The admirable life of S. Francis Xavier Deuided into VI. bookes written in Latin by Fa. Horatius Tursellinus of the Society of Iesus and translated into English by T.F. De vita B. Francisci Xavierii. English Torsellino, Orazio, 1545-1599. The admirable life of S. Francis Xavier Deuided into VI. bookes written in Latin by Fa. Horatius Tursellinus of the Society of Iesus and translated into English by T.F. De vita B. Francisci Xavierii. English Torsellino, Orazio, 1545-1599. Fitzherbert, Thomas, 1552-1640. THE AVTHOR TO THE READER. T RVE it is, Nothing is begun and ended at one, and the selfe same tyme; nor are af∣ter-thoughts only, better then the workes themselues. Some yeares past, I wrote the like of Francis Xauier, with as much ex∣actnes and fidelity, as possibly I could: but the very shape thereof, when I saw it (being diuulged in my absence) could I hardly know, it was so defiled & distayned with faults. Nor came it forth, indeed, more faulty, then mayned. For when as formerly the King of Portugall had commanded Xauerius famous Deedes to be sought out by his Viceroy of India; those things only of note, which he had wrought within the Portugheses dominions, were then col∣lected, and set downe: nor yet those entierely neither, but only such, as could be knowne, and testified by sufficient Witnesses that were present. As for his other acts, especially those which he perfourmed among the Chineses and Iapo∣nians (although very memorable and illustrious) they were for the most part, as yet, detayned in silence, and obscurity. Those therfore in like manner comming at last vnto my hands, & being written by such persons as at that tyme con∣uersed with the Iaponians and Chineses; I was not vn∣willingly induced to set my selfe to worke againe, by transla∣ting them into Latin, and inserting them in their due place amongst the rest. And although I was heerein to vndertake the compiling of almost a new worke, and thereby driuen at the first into some feare from the enterprize: yet my loue, as well to Xauerius, as my desire of the publicke vtility, ouer∣came all the difficultyes with were presented to my fancy. For so great was the copiousnesse and worth of his new exploytes, that of foure Bookes (least they might grow ouer-great) it was necessary to make six. Besides, I haue in this, done my best also, to procure, that, as our Xauerius hath heereby gotten a new Make; so he may appeare in publicke, more corrected and exact, although humane frailty can neuer be wary inough against errours. So as, he may well be said a most wise and iust Esteemer of things, who iudgeth that to haue bin corrected best, which in this kind may seeme to haue fewest faults. THE PREFACE. C OVRTEOVS REA∣DER. I purpose heere to set downe the admirable & renowned Lyfe of S. Francis Xauier: a man spe∣cially borne for the saluation of India, and the furthest Easterne world. Of all the nine first Disci∣ples of our Holy Father S. Ignatius of Loyola, he most resembled his Mayster: and of the Society was the first who laboured in India, Iaponia, & those barbarous Countries, opening the way both for the Indians vnto heauen, & for the Society into India; wherby he brought no lesse renowne, then left exam∣ple to his Order. For which cause, the whole Society not without good reason, desired long since to haue so fayre a Pourtraicte, beautified with such admirable vertue, liuely drawne in colours for Ours to behold; seeing the glorious exploits of Predecessours, do cō∣monly inflame the harts of generous spirits, with a certaine kind of heauenly fire, which hardly can be quenched, vntill by imitation they become true pat∣ternes of their noble Vertues. Now, as on the one ide I perceaued, that other Authors in their Histories, had with great honour, touched Xauerius chiefest acts: so was I on the o∣ther ide not a little grieued, that for the space of a∣boue 35. yeares, there had bin none who thought v∣pon the setting forth his life (then shining with so many and so illustrious vertues) in a proper volume by it selfe, either by giuing that charge, to some other, or by vndertaking it themselues. VVherfore being moued of late, as well through perswasion of some dearest friends, as (which is more) by the command of Superiours to vndertake the same, I was put in some hope to performe, what others had conceaued of my ability therin; & for my deuotion to Xauerius, I was not only not vnwilling, but very willing also, as tyme should afford, to set vpon this taske, to th'end the memory of a man so worthy, yea euen of immortality it self, & who triumpheth now in heauen, might be renewed, not only to the minds of our owne Religious, but to Posterity also. Moreouer, it seemeth vnto me, this falleth out, not so much by humane, as diuine prouidence, that euen at this tyme his most industrious and laborious man∣ner of life, should be layd open to the view of Ours, when as we behould such a glorious haruest of soules brought in from those far countries, which by him were first cultiuated & manured. For now the newes is brought vnto vs, of the conuersion of many great Princes & Kings of Iaponia, with almost all their people, to the Christian faith; and of a passage also, through Gods assistance, made into China for the preaching of the Ghospell there, which was hertofore by the Diuels craft wholy stopped, & euen rāpier'd vp aswel with walles, as lawes. Both which certainly next after God, we must attribute to holy Xauerius who not only lead the way to our Society for the cō∣uersion of those Nations, but left that enterprize also fully ready, and easy to be compassed. VVherfore my intention is to set downe heere in writing the life of this most Blessed man, being full of all variety of matter. And though my VVill and Desire be more ready to obey, then either Ability or Hope to satisfy; yet confiding in Xauerius praiers for whose sake I vndertooke the worke, and also in the diuine power of Obedience, I trust my Forces wil in some sort be answerable to my VVill, & my En∣deauours to Expectation. The which, if through my slendernes I be not able to bring to passe; yet shall I gaine this much at least, that my endeauours, how poore soeuer, may serue to stirre vp others, more studious & industrious, to vndertake the same And howsoeuer it falleth out, I will neuerthelesse reserue this comfort to my selfe, that I haue bin obedient to my chiefest Father, and (as much as in me lay) en∣deauoured to preserue the memory of so great, and holy seruant of God. For peraduentnre I may giue future Ages to vnderstand from what seed so plen∣tifull a haruest of new Christians, in those desert places, hath sprunge, whereof that most industrious and skilfull Husbandman, who sowed in teares, hath with abo ndant ioy, brought his handfull home. And albeit our Predecessours haue studied more how to expresse the worthy acts of Francis in their deeds, then put them downe in writing; yet will I gather only that which is either extant in approued Authors, or els is come vnto my hands frō those who haue byn present, or haue had them from eye witnesses of the same. First then, concerning his infancy and childhood I shall set downe some few things, which my selfe came to know by Martin Azpilqueta of Nauar (some few months before his death) a man for ver∣tue and learning famous, who was both kinsman, & in former times companion also to Xauerius. For the rest of his life, those who conuersed with him, when his vertue did not so greatly appeare, negle∣cted to obserue; but when as afterward it began to shew it selfe vnto the world, the King of Portugal cōmanded his acts to be more carefully obserued, & put downe in writing; & for this reason we haue not all the parts of his life furnished alike with vertues and worthy deeds. Nor do I thinke that those who knew the life of our Father Ignatius, will take any great delight in reading the beginnings of Xaueri∣us, or those first actes of his feruēt vertue, as known for the most part vnto thē already, but will rather make hast to those other of his notable Acts in In∣dia: yet must they remember, that seing from those first beginnings Xauerius became so noble a souldi∣ r of Christ (although for iust causes his deeds haue byn related otherwhere) they ought not therfore o be passed ouer with silence in their proper place. But now let vs come vnto his life it selfe, where we will first speake of his parentage, which was very Noble, on either side. TO S. FRANCIS XAVIER the Apostle of India, and Iaponia, vpon his Motto, {Satis est, Domine, satis est.} Inough, O Lord, Inough, are thy loude thankes, When drops of Heauens dew harts boūdlesse bankes All-ouerflowing are, like Ocean mayne: Thy Brest's too narrow for so large a strayne, Enlarge, O Saint, thy soules most inward roomes, Embosome all that Power, which streaming comes: Children of thine stand vnder, who are blest In taking in their fill, thy Ouer-feast. T. F. OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE I. BOOKE. Of the Linage, disposition, & education of S. Francis Xauier. CHAP. I. I N that part of Nauarre, which lyeth towards Spayne, at the foote of the Pyrenaean mountaines, not far from Pamplona the head Citty of that Kingdome, there is scituate a Castle called Xauerium, fortifyed both by nature and art, the ancient & proper mansion of the family of the Xauiers, where vntil this day is to be seen the place where S. Francis Xauier was borne; for the Nobility (according to the custome of that Coun∣try) dwelleth for the most part in Castles out of Tow∣nes. His Ancestours, for their warlike prowesse, and approued loyalty to their Kings, haue purchased to themselues and their posterity, many great Honours and Dignities, and haue byn no lesse renowned for their owne vertue, then their Soueraignes fauours to∣wards them. His kindred by the mothers side, was very Illu∣strious and Noble; The antiquity wherof may for al∣most a thousand yeares togeather, His No∣bility of birth. draw a very fayre pedigree of famous Warriours, testifyed by approued monuments. His Grandfather by the same lyne was named Martin Azpilqueta, a man no lesse noble for his owne vertue, then for the greatnes of his Ance∣stors, who was now almost the only branch left of that most renowned family. He tooke to wife Ioane Xaueria, a Virgin in honour equall to himselfe. By her he had issue an only daughter called Mary, the stemme & hope of both families; so that, two of the noblest families of Nauar depended vpon the life of this yong Maydē; who was no lesse eminēt for beauty thē vertue as being answerable therin to her most excellēt Name. She was ioyned in marriage to Iohn Iassus, a man Noble both for antiquity of his family & wealth, His Pa∣rents. but especially for his learning & prudence, as being the chiefe Priuy-Coūsellour to King Iohn of Nauarre. He now hauing through the persuasion of his Father-in-law, remoued his dwelling from the Castle Iasso the aunciēt Seat of his Ancestours, to Xauerium his wiues Ioynter, & hauing more fortunate successe in marria∣ge then his sayd Father-in law had, prouided better for the family of the Xauiers then his owne. For hauing by Mary many children (wherof this our Francis was one) he began to take great care how he might keepe vp, two of the most ancient families of Nauar, which were now somewhat in declining. Whereupon he re∣solued to leaue the Name of his own Family, although it were neither meane nor obscure, and to giue his children, and posterity the name of his wiues kindred; so as some of them were called Azpilqueta's, others Xauiers. These therfore were the Parents and Aunce∣stours of Francis Xauier, borne in the yeare of our Lord 1497. and raigne of King Iohn of Nauarre, & of Pope Innocentius the VIII. He was the least of all his bro∣thers, yet as another Dauid the greatest by Gods holy Prouidēce designed to that perfectiō of sanctity wher∣unto he arriued, by assistance both diuine & humane. From his cradle he was brought vp in the bosome of his most vertuous Parents, His Edu∣cation. and by them instructed in all Piety during his childhood. He was also in his yong and tender youth trayned vp by careful Tutors, in those artes, wherby the vnderstanding of man is most of all adorned. He was moreouer of a very ver∣tuous disposition, of an excellent constitution, and comlines of person, of a great and sharpe wit, giuen more to his booke, thē vsually childrē are. None more innocēt, none more pleasant, none more aff able then he, His vir∣ginall chastity. which made him beloued of all both at home and abroad. Yet he was not more gracious in the eye of the world, then of heauen; whereof this is an eui∣dent argument, that notwithstanding such abounding fortunes, & youthly liberty, ioyned to a Personage so beautifull and comely, he was alwayes maister ouer himselfe, his Chastity still hauing predominancy o∣ouer all disordinate appetites. And by Gods particu∣lar assistance he euer preserued the flower of virginall Integrity, without spot or stayne; so that, the Hea∣uenly spouse, Cant. c. 2 who feeds among the Lillies, may seeme euen then to haue haue taken vp his habitation in his brest. His Chastity (as is the nature therof) sharpened his wit, and prepared his mind as a most pure soile, to receiue the seeds of wisedome. Therefore making no account of his brothers words who went about by warlike discourses to draw him to be a man of armes (the ancient ornament of their Ancestours) he stucke close to his resolutiō, He pre∣ferreth learning before armes. & whether stirred vp by the late example of his Father, or drawne by the delight of knowledge, or moued by diuine instinct, he prefer∣red the glory of learning, before warlike prayses. Yet the desire of Honour, a deepe rooted Euill by succes∣sion from his ancestours, intermingled it selfe with his best intentions. For, as great Nobility ordinarily aspireth to excellency; so he by reason of his liberall Education, became of an high, and lofty spirit. And relying much vpon his wit began to looke after great and high matters, therby to augment the Honour of his Noble Family. For this cause therefore he resolued, to furnish himselfe with the greatest knowledge and learning he could, the only way, as he thought, to in∣crease in himselfe both dignity and wealth; a resolu∣tion more glorious to the shew, then sound in sub∣stance. CHAP. II. At Paris, by Ignatius of Loyola, he is con∣uerted to a vertuous Life. T HE Vniuersity of Paris was at that time famous both for antiquity, and learning, & also very much frequented, in respect of her excellent Professours and Maisters, by the long continuance of peace, the best wits of En∣rope resorting thither to furnish themselues with all kind of eminent knowledge. Francis therfore being not more desirous of learning then glory, as soone as he thought himselfe scholler good inough, went also to Paris; where, as soone as he came, being admitted into the Colledge of S. Barbara, The Col¦ledge of S. Barba∣ra. the chiefe residence of the whole Vniuersity both for Readers and Schollers, e betoke himselfe wholy to the study of Philosophy, hat he might afterwards with more facility and ease pply himselfe to Diuinity. This generous resolution he secondeth with Cō∣ ancy, a Vertue able to effect the greatest matters. He stu∣dieth Philoso∣phy at Paris. He as not tyred out with cōtinuall labours; nor drawne y any disordered pastimes, or pleasures (the greatest agues of inconstant youth) frō his intended course. ut contrary wise in a Schoole so much frequented, mulation of choice wits (the greatest incitement to ) drew on more eagerly his desires, bent wholy the attaining of excellency. And the successe was not vnanswerable to his endeauour. So as hauing no lesse prosperously then constantly ended his course of Philosophy, he purchased to himselfe, not only lear∣ning, but also honour due thereunto▪ For as soone as he had giuen worthy testimony of his labours to the moderatours of the Vniuersity, he tooke (as the cu∣stome is) degree of Maister: He inter∣preteth Aristot∣le at Pa∣ris publi∣kely. and being also preferred to read Philosophy, he did for sometyme explicate Aristotle there publickly, not without prayse. Then from Philosophy he passeth to Diuinity, & followeth it with the same feruour of spirit, and temper of life. In this meane tyme, Francis desirous (as is vsuall) to maintaine his Nobility & Estimation amongst his E∣quals, fell into extraordinary expences, for which cause, Iassus his Father began to thinke of calling him home. Xauierius had at Gandia (a noble Citty of Spaine ) an elder sister that was there Abbesse of religious vir∣gins, called, by reason of their austerity of life, Dis∣calceats, a woman of eminent sanctity. She vnderstā∣ding her fathers intention, & learning also by diuin reuelation, what a great man Francis would one da proue, intreated him by her letters very seriously, furnish Francis (who was yet at Paris, in his chiefe studies) with all things abundantly, A Pro∣phecy concer∣ning his Apostle∣ship in the new world. and to spare no cost, though he should spēd al he had vpō him; for tha God had ordayned him to be the Apostle of the new World, and the further Easterne parts. These letter are yet extant in the Castle of Xaueriū, as witnesses o this Prophesy, the euent wherof afterward proued be true. Iassus therfore taking courage by the predicti of his daughter, of whose eminent Sanctity he had certain proofe, from thenceforth allowed Francis all necessary expences in abundant manner. But whilst Xauierius, attending more to Honour, then his owne saluation, directeth his study of Diuinity to humane ends, Gods powerfull hand intercepted his vaine en∣deauours, & turned the same to a more glorious pur∣suit of a pious and holy life. Francis (as we said before) remained still in S. Barbara's Colledge, and had for his chamberfellow one eter Faber, a Sauoyard by Nation, a man of a greater it, then descent. At the same time Ignatius Loyola who afterward was the Institutour and Founder of the Society of Iesus) cōming to Paris, gaue himself also to the study first of Philosophy, & afterwards of Diuinity. As soone therfore as he met with Faber and Xauerius, their like dispositions and studies, as many times it hapneth, brought them presently acquainted; And at last Ignatius, His ac∣quaintā∣ce with S. Igna∣tius. being by them courteously recei∣ued for companion and chamber-fellow, requited his their friendship most aboundantly. For percei∣ ing in them both notable forward wits, and hauing erfectly found out their natures, he began to draw hem by friendly offices, to giue them wholsome cō∣ ell (as occasion serued) & by sweet meanes to allure hem to the perfection of a Christian life: S. Igna∣tius his aduises. insinuating nto them that they should seriously thinke with thē∣ elues, that man endowed with an immortall Soule as not borne for this short and miserable life, but for uerlasting blessednes; and to remēber that whatsoe∣ver they saw heere, was not so much giuen to mortall men to vse and enioy, as to bring them to know and loue God; that they should preferre those goods which were eternall and properly their owne, before that which was temporall, and only lent vnto them. For what would it auaile a man to gaine the whole world, and loose his owne soule? If the sonne of God himself had now left men most certaine meanes for salua∣tion, what discretion were it to remaine among their deadly enemies dartes without those helps, to defend them? Wherfore they should sometimes, and that e∣uery eight day, if they would follow his aduise, arme themselues with the Sacraments of Confession & the holy Eucharist: for being armed with these heauēly weapons, they might easily withstand their enemy; wheras being naked without them, they should as it were giue him their throates to cut &c. These admonitions were not alike gratefull, & acceptable to them both. Faber, who had no great de∣sire to any thing of this world, embraced them with great affection. But Francis hauing his mind set fully vpon desire of greatnes, wholy reiected them. For he was of a very liuely, yet tractable nature, if euill cu∣stome had not corrupted it. Being therfore a yonge man of a great spirit, with froward and ouer-thwa answers, oftentimes of set purpose carped at Ignatius and his words, yea, and sometimes also in very re∣proachful māner scoffed at his excellent piety: but he on the other side vsed al the sweet meanes he could to reclaime him from his insolency. And not in vaine; for Patience at last ouercame Pertinacy. And Xaue∣rius being by little and little made tractable, by that so gentle & courteous vsage began to beare some respect towards to him, Ignatius gently handleth Francis his wild∣nesse. and at last touched by Gods diuine spirit, left himselfe to be wholy ruled, and guided by him. But it is a great matter to go to God with a free mind wholy discharged of all other affections. For Fa∣ber indeed contemning all things of this world, and hauing now for the space of foure yeares, frequen∣ted the holy Sacraments, according to Ignatius his ad∣uise, it was easy to perswade him to cast off all other cares, and make himselfe a souldiar in that battaile wherein Christ himselfe carrieth the prime Banner. But Xauerius still feeding his mind with vaine hopes & imaginations of Honours, although he imbraced the same course of life, yet stifly resisted the holy Ghost, & would not follow his Captaine Christ, going forth vnto him out of the Campe, Heb. 1 . carrying his reproach. He was for other things pious and tractable, but in this one thing hard to be dealt with all. For which cause Igna∣tius begged him of God more earnestly with teares; which were not lost. For Francis his hart being thereby very much ollified, commeth at last to bend, and receauing a stroke from heauen concerning the saluation of his soule, vpon a time entred into himselfe, and began silently to thinke & examine what Nature on the one side and what Vertue on the other could say for thē∣selues. Francis his deli∣beration about chāging his cour∣se of life. Shall I, saith he, giue eare to God who cals, & akedly follow my naked Sauiour? But then I must vndertake an hard, and abiect course of life. Shall I neglect Gods call, and still retaine my Reputation, & manner of life, which I haue begun? But then I am in great danger, that if I draw backe when God cal∣leth, he wil with indignation laugh at my destruction. But how shall I be able to beare the bitternes, & igno∣miny of the crosse? What then? shall I rather choose to take part with the enemies of Christ his Crosse, whose end is destruction, Phil. 3. and glory in their confusion? with what face shall I looke vpon myne aquaintance? How shal I endure to heare what my companions will say? But to be drawen from a vertuous and blessed course of life by mens speaches, is an argument not only of extreme lightnesse, but of meere madnes also. What exceeding great sorrow will this vnexpected newes bring to my friends, and kinsfolke? But, shal the loue eyther of Parents, or any mortall creature whatsoe∣uer touch me neerer then myne owne saluatiō? neerer then the loue of God, and Christ himselfe? With these, and such like contrary cares he stood wauering with a perplexed & doubtfull mind, and hauing spent some dayes in these kind of cogita∣tions, at last, this cōbat was ouercome, & he yielded himselfe to God who had vrged him so hard; and vpon a suddain changed into another man he began to looke vpon the author and consummatour of Faith Christ Iesus, who (ioy being proposed vnto him) susteined the Crosse, Heb. 12. con∣temning confusion. And first, as by Ignatius help he was raysed vp, so by Ignatius help he remained con∣stant in his resolution. And from that time being as it were borne a new, more ioyfully & happily then be∣fore, he yielded very rare, and goodly fruit of Chri∣stian perfection, being now more like Ignatius then himselfe. CHAP. III. His Feruour in the mortification of his bo∣dy, and study of Perfection. F OR within a little while he sought with greater desire after mortifications & con∣tempt of himselfe, then he had before af∣ter dignities and honours: such (for the most part) is the property of excellent dispositions, to apply themselues wholly to whatsoeuer they take vpon them. Mortifi∣cation. Francis therfore ayming at the highest toppe of Sanctity, began first (as the custome is) to combat with his owne body. For knowing the flesh o haue contrary desires to the spirit, he resolued to ring it vnder, that the vntamednes therof might be o hindrance to him in the way of Christian perfecti∣ n. Wherfore both in his yonger dayes, & all his life after, he did no lesse often thē zealously vse the ordi∣ ary austerity of fasting, disciplines and hayrecloth, as fit meanes to tame & moderate disordinate affecti∣ ns, and to make satisfaction for sinnes. And euen at is very entrance into this new war-fare, he gaue manifest tokens of his noble disposition and courage. For being in his yonger yeares accustomed often o leap amongst his Equals & companions in a field eere to the Citty, His agi∣lity of body. (that being then the only sport wherin he tooke delight) vpon a certaine tyme he tooke ouermuch content in his owne agility of body, wherin he far outwēt all the rest in leaping; wherfore as soone as he had altered his course of life, although that offence had byn but light, yet he mortifyed him∣selfe for it very seuerely. He tyeth about parts of his body a litle rope For binding his body very hard with a small cord which caused him intollerable paine, he went some dayes together in that manner; and to purge his mynd of the pride he had taken ther∣in, he exercised himselfe all that while meditating v∣pon deuout matters, that the greatnes of the paine might restraine both his mind and body from the like excesses heerafter. And this hard hand he kept ouer his youthfull motions, as well to excite and stirre vp his mynd, as to make satisfaction for his sinnes. As he was once imployed in those pious considerations, which we call spirituall Exercises, and therin endea∣uouring by abstinence to bring vnder & make subiect the vnruly motions of his body, out of a desire he had to obtaine a cōplete victory ouer himself, he was carryed something to farre, Foure dayes he abstaines from ea∣ting any thing. abstayning foure whole dayes from eating any thing. A rash attempt indeed, but yet faultlesse, being excused by the feruour of his new beginning, and youthfull yeares. For nothing is more hard, or a greater step to vertue, then the ma ∣stry ouer ones selfe: but for Nouices and new begin∣ners neuer to exceed, whilst they follow the battaile in their feruour, is a thing rather to be wished, then hoped for. Wherfore Xauerius continually striuing & with diligent care ouercomming himselfe, became euery day to grow stronger therein. Coquest of him∣selfe. That which most of all helped him, was his often and deuout meditation vpō the life and death of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and his vnspeakeable Charity, Medita∣tion vpō the life & death of Christ the greatest incitements to the loue of God, and christian perfection. And the more those pious meditations increased in him the loue of God, so the more his hart was set on fire with a de∣sire of sauing soules, and suffering of martyrdome. Which thing went so farre at last, that as the sonne of God had deliuered himselfe to death for his saluation; so he againe, vowed himselfe wholy and entierly for euer, to employ himselfe for his glory, & the saluatiō of soules. And to the end that nothing might separate im from this Charity of Christ, His desir of Mar∣tyrdom. by the aduise of S. Ignatius he determined, togeather with the other companions (who were then nine in nūber) to bind imselfe to God by certaine vowes, which might be meanes to bring him to the crowne of Martyrdome. In the yeare therfore 1534. they for that pur∣pose assigned the feast of the Assumption of the B. V. Mary, intending therby to haue her both witnesse & patronesse of their vowes. When that day was come they, hauing their minds set on fire by continual me∣ditation, met all togeather in a Church neere Paris called Mons Martyrum, that the place might adde flames to their earnest desire of martyrdome. Where after they had heard masse and fortified themselues with the sacred Eucharist, He binds himselfe to God by vow. replenished with spirituall ioy they make their vowes, and dedicate themselues to God. The summe of their vowes was this, that ha∣uing finished their course of Diuinity, dispossessing themselues of all things, they would in perpetuall po∣uerty employ their seruice for the glory of God, and the saluation of soules; and that vpon a set day they would go to Hierusalem, there to labour for the con∣uersion of the Turkes, with eminent hazard of their liues. And if by chance this determination of theirs should be hindred by any accident, at the yeares end they would go to Rome, and offer their endeauours to his Holines towards the saluation & helpe of soules, without exception either of time, place, or mention of prouision, or allowance for their iourney. Vpon the making of these vowes, there follo∣wed a new, Yeerly re¦newing of vowes but yet pious custome of often renewing the same, thereby to keep them fresh in memory, and increase a religious deuotion towards thē. They mad these vowes not only that yeare, but also renewed thē euery yeare vpon the same day, and place, with the same solemnity, alacrity, and fruite as long as they studied at Paris. But Xauerius vsed this custome often∣times by himselfe with great feruour, Frequēt renoua∣tion of vowes. finding by ex∣perience that by often renewing his vowes, he found his vigour and strength of mind againe renewed, like the youth of an Eagle. And this great desire of perfe∣ction in vertue was no hindrance at all to his studies; but there was a tyme when he manifestly shewed, that he tooke more delight in being a souldiar of Christ thē in his studies, for whose only sake, he now employed himselfe therein, CHAP. IIII. He goeth to Venice vvith extreme payne of body. H E had now almost finished his course of Diuinity, He brea∣keth of his cour∣se of Di∣uinity not farre from the end. when presently he was to depart for Italy. For the Fathers had agreed among themselues, that vpon a set day▪ to wit the 24. of Ianuary 1537. they would meete al together at Venice, with S. Ignatius, who was gone thither before vpon certayne occasiōs. In the meane tyme before the appointed day of their iourney came, France was all in armes, by reason of Charles the fifth his warre ade vpon the Frenchmen: which accident made em hasten their determined iorney, by setting aside care of ending their course of studies. Xauerius was i deed much grieued for this hindrance, but yet car∣ ed it discreetly, esteeming it as good to leaue his stu∣dies for Gods sake, as to follow them. Therfore vpon the 13. day of Nouember, Their manner of tra∣uaile. a most nseasonable tyme of the yeare, hauing, according to eir vowes, giuen all they had to the poore, except nly their writings, and some litle thing to help them their iorney, he togeather with his other company tteth forth on the way. Their manner of trauailing as this. They were cloathed in course and old habits, ery one with a staffe in his hand, and a short leather antle vpon his shouldiers, like poore pilgrimes; a∣bout their neckes they hunge their beades, therby to be knowne for Catholikes as they trauayled amongst heretiques, and their writings they carryed at their backe in a little bagge. They vsed euery day to cōmunicate, being the only comfort of all their labours, therby both to renew their forces, & reuiue their spirits being wearyed with paynfull trauayle. When they departed from their lod∣ging they allwayes commended themselues to God, & when they came into it they gaue him thankes. Being vpon the way they first spent some time in meditating vpon heauenly matters; then they vsed some pious dis∣course together, and now and then they lightned the labour and wearisomnesse of their iorney with singing of hymnes, Psalmes, and spirituall Canticles. In this manner for the most part taking his way into Italy through Loraine and Germany, to auoyd the troubles of the warre, he endured the Autumne show∣res of France, and the winter coldes of Germany. And although he were not accustomed to trauaile on foote yet he cheerfully vndertooke, and performed this so longe & tedious iourney, being loaden with his wri∣tings; and this in the dead of winter, and through most fowle wayes many times euē couered ouer with snow, Volun∣tary mor¦tificati∣on in his iorney. and frozen vp with ice, especially as he passed the Alpes. And besides the weight of his bagge, and badnes of the way, he voluntarily vsed another mor∣tification which put him to intolerable paine, so great was his courage to indure all incommodities and la∣bours for the loue of God. For before be began his iorney he had for a good while togeather, (either to exercise himselfe in patience, or else to mortify his body) tyed about his armes and thighes little cordes, which through continual stirring about necessary bu∣sines of the house, had caused the flesh to swell, and therby gauled him most pitifully. Yet so great was his desire and courage to suffer, that albeit the iorney he was to go on foote was so long and hard, he would not for al that take of those cordes which did so much afflict him. When therfore this torment being of it selfe very paynfull was now seconded with so hard a iorney on foot, the extreme griefe which the cords did put him to, was also very much increased. But he being no lesse couragious in enduring torments, then in vn∣dertaking them, kept on his way, and did not only cōceale, but also contēne all the paine he felt therby. For he hoped that, that might by vse & custome be as∣swaged as well as other corporal molestations, which he had made triall of. Through anguish of body he faints in the way. But when the vehemency thereof daily encreased, his confidence being turned into care, he began to faint not through want of cou∣rage but of strength. At last therfore when he could no longer neither dissemble nor endure the violence of the payne, being through necessity constrained to ield, he sweetly intreated his companions to pardon im, for he was indeed so weary, that he could not go one step further. They at first wondred to see him who before was all feruour, vpō the sodain to faint, nd languish in that manner; but when the palenesse of his countenance discouered the greatnes of his in∣teriour paine, they held him vp as he fainted, and a∣sked him what new accident was befallen him. Then he taking breath awhile, which was before stopped through griefe, was enforced to open vnto them the whole matter. They all condoling his case, but secre∣tly admiring his vertue, intreated him to rest awhile vn il the violence of the paine were a little asswaged; then as soone as they thought he had rested inough, & recouered a little strengh, they brought him fayre and softly to the next Inne, and presently sent for a Physitian, who hauing diligently viewed, and consi∣dered of the soare, resolutely answereth that the cords could not be seene, His ma∣lady be∣ing held despe∣rate, the Physitiā giues him o∣uer much lesse cut. And although the ends of the cords did appeare, yet they had made such vlcers, that they could neither be vnloosed, or cut, without most extreme paine. Therfore (because the disease surpassed art, & the cause therof went beyond all custome) he stood awhile in a maze like one that knew not what to say. At last fearing the successe he could not be persuaded eyther by Francis or his com∣paniōs to medle with it, there was such danger in the Cure; And so departed without so much as making the least triall. The Fathers his companions then were in great solicitude and anxiety, not only for what would be∣come of the Patient, but also for their owne iorney, which was hindred by this vnexpected chance to the great hindrance of them all. And Francis grieued no lesse that his companions were enforced to stay for him, then for his owne infirmity. Despayring there∣fore of humane, they had recourse to diuine help, ech one humbly imploring assistance from Heauen. Their prayers were not in vayne, for God himselfe played the Phisitian, and presently applyed a remedy to that desperate Cure. A strange thing, the next mor∣ning Francis rising out of his bed found all the cordes broken asunder & fallen of, He is cu∣red from heauen all the swelling gone, & nothing to remaine of the soares but certaine markes, where the ropes had byn. Then being stroken into ad∣miration & reioycing not so much for himselfe as for his companions sake, with a lowde voyce gaue than∣kes to Almighty God; wherat his companions came running to him, asking him the cause of that new ioy? Which hauing vnderstood, and being astoni∣shed at the euident miracle, gaue (as reason was) all due praise and thankes to God; and lifting vp their handes to heauen & weeping for ioy began presently to extoll the heauenly Fathers prouidence, and singu∣lar bounty towards them. Then they presently set on againe to their tra∣uaile, most ioyfull for that good successe, inciting one another to employ al their labours in the seruice of so sweet a Lord; And Francis throughout the whole ior∣ney (as he was alwayes before wont to do) applied himselfe with such diligence & alacrity in helping & seruing his cōpanions as was wonderfull. For as they all stroue to the vttermost (this only being the emu∣lation among them) to excell one another in cour∣ esy, In the way he serueth his cō∣panions. he either out of feruour of spirit, or naturall ci∣ ility farre outwent the rest. And this care and desire f his was no greater to helpe his companions, then to procure the saluation of others. Whersoeuer occa∣sion was giuen him of helping his neighbours, either with counsel, Vpon the way he hel∣peth his neigh∣bours. aduise or example, he with great zeale made his commodity therof, and imbraced the same as opportunity serued. And herein his labour was not in vaine; for many Catholiques were therby reclai∣med to a good life, and some Heretiques also reduced to the wholsom way of truth. Which way soeuer they passed, they left behind them tokens of sanctity for all to behould, and Catholiques to imitate. And so it hapned oftentimes, that euen Hereticks themselues taken with admiration at their sanctity, would cour∣teously shew them their way, He win∣neth the hereti∣ques af∣fections. tell them what difficul∣ties they were to passe, and when need was, would themselues freely conduct them in their iorney. Thus true and kindly vertue sheweth it selfe, and putteth euen sauage people in mind of humanity. Francis therfore by the aide both of heauen and earth, hauing waded through all the incōmodities & dangers of the way, vpon the tenth day of Ianuary the yeare following, arriued safe with his companions at Venice. There he foūd Ignatius of Loyola with the grea∣test desire expecting his deerest sonnes & cōpanions. Then according to the custome of the society they sa∣lute and imbrace one another most ioyfully, with the greatest demonstration of loue that might be imagi∣ned. And this their ioy made them forgetfull of all their toylsome passed labours. CHAP. V. At Venice he serueth in the Hospitall of the Incurable, and from thence goeth to Rome to the Pope. T HE Fathers had already agreed al togea∣ther to go to Rome there to aske leaue of the Pope to go to Hierusalem to preach the Gos∣pell, and there to remayne at their owne liberty. It seemed therfore good vnto thē, that vntill the extremity of the winter were ouer past, that they should begin to practise thēselues at Venice in that kind of spiritual warfarre, which afterward they were to undertake. Wherfore deuiding themselues to the pu∣blike seruice of the Hospitals of that Citty, as into so many Prouinces, Francis requested that he might haue the care of the Incurable, a fit meanes to gayne, as he desired, a most noble conquest ouer himselfe; the which office he performed with no lesse feruour of spirit, then he had desire thereunto. As soone therfore as he came thither, he begā to go about the beds & couches of those poore soules, spea∣ ing comfortably and sweetly to the afflicted; encou∣raging them that were giuen ouer by the surgeons, with hope of life euerlasting; hartening them that lay dying, & mouing all most affectionatly to patience, modesty, & vertuous life, endeauouring by all meanes possible to cure their minds, whose diseases were in∣curable. And considering moreouer, that if he serued them in things belonging to their bodies he might the more easily helpe them in their soules: He therefore would himselfe sweep the hospitall, make the beds, rid away the filth, performe euen the most base and abiect offices of the place (those being the first groūds of Christian humility) & finally as the custome is, wash the bodies of the dead, & bury thē as they ought to be. And in the midst of all these imployments there appeared in his countenance and lookes such, and so eminent a Piety, that you would haue thought he had seene Christ with his eyes in those poore sicke persons, and employed all his labours in seruing of him. These things were done, in the sight of a most frequented Hospitall, in the view of a most noble Cit∣ty, with such vnusuall cheerfulnes and ioy, that ma∣ny flocking thither through the reporte of so new a thing, Francis became a spectacle not only to God & his Angels, but to men also. In so much that his care & charity towards the sicke, renewed agayne the most comfortable memory of S. Rocke (whose Name is most famous at Venice ) for his singular benignity in that kind. In the meane time his vertue breathed forth▪ most delightful odour in the Celestial Court. With speciall care he serueth a sick man full of oares. For ha∣uing gotten the care of one that was sick of a consūp∣tion and the Pox, the more horrour he had of him (a being delicate both by nature and custome) the more diligence he vsed in tending and seruing him. Vpō this occasion he fought many noble combats & got most glorious victories ouer himselfe. For though Reason did withhold the vnbridled contradiction of nature; and diuine grace ouercome the horrour of that pesti∣lent disease: yet for all that, the loathsomnesse of the vlcers, and the intollerable stench therof, did some∣times, so ouercharge his stomacke (as it often fal∣leth out) that he had euen an auersion from his said Patient. But neither could the Deuils nor Natures af∣front beguile Xauerius. For as soone as he perceiued his charity to waxe somewhat cold, sharpely rebuking himself of cowardize & want of courage in this kind he resolued by way of reuenge to rid himselfe of that dainty disposition. And without further delay armed with the loue of Christ his Sauiour, after the example of S. Catherine of Sienna, he nobly ouercommeth him∣selfe, and sucketh out once, He suck∣eth out the fil∣thy mat∣ter. & againe with his mouth the putrified matter out of his Patients loathsome vl∣ ers. This extraordinary vertue was recompensed by God with an extraordinary reward. For he did not on∣ly giue him conquest ouer himselfe for that present, but euer after gaue him strength and courage to beare all annoyances euen of the most vlcerous & leaprous. n so much as from thenceforward, he would not on∣ly without difficulty, but with a kind of delight also ādle & dresse such loathsome diseases as others durst ot without horrour once looke vpon, Con∣quest of himself. so important thing it is for the obtaining of true freedome of spi∣rit, but once nobly to ouercome ones selfe Wherfore hroughout the whole course of Francis his life there appeared a perpetuall victory ouer himselfe in all things, and an extraordinary charity towards poore sicke and needy persons. Hauing layd this foundation he bent all his cares for his intended voyage. Now therfore the spring comming on, the Fa∣thers thought good to make no delay, but according to their vow, as speedily as they could hasten towards Rome. But there fell at that time so extraordinary great raynes, that the wayes became very foule; and Lent was also at hand, Religi∣ous re∣gard to∣wards vowes. a very incommodious time fo religious men to trauaile in. Yet for feare delay should make that lesse grateful in the sight of almighty God, which was of it selfe most acceptable vnto him, they all had so religious a care of performing their vow▪ that they thought it by no meanes fitting to expect any longer, but presently to set forwards. Thus di they accommodate, not their vowes to themselues but themselues to their vowes. At the beginning therfore of Lent they all togea∣ther make hast to Rome; Iorney∣ing on foot in Lent and begging he truly fasteth. by thus much now more poore then in their former iorney, in that without a∣ny penny of Viaticum for their expences they pu thēselues on the way, depēding only vpon Gods pro¦uidence. In their iorney they dayly obserued thei former practise of Piety, and the rather because of th holy time of Lent; & although by reason of their tra∣uailing on foote they endured great difficulties wha by the painfulnes of the iorney, and their very poor diet, which they also begged as they went, yet euery day did they strictly obserue their fast, so that it is har to say, whether they obserued with more deuotion, the Precept of Fasting, or the Euangelicall Counsell of Pouerty. Yet through Gods prouidēce their religi∣ous confidence was not any way frustrated. For al∣though they were much combred with raine and ill weather, yet kept they on their iourney, passing on foote through Lombardy where the wayes especially at that time of yeare were very fowle & troublesome. And sometimes also they were forced, Taking but a lit∣le piece of bread they go on foot a good dayes iorney. with all pati∣ence and cheerfulnes, bare-footed to trauayle thirty miles a day, refreshing themselues only with a piece of browne bread and water, in most rayny weather, when the fields were so swelled & ouer flowen with flouds of water, that in some places they waded euen vp to the neeke. At last by the speciall prouiden∣ce of God, who gaue them sufficient forces, and deli∣ ered them from all dangers in this their iourney, he brought them safe vnto the place they desired. As soone as they came to Rome, the first thing they did was to visit the Churches of S. Peter, and S. Paul, and to humbly beseech those most holy Patrones both of the Citty and whole world, that God would through their intercession giue prosperous successe to their Intentions. Then confiding in the patronage and fauour of so mighty Protectours, they sought meanes to haue accesse vnto his Holines (who at that me was Paul the third of the noble family of the Far∣ esi, a man right eminent both for grauity, and pru∣ ence) and to desire his approbation of that which hey had at first determined. There was at the same me in Rome, Embassadour for the Emperour, Peter Orttizius a Spaniard, a man of no lesse authority, then courtesy. He hauing brought them to the Pope, and earnestly commended them vnto him, his Holynes as the custome is, benignely and courteously admit∣teth them to the kissing of his feet. Then to make tri∣all of their learning he caused them to dispute, some∣times in Philosophy, and sometymes in Diuinity in tyme of dinner, as that most worthy Princes custome was. Wherin when all of them, but especially Xaueri∣us, had giuen great demonstratiō both of their ability & vertue, presenting their petition concerning their iorney to Hierusalem, the Pope without any difficulty, yea with great approbation granteth them what they demaund, and out of his Fatherly charity to all Nati∣ons, tooke such affection to their vertuous desires, al∣though meere strangers to him, that for his singular bounty & liberality, he dismissed them not only with his benediction, but also with a large Viaticum to be∣are their charges in that long and tedious iourney. But they not forgetfull of pouerty euen amidst such plēty, put that money giuen thē for their vowed pilgrimage into a Bankers hands to be kept, vntill they were rea∣dy to go. And in the meane time they liued by begging publickly vp & downe the Citty, more knowne now for their Religious modesty then their learning, by reason that abandoning of their owne accord the fa∣miliarity of great and noble Personages, they had vndertaken that abiect and humble course of life. CHAP. VI. At Vincenza he saith his first Masse, ha∣uing first prepared himselfe thereto. W HEN they had dispatched all things at Rome with fortunate and speedy successe, in the same manner almost as they came thither, they returne againe to Venice inten∣ding with the first occasion to imbarke themselues for Hierusalem. There, inflamed with a longing desire of n heauenly life, to vnite and tye themselues more irmely to God, they resolue to consecrate their liues wholy to Christ, as they had long since done their oods. Therfore hauing for that end prepared them∣ elues by interiour recollection, at a solemne Masse hey vow perpetuall Pouerty and Chastity in the hāds f Hierome Verallus who was then Legate for the Sea postolique. He vow∣eth per∣petuall pouerty and Cha∣stity. Francis was neuer before seene to be ore replenished with heauenly ioy then at this time▪ or being very cheerfull, as might be discerned by is lookes, he gaue his whole hart to God, being euen uer whelned in his soule with his diuine grace; and alling to mind his former practise, he frō that time, ll his life, euery day renewed the vowes which once e had made. But whilst he expecteth an opportunity for his ntended nauigation he againe applieth himselfe with reater feruour then before, to his exercises of Cha∣rity, which he neuer forgot, although they had been intermitted by reason of his iorney. And the Venetians so much the more admired & esteemed this great cha∣rity of Francis towards the sicke, by how much lon∣ger, this his labour continued with them then before. For it fell so out, that the Turkes and Venetians be∣ginning that yeare to make warre vpon one another, the passage into Palestine was stopt, which before was alwayes open for Pilgrims. And the seas were so beset with the Turkish ships that none could passe out of Italy to the Easterne coasts without manifest daun∣ger of death or captiuity. Which accident, as it first delayed the good Fathers iorney to Hierusalem, so it afterwards brake it cleane of, God reseruing their la∣bours for better vses. For he sent these his hyred ser∣uants in such sort into his vineyard, that leauing the Turkish soyle, as barren, and euen past bearing fru∣ite, they might employ thēselues, some in pruning the ouergrowne vineyardes of Christians, & others in cultiuating the desertes of India, & Iaponia, which before that were neuer so much as touched. So whilst Francis (not knowing Gods designement) betweene hope and feare expected euery day some opportunity for his long desired nauigation, many monthes passed away in his foresayd labours of the Hospitall, in all which time he neuer became slacke in his indeauours nor any whit remisse in his charitable exercises. But seing at last all hope of going to Hierusalē, vtterly to fayle, he tooke it very heauily, and was much grieued, that he was so depriued of all meanes to see those holy places of Palestine, and also of the oc∣casion of suffering martyrdome for Christ: notwith∣standing beholding therein the prouidēce of God (the only cōfort of all humane accidents) he bare the same with courage and constancy, although it gaue him o∣therwise no small resentment. Then they consulted among thēselues what was best to be done, & turning all their cares another way, it seemed good vnto them that they should all take holy Orders, that so they might attend with more profit to their owne perfe∣ction, and saluation of others. In the moneth of Iune therfore, vpon the Natiui∣ty of S. Iohn Baptist hauing vsed great preparatiō ther∣unto, they were made Priests by the Bishop of Arbe for the other holy Orders they had receyued a litle before.) He is made Priest. And it is reported of them, that al the time of consecration they were so ouercome with ioy that the good Bishop himselfe participated thereof. For he af∣ rmed afterwards, that whilst he did the ceremonies, e felt a new kind of heauenly ioy and delight, the like whereof he neuer had before experienced. By this all hope of passing into Palestine was so wholy taken away, that they seemed almost freed frō their ow: yet that there might not remayne the least ruple in their mynds, they thought good still to atch if there might be any occasion offered of per∣ rming the same vntill the yeare were fully come a∣ out, for so it was expressed in their vow. In this meane space being forthwith to offer to od the first fruites of their Priesthood, Prepara∣tion for his first Masse. they with∣ ew themselues out of the great concourse of that ost populous Citty, & the better to attend to recol∣lection they separated themselues into diuers places neere by, some one way, some another. Francis, to∣gether with Alphonsus Salmeron, betooke himselfe to Mont Celsus, a village distant some fifteene miles from Padua: there desirous to be solitary he withdrew himselfe farre from all men, that he might vnite him∣selfe neerer to God. And hauing found in a priuate place, a desolate and ruinated cottage, he thatched the roofe therof with straw, and so made himselfe a litle sorry habitation, wherein he tooke so much the more delight, because it represented to him the manger of Christ his Sauiour, and his great pouerty. Then, that experiēce might make a deeper impressiō in his mind of the pouerty of IESVS whilst he was a child, and of his solitude when he was a man, he taske himselfe to this kind of life: he eate very sparingly of such meate only as he got by begging, he lay vpon the bare groūd with straw vnder him in the forsayd houell exposed to rayne, wind, and weather; and to stirre vp his mynd with more then ordinary feruour to the contē∣plation of heauenly things he euery day imposed vpon himselfe certaine voluntary pennances; Gse 2. and remem∣bring that God leadeth a soule into solitude, and there speaketh to her hart, Psal. 84. he gaue more attentiue eare to what his Lord God should speak within him. He pray∣ed therefore very much & often, & whatsoeuer spare tyme he had, he imployed it in reading of holy boo∣kes, and deuout meditation of heauenly things. What discommodities, and paynfull labours he endured in that place, and what true and perfect consolation he receiued, through conuersation with the heauen y spouse we may easier imagine, then by words expresse. This is certaine, that the litle which he begged would hardly find him bread, to which if perchance he got a litle oyle, or other meate, he thought he had then made a dainty meale indeed. In this solitary kind of life he passed fourty dayes with exceeding great comfort, according to the exā∣ple of his heauenly Maister, who remained so many dayes in the wildernes. And no doubt but by his con∣uersation with God, through his exceeding feruour of spirit and inflamed loue to his Creatour, he recei∣ued as many heauēly graces, as he did ioyes. Somtimes therfore going forth into publicke, he began accor∣ding to Christ his example to teach the people, and to make them partakers of that which he had receiued om heauen. After his solitary life he begin∣neth to teach the peple. This was his manner of preaching: re∣ ēb ing that Christ was wont to preach in the fields vpon mountaines, and by the s a shores, whersoeuer saw any hope of doing good, there would he put mselfe amongst assembles of people to preach, and especially would he teach those, who most of all wanted instruction, and such as neuer vsed to come sermons, that so God might also be found of them at did not seeke him. Therfore gathering togeather e people in crosse wayes and streets, and borrowing stoole out of some shoppe, standing theron he would eake of vertuous and godly life with more feruour spirit then flourish of words, to such as either stood ere idle, or else were in their playes and pastimes: so much as some who came to his sermon only, to get something to laugh at, being moued by the weight of his speach, & the diuine force wherwith he spake, in steed of laughing, went away weeping. Nothing caused him to be more admired, or helped on his busi∣nes better, then refusing to take money, a token of sanctity most pleasing to all men. For when all saw that he neyther asked any thing of the people about him, nor would take any thing which was offered him, they could not but think that he sought the salua∣tion of others, more then his owne commodity. Hauing thus employed his labours and indea∣uours in Mont Celsus, with no lesse good successe in helping of others, then in the perfection of himselfe, he went to Vincenza sent thither by Ignatius. Where hauing agayne recollected himselfe in most diligent mann r, and thinking it now time to performe that for which he had long prepared himself, this our new Priest, with plentifull teares of ioy, offereth his first, heauenly & wholsome sacrifice to the diuine Maiesty. Yow would say that he did not so much belieue that which is conteyned vnder those sacred mysteries, as he saw, and beheld it with his eyes. And such indeed was the ardent fire which inflamed both his soule and body, that they who beheld the teares streaming so sweetly from his eyes, could not themselues absteine from weeping. And this singular feeling of deuotion he frō thence forward reteined throughout his whole life, in such sort, as if comming euery day like a new Priest to the Aultar, he had tasted that first sweetnes of those sacred mysteries. CHAP. VII. He assisteth the Cittyes of Bononia, and Rome, vvith his Sermons. T HE day appointed for their Pilgrimage to Hierusalem was now past, & yet there was no hope of passage, the Enemies nauy still keping the seas. Therfore they were, accor∣ding to the tenour of their vowes, to leaue themselues to the disposition of the Pope; And for this cause the athers agreed among themselues that Ignatius Loyola ter Faber, & Iames Laynes, should go to Rome in name of the rest, & offer to his Holines their endeauours & bours for the help of soules. In the meane time the hers dispersing themselues throughout the most fa∣ ous Academies of Italy, should instruct the students vertue, & draw more to be of their Company, if it ould so please God. In this diuision the vniuersity of onia fell to Xauier his lot, with no small benefit to at Citty. For as soone as he came thither, he went say Masse at the Sepulcher of S. Dominick, to whome was euer especially deuout. And it hapned that ere was present at his Masse Elizabeth Casiline of Bo∣ nia, a religious woman of the most holy Order of Dominick, who perceauing Francis his great deuo∣ on, desired so speake with him. Their discourse was ch that she was wholy possessed with an opinion of s sanctity. This Elizabeth had an Vncle called Hierome Ca∣siline, a man both learned and noble, who was also Chanon of S. Petronius, He lod∣ged with Hierome Casiline. & Rectour of S. Lucies Col∣ledge where he then dwelt. Francis, at her request, went vnto him, and by his courteous speach, and candide behauiour got his affection so, that he most willingly and freely inuited him to his house. Xauie humbly accepted of so worthy a mans courtesy for his lodging, but to eate there he absolutely refused, because he begged his meate, as he was accustomed. I the meane time Casiline obserued him, greatly admi∣ring his vertues, wherof he gaue also publicke testi¦mony. Francis therfore, although his courage wa greater then his forces, because he was at that tim sickly and weake, His dili∣gence in helping his neigh¦bours e∣uen whē he was il himself. yet his admirable feruour of spiri abundantly supplied what he wanted in strength. Fo such was his great desire of doing good to all, th there was almost no worke of Christian charity, wherein he had not a sweet and louing hand, no other∣wise then if he had enioyed the greatest health th could be. Hauing said Masse euery day, as his custome was he afterwards employed himselfe in seruing the si in the Hospitals, and the poore that were in prison, teaching children, and ignorant persons the princi∣ples of Christian doctrine, His man¦ner of preach∣ing. & in hearing Confessions He moreouer preached to the people in the streets an publicke high wayes, and that not more frequently then profitably. For he vsed not the then new flouri¦shing and Rhetorical kind of speach, but followed a togeather that old, feruent, and Apostolicall manne of preaching. There was in him no curious setting orth of arguments, nor ornament of words, but all eruour of mynd and spirit, intermixed with most pithy and graue sentences, wherto his plainesse, and as it were neglect of speach (an euidēt marke of truth) ue great lustre and force. The modest and humble mposition both of his countenance, & whole body eathed out that sāctity which lay hiddē in his soule. The piety which shined forth from his face & lookes euidently demonstrated, that whatsoeuer he said, came from the bottome of his hart, and from the fire of Charity, which inflamed his brest. Wherupon his words carrying more feruour with them then elo∣ ence, were like burning torches to the vnderstan∣ding of those that heard him, and like a flame of fire their affections: so as therby might manifestly ap∣ are how fiery the diuine word is, when men speake as God alwayes supplieth them with matter. For uiers drift was not to haunt after fauour and vul∣ applause of the people, but to cause in his audi∣ rs affections, a feare and loue of God, and indeed eeke truly the saluation of soules, not his owne eeme. In fine the substance of his sermons was to lay be∣ e The su∣bstance & fruit of his sermons. the people the most bitter & euerlasting tormēts hich are ordained for the reprobate in hell, and the ost sweet & neuer-ending rewards layd vp for the t in heauen; as also to shew the deformity of sinne, d the beauty, and louelynesse of vertue, not in cu∣ us, but in weighty and substantiall words. And ds word being cast and sowen in this manner, was receiued by the hearers with prōpt & willing minds, & yielded that fruite which Francis desired. For many were by the grace of God drawne out of the sinke of sinne, many also brought to frequent the Sacraments, great store of money was likewise giuen in Almes, wherof notwithstanding he touched not a farthing, Loue of Pouerty but causing it to be distributed amongst the needy, himselfe begged from dore to dore, prouiding therby both for the necessity of the poore, & mantaining the dignity of a Preacher. Whēce it came to passe (which he chiefly aymed at) that, not only very many being penitent for their sinnes, lead afterwards a pious and Christian life, but also (which he cared not for) that his name was made famous by the speach and good report of all: Yet he was not more admirable in his sermons, then in his priuate discourses and exercises. Casiline his Host, Xauier sparing in his words but wō∣derfully efficaci∣ous. who as before we said, diligen∣tly obserued him, gaue this testimony: That Xauier was sparing in his words, but wōderfully efficacious. For he was wont to discourse with such feruour of spirit of diuine matters, that he inflamed the harts of his Auditours. When he said masse, especially that of the Passion, it was ordinary with him to shed abundā∣ce of teares, with great inward feeling. In offering of which sacrifice he saw him once at the time of his first Memento so abstracted from his senses, Saying Masse of the Passion he is ab∣stracted from his senses. that although his minister pulled him oftentimes by the vestment, yet he did not in any wise perceiue him, but remai∣ned so a whole houre before he came to himselfe a∣gain. For he was indeed (as is said of Daniel) a man of desires, and much prayer. These things therfore drew many of that Citty, but especially his Host to the loue of his singular piety, and made his memory also gra∣tefull and famous amongst them after his departure. And thus he left behind him at Bononia, foot∣sheps of long continuance as well of his sanctity, as of his industrious labours. For Casiline from thence forward bare great respect to that lodging and cham∣ber of Xauerius, and made thereof a place for those of the Society to lodge in, as they trauayled to and fro that way. But in processe of time when the Society of IESVS made meanes for a house at Bononia, by the speciall prouidence of God, The pla∣ce where he lod∣ged tur∣ned into a Chap∣pell. there fell vnto them, the next howse to Xauiers forsaid lodging, and the Church of S. Lucia wherin he had oftentimes said masse; at what time the said lodging was, through the memory of that holy man, and deuotion of the place, turned into a Chappel, that it might be a monument both of Xauiers lodging, & sanctity of life. But when afterward the Church of S. Lucia was repayred, it was thought good to take in that Chappell to the same, & dedicate it to the Circumcision of our Sauiour, so that ou would thinke Xauier being inspired from heauen, ordained that place for the Society to inhabite. Francis, hauing performed all things wel at Bo∣nonia came to Rome (as was agreed) about the midst of Lent in the yeare of our Lord 1539. The fathers at that time, had begged a lodging at the foote of an hil of certaine litle Gardēs (now called Mons Trinitatis ) in a place there which Quirinus Garzoni, an honest and vertuous Cittizen of Rome had lent vnto them. There they all liued by begging; and being no lesse desirous of their neighbours saluation, then of their owne per∣fection in vertue, they agreed amongst themselues to imploy all their endeauours in aduancing Christian Religion, and to labour what they could in Christs vineyard, hoping that, that Citty being the seat of Religion, and made fertile by the bloud of so many Martyrs, would yield most plentifull fruit of piety. Taking therfore a right course in the execution of this their vertuous determination, they first presēt themselues to the Vicegerent of the Pope, and to the Pastours of Parishes. And hauing obtained leaue to preach whersoeuer they would, they deuide themsel∣ues throughout the principall Churches of the Citty. And S. Laurence in Damasus, a very famous & remar∣keable Church, He prea∣cheth in S. Lau∣rence of Damasus. fell vnto Xauerius, and Fabers lot, to preach therin by turnes. In this Church therfore preaching oftentimes before a frequent and fauoura∣ble audience, not of pleasing but profitable and ne∣cessary matters, he reaped a haruest proportionable to his seed, and caused in his auditours not so much admiration as profit, which is the chiefe thing in a Preacher. For by his often preaching he endeauoured to allure the people to an honest & tēperate life, & to frequent the holy Sacraments. And his other compa∣nions bēding all their forces likewise to the same end, deuotion seemed now againe to be set on fire in the harts of the Romans, and old Rome by little & little to appeare agayne in her former lustre and renowne. Yet Xauier was not so imploied in helping the people by his Sermons, as that he forgot the yonger sort therof, but with very diligent care instructed them, euen street by street, in the precepts and mysteries of the Christian faith; knowing for certaine that the chiefe good of the whole Citty depended principally vpon the instruction and vertuous education of chil∣dren. In the meane time these good Fathers, through their industry and labours, brought the Society of Iesus to a forme of Religion, which then began, not only to be established at home, but also to be in great esteeme abroad, by reason of the vertuous and indu∣strious labours therof: In so much that Ignatius & his cōpaniōs were famous throughout the whole world, God intending to spread this his new flocke ouer all Nations. CHAP. VIII. The Prouince of India is by God assigned to Xauerius. T HE Society of Iesus was not as yet con∣firmed by the Popes authority, The King of Portu∣gall de∣manded some of the Soci∣ety. when the fame of Ignatius and his companions mo¦ued Iohn the 3. King of Portugall to de∣mand some of them of his Holines, and of S. Ignatius, by Peter Mascar nas his Embassadour, resident at that time in the Citty. The reason of this his demaund was, because the Portugheses at that time furnished with the kings shippes, had with no lesse fortunate successe, then valorous attempt by vnknowne seas, found out new wayes and Countries, neuer before heard off, and hauing subdued many sauage and bar∣barous prople, had penetrated, euen beyond the Ri∣uers of Indus and Ganges, into the vtermost East. The most pious King therfore knowing of what importāce it was to introduce Christianity into those Nations, resolued with himselfe to send thither some vertuous and approued Preachers of the holy Gospel; thinking himselfe not worthy the name of a Chri∣stian King, vnlesse he procured to bring that sauage people, now vnder his power, to the faith of Christ, He had heard, by many letters, of Ignatius and his Companions singular guifts, and great paines in hel∣ping their neighbours. Wherfore desirous of such mē, he gaue in charge to Mascarenas his Embassadour a∣foresaid, to procure in his name as many of them as he cold, both of his Holines (at whose disposition he vnderstood them to be) and of Ignatius their founde and Superiour. Mascarenas failed not to performe with all diligence what his King had commanded, & so dealt with the Pope and Ignatius; but could obtay∣ne only two of them out of so small a number. The enterprise was indeed no lesse dangerous, then laborious, because they were by continuall naui∣gation for many monthes togeather to passe through the vast Ocean, & horrible raging seas as it were into another world, where also they should be hourely in as great danger in labouring amongst those barba∣rous and wild people, as they were in comming to them. Phil. c. 1. But those things which vse to affright, & keepe backe others, drew on these men of God, and louers of the Crosse, to whome it would be Christ to liue, and gaine to dye. Therfore when it was knowne that two were to go into India they being all in good hope, and euery one wishing it might be himselfe, did with silēce expect the euent of that great businesse. At that time Ignatius a man venerable both for his admirable sanctity, and institution of the Society, gouerned his companions more by authority, then by any command he had ouer them. He therfore at the first allotted out for India Simon Rodrigues, & Nicolas Bobadilla, not without the pious emulation of their other companions: but indeed God reserued it for Francis. Rodrigues was already passed into Portugal, although he were there sick of a quartan ague; & Bo∣ adilla was still so sicke at Rome, Ignatius his spe∣ach. that he could not go with the kings Embassadour, who then made hast a∣way. Wherfore Ignatius hauing very seriously con∣sulted with God by prayer, calleth vnto him Francis, who had now some little suspicion of the matter. Then with a cheerfull countenance as his ordinary ustome was: Francis, quoth he, God himselfe hath certainly assigned India for you B badilla, whome I had appointed for it, being as you see, detained with a long sicknes, cannot vndertake it. The rest of our Companions, for the most part, by command of his Holines, are employed heere in Italy in charitable ex∣ercises. You I thought to haue kept with my selfe for other occasions; but God, who hath chosen you out for his Ghospell, hath otherwise ordained. Shew your selfe therfore a man, follow God your Capitaine who by infallible signes calleth you into India: let that heauenly flame wherwith we haue alwayes seene you set on fire, stirre you vp now to this worthy en∣terprize. Take courage answerable to your nobility of mynd, to the greatnes of the employment which you are to vndertake, and to the expectation which both heauen and earth hath of you. Your knowne vertue, and especially that prompt obedience of yours, which is wont to be ready not only at euery com∣mand, but also at the least becke, maketh me say no more to you about this matter, seeing, what I haue sayd, may seeme more then inough to him, whome this had byn sufficient, Go, follow God who calleth you into India. At these words Francis, with a virginall blush in his countenance, after he had sayd that he was ready to vndertake all things for Christ his sake, with teares of ioy trickling from his eyes, gaue Ignatius next vnto God great thankes, because he had accomplished his desire. For he had felt himselfe indeed long since mo∣ d by God to procure the saluation of the Indians, and now by diuine instinct he saw the same approued by his authority, whome he tooke to be the Interpre∣ter of Gods will. Therfore he would without fayle vn∣dertake it how paynefull or dangerous soeuer it were. For although all other, both humane and diuine helps, should fayle him for Gods seruice, yet certaynly his promptitude of will to obey him should neuer be wā∣ting, & his obedience & life should end both together. There appeared hereby in Francis not only an ad∣mirable promptitude in obedience, Francis his obe∣dience and gre∣atnes of mynd. but also a singular courage. For the Society at that tyme had not any o∣ther place, but only at Rome, where he might haue en∣tertaynement or lodging: And in Portugall and India he was to find such condition as he could best procure for himselfe. Moreouer his iorney into India, and tra∣uailing there among those barbarous people, carried with it no lesse danger then misery. But he thirsting after martyrdome, began to hope for that in India, which Hierusalem had denied him. Wherfore through courage of mynd, and confidence in God contemning all difficulties and dangers, he as readily resigned him∣selfe to Ignatius, & with as great obedience, as though God himselfe had commaunded him. And so depar∣ting from his chamber he prepared himself for his ior∣ney, reioycing much that the employment which he desired, was thus now put into his hands euen by God himselfe. There was not any one of the whole howse who did not affirme for certayne, that it was Gods parti∣cular prouidence, that Xauier should be chosen before all others, to take the essay of that new Prouince of India. For they then called to mind his frequent spea∣ches, wherein he was accustomed to extoll the great fruite and haruest in India, and to bewayle the misery of so many Indians who perished through ignorance. Therfore they thought him most fit to remedy their calamity, who had greatest feeling and compassion of t. They also remembred a certayne vision, which Ia∣ es Laynes affirmed was tould him in tymes past by Francis himselfe, when they were chamber-fellowes. For Xauier oftentymes in his sleep thought he carryed for a good while an Indian vpō his shoulder, who see∣med so heauy, that being weary with the weight, he was awaked out of his sleepe: Francis his drea∣me of bearing an Indian vpon his shoul∣ders. which at last the euent shewed to haue byn rather a presage of a future verity, then only a dream. Francis therfore carying with him these hopes & cogitations into India, and being ready the next day to set forward on so long a iourney, was an argument how little he affected worldly things, who depended wholly vpon God. CHAP. IX. Hauing byn vvith his Holynesse, he goeth into Portugal, and giueth arguments of of great vertue in the vvay. B VT before he began his iorney thinking a all things would succeed prosperously and happily with him, if by the authority of Christs Vicar he vndertooke so hard an enterprize, he went vnto the Pope, who then was Paul the third, and hauing, as the custome is, kissed his feete, he demaunded his benediction, and graunt of certayne Indulgences, being ready to go into In∣dia, without making any mention of his command. Wherevpon the Pope reioycing for this expedition, receyued him courteously and giuing him his benedi∣ction with most cordiall affection spake vnto him, al∣most in manner following. I truly, render infinite thankes vnto the diuine Goodnes, Paul the 3. his speach. that in my Popedome, the fayth is agayne to be brought into India, which hauing byn first plan∣ted there by the Apostles, was by litle and litle extin∣guished by the barbarous carriage of those Nations. As for your selfe, do you (being raysed therunto not on∣ly by our authority, but also by the impulse of God himselfe, whose person we beare) vndertake this so great charge with like greatnes of mynd, remembring that God by men calleth you into India; Thinke with your selfe who calleth, not who you are. Remember that you are called by him, Rom. c. 4. who calleth aswell those things which be not, as those things which be. Nor doeth he so much seeke men that are fit for his worke, as that he maketh men fit by choosing them. Whomeso∣uer he choseth, to him he giueth sufficient courage & strength. For who knoweth not, that the Apostles were of themselues vnprouided of all things: and yet they being poore fishermen without eyther learning or experience in other affaires, what did not they do, being sent, and guided by God? What Kingdomes, what Nations, what people did not they make subiect to the Crosse? And to say nothing of others, how wel did S. Thomas the Apostle carry the matter for the Christian cause in India, whither you now goe vnder the conduct of the same God? How many barbarous nations did he win to ciuility? How many Aultars of false Gods did he ouerthrow? How many kingdoms did he bring vnder the sweet yoke of Christ? Neyther ought the terrour of miseries, or death it selfe make you slacke in ad∣ enturing. For to one that thinketh vpon life euer∣lasting, this life is vile; and to a mortall man nothing is more to be desired, then a good and happy death. To one therfore who contemneth, nay desireth death, what can seeme hard, bitter, or horrible? Go one ther∣fore, and by Gods holy conduct, and S. Thomas his e∣xample, extend farre and wide in the east the bounds of Christian Religion. The hand of God is not abbre∣uiated. He that in times past founded the Church by Apostles, increased and adorned it afterward by A∣postolicall men. Then Francis shewing by his countenance his sub∣mission of mind, answered almost in this manner. For my part (most holy Father) I do not know what I can do in this kind, why I aboue al others should be chosen for this great worke. This I leaue to them to iudge of, who haue chosen me. For it belongeth not to him that obeyth, to iudge what he can do, but to them that command. But I, by how much I distrust in my owne forces, by so much I confide in the assi∣stance and prouidence of God, who choseth weake things of the world, 1. Cor. 2. to confound the stronge, that all flesh may not glory in his sight. Therfore I assuredly hope, that he who hath layd this charge vpon me, wil also giue me forces for the performance therof, according to his pleasure. The Pope when he perceiued in his countenance, and by this speach a token of great worth in Xauerius, iudging that he who was to propagate the faith a∣mong the Indians, Francis made le∣gate Apo¦stolicall of India. had need of greater authority; of his owne accord, gaue vnto him his owne power, as farre as should be needfull. For he made Francis his legate Apostolicall in India: And therof gaue letters patents to the King of Portugals Embassadour to be deliuered to his King, wherewith, if he thought it good, he might honour Francis at his departure into India. Francis therfore, who thought himselfe, not sufficient to vndergo so great a burthen, returned home more glad that that Honour was differred, then if it had presently been giuen vnto him. Thence he tooke leaue of his friends not without many teares on both sides, all being very sory for his departure: and with him he carryed nothing at all, but his ordi∣nary habit, & a Breuiary. He went from Rome to Por∣tugall in company of Mascarenas the Kings Embassa∣dour in the yeare of our Lord 1540. hauing for his cō∣panion Paul Camertes, who about that tyme had byn by Ignatius receaued into the Society. In his iourney he gaue no lesse signes of modesty, then of sanctity. For although he were giuen to the ontemplation of heauenly things, yet being not alto∣ ether vnmindfull of humane, he shewed himselfe so ourteous vnto all, that when he came to the Inne, he would leaue the best chambers & beds to other of his company, contenting himselfe with the worst things. And when the seruants neglected to looke vnto their aisters horses, or discharge other inferiour seruile ffices, He loo∣kes to o∣thers horses. he would himselfe do them all, shewing him∣ lf therin rather a seruant indeed, then a companion. et none was more pleasant in cōuersation then him lfe, none more ready in all kind of courtesies. He ught by all meanes to deserue well of all, he spake euery one louingly and friendly, he would himself sit others in a courteous manner, and alwayes bid em welcome with a cheerfull countenance, who came vnto him; he did easily and willingly yield vnto others; his discourse was seasoned with a sweete and pleasing affability. But (which is hardest of all) he kept such a meane in all these things, that tempering courtesy with grauity, both his actions and wordes sauoured all of sanctity. It was his proper and conti∣nuall custome to discourse of matters which were ey∣ther pious in themselues, or els seasoned with piety, and to incite all with whome he conuersed, by occa∣sion eyther of speach or otherwise, to the hatred o vice, & amendment of life; shewing them that it was harder to endure vices, then the remedies thereof. And the wholsome bitternes of these discourses he al∣wayes allayed, with the sweet sawce of many cour∣teous offices. Diuers accidents also made Xauerius his payneful care no lesse admirable for his deeds, then for his words. Vpon a tyme the Embassadour being angry with his Harbinger, because he had byn negligent in preparing his lodging, reprehended him sharpely for it; but being gotten from his Maister (as he wa intemperate both in his passion and speach) he inuei∣ghed vehemently agaynst him to his companions i Francis his hearing; He ex∣pects a fit time to repre∣hend. who thinking it best to dissemble the matter for the present whilest he was yet in chol∣ler, forbare to speake vnto him, that his mind being pacifyed he might the easier be cured. The next day therfore he obserued the man, watching an occasion to reprehend him: and when it grew towards night, the Harbinger, as the custome was, began to ride on before to prouide lodging: whereupon Francis getting presently on horse-backe (for most commonly he went on foote for pouerty sake, although he might haue had a horse) set spurres to his side, and made hast after him. When he had almost ouertaken him, the Harbingers horse by chance (yet very fitly for his pur∣pose) falling downe, lay vpon the man with all his weight, by which misfortune he was in daunger to haue byn slayne, but that Xauerius came at the very point, and saued his life. Then taking that as an oc∣casion to tell him of his former fault: What, quoth he, would haue byn come of thee, if suddaine death, which was not farre of, had surprized thee, being out of the state of grace by reason of thy anger yesterday, and intemperancy of thy tongue, for which thou hast not yet satisfyed? These wordes so stroke the Harbin∣ er (who now saw manifestly the dāger which he had scaped) to the hart, that he was sory for his fault, nd being put in mynd of his fury the day before, ac∣ nowledged his vnbridled passion, and intemperan∣ e of tongue, and then by Xauerius persuasion gaue sa∣ sfaction to his companions whome he had scandali∣ ed. Francis also did not only comfort and assist with ll courtesy his companions when they were weary with trauayling, but also in their daungers gaue them uccour, with his prayers, when he could not with is hands. One of the Embassadours chiefe pages, al∣ hough dissuaded by the rest, aduenturing to ride o∣uer a swift riuer, was brought euen to the point to be cast away; for being now carryed into the violent streame, and not able to guide his horse, whereby he became inuolued in the turnings of the waters, was by force thereof carryed away without any hope to escape drowning; whereat when others were greatly affrighted, By his prayers he saueth one from drow∣ning. Francis his vertue ouercame the dā∣ger. For encouraging others to pray with him to God, he himselfe began with all attention. And his prayers wanted not their desired effect, for vpon a sud∣daine the page getting out of the maine streame with his horse, to a shallow place where the water ranne with lesse force, and so taking courage, by Gods assi∣stance, and his companions who called out vpon him, he got at last vnto the banke, on the further side of the riuer, being as all acknowledged, by Francis his pray∣ers deliuered from present death. Afterwards as they trauayled ouer the Alpes, where being not able to take sure footing by reason of the driuing of the snow, and the craggy rockes & pa∣ches, their horses being tyred with no small daunger to their maisters, the Embassadours Secretary fell by chance from his horse, and was suddainly swallowed vp in a huge masse of snow. The place was vpō a slip∣pery and steepy rocke, vnder which ran a swift tor∣rent. The greatnes of the danger stroke all his com∣panions into such a feare, that none durst vndertake to assist him, He draw¦eth the Embas∣sadours Secreta∣ry out of the snow least he should rather pull them after him who should go to help him, then himselfe be pulled vp agayne; so they being all amazed stood still looking one vpon another. As they thus stood, on commeth Xauerius, and regarding anothers life more then his owne, leapt presently from his horse, and by mayne strength drew him vp out of the snow, & de∣liuered him from manifest danger, with no small pe∣rill of his owne life; whereupon the Secretary being obliged to Francis for so great a fauour, honoured him euer after as the author of his life, and saluation. The Embassadour also himselfe moued by these wonder∣full acts, and also by the sweetnes of his most holy be∣hauiour, bare great affection vnto him. Francis moreouer did not content himselfe with helping his companions, but besides, he helped all he met, in as much as he was able, especially at the lod∣gings, and Innes, taking all occasions both by instru∣ction, and admonition to incite them to an honest & Christian life. From that tyme also his singular piety hath left behind it an example of Euangelicall per∣fection, both for religious to imitate, and others to admire. Hauing past the Pyrenaean mountaynes they were come to the borders of Pamplona, where his iorney lay not farre from his owne territory; his mother, kins∣folkes, and friends were not farre out of the way; if e should let slippe that occasion, he knew wel inough that by reason of the great distance from India thither he should morally neuer after haue opportunity to see them. He pas∣seth by his owne country without saluting his kin∣dred. He knew also, that there could not come any hindrance of his iourney eyther by his mother, she be∣ing a vertuous woman (for his good Father was now dead) or by his knisfolkes. His companions importu∣ned him; the Embassadour himselfe vrged him to vi∣sit and salute them by the way. But Xauerius fearing least some of the company, through want of consi∣deration, might be afterwards deceiued by his exam∣ple, he could by no meanes be drawen thereunto. Thus he shewing an holy hate to his friends, both pro∣ued himselfe to be the true disciple of Christ, and also gaue a document to Religious persons, that they should with▪ far greater reason hould their friends for enemies, if they went about to hinder them in the ser∣uice of God. But least this vnusuall thing should offend eyther the Embassadour, or any other of the company who were not acquainted with this kind of heauenly Phi∣losophy, he endeauoured by his mild speach and solid arguments to make good to them what he had done. Hauing therfore passed Spaine with speed, he made like hast with the Embassadour vnto Lisbone, where the King of Portugall resided. But the Embassadour throgh long and inward friendship, and familiarity with Xa∣uier had now gottē such an opinion of his vertue that he could not withhould himself from sending an ex∣presse messenger with letters before vnto the King, to certify him of Francis his comming, and prayse-wor∣thy qualities, which caused in the King a great desire to see and honour him; which soone after he did ari∣uing at Lisbone, where he was already knowne, and much desired, through report of his vertues. CHAP. X. Beeing louingly entertayned by the King of Portugall, he exciteth them of Lis∣bone to deuotion. L ISBONE is a Citty, Descrip- of Lis∣bone. wherin the Court is kept, not farre from the Ocean sea, the greatest without comparison, of all Portu∣gall; and by reason of an excellent Hauen in the mouth of the riuer Tagus, which runneth by that Citty, it is a place very populous for the com∣ ing thither of Indian merchandise. As soone there∣ re as he was come thither, being glad of his ariuall the place from whence he was to embarke himselfe India, He cu∣reth Si∣mon Ro∣driquez of a qua ¦tane. he found Simon Rodriguez his companion who as we sayd, was come thither before, for this rney into India ) still sicke of a quartane ague, and apned that that was his sick day. A strang thing: comming to him vpon a suddain, & imbracing the ke man, caused in him such ioy, that his ague neuer er came agayne, and so whether through the great∣ s of the ioy, or rather by Xauiers vertue, he was quite de of his sicknes. When he had a litle rested him∣ fe after his trauaile, being sent for to the Court, he nt thither, togeather with Simon who was now ouered, offering both himselfe, and all he was e to do for the help of the Indians. The King ha∣ g vnderstood much by his Embassadour of Francis great vertue, after he had courteously receyued thē both in a great assembly of the Nobility, spake vn∣to them in this manner. The Kings speach. Fathers, quoth he, I am very glad of your ariuall in Portugall for the good of India. And I do not doubt but you, are as glad of it, as my selfe. For there is opened vnto you, to shew your ver∣tue, the great and vast Countries of India, which as I hope, being carefully and faythfully manured, gi∣ueth great promises of a most plentifull haruest of soules, so great an inclination the people euery where seeme to haue to the Christian fayth I for my part, as long as I carry this Crowne, will preferre Religion before my Kingdome, and then, shall I account my∣selfe King of those Nations, when I shall heare tha they are obedient to the King of Heauen. Wherefore you cannot doe any thing which will be more grate∣full to mee, and to God also as I hope, then to ioyne all your forces with me for reducing of the East to the faith of Christ, our cōmon Lord and Father. If I were to deale with other kind of men then you, I would exhort you not to feare the difficulties which nature may obiect, or the threates of the raging Ocean, or the miseries of so tedious, yea almost infinite iorney, or the encountring with barbarous nations; or that your feruour of piety should not be slacke in going thither, whither others out of desire of gayne runne with alacrity. But why do I by wordes endeauour to inflame your Vertue, knowing well inough, by the warre you haue vndertaken for Christ, and his Gos∣pels sake, that out of dangers you bring glory to God, and euerlasting saluation to men; and that you desire nothing more in this life then to dye a worthy death for Gods sake? It is certaine that nature hath locked vp nothing so close, to the which true vertue is not able to penetrate. By Gods assistance you will open a way for the Gospell, not only into India, but also into the furthest Eastern parts of the world. There remayneth for you eyther a life of eminent merit, or a glorious eath. Therfore whilest the Nauy is in prouiding a∣ ainst the spring, do you also prepare what shall be ecessary for your iourney. We will take care that ou want nothing, eyther in Portugall, or India. Then they giuing most humble thankes vnto the King, Xauier and Ro∣driquez answere answered in this manner. That they had long nce manifestly seene the great desire he had of aduā∣ ing Gods honour, and had not only heard at Rome by the report of many, of his liberality answerable to his religious desire: but had themselues also experienced of late in their iorney by many proofes; so that they ught rather to endeauour to correspond to his Maie∣ ies worthy merits, then to make any question whe∣ er he would be like himselfe or no. And because eir greatest desire was to bring the light of the Gos∣ ell into India, & other barbarous nations, he should erefore without delay vse them in whatsoeuer they ould do, for the help of those countries. For albeyt hey well knew both themselues and his Maiesty, & ound themselues to haue neyther ability nor forces nswerable to so weighty a charge, or to his so great eruour: yet their confidence was that God who layd pon them that burthen would supply what was wā∣ ing on their behalfe. What danger should be refused or Gods sake, and where God leadeth the way? As for themselues, their chiefest care ought to be of Gods glory, and to preferre a worthy death before any life whatsoeuer. Heerupon there arose a strife betweene the Kings liberality, and Francis and Simons modesty. The King promising them all things in aboundance, performe more in deeds, then he spake in words; and they or the other side through the strict obseruance of the po∣uerty which they had vowed, would not vse the commodities the King offered them. At last the ser∣uants of God remayning constant in their resoluti∣on, ouercame the Kings, bountifull nature, and so he yielded vnto them, drawne therto not throug the equity of their cause, Refusing a fayre lodging they go to the Hospital of the sicke. but through admiration o their vertue. Departing from the King and refusing a fayre lodging which was freely offered them, they presently went to the publicke Hospitall of the sicke, with great commendation both of their humility and piety. For it was knowne well inough, tha they desired to lodge there before all other places, that they might more freely serue the sicke for Christ sake. And herein their charity, and diligent labour were answerable to that, which the Citty expected from them. Their manner of life in the Hospitall was this▪ In the morning before day, they spent an houre in prayer and meditation, Their manner of life in the Hos∣pitall. and hauing read their diuin office they sayd Masse at breake of day. The rest o their tyme they imployed both seriously and cheer∣fully in helping and instructing the sicke, sometym comforting those that were sad and afflicted, other whiles encouraging those that were ready to dye, to that last battayle and encounter; sometymes agayne hearing their Confessions, and at others tymes re∣soluing those who asked their aduise in matters con∣cerning their conscience. Which labour of theirs pas∣ d not away eyther in obscurity or without fruit, se∣ g most of the Citty drawne by the reporte of their anctity, Many of the Citty are recal led to a good life came thither flocking vnto them. And they continually discoursing of pious matters, & things ncerning euerlasting saluation, with great feeling d feruour of spirit, drew many to the hatred of vice d loue of vertue, and especially to the frequent vse f the holy Sacraments. Which pious custome of fre∣ enting the same being then, after a long tyme, first newed in Lisbone, The fre∣quent vse of the Sacra∣ments is brought into Por∣tugall. was afterward spread ouer al Por∣ gall, both to the great good of the Cittizens themsel∣ es and commodity of all their Citties. For innume∣ ble people euery where (as the Portugheses are very uch inclined to piety) renewing that most pious holy custome, and taken with the comfort of lea∣ ng a godly life, by diuine instinct, intred into sundry gious Orders: some also desired to be of their So∣ ety, which was at that tyme confirmed by Pope ul the III. And thus through so great a reformation of be∣ uiour in the people, the Citty began to appeare of other forme then before. So as now, not only the eaner sort, but the Nobility also frequented their dging for the Sacamēts sake, and to aske their con∣ le in other matters; the pouerty of the place & the en, making the same more remarkable, by reason that the chiefe of the Citty resorted often to the lod∣ging of poore strangers; and lastly their contempt of all worldly things stroke all men into admiration For it was now reported among the people, that twelue Priests (for two more had ioyned themselues to the other ten) had at Rome made a certaine Society among themselues; of which number they seemed to behould in these two, who were present with them, I know not what resemblance of an Apostolicall life. And so the people, whether in regard of the number of twelue or for a certayne likenesse to them in their lyfe, began to call them Apostles (too great a Title indeed) In Portu∣gall he is called an Apostle. al∣though the good Fathers withstood, and wholy dis∣claymed the same what possibly they could, but in vaine for the Portugheses being a nation no lesse con∣stant in what they once haue begun, then pious in their resolutions, could not be brought by any means to reuoke that, which once they had giuen to truth, as they verily belieued. Yea this matter went so farre, that the same name was afterward deriued to others of the Society, almost throughout all Portugall. CHAP. XI. His Iourney into India is hindred, but all in vaine. B VT the Portugheses singular deuotion, by rather burdenning, than gracing the Fa∣thers with such a Title, was afterwards some hindrance to their Indian voyage, yet so, that although men were diuersly inclined, still Gods will stood firme concerning Francis. For some of the prin∣cipall of the Citty who were much affected to Xauerius and Rodriguez, valewing the profit of the Citty, not only by the present fruit, but also for the hope of fu∣ ure commodity, contriued among themselues how they might stay these men in Portugall, esteeming their owne good to be preferred before others. First there∣fore this matter was treated off by the chiefe of the Kingdome, and afterwards when it had gotten ma∣ny graue abettors and furtherers, at last is brought into the King. Then the Noblemen euery one of them shewed how much benefit that Royall Citty had eaped by Ignatius his companions in so short a space, and what great help all Portugall might hope from them, if it could enioy them, not as strangers for a yme, but as perpetuall inhabitants thereof. And that he good of Portugall, and of that Princely Citty, as eing his chiefe and Royall seate, ought to be dearer nto his Maiesty then India: Why therefore for the succour of barbarous Nations should he depriue his owne natiue Country of so excellent helps? Why hould India abroad, rather then Portuall at home, be ore deare vnto him? Wherfore if it seemed good vn∣ o his Maiesty as it did to them, he should plant those worthy men, as seeds of that generation, in Portugall, nd so erect a Seminary at hand which might supply hem, with fit Priests to send into India. The King approuing his Nobles opinion, & iud∣ging it meet to prouide first for thē who were neerest to him, leauing off for the present his determination of helping India, resolued to detaine them both in Por∣tugall to begin a Seminary of the same Institute. Which as soone as Rodriguez▪ & Xauerius vnderstood by their friends, being indeed moued at the vnexpected newes, they presently certify Ignatius by letters of the Kings new determination, asking him what they should do. Who hauing acquainted his Holines with the busines, thought it good to leaue it wholly to the Kings arbi∣trement, nothing doubting but the treating thereof before him, would make him thinke better of it. Let∣ters are at the same tyme dispatched from his Holines to the King, and from Ignatius to his companions, wherin the matter was left wholly to his maiesty. But if he would know, what Ignatius his opinion was therin, it seemetd to him most conuenient that a se∣paration should be made, so as Rodriguez might stay in Portugall, & Francis go forward into India. The King therfore following Ignatius his Coun∣saile, sendeth for th m both, who being vncertayne what would be resolued off, depended wholy vpon the diuine prouidence. Then the King in a courteous manner, as his custome was, shewing them first what was granted to him from Rome concerning their dis∣posall, declareth what he had now resolued: to wit, That Simon should stay in Portugall to begin a Colledg at Conimbria which might be a Seminary for members to be sent into India, and that Francis should go into his designed Prouince of the East. Wherefore they should both, with all speed, prepare themselues with like diligence to their offices, although they were different, knowing that many times equall rewards are assigned for vnequall seruices, God not respecting so much the worke, as the good will wherwith it is done. Heereupon Xauerius, being presently changed from his great feare, into great ioy, gaue the King many thankes, that he had granted his desire, and had so prudently tempered the want of his compani∣on , with the ioy he gaue him of the diuision, that he promised not only to be gratefull, but also to vse all care and diligence to be answerable for so great a be∣nefit. But Rodriguez being frustrated of his hope and desire, and at the first stroken with such an vnexpec∣ted declaration, shewed by his lookes, and counte∣nance to be somewhat troubled: but presently recol∣lecting himselfe he answered grauely and quietly, al∣most to this effect: That the taking of India from him had stroke him with such griefe to the hart, that he was not able to cōceale it; yet since Ignatius, the King, and his Holinesse agreeing all in one thing, sufficient∣ly declared it to be Gods holy will, he would most wil∣lingly, at his Maiesties commaund, leaue off that em∣ployment for whose sake he had vndertaken it. Wher∣fore he remained wholly at the Kings disposall, and was glad that by beginning a Seminary, he might also in some sort labour for India, since he might hope to help them by his schollers, whome he could not by himselfe. Thus departing from the King, each of them addressed their cares, for the performance of their charge. CHAP. XII. Being ready to take shipping for India, he receiueth from the King the Popes Let∣ters patents of Legate Apostolicall & refuseth to take any thing for the char∣ges of his iourney. F RANCIS therfore seeing his iorney to be approued by such euident signes both from God and men, began to furnish him∣selfe for it, not with prouision of victualls and other things necessary and conuenient, but with pious meditations and profitable considerations. For he would not vndertake so weighty a charge rawly & vnprouidedly, but with serious ponderation & pre∣paration, and by thinking with himselfe now whilst he was at leasure, of what he was afterwards to make vse, that so he might not spend his tyme in speculation of that, wherein he was to employ himselfe in the practise. When the tyme drew neere for his iourney into India, the King calling him, is sayd to haue spoken vnto him particularly to his effect. The Kings speach. Francis Xauier, our ships are ready, the tyme that you haue so earnestly de∣sired of going into India, is now come. For my part haue hitherto had so many, and so great arguments both of your vertue & prudence, that I hould it need∣lesse to vse any exhortation vnto you, presaging what will follow by that which is already past. Yet that we may not seeme to be wanting in our duty, we will as the saying is, spurre on him, who runneth already. First therfore, I commend vnto you the Ethincke Nations which are vnder our subiection, endeauouring to v∣nite them to the Church, that my dominions may not be further extended then Gods Religion. Then out of our fatherly affection towards them, I deliuer & com∣mit the Portugheses that remaine in those places to your trust, in such sort that I would haue you supply the place of our beneuolence towards them. You are not ignorant, I know, that Kings haue need of many hands and eyes, for the gouernment of their king∣domes. Wherfore I pray, & beseech you by that very God, who is your guide and companion in this iorney hat (as farre as you may with conueniency) you ould diligently visit our garrisons there, and after∣wards certify vs of all things appertaining to Religi∣ n; that so, all impediments, if there be any, being eedily remoued, the Christian Religion by your ad∣ se and labour, and by our assistance and authority, ay spread it selfe ouer India and the East. As for my lfe I will loose my kingdome, before I will leaue off y desire to aduance Religion. For I am resolued to mploy all the meanes and forces I am able, for the ropagation therof. It is your part to be answerable oth to the charge you haue vndertaken, and to our esire. What ayde or help soeuer, either the honour of God, or the Christian cause shall seeme to require, emaund it confidently, and it shall be granted, and I shall thinke my expences a gayne for Religion sake. Wherfore proceed cheerfully, and seeing that you go, (no doubt, by diuine instinct, and conduct,) vpon an enterprize which of al others is hardest, maintayne still that couragious mynd, which hitherto you haue borne, and carry with you into India that vertue and sanctity of which all Portugall speaketh to be in you. Then the King taking out of his bosome the Po∣pes Breue said further. And that you may know what most ample power is granted you, towards the effec∣ting of what you take in hand, not only by mee, but also by Christ his Vicar vpon earth, behold heer his Holines Breue, wherin he maketh you his Legate A∣postolical in India, which may be both a testimony of your power, and an incitement to your vertue. Then Xauier, who had all this while blushed to to heare his owne prayses, receiuing the Breue with no lesse reuerence, then modest bashfulnesse, replyed. If I (most excellent Prince) could find that your e∣steeme of me were as true, as it is good, I should very much reioyce for the opinion of so noble a Person your Maiesty is, & the giue great thākes to God the giue of all good things. But assuredly, your singular Good∣nes is much deceyued, the by opinion of anothers ver∣tue. I knowing mine owne weakenes and imperfecti∣ons, should I not be thought a mad man, if concerning my selfe, I should belieue others before my selfe? Verily Syr, I being a sinnefull man, and wholly vnfit for this godly enterprize (which I say because it is true, and not for humilities sake) both your Maiesty, and his Holines do impose a farre greater burden vpo ee, then my feeblenes is able to susteine; yet had I ra∣ her be oppressed with the weight of the burden, then yther refuse, or cast off that charge, through pusil∣ animity, which by Gods will is layd vpon mee. For God when imposeth a burden, he affoardeth also for∣ces to beare it, & with power giueth also ability for the execution therof. Wherfore by the helpe of his hea¦ enly assistance, I will do my best to make it appeare that I remember, what person I present in this weak∣nesse of myne, since the charge is imposed vpon me by God, his Holines, & your maiesty. And my life shall leaue mee sooner, then I will violate my fidelity, ey∣ther in word in deed. Hauing sayd thus, the King aduiseth him in a most courteous manner to thinke well with himselfe, what might stand in need off in Portugall or India, for he d giuen charge to his officers in ech kingdome that ey should carefully procure him, whatsoeuer he desired. And withall he giueth him his Letters Roy∣all, conteyning no lesse authority then commenda∣tions. Francis then hauing giuen thankes to the King kissed his hand, as the custome is, went home to his friends farewell, that he might embarke him∣ fe. And the King was no lesse liberall in deeds then had byn in words: for he gaue very strayte com∣ and to his Captaynes and Officers, and that they ould furnish Francis and his companions both in ortugall and India with all things needfull for their owne maintenance, and for the increase of Gods ho∣nour and glory. So as Xauerius, and others of the So∣ciety from that tyme forward, dilated the fayth of Christ in India, Xauier & others of the Soci∣ety of Jesus are mantay∣ned in In¦dia by the libe∣rality of the King of Portu∣gall. Malaca, the Moluca's, and Iaponia, maintayned by the Kings liberality. But albeyt all things were plentifully afforded vnto them, yet their modesty so contended with the kings bounty, that they would take nothing but what was merely need∣full iudging it good, to draw sparingly of anothe mans liberality, that it might the longer continue. Wherfore in procuring their owne commodities they in all places spared the Kings treasure, but espe∣cially vpon their iorney into India. And when Franc more for the loue of pouerty, then for bashfulnes ab∣stained wholy from asking any thing at all, the Offi∣cers of their owne accord, shewed him what a stra charge the King their maister had layd vpon them, to furnish him abundantly with whatsoeuer he shoul want, or desire for his iorney. And withall intreated him to giue them as soone as might be, a note of what things he required, that they might be procured time. Francis hartily thanked both the King for his ∣berality, and them for their diligent care: but inde for his part he required or desired nothing at all. the Officers had often done thus, & receaued alway the same answere from Francis, they pressed him by in∣treaties, & were very earnest with him that he would at least take some prouision. Loue of pouerty in his iourney. At last to satisfy their im∣portunity (least his too much stāding out might make him seeme obstinate) he so yielded vnto thē, that with all he still kept his former resolution. Then he asked to haue a course rugge, or mantle, to keepe him from the extreme cold which he knew they were to endure when the sayled about the Promontorium bonae Sp i, & a few litle bookes, whereof he should haue great need in India. And besides this, he could not be brought by any intreatie to permit any thing els to be prouided for him. Therfore Count Castānerius Generall of the Nauy seeing Francis in the Admirall-ship, as the King had commaunded, without any prouision for his iourney, taking compassion on him, tould him that the King had sent a Page vnto him with great charge to see him aboundantly prouided of all things fitting for his voyage. But Francis earnestly intreated the Ge∣nerall that nothing might be giuen vnto any, for his prouision. Notwithstanding the Count was earnest with him to take at least a seruant to assist him vpon necessary occasions. Nay, quoth Francis, as long as I haue the vse of these hands, I hope I shall not need of any other seruant. At which answere of Xauerius the Count had no more to say, as he himselfe affirmed af∣terward when he related this passage to others, and withall highly extolled him for his singular abstinen∣ce. Thus furnished with no other prouision then his confidence in God, at the beginning of the spring he setteth forth for India. CHAP. XIII. In his iourney to India he giueth admirable tokens of his vertue. I N tymes past when the Romane Empire stood entire, Wayes into In∣dia. and Christian Religion flou∣rished in Asia (for India is a part of Asia there were most commonly two beate rodes into India, the one through Syria by the riue Euphates & Tigris, & the Persian gulf; the other throug Aegypt by the gulfe of Arabia and the Red sea. But no those countries being possessed by the forces and su∣perstitiō of the Saracens, the passage is not so secure, it is short, for the Christians of Europe through pla∣ces annoyed with their enemies. Wherfore the ∣gheses coasting about by Affricke, which lyeth vpon the Mediterranean Ocean, and from Affricke (as vast as i is) winding about by Arabia and Persia, A league of Por∣tugall. sayle int India, fetching thereby a mighty circuit. For by the turnings of the sea, India in distant from Portugal mo then foure thousand leagues; I meane those leagues which vsually amongst the Portughese marriners con∣teyne euery one three miles. And in this circuite the Equinoctial line, which through the heat of the sunne is extreme scorching, Prince Henry openeth a new way into India. cutting of Affricke almost in the midst, must necessarily be twice passed. The first who with as great courage as skil aduētu∣red vpon this so long, & hard away, was Prince Henry sonne to Iohn King of Portugall the first of that name, man very well experiēced in the Mathematicks. The ause of this his attempt was, that he might by laying pen a new way, haue for himselfe and the Portughe∣ses friendly trafficque with the King of Aethiopia, com∣monly called Prestre-Iohn, whome he knew raygned in the furthest part almost of Affricke, not farre from the gulfe of Arabia. This designement hauing pros∣perous successe, three Kings of Portugall following, to wit Alphonsus the V. Iohn the II. and Emanuel the I. prosecuting the same by litle and litle, brauely & for∣tunately opened, and fortifyed a way euen into India it selfe. For they tooke the Ilands, which lye vpon the cost of Affricke, and many other commodious pla∣ces, where the Portugheses haue their garrisons euen to this day. Xauerius therfore making this circuit into I dia put to sea from Portugall vpon the eight day of April in the yeare of our Lord 1541. He went in the ship with Martin Alphonsus Sosa newly made uernour of India. He had of the Society two com∣ nions only F. Paul Camertes a Priest of singular ver∣ d (who being assigned by Ignatius, had accompa∣ ed him from Rome ) and Francis Mansilla a Portu∣ ese, who had in Lisbone ioyned himselfe companion him. They met by the way in this their iourney ith many things worthy to be obserued, they being deed learned men, and very skilfull in Geometry, hilosophy, and Astrology. In the mediterranean sea ey discouered many Ilands of note, lying vpon the omontory of Affricke some lesse, some more distant oth from one another, and also from the continent. Amongst these are the Fortunate Ilands (commonly called the Canaries ) and the Ilands of Promontorij viri∣dis, The Gar¦dens of the Hes∣perides. which some are of opinion were the gardens of the Hesperides, the three daughters of Atlas, so much spoken of in the Fables of Poets. And by these remar∣keable places the Nauy passed so neere, that most of them were wit sight. Besids this, the sky being ve∣ry cleere and the sea calme they saw many vnusuall & strange kind of fishes, to the great admiration, and de∣light of the passengers. But Xauerius although he did not indeed contemne the knowledge of such things, yet thinking with him∣selfe that he went not to fetch learning or pleasure out of India, but for the glory of God, and saluation of soules, began himself within the ship to set forth sights more gratefull to God, & more profitable to men. The chiefe Admirall-ship was rather like a Towne then o∣therwise, being full not only of marriners, but also of souldiers, the Gouernours retinew, merchants, & seruants, to the number of a thousand persons or ther∣about. Francis therfore as soone as he was entred into his iourney, began togeather with his companions to employ himselfe in the most diligent manner he could in procuring the saluation of his neighbours, He in∣structeth the mar∣riners, & the Sol∣diars in the ship. by instructing the marriners, and passengers, and soldiers in the Christian doctrine, partly by reprehending their ill behauiour, and partly by exhorting them to cleanse their soules from all filth of sinne. And not in vaine. For thereby the custome of swearing was taken a∣way, many of deadly enemies became friends, many confessed their sinnes with sorrow of hart and many were reclaymed from a bad, to an honest life. Xaue∣rius carried alwayes a cheerfull countenance, He win∣neth by his soci∣able be∣hauiour great sin∣ners. winning the affections of all by the sweetnes of his behauiour. And for this cause some who were euen drowned in most abominable vices & villanies, & who cōmonly could not endure the sight of a religious man, were much delighted with Francis his most pleasing conuer∣sation. And he knowing well how to deale with such kind of dispositions, drew them at first, by sweet mea∣nes, and by litle & little, from their bad courses; and when at length he found them tractable, then he inci∣ted & spurred them on in the way of piety & vertue. The dif∣ficulties of the In∣dian na∣uigation In the meane tyme God afforded him matter answe¦rable to his generous and vertuous mind. This tedious and laborious nauigation (as commonly it hapneth) had so extremely worne out the marriners, and other passengers, that now very many fell sicke in the ships, and their victuals greatly increased the same. For they fed continually vpon salt meates, & oftentimes vpon musty bisket: besides, they had for the most parte, no other drink but stinking & corrupted water, which by reason of the nature of the liquour, and small quan∣tity thereof, did rather increase then allay the extreme thirst which the salt meates caused in them. So as the bad humours of such vnwholsome diet being disper∣ced through their veines, ingendred in them diseases no lesse grieuous then deadly. For their gummes swel∣ling after a loathsome manner, and breaking out into horrible vlcers, did not only put the sick men to great torment, but also (which was most miserable) made them that they could not eate. And this contagion by litle and litle increasing through their griefe of mynd, and want of necessary commodities, began to spread it selfe ouer the whole multitude, who were much thronged vp in straite places for want of roome. For though the King had, besides necessary prouision of victuals appointed for euery ship an Apothecary-shop of excellent drugs, which is no small comfort for sicke persons, yet the same could not suffice the great num∣ber of the diseased. The great feare also of the infecti∣on (as it hapneth) made euen friends themselues to leaue off the care of one another, & euery man to pro∣uide as well as he could for his owne safety. So as the sicke being destitute both of phisicke, and attendance dyed not more through the cōtagious disease, then for hungar, which was a worse plague. Besides the filth of the ship did so extremly annoy these poore wretches, that it was farre more troublesome and loathsome vn∣to them, then vnto the others who were in health. Xauier therfore when he saw the ship, wherin he sayled full of sick persons, calling to mind what he had accustomed himselfe vnto▪ at the beginning of his cō∣uersion gaue an euident proofe of his benignity and vertue. His in∣credible courage of mind. That which hartned him on, would haue made another afrayd. He saw the hatches of the ship strowed not only with sicke bodyes, but also with halfe dead; he knew the disease to be very infectious; he saw deaths grisly lookes before his eyes. Yet for all this, turning feare into charity, and knowing it was a kind of Martyrdome, to hazard ones life by such contagion, for the sauing of soules, he resolued to help the sayd sicke the best he could. And so he pre∣sently began to heare the confessions of those who lay a dying; he cleansed the sick mens bodies of their filth; he washed their linnen, dressed their meate, minced it smal, and fed them with his owne hands. He mini∣stred phisicke to the weake; he most louingly cheered vp those that were sad; and put them, that were out of hart, in hope of recouery both of body, and soule. And thus by seruing all indifferently, without regard of persons, & that with diligence & alacrity, he made euen those that were in health to beare him great res∣pect and reuerence. CHAP. XIIII. Seruing the sicke, he arriueth at Mozam∣bicum. A LL did indeed admire the singular sancti∣ty of life which they saw in Xauerius his cō∣tinuall diligence, his feruent prayer, & me∣ditating at set tymes, and his fatherly loue and Charity to all, without exception. By which meanes he gained both the loue and respect of all the rest, but especially of Sosa the Generall. For although the King had vpon his setting forth very seriously cō∣mended Francis to Sosa, yet his owne vertue (a most efficacious kind of commendations) commended him dayly more, and more vnto him. For which respect Sosa both to fulfill his Kings command, In the ship he liueth by begging. and out of his owne accord gaue him all things largely and bounti∣fully. Yet Xauerius himselfe liued alwayes by begging what he wanted of the passengers for Gods sakes, and through zeale of pouerty in himselfe stirred vp others to charity and bounty. His con∣stancy in keeping of pouer¦ty. Which practise he with such constancy reteyned, that neyther the Generall himselfe nor any of his Honourable retinew could at any tyme draw him from the obseruance of highest pouerty. But this one thing got Xauerius much more loue & esteeme in the sight both of God and men, to wit, that sparing from his owne belly, he would most freely deuide amongst the sicke all what he begged of the passen∣gers, and what was assigned him by the Generall. For being resolute in keeping his purpose, he eate very sparingly, and of such meate as required no great la∣bour to make it ready; not so much to satisfy nature, as to sustayne it. Yet in this meane tyme, his new care of helping the sick did not interrupt his old custome of teaching the Catechisme. His en∣during of la∣bour. For euery day he both instructed the ignorant slaues, marriners, souldiers, and other passengers in the mysteryes and precepts of our fayth, & also exhorted them by pious sermons to liue Chri∣stianlike. And in all these labours you would haue thought him not to be tyred out, but to grow stronger thereby. Which was neuer more apparently seene, then in this Indian voyage. For besides his extreme labour, this also was, as it were, added thereto, that whilst he did all these things, The dis∣commo∣dities of the tor∣rid Zone he passed the Torrid Zone and the Equinoctiall line not long after the tyme of the Equinoctium. At which tyme there is commonly in that tract of the sea, eyther through the scorching of the sunne which hāgeth ouer their heads, or by the reflexion thereof vpon the still sea, such an intollerable heate, that the strongest men being al∣most burnt vp, and consumed with heat and sweat, do euen faint away, and languish. And no meruayle, seeing the passengers being thrust vp togeather in close roomes of the ship, can hardly draw their breath, or at those tymes scarsely take any comfort, eyther in meate or drinke. For all their drinke, and victualls being vsually corrupted by the vapors of the scalding sunne, do for the most part loose their force and good∣nes for a tyme, vntil they be past the forsayd line. Ma∣ny times also the winds wholy ceasing, there followeth for many dayes, & sometymes weekes together, such a calme, that the ships are not able to moue, to the great irkesomnesse and griefe of the passengers. And as the intollerable heate of the sunne, continuing almost throughout the whole Torrid Zone, causeth vehem̄t feuers amongst them that passe vnder it, so doth it also bereaue many of their liues. At this time when sicknes came vpon them so fast, in so great a mortality of marriners & passengers, as euen they who were well, and had nothing to do could scarse breath, Francis forgetfull of him selfe vn∣derwent the burden of all these inconueniences with courage answerable thereunto, iudging it meet as he saw the sick mens incumbrances to grow greater, so also to increase his diligence in helping them. And al∣beit he was ready to languish away also, through in∣tollerable heate, yet such was his courage of mind such the force of the holy Ghost (who is euer a most sweet refreshment in heat) that he applied himselfe no lesse carefully then before, both in the seruice of those that were sick and ready to dy, as also already dead. Hauing thus sayled through the excessiue difficul∣ties of the Equinoctiall line, and being now passed a∣bout two thousand leagues, a greater feare came vpon them thē before, The Pro¦monto∣ry of Good Hope. since they were to vndergo a greater danger. For the Promontory of Good Hope, a very vn∣fortunate place by reason of most cruell tempests and shipwrackes, threatned to them no lesse pestilence & mortality then they had already endured. This Pro∣montory taketh its name of Bonae spei, or Good Hope, for this reason, that hauing once passed the difficulties & dangers therof, you then may hope for a prosperous nauigation. For thē the African coast growing sharpe in the forme of a wedge, runneth an huge way into the southern Ocean towards the frozen climate: so as two most vast seas meeting from both sides of Africk and continually tossed with contrary windes, make a most hydeous conflict with themselues. And this hapneth especially in the monthes of Iune and Iuly, at which time in those parts it is the midst of winter wholy contrary to Europe, and in which moneth or∣dinarily, they must passe that Promontory, who go from Portugall into India. And although the shippes to auoid that raging fury & violence of the sea, as much as they can, vse to keep off a great way from land, yet do they seeme to fly the danger more thē the domage. For whilst they fetch a great compasse about, the fur∣ther they go from the Promontory, the neerer they come to the frozen Zone, & so do neither auoid the cruell stormes, nor yet escape the intollerable cold. Wherfore although they be more secure from danger of shipwracke, yet by reason of the vnusuall and ve∣hement tossing of the shippes, the passengers become extremely sea-sick, and vomit. And as the same could not but augment their disease who were already sick; so also Francis his labour was of necessity increased therby: especially when he himselfe being all frozen with cold, sea-sick, and full of loathsomenesse in his stomack, did at the same time performe all those he∣roicall exercises of Charity. But the diuine vertue which was in him ouercame the weakenes of his na∣ture, and his noble and constant courage, held in the troublesome vomiting of his stomake. And so when he was not able to help himself, he failed not to help those that were sick, euen in the most dangerous time of all. Moreou r, he did not only affoard all the help and assistance he could for the present, to those that accompanied him in this Indian nauigation; but left also an example for others of the society who were to go thither afterwards, how they should carry them∣selues in that iorney; which they at this day diligently obserue, & are a great help and comfort to the shippes wherin they sayle. Sosa therfore the Vice-Roy & the other Portughe∣ses hauing now passed the Promontory of Good Hope, and the dangers therof, by fetching the aforsaid cō∣passe, & greatly reioycing by giuing thankes to God, & congratulating one another as the custome is, they sailed amayne along the other side of Africk, which lyeth towardes the South and the East. And hauing gotten beyond the Promontory, almost 600. leagues, after they had spent siue whole months in continuall nauigation, and Francis in perpetuall labour, they ar∣riued at Mozambicum in the latter end of August, es∣caping, through a more safe then prosperous nauiga∣tion, many & great dangers. For it is ordinarily but halfe a yeares sayle into India from Portugall: so as set∣ting out in March, they come for the most part to Goa in the beginning of September. But if through ill weather, cōtrary wind, or calmes their course be hin∣dred (as now it hapned) they are cōstrayned to win∣ter at Mozambicum. CHAP. XV. In the Hospitall of Mozambicum he hel∣peth the sick, being himselfe at the same time sicke. M OZAMBICVM (called Prasus in former times) is a little Iland in the Eastern coast of Africk, commodious and conuenient rather for the hauen, then for the tempera∣ture of the ayre (for it lyeth vnder the Torrid Zone. ) There be in this Iland but two Townes, The Ilād Mozam∣bicum. one belon∣ging to the Portugheses, the other to the Saracens, their friends. It is distant from Portugall, if we take our measure not straight on, but by the windings which shippes make thither, aboue 3000. leagues, and from India about 900. The farre greatest part of the iorney was now past, and scarse the fourth part remained. But the nauy came later to Mozambicum then it should haue done, because both conuenient tyme, and wind had fayled them: So as they were constrained to stay there al the following winter. At Mozambicum therfore when the rest refreshed themselues after the tossing of so long a iorney, only Francis who loued la∣bour better then ease, tooke almost no rest at all, through the inflamed desire he had to instruct the ig∣norant, and help the sicke. I do not doubt, but they who shall read this often repetition of Francis his la∣borious endeauours, in instructing the ignorant, and seruing the sick, will besides their satisfaction therein, reflect vpon that also which my selfe in more serious thoughts, haue often wondred at, to wit, from whēce he had those wonderfull forces, by which he was so often able to vndergoe at once so many, & such great labours. But the worthy man being indowed with an incredible courage both of body and mind, His strength of body & mind. and Di∣uine Grace ministring strength to his able nature, was of such force and vigour, that he alone would, and could do in a manner all things for Gods sake. And wheras he applied himselfe continually in the same workes of Christian charity without any wearisome tediousnesse, he neuer omitted any thing, which he saw was either good for men or gratefull to God. Therfore as though he had come thither with his forces intire, & no whit weakened, he presently tooke vp his lodging in the Hospitall at Mozambicum, erected there by the King, as in other places also where the Portugheses haue fortes. His labour was now no lesse at land, New la∣bour in the win∣tering places. in the hospitall, then it had bin at sea in the ship. For there was, at that time, in Towne both very great sicknesse, and a multitude of diseased persons. And that which greatly augmented this contagion in time of Autumne was this, that all the shippes which had set out from Portugal that yeare for India▪ lighting alike vpon ill weather, and pestered with the same sicknes, were forced to stay all winter in that place. This occasion gaue an new edge vnto Xauiers industry to vndertake the care of that great multitude of sick mē. For thinking it fitting for him to bestow his cha∣rity also vpon the other shippes, in as much as he was able, by labouring continually both day and night he applied himselfe to help the afflicted, to administer the Sacraments to the sicke, to comfort the sad, and to rayse them vp that lay a dying to hope and confiden∣ce in God. All therfore that were sick esteemed Francis to be sent them by God almighty, as the onely remedy which the afflicted Nauy had. Yet he did not giue himself so wholy to the sick, as to become vnmynd∣full of the rest. For at the same time vpon holy dayes he preached before the Viceroy & others, in presence of a very great audience, that he might thereby helpe the soules also of those who were in health. Whilst he was thus busied, and wholly imployed in helping both sicke, His care of soules and healhfull in all he could, he vnderstandeth that a boy, who came in the same ship with him, was fallen suddainly dead. Whereupon he presently asked euery one (whome he met) whether that boy had learned the principles of the Christian fayth? And when he found that he dyed wholy igno∣rant therof, he was presently stroken to the hart with such griefe, that he shewed exceeding sadnes in his countenance, although otherwise he was alwayes wont to looke cheerfully. Wherefore Sosa the Vice-Roy demanding of him the cause of his heauines, whē he vnderstood what it was by his own relation, asked him, whether he knew that boy to be ignorant in his Christian fayth? No quoth Francis, for if I had certain∣ly known that, I would not be sad, for I would with∣out doubt haue taught him with the rest. Then Sosa vrging him agayne, why therefore would he afflict himselfe so much, seeing it was not his fault? Because (quoth he) there was one in the same ship with me, who knew not his Christian fayth, & I knew it not: Such a care he had of the good of mens soules, He fal∣leth sick. and of the instruction of children. But how much profit and benefit arose from his great Charity, the sicke found rather by wāting the same then by inioying it. For within a few dayes after Xauerius fell sicke himself whilst he was helping others with the greatest feruour he could, wherin indeed, his fortitude wanted not matter to worke vpon. So great and dangerous a feuer inuaded him, that he was let bloud seauen tymes with∣in few dayes; whereof, for all that, he did not only make light account, but imbraced it willingly, as though it had bin sent from God. But to the end his generous vertue might be the more euidently seene, this corporall sicknes was seconded with a greater of the mind; for he fell also into a Phrensy. This held him three whole dayes, during which time the Phy∣sitians who had care of him, tooke their solemne oathes, that in things blonging to the body, and his health (as the nature of the disease was) he seemed to be out of his wits: but in matters diuine, and things belonging to the soule (wherin phrensy vseth chiefly to shew it selfe) he was to their great astonish∣ment so well in his senses, that he spake not one word which might seeme to swarue frō reason; of such force is the vse and custome of vertue. He refu∣s th to be carri∣ed out of the hos∣pitall in to priuat houses. And in this sicknes Francis was not more obseruant of piety, then of po∣uerty. He lay in the publicke Hospitall amongst the rest, hauing his bed & all other things like vnto them. There wanted not men of Nobility and Esteeme, who whē he fell first sick stroue to take him into their hou∣ses, & there to haue care of him, and this as earnestly they intreated of him, as possibly they could. But all in vayne. For being a true louer of holy Pouerty, in few wordes, he thanked them for their courtely, but would not accept of their liberality. As long as he was sicke, he lay amongst the common multitude without any difference at all. But the violence of his sicknes was more dangerous then long, which being soone mitigated, he began to be better. This suddain chāce did not any whit diminish his alacrity in his re∣solution, but rather increased his diligence; and no wonder, for now he had learne by his own experience how much sicke mē stood in need of other mens help. Therfore as soone as his feuer began to decline, for∣getting himself, sick he lpeth the sick. he would with neuer the lesse diligē∣ce goe about the Hospitall, comfort the afflicted, heare confessions, & endeauour what he could to help the sicke, though himself were sick, euen at that tyme. Neuer did Francis his benignity shew it selfe with more splēdour & admiration then at this time. For the Phisitian visiting (as his custome was) the sicke that kept their beds, light by chance vpon Xauerius, who hauing a great feuer vpon himselfe, stood notwith∣standing by them that lay sick, and did his best indea∣auour to serue them, no otherwise then if he had byn perfectly well. The Phisitiā being amazed at that strāg accident, stood still a while, then feeling his pulse, and finding him certainly to haue more need of atten∣dance then they whome he serued, intreated and ear∣nestly besought him to go to bed, and rest himselfe at least, vntill his feuer had remitted of its heate, and then he might, if he would, rise agayne, to help the sicke. Whereupon Francis thinking he was bound to obey the Phisitian, & yet not to leaue those that were in danger, answered, That this next night he should haue some occasion with a certaine sicke person who was not well prepared for death, and was in immi∣nent danger, and hauing secured his saluation then he would take his rest. He whome he meant, was one of the poorest marriners of the ship, A marri∣ner be∣ing mad seemeth to be re∣stored to his sen∣s s by F. his bed who falling mad through a burning feuer, had not yet made his con∣fession. The next day therefore the Phisitian found Francis talking with the sayd marriner, who lay in Xauerius bed, and he sate by hearing his confession; for hauing foūd him vpon a suddain lying on the hatches he was so moued with compassion towards him, that he presently layd him in his owne bed. And it seemeth this strāge charity of his was honoured with as stran∣ge a miracle. For as soone as this frantick man was layd in Xauiers bed, he returned agayne to his senses. And Fran is prophecy of his death was not without ground. For the very same day towards night he dyed, after he had receyued the Sacraments, full of great confidence in God. And then it was manifestly seene that Xauerius tooke such paines with him, be∣cause he forsaw him to be in imminent danger, both of lyfe and saluation. Now Francis being very glad for this marriners safety, went presently to bed, for his owne health, obeying the Phisitian in al things, leauing behind him an example of no lesse obedience then Christian cha∣rity: but as soone as he was recouered of his feuer, he againe with no lesse diligence then before, set himselfe to his former labours of helping the sick. And to per∣seuer constantly in that which he had begun well, & happily, he still kept on the very same course of these his industrious exercises to the last day of his iourney. And in this halfe yeares space (for they wintred so lōg at Mozambicum ) he gaue such proofs of his eminent sanctity, The opi∣nion of Francis his san∣ctity. that all, both inhabitants, and they of the nauy held him generally for a Saint. Wherefore they doubted not to hold themselues bound to Xauerius for many things which succeeded with them prosperous∣ly at the same tyme; ascribing al o to his vertue and merits, that in so great a sicknes, & amongst such a number of sick persons, so few had dyed at Mozam∣bicum that winter, thinking for certayne, that his diligent Care lightned their diseases, and his Sanctity tooke them away. Now the tyme was come that they were to depart, and yet very many of the sicke were not recouered. Moreouer the Vice Roy himselfe began to feele some grudgings of an ague; wherfore making all hast, he thought it best to leaue them who for want of health cold not follow him (w ch was almost the whole nauy) in the wintering places, vntill they hauing recouered their forces, might be able to passe into India. And so hauing easily persuaded Father Paul, & Fa. Mansilla to stay at Mozambicum with the sicke, he determined to take Xauerius with him, who might be to all both a comfort in this iourney, and an assured help also, if any thing should fall out amisse. CHAP. XVI. Hauing stayed a vvhile at Melinda, and in the Iland of Socotora, to the great benefit to the inhabitants, he arriueth at length in India. T HE next yeare therfore in the month of April, Sosa the Vice-Roy preparing a great Galeon for his Indian iourney, putteth to sea with a strong band of Souldiars, com∣manding the Nauy to follow him, as soone as their health would permit. With him Francis also departed, both the Portugheses and the inhabitants bidding him farewell with many teares, and great tokens of be∣neuolence. Sosa hauing a prosperous gale, had sai∣led in few dayes 700. miles, or thereabout, beyond M zambicum, The Cit∣ty M ∣ inda. & comming to Melinda (a fayre towne of the Saracens, yet friend to the Portugheses ) he staied there a while. In this Citty there be very many Por∣tugh se merchants, of whome if any chance to dye there, they are buryed with crosses vpon their graues. Also neere vnto the Citty there is a goodly, The Crosse in ho∣nour a∣mongst the Sara∣ ens. and fayre Crosse of marble guilded, erected by the Portugheses: which when Xauerius beheld, he exceedingly reioyced and gaue thankes to God for that great vertue & glo∣ry of the Crosse, because like a conquerer it triumphed in the middest of the Saracens, and in the Diuels Do∣minion. This ioy of his was afterward increased by a memorable accident. A principall Saracen of that Citty, complayning to Francis that the Religion of the Saracens grew to de∣cay, demāded of him whether it were so among Chri∣stians. For of 17. Temples which were in Melinda, he wondred to see but three only frequented, and those but of a very few, not knowing the reason why their deuotion fayled. And all that misery, sayd he, procee∣ded certainly from some great sinne of theirs. Maho∣mets Religion going to d cay. But Xauerius reioycing that the presence of the Crosse had so weakened the Deuils force, tould him, that it was not so much to be admired that Mahomets superstitiō did now fayle, as that it had held vp so long. For God being the Author of true Religiō could not endure the prayers of the superstitious Saracens: and that indeed was the cause why he would haue their Religion also ouerthrowne. These things comming to the hearing of a chiefe man of the Saracens superstition (called in their language Caciz ) a great Doctour in the Maho∣metā law, he protested openly, that vnlesse Mahomet came to them agayne within two yeares, he would quite forsake him, so decayed was all reuerence to his Deity in their perplexed minds. But Francis being not able for want of tyme to free them, for the present, whose mynds were wholy led away with superstitiō, nor could endure any wholsome counsayle; all that he could do, was to enkindle in them a desire of Chri∣stian liberty, very seriously aduising them to cry of∣ten tymes to God the Creator of man, that he would vouchsafe to bestow his grace and light vpon them. After a small space, he set to sea againe, & with new feruour of spirit held on his old custome to help the passengers, but especially the sicke (who were not wanting in the ship) in whatsoeuer he was able. He lends his cham¦ber and bed to the sick. In which kind he went as farre, as Charity could possi∣bly extend it selfe. He was austere and hard vnto him∣selfe, that he might be bountifull to others. For a great part of that iorney he lay aboue hatches among the cōmon mariners & soldiers, that he might lend his cabbin and bed to the sick: for his repose he had a hard Cable rope to lye on, A cable rope is his bed. and an Anchor for his pillow. From hence forward Francis had new matter of merit giuen him both in respect of men, and religion. The Viceroy hauing sayled roūd about the cost of Affricke, arriued at the Iland of Socotora, 1700. miles almost frō Mozambicum. This Iland lyeth vpon the furthest pro∣montory of A fricke, which now they call Guardafu, in tyme past Aromata, and it is opposite to the Arabian Gulfe, and to the Mecaan sea, so called of the Citty Meca, a place notorious for the Sepulcher of Mahomet. Socotora is about 100. miles compasse. It is a land wast, very craggy, and stony, without any signe al∣most of tillage. The Ilād Socotora. most of tillage. It beareth neyther wheate, rize, wine nor apples, being wholy barren; yet it aboundeth with catle, and Dates, whereof the inhabitants make their bread. Morouer it is a very intemperate ayre be∣ing burnt vp with the extreme heat of the sunne. The people are wholy rude and ignorant, there being no signe of learning among them, nor a man that can read. They dwell in Villages, and euery village hath his Caciz, Gacizes like Cu∣rates. in māner of a Curate. And these Cacizes haue no more learning then the rest, only they do recite by hart certayne prayers in a strange language, which they themselues do not vnderstand. But the inhabi∣tants glorying that they are Christiās, beare great de∣uotion to S. Thomas the Apostle, and deriue their pedi∣gree from them who were in ancient tymes baptized by the Apostle in that Iland. And although Christia∣nity is at this day extinguished among them, yet they haue many signes of Christian Religion. Their Chur∣ches or Temples are built, and adorned magnificently and deuoutly. They haue Crosses vpon their Aultars with lampes before them: and because their pouerty will not affoard them bells, they call the people toge∣ther with woodden ratles (as the custome is with vs in holy Weeke.) Cacizes famous for absti∣nence. Their Cacizes although they be mar∣ryed, are notwithstanding notorious for their ab∣stinence; as often as they fast, they absteyne not on∣ly from flesh, and whitmeates, but also from fish, which they haue in great aboundance; so that they they will rather dye then tast any such thing. Besides they haue also euery yeare two Lents, wherof one la∣steth two moneths, and if any be so prophane as to eate flesh at these times, they are forbidden to come within the Temple. But it is very euident that the Ca∣cizes being themselues ignorant, there hath byn none for a long tyme, eyther instructed in the Christian fayth or baptized. The mi∣serable conditiō of the Socoto∣reans. And that which increased their mi∣sery was the cruell impiety of a Saracen Prince, who had by force subdued the inhabitants. For he did not only keepe them in miserable subiection, but taking also their litle children out of their armes, endeauou∣red to trayne them vp in the execrable superstition of Mahomet. Xauerius therfore by beholding these inhabitants & conuersing with them, was surprized with no lesse griefe, then ioy, much lamenting, that degenerating from their ancestours, ignorāt of the Religion which they professed, and destitute of Catholicke Priests, they should be subiect to the Saracens, like sheepe to wolues. He ende∣auours to in∣struct the Soco∣toreans by signes Wherefore all though he hauing a great de∣sire to instruct them (as much as tyme would giue him leaue) yet was he a stranger, and wanted their language answerable to his will and desire. But no∣thing is hard where charity aboundeth. Wherfore lea¦uing such signes, as be proper to particular nations, he vsed such as be common to all; and so the little while he stayed there, He bap∣tizeth a great nū∣ber of children he instructed those ignorant people in the Christian fayth by noddes, and beckes, and all other signes he could inuent. He baptized also many children, with the free consent of their parents. Presently they began euery one to bring their childrē vnto him, earnestly entreating him, that he would be pleased to stay with them, assurng him that there was not one in the whole Iland who would not be baptized. Xauerius therfore although be well saw the rude∣nesse of the people and discommodities of the place, yet thinking of nothing but their saluation, went to the Viceroy, and shewing him what a forward haruest he had now found, intreated him, that he might with his good liking remain there some time. But the Vice∣roy knowing that that Iland was subiect to the pillage of the Turkes, thought it not good to put such a man in hazard to be taken captiue by them. Therfore cō∣mending him for his singular charity towards those poore soules, He desi∣res to stay in Socotora. he aduised him, not to suffer himself to be deceiued with the shew of the present good. Be not quoth he, ouer greedy to set vpon the first, for feare you loose that which is better. Why do you so much desire to labour heer, where the labour is greater then the fruit, and where the hopes are lesse then the dan∣gers? Another country, another people, other Christi∣ans expect you, with whome you may employ your labours, both with more safety, and fruite. Then Francis, seeing him of a different opinion, & well considering that he knew more then himself, an∣swered, that he was wholy at his dispose. Then con∣forting the inhabitants, he promised them that he would alwayes, whersoeuer he was, haue a great care of their saluation. And exhorting them to keep, in the meane time, the true religion in the midst of a cor∣rupted generation, he gaue them assured hope of spee∣dy help. Francis his letter to the King of Portugal. In which promise he did not fayle. For after he was departed from them, by the first occasiō which was offered him, he directed letters to Iohn King of Portugall wherin he earnestly commended to his king∣ly prouidence the Christians of Socotora, who straying like sheep without a pastour, & abandoned of al, were greatly oppressed by tyranny. For in that Iland there was a Saracen Prince who cōtrary to al right & equity tyrannizeth ouer the inhabitants, who be eyther Chri∣stians, or affected to the Christian fayth, hauing had their first beginning from the disciples of S. Thomas the Apostle, vexing & oppressing them in a miserable manner; yea taking the children by violence out of their parents bosomes he endeauoureth to make them slaues to Mahomet, & the Deuill. He therefore intrea∣ted his maiesty, as a most religious King, not to per∣mit them by litle & litle to fall away from the grounds of Christianity, to the customes, and rites of the Sara∣cens; and that they might not willingly giue their sou∣les to him, who had by force gotten dominion ouer their bodyes. They were in danger vtterly to be vn∣done, vnlesse his Maiesty from Portugall would help them. And there was no doubt, but God, who had giuen him such ability, that he alone of all the Kings in Christendome was able to performe it, would also giue him the will and desire to protect & defend those miserable and afflicted soules. Wherefore he should with all speed endeauour by his Royall assistance, to maintayne them in the faith of their Sauiour who had redeemed both them, and vs with his most pretious bloud: Especially seeing that all this, might be done without any danger or charges at all. For he needed only to command his Royal Nauy which was yearly to passe that way, to deliuer the Socotoreans by force from the most barbarous Tyranny of that Saracene Lord. These letters and requests of Francis lost not their desired effect. They So∣cotoreans at Fran∣cis his in∣treaty are deli∣uered from the Saracens tyranny. For the cause seemed no lesse worthy of consideration to the King, then it had done vnto him, neither did he take it lesse to the hart. Wherfore with that speed, which beseemed his religious Piety, he sent thither a nauy; and the warre was as fortunate as pious. For they taking Socotora by force, beate out the Saracens, and freed the inhabitants from the sub∣iection of their Tyrannicall Lord; and moreouer pla∣ced a strong garrison in the Iland, that their liberty might be no lesse gratefull then secure. But Xauier not content with this, bestowed vpon them afterward a benefit greater then their liberty. For he sent some of the Society into that Iland, who might againe culti∣uate that ouergrowne vineyard of our Lord, and de∣liuer them also from the Tyranny of the Deuill, who were already freed from the Saracens. As soone as the ship departed from Socotora, Fran∣cis setled himselfe agayne to his former taske of hel∣ping the sick; and at last with the same laborious and charitable exercises, as he began his Indian voyage, hauing passed the coastes of Arabia and Persia, he ar∣riued at Goa a famous Citty of India vpon the VI. of May 1542. which day being the feast of Saint John ante portam Latinam, is very memorable among the Indians. For vpon that very day Xauerius, who by the speciall benefit & fauour of God, was borne for the good of those nations, brought with him great light and saluation into India, togeather with the light of the Gospel, and by himselfe reuiued those lost coun∣tries, & opened a way to others of the Society for the conuersion of other nations; the which shalbe plainly seene by that which followeth in this History. For heerafter I well set downe Xauiers actes more at large then hitherto I haue done. Because those things which I haue already spoken of, are, although not doubtfull, yet a litle obscure, because for the most part they want the cleere testimony of letters. But henceforward I will speake of such things, which were left written partly by himselfe, and partly by those, who through long and familiar conuersation with him in India, did not only obserue them whilst he liued, but had also particular knowledge of them after his death. OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE II. BOOKE. In vvhat state be found India. CHAP. I. I NDIA, The des∣cription of India. being a place much spo∣ken of by Poets, and Historiogra∣phers, is a Country of Asia, al∣most twice as long, as broad, som∣what like in proportion to a mans tongue. Towards the North it but∣teth vpon the Mount Caucasus; in the West it is inui∣roned with the Riuer Indus, from whence it taketh its name; as the East in like manner, is with the riuer Ganges; and from the temperate Zone it stretcheth it self out, euen vnto the Southern Ocean. The forsaid riuers issuing from the mountaines of Scythia, and de∣uiding themselues into two mayne Torrents, the fur∣ther they runne, the broader they leaue the land bet∣weene them; and hauing run almost a thousand miles (that is, very neere halfe the length of India ) they fall finally into the sea. Betwixt the mouths of these ri∣uers (where India is broadest) it hath 800. miles, or there about in breadth. From thence by litle & little it groweth narrower, vntill it commeth vnto the Pro∣montory of Commorinum, where in forme of a wedge it shooteth out a mighty way towards Asia. India, in the inward partes of the land, is inha∣bited by Pagans of the same Country. Towards the coast which lyeth vpon the riuer Indus, they haue for the most part Kings of their own nation; but towards Ganges they be Saracens. For the Saracens hauing now long since gotten thither out of Arabia & Persia, by lit∣le and litle, partly by policy, and partly by force haue brought many of the Indians vnder their subiection. The Portugheses also hauing free passage thither by sea, and by occasion of their often going to those Coun∣tries, vnknowne to others, haue in ech Coast therof taken the possession of many Townes of good note, for which cause they are very famous throughout In∣dia, & the whole East. The sea coast of India, which for a great part lyeth vnder the Torrid Zone, is conti∣nually almost so beaten vpon with the sunne, that it remaineth, euen parched & withered vp all the yeare long. Yet the heat is so tempered by seasonable ray∣nes and Eastern windes, that it is inhabited without any great incommodity; although in summer (which they haue twice a yeare, by reason the sunne passeth yearely the Equinoctiall line twice) all things are burnt vp with the forsayd scorching heates. The Country is fertile, especially of Rize which they vse insteed of wheat: next to Rize, they haue a certayne Palme-tree, whereof they gather not only greene, and dry fruite, but also (which may seeme in∣credible) furnisheth them with wine, vineger, and oyle; yea and besides this, with matter likewise for houses, ships, ropes, and bookes; Nature in this man∣ner making one tree a storehouse almost of all things. They haue also aboundance of fish and cattle, & very great store of Pearles, which lying inclosed in shell∣fishes, the inhabitants search after with great diligēce in the holes of rockes. And this is the greatest cause why ancient writers speake so much of the wealth of India, since Riot hath set a price vpon the Sea's excre∣ments. The Natiue people of the Country being blacke of complexion, couer themselues from the nauell to the knee with fine linnen, leauing all the rest of their body naked. They are ordinarily of a seruile, and de∣ceiptfull nature: yet in so rich a country the people are most commonly poore, their riches being ordina∣rily engrossed in a few mens hands, by reason of their Kings, & Princes tyranny ouer them. Yet want doth not with hould them from excesse in their attire: For all, both men and women, haue commonly gold, or copper iewells hanging at their eares, which by art they drawe downe to their shoulders, as a thing they much glory in. Most of them also weare for an orna∣ment bracelets vpon their armes, so effeminate they are become in their attire. Many other things besides are recounted of their customes, which I hould not worth the speaking of, with further hindrance to this history. The head Citty of India is Goa, Goa the chiefe Citty of India. scituate in an I∣land of the same name, almost right against the Persian gulfe, distant from the mouth of the riuer Indus some 300. miles, or thereabout. This Citty being fortifyed by art and nature (for the Iland wherin it standeth is diuided from the cōtinent by a strait arme of the sea) for the multitude and fayrenesse of buildings, for traf∣fique, wealth, and number of Cittizens, and inhabi∣tants, may not vnworthily be compared with the chiefe Citties of Europe. And therfore both the Arch∣bishop, & the Viceroy of India haue therin their seates, and is very much frequented by the Portugheses. There be very certayne proofes, not only of S. Thomas the Apostles being in India, but also that he watered the same with his bloud, bringing very many therein to the fayth of Christ: but their posterity liuing mixt with Ethnickes and Saracens, are now by litle and litle fallen into abominable superstitions, so as for a very long tyme (excepting a few villages, the inhabitants whereof take their name from S. Thomas ) there was almost no signe of Christianity left in India, but on∣ly a bare report thereof, vntill the Portugheses obtay∣ning Goa, and other Townes of India, deliuered the Indians from the seruitude of the Saracens & other Ty∣rants, and restored them agayne to the light of the Gospell. For by liuing amongst them they gayned the inhabitants to become members of Christ. At this tyme Iohn Alboquercius of the Order of S. Francis, a man famous both for his learning and re∣ligious feruour, was ishop of Goa (hauing likewise authority ouer all Indi , by reason that there was ne∣uer a Bishop therein but only himselfe. He with a few others of his owne Order, although he laboured more for the Christian cause, then from so small a number could haue byn expected, yet through want of Priests, could not do so much good, as necessity required. There were then no religious men in all India, but the Franciscans, who were so imployed in assisting the Portugheses, that they had no time to attend to the Eth∣nickes. Of these, The Frā∣ciscans zeale of Religion Friar Iames Borban was most emi∣nent, both for his learning, vertue, and zeale of pro∣pagating the Christan fayth. For he hauing conuerted and baptized certayne Indian children, after he had instructed them in the mystertes of the Christian faith, and taught them the Portughese language, he vsed them as his interpreters in the conuersion of Ethnickes; which inuention had good suuesse, answerable to the witty contriuing therof. He therfore assisted by pious and worthy persons, began to thinke vpon greater matters; and instituting a Seminary for the Indians, he imployed himselfe wholy in teaching the students therof. Wherfore albeyt the Bishop, and the Francis∣cans out of their singular piety, The be∣ginning of a Col∣ledge in Goa. desired to spread the Christian fayth ouer India, yet they being but few in number were not able to supply so many places. Ther∣fore the superstition of the Ethnicks and Saracens bare great sway not only in other townes of the Portughess but also in the Citty of Goa it selfe. For the Pagans & Saracens being wealthy, and liuing euery where a∣mongst the Portugheses, practised their execrable rites publikely euen at noone day, the Gouernours of the Fortes winking therat, eyther because the forces of their new commaund were not as yet sufficiently esta∣blished, or else because their was no body to couince them of their errour, and bring them to the true wor∣ship of Christ. Moreouer, if any inferiour Ethnickes chanced to become Christians, The mi∣serable conditiō of the Neophi∣tes. they were so tormented by the richer sort, that they durst scarse professe themselues Christians. For the Ethnicke and Saracen merchants, who dealt with the Kings wares, and customes, were so rich euen in Goa, that through fauour, & power they could do much both with the Portugheses, & the Christian Magistrates. So as the new Christians be∣ing oppressed, the conuersion of the Ethnickes grew ve∣ry cold. The state of the Portugheses themselues was not much better. In many places there was very sel∣dome vse of Sacraments, The loose be∣hauiour of the Portughe∣ses in In∣dia. and of sermons almost none at all. Because in all India there were but two or three Preachers at the most, and not many more Priests. Wherfore most of the Portughese garrisons were ma∣ny tymes for whole yeares togeather, without eyther sermon or Masse. And besides this, the beastly and wicked conuersation of the Saracens and Ethnickes, drew them on to much lewdnes. For none were more corrupted in their behauiour then they, nor more forcible to set sensuall lust on fire; & ech one giuing himselfe to vncleane pleasures, esteemed nothing lighter almost, then his owne wiues honesty. Wherfore the Portugheses, although naturally they be inclined to temperance and frugality, yet giuing themselues amidst so corrupt a nation, to ouermuch banquetting, & to other things which follow therof, kept commonly with them in their houses, many har∣lotts, which they had bought, as slaues. And ha∣uing none to reprehend their vices, their lust was growne to such a height, that they counted it a point of honour, to liue lewdly, & esteemed no gaine vniust or disgracefull; so much had couetousnesse, fortifyed by bad custome, changed all things. It was ordinary amongst them to passe diuers yeares, without eyther Confession or Communion; and if any did confesse more then once in a yeare, they were commonly held for hypocrites. In so much that if any one would per∣chance, out of remorse of conscience, go oftener to confession, he must do it priuatly to auoyd the note & speach of others, like Nicodemus who came to Christ by night. Moreouer the Portugheses wiues, and harlots being natiue of that Country, although they were Christians, yet through ignorance of the mysteries of the Christian fayth, were entangled with the supersti∣tion of the Pagans and Saracens. And their children were like their parents, or rather worse. This was the state of matters in India when Xauerius came thither; who being very ioyfull that he was at last (according to his hartes desire) arriued there, & vnderstanding of the foresayd things, bent all his endeauours for the remedying of so many and great euils. And which is to be much admired, in so great feruour of spirit, he carried himselfe no lesse warily then diligently. CHAP. II. Hauing gotten the good vvil of the Bishop, he beginneth to labour in India. H E was not ignorant that many Contro∣uersies and contentions, with no lesse dō∣mage then scandall to the people, might easily arise betweene Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticall Pastours if ech of them should stand to fend the vttermost of their right, without yielding my thing at all therein. First of all therefore thinking it good to cut of all occasion of debate and strife, and hat he might prouide good things, not only before God, He goeth to the Bis¦shop of India. but so before all men, he resolued by all meanes to gayne e good will & liking of the Bishop. Calling therfore on God, and the Archangell Patron of India, as his ustome was, he goeth to the Bisshop, and hauing salu∣t him in an humble and most reuerend manner, he sheweth that he was come into India sent by Pope Paul III. and Iohn III. King of Portugall to conuert the th nickes to the Fayth of Christ, and to instruct the eophites (or yong beginners) and the Portugheses in atters of Christian piety. But being accustomed to obey then to command, he had rather follow others mans iudgement then his owne: and for that Grace being the chiefe Prelate, he desired to be wholy at his command, & to attempt nothing, but with his Lordships aduice & good liking. Then shew∣ing the Popes, By great humility he wyn∣neth the Bishop of Goas good will. and the Kings Letters, which testifyed him to be Legate Apostolicall, he cast himselfe at the Bishops feete, giuing vp all into his Lordships hands, and desiring to make no other vse of them, then he should thinke conuenient. Neuer, peraduenture, was it more euidently seene how soone true Humility winneth mens affections. Alhoquercius admiring to see so great humility, & mo∣dest behauiour in such a man, answered to his gentle submission with the like courtesy; for presently he ta∣keth him vp in a friendly māner, & giueth him againe both the Patents and the Letters, telling him, that would be very gratefull to him, that he, being Legat Apostolicall, should vse the authority which was gi∣uen him, according to the Popes and the Kings plea∣sure: neyther did he doubt but he would make suc vse of it, as might make good the opinion which such worthy personages had conceyued of him. And from that time forward there was engendred betweene the Bishop & Xauerius so great a loue and respect towards one another, that in most friendly manner they im∣parted to ech other their most priuate counsayles. Francis therfore being glad that the Bisshop would as∣sist him in the aduancement of the Christian cause, began more cheerfully to employ all his forces in hel∣ping the sicke at Goa, as being the taske which he had vndertaken. Whe fore out of hand taking vp his aboad in the Kings Hospitall, he neuer gaue ouer seruing them who were extreme sicke, with all the diligence he possibly could, sometimes speaking to them a part, sometymes exhorting them all togeather, and sometymes admie¦nistring to them the Sacraments of pennance and th∣holy Eucharist, vntill their change of behauiour gaue him hope of amendment in their liues. His chiefe la∣bour was to help thē, that were grieuously sicke, vpon whome he attended very diligently, not only in the day, but also in the night, which made all to admire his singular charity, and more then fatherly loue to∣wards them, who were meer strangers vnto him. For Francis his bed was commonly sayd to be at his feete who was sickest in the Hospitall; Francis lyeth hard by thē that are dan∣gerously sicke. choosing to lye there all night that he might be presently ready to help if any occasion of suddaine death should chance to happen. And among all these employments he had no lesse care in the obseruance of holy pouerty, then in exercising actes of charity. Xauerius had yet the same apparell which he brought vpon his backe out of Portugall, much like to that which the poorer sort of Priests vse to weare in Por∣tugall. But fearing least his difference in apparel might auert the Indians affections from him, he resolued to cloath himselfe according to the custome of the Priests in those countries. Wherfore knowing that the Soci∣ety of IESVS hath no particular and proper habit, but such as the Priests where they liue are wont to weare, His loue of po∣uerty in his appa∣rell. out of the familiarity which he had with the steward of the Hospitall, he friendly intreatech him to get him an ordinary Cassocke such as the poore Priests of that Country were wont to weare. But he not attending so much to what was requested him, as what he thought conuenient, hauing regard of Francis his dignity and authority, bringeth him an habit of Water-chamlet; and this liberality of his he secondeth with a more li∣berall speach, telling him that the Priests do there vse such king of habits, by reason of the extreme heate of India, and that although it were Chamlet, yet i was a playne and homely weare amongst them. But Xauerus not liking such curious apparell, You may, quoth he, then if you please giue this Chamlet habit to some of the Priests you speake of; as for me, one of¦course black linnen, if you thinke good, will be suffici∣ent, for it is meet for him who hath vowed pouerty, to haue such an habit, as may be a token & signe ther∣of. The Steward being ouercome with the verity of this answere, He vseth a coate of black linnen without either girdle or cloake. caused presently an habit to be ma for him of course hempē linnen downe to the ankles, such a one as he desired. Francis euer after wore this habit, according to the fashion of those coūtry Priests, without either girdle or cloake, choosing rather to a∣bate of his apparel, then any whit of his pouerty. And in this, his moderation was not more apparent then his constancy. For the same kind of habit he vsed al∣wayes afterwards in India, which practise of his, bare such authority amongst others of the Society, that ac∣cording to his example, He refu∣seth to change his old and ill-fauoured shoos for new. they kept the same kind of ha∣bit a great while. But now adayes they vse both gir∣dle and cloake, as the Portugheses do accustome; which fashion many of the Priests in India do also follow. Afterwards the Maister of the Hospitall perceiuing Francis his shoes to be worne out and broken, & the vpper-leather, and soales to be clowterly sowen togea∣ther, brought him a new prayre. He refu∣seth to change his torne & ill fa∣uoured shoos for new. But he being euery where like vnto himselfe, could by no meanes be in∣treated to change his old shoes for new, saying that his owne would still serue him well inough so immo∣ueable he was in his obseruance of Pouerty. Xauerius was then about 45. yeares old, which age most cōmonly excelleth more in grauity of iudg∣ment, then strength of body. Yet he being of a cou∣ragious spirit, shrūcke not at any labour. For although at that time his principall care was to helpe the sick, yet he was no way wanting to them that were in he∣alth when any necessity either spirituall are corporall occured. After he had done his endeauours with all diligence about the sick, in the morning he was ready to heare the Cōfessions of them that came vnto him, for which cause he was also oftētimes sent for by the principall men of the Citty. And such a multitude de∣sired to confesse vnto him, that his diligence though it were extraordinary, He hel∣peth pri∣soners with al∣mes. was not for al that able to satisfy the tenth part of them. In the afternoone his custome was commonly to visit those that were in prison, and to relieue them with almes which himselfe begged for them; where also teaching them how to make a good Confession, he by that meanes heard many of their whol life past. This example also of Xauerius was not without force with others. For the new Viceroy tooke this course once euery weeke, both in a louing manner to visit the sick, & to comfort them that were in prison, by examining and dispatching their causes; which custome he continued as long as he stayed in India. Vpon Sundayes also Xauierius assisted the leapers (who haue an Hospitall in the suburbes) seruing thē as well in other things, He ser∣ueth lea∣pers. as in hearing their Confessiōs and ministring vnto them the holy Sacrament of the Aultar; wherin he so wisely behaued himselfe, that there was not one of thē who did not receiue the holy Sacraments at his hands. When he thought he had sufficiently holpen the sick, he went into a Church of our B. He prea∣cheth. Lady hard by the Hospitall to make them also who were in health partakers of his labours. There on Sundayes & holy dayes in the fore-noone he preached to the Portugheses, in the after-noone he very diligē∣tly explicated to the people of that country the chiefe principles of our beliefe, whereunto resorted more to heare him then the Church wherin he taught was able to conteine. Then he reconciled & made friends such as were at discord and debate among themselues. And in his priuate conferences he omitted no meanes that might be good for the Cittizens spirituall profit. His pri∣uate con∣ferences. Ha∣uing wonne the Portugheses by his affability of speach he admonished thē in a frindly manner of their vices: and as for other lewd persons he deterred them from their wickednesse, by laying the feare of death & the terrour of hell-fire before their eyes, whome as soone as he perceiued to be any thing moued, then he endea∣uoured sometimes by intreaties, sometimes by perswa∣sion to drawe them to make a good confession for sa∣tisfaction of their sinnes & amendment of their liues: The fru∣ite of his sermons. wherupon, as it is well knowne, many were so mo∣ued and encouraged, that after they had made their cōfessions, the began a new life, putting away their Concubines, & making restitution of what they had vnlawfully gotten. CHAP. III. He very dexterously causeth those vvho kept Concubins, either to marry them, or to put them avvay: and instructeth chil∣dren, and ignorant persons in the Ca∣thechisme. B VT he found farre greater difficulty and trouble among them concerning their Cō∣cubines, then about other mens goods. For at that time the Portugheses of Goa, were through want of wiues of their owne nation, great∣ly intangled with the loue of women-strangers, wherof many were of the country of Sion, or Pegu, & some others of Iaponia, and China, since these do farre excell the Indian women both in beauty of body and comelines of person. Wherefore the Portugheses dis∣daining to marry with them, kept them as their Con∣cubines. Xauerius thinking with himself that he ought to apply some remedy to this great euill, began to dis∣pose thē with al the endeauours he could vse. And first he went about to winne thē by all courteous meanes; then as he met them in the streets, he would merily request them to inuite a poore Priest to their ordinary fare, which they willingly accepted of. He now sitting at table, would before, or at their repast, intreat his host to cause his children to be cal∣led: whereupon the litle children comming presently at their fathers cal, Francis would take them vp in his armes, & hug them in his bosome, thanking God who had giuen the Father such children for the hope of his family, & withall would pray God to grant thē a good & holy life. Then would he desire that their mothe might be called (a thing which in another would haue bin temerity, but his Sanctity easily excused it:) when she was come he would speake sweetly vnto her, and commend her beauty to his host, therby to draw him to take her to his wife, saying, that doubtlesse she was of an excellent disposition and louely countenance, so that she might well be accounted a Portughese, that the children which he had by her were certainly wor∣thy of a Portughese to their father. Why therfore did not he marry her? What wife could he haue better? And he should do well to prouide with al speed for his childrens credit, He cau∣seth som to marry their con¦cubines, & others to put them a∣way. and the womans honesty. Which wholsome counsail of his proued not vn∣profitable. For by his words and authority, without great difficulty he perswaded many of them to marry their Concubines being himselfe witnes therof. But if by chance he lighted vpon any one who had, by some ill fauoured Indian -woman, children like vnto her selfe, then as conceiuing great indignation therat he would cry out: Good God! what a monster haue we here? Do you keep a Diuel in your howse? Can you keep cōpany with this vgly beast? Can you haue chil∣dren by her? Follow my counsail, driue this monster, his prodigious creature presently out of your howse, He to marry il fauou∣red wiues thereby to keep them frō adultery and con∣cubines. & seeke you a wife worthy of your selfe: so as putting away his concubine, he maried a wife. Moreouer he would not by any meanes (as much as lay in him) suf fer the Portugheses to marry black, or tawny Mores, but such as were faire and well-fauoured, to the end hey might absteine from adultery, and ech one con∣ nt himselfe with his owne wife. In this meane time he left not off to instruct, and drawe all men to the loue of piety, and of a Christian life: which labour of his was not in vaine. For this heauenly kind of discipline did so worke in the Citti∣ ens, and in habitants behauiours, that Goa seemed to e quite changed, from what it had bin a litle before: so as by reason of these his pious exercyses in the day, and continuall prayer in the night, he became to be of great credit and esteeme both with the Portugheses and the Indians. But being a man truly vertuous he v∣sed this their esteeme which was had of him, not as n incitement to pride, but as a spurre to further ver∣ ue. For he thirsting more after the saluation of soules then his owne prayse, was alwayes thinking of some new wayes, how to helpe them, for the performāce wherof there was nothing which he would not do. And amongst the rest he had one inuention which in such a man as he, gaue an admirable example of Chri∣stian simplicity, & was also more profitable in effect, then fayre to the shew. He being a man of graue yeares and authority, went vp & downe the high wayes, & streetes with a litle bell in his hand (so far was he from thinking any thing disgracefull to him, He cal∣leth chil∣dren and seruants together with a litle bell and tea∣cheth them the Christiā doctrine. that might be gratefull to God, and profitable for mans saluations) to call the children and seruants together to Christian doctrine, at the corners of streets and Crosse wayes, sometymes stirring vp the inhabitāts to piety with these, or such like wordes: Faythfull Christians, for the loue which you beare to Christ, send your Children and seruants to the Chri∣stian doctrine; which new inuention made infinite of children, slaues, and others to runne flocking vn∣to him from all places; all whome, himselfe marching before, he would leade into our B. Ladyes Church, singing aloud the Cathechisme vnto them, and tea∣ching them the same, thereby to cause them more willingly to come to heare him, and so more easily to remember what was taught them in the manner of singing: both which proued afterwards to be so. And herein he vsed no lesse prudence then diligence. For knowing very well, that his labour would then be profitably imployed, if those things which ought to be learned, were well vnderstood, all that he sunge he would explicate briefly and cleerly, according to the capacity of his auditours. To the ruder sort, He spea∣keth ho∣mely of set pur∣pose. and to slaues he would purpo∣sely speake after a rude and homely manner, that their owne fashion of speach might keep them more atten∣tiue, and make deeper impression in their mynds: which endeauour of his was neyther fruitlesse, not in vayne. The fruit of Cate∣chizing. For from hence arose that so worthy a custome of teaching, and learning the Christian doctrine, which is at this day practised in India. And because men reaped more fruit by it, then was expected, the Bishop caused the same to be practised by others, in the other Church: so as aduācing himself in this new piety, those of the Society following Francis his institution, others stirred vp therunto partly by the Bishops com∣mand, and partly by the example of the Society, it came at last, to be a custome, throughout all India, to the great aduancement of the Christian cause. For his practise so spred it selfe abroad both in Goa and other places, that euery where, in the schooles, high wayes, streetes, howses, fieldes, and shippes, there were, in steed of vaine & idle songes, sung and heard the principles of Christian faith, with great delight Wherupon it grew to a custome, that children who could scarse speake, did striue to sing most of those verses by hart. And in this exercise Xauerius gaue no esse noble proofe of his temperance and moderation hen of his industrious labour. For of all that was gi∣ en him vnder the title of Almes, he reserued nothing o himselfe, but gaue all to the sicke, and poore, in the most priuate manner he could, to the end humane prayse might not depriue him of any reward in the sight of God. Moreouer he detested from his hart not only vaine glory, Flying of ho∣nour. but also all honours, wherein few are found firme and constant. For when they vsed to giue him that honour which was due to his vertue, he would not only in his wordes & countenance, but also by the gesture and carriage of his whole body, shew a dislike not only of the honour, but also of those who gaue it him, deeming it an vnworthy thing for a Christiā, who should alwayes haue in mind the reproaches of Christ his mayster, to take delight in honours. Let therefore those who hunt after titles of honors, hearken what I am heere to say. Xauerius being a true contemner of all worldly things, and especially of himselfe, did no lesse despise popular applause and honour, then others commonly seeke after it: So as now all might see, that nothing could happen more heauy, or crossely vnto him, then to see his actions praysed, or himselfe ho∣noured. But as honour followeth them most of all that fly from it, this his flying from honour, as ordi∣narily it hapneth, made him more honoured and ad∣mired. All were stroken with admiration that a Priest of singular learning and vertue, comming as a stran∣ger out of another world, should do so many and such excellent things, for no reward at all, no not so much as for prayse or glory. Therfore as before it had hapned in Portugall, He is cal∣led the Apostle in India. so also now it fell out in India, that he began to be cō∣monly called an Apostle, but indeed with no small griefe of mynd vnto him: yet the rude multitude pre∣uayled through their constancy or rather pertinacy therein; For that tytle of Apostle was so setled vpon him, that he could by no meanes shake it of; & from him was it afterwards deriued also to his other Com∣panions: but they assuming a new Name, whereof we will presently speake, caused that Title, too glori∣ous and vn it for them, to be at last forgotten. CHAP. IIII. He procureth a Colledge at Goa, for the Society. C ERTAINE deuout men of Goa hauing through the perswasion of Fr. Iames Borban the Franciscan contracted a league amon∣gest themselues, for the increase of the Christian faith, as we haue before declared, had be∣gun a Seminary there of Indians, a few months before Xauerius arriuall. And hauing found by experience the great want therof, they agreed that it was best to aue many children and youthes of most of the coū∣ ries of India to be instructed in the rites of the Chri∣stian faith, & to be brought vp in learning, who might be sent afterward ech one to his owne coūtry, wherof some might be made Priests, others interpreters. This their pious determination by common consent they bring vnto Ferdinand Rodrigues the Kings Treasurer, (who at that tyme, in the absence of Steuen Gama the Viceroy of India, was Gouernour of Goa ) desiring his aduise, & assistance therin. Wherupon by his autho∣rity a Seminary was instituted at Goa, and children of most of the Prouinces of India (especially those of the Canarines, to whome Goa it selfe appertaineth,) of Cingala, Malauara, Cellano, Bengala, Pegu, Malaca, China and the Abissines placed therein, & instructed in the precepts of the Christian faith, who might afterwards become Priests or Interpreters; and if any of them should not proue fit for eyther of both, they should notwithstanding be there maintained vntill they had learned some trade. And for the better managing of the temporall state of this Seminary, it was thought conuenient, that there should be certaine Procurato s chosen by the said Company: but for the education & bringing vp of the children, it was to be committed to the Franc scans. These things being thus disposed, the Kings Tre ¦surer in name of the viceroy of India, and of the Kin of Portugal assigned to this Seminary of Goa out of publick treasury a stipend of 800. crownes, which ha belonged to the Pagan Priests, God by his diuine pro∣uidence turning, in this manner, the Diuels treasure his owne seruice. This pension being afterward dou∣bled by the Treasurer, was confirmed by the Viceroy▪ and the Kings authority. They began also to buil howses for that end with a Church therunto adioy∣ning. And because the said Seminary was founded for the propagatiō of the Christian faith, it was in tituled A sancta Fide, of the Holy Faith; the reuenewes, and almes whereof were such, that an hundred schollers might well be maintained therwith, but as yet there were not aboue threescore. Friar Iames Borban who was the first beginner, was Rectour thereof. But it seemes this Seminary was ordayned by God for a Col∣ledge of the Society of Iesus, as Borban himselfe, after he began to be acquainted with them, more then once foretould, being very glad that it so fell out. Hauing herfore taken an exact view of Xauerius eminent mā∣ er of life, and greatly approuing his industry in the ringing vp of children, he of his owne accord of∣fred him the gouerment of the Seminary: He refu∣seth the gouerne∣ment of the Semi¦nary. But he ha∣uing resolued to trauaile all India ouer, to preach the Ghospell of Christ, would not take vpon him that burden. Borban was very earnest with him, laying be¦fore his eyes what an important busines it was, and shewing what great fruit might ensue therof, since it being a Seminary of Priests, and Interpreters, a sup∣ply might be continually raised therout, for the helpe of Ethinke nations, a matter of the greatest moment that could be deuised for the aduancement of Religiō. But when he perceiued that he could not preuaile, he began both by himselfe, & by Sosa the new Viceroy to deale with Xauerius, that in case he neither could, nor would take vpon him the charge & Gouerment, yet that he would at least cōmit the same to some one of his Companions. Now Francis euery day expected F. Paul and F. Mansilla from Mozambicum, & others also out of Portugall. And therfore considering with himself of what vse such a Colledge might proue, at last he accepted of the offer, & made F. Paul Camertes Rector therof in his place; and with the good liking both of the Viceroy and Borban, he sent to Rome for some others of the Society, to be maisters to the fore∣said schollers. Afterwards the reuenewes being by the Kings li∣berality increased, when they thought of enlarging their house to receiue more schollers, Sosa the Vice∣roy furthered them therin, both with his authority & bounty. Wherupon both a new Church, and other buildings were begunne, and in short tyme finished, principally by his help and assistance. The Church was dedicated to S. Paul, whence also the Colledge was called S. Pauls Colledge. And from this time for∣ward the Fathers were called by the Name of the Soci∣ety. For when afterwards that Colledge (excepting the Seminary of the Indians ) was by the King of Por∣tugall giuen to the Society of Iesus, for the instituting of such as were appointed for India, and the East, the Fathers tooke their Name from the place. It is now enlarged by the Kings liberality, and furnished with buildings, being indeed a worthy mo∣nument of the King of Portugall his bounty, and a most ample Seminary of Preachers and Priests for the help of India and the East; the Seminary at Co∣nimbria being by his Maiesties order turned into that of Goa. For besides many students of the Indian Na∣tion, who liue in separate houses, there be to the number of an hundred of the Society, wherof some are there receiued, and others sent thither out of Por∣tugall, to be brought vp in learning and vertue, vntill they be able to helpe the Indians, and the people of those Eastern partes by their preaching and example. This place the diuine Prouidence ordained first of all for the Society in India, before their Name was so much as heard of in those parts, and it is the mother and head Seate of many other Colledges which were afterward founded in the East. But now to come a∣gaine to the order of our History, (which hath bin by vs a little interrupted, through the fit occasion we had to speake of this Colledge which Xauerius procu∣red at Goa ) this Seminary, as we haue sayd, being as∣signed to the Society, God gaue vnto Xauerius a new and fertile haruest in India to manure. CHAP. V. He goeth to help the Neophytes, or nevv Christians of Comorinum. N O sooner had Xauerius restored Christian discipline at Goa which was fallen to decay but presently with great care he began to think vpon the inhabitants of the Promō∣tory of Comorinū, & the Coast of Piscaria, who had bin lately conuerted to the Christian faith, but were left without Priests. Piscaria. This Country of Piscaria consisting more of villages then townes, is inhabited by Fisher∣men (whom they call Paraua's ) & aboundeth greatly with Pearles, from the fishing wherof it is commonly called Piscaria. But the habitantes not knowing their owne Country Treasures, employ themselues wholy in fishing of pearles for the Saracēs. In this coast there is a Town of no smal note called Tutuchurinum, wher∣in, vpon a very sleight accident, A deadly warre v∣pon a slight oc¦casion. was raysed a deadly warre, and imminent destruction to that nation, and was also the occasion of their receyuing the Christian fayth. A Saracen wrangling with a Paraua (as by na∣ture they are passionate and apt to offer disgrace) pul∣led contumeliously a ring out of the Paraua's eare, which he had hanging therat, as that country fashion is, and withall tore out the hole in the flesh, which with them is the greatest disgrace that can be imagi∣ned. Wherupon the Paraua, to reuenge the iniury, kil∣led the Saracen. But (as in hoate bloud there often follow mur∣ders and massacres, whereof there is no end vnlesse peace be made) the quarrel w ch first began by wrang∣ling of two persons vpon so slight occasion, through desire of reuenge, did afterwards breed a deadly war throughout the whole nation. For the Paraua's hauing had many of their side slayne, for one Saracen whome they had killed, resolued to wash away that disgrace with their enemies bloud; & priuatly gathering great troopes out of all the villages, make a suddain assaul vpō the Saracens, & massacred a great number of thē. The Saracēs againe being mad with rage raised al their forces against the Paraua's, resoluing to destroy and vt∣terly extinguish the whole nation. Whereupon they presently make ready as great a Nauy as they could, and with great summes of mony corrupt and stirre vp the Paraua Kings, against their owne subiects; per∣suading themselues, that thus enuironing their ene∣mies both by sea and land, they might more easily de∣stroy them. The Paraua's now, when they saw themselues thus beset, enuironed by their enemyes, and betrayed by their owne Kings, not knowing what to do in this case, they beganne to thinke of forraine ayde, so to help themselues in this extremity. There chanced at the same tyme to be present among them a Christian Knight (called Iohn de Cruz ) a man of good account in his own Country, Iohn de Cruz. a Malabar by birth, yet more resem∣bling a Portughese then his owne Nation; who for his valour hauing byn made a Christiā Knight by the King of Portugall, had brought at that very tyme cer∣tayne horses for a present to the Kings of the Paraua's. The chiefe therfore of the Paraua's by reason of their former familiarity go vnto him, & lay open the whole matter before him, asking his counsayle, and aduise what they should do? Cruz being a man both graue and pious, and hoping this feare of theirs might be an occasion to bring in the Gospell of Christ among them, so as at once, they might be set free from the misery, both of their warre, and their superstition, tould them his opinion was, that in this extremity of danger, they were to fly to extreme remedyes: and seeing, contrary to all iustice and equity, they were betrayed by their owne Kings, and hardly charged on all sides by their enemies forces, they should implore ayde of the Almighty King of Heauē, & of the Portu∣gheses their friends, who were his deuoted and reli∣gious seruants; that so, protected by the Portugheses and the diuine assistance, they might not only defend themselues, but also triumph ouer their enemies. For if they would yield themselues subiect to the Christiā Religion, & to the Portugheses, they certainly would fight with all their forces for them, both in regard of religion, and because they were now become their su∣iects, and would also by the help of God, carry the whole businesse with as good successe, as valour. And hauing conquered, & ouerthrowne the Saracens, the deadly enemyes of Christians, they might also per∣haps, giue vp the fishing of pearles (as taken from the Saracens by right of warre) vnto the Paraua's, in res∣pect they were become Christians, as a pledge of their Religion. To this counsaile they gaue willing eare. And the Paraua's were neyther deceyued by the Knight, nor the Knight by them: for all things came to passe as he had fortold. Now, when the feare of their enemies, & the authority of that vertuous knight had driuen them to enter league with the Portugheses, presently their chiefe Magistrates (whome they call Pantagarines ) dis∣patch an Embassage of certayne principall men amōg them, to the Portugheses at Cocinum▪ to whome they gaue in charge, that as soon as they came thither, with the first occasion, they should become Christians; & then, putting the Paraua's vnder the protection of the Portugheses, they should demaund succour of them a∣gaynst the imminent fury of the Saracens, and with∣all, Priests to instruct, and make the rest Christians. Cocinum is a goodly Citty belonging to the Portu∣gheses, Cocinū. scituated on the sea betweene the Promontory of Comorinum and Goa, the chiefe of all India both for extent and worth, next vnto Goa. As soone therfore as the Paraua's Embassadours arriued at Cocinum, after almost two hundred myles iourney, they very fortu∣nately find there present Michael Vasaeus the Suffra∣gan, or Bishops Vicar-generall, a man very zealous for the propagation of Religion: who courteously recei∣uing them, led them to the Gouernour, and commen∣ded them and their busines no lesse seriously then effe∣fectually vnto him. The Gouernor hauing in a friend∣ ly māner heard the Paraua's embassage, he both shewed them all courtesy for the present, and promised them also to deale their matter with the Viceroy of India. And what he sayd, he performed in a more example manner, after that the Embassadours had desired to be aptized. The Viceroy being certifyed of the whole usinesse by the Gouernour of Cocinum, as he was a an of extraordinary zeale, was very glad of that oc∣casion, and commaunded forthwith that ayde should be sent to the Paraua's. The Co∣morines are bap∣tized. In the meane tyme the Paraua's mbassadours being all baptized, were called de Cruz (of the Crosse) for Iohn de Cruz his sake, who had giuen them that counsaile. And so great is the reward which good counsaile deserueth, that the other chiefe men also of that nation did afterwards take the same name. The Gouernor therfore by commaund from the Vi∣ceroy prepareth out of hand a strōg nauy, hastneth to the coast of Piscaria, ioyneth battayle with the enemy; where the matter seemed to surpasse all humane for∣ces. For the Saracens were ouerthrowen at the first onset, and entirely conquered by one battaile. Then the Paraua's being deliuered from all feare of warre, the Gouernour turned his care to procure the salua∣tion of their soules; and sending thither Priests, there were baptized to the number of 20000. Now the Por∣tugheses returning Conquerours, were not content with the protection & safegard of their subiects, but gaue them moreouer (as Cruz had foretould) the fis∣hing of pearles, for congratulation of their becom∣ming Christians. Wherby the case was now so alte∣red, that the Saracens might not fish, without the Pa∣raua's gaue them leaue. Thus, God drawing good out of euill, by the tearing of one eare, was an occasion of the saluation of a whole Nation. But humane frailty was not answerable to the will and ordinance of God. For the Priests (I spake of) when they had baptized a great number of the Paraua's, The Co∣morines are for∣saken by the Pri∣ests. being dismayed through the intemperatnesse of the ayre, and want of victualls, returned home a∣gayne. And so those poore new Christians, who per∣chance had not byn conuerted to the fayth of Christ so much for the loue of true Religion, as for the feare of daunger they were lately in, being left de∣stitute of Pastours and wholly ignorant, fell agayne into their old superstitions and customes. Xauerius be∣ing certifyed hereof by Michael Vasaeus the Suffragan, his mynd was possessed with various affections; for as he much reioyced at so great an aduancement of the Christian cause, so was he extremly grieued for their succourlesse estate; yet was he agayne comforted through firme hope, that himselfe might be able shortly to help & comfort thē. For now the Ethnicks and Neophites that were about the Citty of Goa, and who at that tyme vsed his help, were very well pro∣uided through the endeauours of F. Borban & others, and therfore he much desired to succour these, who were left destitute of all assistance. Whereupon forthwith he resolued to go to Pis∣caria, to fish for the soules of the fisher-men themselues which were farre more precious then their pearles. And presently he goeth to the Bishop▪ as his custome was, to whome he declareth what determination he had made, but withall leaueth the whole matter to his discretion. Who approuing of what he had deter∣mined, wished him a happy iorney, & with al courtesy dismissed him. At whose departure the teares which stood in Alboquercius eyes shewed euidently how much he loued Xauerius for his humility. Thē Francis hauing gotten the Bishops approbation, The Bi∣shops lo∣ue to Xa∣uerius. goeth to Sosa the Viceroy, and opening the matter vnto him, earnestly equesteth his furtherance for the accomplishment therof, if he thought it fitting. The viceroy thē tooke God to witnesse, that he was very sory for his depar∣ture, but for as much as he doubted not but that his going would be for the Paraua's soules good, the grief which his absēce would cause, would be therby made more tolerable; The Vi∣ceroyes respect to him. and withall commaunded him to be boūtifully & freely prouided of whatsoeuer his iorney should require. Xauerius thanked him for his so great courtesy, telling him that he wanted nothing but only conueniency of transporting thither; for seeing it was dangerous to go by land, in respect of the many ene∣mies, he intreated with all speed to go by sea. Sosa pre∣sently granteth his request, giueth him a shippe, and also cōmandeth his officers to furnish him of al things necessary. But Xau rius was still like himselfe, in resolutely and constantly refusing al commodities, His loue of pouer¦ty. either for his sustenance, or iorney. So as when the officers offred yea euen thrust vpon him necessary prouisions, he thanked them kindly, and returned them all back agayne. But when they pressed him earnestly, and would haue no deniall, he condescended somwhat to their importunities (with no lesse commendations for his courtesy in yielding, then for his parsimony in ta∣king) and accepted of a Iacket of leather, & a payre of bootes to defend him from the heate of the sunne, which in those places, being neere to the Equinoctiall line, he knew to be exceeding great. These things be∣ing known, his friends began euery one to bring him other necessaries for his iourney, but he corteously re∣turned all backe agayne, because as he sayd, they were rather hindrances then helps vnto him. And so he departed, together with the Gouernor of the Coast of Piscaria, who went thither also in the month of Oc∣tober, of this present yeare 1543. CHAP. VI. He laboureth in the Promontory of Co∣morinum. T HE Promontory of Comorinum being al∣most of equall distance from the Riuers In∣dus and Ganges, The Co∣morine Promō∣tory. stretcheth forth to the E∣quinoctiall line 400. miles almost from the Citty of Goa. Hence India bending it selfe elbow-wise from the same place, & the coast of Piscaria lying be∣tweene the East and the West, runneth out almost 200. myles towards Ganges. The whole country is as poore in victuals, as it is rich in pearles. For the inha∣bitāts liue vpon rice, milke, fish, & some flesh, but they want bread, wine, fruites, and such like things; and commonly there is among them no vse of Phisitians, or medicins. The people (according to the capacity of Barbarians) are of reasonable temperate and quiet dispositions, Intolle∣rable heate of the sun. but very rude. There is not any country in India more scorched with the sunne then this. For when the sunne beateth vpon the plaine sands, there is such an intollerable heate that it burneth vp all things like a fire. Yet, all this great intēperatenes both of the ayre & place, together with the like want of victualls and phisick, Xauerius with an vndaunted courage vn∣derwent of his owne accord, thirsting more after soules, then others did after pearles. Now some, who hauing passed a few labours, and incommodities, Xauiers labours. and may perhaps, please and sooth vp themselues, as though they had suffered all the inconueniences that could be, for Christs sake, shall do well to obserue what we shall heerafter set downe of Xauerius extreme and infinite labours, vn∣speakable miseries, and want of all things in the Pro∣montory of Comorinum. For we may be very much ashamed of our selues, if we cōpare our labours with his toyles in this new vineyard of Christ. This long and vncoth Tract was inhabited by fishermen, who dwelt partly in Villages, and partly in Townes to the number of thirty, whereof twenty belonged to the Christians, in which, besides the forsayd 20000. newly christned, who were yet to be instructed in the preceps of their fayth, there were very many others, both yong and old, to be baptized. He was also often∣tymes to combat both with the heat of the sunne, and with the sand, which in that parching shore did not only sinke vnder him, but sorely scorched his feete as he trauayled. But he discouraged at nothing, went through with that so hard an enterprises with as great a fortitude as he had vndertaken it. For he alone, as if he had had the courage & forces of many Priests, no∣thing regarding the heate of the sun, imploied himself continually in trauersing the villages and townes of that Coast, going oftentimes euen barefoot through those scorching sands (after his bootes were worne out) and daily baptizing of infants, children, and o∣thers whome he found willing to become Christians; inuenting many strange meanes to hinder them from sacrificing vnto Idols, in ioyning men and women together with the lawfull bands of marriage, cathe∣chizing euery one according to their capacity, and making friends those who were at variance, being al∣most consumed and burnt vp with intollerable heat and sweat, without any compassion of himselfe, or care of his owne body. His vsuall custome was to sleepe vpon the bar ground, to liue vpon a little Rice, He dres∣seth rice for him∣selfe, according to the country fashion, & that but ill dressed also by himself among so many great employments. Sometimes also although very seldome, he vsed a little fish with his Rice, or a little sower milke which the Neophytes o new Christians of themselues brought vnto him. Be∣sides this, he encountred with many great difficulties, which the want of things necessary, and the incom∣modity of those places could not but cause in him, be∣ing a stranger: yet aboue all other difficulties the want of language did most trouble him. For when he que∣stioned the inhabitāts of matters belonging to Religiō, they answered they were Christians, but being who∣ly ignorant of the Portughese language, The Co∣morensi∣ans igno∣rance. they had not learned the instructions and precepts of the Christian fayth. Xauerius had brought with him two schollers from the Colledge of Goa, who were of ripe yeares, & skillfull both in the Portughese, & the Malauarian ton∣gue which those country people vsed. But finding by experiēce that to instruct children & ignorant people by an interpreter, to be a thing both very tedious, and of small profit, he choose rather to learne himselfe their language, then to vse interpreters; so great desire he had of their conuersion. Therefore he caused his sayd Interpreters to turne the principles of the Christian doctrine into the Mala∣uarian tongue. Then he (although he were now grown into good yeares) becomming agayne, as it were, a child for Christ, getting the same by hart, went vp & downe the streetes with a little bell in his hand calling the children and people together, in some conuenient place, and there taught them those principles he had learned in their owne language. His feruour in tea∣ching made the people learne with more alacrity. Their forward∣nes in le∣arning. And in the space of a month the childrē which before were rude and knew nothing, had gotten almost by hart all what he had taught thē; so that Francis neither repen∣ted himselfe of his labour in teaching them, nor they of their diligence in learning. Nay they were so set v∣pon learning, that they neuer ceased to solicite him to giue them set prayers one after another to learne by hart, & heerin they would so presse him, that he could scarce haue leasure to recite his diuine office in quiet, they neuer making an end of begging of him, vntill he had performed their desire. Xauerius therfore as soone as he perceiued all things to succeed well in these first beginnings, He vseth children for the instructi∣on of their Pa∣rents and others. not conten∣ting himselfe with the good of a few, bethought how he might help a greater number. And to the end his in∣struction might the more dilate it selfe, he caused the children by litle and litle to teach their parents, kins∣folkes, seruants, and neighbours those things which they themselues had learned of him. So as these chil∣dren, of schollers becomming in a short time maisters, were no small furtherance to the Christian cause. Yet Xauerius although he vsed these helpes, did not for al that take any less paynes himselfe. For vpon sundaies before a great company, of children, men, and wo∣men beginning with the Creed, he briefly explicated vnto them the twelue articles of the Christian fayth & the ten Commandements, some at one time, some at another. He was heard attentiuely and diligently, with the astonishment not only of the Christians, The Christiā law in the iudgmēt of the ve¦ry Eth∣nikes thē selues is confor∣mable to reason. but also of the Ethnickes, who came in great troopes to heare him, admiring that the Christian Law, was so agreable and conformable to Reason. But Xauerius well knowing, that to explicate diuine matters as they ought, the diuine assistāce was more necessary then humane industry, before euery article of the Creed and ech Commaundement he caused the people to recite certayne versicles made for the purpose, wherein Christ, and the B. Virgin Mary were piously inuoked, to assist them particularly both to belieue, and practise those things with they heard taught. Sometymes also he would tell them confidēt∣ly, that if they could obtayne those things of God, which they desired of him, concerning the obseruan∣ce of the Christian Fayth, and his diuine Law, they would afterwards receiue more good, and aboundant benefits from heauen, then yet they durst in their harts presume to wish for. He instructed the Neophites and the Cathecumens altogeather with, whome indeed he tooke more paynes and labour, because they were in more danger of perditiō. He bap∣tizeth whole villages. But the number was so great of such as became Christians (for oftentimes he bap∣tized whole villages in one day) that euen his hands & armes were so weary with baptizing, that he could not possibly lift them vp. And oftentimes also he was so spent with repeating such things vnto them as ap∣pertayned to the Christian mysteries, that both his voice and forces fayled him. His ver∣tue ouer come by labour. Yet for all this his noble vertue and courage sought for no releasement of his labour, but rather how he might gaine new matter of merit: so that you would haue thought his body could not be tyred out, nor his courage ouercome by any labour whatsoeuer. He sought out dayly many infants heere and there, His tea∣ching of yong children. and baptized them: yet his chiefe endeauour was to in∣struct litle children, knowing very well that the brin∣ging vp of tender youth was a matter of great impor¦tance, as forseeing that they being instructed in their infancy, might be more profitable to the aduance∣cement of the Christian fayth, then their parents; whereof he had many euident tokens. For he had ob∣serued, that these Neophite-children being very apt to learne their Christian doctrine, were greatly de∣sirous to teach the same vnto others; and that they did so detest the worshipping of Idols, and all kind of superstition, that if their parents did offend therin, they would not only reprehend them themselues, but presently tell Francis of it. And to this forwardnes of the children, his helping hand was not wanting. For if at any tyme they tould him of any such thing, he would presently take the children by the hand, & go with them to the house, where that heynous offence was committed, and as though an alarum had byn gi∣uen to battaile, he would set vpon the place where the Idols were, and together with the children rush vpon them, breake them to pieces, spit and tread vpon thē, & lastly vtterly destroy them, making in this manner the worship of the Deuill, a laughing-stock to chil∣dren. CHAP. VII. Hauing vvrought many miracles by him∣selfe, and the nevv Christians, he is for his extraordinary Humility, commonly called the Holy Father. A FTER he had sufficiently instructed in the Catechisme, the places which first oc∣cured to him, going to the Towne of Tu∣tuchurinum, he lodged by the way in an obscure village of Ethinckes, who contemning their neighbours examples would not heare of the Christiā faith. Wherupon Francis vrging them with the autho∣rity of all the coast of Piscaria, they all togeather an∣swered, that they could not do it, by reason of their Kings auersion; which was not so indeed, but a pre∣tense only to set a glosse vpon their obstinate Su∣perstition. In which case Xauerius being vncertaine what to do, God out of his prouidence gaue him an admirable occasion of bringing his designes about. There was a certaine womā of good worth, A womā is by ba∣ptisme deliue∣red from the dan∣ger in child-birth. who had now bin very dangerously in trauaile of Child-birth three whole dayes; & her life was desperate. Her hus∣band & kinsfolkes were also weary with praying to their deafe Gods for her safe deliuery, & al in vaine the which Francis vnderstanding, & putting his trust in God, went thither in all hast with an Interpreter and gaue them some hope of help. Forthwith, hauing gotten the consent of the family, he began to deale with her, that seing there was no hope of her reco∣uery, she would prouide for her soule, and withall he began briefly to explicate vnto her the chief points of the Christian fayth. Wherwith she being touched from heauen, and giuing credit thereto, Xauerius de∣maunded, whether she would be a Christian? Very willingly▪ quoth she. Then Francis reading ouer her the Ghospell, baptized her, being euen ready to dye. A wonderfull thing. The baptisme caused her so easy a deliuery, that presently she brough forth her child without any paine or difficulty. For which prosperous euent he being exceedingly glad, presently baptizeth the infant newly borne, and then all the other of the house, who were both astonished at the miracle, and not a little replenished with ioy. This fact being so admirable, and wrought in presence of so many witnesses, was instantly diuul∣ged▪ wherupon Xauerius iudging it a fit occasiō to vrge the people whilest they were thus amazed, began to be instāt with the chiefe men of the Village, that they should not doubt to imbrace that Religion, wherof they had lately seene so euident a testimony. But they tould him first, they would not do it without their Kings licence; He bap∣zeth a whole village. yet afterwards, hauing obtayned the same of his Lieutenant, they were almost all bapti∣zed, together with many whole familes, so as that Vil∣lage presently became Christian. Frō thence Francis going to Punical (a Town of great resort) was there louingly receiued by the Neophytes where presently hauing, according to his custom, bap∣zed many infāts, he began to instruct the people & the childrē in the Catechisme. There was at the same time in that Towne a great mortality, and sicknes among the people, so as very many came daily vnto him frō all places, requesting him to visit their houses, & say some prayers ouer the sicke. And many also who had none to sollicite for them, being extremely sick, crept vnto him as well as they could for the same cause. Xa∣uerius being moued as well out of his owne compassio∣nate nature, as by that pittyful spectacle, had a scruple to deny those poore soules so iust requests, fearing lost if he should be lacke therin, the Christian Religion might receiue some detriment therby. He hea∣leth the sicke, d∣liuereth possessed persons. Therfore he spent much time, and tooke great paines, in visiting them & reading the holy Gospell ouer the sick: & not in vayne. For it is well knowne, that very many sick in that sea coast were by him cured, & many possessed persons deliuered. And it is certainly reported that he there restored three dead men to life, besides a yong maide of Cangoxima, of whome I will speake in her proper place. Pun call, as we said, is a towne of good note in the coast of Comorinum. A youth is raysed from death. In this towne there dyed a certaine yong man of a good family, who being by his frinds brought to Francis, and layd at his feete with great la∣mentation, the good Father tooke him by the hand, and commanded him in the name of Christ to aryse; wherupō he presently rose vp aliue. He sup∣presseth his mira∣cles. This act Xauerius out of his true humility, suppressed as much as pos∣sibly he could, by dissembling the matter, but all in vaine. For there wanted not witnesses therof, nor men to spread it abroad, although it were a matter of great moment wherof they were to be the authors. And this miracle was afterward confirmed by another the like. In the same towne a Christian woman went to Francis, and with teares bewayling her misfortune of being left desolate, most humbly besought him, that he would be pleased to go to her little sonne who had bin lately drowned in a well. A boy drow∣ned in a well is raysed a∣gayne to lyfe. He bad the woman be of good courage, for her child was not dead, and presently goeth along with her, as she desired. As soone as he came to the house he fell downe vpon his knees, and hauing prayed a while he made the signe of the crosse vpon the dead body; wherupon the child presently start vp from the beere wheron he lay, not only aliue, but also sound, and in perfect health. At which miraculous accident the Christians who stood about were all astonished, and cryed out for ioy. But Xauerius earnestly intreated them by al meanes possible to make no words therof, & so secretly retyred him∣selfe from thence. They people could not ouercome thēselues as he requested, to keep silent so miraculous an euent; and besides that, Xauerius his dissembling the matter, made his sanctity the more to appeare. Moreouer (to speake nothing of others) Iohn Triaga a Portughese, a deuout and graue man, & very familiar with Xauerius, being demanded iuridically by the Bishop of Goa his Vicar, after the Fathers death, testified, Two re∣stored to life. that himselfe was present at Punicall when Francis raysed to life a certaine boy, and also a little girle. And withall testified, that he had vnderstood by many, that Xauerius had restored another to life in village called Bembari; wherof himselfe had some∣tymes asked Xauerius, & although, out of humility, he seemed so suppresse the matter, yet he might easily perceaue it was true, which he went about to cōceale. And all this, is very sufficiently testified, vnder the deposition and seale of the Viceroy of India, by the King of Portugals command. Now, whilest Xauerius thus laboureth about the sick, and the dead, there wanted not other many and dayly imployments, to instruct children, conuert the Ethnickes, baptize those that were conuerted, bury the dead, and satisfy those who asked his aduice. But the cumbersomnes of the sick, by reason of their great umber, and the bruit which was now spread abroad of those that were cured, did so greatly increase daily, that it was not possible for one to satisfy all. Moreo∣ er, as many times it hapneth, there arose contenti∣ons among the people, whilst euery one did striue to get Francis first to their house. Therfore to condescend to their iust demaunds without any breach of peace, he found out an inuention, which was as profitable as necessary, to send in his place certaine Christian childrē fit for that purpose. He cu∣reth the sicke by children. These children by Xauiers appointment going about to the houses, first called to∣geather those of the family and their neighbours, then auing recited the Creed all togeather, they exhorted the sick to haue an assured hope and confidence in God by whose help they were to recouer their health; & all last when they had stirred vp all that were present to deuotion, then they added certaine pious and godly prayers. This inuention of his was not in vayne. For what by the fayth of the children, & of the standers by and the sicke, and of Francis Author thereof, it caused in the diseased health both of body and soule. In so much that very many Neophites were therby confirmed in their beliefe, & many Ethnickes brought to the faith of Christ: the force whereof they had experienced by the recouery of their health. But if any of the said children could get Xauerius Beades, he thought him∣selfe highly honoured, for that infallibly they cured all the sick who were touched therwith; wherfore, as iewels famous for the wonders wrought by thē, euery one did striue to get them; so as being carryed about continually to the sicke, they seldome brought them backe to Francis, seruing rather to worke miracles thē to pray vpon. And by the meanes of these children he did not only help those who were sicke, but assi∣sted also possessed, and obsessed persons. There was one, who being possest, was wonder∣fully tormented by the Deuill, to whome Francis be∣ing requested to go, but could not by reason of other employments, sent in his place certayne Children (who assisted him in teaching the Christian doctrine) with a crosse, He deli∣uereth a possessed person by the children and tould them what they should do. The children went to the possest man, and, as Xaue∣rius had instructed them, gaue him the crosse to kisse, and they themselues recited certayne prayers which they knew by hart. Whereupon presently, to the astonishment of all that were present the possest man was deliuered, not so much by the fayth, and sancti∣ty of the children, as of Francis himselfe. The re∣port heereof being spread far and neere with great applause to Xauerius, his fame became more remar∣kable by his humility. Xauiers humili∣ty. For these miracles which he wrought by diuine power, by sending children vp & downe, he would not acknowledge as done by him∣selfe, but ascribed them to the faith of the children, & of the sick persons: so as endeauouring by all meanes to debase himselfe, He is called Holy Father. and to hide his owne vertue, he made the splendour of his sanctity the more appeare. Wherfore shining, as he did, not only with that emi∣nency of vertue, but also with Christian humility, he was now commonly called the Holy Father. Thus hid∣den Vertue becometh more glorious. CHAP. VIII. He substituteth Deputies in his place to teach the Christian doctrine, and procu∣reth for them a certaine stipend of the King of Portugall. T HIS approued fidelity and industry of the He ta∣keth children to teach the cate∣chisme with him neophytes in curing diseases made Xauerius desirous to make thē his fellow-labourers in instructing the people. Wherfore making choice of such as were no lesse diligent then vertuous, he sent them abroad, bidding them teach the Cathe∣chisme to the rude and ignorant in houses, wayes, and streetes, in manner as he had instructed thē. When he saw this course which he had inuented, was able to go on by it selfe, he with the children went to ano∣ther Village, intending in the same manner to in∣struct the rest of the townes. All which when he had once gone ouer, neuer thinking of rest, but as it were dallying with his labours, he againe returned to the first village, there to amend what he should find amisse; and in the same manner went ouer all the rest which before he had visited. In the meane time also, thinking it necessary to establish the Christian faith, nor only for the present but also for the time to come, he left in euery towne & village a Copy of the Christian doctrine, willing those that could write, to copy it out, and the rest to learne it by hart, and to repeate it ouer euery day. He orday∣ned also in all the forsaid villages, that vpon all holy∣dayes, the Neophytes should assemble themselues in∣to one place, and there all togeather sing the Christian doctrine. And that these things might be well and duely obserued, thinking it expedient to leaue some in his place, he appointed in euery Towne and Villa∣ge, one to haue a care of matters concerning Christi∣an religion, whome in their language they called the Canacaple. And that this order which was so necessa∣ry, might neuer cease, or decay, he procured of the Viceroy of India an yearly stipend for the Canacaples. The reason of this was, that in tyme of necessity there might alwayes be some to baptize the infants newly borne when they should be in any danger of death, and to supply in other things that which could not be well differred, and withall to assist the Neophytes, when Francis was farre of, and could not so speedily come vnto them. So as, in euery place he appointed one or two who excelled the rest in the vnderstanding of the Christian doctrine, graue carriage, feruour of piety, and integrity of life, teaching them the man∣ner and forme of baptisme, and giuing them in char∣ge, that if at any tyme necessity should require, they should with all speed baptize litle infants; and if any matter of importance besids, chanced to happen, they should presently certify him thereof. These, euery one in his Village, for want of Priests, being as it were the Curats or Pastours, had the care of the Church, and twice euery day they taught the Catechisme both in Latin, and in their owne coun∣try language: in the morning to the men, and in the afternoone to the women. They also, as the Christian custome is, denounced the Banes of Matrimony, ma∣king enquiry what impediments there might be to hinder any from lawfull marriage; but their princi∣pall charge was to baptize litle infants, who through weakenes might be in danger of death. And when Xa∣uerius made his visit in the sayd Villages, these his sub∣stitutes presently deliuered vp vnto him the number of childrē which were borne that yeare, of those who kept concubines in their houses, and of such as had any emnity or discord amongst themselues, that ther∣by he might with all speed apply remedy therto. And by this meanes he knew, & composed all difficulties euery where; so that making very litle stay any where he might passe on to other places. To these Canacaples at Xauerius request were assigned 400 crownes yearely, out of the publicke Treasury, by the viceroy of India, and afterward confirmed by the King of Portugal. His let∣ter to the Queene of Por∣tugall. This said mony was accustomed to be payd to Queene Catherin of Portugal, to buy her shoes, and Pantofles. Wherfore Francis wrote vnto her maiesty very pleasantly and piously that she could haue no fitter shoes or Pantofles, to climbe to heauen then the Christian children of the Piscarian coast, and their instructions. Wherefore he humbly intreated her to bestow her shoes and Pantofles, as a Tribute, vnto their teachers and instructors, The li∣berality & piety of the Queene of Por∣tugall therby to make her selfe a ladder to heauen, for she might be glad of such an occasion, then the which she could not per∣haps haue wished a better. The Queene, as a woman of notable piety, approued of his request, and very willingly, and freely assigned the same to the Canaca∣ples, and maisters of the Neophytes. And thus, by Xa∣uerius meanes, by the Queenes liberality, & the Kings authority, this order was instituted and established, with no lesse merit of the benefactors, then profit to the Christian cause. CHAP. IX. He conuinceth the Brachmans, and conuer∣teth some of them. I N this meane while, The Brach∣mans & their re∣ligion. Francis had no small ado with the Brachmans. These Brachmans descending frō the race of Kings & Priests, re amongst all the nations of India the chiefe, both or Nobility and Wisedome. They worship one God whome they call Parabram ) the begining of al things, and perfect in euery respect, as being Creatour of hea∣uē & earth. But togeather with this truth they mingle in numerable fables to deceiue the common people. They say, he hath three sonnes, who gouern the world, and yet haue all the same nature, and diuinity. This forsooth, is signified by the girdle the Brachmans thē∣selues weare, at the end wherof there be three little cords hanging from one knot: hauing in this manner, either through the malice of men, or craft of the Diuel corrupted the mistery of the B. Trinity, which was an∣ciētly receiued among them. They haue also goodly Temples dedicated to these Gods, with three Towres, which being separated at the basis, by little & little do ioyne altogeather in the toppe. They haue their ima∣ges drawen out in diuers shapes, which in times past they tooke vpon them, which they call Pagods. These Brachmans, whome among the Indians are indeed famous for their learning and abstinence, The Brach∣mans wicked∣nes and lewd∣nesse. are in the Promontory of Comorinum most notorious for their ignorance, and lewdnes. For not enduring the pouerty which that part of India sustayneth, they co∣uer their naturall lewdnes with abhominable dece∣ipt, and whilst themselues in priuate, sit at their ban∣quets with solemne musick of tabers and pipes, they perswade the simple people that their Gods are a fea∣sting; and withall demaund of them, in their Gods name, whatsoeuer they want for the maintenance of themselues and their families, denouncing the ven∣geance of the Gods against them, vnlesse they pre∣sently performe what they be commanded. Xauerius therfore conuincing them openly of de∣ceipt, began to accuse them to the people, The Brach∣mans de∣sire Fran¦cis his friēdship and to ma∣nifest their false dealing: which occasion caused the saluation of many, who giuing ouer Idolatry became Christians. And the Brachmans being astonished as wel at his great learning, as at the miracles wrought by him, turning their hate into reuerence, endeauoured to gaine his fauour and friendship, both by guiftes, & all other meanes they could deuise. But his loue of pouerty was not ouercome by any such fauours, and though he reiected their guiftes, to keep his owne li∣berty free, yet notwithstanding he conserued good correspondence, and friendship with them. And as he went his circuit about the townes of the Christians, oftentimes he lodged in their abiding places (which are also called Pagods, Pagods. as their Gods are) hoping that some of them might be conuerted, with the saluation of many soules. Vpon a tyme he came to a certaine Pagod, where were assembled almost two hundred Brachmans, Francis his con∣ference with the Brach∣mans. who had vnderstood of his comming thither. Hauing salu∣ted one another, and many wordes passed to and fro, Francis demaunded of them in ful assembly, what their Gods commaunded those to do, who were to come into heauen to them? After long strife amongst them who should giue the answere, it fell at last, by common consent, to the lot of an ancient man of 80. yeares of age, the eldest amongst them; who craftily shifting off the Question, asked Xauerius agayne, what the Christians God commaunded them to do? But he perceyuing the old mans euasion, tould him he would not speake a word of any Christian af∣fayres, vntill he had answered his question, as good reason he should. Then the old man being driuen to it by necessity, with open manifestation of his igno∣rance, sayd: That their Gods commaunded them two things: The one was, that they should not kill any Cow, because with kine the Gods were worshipped: The other was, that they should bestow liberall guifts vpon the B achmans, the chiefe Priests & Ministers of the sayd Gods. Then Xauerius, moued at the ignorance and im∣pudency both of the man, and the thing, presently rose vp, and intreated them, that they would also now heare him. And with a lowd voice reciting the Creed and the ten Commandements, he briefly explicateth the same in their country language: The Brach∣mans approue of the Christiā Religiō. and then he de∣clareth the ioyes of the blessed in heauen, and the tor∣ments of the damned in hell: and finally who they were that should go to the one, and other place. As soone as they heard this, on a suddain they all rose vp, and euery one imbracing him, wonderfully extolled the Christian Religion, containing such agreable my∣steryes and precepts as those were: such is the force of truth, euen with peruerse minds, if light from heauen shine vpon them. The ri∣diculous questiōs of the Brach∣mans. Then they asked him many other things very ridiculous, and such as we who by Gods goodnes vnderstād the Truth, do abhorre to heare; to wit, whether the Soule of man dyeth togeather with the body, as other liuing creatures do? What should be the cause, why we seeme in our sleepe to be with our friends, although they be far of? Is it not because our soule, the body being asleep, leaueth its mansion, and flyeth abroad? Whether God be white or black? for they themselues being blackish by nature, The Brach∣mans thinke God to be black. out of the esteeme they beare to their owne colour, thinke that God is black, and do oftentimes besmeare their Idols with oile in such manner, that they be not only black, but euen vgly also, and horrible to behould; in so much that you would thinke you saw the Diuels themselues, and not their images. Xauerius when these questions were asked him, knowing well how to accommodate his speech to his Auditours, answered not so learnedly, as sutably to their capacities, so that not one of all the company durst open his month to contradict him. But when he pressed them to imbrace the Christian Religion, which they saw so manifestly proued vnto them, they answered, that indeed they were afraid of what the people would say, and that they should want meanes to liue, if they should change their course of life. And so these wretches making more account of what the people would say, then of their owne saluation, con∣temned the light which began to shine vpon them, & remained obstinate in their darknes. Now although, as we sayd, the Brachmans carry away the bell for wisedome among the Indians: yet there was only one found among them all, worthy of that name, a Schoole-man of a famous Academy of India, who out of the familiarity which he had with Xauerius, declared to him certain mysteries of that Academy, w ch held: that there was one God maker of the world, who raigning in heauē ought to be worshi∣ped of mortal mē: that euery eight day (which we cal Sunday) ought to be kept holy: & that a time would come when all should professe one Religion. Moreo∣uer he desired to know the mysteryes of the Christian fayth, which at length Francis declared vnto him, and withall spake these wholsome words of our Sauiour, Marc. 16. Math. Qui crediderit & baptizatus fuerit, saluus erit, He that be∣lieueth & is baptized shal be saued. The Brachman no∣ted downe in a litle booke these words with their ex∣plication, and intreated Xauerius to baptize him vpon certayne conditions. But Xauerius reiecting his con∣ditions being neyther iust nor honest, thought it good to differre his request for a tyme, & so dismissed him; bidding him to publish that mystery of one God to the people, hoping that he would indeed become a perfect Christian, & be occasion of no small aduancement to the Christian cause. But yet there was another yong Brachman who gaue not only greater hopes, A Brach¦man ba∣ptized teacheth children the Ca∣techisme but also proued better indeed. He being of an excellent wit & behauiour, was instructed, and baptized by Francis, & by his appointement vndertooke to teach children their Catechisme; Christ thus choosing to himselfe maysters of his doctrine, out of the Diuels schoole. At this time now, God would shew manifestly how pleasing Xauerius labours were vnto him. An iniu∣ry done to Fran∣cis is re∣uenged by God. He wēt vpon some occasions to an Ethincke noble-man, who being a barbarous & vnciuil fellow, contemning the vertuous and holy man, shut him out of his house, in a rude & disgracefull manner; & scoffing at him, said: Serue me in the same sort, if euer I come to the Chri∣stians Church. This iniury offred to Francis being pu∣blished abroad by those who were present, no body had lesse feeling of it, then he to whome it was done. It seemed doubtlesse, both to the Portugheses, and the Neophites an vnworthy fact, as deseruing indeed to be reuenged by God himselfe. Therfore he who taketh vengeance vpon iniuries done vnto his seruants, sent spedily a due punishmēt vpon that contumelious man. A few dayes after, the same Noble man being vnar∣med, chanced to meet with his armed enemies not far from the Christians Church: wherefore being not able to resist he thought to defend himself by running away. Now as he fled, they followed him close with their deadly weapons, & were euen come to the Chri∣stians Church, wherin that wretch (not thinking thē of the contumelious words which formerly he had vtteed against Xauerius ) thought to saue himselfe. But the Neophites comming forth in hast at the clamour and tumult which they heard, so stopped vp the en∣trance to the Church, and, as it ordinarily hapneth, the last came so hard pressing vpon the first, that he could not possibly haue way to enter, so to saue him∣selfe. They seing this, & knowing the man, cryed out that God the reuenger of Xauerius his iniury had by di∣uine iudgment debarred him of the refuge he desired. And so he who before had contumeliously shut Xaue∣rius out of doores, being pursued by his enemies, and endeauouring to saue his life by flying to the Christiās Church, was himselfe shut out: God permitting him to be serued in the like manner, as he serued Xauerius. CHAP. X. Liuing in the coast of Piscaria vvith great ioy, and fruit of his labours, he comfor∣teth the Neophites, vvho vvere much afflicted. B VT, it is incredible to thinke, what aboū∣dance of diuine consolation Xauerius foūd in these extreme labours of his. Himselfe signified it in a letter which he wrote to the Society at Rome. To which they shall do well to hearken, who preferring earthly commodities before diuine, thinke that the life of holy persons is without all comfort & delight, as though there were no place for pleasure, where riches & delicacies do not abound. In a clause therfore of his epistle inuiting others of the Society to the same labours, he writeth thus: So great is the aboundance of the heauenly ioyes, Aboun∣dance of heauenly ioyes. which God bestoweth vpon them, who labour in this vineyard, for the conuersion of the Indians to Christ, that if there be any ioy in this life, I thinke it only to be heere. Neither did he auouch this without a true ground, and of what he had not expe∣rienced in himselfe. For being oftentimes in the midst of those labours, ouerwhelmed with heauenly conso∣lations, he hath bin secretly heard to breake forth into these words: I beseech thee, O Lord, do not euerwhelme me with such aboundance of ioyes in this life; of if it please thee of thy infinite bounty, that still I flow with these flouds of de∣lights, remoue me hence into heauen among the blessed; for he that hath once had an inward tast of thy sweetnesse, must needes liue a bitter life without thee. Xauerius therfore liued a whole yeare in the coast of Piscaria with infinite labour, The mul¦titude of those that were baptized and the like comfort; and that which much increased his ioy, was the great augmentation of the Christian faith. For as it appea∣reth by his owne letters, he baptized aboue a 1000. in∣fants, who presently after their Baptisme went to he∣auen. Wherby we may gather what a multitude there were, either of infants that liued, or else of elder peo∣ple whome he made members of Christs Church. And it is well knowen, that in that coast many villages, & some whole Townes, were by him conuerted to the Christian faith. When he had thus carryed, and set in order the affayres of Christian Religion in the coast of Comori∣num, about the latter end of the yeare 1543. he retur∣neth to Goa, to deale in person with the viceroy of In∣dia, concerning certaine important busines about Christian Religion. Vpon this occasion he tooke with him some youths of the chiefe nobility of that Coun∣try, both as pledges, & supplies for the Christian faith to be broght vp in learning in the Seminary of Goa; for that by this tyme the Colledge there was for the most part built & furnished. Wherfore Borban, not suffering Xauerius to lodge in the Hospitall of the sick as he was accustomed, brought him home, and of his owne ac∣cord gaue ouer to him the whole gouernment therof, which he, with the consent of the said Borban, com∣mitted to Fa. Paul Camertes, Paul Ca∣merts the first Re∣ctour of the Col∣ledge of Goa. who was lately come from Mozambicum. The fame of the admirable things which Xauerius had wrought in the coast of Piscaria was come to Goa before himselfe ariued thither, and had much increa∣sed his esteeme, aswell with others as with the viceroy of India, who affected him exceedingly; and therfore without difficulty he obteined of him whatsoeuer he desired. Amongst other things, the report being brought to Goa of those who were raysed to life in the coast of Comorinum, made Xauerius name to be spread far and neere. Wherfore Iames Borban by reason of his ancient familiarity, taketh him aside, and earnestly intreateth him, that for the honour of God he would tell him the particulers of those, who were reported to be raysed to life by his prayers in the Country of Comorinum. His no∣table shamefa∣stnes at his owne prayses. At which words Xauerius his countenāce was all dyed ouer with a virginall crimson-blush, be∣wraying both his modesty & the truth of the matter. Endeauouring therfore, as much as he could with truth, to couer any matter which tended to his owne glory, he imbraceth Borban in a friendly manner, and smiling sayth▪ Good Iesu, I rayse dead men to life! O wicked wretch that I am! Certaine mē indeed brought to me a youth seeming to be dead, who being by me commanded in the name of Christ to aryse, presently rose vp: His con∣cealing of mira∣cles. this indeed, and other such like things, they who were present published abroad for miracles. Yet this his couering of those miracles (though his coun∣tenance sufficiently discouered the truth) diminished nothing at all the credit of what was reported of him, his humility therein being almost as admirable, as the miracles themselues. Xauerius hauing now dispatched the businesse for which he came, and taking Francis Mansilla for his cō∣panion, returned againe into the coast of Piscaria vpon the 24. of March the next yeare following, He brin∣geth some to help him in the coast of Piscaria. & setleth himself to his old exercises of Charity. He had now be∣sides Mansilla 3. assistants, Iohn Lesian a Spanish Priest, & two other Priests also of that coūtry, who at Xaue∣rius request wēt thither for the same cause, partly frō Goa, & partly from Cocinum. Hauing made these men partners of his charge, he neuer ceased going about, baptizing infants, & exhorting others to do the same. His labour was as much, if not more, then before, and his difficultyes greater. For being a stranger, & wholy ignorant of the Malauarian language (in so much be∣sides the Cathechisme he scarce knew one word ther∣of) yet liued he, and conuersed amongst the Malaua∣rian Neophytes without an interpreter; which thing did not withstanding rather stirre vp, then hinder his endeauours. To baptize infants he had no need of an interpreter; & the poore and wretched people did of themselues open vnto him their miseries in such sort, that he might easily vnderstand them▪ He also by his study, and endeauours came to be his owne interpre∣ter: for albeyt he were vnskillfull in the country ton∣gue, yet made he good shift to preach vnto the people, expressing oftentimes by his contenance and gesture, what he could not do in words. But to keep an order and decorum in all things, he called them not al together, but caused the men & the omen to come by turnes, euery other day to the Ca∣ echisme. His chiefe care was to baptize infants and struct children, He tea∣cheth mē and wo∣mē their Catec∣chisme apart. because he knew certaynely, that uch as dyed before they lost their innocency, being aptized, were made partakers of the kingdom of hea∣ en, the which many that were of riper yeares lost by returning agayne to their former bad life. And he did ot only himselfe imploy his chiefest endeauours in elping that tender age, What a care he had of bapti∣zing in∣fantes. but also gaue most diligent charge to F. Marsilla his companion to do the same. Moreouer as occasion & place required, he helped the Neophytes, not only spiritually but corporally also. Vpō the East of the coast of Piscaria there lieth bor∣dering a wild & sauage kind of people, The Ba∣dages a sauage nation. whome they al Badages. These gathering together a great army, ei∣ her out of hatred to Religion, or through desire of illage, had inuaded the borders of the Christians of Comorinum, spoyling & wasting all before them. The Christians being affrighted at this suddain incursion abandoning their villages, had gotten ouer a little arme of the sea, The ca∣lamity of the Co∣morinen¦sians. and there hid themseluēs amongst the rockes, a fit place for such a purpose: where abiding in the open ayre and the sunne (the heate wherof, as we sayd, is most extreme in those partes) they were miserably burnt vp, Francis his suc∣cour to relieue the neo∣phyts in their mi∣sery. and brought to such want of ne∣cessary meanes to liue vpon, that some dyed for meere hunger. This fearefull newes did not only moue Xa∣uerius to piety towards them, but also stirred vp his carefull endeauours to affoard new succour, in this new accident. He therfore presently bringeth vnto these poore soules, twenty small vessels loaden with prouision. And withall writeth to the Pantagarines, & magistrates of the Coast thereabout, to make a col∣lectiō among the richer sort, for the reliefe of their miseries. So as he prouided for them, not only for the present, but also for the time to come. But as soone as that storme was ouerpast, by retyrement of the ene∣my, gathering togeather his dispersed sheep, he omit∣ted nothing belonging to the duty of a good Pastour. He raysed vp those that were cast downe, and com∣forted them that were afflicted, both by cōpassionate words, & all other sweet means. But, behould a new tempest aryseth, so much the heauier, by how much lōger it endured. They who were officers in the Coast of Piscaria being couetous and intemperate men, be∣gan after a proud and auaricious manner to dominier ouer the neophytes. Wherupon Xauerius being no lesse moued at the vnworthinesse of the fact then it deser∣ued, first opposed himselfe stoutly against their coue∣tousnesse; & at last, when he saw he was not able to withstand them himselfe, he thought to request the viceroy of India (remaining then at Cocinum ) to ayde him, and for that purpose resolued to go vnto him. But new occasions occurring, hindred both his deter∣mination, and iorney which now he had begun. CHAP. XI. He conuerteth the Kingdome of Trauan∣coris to the Christian Faith, and de∣fendeth the Neophytes from the Barba∣rians. H AVING now spent in the Coast of Pis∣caria halfe a yeare in the forsaid labours; and by his endeauours and diligent care so greatly profited therein, that finding at his comming thither but twenty, both villages and townes in al, & those very rude; he left now to his cō∣panions thirty, all of them well instructed & ordered. Wherfore composing all things as well as he could, he leaueth the charge of the Neophytes to Fa. Mansilla, taking his iorney towards Cocinum through the coast of Trauancoris which lyeth next to Piscaria. Trauancoris is a sea coast, on that side of India where Goa standeth, The cost Trauan∣coris. bending towards the West, and lyeth betweene the Promōtory of Comorinum & the Towne Colanum, almost 30. miles from Cocinum, and is said to be in length about 80. miles. There were in that Coast, of sea villages to the number of 30. inhabited partly by Ethnicke fisher-men whome they call Ma∣choa's, and partly by Saracens. Francis therfore, what for want of shipping, and to try their dispositions had a desire to passe through their Country to Cocinum. He wanted not friends who endeauored to dissuade him from that iourney, shewing him that the Machoa's & Sarac ns hated him extremely, taking it very ill that the Paraua's their neighbours were become Christiās. His nota∣ble cou∣rage of mind. Yet for all this he being driuen on more by God, thē by any other necessity, as afterwards the euent plainly demōstrated, made no doubt of passing through their country. Depending therefore vpon the diuine Pro∣uidence, and thinking also that he should gayne by the bargayne if he chanced to dye for Christ, he be∣ginneth his iorney through the midle of the Country about the midst of the yeare of our Lord 1544. As he trauayled he visited the villages which lay in his way, and (as the goodnes of God farre exceedeth all that pious men can expect) he experienced his diuine boūty no lesse fauourable to his enemies, Gods proui∣dence. then to him∣selfe, so peaceable he found all things, and the people greatly disposed to receiue the seed of the holy Ghos∣pell. First therfore hauing gotten friendship with their King, and working vpon the Barbarians harts as well with hope as with feare, sometimes propounding to them the amity of the Portugheses, & thē againe de∣nouncing against them threats from heauen, he with∣out any great difficulty brought them to imbrace the faith of Christ; especially when, being wonne by of∣fices of Christian Charity, they had obtayned leaue by an Edict from their King, to change their Religi∣ons. Wherfore Xauerius reioicing at this so fortunate successe imployed himselfe incessantly in going about from towne to town, to baptize & instruct the people in the mysteries of the Christian faith. What an infi∣nite nūber were by his meanes made Christians, may be coniectured by this, The nū∣ber of those he baptized that he baptized at one time aboue ten thousand. His manner of instructing and baptizing was this. When he came to any village to baptize, calling all the men, women, and children to∣geather into one place, after he had taught them, that there was one God, the Father, the Sonne, & the holy Ghost, he commanded them euery one to make vpon themselues thrice the signe of the Crosse in honour of the most B. Trinity, according as he had before instru∣cted them. Then putting on a Surplise, with a cleare voice he pronounced the mysteries, & precepts of the Christian Religion, His mā∣ner of bapti∣zing. & explicated the same briefly (as well as he could) in their owne language. And when they seemed to be sufficiently instructed, he bad them aske God pardon publickly for the sinnes of their life past, and demanded whether they did really and truly belieue all and euery point of the Christian Religion? Thē they, by putting their armes a crosse gaue a signe that they did belieue, and so he baptized them, put∣ting downe euery ones name in writing, as his cu∣stome was. When all were baptized, He ouer throw∣eth the temples & Idols. Xauerius caused the Tem∣ples of the Gods to be presently throwne downe, and their Idols to be broken in pieces. One could not haue beheld a more gratefull or pleasant spectacle, then to see them now trample those Idols vnder their feete, which a litle before they had with so great reuerence adored. Which great iniury the Diuel certainly would not haue left vnreuenged, if Francis had not had as great courage to withstand the danger, as to offer him that affront. For he stirred vp the Badages agayne (of whome we spake before) who are no lesse cruell enemies to Christian Religion, then brutish & sauage by nature, against the flock of Christ, which as yet was but yong and tender. Wherfore a mighty army of these barbarians made a suddaine incursion vpon the borders of Trauancoris, & began to spoile the villages of the Christians. The inhabitants making a dolefull outery, Atumult amongst the Tra∣uancorē∣sians. togeather with the lamentation of women and children, being all in vproue, betooke them∣selues to flight, yet with little hope to escape, being round beset by their enemies. Xauerius (for it happened he was then present) being stirred vp by the tumult, wrought a memorable act. For, wholy forgetting himselfe, by reason of the eminent danger he saw before his eyes, he flyeth in a∣mongst them, like a Lion, and with an vndaunted courage, A me∣morable deed of his. both of spirit and countenance, rebuketh those barbarous people; who were wonderfully ama∣zed to behold his courage and boldnes, since being slaues to the Deuill and forgetfull of their owne free∣dome and saluation, they came so violently to offend others. Then as a good Pastour he putteth himselfe into the formest presse of the Christians, either to rule his flocke by authority, or if he could not do that, to dy togeather with them. But the Badages, although most barbarous & cruell, could not indure those fiery flames which seemed to shine forth of Francis his coū∣tenance and face, and so for feare, and reuerence to his person, they spared the rest. Yet all this while he was not free from danger of death. For the Ethnickes out of hatred to Christian Religion, lay oftentimes in waite for him, whome notwithstanding he defeated partly by his prudence, and partly by diuine assistāce, as then it happened. Vpon a tyme some of them seeking after him to kill him, By the goodnes of God he esca∣peth death. he ranne into a wood, where climbing vp into a tree he sate there all night, and so escaped their hands, being sheltred more by Gods assistāce, then ey∣ther by the tree, or night. And his enemies plots against him were so frequent, that some of the Neophytes who were most pious and faithfull vnto him, kept al∣wayes of their owne accord, watch in the night be∣fore his lodging, to defend him. Notwithstanding the continuall treacheries of these barbarous people, he omitted neyther his nightly prayer, which scarcely permitted him two houres rest, nor ceased from his dayly iourneys of the day, euē in the heat of the sunne; for that going about the Townes, he went barefoote, in a ragged coate, and with an ordinary Hat on his head. Yet this carelesnes of his corporall habit did no way obscure the sanctity of his soule, but made it more eminent. He is cal¦led great Father. He was now commonly called the Great Fa∣ther, and the King of Trauancoris commanded by pu∣blicke Edict throughout his whole kingdom, that all should obey the Great Father, no otherwise then him∣selfe. The Christians had not at that tyme any Church in that Coast, wherfore he was constrained to say masse either vnder some tree, or some sayle of a shippe. But now, it is reported, there be built aboue twenty Churches and Chappels in that Country. The mul¦titude of those who fol∣lowed him whē he prea∣ched. And when he was to preach, for want of a pulpit, he would frō some commodious tree, speake vnto the multitude, which was somtimes infinite. For when he went out into the fieldes to preach, there followed him ma∣ny times fiue or six thousand persons. His care also was not lesse in augmenting the flocke of Christ, then in maintaining what he had gotten. That the Neo∣phytes might also, after his departure, retaine what they had learned, vpon his going away, he did not only leaue a copy of the Christian doctrine in euery Towne, but also taught them the manner how to ex∣ercyse it euery morning and euening, and for that end appointed a Moderatout ouer them. Yet all this time he refrained from too much dealing with those who dwelt vp higher in the hart of the coūtry, know∣ing very well that the sea coasts, where the Portughe∣ses commaunded, were farre more fit to receiue and maintaine the Christian faith, then the vpland Coun∣try of India, The vp∣land coū∣try of India not fit to re∣ceiue the fayth of Christ. where the Brachmans, deadly enemies to our Religion, had the possession. He therfore trauailed all ouer that country lying by the sea side, going from village to village; euery where baptizing & instruct∣ing as many as he could in the Christian faith: so as now almost all the townes of the Machoa's & Paraua's had, by Francis his meanes, put themselues vnder the sweet yoke of Christ; when the report therof com∣ming to the bordering Ilands, set on fire the Manarians a neighbouring people, to emulate their piety. CHAP. XII. Neophytes slayne for Religion, become an ornament to the Christian Fayth. M Anaria is a litle Iland, lying ouer against the coast of P scaria, distant from the continent an 150. miles. There was therein a village called Patinus, at that tyme of litle note, but now greatly enobled by the death of many Martyrs. The inhabitants of this place had a great desire to re∣ceaue the Christian Religion, wherof they had heard many notable things reported, as well of Xauerius, as of the Comorines. Wherefore they earnestly inuited Francis to come thither and baptize them. But he be∣ing imployed about other most important affaires cō∣cerning Religion, and not able to go himselfe, sent a certayne Priest in his place to instruct them in the Ca∣techisme, and to baptize them. Wherupon followed a great storme of persecution, which notwithstan∣ding proued very profitable vnto them. For the King of Iafanapatana, vnder whose dominion that Iland is, out of a Barbarous cruelty, being also incensed with the hatred he bare vnto Christians, was so enraged, that sending thither an army of men, what by fyre & sword destroyed, and wasted the whole Towne. There are sayd to haue byn slayne at that tyme for Religion more then 600. persons. Thus, that vast solitude, brought forth fresh and fragrant flowers of Martyrs, for heauens ornament. Since which tyme, that place hath reteyned the name of the Towne of Martyrs. About the same tyme, it fell out fortunately, that the sayd King of Iafanapatana his owne brother, and heire to the same kingdome, fearing his brothers fury had fled to the Viceroy of India, promising that if he could by the Portugheses forces be restored to his Fa∣thers kingdome, The towne of Nagapa∣tana. he with his nobles and greatest part of his subiects would become Christians. The Viceroy greatly desirous as well to aduance Religion, as to re∣uenge the slaughter of the Innocents, was much in∣censed agaynst the Tyrant. Whereupon he presently sendeth a very strong Nauy to Nagapatana (which is a sea Towne scituated in the continent, ouer against the Iland of Manaria, about 200. miles from the Promon∣tory of Comorinum ) and withal commandeth them to make warre vpon the King of Iafanapatana, and eyther to put him to death, or else to handle him in such mā∣ner as Xauerius should iudge expedient, and to restore the Kingdome to his brother. In the meane tyme whilest Xauerius remayned at Cocinum, The Ilād of Ma∣cazaria. there was brought thither ioyfull newes, of many Ethnikes in the most remote Kingdome of Ma∣cazaria conuerted to the Fayth of Christ. This Maca∣zaria is a great Iland, about a 1000. miles beyond In∣dia and the Riuer Ganges, and distant from the Molu∣ca's towards the east about 130. In this Kingdom three Noble and principall men, besids many others of the people, were lately conuerted to the Christian fayth, and baptized by a Portughese Merchant called Anto∣ny Payua: God in that manner bringing in thither his Ghospel euen by the meanes of good & vertuous mer∣chants. They had therfore sent certayne men to the Citty of Malaca, to request of the Portugheses there, some Priests who might better instruct them in the Christian Religion; for that which the merchant had commanded them, was only this: that since they had liued like bruite beasts, now hauing by baptisme recea∣ued the fayth of Christ, they should endeauour heer∣after to liue like men, and withall to serue one God with purity and sanctity of life. The Gouernour of Malaca approuing their demands, granted them cer∣tayne Priests. And although Francis made no doubt but they would worthily behaue themselues for the aduancement of Christian Religion; yet had he also a great desire to be partaker of that labour, thinking that in so large a Kingdome there would be great oc∣casion of worke, and need of many industrious labou∣rers, to plant and cultiuate the holy Ghospell. At the very same tyme almost, there came newes also from the Iland of Ceilanus, which at the first see∣med heauy and sad, but afterwards proued ioyfull. The eldest sonne of the King of that Iland being mo∣ued by conference with the Portugheses (for they en∣deauoured to bring in the Gospel, The Kings sonne with 600 more are slaine for Religion as well as merchan∣dize into India ) had together with many others resol∣ued to become a Christian. As soone as the barbarous King his Father had notice therof, all-mad with rage and fury, commanded his sonne, with others of his consayle (to the number of 600. as was reported) to be publikely slaughtered. But the enemy of Baptisme, baptized them in their owne bloud: and whilest he endeauoured to depresse Christian Religion, he exal∣ted it. For at the very same tyme, the Inhabitants saw a great Crosse of Fire in the ayre; and in the place where the sayd slaughter was committed, the ground opening, made a great and plaine signe of the Crosse, which remaineth vnto this day, Prodigi∣ous si∣gnes of the Crosse. although the Ethnikes haue endeauoured oftentymes to stoppe it vp, by ca∣sting earth into it. So as many of the inhabitants, and amongst the rest the Kings yonger sonne, togeather with his Cousin-german, & some of the Kings guard, moued by these prodigious signes intended to become Christians Xauerius being glad of this newes, albeyt he had already resolued to go vnto the Macazarians; yet he iudged it not expedient to preferre this busines be∣fore the other with which he was then in hand. In the yeare therefore 1545. in the month of Aprill, taking Fa. Mansilla for his companion, he embarked at Co∣cinum with intention to go to the Iland of Ceilanus, to try the disposition of the Inhabitants, and from thence with the first occasion to passe ouer to Naga∣patana, where the Nauy was said to be ready prepared for the foresayd expedition. CHAP. XIII. Being transported into the Iland of Cei∣lanus, he reclaymeth the maister of the shippe from a bad life. C Eilanus is an Iland right ouer agaynst the coast of Piscaria, They I∣land Cei∣lanus. of great note both for pe¦arles and other merchandize, but especially for the aboundance of Cinnamon which it beareth. It is extended in length an 150. miles, and in breadth 40. or thereabout. Vpon the furthest point thereof butteth the Iland of Manaria where the Neo∣phytes, as we sayd, were slayne by the King of Iafa∣napatana. Ceilanus is indeed inhabited by the Malaua∣rians, whome they call Cingales, but by reason of traf∣fique it is much frequented by the Portughese Mer∣chants. The Portugheses haue therin a fayre Towne, and by the shore are to be seene certaine Chappells built by them in tymes past for the exercise of Chri∣stian Religion. Xauerius being thither arriued, there hapned a memorable accident. The Gouernour of the ship, being moued by the familiarity which he had gotten with Francis▪ had v∣pon the way, freely opened his mind vnto him, and told him, how for a long tyme he had byn giuen to a certayne notorious sinne, from which he could not be absolued by the Priest. But Xauerius being a ex∣pert Physitian of the soule, laying before his eyes the clemency, and mercy of Almighty God, that pas∣seth all malice (which was an ordinary custome in him, therby to draw men to Confession) made the businesse light and easy; and promised him withall, that as soone as they were arriued (for then there was neyther tyme nor meanes) he would vnty those hea∣uy bands of his. Hauing thus agreed betweene them∣selues of the businesse, the mayster of the ship as soone as he came to Ceilanus, as though he had byn certaine of his saluation, cast of all thought of making his con∣fession; & began to find excuses, and withall to auoid the sight and company of Francis, that he might not be challenged by him of his promise. Iob. 5. But Xauerius, or rather Gods Prouidence ( Which, as holy Iob sayth, ta∣keth the wise in their crafty plots ) deceyued the mayster, with all his sleights. For on a suddaine, and vnawares he findeth Francis walking by the shore syde, with his eyes fixed towards heauen, as his custome was; and now because he could not auoyd meeting with him, hauing byn already espyed, & that he might not shew himselfe light or vnconstant, he resolued to set a good face vpon the matter, and by some sleight to delude the others carefulnesse. He therfore first saluted him, and of his owne ac∣cord, asketh him; How long it would be, before he would he are his Confession? As soone as he had spo∣ken these words, faltring as it were in his speech, and shewing himself much troubled in mind, Xauerius foūd presently by his countenance, and trembling of body that he had a great horrour of that which he required: yet did he not let slip the occasion offered him what∣soeuer it were. Prudēce in taking away horrour in Con∣fession. Therfore, to free him from that vaine feare, merrily and sweetly, as he was wont, Good Ie∣su, quoth he, will you go then to confession? I will most willingly heare you, & if you please, euen heere as we walk vpon this shore. Wherupō the other being ouercome not so much by the irkesomnes of his foule sinnes, as by Francis his exceeding mildnes, but indeed by Gods diuine impulse, resolued to make a confession of his whole life. Xauerius seeing him to begin with feare and bashfulnes, hearkened carefully vnto him first, as they walked vpon the shore: But afterwards when he perceiued him to go on with more courage and freedome, taking him gently by the hand, he led him into a chappell neere by. The other out of reue∣rence to the holy place, began to kneele downe, as the custome is, therby to make an end of the Confession which he had begun. But Francis perceauing he had some difficulty therin, forbad him to kneele for the present; and to induce him to confesse the more wil∣lingly he spread a mat vpon a banke, that they might there sit more commodiously. They had not sate long when God so touched his hart, that rising vpon a suddain, he fell downe at the Fathers feete, and with aboundance of teares and sighes layd open all the sins of his whole lyfe. And hauing thus waded out of the pudle of sinne, & disburdened his soule of all filth, he began with great feeling to frequent the holy Sa∣crament of Confession (of the fruit and wholesom∣nesse whereof he had now gotten a tast) and seriously to prouide for the saluation of his soule. In the meane tyme Xauerius hauing insinuated himselfe into the Ceilanians friendship, got accesse to the Kings sonne, whome he found perplexed, as well by his brothers example, as by those prodigious signes whereof we spake before, & priuately baptized him, together with his Cousin-German; whereupon he resolued to fly, together with some chiefe men of the Kindgdome, to the Viceroy of India, and to craue his ayde agaynst the sauage cruelty of his Father, who had already imbrued his hands in the innocent bloud of his brother & kinsmen, & now thirsted after his also. Xauerius was likewise by him informed, that most of the Ceilanians being moued by those miraculous signes of the Crosse in the ayre, and vpon the ground, did al∣ready much incline to the Christian fayth, but that their good desires were hindred, through feare of the Tyrant his Father. Francis being very glad of this newes, sendeth pre∣sently letters to Fa. Paul, who remayned at Goa, wil∣ling him to send two of the Fathers, who were euery day expected from Portugall, to Ceilanus, with those noblemen, who where to be restored to their King∣dome, to haue a care of the Christian cause in that I∣land. And sending backe Fa. Mansilla immediatly into the Promontory of Comorinum, he himselfe crosseth o∣uer to Nagapatana, for the occasion which we haue already mentioned. But all that preparation, & Fran∣cis his expectation, when it seemed now to be vpon the point of ioyning battayle and obtayning victory, vpon a suddaine falleth to nothing. For at the same time a ship of the K. of Portugall (which being fraught with rich merchandize was bound back agayne from the Kingdome of Pegu into India ) being by force of tempest driuen into Iafanapatana, was presently set v∣pon by that barbarous King. Wherefore the Viceroy imploying his seruice for the Kings affayres, surcea∣sed from battaile, vntil the Kings goods were recoue∣red. And so by making this delay, the warre, as many tymes it happeneth, was by differring, broken cleane off. Yet God afterwards gaue to Xauerius what he de∣sired. For not long after that Tyrant being disconfi∣ted by many ouerthrowes which Constantine the Vice∣roy of India gaue him, the Iland of Manaria was ta∣ken from him, & all the inhabitants became Christiās. Thus the death of a few for Christ his sake, was the cause of liberty and saluation to many. Francis there∣fore not to loose the labour which he had taken in that iourney, and also seruing himselfe of the wynd, which though contrary for his returne, lay yet right for his going forward, resolued to make vse of that occasion. CHAP. XIV. He visiteth the Sepulcher of S. Thomas the Apostle. T HE Church of S. Thomas the Apostle was not distant from this place aboue 150. miles which was very famous both in regard of his sacred reliques, and of the great resort of Indians, who came to visit it from remote places. He therefore determined to go thither in the guize of a poore Pilgrime, that hauing done his deuotion to the Apostle, he might go on forward to Malaca, & from thence (vnlesse God should otherwise dispose) to Ma∣cazaria, whither he had byn called by most ioyfull ti∣dings For he had lately vnderstood that the Inhabi∣tants of those places were greatly disposed to receaue the Christian Religion, and that nothing hindred the conuersion, and baptizing of many, but want of Priests. About the latter end therfore of Lent, he put to sea from Nagapatana, with a better wind then good speed. He pas∣seth 7. dayes without eating a∣ny thing He had now sayled about 40. miles when a cō∣trary tempest constrayned the ship to remaine 7. daies in a certayne hauen which they chanced vpon by the way. There Xauerius minding more the pilgrimage which he had vndertaken, then humane imbecillity, left behind him a worthy example of abstinence. For al that time (as he that had the care of him testified af∣terwards vpon his oath) he passed without taking any sustenance at all, as though, being indeed inflamed with a desire to visit the holy Apostle, he had byn fed with heauenly food. Afterwards when the marriners hoised sayle to be gone, He for∣telleth the mar∣riners a tempest neere at hand. he asked of the Maister, whe∣ther the ship were sound & strong inough? He replyed that it was an old, & weake ship. Then, quoth he, we must needs backe agayne to Nagapatana, for we shall haue a cruell storme. Although little credit was giuen to this prophesy, yet it proued most true. But the Mayster of the ship being deceaued by the weather & the sea, went neuerthelesse forward: and behould v∣pon the sudain a terrible tempest rising, droue the ship backe againe to Nagapatana (as he had fortould them) and not without great danger. Then the marriners & passengers tooke notice of what he had sayd, and held t for a prophecy. And although Francis being thus beaten backe with a contrary wind, could not arriue where he intended, yet still he perseuered constantly in his purpose, and came thither at last on foote, with greater labour, and more merit. There is a towne belonging to the Portugheses called Meliapora, Meliapo∣ra the towne of S. Thomas rich, and much frequented, scitua¦ted in the sea coast of India, almost in equall distance (if you consider the turnings of the sea) about two hundred leagues from the Promontory of Comorinum & the riuer Ganges, built perhaps of the ruines of the auncient, and famous Citty of Calamina. In this Towne there is a Church of Saint Thomas the Apostle, where the inhabitants, and other Indians say, he was buried; wherof euen to this day there be extant ma∣ny remarkable signes. There is also to be seene the pla∣ce where the Apostle is sayd to haue byn martyred, & a Chappell wherin he sayd masse. Which chappell the Portugheses out of deuotion haue adorned, and made thereof a sumptuous Church, giuing the Towne the name of S. Thomas. The bo∣dy of S. Thomas the Apo∣stle. In this Chappell not long since, as they digged very deep to lay the fondation of the new Church there was, as th y say, the body of the Apo∣stle found, with the sword wherewith he was marty∣red, and a litle vessell full of bloudy earth, which was agayne with reuerence layd in the same place. Ney∣ther is the constant report hereof vayne or doubtfull. This auncient opinion which both they of that Coun∣try and strangers haue of the Body and Martyrdome of the Apostle S. Thomas, is by God confirmed by an yearely and perpetuall miracle. For they haue a stone sprinkled with the bloud of the Apostle, which retai∣neth the prints, as it were, of fresh bloud, and three dayes before the feast day of S. Thomas (on which day they say he was martyred) whilst Masse is sayd there, the sayd stone, Anani∣uersary miracle. being naturally white, by litle & litle waxeth red, and sweateth as though droppes of bloud distilled from it on all sides; and at last when Masse is ended, it returneth agayne to the former colour. For which respect the Apostles Sepulcher is had in great veneration, as wel of the Ethnickes as the Christiās. For that there come vnto this place from all parts, a great cōcourse of Pilgrimes euen Ethnickes themsel∣ues, who beare great esteeme to the Martyrdome & Sepulcher of the sayd Apostle. Hither therefore Xauerius, out of deuotion to S. Thomas the Patron of India, came in the guize and ha∣bit of a Pilgrime, therby both to honour the Apostles Sepulcher, and to assist the bordering neighbours in matters concerning their saluation. He found in that towne, besides many inhabitants about 100. families of Portugheses, who had there setled themselues, and their meanes. Xauerius therefore, presently vpon his arriuall to this place, visited no lesse religiously then affectionately the Apostle of the Indians; admiring his singular glory, whose vertue he emulated, as farre as a mortall man was able. And first he earnestly be∣sought God, that since he being a poore wretch was called from heauen to imitate, though neuer so wea∣kely, so great an Apostle in conuerting of the Indians to the faith of Christ, he would inspire him with some of his Apostolicall vertues. Thē he instantly requested S. Thomas, for the care and patronage which he had ouer the Indians, that through his intercession, he might neither want courage to vndergoe the dāgers, nor forces to endure the labours in trauailing ouer, & manuring India, & other barbarous Countryes: and that neither his owne, nor others sinnes might be any hindrance of his following the Mowers steppes, as Ruth the Moabitesse did, in gathering vp the gleanings of that our Lords field, and (to his poore ability) re∣posing the same in Christs sacred granary. When he had satisfied his deuotion to the Apostle he lodged with the Bishops Vicar (which he was ac∣customed to do, where there was no publicke Hospi∣tall for the sicke, nor place of abode for Religious mē) who was much edified with the great respect he saw him beare to Ecclesiastical persons, & with his natu∣ral affability of speech & true simplicity. So as making himselfe wholly knowne vnto the Prelate, by laying open his hart before him, he easily wonne his fauour and good will. This manner of courtesy, as I sayd be∣fore, Xauerius vsed, A man∣ner how to gayne & help friends. not so much to gayne friends, as to help those whome he iudged worthy of friendship. For when he had once found out their dipositions, he would by litle and litle draw them to whatsoeuer was requisite, both for their owne saluation, and the diuine seruice. This good Prelate therfore of Meliapora re∣quited Xauerius courtesy by returning him the like, & imbracing him as a worthy person, whome he vsed thence forwards with much affection and respect, es∣pecialy after he perceaued in him most euident markes of sanctity. For by the conference which he had with Xauerius, Xauiers Virginal chastity. and by hearing his Confessions, he playnely found (as he afterward testified vpon his oath, which testimony we haue now in our hands, iuridically si∣gned) that he had kept vnspotted the flower of Virgi∣nall Chastity, wherwith he was borne. He remained in the Vicars house three or foure months, to the great profit both of the townes men, and himselfe. For he drew many out of the sinck of grieuous sinnes: & many dishonest louers, whome he could not well separate, he ioyned togeather in wed∣lock. He reconciled also to friendship, such as before were at deadly hatred one with another. He freed many who had bin long entangled with heinous offē∣ces and abominations. Yet for all this, whilst he so much profited others, he neglected not his owne, gi∣uing himselfe very much to contemplation of hea∣uenly things, especially in the night, when he was free from other employments. And it hapned very often, that when he was sought for by his cōpanions, he was found praying in some corner of the Apostles Church. For being at that time doubtfull what to do, and very vncertaine whether he should go forward to the Macazarians, or returne back into India, he con∣sulted with God in the holy Apostles Church; so as there spending almost whole nights in cōtinuall wat∣ching with great feruour of spirit, he craued the in∣tercession, one while of the most B. Virgin mother of God, and another while of S. Thomas, & other Saints. And at last being replenished with incredible ioy from heauen, he perceiued it to be Gods will that he should go forward to the Macazarians, not so much to instruct them (as afterwards he vnderstood) as to help some others, By diuine instinct he deter∣mineth to go to the fur∣thest part of the East. who were in the way, vnknowne to him, and standing more in need of his assistance. Wherfore be∣ing very desirous to performe the will of God, he be∣gan to cast about for some opportunity to passe ouer to Malaca as soone as might be, intending to make vse of a Saracen, or Ethincke ship, if no Portughese could be gotten; nay, he said morouer that he had such con∣fidence in God, His con∣fidence in God. that if no ship of burthen cold be had, and there were but any little boat to go to Malaca, he would make no doubt, by Gods helpe, to passe well ouer therin: such a firme and constant resolution he had, presently to performe what he had by Gods in∣stinct vndertaken. CHAP. XV. Being beaten by Diuels, he notvvithstan∣ding spendeth a vvhole night in Prayer. W HILEST he thus remained, as we haue said, in the Vicars house, there hapned one thing very worthy to be noted in that kind This howse ioyned close to the Apostles Church, into which was made a little dore, for the vicar to enter priuatly. Now Xauerius had a custome, when he perceiued the vicar to be asleepe (for he lay also in his chamber) to steale secretly, and without noise, from of his bed, and to creepe along with great warines into the Apostles church: yet did he not who∣ly deceaue the vicar, who often awaking on a suddain perceiued him to be absent. Wherfore he first dissēbled the matter, but afterwards, out of the friendly confi∣dence which was betweene them, aduised him not to go into the Church in the night time, nor to ha∣zard himselfe by going that way which was knowne to be haunted with bad spirits, for he might perhaps meete with them in their vgly shapes, when he least thought of them. At this Xauerius smiled, thinking he had said it to make him afrayd, and so putting the Prelate off with a iest, stoole notwithstāding the next night priuately into the Church when he perceiued him to be fast asleepe. At this deuotion of Francis the enemies of man∣kind, were mad with rage and hatred, intending to driue him by terrour from that custome: & so at mid∣night as he was praying before the Aultar of our B. Lady, His con∣stancy whilest the De∣uils whip him. they furiously set vpon him on a suddaine, filling the Church with horrible roarings, confused cryes, and hydeous noyses. But finding him nothing afraid at these their threates, they fal vpon him altogeather, and beate him most cruelly with scourges, exercising their malice vpon him, both in railings, & blowes. Amidst all these their violent strokes he hauing more care how to remaine constant, then how to defend his owne backe, called vpon the mother of God who beheld this combat; and so with vndaunted courage deluded at last the Diuells vaine assaults, and conti∣nued on his prayer, not only without feare, but also with greater constancy. So as by this his manly & in∣uincible perseurance (a most deadly weapon against all diuellish incursiōs) he easily droue away these trou∣blesome & outragious spirits. And most certaine it is that he by this victory, so brake their forces, that they neuer afterward durst attempt any thing in that kind against him. There lay a certaine yong man in a chamber ioy∣ning to the Church, who being waked out of his sleep with that noise, heard Xauerius crying out (as the De∣uils tormented him) and oftentimes calling vpon the B. Virgin for help. And he obserued, that he very of∣ten repeated these words: Helpe me, O Lady. Wilt not thou helpe me, O Lady? This yong man recounted what he had heard vnto the Vicar, & others of the house; wherat, He is sicke of the stri∣pes. as often it hapneth, they all fell into a laugh¦ter; and the tale was iested on ouer all the house vn∣knowne to Francis; who the next day, finding him∣selfe very sore with those cruell strypes, & desiring to rise was not able to get out of his bed, & so lay there three dayes, His pa∣tience in suffering scoffes from those of the house all wearyed & tyred out, feigning himself to be sicke, so therby to hyde what had hapned. The vi∣car hearing this came to visit him, & asked him whe∣ther he were sicke? Xauerius answered that he was. Then demanding what his sicknes was; he answered wholy from the purpose, turning his speach another way. The Vicar knowing well the matter indeed, be∣gan to iest with him, and repeated the same words, which he had vttered whilst the Diuells beate him, Helpe me O Lady. Wilt not thou helpe me, O Lady? Francis when he perceiued that all was knowne, began to blush indeed; but yet with a smiling countenance, was no lesse couragious in enduring the speaches of men, then the blowes of the Diuels. As soone as he was recouered knowing very wel that the Deuills terrour is greater then his forces, His cou∣rage in comba∣ting with the De∣uill. and that like a cowardly Curre he barketh fiercely at those who giue backe, but runneth straight away when one resi∣steth, he resolueth, like a Conquerour, voluntarily to returne agayne to his old place of combat, with more alacrity then before. Trusting therefore in Gods as∣sistance, who especially restraineth the Deuils forces, he went oftentimes most couragiously & alone, euen in the dead night, to pray in the same Church, and place; & did so contemne those hellish mōsters & their deuises, as well shewed that nothing is more shameful and weake then the Deuils, if one haue the courage to contemne them. For being thus stoutly vanquished, and perceiuing their open assaults had ill successe, they vsed other deceiptfull tricks, & endeauoured at least to distract him in his prayer, if they could not breake it of. Whilest therfore he was at his praier in the Church at midnight, The De∣uills make a noise in tyme of Xauiers prayer. as his custome was, they in hatred a∣gainst him, come together in troupes, & make a horri∣ble noise, & in a scoffing manner imitating the Clergy men, sing as it were Mattins in the Quire, thereby at least to distract him whome they could not otherwise afright. But how litle they profited heerin did euident∣ly appeare. For Xauerius not regarding who they were, nor what they sung, thought they had byn the Church men comming to sing their mattins. The next day therefore he demaunded of the Vicar, who those Clergy men were who last night sung their Mattins with the doores shut? He at first wondring what Cler∣gy men, and what mattins he meant, perceiued after∣wards that they were Diuels, and scoffers of Clergy∣men. Which thing after Francis his death he often de∣clared to many. CHAP. XVI. He deliuereth a possessed person: and ta∣keth Iohn Durus for his companion. I N the meane tyme Xauerius, that he might not leaue Meliapora without some mo∣nument of his labours taken therin, he em∣ployed himselfe, as his custome was, to help the people of riper yeares both by priuate & pu∣blike exhortations, and to instruct children in their Catechisme. Neyther was there matter wanting for him to worke vpon. In which kind this accident hap∣pened worthy of memory. There was a Cittizen of great wealth who was possessed, and most miserably vexed by the Diuell. To whome Francis being called for ayde, he sent in his place one of the children that helped him in teaching the Catechisme with a Cru∣cifixe, He deli∣uered a possessed man by a child. who reading the holy Ghospell ouer the posses∣sed man, as the Father had instructed him to do, cast out immediately the infernall monster, who was the more enraged, because he was driuen out by a child, & that a Neophyte. There is also recounted another thing in a diffe∣rent kind, yet perhaps no lesse admirable then the former. There was a certayne yong man, a merchant called Iohn Durus, who came to Francis to confession, and hearing him discourse of diuine matters, found there were certaine other merchandize farre richer then those with which he traffiked, and of which he neuer heard before. Wherfore giuing ouer his former trading, and desirous to become a merchant of more precious wares, He hard∣ly admit¦teth Iohn Durus in∣to the So¦ety. intreateth Francis to receiue him for his cōpanion. He at first refused him absolutely (be∣cause perhaps he saw in him a secret inconstancy, & intractable disposition) yet at last, by much intrea∣ty he obteined his desire; and so setling his affayres, began to distribute his goods among the poore. But in executing of this his good purpose, he was more forward, then constant. For whilst he was busied a∣bout selling of his wares, he was vehemently sollici∣ted by the common Enemy of mankind, Luc. 9. who did so worke him vpon that hauing set his hād to the plough, on a suddaine be began to looke backe, and sought a∣gaine most greedily after those things which a little before he had contemned. Being thus wholy chan∣ged in mind, he packed vp his merchandyze in the most priuat manner he could, and conueied them into a ship intending to be gone. But although he deceiued others, yet he could not deceiue Francis, the which he most of all sought to do. Now hauing gotten al things togeather which he thought requisite, as he was about to take shipping, Xauerius vpon a suddaine causeth him to be called vn∣to him. His de∣termina∣tion of flying a∣way se∣cretly is opened to Xaue∣rius from heauen. He the more to dissemble the matter, made shew of ready Obedience, and came vnto him presen∣tly. Francis taking him asyde, with great sorrow and griefe in his countenance sayd: Thou hast sinned Du∣rus, thou hast sinned. At which words he being stro∣ken to the hart, stood like one distracted and amazed, wondring with himselfe how Xauerius came to know that which no mortal creature but himself could haue suspected. Then being filled with shame, and teares, his conscience also accusing him, he cryed, I haue sin∣ned Father, I haue sinned. Then Francis againe with a ioyfull countenance replyed: Confession therefore Child, Confession is requisite. Wherupō Durus hauing his hart softned by Xauerius words, and by the dew of diuine grace, taking againe courage, and some res∣pite to examine himself, maketh his cōfession. Which remedy he found no lesse expedient then wholsome. For by the benefit of that holy Sacrament he was not only pardoned his offence, but also constantly resto∣red to his former good resolution. Wherfore without delay, faithfully distributing his goods amongst the poore, he constantly adhered to Xauerius, as before he had promised, fortifying this his resolution with the remembrance of his former lightnes and inconstancy. At the same time also came vnto Xauerius a new, thought small supply of Companions. For that F. An∣tony Criminalis of Parma, & F. Iohn Beira of Galliaco, of the Society of Iesus, being sent out of Portugall, were very fitly arriued in India: of whose cōming Xauerius being certified by letters, greatly reioyed (as being the first supply which had come vnto him out of Europe) determining to set them presently a worke, by reason of so great want of Priests. And he himself, that his la∣bours might not be restrained within the bounds of India, intended with the first occasion of shipping, to visit the furthest parts of the East. CHAP. XVII. He reformeth the bad liues of the people of Malaca. H E departed from Meliapora the Citty of S. Thomas, towards Malaca by sea in the yeare of our Lord 1545. The cause of this his ior∣ney was, that hauing now holpen the Por∣tugheses, who dwelt in that Citty, he might passe on to instruct the Macazariās in the precepts of the Chri∣stian faith. Malaca is a country compassed almost roūd with the sea, beyond India and the riuer Ganges, cal∣led in times past (as some thinke) the Golden Chersone∣sus. For being ioyned to the continent by a small part of land stretching out into the sea, runneth forth in length towards the Iland of Somatra (formerly na∣med Taprobana ) famous for Gold mines. In this Country right ouer against Somatra stan∣deth the citty of Malaca belōging to the Portugheses, Malaca. a place very rich, and of great note, from whome that country hath its name, distant from the citty of Goa neere 600. leagues. It lyeth almost vnder the Equi∣noctiall Line, yet by reason of the frequent showres of raine which fall commonly euery day, there is as it were almost a perpetuall spring, which doth greatly allay the heates. For they haue alwayes two summers and as many haruests, both of corne & fruit. But the Country is more pleasant and fertill then wholsome, for that the fruitfulnes of the place, and the vnwhol∣somnes of the ayre proceed from the same causes. And besides this, they haue another inconuenience which doth more encumber them, to wit, the Saracens, and Ethnickes who border vpon them. None of these dif∣ficulties did any wayes affright Xauerius to go on with his resolution. Nay rather the latter set him forward to help them with more feruour, seeing them in dan∣ger by reason of their bad neighbours. As soone as he arriued at Malaca, he goeth to the Gouernour of the Citty, and certifieth him of his de∣termination of passing to Macazaria. Wherupon he a∣gaine told Xauerius, how he had lately sent thither a stronge band of Portugheses, togeather with a Priest of eminent vertue to assist and guard the Christians, if any commotion should by chance, be raysed there against thē. And therfore he wisheth him if he thought good, to abide a while at Malaca, vntill the ship were returned, Conuer∣sation of Ethnic∣kes per∣nicious to Chri∣stians. and should bring newes how matters went in Macazaria. Francis followed the Gouernours coun∣saile, and in the meane time taking no rest himselfe, begā to employ his endeauours for the spirituall good of the Portugheses. The Malacensians were at this time wholy corrupted with the bad customes of their bor∣dering neighbours, liuing indeed more like to Saracens and Ethnickes, then to Christians. For that through their owne carelesnesse rather then want of Priests, al good order by little & little was fallen to decay; and their behauiours also growing daily worse, they began to runne headlong vnto ruine. For hauing now lost all memory either of saluation or honesty, they for the most part thought, that they might do whatsoeuer seemed pleasing or profitable to their sensuality: So forcible is the contagion of bad company, to infect others with the same vice. Francis therfore perceiuing them to extremely corrupted, that now they had neither any feeling of their sinnes, nor could endure any remedy to be ap∣plyed thereto, A won∣derfull art to gaine lost sou∣les. setteth vpon their lost soules, after a strange, and artificiall manner. First, as his cu∣stome was, he insinuat th himselfe sweetly into their familiarity, winketh at their sinnes, and hideth his desire of curing them. Then hauing wonne them by custome & friendly vsage, he by litle and litle pre∣pareth the way to cure their inueterate diseases; som∣tymes laying before them their heinous sinnes and of∣fences, by propoūding vnto them Gods diuine lawes; at other tymes striking into them a terrour of Gods fearefull iudgements, by vrging of the variable ca∣sualities of mans life. And at last hauing disposed their minds, he setteth his hand to worke; he cutteth off a∣uarice, taketh away the occasions of lust, mollifyeth and healeth their sore & wounded consciences (wher∣of then they began to haue some feeling) with the sweet oyle of Gods mercies. The fruite which he rea∣ped therby well shewed that his labours were not im∣ployed in vayne. For it is certaynly knowne, that by his meanes many made restitution of goods vnlaw∣fully gotten; many put away their Concubines, and those that made difficulty to put them away, were persuaded to marry them: a great number also cleāsed their guilty consciences by frequenting the holy Sa∣crament of Confession, and were brought to leade a good and vertuous life. Neyther did Xauerius profit the people more by the sweetnes of his priuate discourse, then by the graui∣ty of his publicke Exhortations. Vpon Sundayes he preached in the great Church with no lesse fruite, then applause of his Auditors. And to moue thē the more, and better to imprint wholesome feare in their minds he with great feruour of spirit foretould what heauen threatned agaynst that Citty. His Pro∣phecyes. It was obserued by many, that he was wont oftentimes, when in his ser∣mons he reprehended with greatest vehemency, the loose and wicked liues of the Malacensians, to beseech God to turne from them the wrath which hung ouer their heads from heauen, and the punishments which a little after fell vpon them. For the yeare following Malaca was greatly afflicted by a stronge siege of the Saracens of Iaua, who also wasted the country round about. And besides the calamity into which that cru∣ell warre had brought them, there followed a conta∣gious pestilence, which spreading it selfe throughout the whole Citty, caused a great mortality both of the Cittizens and strangers, in so much as the same be∣came half desolate, whilst God reuenging the former sins of the people, raysed vp, as it were, a new Citty. Xauerius therfore foreseing these euils to hang o∣uer their heads from heauen, and to appease, in some sort, the wrath of Gods diuine iustice, so to dispose the inhabitāts minds to indure those miseryes which were neere at hand, after many threats agaynst them, war∣ned them often to looke seriously about them. And not in vayne; for many being stroken with the horrour of Gods diuine indignation, & moued to compunctiō, arose out of their deadly sleepe, and came againe vnto themselues. Amongst many passages of this kind, a certaine wonderful act which Francis there wrought, did not a little moue the whole Citty. There was a yong man of that Country called Antony Fernandez, who by the Deuils cruell tormen∣ting him had lost the vse of his tongue, and was with∣al fallen into a most dangerous disease, wherof he had layne now three whole dayes in despaire, giuen ouer by the Phisitians. Wherfore his friends and kins-men being superstitious and wicked people bring vnto him certaine Sorceres, a kind of diuellish Physitians, for remedy. But when their Witchcrafts did no good, Xauerius is sent for, A posses∣sed sick∣man is freed frō the De∣uill and cured of his dis∣eases. who was no soeuer come into the chamber where the sick man lay, but presently he be∣ginneth to rage, cry out, and writhe about his face, eyes and mouth, after a foule and vgly manner: you would haue thought the Deuill were now rousing himselfe for the combat which he saw to be at hand. There you might haue seene Francis, moued both out of compassion towards the yong man, and hatred a∣gainst the Deuill, to fetch many a deepe sigh. Then presently falling vpon his knees, he first offereth him∣selfe by earnest prayer vnto God, and then began to exercise the raging yong man, after the accustomed manner; wherein he continued, vntill comming to himself he remained somewhat quiet without so great vexation as before. The next day Xauerius hauing said Masse for the yongman, commeth agayne with coura∣ge and alacrity to the battayle. A wonderfull thing: that obstinate and importune foule Spirit which tor∣mented him, being suddainly vanquished, and driuen out, the sickman presently recouered both his speech and senses, and remayned free from any corporall in∣firmity. There was nothing which euer made Xaue∣rius sanctity of life, more remarkable both to the Chri∣stians and Barbarians then this. For heerupon he be∣gan to be ordinarily called the Holy Father, hauing his old name now renewed at Malaca, which he had left behind him in India. His name grew also famous, A Pro∣phesy. and much renowned by reason of a certaine prophecy which he afterwards vttered in this manner. Vpon a tyme demaunding of a Portughese Merchant who was to go into India, in what ship he meant to go. The merchant pointed to a certayne ship that lay there in the road. I would not haue you (quoth Francis ) go in that ship. But when the merchant answered, that he had already put his merchandize therinto, yet if he thought there were a∣ny daunger, he had rather haue his goods cast away, then himselfe; Xauerius recollecting himselfe a litle, as though he had taken aduise of God, vttered this Ora∣cle: since, quoth he, you haue put your merchādise into this ship, you may also venture your life therein. But if any tempest, or other accident happen, beware you do not cast your goods ouer board, but haue a firme confidence that God will send you help, which will free both you and your goods from danger. The euent afterward shewed him to be no false prophet. For the ship in the midest of her course being driuen by a vio∣lent tempest was cast vpon the sands. Now the marri∣ners being affrighted at the suddayne danger went a∣bout the lighten the ship of her burden, by casting o∣uer board her loading, when as the merchant remem∣bring what Xauerius had commaunded him, forbad them so to do in any case, telling them what the holy man had fore tould, and withall promising them, by that which he had sayd, that God would assuredly suc∣cour them. Which presently proued true. For the sea comming vpon a suddayne ouer those sands, the ship was straight afloate, and so escaping that danger arriued safely at the hauen, by Gods & Xauerius assi∣stance. The newes heereof being afterwards brought to Malaca, He com∣mēdeth in the night tyme to the peoples prayers the sou∣les in Purga∣tory and men in deadly sinne. it is wonderfull to say, how much it in∣creased his credit, and esteeme of sanctity. In the meane space Francis did not only omit any thing of his former old exercises of Christian Chari∣ty, but also inuented new. For after the sunne was set, he going vp and downe the Citty with a litle Bell, by some graue sentēce or speach admonished the peo∣ple to call vpon Gods diuine clemency, for the soules which were tormented in Purgatory, and for them that were in deadly sinne. Which new inuention be∣ing no lesse profitable for the liuing then for the dead, did not a litle set on fire the Malacensians harts. These labours of his, wherby he restored the Christian dis∣cipline wholy decayed in the Citty of Malaca, were much increased, by no small employment, which he tooke in translating, with the help of an Interpreter, the Christian doctrine into that language, which the Macazarians did also vnderstand, The pre∣paration of the Macaza∣rians to receiue the Ghospel. to whome he greatly desired to go, moued therto by the often good tydings which came from thence. For that about the same ti∣me newes was brought, that the people of that coun∣try were greatly inclined to receiue the seed of the Christian Fayth, because there were no Temples of Idols amongst them, nor Idolatrous Priests to draw thē to the worship of false Gods: They only adored the Sunne when it rose, and besids that, they had no other God at all. Nothing now seemed longer to Xauerius then that day, when as hauing turned the Catechisme into their language, and vnderstood the state of the Iland, he might go to instruct them: yet in the meane tyme he furnished himselfe with contemplation of diuine things, but specially with heauenly prouision, for the vndertaking of so great a charge. For after he had spent whole dayes in offices of charity, he would in the night defraud himselfe of his sleepe, and sit vp watching in prayer and meditation, that so he might come vnto the Macazarians wholy inflamed with hea∣uenly fyre, and burning loue, both to God and men. He had now spent some moneths at Malaca, yet there came no newes of the ship which he expected to re∣turne. Wherefore with the Gouernours good leaue he resolued to go to Macazaria, hastning to instruct that nation in the Christian fayth. CHAP. XVIII. In Amboynum he giueth many signes of his propheticall spirit, and charity. A S soone as he found opportunity of passage whither he intended, he put to sea at Malaca, hauing Durus aforesaid for his companion, vpon the 10. day of Ianuay in the yeare of our Lord 1546. & hauing had a prosperous nauigation he arriued at last at his desired hauen, but not without many incommodities. For the maister of the ship ca∣sting about, A Pro∣phesy. to come to the Iland of Amboynum, and now thinking he had gone past the Hauen, was ex∣ceedingly troubled, being out of hope to get to his intended place, because the wind was ful against him. But Francis bad him be of good courage, for the ship was not yet past the place as he imagined, and that the next day in the morning he should arriue safe at the port which he desired. And so it fell out, although they had very ill weather. At breake of day the next morning they were in sight of the Hauen. But the wind was all that while so boysterous and great, that it seemed vnpossible by any meanes to cast ancker, therby to set Xauerius a land, which was the only cause of their comming to that Iland. As soone therfore as they were come to the mouth, or entrance of the Hauen, vpon a suddaine that blu∣string wind, The wind o∣beyeth Xauerius. as though it obeyed Xauerius, ceased in such sort, that the ship came very commodiously into the hauen. But now behould, a second danger euen in the very Hauen it selfe. Xauerius with a few others had gotten into a litle boate to row to land, when as on a suddayne they fell vpon two Pyratical ships. The Portugheses who were in the boate with Francis made away with al speed, therby to auoyd meeting with the Pyrats. And so putting suddainly into the mayne for feare, they were carryed a great way from land. But now, hauing auoyded the danger, & making towards the land agayne, they were put into a new feare, least they might perchance meete with the same Pyrates againe. Francis therfore fortelling what would happē, bad them be of good comfort, & row without feare to shore, Another Prophe∣sy. for by Gods goodnesse they should come safe to land. And the euent proued true as he had pro¦phecyed. When Xauerius was landed, he was very courteously receyued by the inhabitants, being also before sufficiently recommended vnto them by fame of his sanctity. Amboynum is about some 80. Amboy∣num. miles in compasse, and is an Iland of speciall note vnder the Portugheses dominion, much frequented both by merchants, and the people of that country. It is distant from Malaca aboue 900 miles. There were then in this Iland, be∣sides the garrison of Portugheses, seauen other townes of Christians, without any one Priest among them all, for he, who only had bin there, was lately dead. Francis therfore going about to those desolate townes baptized many infants and children. His manner of going was this: Hauing a boy carrying a crosse before him, he himselfe asked at euery dore, if they had any sick, any children to baptize, or any dead to bury? If he found any sick, Of his manner of going about. lifting vp his eyes, and hands to heauen, he recei ed ouer them the Creed, & the Ghos∣pell. And oftentimes with one and the same labour he cured the sick both body, and soule. He also solemnly buried them that were dead, saying first the vsuall fu∣nerall prayers, & afterwards masse for their soules; so that a question might be made, whether he more as∣sisted the liuing, or the dead. But whilst he sought to deserue well of men, God out of his prouidence gaue him a very speciall subiect to worke vpon. About the same time Ferdinand Soza Captaine o∣uer certaine Spaniards, Ferdinād Soza a Captai∣ne of the Spani∣ards. comming from New Spaine, (which is a Country in the other world, not further distant from Amboynum then from Spaine) and going to the Moluca's, arriued with his whole nauy at Am∣boynum. There were many ships, a very great number of marriners & souldiers, an incredible multitude of sick, besides a cruell pestilence that had taken away many Spaniards: whereupon it manifestly appeared that God out of his singular bounty, had sent Xauerius before to be ready to assist & help them. He relie∣ueth the calamity of the Spanish nouy. For presently his inflamed charity began to set vpon the violence of that pestiferous disease, assisting some by seruing thē, and reconcyling others by the Sacrament of Confes∣sion. One while he comforted the sick, another while he assisted, such as lay at the point of death, and buried those that died with funerall obsequies. Thus he being but one man, performed the office of many. But his greatest labour of al was, to procure of those that had meanes, things necessary for the poore and sicke, and to seeke about with vnspeakable labour & paynes medicines for their diseases, whereof in that place there was great scarcity. Therefore hauing of∣tentymes begged such thinges of one Iohn Arausius a Portughese merchant, He fore∣tels that Arausius will shortly dye. who had great store of such like wares, he at last tooke it ill, & was very angry to see that he made no end of begging. So as when vpon a tyme, one asked him some such drugs in Francis his name, he with much grudging gaue at length what he demaunded, but tould him therewithall, that he should aske him no more. Which thing comming to Xauerius hearing, presently by diuine instinct, What quoth he, doth Arausius thinke that he shall long inioy those things which he hath? He is surely deceiued; Go tell him from me, that he need not be so sparing of his wares which death wil shortly take from him, & that he himselfe will dye ere it be long, in this very Iland, and that his goods will fall to the share of the poore: therfore if he be wise, let him largely bestow what he hath vpon the sicke poore people, for Gods sake, and make his benefit of that which may help him after he is dead. The euent was answerable to what he foretould. For not long after Arausius dyed in the same Iland, leauing no heyre behind him, & his goods were distributed amongst the poore, according as the custome is there, when one dyeth without hey∣res: and Arausius being stroken with the terrour of de∣ath which was declared to him to be at hand, became more wary of his owne carriage, and more liberall also of his drugs to the poore. He spent three monthes (for so long the Spanish nauy remayned at Amboynum ) in seruing the sicke, to their exceeding great good, both of body and soule. Yet Xauerius his diligent endeauours were no lesse profitable to the whole, then to the sicke. For he neuer gaue ouer to drawe out the corruption of their minds both by the medicines of the Sacraments, and by pri∣uate and publike exhortations. Which labour of his was not in vayne. For he reaped indeed plentifull fruite of peace, from those warlike people: many pri∣uate grudges were taken away, many were reduced to see their owne errours, & to betake themselues to a vertuous life. The fruite which the Spa∣nish na∣uy yiel∣ded. Amongst whome Cosmas Turrianus (who came in the Spanish Nauy) being moued by Francis his eminent sanctity, resolued to imbrace his course of life, & to enter into the Society. Then Fran∣cis hauing had good successe concerning the affayres of the Christian fayth at Amboynum, after the nauy was departed, going to Macazaria, tooke the Iland of Ternate in his way, lying about 200. miles from Am∣boynum. OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE III. BOOKE. He reformeth the Inhabitants corrupted behauiour, in the Moluca's. CHAP. I. M OLVCA is a Country diuided into Moluca. Ilands. many small Ilands (which they call the Moluca's ) very famous by rea∣son of the fertility, and traffique of spices especially Cloues distāt from Malaca 1100. miles or therabout. It is full of Country townes, inhabited partly by Eth∣nickes and partly by Saracens; the fertility of the soile being such, that it doth not only keepe at home those that be there borne, from seeking commodities else where, but inuiteth also strangers vnto it. The Molu∣ca's are very many in number, most of them little in in extent, and the greatest thereof is but small: for there is none aboue 18. miles in compasse. They lye vnder the Equinoctiall line, and runne out from the north into the south, diuided from one another almost threescore miles. There are amongst them other I∣lands of lesser extent: Ternate the chie∣fe of the Moluca Ilands. but almost all the Moluca's, be subiect to one Saracen King, who is tributary to the King of Portugall. Ternate, which without compari∣son is the fay rest of all these Ilands, hath in it a Citty of the same name, subiect to the Portugheses, which Citty is inhabited chiefly by them, and other Christi∣ans of that country. When Xauerius therfore was come thither, he lod∣ged in the suburbs, at a Church of our B. Lady, cal∣led the Barres. There, hauing inuoked that mighty Protectresse of the place, his most assured Patronesse, he beginneth presently to imploy himselfe in his accu∣stomed workes of Charity. The people of Ternate had now openly let loose their raynes, so much be∣yond those of Malaca, to wickednes, by how much further they were distant from India. For that throgh dayly commercement, and conuersation with the Ethnickes and Saracens, they were growen so stupide and blind, euen in matters of ordinary humanity, that in making their bargaines concerning trafficque, they esteemed nothing vnlawfull, or vniust, wheresoeuer there seemed any hope of gayne. This Citty there∣fore, being almost past recouery, Xauerius setteth vpon for cure, with the same art which he had formerly done at Malaca. For hauing gotten the Inhabitants good will, Pruden∣ce in re∣calling wicked men. partly by winking at their manners, and partly by the sweetnes of his conuersation, he began by litle and litle to discouer their sores, and to apply remedies thereunto. Wherein his singular prudence manifestly shewed it selfe. For if he foūd any one in∣tangled in the snares of dishonest loue, if he were a person of authority and esteeme, he vsed most com∣monly to deale with him in this sort. First, he would discourse after a sweete familiar manner, & if he did not inuite him to his house, he would gently offer himselfe to be is guest. Sitting at table he would discourse pleasantly, thereby to open a way for good and wholesome counsayle. Then as soone as he had gotten to be in ward and familiar with him, he would begin to speake of the foulenes of sin, and so by litle and litle come to the loathsomnesse of carnall concupiscence, & the inconueniences which ensue thereon; to which he would often also adde threats and vengeance from heauen. At last when he perceiued him to be moued, he would take him, in a gentle manner by the hand, and induce him to make his confession. And so in fine without much difficul∣ty he eyther made him put away his Concubine, or else to take her in lawfull wedlocke. It is well knowne that in this kind he brought many to marry their Concubines, that the lawfulnes of wedlocke might extinguish the flames of dishonest lust. The like course he tooke to draw from thē the mo∣ney which they had gotten by vsury or deceipt; the fumme wherof was such, that the Sodality, called of Mercy there erected, being but meanly foūded, became therby rich & wealthy. This was not a litle furthered by his often exhorting and instructing of the ignorant people and children. Whereby the behauiour of the Citty was amended, vniust Contracts dissolued, and the childrens eares and tongues so filled with the Ca∣techisme, that al places round about sounded with the pleasant tunes of the Christian doctrine. But the chiefe thing which moued the Ternatians was a certayne Prophecy that Francis vttered. He being now at Ternate so far off from Amboynum, saw by diuine reuelation Iohn Arausius the merchant a dying, as he had foretould it would shortly happen. Therfore saying masse before a great assembly, when after the Offertory he turned about, as the custome is, to the people, saying Orate fratres, Pray for (quoth he) & commend to God the soul of Iohn Arausius who is now dead at Amboynum; yesterday I said masse for him and so do now againe to day. Wherat they that were present were stroken into an amazement, looking one vpon another, and asking how he could come to know that, seeing Amboynum was aboue 200. miles from that place, and it was knowen that no man had come from thence at that time. Then their admirati∣on being turned into expectation of what would be the euent therof, they who had bin present, noted downe his words, and the time; and a few dayes after there cōmeth a ship from Amboynum, and bringeth newes of Arausius his death. Wherupon comparing the things and times togeather, they found all to be iust as Francis had foretould. Then they made no doubt but Xauerius assuredly knew the same by diuine reuela∣tion: and therefore euery one did reuerence him, as a Prophet. Now Xauerius began to prepare himselfe for Ma∣cazaria, which was distant from that place only two dayes iorney. But if seemes it was not Gods holy will that he should help them, who were already sufficien∣tly prouided for. At the same time he was informed by persons of credit, that in Maurica (commonly called the Country of the Mauri ) there were very many Christians, who through want of Priests were brought into extreme danger of their saluation. Ther∣fore iudging it best to assist those who stood most in need, leauing of his iourney to the Macazarians who wanted not other helpes, he setleth himselfe, and his whole endeauours thereunto. CHAP. II. He resolueth to helpe the Inhabitants of Maurica, euen vvith the hazard of his life. T HE Country of Maurica lieth distant frō Ternate well neere 200. miles. The land is rough and craggy, and exceeding barren of all things. As for corne and wine the inhabitants know not what they meane. They haue neither Cattle nor sheepe, only a few swine, which serue them rather to wonder at, then to eate. There is much want of fresh water, but ryce inough, & a great multitude of wild Bores. There be trees of an huge biggenesse, from whence they get their bread & wine, such as it is. Other trees also they haue, of whose barke being finely combed, spun, and wouen after their fa∣shion, they commonly make themselues garments. The bar∣barous∣nes of the Mauri. The people are altogether barbarous, & without any humanity; for they haue no signe at all of learning a∣mong them. But in cruelty they surpasse all other na∣tions; and so farre are their Natures made fierce by custome from sparing of strangers, as they vse to mur∣der and poyson euen one another, after a most barba∣rous manner. There was but one Priest among them who had care of their soules, and him they had also killed: so as they had bin long without a pastour. The Country for the most part is often shaken with terrible earthquakes, The in∣commo∣dities of the coū∣try of Maurica. casting forth fyre & ashes beaten vpon with huge waues of the raging sea; so as you would thinke that God did punish thē heerby for their abominable sinnes. Wherefore, these manifold feares kept all strangers from cōming vnto them. But Francis armed with an vndaunted courage against all dangers, Zeale soules. omitting (as we haue sayd) his iorney to Macazaria, which was the cause of his comming thi∣ther, resolued with himself, to free them from eternall perdition, although it were with euident hazard of his owne life. Wherof writing to his friends in Por∣tugall, he sayth, that to help these wretches with his owne manifest danger, he was encouraged by those words of our Sauiour: Qui volu rit animan suam saluam facere, Matt. 10. p rdet eam; qui autem perdiderit propter me, inueniet eam. He that will saue his life, shall loose it, and he that shall loose it for me, shall find it. Which sentence, he said, seemeth very easy and playne, in speculation, but not in practice, vnlesse God himselfe interprete in interiourly in our soule. Neuer did his singular courage, and confidence in God shew it selfe more then now. For when newes was brought to Amboynum that Xauerius meant to go to Maurica, the inhabitants were stroken into admi∣ration, as well at his vndaunted courage, They go aboue to terrify him frō his reso∣lution of going to that bar∣barous nation. as also with commiseration, by reason of the great dangers he was to vndergo. And when they vnderstood, that he was vpon the point to depart, they presently flocke vnto him, & tell him that, that place is rather a receptacle of wild beasts, then of men: That most of the Inha∣bitants haue their hands imbrued in the bloud of their Wiues, Children, Parents, and Priests. Therfore by Gods manifest wrath they are continually scourged with all kind of plagues, both from the land, sea, and heauen it selfe; and for this cause strangers are much more to be kept farre from their fury. They moreo∣uer declare vnto him, that euery moment almost, he was to be in euident danger of his life amongst those people, who make but a pastime & iest of murdring, & poysoning one another, & thirst after nothing more then humane bloud. What prudence therfore could it be, to preferre such dangerous places, before those that were quiet? What reason had he, being a stranger to trust his life in their hands, who, as all wel knew, tooke no other delight, but in killing, and murdering one another? Whilest his friends stood beating these things into his head, the dangers which they obiected touched no man lesse, then himself who was to vndergo them. But then they began with teares to intreate him, The in∣treaties of his friends. not to make so litle esteeme of his owne life; and seeming withall displeased they adde lamentations to their in∣treaties, saying: what Portughese is there in the world yea what stanger or Barbarian who knoweth Xauerius, will endure, that the instruction of a base Country should be bought with the hazard of his life? Who can now hope, that the chiefe stay of the East, which ought to be perpetuall, will continue long, if so wil∣lingly he put his life into manifest danger, forgetting that he draweth with him the soules of so many na∣tions into the same ruine? He should remember how the saluation of all India, & in numerable other Coun∣tries dependeth on his life. If he, out of incredible for∣titude, and courage of mind, contemned all dangers, yet at lest he should not draw with him, the soules of so many people, into hazard. The desire of the com∣mon good, should ouersway the particular; especi∣ally seeing it is manifest, that it was not worth the la∣bour to instruct so sauage a Nation, which had byn forsaken by their Priests, not so much for feare of dan∣ger, as out of despayre to do any good among them. Wherfore they besought him for Christ IESVS sake, the redeemer of mankind, that he would not, out of an vncertayne hope to saue a few, cast both his owne life, and the saluation of innumerable nations into certaine danger, but would, as well beseemed his prudence and vertue, preserue himselfe for the Ea∣sterne Church, or at least reserue himselfe for dangers answerable to the greatnes of his mind. This piety of friends was more gratefull, then pleasant vnto Xauerius. Imbracing therfore ech of thē in a friendly manner, & bedewed with ech others te∣ares, he replyed almost to this effect: Quid facitis flen∣tes, & affligentes cor meum &c. Act. 21. What do you, weeping and afflicting my hart? I acknowledge your fidelity and good will, and thanke you, because you haue o∣mitted no signe of loue towards me. But none of these dangers moue me, considering what God commaun∣deth. Let God prouide for these things, who vndoub∣tedly is the author of this determination; vnder the wings of whose protection I feare nothing at all. For to whome may I better commit my person and life then to him, who hath the disposing of the liues of all moralls? A man that must once dye, ought not to feare death, which layeth hould on euery one, though they feare neuer so much. But a good death (which is the entrance to immortality) is to be desired. And if I dye, God certainly will not dye, who hath both a farre greater desire of the saluation of Nations, then I haue; & can also easily send labourers into his vine∣yard. Neither is the fruite little which shall be reaped in Maurica: for that is not to be estemed little, where there is occasion of great merit. I for my part, if there be nothing else to hinder me, refuse no perill or dāger for their saluation; which being in hazard, I am of du∣ty bound to prouide for. Machab. lib. 1. Vt fuerit voluntas in caelo, sic fiat: what is iudged fitting in heauen, let that be done. Then they, out of the vehemency of their loue, passing from intreaties to plaine force, wonne the keeper of the Castle, not to permit him to haue any ship to saile thence. The keper therfore indeauouring although in vaine, to draw Francis frō that enterprize aswell by alledging the same dangers, as by the terrour also of present death, when at last he saw he could not preuayle with him, He pro∣testeth that if he cānot get a ship he will swimme ouer. tould him flattly, that he would suffer no ship to carry him thence. To whome Xauerius replied, that he feared neither dangers, nor death where the honour of God & saluation of soules was to be sought, and that he esteemed none for his enemies, but those that hindred Gods diuine seruice. He was certainly determined and resolued to follow God who called him into Maurica, neither was it want of ship∣ping which should stay him; for if he could not get a ship, he would assuredly rely vpon God, and swimme ouer. When therfore his friends perceiued him to be se∣cure of Gods assistance, and to remayne immoueable in his determination, not inuenting what more to do, they came all weeping vnto him, & brought him all kind of preseruatiues agaynst poyson. But Francis fea∣ring least by conceauing, through anxiety of mind, some vaine imaginations of dangers, he might cast vpon himselfe too much solicitude and care, He gi∣ueth to his fri ds backe a∣gayne their me dicines a¦gainst poyson. and out of hope of humane helpe diminish his confidence in Gods prouidence, gaue them thankes for their good will, and withall tould them, that those things would be rather a burden then any help vnto him. And ther∣fore intreated them that they would not loade him with so much diffidence in God. But if they desired to haue him preserued from all plagues and poisons, they should dayly pray to God for him. For that was the most infallible, and most present remedy which could be found. And so taking leaue of his friends, he prepared himselfe for his iourney, with all alacri∣ty. Whilest he was thus vpon the point to depart, and venture vpon so great danger, there came good newes out of India, which added more flames to his zealous confidence: which was, that nine more of the Society of IESVS were come from Portugal to Goa, fiue of them Priests, to wit Francis Perez, Alphonsus Cyprian, Hen∣ry Henriquez, Francis Henry, and Nonnius Ribera: the others who had not yet taken holy orders, were Bal∣tazar Nonnius, Adam Francis, Nicolas Nonnius, and Emanuel Morales. Xauerius therfore hauing vnderstood of their arriuall before his departure from Amboynum, being very glad that such assistance was come so hap∣pily, appointed to euery one of them their employ∣ment, & presently dispatched letters to Goa to those of the Society, wherein be gaue order that Francis Perez should remaine in Goa to teach the schollers there, and that Cyprian and Henry should go to Comorinum for the help of the Neophites in that place: and the two Fa∣thers who were already in Comorinum, with the rest of the nyne, he ordeined to repayre vnto the Moluca's, intending with this smal supply to visit all those Ilāds, & assist euery one as farre as he was able. Then with Gods speciall fauour he began his iourney towards Maurica, taking ship at Ternate in the Month of May 1546. whither he soone after safely arriued. CHAP. III. He bringeth the sauage people of Maurica to ciuill behauiour, and instructeth them in the Christian Faith. A AVRICA (as we haue bin informed) is diuided into two Prouinces: Maurica. the one is scituated in the Continent, and is called Maurotia, the other consisteth of two Ilands which they call Maurotides. Of these two Ilands one of them is horrible to behould, by reason of certayne burning rockes, out of which there oftentimes burst forth mighty stones of fyre, as bigge as trees, and with such a noyle and violence, Burning rockes. as no peece of Ordi∣nance, though neuer so great, sendeth forth its bul∣lets with a greater report: and sometimes also where the stone breaketh out in that vehemency aforesaid, there is cast forth from the same place such an huge quantity of ashes, that both men and women labou∣ring a great way off in the fieldes, Ashes are cast out of the rockes. are so besmered, & euen couered with the same, that you would thinke them rather Deuils then men. Many wild Bores also are stifled & ouerwhelmed therwith in the woods: yea and fishes found euery where cast vp dead, vpon the shore. The same Iland, that no inconuenience may be wanting, is so skaken with almost perpetuall earth∣quakes, that they who sayling by chance in the sea neere vnto it, Horri∣bly earth quakes. are oftentymes greatly affrighted, thin∣king they be cast vpon some rocke that lyeth in their way. Moreouer the winds being at continuall warres with one another, within the hollow caues of the earth, make such a dismall noise, & strike such an in∣credible horrour into the eares, that one would thinke he heard the roring of hel itself: vpon which occasion Francis was often wont to put them in mynd of the paines of hell fire, wherin Idolaters and bad Christi∣ans are tormented for al eternity. There inhabit these places also, a kind of people called Iauari, who are without any knowledge of Christianity, extremely wild and sauage, and delight only in murder. And when they haue no strangers to slaughter, they turne their fury vpon their owne wiues and children, and oftentimes do make no small hauocke amongst the Christians. People wonder∣fully sauage. There be also some among them who ac∣count mans flesh for dainties, especially when they are killed in battaile. O eternall God! how strongely is he guarded who trusteth in his diuine assistance, and is protected by him! How secure is one in the midst of the greatest dāgers where God standeth for him! Nothing surely is to be feared, nothing to be doubted when God as the Guide leadeth the way. Among these people then, more truely sauage then bruite beastes, Psal. 90. did Xauerius through help of the Highest, remaine for the space of three monethes, beyond all mens expectation with more profit to the inhabitants, then danger to him∣selfe. For in this t me he brought those sauage people to milder dispositions, and reclaimed them to that ci∣uill carriage, which becommeth Christians. They were at that time wholy ignorant, all alike, in matters of Christianity, retayning only the meere Name of Christians. Francis therfore presently went about to all the Christian villages being neere thirty in number, bap∣tizing infantes, instructing the elder sort, hindring sacrifices to Idols, He terri∣fieth the barba∣rous peo∣ple with the re∣presen∣tation of hell. and helping the neophytes in their miseryes both spirituall and corporall. In his publick and priuate exhortations, he terrified that barbarous people with threatnings both from heauen & earth, shewing them, that they were not far from Hell, as they might well see by the fire and ashes which were oftentimes cast vp, and vomited forth in such abun∣dance, that manylewd and wicked men among them were throwne downe headlong, & deuoured therein. The same also was signified by those huge earthqua∣kes wherwith the ground being ready to open threat∣ned to swallow vp such as for their detestable wicked∣nes were hatefull in the sight of almighty God. Ther∣fore they should by all meanes beware, that they fell not hea long into those euerlasting flames, wherof they had a continuall representation before their eyes. By these kind of exhortations, and other precepts of Christian doctrine he wonderfully qualified their sauage natures: Christiā discipli∣ne quali∣fieth bar∣barous nature. so as within a short space all that Na∣tion, then the which (as we sayd) there had bin none worse, or more inhumane vntill that day, began from that tyme to be not only mild and tractable, but wil∣ling to be instructed also in the mysteries of our faith; such force hath Christian discipline to drawe men to humanity. Here in this place the vndaunted courage of Francis his mind manifestly shewed it selfe. It hapned that as he was in the Church at Masse, vpon the feast of S. Michael the Archangell, before a great number of the inhabitants, the whole Iland was vpon a suddai∣ne so shaken with an earthquake, that the Aultar it selfe seemed ready to be ouerturned. Wherupon most of the people ranne away, ech one whither their feare caryed them; His cou∣rage in the time of an earth∣quake. but Xauerius either as though he percei∣ued nothing, or rather cont mning the feare, went on constantly with his Masse, saying the cause therof to be, that S. Micha l the Archangell did then with many torments throw downe all the Deuills of that coūtry into Hel who withstood Gods diuine honour: so as he had more ado with men, then with the deuils themselues. For there wanted not some Idolaters both obstinate and potent who went about by threates & feares to hinder the going forward of the Gospel. But in vaine. For Xauerius inuincible vertue and courage vpheld by diuine aide, ouercame all things. In a few monthes therfore he ranne ouer all the Christian Villages, instructed an innumerable multi∣tude of the inhabitants in the Christian precepts, & brought many to imbrace the faith of Christ. How much fruit he heaped togeather may be hereby gathe∣red, in that, it is said, he made in one towne called Tolum, 5000. Christians. And surely his labour was no lesse then the fruit. The fru∣it of sou∣les. For running to and fro so troublesome a country, he suffered almost all the dis∣commodities which could be imagined, as penury & want, heate, hungar, thirst, weary somnesse, and dan∣gers. But as commonly the pleasure is proportionable to the paine, so according to the multitude of his trou∣bles he had cōfortes to recreate his soule, which how great they were, may be coniectured, by the clause of a letter of his, to some of the same Society, where ha∣uing spoken of the barrennes of those parts, & of the want of all things: These things, saith he, I haue for this end layd open vnto you, Psal. 94. that you may know what abundāce of heauenly ioyes there be in these places. For such labours & dangers vndertaken wholy and willingly for Gods sake, Heauely ōforts in la∣bours & afflicti∣ons. are treasuries filled with diuine, and vnspeakeable consolations: so that these Ilands may seeme most conuenient, and apt to make one loose his eyes, by shedding aboundance of most sweet teares. I for my part do not remember, that euer I was ouerflowed with so many, so great, and so continuall com∣fortes of mind, in such sort, as they wholy take from me all fee∣ling of labours and miseries. So Francis. Who out of his endeauouring to bring this sauage Nation to lead a Christian life, reaped no lesse fruite and comfort, then labour and merit. CHAP. IIII. He laboureth the second tyme, amongst the Ternatians. R ETVRNING back from Maurica to the Moluca's he came againe to Ternate, Diuers sermons where being most ioyfully receaued by the Terna∣tians, he stirreth vp the slouthfull to the pursuite of vertue, and confirmeth those that were wauering. But the ordinary course he kept was this. Vpon holy dayes he preached twice a day; in the mor∣ning to the Portugheses, in the after-noone to the peo∣ple of that Couutry: exhorting the one to liue a good and vertuous life, and instructing the other in the mysteries of the Christian faith, and auerting them from worshipping of Idols. Besides this, euery day both before & after noone, he heard the Confessions as well of men, as of women. Vpon euery Wensday and Fryday he made an exhortation a part to the wi∣ es of the Portugheses (who for the most part were of that country borne) explicating the articles of the Creed, of the ten Commandments, and of the Sacra∣ments of Confession and Communion. It was then the tyme of Lent: wherfore very many of them did piously & religiously solemnize the Feast of Easter, by receauing the sacred Eucharist, from which they had vntill that time absteined. But now Xauerius hauing bin long abroad, was by the domesticall care of the Society at Goa, called home againe. Therfore he determined with all speed to passe ouer to Amboynum, there to expect passage backe into India. But the Gouernour of the Castle of Ternate, the Sodality of Mercy, and the other Portu∣gheses by their earnest intreaty, inforced him to stay yet a while at Ternate, although it were not much a∣gainst his will, because he did not repent himself of the paines he tooke amongst thē. In the meane time Francis had a great desire to try what good he could do vpon the barbarous King of Moluca, who being tributary to the King of Portugall, was in Religion a Saracen, not so much by profession as in life. For he was not held from becomming a Christian through any deuotion to Mahomet, The King of Molucas 100. wi∣ues. but through his owne exorbitant and licentious lust. For besides whole troupes of Concu∣bines, he had 100. wiues dwelling with him in his Court. This King therfore being moued aswell by Xauerius courtesy, as by his sanctity of life, vsed him with all honourable respect, notwithstanding that his Nobi∣lity openly repined thereat; and he much desired his friendship, giuing some hope that he would one day become a Christian; as when he sayd, that the Sara∣cens and the Christians adore one God, and a time would come when they should both professe one Re∣ligion. But although he seemed to take delight in Frā∣cis his company and discourse, He much honou∣reth Xa∣uerius. yet his immoderate sensuality of life kept him backe from being a Chri∣stian. This thing only could at last be got of him, that he promised, one of his children (wherof he had very many) should be baptized, vpon this condition, that afterwards being a Christian, he might be made King of the Iland of Maurica. Xauerius therfore, al∣though the matter was not yet ripe, being glad of that hope, did so keep friendship with the King, that he laboured neuerthe lesse in instructing the Country people. For trying the disposition of the Ethnickes, he found them to be farre lesse auerted from Christ, then from Mahomet, although they were by the Sa∣racens compelled to the mahometicall superstitions; and that the Saracens themselues, being also ignorant of their owne profession, were not found obstinate therin. The Eth¦nickes of Moluca mislike not Christ so much as Mahomet Supposing therfore that it would be easy to conuert them both, if there were an house of the So¦ciety erected in Moluca, he resolued by all meanes to do his best therein, and at last by helpe of the King of Portugall, who was a very great aduācer of the Chri∣stian cause, he fully accomplished the same. In the meane time his chiefe care was to instruct the Portugheses and the neophytes: which labour in∣deed proued not vnprofitable. For within the space of six months all his paines were recōpensed with a most plentifull haruest of the Ternatians. A Col∣ledge of the So∣ciety in Mo uca. And he so applyed the townes men with godly Exhortations, frequen∣ting of Sacraments, & other holy exercises, that in all mens iudgement they seemed to be another people, then they had formerly byn: and it is well knowen, that the Christian Inhabitants thereof, of an infinite number of Concubines which they kept, had put thē all away, except only two. Neither was there any thing which did the people more good, then the opi∣nion of his sanctity; a very forcible argument to per∣swade, especially when it is confirmed by signes from God. For as he was once in the middest of a Sermon vpon a suddain he desired his Auditors to say deuout∣l a Pater and Aue, A pro∣phecy. for Iames Aegidius Admirall of the Portughese Nauy, who was then a dying at Amboy∣num, which was afterwards found to be true by assu∣red testimonies. This thing then much increased the peoples esteeme of Francis for the present, and after∣wards their desire to keep him. Hauing remayned there now six months, he pre∣pared for his departure with intention to visit Amboy∣num agayne. The Ter¦natians loue to Xauerius. Wherefore out of the extraordinary loue which they bare vnto him, the whole Citty came floc∣king with him to the Hauen. And when he was ready to depart, they brake forth into such a weeping, and crying out, calling him, with their confused voyces, Maister, Guardian, & Father, that euen pitty made him, as though he had forgotten his iourney, remayne a while in imbracing euery one of them, for that his bowells were greatly moued towards this his flock: and so hauing at last imbraced and conforted them all with most sweet words, he with much ado tooke his leaue, where at they bitterly wept, and lamented. CHAP. V. He fortelleth, and is Authour of a notable Ʋictory, vvhich the Portugheses obtai∣ned against the Barbarians. X AVERIVS being thus glad to see the Ternatians great deuotion, The towne Tolum reuol∣ting frō religion is reuen∣ged from heauen. was againe pre∣sently stroken with sad newes of the per∣fidiousnes of the Tolaneans. Tolum, as we sayd before, is a Towne belonging to one of the Ilands of Maurica, hauing in it many Christians, newly planted there by Francis; most of the inhabitāts wherof, eyther through feare of one Geliol, a forraine Tyrant, or else to curry fauour with him, had reuol∣ted both from the King of Portugall, and the Chri∣stiā faith; & ouerthrowing the Church, had in derisi∣on brooken the Crosses and images of Saints; seizing also violently vpon the goods of the other faythfull & ious Christians. At this fact of their Xauerius being much afflicted, left the same to God, who would iudg his owne cause: The lād of fertile becom∣eth bar∣raine & the wa∣ters of whole∣some be∣come vnwhol∣some. but the iniury done agaynst Hea∣uen & Earth, armed them both with reuenge against the Authors therof. And first God layd his heauy ven∣geance vpon them: for their soile which in former ty∣ es had bin most fertile, became wholy barrain; their corne also in their barnes consumed away by an ac∣cursed putrefaction; their waters of wholesome vpon a suddayne became bitter, and infectious, so as ma∣ny of the people were taken away by famine and pe∣stilence. And as they were thus scourged with direfull wrath from heauen, the Portugheses also came vpon their backes with a terrible warre. For the Gouernor of the Moluca's (Francis promising him that the warre should haue good successe) sent presently a Nauy a∣gaynst those perfidious Rebels, together with a choice band of Portughese souldiars. The chiefe Commaun∣der of the Nauy being encouraged by what Xaue∣rius had foretould, & through confidence in Gods di∣uine assistance, vndertooke the warre with great ala∣crity & diligence: notwithstanding he thought it not amisse before he ioyned battayle, to send Messengers vnto them, and offer them pardon, if they would re∣clayme from their rebellion, and so saue their liues. But after they had sent backe their proud answere, the Portugheses set on fire with reuenge, march on to∣wards the enemy. There was a Castle scituated vpon an high place no lesse fortifyed by art then nature, whereto also were added other deceip full stratagems of the enemy. For they being not ignorā of the war which the Portuge∣ses were to make vpō them, had about the wals there∣of for a good cōpa le, stroken into the ground, certai∣ne sharpe stakes armed with foure pointed nayles, o which the Portugheses might be forced to runne if they attempted to approach the Castle. These engine of theirs to defend thēselues, would not only haue de∣feated the Portugheses comming theron but haue also broght great annoyance vnto thē, Prodigi∣ous wo∣ders giue the Por∣tugheses the Vi∣ctory. if Fr cis his prayers had not taken away the present danger, & opened the entrance which was shut vp agaynst them. The Por∣tugheses were not yet landed, when it appeared how meruailous God himself did fight for them. The Sunne about the tyme of midday being ouercast with a sud∣dain cloud, made the day as darke as the night, whē as in the toppe of a mountayne hard by, there brake forth with horrible crackes & roaring, a filthy loath∣some fire, which continued three daies & three nights. Wherupon an huge great quantity of ashes, & stones, the like wherof was neuer seene before, being cast vp out of the earth, did not only couer the forsaid stakes, but also made the ground leuell with the toppe of the Castle. And behould whilst the Barbarians were astoni∣shed at this vnexpected accident, there happened a∣nother thing which strooke a greater terrour into thē. For at the very same time a wonderfull strang earth∣quake ouerthrew an infinite number of houses in the Citty Now when the Tolanes had endured these mise∣ries, for some dayes, the Portugheses came vpon thē with al their forces. But yet it cannot be properly cal∣led a battaile: for most of the enemies were either op∣pressed with the falling of the houses, or else were fled for feare; and the heapes of stones which were cast out of the Earth, carryed them vp easily to scale the wals of the Castles. And thus the Fort, Towne, and whole Country were subdued without any battaile at all; and peace granted them who were conquered v∣pon certaine conditions, wherof the chiefe were, that they should againe build vp the Church which they had ouerthrowne, restore the goods taken from the Christian people, & finally imbrace againe the Chri∣stian religion, which they had once before receaued. The Barbarians saw certainly, that this memora∣ble victory was obteined more by diuine then huma∣ne force. But the Portugheses did absolutly attribute the miraculous burning of the mountaine, & the sud∣dain heaping together of the ashes & stones to Frāncis his mer s, who like another M yses had obteined diuine assistance for them, whilst they fought against the enemyes of God; who, as he had fauoured the warre, so had he also affoarded speciall ayde therunto. CHAP. VI. He againe visiteth Amboynum, and la∣boureth still amongst them. H AVING in this time well increased, and setled Christian religion in Ternate, he say∣led backe to Amboynum, with intention to returne thence into India, after his long absence frō those parts & to visit the Society, wherof was he superiour, A pro∣phecy. & which was now much increased by the arriuall of new supplyes from Europe. Now whilest the passengers were in the midst of their way discoursing merrily amongst themselues, Francis on a suddain stepping forth from the company wherein he was, with great vehemency and griefe of mynd cryed out: Good Iesu, what is this? they kill the man. Whereupon the rest being amazed at the suddaynes of the thing, ranne to Xauerius, and asked him what the matter was? Then he, being come againe to him∣selfe, dissembling the matter answered, that it was nothing, and so sate downe agayne amongst them in a familiar manner, behauing himselfe as though he had neither done, nor sayd any thing more then ordi∣nary. But that which he cōcealed, within a litle while was after openly knowne. For as soone as they arri∣ued at Amboynum, they found a Portughese who had byn slayne by certayne theeues, at the very instant when they heard Xauerius cry out in the ship. There were in the Hauen at Amboynum foure Portughese shippes of burthen. Francis therefore still burning with charity, considered seriously how he might best help both the inhabitants and strāgers, vn∣till he could get passage into India. He buil∣deth himselfe a cottage vpon the shore. And so eyther out of loue of pouerty, or else because he would be neere the port, he maketh for himselfe and his companion a litle cottage of straw vpon the Sea shore, & heerun∣to adioyneth a litle chappell of the same workeman∣ship, therein to heare Confessions, and administer the Sacrament of the holy Eucharist to the marriners and souldiers, giuing himselfe wholy to such employ∣ments. Many also he made friends who were at dead∣ly hatred amongst themselues, but specially he helped & serued the sicke, both corporally and spiritually. A∣mongst whome he found one who lay very sicke of a vehemēt feuer, His con∣tinuall attendā∣ce vpon thesicke. whome he neuer left vntil he gaue vp the ghost, which he did euen in Francis his armes; who gaue great thankes, and prayse to God for his com∣ming backe at that tyme to Amboynum for the sauing of that poore soule, although he should gayne nothing else thereby. Then making his circuit with great di∣ligence ouer all the Christian villages, he baptized in∣fants, & instructed the rude & ignorant in the Chri∣stian precepts, with fruit answerable to his labour. He moreouer imploied himselfe incessantly in preaching to draw the people from vices, and incite them to vertue, The Am∣boynois loue to Françis. and good life. And how much beloued he was of all, his departure well shewed. Vpon the 20. day after his arriuall thither, to preuent the lamentation of the people at his departure which he forsaw would happen, he made al things ready to take shipping pri∣uately at midnight. But it was hard to deceiue louers, for they perceiuing what he intended, came running in the night to the hauen, where vpon a suddayne was heard great crying out of men, women, children & seruants, bewayling and lamenting their forlone & desolate state, & making their moane, that such a man should in such a sort be taken from thē. Xauerius being moued at these their lamentations and mourning in the night tyme, with teares in his eyes cōforted them with all sweet words, and imbraced them one after another, who could hardly be pulled from him, they sticking as close to him as his owne bowels. At last af∣ter much ado, intreating a certayne Priest to employ euery day two houres in teaching thē the Catechisme, he tooke his leaue, commending seriously to their diligence the exercyse of the Christian doctrine. The time and tyde now vrged him to depart, & many Portughese ships being there ready, Xauerius was inuited into the Admirall, wherein were many of his friends and wel willers. But he, although he were ear∣nestly and oftentimes requested, constantly refused the same And when the maister of the ship asked him, why he would refuse so kind an offer; A presa∣ge of what would follow. he knowing, doubtlesse by diuine reuelation, what would happen, answeared, that he was afrayed lest some mischance might befall vnto that ship in the way, and that God might punish them for some secret sinne of theirs. His feare was not without groūd. For the same ship being soone after by a cruell tempest driuen vpon a rock, was in eminent danger to haue byn cast away: but yet was for that tyme miraculously deliuered (by the prayers perhaps of Xauerius ) & held on her course, vn∣till meeting with another crosse tempest, & being by the violence thereof driuen vpon a vast quick-sand, stucke therin so fast, that not only the ship, but all the passengers in her, were accounted for lost; when as notwithstanding Gods Goodnes, which changeth the course of things, supplied againe with help proportio∣nably to the danger: for by force of the raging sea she was at last driuen through the quick-sand, & so esca∣ped without much harme. But Xauerius who had pre∣saged the incommodities which would befall others, hauing himselfe a prosperous nauigation, came safe without any stay, to the place he intended, & arriued at Malaca in the yeare of our Lord 1547. CHAP. VII. He instructeth the Malacensians vvith all the care he could: and by diuine reuela∣tion he vnderstandeth a Ʋision vvhich happened to Durus his Companion. X AVERIVS therfore after long absence comming againe to visit the Malacensians his ancient friends, He lod∣geth in an Hos∣pitall of the sick. he is by them very lou∣ingly entertained. But according to his old custome, refusing to remaine with his friends, he ta∣keth vp his lodging in the hospitall of the sick. At the same time there were three others of the Society new∣ly arriued at Malaca, wherof two were Priests, Iohn Beira, and Iohn Ribera, whome he imbracinge with in∣credible ioy of mynd retayned with him for a while. Then, after some good space of repose, he instru∣cted them of the manners, and behauiour of the peo∣ple of the Moluca's, and sent them thither to manure and cultiuate the vineyard which he had there lately planted. He incul¦cateth to the Neo∣phites the com∣ming of Christ. In the meane time he failed not himselfe to further the Christian cause, by seruing the sick, prea∣ching to the people, composing of quarrels among the souldiars, hearing Confessions, & catechizing chil∣dren, seruants, and ignorant people: especially he of∣tentimes instructed the Neophites in the Euangelicall history of the comming of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ, that so the knowledge of so great a mystery might put out of their minds, the vayne and idle fa∣bles of their Gods. Amongst other things, not forgetting his ancient custom no lesse pious then profitable, he tooke order that in the euening the people by their prayers might remember to assist the soules in purgatory, Euening prayers for the dead and those that are in mor∣tall sinne & such as were in mortall sin. For the Citty of Malaca at Xaue∣rius request, had appointed a certayne mā, who carry∣ing a lanterne in one hand, & a litle bell in the other, should go about the streets when it grew darke in the euening, & by ringing the bell, and calling vpon the people in a dolefull tune made of purpose, stirre vp their minds to the sayd deuotion. Which thing, as it stirred vp the vertuous to their duty, so it stroke a terrour of Gods indignatiō & wrath into the wicked. This practise being begun by Francis at Malaca, was soone spread ouer all the Citties and townes of India, the Moluca's, & the vtmost East, and is still euen vnto this day, there in vse, to the great good both of the li∣uing and the dead. About the same tyme Xauerius gaue a notable e∣xample both of Euangelicall pouerty, and austerity. Iohn Durus his Companion (as we sayd before) thin∣king he was bound to prouide for Francis his necessi∣ ies, had without his knowledge receiued of the Por∣ ugheses some mony more freely then discreetly, vn∣der the colour of Almes. A sharpe punisher of brech of pouer∣ty. Which whē Xauerius vnder∣stood (as he was no lesse sharp in reprehending then diligēt in obseruing holy pouerty) he presently bani∣shed him for a time into an Iland neere by, lying right agaynst the hauen of Malaca, which had in former times byn well stored with inhabitants, but was now left desolate. Durus therefore liuing there, saw vpon a time in a certaine Church (whether awake or asleep is vncertayne) the mother of God sitting at the high Aultar vpon a cushion, vnder a Canopy richly ador∣ned: with her he saw the child Iesus, who endauoured to allure Durus, being much ashamed of his fault, by sweet meanes to come vnto his mother. She at first, as though she had byn angry, turned from him, & put him away: then, when after he had humbly intrea∣ted, and beseeched her to pardon him, she at last re∣ceyued him; He by reuelatiō knoweth things that be secret & farre of. and admonishing him of certayne faults, she left him suddaynly, and togeather with her child Iesus mounted vp to heauen. This vision was altogether secret, no mortall man knowing thereof but Durus himselfe, nor had he spoken thereof to any. Being therefore after a while called backe to Malaca, and making his confession to Xauerius as his custome was, he sayd nothing of the vision. But Francis knowing it by diuine reuelation, asketh him, what that was which happened to him la∣tely in a Church of the Iland where he was? To me (quoth he?) I remember nothing. The Father gently vrged him to tell, but Durus refused, & vtterly denied to haue seene any thing: & being in this māner often∣tymes asked (so obstinate he was to haue concealed the matter) forgetfull both of obedience & Religion, he still answeared from the purpose. Then Francis, whē he saw that he had to do with one of so obdurate a nature, began himself to recount euery thing in par∣ticular, as if he had byn present. Whereat Durus stood like one amazed, and being filled with an holy feare, declareth all the matter in order as it hapned; and so at last the good Father receiued him agayne into his friendship. But this truth being wrunge out of Durus by diuine reuelation, made him more obseruant heer∣after vnto Xauerius, & easier in yelding to the truth. Who after Francis, his death declared all this vpon his oath, with a notable testimony of his incomparable sanctity. CHAP. VIII. At Malaca he procureth a Nauy to be set forth agaynst the Acenians, enemies of Christianity. A FTER this, there hapned another accidēt which made Xauerius name much spoken of in Malaca. The thing certainly is very re∣markeable, by reason of diuers prophesies which hapned in the passage thereof, and therfore must be recounted at large, lest the breuity of the narration, should diminish the truth and euidency of the matter. From the Iland of Somatra, which (as we haue said) is scituated right ouer agaynst Malaca, a strong nauy of the King of the Acenians arriued there in the dead of the night The Barbarians had in char∣ge, some to inuade the Castle, & others to set fyre on the Portughese shippes which lay in the hauen. Ther∣fore so soone as they were landed, and with all speed, they set vp ladders to the Castle to haue surprized the same at vnawares: But they deceyued not the Portu∣gheses. For the garrison being instantly raysed by the watch, armed themselues, and with inuincible cou∣rage beat backe the enemy. But now the businesse of their ships in the Ha∣uen succeeded not so fortunately. For the Barba∣rians fell fiercely vpon the same at vnawares, and in the darke of the night, set on fire their principall shippes, striking there withall such a terrour into the Portughese marriners that they stood wholy amazed, like men without sense, not knowing what aduise, or course to take to help themselues. In the meane space the Barbarians being out of danger, stood looking on, and reioicing to see the Christians Nauy on a flaming fire. And so at last with a most clamorous shout, and outcry they departed, insulting ouer the Portugheses, and Christians, as though they had gotten a notable victory. The Barbarians not content with this, An e∣xample of bar∣barous cruelty. hauing in their returne, met with certayne Christian fisher-mē vpon the sea, they manifested vpon them a most inso∣lēt cruelty. For after they had cut of their noses, eares, & heeles, they sent them to the Gouernour of Malaca, with a letter written with their bloud, wherein most proudely, and insolently they prouoked him to bat∣taile. When the fisher-men had giuen this letter to the Gouernour, he caused it to be publickly read before the Souldiers, who were no lesse moued at the inso∣lent brutishnes of their enemies, then at the misera∣ble spectacle of their friends, who were thus mangled & disfigured by their wounds, and euery one had his hart full of pitty, and indignation. Whilst they were in this perplexity and trouble of mind, Xauerius by chance commeth newly from saying masse in the Church of the Hospital, in the su∣burbs where he lodged, according to his former cu∣stome. And euery one might see, that the Barbarous Acenians had done this, out of their naturall hatred to Christian Religion, and in contempt of the Por∣tugheses. The Gouernour therfore named Simon Mello, asked Francis his aduise, what he iudged fit to be done vpon such an affront offered? He, by diuine instinct (as afterwards appeared) tould him, that he thought it best to send out some shippes presently after the e∣nemy, who was yet in sight, & by setting vpon them of their owne accord, to quit themselues of this dis∣grace, to the end the Barbarians might be taught by their owne harme, to abstaine from doing iniury to others. And this he thought best to be done the rather, because he saw that this publicke disgrace was not offred so much to the Portugheses, and their King, as to Christ himselfe, & to all Christians; and that by no meanes it was to be indured, that the Portugheses, Christians so renowned for their fortitude, should be now accounted cowards, and made a laughing-stock to their enemies. For who seeth not, quoth he, that Christianity wil be ouerthrowne, if barbarous people be suffered, not only to hate it, but also to vse it con∣temptibly? Wherfore he willed them to take courage worthy of Christian souldiars, and with alacrity pur∣sue the barbarous enemy, with all hope & confidence; for although they were inferiour to them in forces, yet their cause was better, and had also God to fight for them, whose cause they mantayned. For certainly he would not faile to assist them, whilst they behaued them selues manfully in that pious conflict, and that through his fauourable conduct they should remayne victors. Xauerius counsell was approued of all that were present, but they wanted shippes to put the same in execution: for there were but only seauen left which had escaped burning, and these also much impayred through tempestuous weather at sea, & stood in need of reparation before they could be set forth for such an enterprize. He desi∣res that he may haue the charge of pro∣uiding the Na∣uy. Besids, they were not only out of order, but wanted tackling and other furniture necessary. As the Gouernour therfore was telling him the want of shippes: I esteeme it, quoth he, a matter of much im∣portance, to be forward in the vndertaking of this great Busines, in which not only the Kings, but God Almightyes Maiesty is interessed. And seeing in this fearefull enterprize you are amazed, not knowing what to resolue vpon, I desire with your good leaue, I may haue the charge of preparing the Nauy. Then turning to the soldiars: Brethren, quoth he, God cer∣tainly stadeth for vs, in whose name I warne you all before hand, Xauerius putteth spirit in∣to the Portu∣ghese soldiers. that you suffer neither feare, nor any thing else whatsoeuer, to diuert you from hauing a part in this glorious action, to which he vndoubted∣ly calleth you. Behould heere I offer my selfe to go along with you to this noble and Christian combat, and to be your fellow, and companion in what dan∣ger soeuer may happen; that we may reuenge our selues vpon these Barbarians, Enemies of most our Vertuous King, and Aduersaryes of the Crosse of Christ. These words so inflamed the souldiars harts, that al of them, being as it were suddainly inspired by God stroue to giue in their names to fight in so religious a warre, nothing doubting but it would haue a prospe∣rous issue, hauing Xauerius for the author, and fur∣therer therof. And the Gouernour being glad to see such consent of the Captains & soldiars left al things to Francis discretion, who with no lesse prudence then courage managed a busines w ch to all mens iudgmēt seemed most ful of difficulty; as was to prepare a nauy so presently vpon the losse of so many ships, for that the Armoury was wholy empty, & small help could be expected from the publicke treasury. Xauerius ther∣fore out of all the maisters of the ships maketh choice of seauen, By seauē rich mai∣sters of shippes he set∣teth forth a Nauy. excelling the rest both in esteeme & wealth. He calleth them euery one by their names, and inter∣mingling gentle words with imbracements earnestly requesteth them, that they would both for the honour of their King, of Christ our common Lord, and of the Christian Name vndertake this busines, how la∣boursome or chargeable soeuer it seemed, & that they would with al speed cause seauen of those shipps that lay in the hauen to be speedily repayred, and they should infallibly be repayed shortly all their expences with an 100. fould. The ship-maisters were by these words so set on fire, that euery one striuing who should make most hast, the nauy within foure dayes stood ready in the Port, well appointed of all things. One Francis Saa a kinsman of Mello the Gouernour was made Generall therof, to whome there were also assigned 180. Portu∣ghese souldiars. Xauerius was to go with them, but that the Malacensians, out of their great affection to him, hindred it. For they came flocking to the Gouer∣nour, and what by lamenting their fatherlesse & deso∣late state, what by protesting vnto him that they would abandon the Citty, if Francis their only com∣fort and vphoulder should depart, they got at last both the Gouernour of the Citty, and Generall of the fleet to intreat him (being himselfe doubtfull what to do in this affaire, since the people were of such different affections) to remaine at Malaca. Xauerius therfore calling togeather the Captaines and souldiars into the Church, Precepts giuen to soldiers at their going to warre. and making to them a comfortable exhortation, bad them be of good cou∣rage, and he for his part, because he could not ac∣company them in person, would be present with them with his best wishes and prayers: and that they should so dispose themselues both in mynd and affe∣ction, to esteeme nothing more pretious vnto them, then to dye for Christ the sonne of God, who dyed v∣pon the Crosse for their sakes: That they should haue before their eyes that amiable and deuout spectacle of their Sauiour, and imprinting it in their harts, should most couragiously take vpon them the battaile, and enter into combat with the Barbarians. Moreouer, in the midst of the battayle, they should cal vpon God imploring his diuine assistance, and confidently hope that he will be ready to helpe those who fight for him. Hauing said this, he began to heare their Con∣fessions, and when he had reconcyled them, and ar∣med them with the holy Eucharist, he animateth thē againe to set forward against the Enemy, vnder Gods conduct, not doubting of the victory. They all by diuine instinct, of their owne accord, in presence of God, & striuing at it were who should do best, make a solemne protestation, The Por¦tughese soldiers called by Xauerius the Ar∣my of Iesus-Christ. that if occasion required it, they would spend their liues for Christ in that quar∣ ell. In respect wherof, and for that they had thus cō secrated themselues to Christ, they were by Xauerius called, The Army of Iesus Christ, a Title very honou∣rable. And thus full of good hope and courage, they were by the Cittizens accompanied to the Nauy. CHAP. IX. Hauing lost their Admirall, he foretelleth the comming of tvvo other ships vnto them, & stirreth vp the slouthfull vvho drevv backe, to fight couragiously. B VT now, when they were all ready, and prepared for this warre, there fell out a disastrous accident, to the end that Fran∣cis his vertue and sanctity might the bet∣ter appeare, which did not a little hinder the busi∣nesse. The ships were now afloat with their sayles & banners all displaied, and their Ordinance playing in a triumphant manner, and the shore thicke beset with the people of Malaca desiring to see them depart; when behould on a suddaine the Admirall, in view of the whole Citty, in the very hauen (by what chance no man knoweth) is sunke, and ouer whelmed in the sea, together with the losse of all that was in her, except the marriners & souldiars. Which accident was held by all for a prodigious token of something else to fol∣low. Wherupon the Cittizens fell a murmuring, that it was certainly a manifest presage of Gods wrath hā∣ging ouer the Portugheses heads, if the fleete should hould on her course against the enemy. Morouer they cast forth bitter words against the Gouernour of the Citty, and Generall of the fleete, as though they had bin the authors of that disastrous warre: neither did some spare Xauerius himselfe, saying; Who could euer haue thought that the flower and strength of the Por∣tughese garrison should be thus sent away to their cer∣tain destruction, seing that their enemies farre exceed them, not only in number, but also in strength of shipping and souldiars. Behould how God, hauing set before our eyes the danger both of the General, and whole Fleete, there wanteth nothing but plaine words to tell vs, that this expedition is not pleasing to him. Whereupon Mello being not able to endure this extreme grudging, and exorbitant complaynts of the people, sendeth presently a messenger vnto Xa∣rius to intreat him he would please to come vnto him with all speed. He finding Francis at Masse in the Hos∣pitall Church, would haue instantly deliuered his message vnto him. But being stayed by a signe which Xauerius made, He by re¦uelation know∣eth things absent. he expected vntill Masse was ended. Then Francis, before he had spoken one word, Go, quoth he, and tell the Gouernour that I will present∣ly come to him, but byd him be of good courage, be∣cause God fauourably assisteth his seruants, at the in∣stant when it is required. This he sayd to shew that he knew by reuelation all the businesse. Francis then following the messenger, findeth them all in feare & tumult. His con∣rage whē others are afraid But he shewing cherfulnesse & confidence in his countenance: What is the matter Mello (quoth he?) Doth so little a thing discourage thee? He is Omnipotent, whose fatherly prouidence protecteth vs. Hauing sayd this, he imbraceth the Captaines & souldiars ech one in particular, & partly by intreaty, partly by aduise, he still exhorteth them to go forward in so glorious a seruice nor did he omit to put them in mind of the promise which they had lately made to Christ, so to stirre them vp to the per∣formance of their duty: wherat they were all so filled with ioy, especially to see so great alacrity in Xauerius, that they seemed rather to behould hope it selfe, then cause therof. The souldiers being thus incited, hee turnes himselfe againe to Mello, shewing him their fer∣uour and zeale in the busines. This was very grateful vnto the Gouernour who much fauoured Francis his designement. A deli∣beration held a∣bout the warre a∣gainst the Bar∣barians. But yet that nothing might be rashly attempted, it was thought good to call the principall of the Citty to a counsaile & haue their opinions & consent herin. Their voyces were soone giuen (who would belieue it) concerning the euents of this warre, euery one iudging that ex∣pedition to be temerarious. For what discretion were it (quoth they) to venter six shipps agaynst a nauy of 60. and lesse then 200. Portughese souldiars against 5000. fighting Barbarians? But now on the con∣trary part all the Captaines and chiefe of the soldiars, who were to vndergo the danger, cryed out, that by all meanes, The Por¦tugheses soldiars renew their oath to dye for Christ. that pious warre was instantly to be fol∣lowed, & that it were better for them to dye brauely in the combat, if it should so fall out, then to violate the promise they had made to the King of Heauen. And heerein they were so resolute, that without more ado they renewed their solemne oath to go vnto that warre, and if need were, to spend their liues for the faith of Christ. Whereupon the others being all stroken into an amazement, Francis ryseth vp ioyfully, and hauing commended the noble courage both of the Captaines and the souldiars, did often inculcate this vnto them; that they should be sure to put al the hope of the victo∣ry in God, for whom it was not hard to saue by many, or by few; 1. Reg. 14. neither were there wanting euident signes of Gods diuine assistance, wherby they might certain∣ly belieue he stood with them. And for one shippe which they had lost, there should that very day come vnto them, two more for their comfort. Which pro∣phecy proued true. A pro∣phecy. For that a litle before sunne-set they espyed two Portughese ships sayling by Malaca. These were priuate vessells belonging to one Iames Soarius a famous merchāt of those parts, who to auoid paying custome at Malaca, kept on his course dire∣ctly for the Moluca's. But yet at Xauerius intreaty, he put in at Malaca, and moreouer offered himself to accompany the rest in that warre. Then were they all by this accident, filled with a new ioy, & confidence. CHAP. X. The Portugheses by Xauerius sollicitation obtayne a great victory against the Bar∣barians. T HE Captaynes therefore and souldiers of this Nauy much reioycing, vpon the 23 of Nouember in the yeare 1547. hoysed vp sayle, The pro∣montori Cambi∣lanum. whilst euery one wished them a for∣tunate voyage. They were only eight great ships in number, and not aboue 230. souldiers. Vpon the fourth day after their setting to sea, hauing had a pro∣sperous wind, they arriued at the Promontory of Cā∣bilanum, where they were commanded by Simon Mello the Gouernour, to seeke after the enemies fleet. Wher∣fore Saa the Admirall vsing all diligence that might be in searching for them, could not find to what coast they had retired; so as being wholy frustrate of their hope, A tem∣pest hel∣ped to∣wards the vi∣ctory. they were constrayned to returne homewards agayne. Whilest, full of sadnes, they began to make backe for Malaca, behold vpon a suddayne there arose a cruell tempest, which enforced them to lye many dayes at ancker. And though this tempest hindred their returne, yet was it a meanes to obtayne the vi∣ctory, the diuine Prouidence disposing of incommodi∣ties themselues, to serue sometimes for good effects. Their victuals now growing short, so soone as the violence of the contrary wind was allayed, they say∣led to the next towne of the Ethnickes, being their friends, to furnish themselues with new prouision: which when they had done, and hearing nothing of the Enemy, they held on their course homewards to∣wards Malaca; yet they were not so much out of care, as out of hope to find the enemy. But hauing gone a little thence, they met by chance a fisher-man who tould them, that the Acenians fleete, hauing spoiled the Country round about, lay not far off in a riuer, called Perlen, intending to intercept the Portugh se Nauy, which (as was reported) was shortly expected from Bengala, to come vnto Malaca, hoping to make prey of the same, and to massacre all the Christians therein. The Admiral hearing this vnexpected newes, much reioiceth, Th cherful∣nes of the Por∣tugheses when the battaile was at hand. & to shew how glad he was put on straight a rich suite of apparell. And moreouer bestoweth vpō the souldiers all things most liberally to feast & make merry withall, and commandeth them all to be boun∣tifully treated, and the Ordinance to be all discharged in token of his excessiue ioy; so that one would haue thought that there had byn rather a victory already gotten, then a battaile at hand: which though perad∣uenture was imprudently done, Gods prouidē∣ce turnes that to good which was ill carried. yet by the diuine prouidence it was to good effect. In the meane tyme the spies which he had sent priuately vp into the riuer with three boates, tooke some of the Enemies pri∣soners, by whome they vnderstood, that the Barba∣riās hauing heard the artillery of the Portugheses play, had put their ships in order for battaile, & were com∣ming downe apace towards the sea, thinking that the booty of the Portugheses from Bengala which they expected, was now at hand. The riuer Perlen being very large within the ban∣kes, The Ri∣uer . becometh almost like a sea where it breaketh in∣to the mayne. For though the channell be deep, yet runneth it neuer the slower by reason of the breadth, but glideth along violently like a torrent, not yelding any foard to passe ouer. Saa the Generall therfore ma∣king vse of the Promōtory, which runneth out by the banke of the riuer, within the winding therof, where the streame hath least force, speedily putteth his fleet in order to fight. The Po ∣tughese Admi∣rall Thē earnestly exhorting all the Por∣tughese Captaines and souldiars, to call to mind that day, wherin they had freely, before the Aultar of our Lord, vowed to spend their liues for his Religion and honour, and vpon which occasion they were intituled the Army of Iesus Christ, encouraged them, & willed them to imagine they saw Xauerius, the Authour of that pious warre, praying for their safety and victory. He put them also in mind, not to forget what the good Father had charged them to do; to wit, that be∣houlding Christ the sonne of God crucified for them, they should (neglecting their owne liues) couragiou∣sly vndertake the combat for his glory. That they should remember how they had twice bound them∣selues by oath to Christ the King of Kings, and twice of their owne accord vowed their liues for his sake. That certainly they, who were to fight that religious battaile for God, should not want his diuine assistāce. And that Xauerius Prophecy, promising them an in∣fallible victory, would proue true. The souldiars be∣ing with these words set on fire, cried out al together, that they were prepared to rēder their liues for Christ our Lord, for whose sake they had more then once vowed the same. And remembring Xauerius charge, they expected his assistance, and promise in the bat∣taile. In the meane tyme, The pre∣paration of the Barba∣rians na∣uy to fight. the enemies Nauy being set in battayle array, came downe the riuer with the strea∣me, and the bankes and shores on both sydes sounded forth with horrible showtings, & confused noise of drummes. The first squadron was led by the Admiral of the Barbarians fleete, guarded on ech syde with foure Turkish galleys. Then followed six other Gal∣leyes, with nine rankes of ships, and all abundantly appointed not only with great ordināce, but also with plenty of small shot. A Sea battayle. The admirall therfore of the Por∣tugheses, as soone as the first rancke of the enemy was discouered, maketh towards them presently at vna∣wares with three ships, commanding the rest to fol∣low as they were ordred for the battaile. Whereupon the Barbarians, whether for want of skill, or rather by Gods ordinance, sayling on headlong with fury, discharged all their great shot agaynst the Portugheses before they could so much as reach them, The Tur¦kish gal∣leys are the oc∣casion of the Barba∣riās ouer throw. so as the bul∣lets fell all into the water, without doing any harme. But the Portughese gūner shooting a very great bullet out of the greatest Ordinance, stroke the Admira'l of the A enians so flat, that presētly he sunke & drowned her. Which was not only a presage of a future victory but rather the conclusion of the combat it selfe. For the Turkish Galleys staying their course, left off the fight, and began to help the Captaine, & other prin∣cipall men swimming to saue themselues; The Bar∣barians ships in∣tangled one with another are shat∣tred. which can-sed both their owne, and the fleets whole ouerthrow. For the Turkes had placed their galleys ouerthwart the riuer, & so had takē vp a good part of the same, to receiue in those that could swim vnto them, not once thinking of the danger themselues were in, God had so besotted them. The six other Gallyes which follo∣wed the first squadron, comming downe with the streame, ranne vpon the former that lay athwart, and all the rest of the nine rancks which came after, fell against those which went before, & became so intan∣gled one with another, & so dashed togeather, ech one striuing to get free from his fellow by force, that one would haue thought there had byn a battayle among themselues. The Portugheses perceiuing manifestly that Gods hand was in this businesse, The Por¦tugheses set vpon the Bar∣barians fleet without any hurt at all to themsel∣ues. fayled not to follow the victory which was thus offered them from heauen. Wherefore presently calling out alowd vpon the so∣ueraigne name of IESVS, they began to grapple with their enemyes, and on euery side to play vpon them with their ordināce, lying there so entāgled & hindred one by another that they were not able to styr. Th ice did they send out with all the violence they could, the shot of all their great ordināce vpon their ships, & no one shot was made in vayne nor was the Enemy able to resist, or make any vse at al of their owne artillery, being so thrust vp togeather; and this without any losse to the Portugheses that assaulted thē. Now with∣in a little while they had sunke nine of the Enemies ships, & battered many more to pieces, with no small slaughter of the barbarians. Wherupon the rest were put into so great a feare, A slaugh¦ter of the Bar∣barians. that most of them, as well rowers as souldiars throwing away their weapons de∣speratly cast thēselues into the swift streame, thinking saue their liues by swimming: but it vayne. For be∣ing carried away with the violence of the water, they were all swallowed vp by the swift windings of the streame, not so much as one remayning aliue to carry newes of so great an ouerthrow. The Portugheses hauing obtayned so noble a vi∣ctory without so much as any drop of bloud sh d on their side, An vn∣bloudy. victory. after they had giuen harty thanke to God, whose present assistance they had found in this bat∣taile, began to gather vp the spoyles of their enemies, where the prey was not inferiour to their glory For they seized vpon the whole Nauy, A great prey. and tooke all the ships except those ten which were sunke. They also tooke about 300. pieces of artillery, besides the great abundance of armour, and all other pillage. And they vnderstood by some of those whome they had before taken prisoners, The nū∣ of Bar∣barians slaine in the fight that there dyed in that conflict to the nūber of 4000. barbarians. Among whome were ma∣ny nobles of the King of Acenians Army, besids many Turkes & Ianizaries that had ioyned themselues vn∣to him. The report of this notable victory was presently bruited all ouer that country; whereupon the King of er en, who through feare of the Acenians had f ed nto places of more security, being animated by this ouerthrow of his Enemies, began to take courage; nd on the suddain setting vpon a certaine garrison of the Acenians which stood neere to the riuer Perlen, lew the guard thereof, destroyed it, and made pilla∣ge of all that he found therein. The memory of which benefit, The King of Perlen of his owne accord maketh himselfe tributa∣ry to the King of Portu∣gall. although receyued from those that thought not of it, wrought so much with that Barbarous King that he presently came vnto the Generall of the Por∣tugheses, and with great submission, and many hum∣ble thankes acknowledged him for the restorer of his liberty, & in recompence therof, of his owne accord, offereth himselfe Tributary to the King of Portugall. This was added to the victory, which was gotten by Francis sollicitatiō. This done, Saa the Generall of the Portughese fleet chose out from all the enemies na∣uy only 25. ships to carry along with him to Malaca, setting all the rest on fire as being eyther battered or otherwise not fit for seruice, & so returneth ioyfully loaden no lesse with pillage, then with glory. CHAP. XI. Xauerius foretelleth to the Malacensians the obtayning of the forsayd victory, vvhereof he had byn the sollicitour. W HI ST these things were doing which was the space of six weekes, Francis his pray∣ers for the victo¦ry. Francis shewed in∣uincible constancy in praying to God for the victory. He did not only by himselfe in priuate craue the fauourable assistance of the diuine Go odnes, but did publikely also incite the people to do the same. For twice euery weeke, to wit, vpon Sunday, and Friday, he preached to the people at Ma∣laca: and his ordinary custome was at the end of his Sermon, to intreate his audience to say with him one Pater and Aue for the good successe of the Portughese fleete agaynst the Barbarians. The people at first did willingly as he requested them, for the space of 15. or 20. dayes, as long as there was hope of the victory. But when, all that tyme, there came no newes of the fleete, many of the Cittizens suspecting that their men were ouerthrowne, gaue ouer, and left of that pious practice. This sollicitude of the Malacensians was increased by a rumour which the Saracens their neighbours, The Ma∣lacensians griefe v∣pon the false newes of the Por∣tugheses. ouer∣throw. had diuulged abroad, without any ground, that the Portugheses were ouerthrowne in battayle, and put all to the sword by the Acenians. That which was knowne to be true, made this false rumour to seeme credible. For it was certayne that the enemyes were stout warlike men, and their forces farre beyond the Portugheses. The whole Citty therfore began to be very heauy and afflicted: The matrones with aboun∣dance of teares, bewayled the death of their husbands their children, and kinsfolkes, & withall their owne desolate and forelorne state. The Gouernour himselfe of the Citty, because he was esteemed to be Authour of this misfortune, durst not come abroad, or appeare in sight of the people. In this meane time Francis, according to his custome preaching to the people, indeauored to take frō them hat vayne feare & griefe. Sometymes he inueig ed against certaine men who had gone about by witch∣craft, and sorcery to know what was become of the Fleete, earnestly reprehending their superstition. At other times he sharpely rebuked the Cittizēs for their orgetfulnes of Gods prouidence and the ouermuch olicitude for themselues: Then againe, he raysed thē p to hope. Finally he most earnestly intreated them ll, to continue their prayers vnto God for the obtei∣ ing of the victory, although he knew full well, that thereby he incurred the ll will of many, who mutte∣red, that the prayers which he required of them, ought rather to be said for the soules of those that were dead & slaine then for the victory of the liuing. But within a little after Francis his prophecy came to be of credit. The day was now at hand, which was to be made famous by that memorable victory. Fran is the efore vpon the very same day (which then hapned to be Sunday) made a sermon in the Church to the people▪ and it was at the same houre when the Portughese fleete was preparing for the fight. He fore∣sees and foretol∣les the victory gotten by the Portu∣ghese fleet. Being therefore to conclude his Sermon, vpon the suddaine he tur∣nes both himselfe, & his speach vnto the Crucifix, & by diuine instinct, with great motion of body, brea∣king forth into a prophesy, he began by circūlocuti∣ons to describe in words the first encounter of the two Nauies, to the admiration and astonishment of his auditours. Then with an inflamed looke & coun∣tenance, and aboundance of teares gushing out at his eyes, he cryed out aloud; O Iesu, God of my hart, I hum∣bly I bese ch thee by the last torments of thy life, that thou wouldest not leaue them whome thou hast redeemed with thy pretious bloud. Hauing vttered these, and other such like words which feare and confidence then suggested vnto him, and growing weake & faint with the vio∣lent agitation of his body, he leaned a while with his head vpon the Pulpit. Then by and by, as if he had a∣waked out of some extasy lifting vp his head he cryes out on a suddayne with a cheerfull & ioyfull counte∣nance thus: A Pro∣phesy. O yee Malacensians cast off all sadnes & reioyce: for now at last our fleet hath ouerthrowne the enemy in battayle without any bloudshed on our part, hauing lost but three men only; so litle hath so noble a victory cost vs. And in a most triumphant māner will they presently returne home, loaden with spoyles and pillage of the enemy, together with many shippes which they haue taken from them; & forth∣with (he appointed a certayne day) wil they be safe with vs. Come on therfore, and in thankesgiuing to God the Author of the victory, let vs say togeather once Pater and Au for the same, and repeate it a∣gayne for those few of ours that be slayne in the bat∣tayle. Vpon this prediction of Francis whole audien∣ce recited the prayers which he had requested, and in signe of approbation what he sayd became ioyfull, seeing the great cheerfulnesse of the worthy mans co∣untenance who had thus raysed them out of so hea∣uy a sadnes. Hauing thus cheered vp the men with this hope, the same day in like māner he made a conso∣latory sermō in another Church to the women a part & fortould the very day, when certaine tydings should be brought of the victory and safety of their husbands and friends. The euent wherof hapned in euery thing as he had spoken. The Ma∣lacensiās ioy for the vi∣ctory. For within two or three dayes af∣ter, there came a messenger with the newes of the victory. And presently after the messenger, followed the Conquerours themselues with an exceeding great booty, and no small number of shippes which they had taken from the Enemy. Infinite therefore, was the ioy which on a suddaine surprized the Malac nsiās when so farre beyond all expectation they saw eight shippes to bring home 25. captiue. As soone therfore as this victorious Nauy was ar∣riued, 8. Portu∣ghes shippes driue a∣lōg with them 25. Barbari∣ans ship taken captiue. the whole Citty (their late great feare being now turned into excessiue ioy) went out to see, and cōgratulate the same. And Francis himselfe to whome a great part of that noble victory and triumph was due, goeth amongst the first; and as soone as the Ge¦nerall was landed he imbraceth him, and the other principall Captaines of the Nauy congratulating thē for their fortunate successe. Then, in the heat of this generall ioy and congratulation, when they inquired more exactly after the time of the victory, they found that not only the very day, but the battayle also did iumpe aright with that which Francis had foretould. Which was so much the more to be admired, because the place where the battaile was fought, was distant from Malaca aboue 200. miles. From that time, Francis was highly esteemed throughout all Malaca, no lesse for the guift of prophecy, then for sanctity of life. The fame whereof hauing spread it selfe throughout the East, moued some to c me from the furthest parts of the world, to see him. CHAP. XII. A Iaponian is by conference vvith Xaue∣rius, conuerted to the faith of Christ. A FTER he had spent foure monethes or thereabout in helping the Citty of Mal ca, hauing now gotten commodity of ship∣ping, & being ready to returne into India, there came from Iap nia vnto Malaca, a certayne Iaponian called Anger, a man of good account in his owne Country, and of a singular wit. The cause of his comming was, to seeke a remedy for cure of the wounds of his soule, caused by the intemperate heat of his youthfull bloud. For hauing committed a hey∣nous murder in Iaponia, & being narrowly sought for to punishment, was forced, partly by the remorse of conscience, and partly by his enemies who pursued his life, to fly for sanctuary vnto a Conuēt of the Bon∣zies (who amongst the Iaponians are accounted a kind of Religious men) to seeke therby as well the quiet of his conscience, Bonzies Priests of the Ia∣ponians. as a refuge for his safety. But this his hope fayled him in both; which was finally the cause of his saluation. For when he found no comfort nor yet safety amongst the Bonzies, he began to be a∣uerted from them, & to seeke for remedy elsewhere. It happened fitly, that certaine Portughese mer∣ hants had arriued in Iaponia for traffique; amongst home Alpho sus Vasius who was before acquainted with him, vnderstanding the matter, for old acquain∣ nce sake offered him freely all the help he could af∣foard him, if he would put himselfe out of danger, escaping away priuately. He againe with harty ankes tould him, that he would make vse of his li∣ erality: whereupon Vasius forecasting with himself, that his owne ship was for the dispatch of his busines to make there some longer stay, commendeth him very effectually by his letters to F rdinand Aluarez a speciall friend of his, being then ready to depart, out of another hauen, for India. And these letters of com∣mendations he giueth to Anger himselfe, who going to deliuer them in the night, mistooke the merchant by reason there were two of the same Surname, and giueth them to one George Aluarez a maister of another shippe: which mistake notwithstanding proued well for him. For George Aluarez thinking that this occasi∣on of gayning a Iaponians friendship, was not to be neglected, dissembled the mistake, & in very courte∣ous manner entertayned him, and carryed him along with him to Malaca, intending to present him to Xa∣uerius his great frie d there. This Aluarez being a pious man, out of desire he had to winne Angers affection, and also the better to dispose him for the Christian fayth, recounted to him oftentymes by the way many things of Xauerius emi∣nent sanctity, and worthy deeds, & of the institutes of the Christians. Anger therfore desiring, much to be acquainted both with Xauerius, and his manner of lyfe which he heard so highly commended, came to Malaca greatly longing to see, Anger desireth to speake with Xa∣uerius. and heare him, whome by Aluarez report he admired as a diuine man: yet a certaine delay which happened much troubled him at first, as commonly it falleth out, but afterward infla∣med his desire the more. Anger arriued at Malaca some monthes before Francis his returne from Moluca, and vnderstanding that he was absent, The dis∣tance of Malaca from Ia∣ponia. being disappointed of what he came for, resolued to retourne backe a∣gaine into Iaponia, being much grieued that he had ta∣ken so long a iorney in vaine. For Moluca is distant frō Iaponia about 800. leagues, lying in the mid-way, almost betweene India, and Iaponia. Taking therfore shipping at Malaca, after almost three months sayle, he was cast vpon the confines of China, some 500. leagues from Malaca. There he stayed a while intending to passe thence into Iaponia, di∣stant from that place a most 800. miles. Departing therfore from China within six or seauen dayes he was come within sight of Iaponia, when vpon a suddain, a contrary wind, togeather with a cruell tempest hin∣dred his going forward, Gods Proui∣dence. & tossing him vp & downe for the space of foure dayes, draue him againe into the same heauen in China, where he had taken ship∣ping. Whilst he remaineth there vncertaine & doub∣full what to do, not without the infallible prouidēce of God, he meeteth with Alphonsus Vasius, the same man, who had bin the cause of his departure out of Iaponia. And by his persuasion, in the yeare 1548. he r tourneth againe to Malaca, whither Xauerius was ow come. At his very first landing he fortunately ighteth vpon George Aluarez that brought him first ut of Iaponia, who being exceeding glad for his re∣ urne, bringeth him presently to Xauerius, Xauerius glad for Angers com∣ming. and told him what he was, & what his busines required. Then Francis as it were presaging, that he would be a mea∣ es to opē a way into Iaponia, imbraced him louingly, & shewed manifestly both by his words & contenāce, the great comfort he tooke for his comming thither. Anger being not ignorant of the Portughese lan∣guage, began to conferre with Xauerius about his bu∣sines without an Interpreter; whome he instructed with such diligence in the mysteries and precepts of the Christian faith, that he freed him from all scrupu∣lous anxiety of mind, and planted in his soule the seed of a vertuous and happy life: whereof Anger gaue al∣wayes good testimony, that by Xauerius meanes he had reaped most aboundant fruit both of his life, and trauaile. And withall he affirmed, that the whole course of his iorney, was certainly disposed of by God that he might at last imbrace that with greater desire which he had so long sought to learne; which mani∣fested it selfe within a short space. For being conti∣nually present at the explication of the Catechisme, and noting downe in a little booke the articles of the Creed, he so much profited in short time, that he reci∣ted the whole by hart, in the midst of the people, al∣though he were a man of grown yeares: & moreouer asked many questions, and made many obiections with no lesse prudence, then sharpenesse of wit. The Iaponians in their manner of writing differ much from other natiōs: for beginning their lines a∣boue in the paper, The Iapo¦nians manner of witing they write directly downeward. Which Francis perceyning in Angers booke, & won∣dring at the strangenesse thereof, demaunded of him why they did not write according to our man∣ner of Europe? Nay, quoth he, why doe not you rather write as we do, who follow the dictamen of nature which teacheth vs so to do. For as in a man the head is highest, and the feete lowest, so he should also in writing, bring his lines from aboue directly downe∣ward. Xauerius therefore obseruing both by Angers words and actions, Good life an∣swerable to do∣ctrine. that he was of a notable wit, as∣ked him agayne, whether the Iaponians would recey∣ueth Ghospell, if it were brought vnto them? They will not, quoth he, belieue presently whatsoeuer is tould them, but will examen both the religion itselfe and the life of those that preach it. And if by their doctrine they can satisfy their demands, and o con∣firme also what they say by their owne liues, then no doubt (being a Nation which is lead most by rea∣so ) when they see and approue the same, they that be of yeares of discretion, wi l easily become hristians. Xauerius being greatly incouraged by these words of his, & stirred vp also by the relation of some mer∣chants who recounted wonderfull things of the good disposition of that nation, made a resolution to pre∣ach the Gospell vnto them. Vpon the eight day after Anger came to Malaca, Francis (being himselfe to vi∣sit the neophytes of Comorinum by the way) sent him before to Goa with the forsaid George Aluarez, to re∣maine in the Colledge there, & to be better instructed the mysteryes and precepts of the Christian faith. Before Xauerius departed he was intreated by the Cit∣ y of Malaca to send thither two of the Society, who ight performe the same charitable offices in his ab∣ ence; which he could not deny them. And in the me∣ e tyme he gaue order to a certaine vertuous Priest f that Country, that he should supply his place, by structing the Neophytes in the forenoone. CHAP. XIII. Hauing escaped a tempest at sea, he pres∣cribeth precepts to those of the Society of Commorium. B EING to depart thence for Commorinum, he intreated the Maister of the ship that went to Goa, to transport into India certain children (which he had brought from Mo∣luca ) to be brought vp, and instructed in the Colledge there. And as he was deliuering them into his charge, vpon a suddain, by diuine inspiration, he tould them thrice, he was afraid least that shippe should meete with some mischance by the way. A presa∣ge. Neither were his words herein frustrate. For as the ship was passing a∣long by the Iland of Ceilanum, she fall vpon the quick∣sands, & stuck so fast as that there was now no hope to escape, when as the passengers all togeather cal∣ling vpon the B. Virgin Mary for ayde, she is by the di∣uine goodnes on a sudd ine deliuered out of danger, and arriueth safe at Cocinum. The ship likewise wherein Xauerius sayled, had as hard a iorney, but better fortune. For three dayes she was tossed with a most terrible tēpest, in such sort that the marriners hauing throwne all the goods and merchandize ouer board, expected euery moment to be cast away themselues. But Francis being not once moued at that which maketh others afraid, continued quietly to implore the help of all the celestiall citizens one after another, His cou∣rage in daunge∣rous tē∣pests. and most earnestly to call vpon the King and Queene of heauen. And being secured by such potent intercessours, he found (as himselfe de∣clared) far more ioy in that tēpest, then he did after∣ward when he had escaped the danger. Com∣forts in dangers. For when all were in that extreme feare, & danger of their liues, he receiued such abundance of diuine consolation, that when others wept for sorrow, he ouerflowed with teares of ioy: and most earnestly besought God, that, although he should free him from that tempest, yet if it were his diuine will, he was ready most wil∣lingly to endure the like or greater, so that he might therby adde any increase to his glory. You would haue thought there had bin a combat between Xauerius pa∣tience, and the diuine liberality, he desiring most bit∣ter sufferances for Gods sake, and God agayne rega∣ling him with most aboundant comforts. He was no sooner arriued in India, but presently he began carefully to go about, to all the villages of the Christians in Cōmorinum, who being as it were the first fruits of his labours, were most deere vnto him. He found there some of the Society, more then at his departure he had left. Wherfore making hast to Goa, he committed all things to their prudence and trust; yet for the experience which he had of that na∣tion, he left vnto them diuers instructions & docu∣ments: wherof these were the chiefe. Docu∣ments giuen to those of the Soci∣ety in Comori∣num. 1. That they should go frō dore to dore & enquire for infants newly borne to baptize them, least in so tender an age eyther through neglect of their Parents or want of Priests they might be in danger to loose their saluatiō. 2. That they should gather little children togeather, and in∣struct them withall diligence in the mysteries & pre∣cepts of the Christian faith; because to instruct them in their youth & tender yeares, was a matter of very great importance for the leading of a good and ver∣tuous life afterward. 3. That they should vpon Sun∣dayes and Holydayes cause all the people to come to∣geather to the Church, to pray and heare the word of God, wherof they should warne the magistrates be∣forehand that they might therin giue others exāple of piety and deuotion. And reprehending of publike vices, they should therby terrify their auditours from the like, laying before thē the paynes & tormēts both of this, & the next life. 4. They should furthermore inquire who were at strife & debate amongst them∣selues, & should call them togeather into the Church & there make them friends, the men vpon Sundaies, and the women on Saturdayes. And if therein any case of greater difficulty did occurre, they should re∣ferre it to the Captayne of the Portugheses. 5. That the almes which should be giuen for the reliefe of the poore, should be so distributed amongst the needy, as that nothing thereof should remayne lying by them. 6. They should often visit the sicke, and say the Gos∣pell ouer them for help and comfort of their soules, as the custome is. 7. That they should assist those that lay a dying, and bury the dead. 8. That they should giue charge vnto the men & women a part, that euery one giue vp the number of their sicke vnto them; decla∣ring also that they whose names were not giuen vp, if they happened to dye should be excluded from Chri∣stian buriall. 9. That they should haue no discourse with the Portugheses, but of holy & pious matters, to the end that vayne talke might not, as often tymes it hapneth take vp the place of their priestly functions. 10. That they should vse the Captayne of the Portu∣gheses with all friendship and courtesy, & keep good correspondence and amity with him, whatsoeuer of∣fence should happē. And the same also they should do, as much as might be possible, with the other Portuge∣ses, and should draw them by all meanes to frequent the Sacraments of Confession, and the holy Eucha∣rist. 11. That they should to their vtmost, further the Priests of that country in matters of piety, and indu∣ce them to confesse often, The good na∣me of Priests is with all care to be preser∣ued. and dayly say Masse. 12. That they should take great heed of reporting or wri∣ting any thing to any man, which might diminish the esteeme of the party, vnlesse it were to such an one who might (if need required) be a meanes to remedy the same. 13. That he only should be acquainted with the vices of the Priests, who was able to cure them. 14. That they should neyther speake ill of the Neophi∣tes to the Portugheses, nor of the Portugheses to the Neophytes, All are to be praysed to on an∣other. but should commend them both to ech o∣ther, to the end that one might be desirous to imitate the vertue of the other. 15. That they should neuer leaue the place assigned them, although they were sent for by any Prince or Noble man whatsoeuer, vnlesse they had first licence granted them by the Father who was Superiour of that Prouince; and in such cases being mindfull of holy Obedience should referre the matter wholy vnto him. Men are to be gouer∣by loue 16. Lastly, that they should endea∣uour by all meanes possible to gaine the affection of all, because therein nothing is more forcible to win mens minds euery way, then loue; & therfore should draw them as it were with the cords of Adam: and should neuer punish any one, but with the aduise of the Gouernour of the Country of Commorinum. These were the documents of Xauerius; by which we may see not only what he desired of his companions, but what himselfe did also practice, seing that like a most excellent Maister, he drew his patternes from his owne actions. CHAP. XIIII. Returning vnto Goa, he establisheth mat∣ters in India. H AVING giuen these forsaid documents vnto the Fathers in Cōmorinū, he ordaineth F. Antony of Parma Superiour of the est in that Coast, (who was after∣wards the first of the Society, that suffred Martyr∣dome in India ) and about the end of February in the yeare 1548. he sayleth thēce to Cocinum; where hauing gotten a litle leasure, he writeth to Portugall and Rome, desiring to haue many more of the Society sent thither, & among others inuiteth Simon Rodriguez, his ancient collegue who had then the care of the Seminary at Conimbria, to come & assist in the vineyard of the East. He aduised the King of Portugall also, to be mindfull of his charge, and to prouide for the Garri∣sons of Portugheses in India good preachers, Francis his let∣ters to the King of Portu∣gall. out of a∣ny Religious Orders; and to giue strict command vn∣to his Gouernours and Officers in India, to help what possibly they were able, towards the aduancement of Christian Religion; & especially to protect & cherish the Neophites, since certainly there was no betterway then that to augment the Christian fayth. Moreouer he humbly requested his Maiesty would be pleased to take cōpassion of his own subiects, & in diuers places to assigne habitation, and allowance for the bringing vp of orphanes, both of the Portugheses, and of that country people. From Cocinum, Xauerius went by sea to Cranganora, which is a towne belonging to the Por∣tugheses, some 15. miles from Cocinum, and from thence he came to Goa, in the beginning of March. There were at that tyme many of the Society in the Colledge of Goa, F. Nico∣las Lan∣celot Re∣ctour of the Col∣ledge at Goa. to wit, Father Paul Camertes who had care of the Schollers; Father Francis Perez their may∣ster; Father Nicolas Lancclot Rectour of the Colledge, which cōsisted partly of th who came lately out of Portugall, and partly of others that were receiued in India: who, for the most part hauing neuer known Xa∣uerius, but only by report, did much desire now to see him. Francis therfore returning home from these farre Countryes, was as a common Father, receiued with incredible loue, & ioy of all the Society; he comming likewise in happy tyme for the comfort, & spirituall good of Cosmas Turrianus, Cosmas Turianus freed frō perplexi∣ty. who (as we said before) ha∣uing in the Isle of Amboynum beheld with admiration Xauerius rare sanctity, had desired to enter into the So∣ciety: and going thence to Goa, had now retyred him∣selfe into the Colledge there, that by meanes of the spirituall Exercyse, he might learne of God what course of life was best for him to vndertake. But whē at the end of those Exercyses his mind was much per∣plexed with cares, and being vncertaine what to re∣solue vpon, suddainly at the sight of Francis, as at the influence of some fortunate Starre, his soule enioyed great repose, and so without further delay he entred into the Society. Now did the fruite of that Seminary begin to ap∣peare. For besides the Priests and Interpreters who had bin sent thence with no litle profit into the coast of Comorinum, many schollers who were well grown in learning & discipline were sent abroad in missions to the villages neere about, The fru∣ite of the Semina∣ry of Goa frō whence they brought many Ethnikes to Goa to be baptized. Wherat Xauerius much reioycing, esteemed it a thing of great impor∣tance, to be very exact, in the training vp of schollers, from whome so much spirituall profit might arise. As he was thus busied, he was giuē to vnderstād that Iohn de Castro the viceroy of India was somwhat auerted frō the Society through the speaches of some maleuolent persons. He recō∣ciles the Viceroy to the So¦ciety. Wherupon he resolued to go vnto him vpon the first occasion, and to giue him satisfaction. But there happened in the meane time an accident worthy to be recounted, which manifested his inflamed zeale in meditation. There was one Andrew an Indian borne, who was a Scholler in the Colledge of Goa, and for that tyme companion also vnto Xauerius, After∣noones medita∣tion. whose custome ordi∣narily was to spend some tyme after dinner in medi∣tating vpon heauenly things. He gaue therfore char∣ge vnto Andrew to admonish him as soone as the cloc∣ke had stroken two, for that he was to go vnto the Viceroy about a busines of importance. Andrew did as he was charged, and at the tyme appointed com∣meth to Xauerius chamber, where finding him fitting with his contenance all inflamed, his eyes open, and rapt in such sort, as he seemed to be abstracted from his senses, called him oftentimes, but all in vayne; and when he could not awake him eyther by calling, or making a noyse with his feete, or knocking at the dore, In medi∣tation of diuine matters he is ab∣stracted from his senses. he pulled him at last by the clothes, wherewith he awaked. In the meane tyme the clocke had stro∣ken foure. Wherefore Xauerius being admonished went presently to the Viceroies lodging: but the same feeling and feruour of spirit made him that he could not tell whither he went; so as wandring vp and downe the Citty, he spent the rest of the day in medi∣tation. And when the night came on, being admoni∣shed therof by his companion, he returned to himselfe agayne, and perceyuing to haue lost his way, turning to his companion he sayd: Will, we well deale with the Viceroy another day, for this day God hath taken vp for himselfe. The next day therfore, he went vnto the Viceroy, & gaue him satisfaction. CHAP. XV. He reclaymeth tvvo Portugheses from a levvd, vnto an honest life. A FTER this, finding that an old friend of his, was vnmeasurably carryed away with dishonest loue towards his owne maides, he went to him of set purpose about noone and comming iust as he was going to dinner, inuites himself to be his guest, & to dine with him. He straight perceyued Xauerius would proue vngratefull to his tast; but hauing not the face to refuse him, cour∣teously bad him welcome, colouring his troubled mind, with a feigned obseruance towards him, and by shewing outwardly a cheerfull contenāce. Dinner be∣ing ready they sate downe togeather, and the faire maydes his concubines wayted at the table. The man was much ashamed, because none of his other seruāts were at home, and such a number of maydes might bring him into suspicion of incontiency. Now ther∣fore when Xauerius, dissembling as though he had ob∣serued no such thing, spake nothing thereof at the ta∣ble, his Host, being taken in so open a fact, was afrayd that after dinner he would haue reprehēded him. But Xauerius thanking him for his courtesy, To dis∣semble anothers sinnes in tyme cō∣uenient doth more good then to reprehēd them. and bidding farewell both to him and the maydes, went his way. This dissembling the matter was of more force, towards the curing of his friends disease then his re∣prehension would haue byn. His Host being freed of this feare, and hauing passed ouer so great and mani∣fest a disgrace, & dishonour, without any reprehensi∣on, began afterwards more confidently to go vnto Francis, and to inuite him freely to his house, yea of∣tentymes to bring byn home to be his guest. Xauerius on the other side vsing him very courteously, and all∣wayes saluting him kindly, asked oftentymes how those sisters of his did, without any further speach at all, thinking it inough to haue thus left a sting in his conscience by this his interrogation. Neyther was it in vayne. For within a few dayes after, his Host co∣meth to S. Pauls Church, & calling for Xauerius casteth himselfe prostrate at his feete: Father, quoth he I am here ready to do what you command, for indeed that silence of yours hath stroke my soule with such cla∣mours, Xauerius silence cryeth out. that being tossed vp and downe day and night it can take no rest. Wherefore I shall be most glad, if you will dispose of all that is mine, to Gods glory, & the saluation of my soule. Francis seeing him thus stro∣ken by God, persuadeth him to make first a good con∣fession of his sinnes, then to put away his Concubins by bestowing them in honest marriage, and lastly to betake himself to a good and vertuous life. Neyther did Xauerius assist these only who were his friends and acquaintance, but strangers also whose saluatiō seemed to be euen desperate. There was a cer∣taine Portughese Sea-souldiar, who despayring of his saluation, had not bin at Confession for the space of 18. yeare, and was now ready to imbarke himselfe for the sea to go with the Nauy to Meca, when as Frācis by chance had notice of him. His zeale of soules Wherfore thirsting after his saluation, he presently getteth into the same ship, and accompanyeth him in that nauigation. Then by speaking friendly vnto him, by sitting by him when he was at play, & by vsing all courtesy towards him, he so wonne his affection, that of himselfe he greatly reuerenced him, He by all courte∣ous offi∣ces win∣neth a soldiar of very bad life to make his con∣fession. & much desired his company. Wherupon Francis thinking it now a very good time to put that in execution which he had resolued, set∣teth vpon him vnawares. And falling with him into familiar speach of the danger of a Soldiars life, began to aske him in a friendly manner, how he was pro∣uided for death, which this mortality could not es∣cape, & was hastned on also by a souldiars life & con∣ditiō; how long it was since he was last at Confession by which Gods wrath agaynst sinne, the reuenger of Iniquity, is appeased. At which words he fetching a deepe sigh sayd, That he had now continued many yeares in the filth of sinne without going to Confes∣sion; but it was rather another mans fault then his. For before the setting forth of the last fleete, he reso∣lued to disburthen his conscience of the many and henyous sinnes which he had committed; and hauing confessed them to the Vicar, he refused to giue him absolution, so as he had now no hope of saluation. Then Francis, a singular Physitian for the curing of forlorne soules, telleth him, that he wondred the Vicar was so seuere, if he had confessed his sinnes as he ought to do. Then he biddeth him be of good com∣fort, promising that he would willingly heare him, & absolue him, aduising him to call to mynd all his sins from his childhood, as farre forth as he could remem∣ber them, prescribing him also an easy and commodi∣ous method how to do it; which he, being now ray∣sed vp againe to hope, did willingly, and diligently practice for many dayes togeather. And when he was thus prepared, the opportunity also of a place was rea∣dy at hand; which was, that by the way the whole fleet was inuited to make some stay at a towne as they passed. He gi∣ueth his penitent a small pennāce intēdiug himselfe to satis∣fy for him. When therefore many went a land, Francis also with his souldiar went with them. And there in a place remote from any company, he beganne to he∣are his Confession, who shewed himself truly penitēt by his often sighes & teares, which many times inter∣rupted his Confession. When he had ended, Fran∣cis absolueth him, inioining him to say for his pennāce once Pater and Aue, and for the rest himselfe promised to satisfy his diuine Maiesty. Wherupon Xauerius lea∣uing the souldiar, withdrew into the next wood, and there stripping himselfe naked, beate and scourged his backe extremely, with a whippe full of most sharpe prickes, and whereof he made no end, or measure. In the meane time the Soldiar hauing said his pen∣nance, and following the Fathers footesteppes, came into the wood, and by the sound of the lashes, came right vnto the place where Francis was a disciplining himselfe. As soone as he saw that horrible whip, & his backe all torne, and begored with bloud, at the first he stood still in amazement. Then with teares gushing forth of his eyes, he leapeth vnto him, and casteth himselfe at Xauerius feete, nor would he rise vntill he left off tormenting himselfe for anothers sinnes. Nei∣ther did this inuentiō of Xauerius proue vnprofitable. For this strange sight did so moue the soldiars hart, al∣ready mollified by Confession, to the desire of pen∣nance, that he afterwards by voluntary mortification washed away the spottes of his former life, and satis∣fied for his offences by good workes. And Xauerius hauing thus compassed his desire, and finding presēt commodity of shipping, returneth backe againe to Goa. CHAP. XVI. Hauing distributed diuers Prouinces to o∣thers of the Society, himself determineth to go into Iaponia. H AVING setled all businesses of the Col∣ledge at Goa, He pre∣pareth in many places, houses for the Society. & that there was at the same time a new supply of the Society come out of Portugall, he began to deuide & distri∣bute them into diuers Missions. Wherfore he sent Ni∣colas Lancellot to the towne of Coulanum, Alphonsus Cy∣prian to Meliapora the towne of S. Thomas, Francis Perez to Malaca, Alphonsus à Castro to Moluca, Melchior Con∣salues to Bazainum, and lastly Gaspar of Artois to Or∣mus a Citty of speciall trade and fame, scituated in the mouth of the Persian gulfe. Xauerius had indeed re∣solued to haue gone himself to Ormus, to suppresse the heynous vices which he vnderstood the sincke of Su∣perstition had nourished in that place. But his iorney into Iaponia changed this his determinatiō, by sending thither the forsaid Gaspar, a man of singular vertue & sanctity of life, and most like to himselfe. It was alwayes Xauerius practise, neuer (almost) to command any of the Society to go where himselfe had not bin before. He sent almost none of the So∣ciety where he him∣selfe had not bin. For he ordinarily first made tryall of the place, to the end he might giue both documents suitable thereunto, and also faithfully discharge his promise made to the King of Portugall, of extending the bounds of the Christian faith. And whithersoeuer he sent any of the Fathers to preach the Ghospell, he alwayes assigned them a companion, and assistant of the Society, giuing them (besides particular instru∣ctions) certain generall documents, the summe whe∣reof was: That before all things, they should attend vnto themselues, & preferre nothing before the pure and religious honour of God, Instru∣ctions giuen to the Soci∣ety. and the saluation and perfection of their owne soules. For being endued with these ornaments, they would not only securely & easily help others in matters of saluatiō, but would also cheerfully and willingly apply themselues to any thing how hūble or abiect soeuer, without the which the gouernment of Christian affayres could not well stand. Now when he had sent some of the Society into almost all the countryes of the East, to manure and cultiuate the tender plants of our Lords vineyard, he egan to thinke vpon greater matters. About this ime Anger the Iaponiam (who as we sayd before, Anger the Iapo∣nese is baptized had in by Xauerius sent to Goa ) being sufficiently instru∣cted in the mysteries of the Christian faith, was bap∣tized by the Bishop, togeather with two of his ser∣ antes, & would needs be called (by the Name of the Colledge of Goa) Paul of the Holy Faith; of such force was the memory of that place, and the benefit which he had receiued therein. By him Xauerius vnderstood (which had bin also related vnto him by the Portu∣gheses, who had byn there) that there were in Iaponia many Ilands, exceeding full of inhabitants of excel∣lent good wits, & lay from Goa about 1300. leagues: and moreouer that the Iaponeses were addicted to the knowledge of diuine, and humane things. Xauerius therfore hauing had some tryall of the Iaponians dis∣positions in this man, and his seruants, began to be taken with such a desire of instructing so vnderstan∣ding a People, that he determined, without delay to make a voyage thither. First therfore he taketh order for the sufficient instructing of those three Iaponians who were with him, both in the Portughese language, and other li∣terature, that they might serue him for Interpreters. Then hauing spent a summer and winter in domesti∣call affaires at Goa, He by the way visiteth the Co∣morinen¦sian Ne∣ophytes. like a good and diligent Pastour by the way visiteth the Comorinensian and Piscarian Coast with all his flocke of Christians in those parts. There he is nformed, that Henry, one of the Society, liued half discontented in the next country of Trauancoris, for that he seemed to loose his labour amōgst the Neo∣phytes of that place, who by reason of the persecution raysed by their new King, a deadly Enemy to Christi∣ans, fell oftentimes into Idolatry. Xauerius therfore by consolatory letters, He com∣forteth some of the Soci∣ety in a fatherly manner. full of fatherly affection, bad him be of good courage, telling him withall, that his profit was far greater, then he imagined. For al∣though he should do nothing else, yet certainly there was no small number of infants, and children saued for being by him baptized, who otherwaies by vntim∣ly death had byn euerlastingly lost. For put the case (quoth he) that there were but few of the elder sort saued, yet there is no doubt to be made of their sal∣uation, who dyed in that innocency which they re∣ceiued in baptisme. And therefore he should beware least through the suggestion of the Deuil he might be drawne to go into some other Country, where he should not reape so good an haruest of soules. But now for those who laboured seriously in the vineyard of our Lord, Francis did not only comfort them himselfe, but somtimes also procured Ignatius to do the like, by his letters from Rome, fearing least their alacrity being oppressed by continual troubles and miseries, might be ouercharged by the labours which they tooke. And so, hauing in a certaine letter of his much praised Hen∣ry Henriquez a man of singular vertue, and exemplar life, who tooke great paines in the same Promontory, he commended him to Ignatius, desyring he would be pleased to write vnto him a letter consolatory. Hauing thus setled matters in Comorinum, he re∣turneth againe to Goa, to prouide for his Iaponian voy∣age. Wherupon presently he went into the kingdome f Cambaya, to treat about certayne affayres for the Moluca's, with the Viceroy, who at that tyme was mployed in the war of Cambaya. By the way he came o Bazain, which is a towne belonging to the Portu∣ heses, scituated almost in the midway betweene Goa and the riuer Indus. And going thence without any ay into Cambaia he was very courteously entertained y the Viceroy, with whome hauing ended his busi∣ esse, he returned presently agayne to Goa; where ha∣uing made Antony Gomez Rectour of the Colledge, and appointed Paul Camertes to supply his owne place, he prepareth himselfe with all speed for his iourney into Iaponia. It was no sooner bruited abroad, The dif∣ficulties of the Iaponian nauiga∣tion. that Francis was to go into Iaponia, but presently many of his friends came vnto him in all hast, to terrify him from so dangerous a resolutiō, laying before his eyes the ma∣ny and great dangers of so long and vnknowne a voi∣age by sea, for that he was to go vnto the furthest end of the world, Iaponia lying from Goa aboue 1300. leagues, and the way vnto it being but newly found out, was not as yet sufficiently knowne, for the auoi∣ding of rockes and quicksands. Moreouer they decla∣re vnto him the horrible stormes and tempests of that sea, in respect whereof, the fury and rage of the rest of the Ocean, was but a sport, especially in the tyme of Autumne, The wind Typhon when as those seas are tossed with a most boisterous wind (called by the Inhabitants Typhon ) and with such a fury and violence, as none can ima∣gine but those who haue seen and proued it; by which also the greatest, and strongest ships being often loo∣sened in their ioyntes, being not able to endure such violent waues, become so broken and shattered, that eyther swallowed vp in the billowes, or els dashed agaynst, the rockes do miserably perish. And the very name of the forsayd Wind, or rather Fury, striketh such an horrour into the passengers, that euē the most skillfull, and hardyest Pilots, and Marriners esteeme this voyage into Iaponia to be no lesse dangerous then toylsome, so farre doth the violent raging of that sea passe all their art, and skill. Moreouer, they tell him, that there be in diuers pla∣ces many quicksands in the way, very hard to be dis∣couered, wherein their shippes, eyther by not being acquainted with the tract, or else by drift of tempest do sticke fast to their certayne destruction. Againe, all those seas for the most part are much pestered with most cruell pyrates. A multi∣tude of Pyrats. For besides the Acenians, who being deadly enemies to the Portugheses, make con∣tinuall depredations in the gulfe of Malaca with great fleetes; there keepe also, about the Coast of China, many nauies of most bloudy and desperate pyrates, vsing no mercy to whomesoeuer they take. They should also in those places meete with other nauies of the King of China, which being appointed to pur∣sue the pyrates, kept no more quarter with strāgers then with the pyrats themselues: in so much that one cannot tell whether it be more dāgerous to meet with the pyrates themselues, or with those that pursue thē: so that it was certaynely esteemed no bad fortune, if but euery third shippe came safe into Iaponia. These, and such lyke things; though they were deed matters of no light moment, yet were they by is friends greatly exagerated, who for that they pro∣ eeded from very graue persons, and skillfull of such ffaires, hoped they might auert Xauerius mynd from hat enterprize. But all in vaine: nor could they once moue his noble courage, which contemned euen de∣ th, and vpheld it selfe with firme confidence in the iuine prouidence. Whereupon they flying to their st refuge, began with teares most earnestly to intreat and beseech him, that he would not with certayne dā∣ger of his life, thinke of going to those coūtries, which Nature had so locked vp from the sight of mortall mē: and that hauing already suffered miseryes inough, he would now at length make an end of conuerting ob∣scure Nations, and haue compassion, if not of his owne, yet, of the common good. But Francis thanking them for their fidelity, Francis speech to his frieds who dis∣suaded him frō going in to Iapo∣nia. and good will, tould them, that by Gods holy help & assi∣stance he feared none of these things; and wondred they should thinke, that whither themselues had gone for gayne of trade and merchandize, he durst not vē∣ture to go for the glory of God, and saluation of sou∣les. I haue assuredly (quoth he) such certayne signes and pledges of the diuine prouidence, that I thinke it would be a great sinne in me to feare any daunger, though neuer so certayne and manifest. For, by Gods speciall goodnes, I haue passed infinite tractes of the Ocean, and haue compassed round the Promontory of Good hope, and haue at last arriued safe hither to this other world. I haue escaped the fury of the Trauan∣corians, the treacheryes of the Badages, and the enco∣unter of Pyrates. Moreouer I haue trauayled ouer all Malaca, & the golden Chersonesus, the Ilands of Moluca, standing almost in the vtmost partes of the world. Without any harme haue I gone to Maurica, and in∣structed and made ciuill that barbarous & sauage na∣tion, giuen wholy to spoyle, robberies, and murders. And hauing now had all these assurances and argu∣ments of the diuine prouidence, do you thinke that I can eyther distrust of Gods fatherly assistance, or giue ouer to amplify his glory, to which I haue wholy de∣dicated & vowed my self? Ought I to draw back for feare of any danger whatsoeuer? I will certaynely for no occasion be wanting in what I haue vnderta∣ken. Whersoeuer I shall be, I will remember that I am exposed to the view of the whole world, and do stād in the sight of God, and all the Court of heauen. Nei∣ther was it my determination, when I passed ouer the sea, to preach the Ghospell only in India, and other places adioyning, but also in the furthest parts of the East. I will tell you truly, I am ashamed that I haue not yet brought Christian Religion into those coun∣tryes, whither our merchants haue long fince brought their vayne, and petty commodityes. I will therefore with Gods grace, lay open at last a way into those co∣untries for the Ghospell, which Nature hath so farre separated from our world: & to spend my life (if need require) in these imploiments, I account it not only an honour, but also a great blessing. His friends being ouercome by this his incredible constancy, and stroken into an amazement at his vn∣daunted courage, desisted wholy from their suite, and praying for his happy iourney they left him to his in∣tended voyage, not without great sorrow for his de∣parture, and carefull sollicitude for his safety, in re∣gard of the many dangers he was to vndergo. CHAP. XVII. At Malaca he doth many things vvor∣thy of memory. X AVERIVS at his departure from Goa, left behind him in writing certayne pro∣fitable precepts vnto Father Paul that had byn lately Rectour of the Colledge of Goa, whome now in his absence he ordayned to supply his place. The summe whereof was: That being mynd∣full rather of Christian humility, then of the place & authority he had, he should carry a fatherly gouern∣ment towards the rest of his companions, and should very carefully prouide for them in all their discōmo∣dities, & difficultyes, and once a yeare to write vnto him into Iaponia of al things belonging to the Society, & of those that were thereof vnder his care & gouer∣ment. Fatherly gouer∣ment. Now when all the other Fathers desired to fol∣low him into Iaponia, he comforted them with pater∣nall words, by putting them in hope, that hauing opened a way into that Country, he might call them all thither: and in the meane tyme he would carry them along with him in his hart, and mynd. Hauing therefore setled all things in order & pro∣uided for his iourney, His Compa∣nyons in the Japo∣niā naui∣gation. in the yeare of our Lord 1548. and month of Aprill he imbarketh at Goa, togeather with Paul of the holy Fayth the Iaponese, Cosmas Turria∣nus, Iohn Ferdinand, and a few others of the Society. He was carryed in a goodly ship, pointed and barbed with iron, the Captayne whereof was one Iames No∣ronia. By his courteous behauiour he began to gayne both the Captaynes and the other passengers affectiōs hoping thereby to make way for the cure of their sou∣les. Wherefore he would looke on whilst others plaid at Chesse, perswade those to play who seemed shame∣fast, and would many tymes also intermingle their game with witty and pleasant speaches. But Noronia the Captayne, who was not yet familiary acquainted with him, although he liked well of his courteous be∣hauiour, yet in words he impeached the fame of his sanctity. For in discourse with his familiar friends, he would often cast forth certayne inconsiderate speaches; as that Francis seemed to be but as other men are, and that his sanctity was not answerable to the re∣port therof. But within a while the splēdor of his hid∣den vertue brake forth, and shewed it selfe. For when they were inforced to go a land to take in fresh water, Xauerius with certayne others went a land also; and whilest they prouided water, or else, as it often hap∣ned, recreated themselues by taking comfort and so∣lace of the land, he withdrew himselfe into a desert, and solitary place neere by, there to conferre alone in prayer with almighty God. Now the ship hauing receyued in those that went for water, was ready to hoyse vp sayle, when as Noro∣nia perceiued that Xauerius was wanting: Wherfore he presently sendeth out some to call him speedily to the shippe. They looking & calling him a great while by the shore side but all in vayne, In his prayers he is ab∣stracted from his senses. find him at length in a priuate place at his prayers, wholy abstracted from his senses. Then the report thereof being spread through out all the Nauy, it caused such admiration both in Noronia and the rest, that turning their rash iudgment into reuerence towards him, they greatly honoured his singular sanctity, and courteous huma∣nity. This occasiō much furthered towards the curing of their soules, and restrayning their vices. Francis then arriuing, He lod∣geth with the Francis∣cans by the way, at Cocinum, wēt presently as his custome was, to lodge with the Fran∣ciscans, who was very friendly entertayned by them: Whither the chiefe of the Citty presently came to in∣treate of him, that some of the Society might be sent thither, to instruct as well the youth, as the whole Citty in vertue, & other discipline; promising him a fit place, and all things necessary for those that should be sent. Xauerius being loath to reiect so iust and pious a request, leaueth the disposing of the whole businesse vnto Peter Consaluus the Bishops Vicar, making hast himselfe towards Iaponia, whither all his thoughts were now wholy bent. Afterwards hauing had for the space of more then 60. dayes a prosperous naui∣gation, vpon the last of May he arriueth at Malaca, and lodgeth with his owne Society, to their incredi∣ble ioy and consolation. At the same tyme Alphonsus à Castro of the same Society (who was afterwards slayne in Moluca by the Saracens, for defence Chri∣stian Religion) sung there the first High Masse with all solemnity, to the exceeding comfort of the Neo∣phytes, who were greatly delighted to behold those new ceremonies. And for the greater Celebrity ther∣of, Xauerius made thereat a Sermon. At the same tyme also the Vicar of Malaca, The Vi∣car of Malaca being out of his sen∣ses reco∣uereth them againe. Xaue∣rius ancient friend, lay very sicke of a Feuer, no lesse dangerous then vehement; and his trouble of mind increased his corporall infirmity. As soone therefore as he vnderstood of Francis his arriuall, being much distempered (as it hapneth) through the violence of his sicknesse, he calleth for his apparell, to go & salute his dearest friend. But as he was pulling on his stoc∣kings he fell into a sowne, and suncke downe in the armes of those that were about him. Francis therfore being certifyed therof, cōmeth presently vnto him, & findeth him fallen into a frenzy, and in some despayre both of mynd and body. Wherupon he voweth to say certayne Masses for this his friends safety. And his vow was very acceptable vnto God: for instantly he recouereth his senses agayne, confesseth his sinnes, & dyeth piously, and with great edification. Now whilest Xauerius expecteth commodity of shipping into Iaponia, he imployeth himselfe with no lesse labour & profit amōgst the citizens of Malaca, thē he had done vpon the Vicar. For he deliuered out of the Diuels iawes many lewd and desperate men, He eua∣seth a merchāt to leaue his con∣nes. who were extremely bewitched with harlots allurements. Amōgst whome (that by one, a scātling may be made of the rest) there was a cetayne Merchant, who kept at home with him seauen maydes to the shew, but in∣deed were all Harlots. Which thing Xauerius vnder∣standing, first dissembled the matter, expecting a con∣uenient time. Afterwards meeting this miserable man vpon an Holy day (imitating therein our Sauiour Christ who bad himselfe to supper with Zacchaeus the Publican) tould him in a friendly manner, that he would dine with him that day, if it were not incon∣uenient. The merchant, for feare his maydes might be discoured, was at first extremely troubled, and thought on all the meanes he could deuise how to ex∣cuse the matter. But at last, moued through shame least he might seeme vnwilling to receiue such a guest into his house, he shewed himselfe to be content. And so framing both his countenance and speach to a courteous willingnes, carryeth Xauerius home to din∣ner, and causeth good cheere to be made. They sate downe, and his fayre mayds wayted at the table. The merchant was indeed halfe ashamed, that he had no men to wayt, & that the mayds were constrayned to serue; remayning also with an anxious & sollicitous mind, what the good Father might thinke thereof. Which when Francis perceiued iudging it prudence to free the man both of shame and feare, Prudēce in dissem¦bling matters. said nothing of what he intended. Wherupon presently, as though he had interpreted al things in the best sense, he began to commend the meate, and the maydes also who had dressed the same, and made the sauces to it, asking them their names, and country, & how long they had byn Christians. The Merchant when he saw in him this mildnes and simplicity, who (as he thought) suspected no∣thing Religion) sung there the first High Masse with all solemnity, to the exceeding comfort of the Neo∣phytes, who were greatly delighted to behold those new ceremonies. And for the greater Celebrity ther∣of, Xauerius made thereat a Sermon. At the same tyme also the Vicar of Malaca, The Vi∣car of Malaca being out of his sen∣ses reco∣uereth them againe. Xaue∣rius ancient friend, lay very sicke of a Feuer, no lesse dangerous then vehement; and his trouble of mind increased his corporall infirmity. As soone therefore as he vnderstood of Francis his arriuall, being much distempered (as it hapneth) through the violence of his sicknesse, he calleth for his apparell, to go & salute his dearest friend. But as he was pulling on his stoc∣kings he fell into a sowne, and suncke downe in the armes of those that were about him. Francis therfore being certifyed therof, cōmeth presently vnto him, & findeth him fallen into a frenzy, and in some despayre both of mynd and body. Wherupon he voweth to say certayne Masses for this his friends safety. And his vow was very acceptable vnto God: for instantly he recouereth his senses agayne, confesseth his sinnes, & dyeth piously, and with great edification. Now whilest Xauerius expecteth commodity of shipping into Iaponia, he imployeth himselfe with no lesse labour & profit amōgst the citizens of Malaca, thē he had done vpon the Vicar. For he deliuered out of the Diuels iawes many lewd and desperate men, He eua∣seth a merchāt to leaue his con∣nes. who were extremely bewitched with harlots allurements. Amōgst whome (that by one, a scātling may be made of the rest) there was a cetayne Merchant, who kept at home with him seauen maydes to the shew, but in∣deed were all Harlots. Which thing Xauerius vnder∣standing, first dissembled the matter, expecting a con∣uenient time. Afterwards meeting this miserable man vpon an Holy day (imitating therein our Sauiour Christ who bad himselfe to supper with Zacchaeus the Publican) tould him in a friendly manner, that he would dine with him that day, if it were not incon∣uenient. The merchant, for feare his maydes might be discouered, was at first extremely troubled, and thought on all the meanes he could deuise how to ex∣cuse the matter. But at last, moued through shame least he might seeme vnwilling to receiue such a guest into his house, he shewed himselfe to be content. And so framing both his countenance and speach to a courteous willingnes, carryeth Xauerius home to din∣ner, and causeth good cheere to be made. They sate downe, and his fayre mayds wayted at the table. The merchant was indeed halfe ashamed, that he had no men to wayt, & that the mayds were constrayned to serue; remayning also with an anxious & sollicitous mind, what the good Father might thinke thereof. Which when Francis perceiued iudging it prudence to free the man both of shame and feare, Prudēce in dissem¦bling matters. said nothing of what he intended. Wherupon presently, as though he had interpreted al things in the best sense, he began to commend the meate, and the maydes also who had dressed the same, and made the sauces to it, asking them their names, and country, & how long they had byn Christians. The Merchant when he saw in him this mildnes and simplicity, who (as he thought) suspected no∣thing by seeing so many handsome maydes without any men, began to take some courage; but when at last there was not so much as a word spoken that day about that matter, fearing now no reprehensiō, he of his owne accord inuiteth oftentymes Xauerius to sup∣per. Francis therefore obseruing this cunning of his, dissembled all vntill he came to be throughly acquain∣ted with the man, and hauing found out his inclinatiō & which of those Concubines he loued best; when he saw a fit tyme for the purpose▪ in a friendly manner as his custome was: Why, quoth he, haue you so many maydes, seeing you haue no men? If you will follow my connsayle, you shall do well to put away one or two of them. And when, condescending to Francis his gentle instance, he had put away one, Xaueriu be∣ing by him inuited another day to supper, by com∣mending what he had done, drew him, without any great difficulty, to put away another. In the meane tyme he ceased not priuately to vse all the industrious meanes he could deuise to rid away his deerest miniō, that so hauing weakened his loue to her, he might the more easily batter the chiefe hould, in which his In∣continency dominiered. Some dayes after therfore, being agayne inuited to supper, he withdraweth from him the third, and afterwards the fourth, and by litle & litle all the seauen one after another: and finally bringeth the merchant himselfe, being now moued thereto by diuine power, to cleanse his soule of his sinnes by Confession, and to prouide honest places for the forsayd women; vsing heerein no lesse discretion in curing a disease of many kinds, then in wholy ta∣king away the causes, and occasions thereof. The same course he tooke also not only in the Cit∣ty, but likewise in the ship with men, Prudēce in repre∣hending who had no go∣uernment ouer their ngue. For if at any tyme he heard any one cast forth base or contumelious words, he dissembled for the present, making no shew of be∣ing displeased thereat; neyther would he straight∣wayes reprehend the same, but expect alwayes a fit tyme & occasion to admonish the offenders, least his admonition might therby, as oftentymes it hapneth, rather increase the sores of festred wounds, then cure them. He being therefore a Phisitian very skill∣ful in curing of such euils, to the end that his patients might quietly abide the applying of his remedy, he would first gently insinuate himselfe into his friend∣ship who was to be thus cured, then would he take him a side, and all alone reprehend him in so sweet a manner, as a friend once tould, him that he won∣dred how such mild words proceeded frō his mouth. And by this meanes he so brought the matter about, that the offenders not only acknowledged their fault, but did sincerely amend it. CHAP. XVIII. Being carryed in a Pirats barke, he arriueth at last in Iaponia, in despite both of the Pilot, and the Deuill. W HILEST he was thus imployed at Ma∣laca in the exercises of Christian charity, the tyme approached for his departure to∣wards Iaponia. Wherupon, eyther through want of a greater Portughese ship, or else to prouide for the more security of his Neophites who were to accompany him, he ventured to go with a Barbarian Pyrate, so secure he esteemed all things with those who rely wholy vpon God: For he was afrayd least the three Iaponian Neophytes, who went along with him in that iourney, might be much scandalized at the Portugheses, if they should perceiue them, being Christians, The di∣uine pro∣uidence fauou∣reth Xa∣uerius. to offend in any thing. Wherefore mee∣ting with an Ethnicke Pirate of China, who was not without cause, surnamed the Robber, he agreed with him, that passing by China, he should carry him, and his companions directely into Iaponia. And taking pledges for security (yet trusting more vpon the di∣uine assistance, then vpon the fidelity of that Barbar∣an) he aduentureth himself and his company in a lit∣le Barke, which they call in their language Iuncus. He departed from Malaca in the month of June, pon the Natiuity of S. Iohn Baptist, and had a reaso∣ able prosperous, and commodious nauigation, al∣ ough his Pilot were neyther industrious, nor fayth∣ ll towards him. For he (as Ethnickes make no great nsciēce of their promise) hauing on a suddain chan∣ d his mind, The per∣fidious∣nesse of Ethnic∣kes. was not willing to go into Iaponia; and erfore to trifle away the time, he stayd at euery Ilād met withall, without any reason or occasion. Xaue∣ s therfore being sollicitous about his iorney, when saw him of set purpose, by making delayes, loose tyme which was most conuenient for them, be∣ n to be afrayd least the summer once past, he might constrayned to stay all winter in some Hauen of ina. Wherupon he earnestly expostulated with the ayster of the ship, put him in mynd of his pledges, lastly besought and intreated him, that he would ot breake his promise made vnto the Portugeses. But hen he could nothing preuayle with the Pyrate, al∣ ough he was much grieued in mynd, yet he suppres∣ d the same, casting all vpon the diuine Prouidence, which he had alwayes found to be fauourable vnto im: notwithstanding, The exe∣crable sacrifices of Eth∣nicks. the detestable Superstiti∣ n of the Pilot and marriners did mooue him much ore, then their perfidiousnes had done. For they had the ship an Idol to which they very often offred exe∣ rable sacrifices. They also oftentymes by casting otts asked aduise of the Deuill, and specially whe∣ her they should haue a prosperous iourney if they ayled into Iaponia. Xauerius was indeed much incen∣ ed heerat, & could in no case brooke that they should thinke his voyage into Iaponia w ch he vndertooke for gods sake should depend vpon the Deuils lot & plea∣sure; yet relying wholy vpon the diuine Goodnes, he contemned whatsoeuer the Deuill could act agaynst him and so by Gods all-ruling disposition they driect their course towards Iaponia. By the way there hap∣ned two things worthy of note. The first was, One of Francis his com∣panions falling into the pumpe is deliue∣red from death. that Emanuel a Chinese one of Xa∣uerius company, being in a tempest cast downe by the extreme tossing of the ship, fell headlong into the pumpe which was by chance open; and the fall was not without great danger of his life, for that he fell both very high, and besides stucke fast in the pumpe with his head downeward. Euery one therefore thin∣king him to be dead, he was at last with much adoe drawen out, and a litle after by Gods help, and Fran∣cis his prayers came to life agayne. In the fall he re∣ceyued a wound in his head, but the feare therof was more then the daunger, for within a few daies he was perfectly cured. Not long after this there hapned another chance with the like danger, but different in the effect. Whilst Emanuel was in dressing his wound by the surgeō, the ship being suddaynly tossed, cast the Pylots daughter ouer board into the sea, and being driuen on with a violēt wind, The Pi∣lots daughter is drow∣ned. & a cruel tempest that immediatly arose, there was found no meanes possible to saue her crying out for help. And so in sight of her Father, and the rest of the marriners the vnfortunate mayde is swallowed vp by the raging billowes. Vpon this mischance there ariseth a doleful cry intermingled with a certain how∣ling out, and lamentation of the Barbarians, which ontinued all that day, and the next night. Now the euill who had bin long since spitefully bent against auerius, The di∣uell ta∣keth oc∣casion of treache∣ry. thinking that he could not haue a fitter oc∣casion to wreake his malice vpon him, vsed many de∣ eiptfull stratagemes against him in this busines. For when they Infidels damaunded of the Idoll the reason hy the Pilots daughter was drowned; it was answe ed, that if Emanuell the Christian had dyed in the umpe the maid should not haue bin cast away in the . Francis presently perceiued that by this answere, & his company were aymed at, to make them odi∣ s both to the Pilot and the marriners: and withall und himselfe to be oftentimes much tempted inte∣ ourly by that horrible beast. But calling vpon the uine assistance, he did not only defeate all the plotts this most cruell Enemy, but freed himselfe also frō he imminent dangers, in which he was amongst hose Ethnickes. There was nothing which more cooled the mali e of the Deuil, His mag∣nanimity against the ter∣rours of the deuil and the marriners agaynst him, then is couragious mynd. Neyther did this combat asse without some fruite vnto Francis. For by his wne peril he experienced what horrible terrours the iuell striketh into others, when he is permitted, & ndeth opportunity Concerning which matter there extant a notable Epistle of Xauer us to the Society at oa, The way how to ouer∣come the affrights of the Deuill. the contents whereof are: That there is no surer ay to defeate the vayne affrights of the Deuill, then y wholy distrusting in our selues, & putting our cō∣fidence in God, with a couragious and vndaunted art, to contemne the feeble assaults, and threats of that Monster; and by depending vpon the diuine assi∣stance, to keep our selues, with all the courage we can, from being afrayd. For in such a case, and at such a tyme nothing ought more to be feared, then diffidence and distrust in God: seeing it is manifest, that our E∣nemy cannot, with all his forces, dovs any hurt, vn∣lesse God permit him. Xauerius hauing thus ouercome the Diuell, had now a new combat to fight with men. When they were ar∣riued at Cantonium a hauen Towne of China, the Pilot and marriners consulted againe with the Idoll by lot∣tes, & receiuing no comfortable answere from the Di∣uell concerning their nauigation into Iaponia, cast ancker, & resolued to keep their winter there. Which Xauerius perceyuing, cast about to help himselfe. And first he humbly besought the Pylot, to stand to his promisses; then when intreatyes could do no good, falling from requests vnto threats, he layd before him the losse of his pledges, and the displeasure of the Go∣uernor of Malaca, & the Portugeses, to whome he had giuen his word: so as, at last the Pilot being somwhat moued with what was obiected agaynst him, he wei∣ghed ancker, and began to sayle forward. But this cō∣stancy in him was no more then his fidelity. For a lit∣le while after the perfidious Ethnicke fell agayne into his former humour of wintering in those coasts. Which perfidiousnesse of his, would infallibly haue hindred Xauerius iourney, had not the diuine Proui∣dence turned the Pilots course another way. The ship now sayled amaine with a prosperous gale towards Cinceum a hauen towne of China, where the ylot intended to harbour all the winter, for that the mmer was now almost at an end; when as vpon the ddaine they meete with a Pinnace which telleth thē at the port of Cinceum was much pestred with Py∣ tes. The Pylot being greatly affrighted with this ewes, called his witts together, and began to thinke hat was best to be done. To go backe agayne to Cā∣ nium he could not, because the wind was ful agaynst , and withall lay very right for Iaponia. Wherfore aking his benefit of necessity, he resolued to follow wind. And so in despite both of the Pilot, Marri∣ ers, & the Diuell himselfe the ship was constrayned hould on her course into Iaponia: whither at last arriued vpon the very day of the Assumption of ur B. Lady, more by the fauour of God, and his Ho∣ Mother, then of the wind or weather. Now when s they could not well reach to other Hauens as they esired, they arriued with their ship at Cangoxima, a Citty in the Kingdom of Saxuma, and the very Coun∣ ry of Paul of the Holy Fayth. There Francis together with his companions, is very courteously entertayned oth by Paules friends, & the rest of the inhabitants, ea euen of the Magistrates thēselues: whose arriuall eing diuulged among the people, euery one, as it of∣ en hapneth, ran with admiration to behold the new Priests that were come from Portugall. OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE IIII. BOOKE. He inquireth of the Manners, and Reli∣gions of the Iaponians. CHAP. I. I APONIA is a Country of the vt∣most East, A discrip¦tion of Iaponia. and bordereth vpon the furthest part of Asia. It consisteth altogeather of Ilandes, diuided by strait and narrow armes of the sea. Concerning the extent and bignes thereof (as much as can be obserued by a Portughese skillfull in such matters, who hath lately measured the same) we haue for certayne, that it is extended in length about 900. miles, and in forme not much vnlike to Italy, except that Italy ioyneth to the Con∣ inent, & is almost equall vnto it in greatnes. On the North, it lyeth towards the furthest part of Scythia, which we call Tartary; on the west it bendeth towards China, and on the East, it is opposite to New Spayne, eing distant from thence lesse then 500. miles. From oa it is well neere 2000. leagues. It conteynes sixty ix Kingdomes; and which is very strange, the whole Nation vseth but one language, & that not hard to be earned. But all Iaponia (by reason of three Ilands big∣ger then the rest) is diuided into three partes, which aking their names from the greater Ilands, haue ma∣ y of the lesser belonging vnto them. That part which of all the rest is the greatest with∣out comparison, and furthest distant from India, is properly called Iapon, from whence the rest of the country taketh its name. This Iland is in length 750. miles, but the breadeth is various, yet for the most part it is about 180 miles ouer. There be in it 53. King∣domes; which certainly can be of no great extent: For euen to Lords, & Princes of seuerall Cittyes they giue the Title of King, of whome, many abound in wealth, especially those who haue the Dominion o∣uer many Kingdomes. Heerein is scituated Meaco which was anciently the head Citty of all Iaponia, but now of many Kingdomes only. The next vnto Iapon in greatnes and wealth is Xi∣mus, The Ilād Ximus. which is sayd to be 150. miles in length, and in breadeth 70. This lying neerest of all the other vnto China, and lesse distant from India, is deuided into nine Kingdomes, whereof Saxuma is one, and where, as we sayd before, Xauerius first arriued. The third Iland lying betweene both these, is called Xicus, The Iland Xicus. or Xicocus, little more then halfe as great as Ximus, and conteyneth only foure Kingdomes. This whole country being altogether vnknown to former ages, was discouered by the Portugeses, who being by tempest of weather driuen thither, began by meanes of traffique, to haue correspondence with them, some ten yeares before Xauerius came thither. The Country is very cold, vnpleasant to the eye, & in many places mountanous and barrayne, yet for the most part chā∣pion, enterlaced with many fayre riuers, & by nature fertile, although they do not till the ground by rea∣son of their continuall warres; so as it is more fit for vines & oliues, if it were ther with planted: for want whereof there be very few vineyards, and no oliues at all, and yieldeth rather Rice, then Corne. Ney∣ther do there want mines of gold, but skill to make it: yet chiefly it excelleth in siluer mines, A siluer country. for which cause it is called Argentaria. Notwithstanding, for that the Inhabitants are debarred from trafficque with the Chineses, in tymes past it wanted many things which now the Portugheses haue by their commercement lately supplyed, not without great profit to thēselues. And although there be frequent Hauens in the whole Country, yet the Iland Ximus, both because it hath more store of Port Townes, and lyeth most commo∣dious for the shippes that come from India, is most of all frequented by the Portughese merchants. There was at that tyme one King who ruled o∣uer all Iaponia, called by the inhabitantes Dayrus; whose raygne, because Kingly Maiesty was now worne out amongst the Nobles, What kind of people the Iapo∣neses be. began to depend vpon their pleasures. The people of Iaponia, com∣pared with the Indians, are white of complexion, by nature most warlike, and in vertue and vpright∣nesse doe farre exceed all other Nations which haue byn found out of late. Xauerius therefore making his abode at Cangoxima (which is the principall Citty of Saxuma ) before he would aduenture to set vpon the Iaponians soules, thought best to seek out first all kind of wayes & meanes how to do it, & chiefly to inquire of their manners & religions. And hauing diligently sounded them all out, he found the matter for the most part thus to stand: to wit, that the whole Nation was of a very tractable disposition, and for the most part cannot endure any double dealing. They haue no great store of gold, riches, or wealth; and ther∣fore (as most commonly where there is least money, there also is least seeking after it) their study is least about such kind of things. Neyther do they account any thing more dishonourable, then to increase their wealth & substance by trafficque, or any other art. So as their manner of lyfe is vpheld by the direction of pouerty, yet in such sort, that they hyde the same with a neat and handsome adorning of their bodyes. They stand very much vpon their dignity and re∣putation, so that you would thinke them therin most perfectly to resemble the auncient Romans. They do all for the most part, euen children, place their grea∣test delight in martiall affayres, nor do they ordina∣rily, take content in any thing else. Notwithstanding (which is incredible to be spoken or heard) although they be of such couragious spirits, and so much giuen to bearing of armes, yet they absteyne from all quar∣rels amōg themselues, reseruing the vse of their wea∣pons for tyme of warre agaynst their enemies. The Ja∣poneses temper in brid∣ling their passions. For the Iaponians haue such gouernement ouer themsel∣ues and their passions, that they seeme therein to be of the sect of Stoickes. And to see a Iaponese brawling, chafing, or wrangling one with another, is amongst them accounted a monstrous thing. Wherfore the bet∣ter to auoid all occasion of contentions, they neuer deale about any businesse of importance or cōtrouer∣sy by themselues, but by a third person. And this they obserue, not only with strangers, but also with their friends, and those of the same household with them; wherby they conserue quiet of mynd in themselues, and peace with others. They take very great delight in hunting, in so much that they eate no flesh which is not gotten by that meanes. They can no more endure mutton, swi∣nes-flesh, beefe, or veale, then we can dogges, or horse∣flesh. They absteine from milke and cheese as we do from raw bloud. They keep hennes and geese, not so much to eate, as for their recreation & pleasure. They do therefore seldome eate flesh, which when they doe, The Ia∣poneses spare dyet. is alwayes Venison. They feed for the most part on fish, fruite, herbes, and rice: and by the meanes of their temperate dyet they are very sound and healthfull, liuing ordinarily vntill they be very old, vnlesse they meete by chance with some violent or vntimely death. At least, we may learne by this their liuing so well vpon a little, that Nature is content with few things, although sensuality be neuer satisfied. Adulteries are with them most seuerely punished. They absteine altogeather from dyce-playing, and such like games, deeming that by those meanes, men become desirous of others goods. They are also so farre from theft and robbery, that they iudg nothing more vnworthy in a man: for which cause they con∣demne felons to the gallowes, the most disgracefull of all punishments amongst them. They vse cleanlinesse in their dyet, The Ja∣ponians ciuility. neatnesse in their attyre, and most courteous ciuility in all their meetings, salutations, and conuersation: wherein the men are not more exact, then the children; nor the Nobility, then the Country people. You would be∣lieue they were all trayned vp togeather to ciuill and courtly behauiour in the same Kings Court. But these guifts of nature are obscured by pride, a malady deep∣ly rooted in this Nation. For they so contemne other nations in respect of themselues, that they are for the most part very arrogant and insolent in their carriage towards strangers. This one thing only excepted they want nothing, but the light of the Ghospell, being of themselues a nation (if there be any in the world) borne, and in a manner framed to al ciuility. For euen the country people themselues are very ingenious, & desirous of learning; in so much, that as euery thing seemeth most conformable to reason, so they do most willingly imbrace it. They are very attentiue to dis∣courses, especially of God, and diuine matters. They are moreouer commonly very good schollers, & ther∣fore so much the more apt to receiue Christian disci∣pline. Now when Xauerius had vnderstood these and many other things (which for breuities sake I omit) of the disposition & manners of the Iaponians making also iniquity after their Priests, The Ia∣ponians Gods. & Religions, he found things standing almost in this manner; to wit, that they account those things most of all their Gods, by whose meanes they receiue help. Some therefore do worship the Sunne, others the Moone, and others other Gods. There be also among them certayne Men held for Gods, which they had from the Chineses: Amongst whome are Xacas, Bonzies Japonian Priests. and Amidas. But there is no greater villanny, or impurity, then among their Priest (whome they call Bonzies, ) so that you may easily know whose Ministers they be. For hauing brought in that heynous sinne (which is not heere to be named) of preposterous lust, they haue cast such a thicke mist before the Iaponians eyes, that being not able to discerne such impurities, they commonly ac∣count that most detestable crime of al other, to be no sinne at all. Whereupon (both their kings, and sub∣iects being alike infected with that abominable sinne, and running on headlong therin, as it were to armes) their Cittyes euer since, vndoubtedly through Gods wrathfull indignation, being continually in tumultes and vprore, they are perpetually engaged in ciuill war∣res amongst themselues; wherby at last they may, by Gods goodnes, open their eyes to fly from such abomi∣nations. And in the meane tyme, that sinne may not want matter to worke on, the Nobility for the most part, commit their children, like sheepe to wolues, for their Education to the Bonzies. There be diuers Conuents of them both men and women, called Bon∣zies, & Bonziesses, and they haue also distinct habits, as amongst our Religious men of Europe, the Deuil ther∣in playing the ape with the Church of Christ. But al∣ hough the Bonzies be not without good ground, estee∣med to be giuen all alike to that beastly impurity, yet hey are so cloaked, either with the respect of their Priesthood, or else by the great opinion which is had of their abstinence, that they are for all that, held in very great esteeme, both with the Nobility and com∣ on people: because it is bruited abroad with more lory then truth, that they absteine wholy from flesh, sh, and wine, and liue only vpon hearbes, & ryce, & ate but once a day. CHAP. II. At Cangoxima he conuerteth many to the Christian faith. F RANCIS hauing taken exact notice of these things, & iudging it fit (as the state of such busines then required) that he ought first of all to prescribe vnto himself a more strict manner of lyfe, liued indeed more spa∣ringly, and hardly then the Bonzies were reported to do; which was most certainly true, seing that he found in those places not only want of things neces∣sary, but euen a quite different kind of dyet from that he was accustomed vnto; so as meere hunger and ne∣cessity did constrain him to change, as it were, his v∣suall manner of dyet, and euen his very tast also. For he kept himselfe aliue with ryce insteed of bread, and for the most part, Francis extreme sparing diet in Iaponia. with fruit and hearbes insteed of meate, & this dressed after the Iaponian fashiō. Which new kind of frugality he most willingly imbraced, for the vehement desire he had of gayning soules to God, like one, Whose meate and drinke was to do the will of him that sent him. And he was alwayes wont to say, that he was much behoulding to Iaponia, because that euen then, when he was by the inhabitants inuited to a Feast, he found none of those daynties, wherwith mortall men, being often deceiued, sought more to please their Sensuality, then to satisfy Nature, euen to the ouerthrow rather of their forces, then to the strengthning therof: so as that vnusuall dyet, and the manner of dressing it, held him to greater temperāce therein. Yet for all this, he was of no lesse ability of body then before. For he had his health no where bet∣ter then in Iaponia; by which it is euident, that a spare dyet doth not diminish, but increase ones health, and forces. But now he had much more to do, in acquainting his tongue with their language, The Ia∣ponian language then his palate with their dyet. For although the Iaponian language be not of its owne nature very hard, yet haue the Iaponians by their endeauours brought it to be exceeding difficile to learne. There is not any language more copious then theirs. For to expresse diuers conceits of things in a different māner it hath wōderful store of words, all signifying the same thing; and in vsing thereof, it hath a certayne kind of Elegancy, and as it were, a smacke proper to that country. They do not without great consideration, vse any word which first occur∣reth, but, as some are more elegant, some of a lower strayne, so do they keep a proportion with the mat∣ter, and persons to whome they are applyed. Nay, which is very strāge, they speake far otherwise, then they write. The men vse one kind of language, and the women another: and the letters which they send one to another, are written with one kind of chara∣cter, and their Bookes with another. By which co∣piousnes, and variety both of speaking and writing, much labour and tyme is required to learne their lan∣guage. And no man of ciuility must be ignorant in this kind. For if he do swarue any thing from their manner of speach, they will laugh at him, as at an ignorant and rusticall fellow; no otherwise then we are accustomed to do, when in speaking of latin, any one should make an odious iarring, in choice eares, by harsh and barbarous words. Francis therefore thinking that it now stood him vpon, to learne their language howsoeuer; when he had caused Paul the Iaponian to set downe the chiefe heads of the Christian doctrine in writing, he met with many rubs. For Paul being a man without lear∣ning, was no whit a better interpreter then a Mayster. And although his endeauours were aboue his forces, yet he effected lesse then the matter required. For he interpreted those points so ill, that there was no con∣nexion in his speach. And he also wrote so badly, that the Iaponians, who were euen learned, could hardly read his writing without laughing. But Xauerius be∣ing of an vndaunted courage, which alwayes striued agaynst difficulties, & making small account of mens laughing at him when their saluation was in hand, went perseuerantly stil on in the businesse. Where∣fore dealing in the best in manner he could with the people, he by the sanctity of his lyfe, and diuine fer∣uour of spirit, wrought so efficaciously with thē, that he did more good by himselfe, then eyther by Paul, or any other Interpreter. For at the nouelty of the thing, and of the doctrine he taught, the inhabitants came flocking about him by whole troupes, partly out of desire to see strāgers wholy different from them, both in habit and behauiour; and partly also, to know what Religion they had brought out of the other world. But because for want of perfect language, they could not well explicate their owne meaning, nor yet resolue those who asked them questions, some scoffed at them, others mocked at their strange habit and be∣hauiour, & others pittyed them being strangers, dee∣ming that such men comming out of another world as farre as Iaponia, to bring thither a new Religion, ought neyther to be fooles, nor to bring with them matters of small moment: so as by this variety of iud∣gement many were moued with a desire to know the new Religion they had brought, and receyued much profit therby. In the meane tyme Paul the Iaponian hauing setled his affayres, began to be admired by his Countrymen, because hauing trauayled ouer India, he recounted to them many strange things, & neuer heard of amōgst them. Going therefore to salute the Prince of Saxa∣ma who remayned 15. miles from Cangoxima, he is by him courteously entertayned. After mutuall gratu∣lations, the Prince asked him many questions concer∣ning matters in India, & of the Portugheses wealth and manners. Paul hauing well satisfyed him by his relation, of what he asked, taketh forth a curious table which he brought out of India, wherein was painted the Image of the B. Virgin Mary with the child esus sitting in his mothers lappe. A King of Iapo∣nia hum∣bly ado∣reth the Image of our B. Lady. And after he had ould the Prince diuers things of the Christians Reli∣gion, he shewed him this picture, who forthwith ben deth downe his knees in veneration therof, & cōman∣deth all that were present to do the like. But further then this veneration of the Picture, the Prince went not: yet his mother being in loue therewith, greatly desired to haue a patterne of it, but there was no pain∣ter found who could performe what the pious womā requested. She had also afterwards a great desire to know the Christian Religion, & demanded to haue the principall points therof set downe in the Iaponian language. Paul did so indeed, but soone after she de∣sisted from her good purpose. Wherfore seing his endeauours to haue no effect he returneth agayne to Cangoxima, Paul the Iaponian endea∣uours to propa∣gate the Christiā fayth. and imployeth himselfe with farre better successe at home, then he had done abroad. For the deuout and laborious man, being as well moued by Xauerius example, as of his owne accord, set himselfe seriously to worke amongst his owne family and kindred, neuer leauing to teach and exhort them, day nor night, sometimes by one alone, sometimes altogeather, vntill he had drawen many of them to the Christian faith: so as within a short space his wife, daughter, and many of his kins∣folkes both men and women, were instructed in the Catechisme, and baptized, the people no wayes misli∣king what they had resolued vpon, and done. But Xauerius vnderstanding for certaine, The Ninxit or chiefe Priest of the Bonzies. that the peoples affections depended wholy vpon the authori∣ty of the Bonzies, and that if he could but once weakē the same he should find all things easy; thought it ex∣pedient first of all, to bend all his forces against their esteeme and credit amongst the people, as against the maine fort of superstition. Wherfore meeting vpon a very fit occasion with the chiefe man of the Bonzies (whome they call Ninxit, & who farre excelleth the rest not only in yeares and dignity, but also in the o∣pinion of learning) he by his courteous behauiour in∣sinuateth himselfe into his familiarity. Then falling from one discourse to another, by little & little he be∣gan to buckle with him about matters of Religion. And not in vaine. For he found him presently, not to stand constantly to what he said, as well concerning the immortality of the soule, as in other points, but to stagger in his opinions, when he was pressed with the truth; so as he had no great difficulty in ouercom∣ming, and pressing downe the poore man. Yet the Bonzy taking great content either in Xauerius prudēce or els in the sweetnes of his conuersation, held him in great esteeme. Now the rest of the Bonzies following their Ninxits example, desired also to conuerse with Xauerius, rather for ostentations sake, then for any od will they bare vnto him. There was nothing hich they more admired in him, then the greatnesse his mind, who for Religions sake only, had by a ng and dangerous nauigation come from Portugall rough the vast Ocean, to those vtmost partes of the orld. They also with exceeding admiration and de∣ ght gaue eare to him, whilst he declared vnto them, at there was an euerlasting Blessednes in Heauen, yd vp for those who serue Christ with deuotion, & nctity of life. Now the Bonzies being partly wonne by Xauerius ourtely, and partly conuinced by his erudition, the usinesse seemed to be in a good forwardnesse. But be∣ ause he could not deale with the people without an nterpreter, his endeauors were indeed much hindred through want of language. Wherfore being sollici∣ ous how to procure the saluation of so many peri∣shing soules, he with all speed learneth the principles of the Iaponian tongue, wherof he had before gotten a tast. Then, that he might deale the more freely with the people, he maketh meanes for accesse vnto the King: wherin Paul the Iaponian stood him in great steed. For he easily drew the King of Saxuma, who much desired to haue friendship and commercement with the Portugheses, to shew particular countenāce vnto Francis and his companions, who were of great authority with the Portugheses. Francis therfore being admitted to the King, and finding him well disposed, brought him without any great difficulty, to giue free leaue vnto his subiects, to receiue the Christian Reli∣gion. This liberty was no sooner graunted, but pre∣sently two of the Bonzies, and many other Iaponians vnited themselues to the fayth of Christ; and within a few monthes space aboue an hundred Cittizens be∣came Christians with the good liking of their friends and kins folkes: All whome Xauerius instructed with a greater care & industry, for that he had as yet no skill of the Iaponian characters, which (as we sayd before) are more difficile to learne, then the wordes themsel∣ues. Wherefore hauing the chiefe points of the Chri∣nian fayth turned into the Iaponian language, but yet written in our European characters, he taught thē to the Neophites, reading them out of the writing it self. He also sent diuers Neophytes into India, there to be brought vp in learning in the Colledge of Goa, that being afterwards furnished both with knowledge, & Christian behauiour, they might be more able to bring both admiration, and assistance to their Coun∣try men. CHAP. III. He rayseth a dead Mayd to lyfe: and cu∣reth another of the Leaprousy. A FTER this, there happened a strange E∣uent, which augmented both the flocke of Christ at Cangoxima aud made Francis his name more famous also. There was in Cangoxima an honest and substantiall Cittizen, yet no friend to Christian religion. He had a litle daugh∣ er whome he loued most deerely, who by vntimely eath was suddainly taken away. Whereupon falling ut of wits with griefe, he sayd, and did many things nbeseeming a man of his ranke. Amōgst others, there me vnto him certaine Neophytes of his kindred & iends, to condole with him, & to celebrate the fune∣ lls of his daughter; who being greatly moued with e wofull case of their kinsman, aduise him with all eed to go vnto Xauerius, who was a holy man newly ome out of another world, and implore his ayde; for ertainly he would restore his daughter to life. There was no great difficulty to perswade the afflicted Fa∣ her therto. Wherfore being set on with the desire of his daughters life, he runneth to Xauerius bedewed all with teares, and declareth the matter vnto him, hum∣bly beseeching his help, who hauing lost his child, was now left all alone. Francis pittying his case, presently betaketh himselfe to prayer, togeather with Iohn Fer∣nandez his companion. And after a while he riseth vp cheerfully, & comforteth the man, willing him to be of good courage, and telling him withall, that his daughter was aliue. Vpon which words the Barbarian began to be in choller, who had but euen now left her certainly dead. Wherfore either thinking himself to be accounted a lyar, or else that Francis disdayned to come vnto his house, he departed in a chafe. As he was in the way homeward, one of his family mee∣teth him, and bringeth him tydings that the mayd was aliue, and in good health. Wherupon the man, feeling his sorrow in an instant turned into ioy, hast∣eth home with great desire to see his daughter whome he so dearely loued. When he entred into his house & beheld her aliue and in health, he could hardly belieue his owne eyes; and with teares trickling downe for ioy, asked her by what meanes she was restored againe to life? As soone, quoth she, as I was dead, there stood ready at hand certaine cruel executioners, who snatching me vp, went to cast me headlong into an horrible pit of fire▪ but vpon the suddain there appea∣red two other singular men, by whose meanes I was deliuered out of those executioners hands, & restored to life againe. At this relation of the maid, the father stood a while astonished through admiration. Then perceiuing, manifestly, that it was done by Xauerius help, he leadeth his daughter to him to giue him than∣kes. Assoone as she saw Francis & his companion, she stood at first amazed, then turning to her father, she cryeth out: Behould, Father, these be the two men that rescued me from Hell. Then he with the mayd falling downe at Xauerius feete, with aboundance of teares gaue him humble thanks: who presently taking them vp with ioy of hart, willeth them to giue thākes to Christ the sonne of God, and Author of mans sal∣uation. Neither was this great miracle done in vaine. For this one mayds restoring to life, caused the saluation of many others. And the Father, daughter, and all the rest of that family presently became Christians. O∣thers also were, by this example, mooued to implore Xauerius ayde, & desired to receaue the faith of Christ. Amongst whome there was a certaine Leaper, borne of good parentage, who had sent one to Francis, re∣ uesting him to come & cure him. But he receiuing the essage excuseth himselfe in a courteous manner, by eason of his so many other imployments; yet sendeth ne of his companions to him, with instructions what o do. When he came thither, he saluteth the sick man erylouingly, & asketh him three, times as Xauerius had ppointed, whether he would become a Christiā? And uing a signe that he would, the other presently ma∣ eth vpon him the signe of the Holy Crosse. A won∣ erfull thing. He had no sooner done, but the Crosse stantly wiped cleane away the leaprosy. Wherupon e man was instructed in the Christian faith, & a lit∣ e after baptized. These things being done in the view f the whole Citty of Cangoxima, were straight carri∣ d into India, and related to Francis his companions here, not only by Vincent Pereira a Portughese mer∣ hant and Xauerius familiar friend, a man worthy of ll credit although in a matter of such importance; ut by many others also. CHAP. IIII. He receaueth nevves of the Martyrdome of Fa. Antony Criminalis. N OW whilst Xauerius was reioycing at the happy successe of Christian affayres in Ia∣ponia, there came vnto him letters out of India that did somewhat afflict him, by which he vnderstood of the death of Fa. Antony Crimi∣nalis. This man, as we said before, was by Francis made superiour in the Promontory of Comorinum, & hauing for the space of foure yeares, with great fruit of his labours, managed the affayres of Christian Religion in that Coast, in the yeare 1549. a little before Xaue∣rius entred into Iaponia, obteined the crowne of Mar∣tyrdome, a reward due to his paynes. For when a great band of the Badages, inflamed with hatred against Christian Religion, had from the bordring kingdome of Bisnaga, broken into the coast of Comorinum, spoi∣ling & destroying all before them the Christians, in such a fearefull tumult, presently forsooke their villa∣ges, and houses, and began to fly to the Portughese shippes, which at that time lay there at anker. Antony therfore being in a great throng of wo∣men and children, and troubled with many cares, in∣couraged those who were afraid to make hast away, and withall affoarded his help and assistance to others that were weake, and cold not fly so fast. In the meane time the enemy approached, & he fearing least some of the Neophytes being intercepted by the Barbarians might through payne of torments, be drawne from the faith of Christ, resolued like a good Pastour there to spend his life for his sheep, Ioan. 11. if need required. The Portugheses inuited, and intreated him to come into their shippes to auoid the presēt danger; but he wholy forgetting himselfe, prouided more for the safety of those that were with him, then his owne, by ridding out of the way those, especially women & children, who by reason of their weakenesse, were most in danger. Now whilst he freeth others from the cruelty of the Barbarians, being himselfe stopped from reco∣uering the shippes, for that the enemy had gotten be∣tweene him & the shore, The Mar¦tyrdome of Fa. An¦tony Cri∣minalis. he fel into their hands. Then all burning with the loue of God, and hauing his co¦gitations fixed rather vpon Eternity, then vpon this mortall life, kneeling downe vpon the ground, and lifting vp his hands to heauen, offereth himselfe to death with incredible courage and constancy. Nor was the Barbarians cruelty, lesse then his valour. For being thrust through the body with three launces, he fell downe dead. And it is reported, that when they were stripping him, as he lay thus grieuously woun∣ded, he helped those cruell robbers to draw off his owne cloathes, that he might not seeme to hold his apparell faster then his life. This newes, which could not otherwise choose, caused in Xauerius diuers affections. For as it grieued him, that he was depriued of so notable a subiect; so was he greatly ioyed for the Fathers good fortune, in receauing the reward of his labours, by so noble a Crowne. So as honouring the memorable death of this holy man both with teares, and prayses, he be∣gan to hope firmely, that the sterility of that field, be∣ing now watered with the bloud of this Martyr, would dayly yield more plenty of fruite. Neyther was his hope heerein frustrate. For since that tyme the Ghospell hath no where yielded a more plentiful har∣uest, then in the coast of Comorinum, so abundant hath byn the increase of Neophytes in that coast, no lesse eminent in piety, that in sweetnesse of manners. CHAP. V. The course of Christian affayres being hin∣dred at Cangoxima, he goeth to preach the Ghospell at Firandum, & Aman∣gucium. F RANCIS hauing the like occasion in the citty of Cangoxima, met with a farre diffe∣rent condition. For when he, thirsting af∣ter Martyrdome, had weakned & beaten downe the authority of the Bonzies, and that the for∣ward spring of neophites begā to make now a glorious shew; behold vpon the suddaine a tempest was raysed by the Bonzies, which brought great calamity to the Christian cause, and which was more heauy to Xa∣uerius, then euen death it selfe. Many were now by diuine instinct become Christians; and many also by seeing the truth, were drawen to imbrace the fayth of Christ, The Bon∣zies hin∣der the course the Gos∣pell. when as the Bonzies (which thing Fran∣cis had long for seene) hindred the course of the Ghos∣pell. For when they perceaued, that by bringing in, and increase of Christian Religion, the respect both to their Gods, and their owne authority came to be set at naught, they began in good earnest to be all on fire with rage & anger. And so thrust forward as well with madnes, as by the Deuill himselfe, they come in great troopes to their king, telling him very reso∣lutely, and plainly: That he should looke very wari∣ly what he did, and should prouide both for his owne safety and of the common good, whilest it was in his power. If he did permit his subiects to entertayne strange Religious, their Countrey Gods would cer∣taynly become a mocking stocke euery where: and if they were once incensed, what could he expect els, but that Cangoxima, and his whole kingdome would within a while be vtterly ouerthrowne? Did not he see, that the Christian Religion was wholy repugnāt to that of Iaponia? & how it lost euery day so much, as the Christian Religion gayned? Neyther could he be ignorāt that where strange ceremonies should be pre∣ferred before those of their owne coūtry, there would be caused extreme sorrow to the country Gods? And certaynely it was a lesse fault for the people to offend therein, then for the King to winke at others offences. The slower that Heauen was in punishing, the more enraged would the wrath thereof be when it came. For no doubt but the first founders of the Iaponian Re∣ligion, would be reuenged of Cangoxima for so great a disgrace, and that both he & his kingdome would be vtterly destroyed for the impiety of a few. Wherefore if he had any respect, or reuerence of his Country ce∣remonies, or Gods, it were wisedome to looke ey∣ther for their fauour, or stand in feare of their anger. The King being stroken with this speach of the Bonzies, & being also out of hope of commercement with the Portugheses, published presently an Edict or Proclamation, prohibiting vnder payne of impri∣soment & death, that all men should keep their Coū∣try Religion, & that heerafter none should become Christians. But Xauerius hoping euery day, that times might grow better & calmer, tooke great care in loo∣king to his yong flocke. And all the rest of his tyme which he did not imploy therin, he was accustomed to bestow vpon God, with whome he conuersed more then with men, esteeming such diuine conferences to be, not only an incouragement to vertue, but a com∣fort also in the time of persecution and labour. He therfore being a stranger in a Barbarous Citty, and which was wholy bent against him, endured with wonderfull quiet of mind, many and grieuous mise∣ries, as well of hungar and cold, as of other extreeme difficulties. The King∣dome of Figua. But hauing passed a whole yeare in these labours & incommodities, when he perceiued there was small, or no hope left for increase of the Ghospell at Cangoxima, he resolued to depart from thence to some other place. Wherfore bidding farewell to his Neophytes, he left the protection of them to Paul of the holy Faith: & togeather with Cosmas Turianus, and Iohn Fernandez, raysed vp with new hopes, intended to passe into the kingdome of Figua, whither now the Portugheses had resorted for traffique. It is incredible to be spoken what aboundance of teares the new Christians shed vpon Francis his depar∣ture from them, for al did beare him extraordinary af∣fection, as well for many other respects, as chiefly for his singular sanctity of life. Wherfore weeping, & in lamentable manner, calling him Maister, Guide, and Father, they tooke at last their leaues, with infinite thankes for the great paynes he had taken, in shewing them the way to eternall saluation. There were well- eere 800. Neophytes, so well instructed, that though ey were within a few months after bereaued of Paul eir maister, yet they perseuered euery one of them the Christian faith seauen whole yeares, without y other guide, vntill some of the Society came thi∣ er againe. The kingdome of Figua is in that Iland of Iaponia hich, The towne Firandū as we sayd, is called Ximus. In this King∣ ome there is a towne called Firandum, about 00. iles from Cangoxima, whither he repayed, and was ourteously entertayned by the Portugheses, and by heir meanes also by the King himself; with whome emayning for some dayes, he brought well nigh an 00. of the Cittizens, to the faith of Christ. And al∣though he repented not himselfe of the paines which he had taken amongst the Portugheses, and those of Firandum (for he had in few dayes made more Christi∣ans in Firandum, then he had done in Cangoxima in many monthes) yet hauing greater matters in hand and committing the charge of the Neophytes to Cos∣mas Turianus, and taking Iohn Fernandez with him, he passeth ouer into the Iland of Iapon, intending to go to Meaco. But vnderstanding by those who were expe∣rienced in those parts, that Amangucium, a Towne of good note lay in his way, he presently goeth thither, to sound out, and try the disposition and inc nation of the King of that Country Amangucium is a very ample, and famous sea Towne, scituated in that part of Iaponia, which (as we said) is properly called Iapon. For there the King of that Country hath his Royall seate; who being very wealthy & potent, striueth for the Empire with the King of Meaco, who is accounted the greatest King of all the rest. That towne of Amangucium ac∣cording to the fashion of that country, is built of tym∣ber, conteyning in it to the number of 10000. fami∣lies, and is distant from Firandum almost 300. miles. As soone therfore as Xauerius came thither, he found very many of the Nobility, and more of the vulgar sort, desirous to know the Christian Religion, wher∣of they had long since heard many things by report. He therfore obserued this order, that twice euery day at the corners of streetes, and in crosse wayes before a great concourse of people he explicated the Ghospel of Christ out of a written paper, for he had not yet gotten the Iaponian language perfectly; yet all did not with the like prosperous successe giue eare vnto the word of God: many did indeed hearken very willing∣ly thereto, but more contemned the same; some also laughed thereat in skornefull manner. In so much, that when Xauerius went along in the steetes, Xauerius is vsed like a madmā. a great company of boyes, and baser people followed, and mocked him as though he had byn out of his wits, re∣peating also in a scoffing manner many words of the sacred mysteryes, and Christian lawes which he had read vnto him. All which things he bare patiently & ioyfully, not considering so much the reproach, as the cause thereof: so as he did much more good by his pa∣tient suffering, then by words. For the wiser sort of his auditours, seeing playnly that he was no foole, ad∣mired at his singular patience, and quietnesse of mynd in the midst of such disgracefull reproaches and con∣ melious words, especially when they heard that he as come out of Europe into Iaponia, through such uge and vast seas, for no other end, but only out of ale to teach them a new Religion. At last, his strange vertue & sanctity of lyfe began be held in great admiration and reuerence, and to anifest it selfe not only by words, but by deeds also. hereupon many Noblemen desirous to know more rticularly, what Religion that was which he had ought out of the other world, sent for him home to eir houses, promising of their owne accord, that he could yield good reasons of those ceremonies, hich he had introduced amongst them they would referre them before those of their owne Country. ut this indeed was now a businesse, not consisting the wil, or any indeauour of ours, but in the mercy f God. There were diuers others also who heard these hings, but most of them attended therto, more with heir corporall eares, then with any interiour desire hey had to imbrace them. Noble∣men sed for him to their houses. Xauerius, hauing thus spent ome dayes in the streetes, and in priuate houses not without fruit, was at last sent for by the King him∣ elfe: who demaunded of him his Country, and the cause of his comming into Iaponia. He answered, that e was a Spaniard borne, and came thither to preach nto them the law of God, out of the care, and zeale which he had of their saluation. For that none could be saued who did not acknowledge God the Creatour of this vniuersall World, and Iesus Christ his only Sonne the Sauiour of all Nations; and moreouer keep his diuine lawes, and Precepts. Whereupon, being commāded by the King to declare what that law was, He prea∣cheth the Gos∣pell to the King he willingly obeyed, & began to recite the same out of the booke which he had written. He was heard with great attention, and admiration, for the space of an hower or there about. But the barbarous King being better disposed to heare, then to performe those hea∣uenly things, was carelesse of what was sayd. Xauerius then applying himselfe againe to his for∣mer function of preaching (as custome doth by little and little qualify the most vnruly dispositions) found the minds of the people more indifferently disposed, and began to reape more fruit of his labours. The Eth¦nickes at the hea∣ring of Christs tormēts fal a wee∣ping. For that now very many gaue willing eare to the admirable passages of our Sauiours life which he recounted. But when he came to relate his bitter torments, and most vnworthy death, they could not conteine themselues from weping, the same seeming, euen to the Barbari∣ans harts, so greatly to deserue compassion. Thus Mercy it selfe opened the way vnto Religion, & some began already to be Christians. But Francis thinking it not worth his labour to remaine any longer in that Citty, determined to go vnto Meaco, with intention to demand of that King (who by reason of the ampli∣tude of his Empire, The great King of Meaco. is called the great King) permissiō to preach the Ghospell. For he had vnderstood that Meaco was the noblest and chiefest Citty of all Iapon, and very famous as wel for the greatnes therof, as for the fame of the Colledges (being also a prime Acade∣my) & multitude of Conuēts therin; in so much that at his first entrance into Iaponia he was in the mind to haue gone directly thither. But God fauouring those of Cangoxima, the ships, as we said before, arriued thi∣ther first, where hopes of good successe for the Chri∣stian Cause, had longer deteyned him, then the fruit which he reaped therby. Being resolued therfore to go vnto Meaco, he tooke with him for his companions Iohn Fernandez of the Society, and Bernard a Neophyte of Iaponia, a sincere good man, & the first that became Christian at Cangoxima. CHAP. VI. Of the great paynes vvhich he tooke in his iourney to Meaco. T HE Citty of Meaco standeth almost in the midst of the Iland, as it were the Nauil, of Iapon. It is distant from Amungucium, which is scituate in the first entrāce of the Iland, not aboue 150. miles, by a direct lyne. But the way of passing thither is much longer, by reason of the montaynes, and the many turnings & windings about those narrow armes of the sea. Thither did Xaue∣rius direct his iorney in the yeare 1550. and month of October, at what tyme the weather is very could and bitter in Iapon. The way was then not only rough and craggy, but couered also with perpetuall snow, which the hard frosty winter had congealed togea∣ther. Throughout the woods there hunge downe from the trees as it were certaine ysicles, like beames of cogealed Snow, and Ice, threatning death and destruction to all passengers who trauayled that way. Besides this, there was no small daunger in respect of the continuall ciuill warres, wherewith the whole Country was then exceedingly pestered; as also of the great number of theeues wherewith those woods and wayes were ordinarily, yea daily haunted, and infested. Notwithstanding all these, & many other vnspea∣kable miseries of the way, Xauerius hauing his mynd wholy fixed vpon the Diuine Prouidence, and Salua∣tion of Soules, vndertooke with incredible ioy, and iubilation of hart, Xauerius maketh himself lacky to one that ri∣des on horse∣backe. that so long and daungerous a io ∣ney, entring into the same, euen in the most vnseaso∣nable tyme of the yeare. And that he might the more freely passe through so Barbarous a Countrey, and sauage a Nation; and withall to enioy the company, and commodity of a Guide in so tedious, and vn∣couth a iourney, he maketh himself a seruant, and be∣commeth a Lacky to a certayne Iaponian Gentleman of that Countrey, who by chance he met withall, trauayling a horsebacke vpon businesse to Meaco; ac∣counting it an honourable thinge to serue a Barba∣rian, or Infidell, euen in the basest office, for Christ his sake. Francis therefore, running a foote by his Mai∣sters side, ouer and aboue the burden of his owne furniture for saying of Masse, and administring of other Sacraments, he carryed at his backe his May∣sters implements and baggage, who rode on horse∣backe, and euen disdayned to carry his owne neces∣saries himself, when he found commodity of another to do it for him. Besides, the Iaponian when he was to passe through any theeuish place, for feare of ob∣bing, spurred on his horse, more like one that were running a race, then an ordinary trauayler by the way; and this without any compassion at all of his Lacky, whome he saw, was not able to follow him keeping on that pace, especially through such dur∣ty, and vneuen way, and with so heauy a burden on his backe. Therefore, for the most part, he was forced to trauayle barefoote, The la∣bours and mi∣series of his iour∣ney to Meaco. by reason of the many and of∣ten slowes and plashes of water he met withall, and other little brookes that he was to passe ouer. In so much that hauing his feete oftentymes greatly swol¦len with snow, and cold weather, he trauayled with exceeding great payne; being also, partly through running after his Mayster, and partly through the weight of both his burdens, that he carryed at his backe, euen wholy spent, and tyred out. Besides being not able to take sure footing, by reason of the slyppinesse of the yce, and roughnesse of the way, he receaued many a sore, and painefull fall. All which intollerable difficulties he not only o∣uercame with great quiet of mynd, but had with withall his cogitations so firmely fixed vpon God, that euen at that very tyme he became wholy abstra∣cted from his senses. For such was the force of his heauenly contemplation, and so greatly was he o∣uercome with the sweetnes thereof, that scarsely knowing what he did, he many tymes ran among the brambles and bushes, and strooke his feete agaynst the stones euen till the bloud came out, without any feeling or payne at all. Now at night he was common∣ly in as bad a plight as in the day. For oftentymes be∣ing all wet, and euen wholy spent with cold and hungar, he came at night to his Inne, where there was no humane comfort to be had, nor any ease for these his miseries. Wherof this may be a sufficient proofe, that during all that iorney, he eate nothing but only ryce (which himselfe also begged as he trauailed) with no lesse want of food then payne of body. More∣ouer the insolency of the Country people, to these his miseries which he suffred in the way, added sauce of the same nature. For the Iaponians being of a proud and haughty spirit, & seing him a stranger, contemp∣tible, vnexpert in their complements and behauiour, & one that contemned himselfe, vsed him euen like a poore foole, or sotte: so as in townes and villages where he was to passe in boates, as also vpon the way, and in the Innes, Xauier is vsed like a foole. he was the subiect for euery one to play vpon. But all this he bare, not only patient∣ly, but cheerfully also, reioycing with the Apostle to be for Christ his sake reputed a foole, & the outcast of all. And hauing thus spent two whole months vpon the way, after innumerable miseries passed both by water and land, at last through the goodnes of God he arriued safe and sound at Meaco. Meaco is the royall Citty, and the greatest and most famous of all Iaponia. This Citty when it flouri∣shed (if we will belieue what is reported therof) con∣teined well neere two hundred thousand families; but hauing bin oftentimes destroyed by warres, pillage & fire it is now little more then halfe so great. The Cir∣cuit indeed of the walls, and the vastnes of the Citty do yet well shew to haue byn no lesse in forme times hen that which hath byn sayd therof; but now when au rius came thither, it had only about one hundred ousand houses. There is in this Citty a very famous Academy, fiue principall Colledges of Schollers, and nnumerable Conuents of men, and women: so as here seemed to be offered to Xauerius abundant mat∣ r to worke vpon. But so secret are the iudgments f God, that his hope wholy vanished away, & came nothing. As soone therefore as he came to Meaco, he expe∣ ed some dayes at the Court, wayting for oppor∣ nity to come vnto the Kings presence, and to aske is licence to preach the Ghospell in his kingdome; Xauerius is deri∣ded by the Kings guard. ut in vayne. For his ignorance of the Iaponian custo∣ es and behauiour, his vulgar, and worne-out ap∣ arell, and his Christian simplicity caused him to be erided, and wholy reiected by the Kings Guard. Fin∣ ing therfore all passages vnto the King to be stopped n such sort, that he could not by any meanes get ccesse vnto him; and vnderstanding that certayne Noblemen, who, by reason that the King of Meaco's Regall authority began to grow now out of date, had withdrawn themselues from his obedience, changing is determination, and leauing off all thought of ob∣ ayning the King Letters-Patents, began to try the Meacensians themselues how they stood affected to∣wards the Christian Religion. But finding the whole Cittty in perplexity, and solicitous expectation, and feare of warres which were then cōming vpon them, he lost his tyme and labour in speaking to them, who had their eares, & mynds wholy bent another way. Moreouer, when he preached in the streets to the people that stood round about him (which had also hapned to him in other townes) the boyes, He is thowne at with stones. and baser sorte of people, threw old shoes, and stones also at his head to driue him away; so far was obstinate Su∣perstition from opening her eares, or vnderstanding to admit of wholesome doctrine. But he went away, reioycing that he had byn held worthy to suffer reproach for the name of IESVS. At last when he saw the saw the Citty to be both disquieted in it selfe, & wholy auerted frō the Ghospel, it much grieued him that after so lōg & pain∣full a iourney, he was to depart without doing any good, hauing not so much as reaped one handfull out of so large & spacious a field. But leauing all to Gods diuine prouidence, he returneth agayne to Amangu∣cium, comforting himselfe with this consideration, That it is a great honour, not only to do, but also to suffer for Christ. CHAP. VII. Hauing by Presents obtayned the King of Amangucium his fauour, he conuerteth many to the Christian Faith. R ETVRNING therfore to Amangucium with almost as much trauell and misery, as he had gone from thence to Meaco, he de∣termined presently to go vnto the King, & o deliuer him certaine letters, and presents from the iceroy of India, and the Bishop of Goa, which he had eft at Firandum. He intended to haue presented these uifts to the King of Meaco, who was sayd to be the reatest of all Iaponia: but when he perceiued that he aigned now at other mens pleasures, and that his uthority was not so great as his Name, and withall, hat the King of Amangucium was very potent and wealthy, changing his determination, he thought it est to present them vnto him; deeming it not amisse o gaine his fauour by guifts, who was by his autho∣ ity best able to helpe the Christian cause. So retur∣ ing speedily to Firandum, he bethinkes himselfe of a ew meanes to obteine accesse vnto the King, the which necessity had forced him vnto. He had now learnt by experience, that the Iapo∣ ians (according to the common corruption of mor∣talls) esteemed men by the outward shew, and orna∣ment of their body, & that any one in poore cloathes was scarce accounted a man amongst them: as if the worth of man consisted rather in his outward attyre, then in his vertuous disposition. Wherefore laying aside his old worne coate, By put∣ting on rich ap∣parell he procu∣reth to speake with the King. he resolued to cloath him∣selfe in Court-like habit; and by the splendour of his ornaments, so to feed the eyes of such as were carry∣ed away, rather by the exteriour shew of things then by that which was truly good indeed, that afterwards he might bring them to conceiue the light of Truth. As soone therfore as he came backe againe to Aman∣gu ium, putting himselfe into rich apparell, and with two or three seruāts attending him, he went vnto the King. And the euent declared his prudence heerein. For being presently brought in to the King by his of∣ficers, he is by him receiued in a very friendly & cour∣teous manner. Then making a short speach before hand, He pre∣senteth his guifts to the King. he deliuereth vnto the King, from the Viceroy of India, and Bishop of Goa, as pledges of their friend∣ship, Letters, and certaine outlandish Presents, among which there was a Musicall Instrument, & a Watch, things very gratefull, and much esteemed in those places, not so much for the value, as for the rarity, and curiosity of the workemanship. The King therfore being wonderfully glad for these letters & guiftes which the Portugheses had sent him, presents againe Xauerius very bountifully with a great quantity of siluer, He refu∣seth the Kings guifts. & gold. But he remembring himselfe to be a Priest of God, & no merchant, giueth backe againe the things which were offred him, and withall earnestly requested the King, that he would by his Royall Edict giue him leaue to publish the di∣uine Law throughout his dominions, and his subiects to receiue the same: for that nothing could be more gratefull to his and the Portugheses desire, then that. At which words the King being stroken with admi∣ ation at his temperance, The Kings E∣dict for the Christan Religiō. who despised that which o∣ hers sought after with so great dangers both by sea & and, made no difficulty to fauour his Religion whose vertue he admired. Wherupon without any further delay, he commandeth a Proclamation to be made hroughout all the streets of the Citty, that it was his Royall pleasure, that the Christian Religion should e propounded to his subiects, and that whosoeuer would, might become Christians: And that none should either by deed or word offer any affront to the Portughese Priests; neither should any of his subiects suffer any detriment, or disgrace for hauing forsaken is country Religion. Besides this also, the better to nable Xauerius to performe that which was granted vnto him, he gaue him for his dwelling place a certai∣ e Conuent of the Benzies, which then was voyd. This gayned both credit to Xauerius, and esteeme o his Religion. For many desirous to know the new Religion came flocking to heare him; nor was Xaue∣ ius wanting to giue them satisfaction, hauing now gotten some pretty skill in their language. Twice therefore euery day did he preach vnto the people, be∣fore a great assembly of the Cittizens. After he had ended his sermon, he spent some tyme in conference with his auditours about that which he had propoun∣ded vnto them out of the pulpit, eyther by answering to their questions, or else by questioning them. These disputes cōming one vpon the necke of another, held out most commonly till it was very late in the night, so that he had scarcely any leasure to prouide for his corporall necessities. And in all this businesse nothing hindred him so much, as his vnperfectnesse in the Ia∣ponian language. For oftentymes when any vnpro∣per word sounded harsh to their nice and delicate ea∣res, they laughed at his ignorant pronunciation. And there wanted not some also, who did load him with questions, for no other end, but to fynd out some∣thing whereat to laugh. But such was the spirit which he spake with all, such the sanctity of his lyfe and Religion, and so farre excelling the lyfe and doctrine of the Bonzies, that what he could not effect by words, he cleerly de∣monstrated by deeds. Wherefore the Iaponians being an ingenious nation, & much led by reason, saw now well inough that the things he spake, had very good sense & connexion, how soeuer he vttered them in bad language. Many therefore came vnto him out of the Cōuents both of Bonzies & Bonziesses; many also of the Nobility, but much greater was the nūber of the vul∣gar sort. The house was continually filled with peo∣ple of all qualities, and many tymes it could not con∣teine the multitude which came thither. The questi∣ons which were disputed to and fro, were so many & diuerse, that the foggy mist of errour being dispersed, and the light of truth spreading abroad its glorious beames, many perceiued by Francis his answeres, how vaine & false their superstitions were, and that the diuine Law was true and solid: and this diligence of theirs to find out by examination the true Religion was seconded also on their part, with as great for∣wardnesse in receauing the same. Some dayes therfore being spent in asking & an∣ wering Questions, many became Christians, wherin hose who had bin formerly the chiefe men, in obsti∣ ately ouerthwarting and contradicting Xauerius in is sermons and disputations, gaue the first example; God turning their spirit of contradiction into a mild plyable disposition. Fernādez vertue at a certay∣ne Iaponi∣ans inso∣lency. And heerin, Patience, and not Learning only, carried away the chiefe prize. For as ernandez, Xauerius companion, was preaching to the eople in the publike street, a certaine Iaponian pas∣ ng by by chance, came to his sermon; who being an solēt rude fellow gathering his mouth full of spitle, asteth it forth, full into the preachers face, in sight of al the people: The for∣ce of pa∣tience to conuert Ethnic∣kes. who bare that disgrace with such ad∣mirable patience, that he was not moued one whit herat, but only wept his face with a handkercher, nd so went on with his sermon. Wherupon one of he Assembly was so moued by that example of Pati∣ nce, that he verily belieued men endowed with such ertue, could not teach any Religion but that which was holy. And so repayring to Francis, was instructed, nd the first of all that was baptized. Others afterwards followed his example. Amongst whome, one Laur ntius Lusko conceiued within his soule, Laurence Lusko a notable preacher such impressions of diuine light, that quite a∣ andoning all earthly things, he consecrated himselfe wholy to Gods seruice, to the great good of Iaponia. For being by Xauerius receiued into the Society, he be∣came afterwards a notable Preacher, and brought very many of his Country-men to the light of the Ghospell. After this many of good note were receiued to the sacred fountaine of Baptisme, who being ther∣by bound to Francis in the highest degree, endeauou∣red so to gratify his loue, that they could neuer sa∣tisfy themselues therin. When he therfore asked them about the Iaponians Sectes, and Religions, they disco∣uered all vnto him, and that with more freedome and forwardnesse, then they were demaunded. CHAP. VIII. Hauing found out the Sects of the Iaponi∣ans, he conuerteth many of them. B Y these men therfore, he got a farre more exact knowledge, then before he had done of the Iaponians Religions, The Ia∣ponian sectes. & Ceremonies. There were in all, amongst them, nine principall Sectes, as well of men as women, wher∣of it was free for euery one to follow that Sect which best pleased him. Whence it came oftentimes to passe that there were in the same house almost as many dif∣ferent opinions, as there were seuerall persons, and all at strife amōgst themselues, euery one endeauouring to preferre their own sect before others. Among al these Sects, there was not one which taught any thing cō∣cerning the world, or the soules Creatiō. And no mer∣meruayle, since they all togeather held, that they had no beginning. Yet they all agreed in this, that after this lyfe there be two places, one for the damned, the other for the blessed. But what manner of abyding place the blessed haue, or by whose power soules are thrust downe into Hell, there was no mention at all amongst them: only they spread abroad certayne old wiues tales, Xacas & Amida the Iapo∣niā Gods of the Authours of their Religion, among whome one Xacas and Amidas were esteemed the prin∣cipall Gods, who of their owne accord vnderwent most grieuous, and very long paynes, to saue the rest. Of these Sectes, some of them conteyne 300. precepts, others fiue hundred; yet they all hold that there be fiue points only necessary to saluation, wher∣by is forbidden Murder, Eating of any liuing creature that is killed, Theft, Adultery & Lying, & the Drin∣king of Wine. These the Bonzies, & the Bonzi sses vn∣dertooke to satisfy for the people, who being hindred through the cares & affayres of the Citty, could not obserue these lawes; but yet vpon this conditiō, that they should allow them houses to dwel in, yearely re∣uenewes, & other maintenance; & withal (forsooth) should do them honour & reuerence. The Bou∣zies wic∣kednes and aua∣rice. Wherupon the wealthier sort of people, and the Nobility, that they might haue freer leaue to sin, accepting of the condi∣tions, gaue then readily whatsoeuer they demaunded, making no doubt but the Bonzies prayers would res∣cue them, euen out of hell it self. Besids this, the Bon∣zies begge almes of all men, but giue to none. Now when Xauerius had found out these, & other such like things, turning the Iaponians own practises as weapons against themselues, he began in such sort to deale with the Bonzies before the people, as that by euident arguments and reasons, he ouerthrew their counterfaite fictions. But especially he demonstra∣ted vnto them, that none could, by the Bonzies pray∣ers, be freed from the torments of Hell, seeing that it was certayne, they did not obserue those conditions themselues, which they had vndertaken to obserue for others. For it was manifestly knowen, that they being now fallen frō their ancient discipline, vsed to drinke wine, to eate flesh priuately, and publikely to Lye, and commit Adultery. Whereupon the people, when they saw the Bonzies false dealing laid open be∣fore their face, began to be all-enraged, and to com∣playne, that they had by their treachery byn decea∣ued, and robbed of their goods. The truth where∣of the Bonzies themselues were driuen at last to con∣fesse, saying; that vnlesse they had by their wits vp∣held themselues, they should infallibly haue perished with hunger. And so from this tyme forward, they not only suffred many losses, but foule disgraces also. Then Xauerius vnderstanding by the relation of of some Iaponians his friends, The Ia∣poniās fa∣bles of Xacas & Amidas. & by their ancient writ∣ten Records, that Xacas and Amidas had liued full out two thousand yeares, and that Xacas had byn borne eight thousand tymes, and much other such like stuffe deseruing rather to be laughed at, then recounted; he presently with great instance set himselfe to can∣uase out these idle fables, shewing that they were not Gods, but diuelish Monsters. Whereto when the Ben∣zies themselues, the Sorcerers, & other aduersaryes of God (being vtterly vanquished) had nothing to say; the Christians were indeed very glad, and much cō∣firmed in the fayth, and course which they had vnder∣taken: And the Ethnickes that were present percei∣uing their Maysters errours, began to stagger in their owne Religion, and by litle and litle retyred them∣selues to the standard of Christ. The Bonzies againe, vrged Francis with the autho∣rity of the Chineses, from whome the Iaponians had fetcht their Religion: and therfore that the Iaponians would certainly neuer change their Religion, and ce∣remonies, vnlesse the Chineses first changed theirs. Wherfore he should goe, and carry the Ghospell thi∣ther first, and bring the Chineses vnder the yoke of Christ; and when he had so done, then would Iaponia also willingly imbrace the faith and Religion that he taught. But these sayings of the Bonzies, were litle or no hindrance at all to Xauerius endeauours, who went on neuer the slower with that which he had resolued vpon. The Iaponian , who had neuer heard any thing at all of the Creation of the Sunne, Moone, Starres, celestiall Globes. Land, Sea, Soules, & other things, did not, for the most part, acknowledge any author or maker of the world. The Ia∣ponians ignorāt in astro∣logy. When Francis therfore shewed them that God was the Creatour of all things, and es∣pecially of soules, they wondred very much that such a beginning of all things, had bin wholy hidden and vnknowen, not only to the Iaponians, but also to the Chineses, from whence they had their Religion. At last their admiration came to this, that looke how much they reuerenced Xauerius & the Christian Religion; so much they detested the Bonzies, & the Iaponian Sectes. By these disputations therfore Xauerius did so vexe the whole generatiō of the Bonzies, that they who be∣fore his comming, were continually iarring amongst themselues about their owne Lawes, new leauing off that quarrell, there was no other speach among them, but of the law of God. The Ja∣ponians witty in∣terroga∣tions. And euery day there came many, who asked of Francis diuers questions: as whe∣ther there were one beginning of good & bad things? And whether that, were good or bad, it self? When he replyed, that there was but one beginning of all, and that good in the highest degree; they alleadged against him, the euill spirits, enemies of mankind, who were certaynly knowne to be naught: If then God were good, why did he create such detestable creatures as they were? Then Xauerius answered, that God had created them all good, who by their owne fault were become bad, and therfore were tormented eternally in Hell. But then they vrged him, why did God per∣mit men, whome he had created to serue him, to be deceyued by the Deuils? And why had he not created their affections rather inclined to vertue, then proue to vice? To which Francis demonstrated, that man was free by nature, & had diuine helps at hand, both to combat and get the victory, if he would make vse therof: and withall shewed, that al mankind was fra∣med to honest and vertuous carriage, but was by the sinne of their Parents, and their owne faults growne dep aued. Then they fly from mans fault to Gods se∣uerity, & aske him; Why he made that infernall pri∣son of Hell, the greatest of all euills? And why would e neuer shew mercy to them that be condemned to e∣ ernall torments? Xauerius contrary wise declared vn∣ them, that such was the Maiesty of God, and so reat his benefits bestowed vpon all men, and euery ne in particular, that there could be no torment foūd great, which was not due to man for his abomina∣ e wickednes; who being a base worme of the earth, urst violate the infinite power of Almighty God: yet ch againe was the diuine Mercy & Clemency, that alwayes punished lesse, then was deserued. These, & many other such things were heard with ceeding good liking, so as they were all easily satis∣ ed. But that which troubled thē most, was, that God emed neither bountifull nor indifferēt, who hauing are of all other Countries besides Iaponia, had neuer eclared himselfe to the Iaponians, before Francis his omming thither: Who likewise, had damned to the aynes of Hell, all those who had not worshipped the od they knew not; and had permitted also their an∣ estours, who neuer enioyed that heauēly light, to be arryed headlong thither? Concerning this point rancis made it cleare vnto thē, that the diuine Law, hich of all others is the most ancient, was imprin∣ d in the harts of men. For the Iaponians euen before ey had their lawes from the Chineses, knew by the ght of reason that it was an heynous offence to kill man, to steale, forsweare, and other things which ere forbidden by the diuine law. Wherupon if any ne had committed any of these crimes, he was tor∣mented with the worme of conscience, which tooke s it were reuenge of that wickednesse. This (quoth he) we may vndoubtedly find to be true, in a solitary man, who although he should be brought vp in the wildernesse, without any learning or knowledge of humane law, would not for all that be ignorant of the diuine law, concerning Man-slaughter, Theft, Periu∣ry, and other the like things. And if this were so, euen amongst barbarous nations, what should we thinke of those, that were ciuill, and well trained vp? Should not they therfore be iustly punished, who did violate the diuine law, which was ingrafted in them by na∣ture? which if they had obserued, they should infalli∣bly haue bin illuminated with light from heauen. After he had satisfied them with this answere, they began by little and little to put themselues vnder the wholsome yoke of Christ. 500. Ia∣ponians baptized Wherupon within the compasse of two moneths, there were wel neere 500. cittizens baptized, who bewailing the state of their children, parents, kindred, and Ancestours, deman∣ded oftē of Xauerius, whether there was yet any hope, or meanes to deliuer them out of euerlasting misery? But he with teares in his eyes affirming no, exhorted them, that they who had the diuine light & saluation now offred them, should be so much the more thanke∣full to God for it, and should mitigate the feeling of others ruine, with the hope of their owne saluation: so that Patience might make that lighter, which they could not auoid. Then turning themselues to other questions, they asked him of what figure the world was? what cours the sunne and the starres held? from whence came the blazing Comets, the winds, lightning, and thunder? hat force that was which powred forth snow, haile, nd showres of raine? Of all which, when Xauerius, ho was very skilfull in Astrology, & natural Philo∣ ophy, had fully declared to thē the causes, they being holy ignorant before of all such things, stood wholy mazed therat, admiring both his wit, and learning, auing neuer heard of the like. And when the report ereof was spread ouer all the Citty, it brought also ch esteeme to the Christian Law, that it was much oken of, not only in publick, but also at home in pri∣ ate houses. This thing also caused no lesse domage to e Bonzies families, then it did good to the Christian ause, by auerting the affections of many from their ountry Superstitiōs: so as some were of opiniō, that any Bonzies forsaking their manner of discipline, & eir corporall maintenance failing them, many of eir Conuentes would heereby fall to decay, to the reat aduancement certainly of the Christian cause. nd how much the Bonzies authority was weake∣ ed heereby, may euen appeare by this, in that there as neuer a one amongst them all, though neuer so ealous, who was not detained in his former course, ather out of necessity, then for any affection he bare nto it. There was in Amanguc um a certaine Noble man o rich & wealthy, as few in that kind out went him. He, togeather with his wife, exceedingly fauoured oth Xauerius and the Ghospell; but their too much orwardnesse in former times did much abridge them f their liberty afterward. For they had built many ouses for the Bonzies, and endowed them with great reuenewes, to the end that Amidas, to whome they bare special deuotion & reuerēce, might be propitious vnto them for the attayning of eternall blisse. Where∣upon they stood earnestly vpon it, that they would neuer by changing their Religion vpō a suddain, loose Amidas his fauour, which they had now purchased with such expences, for so many yeares togeather; & that if this were not, w ch lay heauy vpon their cōsci∣ences, they would be otherwise aduised: shewing heer∣in a double folly, who hauing once rashly cōmitted an errour, had rather still remaine plunged therein, then once to rayse themselues out. But that which they, out of a vaine respect of their ancient institute, would not do, to follow the glorious faith of Christ, was zea∣lously performed by many others, who were illumi∣nated with the light of truth. The Bonzies therfore, being not able to indure this ignominy, and disgrace, began to be enraged agaynst the Christians, and in their Sermons to cast out ma∣ny impious wordes against God; also to belch forth many reproches against Xauerius, which suited better with themselues; and withall to denounce vnto the Iaponians in a threatning manner, that as soone as Ia∣ponia had receiued the faith of Christ, it should be vt∣terly destroyed. But these their reproachfull speaches caused more hatred to themselues, then cōtempt vnto Xauerius. For the Iaponians knowing for certaine that the Bonzies maledictions proceeded out of enuy and malice, begā not only to find fault therewith, but also to fauour the innocent, by turning their backbiting into Xauerius prayse, and respect towards his person. In the meane time Francis making most diligent quiry whether the Iaponians had had in times past a∣ y knowledge of Christ, The Ja∣ponians had re∣ceyued no know¦ledge of Christ & his Gos∣pell. & his Ghospell, found both y their writings, and testimony of the Iaponians thē∣ lues, that they had neuer so much as heard of the ame of Christ before his comming: which thing (as ood reason it should) gaue thespurre to Xauerius fer∣ ent desire, who was of himselfe forward inough, in reading abroad the Ghospell, being exceeding ioy∣ ll that he was come thither for the aduancement of eligion: & that the sound of the Gospell which had in heard in the furthest parts of the Land, might also ow be preached in the vtmost Ilands thereof. Many herefore being thus brought into the fold of Christ, Christianity began greatly to flourish, when as there apned an accident which caused much furtherāce & onour thereunto. There is at Bandua in Iaponia, an Academy of very great note, both for the fame & no∣ ility therof, as being frequented by more then 4000. udēts. One of this Academy, a man of good esteeme, nd renowned for his wisedome and learning, vpon very memorable occasion, became a Christian. There were in that Academy a kind of Bonzies who aue themselues much to speculatiō, The Aca¦demy of Bandua. pondering what would become of thē after this life, & other such like hings: wherof many through deep cōsideration, came tlast to be of opinion, that there was no meanes in the Iaponians Religion for the sauing of their soules. For thus they discoursed with themselues: That certainly there ought to be one beginning of all things, wherof in their Books & Records there was no mention at al, nor of the maker of this world. How therefore could they be saued who knew not their maker? But whilst others stood staggering betwixt shame and feare, this man, of whome we speake, ouercomming the one & the other, through desire of his saluation, was made a Christian. He was indeed of the mynd to haue v∣nited himselfe to the Bonzies; but as soone as by Francis his discourse he came to know their errours, thinking that he ought certainly to worship him that made both him, and the whole world, and whome the Chri∣stian Religion propounded vnto them to adore, chan∣ging his mind, he put himselfe vnder the triumphant standart of Christ. This accident grieued the Bonzies no lesse, The Ja∣ponian Neophi∣tes zeale. then it comforted the Neophytes. For when he for his lear∣ning, bare away the bell from the whole Citty where he dwelt, his authority gaue great aduantage to either part. Whereupon inciting others by his example to Baptisme, the Christian Common wealth began to be increased both in dignity and number. And this cau∣sed in the Neophytes such feruour of spirit, that euery one of them fell to dispute with the Ethnickes about matters of Religion: and when they had conuinced them, would lead them, as captiues to Baptisme, stri∣uing in these their combats, and victories one with a∣nother. Whereat Francis took such content of mind, Within the space of one yeare he bapti∣zeth 3000. that it made him to haue no feeling of his labours. Thus therfore was the Christian busines wonder∣fully increased at Amangucium (for within the com∣passe of one yeare there were baptized to the number of 3000.) and their piety equalized the increase of the ocke. For they who in former tymes had so often run er their beades, by imploring the Authours of their ct; now turning superstition into true Religion, in∣ eased wonderfully that deuotion of theirs. For in ying the Beades of our Blessed Lady, at the end of e∣ ery Aue Maria (which is vsually said vpon euery smal ead) they alwayes pronounced the wholesome na∣ es of Iesus and Maria, Iaponian Beades. and withall endeauoured, as uch as they could, to frame themselues according to rancis his fashiō, as being the nly patterne they had imitate. And so great was the progresse in piety hich the Amangucian Neophytes made vnder Xaue∣ us their Maister, that although, when he was called way by other Kings who importuned him, they ere left almost wholy destitute both of maisters and eachers, for the space of 25. yeares, in the midst of Ethnickes: yet they held on most laudably the sayd Christian course which they had begun, being ther∣in both guides, and maisters to themselues. CHAP. IX. Going to the King of Bungo, at his inui∣tement, he is honourably receyued by the Portugheses. S O great was now Xauerius Name in Iapo∣nia, and so great was the opinion of his Sanctity, that it almost exceeded all hu∣mane power: wherefore the Iaponians re∣uerenced him as a diuine man. This fame of his Ho∣lines spreading it self farre & neere, had filled almost all Iaponia with his renowne, and worthy acts. Whilst therefore he was imployed, especially at Amanguci about the occasions whereof we spake before, Francis is sent for by the King of Bungo. he receyueth from the King of Bungo very courteous, & respectful letters to this tenour: That wheras by rela∣tion of a certaine Portugese ship that was lately arri∣ued in his Dominiōs, he had vnderstood many things of his singular vertue; and being greatly desirous to impart an important businesse to his owne person, he would be pleased to repaire withal speed to Bungo &c. At the very same tyme also, one Edward Gama Gouer∣nour of the Portughese ships, had by his letters inui∣ted Francis to a port Towne of Bungo, distāt 180. miles from Amangucium. Xauerius therefore, conceauing in ech place new hopes of happy successe in his busi∣nesse, leauing Cosmas Turrianus, and Iohn Fernandez to looke vnto the Neophytes at Amangucium, he pre∣pareth himselfe for this new iourney, and forthwith setteth forward on his way, with two or three Neo∣phytes in his company. He had now gone almost 175. miles on foote, when as Gama vnderstood that he was comming on his way▪ all wearied-out with trauailing a foot: wher∣fore he speedily sendeth out certaine Portugheses with horses to meete him; who hauing gone about a mile, met with Francis, and his Neophytes These Neo∣phytes were of noble Parentage in their owne coun∣try, and heertofore of great wealth; but hauing had all their goods taken from them by the King of A∣ angucium, because they were become Christians, hey went with Xauerius with intention to be brought p at Goa. They rode vpon excellent horses with good urniture, for so Xauerius had commanded them. But e followed them on foote, loaden with his packe of Church-stuffe, so ardent was his loue to Humility, & he Crosse. Xauerius loue of humility and the Crosse. This sight moued the Portugheses no lesse o admiration, then compassion, that so worthy a an, should in such sort so debase, and tyre out him∣ elfe. Presently therfore they offer him a horse, as also o take his packe to ease him: but he by no meanes ould be drawne to mount a horse backe. Wherefore he Portugheses, although Xauerius were very vnwil∣ ing, and forbad them so to do, went along with him n foote. This spectacle was most gratefull, & pro∣ itable vnto the Neophytes, who admired the ciuility and courtesy of the Christians. Thus they came vnto he Port of Bungo, which is called of the inhabitants, by the name of the Riuer, Fingus. Bungo is a Citty wherin the King keepeth his Court, Bungo the Royall Citty. standing in that part & Iland of Iaponia, which as we said, is called Ximus. The King of Bungo was but a yong man, Xauerius is with all ho∣nour re∣ceiued by the Portuge∣ses. yet far surpassing his age in grauity & wisedome. At that time he had only Bungo vnder his gouernment, being a King among the Iaponians more famous for prudence, then wealth. None was more fauourable to the Portugheses then he▪ For being gre∣ atly desirous of their friendship, he had long before sent letters with presents to the King of Portugall, and the Viceroy of India. As soone as newes was brought to the Portughese ships that Xauerius was arriued, the men came all out presently to meete him with great ioy & gratulation, euery one endeauouring to honour so holy a man: wherein they proceeded so farre, as to salute him one after another in a triumphant māner, with foure vol∣ley of shot, from out their great Ordinance, being 18. peeces in number. And the euent declared afterwards that this was not done so much through the aboun∣dance of humane affection, as by the diuine prouidē∣ce. For that the thundring out of so many great shot, sounded to the Iaponians eares, as though there had byn a battayle at sea. Whereupon the King, who remayned in the Citty not farre from the Port, was surprized with no small care, thinking that the Por∣tugheses had byn at fight with Pirats. And therefore with all speed he sendeth a principall Gentleman to Gama the Gouernor, to demand of him what the mat∣ter was, that he might assist the Portugeses, if any oc∣casion serued. Gama, after he had returned humble thankes to the King, tould the Gentleman that all things were quiet and ioyfull with the Portugheses; and for that Francis Xauerius an holy man, & much respected by the King of Portugall their maister, was there arriued, they had receyued him with that applause, and shew of good will, as was fitting his deserts. At this the Gentle∣man stood amazed, & would hardly belieue that they had affoarded such extraordinary honour to so poore a beggar, The Bon∣zies de∣fame Xa∣uerius. whome he thought of no credit, by reason of his beggary, and basenesse of attyre: For the Bon∣zies being afrayd, that if Francis (who was very fa∣mous for his sanctity of lyfe) came once to Bungo, he might there also lessen their credit, as he had done at Amangucium, had defamed him after an vnworthy manner, both with the King, and the people. The Gentleman therefore stood still as one great∣ly astonished, without once mouing, through admi∣ration. But afterwards, when he saw Xauerius coun∣tenance shining out with worth, and sanctity in that old torne habit, he perceyued presently the Bonzies crafty dealing. Whereupon returning with all speed e relateth to the King both what the Portugheses had answered him, and what himselfe had also seene; and withall tould him, they had made as great a triumph for Xauerius arriual, as if a ship had come into the port oaden with siluer; wherefore there could be no que∣stion, but al those things were false which the Bonzies (who were indeed fretted to the hart at his incom∣parable vertue) had broached abroad of him. For that his very contenance was so full of worth, that he was able to drawe the behoulders, to loue and reuerence him. The King greatly admiring heerat; Good reason, quoth he, haue the Portugheses then, to reuerence and respect him. CHAP. X. He is conducted to the Kings Court, in great pompe, by the Portugheses. P Resently vpon this relation, the King sen∣deth a yong Gentleman a kinsman of his to Xauerius with letters, in a most friendly & respectfull manner, earnestly requesting him, not to thinke it much to come vnto him the next day, pretending withall the great desire he had to be acquainted with the Christian Religion. The Princely youth therfore, cōmeth to the Portugheses, hauing in his company 30. Noblemen, besides his Tu∣tour. Who as soone as he beheld Francis, although in poore attire, yet most venerable both in counte∣nance and corporall presence, and much honoured by the Portugheses, was amazed. Wherupon, after he had deliuered the Kings letters to him, The Ja∣ponians admire at the loue of pouerty. looking v∣pon his Tutour; Certainly, quoth he, this Nation cā∣not but haue a most excellent God, whose secrets are wholy hidden from vs, seeing that his pleasure was, that the Portughese shipps should doe homage to so poore a man; giuing all to vnderstand by that solemne triumph of theirs, what a gratefull iewell Pouerty was in the sight of Heauen, which is commonly so basely esteemed, & contemned by mortall men. The next day Gama calling to counsayle the merchants, & the other Portugheses, concluded with the generall onsent of all the rest, that it would make much for he aduācement of the Christian cause, if perhaps that first encoūter of Francis with the Ethnicke King did arry some shew of Maiesty, by setting the same out with all the preparation that might be; The Portu∣gheses preuent the Bon∣zies calū∣niations. as well to pre∣ ent the Bonzies slaunders and culumniations, that here might be no hindrance to the current of the Gos∣ ell; as also that Xauerius high esteeme might be able to rāple vnderfoote that authority, which a most proud eneration had vsurped through falsehood and lying. or certayne it was, that how much he should seeme be esteemed by the Portugheses, so much the more lso would the Iaponians account of him. But now, He is a∣gainst his will condu∣cted with gre∣at pōpe to the King of Bungo. when all the rest agreed to the Gouer∣ ours proposition, Francis only, who could not en∣ ure to heare of such honour, as holding fast his Euā∣gelicall simplicity, was of a contrary opinion: yet be∣ ng conui ced not so much by reasons, as by the vna∣ imous consent of the Portugheses, he was forced at ast to condescend vnto them. Whereupon the Por∣ ugheses putting on euery one the most costly appa∣ ell they had, set forward with Xauerius towards the Royall Citty, with such solemne preparation, as is worthy to be obserued. They were carryed in small oates, hauing their sayles all of silke, bedecked & set ut with glittering banners. Besides this, there went long with them Trumpets and Cornets, answering ne the other by turnes, with notes declaring their estiuall ioy. At this vnusuall spectacle the inhabitants locked by troopes from all parts there about, in so much as the bankes vpon the riuer side where they were to passe, were all so thronged with people who came to behold this solemnity, that the Kings Officers were constrayned to keep backe the multitude, and to make place for the Portugheses landing. There was also one of the Nobility sent by the King, ready with a costly Litter wherein to carry Xauerius; but he very courteously giuing the King thankes for his ho∣nourable offer, would not accept thereof; and so sending backe the Litter, came on foote to the Court with very many of the Nobility of Iaponia attending him. Amongst all those that accompanied him, the Por∣tughese trayne far surpassed the rest in brauery. They were 30. in number, all gorgeously attyred, hauing chaynes of gold about their neckes, and euery one his man following him in a rich Liuery. Francis also (the Portugheses hauing forced him therunto) had set himselfe forth better in his apparell then ordinary, in∣tending afterwards to resume againe his old habit. For he had put on a very fayre gowne, ouer which he wore a fine linnen Surplisse, and about his necke there hung a Priests stole of green silke grogran down to his knees, with a fringe of gold, such as Priests did ordinarily vse to weare. Gama the Gouernour, as though he had bin his Steward, wēt before him with a long wand in his hand: Then fiue of the choysest yongmen of the whole company followed Francis, at∣tending as it were vpon his person; whereof one car∣ryed his Breuiary in a litle bagge of silke, another his Veluet Pantofles, another his staffe made of a Benga∣lian Reed, which had a typpe of gold at the top, ano∣ her his Hat, and the last an Image of the Blessed Vir∣ in mother of God, vnder a Canopy of crimson Da∣ ask. The rest of the Portugheses marched after, in a oure square ranke. This was the Portugheses owne inuention, not much approued by Xau rius, as winked at, becau∣ he could not hinder it. They went in this pom∣ e to the Court through nine of the principall streets f the Citty, with such concourse of the inhabitants ho flocked to see them, that the very houses were ucke, and euen couered with the people. CHAP. XI. The King of Bungo vseth Francis vvith honourable respect, although the Bon∣zies vvere agaynst it. A FTER this, when Francis was come into the Pallace, he findeth at the entrance or vtter Court thereof, 600. Souldiars of the Guard, all well appointed; and by and by n a large Gallery he meeteth with many more of the Kings Attendance. Heere, those fiue Portughese yongmen, whereof we spake before, bowing downe heir knees, offered to Xauerius with great reuerence that which euery one carryed; wherat the Iaponi∣ ns were so stroke with admiration, that presently they muttered out these, and the like words: Let the Bonzies now be gone with a mischiefe, and neuer heerafter haue the face to appeare in the sight of men, idle companions as they were. For certainly this man is not such a one, as they haue described vnto vs and the King, but rather indeed one, as we may thinke, sent hither by God himselfe, to curbe the slaunders of malicious tongues. From this Gallery there opened a fayre & spatious Hall ful of Noblemen, A child of seauē yeares of a rare wit. where a Child of seauen yeares of age (but of a rare wit, as might easily be perceaued) being led by a Venerable old man, meeteth with Xa∣uerius, and saluteth him according to the Country fa∣shion, telling him, that his fortunate arriuall at the Court would be as deare, and pleasing to the King, as a seasonable showre of rayne, is to a thirsty field of corne in the summer tyme. Wherefore he willed him to enter with ioy, & to know that he was as welcome to the good, as odious to the bad. To whome, when Francis had courteously saluted, and kindly returned answere: O Father (quoth the Child agayne) hap∣py are you, who are come out of another world into forrayne countryes, desiring to carry hence no other merchandize but the ignominy of Pouerty! O infinite goodnes of the God, whome you serue! O hidden wisedome of his, who is comforted with the Want & Pouerty of his Priests! Behould our Bonzies do so ab∣horre the disgrace of Pouerty, that conspiring all to∣gether, they auouch openly, that the way to heauen is stopped, and rampierd vp agaynst poore people. Heere Francis replyed, that he was in good hope, that God, the most mercifull Lord of Heauen and Earth, would at last driue away the cloude of errous, which ad blinded the Bonzies vnderstandings, and bestow vpon them the light of truth; and that they would al∣ o, when they saw that heauenly splendour once arise, forsake their peruerse and ignorant opinions. Then the Child discoursing a while vpon very weighty matters far beyond his age, brought Francis nd the Portugheses into a further Hall, The No∣blemens children make re∣uerence to Xaue∣rius. where the Noblemens sonnes sate all together. Who as soone as hey saw Xauerius enter, rose vp presently euery one, nd bowing their heades thrice downe to the ground, ccording to the Country fashion, make reuerence nto him. Then two of them, made a speach in the ame of all the rest, which I will heere set downe in riefe, wherby it may appeare what kind of eloquence he Iaponians are delighted in. Thus therefore they re sayd to haue spoken. Your happy comming, Sa∣ red Priest, will be as gratefull to the King, What kind of eloquen∣ce the Ja¦ponians haue. as the smile of the sweetest infant is to the mother when she giueth it the pappe to suck. And what wōder? seeing hat the very walles, which heere you behold, reioy∣ cing as it were at your presence, command vs to cele¦brate your comming with great loue and affection: & this for the honour and glory of that God, of whome as the report goeth, you haue declared certayne stran∣ge things at Amangucium. After this, they passed into another spacious Gal∣lery leading into an inward Hall, where Ficharondono the Kings Brother remayned with the chiefe of the Nobility. As soone as he saw Francis, he rec iued him courteously with the rest▪ & after mutu ll betweene ech other, he tould him, that the Court neuer saw a more ioyfull day; and with good reason, since the King accounted himself more happy, by the arriual of so worthy a mā, then if he were Lord of the 33. Treasuries of China: for so many there are sayd to be. The King of Bungo standing vp expe∣cteth Francis his com∣ming. At last Xauerius being brought by Ficharondono in∣to the inmost Hall, which for richenesse of furniture surpassed all the rest, he there findeth the King him∣selfe, who expected his comming. The fame of his worthy actes had long before this caused in the King a great admiratiō, but now vpon his meeting he con∣ceyued a much greater esteeme of him, so farre did Francis his presence surpasse the imagination (how great soeuer it were) which the King had conceyued of him in his owne vnderstanding. For his maiesti∣call and venerable aspect which Nature, and Age had now bestowed vpon him, was also much graced by the splendour of his sanctity, which euen dazeled the eyes almost of all that beheld it. The King therefore seeing Xauerius, came on a litle towards him, Xauerius maiesti∣call coū∣tenance. and receyued him, both in a respectfull and courteous manner. And when Francis according to the custome was kneeling down, he presently for∣bad him, by lifting him vp by the hand. And forth∣with making himselfe reuerence vnto Xauerius, by thrice inclining of his head as the coūtry fashion was, caused him to sit downe, on the same seate by him. After these salutations, & gratulations past on both sides, the King looking vpon Ficharondono his brother, and the other Noblemen, began with a lowd voyce that all might heare, to speake in this manner: O that ere lawfull for vs to demaund of God, The King of Bungo his testimo∣ny of the Christian fayth. the maker d Lord of Heauen and earth, his secret iudgments, d to aske what the cause hath byn, why he hath ey¦ er suffered vs to lye so long buried in such darknes, else bestowed such light and wisedome vpon these en who come out of another world? For we all ma∣ festly see, that whatsoeuer they say, although it be aynst our Religion, is confirmed which such solid asons, that we are not able to contradict it, if we ill follow the light of reason, or vnlesse we be who∣ voyd of all vnderstanding. Contrariwise we see r Bonzies to keep a stammering, when they are to plicate any difficultyes of our Religion, and to be variable and inconstant, as neuer to stand fast to hat they say; in so much that if they be now of one ynd and opinion, presently they wilbe of another. Wherby it sufficiently appeareth, that their doctrine nd Religion is nothing els but a rabble of confusion nd vncertainties: so that one cannot with any dis∣cretion hazard therein the euerlasting saluation of his oule. At this speach of the Kings, a certayne Bonzy no∣bly borne, called Faciandono, being by chance present and finding himselfe touched to the quicke, rose vp & answered the King very boldly and freely: That the cause of Religion was not of that nature that it might be determined by him, A Bonzies arrogan∣cy. who was ignorant of the do¦ctrine therein conte ed; Wherfore if he Maiesty had any doubt in his mind, he had those present there who could easily resolue him. And euen he himselfe would vndertake not only to ridde him of his scruple, but al∣so to make whatsoeuer he doubted of, more cleare vn∣to him then the sunne that shines: whereby all might plainly see, that those things which the Bonzies taught were both true; and that they also well deserued the stipēd which was payd them for their learning. Then the King smiling: Goe to (quoth he) incomparable Doctour, declare at last these secret and hidden my∣steryes of your Religion, we will with silence giue eare vnto you. Faciandono then, looking about him with great grauity: First, qu th he, it is impiety to call the Bonzies sanctity into question; for all do know well inough that they lead a lyfe which is holy, gra∣cious, and acceptable in the sight of Heauen it selfe. For they are men who do religiously obserue chastity, abstayne from fresh-fish, teach and instruct young youth, giue Bills of Exchange to those that lye a dy∣ing for the taking vp of mony in heauen, and ryse in the night to pray for the sinnes of the people. And be∣sides this, they are great friends to the sunne, starres, and celestiall Gods, with whome they haue often dis∣couses in the night tyme, and whome they do also many tymes imbrace, after a most sweete and louely manner. The Bonzy hauing stuft his Preface with these & such like fooleries, The Bon∣zies foo∣leries. anger so boyled in his proud and passionate hart, that he began, without feare or shame to inueigh intemperatly agaynst the King himselfe. Whereupon he gaue a signe, The Kings temper. twice or thrice to his brother, to cause the Bonzy to hould his peace. Who being commaunded so to do, and the King firmely fixing his eye vpon him, tould him, that indeed e gathered by his manners a sufficient tryall of the Bon∣ zies sanctity; and withall auerred, that he was so well edifyed, by the intemperancy & temerity of his ton∣gue, that he durst sweare, Hell had more right to his person, then e to Heauen. Heerupon the Bonzy ad∣ding intollerable pride to his former violent humour, cryed out aloud. That the tyme would come when Faciandon should be exalted so farre aboue all mortals that neyther the King of Bungo, The pri∣de & in∣tēperate tongue of a Bon∣gy. nor any other should be able to aspire to his throne. The King at these his wordes began to be moued, yet withall laughed at his rrogancy, looking vpon Xauerius, who aduised his Maiesty not to trouble himselfe, but to expect vntill the Bonzies fury were past▪ But the King commanded Faciandono to be gone, and warned him withall, that henceforward when he spake of God, he should not be so vaine glorious before men: In the meane time, he wished him to keep hand ouer his passions, and come againe to himselfe before he returned to the Court. The Bonzy therfore, being set on fire with this disgrace in respect of the assembly of Nobles who were present cryeth out alowd; Fyre from heauen consume the King, who dares do these things against the Prelates of the Gods; and so in a fretting and chasing manner flingeth vpō a suddain out of the Presence, leauing the King & No∣bles greatly moued with indignation at his vnciuill behauiour. The King then ready to sit downe to table, The King in∣uiteth Xauerius to dinner inui∣teth Xauerius to dinner. But he alledging that he was not acquainted with the Iaponian daynties, courte∣ ously refuseth: and withall making d e reuerence to the King, beseecheth God, for whose sake he did him that honour, to bestow vpon him sufficient diuine light & grace, that he might serue him in this life with sanctity, and purity of hart, and in the next enioy him for all eternity. At last the King, at Francis intrea y, giueth him leaue to depart, and withall earnestly re∣questeth him that he would now and then visit him, and teach him the mysteries of the Christian faith. Xauerius promised he would. And then the King pre∣sently with a cheerfull and friendly countenance of∣freth him with his owne hands, The King gi∣ueth to Xauerius from his owne ta∣ble. a dish of meate which stood before him, desiring him to take it; who, to com∣ply with the King, accepted of the same. Then the Go∣uernour with the rest of the Portugheses, who stood about Xauerius, fell downe vpon their knees all togea∣ther, giuing the King humble thanks for the great ho∣nour he had done vnto the Father, & themselues, euen against the Bonzies wills. CHAP. XII. Xauerius instructeth the King and people in the misteries of the Christian faith, & curbeth the audacity of the Bonzies. F RANCIS remained 46. dayes in this royall Citty of Bungo, imploying himselfe with al possible diligence in the instructiō of the Inhabitants. Yet his principall ca as to make deep impression of the mysteries, & ob∣ eruances of the Christian faith in the Kings mind. or which cause he became so inward with the King, hat there was then no comming for any Bonzy to is presence. For that he beganne to be much asha∣ ed of the foule enormities, which he had commit∣ ed, through the doctrine of the Bonzies. Wherfore by Xauerius perswasion he first abandoned many vicious abits in his owne person, The King by Xauerius persuasi∣on refor∣meth both his owne & his sub∣iects mā∣ners. rid his pallace of all vn∣ wfull loues and pleasures, and began liberally to elieue, & susteine the necessities of the poore, con∣ rary to the doctrine which the Bonzies taught. Then urning his thoughts to the reformatiō of his people, y little and litle he enacted many and seuere lawes a∣gaynst the murdering of infants (an vsuall practice in hose places) and other haynous crimes, and enormi¦ ies, which hauing byn brought in by the Bōzies were ow growne to a custome. He reuerenced Xauerius, as one that came from Heauen, & sent vnto him by the fauour of celestiall powers. Him only he admired, say∣ ing many tymes, that he saw in his face, as in a glasse, o his great confusion, all the hainous offences, wher∣with, by the Bonzies incitemēt, he had defiled his own soule; so as he was now vpon the point to be made a Christian. Yet Francis, did not so imploy himselfe about the King, as that he neglected thereby the people. For be∣ing wholy vnmyndfull of himselfe, he spent so much of the day in preaching to them in the market-place, that the Portugheses could scarce get from him one houre after sun-set, to onfer about pious matters, and another before day heare their Confessions. Not min¦ding his meate he attends to the sa¦uing of soules. Wherefore when some of his familiar friends com∣playned, that he came home late; he earnestly reque∣sted them, that they would neuer at any tyme expect for him at dinner, no in the day tyme euer thinke him aliue, for if they did otherwise, they would cause vnto him much trouble. For the dainties whereon he fed with chiefest delight, were the good of soules: neyther did he esteeme any cheere better then the sal∣uation of one only Iaponian, by vniting him to the flocke of Christ. And to this pious a arice of his, the diuine Prouidence was not a litle indulgent. There came flocking to him an infinity of peo∣ple, not of the vulgar sorte only, but also of the No∣bility, and many of the Bonzies themselues: whereof one of a very Noble Family became Christiā, with no small good vnto the Christian cause. He was called Saquaygirano, A noble Bonzie being conuin∣ced and conuer∣ted to Christ profes∣seth his fayth in in the market place. the chiefe of the Bonzies, a man of great note both for his learning, and Nobility of birth: who entring into disputation with Xauerius, & being ouercome by reasons, & inspired by the diuine good∣nes, yielded himselfe captiue to the truth. Wherfore, not thinking vpon any thing els then the truth which was offered him from Heauen, he publikely in the midst of the market place, before an infinite assembly of people falleth downe vpon his knees, and lifting vp his hands and eyes to heauen, with teares falling from his cheekes, cryeth out with the lowdest voyce he could. Behold, O Iesu Christ, eternall Sonne of Almighty God, I yield, and dedicate my selfe wholy vnto thee. And what I haue conceyued in my hart, I freely prof ss with my mouth. Do not thou, I , thee who of thyne own accord l ast called me, pe l me now, when I come vnto thee. Then with eeping eyes looking vpon the multitude who stood ound about him he added. And yee, O Cittizens, I treate & beseech you, that you will both your selues ardon me, and desire also others to do the like, for my often setting to sale those things vnto you for true, hich now I vnderstand to be false. This Confession of that famous Bonzy wonder∣ ully moued the affections of that Country people, 500. Ia∣ponians wonne to Christ in one day. & as an example to many of imbracing the Christian Religion. For it is well knowen, that Xauerius him∣ elfe often affirmed to the Portug ese , with whome there liued, that if he would, he could haue bapti∣ ed more then 500. Iaponians one day. But (which as very rare in such feruour of spirit) he was more prudent, Xauerius prudence then forward in the making vp of the mat∣ er; and also very circumspect, that nothing might done rashly, or in passion, which might giue aduan∣ age to the Bonzies fury, beeing now ready to burst orth. For that, being mortall enemies to the Chri∣ tian cause, they were long since, incensed against Xauerius and his friends, and had persuaded the peo∣ple, that seeing they would needs cast away themsel∣ es, they should damaund of Francis a great summe of mony in recompence, for changing their Religion, that they might not perish for nothing. Pouerty a disgra∣ce amōg the Iapo∣nians. Which plot of the Bonzies had this drift, that the vulgar sort taking notice of Xauerius pouerty, might haue lesse esteeme of his sanctity: so great a disgrace was pouerty a∣mōgst the Iaponians. A crafty deuise of the Bon∣zies. Yet little or nothing did they pre∣uaile by this calumniation against the knowne & tryed truth, but rather like water cast vpon hoat burning coales, it made Xauerius zeale flame out with greater force & vehemency. Whereupon the enraged Bonzies being put to the plunge, not knowing what to do, left nothing vnattempted, which might seeme for their purpose. But whē they perceaued their endeauours not to correspond to their desirs, they resolued to try their very vttermost. They had now oftentimes by entring into dispu∣tation with Francis, byn so foyled, & euen driuen out of the field, that they durst not open their mouth be∣fore him. Therefore they falsly slaundred him behind his backe, but in vayne. For that the threats which they had denounced, of the Heauens Wrath, agaynst the people, were now accounted idle. Wherefore see∣ing their ancient authority, to be worne out in the estimation of the Cittizens, turning their passion into fury, they began to waxe mad indeed. And first they heaped vpon Xauerius all the reproaches and maledi∣ctions they could deuise, calling him in scorne, A foule stinking dogge; the most beggarly fellow aliue; and a deuo ∣rer of dead mens carkasses. Then they cast forth threat∣ning words against him, and his company, that they would make them repent it, vnlesse they presently desisted from their enterprise. At last their passion & fury went so farre, that they plotted to make a tumult in the market-place, and therein vpon a suddain, to kill both Francis and the Portugheses. Yet were not these things kept so secret, but that Xauerius and the ortugheses had notice thereof. But he accounted it he greatest fauour which God had bestowed vpon im, to be threatned by his enemies: taking heed with∣ ll that he might not vnaduisedly prouoke those who ad no stay ouer their owne enraged passions. As for e Portugheses, they hauing the Kinges guard to se∣ re them, contemned the vayne threats, and plottes f such mad-brayne fellowes. Wherupon the Bonzies eing violence would not serue the turne, they bent eir designes another way. CHAP. XIII. n a disputation before the King, he ouer∣commeth the most learned of the Bon∣zies. T HERE was a certayne Bonzy called Fi∣carondono, the only esteemed man for lear∣ning among them, & who carryed the bell away from al the rest. For he had for thirty eares togeather, taught their profoundest & deepest ciences in the most famous Vniuersity of Iaponia. He as at that time President of a Conuent of Bonzies ome 40. miles distant. The Bonzies therfore of Bungo erswaded him, without much difficulty, to dispute with Francis, thinking it would be a great honour, if (as to him it seemed easy) he could in the presence of the King confute that strange Priest, who, as al knew, ad already beaten downe the rest of the Bonzies. He hasteth therfore with all speed to the Royall Citty, with six or seauen other famous Doctours in his com∣pany. It fell out very opportunely, that at the same time Xauerius, & the Portugheses were gone to Court to take their leaue of the King, being the next day to depart. And whilst they were rendring his Maiesty thankes, and requesting his passe-port for their iour∣ney, newes was suddainly brought vnto the King, that Ficarondono was arriued with a cōpany of choice Bonzies. The King (as might be noted by his counte∣nance) was not very ioyfull at this newes, fearing least Xauerius, & the truth might be beaten downe by his great learning. Xauerius therefore, seeing the King troubled, & doubtful what to resolue vpon, tru∣sting in the goodnes of his Cause, humbly intreated his Maiesty to let Ficar dono, that pillar of the Bonzi race, be brought in, knowing for certayne, that al∣though learning could do much, yet Truth could do more. Wherupon, the King being at last content, the Bonzy was admitted. After he had made due reuerence according to the vsuall custome, when the King demaunded the cause of his comming to Court, he answered: That he came to see a strange Priest, The pri∣de of a Bonzy. who was sayd to be come out of another world, and to know what manner of man he was, and the newes he had brought thence, This he thundred out with such boldnesse and arro∣gācy, that one might easily descry what a most proud and diuelish mayster he serued. And presently fixing his eyes vpon Xauerius (who courteously saluted him) and making an end of his ceremonious complements (whereof the Bonzies are very liberall) with a ooke n aboue the Bonzian strayne, he demaundeth of , if he knew him? and when Xauerius told him No, cause he had neuer seene him before, he turned to companions, and sayd: I perceiue, we shall haue great difficulty with this fellow, who knowes not arondono by his lookes. Fixing then his eye vpon ancis: Dost thou, quoth he, remember what mer∣ andize thou soldest me at Finorama? He tould him had nothing to answere to that, The Bon∣gies Py∣thagoreā fooleries concer∣ning the transmi∣gration. of soules whereof he was holy ignorant, for he had neuer byn eyther a Mer∣ ant, or seene Finorama, or spoken with him before at tyme; how therefore could it hang together, that had sold him wares at Finorama? The Bonzie af∣ med for certayne that it was so, and he could not oose but remember it, vnlesse he were very forget∣ ll. Xauerius therefore requested him, that because s memory fayled him in that point, he would help m out therein. Then very confidently, and setting it such a face as bewrayed his inward pride: Call y fe, quoth he, to remembrance with me: It is w 1500. yeares agoe since thou soldest to me at Fi∣ oma an 100. balles of raw silkes, in the vtterance hereof I became a great gayner. Hereupon Xauerius looking vpon him both grauely pleasantly: And I pray, quoth he, how old are you? he Bonzy answered that he was one and fifty. Then uoth Francis, how can it be, that you haue beene a erchant 1500. yeares ago, who before one and fifty ere not borne? vnlesse perchance you played the erchant before you were borne. And I vnderstand, uoth Xauerius, you all agree, that this Country of Iaponia began to be inhabited, not aboue 600. yeares since: how therfore doth this hould togeather, that you were a Merchant 1500. yeares ago at Finor , which at that time was nothing but a meere wilder∣nesse and solitude? See then, quoth the Bonzy, how much better we know things past, then you do what is present. Thou shalt therfore know, (because hi∣therto thou hast bin ignorant of it) that neither the World, nor Mankind, hath either had any begin∣ning, or shall haue any end. And so, mens soules being immortall, go successiuely out of one body in∣to another, both of men and women, according to the coniunction of the Moone, with the Sunne, and the starres, who frame and fashion the Bodies tender lim∣mes. Wherfore soules which haue good memories (such as myne is) do easily remember all whatsoeuer they did in their life time, when they were vnited to other bodies, which is not so with forgetfull soule , as it seemeth yours is. Xauerius hauing heard this foolery, He con∣uinceth the Py∣thagori∣call fa∣bles. & being very learned both in Philosophy and Diuinity, found n difficulty, by solid arguments, to confute these Pytha∣goricall and Platonicall dreames. First therefore he sheweth, that the World was not from all eternity, but was made at a certayne tyme, seeing that it ney∣ther was of it selfe, nor could be equall or coeternal with the maker thereof. And that it was made, and a∣dorned with men, and other liuing creatures by God the Parent and Authour of all things. When he ha proued this by many arguments, it was easy for him to shew, that the soules of men, had also a beginning nd were not before the bodies, which they do infor∣ e; but being by God infused into bodyes aptly orga∣ ized for them, did make vse of the corporall senses, r the gaining of arts & sciences. For who is so blind at seeth not, that Soules would willingly, if they ould choose, with losse & domage of so great a good, creeping into new and mortall bodies? And that ey would not, vnlesse it were by constraint, yield hemselues prisoners to their bodyes, to be parta∣ ers of all their miseries? Wherfore hath God, as euen eason it selfe teacheth vs, who is a most iust Iudge, ppointed for mortall men after this life▪ eyther eter∣ all rewards, or torments, according to their deserts; nce we playnly see, this equity is not vsed amongst hem whilest they liue in this world? When Francis made these things cleere and mani∣ est, by euident arguments, most fit similitudes and e∣ amples, the King indeed & Noble men agreed vnto im, declaring by their fauourable acclamations, that what he sayd, was very coherent, and most confor∣ able to reason. But the Bonzie, although in the iud∣gement of all he had the foile giuen him, would not for all this, through the pride & obstinacy which was ooted in his hart, giue ouer, least he should seeme to grant his duersary the victory, if he should acknow∣ edge himselfe ouerthrowne. Going therefore from the Controuersy concerning the world and soules, he egan to inueigh bitterly agaynst Xauerius, for that he euerely censured preposterous lust to be a most hey∣ nous offence, notwithstanding it was cleere & eui∣ dent, that the same was allowed by the lawes of Ia∣ponia, which neuerthelesse punished murders, adulte∣ries, and thefts most rigorously. To which Xauerius (after he had euidently demonstrated, that, that abo∣minable kind of lust, was most repugnant both to na∣ture, reason, propagation of mankind, and honest behauiour) answered, that it was no wonder the ma∣kers of the Iaponian Lawes, being themselues blinded with the very same vice, saw not the fowlenesse ther∣of; or if they did, yet would they not by any Law re∣strayne the liberty therof in others, which they would haue to be common to themselues. But grant it be so (quoth he) that no Law of the Iaponians did forbid it, yet certayne it was, that the law of Nature, en∣grauen in the harts of men, and Reason it selfe (if it were not depraued by euill custome) did wholly for∣bid it. For proofe wherof, this is a most impregnable argument, that in these kind of enormities specially, the doers thereof seeke out darke holes, and corners, and vse all meanes that none may see, or know it. Be∣sides this, if any one be knowen to be branded ther∣with, it is the very first thing that is cast in his teeth, when one intends to do him a disgrace, if he be once knowne to haue committed the same. Heere now Ficarondono's obstinacy being in the iudgment of euery one conuinced, The pee∣uish per∣tinacy of a Bonzie. gaue way to the truth. Yet he, because reasons failed him, held on his combat with spitefull clamours, & that in a more froward then obstinate manner. In so much, that the violent course into which this arrogant fellow did at last run, moued both the King and his Nobles, who began to cry all out vpon him, and that if he came to fight, he should get packing into the kingdome of Amangucium, which then was vp in armes, & there e should not want matter of combat; for that heere ll peace and quietnes was desired; But if he came to ispute, he should abstaine from passion and obsti∣ acy, and should imitate the forreyne Priest with whome he disputed, for that his temper & modesty in disputing ought to giue him example. At this the Bonzy (as he was naturally much inclined to chollar) eing carryed on by the intemperance of his tongue egan to curse the King and his Nobles, as though he ad bin mad, or drunke. Wherupon the King, incen∣ ed and styrred vp to indignation, commanded him presently to be thrust out of the Pallace, solemnely protesting withall, that were it not for reuerence to his Priesthood, he would haue commanded his necke to be broken. CHAP. XIV. Francis his constancy vvhilst the Bonzies be vp in tumult. T HIS so publick a disgrace (as they termed it) wherwith the Name of the Bonzies was for euer branded, droue them presently into a tumult, and vprore. Wherupon the dores of all the Temples in the Royall Citty were shut, and an Interdict put vpon the people, & Nobi∣lity; so as now the businesse was come vnto a com∣motion amongst the vulgar, The King of Bungo his prudēce. when as the King by his prudent dissembling the matter, did easily allay both the tumult of the one, and sedition of the other. In this meane time, the Portugeses partly fearing the vprore of the common people, and partly the Bonzies rage, had with-drawne themselues into the Hauen, counsayling Xauerius also to giue way vnto the time, & quit himself of the present danger. But he alleadging, that the Cathecumens would be therby left succourlesse and desolate, vtterly refused. Wher∣upon the Portugheses being in great care and sollici∣tude least they should leaue so worthy a man, in the hands of Barbarians, thought it very expedient, that Gama himself should go backe into the Citty, to draw him thence, before any mischance hapned vnto him; and in the meane tyme, they would expect him in the Road, vntill he returned backe with Xauerius. therfore hastning to the Citty in a little boate, fin∣deth Francis in a poore Cottage, instructing one of that Country, who was preparing himselfe for baptisme, and sheweth him the charge which the Portugheses had giuen him to fetch him away; sometimes allead∣ging reasons for the same, then againe intrea ing him that he would auoyd the present storme of persecuti∣on, which was comming vpon him from the Bonzie . But Xauerius being endowed not only with an vn∣daunted courage against dangers, Xauerius couragi∣ous spi∣rit. out desirous also to encounter euen with death it selfe for Christ his sake▪ O how fortunate (quoth he) would he be if any one of vs should chance to suffer that which you are so much afrayd of! I for my part know well inough, that I not worthy of so great an honour: yet if the diuine bounty please to bestow such a fauour vpon me, al∣though not deseruing it, God forbid I should refuse it. Wherfore in that you aduise me so earnestly, to prouide for my selfe, by flying away, I thanke you, & acknowledge my selfe much obliged to you for your great loue: but I neither may, nor can in conscience do as you counsaile me. For what greater calamity cā befall those, whome we haue lately begotten vnto Christ, then being forsaken by their Father to be ex∣posed to the rage and fury of the Bonzies? And what can be more gratefull to the Bonzies, then for him to giue backe to their threats, who neuer shruncke at their arguments? and by disgracefully flying away, to loose the honour of the victory already gotten a∣gainst them, and to leaue the spoyle behind vs? As for my selfe I will neuer, by Gods grace, suffer that my feare may be an incouragement to the wicked attēpts of Christ enemies. For we haue to deale with those who be terrified by our confidence, and confirmed in their presumption when they perceiue vs once to be afrayd. G. e too, therfore, since now you know what my absolute determination & resolution is, returne backe to your Companions, who expect you. I see well how much you are bound to assist them in their merchandize; but I know withall what obligation I haue to so bountiful and mercyfull a God, who for my sake & other mens saluation, hath suffred death, yea the death of the Crosse. This he spake with weeping eyes, and with such forcible words, and so inward a feeling, that Gama not daring to reply one word to the contrary, like a man wholy amazed, returned backe vnto the ships. When therefore he had related to the Portugheses, By the Gouer∣nours meanes the Por∣tugheses vndergo the dan∣ger with Xauerius. how all had passed betweene him and Francis, he tould them plainely, that since he was bound by the agreement he had made with them to carry their mer∣chandize to Cantona, an hauen towne of the Chineses, he would there leaue them his ship, to do with it as they pleased: But for himselfe he was absolutely and fully resolued to come backe agayne to Bungo, and ey∣ther to defend Xauerius, or els to dye with him. This incomparable fidelity of the Gouernour, wrought ve∣ry affectually in the pious mynds of the Portugheses. Whereupon, when they had all togeather commen∣ded his resolution, they also offer themselues to ac∣company him in so glorious an aduenture, striuing withall who should be most forward therin; so as pre∣sently they returned backe agayne with their ships in∣to the hauen, intending there expect the euent of the businesse. This newes greatly comforted both Xaue∣rius and the Cathecumens, and withall tormented, and euen brake the Bonzies harts, being a people very audacious where they see others fearefull; and very cowards, when they perceyue them resolute. CHAP. XV. auerius getteth a nevv victory ouer the Chiefe of the Bonzies. T HE Bonzies therefore, falling from open violence to priuate plottes, came togea∣ther in great troupes to the King, making earnest suite vnto him, that he would cō∣ and the disputation betweene Ficarondono & Francis oncerning Religion which had byn broken of, The Cō∣ditions of the disputa∣tion. to be gaine renewed. The King at first was no wayes incli¦ ed therto, but yet vpon certaine conditions he at last ondescended; To wit, that the busines might be car∣ ed without clamours, & falling into chollar; That or deciding of matters which might occurre in any ōtrouersy, there should be appointed certaine arbitra∣ ours, not any of the Bonzies, but of other indifferent & moderat men, whose office should be to iudge, what was granted and confirmed on eyther part, and to see hat the arguments were made according to the rule f reason; That the disputation ended, the said arbitra∣ ours, and the other Auditours should giue their sen∣ ence of euery article of Religion disputed, and that which was confirmed by the greater part of voyces, hould be held for certaine & ratified; And lastly that the Bonzies should neyther by themselnes, nor others hinder any frō being Christians that desired the same. There conditiōs were not so much approued, as acce∣ted off by the Bonzies, because they could not indeed refuse them. The next day therfore, commeth Fica∣rondono to the Court with aboue 3000. other Bonzies in his company: so as one would haue thought he had bin going into the field with an army. But the King out of his prudence, admitted only foure of al that nū∣ber, alleaging the danger of a tumult, and the disgrace also which might come therof vnto the Bonzies, for whome it could not be any credit, if it should be spread abroad, that 3000. Bonzies had disputed with one only forreine Priest. Neither were the Portu∣gheses failing in their affections towards Francis. For being aduertised of this his new combat with the Bon∣zies, The Por¦tugheses new affe∣ctions to Xauerius. they came againe vnto the Citty in a brauer mā∣ner thē before; in so much that the pompe they came in, and the singular reuerence which they vsed to∣wards Xauerius, did greatly amaze the Bonzies. When the company was assembled, the King first asketh of Ficarondono, what reason he could alledge, why a new Religion brought out of another world might not be diuulged in that Royall Citty? To whome the Bonzy, being now taught by the late dis∣grace he had suffred, to vse more temper, answered calmely; that the reason was easy to be giuen, because there was nothing more hurtfull then that, to their ancient Religion, to the Common-wealth, and to the whole order of the Bonzies, who both had, & al∣wayes did serue the Gods after a holy & pure māner: wherof there were extant most certayne approbati∣ons, and testimonies of the Kings of Iaponia; so that it were impiety in they Iaponeses, to seeke to saue their oules by other meanes, then had byn vsed by their orefathers, & predecessours for so many ages. Then Francis being by the King willed to answere nto this, desired that there might be some order, & ethod obserued in this disputation. Wherfore he re∣ uested the King, that seeing the Bonzies were come f their owne accord to oppugne him, he would be leased to command Ficarondono to declare in parti∣cular, whatsoeuer either he, or the other Bonzies mi∣ ked of that which he taught, that so he might an∣ were vnto them all. And moreouer he intreated, for he auoiding of contention, that that might be ratifi∣ed, and held for good, which his Maiesty, with the greater part of the arbitratours, should agree vpon, touching matters in the present cōtrouersy. The King granted Francis his request, and commanded that all matters should be so carryed. To which the Bonzy also agreed. Then Ficarondono demaundes of him, why he, be∣ing a Priest of a strange Coūtry, inueighed against the Iaponians most sacred Gods? Because (quoth he) I iudge them vnworthy of so glorious, and diuine a Title; which the rule of right reason hath made pro∣per only to him, who by nature is Eternall, and Im∣mortall▪ and being the Author of all things, made both heauen and earth, wherof he is sole Lord and gouernour For such is the infinite power & maiesty of God, that hardly can the wit of man, by imaginatiō or thought cōprehend it. Wherfore these few things which heere we see with our eyes, the motions of the celestiall globes, and starres; the certaine and fixed courses of times; corne, fruite, and other things pro∣claime him to be the only true and proper God, who gouerneth & ruleth this world, which himself made. As for Xacas, Amidas, Giron, and others whome you hold for Gods, looke but into your owne Chronicles and Monuments, and you will find them to haue bin men, very rich, and potent indeed, but yet mortall as we are. This answere which Xauerius gaue, caused in the Iudges a soft whispering among themselues, wherby they declared that it pleased them well. Wherupon when the Bonzy was ready to oppose him, the King bad him go to something else, for that was already iudged for good by the Arbitrators, whose sentence they were to stand vnto. He therfore demandeth of Francis, The Bon∣zies bills of Ex∣change. Why he disallowed of the Bonzies bills of Ex∣change, wherby the dead were prouided of mony in heauen, specially seeing by that meanes they who de∣parted out of this lyfe, became rich in heauen on a suddaine, who otherwise would haue remained poore and beggarly? To this Xauerius replyed, that their riches who went to heauen, consisted not in the Bonzies Bils, but in the Merit of good workes. And those workes were good which proceeded from right reason, and true Religion, being without question gratefull, and ac∣ceptable to that Eternall God, who giueth rewards to euery one according to their merit. As for Religi∣on there was none true & pure, but that of the Chri∣stians, whereby, sincerely and piously the true God is worshipshed; the which is also called Christian, be∣ use Christ the sonne of God deliuered it vnto men. or Christ, quoth he, being made Man for mans sake ought downe that excellent doctrine from heauen, ho being also glorious in miracles, replenished the rts of men with heauenly precepts; and lastly for ans saluation suffred death, washing away their sin∣ es with his owne bloud. Whosoeuer therfore being aptized according to the Christian rites, do truly & ncerely obserue the cōmandments of Christ in this ortal life, shall at last be admitted into heauen, to an uerlasting life, abounding with all happines. Neither is the Christian Religion so niggard, and inching as the Bonzies is, The Bon∣zies shut out of heauen poore people and wo∣men. it shutting out neyther oore people nor women from heauen, so that they iue and dye as Christians ought to do; and yet the Bonzies either out of niggardnesse, or superstitiō will not affoard them any entrance into blisse: wherby it is easily seene, that the Bonzies course of life, aymeth rather at their owne profit and commodity, then at truth of Religion; and that they respect their owne gaine more, then the honour of God, or saluation of oules. For seeing God, who is Lord of Heauen and earth, hath created women as well as men, poore as well as rich; he will without partiality, haue them also to be saued and blessed, if they leade a good, and vertuous life. Heere now the King, and the other arbitratours approued the discourse of Francis for very good; whe∣reat the Bonzies were extremely grieued and ashamed, it galling them to the hart, to depart the field with the losse of the victory, by the iudgement both of King and his Nobility. For with this, the disputation ended; notwithstanding that their obstinacy in de∣fending what they had once sayd, was not yet o∣uercome. After this other Bonzies, gallant fellowes both for learning and eloquence, that they might not seeme wholly vanquished, New dis∣putation with o∣ther Bon∣zies. set againe a fresh vpon Xauerius. As he was therfore speaking to the people, they be∣ganne to presse him with very many, and different questions. This businesse lasted for aboue fiue dayes: all which time the King was neuer absent, either to benefit himselfe by the disputations, or else by his authority to defend Francis, of whome he had vn∣dertaken the protection; hauing not the patience to see the Bonzies, with more obstinacy then truth, im∣pugne his answeres, which were very cleare, and ac∣cording to reason: so as when the Bonzies ran crying out, and rushing togeather in throngs vpon Xauerius, he caused them to be kept backe, telling them aloud, that if any one would try whether a Religion were according to reason, he should not himselfe be void of reason, as they all seemed to be. And with this, ri∣sing vp, The King lea¦deth Xa∣uerius to his lod∣ging. he tooke Francis by the hand, and with his Nobles following him, led him to his lodging, which was not indeed more gracefull and glorious for Xauerius, and the Christian Religion, then disgracefull & ignominious for the Bōzies, who vpon this their new ignominy, heaped vp also new rage in their spitefull minds. The Bon∣zies rage. Wherfore like men out of their wits with fury they fell openly a roaring out, and with lowd voices to wish, that Thunder from heauen would consume King to ashes, seeing he made lesse account of his ncestours Religion, confirmed by authority of so any Kings, then of a strange, and infamous ect; & ad a more sleight esteeme of the Bonzies authority, en of a stinking, roguish, and base fellow. CHAP. XVI. He procureth the Kings of Amangucium and Bungo to fauour Christianity. I N the meane time whilst Francis was glad to see matters fal thus out happily (God almighty seasoning his sweet meate with soure sauce) he commeth to vnderstand ow variously things had bin carried at Amangucium nce his departure thence. Cosmas Turianus had al that hile imployed himself there with no lesse fortunate ccesse in refuting the Bonzies, then in instructing Neophytes, when as a ciuill warre breaking forth pon a suddain, disturbed all. For that a certaine otent Prince setting vpon his King at vnawares, ith a great army of souldiars, had driuen him out f his kingdome; who being not ignorant that his life as sought for, & that he might not fall aliue into the ands of his enemy, being his owne subiect, had esperatly killed himselfe. Vpon this, the Citty be∣ ame all in a tumult, and all things were turned vp downe, whilst the souldiars without any restraint had practised their cruelty vpon all that stood in their way, without respect eyther of quality, age, or per∣son, wasting also in a furious manner, euen the very houses themselues. In the middest of these so many slaughters and de∣uastations by fire, the malicious Bonzies intended to haue oppressed the Christians and their Instructors, if the diuine Prouidence had not with present ayde pro∣tected thē. For presently vpon the newes of the Kings death, that dismall warre soone was turned into a ioy∣full peace, by meanes of the chiefe Nobility of the Kingdome, who conspiring all togeather, sent forth∣with Embassadours to Ficarondono the King of Bung his Brother, to demaund him for their King. Where∣fore Xauerius hoping for a fit opportunity to obtayne the new Kings fauour, towards the Neophytes at A∣mangucium, went straight vnto the King of Bungo, & requested him to commend vnto his brother, the Fa∣thers of the Society, and the Christians that liued at Amangucium. The King did very carefully what Francis reque∣sted, and the new King of Amangucium also made vn∣to him a liberall promise of what he desired, which heafterward faythfully performed. Moreouer the King of Bungo, that his deeds might adde force to his words, The King of Bungo gi∣ueth an house to the Soci∣ety of IESVS. began presently himselfe to practise that in his owne Kingdome which he persuaded his Brother to do in his, by fauouring of the Neophytes, and ap∣pointing a certayne house for such of the Society as should come at any tyme to Bungo: Yet himselfe durst not imbrace the Christian Fayth, which he so much proued and fauoured, for fearing he might be thrust of his Kingdome by sedition. Wherefore Francis uing done his endeauour, although in vaine, to draw to the fayth of Christ, when he saw that he lost his labour therein, and that the businesse was not ripe, turneth his thoughts another way. Now when Xauerius was to depart, the King with ares in his eyes, The King weeping at Xaue∣rius de∣parture. looking vpon the Portugheses that ccompanyed him; I do, quoth he, in all sincerity, uch enuy you, in this your Companion, of whome being depriued, cannot refrayne from teares; and more, because I feare that this is the last tyme shall euer see him. Then Xauerius giuing the King umble thankes for these tokens of his good will to∣wards him, told him that he would certaynly, if God pared his lyfe and gaue him leaue, returne vnto him gayne ere long; by which promise he put the King nto some comfort. Then entring into speach with his Maiesty about the Christian Religion, he put him n mynd of those things which he thought most pro∣fitable for him, Francis his ex∣hortatiō to the King. aduising him seriously to remember that he was a mortall man, and therefore should deep∣ly consider with himselfe, how many foule crimes and offences would cry vengeance agaynst him after his death, vnlesse he purged himselfe therof whilst he liued: And that he should for certayne know, that whosoeuer dyed out of the Christian fayth, was in∣fallibly to be tormēted euerlastingly in Hel: but they who were Christians, and liued as they ought, should by the help & grace of Christ, enioy euerlasting blisse in heauen. These words of Francis, so stroke the King vnto the hart, that in the presence of them, he agayne brake forth into aboundance of teares. Xauerius now humbly bidding his Maiesty fare∣wel, departeth from him at last with much a do. Then comforting the Catechumens with hope of his speedy returne, or else to send one in his place, he departed also the Citty, ful of hope and confidence, for that he left the King, & a good part of the people well affected to the Christian fayth. Besides, he had much confi∣dence, that so great a Kings fauour might be a sin∣gular defēce to the Christiā cause in those places. Ney∣ther was he mistaken therein. For euer since the King of Bungo entred into amity with the Portugheses, and tooke vpon him to protect the Christian Religion, he hath alwayes proceeded with very much fauour and friendship towards thē; assigning also a cōmodious place for Francis his companions, that were after sent thither, and by his letters of Commendations, ope∣ning the way for them, to enter into the familiarity and fauour of his neighbour Kings. Besides this, he furthered also the propagation of the Ghospell, The King of Bungo his desire to pro∣tect and propa∣gate the Christiā Religiō. and fauoured those of the Society, in the greatest muta∣bility of times that might be, with extraordinary be∣nefit both to himselfe & all Iaponia. For by his meanes although an Ethnicke, Christianity came afterwards to be exceedingly increased. And he by the goodnesse of Christ, who rewarding in due time al these fauours of his▪ did not only add foure other kingdomes to that which was left him by his Father, but was also made a Christian about the 30. yeare after Francis his death, as hauing no small reference vnto his merits. For that he King when he was baptized, eyther out of respect which he bare vnto Xauerius, or for that he attributed hat benefit vnto his merits, would needs be called Francis. This most prudent Kings example, When the King of Bungy was bap∣tised he would be called Francis. was by many f the Nobility, and some Princes also followed: yet e went beyond them all, no lesse in piety then in dig∣ ity. For God Almighty hath granted this our age fauour, as to see an Embassadour sent from him Grego y the XIII. supreme Pastour of his Church; hen as certaine yong Noble men of the bloud Royal ere solemnely sent to Rome, from the Christian rinces of Iaponia, to acknowledge the Bishop of ome for the chiefe Prelate of Gods Church, and Fa∣ er to all Nations: Who comming out of another world, & returning againe into their Country, were onoured greatly as they deserued, not only in Rome, ut also throughout Italy and Spayne. For which way euer they wēt they became a most pleasant spectacle nto all; the like wherof had neuer bin seene or heard the memory of man. So as they were euery where eceiued not only with great concourse, & admiratiō f the people, but with applause, congratulations, & ther tokens of excessiue ioy; that euen the memory f Xauerius, who first of all brought the Ghospel into aponia, might also seeme heerin to triumph. Yet was there one thing which did not a little ouble Xauerius mind, for that he had wrought so all good amongst the Nobility of Iaponia (whose thority euer beareth great sway among the people) nd that neuer a one of them had receiued his whol∣some counsayles. That which most hindred this busi∣nesse, was the great authority of the Chineses, from whome the Iaponians had receaued their Religion; which the Bonzies of Bungo, and Amangucium com∣monly vsed for their starting hole, when they were ouerpressed by Xaucrius, saying: If the Christian Re∣ligion were true, why did not the Chineses approue of it? Moreouer the King of Bungo his example was no small blocke in their way, who being very famous both for prudence and learning, seemed in his iudg∣ment to disallow therof all that tyme, because he did not imbrace it. When Francis therfore saw that the Ia∣ponians could not be won to submit their vnderstan∣ding to the true Faith, Why he deter∣mined to go into China. vnlesse the superstition of the Chineses were first ouerthrowne, he resolued to lay his battery to the principall Fort it selfe, with great hope and confidence, that if he could once draw the Chineses to the standart of Christ, the Iaponians would easily follow their example. OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE V. BOOKE. Intending to passe into China, he determi∣neth first to returne into India. CHAP. I. T HE Confines of China, are distant from Iaponia, The des∣crip ion & man∣ners of the Chi∣neses:. where the sea is nar∣rowest, not aboue 200. miles. This kingdome in the continent is far the greatest & peaceablest of all the East. It is a Countrey inferiour to none for number of goodly, & wealthy Cittyes and Townes, replenished not only with store and plenty of people and all other things, but also with excellent wits, and liberall sciences. It is ruled by one sole Monarch, whose becke all do obay. And certayne it is, that there is not any Prince in the whole world, who hath ey∣ther his subiects, or officers more at command, then e. The King himself attendeth rather to moderation in his gouernement, then Power, ruling wholy by the aduise of the Senate, & according to the lawes of the Kingdome. You would thinke it to be rather a Com∣monwealth then a Kingdome, so great a sway doth counsayle and equity beare therein. The people of the Country in fauour, are like to the Iaponians, white of complexion, and ingenious: but not so much giuen to warre. As for the Bonzies the Priests of their Gods, they are of litle or no reputation and esteeme amongst thē, for that the opinion of their sanctity is long since worne out of date. There is almost no Nation more apt then they to receyue the Christian Religion, were it not that Luxury, and the craft of the Diuel did hinder the same. For by Sathans meanes, who is there, euen afrayd of himselfe, the whole country is so kept, The coū∣try of China shut vp against Christs Ghospel & as it were locked vp, that it affoardeth no entrance at all to Preachers of the Ghospell; it being enacted by the most ancient Lawes of the Realme, that all strangers whatsoeuer be exclu∣ded, excepting only the Embassadours of Princes. In so much, that it is a death for any one to come thither without commaund from the King. Xauerius vnderstanding this, began to thinke how he mightworke himselfe in amongst them. And it came to his mynd, to returne agayne into India, there to deale with the Viceroy, and Bishop of Goa, concerning the sending of an Embassage to the King the China, and so he going as companion to the Em∣ ssadour, when he had gotten entrance, might bring the Ghospell amongst the Chineses. And because so any People, and Prouinces were gouerned by the mmand of one King, it seemed as an euident token ō God, that the propagation of Religiō there would the more easy. Wherefore he was not out of hope t that (as it had in tymes past happened in the Ro∣ an Empire) Religion begining with the King him∣ fe, who was head of the whole Country, it might conueyed to all the rest of the Prouinces of China, members of the same Kingdome. He had now remayned two whol yeares in Iaponia, His care of the Society. d had not only vnited many to the flocke of Christ the chiefe kingdomes therof, but procured places so of abode for those of the society, when as he begā thinke of returning into India. Besides the cause herof we now spake, of procuring an Embassage to e sent into China, the sollicitude & care of his owne ociety inuited him also home; not that he was so uch troubled for the great distance of place from em, or for any longing desyre he had to see them, ut that he deemed, he ought not so to employ him∣ lfe in gaining of Ethinckes to Christ, as wholy to bandon the flocke & company which was commit∣ d to his charge, both by Christ, and Ignatius. For lthough he often vnderstood by letters from India hatsoeuer was done by those of the society there: yet e remembred well the Prouerbe that sayth, The ore part of the head is better then the hinder; & that igilant pastours ought to vi it their flockes, with their owne eyes, rather then with other mens. He therfore determined, hauing now bin long absent, to visit the Society in India, wherof he was Superiour, & to send some thence into Iaponia; and after hauing setled all things there, and procured the forsaid Em∣bassage, to go presently into China. CHAP. II. Going into China, he recouereth, by his prayers, a Cocke-boate vvhich vvas carryed avvay by the violence of a tem∣pest. B EING therfore inuited to China by the opportunity of a Portughese ship, which was going thither, he, togeather with the King of Bungo his Embassadour, who wēt with presents to the Viceroy of India, imbarketh in the moneth of Nouember, & yeare of our Lord 1551. He tooke with him out of Iaponia, Matthew and Ber∣nard two of that Country, whome he had there bap∣tized, intēding afterwards to send them to Rome, that others might behold them, as a patterne of the Iaponi∣an Nation; and they likewise benefit themselues, by seeing the dignity & Maiesty of the Church of Christ that so, hauing by eye witnesses of the glory, and ri ches of that Church, especially at Rome, they might returning home agayne, cause the Iaponians to co yue a worthy esteeme of the Christian Religion, y relating vnto them what themselues had seene. Departing therefore from Iaponia with a prospe∣ ous wynd, they found this their nauigation after∣ ards very various, & remarkable for miracles. The auenth day, after they had put to sea, there arose v∣ on a suddaine a cruell tempest, which by mayne for∣ e & violence carryed away their ship into a sea who∣ vnknowne to the marriners. And as they wandred p and downe amongst the billowes, without once nowing where they were, or whither they wēt, they were so tossed with crosse waues, that they were in mminent daunger to be cast away. For the sky was uercast with such thicke and mysty clowdes, that hey were wholy depriued of the light of the sunne, & o remayned in darknes for the space of fiue whole ayes. At which tyme, not only Francis his sanctity, ut also his care and sollicitude manifested it selfe. He ncited the rest to assist the marriners in their offices, ot more by words, Francis imploy∣eth him∣selfe to help the ship be∣ing in danger. then by his owne example. He was behind none in labouring, both night and day. He comforted the afflicted, and put them that were ut of hart, in hope to escape. One would haue sayd e had byn the Captayne, or rather Gouernour of the hip. But when the wind was enraged with greater fury, nd tossed the waues higher and higher, the Maister f the ship fearing (which after hapned indeed) that some soddain puffe of wind might violētly rend away the Cock-boate frō the ship, caused it to be fast bound thereto with cable ropes. As they were now labou∣ring about it (being fifteene men in number, besides two Saracens) they were presently ouercast with a mist as darke as pitch. And not long after, their ca∣bles burst a under with the violence of the tempest, and the boate, with the men, was carryed away with such swiftnesse and vehemency, that almost in an in∣stant it was out of all their sights. Wherupon the May∣ster lamenting their case, making accompt they were all but lost men, vnlesse the Cocke-boate could be recouered, directed his course that way, which he thought the boat was carryed. But the waues grow∣ing rougher & rougher, and the ship compassed round as it were with mountaynes of water, was vpon the suddayne driuen vnder the waues, ready to sinke. Whereupon Xauerius stirred vp by the clamours of the marriners and passengers who called vpon our B. Lady, He deli∣uereth out of danger the ship almost cast a∣way. commeth running out of the Maysters ca∣bin, where he was at his prayers, and there finde n the passengers & marriners cast one vpon another on a heap, expecting nothing but their certayne casting away. He therefore not caring so much for himselfe, as for his companions, cryeth out: O Iesu Christ, God of my hart, I beseech thee by those fiue wounds which the Loue of vs gaue thee vpon the Crosse, help these thy seruants, whome thou hast redeemed with thy precious bloud. A wonderfull thing. The ship on a suddayne mounted vp aboue the waues, and got out of present daunger, euery one acknowledging Gods most liberal, and helping hand therein. When they had thus escaped their owne perill, all their care was for their neighbours: and euery one who had kindred, or friends in the lost boate, began greatly to lament their misfortune. After they had thus a while bewayled their friends, they fall to pitty themselues. For they were tossed vp and downe in an vnknowne sea, where neuerthelesse together with the Cock-boate, they had lost almost all hope of sa∣uing themselues. Xauerius therefore, seeing them all weeping, and halfe dead through feare, biddeth them take courage, and telleth them withall, that with∣in three dayes the daughter would agayne come to her mother, signifying thereby that the Boate should re∣turne agayne vnto the shippe. They generally gaue no great credit to the matter, A predi∣ction of the boa∣tes re∣turne to the ship. yet they were not alto∣geather out of hope. The next day in the morning as soone as it was light, Francis commeth forth amongst them with a cheerfull countenance, and saluting the Mayster of the ship after a courteous manner, willeth him to command one to clime vp the Mast, to espy whether the Cocke boate were in sight or no. Wher∣upon an ancient and expert marriner, called Peter, answered in a gibing manner, that they should then recouer their Cock-boate, when they had lost their ship. To whome Francis replyed: why, Peter, thinkest thou any thing hard for God to do? I for my part am not out of hope, but that by the goodnesse of God, & our B. Lady of Malaca her help, to whome I haue vo∣wed three Masses, the boate with those poore wret∣ches in her, will shortly b safe with vs againe. Then when he who had ascended the Mast sayd, that it could not yet be seene, Frācis shut himselfe close vp in a Cabine, and there with teares spent a good part of the day in prayer, and at last commeth out tel∣ling them good newes, that they should presently see the boat returne home againe: and forth with intrea∣teth the Maister to strike sayle, and to stay for the boate, for certainly all that were in her, especially the two Saracens, should by Gods and his B. Mothers help be saued. The maister of the ship refused his re∣quest, and the others cryed out vpon it, both because it was in vaine then to expect the boate, and also be∣cause they could not do it, without manifest perill of their ship. For euen still they thought they saw be∣fore their eyes the danger which they had so lately es∣caped. But the Maister, being at last wearyed out with Francis intreaties, causeth the small sayle which then was only vsed, to be let downe. Hauing thus stayed his course for a good space, and the boate not yet appearing, and the ship also seeming to be in some danger because the sea was still very rough and the wynd boisterous, he commandeth the sayle to be hoysed vp againe. But Xauerius still vrged him, and intreated the marriners to expect yet a while, confi∣dently assuring them that the boat would come pre∣sently without any danger to their ship. But when the marriners, who were out of all hope, and moued also with the present danger they were in, would not∣withstanding haue hoysed vp the saile, the Father runneth vnto them, and laying his hand fast vpon the yard, besought them by the pretious death, and woundes of our Sauiour, that they would be pleased to expect yet a little longer. With much ado they obeyed; and he set himselfe againe to pray. In the meane time Antony Dias was at his request gone vp to the toppe of the Mast, who looking all about, tould them he could yet see nothing; and therefore intreateth Xauerius to giue him leaue to come downe: but he, on the other side, wished him to stay there still a while. And as he prayed earnestly with his hands lifted vp to heauē▪ he biddeth the Mai∣ster and the rest to be of good courage. Now all this while the ship (being as it were warranted by Francis from any present danger) was tossed with mighty waues, and floated vp and downe the sea without any harme at all. And hauing in this manner expected al∣most three houres, and the matter held for desperate by some, behold vpon a suddaine Dias cryeth out that the boate was in sight, and comming towards them. Then they being all exceedingly comforted, began to giue thankes to God, and to Francis Xauier. As soone as the boate came within all their sights, pre∣sently they turne the ship crosse-wise to receiue her, and she, God certainly guiding her, cōmeth directly vpon the ship. As she approached neerer vnto them, the marriners, now leaping for ioy, went about, as the custome is, to cast out a rope vnto her: but Xauerius tould them that there was no need so to do, The bo∣ate of her selfe co∣meth to the ship side. for she of her owne selfe would come close to the ship side. And so it came to passe indeed; all the company being astonished at the miracle. At last she came so right vn∣to the side, that the poore men might be cōmodiously taken vp. Besids this, although she were in the midst of the waues, yet remained she firme without any to hold her, vntil she was againe fast bound vnto the ship. Besides this so euident a miracle, another strange & almost incredible thing is recoūted by Fernand Men∣dez Pinto, a graue and vertuous Portughese, who was companion vnto Francis in that voyage out of Iaponia into China, & partaker also of all these dangers; which was, That after the men were taken vp safe into the ship, & the marriners would haue thrust of the boate w ch was now empty & fast tyed therto, Francis being in the ship was seene at the same time also in the boate. they all cried out vnto them that they should first help forth Xauerius who was stil in the boat. When the marriners replyed that Xauerius was well & safe in the ship, & had neuer byn in the boat, they affirmed constantly one after another, that all the while they were tossed by the tē∣pest, & driuen vp and downe in the sea, Xauerius was seene comforting them, & putting them in hope to es∣cape euen vntil the boat came backe. Then they began to vnderstand, that Francis whilest he prayed for their deliuery appeared also vnto them (as it is recounted of S. Nicolas Bishop of Myra ) by whose prayers it was manifest they had byn saued from shipwracke. This thing was much spoken of by all the passengers, He fore∣tels a calme sea. and marriners. But Xauerius affirmed, that it was Gods handy-worke and not his, and willeth the Mayster of the ship, with all speed to make ready all his sayles, for that presently the tempest would cease, and they should haue faire weather. This proued also very true, for the marriners had scarce put in order their say∣les, when vpon the suddaine, the storme wholy cea∣sed, and the ship sayled on with a prosperous gale. Now this regayning of the Cock-Boate, made also much for gayning of the two Saracens soules, who ad byn in all the danger. For they being moued by o euident a miracle, were by Xauerius without great difficulty conuerted to the fayth of Christ; and being y him instructed and baptized, were, next to God, ound vnto him for the saluation both of their bodies nd soules. The ship then hauing afterwards a prospe∣ ous voyage, came safe to Cinceum, an hauen Towne of China, whither she was bound. CHAP. III. He maketh the Port of the Chineses, and his voyage to Malaca, very famous by his Prophesies. A S soone as Francis was landed, he met very fitly with Iames Perera his ancient & great friend, a man of note both for Nobility of birth and riches, who was shortly to re∣ rne into India. When they had saluted each other ith great signes of ioy & affection, Francis acquain∣ ng him with his determination, of cōming to speach ith the King of China, asked his aduise therin. Wher∣ pon he being a prudent man, and experienced in ch matters, thought his best course would be to rocure the Embassage which he spake of, and also resents from the Viceroy of India to the sayd King f China. Iames Pererias notable bounty. And to second his aduise with his helping and, he offered cordially for that purpose not only is owne endeauours, but his ship also, and all he ad besides; so much did the loue of Xauerius togea∣together with aduancement of Christian Religion in China moue him. And truly his deedes proued grea∣ter then his words: for he sent with Xauerius to Goa, a man of purpose to conduct him, & furnished him with 30. thousand Crownes for that voyage. Francis giuing him many thankes prayed God to requite him, and promised also, that his King should do the like. From thence he passed to Machao a very famous Mart Towne of the Chineses, where finding a yong mayd, who through pouerty and want had exposed her Chastity to be abused, he presently began to beg money to make her vp a dowry. He therfore going to one Peter Vellius an ancient acquaintance of his, and a wel monied merchāt, & finding him playing at chesse in another mans house, openeth the matter briefly vn∣to him, and withall intreateth to borrow some gold of him to be payd agayne an hundred for one in hea∣uen. Ʋellius being somewhat troubled at Xauerius vn∣seasonable comming vnto him, Peter Vellius his great liberali∣ty. tould him that it was then no tyme to talke of such things, for that he was not at his owne house where his money was. Francis vrged againe in a very friendly manner, saying, that to one who was to dye, no time was amisse to do good deeds in. At which words Vellius being moued, gaue him the key of his chest where his mony was (for Xa∣uerius knew wel his house & where to find any thing) bidding him take as much as he would. Francis went and tooke out 300. crownes, and presently bringeth him backe the key, telling him withall how much he had taken. Then, quoth he, Father, you haue com∣mitted an errour, and your modesty hath done me an niury, hauing taken farre lesse then I intended you should. For by deliuering you my key, I meant you should haue taken the halfe that was in the chest I which I thinke are 30000. crownes of gold) & haue equally deuided it betweene vs; but alas, what a mall summe haue you taken thence, for your selfe? Francis admiring hereat, perceiued that Vellius spake incerely frō his hart, & that his words were not more complementall then true. Wherupon he replyed: Go orward Vellius, quoth he, stil in this thy liberality, for hy noble & reall Hart testified by these effects, is gra∣ efull and acceptable to God; A nota∣ble Pro∣phecy. in whose name therfore promise, that God shall neuer fayle thee, and that hou shalt also by reuelation from him, foreknow the ast day of thy lyfe. Wherein God neyther deceyued Francis, nor he the merchant. From that tyme for∣ward Vellius became quite another man, and was ve∣ y much addicted to bounty and piety. Some yeares fter, being forewarned from heauen of the tyme of is departure out of this lyfe, he began to cast vp his ccoumpts, and to setle his household affayres, distri∣ uting a great part of his substance among the poore, and made himselfe ready for that last combat, now whilst he was strong and lusty. When his last day was come, he went vnto the Church, & caused the Priest to sing a solemne masse of Requiem for Peter Vellius, at which himselfe was pre∣sent, reckoning himselfe euen then for dead. Then go∣ ng to euery one of his friends, he biddeth them fare∣well, for he was to take a long iourney. When they asked him, whither he meant to go? To heauen, quoth he, I trust. Wherupon they thought he had but iested being alwayes a merry and pleasant man. But he per∣sisted with many asseuerations that indeed he went to heauen. Then they thought verily he was distracted, or crazed in the braine, wherein they were absolutly confirmed when they heard it reported, that Peter Vel∣lius hauing gotten a Masse sayd for his soule, had shut himself vp in his house, & there expected deaths com∣ming. They therfore came vnto his house by troupes, & endeauoured one after another to draw him from that melancholy cogitation. But he, carrying himselfe with a cheerfull contenance, shewed manifestly, that he had no griefe of mynd, and withall very ioyfully openeth to his friends Xauerius his prediction, and the euent thereof. At last, when he had tould them the whole matter, he intreated that they would euen that very day, keep the funeralls of Peter Vellius who was presently to dye. It so fell out indeed: for being well stroken in yeares, he was presently taken away by suddayn death; and the very same day his friends ac∣companied his Corpes to Church, being greatly asto∣nished and amazed, partly at his departure, and partly at Xauerius prediction. In the meane tyme, as Francis was going to imbarke himselfe in Perera's ship, turning vpon a suddayne to those that accompanied him, who were many in nū∣ber: Let vs, A dou∣ble Pro∣phecy. quoth he, pray to God for the Citty of Ma∣laca, which is pressed by the Enemy that besiegeth it, & if any one can affoad any help to it in this distresse, let them make hast, least they come to late when all is lost. This fearefull saying wrought much in them all, ither by reason of the Malacensians dāger, or els for the iraculous prophecy it selfe: for Malaca was distant rom thence 900. leagues, or thereabout. Through this each of Francis they all fell together to their praiers. or was it in vayne. For whilst the marriners were reparing for this their iourney, Iames Perera afore∣aid, being much moued by what Xauerius had spoken ade prouision both of armour and souldiars to assist he besieged. Whome when Xauerius perceyued to be such care, through feare of danger wherein the Ma∣ censians were: Away Iames, quoth he, with this feare nd preparation for warre, and giue God thankes to∣ eather with vs; For now Malaca is by the diuine Goodnes freed from the siege: wherby all might per∣ eaue that the Malacensians were succoured by the rayers which were lately made for them vnto God. Now Xauerius imbarking in Perera his shippe, hey arriued vpon the fortith day after their depar∣ ure frō Iaponia, The Ha∣uen Sin∣capura. at Sincapura a hauen Towne 120. mi∣ es distant from Malaca, and where they remayned ome few dayes. From thence Xauerius least any thing ight peraduenture hinder his iourney at Malaca, rote letters to the Society there, aduertising them of is returne, & warning them to prouide him with all peed of all things necessary for his voyage into India, or that he was in very great hast. The chiefe season or commodious passage into India was now a good while past, when they departed from Sincapura to∣wards Malaca, intending from thence to passe in∣to India. Wherfore Perera was very anxious doubting that there was not at that tyme of the yeare any ship to be gotten at Malaca, to transport Francis vnto Goa. Then Xauerius: Iames, A Pro∣phecy. quoth he, be not afrayd, but cast away this care: For Anthony Perera hath now stayed for vs a good while, with a shippe ready for our iorney. The euent shewed presently after, that what he said was true. As soone therfore as they came to Malaca, they find Anthony, who had now three dayes expected the comming of Xauerius with a ship fraught, and ready to set forth. And withall, they vnderstood that Ma∣laca had byn lately straitly besieged by those of Iaua, a barbarous people that border vpon them; and that it was freed from the siege, & danger, at the very same time that Francis had foretold. As soone as it was re∣ported abroad that Xauerius was returned out of Iapo∣nia to Malaca, presently there came vnto him great concourse of al sorts to congratulate with him for his safe returne. At Ma∣laca he is receiued with great ioy & gratu∣lation of all. For when he departed for Iaponia he had cōmitted himself to so long & dangerous a nauigatiō euen against their wils, to their great griefe, and sor∣row. But as soone as newes was brought that he was safely returned agayne at Malaca, the whole Citty presently making a procession to the Church of the Society, gaue there publike thankes to Almighty God, demonstrating thereby the great affection which they bare vnto him. Wherfore his safe returne, togeather with the good newes of the conuersions he had made in Iaponia, brought aboundance of ioy vnto the whole Citty. CHAP. IIII. At Goa he cureth one that vvas ready to dye: and taketh account of vvhat the Society had done, since his departure. F RANCIS hauing stayed at Malaca some few dayes for the comfort of the Society which there resided, imbarketh himselfe in the shippe, which had now byn there a od while ready, and with a prosperous gale arri∣ eth at Cocinum, where he is receiued with the gene∣ all ioy and gratulation of all the Citty. Now at the ery same time that Francis arriued at Cocinum, there ere shippes ready bound for Goa. Wherfore making se of the benefit which was at hād, he presently with ll speed maketh hast thither. As oone as he was lan∣ ed, he went as his custome was to the hospitall of the cke before he would go to his owne house of the So∣ciety. As soone as he came to Goa he visiteth the sicke After he had in a sweet manner comforted the ck he went vnto the Colledge, being earnestly expe∣ ted there by all his Society. Where after he had most ouingly & tenderly saluted & imbraced them all one fter another, that he might not seeme more courte∣ us vnto externes, then to those of his owne family, e asketh whether there was any sick in the house? To whome it was answered, that there was only one. Wherupon he goeth presently vnto him, before he went to his owne chamber. The Patient at that present lay in great extre∣mity, and was watched day and night by some of the Society who had care of his soule. All things were now prepared for his buriall, yet the sickeman him∣selfe, although he was then euen ready to giue vp the ghost, was not out of all hope of life, saying of∣tentimes with a broken and dying voice, that if Xa∣riuss would come before he were dead (for he was e∣uery day expected) he should certainly by his merits & prayers recouer his health, He reco∣uers one of the Society ready to dye. although euen then des∣payred of. Francis failed not to answere to the sicke mans hope, and assoone as he entred the chamber, he saluteth him as he lay euen a dying, reciteth the Ghos¦pell ouer him, and deliuers him from death; so as be∣ing instantly eased of his paynes, not long after per∣fectly recouered his health. One would haue thought that God had so disposed the matter, that both the sick man should expect the comming of Xauerius, and Xauerius make hast on his iorney to come to him. After this, incredible ioy was conceyued not only by those of the Society, but also by the principall of the Citty for Francis his safe returne, who greatly lon∣ged to heare how matters went in Iaponia. Xauerius found also in Goa that Christianity, The Frā∣ciscans & Domini∣cans in∣dustry. & the Society had there much increased in his absence. For the Portu∣geses hauing bin very carefully instructed both by the Franciscans, Dominicans, and those also of the Society, after their vices were once rooted out, liued very ci∣uilly and piously, euen amidst the greatest liberty and affluence of al things. For although they were warlike nd martiall men yet they lead a life void, and free ot only from quarrelling, wrangling, and iniuries, ut euen from those pleasures also, which are law∣ lly granted vnto men; in so much that it was held r a monstrous thing for any one to keepe a Concu∣ ne: so farre did the force of heauenly mysteries re∣ raine the liberty of Souldiars. For many times in the eare, and as often also as they were to be sent vpon y seruice, they armed themselues with the Sacra∣ ents of Confession and Communion. One would aue thought they had bin rather religions men, then uldiars. Fa. Paul Camertes also ( Francis his Vicar) hauing stituted an Hospitall at Goa for the poore, did imselfe begge almes about the Citty for the mainte∣ ance therof, with no lesse incouragement to pious eople, then comfort to the poore themselues. Be∣ des this, Fa. Anthony Gomez by the Viceroyes and shops command hauing byn sent to Malauaria, The King of Tanoris baptized had structed in the mysteries and precepts of the Chri∣ ian faith, the King of Tanoris, (who had bin lately onuerted and baptized priuatly by Vincentius a Fran∣ scan Friar ) and brought him at last (being much a∣ ayd of the speeches of men) to prefer religion be∣ ore feare, professing himselfe a Christian publikely uen in the Citty of Goa. Where being intertayned by he Bishop and Viceroy with all honour and solem∣ ity, he became an example to many Kings and Prin∣ es, and to his owne subiects also, to make the same ryall of the Christian Faith. Those also of the Society, whome Xauerius had sent abroad into diuers other places, had ech of them wrought great fruit by labouring in our Lords vineyard. For in the Promontory of Comorinū, which as we sayd before, had byn manured by Fa. Anthony Criminalis, & watered with his dearest bloud, was to be seene a most plentiful haruest of soules, In the Promō∣tory of Comorinū there are numbred 400000 Christiās there being numbred 400. thousand Christians. So that there may be a question whether his life, or death caused more increase to the Christian cause. But at O s, that most fayre and rich Citty (as we said) seated in the mouth of the Persian gulfe, Gaspar Barzaeus the low Country mā had most nobly carryed on the businesse. For that Citty, being the very sincke of Ethinckes, Saracens, and Iewes, had now publikely giuen full scope to all abuses, being growne euen degenerate, & wholy ignorant of their owne country customes and ceremonies. Wherefore Gaspar being sent thither by Xauerius order, had in a short space greatly corrected and reformed their corrupt & wicked manners, she∣wing himselfe a schollar not vnworthy of such a mai∣ster; whose worthy acts being by others already recoū∣ted, I will only mention one in this place, whereby a coniecture may be made of the rest. There was at Ormus a most ample and famous Temple dedicated to Mahomet, A memo¦rable fact of Father Gaspar Barzaeus wherein he was ser∣ued by the Saracens with the greatest solemnity an deuotion that might be. Gaspar could not endure to se the honour due to Christ, giuen to that wicked Apo∣stata from the Christian Religion. Wherfore infla med with diuine zeale he performed a noble act, wor∣thy of all memory. For leading with him a troupe o ldren with great crosses in their hands and singing oud, he setteth vpon the Temple, in the open day e; and himselfe carying also a Crosse, first of al ru∣ th into the midst of the chaunting Saracens, and in e sight of those Barbarians, who stood amazed at e strang accidēt, planteth at leasure six great Crosses st in the pauement of the Temple. One would haue ought the fury of that franticke people, to haue n with-held by diuine power from doing any out∣ ge vpon him, who was moued by God to performe at noble act. The for∣ce of the Crosse. The which was afterward made more ident by the euent of the thing it selfe. For that the ght therof did so discourage and terrify the Saracēs at they forsooke the Temple euer after, and ran a∣ ay like men distracted, as the Deuills are wont to o when the signe of the Crosse is made against them. aspar at first, by Francis his appointment, remayned the hospitall. But afterwards when the Citty of rmus had receaued euident triall both of his, & his ompanions vertue, they built a proper House and Church for the Society. Both which, the Society for certayne reasons, The Do∣minicans commen¦ded. thinking good afterwards to leaue, yielded them vp freely to the Dominicans (who with much prayse & fruit laboured in that vineyard of our Sauiour) for the respect they bare vnto that most holy Family. With no lesse labour did Fa. Cyprian liue in Meli∣ pora the Towne of S. Thomas, who after he came thither, so moued the townes-men by his preaching and exemplar life, that of themselues they freely gaue to the Society a place for their perpetuall habitation. Cyprian therefore assisted by the diuine goodnes, did therin many and worthy things, but amongst others, this one was very remarkeable. A certaine Marri∣ner hauing taken away a Christian woman by force from her husband, put her into a ship, not without the Maysters knowledge, Cyprians notable vertue. to carry her away. Wherof Cyprian being aduertised, when he could not by any meanes hinder such an abominable fact, pronounced this prophecy out of the pulpit. Certaine persōs haue carryed away another mans wife, but it shall not be long before they be punished, according to desert, for their sinne agaynst God and man. For the ship where∣into the woman is conueyed shall perish; and wheras he that hath committed this fact, hath now but one eye, and stammereth with his tongue, shall ere long loose his other eye, and speach also. All this fell out as he foretould. For within few dayes after the ship was cast away; whereupon the Mayster thereof, be∣ing enraged agaynst the sayd marriner, pulled out his other eye. And he lykewise, by his loud crying out in the shipwracke, became of a stammerer, wholy speachlesse. Moreouer Fa. Nicolas Lancelot at Colanum, Balta∣zar Gage at Bazain, Francis Perez at Malaca, Iohn Beira in Moluca and Maurica, & others of the Society, some in one place, some in another, by the help of our Lord imployed their labours not without great profit, in confirming the Neophytes, and gayning of Ethnic∣kes to Christ. And all of them carryed themselues with such wonderfull sanctity of lyfe, euen amidst so great want of humane assistance and hardnes of all hings, that with ease they obtained, or established pla∣ es of Residence for the Society. About the same time also Gaspar Consalues procured a Residēce for the Socie∣ y at Tanaa a towne distāt from Bazain 17 miles, where he Townes men being instructed by the same Father Christian piety, became good husband-men, & of vertuous life. And many of their children were trai∣ ed vp according to ech ones capacity & propension, ome to learning, and others to diuers handycrafts; so s, they were taught at once, both to behaue themsel∣ es vertuously, & also to get their liuing for the main∣ nance of their lyfe. At this place there came vnto Fa. Gaspar, from e furthest part of India for religion sake, a certayne ndian who was very aged, and almost withered vp with leanesse of body; yet of such comportment both in habit & countenance, that he resembled one of the ancient Hermits. He being in a short space instructed n the precepts of the Christian Fayth, An Indiā like ano∣ther Si∣meon dy∣eth after he had imbra∣ced Christ. when one day e beheld, drawne in a Table, the Child Iesus in his mothers lap, began presently with great veneratiō to ake vp the diuine babe into his armes, & forthwith, s he was in that sort imbracing the picture, being ike another Simeon, admonished that the tyme of his death was at hand, vrged and instantly besought the Father that he might, without delay, be made a Chri∣stian, for that his last day and death was at hand. He was therfore forthwith baptized, and the next mor∣ning at breake of day he departed this life in peace, after he had imbraced the Sauiour of the world. Xauerius being certified how matters went in all places, and of the difficulties also which many of his subiects were in, he sent vnto euery place according to the condition & necessity therof, not only supplies, but rules and precepts also for their further direction; which not to interrupt the order of this our History we haue thought good heere to omit, intending after∣ward to set them downe in their proper places. In the meane time whilst euery one greatly reioy∣ced for the good newes he had brought out of Iapo∣nia, with a speciall feeling; only he, who had bin the Author therof, still burning with an vnsatiable desire of the good of soules and glory of God, thought the conuersion of Iaponia but a matter of small moment, in comparison of those other things, which he hoped, and intended to compasse. For he had now a good while, fixed his cogitations vpon China. That was the Countrey, so replenished with townes and inha∣bitants, yea the Court it selfe of the most ample king∣dome of the world, which his intentions aymed at, as the complete and finall end of his trauiales, and a thing whereon the saluation of all the East did spe∣cially depend. CHAP. V. Hauing procured the Embassage before spoken of, he goeth himselfe to China. S CARSE was he come to Goa, when as the care he had of China ranne so conti∣nually in his mind, that be began with all diligence to set forward the businesse, making account, that how long the matter was differred, so long was the saluation of the Chineses delayed. He therfore out of hand dealeth with Alphon∣sus Noronia the Viceroy of India, and Iohn Alboquercius Bishop of Goa about the sending of an Embassage vnto China. The pie∣ty and liberali∣ty of Ja∣mes Pere∣ra. The person appointed heerto was Iames Perera a man of singular piety, & by Xauerius the only desi∣red, and one who was no way failing in that which was expected from him. For out of the desire he had o aduance Religion, he so tooke the businesse to hart, hat in setting out his Embassage, and prouiding of Presents, he spent the greatest part of all his wealth. In the dispatch of this businesse Xauerius carryed all things with exraordinary speed. For within the cōpasse of a moneth, he had gotten ready not only the Patents, Letters, and Presents from the Viceroy, and Bishop for the Embassage, but also all other things that were necessary for so hard a voyage. Wherin he was much furthered by the prompt liberality of the Viceroy, a very pious man, & Xauerius speciall friend, who gaue him both an Embassadour according to his desire, and prouided all things necessary for that ior∣ney, not with more care then speed, & besides com∣mended earnestly the whole businesse by his letters vnto Aluares Thardus Gouernour of Malaca. Now though Xauerius were daily imployed in this busines of China, Gaspar the low country∣man Frā∣cis his vi∣car. yet was he not vnmindful of his charge at home in India; setting in order all such things as were necessary for the Society, in those and other places round about. Wherfore he calleth Gaspar the low country man from Ormus, and ordayneth him his Vicar, and Rectour of the Colledge of Goa, lea∣uing with him most prudent and wholsome precepts for his direction. The Towne Diu. At the same time he sent also a Priest, with a Coadiutor to assist him, vnto Diu (a Fort in the Portugheses dominion standing vpō the mouth of the riuer Indus ) & diuers others vnto other places, giuing to euery one instructions fit for the place, wherunto they were sent. In this meane time Mathew one of the two Iaponians chanced to dy at Goa. Wherfore Bernard was his other companion was sent to Rome in cōpany of Andrew Fer∣nādes whom Xauerius sent vnto the King of Portugal, and to Rome also to Ignatius Founder of the Society, to bring backe with him some store of the Society, and such as were most fit for the Iaponian haruest, The summe of Fran∣cis his let¦ters to the King of Por∣tugall. and expedition of China. Xauerius writing at the same time vnto the King of Portugall, declared what his drift was, in going into China, in these words: We are only three of the Society who go into China with Iames Pe∣rera the Embassadour, with intention to redeeme the Portugheses who remayne there in captiuity, and to ake a league of friendship betwene the King of Chi∣ a and them; & moreouer to wage warre against the Deuils, & those who worship them. We will therfore the name of the King of Hauen, denounce first vn∣ the King of China himselfe, then vnto the people, hat they do not hereafter worship the Deuil, but God e creatour of mankind, & Iesus Christ who redee∣ ed and saued them. This may seeme indeed a bold ttempt among so barbarous a people, and with so ighty a King, as to reprehend their errours, and reach vnto thē another law. But then we are againe reatly encouraged, that this desire of ours cōmeth as∣ redly from God, who hath so replenished vs with rme hope and confidence heerin, that depending wholy vpon his goodnes, we shall not need to doubt f his omnipotent power, which by infinite degrees urpasseth that of the King of China. Besides this, he writeth also many other things in he same Epistle to the King of Portugall, wherby id euidently appeare his great courage of mind, ac∣companied with the like humility; as also his singular eruour and zeale for the aduancement of the Chri∣stian Faith, euen with the manifest danger of his wne life. But, because those things belong not pro∣ erly to this present History, we will heere passe them uer in silence, reseruing the same to a Volume a art, wherein we haue made a collection of allmost ll Xauerius his Epistles., that haue come vnto our ands. Francis being now ready to depart from Goa, to the end he might stirre vp in those of the Society a great loue to Humility and Obedience, he called togeather all the Fathers and Brothers, and like a rare maister of Obedience, very efficaciously exhorted them all to the practise of those Vertues, & finally confirmed by this notable deed of his, what he had commended vnto them in words. An exā∣ple of Christiā humility For hauing constituted F. Gospar aforesaid Superiour ouer all the Society in India, and ouer himselfe also, he fell downe at his feete, and after an vnusuall manner, not heard of before, promised entyre Obedience vnto him; striking thereby no lesse admiratiō into the rest of the Fathers present, then in∣to Gaspar himself. Wherupon all the rest with weeping eyes through the tender feeling they had therof, pro∣strate themselues in like manner, and promise one by one to performe the same; no one refusing to imitate the example which Xauerius their Maister had giuen them. Then, because that being perhaps the last time he was to see them, all bedewed with mutuall teares, he imbraceth euery one; & out of all those who ear∣nestly desired to follow him, he chose only foure, not so much to take them with him into China, as to send them for a supply into Iaponia. He departed therefore from Goa vpon the 15. day of Aprill in the yeare 1552. leauing behind him many good wishes, both to himselfe, and his iourney. A soone as the ship was come into the mayne Ocean, there arose a vehement tempest, which put her int extreme danger. When the storme was most violent and euery one (especially Iames Perera, who was a skil full Pilot) affrighted with the imminent danger the ere in, Xauerius remayned without any feare at all. nd looking vpon Perera, who stood as one benum∣ ed with feare: Take courage Iames, quoth he, the iuine Prouidence protecteth vs. Would to God the her ship which put out of the Hauen togeather with , A triple Prophe∣cy. fared as wel, the signes of whose calamity we shall ortly behould. As for the shippe wherein we are rryed, in a docke was she built, and in a docke shall e be taken asunder agayne. This triple Prophecy as verifyed by the euent thereof. For presently the ind began to fall, and the storme to cease. Then by e planckes, vessels, and bodyes which floated vp & owne the sea, they manifestly perceyued that the o∣ er ship was cast away. And lastly, that very ship herin they sayled, being thirty yeares after brought to the Docke, to be taken asunder and mended, erifyed the whole Prophecy of Xauerius. About the eight day after their departure from Goa hey arriued at Cocinum. There, when he had with uch ioy & cōfort, visited those of the Society in that lace, being informed of the necessity of others that iued in Comorinum, and Colanum, he wrote backe in ll hast to Gaspar his Vicar, to succour them as soone s might be, and whatsoeuer he should do in that kind to certify him therof by writing with the first oppor∣tunity, not doubting but that he would vse the more peed and diligence therin, since he was presently to giue an accompt therof. Hauing stayed a few dayes at Cocinum, he sayled to Malaca the same moneth, and about the midst of their course, a vehement tempest put both the pas∣sengers & marriners into great feare. The conside∣ration of the present danger had now stroken them all with a dismall terrour, when as Xauerius, whilst others bewailed their owne, & their friends distresse commeth forth amongst them with a cheerfull coun∣tenance, willeth them to take courage, and put away all feare. A tēpest by Xa∣uerius is calmed through Gods help . Then going vp to the Poope of the ship, he hangeth in the sea a little Reliquary, tyed by a cord, and hauing withall made his prayers vnto God, retur∣neth againe into his cabbin to heare Confessions. A strange thing. Vpon a suddayne the winds cease, the tempest is allayed, and they sayle on forward with fayre weather. When they had giuen thanks to God for this their preseruation, their feare as cōmonly it hapneth, was turned into ouer much security. But Xauerius aduising the maister to looke vnto himself, told him, that he was very much afrayd, least in the same iorney other difficulties no lesse dangerous then the former, were hanging ouer their heades. And iust so, it came to passe. For the ship running twice against the rockes, was almost cast away, which perhaps would haue so happened, if Xauerius prayers had not preuented the danger. Neither did he in this iorney, foretell their owne dāger only, but the calamity also of others, though in a more hidden manner. He was at that time farre di∣stant from Malaca, nor had any man come lately frō thence, when vpon the suddain he earnestly intrea∣ted the passengers, to make feruent prayer to God for the Citty of Malaca, which was, as he feared, a that time insected with grieuous sicknesse. The euent roued this to be a diuine presage. For assoone as they riued at Malaca they find it almost vnpeopled throgh grieuous plague, which happened among them by easō of the great wants they had endured in the late ege. And first of all, it had spread it selfe amongst e Cittizens, afterwards it made as great hauoke a∣ ongst the Country people, & strangers; and was at ast by litle and little crept into the Nauy, which was en lately come from Portugall. And although in e very same shippe wherein Xauerius came, this pla∣ ue had made an end of fourty men; yet by Gods oodnes, it had not once touched any of his compa∣ ions. CHAP. VI. He Excommunicateth the Gouernour of Malaca. X AVERIVS was more friendly entertai∣ned at Malaca by the Cittizens, conside∣ring the calamities wherwith they were oppressed, then by the Gouernour himself. As soone therfore as he was come to the Residence of the Society, being not ignorant of the combat he was shortly to vndergo, he earnestly intreated all his cō∣panions, by their serious prayers, to commend to God his iourney into China, greatly fearing that the e∣nemy of mankind would by all possible meanes seeke to hinder the same by his ministers. Which feare of his was not, indeed, without good ground. For the Gouernor of Malaca hauing no disposition in him worthy of a Portughese, began to enuy Iames Perera's glory, to whome he had long before borne a grudg: well foreseeing that not only great gaynes, but much honour also, would redound to an Embassadour that should be sent from the Viceroy of India into China. Wherefore by a deuice, and help also of some of the chiefe of the Citty, vnder colour of a siege that was feared might happen to Malaca, he resolued to hin Perera his Embassage. Francis, who had his mind wholy fixed vpon his iourney perceauing this, began by all māner of swee meanes, to draw the Gouernour from his resolution. But emulation which had blinded his mind, stopt also his eares. For neither the Bishop of Goa his Letters, nor the Viceroyes Patents, nor all the allegations, o intreaties of friends could any whit mooue him, so ob∣stinate he was. Xauerius therfore who had lately fol∣lowed a suite of his with the Viceroy, & procured him money by way of reward, commeth vnto him wit great humility, and first requesteth him for friend∣ship sake; then beseecheth him for Christs sake who was their common Lord and Father, that he would permit him to go into China with the Embassadour, whome the Viceroy had appointed; & that he would not be any hindrāce or obstacle to the setting forward of Christs Ghospell; lastly that he would not comply with the diuell whose desire was to hinder the same nor offer any such iniury to the Bloud, and Name Christ. But the Gouernour, who through his insatiable ride & auarice, had already, in conceyt, made him∣ elfe sure of the Embassage, shewed himselfe no lesse vngratefull towards men, then impious to God. For auing lost all feeling of humanity, neither Fran∣ is his authority, nor the late courtesy he had done im, nor Religion it selfe, which was obiected vnto im, could once moue him a iote. Then Francis ioining hreats to intreatyes, began seriously to aduise him, hat he should beware he did not incurre the displea∣sure and indignation of the Viceroy of India, the King of Portugall, and of God himselfe; seeing that in this one businesse, he should violate the authority & ma∣ esty of them all togeather. But he for all this remay∣ ned obstinate, and shifted off all, in a most contemp∣tible manner. Xauerius therfore, when he perceyued the senselesse man neyther to respect his King, nor feare God, being also vncertaine what to determine of, was constrai∣ned by necessity, to vse the best meanes he could de∣uise. He had indeed before that tyme, neuer carryed himselfe publikely for Legate Apostolicall: but now seeing that neyther his words, nor intreatyes would serue the turne with that obstinate fellow, he thought best to take vpō him for a while the person, which for humilityes sake he had so long layd asyde, & terrify him, by threatning against him present reuenge from heauen. He therfore produced the Popes Breue which he had so long kept close, wherin was denounced Ex∣communication expresly against all such, as durst any way presume to hynder the aduancement of Christiā Religion. Now Francis his moderation was neuer more ad∣mired, then at this time. Francis notable modera∣tiō when he was iniured. For though he were much moued to see so great an iniury offered rather vnto God, then to himselfe; and though he could not ob∣teine that which was iust: yet neuerthelesse he kept himselfe in all quiet of mind, and did so moderate his grief, & held so mighty a hand ouer his passions, that euen at the very time, when he was by the Gouer∣nour vsed most insolently, he shewed no lesse temper & mildnes in his words, then authority in his deeos. For so sweet was his behauiour vnto all sorts of per∣sons, and so wisely did he produce the forsaid Breue, that he desired not to wound, but to terrify with the same. Yet if mildnes would not serue, he determined to vse seuerity: and so at last when he had tryed all o∣ther meanes, His mo∣deration in excō∣munica∣ting. being constrained therunto by necessity, he pronounced the sentence. In the execution wher∣of notwithstanding he shewed no lesse prudence, then moderation. For to the end the businesse might be carryed without tumult, or vproare, he thought it best to deale by a third person, as the Iaponians vse to do; thereby to auoyd meeting with the Gouernour whome he knew had no stay ouer his owne passions. He therfore went vnto Iohn Soarius the Vicar of Malaca, He dea∣leth with the Go∣uernour by a third per son, as the Iapo∣uians vse to do. and relating to him all the matter, intreated him to vndertake the businesse. Now when the Vicar had taken vpon him to performe it carefully, as wel to satisfy his duty therin, as for friendship sake, Frācis giueth vnto him a supplication, as a testimony, no lesse of his moderation in this busines then his autho∣rity; which supplication we haue thought good to ert into this History, wherby it may more euiden∣ appeare what tranquility of mind and moderatiō uerius held, when he was most intemperately abu∣ . This therfore is the tenour therof. Pope Paul the III. at the instance of our gracious ng, sent me into the East for the cōuersion of Eth∣ ckes, that to the vttermost of my power I might la∣bour in dilating the Gospell of Christ, and drawing en to the knowledge & worship of him who made e world, according to whose image and likenesse ey were created. And that I might performe this sinesse the more exactly, and with more ample au∣ ority, his sayd Holines hath also made & cōstituted e Legate Apostolicall, in testimony whereof he sent nto the King of Portugall, his Letters Pontificall, ogether with a Breue, that if he iudged it expedient because indeed he sēt me hither at the Kings request) e might by those helpes, set forth and strengthen my uthority. Whereupon his Maiesty, when I came vn∣ o him at Lisbone, whither he had called me, deliue∣ ed me with his owne hands the sayd Breue, in testi∣ ony of my Apostolicall Legation, and togeather with it, his owne Letters Royall. These, at my first arriuall in India, I presented vn∣ o Alboquertius Bishop of Goa, who did both acknow∣ edge and approue the same. Wherefore he thinking also that there might be much good done concerning matters of Christian Religion in China, hath sent me thither with this intention, that I might lay open to those people the true Religion, then the which there is no other way to saluation. That this is so, you may know by his owne letters to the King of China, which I haue purposely sent you, that you may therein ma∣nifestly see what his Lordships opinion, and desire is concerning my voyage into China. The Viceroy of India also thinking that it was much for Gods glory, for me to haue safe entrance into the bounds of China hath sent with me Iames Perera vpon an Embassage vnto the King of China. This is testifyed by the same Viceroyes commands, and letters to Iames himselfe. And Francis Aluarez keeper of the Castle of Goa, who is also the Kings Procuratour, and Attourney Gene∣rall caused all things to be dispatched as the Viceroy had commanded. Yet the Gouernour of Malaca is not afraid to hinder this our iorney, so acceptable to God, so beneficiall to men, and vndertaken by such, and so great authority; and withall to withstand the Ghospell of Christ. Therfore I earnestly intreat and beseech you, in the name of God, & of the Bishop of Goa whose au∣thority you beare, that, for as much as in this place you represent the person of the Bishop, you will care∣fully declare vnto the Gouernour of this Citty, his Holines Decrees which begin thus: Qui verò de caetero; (wherby all those who hinder his Holinesse Legates are excommunicated) and to request him for Gods sake, that he will not hinder our said iorney, vnder∣taken by the Viceroyes and Bishops authority. If he wil not desist, then presently denounce vnto him that he is excommunicated, not by the Bishop of Goa's, or by yours, or my authority, but by the supreme po∣wer, and authority of those holy Bishops, who first made those Decrees and Canons. Wherfore you shall ntreate him in my behalfe, by the death, & pretious wounds of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that he will not cast himselfe headlong into such grieuous Ecclesiasti∣ all censures. For God will certainly lay farre greater unishments vpon him, then he doth imagine. Then I do beseech you, to send me back this very pplicatiō, togeather with the Gouernours answere, o the end I may testify to the Bishop, that my negli∣ ence hath not bin the cause, why I haue not gone orwards on my iorney into China, which I vnder∣ oke by his aduise and counsayle. Also I most ear∣ estly beseech you, that you wil dispatch this with all eed that possibly may be, for the fit season for na∣ gation into China passeth away. If you do this, you all at once, do both God great seruice, & me a spe∣ all fauour. Neither can I be brought to belieue that he Gouernor is so obstinate or hard-harted, but that e will dismisse vs presently, as soone as he is made cquainted with his Holinesse decrees. The Vicar therfore moued by this supplication & treaties of Francis, goeth to the Gouernour, and de∣ areth vnto him plainly, that he is forthwith excom∣ unicated by his Holines authority, vnlesse he desist om hindring of Xauerius endeauours, & withal in∣ eateth him by the death and passion of our Blessed uiour not to commit any thing which might cause nto him so deadly a wound, together with no small sgrace. And withal, that he would beware how he tangled himself in so heinous & vnexpiable a crime or which certainly, God would take a more seuere accoumpt of him, then he could imagine. But the poore Gouernour harbouring a world of disordinate affections within his brest, could not be persuaded to heare what was sayd vnto him. For neyther his Ho∣linesse authority, nor the threatning of excōmunica∣tion could once induce the miserable man to giue o∣uer what his madnesse had begun; so farre is Enuy from thinking any thing vnalwfull. Wherby it ma∣nifestly appeared that it was not so much the obstina∣cy of the Gouernour, The Em¦bassage into Chi∣na hin∣dred. as of the Diuell himselfe, who was afrayd of the kingdome of China, and his owne ample domination therein. At last, with much ado it was obtained of him, to permit Francis to go forwards into China, but for Perera the Embassadour, he could by no meane be drawen vnto it. Thus was the whole Embassage, and Xauerius designe brought to nothing, as afterward appeared by the effect, through the de∣fault of one passionate man. Then Francis being indeed greatly moued at such impudent audacity, thought it high tyme to giue a example of his seuerity, that none might thence for∣ward dare to attempt any such thing heerafter. Wher∣fore he giueth order, that the Gouernour, with all hi ministers and officers by name, according to course should be declared excommunicated by Apostolical authority, not that his intention was to inflict an new woūd vpon them, but that they might acknow∣ledge the wound which they had before receyued. Fo Xauerius himselfe is reported to haue sayd, That he fo his part would neuer counsayle any one to lay so so a wound as Excommunication is, vpon another; y e would by all meanes cause their wounds to be laid open, Xauerius opinion of excō∣munica∣ted per∣sons. to the view of all, who for their contumacy were wounded by Apostolicall Decrees, to the end hat others might by their punishment be warned frō he like folly, and themselues, at least through shame ight seeke a speedy remedy for so loathsome a sore. But Xauerius receiued no small wound in this cō∣ at. For it is certaine that of all the many & vnspea∣ able vexations and troubles which he suffered all is whole life after, nothing euer hapned more bitter nto him, then that so important a iourney should be indred by one, who ought to haue bin a chiefe fur∣ herer therof. Wherfore being grieued not so much or himselfe, as for the Gouernour, who by his owne ault had cast himself into that danger, A grie∣uous prophe∣cy. he is said with sighing hart to haue cryed out in this manner: In∣ allibly that violatour both of humane and diuine law will ere long pay deerely for his vnsatiable desire of money & honour; not only in money, and honour, but in body, if not (which God forbid) in soule also. Then looking vpon the Church which stood ouer against him, he cast himselfe downe vpon his knees, and with his hands lifted vp to heauen, began to pray to God for him; He by his pray∣ers obtey¦neth of God pā∣nance for the Gouer∣nour of Malaca. & with his eyes all gushing out with teares, cryed out: I therfore beseech, and earnestly intreat thee, O Iesu Christ, God of my hart, by those most bitter torments of thy death, that thou wilt be hold those thy pretious wounds, which continually thou she west vnto thy heauenly Father for vs, and vouchsafe also to apply the benefit therof to this mi∣serable wretch, that being taught by his owne misery he may at last come to himselfe againe. Neither were his prayers, nor prophecy in vaine. For not long after, whē he had against al iustice done many other things, and with the same impudency, and audaciousnesse contemned the Viceroyes command, wherwith he had contemned Xauerius authority, he by the watch∣full wrath of Gods indignation, was punished accor∣ding to the height of his arrogancy. So as by the Vi∣ceroyes order, and command the obstinate wretch was cast into fetters, being accused to haue gone a∣bout to reuolt from his King; and forthwith, bound as he was, was carryed to Goa to the Viceroy, & from thence sent into Portugall to the King; where being despoyled of all the goods which he had vniustly got∣ten, branded with ignominy, condemned to perpe∣tuall imprisonement, and his body couered all ouer with a most loathsome leaprousy, he ended his dayes in such misery, that the King seemed not so much to reuenge the transgression of his Command, as God the violating of his diuine Maiesty. At last this wretch being euen tyred out with calamities, opened his eyes, and by wholsome pennance, washed away the staynes of his former sinfull life. CHAP. VII. The designe of going vvith the Embassa∣dour into China being broken of, Xaue∣rius notvvithstanding setteth forvvard thither. N OW although Xauerius his designe were broken of, yet was he not a whit discou∣raged; but knowing his combat was not so much with men, as with the common Ene∣ y of mankind, he thought he was bound to make ll resistance he could, not to giue ground therby vnto he Diuell. He was not ignorant that in the kingdome of China there were very many prisons full of priso∣ ers; and that all strangers who presumed to enter in hither, without publicke warrant, were cōdemned o perpetuall imprisonmēt. These things which would aue bin a terror vnto others were an encouragement o him. For that, burning both with the loue of Christ nd men, he bequeathed himselfe vnto perpetuall im∣ risonemnt, that he might first preach the Ghospell nto those that were in captiuity, and afterwards by hem to others. And he conceyued such an hope with∣ n himselfe, His desi∣re to pro¦pagate the faith. that if he could but once bring any of the risoners to imbrace the fayth of Christ, they would fterwards, when they were set at liberty, bring their owne family to the same fayth; and might also, if it were Gods blessed will, procure his freedome also, so to propagate the Christian Religion. Now though Xauerius in respect of the peruersity of men, found no humane assistance in so hard and dif∣ficult a businesse; yet for all this, placing a firme con∣fidence in the diuine Goodnes, he resolued to go for∣ward into China, and try what he could do alone; ho∣ping at least, that if he could not himselfe enter into the kingdome, he might yet open a way therinto for others of the Society, and leaue an example to them that should come after him, of what himselfe intended and desired to haue done. He therefore sendeth three of his cōpanions, to wit Baltazar Gage, Edward Silua, and Peter Alcaceua into Iaponia, & departeth himselfe from Malaca with one companion only, He sha∣keth of the dust of his shooes. & a Chinese for his Interpreter. And at the gate of the Towne sha∣king off the dust from his feete (as Christ had com∣manded his Disciples to do) he denounceth to that Citty, wrath from heauen, and many other miseries. And as he had denounced, so it fell out. For shortly after, A deno∣uncing of cala∣mities. the Citty was so wasted, and exhausted with warre, famine, and plague, that being before of great resort, it was almost left vnpeopled. Now Xauerius although he were not ignorant that Perera the Embassadour was much afflicted by reason his Embassage was thus hindred and for the great ex∣pences also which he had byn at, in setting forth the same; yet for al that, he could not be induced to speak with him at his departure, least by imbracing one another, both their griefes might be increased, as or∣dinarily it hapneth. Wherefore hauing a greater fee∣ling ng of Perera's griefe then his owne, he writeth vnto im from out the ship, a most friendly letter, assuring im, that the contumely togeather with the dommage hich he had incurred, would one day turne both to is great gayne, & honour. Which fel out according∣ . For that by the King of Portugall (to whome rancis had most earnestly commended him) he was fterward raysed, to great wealth and dignity. Xauerius leauing Perera the Embassadour behind im, imbarked himselfe for China in a ship of his, by is permission, whereby the very ship it selfe might ut him in mind both of the loue to his deerest friend nd of the benefit he had receyued from him. Now a ttle before his going away, the Vicar commeth to im aboard, & intreated him that he would salute the Gouernour before his departure from Malaca, least e might giue occasion to the people to thinke he was ot in charity with him, if he went away without due saluatations. But Francis inflamed rather with the zeale of Gods honour, then with any anger, whereto not∣withstāding he was iustly prouoked: He auo∣ideth by all mea∣nes spea∣king with an excom∣munica∣ted per∣son. Shal I, quoth he, go to salute one that is cast out of the Communion of the faythfull? Assuredly I shall neuer heerafter either see him, or he me in this life, nor after death also, but then, when I shal accuse him in the valley, of Iosaphat before the supreme Iudge, for that, being blinded by his most wicked and base couetousnes, he hath hind∣red so great an haruest of soules. As for the rumours & speaches of mē, I do not any whit feare them, seing it is manifest that he is excommunicated, & therfore all men ought to fly his company, and conuersation, which I desire may be made knowne to all, by my au∣thority, and example. Nay rather, quoth he, it may be feared, least by my saluting an Excommunicate person, the Censure wherwith the Pope hath bound him, and the paine of the excommunication should be extenuated: and so I might perhaps because, that o∣thers by my example, would conuerse with him without any scruple. Wherfore I pray yow let him alone with his owne busines, for he shall certainly neuer haue me his friend, as long as he hath God his enemy. When he had dismissed the Vicar with this an¦swere, who was not able to make any reply therto, he putteth to sea in the moneth of Iuly, making all the hast he could from Malaca. But comming to make some stay at the straits of Sincapura, being not vnmind∣full of his friends, he againe comforted Iames Perera the Embassador, who remained still at Malaca afflicted for this late accident, with a letter full not only of af∣fection, but piety also, earnestly beseeching him to cure the wound which he had receiued, with discre∣tion and prudence, and from thenceforward, by vni∣ting his soule to God more feruently, Cōforts in sadnes and mi∣series are to be obtained of God by the Sacra∣ments. by the Sa∣craments of Confession and Communion, to seeke thereby secure meanes of consolation, and to con∣forme himselfe wholy to the diuine will. For there was no doubt, but that disgrace & griefe would one day turne vnto his honour, and comfort. Then be∣taking himselfe againe to sea, his two Companions fell into a long and dangerous sicknesse, in the ten∣ding and curing wherof, Francis his charity and pati∣ence was continually employed, to the end that the Louer of the Crosse, might neuer be without his Crosse. And so hauing a prosperous nauigation, he came to China the third moneth, after his departure from Malaca. CHAP. VIII. He endeauoureth, though all invaine, to open a passage into China. T HE Country of China is the furthest part of Asia, The des∣cription of China. inferiour to no one Regiō therof in largenesse of extent, nor number of citties and Townes. For it is said, to be in length boue 400. leagues, and in breadth 300. And the Cit∣yes therin are so fraught with inhabitants, that the ultitude being more then they can hould, the very uers themselues are couered ouer with ships, and in∣ abited like Townes. Towards the East & South it compassed with the Ocean. On the North side it is iuided from those Scythians of Asia, whome we call artarians, with a most vast, and almost endlesse wall. he West side therof lyeth towards the furthest part f India. The Chineses themselues being a people more in∣ yned to peace then warre, The cu∣stomes of the Chineses. liue al vnder the obediēce f one King. There be no petty Kings, nor Princes mong them as in other Kingdomes; but one King only ruleth ouer them all. He appointeth Gouernours ouer euery Prouince, and is alwaies by them informed of the most important affayres of euery place. These Gouernours are not brought vp in the Court, but in Academyes. For by their Lawes, those that be of the Kings bloud and alliance, haue neuer any thing to do with the gouernment of the Kingdome. Out of these Academies are chosen men, famous both for elo∣quence, and knowledge in the Lawes, and these are made Gouernours ouer Cittyes and Prouinces, but yet neuer of their owne Prouince, or Citty. They or∣dinarily esteeme so basely of their Gods, that when either their prayers do not take effect, or any ill for∣tune befalleth them, they whippe, and beate their Houshold Gods, like slaues. One would thinke there were no Gods among them, but their owne magistra∣tes, of whole power they stand in great feare, by rea∣son of their extraordinary seuerity. There be indeed many other things, and those not of common note, recounted of the manners and customes of the Chine∣ses, which because they make nothing to our present purpose I willingly heere passe ouer. Yet I can hard∣ly say, whether that custome of theirs be more inhu∣mane, or imprudent, whereby contrary to other Nations which haue entercourse with one another, they debarre all strangers from comming into thei Country, vnder payne of death. There is adioyning to the sea coast of China, The Ilād Sāciana. an I∣land called Sanciana, a desert place, and without any tillage, lying about 70. miles from the Continent. In this Iland the Portugheses, and Chineses meeting to∣geather for traffique sake, had sleightly built themsel certayne cottages of straw, and boughes to serue them for their present vse. Xauerius therfore tending o this place for his traffique also, as they sayled along by the coast of the Iland, the mayster began to doubt, whether he were not already past the Port of Cunianū or no, whither he had directed his course to land. Yet thinking he was still short thereof, sayled forward with good speed, when as Francis (seeing him in that doubt) telleth him that he was already past the Port. Whereat not knowing what to thinke, he presently stroke sayle, for that Xau rius had yet neuer deceyued him in any thing he affirmed: so as deeming, that he ought to giue more credit to auerius then to himself, casteth ancker, and causeth the Cock-boate to be let downe into the sea, wherin he sent certaine marriners with all speed to make enquiry of the truth. Within a few houres after, they returned backe together with certain Portugeses in their boat who remained in the Iland, certifying them that they were past the Port of C nianū, as Xauerius had affirmed. At which newes the marriners being all stroken into admiration, cryed out and sayd, that certaynly Xauerius had it reuealed to him from heauen. Then weighing ancker, and tur∣ning their course backe agayne, they sayled towards the Port. As soone as it was bruited amongst the inhabi∣tants of the Iland, that Francis Xauerius (for his name was also famous in those places) was cōming thither, presently all the Portugheses runne with ioy to the shore side to meete him. When he was landed, after they had courteously saluted ech other, they conten∣ded amongst themselues who should haue so worthy a man for his guest. But Xauerias soone decided the cō∣trouersy, without wrong to any, and lodged with George Aluarez his ancient and deere friend. Then he desired the Portugheses in generall, that they would build him vp a litle Chappel of straw, and boughes, with the least expence they could, wherin he might say Masse, administer the Sacraments, & instruct chil∣dren, and seruants in their Catechisme, according to his custome. They condescended most willingly to what he required, and very diligently set vpon the businesse; so that within two dayes there was built a chappell for him, vpon a hill, which runneth downe with equall descent vnto the Port. Xauerius therefore, as his ancient custome was, began presently to exercise therin his sacred functions with all diligence, by comforting sometymes those that were sicke in the ships, and at other tymes relie∣uing the poore with almes which himselfe would beg of the richer sort. Sometymes also would he dispute with the Chinese merchants concerning their owne, & the Christians Religion. And in these labours & ex∣ercises he spent two moneths & a halfe with extraor∣dinary feruour of spirit: which made him also renow∣ned, euen amongst the Chineses themselues, no lesse for wisedom then for sanctimony of lyfe. The Chi∣neses ex∣clude strangers In the meane tyme he inquired of the Portugheses & Chineses if there could be any meanes possibly found, to bring in the Ghospell into China. They both answered that it was a very hard matter, & full of danger, seeing that by special cōmand of the King himself, al entrances into Kingdome were kept with a most strict watch, al strangers debarred frō accesse thither vnder pai∣ e of death, no lesse to the commers themselues, then the bringers of them in. Moreouer, it was not law∣ ull for any forreyner to touch vpon the Continent, ithout expresse command of some of the Gouer∣ ours: neyther durst the Chin ses aske leaue of them, y reason of their rigorous gouernement: nor were he Portugheses able to do it, being excluded no lesse hen other strangers. Wherefore there was neyther ortughese nor Chinese to be found, who durst vnder∣ o so manifest a dāger as death, Francis his inuin¦cible courage in time of dāger. or certayne captiuity. But Francis, as he was of an vndaunted courage euē those attempts which ordinarily strike terrour into thers, was notwithstāding greatly inflamed through he continuall good successe of his indeauours, to en∣ ounter with this danger. Wherfore, seing there was o other way to compasse the busines, he resolued to duenture euen vpon the dangers themselues, and to ontriue by one meanes or other, to be conueyed se∣ retly into some Citty of China, that so he might haue ccesse vnto the Gouernour, & deale his busines with im himselfe. The Ma∣gistrates of Chi∣na's cru∣elty to∣wards strangers This deuise of Xauerius was generally i liked of by all the Portugheses, as ouer bold and te∣ erarious. Wherfore there wanted not some who out of their friendship and familiarity with him, en¦deauoured al they could to terrify him frō that desig∣ e, dissuading him not to cast himself wilfully into so manifest a danger, either of death, or perpetuall ser∣uitude. For the Gouernours (whome the Inhabitants call Lutij, and the Portugheses Mandarino's ) were so seuere, or rather harsh, and cruell in keeping their Lawes, that euen for the least fault, they do without any difference of persons beate to death, as well In∣habitants, as Forreiners. Of which cruelty they had lately had a domesticall example of certaine Portu∣gheses, who hauing the yeare before, bin by a tem∣pest driuen vpon the shore of China, had found the Chineses dispositions farre more cruell then the waue of the Ocean, where they lay vntill that day in prison and misery, cruelly rent, and torne with stripes, with∣out any hope of deliuery. What reason therfore could Xauerius haue to leaue of labouring amongst other nations, with certaine and secure hope of great good which might be done, & to hazard his owne liberty, only to intrude, by force, the Ghospell vpon a nation fierce & cruel? and this which the Portugeses said, was also confirmed by the general consent of the Chines s. But Francis being vndaunted at these things (so much doth the force of diuine loue ouercome all hu∣mane feare) replied: His zea∣le of sou∣les. That he desired nothing more from the bottome of his hart, then euen with his owne death to bring the Chineses to euerlasting salua∣tion. For do you not know (quoth he) being euen taught by experience, that feare giues way to hope, where the rewards are greater then the dangers? can you make any question, but that the Citties of Chin , if they should once receiue the seed of the Ghospell, would yield most plentifull fruit, by reason of their most exact manner of discipline, and gouernement? And as it is doubtful whether my endeauor may haue prosperous successe or no; so is it certayne that my seruice will be gratefull to God. For fetters, tormēts, and death it selfe for Christs sake, ought to be to me as a beatitude, and immortality. He had now put his friends to silence with these and the like speaches, when as being much troubled with cares, he was taken some what suddainly with an ague which held him 15. dayes, but by Gods fa∣uourable assistance soone cured; yet in such māner as that the same seemed the forerunner of his death, which was so neere at hand. As soone as he was re∣couered, he returned presently to his former exercy∣ses, hating nothing more then idlenesse, and rest. CHAP. IX. He agreeth vvith a Chinese, to carry him priuately to Cantona. N Otwithstanding all that could be alleaged against his going, he neuertheles diligētly sought how he might be transported into China. And first he began by all the art he could inuent, to try the Portugheses, and afterwards the Chineses, propounding many wayes vnto them, how they might conceale the businesse, & intreating them to pleasure him in so reasonable a request. But they, being absolutly resolued to take heed of them∣selues, could not be wonne therto by any meanes or intreaties, since Feare had wholy shut vp their eares a∣gainst the same, being not willing to expose their for∣tunes and liues to so manifest a danger. Francis therfore being not only depriued of all help, but also not knowing what to resolue vpon, had many different cogitations in his mind. And that no mortification might be wanting vnto him, both his companions lay very sicke. Besides, Anthony of the holy Faith, a Chinese borne, and Schollar of the Colledge of Goa. whome he had brought with him from India for his Interpreter, hauing through want of vse al∣most forgotten the Chinese language, could now stād him in little steed, especially seing he was wholy ig∣norant, and vnskilfull of that ciuill, and gentile lan∣guage, which the Gouernours there are wont to vse. But Xauerius hauing an inuincible hart & courage, & thinking with himselfe that he was bound to leaue nothing vnattempted, persisted neuerthelesse to fol∣low on the busines very hard, hoping that yet at last he might, through Gods assistance, ouercome the difficulty. In the meane time there fell out no small accident which set on fire, and inflamed his hope & desire. For he vnderstood that he King of China at that very tyme had sent abroad Embassadours vnto all places round about, to make diligent inquiry after the Lawes, and Customes of other Kingdomes. Wherefore there was great hope that it would be a gratefull and comforta∣ble thing vnto his Maiesty, to vnderstand also of the Christians Lawes, & manner of lyfe. There were also some of the Chineses, men of good worth, and Fracis his familiar friends, who did earnestly persuade him to go to China, thinking very wel of the Christian Re∣ gion, by the sanctity of his life; persuading themsel∣ s that there was conteyned in those Bookes which carryed with him, some excellent Law, and far bet∣ r then theirs. Heerupon Xauerius being more stirred then before, vnto this noble enterprize, thought erily that God had thus disposed the Chineses, & their ings mind, to the end the Ghospell might at last, eceaue entrance into that Kingdome, and spread it lfe ouer those most populous Citties. Wherfore ful hope and confidence in God, he determined to try manner of wayes to hasten on the matter. For he oubted not, but that either without much danger, nd with great aduancement to the Christian cause, e should get accesse vnto the King; The loue of the Crosse. or els if any hard ishap should fall vnto him, he would esteeme it for n extraordinary gayne. For to be tormented, and aine for Christ (which seemed was the greatest dan∣ er that could befall him) he thought it indeed, the reatest benefit, that God could euer bestow vpon im. But all these difficulties giuing way at last vnto is Constancy, as commonly it happeneth, within a ittle while there was another who offred himselfe for s interpreter. Then finding out a merchant of China who seemed a couragious man, he solliciteth & draw∣ th him on by hopes and promises, to vndertake that ardy enterprize. And when as nothing could be ffected without present money, he beggeth of the Portughese merchants, and for a certaine quantity of Pepper, to the valew of about 300 crownes, agreeth with the merchant to carry him, with his interpreter and his bookes very secretly in the night, and to set him a land in China neere to the Port of Cantona. This Cantona is a famous port Towne standing in the Con∣tinent, about 80. miles from Sanciana. The mer∣chant therfore to keep the matter secret, least he shold venture his life vpon the fidelity of his marriners, of whome he was not secure, had thought to haue v∣sed his owne children, and the most trusty of his ser∣uants for that purpose, and to transport Xaueriu the night in a small vessell. Moreouer he had of his owne accord promised to harbour him in his how and keepe him secret for the space of two or three daies, till he might by some meanes or other declare to the Gouernour of Cantona the cause of his comming into China. Now there were in this businesse two dangers ob∣iected vnto Xauerius by his friends. The one, least the merchāt hauing fraudulently taken the money should breake his promise, & to conceale the matter, might either expose him vpon some desart Iland, or els ca him ouer board into the Sea. The other was, tha (though the Barbarian should keep his word, and se him a shore neere the Port of Cantona ) the Gouernou of the Citty finding he had gotten in thither, being stranger, against the Kings Edict, without any pu∣blike warrant, might to make him an example vnt others, cruelly whippe & murder him, or els cast hi into perpetuall prison. Against these obiections, Xa∣uerius opposed farre greater dangers which they wer not aduised of. First, said he, it was rather to be feare least his owne diffidence, more truly then his wari esse, might be iniurious to the Goodnes and Proui∣ ence of God, if the fearefulnesse of mortall men ould cause him to leaue off that, which he had vn∣ ertaken by diuine instinct, and motion. Secondly quoth he) I should proue my selfe an vnworthy Disciple of Christ, Math. 10. if I did not heare him, denouncing nto me: Who so looseth his life for me, shall find it. Wher∣ ore seeing that the daungers of the body were farre ghter then those of the soule, he thought it more se∣ ure to breake through those, which might put his yfe in hazard, then to hazard the saluation of his oule; seeing that to go to the Chineses, and to subdew hem to the faith of Christ (maugre the enuy of those hat went about to hinder it) carryed not, by Gods grace, more difficulty with it, then Glory. At the same time also there hapned another strāge ccident. Peter Gerra a chiefe Maister of a ship was go∣ ng for Iaponia; and now the Port which he meant to go vnto was in sight, when as vpon a suddaine the wind wholy ceasing, there followed such a calme, that or two or three dayes the ship could make no way. Wherfore being troubled, and discontented in mind e thought to bend his course towards China, when s he saw Xauerius comming from China towards him n a litle boat (for the great ship seemed not to be farre of) and saluting him in a friendly manner, biddeth him be of good cheere, & speedily make ready his full ayle, for that he should by Gods grace haue a prospe∣ ous wind. This prediction fayled not. For they had carce hoysed vp sayle, when by a Westerne gale they were carryed into the hauen. And to shew manifestly this was a miracle wrought by Xauerius from the hand of God, they were no sooner come into the hauen, but the wind turned againe Southwest, which would cer∣taynly haue driuen them into China, had they not al∣ready gayned the Port. In the meane tyme whilst Francis expected there∣turne of the merchant, with whome he had agreed to carry him into China, he wrote many letters as wel to those of the Society, as to other friends. And first he wrote to Fa. Gaspar Rector of the Colledge at Goa, that he should with all speed procure the Bishop (so far was he from assuming any thing to himselfe, although he were Legate Apostolicall) solemnely to declare all those of Malaca excommunicated by the Popes autho∣rity, who had hindred his iourney into China, to the end, that the wound being agayne renewed, might put those wretches in mind, to seeke at last for some remedy. He wrote also to Francis Perez Superiour at Malaca, that seeing the Gouernour had hindred his voyage into China, he should, togeather with all the rest of the Society there, depart from thence with the first occasion into India. Neither did he forget his deere friend Iames Perera, but eased his griefe now the third tyme by sending him consolatory letters, wher∣of this one clause manifestly declared his notable co ∣rage: I would to God (quoth he) we might one day meete one another in the K. of China's Court although I hope, if I can get into China, that you shall find m there, either made a slaue, or else a prisoner in the goal of Cantona, or the Kings Castle. CHAP. X. His transporting into China being differ∣red, he sortelleth his ovvne death. B VT now, Xauerius thinking vpon the con∣uersion of China, and of obteyning there a crowne of Martyrdome, behold new and greater difficultyes are still cast in his way. or whilst with much ioy, for the hope lately concey∣ ed, he prepareth himselfe to his iourney, his new nterpreter, eyther through the secret dealing vnder and of the Portugheses, or else through feare of tor∣ments which he might likely vndergo, on a suddaine hangeth his mynd: so as, regarding more the Feare which was represented vnto him, then the faythfull promise he had made to Xauerius, suddainly forsaketh him who had not the least feare of any such thing. Yet Xauerius constācy was no whit daunted with this vn∣ xpected disaster; but determined notwithstanding, o set forward with his old Interpreter, although, as we sayd, he were nothing fit, by reason of his discon∣ inuance from exercise of the Chinese language. Presently therefore, the Portughese Merchants not more sollicitous for Xauerius case, then for their owne, came all flocking vnto him of purpose, and compassing him round about, besought him most ernestly, that now at last he would desist from that so desperate an enterprize; & if he had no feeling of his owne danger, that yet at least he would take some cō∣passion of his neyghbours, for that theron depended not only his, but also all the Portugheses liues. Bec se the Gouernours of China, if they were once exaspera∣ted by so bold an attempt, would not perhaps rest cō∣tent with the punishment of one, but might also call all the other Portugheses to account for the same; and therefore he ought not, togeather with his owne, draw the fortunes, and liues of all his friends into the same danger. But if he were absolutely determined, and resolutely bent to try his fortune in this kind, that yet at least he would expect a more cōmodious tyme, and that the Portughese ships might first retyre from that place, therby to free themselues from danger. Vpon these their speaches Xauerius willeth them to be of good courage, Xauerius humani∣ty to∣wards the Por∣tugheses for if any dāger should happen vnto them, himselfe being a base & miserable wretch worth nothing, would vndergo it alone: wherfore he was willing to attempt nothing more vntill they had made themselues secure. And so, whilst the Por∣tugheses hasten to be gone, Francis also made himselfe ready for his iourney. Yet certaynly, it was not th will of God, that he should euer enter into China. An that no difficulty heerein might be wanting, the Chi∣nese merchant aforesayd with whome he had contra∣cted for his transport, deceyued him also. For whe∣ther by some accident that hapned in the meane time, or out of feare of punishment, or by the instinct o the Diuell, he wholy fayled in his promise. So as Frā ∣cis hauing a long tyme expected him, but all in vayne was at last forced to cast of al hope of being transpor∣ d thither. When therefore he found as little fideli∣ in his merchant, as he had before done in his Inter∣ eter, not knowing what to resolue vpon, and being stitute, both of all hope, and humane assistance he d recourse vnto the diuine; and with his wonted, d vndaunted courage he began to thinke of new eanes how to transport himselfe into China, not i∣ agining that he was so soone to be transported into eauen. Whilst things stood in this manner, there happe∣ ed a new occasion, which began to put him againe good hope, but proued nothing to the purpose, as afterward fell out. For he vnderstood that the King Sion (which is a Kingdome neere to Malaca ) had etermined to send an Embassage the next yeare vnto e King of China. Wherefore being glad of this good ewes, which he hoped would be for his purpose, he esolued that if the Chinese merchant came not to him acke in tyme, he would take ship for Sion, and there ndeauour that he might be transported into China ith the said Kings Embassadour. But now the tyme pproached when he was not, as he thought, to be∣ in his trauayles and labours, but to make an end of em. For whilst he sought for new helpes if his old ould fayle him, and thought of his transport into he Kingdome of Sion, he was vnexpectedly called o the celestiall Sion. He had now earnestly commended his sicke com∣ anion (that he might not be a burden or hindrance o him in his iourney into China ) to the Portugheses who were to returne into India, to go along with them, himselfe with Anthony of the holy Fayth, and an∣other seruant remayning still in Sanciana. After the Portughese ships were gone, Francis (as the property of hope is neuer to giue ouer) still expecting the Chi∣nese merchant, employed himselfe with neuerthelesse diligence in his accustomed exercises of Charity, to gayne thereby, by Gods holy assistance, the victory ouer Sathan, who as he perceyued, vsed all the stra∣tagemes he could to defeate his endeauours. But God whose counsayles are vnsearchable, & wayes incom∣prehensible had otherwise determined of the busines: and being content with Francis his endeauour, reser∣ued the glory of conuerting the Chineses, vnto others who were to come after. God being therefore greatly delighted with the inflamed hart and desyre, which Xauerius had both to labour, and suffer, Francis being left by his host falleth sicke. pleased to bestow vpon him ra∣ther the reward of all his trauayles formerly taken for his sake (which were both many and great) then to open the way for him to new. And so vpon the very same day, which was appointed for his pas∣sing ouer into China, he fell into a sicknes, whereof soone after he dyed. His disease was caused by them∣humanity of his Host. For when the ships departed to∣wards India, Francis his Host also changing his mynd, and violating the right of Hospitality, being eythe taken with some toy the head, or prickt forward with desire to be gone, departed in all hast, without euer ta∣king his leaue of Xauerius his old friend and guest; n not expecting a ship which himselfe had lately bough in another I and of China. For Francis according t is custome going to say Masse was accompanied with is said Host, who leauing that sacred mystery wherat e was present, and forsaking his guest, departed the land more like a fugitiue, then a friend. Xauerius, as soone as he had done Masse, and made is accustomed recollection, & sayd the prayer for the ead, looking about, perceyued that his Host was ab∣ ent, and inquiring what was become of him, an∣ were was made, that he was shipt in all hast with the est for Malaca. Then Xauerius: Verily, quoth he, I am frayd that his conscience being guilty of some hei∣ ous sinne suffereth him not to rest in quiet through he wrath of God towards him. For what meaneth his ouerhasty speed? Behould the ship which he hath ately procured to be bought, is hourly looked for, yet s he loath to expect her. But let him go in Gods name o Malaca, A dou∣ble Pro∣phe ey. from whence he shal neuer depart, for there he wretch will soone end his dayes. Of these two Pro∣phecies the one was presently verified, and the other not long after. For they who were present were scarc∣ y come out of Church, when the ship he had bought vpon a suddayne appeared in sight; wherat they were all stroken into admiration, and esteemed Xauerius as a man sent from God. And his Host (as was afterward verifyed) a few dayes after his ariuall at Malaca, go∣ ng into the forrest to prouide himselfe of wood was murdered there by theeues, and so made a miserable nd, for that he had byn the cause of Francis his vnti∣mely death. But Xauerius knowing he was not long to liue, for∣told the same to some familiar friends, yet after a manner no lesse profitable, then admirable. As he was one day in an assemby of Portugheses: Let vs see (sayd he) how many we are heere, for within a yeare most of vs shall dye. This Prophecy was more true, then ioyfull. For of seauen who were then present, fiue dyed that very yeare, whereof Xauerius himselfe was one, who certaynely both foresaw and foretould that his owne death was at hand. For that about the same tyme also, he by diuine instinct, no doubt, forgetting all humane things, began to haue a great desire to see God, which was no small token of the beatitude wherunto he was now approaching. Wher∣upon he wrote in a certayne Epistle, That although he had vntill that tyme desired to haue lyfe graunted him for the seruice of Christ, and the propagation o his Ghospell; yet now those liuely sparkes were grow en but cold in him, through a burning desire he had o seeing, and inioyning the diuine Maiesty. CHAP. XI. He endeth his life in a most holy manner. T HE suddayne, and vnfriendly departur of Xauerius Host, Xauerius liues by begging. constrained him to begg his victuals. And so much the more his pouerty afflict him, by how much more scarse all things were made, by reason of th strict watch which the Manderino's made, who pe ∣mitted no man to transport any victualls out of Ch . . Which incommodity he most patiently indured, auing his mynd fixed more vpon Euangelicall po∣ erty, then vpon his owne necessity: wherefore he ought good, not to seek out any new Host, but heer∣ fter to prouide his victualls by begging. But now al∣ ough his mynd, being wholy desirous to suffer, did aliantly encounter with so great difficultyes, & dis∣ ommodities of all things; yet his body could not hoose but be much broken therby being euen worne ut, as well with age and continuall labours, as with is late sicknes also, whereof he was not as yet per∣ ectly recouered. Besides this, he was greatly afflicted mynd, through the care and sollicitude which his esire of going into China caused in him. Being therefore sicke, He agay∣ne falleth into his former sicknes. not in body only but al∣ in mynd, & earnestly wishing his soule might by eath be freed of all her anxietyes, about the twelfth f Nouember he fell agayne into his former sick∣ es. He had scaresly made an end of saying Masse for he dead, when as a mortall feuer came vpon him, to pen him the way to lyfe eternall. Wherfore, sicke s he was, he withdrew himselfe into the same ship which brought him thither, partly to visit the sicke herein as his custome was, and partly also to take vp is lodging there among them: yet some few daies af∣ er, his sicknes grew so violent, that being not able to ndure the tossing of the ship, he was constrained to o agayne to land. A Portughese Merchant therefore eing such a man as he, so pittifully tormēted with an oat burning feuer, and lying abroad in the open ayre moued to compassion towards him, inuiteth him pre∣sently in a courteous manner to take a lodging with him; He is en∣tertained by a Por¦tughese in a cot∣tage. and bringing him home to his house (which stood alone vpon a litle hill, being indeed more turly a cottage then an house) vsed him very liberally, con∣sidering the want of all things at that present. And taking a great care of his health, he intreated him to suffer himselfe to be let bloud. Xauerius, although he knew well inough what kind of Phisitians that desert Iland could affoard, He prom¦ptyly o¦beyeth the Phy∣sitian. sayd notwithstanding, that for all things which belonged to the cure of his body, he would most willingly put himselfe into the Phisitians hands. And this he performed with all alacrity and resignation seeking all occasions whereby to exercise his obedience. He therfore was let bloud, The grie¦uous pai∣nes of his sick∣nes. not without great pai∣ne, and conuulsion of his nerues. After which there followed in him a certayne loathing of all meates, al∣though indeed there was not any meate to be gotten in the Iland fit for a sick person, except a few almonds which were sent vnto him by a Portughese Mayster of a ship, and that also too late: For he did now so much loath al kind of food, that he could not take any thing at all. In the meane time, perceauing that his last day was neere at hand, His Ioa∣thing of his meate he caused all such things as he had brought with him vnto the cottage to be carryed backe agayne into the ship, to the end they might no be lost. Hauing now passed two whole dayes without receauing any sustenance at all, as his sicknesse mor and more increased, so also did his patience & ver∣tue more and more shew it selfe. He had now layne fifteene daies in that poore shel∣ er of Cottage exposed to the wind and weather, and in the cold of winter, not only destitute of all humane help and assistance, His excel¦lent pa∣tience. but tormented also with the ve∣ hemency of his burning, and mortall feuer; yet bare he all these discommodityes, and the violence of his sicknesse also, with such a quietnes of mynd, and ad∣mirable patience as cannot be expressed. He was neuer eard to speake so much as one word, either by way of complaint for the payne of his infirmity, or to aske ny thing of any that were about him, as men are wont to do in tyme of great sicknesse. Nay contra∣ wise, all his speaches and gestures were such, that sufficiently appeared, he accounted his infirmity be a very great benefit, bestowed vpon him from God, as a subiect wherupon to exercise himself in solid ertue, & to deserue an euerlasting crowne of glory. One thing only there was which did a litle grieue im, to wit, that he should dye a naturall, and ordi∣ ary death in his bed, and be depriued of the crowne f Martyrdome, which he had so vehemently desired, specially seeing that he was at that time, as it were v∣ on the point to obtaine the same. But being not igno∣ nt that the Glory of Martyrdom was a free guift of God, the which was oftentymes denyed to those who esired it, & giuen to others that thought least on it; e conformed his will to the disposition of the diuine rouidence, quietting his mind by thinking himselfe worthy of so great an honour. Now, the violence of his infirmity growing more more vehement, fully declared the sanctity which was so deeply ingrafted in him. For, as we see, most commonly in others, when they are tormented with payne, then their corrupt nature most of all mani∣festeth it selfe; but in Francis contrarywise, there ap∣peared at this tyme a true and solid piety. For that he vsed the selfe same actions almost, when he lay euen a dying, that he was wont to do, whē he was in health, sometymes casting his eyes to heauen, and speaking to Christ our Sauiour with a ioyfull & cheerful coun∣tenance, as though he had byn visibly present: at o∣ther times reciting certaine Verses out of the Psalmes, with great feeling of deuotion; repeating very often these words, & the like: Iesu Sonne of Dauid, haue mer∣cy on me. And, Thou O God take pitty on my sinnes. Mary Mother of God, remember me &c. Wherein he spent two whole dayes. The last houre of his lyfe was now come: He de∣partteh this lyfe. Wher∣fore holding a Crucifix in his hands, and fixing hi eyes stedfastly thereupon, he fetcheth many a feeble sigh, and often cryeth out, O Iesu God of my hart: per∣petually mingling his prayers with his teares, vntil both voice, and lyfe did fayle him. And thus com∣batting most valiantly, both with his infirmity, an with death it selfe vntill the last gaspe, vpon the se∣cond day of December (being the Feast of S. Bibia the Virgin) calling incessantly vpon the sweet Name of Iesus and Maria, with all content and quietnes o spirit, he rested in our Lord, and rendred vp his sou to heauen, there to accompany those, whome in h life he alwayes bare in hart, and at his death were n ¦uer absent from his mouth. After he was departed, there still appeared such heerfulnes & sweetnes in his coūtenance, that the be∣ uty of his body was an euident demonstration of the eatitude of his soule. He died about the 55. yeare of is age, ten yeares after his arriuall in India, & in the eare of our Lord 1552. A man without all question, dmirable both for true vertue, & incredible courage f mind, and aboue all, for the feruent desire he had o conuert Ethinckes to the Ghospell of Christ. He euer refused any labour, or danger whatsoeuer for Gods cause; yea not contenting himself with the sal∣ ation of all India, & other Nations bordering theron, e comprehended the whole East within the bosome f that Charity, which esteemed the whole world to tle for him, to do good in. Wherfore hauing planted he Ghospell of Christ, and the Society also, through∣ ut the whole East, almost at the very tyme when he as thinking how to get into the hauen of Cantona, he anscended the waues of this mortality, & arriued at he hauen of eternal blisse, there to set vpon the Chine∣ es by his forcible praiers in the sight of God. And there s no doubt, but that he who is now Blessed in heauen, ath by his contiuual praiers vnto God opened a way nto China, When he was dead he ope∣ned a∣way into China. not only for the Society of IESVS, but lso for the Portughese merchants, and the Christian Religion. For a litle after Francis his death, there was generall leaue graunted to the Portugheses to resort nto the Port of Cantona, and there to make their a∣ oad for traffique; sake, it being the generall opinion, that Xauerius had by his prayers opened that way in∣ o China, which was before so straitly barred vp on euery side. And about 30. yeares after this agayne, when as the Chineses kept not so narrow a watch v∣pon their coastes, as before they were wont to do, some Fathers of the Society of Iesus, emulating therin Xauerius his vertue, got entrance at last into China, & there by Gods fauourable assistance, layd the founda∣tions of Christian Religion. CHAP. XII. His body is buried in quicke Lime. A S soone as it was knowen, that Francis wa departed this lyfe (for his feuer being mor dangerous then it seemed, The Por¦tugheses feeling of Xaue∣rius death. had deceyued a men but himself) the Portugeses that wer left in the Ilād being as it were strockē dead with th doleful newes came running presently to his Body, a if they had hastned to their Fathers funerall. Al place about the cottage were filled with cryes & lamentat ¦ons: then followed a dismall silence, with an earne longing to see his body. Which assoone as they behe to be as it were the picture of his soule, & to represe to them the eternal felicity which he inioyed, they f agayne vnto their former weeping, since they cou neyther satisfy their harts, nor eyes, with so loui and most amiable a spectacle. Xauerius was of a well set, and strong body, tall stature, though not much aboue the ordinary pitc fayre of complexion, and of a gracefull aspect. H countenance was exceeding cheerfull, and liuel is eyes grey, and quicke; his nose of a moderate size, is beard and haire naturally blacke, but now turned ray with age and cares; his habit poore & ordinary, ut yet neat and decent. His vpper garment (accor∣ ing as the Priestes of India vse to weare) reached owne vnto his ankles, so that it serued also for a owne. Those therefore, who thus beheld him, cal∣ ed to mynd his exceeding courtesy, and singular be∣ ignity vnto all men; his courage & magnanimity of art, giuing way to no dangers, or difficultyes what∣ euer; his perpetuall contēpt of death, the very name wherof striketh such terrour into others; his infinite esire to aduance Gods Glory and Religion; his Hu∣ ility equall to his magnanimity; but specially his iety, and sanctimony of life, transcending farre the ighest strayne of other men. They therfore made dolefull complaints, because hat sweetnesse of behauiour, that example of forti∣ de, that charity towards their sicke was taken from hem; because Religion had lost such an excellent ad∣ ancer thereof; because the world was depriued of ch an vpholder; and finaly because that new Starre as now vpon a suddaine set, which gaue light to the ndians, who before had laine in almost perpetual dar∣ nesse, and which had driuen away the foggy myst of the East, by the radiant beames of Christs Ghospel. Where was now one to be found, to carry on the Christian Religion to the furthest part of the world? Who should heerafter cure the Portugheses both cor∣ orall & spirituall diseases? Who should succeed Xa∣ erius roome and place? In the meane tyme, whilst the Portugheses compassing his body, feed both their eyes and thoughts with the most comfortable sight and re∣membrance of their dearest father, and ouerwhelmed with teares, wholy vnmindfull of themselues beway∣led so great a losse, Anthony the Intepreter who had attended vpon Francis all the tyme of his sicknesse, and at his death, ranne vnto the ship for Francis his Priest∣ly habit, which was kept therein. When the Portu∣gheses who were aboard vnderstood of Xauerius de∣parture, they also with streams of teares gushing from their eyes, brake forth into lamentations and sighes, being strucken, not so much for their owne present griefe, as for the sorrow which they knew it would cause in Perera their mayster, who remayned at Ma∣laca. The Interpreter therefore returning backe with Francis his apparell, He is pur into the ornamēts of a Pri∣est. and accompanied with the mar∣riners weeping, cloathed his body in Priestly gar∣ments as the manner is; and by aduise of the Portu∣gheses determined to put him into a woodden coffin, as the Chineses are accustomed to doe: which, as the e∣uent afterward declared, was done certaynly more by diuine, then humane prouidence, to the end that those things which miraculously happened to his holy bo∣dy, might be made the more manifest. Being therefore put in a woodden chest, and his funeralls celebrated with the greatest solemnity that could be, in so great penury of all things, it was carryed forth by all the company to be buryed in the very shore of the Hauen. Hauing there prepared a Graue, and setled the Cof∣fin therein, it came into their mynds, by diuine in∣stinct, to put vnto the body quick lyme, to eate away the flesh, that the bones might be afterward transpor∣ted into India. Opening therfore the Coffin agayne, they couered the whole body with lime, vnsle kt Lime is put into the Cof∣fin. to the end the flesh might the sooner be consumed, and so closing it vp, they carefully buried it in the same place. Then they heape togeather certayne great stones vpon the graue, to serue as a marke to find it out by, if any of the Society should chance to seeke after the same; and so depart with many teares, ful of exceeding griefe and sorrow, for the losse of so worthy a man. CHAP. XIII. His body being found vvhole and incor∣rupt, is carryed to Malaca, and there a∣gayne interred. A FTER this, at the beginning of the spring, when the tyme was come, that the shippe which brought Francis thither was to depart for Malaca; the Chinese In∣terpreter, of whome we spake before, eyther out of the loue he bare vnto Xauerius, or rather by diuine in∣stinct goeth to the Mayster of the ship, and sighing sayth: What! sall we heere leaue Xauerius, who came with vs as farre as India, in a desert Iland of the Chi∣neses, amongst the barbarous people? O what a man was he! Did we not our selues behold his Heroicall sanctity, both in life and death, with these our eyes, which all posterity shall admire? Why should not we rather carry his sacred Body into India, to remayne there, where it may be honoured, then leaue it heere, where it wil be contemned? I would (quoth the mai∣ster) with all my hart carry his body with me into In∣dia, if the flesh were consumed from the bones, that he might easily be transported. Wherefore I will pre∣sently send expresly one to view the same, and if the hope be answerable to my desire, I will carry it along as you request, not for your sake more, then for my owne. For I am not ignorant, what great fauour I shall reape thereby of my Mayster Iames Perera, who will certaynly receiue no small content, and comfort also, to haue Xauerius with him dead, whome in his life tyme he so deerly loued. Wherefore he dispatched presently a trusty person to open both the graue and coffin, & if his body were consumed with the lime, to bring it away with him vnto the ship. The messenger hastning to the graue, diggeth vp & openeth the Coffin, Francis his body is found entier 4. monthes after. & putting the lime aside from of the body, a wonderful thing to be spokē, he findeth it so wholy entiere, & incorrupt as if it had byn but newly buryed. No ill sent or sauour, rather most sweet and odoriferous smell did issue from it; no putrefaction was there found at all, no not so much a of the nose, which vseth first to be corrupted. Th colour as fresh as if he had byn aliue; his garments no whit consumed or hurt; his flesh was fayre and soft nor had the very colour, which dependeth of the lyfe o much as once forsaken his visage, so that he durst carcely touch him with his hands, for that he seemed uen to be yet aliue. Being therefore wholy astonished at the strange∣ esse of the thing, he presently acknowledged Gods uourable handy-worke therein, and by the integri∣ y of his body, he most highly valueth that of soule. is admiration also so much the more increased, be∣ use he knew Xauerius to be by nature, not hoat and ry, but cold and moyste: and that it was now also e fourth moneth that he had layne thus buryed in uicke lime. Fearing therefore lest he might be heer∣ deceaued, he cut a little piece of flesh from off his high, and carryeth it vnto the maister of the ship, re∣ ting at large what he had seene and found: and he piece of flesh which he had brought, gaue credit the miracle. Wherupon presently the maister, mar∣ ners, and passengers being stroken into admiration, egan to withall speed to run vnto the graue, and fin∣ ing euery thing as was related, some of the company ho had bin either niggard, in giuing to Xauerius ings necessary for his sustenance, when he was li∣ ng; or els had spoken som what disgracefully of him fter his death, began to powreforth aboundance of ares, & to be t themselues vpon the face with their sts, for shame and sorrow of their fault. Others gaue rayse to God, who tooke such care, euen of his ser∣ nts dead corps. This done, the Maister of the ship commanded he body to be presently carryed aboard, as it lay in he Coffin, intending to make more certaine try all thereof himselfe, that so the miracle might be publi∣shed to others. And hauing throughly searched the body, and found it sound and incorrupt, with great reuerence he putteth in the lyme againe into the Cof∣fin as before, and hoysing vp sayle departed from Sanciana in the month of March with a very prospe∣rous wynd towards Malaca, where he soone arriued; so as one would haue thought the winds themselues had obeyed Francis. They sent their little boat before to Malaca to carry newes, that Xauerias body was foūd intier and incorrupt, & was comming towards them. At which tidings the Malacensians being stirred vp with deuotion, and desirous to make satisfaction for their former iniury done vnto him, resolued to receiue his dead corps with all the honour & reuerence that they could, whome whilst he liued, they had cast out with no small disgrace. Then they began to cal to mynd, The Ma∣lacensians zeale in recea∣uing Xa∣uerius body. and seemed euen to behould with their eyes the feruour, and counte∣nance where with Xauerius was wont to preach vnto the people, and wherwith he sought to draw men fr their euill life, to seeke their saluation; to cure their sick and possessed persons; & lastly to foretell thing far absent, and to come. Wherfore turning their con∣tumacy into reuerence towards him, they all setle themselues with greatioy to solemnize the funerall of so worthy a man. But Iames Perera who had al that tyme remayned in Malaca, out went all the res in his loue to Francis, and which he shewed also by hi deeds. For he mitigating the griefe which he had con∣ceiued for his friends losse, by the comming of his bo∣dy, presently prouideth with extraordinary diligence aboūdance of torches, & all other things necessary r the funerall pompe. In this meane tyme the shippe as come into the hauen, and they had put the Coffin to a Church neere by, there expecting vntill the itty came forth to meete them. Now, as soone as it was knowne in the Citty at Xauerius Body was landed, Xauerius funerals at Mala∣ca. all the people pre∣ ntly thronged out of the gates to meete it, partly to e, and partly to touch the same with their beades. he Vicar also of the Citty with his Clergy came thi∣ er in Procession, who opening there the coffin be∣ re the people findeth the body entiere & fresh, with∣ ut any the least corruption whatsoeuer, breathing ut a most sweet and pleasant sauour. Heerupon the eople that were present with great admiration be∣ an to extoll Gods diuine power, to kisse the sacred liques, and touch them with their beades, especi∣ ly Iames Perera, who hauing heerby his long sorrow hanged into a suddayne, A sick∣man is healed by tou∣ching his body. & excessiue ioy, celebrated e arriuall of his dead friend with the greatest affe∣ ion of hart that possibly he could. And that Gods probation might adde more credit to humane iud∣ ments, a certaine sick man by touching of the body as instantly restored to his health. The next day therfore in the morning the whole lergy of the Citty together with al the people come gaine in processiō to meet the body with burning ta∣ ers & torches in theirs hands, as also with extraordi∣ ary feeling of ioy & deuotion. There was not at that ime any of the Society remayning in Malaca, for they were all departed lately thence, by Francis his expresse order. Yet the Citty thought good to haue his body carryed into the Church, which had formerly be∣longed to the Society, wherby they might haue Xa∣uerius in the meane tyme as a pledge of their returne. Wherfore with a most solemne procession, & aboun∣dance of lights the coffin was cōueyed to the Church aforsaid. And there after they had with all solemnity sung masse, the body being separated from the lyme, was put into a new Coffin, and buried in a most emi∣nent place of the same Church, causing all that were present to burst forth agayne into new teares partly through ioy of the late miracle, & partly also through the griefe which the want of such a man had caused in them: and presently there followeth one miracle vpon another. The shortnesse of the new Coffin, had constray∣ned those who put him therinto, Bloud floweth out of Xauerius dead bo∣dy the 5. month after. so to bend & stray∣ten the Body as that there presently issued fresh bloud from out his shoulders, breathing forth a most sweet & odoriferous sauour. Which the behoulders percea∣uing, and attentiuely considering, were driuen into admiration at the strangenesse of the miracle, in tha a body which had bin now fiue monthes without soule (so rare & perseuerant was the miracle) shoul still retayne not only the flesh, moysture and colour but also euen bloud it selfe, and that so sweet as it see∣med to be the odour, not of his bloud, but of his san∣ctity. Wherfore thinking good to keep it without a Coffin, it was taken forth againe, and by the Mala∣censians not only honourably interred, but preserue lso, as a pledg of the diuine Clemency towards them. Wherein they were not frustrate of their hope. At the same time, there was through God heauy wrath towards thē, a most contagious sicknes spread uer all the Citty, which hauing almost vnpeopled great part therof, had put them all into a wonderful eare. Wherfore being much perplexed, and through emorse of conscience, calling to mind the predictiō which Xauerius had pronounced agaynst them for the wronge they had done vnto him, they verily thought there was no other cause of Gods indignation against hem but that. But this pestilence wholy ceasing vpon the very day that his funerals were kept, shewed suf∣ficiently that God was now pacified agayne, by the merits of Xauerius, by whose intercession the sicknes was remitted. CHAP. XIIII. His Body is translated from Malaca into India. A FTER this, vpon the 13. of August Iohn Beira a Priest of the Society of Iesus going with some other Companions to Moluca, tooke Malaca in his way. He for the reue∣rence and deuotion which he bare vnto Xauerius, ha∣uing heard by report that his body was incorrupted, greatly desired to visit & behould the same. Wherfore going priuatly into the Church with his companions in the night, Francis his body intier the 9 month after his death. and opening the Sepulcher, he findeth Francis like one aliue, no lesse intier and incorrupt in the ground, then he was before in the lime, it being now nine monthes after his death. Wherfore ioyntly giuing prayse to God, who is admirable in his Saints, with great veneration, and many teares, they kisse and adore his sacred body. Neither was there wanting, at the same time a new miracle. For they perceiued that the veile wher∣with his face was couered, The veile di∣ed with fresh bloud. was, by reason of the heauines of the earth which was throwne vpon him, besprinkled as it were with fresh bloud. Wherefore Beira being moued by the euidency of the miracle, be∣thinketh with himself of doing greater honour to Xa∣rius. And conferring the matter with Iames Perera, they iudged it conuenient, that his body should be taken vp, and kept in the Sacristy of the Church; and Perera himselfe procureth a new Coffin to be made and lined within, with rich Damaske, and couered on the out-side with cloath of gould. Beira hauing thus inclosed Xauerius in his new Coffin, departed to Moluca, and leaueth Emanuel Tabera one of the Socie∣ty at Malaca, with order to transport that rich and precious Treasure, with the first opportunity vnto Goa. In the meane Iohn Mendoza, a noble and wealthy Portugese-merchant had a ship newly arriued at Ma∣laca fraught with Chinese merchandize. His factour hauing vnladen the wares kept them in the Citty ex∣pecting a fit season to transport them to Goa. But when the time for nauigation came, he could not get a ship, for that there was but only one in the Hauen, & that not fit for sea, as being old, & halfe rotten, & her keele specially so very weake, that she was ready to fall asunder: So as the sea men and marriners gaue their opinion absolutly of her, that she would not be able to brooke the seas, but straight grow loose in her ioynts and leake, and so be quickly cast away. Wher∣fore the factour being sad, knew not what to do. But when he vnderstood, that Xauerius holy Body was to be transported vnto Goa, he ventured in her, not only all his merchandize, but his person and life also, ha∣uing assured confidence in God, that by the merits of Xauerius, of whose admirable vertue he had had suffi∣cient experience, the ship would arriue safe. In the meane time Peter Alcaceua of the Society of Jesus being sent by Cosmas Turrianus, was come vnto Malaca, to bring away those sacred Reliques vnto Goa. Wherfore he, togeather with Tabera, conuey the holy shrine into the ship, to the exceeding ioy, both of the marriners, and passengers, as thinking themselues strongly armed therby against al tempests. There was a chamber in the ship prepared of purpose for the sa∣cred Body, richly hung with silke, wherin the shrine was placed, togeather with store of excellēt perfumes and waxen tapers. All which dutifull seruices, Xaue∣rius did aboundantly requite. For when they were in the midst of their course, the ship running vpon cer∣tayne vnknowne rockes, stuck so fast amongst them that she could be haled neither forward, nor back∣ward, but remayned immoueable, as if she had bin fast nayled thereto. At length, after the Marriners had laboured for many houres to get her loose but al in vayne, they be∣gā to despayre. Wherfore hauing no hope in humane they implored the diuine assistance. And presently they came to Father Alcaceua intreating him earnestly to set forth Xauerius Body. He without any difficulty yieldeth to their request, that they might all togea∣ther call vpon the Saint for help. There was no delay made, and so all with burning tapers in their hands fell downe vpon their knees, and in most suppliant wise, and with may teares began to call vpon Xaue∣rius, beseeching his ayde in this their distresse. And not in vaine. For as they were thus seriously implo∣ring his help, the Rock vpon a suddaine leauing its fast hold, the ship got loose, and gaue withall a great cracke, then by little and little wynding her selfe frō out the shallowes, held on her course with a prospe∣rous gale. At other times also, being in manifest dan∣ger of casting away, she escaped miraculously, by the passengers & marriners calling vpon Xauerius, whose holy Body was there present, and so at last arriued afe at Cocinum. Where as soone as it was knowne that Francis his body was comming thither whole and in∣corrupt, The zeale which the Coci∣nensians shewed in going to visit Xa∣uerius body. the whole Citty was so stirred vp with the strangenesse of the thing, that yow might presently see the hauen full of people, and many also making hast in smal boates to meet the ship, therby to satisfy their longing eyes. Then climing vp vnto the ecke, they came into the chamber where the body lay, and there one after another, touch, and kisse his sacred reliques, admiring to behould the body intiere and sound, and extolling the diuine Bounty of Almighty God, who had shewed it selfe so admirable, euen in he dead corps of holy men. The ship hauing made some few dayes stay at Cocinum, departeth thence for Goa, yet stayed a little y the way at a towne of India called Baticala, some o. miles from Goa, with no smal benefit to the inha∣ itants of that place. For there, by Francis his merits principall Portughese woman was deliuered of a reat sicknes, & many other miracles wrought besides which we shall afterwards set downe in their proper ace. But now, for that the wynd was ful against thē hey were forced to stay their course at Baticala for ty me. Wherfore the gouernour of that place taking small gally maketh hast to Goa before, and there de∣ lareth the whole busines vnto those of the Society. Their desire, as often it hapneth, was by that delay expectation more inflamed; nor could they satisfy themselues to make any longer stay. Wherefore Melchior Nūnius Rectour of the Col∣ dge went vnto the Viceroy, and easily obtained of m, a light barke of fetch away the sacred shrine with speed. The barke belonged to one Alphonsus No∣ nta, a vertuous man, and one that alwayes much e∣ eemed of Xauerius, who lent the same far more wil∣ ngly then it was demaunded, & moreouer imployed s owne indeauours carefully therein. But the may∣ er of the ship, who had brought Xauerius body from alaca, opposed himselfe, and earnestly requested, at, seeing his ship was not now farre from Goa, she ight not be despoyled of so sure and safe a guard. Yet the great desire they had to see their Father Xauerius, ouerswayed his iust request. Melchior therfore leauing many of the Colledge behind who desired to accompany him, with certaine of the principall Fathers, and a company of Orphane Children taketh boat, & with al the speed that might be hasteth to the ship. And when he was arriued, he forth with went aboard, and entring into the cham∣ber where the shrine was kept, findeth Xauerius body wholy sound and vncorrupt, retayning still the selfe same countenance which he had yet liuing; so that seemed to be but newly dead, or rather still aliue Wherefore shedding teares for ioy, after he had while contemplated his holy visage, as an euident to ken of his heauenly felicity, he sweetly kisseth his sa∣cred hands and feete, with extraordinary feeling o deuotion; and the like also did all the rest, euery on striuing who should be most forward therein. In the meane while, the Maister had commande his ship to be set out with many flagges, Honour giuen to Xauerius by the mariners & others. and tapest hangings, and the great Ordinance to be all couere with silke. As soone as the Body was brought abo the hatches, the Orphane Children that were co∣ frō Goa, with garlands made of flowers on their head & boughes in their hands began very deuoutly to si the Canticle Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel &c. wh at neyther themselues, nor the rest that were prese could abstayne from weeping. Whilest they sung that manner the Body was let downe into the Bark & gently placed in the poope: & presently the gr ship taking her leaue of Xauerius, sent forth a mig eale of Ordinance, which renewed againe the ioy & ares of al that were presēt, whilst they called to mind ow good God was, who would euen in the midst of e sea honour his humble seruant with so great ma∣ nificence. Then the forsaid ship, hauing deliuered vp e body, & being lightned also of all her merchādize, perform as it were her last duty to Xauerius, in the ve∣ same place, and at a calme sea, sinketh downe of her fe vnder the water and is drowned; to shew therby at hitherto by his holy assistance she had passed safe, rough both waues and rockes. This done, the Barke arriued in the ame euening a Church of our B. Lady called Rebandaria, about mile and halfe from Goa, seated in the mouth of e riuer, which runneth along by the Iland of Goa. Francis his body is intier 16. mon∣thes after his death. here Fa. Melchior, greatly desiring once more, to hould and cōtemplate Xauerius Body at leasure, did midnight, all the doores being fast shut, take vp the me in his Priestly ornaments, as he lay, from out e shrine, it being then 16. monthes after his death, findeth him to haue the very same face, countenan∣ and feature of Body, as he had whilst he liued; to∣ her with his flesh full of moysture, his skinne fresh d flexible, and his colour so liuely, that one would ue taken him to haue byn rather a sleepe then dead. Francis his shirt also no∣thing the worse after so many monthes buriall. He had vpon his body a garment of fine linnen, hich he had carryed with him in his iourney, inten∣ ng to cloath himselfe therwith, according to the ountry fashion, when he came vnto the King of ina. This, because he had neuer vsed it in his life, ey made to serue him for a shirt when he was dead: the which, notwithstanding that his dead Body was wrapped therein, the space of so many moneths, and also that it had byn often couered ouerwith lime, and earth, seemed so neat and cleane, that one would haue thought it had bin newly put on, & preserued rather then any way impayred by the Body. Hereupon Fa. Melchior, after he had rendred due thankes & prayses to the diuine maiesty, remembring what an incitement to vertue S. Paul the Hermits coate of Palme-tree was vnto S. Anthony, and how Elias his cloake had byn beneficiall to Elizeus, felt in himselfe a vehement desire to be made possessour of Xauerius shirt. Wherfore taking it of from his body, he kept it most carefully, either as a memory of Xauerius himselfe, or as an ornament for his owne vse. For that he going afterward into Iaponia, carried the same with him thither, intending to cloath himselfe ther∣with, when he went to speake with any King, or No∣bleman of that Country, to the end that by Francis hi merits and intercession for them, he might not only delight their eyes, but also winne their harts to God. And the euent proued afterward answerable to hi desired deuotion. CHAP. XV. His Funerall is kept at Goa, vvith all so∣lemnity. I N the meane time, the Viceroy (who was then at Goa ) being certified ouer night of the cōming of Xauerius body, for the great veneration which he bare vnto him, was ceeding ioyfull, & presently commāded a solemne ompe, and preparation to me made ready against he next day. But the Fathers of the Society, whome Melchior had left at home against their wils, were so uercome with ioy, that hauing their harts wholy possessed with desire to see their deerest Father, could ot sleepe, nor take any rest all that night. Neither as there any one among them either so could in spi∣ it, or weake of body, that did not watch the whole ight, so great possession had the loue of Xauerius otten in all their harts. Wherefore all that night, hey busied themselues to adorne their Church with reene boughes, Tapestryes, Carpets, and other or∣ aments, intending to receiue their most desired Fa∣ her with the best preparation they could deuise. Now t chanced, that this day fell out vpon the Fryday next before the Holy weeke: yet they thought good to dorne the Church, and Aultars in the most sumptu∣ us manner they could, and with the rich ornaments which they commonly vsed vpon the greatest Feasts of the yeare. For they deemed, that this holy Man, whose funerall God would haue celebrated with sol∣lemne pompe, ought to be receiued rather in orna∣ments of ioy, then in dolefull and mourning blacke. This funeral then was kept vpon the 15. of March in the yeare 1554. His fu∣nerall at sea. Vpon which day early in the mor∣ning, Iames Perera who was come from Malaca thi∣ther, embarketh himselfe with a traine of choice friends in a galley, and all with white torches in their hands, goe to meete his deerest Father, and Friend Xauerius. Presently after him there followed six little boates, wherein there were to the number of fifty persons, all ardent louers of Xauerius, and admirers of his vertues. Euery one had a great torch lighted in his hand, and his page a lesser taper. As soone as they were come to the Church where the holy body was kept, they all togeather prostrate themselues v∣pon the ground, and with teares adore the sacred re∣liques. But yet Perera went beyond them all in pie∣ty, who had alwayes borne so speciall an affection to Xauerius. Then there followed other small vessels one after another, to the number of twelue, of Portughese , Chineses, and Malacensians, all men of very good ac∣count, and in equipage accordingly, both for ap∣parell and lights: Who when they had, with all the rest, performed their deuotions vnto the Body, rety∣red themselues, ech one to his Boate. Now, when it was well in the day, the shrine a∣dorned with cloath of Gold, was placed in the Poope of a small Barke al beset with burning tapers of waxe; the Fathers of the Society in their white surplisses, & e Orphane children with garlands on their heads, ompassing the same round about & singing of hym∣ es and psalmes, and so conueyed it to Goa. There fol∣ wed this little Barke, in a long row, to the num∣ er of about twenty other little boates, all beset with urning torches & tapers likewise, the more to grace e solemnity of the funerall pompe. The Sea seemed on a fire with lightes, the shores resounded with ch melodious musicke, that it caused most that were esent, through their great feeling of deuotion, to ed aboundance of teares. But when the Barke thus istering with the splendour of so many tapers appe∣ ed within sight of the Citty, wherby they vnder∣ ood the Body was at hand, the people were so reatly moued thereat, that they seemed to leape, nd triumph for ioy. For although the Fathers, not nmindfull of their humble modesty, had dealt alrea∣ y, and that earnestly, with the Viceroy and Bishop, at Xauerius might not be receiued as a Saint, but as he seruant of God, vntill his Holinesse should other∣ yse determine thereof: yet by the Viceroyes order nd command, the bells of all the Churches began to ing forth peales of ioy and melody. At the hearing whereof the whole Citty began to runne forth, to eete the Body, so as the shores, walls of the towne, indowes, Garrets, & toppes of houses, from whence ey might discouer the comming of the Barke, were ll beset, and filled with people. And the neerer the arke drew vnto them, the more did the multitude, & eir desire to see it, increase. Yea many out of feruor nd zeale leapt one after another into the water, stri∣uing who should first touch the holy shrine. In this meane tyme the Viceroy, and all the No∣bility, with a great number of chiefe Cittizens, stood expecting the Barke at the Hauen, with burning ta∣pers in their hands, and the Chanons of the High Church, with all the other Priests in white surplisses came with their Crosses in Procession wise, to meet the same. Thither also came the Sodality of Mercy with their banners, and ensignes all glittering with gold and siluer. After them followed a very sump∣tuous Beere, couered ouer with cloth of Gold, where∣on those of the Sodality had determined to carry the Shrine aloft, that so it might make the more glorious shew. As soone therfore as the Shrine was brought aland by those of the Society, A great concour∣se to Xa∣uerius bo∣dy. the people made such a presse out of desire to touch and kisse the same, that very many were thereby throwne downe one vpon another. And because those who came last, would not make way for the first to retyre, they were so thronged vp toge∣ther on a heape, that many were in danger to haue bin pressed, and stifled to death, if great prudence had not byn vsed to auoyd the danger. The Viceroy therefore was forced to send this Guard to put back the throng, and to make way for the Procession, that was ready to begin. Now, His land funerall. when the multitude with much adoe was forced backe, the Procession set forward, & was performed with all the pompe that might be. After which there followed the Shrine placed vpō the Beer most sumptuously adorned, and carryed by certayn Fathers on high vpon their shoulders, togeather with two other empty Beeres, borne on each side one, and richly furnished like the other. After the Body fol∣lowed the Viceroy, and his Court, togeather with all the Nobility, and whole Citty, with such aboundan∣ce of torches and tapers, that the streets seemed to be on fire, and this with such applause of extraordinary ioy in all sorts, that one would haue thought it had rather byn a triumph, then a funerall. The Shrine or Coffin glittered all with gold; the way was al strowed with greene boughes, and odoriferous flowers; The windowes and walls of all the houses were adorned with costly hangings and tapestry; besides the many sweet perfumes, set euery where about, on both sides. There were moreouer hung about the Beere diuers Censars of siluer, in which were cast continually ma∣ny sweet and fragrant odours. Francis therefore in this triumphall manner, re∣turning from his China -voiage, was at last brought into the Church of the Society at Goa, giuing vs ther∣by to vnderstād with what honour his soule no doubt is now glorified in heauen, whose Body being dead, through the sanctity of his soule, did notwithstanding so triumph heere on earth. CHAP. XVI. The great Concourse of people to behould his Holy Body. A S soone as they came to the Church of the Society, a solemne Masse was sung. And to auoyd the great presse of people, the Beere was placed within the Cancells of the Altar. It was told the people that when Masse was ended, the Coffin should be opened, and that all who would, might see the Body. Whereupon the multi∣tude made so great a throng that they brake downe the rayles of the Cancells. But the Coffin being shut, was kept safe by nothing more, then by the presse of people, hindring one another. Then the Rectour of the Colledge, An incre¦dible cō∣course to Xauerius body. fearing the violence of the pious peo∣ple, earnestly intreated the Viceroy that he would be pleased to retyre vnto his house with the Nobility, for that the people would then certaynly follow his exā∣ple; and that when afterwards the chappell was voy∣ded & the presse of people gone, they might themsel∣ues the more commodiously see the body. The Viceroy therfore yelding to his request, with∣draweth himselfe, and all the Nobility followeth him. But the people remayned still immoueable, vr∣ging, and requiring to haue the Body shewed vnto them: for vnlesse they had their desire, they sayd they would not stirre a foote. And by standing out thus stifly, they obteined at last their demand. For when as no delay would serue the turne, F. Melchior was forced at length to giue way vnto the tyme, and putting the presse of people a litle backe, vntill the Cancels were agayne set vp and fastned, Xauerius body was shewed to them in his Priestly robes, as he was brought thi∣ther. Which when the multitude beheld, they were so desirous to see it neerer hand, that rushing on with great violence they agayne brake downe the Cancels. Whereupon the Fathers through a suddayne feare pre∣sently shut the Coffin agayne, that there might no violence be offered thereunto, & would by no meanes open it any more. So as the people being out of hope to see it agayne, and weary with expecting, they that stood neerest, & had seene it though a far of, at length retyred, and told the rest what they had seene. They being set on fire by what they sayd, neuer left vrging vntill the Cancels were agayne set vp, and the Body also shewed them. The same day in the euening Anthony Perera a Portughese, arriued at Goa with presents, and letters frō the King of Bungo to the Viceroy of India. He was sent thither by the King to procure Xauerius returne agayne into Iaponia, although it were now too late. The contents of the Kings letters, were these: That Francis Xauerius had oftentymes discoursed before him of God the Creatour and redeemer of the world, and that his words had taken fast hold within his hart, & the in most bowels of his soule. Wherefore he was now fully determined and resouled to be baptized by Francis his owne hands, although it were with the ha∣zard of loosing his kingdome. Xauerius had indeed at his departure promised him, that he would shortly re∣turne vnto him, if God spared his lyfe. But because his returne was not so speedy as he had hoped, he thought good to send one expressely vnto Goa, who might certify him of the cause of his so long delay. Wherefore he intreated the Viceroy, to send Xaue∣rius vnto him with the first opportunity: whose com∣ming would certaynely be both a great incitement to the Christian Religion, & also a pledge of the Portu∣gheses friendship vnto his person. When the Viceroy had perused the Kings letters, he easily persuaded Fa. Melchior Nunius (who was one of the chiefe Fathers of the Society in India ) to go himselfe with all speed vnto the King of Bungo. In this meane tyme Xauerius Body was exposed at Goa, not only to the view, but also to the admiration of all the behoulders. But the great desire of the peo∣ple was not satisfied by seing him, but rather more in∣flamed: Yea the selfe same persons did oftentymes re∣turne agayne to looke vpon him, & others came floc∣king almost euery moment to behould him. The Fa∣thers therefore through necessity, were constrayned to change their determination. And so to satisfy the longing desire of such an infinite multitude, the bo∣dy was exposed three dayes in a Chappell well fenced with strong Cancells to the full view of all, and euery one that would might looke vpon it at their leasure: So as there came from all parts an infinity of people to behold, & touch the same with their beades, which they performed with aboundance of teares and much inward feeling of deuotion. Now whilst some became doubtful of the incorrup∣tion of his body, the same was made therby not only more certayne, but more glorious also. For seeing the miracle did surpasse all humane beliefe, there were not wanting some, yea Religious persons, & men of good authority, By order from the Viceroy a Physi∣tian exa∣mineth the inte∣grity of his body. who gaue out, that Francis his body being bowelled, was by art, & certayne precious em∣balmings kept thus liuely. The Viceroy therefore, to examine the truth of the thing, commaunded Cos∣ as Saraina, a Physitian of great fame and experience to try, and looke into the Body. But he beginning to launce the belly with an instrument, when he per∣ceyued fresh bloud to issue thence, being astonished t the miracle, gaue ouer his designe. Then putting his finger into the hole he had made, he findeth his bo∣wels intiere & sound, without any signe of balme, or other preseruatiue applied; which he cōfirmed by pu∣blicke testimony vpon his oath. Wherfore the matter being throughly examined, and diuulged abroad, Xa∣uerius Body began to be greatly honoured & reueren∣ced, not more by others, then by those who had byn authours of the false rumour aforesayd, euery one kissing his feete and hands, and touching them with their beades. And so great was the opinion of Xaue∣uerius sanctity, that euery one did striue to get, yea purloyne some small particle of his body, or gar∣ments: in so much that all the care and vigilancy the Fathers could vse to looke vnto it, did hardly hinder the violence of the deuout pepole. In the meane tyme Xauerius prayses were spread all abroad, & his worthy actes, prophecyes, and mira∣cles were blazed far and neere, not only by those who had themselues byn eye-witnesses thereof, but by o∣thers also, who had heard the same from credible au∣thours; so as all India sounded forth his sanctity, as it were with one mouth. And likewise for the confir∣matiō of the former miracles there were many others added anew. For that many who went to behould that sacred spectacle, affirmed vpon their oath, that there came thither many persons who hauing eyther lost the vse of some of their lymmes, or otherwise sick of some disease, were by touching Francis his body healed, & returned home sound, and in perfect health. Now, when these three dayes were past, although the people had not yet their fill of behoulding & con∣templating the sacred Body, the shrine was for a time placed in a Sepulcher, which they had prepared for the purpose, vpon the right hand of the high Aultar, vntil a fayrer monument were erected and adorned, fitting the dignity of so worthy a man, according to the Fa∣thers desires, and deuotion of the Cittizens of Goa, if the King of Portugall, as they hoped, would procure his Canonization from the Pope. About the tenth day after his buriall, The Bi∣shops Vicar againe exami∣neth the matter. Doctour An∣tony Ribera the Bishops Vicar, and Inquisitour Gene∣rall, determined, in respect of his charge and office, to examine the matter with his owne eyes, and see whe∣ther those things were true which had byn diuulged abroad of Francis his incorruption. Wherefore ope∣ning the Sepulcher about Midday himselfe, with ma∣ny lighted torches attending, throughly felt, and viewed the whole body all ouer. And finding no∣thing which was not entiere, he gaue testimony ther∣of vnder his hand and seale to all posterity. This cau∣sed the reuerence, and deuotion to Xauerius dayly to increase. There were all most none, who came not with veneration to his sepulcher; many brought thi∣ther flowers and garlands, and the number of white wax tapers to burne continually before it, were ex∣ceeding great. And this deuotion of the people to∣wards his seruant was by God himselfe approued also. For there is euident proofe, that a wax Candle of a ubit long only, being lighted before the Sepulcher id burne perpetually for the space of 18. whole daies, nd nights togeather. The King of Portugall being moued by these re∣ tions, The King of Portu∣gall ma∣keth meanes to haue Francis Canoni∣zed. gaue order presently to the Viceroy of India, make exact inquiry of Xauerius worthy facts, and iracles, & to set them carefully downe in writing, e which he afterward sent to Rome to his Embassa∣ our, that he might deale with his Holines about his Canonization. But this most Excellent Kings pious deauours were hindred by his vntimely death. The thers therefore hauing finished their new Church Goa, and dissolued the old, remoued Xauerius Body to a priuate Chappell within their house, where this day his memory and name is honoured, vntill Holinesse shall graunt (if it please God) that so∣ mne Honour and Veneration, may be publikly ex∣ bited vnto him. OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVIER. THE VI. BOOKE. By the King of Portugall his command, Francis his deeds, and miracles are com∣mitted to vvriting. CHAP. I. A LTHOVGH the guifts and fa∣uours, which the Goodnes of God had already heaped vpon Francis, shined forth at sundry times in al th parts of his life, as we haue demon∣strated before▪ yet will it not be a∣misse heere to propound those things to be maturely cōsidered, which haue byn touched by the way, and as it were in an obscure manner; that so by vnfoul∣ding the chiefe heads of matters, we may at once be∣hould all whatsoeuer appertaineth thereunto. And to the end, we may first of all speake of such passages, which ordinarily cause most admiration, and are es∣steemed both by good, and bad-willers; many things, not only through the whole course of his lyfe, but much more at the very tyme of his funeralls, haue by diuine power happened vnto Xauerius, which no na∣tural cause can any way excuse frō being miraculous. Wherefore we will heere, in a more exact manner, treate of these signes, and testimonies of his sanctity; & will cite for euery thing such authors & witnesses, whose authority, and fidelity cannot iustly be called into question. Iohn the third King of Portugall, by whome, as we haue sayd before, Xauerius was sent into India, whē he had vnderstood, & made tryall of his sanctity, ho∣noured him no lesse dead, thē aliue. For as soone as the newes of his death was brought vnto him, moued, as indeed he had reason, for the losse of so worthy a man, he was inwardly grieued at the blow which the who∣le East had receyued thereby, then the which there could not perhaps an heauier haue byn giuen by the wrathfull hand of God. When his griefe was some∣thing ouerpast (as his owne singular piety and pru∣dence admonished him) he sought a remedy for the same, from that source which had caused it. For ha∣uing vnderstood, of the many miraculous thinges, which had byn wrought by Francis, as well aliue as dead, and being inflamed with deuotion towards the blessed man, out of his feruour to Religion, he giueth order by Letters Patents vnto Francis Barret his Vice∣roy of India, to make all diligent inquiry after his il∣lustrious actes and miracles, and to send them to him with expedition, for that he determined to present the same to his Holinesse, that he might according to the custome of Holy Church, if he thought it expedient, decree a publike honour and reuerence to be exhibi∣ted vnto him, who was famous both for sanctity, and miracles. But to the end this Religious Kings opinion of Xauerius vertues may be knowne, The King of Portu∣gal let∣ters to the Vice∣roy of India. and testifyed to all the world, we iudge it not amisse heere to set downe a Copy of his Letters Royall. Friend Viceroy, I the King, send you harty greeting. Francis Xauerius lyfe and labours haue byn so profitable by their exemplar edification, that we iudge it will be most accepta∣ble vnto God, to haue them brought to light, to the honour, and glory of his Diuine Maiesty. Where∣fore, being published abroad, to the end they may receaue that full authority and credit, as it is meet they should; We giue you all charge, and commission that whersoeuer throughout India it shall be thought that good and substantiall witnesses of these matters may be found (I meane of such as haue liued and con∣uersed with him) you will procure with the greatest diligence you can, publicke instruments, & testimo∣nialls to be iuridicially made thereof, and vnder the witnesses oathes, both of his life, & behauiour, as well of all thinges which he hath worthily performed for the saluation, & example of mortall men; as of those things also which he hath miraculously wrought, ei∣ther aliue or dead. These instruments, togeather all the testimonialls and authorities, subscribed with your owne hand, and signed with your seale, you shal send ouer vnto vs three sundry wayes. This if you carefully, and speedily performe, you shall receaue great thankes from vs. From Lisbone this 27. of March 1556. As soone therfore, The Vi∣ceroyes Inquisi∣tion af∣ter Xaue∣rius acts. as the Viceroy had receaued these letters, he by fit persons expressely ordained for that purpose, presently commanded exact inquiry to be made of such things accordingly, not only at Goa the Metropolitan Citty of India, but in euery part of that Country; and also at Malaca, and in all places where it was knowne Xauerius had euer bin. Wheru∣pon very many things were found by the testimony of vndoubted witnesses which Francis had both in his life and after his death, eyther performed with great profit, or else wrought miraculously by diuine power. Of which the Viceroy hauing caused publicke instru∣ments to be made, subscribed & signed the same with his owne hand and seale, and sent them speedily vn∣to the King his Lord and Mayster. The matter now was come thus farre, that the King had sent the Instruments aforesayd to Rome, and dealt by his Embassadour with his Holinesse, for the proceeding therein to his Canonization, when as his vntimely death brake of that his pious determination. An authenticall Copy of all which instruments, iuri∣dically sealed & signed by the Viceroy, we haue at this present in our hands, from whence, for the most part, we haue taken those things which we haue hitherto mentioned, and shall heerafter also recount. And for that we haue in these our former Bookes comprized most of them already; we will therefore in this last, relate only those which we haue of set purpose reser∣ued vnto this place, as not seeming good for diuers reasons, to haue put them downe before. CHAP. II. Hovv Xauerius foretelleth things future, and absent, and seeth mens invvard Thoughts. X AVERIVS was indeed remarkable for many worthy fauours which God Almi∣ghty had bestowed vpon him; yet for no∣thing more, then for his manifold guift of Prophecy. Whereof many vndoubted signes are cler∣ly to be seene, throughout the whole passage of his lyfe. But these which heere ensue are of most parti∣cular note. One Cosmas Ioannes Procuratour of the King, had bought in India a Diamond of extraordinary bignesse for 8000. crownes, which would be worth foure times as much in Portugall. This Iewell he had deliue∣red vnto one Ferdinand Aluarez at his departure for Portugall, to be carryed vnto the King his Mayster. At the same tyme Francis commeth to Goa, and out of familiarity with Cosmas asked him how his trafficque went forward? He recounteth all vnto him, and in particuler concerning the said diamond, which he had sent vnto the King, hoping all things went very pros∣perously with him. Then Xauerius asked him againe in what ship he had sent so precious a Iewell? And when he had told him the name of the Ship; I would to God quoth Francis, you had not sent it in that ship. Why, quoth Cosmas, is it, because she was almost cast away this last yeare by a contrary tempest? No, quoth Fran∣cis, for she is to vndergo a greater danger. Vpon this speach he began to intreat Xauerius earnestly, that he would not giue ouer praying to God for that ship, see∣ ing that he had vpon his owne hazard sent the Dia∣mond vnto the King. And being thus pensiue for his ewell, newes was brought vnto him, that the ship hauing one of her chiefe planckes rent away, by the violence of a tempest, was euen at the point to haue byn drowned; but that by the prayers of Xauerius she miraculously escaped, & was safely arriued in Portu∣gall. The day also before Francis put to sea from Ma∣ aca towards China He being at Mala∣ca fore∣seeth a danger which the Soci∣ety vn∣derwent in Por∣tugall. (as they of the Society who were then present, haue recounted) lying after an vnusual āner vpon his bed, all along vpon his belly, like one betweene sleep and awake, he continued a great whi∣ in the same posture without euer mouing, wholy lienated from his senses. Whereat those of the Soci∣ ty that were by chance present, being astonished at strange a posture, durst not, for the great reuerence which they bare him, eyther awake, or speake vnto im. Wherefore turning their admiration into care, hey with solicitous and perplexed mynds expected the euent of the thing. At last awaking as it were out of a deepe sleepe, and like one that had escaped some great trouble, called vpon a certaine person by name who was then in Portugall, & oftentimes cryed, God pardon thee &c. so as for the present (except himselfe only who knew it) none could imagine what that his complaint meant. But soone after letters comming out of Portugall it was knowne that at the very same time, through the fault of him, whome Xauerius had so often called vpon by name, in that Extasy, the Society had in Portugall suffered a great detriment, which notwithstanding through Gods goodnes and Xauerius prayers, turned to their benefit. Whereby it plainly appeared that God had shewed him what hap∣ned at that very time in Portugall, that by his prayers he might auert the danger which was imminent to the Society there. Moreouer Xauerius, being at Malaca, did not only tell of things that were absent and farre off, but fore∣told also thinges to come, and those as well dole∣full, as ioyfull. I passe ouer with silence the deua∣stations of the Country, the besieging of the Citty, the grieuous contagions amongst the inhabitants, & other miseries, which either in his publicke sermons, or priuate conferences he foretold so long before vn∣to the Malacensians, euen in the very same manner that afterward they fel out. Let vs cal againe to mind that memorable victory acheiued against those Bar∣barous Acenians; that Prophecy glorious by so many predictions of Xauerius, and enobled by so many to∣kens of the diuine prouidence. How many & diuers also were his predictions at Amboynum, and the Molu∣ ca's? What notable prophecies were those of the Vi∣ctory against the Tolanians; of the returning againe of the Cock-boate, which had bin carryed away with he tempest? But all these we haue related before, ex∣cepting this which followeth. When in his voyage to China, as he was sayling to Malaca, the great iron-barbed Ship wherin he went be∣ ng on a suddain tossed with a cruel tempest amōg the lands of Sumatra by which they passed, was in eminēt anger to be cast away. Now as they were all euen in despayre, beholding present death represented before their eyes, A Pro∣phecy of fayre weather in the feare of shipwrac¦ke. Francis commeth to Iames Sosa the mayster of the ship, and biddeth him, and the rest that were present, be of good courage, for that very day in the euening the tempest should cease, and the ship ariue safe at the Hauen. And so it fell out, iust as he had foretould. For before sunne-set, the wind which was in the South ceased, the sea grew calme, and they ar∣riued at their desired Port. Moreouer he did oftentimes foretell to many, not only their safe arriuall, but their deaths also which were neere at hand. He fore∣tels the speedy death of thē that were in good health. For to say nothing of Iohn Arausius is death, which he plainly foretould, as he was one ay at Malaca in familiar conference with Antony Sosa, & falling into speach of the Gouernour of the Citty, e tould him playnly, that although he were then in very good health, yet he would within a little after ye. And his death following the next moneth, pro∣ ed what he had foretould to be true. Then agayne when he was going for China, he out of friendship ad- Iames Pe ra a wealthy merchant, in whose ship he wēt to substitute another factour ouer his wares, because he whom he had appointed should not arriue thither. And the euent was answerable to the Prophecy; for the Factour dyed by the way, before the came to Chi∣na. Being also at another tyme bound for the u∣ca's, and he setting out in one ship, and Iohn a merchant in another, Xauerius being carryed away by the violence of a tempest, soone arriued at the port he desired; Where whilst Galuano the merchant was earnestly expected, Francis vpon a suddain, as he was preaching to the people exhorted them to pray to God for Galuano his soule, who was then dead. And three dayes after Galuano's merchandize being found castvp vpon the shore, testifyed the ship-wrack, and death of their mayster. This Prophecy of his is also admirable, which the euent of late hath proued very true. There was in In∣dia a ship so weakened with age and tempests, that all were of opinion if she went to sea, she would be sha∣ken asunder by the stormy weather, before she could arriue within sight of the Hauen. Wherupon Xauerius (for he chanced to be then present) moued by A pro∣phecy of a ship to perish in the hauē. instinct, Bee of good courage, quoth he, for this ship will not be cast away in this iourney, but at last in∣deed shall perish, yet without losse to any man. Credi was giuen to this prediction, and the euent fell ou accordingly. For presently the Merchants nothing doubting of what Xauerius had by diuine reuelation fortould as well cōcerning that ship, as of many othe ings, stroue exceedingly to lade their goods in her, ssuring themselues, as indeed it hapned, that they ight conueigh their merchandize to and fro therin ithout danger of ship-wrack, or other losse. Nor ere they any whit deceaued. For the same ship, al∣ ough very old and rotten, remayned alwayes safe many iorneyes and tempests, vntil the yeare 1583. ith was almost 30. yeares after Xauerius death. And last, as she lay empty in the hauen, falling to pieces f her selfe, was there made an end of, without dom∣ age vnto any mā; giuing therby testimony to Fran∣ his prediction, no lesse whilst she remayned sound, en when she decayed. Neyther did he only foretell things to come and arre absent, but pierced euen into the harts of men, & new their very cogitations and sinnes. And although his be sufficiently demonstrated before in its proper ace by the knowledge he had by diuine reuelatiō of e priuate resolution which Iohn Durus had made of unning away: yet these things, which now we are o set downe, will make them much more manifest. There is in India a towne called Bazain, which ly∣ th with equall distance almost, betweene Go and the uer Ind s. Xauerius going thither, about the tyme e went into Iaponia, to speake with the Viceroy ho remayned at Cambaya; behould a certayne Mala∣ nsian, that bare very great affection vnto him, offe∣ ed to imbrace him. Francis hauing formerly redu∣ ed this man from a lewd to a ciuil life, that he might eereafter looke better to the good of his soule, had commanded him, vpon iust causes, to returne backe a∣gaine into Portugall, and there to frequent the Sacra∣ment of Confession. But he, although at first had promised to do them both had indeed performed nei∣ther; and moreouer had not only cast off all thought of returning into Portugall, By diui∣ne light he seeth his friēds sinnes & how lōg he had abstained from cō∣fession. but had now also passed ouer the third yeare without Confession. As soone therfore as Xauerius beheld him, and withall by diuine reuelation saw the inward wounds of his Consciēce, refusing vtterly his imbracement: A way (quoth he) get you hence; is this your stāding to the promise you made me? Behould with shame (to say nothing els) since you tooke leaue of me to sayle into India, you haue neuer byn at Confession. I will certaynly ney∣ther speake vnto you, nor acknowledge you for my friend, vntill you haue by Confession purged your soule of your filthy sinnes. Whereupon the man (his conscience accusing him, both of differing his Con∣fession, and of his heynous offences) being stroken with these words, easily perceiued that Xauerius knew what he obiected to him, by diuine reuelation, for speaking humanely he could neuer haue knowne it. Wherefore accusing himselfe and acknowledging his fault, he presently by Confession washeth away the spots of his soule, which he well saw were so abomi∣nable in Francis his sight. He seeth that his friend was in his hart plotting a great sinne. Hauing also asked another friend of his at Coci∣num how he did, and he answered, well: Well indeed, quoth Xauerius, in body, but not in soule. Vpon these words, the man who was at the same tyme plotting I know not what villany, and wickednesse in his hart, pricked in conscience, confessed playnely, that Francis could better iudge, how he did, that he him∣self, and so confesseth his sinnes entierely vnto him; and leauing off quite his wicked determination, re∣couereth agayne his soules health, which Xauerius had perceyued was wanting in him. Moreouer the day before he departed this life, He being ready to dy fore∣telleth destru∣ction of one that accompa¦nied him ca∣sting a sterne looke vpon one of those who attēded on him when he lay sick, cryed out thrice with a pitty∣ful voice, Wo be to thee. Which lamentable denunciatiō of his, was not in vayne. For shortly after the party hauing bin a long while in tangled in dishonest loues, was vpon the suddaine slaine, and dyed miserably. So that Xauerius thrice crying out, might seeme to haue denounced vnto him a triple misery, to wit the woūd of his conscience, his bodily death, & the destruction of his soule. CHAP. III. In his life time, he vvorketh miracles of all kinds. M ORE OVER Xauerius vertue hath she∣wed it selfe most admirable in almost all kind of miracles, wherof we will recount in this place some few, contenting our sel∣ es to haue touched the rest briefly in other places. As concerning Deuils, he did not only ouercome them ftentimes in single combat, when at Meliapora in S. Thomas his Church he contemned their frights and threates, although he were cruelly beaten by them; and againe in his nauigation into Iaponia, when as with an inuincible fortitude of mind he preuailad a∣gainst their deceipts, and subtilities. But oftentimes also both in the coast of C morinum, Malaca, and in o∣ther places, he cast them out of postest bodies, partly by himself, & partly by the Neophytes whome he sent vnto them. And this vertue of his was no lesse seene in curing of diseases, then in casting out Deuils by diuine po∣wer. For to passe ouer with silence, many whome he freed both from feuers and other diseases in the fore∣sayd coast of Comorinum (as we haue before demon∣strated) as well by himselfe, as by the children whose help he vsed in teaching there the Catechisme; going one day to visit Michael Fernandez who was exceding∣ly tormented with the Stone in the Iland Ceilanum, he willed him to take courage, and to put great confi∣dence in God, He mira∣culously cureth the stone telling him withall, that he would the next day say Masse for him, and did not doubt but by Gods grace he should recouer his strength both of bo∣dy and mynd, sooner then he could haue expected. And euen so it fell out, iust as he foretould. He likewise helped those who were ready to dye, and eyther through the defect of nature, or else by some casuality wanted their senses, or members. For it is sufficiently knowne, that at Amangucium he resto∣red a lame man to his former strength; two others that were dumbe to their speach; and two lykewise deafe vnto their hearing. Many also that were brought vnto him being ready to dye, he presently restored t their corporall health, being out of all hope of reco∣uery, by making only the signe of the Crosse, and ca∣sting of Holy water vpon them. At Goa also (as we shewed before) in his returne from Iaponia, visiting one of the Society, who was giuen ouer by all, and reciting the Gospell ouer him, he deliuered him euen out of the iawes of death. Neyther did he deliuer only such as were ready to ye, but restored also those that were all ready dead o lyfe agayne. For it is euidently knowne, that there were three dead persons restored to lyfe by him, in the oast of Comorinum. But that is very strange, which recounted of him in another kind. There was a cer∣ ayne Portughese merchant (whome we will not na∣me for his credit sake) very industrious, & practicall many things, who at Francis his first comming into aponia, had contracted great familiarity with him; ut returning backe some years after into India, liued here more warily then honestly. To him therfore Xa∣ erius on a tyme appeared (whether he were then a arre off, or already dead is vncertayne) denouncing nto him that God would speedily be reuēged of him. nd when the other straight confessed, By mira∣culously reprehe∣ding a very wic¦ked man he makes him be∣come a Francis∣ciscan. that he had deed well deserued no lesse▪ Thou hast, quoth he, uly deserued it, who hast committed such a detesta∣ e sinne; and withall named a certayne heynous of∣ nce, which no mortall creature knew, but he him∣ elfe. Whereupon the merchant being put in mind of is secret sinne of his, was presently strucken to the art, and with admiration cryeth out: Certainly, Fa∣ her, this hath him reuealed to you by God. Goe to therfore, since you haue seene the sore, prescribe al∣so the cure, and shew me, who haue gone astray, the sure path so saluation. Thou shalt then (quoth he en∣ter into the Order of S. Francis, which rule if thou di∣ligently obserue, thou shalt be certainly saued. For I perceiue thou art, as it were borne, and made for that Order aboue all other. He presently obeyed his whol∣some counsayle, as though he had byn commanded by a voyce from heauen; & afterwards, much reioycing at the happy euent, related the whole matter to others. Xauerius moreouer wrought very many miracles of other kinds. There is a Town standing beyond Malaca called Semorra, by which there runneth a broad and deepe Riuer. They who dwell vpon the Banke therof, being set on by the instigation of the Diuell, threw many stones, and darts at Francis; who being eagerly pressed, and pursued by those Barbarians, re∣moued without difficulty a huge beame that lay ouer∣twhart the banke, and hindred his way from flying, & thereby escaped and saued himselfe; whereupon th Barbarians being astonished, and amazed at so mira∣culous a thing, were terrifyed from pursuing him any further; for they playnely saw, that that beame coul not be styrred without the strength of many men, & therfore that Xauerius had remoued the same by diui ne, not humane power. This which followeth was euer scarcely heard o At Amangucium in Iaponia he preached dayly to th Bonzies and other Ethnickes, the Christian Religio After his Sermon the inhabitans (being a Nation n lesse vehement, then insolent agaynst strangers) a ed of him very maliciously, He with one an∣swere sa∣tisfyeth many of the Iapo∣nian que∣stions. one vpon another, many questions, concerning that which he had preached. Xauerius therefore, when he was vrged thus by so ma∣ny at once, with diuers & sundry questions, often sa∣tisfyed them all (which is very admirable to be reco∣unted) with one answere, as though he had answe∣red euery one a part. This was testifyed by one Bernard a Iaponian, a man of sincere vertue and credit, who was present himselfe at those disputations and inter∣rog tions, and had, together with many others, more then once obserued the same. No lesse authenticall, and wonderfull is that which is recounted to haue happened in a certayne Towne of India called Coramandela. Xauerius being there by chance, a poore man, who had newly suffe∣red shipwracke, came vnto him, beseeching him to bestow some almes vpon him, to relieue his misery. Francis, He gi∣ueth gould which he had miracu∣lously re¦ceiued to one that had suffe∣red ship∣wracke. although he had not where withall to shew his Charity, could not for all that, find in his hart to send the poore wretch away, without somthing. Ther∣fore, not thinking of his owne pouerty, he put his hand into his pocket, but found there nothing at all. Yet would he not desist from his determination, but began to haue recourse to him, who is Lord of all ri∣ches. Wherefore lifting vp his eyes to heauen, he bid∣deth the poore man put his confidence in the diuine liberality. And God neyther frustrated Xauerius hope, nor he the poore mans. For putting his hand agayne into his pocket, he brought it out full of fayre pieces of gold (which the inhabitants call Fano'es ) and pre∣sently gaue them all, since God had thus affoarded them, vnto the poore man, putting his whole confi∣dence in the endlesse Treasure of diuine hope. A Portughese Souldiar also, playing at dyce had lost 600. Crownes; wherfore being sad, & not know∣ing what to do, or course to take, he maketh his mo∣ane to Francis. He iudging it meete to apply a playster fit for the poison of the disease, demaundeth of him a Dye, He vseth strange meanes to make a game∣ster at dice de∣test that play. and hauing shaked it in his hand, giueth it him backe, and biddeth him go play againe to recouer his losse. Neither was he therin deceiued. For on a suddain the fortune of the game began to chāge, & the souldiar hauing good lucke, soone recouered all againe When he had got his owne againe, he would haue played on stil, but Xauerius for bad him, nor did the souldiar con∣tradict him, but remembring the benefit he had recei∣ued, promptly obeyed his wholsome commaūds: and promised furthermore of his owne accord, that he would neuer after play at Dyce. And he was indeed as good as his word. For from that time forward, he could neuer indure to handle Dyce, such an auersion he had to that game, by Francis his meanes. It was an ordinary practise with Xauerius, that in his voyages by sea, The oyle vessell which was emp∣tyed was miracu∣lously filled a∣gayne. whatsoeuer he brought a∣board into the shippe for his owne vse, or prouisi∣on, he would strayght distribute it all amongst the poore passengers, and marriners, and liue himselfe by begging. Wherefore on a tyme, giuing out his oyle freely to them that asked of him, his vessel was within a little space wholy empty: Notwithstanding another comming afterward to demand a litle therof, Xauerius bad that some should be giuen vnto him. His Companion told him, there was no more oyle left, nd that the bottle was now spent, for he had turned p the bottome, and shaken it, & could not wring so uch as one droppe thereout. Go yet, quoth Francis, or all that, & looke againe. He doth as he was wil∣ ed, and by and by he bringeth word, that the bottle was now full againe, notwithstāding he had but a lit∣ le before left it empty. But Xauerius taking no notice of the miracle, as his custome was; Giue therfore, uoth he, liberally to him that asketh. Moreouer, He by his pray∣ers cur∣reth a childfull of vlcers. lighting by chance vpon a child which was sick, and very full of vlcers; and moued to com∣ assion towards him, he made at first a little stand, & hen taking him vp in his armes, and hugging him in is bosome, he began to repeate these words, God make hee whole▪ which he had scarce pronounced twice or thrice, when as he restored the child whole & sound to his mother. This was witnessed by Vincent Perera a mayster of a ship, & Xauerius familiar friend (whome we haue named in another place) and recounted to those of the Society in India. But of this kind we haue n his lyfe set downe innumerable examples although e referred these vnto this place, because, the tymes wherein they were done, were not then sufficiently nowne vnto vs. This also is very admirable which hapned in the land of Sanciana. Xauerius as he stood baptizing a umber of Saracens, who were men of extraordinary great stature of body, seemed vnto the Portugheses, who beheld the thing a far off, to be much taller then they. Which caused in them such admiration that they approched neerer to see whether he did not baptize out of some pulpit or high place. But comming close vnto him, they find him standing vpon euen ground. Then indeed they perceiued that his greatnes of mind had added so much to his body, that he seemed to sur∣passe the ordinary pitch of the tallest men. Neyther is this a small argument of his vertue and sanctity, that whereas the Sanciana sea, which in for∣mer times had bin very dangerous, & subiect to often shippewracks, by reason of a certaine furious wind called Typhon, Francis by celebrating the sacred myste∣ries of the masse there, hath as it were so sanctified the Iland, and made the sea so calme & temperate, that the raging Typhon doth very seldom bring any great incō∣brance to the ships that sayle therein. So great was the force eyther of Xauerius sanctity, or the vertue of the Holy Masse. CHAP. IIII. Miracles vvrought by him after his death. B VT now Xauerius life was not more glori∣ous nor remarkeable by such like signes of sanctity, then his death. For God, who is admirable in his Saints, adorned Francis his Body after his death with many illustrious miracles, which whilst he liued had bin a Temple of the Holy Ghost. For (as we said before) his dead corps being digged vp after it had layne three moneths in quick lime, was found wholy entiere, breathing forth most pleasant and fragrant odour, which was no doubt a perpetuall, and manifold miracle, seing it reteined the same integrity, and fragrant odour, after he bad bin interred six months at Malaca in the groūd without a Coffin. This diuine vertue which was im∣parted to his body, redounded likewise euen to his garments, and preserued them wholy incorrupt, & sound from all putrefaction. Moreouer (which is very admirable) fiue moneths after his death, when he was interred at Malaca, he led a fresh, the signes whereof remayned liuely to be seene, vntill his Funerall at Goa, being 16. moneths after his decease. Wherupon not only the Cittizēs of Goa, but almost all India being stirred vp no lesse by the report of the integrity of his body, then by his emi∣nent sanctity, came flocking thither to his buriall; which indeed, as before we haue shewed, seemed ra∣ her a triumph then a Funerall, the multitude wher∣of from all places was so great, as the like was neuer seene or heard; so that they were constrained, as be∣fore we haue said, to leaue the Body exposed for three whole dayes to the view of the people, to giue them atisfaction. And besides this, they were all so taken with deuotion to his holy Body, that euery one did riue to touch the same with their beades, and to get way, euen by stealth, some Relique thereof. Lastly, this miracle of his Body hath (as after we all declare) bin honoured by God himselfe with so any, and euident signes, that all men, yea euen the aleuolous, haue bin satisfyed therby concerning the atitude of his soule. And these things which we aue recounted of Francis his body, haue bin so testy∣fied, that there were as many witnesses therof, as were people at that time in the Citty of Goa, that is to say, almost all India. But least perhaps such wonder∣full fauours of Almighty God, might seeme to some more admirable, then credible, both humane and di∣uine Prouidence hath so concurred in this busines, that these priuate testimonyes haue byn confirmed by publick Records. For Ambrose Ribera the Inquisitour, and Vicar Generall of the Bishop of Goa, when the fame of that great miracle was spread ouer India, iud∣ging it to be a matter which belonged to his office, togeather with certaine most skillfull Physitians went to visit Xauerius body, before it was buryed, to try whether the same were wholy intiere and incorrupt, as was reported, or no. He therfore hauing with his owne eyes throughly beheld the integrity of the same surpassing all humane faith, and then by making in∣quiry therof, as the King of Portugall had comman∣ded, hauing found out his incomparable sanctity, confirmed the truth with a most worthy testimony, The In∣quisitors and Vi∣cars testi∣mony of Xauerius sanctity. which I haue thought good heere to insert, in the selfe same words wherein he gaue it. I D. Ambrose Ribera, Inquisitour, Vicar Generall, and Assistant of the Bi∣shop of Goa, and India, do testify, that Francis Xauerius for the space of nine whole yeares (for so many haue byn resident in this place) hath gone vp & downe to the townes and villages of India, Malaca, the Moluca's, Iaponia, and other farre remote places of the Barbari∣ans, preaching and teaching the mysteries & precepts of the Christian faith, as well to the Portugheses, as to other People, and Nations; and hath in the same places cōuerted an exceeding great number of Ethni∣ckes to the Christian Religion, building euery where Churches; and for the effecting thereof hath endu∣red very many great miseries, and labours, euen to his dying day. And that his body hauing bin brought o Goa, and there receiued with all solemnity, was y the whole Clergy and Citty conueyed to the Col∣ edg of S. Paul, His testi∣mony also of them te∣grity of his body and there buryed. But for that there was a certayne rumour spread abroad, of the integri∣ y of his Body, which seemed to surpasse the forces of Nature, and to be euidently a diuine Miracle, since a Body that had byn dead so long, and layne uryed an eleuen monethes before, to wit, three in China, and eight at Malaca (as the Viceroy of India Alphonsus Noronia, and my selfe haue proued by ndoubted witnesses) should remayne the space of 6. moneths free, and entiere from all corruption; thought it belonged vnto my office, to examine nd make tryall of the same. Wherefore I went into he Church where he lay, caused the Coffin to be ope∣ ed, looked vpon his body with lighted torches about n houre before midday; and I felt, and handled, for good while, his armes & legges, his knees & thighs & the greatest part of his body (so that by those parts which lay open a coniecture might be easily made of hat which was not seene) and found the Body en∣ ere, & wholy free from all kind of corruption, with he flesh altogether fresh, and solid, euen reteyning he naturall moysture and colour. Moreouer I saw in is left thigh, a litle aboue the knee, as it were a woūd rom whence there had byn a little piece of flesh taken about the biggnes of a fingar. And another wound also in the belly, whereinto I putting my fingars, found all entiere and incorrupt, and without any kind of ill smell. And moreouer, I layd my mouth to his month, and felt, and looked vpon his face all ouer with the greatest diligence I could. Whereupon after examination made of all these things, as I found them, I commanded my Notary to set them downe in wri∣ting. In testimony whereof I haue heerunto set my owne hand and seale, the first of December 1556. The Viceroyes Phisitian also, one of excellent skill, hauing by his Lords command, throughly exa∣mined the body, gaue no lesse euident a testimony of the integrity thereof, which was this: I Cosmas Sa∣raina Physitian to Alphonsus Nor nia Viceroy of In∣dia, An ex∣cellent Phisitiās testimo∣ny of the inte∣grity of his body do testify, that when Francis Xauerius body was brought to Goa, I looked very diligently vpon it, and felt it all ouer, especially the belly, which vseth to be most subiect to corruption, and I found his entrayles wholy sound, & solide; notwithstanding it was ma∣nifest, that there had neyther balme, oyle, or any o∣ther thing agaynst putrefaction byn applyed thereto. Afterwards when by my aduise one of the Society of IESVS did put his fingar into a wound, which was open in his left side, close to his hart, there issued out bloud, and water togeather, to which I smelling, found no kind of bad sauour at all. I also found his thighes, and the other parts of his body entiere, with the flesh so solid, and naturall, that it could not by art of Physicke be in that manner preserued. For the bo∣dy had byn now dead almost a yeare & a halfe, & had yne well neere a yeare, in the Sepulcher. These ings according to the charge which is giuen me in his businesse, I do testify vpon my oath. Giuen at Goa the 18. of Nouemb. 1556. And these humane testimonyes were also confir∣ ed by diuine. For about the same tyme, there were many miracles wrought, to testify as well Xauerius anctity, as the happines of his soule in heauen. Iohn Mendoza his ship, A sick woman by doing reuerēce to Frācis his bo∣dy is cured. which brought Xauerius body back nto India miraculously escaped many great dangers, especially in the Iland of Ceilanum. From thence when it came to Baticala a towne in India, Mary Sarra a Por∣tughese woman of good note, and wyfe to the Kings Solicitour there, lay very sick of a dāgerous infirmity, who being certifyed of the cōming of Xauerius body caused herself presently to be carryed to it, where she imploring the holy mans assistance with no lesse con∣fidence then deuotion, was forthwith by Xauerius in∣tercession, & the diuine goodnes cured, & recouered her health. She also hauing obtayned by earnest in∣treaty a litle piece of the girdle, wherwith he was girt, enclosed it in a siluer reliquary, and wore it about her necke, eyther as a remembrance of him, or as a preser∣uatiue agaynst sicknesse. And heerein her deuotion fayled her not. For her litle sonne who had byn then grieuously afflicted for the space of six moneths with an ague, Xa erius girdle cureth many & great diseases. was cured by applying the sayd reliquary vnto him the which also recouered him afterwards, of an Apoplexy wherewith he was greatly vexed. It being also hung about the necke of a womā-seruant, who was very dangerously in trauayle, caused her an easy deliuery. Moreouer it cured a sicke man of a fe∣uer. And from two children, who were grieuously sicke of the Pox, it tooke away both the sicknesse, and the markes thereof. All this the sollicitous woman of Baticala related vpon her oath. It is further more euidently knowen, that many sicke were at Goa recouered by touching Francis his body. Amongst whome one was a woman-seruant, who in the time of labour, being out of her senses, & in extreme danger of death (for the child being dead in her wombe, and lying ouerthwart, she could by no meanes be deliuered) was vpon a suddain preser∣ued, & deliuered of the dead child, by applying vnto her certayne hayres of Xauerius, which were religiou∣sly kept in a reliquary. This, her maister Anthony Saa testified vp his oath; who also further more affirmed, that there was in his house a another woman of that Country, who being also in labour of Childbirth, and brought to such extremity, that there was no hope of her life, was by the meanes of the same Reli∣quary applyed vnto her, deliuered presently, and quit of the danger. It is also certainly knowen, A Gētle man re∣couereth his sight by ap∣plying Francis his hāds to his eyes. that many others haue with diuers reliques of his cured sundry diseases. This following is worthy of note. Antony Rodriguez a man of no small ranke, had through a long rheume so lost the sight of his eyes, that he could not so much as see those with whome he spake, although they were close by him. He therfore being out of hope to find any help by art of Physicke, hauing tryed all kind of medicines, but in vaine, caused himself to be carryed to Xauerius Sepulcher, and intreating the Fathes to open the Shrine, put Xauerius hands to his eyes, and presently began to see, finding that thick dimnesse to be driuen away; and shortly after he fully recoue∣red his sight. This also he himselfe affirmed vpon his oath. No lesse memorable was that which hapned to Baltazar Dias a Priest. He being tormented with the Squinancy in his throat, The key of his shrine driueth away the rheume. could not swallow downe a∣ny thing at all: wherefore dispayring of all humane help, he had recourse to diuine; & intreating the Fa∣thers of the Society to lend him the Key of the Shrin wherin Xauerius Body was kept, toucheth his thoate therewith, and the rheume on such a suddayne went so away, that the Key seemed by Xauerius fauourable assistance, to haue opened an entrance into his thro∣ate. But this is farre more glorious. A certaine woman of good note, named Ioane, hauing byn tormented with a long sicknes, was now brought to the point of death at the very time that Xauerius body was brought to Goa, A prin∣cipal wo∣man desi¦ring to visit Xa∣uerius, is recoue∣red of a great sicknes. being watched day & night for her departure. Wherupon being stirred vp by the solemne ringing of the bells, and also by the fame of his sanctity and miracles, she earnestly besought Christopher Perera her husband, and others that were present, to permit her to be carryed to Xauerius funerall. They affirmed plainly it could not possibly be done, without mani∣fest danger of her life, and would by no meanes yield thereunto. Yet the woman lost not the fruite of her deuotion. For from that time forward she began to be better, and euery day more & more amending, with∣in a while after perfectly recouered; so powerfull was the desire, not only of touching, but euen of seeing his body, in restoring health to the sicke. It is also recounted, and that by assured testimo∣nies, that a certaine whip made of little cords, wher∣with Xauerius was wont to discipline himselfe, being kept with great deuotion by a certaine Neophyte, Francis his disci∣pline restoreth many to their health. re∣stored diuers sick persons to their health, and wrought many other wonderfull things. For which cause Xa∣uerius name both was, and is, not only glorious, but also greatly reuerenced in India, and throughout the whole East; all the people thereof ordinarily, im∣ploring his protection and patronage. And as often as any ship passeth by the Iland of Sanciana, where, as we said, Xauerius was first buried, the Marriners and passengers haue got a custome to call vpon Francis, as a Saint raigning amongst the blessed in heauen. Neither was India, or the whole East able to com∣prehend the vertue, and glorious Name of Xauerius within their owne bounds, but passing ouer the Oce∣an, it penetrated into Europe. There is in Portugall a Citty called Ebora, a place of speciall note, wherin there is a Colledge of the Society of IESVS, built by Henry the Cardinall, who was afterward King; a worke well beseeming both the bounteous liberality of so worthy a Prince, & the magnificēce of the Citty also. In this Colledge, at the same time that newes was brought of the death and miracles of Xauerius (as we haue byn informed by one of good credit, whilst we were writing things of the same nature) two of the principall Fathers, Leo Henriquez the Rectour of the Colledge, and Andrew Capreda the Ghostly Fa∣ther, very worthy and venerable man, were sore op∣pressed with a burning feuer; who vpon the report of the wonderfull effects which had bin wrought by Xa∣uerius, conceiued both of them great hope of recoue∣ring their health. Leo therfore caused the Indian letters wherein was written Xauerius happy departure out of this lyfe, & his funerall made glorious by the miracles which had happened therein, to be brought, & read vnto him. As soone as they were read, he presently as it were, moued by diuine instinct, and stirred vp with admiration of Xauerius vertues, Two Fa∣thers in Europe recouer their he∣alth by calling vpon Francis. rayseth himselfe vpon his elbow in his bed, and lifting vp his hands & eyes to heauen, calleth vpon him with no lesse deuo∣tion then confidence against the violence of his feuer, beseeching that he would be no lesse fauourable to his owne, thē he had byn to strangers. And his confidence & supplication were neyther in vayne▪ For his health followed vpon this prayer, & he presently felt his fe∣uer, to be as it were driuen away, by Gods diuine hād, and his former strength to be agayne restored vnto him. Whereupon crying out aloud with ioy, and teares in his eyes, he giueth humble thankes to God, and extolleth Francis his miraculous vertue, to the a∣stonishment of all that were present. So as instantly finding himselfe to be wholy sound and lusty, he lea∣peth out of his bed, and runneth with all ioy, and alacrity to Capreda his sicke Companion. Capreda knowing how extreme sicke Leo was but a little be∣fore, began to be amazed, and to aske him what the matter was? Whereupon Leo declared vnto him, not more in words, then by effect, what soueraigne help he had receiued from Xauerius in the curing of his sick∣nes, and withall counsayled him to do the lyke, and without doubt he should in the same occasion find the lyke help from him. Capreda, without more ado followeth his aduise, stirreth vp himselfe to confiden∣ce, & calleth vpon Xauerius: nor is he frustrated of his hope, but freed from his feuer, sooner then any one could haue expected. Thus was the Societyes ioy re∣doubled, by this double miracle, & Francis his sanctity more euidently demonstrated. One of these Fathers, wherof we now speake, to wit Leo Henriquez, is yet liuing in Portugall, as a glorious witnes of Xauerius approued vertue. The report whereof, afterwards as soone as it was spread abroad, caused many not on∣ly of the Society, but euen strangers also to admire his power, and reuerence his sanctity. There was (to say nothing of lesser matters) still liuing in Paris, euen when we write these thinges, a certayne honest and deuout person, venerable no lesse in respect of vertue, then age. This man was wont to make this relation; to wit, that when newes was first brought of Francis Xauerius death, whome he had neuer knowne but by report, and heare-say only, he felt himselfe wonderfully stirred vp with reuerence & veneration towards him. Whereupon his wife being at the same tyme sicke, and in danger of death by rea∣son of her labour in child-birth, yea & giuen ouer by the Physitians, he recounted to her certayne passages of Xauerius sanctity and vertue, and withall persua∣ded her earnestly to implore that holy mans assistan∣ce, Being called v∣pon at Paris he obtei∣neth an easy deli¦uery for a woman in child∣birth. and no doubt he would help & cure her. She gaue diligent eare vnto her husbands counsayle, and forth∣with hauing called vpon Xauerius for help, she was ea∣sily and safe deliuered of her child. And thus were both the mother, & the child by Xauerius merits freed from present danger of death. Nor was Xauerius natiue soyle euen at this tyme without all knowledge of her Childs great sanctity. For it is euidently knowne that his death was by cer∣taine prodigious signes foreshewed in the same place where he had receiued life. There is in the Castle Xa∣uerium, being the mansion house wherin Xauerius was borne, a Chappell wherin is to be seene a Crucifix of exceeding great deuotion, and very much esteemed in those parts. There hapned at this tyme a prodigi∣ous accident, miraculous both for sight, & the euent therof. For certaine it is, that this Image, or Crucifix of our Sauiour, being made of wood, did manifestly weate, as often as Xauerius had any great suffrance in India, which they of the Castle found out, by the let∣ters which he himselfe had sent from thence, by calcu∣lation of the times. But vpon the very yeare wherin Xauerius departed this life, it sweat bloud euery friday after, for a whole yeare togeather, and made an end of sweating vpon a Friday also. Which many so in∣terpreted, as if it had portended Francis his death, af∣ter many long and painefull labours vndertaken for Christ his sake, who had continually carryed in his body the mortification of the Crosse. CHAP. V. Xauerius his feruent loue to Prayer. T HESE admirable things, which (as we haue before declared) haue as well byn wrought by Xauerius diuine power, as o∣ther wayes hapned vnto him miraculously, were certaine signes and testimonies, of the extraor∣dinary vertues and guiftes, which the diuine Good∣nes had with a most liberall hand, heaped vp togea∣ther in his soule. For he was not more glorious in mi∣racles, then in heauenly Vertues, some wherof we will set forth to publicke view; which, although he vsed all art and diligence to conceale, did notwith∣standing discouer themselues of their owne accord. And these I shall recount more willingly then the for∣mer, in respect, they are not bare tokens alone, but liuely examples also of his rare sanctity. And wheras those other serue only for admiratiō, these are brought within the compasse of imitation. Wherfore to begin with that vertue which is the source & fountaine of the rest, it is to be obserued that Xauerius was extraordinarily addicted vnto Prayer, Meditation, and Contemplation of heauenly things. For although he had his mind perpetually fixed vpon God, and diuine matters; yet did he assigne vnto him∣selfe euery day, a set and determinate time, which, by withdrawing himselfe from al exteriour affayres, he imployed in meditating vpon celestiall things. But the meditation wherin he chiefly exercised himselfe, was vpon the life and death of our Sauiour knowing very well, that he might there behould, and imitate most excellent and exemplar patternes of all kind, li∣uely represented in that noble maister-piece. This most wholsome, and fruitfull manner of meditation (as being indeed the principall modell of a Christian life, and a singular incitement to diuine Charity) he most diligently obserued himselfe, and commended the same also vnto others, imploying all his faculties heerein, with no lesse constancy of mind, then feruour of spirit. The which did neuer more dis∣couer it selfe, then whilst he laboured amongst the sick in the Hospitalls. For when his other continuall labours would not affoard him any part of the day free for that purpose, he hauing his mind more vpon prayer then vpon sleepe, did alwayes vse to take some owers from his corporall rest, His night prayer. that his soule might not be defrauded of her heauenly food, and repast; such possession had the sweetnes of his discoursing with the diuine Maiesty taken of his hart. He ordina∣rily slept but two, or at the most, three houres of the night, and that in such sort also, as his very sleepe was not without prayer. For oftentimes in his sleepe he brake forth into these words: O good Iesu, O my Crea∣ our, & other the like; so as one would haue thought him to haue bin praying, and not sleeping. It is moreouer certainly knowne, that he did not so much as breake off this custome of prayer, euen in his greatest imployments in the Promontory of Como∣rinum; for he held his meditation to be the most im∣portant affayre which he had in hand. At Meliapora also, when he lodged neere to S. Thomas his Church, as we haue before declared, rising in the night tyme, he went often into the Church, & could not eyther by the speeches of men, or strypes and other molesta∣tions of the Diuells be affrighted, or debarred from discoursing with God; with whome be often spent the whole night almost in prayer. Lykewise at Malaca, when he remayned there in a chamber made of Mattes, certayne persons moued with the opinion of his sanctity, did oftentymes by stealth, as themselues did afterwards reporte, looke through the chinckes and slifters of the Mattes, to es∣py what Francis was a doing in the night tyme▪ and they found him alwayes (though he had byn but im∣mediately before, long kneeling at a Crucifix) li∣uely perseuerant in prayer, both in spirit and body, vntill sleepe seizing vpon him, constrayned him by force to yield a while vnto necessity of nature; & then laying himselfe downe vpon the ground, and resting his head vpon a hard stone insteed of a pillow, he in that māner refreshed his body for a while, euē worne out with continuall toyle and labour day and night; so as one would haue thought him to haue vsed sleepe as a medicine; and whilst he tooke his rest, to loue no∣thing lesse then rest. But he, well knowing that God giueth more fa∣uourable audience to those who pray in places which be more religiously honoured, whensoeuer he could find opportunity, he alwayes vsed to make his prayer with much more feeling in the Church; As often as oppor¦tunity serued he pray∣ed in the Church. and there∣fore he would commonly take vp his lodging next to the Church, that he might go thither secretly in the night, for that purpose. And those of the Society at Malaca obserued, that like another Samuell he was wont often to lye vpon the bare ground in the Vestry vntill the dead of the night, and then would steale in∣to the Church, and there fall to his prayers vpon his his knees, before the high Aultar, in presence of the Blessed Sacrament: and when his knees were weary, he would eyther lay himselfe along vpon the steps of the Aultar, or else leane vpon his hands, and still go on with his exercise, vntill eyther sleepe constrayned him to giue ouer, or else the light of the morning came vpon him. And when he could not haue the commodity of a Church, he notwithstanding held on this exercise of prayer, in some other place. A certayne Priest in whose house Xauerius lodged related, that he vsed oftentymes to pray late in the night, & somtimes to sit vpon a litle stoole (eyther be∣cause such a seate was more cōmodious, or else because he could kneele no longer, being wholy tired out with kneeling) and so go on with his deuotions. Moreouer many Cittizens of Malaca of good account haue gi∣uen testimony, that Francis when he was in familiar conuersation with them, He goeth into so∣litary places to pray. would oftentimes withdraw himself priuately from their company; & after much & long inquiry made, they should find him eyther in some vncouth wood, or desert and forlorne place, deuoutly at his prayers, or else a disciplining himselfe there; who not to interrupt his deuotions would le∣aue him thereunto, & dissemble the matter as though they had perceiued nothing. And in this feruour of prayer, Xauerius was no lesse constant by sea, then by land, wherof so many demō∣strations in his often nauigations are extant, which we haue already set downe, that to seeke out more ex∣amples therof, would not only be superfluous, but a troublesome labour also. For though he were conuer∣sant in many & differēt places, & with sundry persōs, yet he remayned alwayes like himselfe, His pray¦er in the ship. and kept as it were, one fashon and method throughout the whole course of his life. Notwithstanding we will not con∣ceale that which properly belonged to the sea. For there be certaine and euident proofes, that whilst he was a ship-board, he did vsually sit vp watching in prayer from midnight, vntill breake of day; and in the midst of any tempest, or whatsoeuer danger, he called on God with a most patient and quiet soule. In so much that the marriners and passengers acknow∣ledged both themselues, and their ship to haue bin ve∣ry often saued by Francis his prayers. Moreouer, he was alwayes feruent and inflamed in his prayers, His fer∣uour in prayer. & most commonly ouerflowing with heauenly ioyes: the which was seene and knowne by many, & most euident arguments. For to say nothing of those extraordinary contents which he receiued from God, amidst his excessiue labours in Comorinū, and Maurica, wherof we haue already spoken in their proper places; at Goa he was obserued by the Fathers there to walke oftentymes in the dead of the night in the garden, with his eyes fixed vpon heauen, & to be wholy carryed away with contemplation, and loue of God: so that one would haue thought for certayne that his soule, He pu s his clo∣aths frō his breast being in∣flamed by the force of prayer. as being abstracted from his senses, had byn departed out of his body. And afterwards when he came agayne to himselfe, opening his Cassocke from his inflamed breast as his custom was, he would oftentymes repeate these words: It is inough O Lord, it is inough, & this in such a tune, as manifestly decla∣red, that so aboundant was the heauenly ioy which ouerwhelmed him, that humane Nature was scarse able to beare it. At Goa also, as he was conuersing familiarly with the other Fathers, there came vpon him oftentimes such excessiue ioy of spirit, that it constrayned him to with-draw himselfe from the sight of men, be∣cause he could by no meanes conceale the aboundan∣ce of Consolation which he felt. The ar∣dour & splēdour of his counte∣nance. And euen in humane affayres, there appeared in him such a diuine semblan∣ce of heauenly Ioy, that they who conuersed with him, being often stroken with a reuerent respect to∣wards him, could not forbeare behoulding and admi∣ring him, as if he had byn a second Moyses. Lastly, in his iourney to Meaco, wherein, as we sayd before, he suffered extreme miseryes and incom∣brances, being notwithstanding as it were almost in a continuall rapt through the excessiue comfort and consolation, which his soule receaued in meditating vpon celestiall obiectes, and with that sweet conuer∣sation with God; he often stroke his legges, and feete agaynst stubbs and stones, yea hurt and bruised them sore, without euer feeling therof; going forward with such ioy & iubily of hart, that he euen seemed to par∣ticipate of the happinesse of the Blessed in heauen, ra∣ther then to meditate vpon their lyfe. And verily it is an admirable thing to consider that there could be in him, A great combi∣nation of con∣tēplation & action togea∣ther. such a combination of contemplation, & action togeather. For it is incredible (as we haue byn cer∣taynely informed) that he, being a man perpetually imployed in so weighty affayres, & cōtinuall trauay∣les, and nauigations most hard and difficile, and be∣ing also of so affable & pleasant a conuersation; should notwithstanding, be endowed with so extraordinary a guift of diuine contemplation, and comforted so aboundantly by the holy Ghost, and with continuall ouerflowing of diuine streames into his soule. For cer∣taynly this diuine man, wheresoeuer he was, or what∣soeuer he did, kept alwayes his habitation with him∣selfe, and with God. Wherupon it followed, that euen from his very exteriour imployments, and conuersa∣tion amidst aboundance of people, he came alwayes to mentall prayer & meditation with his soule so fresh and rectifyed, that presently he could cast, and as it were, euen embosome himselfe into the most sweet conference with his heauenly Spouse. In so much, as one would haue thought him to haue alwaies bin kept in a most strayte solitude, he had his soule so firmely fixed vpō God, euen amidst his greatest imployments. No lesse was the feeling of deuotion which he found, nor the diligence which he vsed, in Vocall Prayer, as they call it, and in reciting the Psalmes, and Hymnes. For he had gotten a custome, which with great care he alwayes obserued, to recite the di∣uine office & Canonical Houres very diligently & de∣uoutly. First therfore following the aduise of Ecclesia∣sticus. He reci∣teth his diuine office with gre∣at prepa∣ration & attentiō of mind. Before Prayer prepare thy soule, and be not as a man that tempteth God, he prepared himselfe with a recol∣lected care, the better to stirre vp attention, and de∣ otion in his mind; and before euery Houre he vsed o recite the Hymne Veni Creator, to implore therby he assistance of the holy Ghost. Which Hymne he lwayes pronounced with such feruour of spirit, that is hart seemed euen to burst out of his breast, Eccles. 18. & his orces to faint. And very certaine it is, that being any times interrupted therin by some that came & pake vnto him, he againe repeated the same from the eginning, with such feruour, as if he had not byn in∣ errupted at all. This singular deuotion of his, He pre∣fers the longer Breuiary before the shorter. in this kind, was aused by the liberty of those times. There had byn ately, for the more ease and commodity of such men s had great imploiments, a new Breuiary set forth of hree Lessons only (called of the Holy Crosse ) the which as also granted vnto Francis at the first, by reason f his weighty affayres. Yet he, although he were cō∣ nually imployed, would notwithstanding neuer ake vse of that Grant, but alwayes sayd the old Bre∣ iary of nine Lessons, although it were a great deale onger, to the end he might haue therby more tyme to onferre with God, in whose conuersation he tooke comparable content. But aboue all, Xauerius feruour in saying Masse. his feruour of deuotion shewed selfe in celebrating the diuine mystery of the sacred Masse, especially in the tyme of Consecration, and Consummation of the Holy Eucharist. For at those tymes he vsed so to weepe for ioy, that his face & bo∣some were all bedewed with teares. There also appea∣red both in his pronunciation, countenance, and all the gestures of his body, such a feeling of heauenly de∣uotion, that it euen redounded to the standers by; and strooke them into such a pious admiration, that they oftentymes forgot themselues. Moreouer, there wanted not some, who affirmed, that whilest he was at Masse, they saw him eleuated and lifted vp a little from the ground. He had besides this, a custome in his Masse, before all other things, to begge most earnest∣ly of our Sauiour Christ, the Conuersion of Ethnickes by that precious death which he had suffered on the Crosse for their sakes; and for this end, he oftenty∣mes also added a prayer of his owne making which was this: Xauerius prayer for the conuer∣sion of Infidels. Eternal God maker of all things, remember that the soules of Infidels were created by thee, and man made to thine owne image and likenesse. Behold O Lord, how to thy disgrace Hell is filled with them. Call to mind, how Iesus thy blessed Sonne dyed a most bitter death for their saluation. Doe not, I beseech thee, O Lord, any more permit thy Sonne to be con∣temned by Infidels; but being pacifyed by the praiers of Holy Men, & of the Church the most sacred spou∣se of thy Sonne, remember thy mercy; and forget∣ting their Idolatry and Infidelity, make them also at last to acknowledge Iesus-Christ our Lord, whome thou hast sent; who is our Saluation, and Resurrecti∣on, by whome we are saued and deliuered, and to whome be all honour, and glory for euer. Amen. Now after Masse, After masse prayer for the dead. when he had giuen thankes to God, he was alwayes accustomed to recite a certaine prayer for the Dead, that euen then, when he offe∣red Sacrifice for the liuing, he might also giue some refreshment to the soules departed. His deuotion also n administring the most sacred Body of Christ, was o lesse remarkeable then in the consecration thereof. He had this custome peculiar to himselfe, He admi¦nistreth the holy Eucha∣rist vpon his knes. that where t could commodiously be done, he would giue the oly Communion to the people vpon his knees. The euent whereof declared how pleasing a thing it was o God. For Cosmus Saraina (the Physitian afore na∣ ed) and many other persons of good account, haue penly testifyed, that they oftentymes saw Xauerius, s he was in the Church at Goa communicating the people vpon his knees, He by di¦uine power is eleua∣ted from the ground. raysed vp miraculously, more then a cubit aboue the ground; so as one would haue hought, that God had then exalted his Humility. Moreouer, he was extraordinarily deuout vnto the most B. Trinity. For he vsed to adore, and to name the ame with the greatest and religious respect that could e. He bare likewise a most singular affectiō to Christ he worker of mans Saluation: His de∣uotion to the most B. Trinity and the B. Vir∣gin. and was also specially euoted to the B. V. Mary, the Mother of God, & the ost benigne Patronesse of mankind: wherupon he ad gotten such an habituall deuotion, by continu∣ ll practice therof, that when he lay vpon his death ed, he oftentimes implored the help of the most B. Trinity, of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and of the B. V. Mary, that so he might at his death call often v∣ on them, to whome in his life he had alwayes car∣ried such extraordinary deuotion. Next vnto these, His de∣uotion to S. Michaell the Ar∣changel. he was singularly deuoted to S. Michael the Archangell, Prince of the Court of Hea∣uen, and Patrone of the Holy Church. Then here∣uerenced the Congregation of all the Blessed & Faith∣full, and of the Church the Spouse of Christ, whose assistance he often implored. Also in all his imploy∣ments, iourneys, miseries and dangers he very often implored the help and patronage of his Angell Guar∣dian, and of the Archangells and Patrones of those places, where he made his abode, or whither he went. CHAP. VI. His purity of Hart, and Chastity. T HIS excellent Deuotion which Francis had in Prayer, was, by the like Purity of his soule, enflamed to behold God. The which is not only manifested by the pu∣rity, and innocency of his life, but approued also by the assured testimonys of such as cōuersed familiarly with him; who haue solemnely auerred, that they ne∣uer obserued any thing in him, He exa∣mineth his con∣science oftenty∣mes eue∣ y day. which might be dis∣pleasing, or giue the least offence to any. This also is a further argument therof, for that he did oftentimes euery day examine his Conscience with very great rigour and diligence, & seriously exhorted others also to doe the like, a thing whereon he esteemed the perfection of lyfe chiefly to depend. He vsed also to confesse euery day, when he could haue a ghostly Father. He vsed to con∣fesse eue∣ry day. And this purity of his soule was much graced by the perpetuall sanctity of his body. It is well knowne that he preserued the flower of Virgi∣ginall Chastity, euen till his dying day. This the Vi∣car of Meliapora testifyed publikly, that he found it to be certayne by the often conference he had with him in that place; & many others also who vsed to heare his Confession, His vir∣ginall chastity. haue affirmed, that they gathered no lesse from out of himselfe. He bare indeed a most sin∣gular affection vnto Chastity; & as great was the ha∣tred which he bare to the contrary vice, in so much that hauing a detestation to the least staynes which might be in that kind, he could not without horrour heare it once named, as we may easily coniecture by that which now I am to recount. Whilst he remained at Lisbone in Portugall, expe∣cting to go into India, he lodged in the same chamber with Simon Rodriquez. Being once vpon a suddayne in the dead of the night, as he lay in his bed, awaked out of his sleepe, he became so vnsually moued, that there gushed out a great deale of bloud from his nose. Wherof when Simon oftētimes asked him afterwards the cause, His hor∣rour of impure thoghts he kept it close, and would by no meanes speake of it, as long as he was in Portugall. Yet at last, whē he was vpon his departure, & ready to take ship∣ping for India, he tooke Rodriquez aside into a priuate place of the ship, and said: Now Simon, quoth he, it is time to declare vnto you that which you haue so often in vayne demaunded of me: for this (as I suppose) is the last tyme, that I shall euer see you in this lyfe. You shall therefore know, that there was that night am impure thought presented to me in a dreame, the which, I endeauouring all I could to reiect, caused me to shed that bloud at my nose. And these signes, and humane testimonies were no lesse confirmed by the integrity of his Body, after his death, then by the sentence, and approbation of God himselfe. Which singular benefit of the diuine goodnes, among many other, we must acknowledge as granted to his extraordinary Virginall Chastity. And he, His vai∣nes in matter of chasti. to preserue this so singular and heauenly a treasure, was not more chast then wary. For albeit the holy Man being very much giuen to the contempla∣tion of heauenly things, and fenced with the shield of more then vsuall temperance, could easily extinguish the fiery darts of the most malicious Enemy; yet he was as fearefull, & wary in this kind, as if he had bin much subiect to such a Vice. He neuer therfore spake with any woman, vpon what necessary occasion soe∣uer, but openly, where they might be both seene, & also with witnesses by; thinking there was not com∣monly so much profit, as danger, in womens con∣uersation. CHAP. VII. His Loue of the Crosse, and Euangelicall Pouerty. N O lesse exact also, was Xauerius in the auste∣rity of his life, as a chiefe meanes for the conseruing of Chastity. For he to tame his want on youth (as we haue said before) did oftentimes (yea and for a long time togeather) begird his naked flesh with certaine litle cords, which aused him intolerable paine; & moreouer, throgh∣ ut his whole life, he greatly afflicted his body, both y frequent fasts, and very sore disciplines. His food was euer very slender, The slen∣dernes of his food. & such as might be easily made eady to eate, which he also either begged himselfe, or else, was brought vnto him by way of Almes. But when he tooke his repast abroad with others, follow∣ ng the example of our Sauiour, he vsed to eate indif∣ferently, of whatsoeuer was set before him; wherby he uoided all troublesomnes to those who entertayned im; and by hiding his singular abstinence, recom∣pensed also the dainty fare to which he had bin inuited with the hardnes of his owne priuate diet afterward. And the measure in his meate and drinke, was mee∣ ely the necessity of nature, not any delight he tooke herin. His custome was to eate only once a day, He eates but once aday. and hat ordinarily, of one only sort of meate, which did not so much please his tast, as susteine nature. What∣soeuer meate he got when he was busily imployed, with that he contented himselfe. He very rarely tasted either flesh or wine, vnlesse it were among strangers, and at other mens Tables. He neuer eate his fill, euen of bread, although he had it lying by him. In his or∣ney to Meaco which was very long, tedious, and trou∣blesome, he liued only vpon a little Rice parched on the fire. And all the time of his abode in Iaponia, he so accustomed himself to the Iaponians vnsauoury meates & to extraordinary spare dyet, that when he returned againe to Goa, he had lost all tast of his Country vi∣ands, to which he had bin formerly vsed. He abstayned wholy from wine for many yea∣res, He abstei¦ned from wine. yea euen vntill his old, and sickly age; and then his strength being greatly decayed through continu∣all labours, he was constrained to vse a little wine, yet well mingled with water. Wherefore when Alphon∣sus Sosa the Viceroy of India sent vnto him, whilst he remayned in the Promontory of Comorinum, two ves∣sells of excellent wine for a present, he without euer tasting thereof, distributed it all amongst the poore. Moreouer, he was so farre from taking any delight in the softnes of his bed, that whatsoeuer place see∣med fit to lye downe vpon, that serued him alwayes for his Couch: yea the bare ground very often (which was vsuall with him in the Promontory of Comori∣num, the Moluca's, and Iaponia ) was the place where he tooke his repose. When he was at sea, he lay eyther vpon the hard plankes, or els vpon some Cable∣rope rolled vp togeather. And if at any tyme he had he commodity of a bed, yet would he seldome, or ne∣ er make vse therof, but lend it freely vnto those who were sickly and weake. And in the coast of Comori∣ um also, that he might the more freely lye vpon the are ground, he gaue away vnto the sicke, a fayre Bed and Pillow, which the Viceroy of India had sent vnto him. In his trauailes by land, although oftenti∣ es he might haue had a horse to ride, yet he went most cōmonly on foot; & this euen in Iaponia, where for euery step he went, he was exceedingly troubled with stones, snow, ice, & torrents of water in his way. But nothing was more obserued in him, then his bridling of all disordinate appetites and affections, He mor∣tifyeth his affe∣ctions & ouer∣cometh himselfe. & wholy ouercōming of himselfe, which is the hardest and most glorious kind of victory of all others. This appeareth euidently by that, which hapned at Venice, where whilst he serued in the Hospitall called Of the Incurable, as we haue before related, he continual∣ly ouercame himselfe, in tending one so full of vl∣cers, that it caused a great horrour vnto him. He also oftentimes admonished those of the Society that they should accustome to conquer and ouercome themsel∣ues first in small things, He ouer∣cometh himselfe in small matters. to the end they might after∣wards obtayne the victory in greater combats. And himselfe following this rule, which he prescribed to others, had all his passions and affections euermore so bridled, and restrained within his owne dominion & power, He kept alwaies the same counte∣nance. that he continually inioyed most full tran∣quility and repose of mind, and withall a most sweet and amiable countenance. And if at any time he were forced to reprehēd any one for his fault, he so tempe∣red seuerity with mildnes, that hauing once rebuked him, he presently, as it were vnmasked himselfe, and returned againe to his former sweetnes & affability. Moreouer, he esteemed more of this interiour mo∣deration, then of exteriour mortification. The mortifi∣cation of affe∣ctions. For well knowing that al passionate and vnruly motions of the mind ought euer to be suppressed, he accounted the affliction of the body to ayme principally at this, that the exteriour mortification might help the interiour. Wherfore he most of all commended those kinds of mortificatiō, wherby the interiour motions might be restrained, and vertue and piety quickned, and en∣couraged. He so dominiered also ouer the passion of anger, as if he had neuer known how to be angry at al. But his extraordinary Mildnes was euery where very remarkable, & especially at Malaca, where he had that sore combat with the senselesse insolency of the Gouernour of the Citty. The do∣minion he had ouer his anger. For when the Gouernour (as we haue declared before) by his most iniurious intercepting of the Embassage into China, had both obstinately and impudently hindered his worthy en∣deauours, & the aduancemēt of the Ghospel; Xauerius notwithstanding carryed himselfe so mild therein, that being at last forced to denounce his Holines Ex∣communication agaynst that temerarious and mad∣braine fellow, although himselfe were Legate Apo∣stolicall, yet he oftentimes sent the Bishops Vicar vn∣to him, in most suppliant manner; so as one would haue thought, that he had rather done, then receiued the iniury; or that he intreated, rather to auoid the blow himselfe, then to haue threatned it to another. Moreouer in the greatest reproaches, sufferances, & vexations that could be offered, he neuer complai∣ned of any man, but prayed to the diuine Maiesty for those who caused him the same, and that he would vouchsafe, rather to receyue them to mercy, He pray∣eth for his ene∣mies. then to exercyse his diuine iustice vpon them. Wherefore at the selfe same time when he was by the Gouernour of Malaca's officers, without cause, most iniuriously & disgracefully treated, he notwithstanding said Masse dayly for that outragious Man, praying to God, that though he had begun to fall, he might not yet be vt∣terly ouerthrowen. The loue of voluntary Pouerty also, which shined in him, His loue to Euan∣gelicall pouerty. was not inferiour to the moderation of his mind. For through long and serious meditation vpon the pouerty of Christ Iesus, who when he was rich, be∣came poore for vs, he bare so speciall an affection vnto Euangelicall Pouerty, that he dayly found by expe∣rience, the Riches of Pouerty to be such, that they not only discharged and freed the mind from all trou∣blesome care, but enriched it also most aboundantly with celestiall treasures, and caused him who had nothing, not to be in want of any thing. Wher∣fore he alwayes for the most part, liued by begging, euen in the Colledge at Goa it selfe, where all things were at hand without seeking for: neither also, when he trauailed as well by land, as by sea, had he any care at all of any Viaticum, or prouision of victuals. Of this his extraordinary Pouerty his whole life affoardeth vs notable examples. For to say nothing of such as be of lesse note, let vs call to memory his de∣parture out of Portugal towards India, how he would carry nothing with him but a sorry mantle, to vse in the Promontory of Good Hope (a place much pestred with the extreme vnseasonable colds of the Antar∣tick Pole) and a few bookes for his necessary vse, al∣though the Kings Officers by expresse order from his Maiesty vrged him earnestly to the contrary. And in the ship it selfe he could not by any intreaty, either of principall persons therein, or of the Viceroy him∣selfe be drawne from begging his victuals, and other necessaries. For he choose rather for Christ his sake, to aske of the Souldiars in the Nauy, not only victuals, but shooes also, shirts, and other things necessary, thē to haue them freely giuen him by the Viceroy, or his followers; such sweetnes found he in Euangelicall pouerty. His iorney also into Comorinū, was not much vnlike to that into India, contenting himselfe with only a payre of bootes. Moreouer, his apparell and habit was of the vul∣gar sort. He went in an old cassocke from Rome into Portugall, and so on forwards into India. In India it selfe he refused euen a decent, and ciuil habit which was offred him, & made choice of a cassock of course linnen cloth, He pre∣fers his old gowne before a new one. without a cloake, fearing least, as of∣tentimes it hapneth, some pride of mind might fol∣low vpon such gaynesse of apparel. His gowne being now worne out and torne, his friends offered him a new one: but he wraping himself vp in his pouerty, would neuer suffer his old one to be taken from him for a new. Wherupon some, in the dead time of the night when he was a sleep, sent one to take away his ld ragged gowne, and to lay a new one in the place. He rising before day put on the new gowne he found, steed of his old, and went abroad therein, neuer reaming how charitably his friends had deceaued im. Now, this new gowne was of a farre different ashion from his old one. Wherupon being the same ay at supper with Francis Paiua, & others of his friēds who were acquainted with the matter, they as it were ondering, began to aske him in iest, what kind of abit that was? And when he perceiued by looking pon it, and feeling it, that it was a new one, and that e was therewith deceiued, he smiling sayd; Indeed his strang habit is more fit for others, then for me. Wherefore by his earnest intreaty he preuayled at last o much with them, that they restored to him his old owne, which they had taken away, and receaued he new one backe againe. He therfore with his old owne indured the extreme hard weather of Iaponia, lthough oftentimes he euen shiuered, and trembled or cold. Afterwards also he returned out of Iaponia o Goa triumphant, as it were, ouer braue and gay ap∣parell, with glorious ensignes of Pouerty, to wit, with n old hat, a ragged shirt, a torne gowne, & that also atched in diuers places. But if we desire to know, how willingly he im∣ raced all the incommodities which pouerty brought a long with it, and how he was wont to reioyce in the extreame want of all things, as in the midst of heauē∣ y delights; we may easily gather it out of a certaine letter which he sent from Maurica to those of the So∣ciety at Rome; where describing that Country, after he had sayd, that it wanted all commodities both of victuals, and other necessaries for the maintenance of life, he affirmeth that he neuer receiued from God greater and truer content. In his letters also which he wrote out of Iaponia to the Society at Goa he speaketh thus: I beseech you, deerest Brethren, to helpe me to giue God thankes for so great a benefit. We are now by Gods singular goodnes arriued in Iaponia, where there is extreme want of all things; which I indeed esteeme as one of the greatest fauours of the diuine Prouidence. For in other places, plenty of victuals & commodities doth most commonly inuite the people to satiate, and fill their vnbridled sensual appetits. And so their soules being not acquainted with Euangelical pouerty, are extremely oppressed through the want of heauenly graces and delights. And many times also their bodyes being tormented with diseases, and other incommodities, indure no small, nor short punish∣ment for their intemperance. CHAP. VIII. His Obedience, and Humility. T HIS abandoning of the vse of other things was not more exact in him, then the for∣saking of his owne Free-will, and proper Iudgment, wherin the chiefest prayse or Obedience consisteth. Which vertue being the prin∣cipall ornament that the Society of IESVS hath, shewed selfe most of all in Francis, euen at the first, when he as by Ignatius sent into India. It was well knowen, at the Nauigation into India was no lesse dangerous en long and tedious. And the Society at that time, hatsoeuer state it had, was not gouerned by any cō∣ and which Ignatius had ouer it, but only by his au∣ ority. Notwithstanding Francis forgetting all things esides Obedience, did more promptly obey then he as commanded; and without any delay prepared imselfe, euen against the next day, for that long, & most endlesse iorney so that God may seeme to haue pened the vtmost parts of the East to his incompara∣ e alacrity, by this his prompt Obedience. In Portugall also, and in India, it is incredible to y, how willingly and exactly he performed whatso∣ uer Ignatius by letters commanded him; and gaue m therin such satisfactiō (since he was one who ex∣ cted to haue all things squared out by the rule of O∣ edience) that none excelled in that point more then e, shewing himself therby a schollar, How much he esteemed Ignatius. worthy indeed f such a maister. For he had such an esteeme of Ig∣ atius his Sanctity, that he reuerenced him as a most oly man, sent from God: in so much, that when∣ euer he did name Ignatius either in his discourse, or tters, he alwayes gaue him the title of Blessed, or oly. And in a reliquary Case that he wore about is necke, he kept inclosed Ignatius his Name, written with his owne hand (cutting it from the subscription f a letter which he had sent him) togeather with o∣ her holy reliques, and the forme of his owne profes∣ on. And when he commanded any thing, to any of the Society, he was wont to say. This I command you, for the Reuerence, and Obedience you owe vnto our Holy Father Ignatius. No lesse was the confidence which Ignatius had in Francis his modesty, Ignatius his opi∣nion of Xauerius obediēce and obedience. Whereof this may seeme an euident argument, in that he was all∣wayes very free in commanding him diuers things, how hard soeuer they were, neuer doubting but that he would presently execute whatsoeuer he should cō∣maund. And when Ignatius foresaw the deposition of his Tabernacle was at hand, and iudginge it expedi∣ent that Francis, as the chiefe vpholder of the Society, should be called backe to Rome, he wrote vnto him in such sort, that whē he had set down the reasons which moued him to that determination, by adding in a Postscript thereof apart, one single Character only, to wit the letter, I, he seemed to signify thereby that he so confided in Francis his obedience, that he did not doubt, but he would returne backe to Rome, euen from the furthest part of the world, and where he was then planting, and setting forward the Ghos∣pell of Christ, with the greatest speed that might be, although he had giuen him no one reason for this his returne, being inuited by one sole letter, by which he was cōmaūded to goe. And certainly Ignatius would neither haue bin deceiued in his opinion he had of Francis, nor of his most prompt obediēce. For without doubt, that only letter, I, Goe, would haue spoken so forcibly in his hart, that he would without delay, haue euen seemed to fly from the furthest part of the East, had he not already bin flowne to hea ē, there to eceiue the reward of all his labours, before Ignatius etters could come vnto him. And as Francis, throughout the whole course of is life was most eminent in this zeale of Obedience; so desired he also, all those of the Society to haue a spe∣ciall regard vnto the same Vertue. Wherefore, he of∣ entymes inculcated vnto them, in his Admonitions oth by words and letters, Commē∣dation of obediēce That without true, and generous Obedience, that is, prompt and cheerfull, o man could be the true and naturall disciple, and onne of the Society: and whosoeuer wanted that vertue, could not continue long in that, Order with profit, or ioy of mind. Wherfore he alwayes gaue this precept to his subiects, that by harty, and sincere Obe∣dience, they should wholy conforme themselues to the iudgment of the superiour of the Society, & of the Church; hauing their eyes fixed, not only vpon their Command, Interi∣our hu∣mility. but euen vpon their least signe, or becke. For it was far more secure to be gouerned, then to go∣uerne, & to obey then cōmand. Wherfore inciting Fa Paul Camertes Rector of the Colledge of Goa (charging him to be ruled by Iames Borban a Franciscan, who had care of the same Colledge) to the practise of Obedien∣ ce, he wrote vnto him, that if he were in his place, no∣thing would be more gratefull vnto him, then to o∣bey him who had command ouer him. For one can∣not take any more certaine and secure course, to come directly and without erring to the iorneys end which he intends, then by following his guide who is skil∣ full in the way. And contrariwise, nothing is more dangerous, then to liue according to ones owne wil, and to slight the precepts of Superiours. Extradinarily also was Xauerius Reuerence, and Obedience vnto Bishops, and their Vicars. For that honoring God in them, he desired to exercise his f ∣ctions by their authority, & left himselfe in al things, wholy to their disposall & determination; Xauerius Obedi∣ence to Bishops and their Vicars. & the same he commanded others of the Society also to do, say∣ing oftentimes, that those of the Society ought to giue example of true Obedience towards all Ecclesiasti∣call persons and Prelates. And whosoeuer tooke not true content, in the Societyes kind of gouernment, which consisteth chiefly in Obedience, him he iudged to be of a quite differēt spirit from the Society. Neither did he thinke it expediēt, to expect vntil that man had committed some thing against the honour of the So∣ciety, whome he forsaw, by that his beginning, would one day surely do it; but before any ignominy happe∣ned, he would dismisse him; and thereby effect the sooner, what the other intended, and by his example make his companions more wary in the same kind. The same Obedience also he required of those of the Society vnto Ecclesiastical Prelates, and that they should not preach vnto the people, nor exercyse the functions of the Society, without licence first granted by them, or their Vicars: nor that they should at any tyme exercise, Obedi∣ence to∣wards Ecclesia∣sticall Prelats. or do any thing, whereby the sayd Prelats might be iustly offended, or be auerted from them, though neuer so iust cause or occasion were gi∣uen them. And if at any time it fell out otherwise, he alwayes tooke it very ill. Wherfore whē two certayne Vicars did by their letters complaine vnto Francis, of wo Fathers who aboad within their districts, he pre∣ ntly wrote vnto them, that they should forthwith o to the Vicars, & humbly kissing their hands, should ke them pardon, and from thence-forward, in to∣ n of the great respect they ought vnto them, they ould go euery weeke once to salute them. This, & ch like Humility & submission, he sayd, was neces∣ ry, both to beate downe the Deuill, the ring-leader f Pride, and to gaine the Prelates of the Church, by eciall obseruance, to be fauourable and courteous nto them, that so they might be the better able to duance the Christian cause. But aboue all other things there shined in Xauerius most profounded humility, Humili∣ty. the mother of Obediēce, nd the gayner of good will both with God and man, herof we find in his life many admirable testimo∣ ies. For in his iorney into Portugall, as before we aue sayd, he looked very diligently to the companies orses, and perpetually both at home and abroad in the Hospitalls of the sicke, with the greatest affection that could be, he tooke vpon him all the basest offices herof. And when he came to Goa, although he were Legate Apostolicall, yet he fell downe at the Bishops eet, and deliuered vp to him the Kings Letters, and the Popes Breue, which he would not vse otherwise, then might seeme fitting vnto him. Which modesty of his so gayned the Bishops good will, Xauerius Reuerē∣ce to the Prelates. of the Church. that he did not more reuerence Xauerius authority, then admire his Humility. But Francis had the Prelates of the Church in such speciall veneration and reuerence, that he ex∣hibited vnto them, euen diuine honour almost, as representing the person of God himselfe; vsing with very great reuerence, both to kisse their hands, and some ymes also, to cast himselfe prostrate at feete. Moreouer (such was his singular Humility) he not only bare these great respects and submissions to Prelates and their Vicars, but also to priuate Priests and Clergy men, carrying himselfe rather as a ser∣uant to them all, then as Legate Apostolicall. Yet his exteriour Humility (which is a token of the in∣teriour) was not the only marke his affections chiefly leuelled at, but rather the interiour it selfe, which consisteth in the knowledge, and contempt of ones selfe. For when in respect of his singular sanctity, he was held for no lesse then an Apostolicall Man, yet he esteemed himself to be the most wicked of all mor∣tall men, as may be gathered out of many of his let∣ters. Wherefore being a true Contemner of himselfe, he no lesse detested prayse and honour (the allu e∣ments to pride & arrogancy) then others do ate dis∣grace and dishonour. His ha∣tred of honour. For he so neglected both ho∣nour it self, & those that gaue it to him, that all might playnely see, he ba e most cordiall affection to that ancient Simplicity, which in former tymes was ne∣uer acquainted with flattery or ambition. Concea∣ling of heauenly guifts. Wherefore he alwayes vsed great diligence to keep such thinges secret which he had done worthy of prayse or com∣mendation; and if at any tyme he were for the good of others constrayned to make them knowne, he did it in such sort, as you would haue thought they had elonged to some other & not to himself. And so wri∣ ing to those of the Society out of the Promontory of omo nū of things which he himself had there done, attributeth the health which many sicke persons ad recouered, by his meanes, vnto certaynes Neo∣ hyte children, whose help he had vsed therein, al∣ hough it were neuer so litle. Writing also of the heauenly Ioyes, which God, the same Promontory, had bestowed vpon them who labour for his sake, he recounted what had hap∣ ed to himselfe, as appertayning to a third person, without any equiuocation at all. Nor was there any hing in him which more declared his singular mode∣ ty, then a certaine remarkeable blush, which straight rose in his face when he heard himselfe praysed, as a manifest demonstration of his interiour Humility; which we may see sufficiently declared by this one e∣xample. A remar∣kable blush in Xauerius at his owne prayses. At his returne out of the coast of Comorinum to God, when Iames Borban asked him, whether that were true which was reported of him, to wit, that he had restored a dead man to ly e; he was so wholy confounded, and out of countenance through shame-fastnesse, that Borban taking great compassion of him could not find in his hart to vrge him any further in that point. Moreouer, he was so farre from affecting titles of Dignity, His fly∣ing titles of ho∣nour. that for the space of ten yeares (for so long he liued in those Countryes) there was none, but the Bishop of Goa only, who knew that he was Legate A∣postolicall, so carefully he concealed the matter. Nei∣ther did he euer discouer his authority vnto others, vntill he was driuen therunto by necessity, to curbe the insolent audaciousnesse of the Gouernour of Ma∣laca; wherin notwithstāding he so moderated his au∣thority, that it seemed to be rather Humility, then po∣wer. And (for as much, as out of the aboundance of the hart the mouth speaketh ) in all the Exhortations almost which he made to those of the Society, he insisted most cōmonly vpon the perfect rooting out of Pride and selfe esteeme from their minds. And he was wont to say, that looke how much any one was in the iud∣gement, and estimation of God; His ex∣hortati∣ons to true hu∣mility. so much, & no more, ought euery one to deeme of himselfe, although the whole world should otherwise esteeme of him. Wher∣fore he admonished them neuer to extoll themselues for the good opinion which other men had of them; and that ballancing themselues in their owne know∣ledge they should humble themselues, and consider that they were far otherwise in their owne conscien∣ce, and in the iudgement of God, from that which they seemed vnto men. For they who want the know∣ledge of themselues, are soone puffed vp by the pray∣ses of men, thinking themselues to be such indeed as men esteeme them; as though they were able to dece∣aue both God and men. This also he was wont oftentymes to say with in∣ward griefe of hart: O arrogācy, the poyson of Chri∣stian vertue! How much hast thou, doest thou, and wilt thou hurt the world! How contrary art thou, to the institute and perfection of the Society of IESVS! What a deadly enemy art thou to the pious, & whole∣some endeauours of those that be of that profession! or he affirmed, that none could be a true Child of the he Society of IESVS, or imploy himselfe faythfully or God, who did not contemne himselfe, and thinke owly and humbly both of himselfe, and of all his a∣ tions. Wherefore, as he could by no meanes away with such as too much esteemed themselues, who ey∣ her vnder the colour of Humility, or for the Nobili∣ y of their Ancestours, desired to be honoured: so he are an extraordinary affection to such as were truly umble, & contemned both themselues, and whatso∣euer els was theirs, although they were persons of ne∣uer so meane condition. CHAP. IX. His Magnanimity of Mind, and Confi∣dence in God. T HIS Humility of Francis did not, for all that, cause in him so abiect a mynd, that he durst not ayme at high matters, or as∣pire to any noble enterprize; but putting his whole confidence in God, and accounting no∣thing to be eyther hard, or difficile to the magnani∣mity of his mynd, be attempted euen the greatest things. For whensoeuer the Honour of God required it, he gaue way to no difficulty, nor daunger: so as, he ordinarily attempted nothing, which he did not effect, or bring to some good passe. This indeed is pro∣per to the seruants of God, to be humble and abiect in their owne sight, but most couragious and constant in the affayres of God. This magnanimity of mynd, and slighting of all difficultyes & dangers, appeared manifestly through∣out the whole course of Xauerius lyfe. And indeed it oftentymes so farre surpassed the vsuall straine of or∣dinary Fortitude, that it might haue bin accounted e∣merity, if it had not depended rather vpon diuine, thē humane assistāce. For in his iorney to Trauancoris, when he passed through the midst of his enemies, he seemed to thrust himselfe into manifest danger. But far mor euident was that perill, when he attempted to in∣struct the inhabitants of Maurica, a Nation extraor∣dinary fierce and cruell, hauing no other defence a∣gaynst those barbarous and sauage people, but his confidence in God. He also aduentured to passe in a Pyrates ship into Iaponia the furthest part of the East, without any feare of danger, although his deerest fri∣ends, and such as were most expert therein, presented before his eyes how many & extreme difficulties there were. Concerning which thing he wrote himself vn∣to the Prouinciall of Portugall in these words. All my well-willers and friends are amazed, that I am not afrayd to vndertake so long, and dangerous a iorney. They lay before me many dangers of tēpests, quicksands, and Pyrates. But I am no lesse amazed at them, that they haue so little confidence in God, in whose hands and power, all those things are pla∣ced. I for my part, knowing for certaine, that al things are gouerned according to God Almighties beck and commandment, do feare nothing else, but God him∣selfe, least he should punish me according to the de∣ erts of my negligence, and sloth in his seruice, and f the obseruance of my Religion. But as for other errours, dangers, miseries, and crosses, I do not at ll weigh them. For I feare only God, the maker and oderatour of all things, because other things how urtfull soeuer they be, cannot annoy vs, but on y so farre forth as God permits them. It is wonderfull also, what Confidence he repo∣ ed in the diuine assistance. So as hauing only God for is guide, through so many dangers both by sea and and, through so many Nations different in language and manners, he penetrated to the furthest parts of the East, and by his often passing ouer the Ocean e instructed those sauadge, and barbarous Nations in the mysteries of the Christian faith, and brought them at last to a ciuill life. And indeed his Confidence in God did neuer fayle, but alwayes freed him from the dangers, He is as∣saulted by the Barbari∣ans. both of enemies, tempests, and other calamities. For to pretermit with silence other things wherof we haue already spoken in their proper pla∣ces, in passing ouer the Iaponian seas, when as the Bar∣barians bent all their fury agaynst him, he by diuine Assistance, escaped all their machinations, He suff ∣rethship∣wracke thrice. without any hurt or danger at all. He also in the sea of Mo∣luca suffered ship wrack thrice; and once also he mi∣raculously escaped by lying vpon a plancke after ship∣wracke tossed vp & downe the sea, He is de∣liuered from ma¦ny dan∣gers. without any hurt at all, for the space of two or three dayes. More∣ouer he auoyded the fury of the Saracens who were set in armes against him, by lying secret for many dayes togeather in a wood hard by. Also he did not on∣ly defeate the strategems which his enemies had plot∣ted against him by the force of armes, but discouered their secret inuentiōs also, when as they sought to poi∣son him. And besides all this, he very often escaped the incursions of Pyrates by sea, as likewise of theeues by land. Agayne, His loue of the Crosse. being wholy inflamed with the loue of God, he did not only contemne difficultyes and dan∣gers, but seemed also to imbrace them willingly. Wherfore as desirous to suffer in the very midst of in∣commodities & dangers, he earnestly besought God, not to free him from them, vnlesse it were to vndergo greater, for the glory of his diuine Maiesty. And the diuine Goodnes, corresponding sweetly to the mag∣nanimity of his mind, heaped vpon him store of suf∣ferings, and merits, with no lesse approbation in the sight of Heauen, then ioy & comfort to himselfe. He likewise in that most hard and difficile expedition in∣to China shewed no lesse courage. For notwithstan∣ding (as we haue sayd before) that no stranger could enter the bounds of that Countrey, without certayne danger of his lyfe or liberty (the same penalty being designed as well for the stranger that entreth in, as for him that bringeth him;) yet hauing an admirable cō∣fidence in God, who had moued him to that resoluti∣tion, and to the vndertaking of that iourney, he de∣termined to commit his lyfe to the trust of a Chinese merchant, which was no lesse doubtfull and dange∣rous, then the entrance itselfe into China. Concer∣ning which, he wrote himself to Francis Peren at Ma∣laca to this tenour. In this busines, my friends bring two dāgers against me, the one least the merchant hauing already recey∣ued his money, may breake his promise, and eyther leaue me in some desert Iland, or else cast me headlong into the sea, that so his bargayne of passing me ouer may not come to light. The other is (supposing he stand to his promisse) least the Gouernour of the Cit∣ty may make me (being a stranger) an example to o∣thers of comming into China agaynst the Kings Edict without publicke warrant, & eyther put me to death by torments, or else cast me into perpetuall prison. Against these dangers, I obiect others farre greater, which themselues do not perceyue. And the first is, least we distrust the diuine Goodnes and Prouiden∣ce: For we come hither for Gods only Cause, to pre∣ach to these Countryes his sacred Law, and his sonne Christ Iesus the Redeemer of mankind, whereof God himselfe, who gaue me this mind, is my witnesse. So as now to cast off our hope, and confidence in his Diuine Prouidence and power, for the dangers we are said to be subiect vnto in labouring for his cau∣se, ought certaynly to be esteemed a far greater dan∣ger, then whatsoeuer the enemyes of God, and Men, are euerable to bring vpon me. Especially seeing, that neither the Diuels themselues, nor their ministers can hurt vs at all, but only by the permission and will of God. What can we say to this? That if God do appro∣ue and further our endeauours, we shall by his fauour not only be deliuered from dangers, but also follow the admonition of our Sauiour Christ, His vn∣daunted courage agaynst danger. who sayeth: He that shall loo se his lyfe in this world for me, shall find it. Wherefore for as much as we hould these dangers of the soule farre greater thē those of the body, we estee∣me it far better, and more secure, to breake through those of this lyfe, rather then to hazard the saluation of our soule. I am fully resolued, God willing, to go into China, in despite of all his enemies. For, if God be with vs, who shalbe against vs? We do, without all doubt, go vpon great danger, although there were nothing else but perpetuall seruitude: But this consi∣deration comforteth me, that it is much better, to serue in captiuity for Gods cause, then to enioy liberty by running away frō the Crosse &c. In which words he doth indeed sufficiently shew an vndaunted cou∣rage against all dangers. And how much Xauerius contemned all the miseries of this world, appeared also by another letter of his to Iames Perera, whereof we haue inserted a clause in its proper place. This greatnes of Xauerius mynd was not lesse a∣gainst the insolency of Christians, then against the threates and terrours of the Barbarians. The Gouer∣nour of the coast of Comorinum being a Portughese, & potent, through his couetousnesse, had held the Neo∣phytes in cruell subiection. Which when Francis vn∣derstood, he threatned, that vnlesse he carryed him∣selfe most mildly towards the Christians there, he would by letters complaine vnto the King of Portu∣gall of his insolencies and Tyranny. Likewise he cau∣sed his companion to declare to a certayne Portughese Captaine, who treated the new Christians iniuriou∣sly, that vnlesse he ceased frō his cruelty, he would be far more sauage then Herod, because Herod slew only the bodies of the Innocents, but he also slew their sou∣les: and this would certainly be the effect therof, that if through his insolēcies the Fathers should leaue that Coast, the little infants would dye without Baptisme. The Gouernour also of Malaca, who, as we sayd before, most iniuriously, and obstinately hindred his iorney into China, was by Xauerius, who turned at last his patience into seuerity, excommunicated, and the sentence published formally in the Churches; to the end others, through feare to incurre the like igno∣miny, might carry themselues, as their duty requi∣ ed. But nothing more declared the incredible greatnes of his mind, then a certaine infinite desire (as we may call it) which he had to preach the Ghospell throughout the whole world. For not contenting himselfe with the vast Countryes of India, he exten∣ded his desires, and endeauours to Malaca, the Ilands of the Moluca's, Maurica, Iaponia, China, and in fine to all the East; intending certainly, to haue extended hem afterwards to all the parts of the world, if his life had bin answereable to his feruour of spirit. For he with such speed trauailed ouer the vtmost parts of the East, that the huge vastnesse of Asia, seemed too small a circuite for his couragious mind. CHAP. X. His Charity, to God, and his Neighbours. T HIS so great Fortitude of mind in Xauerius was matched with the like Charity both to God & men. For throughout the whole course of his life, there is to be found no one vertue more eminent, then his desire of increasing the Honour of God, and sauing of soules. And no wonder; for he was so greatly inflamed with such spe∣ciall loue of hauing cleane abandoned the world, that he became now wholy wrapt in the perpetuall con∣templation of celestiall things. Hence it was, that his soule being raysed to God, the supreme goodnes, and to the loue of his most bountifull Creatour and Redeemer, held continually most sweet discourses with his diuine Maiesty; nay euen then, when he was most seriously imployed in conuersing amongst men. Hence proceeded that inflamed loue to Iesus Christ his benigne Lord & Sauiour, repeating so oftē in most sweet manner, that most comfortable & wholsome Name. Hence also arose in him that burning desire of Martyrdome, which finding no entertainmēt among the Turkes, went on to the furthest parts of the Earth thirsting after the glory thereof, by a thousand mea∣nes, amongst those sauage and barbarous people, & amidst euident danger of pestilent diseases, shipwra∣ckes, and Pyrats; so that Martyrdome it selfe fled ra∣ther from him, then he from Martyrdome. This boundlesse charity of Francis towards God, had enkindled in his soule the like loue to men, which neuer suffred him eyther to rest, or to be weary. This t was, which made him euery where as it were a slaue o the sicke, imprisoned, and wretched persons, and o feare no contagious or infectious disease, euen whē he bodyes lay dead round about him. This it was which pricked him forward to instruct barbarous & auage Nations, euen with euident hazard of his owne ife, & kept him amongst them as long as was need∣full although he were extremely oppressed with wāt of all things. In fine it was this, which causing him to leight the raging billowes of the stormy Ocean, the cursions of Pyrates, and inconueniences of an end∣ esse Nauigation, drew him to the furthest part of the world, to make the Iaponians also members of the Church, who had no knowledge at all of the Gospell: o as hauing passed so many seas, & instructed almost ll the sea coasting Countrys of the East in the fayth f Christ, he was now come euen to the furthest end f the world. The same charity to saue mens soules, set on still with no lesse manifest danger of his owne , to accēpt to get entrance into China, which was so ured vp, both with rigorous lawes, & strict watch; as the insatiable zeale which he had of soules, suf∣ red nothing to seeme impossible, nothing terrible nto Xauerius. But now, after he had brought so many Nations nd people to the fayth of Christ, it grieued him ex∣ emely to be with-held from entring into China; and hauing determined with himselfe the conuersion of the whole world, be forced now to make as it were a stand at the begining almost of his endeauours. And no doubt, if he had liued vntill he had dispatched his expedition into China, and had come backe agayne to Rome, whither he was sent for by Ignatius, he would haue byn a most potent meanes, to haue reduced also those forlorne partes of the Westerne Church. For in what office soeuer he should haue byn placed, either of the Generall, or of the Generalls Assistant, he would neuer haue giuen ouer sending Religious men, of the Society, to cure the westerne Nations, infected with Heresy, vntill either there had byn none left who nee∣ded such cure, or else his owne lyfe had left him. It is incredible to say, He ser∣ueth his neygh∣bours forget∣ting his owne meate and drin∣ke. how exceeding zealous he was for the saluation of soules. For at Malaca, and else where in the East, he imployed himselfe continu∣ally in hearing Confessions, in making reconciliation betweene those that were at variance & debate among thēselues, & in helping the sicke, wherein he so forgot himselfe, that oftentymes he passed two or three daies without eating or drinking any thing; in so much that one would haue thought he had byn fed which such exercyses, & seruices done to God. And no meruayle, for the zeale & desire he had to help his neyghbours, & to propagate the Christian Religion, was so engrafted in him, that it seemed almost naturall. To this all his forces were bent; in this he was wholy imploied; this was his only desire; in this he tooke his greatest ioy, to vnite as many as possibly he could, to the flock of Christ. Neither was his care greater in gathering new sheepe vnto that sacred fold, then in attending those diligently, whome he had already brought thither. For he gaue them such godly precepts & instructions that they scarce needed any other Pastor to help them. Ludouicus Fr es of the Society of IESVS, a man both of great prudence and pie y, gaue vp this relation: That when himselfe first of al trauailed ouer the Iland of Iapon, he came by chance to a castle there scituate in a corner of the Iland, where he met with three of the habitants of that country, who asked him what was become of Francis Xauerius? At which suddaine que∣stion, he at the first stood a little astonished, then paw∣sing a while vpon the matter, he found that Xauerius had sometimes bin there amongst them, and had con∣uerted many of the inhabitants to the faith of Christ; had also built them a Church, and so diligently in∣structed the Neophytes, that Christian discipline con∣tinued stil amongst them, without any other Maister. For Xauerius being to depart from Iaponia, had pro∣uided for them for time to come, & giuen them writ∣ten in their owne language the life of Christ, and a briefe Summe of the Ecclesiasticall history, as also the Roman Kalendar, with a table of the moueable feasts, a forme also for the inuocation of the Saints, which we call the Litanies, the Seauen Psalmes, togeather with the forme and manner of Baptisme, aduising thē to assemble themselues all togeather vpon holy Dayes and there to read something of the life of Christ, and out of the holy Scripture; to obserue the Festiuall dayes, to inuocate the intercession of the Saints, and to recite the seauen Psalmes. Moreouer he ordayned that the clarke of their chiefe Guide should baptize the little infantes, vnlesse some necessity otherwise dis∣suaded. And the Neophytes hauing kept these precep which Francis had giuen them in memory, were so throughly instructed in matters of Christian Religion that they came not farre short of those of Europe, Wherupon Froes concluded, that he had no more to say, but that by Xauerius example, Religion ought so to be sowen, and planted euery where, that it might be able to vphold it selfe by its owne proper forces. And although Xauerius, as much as in him lay, ceased not at any tyme, to aduance his Neophy∣tes by those of the Society: yet his Charity was not so imployed in helping of whole Cittyes & Nations, as that he neglected particular persons, how peruerse and obstinate soeuer they were. At his departure frō the Iland of Ternate, of an exceeding great number of Christians that inhabited therin, he left only two, whome he could not draw to forsake their cōcubins. Wherfore when he came backe to Amboynum (com∣passion succeeding in place of indignation) he wrote vnto a certaine Ternatian, His zeale of soules a friend of his, intreating him to salute those two persons in his name, in the most friendly manner he could deuise, and signify vnto them, that if they would at last resolue to arise out of the sincke of sinne, he would presently make all hast thither, & in the meane time he would not cease to pray to God our cōmon Father for their saluation. At Malaca also, He con∣uerteth a Iew. as he preached vnto the people, there was oftentimes present at his sermons a certaine Iew, a man of sufficient learning, but (as the proper∣ty of that nation is) most obstinate; and who scoffed no lesse at Xauerius, then at the truth it selfe. He being intangled both in vices and errours, stifly opposed the Ghospell, and his authority kept back many other Ie∣wes from the faith of Christ. Francis therfore treating this man sweetly by all kind of obsequiousnesse, and vsing to suppe with him in a friendly manner, so wrought with him at last, that being quite altered frō what he was, became of an obstinate Iew, a vertuous and deuout Christian. And this Charity of his to his Neyghbours, was not more forcible thē industrious. There standeth betweene Goa and Cocinum a for∣tresse belonging to the Portugheses called Canonora, His wō∣derfull industri∣ousnesse in mo∣uing such as were obsti∣nate in sinne. much frequented by reason of a good hauen in that place. Xauerius comming thither endeauoured by the way to draw a certaine person to make his Confessiō, but in vayne; wherupon he desisted for a while frō his intreaty, that when the other thought himself secure, he might at vnawares more forcibly set vpon him. For being pressed hard therto, as one most obstinatly bent he had passionatly sworne neuer to yield therein to Francis. Therfore as soone as they came to land Xaue∣rius resolued to try all the remedies he could deuise a∣gainst so desperate a disease, & so faygning as though his mind were set on other matters, got this obstinate man into a wood, in a courteous manner vnder pre∣tence of recreation, beset (according to the Nature of that Country) with many Palme-trees. As soone as they came into a priuy place where none could see them, Xauerius suddainely casting of his clothes, and baring his backe, falleth downe vpon his knees, & presently (the other standing amazed, & expecting to see the issue of so suddaine an alteration) pulleth out a very sharpe discipline full of iron pricks, and beating his owne backe extremely, before the others face, cryeth out, that he willingly suffred that torment for his sake thereby to turne away Gods indignatiō from him. In the meane time the Wood runge againe with the mighty stripes of the discipline, and he that stood looking on, in that amazement, like one out of himselfe, was all besprinkled with Xauerius his bloud. Wherfore turning his admiration, into compassion of hart, he instantly casteth himselfe at Xauerius feete, and beseecheth him, to leaue off reuenging anothers fault vpon his owne backe, for now he was ready to purge himselfe of his sinnes by Confession. Xauerius being glad he had thus wonne the victory, presently apparelleth himselfe, & hearing his Confession, brin∣geth that wretched man, backe againe into the right way, and hope of saluation. But now his Prudence & industry was farre more seene in curing the diseases of the Citty of Malaca, which was almost brought therby vnto a desperate state. For when he perceiued the Malacensians minds to be so inueterate, and drowned in the corruption of all wickednesse, that they would by no meanes heare of remedy, he, being an exquisite Physitian of soules, found out a new & soueraigne antidote wher∣by to cure them. Wherfore setting vpon them in a se∣cret and couert manner, he vsed to insinuate himselfe into the company of the souldiars when they were at their wanton sportes, comming oftentimes vpon them as they were at play, seeming as though he tooke delight in their game and conuersation; He be∣comes all to gayne all to Christ. and if any one vpon his presence, or otherwise through shame-fastnesse, absteyned from playing, he in a sweet, and friendly manner would exhort him to be merry for he also loued the like pastime; and that souldiars ought not to liue like Monkes: and if it were vsed without offence to God, it was better to play, and be merry, then to speake ill of other men, or to commit any other wickednesse. Then hauing wonne their affections by this his gentle behauiour, he would by all manner of obsequiousnesse insinuate himselfe into the greatest familiarity with them that was possible, that so he might find out their secret inclinations, & thereby take some occasion to apply fit remedies to their diseases. Now, for others who were intangled with disho∣nest loue and kept Concubines, he would oftenty∣mes himselfe appoint certayne daies to dine or suppe with them, where sitting at table, and by bringing in some familiar discourse, as commending of the dishes of meate which were serued in, and inquiring of the mayd-seruant, that had so well seasoned the same, requesting his Host oftentymes to send for her, & then to cōmend her for her diligence & skill in Cookery, & the like; he opened to himself away for his future desi∣gnes. If he found one that would not willingly admit him to his table, he at vnawars would earnestly intre∣ate him, that he might see his house, & being brought in, did often wyn the mans affection by his sweet, conuersation, & then concealing his determination he left no corner of the house which he did nor search in∣to, as if he had hunted after some wild game: where if by chance he light vpō his hosts Concubine, he inqui∣red what that woman was, & to whome she belonged; making as though he liked all well that he saw, yet still watching for an occasion wherin to effect his busines. Finally, he became in such sort euen all to all, that among souldiars he seemed a souldiar, & among mer∣chants a merchant. Wherefore not only the Portughe∣ses, but also their Concubines themselues by reason of his singular affability, desired greatly to haue him come to their houses and table, neuer so much as once dreaming of what he aymed at. But Xuerius as soone as he had gotten himselfe in∣ward with them, he would begin couertly to apply his cure to their festred soules. If he met with any that had a beautifull and handsome mayd with whome he was in loue, he would commend her vnto him, & tell him that indeed for her extraordinary beauty, & good disposition she deserued to be an honest woman, and was worthy to be marryed to some man of good account. Then would he aske his Host that if he loued her, why did he, to both their dishonours, and vtter ouerthrow, rather keepe her as his Concubine, then honestly and religiously to take her to his wife? Thus turning the cause of the disease to the cure therof, he tooke away sinne, & brought honourable wedlocke into place therof. But if the woman were deformed, he would demand whether he were wel in his wits or no, who could set his affections vpon so ill fauoured a Creature, & for whome all the Portugheses talked of him, and laughed him to scorne? Or why did he not rather seeke a wife fit for him? For that would cer∣tainly be a great honour to him, as it had bin to o∣thers, whome he would then name. But now, with others that could not so freely marry, by reason that they were intāgled with many Concubines at once, he tooke another course. First he would aske them, why they kept in their house so many maydes, who serued almost for no other vse but to ouerthrow their soule, and consume their sub∣stance, besides the often disquiet of the house by their chiding and brawling. And if they either could not, or would not put them all away, he aduised them se∣riously to rid themselues of some one of them. Then comming againe vnto them after some dayes space, he in a friendly manner would importune them, to dis∣misse the second, & so one after another al but one, for they should be both lesse hatefull to God, & the sooner obtaine pardon, if they kept but one woman, then if they kept many. At last, vpon some new occasion, he would vrge them againe either to put that one away, or else to marry her, whome they still kept vnlawfully, that so at length they might appease the diuine wrath incensed against them. And thus by lit∣tle and little he reclaimed those lost soules (by taking away from them all enticements to sinne) to a ciuill and vertuous life. Xauerius had perpetually this property & custome to seeke most of al to be familiar with those who were most wicked, thinking that where the sicknes was most grieuous, there was greatest need of a Physitian, and antidote: neither would he euer giue them ouer vntill he had restored them to their soules health. This also was another chiefe care of his, that all men by his owne and the Societyes examples, might be inflamed to vertue and deuotion, and none offended by them. Neither did he vse to inculcate any thing more often and seriously to those of the Society who were sent in mission to any place, Rom. 1. then, That they should prouide for good things before God, and men. And besides this he oftentymes also put them in mynd by letters, of those precepts which he had giuen them at their departure. But if any one had at any time giuen offence, he was so afflicted in mind therfore, How gre¦atly he a∣uoyded to scan∣dalize o∣thers. that he might well haue said with the Apostle, Who is scandalized, and I not burned? Wherfore he gaue strict charge by letters, to Fa. Gaspar the Rectour of the Colledge at Goa, that whosoeuer of the Society should giue publick scandal he should by all meanes dismisse him; 2. Cor. 11. and being once dismissed neuer to receiue him againe vpon any ter∣mes; iudging it a heauier lesse for the Society to be de∣priued of its good Name, then of any member therof; imitating heerin that sentence of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 5. 6 appro∣ued by dayly experience: A little leauen corrupteth the whole past. And where the offence was giuen, there he iudged it conuenient, that satisfactiō should be made, therby to take away all scandall from such, as had re∣ceiued it. Neyther did he thinke it fit that satitfaction should be giuen only to those who were offended, The care he had to edify his neigh¦bours. but to those also who were otherwayes offensiue vnto them. At Cocinum therefore, when as he vnderstod, that a cer∣ ayne Sodality, who had granted a Church to the So∣ciety, was displeased with the sayd Fathers, Xauerius asting himself prostrate on the groūd, before a great ssembly of worthy personages, layd the keys of the Church at their feete, and by that Humility wholy pa∣cifyed their offended minds. For he was alwaies wont to say, that he preferred the good name of the Society before all the riches and wealth of the world; seeing God did commonly bestow better, and more durable riches vpon pious men, who made not so much ac∣count of their owne commodities; as of the common estimation of their Religion; then vpon those, who enioyed their owne rights and commodities, with the losse and dommage of their good Name. Wherefore in his letters which he wrote to those of the Society, he was alwaies wont to adde, that he had rather haue a litle fruite without offence, then a great deale with the offence of any. For that a little seed of soules sow∣en without offence, would like corne increase, and continue without weeds; whereas neuer so great a Crop, once ouer-growne with displeasures, as with weeds, consumeth and wasteth away to nothing. And all this he obserued in himselfe with far more care & diligence, then he commāded it to others, manifesting himselfe indeed better by his examples, then by his commands. CHAP. XI. His svveetnesse of Behauiour, and Con∣uersation, ioyned vvith Grauity. M OREOVER to procure the saluation of soules his sweetnes of Conuersation ac∣companyed with extraordinary Grauity was of special force; which two Vertues be∣ing different in shew, were yet so combined togeather in him, as neyther of them detracting from the others force, he was both very graue, and also incomparably sweet in his conuersation. For as we sayd before, there playnely appeared in Xauerius Countenance, Gesture, Speach, and Conuersation, a most incredible sweet∣nesse, which being engrafted in him by nature, and augmented by Grace, could easily draw, and conserue also, the affection of any one. He was wondrous cheerfull in his countenance, tractable in his discourse, and most sweet in his con∣uersation and behauiour. His lookes were so gracious and pleasant, that they gaue great comfort to the sick, and ioy to all those that were in health. And oftenty∣mes, many of the Society came to visit him, Xauerius lookes pleasant to the be holders. for no o∣ther cause, then that receiuing comfort from his hea∣uenly aspect, they might by the remembrance of his extraordinary alacrity, and admirable feruour, be the more enflamed towards the pursuite of a blessed life. For so often as they could get but an essay of this his alacrity, or euen but a breathing only of so couragious an hart, they neuer came away sad or heauy from him. Againe, the singular sweetnesse of his countenance and speach, drew vnto him as wel the bad as the good, great and little, and got such firme hold ouer the af∣fections of their harts, that he was able to drawe them which way he pleased: so as he neuer demaunded any thing of any one, how great, or hard soeuer, which he did not at last obteyne. His ordinary discourse also, he was wont to sea∣son with great dexterity, and to intermingle with wonderfull variety, that it might not cause any te∣diousnesse in the hearer. He was very skilfull both in Astrology and Philosophy, & therfore alwayes when he trauailed by the way, to relieue the wearisomnesse of the iorney, he would oftentimes bring in discourse of the motions of the celestiall Globes, & the Planets. Also the Eclipse of the Sunne and Moone, he would foretell long before it hapned. Againe, he would de∣clare the causes of those things which we behould to be admirable, both in the heauens, and the world; what the cause, or origen of Hayle, Frost, Snow, and Rayne was; whence clowdes, mystes, winds, and thunder proceeded; what that was which caused the swelling, and raging of the seas. Many other things also, he would adde of the same kind; which as they were very admirable, so were they delightfull to the hearers; and in the end of all, he would referre them to the honour, and feare of God. Of these things therfore, he discoursed so learnedly and pleasantly amongst the Iaponians, who are wholy ignorant of such matters, that they were wont vsual∣ly to say, that in Xauerius company one might trauaile all Iaponia ouer without being once a weary; and this delight of his discourse carryed his companinons a∣long in such sort, that he ordinarily wonne them both to himselfe, and to God. Yea this sweetnes of his Conuersation was tempered with so weighty a Gra∣uity, that in the height of his most pleasant discourses what he sayd, or did, breathed forth a most sweet o∣dour of sanctity. Wherof al men had now gotten such an opinion, that although he conuersed often, & very familiarly, euen with the most vitious, yet the same was neuer any staine to his reputation; since the con∣stant fame of his sanctity defended him, not only from euill tongues, but also from the least suspicion of e∣uill it self. Moreouer, Xauerius had this property, that his fa∣miliarity did not any whit diminish, but rather in∣crease a most reuerend & religious respect of all sorts of people towards him: in so much as one would haue said, that his sanctity, like a pretious stone, grew daily brighter and brighter, by continuall vse and exercise▪ Consaluus Fernandez a Maister of a shipp, and a man of good account, was very conuersant & familiar with Xauerius, in that he oftentymes went in his ship, and lodged also in his house at Goa; yet he bare such reue∣rence and respect vnto him, that whensoeuer he came vnto his house, he with his whole family, would go out to meete him, and casting themselues prostrate on the ground, did alwayes receiue him in that manner. And although Consaluus were oftentimes intreated by Francis, not to vse that respect vnto him, yet he would neuer refraine there from, such possession had the Reuerence of his holy person taken of his hart. Iames Perera also, who was so great and familiar with Xauerius as no man more, was wont to say, that he could neuer stād before him with his head couered although Xauerius himselfe intreated the same; pro∣testing, that whensoeuer he spake vnto him, he vsed to be taken with such reuerend and religious a respect towards him, that he seemed to behould God in his person. Yet as occasion required, Francis wanted not Seuerity also, the sting of Grauity, which we shall heere recount by an example, or two. A certayne de∣uout Matron of good esteeme, was wont alwayes to to confesse to Francis when he was at hand. This wo∣man (as herselfe afterward recounted to a Religious man) Xauerius sharply reprehended, because she had vpon occasion cast her eye vpon an handsome, proper man, and well attyred: Hast thou, quoth he, looked vpon a mā? Thou deseruest that God should not looke on thee. Which words so stroke her chast and pious heart, that she could neuer after throghout her whole life, endure to looke any man in the face. He was also, aboue all other things, a most seuere reuenger of obstinacy. In the Promontory of Comori∣num vnderstanding that a certaine Neophyte had bles∣sed an Idoll, he was so greatly moued with the indi∣gnity of such an abominatiō, that he presently caused the house to bet on fire, to the end the seuerity of the punishment might make others afrayd to commit the like offence. And when as, many persons of worth requested him to mitigate the penalty, he only per∣mitted, that the dwellers might carry out their house∣hold stuffe, but the house it selfe which was the recep∣tacle of that sacrilegious Monster, he would by all meanes haue consumed, euen to the ground. CHAP. XII. His Prudence, and the Precepts he gaue to the Rectour of the Colledge of Goa; and to Gaspar the Lovv-countryman. M OREOVER, Prudence, the Modera∣tresse of other Vertues, shined not a little in Xauerius, as wel in his dexterous gaining and conuerting of soules (which euident∣ly appeared throughout his whole lyfe) as in his pro∣pagating also of Religion, & gouernment of those of the Society committed to his charge. For he knowing well, that nothing so much hindred the Christiā faith, as the bad examples, and vices of euill Christians, he would not set vpon Ethnicks to instruct them in mat∣ters of fayth, vntill he had reclaymed the ancient Christians from their vicious and sinnefull life. And those Neophites also, which he had broght vnto Christ with infinite labour and patience, he first of all instru∣cted them himselfe with the greatest diligence that could be, before the committed them to others of the Society for their further education in vertue. And as or those of the Society, he neuer sent them vnto any lace where himself had not first bene, and laboured. Those also whome he sent, he armed with certayne wholesome and proper instructions agaynst inconue∣ iences that might happen, vntill they were well ac∣ uainted, and experienced in those thinges which mselfe had learned by long practise, and diuine in∣ inct. Now, concerning Francis his Prudence, being o lesse-profitable a Maistresse vnto others, then to ose of the Society, it shewed it selfe most of all in ose Precepts, and Instructions wherof I haue before poken; although I deeme it worth my labour to set owne a good part of thē againe, since they may be of s great force to teach vs knowledge and prudence, as hey were to make him admirable. Hauing therfore onstituted Fa. Paul Rectour of the Colledge of Goa, his departure he left him these admirable ensuing structions. First of all, I pray and beseech you, for the loue you eare to God, and for the obseruance you owe vnto ur holy Father Ignatius, that you will louingly and ourteously receiue, and treate the whole Society of ESVS, and al the Fathers, and Brothers therof, cō∣ming either out of Portugal, or already dispersed ouer ndia. I for my part haue indeed such an opinion of all hose of the Society, His o∣pinion of the vertue of the Soci∣ety. that (for so much as I can ghesse) do not thinke they haue need of a Rectour. Notwith∣standing that others may neither want a subiect of o∣bedience, and that all things may be kept in right & due order, I haue thought good, that there should be someone, to whome the rest, in my absence, may be obedient. Wherfore confiding in your Humility, Pru∣dence, and Wisedome, I haue iudged it expedient, that you should be made Superiour ouer all those of the Society in India, so as all of our Order in, & out of Goa shall obey you, vntill it be otherwise ordayned. Antony Gomez shall be President of the Colledge of Goa, and shall gather vp the rents, and disburse them vpon necessary occasions, as shall be thought fitting. In these things I haue giuen him ful power; wherfore you shall not therin interpose your authority. If you find him to do otherwise then well, you shall direct him by your counsayle, rather then by command. Againe, I earnestly pray and beseech you, for the obedience which you owe to Father Ignatius, that there may be nothing done, His care of con∣cord. which may at any time, sow discord betweene you & Antony Gomez, or affo∣ard subiect of talke, either to those of the house, or to others abroad. And on the other side, to indeauour all you can, that you may alwayes carry the businesse to∣geather betweene you, with all concord, both in will and actions. If at any time those of the Society in C ∣morinum, or others that labour in the vineyard of Christ, shall require of you any thing belonging to the saluation of soules, you shall with all speed, and li∣berally prouide them therof. And when you write to those poore wretches, who are so greatly oppressed take heed you write not any thing harshly which may offend them. Moreouer, to such as labour couragiously for God cause, you shall readily, and liberally administer such things as be necessary, but especially to those of Como∣rinum and Malaca, who carrying a most heauy crosse, beare the burden and heate of the day. You shall ther∣fore both carefully & speedily furnish them, not only with spiritual, but with corporall supplyes also requi∣site for their soules: and if any of them come vnto Goa to retire themselues, you shall receiue, and cherish thē as beseemeth both your selfe and them. And this I charge and command you, in Gods & Father Ignatius name. Moreouer, I beseech you, deere Brother, that you will dayly go on forward in the way of vertue, and become a patterne and example therein vnto all men as hitherto you haue bin. Write to me also often in∣to Iaponia, wherby I may know how all things goe with you, and with those of your Family, & especially how you and Antony Gomez, and the rest of the So∣ciety do loue & agree togeather; and of the number, quality, & sufficiency of those Fathers, both in natural, and supernaturall talents, who shall heereafter come vnto you out of Portugall. This you shall not fayle to do euery yeare twice, to wit, in the moneths of April and September. You shall likewise take care, that some others of the House also (to ease you of labour) do certify me by writing of such things, concerning the Fathers & Brothers throughout India, which you thinke I de∣sire to know. And if any thing require secrecy, you shall write it with your owne hand in a postscript. Lastly, I earnestly request of you, that you will make much of these precepts, and read them ouer euery weeke once, and withall being mindfull of me that you will both by your selfe continually pray to God for me, and incite others to do the like. Other like precepts he also gaue to F. Gaspar the Low-country man when he was to goe to Ormus, Precepts giuen to Gaspar. & to other Fathers who went to labour in India, as follow: Attend principally to your selfe, being very carefull both of Gods honour and your owne Saluation. For assuredly if you be vpheld with these two props, you will both affoard more help to others, & be also your selfe the better prepared for humble and religious ex∣ercyses. Care of the Cate¦techisme You shall therfore instruct the Portughese children, and bondslaues, and other ignorant persons in the Christian precepts; and this charge you shall not commit to any other, since it is a thing of so great importance, for the saluation of soules, and gaining of good will. You shall diligently visit the poore, and sicke in the hospitall, and by telling them that sick∣nes is most commonly a punishment of sinne, Workes of mercy you shal gently incite them to examine their conscience, and confesse their sinnes. Then, when you haue leasurely heard their confessions, and refreshed them with hea∣uenly food, it will be conuenient to commend them to the Prefect of the Hospitall, and to help them with such things, as they shall want. It is likewise fit, that you goe oftentimes vnto the Prisons, to visit the prisoners, and to exhort them to make a generall Confession of their life. For a∣mongst those kind of men you shall find many that neuer made a true Confession. You shall commend all to the Sodality of Mercy, that no iniury may be done to any one; & for such as be in extreme necessity, you shall also begge meanes to assist them, therby to re∣lieue them in their misery. You shall likewise prouide for the Sodality of Mercy, so farre as you shall be able. Wherfore when any money is to be restored, and is vncertaine to whome, I thinke absolutely that you had best giue it to the said Sodality of Mercy. For al∣though there want not poore, Almes ought to be distri∣buted to the poo∣re by ex∣terne per¦sons. for the relieuing of whose necessities those helps may well be imployed; notwithstanding the deceipt and cunning of beggars vseth oftentimes to cause some note of infamy in this businesse; by whose impostures others may sooner be deceiued, then those of the Sodality of Mercy, who by long experience, haue learned prudently to beware of such cosenage. Wherfore it is best to leaue that bu∣sinesse wholy to them of the Sodality, who may di∣stribute the Almes, according to the quantity thereof, amongst such as are knowen to be truly in want. This you ought to do, for many and weighty reasons. First, because if you distribute the money to the poore your selfe, many will certainly aske of you some reliefe, especially for their bodies, which they would assuredly neuer do, if they saw that you vsed only to help the necessities of the soule. Secondly to auoid the suspitions, & rumours of those that should giue you such money to be distributed amongst the poore. For (as men are apt to belieue the worst) it is to be feared, least that exacting of money may carry with it some suspition of auarice; as though you in∣tended to turne the money, begd vnder colour of re∣lieuing the poore, to your owne vse & benefit. Wher∣fore it is better to giue ouer that charge to others, of whome there can be no suspition. Yet if at any time occasion moueth you to the contrary, you may do as may be most for the glory of God, and the good of soules. Yow shall also so carry your selfe before those with whome you conuerse, With friends we must liue as if they were to be our enemies. although they be you friends, and familiar acquaintance, as if they were one day to be your enemies. This consideration will easily re∣straine your behauiour from growing dissolute throgh liberty, and keep you backe from giuing offence to a∣ny, through too much friendship and familiarity: and such kind of warinesse wil also make them ashamed to breake friendship with you without cause. This wa∣rinesse, I say, keepes not only others from being in∣solent with vs, but also maintayneth piety in our sel∣ues. For if you be present with your selfe, you will both enioy God the more, and haue the better know∣ledge of your self; wheras certainly the want of know∣ledge, and forgetfulnesse of ones selfe, is the mother of many Monsters of vices, which make vs loose our friends, and insteed thereof procure vs enemies; so as they who are not ignorant of our fashions, do a∣ryse with more bitternes and vehemency against vs. Towards the Bishops Vicar you shal alwayes car∣ry your selfe with extraordinary reuerence and obe∣dience. Reuerē∣ce to∣wards the Bi∣shops Vicar. Wherfore so soone as you come to any towne where he resideth, you shal presently go, & cast your selfe at his feete, and also kisse his hand, as the cu∣stome is. Then you shall aske of him leaue to preach, heare confessions, and to exercyse other offices of pie∣ty. And no offence whatsoeuer shal at any time with∣ raw you from him, but shall rather inflame you by ll kind of complying with him, to gaine him sweet∣ y vnto you, that being at last wrought by pious con∣siderations he may become better, & more plyable. You must a so seeke & maintaine friendship with other Priests, that they may also be the more efficaci∣ously drawne to the same wholsome considerations. Moreouer, to the Gouernours of Townes you shall be very obseruant, A man∣ner how to admo∣nish Prin¦ces. and seeke to gaine their good wils by all seruiceable and familiar endeauours, so farre as may be possible. Neither shall you incurre their dis∣pleasure, or hatred for any cause although it be iust. But if any one of them shall chance to commit any great offence; first hauing entred into some fit discour∣se, you shall in a friendly & sweet manner shew vnto him, how much you are grieued for the infamy, wher∣with his dignity and reputation is stained. Then with the like sweetnes and humility, you shall in such sort declare the rumours which be spread abroad of him, that of himselfe he may acknowledge, and amend his fault. And this must be done when there is hope, that your admonition will take good and prosperous ef∣fect. Otherwise it is better to let it all alone, then to labour in vaine, and to gaine nothing (as they say) but ill will for your paynes. Vpon Sundayes & Holydayes in the after-noone, ha ng called togeather the men & mayd seruants of the Portugheses, as also their free-men and children into the Church, with a little bell; besides the heades of the Christian fayth, you shal teach vnto them also a method how to pray, anh how to haue care of their soules. And to ignorant persons, the practise of this method shall be for some time inioyned them for their pennance after they haue made their Confession, that being by litle and litle exercised therein, they may at length get a wholsome custome therof. I know by ex∣perience that this hath bin the saluation of many. The same methode shall be written in a table, and set vp in the Church, that they, who will vse it, may write it out. Some tyme and labour must be also imployed in making peace betweene enemies, A man∣ner how to take away suites in law. & reconciling such as are at variance among themselues. In taking away also of controuersies and suites in law, you shall insist much vpon this point, that ordinarily there is more spent in the suite, then the thing about which they striue, is worth. And for that this practise will proue vngratefull and odious to Lawyers and Notaries, they are therefore specially to be gayned also, and by fit considerations brought to conforme themselues to iu∣stice & equity. For if we rightly consider the matter, we shall find them to be the chiefe authours, and a∣bettors of all Controuersies, and suites in law, as tur∣ning to their owne gayne. If you meete with any that be so intangled with fraudes, Away to conuert such as be very vicious. vnlawfull lusts, and hatreds, that they doe not only vse no meanes to free themselues of those vi∣ces, but reiect all necessary remedyes also: there must be all care taken both by humane and diuine meanes, that their soules, although they be already as it were past hope, may at last be cured. Wherfore vnlesse they e wholly senselesse, you are to propound vnto them he loue & reuerence which they owe to Christ their God & Sauiour: and to strike into them an horrour of Death & Hell that hangeth ouer their heads. If nei∣ther the loue of God, nor feare of Hell wil moue them hey must be terrified with those most bitter tormēts, which euen in this lyfe the wrath of God inflicteth v∣ on wicked men. Wherfore it wilbe then a fit time, to threaten against them, the grieuous & long sicknes of this life, ouerthrowes of temporall states & goods, the riuation and want of children, the reproachfull dis∣honesty of wyues, dangers both by sea and land, sud∣dayne and disastrous chances, and other such like mi∣series, wherewith God is wont to take reuenge of foule sinnes and enormityes, such especially as by long continuance of tyme haue taken deepe roote in man. For we dayly see that many are moued much more through the feare of such wordly miseries and incom∣modityes, From whence obstina∣cy pro∣ceedeth in foule and hay∣nous of∣fences. then by the terrour of euerlasting tormēts. The cause of which insensibility, or rather madnesse, is eyther the forgetfulnes of the diuine Maiesty, toge∣ther with the great neglect of their owne conscience; or the slendernes of supernaturall beliefe in such most lewd and wicked persons, who like sensuall beastes, measure out all things according to what they behold with their eyes, & tread vpon with their feete; who∣ly vnmyndfull of the ioyes of heauen, and of the last combat, whereon their euerlasting weale or woe de∣pendeth; that is, whether they shall be blessed, or mi∣serable for all eternity. Some also shall you find, who sticking fast in the sinke of sinne, will notwithstanding seeke to haue friendship & familiarity with you; not that they may be drawen out therof, but that they may so escape the reprehension which they deserue, and gaine a good opinion also from others by keeping company with you. Prea∣chers are to refuse presents. Wherefore I aduise you, to be present with your selfe: and if at any tyme such lyke persons inuite you eyther to their houses, or send you Presents, take heed your liberty be not so restrayned by their guifts, that you dare not reprehend them, euen sharply when they offend. Therefore if they inuite you to dinner, you shall not (indeed) refuse to go; but yet requite them agayne, by inuiting them likewise to the holy Sacrament of Confession. When in∣uitation to dinner is to be accepted of. And if you shall perceyue that you do no good at all with them, but wholy loose your labour, then you shall tell them playnely, that vnlesse they leaue such courses, you will from that tyme disclayme from hauing any friendship, or con∣uersation with them. Notwithstanding what I say of receiuing Presents from any one, What presents are to be receyued I do not meane small & seldome gifts, as fruite, and such like, which being sent backe, do of∣tentymes much offend those that send them: But I meane great & precions Presents, which may chance to take you, if you take them. If at any tyme there be a great quantity of victuals sent vnto you, it shall be distributed amongst the poore in the Hospitall of sicke, or in the prisons, and other places; that all men may see the greatest part, euen of such things, to be di∣uided amongst the needy, and that you keepe hardly any for your selfe. This Charity wil giue better exam∣ple of your abstinence, then if you should refuse to receiue such Presents, specially when they who send them, account it a dishonour to haue them sent backe againe. Now, The manner how eo correct. when you intend to correct any one for their ad demeanours you shal not do any thing therin vn∣ ill you haue throughly found out his most inward isposition. Wherfore I seriously aduise you, first to search out and examine whether he, by reason that he is intangled with some vice, or trouble of mind, o neglect the good of his soule. If you find him to e of a quiet disposition, and ready to receaue admo nition, then you may diligently aduise him of such hings, as you shall thinke good. If you perceiue him to be moued with anger, or any other trouble, you must then forbeare to admonish him, and endeauour gently to pacify his distempred mind by certaine in∣ward insinuations, & sweetnesse of speach. Then you shall bring him to haue a consideration and care of his aluation, trying him at the first with lighter admoni tions, and if they succeed well, then to set vpon him with sharper. And at last when you haue wholy wōne him vnto you, & that he commit himselfe intierly to your direction, you shall prescribe him certaine rules o obserue, A reme∣dy how to pa∣cify an∣ger & to ease trou¦ble of mind. and plainly, and openly declare vnto him ll such things as shall be necessary for the good of his soule. And the only remedy to ease his trouble of mind or qualify his anger, is, by speaking prudently vnto him, to extenuate & make lesse the cause of his griefe or anger: As if he be moued with passion, to impute the iniury rather to want of consideration, then to any malice, or ill will which the other had; or to tell him, that God permitteth it for the punishment of his former sinnes; or that perhaps himselfe had heereto∣fore cōmitted something against his Parents, knisfol∣kes, friends, or other innocent persons, for which his diuine Maiesty did now iustly, and duely punish him. These things, or such like, which are of force to extinguish passions of anger, must be inculcated vnto him. And this rule which I haue giuen against Anger, may be also applyed to other vnbridled motions of the mind. This likewise you shall vrge vnto him, that al∣though he then seemeth to haue some iust cause to be moued, yet if he will recollect himselfe a little, & by calling backe his thoughts to the truth it self, & more narrowly and attentiuely consider of the matter, he shall infallibly find, that, that which so much trou∣bleth him, is nothing at all. And so at last with a cheer∣full and ioyfull looke, you shal wipe away al his trou∣ble of mind, and in a friendly and careful manner ad∣uise him, what is needfull to do, according to the condition of the party, and the promptitude of hi will. Endea∣uour must be vsed that they who are instru∣cted by one must opē to him their rēp¦tations. You shall also endeauour what you can, to cause them whome you instruct in the way of vertue, to o∣pen vnto you all their temptations, and the thoughts which assault their mind. For this is an especiall help for those who are ignorant in this kind of combat or at leastwise not sufficiently experienced or practi∣sed therin, to arriue to the perfection of vertue. Bu if you carry your selfe with more Seuerity, then Benignity towards them (seeing that Seuerity often excludeth Confidence) they wil easily conceale from you how they are assaulted by the Deuill, Mildnes is neces∣sary in one that instruct∣eth o∣thers. thinking it easier to suffer the Deuils assaults, then their Instru∣ctors harshnesse: and so, being depriued of all ne∣cessary help, & exposed to the darts of their most cru∣ ll enemy, wil be so long assaulted, and oppressed, vn∣ ill at last being ouercome with vexations, they yield themselues as prisoners. If you shall perceyue any to be tempted, A way how to correct vices. eyther with pride, carnall concupiscence, or any other vice, your best course perhaps wilbe, by giuing them some time to deliberate, to wish them to bethinke them∣selues vpon some remedy against those vices. Which that it may succeed according to their desire, you shal first open them the way to inuent some such remedy; then you shall will them to consider seriously, what course themselues would take, to perswade sick per∣sons, prisoners, or others to auoid such like vices; and so the same medicine which they would giue to others they may apply to themselues. For if they be commu∣nicated to others, they will both profit them, and they will also of themselues be incited to those things, which they perswad to others. This rule may also serue for others, who by reason of some impediment, cannot be absolued. For it is good to demand of thē, that if they should go about to reclaime another from the same vice whereto themselues are subiect, what course they would in fine take? & so at last perswade them to make vse of that counsayle and remedy them∣selues, which they would giue vnto others vpon the like occasion. This also must be looked vnto, that in exercising those that be brought vp according to our Institu e, and in inioyning them imployments of vertue, th be a meane obserued, so as euery mans burden be ∣lotted him proportionably to his forces. For if they be greater then he can commodiously carry, A meane in the exercyse of vertue they wil not stirre vp vertue, but rather keep it downe in him. And so being discouraged & tyred out, he wil refuse to take the burden which is to be imposed vpon him, and perhaps shake of that also, which he hath already vndertaken. And for as much as the King of Portugall hath out of his free bounty giuen order, The King of Portu∣gall his liberali∣ty. that we shall be euery where prouided of all things necessary, I iudge it fit, that you make vse of his liberality, rather then of any other. For assuredly, he that receyueth thinges from another, looseth his owne freedome, especially seeing that bounty imposeth a necessity of being obsequious for the benefit receaued; and that liberty which is sold for a benefit, is so seruile, that although it be bold sometymes to aduenture vpon something, yet the effi∣cacy therof is of farre lesse weight, then it would be, if it had the full disposing of it selfe. To which you may also adde, that if he, who bestoweth any thing vpon you, commit a sin, you cannot reprehend him freely. For who will haue so bold a face, as to presu∣me to barke at him that feeds him? CHAP. XIII. Precepts giuen by Xauerius to Iohn Braui∣us, and others of the Society. A S soone as you rise out of your bed in the morning, Manner of medi∣tating. you shall obserue this rule: For halfe an houre at least, to meditate some∣thing of the life of Christ; and this order you shall keepe therin, to begin with his Natiuity, & then going on with your meditation, by little & little to runne through all the other noble passages of his life, vntill you come to his glorious Ascension into heauen. And for euery day, there shall be particular points assigned, in the very same manner, as is pres∣cribed in the little Booke of Spirituall Exercises: so that you may euery moneth run ouer the whole life of our Sauiour Christ in your Meditations. Moreouer, Vowes dayly to be rene∣wed. I would aduise you euery day when you haue ended your meditation, to renew your vowes of Pouerty, Chastity, & Obedience; then the which, for such persons as are consecrated to God, there is scarce any more safe defence against the assaults of our deadly enemy the Deuill. Wherfore you shall hould this in highest esteeme, dayly to arme your selfe with those wholsome weapons. And in the After∣noone, when you haue taken your corporal refection, you shall againe imploy almost as much more time in the repetition of your morning meditation, which you shall also in the like manner, conclude with the like renouation of your vowes, as before. Moreouer, A māner how to examine ones cō∣science. at night after supper, before you go to bed, you shal betake your selfe to the examen of your Conscience; so as taking an account of all that you haue thought, sayd, or done that day, you shall easily see, if there be any thing wherin you haue offended God, or your Neighbour: and this you shall performe in as exact a manner, as though you were presently to make your confession. Then you shal demand of God pardon for all your offence, purposing from your hart to amend your life. And last of al, hauing sayd the ac∣customed prayers of Pater Noster, and Aue Maria, you shall for a little while, thinke what course you may best take for the speedy amendment of those your de∣fects. Care of amend∣ment. The next day therfore in the morning whilst you arise, and apparell your selfe, you shall call to mind your late offences of the day before, and hauing hum∣bly implored the assistance of the diuine Maiesty, that you may not offend in any thing that day (and spe∣cially not to fall into those ordinary & vsuall faults) you shall beginne your meditation, in the manner we spake of before. And this you shall do euery day. But if throgh negligence you omit any of these said things, making a conscience therof, you shal acknow∣ledge your fault as the custome is, Victory ouer o∣nes selfe. and that openly before your companions, that you haue neglected those things which were prescribed you. You shall moreouer in all things, wherof you perceiue your inordinate desire, or corrupt nature to haue an horrour, Humili∣ty and obediēce necessa∣ris for those of the So∣ciety. couragiously ouercome your selfe, knowing that our chiefe care ought to be of Christiā humility. For without lowly submission of mind, & true Humility, you will not be able to profit either your selfe or others; nor will you be gratefull to God and his Saints, nor yet worthy to be long indured of the Society of Iesus, as being no way able to brooke haughty spirits, who commonly follow their owne wils, and iudgments. Wherfore you shall diligently vpon all occasions indeauour to obey your Superiour, and that without any excuse, or vnwillingnesse, no otherwise then if Father Ignatius himselfe should com∣mand you. Tempta∣tions are to be discoue∣red. To him you shall declare the temptations which the Deuill suggesteth vnto you, of what kind soeuer they be, that being armed by his aduise & assi∣stance, you may the more easily auoyd the assaults of that most cruell Tyrant. For humility in discouering the Aduersaryes temptations and assaults, obteyneth no lesse ayde & assistance, then fauour at Gods hands. Wherfore it doth not only defeate his most crafty plottes for the present, but also weakeneth his forces and indeauours for the time to come. For perceauing that his subtilties are once discouered, by little & little he looseth his hope of the victory, and is discouraged also from setting vpon vs. These admonitions he gaue to Brauius, remayning at Malaca; & these also which follow vnto others whē they went to Cocinum. Aboue all things (as much as shall lye in you) you shall gayne the loue of the Citty, but especially of Religious persons, & of those of the Sodality of the B. V. Mary. Let therefore both your words and deeds manifest that you desire nothing more then to deserue well of all, and to aduance both those of the Citty, and of the Sodality also, in prety. Courteousnesse in going to salute those of the Sodali∣ty, Courte∣ousnes in salu∣tations & visits. will easily gaine them to assist you in your difficul∣tyes. If you shall stand in need of any thing, for re∣liefe of the poore, you shall request it chiefly of them, but in such sort, that you teach the poore to acknow∣ledge them to be the authours of that bounty. This course also you shall take with the poore, that when they lay open vnto you their corporal necessities you shall in like sort lay open to them the necessity of their soules, What course is to be ta∣ken with the poore. which they themselues do not perhaps perce∣aue: and after you haue taken care of their soules, then you shall also, if you can, assist them in their corpo∣rall necessities. In your conuersation and discourse with others, you must take heed least a kind of too much grauity in you, yield suspicion of arrogancy, which looketh to be reuerenced: but rather carry your selues with a cheerfull countenance, and alwayes shew affability in your speach. Too much grauity is to be auoided. Your chiefe care shall be to behaue your selues humbly, and modestly in all things. Yow shall therefore beare great respect not only to the Pre∣lates of the Church, but to Priests also, and all others. It is also very necessary to make them partakers of such things, as shalbe by you laudably performed, to∣geather with the prayse therof, that they may become fauourers, and Patrons of those workes wherof they reape the fruite. In your Sermons also, you shall gently recall your your auditours from the errours, and vices wherein hey liue. Diuers wayes to deale with di∣uers per∣sons. But such as be hard-harted and obstinate, re now and then to be terrifyed with the seuerity and igour of the diuine iustice; as contrarywise, such as shew themselues tractable are to be comforted and a∣nimated by propounding to them the clemency and mercy of God. Moreouer such as are obstinate, and stick fast in the sincke of heynous sinnes, must be vr∣ged with threathes from heauen, yet in such sort, as they may not loose all hope in the diuine Mercy, but that their hartes may be sometymes cheered vp by re∣membrance thereof. By all meanes procure, that the good name of the Society may be spread abroad by you, farre and neere. For the which there is no vertue of more im∣portance, then true and sincere submission of mynd. Remember how those Enlargers of our Society in the very heate of many, and great vexations, exercised themselues very carefully in all kind of vertues; and so shall you be partakers of their merits and glory, if you imitate their industrious labours in aduauncing the Societies good estimation. You must also remem∣ber that to gayne authority with the people in sacred affayres, and such things as belong to the good of sou∣les, is the guift of God; Autho∣rity with the peo∣ple is a guift of God. which is bestowed gratis vpon pious and vertuous persons (but is ordinarily denied vnto the crafty and subtile, and to such as seeke after it by humane meanes) to this end without doubt, that peruerse men may not thinke contemptibly of diuine guifts; which they would doe, if they were dispensed equally, as well to the arrogant, as to the humble. You must therfore earnestly beseech of God, that he would be pleased in euery thing to declare, and lay open vnto you the impediments, which, through your imprudency, you cast in the way before the di∣uine i deauours, by reason wherof he doth not by you impart his guifts to the people; wherby you do, without doubt, deserue that he should not giue you that authority, and esteeme, which is necessary for such a businesse. This certainly must be taken heed of, with the greatest diligence that can be possible. Wherfore in your examen of conscience, you shall with a very inward care, In exa∣mine of our con¦science we must looke into our offices & charges. take an especiall account of your selues, whether you haue done any thing amisse, either in preaching, hearing confessions, or in your conuersation and discourse; and shall take ioy in amē∣ding those faults which you perceiue in your selues, & in purging your soules of all bad affections. For cer∣tainly the further you remoue your selues from vices, the neerer you approach vnto celestiall guifts. Do not therfore admire, much lesse imitate those who inuent new wayes to please the people, hunting therby after popular esteeme, Popular applause is by no meanes to be sought. and prayse. For such kind of persons attend rather to their owne, then to Gods glory, & are more sollicitous about their owne commodities, then of the saluation of soules. Wher∣fore their course is very vnstable, & subiect to ruine, which being puffed vp with a blind desire of glory, setteth it self forth with ostentation to the people, be∣ing in the meane while hatefull to God. You must al∣so by all meanes endeauour, to haue both a feeling in your meditations of those things, which I shal suggest vnto you, Things medita∣ted are to be put in execu∣tion. and also to put them carefully into execu∣tion. And if by diuine instinct, there happen to be a∣ny such feelings or motions in your soules, you shall for memory sake, set them downe in writing, & ex∣presse them afterwards in your actions: and thus by practising those things wheron you haue meditated, vertue (being as it were nourished with good feeding) will arise to a greater grouth. For it is wonderfull to thinke what difference is betweene that gust and fee∣ling those holy men had, who haue left vs their wry∣tings concerning this subiect, & that which we now haue, who only read, or heare their writings read. For those things which they meditated vpon, and concei∣ued in their mind, gaue them great incitements to vertue; wheras for the most part, they do not make in vs, any great impressions. Wherfore I do seriously aduise & exhort you, Things medita∣ted are to be loo¦ked ouer that euery one be carefull to keepe in writing, and dili∣gently to looke ouer those feelings, and motions of piety which he shall receiue from God. The which, that God may dayly more and more increase, you must endeauour to roote your selues euery day deeper and deper in humility. Fayth∣full ad∣moni∣tours are to be sought after. You shall also seeke out some faythfull friends and admonitours, who may tell you in a friendly, and free manner, if you fayle in any thing that is appointed you, that so you may by others come to the knowledge of your owne faults, & amend that which you your selues doe not see, because euery one is more quick-sighted ordinarily to behould ano∣thers imperfections, then their owne. These, and the like admonitions did Xauerius giue, partly to Superiours of the Society, and partly to o∣thers. But those are very singular which at his depar∣ture towards China he left vnto Gaspar his vicar. Which notwithstanding, as well as others (to auoyd the tec ∣ousnesse of repeating the same things) we do heere of purpose omit, reseruing them for another place. For seeing that the same precepts are accommodated for the instruction of diuers sorts of persons, we haue thought good to distribute them into certayne Chap∣ters, that euery one may benefit himselfe, by that which he shall perceyue to be fittest for him. CHAP. XIV. VVhat kind of Gouernours, and Superi∣ours he required in the Society. X AVERIVS required, that Superiours in the Society, Care of ones selfe. should be such, as himselfe was. He vsed therfore so say, that aboue all things, they ought first to haue a care to looke vnto themselues, before they tooke vpon them to help others. For that man could neither haue any care of another, who had none of himselfe; nor looke vnto other mens saluation, who was negligent of his owne. It is not for eue∣ry one to gouerne. Wherfore he said, that it was not for euery one to be a Superiour. For the person of a Gouernour could in no wise be vndertaken, and endured by the vulgar sort, and such as were imperfect, without infi∣nite danger to himselfe. Moreouer he seriously admonished those that were superiours that they should not suffer themselues to be intangled with other publicke affayres, Ciuill busines∣ses to be a voyded 2. Tim 2. especially such as belonged to the Common-wealth, deeming them a great distraction and hindrance to their pro∣per and domesticall charges. For no man, who is a souldiar of Christ vseth to intangle himselfe in secular businesse. Wherefore their chiefe care should be, to performe well and daily their owne office, and also to assist, & looke to those who were committed to their charge. Superi∣ours first care must be of their owne. Mash. 23. And when they had performed that with care & diligence, if they had any tyme to spare they might employ it vpon others: whereto he applyed that sen∣tence of our Sauiour Christ, These things you ought to doe, and not to omit those. This principall Precept ther∣fore he gaue to Gaspar his Vicar. Your first and chiefe care must be rather concer∣ning your selfe, then those who are vnder your char∣ge. For he that is bad to himselfe, to whome will he be good? Let your owne saluation, I say, Eccles. 14 and theirs who are of your house-hold be more deare vnto you, then o∣thers, because we must chiefly giue an account to God of our selues, and for those also that be committed to our charge. And they who omit their owne domesti∣call affayres, and busy themselues about others, do erre no lesse, then they who being vnmindfull both of God and themselues, seeke to please and content men. Wherfore you shall first take care of your owne Hou∣sehould, and afterwards of others, if you haue any leasure. As for your manner of helping them, the more generall it is, the more profitable it will be; such are the exercises of often preaching, explication of the Catechisme, and hearing Confessions. He would also haue Superiours to go before others, no lesse in humble submission of mind, Superi∣ors must excell in humility & other vertues. temperance, charity, and prudence, then in power and authority; & with a fatherly affection to beare as well with their subiects weakenesse and imbecility, as to ease them of vexations, & troubles. This likewise he much insi∣sted vpon, that they should alwayes desire to beloued rather then feared, and endeauour in all they could, to be as a louing Father vnto them all, by which mea∣nes it would easily come to passe, that themselues should be sure to imploy their admonitions with pro∣fit, for the reformation of bad habits, and the other could not choose but take all such things in good part also. Wherefore in their gouernement, they should vse rather lenity & gentlenes, then authority and com∣mand, lest they should feed their flocke as dominiering ouer the Clergy, Arrogāt persons are to be kept downe. which S. Peter forbiddeth. And this course they should hold, especially with the quiet & humble. Now for such as were turbulent, arrogant, and immoderate praysers of themselues, they ought to be sharpely reprehended for their abuses, and puni∣shed also if need were, that the rod of discipline might bring vnder, the haughtines of such dispositions. In which kind he gaue to Gaspar certayne precepts in these words. To the Fathers, and Brethren, who be commit∣ted to your charge, carry your selfe rather gently and with moderation, then seuerely and with too much grauity, vnlesse any one chance to abuse your beni∣gnity; for then to prouide for his good, you must take vpon you some seuerity; the which, if you perceyue ny one to be puffed vp with arrogancy and pride, will be to good purpose to beate downe, and abate his ll-distempered spirits. For as it is expedient to beare with those who fall, out of some inconsideration or forgetfulnesse; so lykewise it is necessary to represse and keepe those vnder, who through arrogancy be∣come insolent and contumacious. And by no meanes must you giue any one cause to thinke, that you being his Rectour, and ouercome by his insolency and stub∣bornes, do giue therby way vnto his abuses. For there can no greater mischiefe euer happen to stubborne natures, then if you wincke at them by treating them imorously & gently in their errours and obstinacies, seeing, the giuing way to such persons, causeth them to take more stomake, & putteth them oftentimes in hope to do what they list, without any to correct, or punish them. Neither would he haue the Rulers and Superiors of the Society to be ouer hasty, Choice is to be made of such as are to be admit∣ted into the So∣ciety. or too facile in recei∣uing any into their company without choice, but out of many to choose few, & those fit members, because there is farre greater strength in a choice band of men then in an infinite multitude of the vulgar sort. And such indeed, were wished to be admitted into the So∣ciety, who seeme to be borne, and framed as it were, for that course of life, and vpon whose vertue one might assuredly rely both at home, and abroad. But for such as should come vnto the Society inforced ra∣ther by some difficulty or necessity, then out of deuo∣tion, or desire to serue God; to such the Society should in no case giue way. And this opinion was so groun∣ded in Xauerius mynd, that he had rather haue ser∣uants, either hyred for wages, or procured by some ∣ther meanes, then to admit such into the Society, as were not fit, for the manage of domesticall affayres. Wherfore he gaue Gaspar this charge. Do not easily, and without choice receiue many into the Society, but a few, and such as may be fit. For both the nature of the Society requireth it, and a few extraordinary spirits are more profitable, then a thou∣sand of the vulgar sort. Such therefore as are weake, dull, and of no spirit you shall not admit, as very vnfit members for the Society, which requireth men that be industrious, generous, and indowed with extra∣ordinary vertue, and who performing great matters are contented with a little. And as for such to whome a pious and vertuous disposition had giuen a sufficiēt commendation, How the vertue of those that were to be admit¦ted was to be tryed. and were iudged fit men for the So∣ciety, those he would haue to be long, and well exer∣cysed and tryed, vntill their vertue were sufficiently made knowen, by many and great proofes. He com∣maunded also, that their Vertue should be tryed rather by ouercōming themselues, and suppressing the tur∣bulent motions and appetits of their mind, then by any shew of deuotion, by teares, sighes, or rigorous mortification of the body. Wherfore he gaue order so to mortify their members, A man∣mer of mortifi∣cation. which were vpon the earth, that the same might serue to cast off the old mā and put on the new. And therfore he prescribed this method, least by giuing way to new inuentions, the wonted nesse of the thing might displease the eyes minds of the behoulders. Concerning which mat∣ he giueth this command to Gaspar. Those whome you shall admit into the Society, I inke it better to exercyse them in the ouercomming their vnbridled passions and affections, then in cor∣ rall mortifications, and such like new inuentions. t if any exteriour mortification be applyed to re∣ raine the inward motions of the mind, let it be al∣ aies such, as may not cause laughter in the behol∣ ers, but be approued; As for example, continuall ruing of the sick in the Hospitals, begging of money other almes for the relieuing of poore prisoners, & he like. It much auaileth some also to Humility, to eclare publikely to their companions, the manner, unctions, and imployments of their former life be∣fore their entrance into the Society, and other such ike things which may help to humility. But in this kind, there is great respect of persons to be had, and much consideration also of what euery ones conditi∣on, and vertue can beare. For vnlesse this heed be ta∣ken, there may arise more harme then good therof. Xauerius iudged it likewise fit, that Nouices should be accustomed to declare themselues to their Instru∣ctors, and to lay open vnto them all their temptations inclinations, and passions, as likewise their feelings of deuotion, their diuine consolations, and volun∣tary pennances; that so they may infallibly defeat all the machinations of the enemy, who most of all as∣saulteth there, where his deceit is least feared, by ma∣nifesting the same to those who are experienced in such kind of matters: And if by chance they shall haue erred in any thing, All not to be ad∣mitted to holy Orders. they may thereby agayne b brought into the right way. Moreouer he required that Superiours should take great heed, that they did not inconsideratly admit all to receyue holy Orders, but such only of whose fidelity, and vertue they had had long triall, and whose prudence, & learning was at least ordinary. For Priests of the Society, to liue ac∣cording to their institute, cannot without great dan∣ger want these helpes. Whereupon he giueth Gaspa this admonition. You shall iudge none fit for Priesthood, vnlesse he haue the commendation of long, and throughly▪ tryed Vertue: because the Society requireth Priests of approued Vertue and learning, for the perfor∣mance of the functions of their Institute. This our experience hath taught vs to be true: for they that haue not byn such, we know to haue byn rather an hindrance, then an help vnto the Society. And before all others, he would haue those that be absent, labouring in our Lords vineyard far from the company of their Brethren, to be especially pro∣uided for of all commodities, because they (as he was wont to say) were workemen, who indeed did beare the burthen of the day, and the heate. For which cause he sayd, that both their corporall and spi∣rituall necessityes ought carefully to be considered & relieued. And that it was also good, to aske oftenty∣mes of such men of credit as came thence, how they behaued themselues, and oftentymes lykewise, to giue them comfort by letters; but neuer to write any ing sharpely vnto them, or of that nature which ight either cause them trouble, or put thē out of hope effecting what they haue vndertaken, for that they ommonly suffer vexations inough where they be; & herefore it was good to absteine from all seuerity, & ot to heape affliction vpon the afflicted. Moreouer e forbad they should be often changed (vnles neces∣ ity did perchance vrge vnto it) especially by such Su∣ eriours, as had not yet sufficient knowledge of the places, Frequēt changes to be a∣uoided. countryes, and imployments wherein they li∣ued. For there was danger least the changing of the labourer should bring some disturbance to their fruit∣full, and profitable workes. He would also, that the Rectours and Superiours should haue great care, Scandall by all meanes to be a∣uoided. Prou. 22. that the Societies good name might be spread abroad, and that all offence might be euery where auoyded, although it were with some detriment in their temporall meanes, for better indeed is a good name, then store of riches. Wherfore he seriously exhorted them, that attending more to the edification of Vertue, then of Colledges, they should cause their Houses to be built in such sort, The bui∣lding of howses. that they might not so much carry a glorious shew, as serue them for ne∣cessity, and commodity of habitation. If any thing belonging to their temporall meanes, should cause them much trouble, as the exacting of rents or money due vnto them, they should commit that businesse, being no lesse odious then necessary, to some hyred Attourney, rather then to one of their owne Com∣pany. Likewise, he most earnestly intreated the Su∣periours of the Society, to gaine the good will of the Superiours of all other Religious Orders & families, as also of Clergy men and Priests, Other Religi∣ous men to be woone. and to liue with thē in the greatest vnity and friendship that could be. To which end they should sometimes go to visite, and sa∣lute them, as well to gaine, as to conserue their good will, or other wayes to shew their vnion, and amity with them. CHAP. XV. VVhat kind of men Xauerius vvished, should be in the Society. X AVERIVS required, that those of the Society should be humble obedient mode∣rate, and conquerers of themselues in all things which are repugnant to our cor∣rupt nature. For without these vertues none of the Society could either be grateful & acceptable to God, profitable to himselfe and others, or euer liue with a quiet and contented mind in the Society. All therfore ought to exercyse themselues very diligently, and for a long space in the knowledge of themselues, that by plucking vp disordinace appetites, as weeds by the rootes, they might lay a deep foundation of true hu∣mility and solide vertue. For as he who in meditating vpon the most bitter death and torments of Christ, by feeling a pious enflamed griefe in himselfe, can easily enkindle in another the same sorrow of hart; so he that hath conquered and beaten downe the disor∣ nate motions of his owne mind, can without diffi∣ ulty, restraine, and bridle the same also in others. Moreouer he said, that none ought to esteeme much f himselfe because he had byn long of the Society. For the worth of those that be in the Society, was not o be measured by the length of the time, but by the greatnesse of their vertue. Seing that they ought ra∣ her to be ashamed, then to boast of themselues, who hauing bin so long in the schoole of Vertue, haue made so small progresse therin, 2. Tim. 3. Alwayes learning, and euer arriuing to the knowledge of truth. He likewise for∣bad them to make any account of the esteeme which other men had of thē, least perhaps a disguized fayre glosse of things might breed in them pride & haugh∣tinesse of mind, the most certaine and greatest plague, and poison which can befall the Society. But contra∣rywise he willed them to turne their consideration to the knowledge of their owne weakenesse, and es∣pecially to ponder oftentymes the difference between the iudgments of mens and the iudgment of God, and there indeed to lay the foundation of their Humility. For he that attentiuely considereth, what a different iudgement God, Who is the searcher of harts, frameth of men, from that which men themselues do, who behould only exteriour actions; will vndoubtedly de∣presse himselfe to the lowest ranke that may be in Gods sight, & repute all humane prayses (as ayming far amisse from the truth) for nothing els but crosses, Confi∣dence in God. and scornes of men. Yet we must not for all this, through consideration of our owne weakenesse, loose courage in the war-fare and seruice of Christ: but we are rather to endeauour, as well by distrusting our owne forces, as by reposing our confidence in the di∣uine assistance, to take hart in all thinges, since we must imploy our selues in great matters for his sake, who alwaies is ready to put therto his helping hand. The way also to arriue to the perfection of ver∣tue which he shewed them, was this. That euery one should in the first place haue a care of himselfe, and twice euery day (if it could be) or at least once, to exa∣mine his owne conscience: vsing the greatest endea∣uour he could by all meanes to amend those defects which he perceyued in himselfe; and that he should moreouer make the greatest esteeme that might be of his daily meditation, and neuer suffer any day to passe ouer, without affoarding his soule some such kind of repast. And this meditation he would haue to be al∣wayes made with serious ponderation vpon the lyfe, passion & death of Christ our Sauiour, as being a su∣biect of perfect vertue, and peculiarly proper to the Society of IESVS. He counsayled them lykewise after meditation ended, agaynst the incursions and assaults of the diuell, euery day to renew their vowes, & to declare al the temptations of the enemy of what sort soeuer, together with their bad inclinatiōs, as wel as their desires of vertue, to their Ghostly Fathers, Su∣periours, and other spirituall Directours, who were able both to counsayle and assist them. For such is the force of this humble submission, that it doth not only obteyne more light and help from God in the ty∣me of combat, but frustrateth also the most impor∣tune Aduersary, who perceyuing his plot to be disco∣uered, his assaults defeated, and his designes broken off, becometh assuredly more remisse in his batteries, and at last flyeth away with losse of the victory, ouer whome he had before triumphed. He also required blind, and simple Obedience in those of the Society, that leauing their owne iudgmēt and opinion, they should in all things (excepting such as were contrary to the diuine Law) obey with∣out any reply, or demurring vpon the matter. That they should not demaund of their Superiours such things as they desired after an odious, and importu∣ne manner, or by any inuention wrest their commād to their owne wils; but that euery one should freely direct his iudgment and opinion to that of his Superi∣our, and leaue himself wholy therin to the iudgment of those that represent the person of God; houlding this for certaine, that in all things which they com∣mand, God will so inspire them, as may be most for his diuine honour, and their profit. For, quoth he, they that should do otherwise, would oftentimes fall into great troubles, vexations, and miseries. Which inconueniences, those who are perniciously blinded with errour might thinke proceeded from the Crosse of our Lord, or from the Obedience; when as indeed they were the fruites which sprung from their owne peruerse iudgement, and selfe will. Wherefore they should alwaies make choyce rather to obey their com∣mand; especially seeing that it is alwayes secure to be ruled by another, but often daungerous to gouerne ones selfe. For although one may sometymes rule himselfe well, yet there be very few, as being decey∣ued with a certayne blind loue of themselues, who do not most commonly the contrary. He further more commanded them, that if at any time they were imployed in humble & abiect offices, they should carefully, Humble offices are to be im∣braced. and seriously performe them, and draw out of them the greatest profit of humility which the could, fully persuading themselues, that they could not at that tyme do any thing more gra∣tefull, and acceptable to God, in whose name they were commanded: remembring also themselues, that smaller exercises were entrances alwayes vnto grea∣ter; & that he who was not quicke in the lowest, vsed not to be excellent in the highest: whereas contrary∣wise he that went with alacrity about little thinges, would easily find courage in matters of more impor∣tance. For as our Sauiour Christ sayth; Lu 16. He that is faythfull in the least, is so also in the greatest. Moreouer he prudently admonished them, not to forsake, or neglect the place or station which was assigned them by their Superior, although they might be in hope to do more good somewhere else. For it was infallibly a deceipt of the infernall enemy to sug∣gest vayne flourishes of the future and vncertayne fruit that might be reaped in other places, thereby to draw vs from the present, & assured good which we do in the place assigned vs; that so, whilest we are di∣stracted with wauering cares, he may make a moc∣king stocke of vs, and send vs away without any fruit at all: Seeing, that as long as you remayne in this vn∣certainty what to resolue vpon, you are not well able eyther to labour in another place where you are not, or in that where you are, because you mynd is some∣where else. For confirmation of this wholesome pre∣cept he vseth that common sentence of the Apostle: Gal. 10. While we haue tyme, let vs do good. Wherefore he wished such to be confident, that if what they desired was pleasing to God, he would vndoubtedly moue their Superiour to send them thither where it should be most for his diuine honour. He was also wont to say, that they were indeed grieuously mistaken, who desired to be honoured for the vertue, and notable deeds of their predecessours, from whome they themselues were become degene∣rate; imitating therein those, who adorning themsel∣ues with other folkes apparell, sought to be honoured and esteemed for great persons. It were indeed better for them by following their ancestours foote-steps, to emulate their vertue and worth, then degenerating from them, to boast of others goods, as if they were their owne. Moreouer, We must not go to help o∣thers be∣fore our tyme. this aduise of his was not more prudēt then profitable. He charged those that were still in trayning vp at home in regular discipline, that they should not be ouer desirous to go into the field to fight before their tyme, nor trust too much vpon their owne forces, although they should see thēselues sub¦iect to no great fault: For certayne it is, that young beginners are many tymes guarded, not so much by their owne vertue, as by the place where they liue, which easily defendeth them from the assaults of their enemies, and allurements to sinne. Wherefore in the time of their Nouice-ship they should carefully arme themselues with solid vertue, that afterwards they might liue safely in the midst of their enemies darts. CHAP. XVI. VVhat manner of Preachers he required in the Society. H E oftentimes admonished the Preachers of the Society, Prea∣chers ought to preach not thē∣selues but Christ. not to preach themselues, but Christ crucified; that is to say, that they should, not by handling subtile que∣stions and arguments farre from the reach, & vnder∣standing of the vulgar sort, make a flourish of their owne learning and wit, therby to get esteeme, and applause of the people: but their Sermons should for the most part be of moral matters, such as were plaine and suitable to the capacity of their vulgar audience; which being modestly, religiously, and prudently ex∣plicated, would certainly preuaile not a little towards the curing of mens soules. This therfore should be their ayme, by laying before their Auditours, the foulenesse of sinne, and the greatnesse of the offence against the diuine Maiesty, togeather with the wrath which from heauen is threatned against such enormi∣ties, to draw them to sorrow of hart, and repentance. But it will not be a misse to heare what instructions he himselfe giueth vnto Gaspar. The chiefest office of a Preacher, sayth he, is to cause in his auditour great feeling of his sinnes, and to terrify him from future crimes and enormities, by laying before him the infallible, and neuer ending tormēts of the damned. To discouer also the deceiptes and treacheries of Sathan; and in fine to treate of such things, as may be rather vnderstood, then admired, e∣uen by the vulgar sort. Wherfore in his Sermons he was not to cite too many testimonies out of holy scripture, nor to handle such things as were doubtful, & in controuersy among Doctours; Testimo∣nies out of scrip¦ture ought not to be too much v∣sed. but such as were certayne, plaine, and fit to draw men to the amend∣ment of their liues, and good deportement in their behauiour. He should therfore much insist vpon re∣prehending of vices, making grieuous complaints for the iniuries which are done to our Sauiour Christ, ea∣gerly threatning reuenge from heauen, and euerla∣sting torments, which are prepared in hell for lewd, and wicked persons, togeather with the imminent terrours of death, which often times seizeth vpon mē when they least expect it. Certaine points also were to be propounded by way of colloquy either of a penitent sinner with God, or of God all-enraged with a sinnefull man. But all meanes must be vsed, that by the feruour of their spe¦ach, the auditours may at last open the eyes of their harts, to behould the wounds of their soules, & cure them by meanes of the Sacraments. And thus his Ser∣mons will in the end proue profitable, and fruitfull; notwithstanding he is to take great heed, that he do not let fall any inconsiderate words, which may re∣prehend, or touch any one in particuler either present or absent, especially if they be Prelates or Magistrates. For if such persons shall chance to offend, it will be better and more secure to admonish ech of thempri∣uately, and discreetly at home in his owne house, or in confession. For to reprehend them publickly is no way conuenient. so apt are men, when they are tould of their faults, to be rather exasperated therat, then to amend the same; especially Gouernours and Magi∣strates, whose authority certainly seemeth much im∣peached, when they are reprehended before their owne subiects; because great Honours cause ordina∣rily great spirits, which may not easily be reprehen∣ded. If any such person be admonished in priuate, A man∣ner how admo∣nish gre∣at men. this course shall be taken, to do the same more earnestly, or gently according as you are acquainted with him; for that which is accounted freedome amongst fami∣liar friends, may seeme oftentymes too much bold∣nesse with strangers: & the rigour also of the repre∣hension it selfe, must be tempered with cheerfullnesse of countenance, and mildnesse of speach. Wherefore let al sterne looks & harshnesse of words be layd aside, & let there be intermingled imbracements suitable to that purpose (if the state of the person will allow it) with frequent signes of humility, that being woone therby, he may with a more contented mynd receaue that soueraigne antidote of your admonition. For if the reprehension, which of it selfe is allwayes bitter inough, should be presented vnto such men in a harsh or crabbed manner, persons of great spirits being not able to brooke the affront, will certaynely contemne and reiect your wholsome admonishment; & moreo∣uer will cast of all respect vnto vs, and vpon the sud∣dayne become our enemies, who before were friends. And these things are to be vnderstood of principall persons, and such as are placed in gouernement, and authority. Moreouer, A prea∣chers pruden∣ce to in∣quire out the vices and be∣hauiour of the people. he required often and frequent sermōs, supposing that out of that common fountayne, there might flow many and particular benefits. Wherefore he would not haue a Sermon omitted without good cause, nor preachers to be busied in other affayres. Concerning which subiect, as also about the diligent endeauours of a Preacher, he giueth to F. Gaspar this diuine instruction. You shall, sayth he, neuer prefer a priuate good, before a common. Wherefore prea∣ching must not be omitted for the hearing of Confes∣sions, nor the instruction of Children or ignorant people be put of for priuate exercises of charity. If you come into a Towne which you do not know, your chiefe care shall be, to inquire of some persons of e∣steeme and credit, about the vices vnto which the in∣habitants are addicted, and what vniust contracts be among them. Agaynst which your sermons shall in∣deed be carryed on with a certayne seruour, that such vices, and corruptions may, by reprehending after∣wards more sharpely in Confession, be wholy taken away. For the chiefe meanes to help soules is to know the disposition and behauiour of the people in gene∣rall, and the diseases (as much as may be) of euery one in particular, to wit, who disagree amongst them∣selues who beare emnity to one another, what de∣ceipts, what iniustice in matters of equity, what per∣fidiousnesse of witnesses, what corruption of Iudges and iudgements there be among them. These thinges therefore must be inquired after, of prudent and expe∣rienced persons, and all carefull consideration be vsed to find out, what course ought best to be taken for the curing thereof. You shall moreouer by all meanes possible, draw your penitēts to lay open their whole soule vnto you, for you will find no other way better, wherby to help those with whome you conuerse, in matters con∣cerning their saluation, then if you can throughly sound out their inclinations and conditions, and all such things as hinder them in the way of vertue. This indeed ought to be their chiefe study, who imploy themselues for the gaining of soules. This in fine, is the true reading in liuing bookes, which will teach you, what you cannot find in dead papers. For the things which are deliuered in writing vse not alwayes to be so good for practise, as those which are taught in liuing bookes, who are the persons with whome you be conuersant in the same affayres. These bookes assuredly will easily teach vs a prudent method, both how to conuerse warily amongst men, and to preach also with profit vnto the people. Notwithstanding I speake not these things in such sort, as that I would not haue the worthy monuments of holy and learned men to be read, but to giue you this rule; That you should gather doctrine frō thence to confirme therby such cures of vices, which you haue drawen out of those liuing bookes; for so much as both the examples and sentences of holy men, as also the testimonies of sacred Writ, are of great force to giue credit to any thing you teach. Moreouer, Cheer∣fulnes of counte∣nance. in your conuersation and discourse, there must rather appeare a cherfulnesse & sweetnesse of countenance, then sadnesse and seuerity. For if you carry your selfe with heauinesse, & too much grauity many will be te ryfied with your lookes, and will as∣suredly auoid your company: and what then is to be expected of such, but that they become a prey ready for the wolfe to deuoure, seing the Pastour hath frigh∣ted them away. They be certainly the cords of Adam, wherwith men must be drawne, whome gentlenesse allureth, and seuerity driueth away. Wherfore it is best to endeauour to carry your selfe mild and affable to all. Let your reprehensions in any case be gentle, & mollified with the spirit of lenity: and let there be ve∣ry great heed taken, least any harshnesse in your beha∣uiour make your conuersation troublesome, and odi∣ous to others. Againe, he gaue this instruction to Preachers, that they should both thinke humbly of themselues, and also carry themselues so in the Pulpit, that their very countenance and speech might easily shew their hu∣mility of mind. Whatsoeuer good they sayd, or did, they should attribute it to God the Author of al good∣nesse, & acknowledging only to be their owne what∣soeuer should be ill, or done amisse. In so much, sayd he, as they ought sometimes to examine their owne Sermons, and if they found to haue committed any errour in their preaching, & hindred either the glory of God, or the profit of the people, they might hum∣bly aske God pardon for the same. For that a princi∣pall profit which may be drawen out of holy sermons consisteth in the amendment of such faults. In which kind there is extant a notable admonition of Xaueri to Gaspar his Vicar, who was an excellent Preacher. The principall thing, sayth he, as well in other things, as in the office of preaching, is to referre to God, whatsoeuer good ariseth therof. For it is vn∣doubtedly he who both giueth to the people a feeling of deuotion to heare the word of God, and to you to preach it. Remember therfore, that you haue not receiued that very guift, so much through any merit of your owne, as by the prayers of the Society, which often most instantly beseecheth the diuine Maiesty to bestow his guiftes vpon those that be members ther∣of: bearing also in memory, that whatsoeuer you shall vtter in your Sermon which is good or pious, is not your owne, but Gods who speaketh in you. Exercise therfore that diuine talent with all care & diligence whereof you are one day to render an account. Attri∣bute nothing to your selfe but only defects, slouthful∣nesse, pride, and ingratitude both to God, to the peo∣ple, and to the Society, who haue by their prayers obteined that guift of God for you. Wherfore you shall humbly againe, and againe, desire of God, that he will cleerly manifest vnto you, wherin you haue hindred his diuine grace, as that he hath not effected those things which he would, whilst your vnworthi∣nesse was an obstacle to greater matters. And lastly you shall from your hart cast your selfe prostrate be∣fore God, the examiner of harts and reines, and ear∣nestly beseech him, that you may not in your sermōs or discourses giue offence to any one. This consideration is the nurse of true and perfect humility. The grounds of humi∣lity: For the knowledge of ones selfe, that is to say, a perfect vnderstanding of ones owne weakenesse considered, breedeth, nourisheth, & increaseth Chri∣stian humility and vertue. I would haue you by all meanes to remember this, and deeply to ponder the same, That there be many Preachers now tormented in hell, who were more copious, and eloquent then you are, and haue also conuerted more from a lewed and wicked to an honest and veruous lyfe: and who (which is euen a prodigious thing) hauing byn the cause of many others saluation, haue notwithstāding most miserably perished themselues. And why so? Vn∣doubtedly for this reason principally, because becom∣ming insolent through pride & arrogācy they did not referre the diuine guifts which God had bestowed v∣pon them vnto him, but attributed them vnto thēsel∣ues. So as hunting greedily after popular applause, & puffed vp with a vaine opinion of thēselues, they were by an insatiable desire of pride & glory, eleuated to a most dangerous precipice, frō whence they fell down headlong to their euerlasting destruction Let euery one therfore call his wits togeather, and looke wel to himselfe. For if we will atrentiuely diue into the truth of this doctrine, we shall easily see, that we haue no∣thing at all in our selues wherin to glory, vnlesse we do perchance desire to be honored for our imbecillity, imperfections, for such be the flowers, or rather weeds indeed, which our garden affoardeth, and are truly & properly our owne. For if in our good workes there be any fault or blemish, it cōmeth from our selues, but all the worth proceedeth from God, who sometimes euen from our weakenes produceth good effects, ma∣king vse of poore and abiect men for the performance of glorious designes; as well to declare his owne infi∣nite power and goodnes, as also to humiliate and re∣presse our arrogancy of spirit. Take heed therfore that you do not contemne your companions and brethren as though your burden, or labour were more then theirs: But rather perswade your selfe, that by their deuout prayers, the diuine Goodnes is moued to af∣foard you greater forces, for the due performance of your charge, so as you owe much more to them, then they to you. This consideration assuredly, will not only represse all haughtinesse of mind in you, so that you shall not despise any one how humble or abiect soeuer; but will also stirre vp such flames of charity in your hart, that you will beare a fatherly affection vnto all. Moreouer, he seriously aduised such as were prea∣chers, to procure vnto themselues certayne trusty friends, eyther of the same place where they liued, or otherwise, that were prudent and vertuous persons, who might freely admonish them of what was amisse in their sermons, that so they might more easily come to know the same, and amend it. That they should also giue themselues to prayer, and meditation of such things which they were to propound vnto the people in their sermons; and endeauour by all meanes if it were possible, to get a tast themselues first, by some inward feeling, of the force of those thinges which they intended to speake of. For there is great diffe∣rence betweene him who with feruour of spirit thun∣dereth out those things which he hath before medita∣ted vpon, and him that barely, and coldly produceth that which he hath learned by hart. He would more∣ouer haue them to confirme their words by deeds, and alwayes to second their Sermons with the exercises of charity and mercy. Wherefore they should be care∣full to serue the sicke in the Hospitals, visit restrayned persons in prison, prouide for the necessity of such as were in want, & diligētly employ themselues in other offices of Christian charity & humility. For certainly such offices were much holpen by sermons, & sermōs agayne by such offices. They should also sometymes condescend to Pastours & Vicars, when they intreated them to preach to the people in their Churches. Fur∣thermore what kind of people soeuer they should vn∣dertake to instruct in their Sermōs, they should beare a speciall loue vnto them, & very carfully looke to the spirituall good, and commodity of their Auditours. He charged them likewise, Conten∣tions with o∣ther Pre¦achers to be a∣uoided. by all meanes to auoid contentions & strife with other Preachers, especially with the Bishops Vicars, although there might hap∣pen many, great, and iust causes of the same. For by such falling out there commonly aryseth not only of∣fence to God and the people, but also great distur∣bance to the contenders themselues, and hindrance to the diuine seruice. For indeed the good name and re∣putation of the Society ought not to depend vpon cō∣tending about their dignity, but vpon labouring for the augmentation of the diuine glory. Wherefore our contention with others must not be with detraction and pride, but with gentlenesse and humble submis∣sion, bending all our forces to beware that our emu∣lation about dignityes, make vs not odious, and hatefull to others If perchance, there should aryse a∣ny controuersy which could find no end, the matter must rather be handled by priuate disputation before Ecclesiasticall Prelates, then publikely, with scandal to the people. Concerning which subiect he gaue to Gaspar his Vicar, this no lesse profitable, then prudent instruction. With all Religious persons, and Priests your strife shall be in courtesy, & humility. If any offence chan∣ce to arise, you shall by your humility appease their anger, whether it be iust or no, yea although you may seeme vnto your selfe to be innocent. And you shall require no greater reuenge, Away to reuenge an iniu∣ry. then to suppresse the iniu∣ry with silence, where right can haue no place. But if any of them should any time swarue from their du∣ty, you shall be hartily sory for him, who vnlesse he amend himselfe, shall sooner or later pay for it deerer then one can easily imagine. Wherefore taking com∣passion of the poore mans case, you shall continually pray to God for him. Nor shall you make only a con∣science of reuenging your self either by deed or word, but also to permit the least anger or disquiet of mynd remayne with you. For both anger and reuenge are alike to be auoyded, seeing they do both spring from the same toote. God certaynly bestoweth many, and great fauours vpon those who do for Christ his sake patiently suffer the troubles which happen vnto thē: and seuerely reuengeth also, though sometymes it be long first, the iniury which thereby is done vnto him, and brandeth commonly at last the aduersaryes ende auours, with the marke they deserue. But God will by no meanes take reuenge on you, if you go about, eyther by deed, word, or thought to be reuenged on your selfe. If there should (which God forbid) any dissensi on arise betweene you and other Religious men, Away to compose discords you shall looke carefully that it be suppressed, and take heed that you do not by any signes of auersion giue notice therof, either to the Gouernour, or others of the Citty. For it is not to be thought how greatly wordly persons are scandalized, when they see reli∣gious men, and such are consecrated to the diuine ser∣uice to be at discord amongst themselues. Wherfore if any controuersy chance to aryse among you, you shall both take the Bishop for arbitratour, who by his authority may compose the mater without offence to any; and you shall also request the Bishop in my name that if at any time the enemy shal ow debate between brethren he as a father will make peace amongst you; and as the author of concord take away whatsoeuer difference may be betweene you, that the matter may not come to the Magistrates, or publicke Tribunall. Remember likewise, that if the other part shall at any time speake ill of you, you are not to defend your sel∣ues by speaking ill of them againe; but restraining both your speech and anger, you shall (as I sayd) haue recourse vnto the Bishop, who by comparing the mat∣ter with equity, may take away all matter of conten∣tion. And since you know, that the dignity and esti∣mation of the Society consisteth not in the opinion of men, but in the grace and protection of the diuine Maiesty, you shall haue a very speciall care, not so to defend the Honour of the Society, as thereby to in∣curre the offence both of God and men. Lastly, he aduised such as were Preachers, that if any, especially men of note, who were plunged in publick enormities, did desire their company and fa∣miliarity, in such sort as notwithstanding they would not aryse out of that sinke of sinne; they should de∣clare vnto them, that such friendship and familiarity had only this end, to reclaime those that were our friends and familiar acquaintance, to seeke the good & saluation of their owne soules; seeing we vse only to conuerse with them so farre forth, as our conuer∣sation may help them towards their saluation. He further more added, that Preachers, wheresoeuer they had that which was necessary to maintaine life, ought not to take any thing of others, because guiftes did hinder their freedome: but if any small things were sent vnto them, as signes of good will, rather then as guiftes, they were not to be refused, least they might seeme to reiect the friendship of those who sent them. CHAP. XVII. VVhat manner of Confessours Xauerius required in the Society. M OREOVER he seriously exhorted such s were Ghostly Fathers, A Gho∣stly Fa∣ther must haue mildnes in hea∣ring Cō∣fessions. that in hearing Confessions (hauing first an inflamed de∣sire of curing soules) they should midly & gently receiue such as came vnto them, wherby the lenity of such spirituall Phisitians might draw them without delay to discouer all the soares of their con∣science. Wherefore they should not (especially at the begining of Confession) make any shew of grauity, or seuerity, but rather of sweetnesse and mildnesse. To which effect he gaue to F. Gaspar at this setting forth towards Ormus, this instruction. You must take very great heed, least in hearing of Confessiōs, feare may be an obstacle of freedom to men in disclosing their sins, if you hearken vnto them with a seuere eare: but must rather seeke with sweet∣nesse, to adde courage to the fearefull, by extolling the diuine clemency, & by compassionating of them, vntill they haue freely vngorged themselues of all the poyson of their sinnes. And in this kind there must be great warinesse vsed. For there want not some, who through shamefastnesse commit greater offences by concealing their sinnes, then they had before to con∣fesse, turning therby the wholesome remedy of Con∣fession to their owne destruction. Wherefore against such pestilent bashfulnesse, all meanes & endeauours possible must be vsed. And to get out their sinnes from such persons, there is no better way, then to shew them, that we haue heard farre more grieuous, and fowle sinnes of others, and withall somewhat to exte∣nuate by certaine fit words, those very sins which they shall with feare and much ado confesse, that so taking hart they may more confidently lay open all the other offences of their lyfe. And to get them confesse free∣ly, this may be as the last remedy (although it must be seldome, and warily vsed) to open vnto them in a generall manner, the offences of your owne former lyfe. For how good a meanes this is, tyme and expe∣rience will teach you. This course he prescribed against such as were fearefull and bashfull; How great sinners are to be vsed. and that other against such as were inthralled in crimes, and abominations of long continuance. And vntill the penitent had so declared all his sinnes, whilst perhaps he standeth wauering be∣twixt hope and feare, they should encourage him, by putting him in mind of the diuine clemency & mercy, and namely they should produce some for an example who hauing byn notorious for their abominable wic∣kednesse, were afterwards receyued into Gods fa∣uor, of which company he should also make one, if he would but confesse his sinnes with the lyke sincerity and sorrow of hart. At last, when the Confessour had throughly examined all the soares, and wounds of the penitents conscience, then he should liuely present be∣fore him the heynouslesse and foulenesse thereof, and by terrifying his staggering spirit, with the indigna∣tion of God hanging ouer his head, & the punishments which miraculously haue byn inflicted vpon great sinners, draw him to a detestation, and sorrow for his sins; differring also his absolution, if it were thought conuenient, vntill another tyme. But now, How to moue ob¦stinate persons. to such as were obstinate, & hard-harted he would haue to be propounded not only the euerla∣sting torments of the damned in hell, but also the pu∣nishments which haue bin inflicted vpon the like offē∣ders in this life, and especially vpon such, and such as themselues had knowne, who had receyued grie∣uous and bitter torments for their sinnes and wicked∣nesse, to the end they might be a warning vnto others lyke vnto themselues. For he sayd, that he had learned by experience, that such kind of persons are sooner mooued by the present detriment which they maysuf∣fer, eyther in their body or goods, then by the future torments of their soules, which seeme to be absent, & a farre off. If there should at any tyme come to Confession, rich and wealthy merchants, Magistrates, or Gouer∣nours of a loose lyfe, he iudged it fitting before all other things, seriously to admonish them, that making diligent inquiry into their former lyfe for the space of two or three dayes, they should (if they distrusted their memory) note down their sins in writing, & humbly craue of God with great feeling, sorrow and cont ∣tion for the same. Then, at the beginning of their Cō∣fession they were to aske of them an account of such offices and charges whereof they had the care; of the affayres wherein they were imployed, how diligent∣ly they did, or had carryed themselues therein. For by these interrogations they might more easily find, whe∣ther there were any thing to be restored, then if they were demaunded in generall, whether they ought to make restitution to any one? because to such interro∣gations, they vse cōmonly to giue a negatiue answere, either out of auarice, or else through ignorance of the thing. Now when they haue heard their Confessions, they must apply certaine admonitions, and remedies for the cure of their soules; nor must they be absolued presently after their confession, but rather when they haue restored those things they ought. Wherfore of such persons he giueth F. Gaspar this instruction. They shal not presently be absolued as soone as they haue made their Confession, but two or three dayes shall be giuen them to prepare their hart by certayne meditations, that in the meane time they may wash away the spots of their sinnes by teares and voluntary pennance. If they owe any thing to any one, let thē make restitution; if they haue any grudge against any, let them put it away, and be made friends with their enemies; let them also be freed from libidinous custo∣mes, and all other vices wherwith they were intan∣gled. These things ought rather to go before absolu∣tion, then to follow it. For such kind of men when they are at confession, promise that they will do all things; but after absolution is giuen them, as care∣lesse of their promise, they do nothing. Wherefore all diligence is to be vsed, to cause them to performe before they be absolued what they ought to do after. Moreouer, concerning the meanes how to con∣firme such as are staggering in their fayth, these docu∣ments he gaue to the same Gaspar. You shall fynd some also (and I would to God they were not many) who are very weake concerning their beliefe of the Sacra∣ments, especially that of the Holy Eucharist, ey∣ther because they haue now byn depriued of the fruit thereof, or by reason of the great conuersation which they haue with the Ethnickes, or else because the im∣pure life of some Priests maketh the vulgar and igno∣rant sort not to esteeme so highly of this Sacrament. With these therefore you shall deale in this manner: First you shall get out of them their suspicions and doubtes, then you shall confirme them in their fayth, by instructing them so, that they may belieue for cer∣tayne that the true body of Christ is conteyned in that mystery. Neyther is there any more present remedy for the curing of this malady, then a pious and dili∣gent frequenting of the sacred Eucharist it selfe. But now because for the most part, Familia∣rity with women is dange∣rous. in conuersing with women there is more danger then profit, he se∣riously aduised such as were Ghostly Fathers, that in hearing their confessions, in discoursing, and con∣uersing with them, and in reconciling them to their husbands, they should be very wary, and attentiue to auoyd not only all offence and sinne, but also the sus∣picions & rumours of the people. Concerning which he left to F. Gaspar his Vicar very notable and whole∣some instructions, which I thought good to insert in this place. You shall not (sayth he) speake with women of what condition soeuer, vnlesse it be by day-light, and in publicke; that is, in the Church. And you shall neuer go home vnto them, vnlesse it be vpon some vr∣gent occasion, as to heare the confession of one that is sicke. And then also you shall take great care, that her husband, or some other kinsman, or at least some honest neighbour be by. If you haue occasion to spea∣ke with some Virgin or widdow, you shall go to their house accompanyed by men of approued integrity of lyfe, in whose company there may be, not only no scandall, but also no suspicion. Yet these visits of wo∣men shall be both very seldome, and also not at all but vpon necessary occasions. For it is a ticklish piece of businesse, where smal profit is made with a great deale of perill. And forasmuch as women (for such is the inconstancy, and leuity of their disposition) do for the most part, cause to their ghostly Fathers a great deale of trouble, this warinesse is principally to be held with them. You shall with more diligence labour about the instruction of Christian men, then of their wyues. For seeing that men are more constant by na∣ture, and the ordering of the house dependeth vpon them, it is certaynly better, & more profitable to im∣ploy ones labour vpon thē. For as the wiseman truely sayth: Such as the Gouernour of the Citty is, such also are they that dwell in it: Eccles. 10. and withall many scandalls and speaches are auoyded, which vse to arise vpon famili∣arity with women. If there happen any debate betwixt man and wife, to take away al controuersy, & to appease their mind, you shall first of all procure, that ech of them, dispo∣sed therun to by fit meditations, do make a good con∣fession of their former life; and as you shall see it fit∣ting, you may differ to absolue them for a while, that they may come againe better prepared for the amend¦ment of their liues, and establishing of concord be∣twixt themselues. If the women tell you, that if they might absteine from the company of their husbands, they should be much more diligent in the seruice of God, do not by any meanes belieue them. For besides, that such feminine feruour groweth easily cold, it can hardly euer be vndertakē without grieuous offence to their husbands. Take heed how you lay the fault vpō the husband in the presence of his wife, The busbāds part must ra∣ther be takē thē the wiues although he be certainly in the fault; but suppressing the matter with silence for the present, you shall afterward be∣tween him & you alone draw him to purify his whole life by Confession. And when he is at Confession, then you shall reprehend him in the most modest mā∣ner that you can, and aduise him to looke carefully to the peace of his howse. But by all meanes you must haue a care of this (being a businesse very apt to breed suspitions) that you neuer by taking the wiues part, seeme to take against her husband. Wherfore he must first by little and little, in a friendly manner be admo∣nished, to acknowledge his owne fault, and at last you shal gently and louingly giue him absolution. For the Indians affections are moued by loue, but violen∣ce ouerthroweth them. You shall therfore (as I sayd a little before) take heed of accusing the husband in the hearing of his wife. For as the nature of women is to be a little im∣pudent & malepart, they will easily cast their husbāds in the teeth with their faults, especially if they be iud∣ged guilty by Priests themselues. Wherfore it is better by dissembling the matter, to lay before the wiues, the respect which they owe vnto their husbands, and to shew them also, that they, for the contempt which they haue oftentimes had of their husbands, haue de∣serued indeed to be seuerely chastised. If therfore there happen to them any trouble from their husbāds, they ought to beare it humbly and patiently, and to be o∣bedient vnto them. Do not easily giue credit to either of them when they complayne of one another, (for oftentimes they are both deceiued themselues, and de∣ceiue others also) but you shall with the greatest indif∣ferency that may be, heare them both, & not condēne eyther of them before you haue examined the matter. This I say, that you may the better, and more easily make accord between them, and auoyd suspicion your selfe. But if at any time you cannot make any reconci∣liatiō between them, you shall refer the whole busines to the Bishop, or the Vicar General, but in such sort, as not to wrong either of the partyes that are at varian∣ce, which you cannot but do, if you seeme to fauour one more then another. You must vndoubtedly vse great prudence to giue no offence at all in this bad world. And the euents of things, which are carryed heere, must be alwaies forecast; for our aduersary the Diuell doth not cease, but roameth about seeking whome to deuoure. And it argueth great want of prudence, not to foresee the inconueniences that may arise of actions which be vndertaken with neuer so good intention. Moreouer he would not haue Ghostly Fathers to take mony vnder pretence either of restitution, or almes, but according to the intention of the giuer, procure it to be laid out in pious vses, or els giuen to the Sodality of Mercy: for so that Sodality might the better prouide for the necessity of the poore, and they also for the conseruation of the Societies repu∣tation. If any come to confession not so much to cure their soules, as to seeke some reliefe for their bodyes, such would he haue to be admonished of the vse of that holy Sacrament, shewing them that the sufferances of the soule, are more intollerable then those of the body: and at last (if it be iudged expe∣dient) to commend them to the Sodality of Mercy. In like manner, he aduised such as heard cōfessions not to make too much hast with their penitents, but to vse all diligence about them, and that they should rather desire to heare a few cōfessions well made, then many hastily posted ouer. For how could they els ca∣refully apply remedies to their soares, vnlesse they cu∣red them by leasure? for there is no doubt but one con∣fession well made, is better then many passed sleightly ouer, especially seing Cōfession prepareth the way to the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. Lastly he adui∣sed them, that they should take some tyme to looke into the Confessions which they had heard, and at∣tentiuely consider whether they had done any thing amisse therin, & to satisfy for the same in their owne Confession, and after to amend the fault; seing such diligence is a great help for the well discharging of a Ghostly Fathers duty. CHAP. XVIII. VVhat kind of persons Xauerius requi∣red for the instruction of soules. X AVERIVS required, that those of the Society who were to labour in the con∣uersion of Ethnickes, and instruction of Neophites, should be not only of the most choyce that could be gotten, but such also as were most addicted therunto; so that they should preferre nothing, how specious soeuer, before so noble an im∣ployment, since there was nothing more gratefull to God, or beneficiall to mankind. Neither did he so greatly exhort vnto this enterprize only, but layd himselfe also for foundation therof, expressing more in deeds, then he willed in words. For as we haue be∣fore declared, he neuer made more account of any thing then of the conuersion & instruction of Ethnic∣kes. Insomuch, as those of the Society who came vnto him out of India or Portugall, he so called them to be his compartners in this diuine function, that where he found any of most emineut talents, he would com∣mit this cha ge vnto thē as a reward of their labours; following therein the example of the Apostles, Who when they heard, Act. 18. that Samaria had receyued the word of God, sent vnto them Peter and Iohn, who were the chiefe of the Apostles. Wherefore he held it fit, that such as were chosen to this Apostolicall function, should be men extraordinary, and of tryed fidelity, vertue, cō∣stancy, and sanctity of lyfe. But because such imploi∣ment required such men, as also for that he had found by experience, that such charges were exposed to most grieuous temptations of the Diuell, vexations, and miseries, therfore in these labourers of our Lords vineyard he required prudence and sanctity, rather then knowledge and learning; well knowing that Vertue was absolutely necessary for the ouercōming of so many and great difficulties, and that Sanctity was of more importance then learning, for the con∣uersion of Ethnicks. But where vertue and learning were beautifully combined togeather, such, he said, were indeed singular, and perfect preachers of the Ghospell, and specially fit for Iaponia, and other such places, where the Barbarians, being a sharpe-witted people, do by their subtile interrogations make sound tryall of the Christian Religion. He required moreouer, in all such as laboured a∣mongst Ethnickes, a propension, and desire to learne their strange language, since without that knowledge there could be small profit made in gayning the Bar∣barians to the Christian faith, or in the instructing of new Christians. For which cause the Apostles, before they began to teach the Gentils, were miracu∣lously endowed with the guift of all tongues. And his chiefe desire was, that all should be inflamed with ardent zeale of sauing soules, so as neuer to omit any occasiō in that kind, but presently to lay hold therof, and follow it close. He likewise charged them to insist thoroughly vpon the saluation and instruction of the Neophytes, to teach Children their Catechisme, and aboue all things to baptize children and infants, so as none, if it were possible, might euer dye without Bap∣tisme, the only safeguard of that tender age. He also exhorted them, that by gayning the affection of the Neophytes, they might be loued & respected by them euen as their parents. For loue naturally taketh all things in good part; and to one that loueth nothing is hard. Furthermore in the instructing of new Christiās they should shew no lesse fortitude then perseuerance as well by enduring their vices, as bearing with their weakenesse; and as good husbandmen expect with our Sauiour, the haruest of the seed they had sowen, & the fruites of their labours though it were long first, knowing, Psal. 125. that they who sow in teares, shall reape in ioy. And if they found the Christians at first not to be such as they desired, they should carry themselues towards them as good parents do towards vntoward children, putting their confidence in God, who in due tyme bringeth forth such fruit in men, as is to be hoped for & wished. Wherfore they should attend vnto them di∣ligently, since God our common Parent, although we infinitely offend him, doth not cease to bestow his be∣nefits vpon vs. Yet would he not haue too much time spent with the ancient Christias, least the new should be defrauded. But if in ciuility their conuersation could not be auoided, they should at least wayes bring in discourses of heauenly matters, and of things per∣taining to the good of their soules, that so they being plyed continually with such pious admonitions, they might either grow better; or else being wearyed out therewith, might suffer vs to busy our selues with hel∣ping the Neophytes. He likewise esteemed more of a little fruit with approbation of the people, then of a great deale with offence, though neuer so small of any, because a little fruit reaped with example of vertue, was both of lōg continuance, and alwayes receiued new increase; wheras oftentymes a great deale, with offence vnto the people, did by little and little dry vp, and wither away. Hetherfore charged them to behaue thēselues mildly & humbly towards all, hauing (as the Apostle sayth) peace with all men, and by all meanes to auoid contentions, especially with Religious men & Priests, and to be mindfull alwayes of Gentlenesse and Affa∣bility, that so they might gaine all to Christ. He vsed also to say, that what good soeuer was not gained by vertue, could not any way be gotten, but by vertue. Wherfore they should take great heed, that they did not, according to the practise of the world, seeke (or seeme to seeke) after dignityes and honours; neither by words or deeds endeauour to get the fauour rather of men, then of God, since the high authority, which alwayes accompanieth Vertue was a guift not of men but of God. And it often cōmeth to passe, that whilst by humane fauour (neglecting the diuine) men seeke to purchase authority, and euen sweat agayne to get it, they by the great prouidence of God, wholy loose it; to this end no doubt, that they may not haue so base an esteeme of things diuine. For they who in pro∣curing the same haue more regard to humane fauour then diuine do manifestly shew, they do not respect the diuine honour, so much as their owne; and that such sacrilegious ambitions wil turne at last vnto their owne confusion and destruction. Euery one therfore ought first to haue a speciall care of his owne soule & then to help other mens. For he that neglecteth his owne, will hardly haue a care of anothers saluation: neither can he well be mindfull of another, who is forgetfull of himselfe. Wheras contrariwyse, he that hath care of his owne good, will also haue a care of his neighbours. Wherfore no day should passe without meditation of diuine matters and perfect examination of their conscience, obseruing wherin they had fay∣led in the diuine seruice, or in their owne duety; and withall consider with themselues, how many things God, through their default, had ceased rather effect, then what he had performed by them: since the one was an incitement to humility and perfect vertue, the other to pride and folly, challenging thereby Gods workes vnto our selues; then the which a more deadly plague may not be found among religious persons. Now, for asmuch as he esteemed the education of children to be a mayne & principall mayster-piece, he ordayned, that they should deliuer the Christian do∣ctrine to whole troupes of children togeather, neuer omitting so fruitful an employment, nor committing it to others. They should neuer exasperare or prouoke any child to anger, Ephes. 6. but forbeare threates (as they A∣postle aduiseth) to the end that so tender an age might with the more alacrity imbrace their wholesome in∣structions. Towards magistrates, and Ecclesiasticall Prelates they should carry themselues with all mode∣ration and humility, and vpon no occasion whatsoe∣uer maintayne iarres or quarrels agaynst them, all∣though they should by neuer so great iniuries be pro∣uoked. For Magistrates are sooner woone by others suffering, then by withstāding their authority. Wher∣fore they should communicate vnto them, as to the Patrons of their endeauours and labours, part of their fruit, and gayne, attributing vnto them (next after God) all the good they had receyued: so as by this meanes they who labored in the Vineyard of our Lord should haue more helpers and defenders of their la∣bours, or at east, fewer aduersaries. He lykewise ad∣uised them to employ themselues no lesse frequently, then willingly in the exercise of charity & humility, by helping the sicke of the Hospital, and prisoners the Goales, both with charitable attendance, as also with almes which they should gather for them; but so, as their help might profit them both corporally and spiritually. For by such exercyses of Charity we shall haue our owne soules inflamed with diuine loue, and others also wilbe stirred vp to the lyke deeds, and the seruants of God get credit, and authority towards the aduancement of the Christian cause. But especially, they should neuer make account of ill rumours made agaynst them without cause, which do often ouer∣throw, and weaken the endeauours of those that be fearefull. Concerning this, there is extant as nota∣ble instruction, which he gaue to Fa. Gaspar, in these words. If, when at any time you go about a good worke, ill disposed persons giue out slaunderous reports a∣gainst you, you shall not be moued therewith; but be sure that none perceiue you are by such mens words, hindred from the seruice of God. For they who are a∣frayd of false rumors, in such a case, are more truly Souldiars of the world, then of Christ. Lastly, I would haue you greatly to esteeme of this; That remem∣bring yourself to be a member of the Society of IESVS, you would in all your words and actions, carry your selfe worthy of such an Head and Body. By which admonitions it might eas appeare, how diligently and seriously Xauerius both by examples and precepts trayned vp those of the Society to the highest perfe∣ction of prudence and sanctity; as also how conforma∣ble Ignatius and he, were in all their iudgments and o∣pinions, notwithstanding that at the very same time they were almost infinitely distant the one from the other, Ignatius being superiour of the Society in Italy, & he in India. But without doubt, one & the same spi∣rit dictated the same things vnto them both, fashio∣ning the Society in ech place, to a certaine forme of discipline, and inspiring them both with diuine wisedome alike. Xauerius prudence was not more seene, in giuing his instructions, then in his gouernement. For wher∣soeuer he resided, he would alwayes be certified by the locall superiours of the Society how all things passed, prouiding remedies for all difficulties, no otherwise then if himselfe had bin present. For at his departure into Iaponia he gaue order, that they should at certaine times write vnto him, & acquaint him what number there were of the Society, as also with their qualities, & tallents both of vertue, learning, & arts, yea with their inclinatiōs also, & to what they were most addi∣cted, as well by nature as by disposition; what zeale of soules appeared in ech of them, what fruit euery one reaped, with what griefes or afflictions ech one was oppressed, tryed, and afflicted. And lastly so great was his care euen in the smallest thinges, that he would be certified of the meanest houshould seruant, as also what debts were owing, and the like: and so accor∣dingly he disposed of ech person, and thing in particu∣lar by letters, as was requisite. And not contenting himself with hauing giuē order what was to be done, he charged also the Superiours, to signify vnto him with all speed, whether euery one had carefully per∣formed his commands or no, to the end that his com∣mand to them might set an edge vpon their cares, for the better discharging of their office. Moreouer, although in his trauailes throughout the vtmost Easterne parts, he bent all his forces for the conuersion of those barbarous Nations, notwith∣standing in his returne back, through almost infinite tracts of the Ocean, he at times visited those of the Society which were committed to his trust, deuiding his care according to his double charge, that he might so assist strangers, as not to be wanting to his owne. Certainly, by his singular industry and vertue, he so contriued all things, that if you consider, how much he aduaunced the Christian Religion, he may seeme to haue had no time to think of the Society: & againe you turne your consideration to the care which he had of the Society, you will thinke, he neither did, nor could possibly haue had tyme to performe, any thing els. FINIS. Gentle Reader, THE faults which haue escaped in prin∣ting (by reason of imploying strangers heerin, not skillfull of our Language) I hope are not very many, nor yet such, as may not easily be corrected, by thy iudicious Reading