


THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reuerend F. HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS Of the Societie of IESVS.

THE PREFACE.
HAVING now a long time donne my endeuour to vnfold from the beginning to our age, the History of the house of Loreto, which many haue rather begu^ne then finished, and most earnestly desired: I pray God as the worke hath beene difficult and painfull, so it may be profitable. For almost all the monuments of this History, which are to be found of
Loreto, Recanati, Rome, or els-where, haue beene perused with great labour and diligence; out of which I haue gathered, and so digested, whatsoeuer seemed to appertaine to this matter, that they might make one reasonable volume. And the solicitude of the successe, made the care of this present worke the greater. For no small, nor few thinges to be spoken of, did occurre vnto me, as I was about to enter into it, to disanimate and auert my mind, from that which I purposed. And first truely the very beginnings of this sacred Chappell are so admirable and so vnusuall, that they may seeme almost incredible, if the iudgements of Almighty God were to be weighed by humane reason. Then the indiligence of our forefathers in committing such things to writing, hath diminished a good parte of this History. Besides, it seemed a spice of arrogancie, to hope for better eue^t in a thing which many writers of no small accompt had assaied with no good successe. And last of all my owne disabilitie began to accuse me; lest I might be thought to haue vndertaken the burde^ of so weighty a worke, with greater confidence then iudgement; being specially to rehearse those thinges, which because they seeme in a sort incredible, by discoursing might be made lesse then they be indeed. VVherupon it was to be feared, that I might rather withdraw, then adde any thing to the worthy fame of this most Sacred Church, and with my lost labour might purchase nothing els, but the reprehension of the wise. But when I had recollected my
selfe, my mind was animated, and difficulties ceased. For although the thing be admirable, and neuer heard of before: yet now it is knowne to be so certaine, and manifest, as to controue^se or doubt therof, were wickednes. For being receiued of our forefathers, as it were, from hand to hand, with great fidelitie; euen so did they deliuer it to posteritie. VVhich is not grou^ded on the monuments of the Sclauonians, and of Recanati onely, but also on the authority of Historiographers, and of the Roman Bishops. Also the constant consent of so many Ages, and the concourse of all nations, hath confirmed the auncient reporte hereof. Besides, the incredible multitude, as well of Vowes, as the aboundance of Donaries, make the religion of the place most illustrious. And finally the old Miracles of this most Sacred House, do not more beautifie the same; then the new ones daily do: that none may doubt of a thing so witnessed and knowne, vnlesse he will either doubt of the power and prouidence of God, or take away from mankind humane fidelitie. And truely if we shew, that the beginings of this most Sacred Church, ennobled with the birth of the B. Virgin, and with the Conception of God, are far more maiesticall then others, all nations must allow that speciall grace, with no lesse willingnes, then they approoue the speciall helpe therof. And albeit the indiligence of our fore fathers, hath bereaued vs of the fulnes of many thinges; yet it hath not depriued vs of the substance of the chiefest matter, who not regarding small things, shewed
them selues diligent in greater. Therfore if this my simple present, shall be acceptable to the B. Virgin, (as I hope it will) truely I mistrust not, but that the rest will be facill and expedite vnto me. For when MARY assisteth, nothing can succeed amisse. But if peraduenture this my labour be not answerable, either to the greatnes of the thing, almost incredible, or els to the expectation of the learned; truely it shall be my contentment, to haue donne my vttermost endeuour, to perpetuate the memory of so famous a miracle, being the glory of the B. Virgin mother of God, the protection of mankind, and euen the inflamed desire of all godly people. And vnlesse the affection of this present worke deceiue me, there is scarce any History of this kind, more famous for miracles, richer for examples, more frequent for practice, or pleasanter for profit. For heere may you behold the diuers and manifold protectio^s of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Here her present helpe in all manner of dangers: here most of her miracles and wonders, laid before you in a worthy monument: fro^ whence you may intreate helpe for your selfe, for your familie and Cittie; for the diuersitie of times as need shall require. And to me truely Italy seemeth to haue a great pledge of Gods beneuolence, to the which, euen fro^ Galiley it selfe, was sent so rare and so great a gi^t; that in time of aduersuie she may hope, that she shall neuer wa^t her patronage, whose natiue House she enioyeth as a suertie and baile from God himselfe. Moreouer Almightie God hath inspired into
the hartes of mortall men, such deuotion towards the place, that whosoeuer come to the house of Loreto seeme not so much to come to the house of the Virgin, as to the B. Virgin herselfe. For heere in very deed, both Almightie God and his B. mother, declare their presence, after a certaine marueilous manner: Hence is stroken that diuine feare into the hartes of all, at their very entra^ce into this most Sacred House: Hence commeth that desire to them that are to depart from it, to reuisit it againe: Hence that notable mutation of desperate and notorious wicked mindes to the contrarie. VVhich continuall miracles of the House of Loreto, are so euident, that albeit others were wanting, as they abound, yet these alone might make sufficient proofe to any creature, of the presence of Almightie God in so much that there is none (though desperat and wicked) but if he visit the house of Loreto may not easily perceiue Almightie God to be present with his B. Mother, in his Mothers litle House. This is speciall and proper to the Church of Loreto, to haue her religion and sanctitie to florish euery day more and more, which may easily appeare in comparison of other famous Churches, either of our B. Lady or els of other Saints. For when their celebritie and reuerence hath florished for a certaine time, we know that it hath diminished by litle and litle: but by the space of so many ages, we euidently see, that because the maiestie of this Church, is grounded on most firme foundations, it doth daily become more glorious and
more holy. VVherfore Almightie God, and his B. Mother assisting vs, of whom this whole worke doth intreate, and on whose helpe we most relie; we will now beginne the History it selfe, which truely through their gracious fauour, will not be so painfull I hope vnto the writer, as profitable vnto the reader. And albeit the beginning of the House of Loreto, be scarce deriued aboue three hundred yeares; yet necessarily must it be deduced higher, that the whole discourse may more purely flow, from the head and fountaine it selfe.



THE NATIVE HOVSE of our B. LADY is reuerenced with great honour in Galiley, whiles the Christian faith remaineth in Palestine. CHAP. I.
THE natiue house of the B. Virgin, in time past was in Galiley, a Prouince of Syria, where in the towne of Nazareth, our B. Lady herself was borne and brought vp; where she conceiued our eternall God, by foretelling of the Angell: And where the footstepes of God and his F. mother, soueraigne to mankind, were first imprinted. The sanctitie of which place, was neither vnknowne, nor at any time neglected of godly people. For first of all it is wel knowne, that our B. Lady hath alwayes beene
of great name and veneration among Christians; wherof the Apostles the^selues were the authours,The Apostles consecrate the h use of our B. Lady. who rightly consecrated the B. Virgins house, either to preserue the memorie therof to posteritie, or els to increase the Christia^ religion therby. From which time the Apostles themselues reuerenced it with exceeding honour, and also co^manded that others should worship it with like deuotion. And the Apostles authoritie preuailed with posteritie. For all succeeding ages haue co^tendingly reuere^ced the birthplace of the heauenly Queene, and the stepps of Gods Conception, with such deuotion and honour, as it deserued. Therfore about 300. yeares after Christes Natiuitie (Christian affaires beginning then to flourish, with long peace renewing all thinges, vnder the protection of Constantine the Great) S. Helene the Empresse adorned this little House of the Blessed Virgin with a goodly Church. For pilgrimaging into Palestine (as Nicephorus deliuereth) and with sacred buildings adorning the places, which were sanctified with diuine mysteries,S. Helen doth adorne it vvith a Church. lib. 8. ca. 30 She came to Nazareth, and finding out the House of the Angelicall Salutatio^, built there a sumptuous Church. Fro^ which time, those holy places began to be reuerenced more then before, not only by
the Asians and Africans, but of the Europians also; and the natiue House of our B. Lady, glorious for the heauenly Embassage and Conception of the diuine issue, was more earnestly reuere^ced of godly people. Proofe is that S. Hierome, a pillar of the Roman Church,S. Hierom and S Paula do visit it. and B. Paula a woman of the chiefest nobilitie of Rome, visiting that holy Land, went as S. Hierome termeth it, to Nazareth the nourcerie of our Lord. And this deuotion continued many ages;Epist. 27 ad Eusto. for about the 700. yeare of our Redemption, when Hierusalem was taken by the Saracens by force of armes, the sacred places of Syria,Guil. Tyr. lib. 1 bell. Sac. and the Church, wherin was the House, in which the Angell saluted our B. Lady, was visited of the Europian pilgrimes. Author hereof is Venerable Bede, soone after that age: for the State of Hierusalem,De loc. Sanc. and of the Christians in Palestine, was not then so bad vnder the Saracens, as afterward it was vnder the Turkes; who conquering Syria and Hierusalem about the yeare of our Redemptio^,Guil. Tyr. lib. 1 one thousand and fiftie, began to dishonour the Christian name many reprochefull wayes. The same wherof incensed Pope Vrbane the second,Idem lib. ^ by a new Breue to proclaime sacred warre. In which by the forces of the Europians, but specially of the French nobilitie,
vnder the conduct of Godfrey Duke of Loraine,Paul Aemil. lib. 4. Hierusale^ is recouered. Hierusalem, and Palestine were recouered, about the yeare one thousand one hu^dred. Wherby as long as the Kingdome of Hierusalem stood, the religion of those holy places did chiefly flourish, among which the natiue House of the B. Virgin, obtained not the meanest place. For which cause Tancred a Norman by birth (whose worthy vertue was very famous in the sacred war) and being President of Galiley adorned the Church of Nazareth with many notable giftes, which afterward, not so much the wealth,The Church of Nazareth is made the Metropolitan as the sanctitie of the place, made the Metropolitan or principall Church, as witnesseth VVilliam Archbishoppe of Tyrus, who liued here those times. Likewise Iames Victriacus Patriarch of Hierusalem, who liued shortly after,Guil. Tyr. lib. 9 doth also deliuer, that he often went to Nazareth for deuotion sake, and sundry times celebrated diuine seruice in the House, where our B. Lady was saluted by the Angell, the very Anniuersarie day of the Annunciation it selfe. About which time began the two most notable Orders of sacred souldiers,Guil. Tyr. lib. 12. and 13. Paul. Aemil. lib. 5. to wit, the Templaries, and S. Iohns, both chiefly ordained to entertaine and defend the Pilgrims, that visited those holy places. The fame wherof preuailed so
much, that the natiue house of our B. Lady of Nazareth was reuerenced of the Transalpines, and them that dwelt beyond the seas, as well as the Sepulcher at Hierusalem, and at Bethleem the birth-place of our Lord. But this quietnes continued not long: For Saladine King of Aegypt ouerco^ming and taking in battell, Balduine the fift, (then King of Hierusalem) forthwith waged warre on euery side, and brought Hierusalem,Paul. Aemil. lib. 4. and other Citties and townes ther-about into his Dominion, about 90. yeares after the Christians had recouered them. Wherupon Conrade the Emperour, Philip of France the second, and Richard King of England,Paul. Aemil. lib. 6. passed ouer into Syria with great forces, either to recouer Hierusale^, or els to keepe the possession of Palestine. But they returned home without their purpose, circumuented and dissolued, either with the subtilties of the Enemie, or with the guile of the Countrey or els by discord among themselues. After whom followed the Emperour Fredericke the second, who also was King of Sicilie, and intituled to the Kingdome of Hierusale^: who through the persuasion and instigation of Gregory the 9. at last conueyed an armie into Syria.Paul. Aemil. lib. 7. But entering into friendship and societie with the King of Aegipt,
he recouered Hierusalem and other bordering townes, with money, and not by armes, the yeare 1225. wherby his fame was greater then his deserte; the possession therof prouing no longer, then glorious. For few yeares after, the Parthians being driuen out of their countrey, by the Scithians and Tartarians, inuaded Syria, and razed Hierusale^, (lately repaired by Fredericke the Emperour) downe to the grownd. Wherupon Lewes the 9. (who at that time was King of Fra^ce) about the 45. yeare or that age,Paul. Aemil. lib. 7. sayled into Syria with great forces, to ayde the Christian cause vpon decaying. But all his endeuour came at length to nothing: for the godly King subduing the fro^tiers of Aegipt (sometime called Pelusium but now Damiata) in the beginning waged many fortunate battells with the King of Aegipt: but afterward being pestered with the plague, he was constrained to purchase peace of his enemie, by surrendering vp Damiata. Finally when his enterprise in Syria had no prosperous euent, he withdrew his armie: but before his departure, that his expedition into Syria might not be in vaine, he purposed to carry thence some profite, if not of warre,Iod. Clito. ser. de S. Ludou. at least of pietie. For visiting those holy places of Palestine, fro^ the mount Thabor
(as some affirme) he went to Nazareth. And as soone as he saw the House of our B. Lady, he speedely alighted fro^ his horse,S. Levves doth visit the house of our B. Lady. fel^ downe on his knees, and with great veneration saluted the natiue House of the B. Virgin, and the B. Virgin herselfe, going thence afoot to the Church to reuere^ce and worship the Sonne of God, there made man for the loue of man, and also his most holy mother the B. Virgin MARY. And the sacred and festiuall day of the Annunciatio^ of Gabriel the Archangell, and of the B. Virgins Conceiuing or God being then at hand, the godly King (as the sanctitie of the place and his owne deuotion moued him) did fast the day before with bread and water onely, wearing a haire-cloath next vnto his skinne. Vpon the festiuall day it selfe, he commanded that diuine seruice should be celebrated with great sole^nitie, and Princely ornature, and after the Dreadfull Sacrifice, he himselfe receiued the most sacred Eucharist, in the maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin the Mother of God, with great aboundance of teares, and singular deuotion. Truely a rare docume^t of Christian pietie vnto posteritie, especially in a King, wherby we may coniecture how highly the sacred house of the B. Virgin
was esteemed euen in those dayes. But the Christian name, and the reuerence of the holy places of Syria, were not quite extinguished by the departure of King Lewes.S. Antonin. par. 3. Paul. Aemil. For the Templaries remained yet in their Catholicke faith, and in their office, and now and then being aided with helpe beyond the Seas, defe^ded the Reliques of the holy land with all their might. But in very deed assoone as Ciuill warres began to rage in Italy, by the deadly factions of the Guelses and Gibellines; and at the same time, the Kings of England, France and Aragon, breaking also into armes, the Furopia^s altogether neglected the Christia^ state in Syria, and the Barbarians much decaying it, gaue it at last an vtter ouerthrow. For the King of Aegipt thinking the dissention of Christia^ Princes his adua^tage, tooke Tripolis by force of armes, and razed it down; and from thence we^t to beseege Ptolemaidis, the famous and most frequented Cittie of Phenicia, which then alone of all the Citties in Palestine, did stand for the Christia^s, and at last hauing conquered it, he destroyed it with fire and sword. And the Barbarians had so desperate a hatred to the Christia^ name, that they slew all the Cittize^s, threw their houses and walles downe to the ground: and which is more, digged vp the very fou^dation
of the walles themselues, that no memorie of Christianitie might remaine in Syria. And thus hauing lost Ptolemaidis, we were driue^ for euer (as it may seeme) out of the possessio^ of Palestine, the yeare of our Redemption, one thousand two hundred nintie one, wherby the Christian inhabitants partly forsooke Syria, and partly, as sometimes it happeneth, conformed themselues to the manners of their Lordes. And forrenners and Pilgrims had beene frighted thence by this terrour of the Turkish furie, but that their accesse is allowed for money Yet this fatall calamitie hath not vtterly abolished the auncient reuerence of the holy Sepulcher, which for deuotions sake was held in chiefest reuerence. For the opportunitie of Hierusalem once a Kingly seate, but now the chiefest Cittie inuiteth Pilgrims vnto her; whose fame the neernes of the birth place of Christ our Lord do the maintaine and fauour. But the distance of the places and desert wayes, not a little infested with the armes of the Barbaria^s, made the natiue house of our Lady (situated in Galiley) inconuenient for the deuotion of Pilgrims, which was the cause of a wonderfull miracle, and such a one indeed, as fro^ the memorie of man, was neuer heard of to that day.





The sacred House hauing lost her honour in Galiley, is miraculously transported into Dalmatia. CHAP. II.
WHEN due reuerence could not be donne to the most Sacred Chappell, neither by the inhabitants nor forraine people, Almightie God permitted not the soueraigne footstepps of himselfe and his B. mother, to lye long neglected among the Barbarians. For the verie yeare, which was notorious for the extreame ouerthrow of Palestine, this sacred House most deare to God himselfe, togeather with the Christian Religion departed out of Syria. Iohn Villanus a famous Historiographer of that age,Toan Villa. lib. 7. doth witnesse, that Ptolemaidis was taken about the midst of the month of Aprill, the yeare 1221. and in the next month of the same yeare, that is to say the 7. of the Ides of May,Anual. Flum. Nicholas the fourth being Pope (as the Sclauonian Chronicles record)
the sacred House of the B. Virgin was transported into Europe,Annal. Elum. apud Hiero. Angel. reco^pencing the calamitie of the East, with this inestimable good of the West. Some there are, who considering the wealth of Ioachim the B. Virgins father, thinke that this was not his house, but rather a chamber apart, fro^ the rest therof. But truely it misliketh not me, to be of their opinion, who thinke it to be both the Chamber and House of the B. Virgin, to wit, the chiefest part of her fathers house. Proofe wherof (to say nothing of the armorie of the earthen vessell there to be seene) is the doore far greater, then for a chamber alone, separated from the other building. Neither must the state of Ioachim mooue vs; for Nicephorus Callistus deliuereth,Niceph. lib. 1. c. 30 that by reaso^ of the warlike tumultes of Iewrie, the parents of the B. Virgin forsaking the towne of Bethleem, their ancestours seat, and going into Galiley, set vp a little house at Nazareth: that we may vnderstand, that this was not their ancestours, but the B. Virgins fathers house, not fitting peraduenture his calling, but being prouided for the time, it was not surely incommodious, nor differing from the vse of that ancie^t simplicitie: Yet altogether such a one it is, that it seemeth to breath the
exceeding loue of our B. Lady towardes pouertie. But whether it were the Chamber or the House of the mother of God, truely being dedicated by the Apostles (as we said before) and reduced into the forme of a Church, continually all Christians did deuoutly reuerence and adorne the same.
Wherfore this most sacred House, by his vertue and power, who at the prayers of S. Gregory Thaumaturge, in time past remoued a mountaine out of his place, and tra^sferred it an other way, in fauour of the Queene of heauen, was taken vp from the foundations, and doubtles by the handworke of Angells was transported (a wonder to be spoken and heard) by great dista^ces of land and sea, euen from Galiley into Dalmatia, which is more the^ twentie hundred miles. Betweene Tersact and Flumen (two townes of Dalmatia) there is a mountaine not very high, in the toppe wherof the plaine superficies of the ground, doth make a pleasant seat, open to the Adriaticke sea, which in time past being notoriously dangerous by reason of many daily and foule tempestes, since that time (as the report goeth) is become very calme and quiet. You may beleeue that the B. Virgin would restraine those furious seas by the presence of
her Cell; that euen by this we might coniecture, what she would effect in the life of mortall men, which is dayly tossed with diuers chaunces, and as it were, with sundry stormes. Therfore euen heere, about the second Vigill of the night, by co^mandment of the mother of God, heauenly ministers did seat the most sacred house of Nazareth, that it might be a most certaine succour to all that were any way indangered: and assoone as the morning light shewed this gift of the diuine liberalitie to the inhabitants, in very deed not only admiration, but also deuotion and pietie was powred into their hartes, dismayed with the strangenes of the thing. Wherupon they that were neerest at hand, assoone as they espied it, ranne contendingly with desire to see it.The description of the House of Loreto, as it vvas in those dayes And they beheld a little house with a sharpe roose, graced as well with the toppe of a chimney, as with a little bell hanging vp on height; but in nothing more remarkeable, then for the antiquitie therof. Forthwith going into the house it self, they prostrated their bodies on the ground to worship Almightie God, who mercifully vouchsafed to replenish them with a certaine sacred dread and vnwonted ioy. After their prayer to Christ and his


B. mother, whose Images they saw, they beganne leysurely to view and review all with their eyes; and perceiued that the sacred Chappell, was of a long square forme, built of ordinary stone, hauing a faire roose vaulted with fretts: which being deuided with small squares, and flourished with blew colours, was beautified with guilded starres which glittered in the diuisio^s, as if it had bin in a certaine heauen. Vnder the vaulted roofe, round about the walles, there appeared small semicircles touching each other, the midles wherof were adorned with painted potts. The walles were almost a cubite thicke, leuied neither by rule nor square, but couered with plaistered worke; wherupon was drawne an ancient painting, to expresse the mysteries of the house it selfe; which vpward till this day remayneth in many places, but downward hath decayed by antiquitie of time. The length of the sacred house, is about 40. foote; the breadth lesse then 20: and the height about 25. Some thing neere the midst of the wall, which in time past (as I suppose) was the forefront of the sacred house, there is a large doore, but truely not differing from the common sorte, which in steed of a transome, hath a plaine
beame layd vpon it. On the left hand standeth a little Cupbourd of simple worke, made to keepe earthen vessell: on the right hand in the next wall, there is a window, not very bigg, and ouer against the window, a meane and a slender chimney of co^mon workmanship, as the rest are. And euen heere standeth a high nicet, and vaulted with an arch of the same worke, resembling fiue moones ioyned togeather. In which Nicet is placed a Cedar Image of our B. Lady standing,The Image of our. B. Lady. being about two cubits high; who with her left hand imbraceth the sweet child Iesus about the middest, and supporteth him with the right. Her face is vernished with amber, giuing a s^uer glasse, but darkened with the smoke of the lightes; yet this very darkening (a token of antiquitie and religion) doth exceedingly increase the maiestie of her virginall countenance. A crownet of iewells doth adorne the toppe of her head. Her traine of haire doth fall along her bare neck and shoulders, after the fashion of the Nazarens. The Image it selfe is clothed with a guilt garment, which is girded round about with a broad girdle, hanging downe to the feete, according to the vse of that countrey, and also couered with a blew
mantle sitting decently about her from the top of her shoulders, both the one and the other carued, and wrought in the same stemme. The sweet child Iesus, doth rest on his mothers right hand, more maiestically then in mortall shape, resembling in his countenance, the disposition of a certaine diuine Maiestie, and lifting vp the foresingers of his right hand, as if he would blesse something, and in his left hand holding a golde^ globe; so that with his traine of haire, with his long garment and girdle, he also doth represent the Nazarens attyre. Before the Image of the mother of God, there is an Altar of free stone squared, seeming to breath forth sanctitie. When the Dalmatians had viewed all this with leisure, albeit they were ignorant what it was, yet with common consent they agreed, that whatsoeuer it was, it was doubtles the gift of God: neither was it newly erected fro^ the ground, but verily by the ordination and will of God, was brought from some other place. Departing therfore thence, whomsoeuer they mette, they tould what they had seene: wherupon many (and among them some diseased people) flocked to the new spectacle of so great a thing, expecting some helpe therby. And their hope
deceiued them not: for to sound bodies the religion of the place imparted health of mind, and to diseased, the oure of their infirmities.


By reuelation of the mother of God, her house is knowne, and honoured, with an euident miracle. CHAP. III.
THE fame of this prodigious Chappell,Annal. Flum. apud Hiero. Angel. comming speedily to Tersact anm Flumen, kindled in the healthfull a desire to see it, and in the diseased, no small hope of recouering their health. Alexander a man of great vertue, deare both to God and man,Alexander Bishop of Tersact being Bishop in the house of S. George of Tersact; and hauing layen sicke of a long and a grieuous disease, liued in litle hope of life, when very opportunely, he was certified of this diuine House by his familiar frendes. Wherupon he had a vehement desire to behold the comfort of so great a miracle: but sicknes oppressing him he could not be carried vnto it, without
manifest perill of his life; which seemed more grieuous vnto him, then the burning of the feuer it selfe, that his distressed body would not follow the affection of his mind. Notwithstanding he dispaired not or him selfe, being acertained that the Image of the mother of God was brought thither with that diuine House. Thinking it therfore to be a Chappell of our B. Lady; he earnestly implored her helpe, and made a Vow vnto her, hoping not only to recouer his health, but also to knowe from aboue, the mystery of that heauenly gift.Our B. Lady appeareth to Alexander. In the quiet night when he was betweene sleeping and waking, the Mother of God descending suddainely from heauen, presented herselfe vnto him in glorious brightnes, and filling all the chamber with a most cleere light, with a gracious countenance sayd vnto him. Be of good comfort, my sonne, behold being called vpon, I am come to bring thee present helpe, and notice of the thing thou desirest. Therfore so it is, that the Sacred House, which was lately brought to your coastes, is the very same, where in times past I was borne, and for the most part was brought vp: where by foretelling of Gabriel the Archangell, through the worke of the Holy
Ghost I co^ceined the Diuine issue, where also the word it selfe was made flesh. Therfore after our descease, the Apostles did rightly co^secrate the House which was honoured with such mysteries, and did contendingly celebrate there diuine seruice. The Altar which is brought therwith, is that which Peter the Apostle did co^secrate: the Image of Christ crucified, the Aposties them selues placed, where at this present it standeth: and the Cedar Image is out representation, made by the hand of Luke the Euangelist, who for the familiaritie that was betweene vs, expressed our similitude in colours, as liuely as a mortall creature could do. And this very House, most deare to heauen it selfe, was reuerenced in Galiley with great honour for these many ages; but now the reuerence therof fayling together with the Catholike faith, it is come from the towne of Nazareth to your partes: wherof no doubt at all is to be made, for God him selfe is the worker of it, VVith whom no word is impos^ible. And that thou thy selfe mayst be both the witnesse and the publisher of this, which I haue said, be thou cured; that thy suddaine recouerie of so long a sicknes may giue credit vnto the miracle. And when she had spoken


thus vnto him, she mounted vp towards heauen, leauing a certaine heauenly odour behind her in the house. And that it was not the fallacie of a dreame, or of a distracted mind, but a true vision indeed, the euent of the thing did shew. For the Bishop awaking betweene ioy and feare, began to be all bedewed with sweat,Alexander is cured. and perceiuing that the feuer was sodainly gon, arose safe and sound out of his bed. And conceiuing no lesse ioy for the tidings of the House of Nazareth then for his owne recouerie, he fell downe on his knees, and listing vp both eyes and handes to heauen, gaue manisold thankes to God and his B. mother for the double benefit, greatly reioycing that they had vouchsafed to bestow so great a gift on him selfe, on his cou^trey and people. Assoone therfore, as it was day, with exceeding gladnes he came forth among the people, and being a man of that age, he forgot grauitie and authoritie, and like to one distracted, began to runne vp and downe the streetes, the Courtes and bywayes, declaring his nightes vision to as many as he mette, knowne or vnknowne, and euery where publishing that gifte of God, and his B. mother, as well common to all, as peculiar to him selfe. And such
was his voyce and countenance, such feruour of mind appeared in his eyes, as might easily giue credit to his speaches. Wherunto was added an vndoubted argument, to witt, suddaine health of body and stre^gth in him, who before was so cruelly afflicted with a long and grieuous feuer, that the other day he was knowne to be in exceeding danger. And assoone as this newes was diuulged amo^g the greater part of the Inhabita^ts of that towne; forthwith great concourse was made vnto the Bishop, and striuingly with one common voyce, they extolled the heaue^ly gift, in token of tha^ks giuing to God and his B. mother. As chiefe among the congratulatours and reioycers, went the Bishop him selfe, exulting with ioy, and making hast to see the natiue house of the B. Virgin. Whither assoone as he came, he very reuerently performed the Vow which he had made: whose religious example imprinted greater deuotion in the hartes of mortall men, specially because he him selfe the authour therof was no vaine man, nor an vncertaine reporte noysed abroad. Wherupon this most holy house (illustrious for miracles) was dayly celebrated and reuerenced of the Inhabitants with greater deuotion. Newes
whereof first passed to the bordering, then to places far remote, and in short time all the people there-about esteemed it most holy, and burned with desire, at length to see so vnusuall and so venerable a thing.


The miracle is sought out by certaine men sent into Galiley. CHAP. IIII.
VERY happily at that time, Nicolas Frangipane a man of the chiefest nobilitie of Rome, for his pietie and godlines, being made President of Croatia, Dalmaia and Istria (of the inhabita^ts called the Great Ban) gouerned that Countrey where this miracle happened, who also was Lord of Tersact and Flumen: and being not a little moued both with the miracle which happened on his land, as also with the relation and suddaine recouerie of Alexander the Bishop, at first he was amazed therat. But afterward reioycing that the heauenly gift had seated it selfe happily in his Iurisdiction,
he hastened spedily vnto the mountaine, and determined to reuerence and adorne the most Sacred House, with such giftes as was behoouefull for him. But because the stra^genes of the thing passed the memorie, and the greatnes, the beliefe of man, he thought good that so vnwonted and vnknowne a miracle with diligence was to be inquired of: for he seared lest their credulitie might be suspected of others, or that so notable a thing, might be of greater admiratio^ then credit with posteritie. Wherupon co^sulting therof with the Bishop, they determined to send certaine men into Galiley, to inquire out the matter with great care. Amo^g all the people, foure of approued credit and vertue, were chosen, whereof Alexander the Bishop was one, whom they sent to Nazareth, commaunding them to bring them word of all that they found concerning the natiue House of the B. Virgin: who without delay, shiping them selues, and sayling along the Adriatike, the Siculum, the Cretike and Cypresse seas, arriued at Palestine with good successe: and pacifying the Barbarians with money, worshipped the most sacred Sepulcher of Christ at Hierusale^. From whence with publicke pasport, and guarded with
a strong company of armed men, they continued their iorney to Nazareth, a Cittie of Galiley, the end of their trauell; where carefully inquiring of the inhabita^ts (not Christians so much in effect, as in word) they assured them that the natiue House of the B. Virgin, was taken thence not long before; and brought them to the Church, which long agone Helene the Empresse caused to be made to inuirone the sacred house that they them selues might behold the ruines therof miraculously broken downe. They also shewed them the floore, where the sacred house had stood, that they might likewise view the foundations, and the late impressions of the house which was taken thence. Wherupon measuring the length and the breadth of the floore, and the thicknes of the foundatio^s, they found all things exactly to agree with the measures of the House and the walles transported into Dalmatia, which for that purpose they had brought with them: Also the time of the departure of the maiesticall Chappell from thence, and the comming of it into Dalmatia doth well accord. So returning home againe with exceeding ioy and gratulatio^, they related all that they had found to Fra^gipane the President; who taking no small
contentme^t in such a message, with flowing teares of ioy, gaue manifold thankes to Almightie God and his B. mother, that not only in his life time, but in manner looking on, so great a miracle had happened, confirmed with such euident wonders, and the authoritie of such men. Wherfore incontinently they made a solemne and a religious procession to the House of the B. Virgin, and performed it with great concourse both of men and women, where Alexander the Bishop in steed of a Sermon, related the matter in order vnto the people, protesting openly before God and the B. Virgin, before mortall and immortall, that he would add nothing to the manifest truth, if it were otherwise, he would not gainsay, that the wrath of God should lay punishment vpon him: yet in this respect they well hoped to be in greater fauour with the mother of God, for that they had made a thing almost incredible most manifest and knowne. When the assembled multitude heard these speaches, falling as it were fro^ heauen, they were suddainly ouercome with so great ioy, that they could not refraine, but with their gratulations and teares confused him, vttering these thinges vnto them: so that the prayers of
the auditorie giuing thankes to God and his B. mother, with the hartiest signes and tokens they could, hindered the Bishops conclusion. It is wonderfull what credit, not only the inhabitants, but euen strangers them selues gaue vnto him rehearsing and affirming those things; and what concourse and reuerence was done to the most sacred Cell at the report of such men. Neither were there wanting many and famous miracles, seeing from all partes, feeble, impotent and possessed persons were there to be cured; notwithstanding there wanted some, to haue deliuered them particularly to writing. With the concourse of people and the manifold miracles, the religion and reuerence of the place did not a little increase. For the exceeding care which they saw setled in the hartes of the inhabitants towardes this maiesticall House (because the B. Virgin her selfe seemed as it were present at suppliants prayers) filled all with so great deuotion, that they imagined, that that place was inhabited, and nor beloued only, of the B. Virgin mother of God. Therfore with striuing emulation, they began to reuerence and beautifie the natiue House of the Virgin, and the B. Virgin her selfe, by all the meanes they could and were able: but
scarcitie of wealth hindering their liberall mindes, they adorned it rather with pietie the^ with magnificence; but so that in short time, it began to be reuerenced and honoured with the recourse of far remote people. For newes of the thrice fortunate House, being daily more and more spread abroad, to wit, that the natiue habitation of our B. Lady, was miraculously brought from Galiley to Tersact, and that men of approued vertue and credit, going to Nazareth, found it was most certaine and manifest, did not only prouoke the remotest Sclauonians, but also the Istrians, Croatians, Bosnians, Seruians, Epidaurians, and the other people of that Countrey, to visit so great a miracle and gift. And the present helpe of the B. Virgin, imparted to many in time of their distresse and calamitie, did also daily increase the celebritie of the p^ace; so much, that the Sclauonians which dwelled by, greatly reioyced at such concourse of people to the Sacred House, boasting that their Cou^trey was of great glory with forraine people and natio^s, and by the co^mon vice of humane arrogancie belieued, that Almightie God himselfe had preferred them before other nations, measuring heauenly gifts rather by the merites of men, the^ the benignity of Al. God.



The Sacred House departeth out of Sclauonie with great lamentation of the Dalmatians. CHAP. V.
Annal. Flum. Hieron. Angel.BVT this ioy and heauenly gift continued not long with the Sclauonians: within lesse then foure yeares (for there wanted fiue monthes) the Sacred House departed out of their coastes; the the cause wherof is vncertaine, for diuers do diuersly report. Whether therfore the inhabitants did reuerence it with lesse care then they ought to haue done, or whether from the beginning (to the short comfort of that nation) our B. Lady did purpose to make it a place of passage, rather then of aboad, or whether it were to relieue Italy, the fortresse of Christian Religion with present helpe, at that time afflicted with warres and calamities; suddainly the heauenly gift was taken from the Dalmatians,
when they mistrusted no such thing, and brought into Italy with as great good and ioy of the Italians, as domage and lamentation of the Dalmatians. For as soone as it was knowne and published abroad, that the diuine pledge, and the most Sacred Cell of the B. Virgin was carried to some other place, in very deed the admiration of so strange and vnexpected newes strooke the people of Tersact and the borderers therabout into great astonishment, being so moued with the desire which they had vnto it, that they ranne to and fro like distracted people, and all their countrey ouer, sought and inquired after the gift, which Almightie God had giuen and taken from them againe. And when they could not find it, nor learne whither it was remooued; the confused multitude of men and women (wounded with the griefe of so great a losse) remained a while in mornfull silence. But when their astonishment was a little past, they brake out all togeather into teares and plaints, and with wonderfull lamentation began to discouer the great domage of their nation. To wit, that the heauenly gift was but shewed to them, and giuen vnto others: that, that refuge of Dalmatia, that succour of the diseased,
that solace of the wretched, that ornament and defence of their nation, was taken from them, that such a Patronesse of the Dalmatians, and such a Protectresse of their neighbourly people, had now forsaken them: that they were altogeather vnworthy of such a pledge, because they reuerenced it with lesse deuotion and care, then they ought to haue done. But what religion, what care, what reuerence of any people whatsoeuer can be answerable to that heauenly and most excellent gift? If this were the cause, why she changed her seat, whersoeuer she is seated, forthwith she may well change her seat againe. This and such like moane they all made, for the departure of it, which the present feeling and griefe of their losse suggested vnto the^, not easie for the writer to relate. Finally being ouercome with wearisomnes, rather then with the satietie of lamenting, they went swarming to Frangipane the Pretor, and there againe renewing their wayling, they asked of him aduise and helpe. And though he him selfe did need comfort, as wounded with the co^mon griefe, and more sorowfull the^ was fitting for his part; notwithstanding he ouercame him selfe, and dissembling his sorrow, asswaged the lamentation
of the people with his authoritie and wisdome: In very deed (quoth he) so it is, that you haue receaued so greate a losse, that Almightie God could hardly lay vpon you a greater for offending him; that no teares, no sighes, no wayling, is able to extinguish your griefe of mind. But now truely you seeme to co^plaine without cause seeing Almightie God hath graunted you the vse of the heaue^ly gift without prescribing any time, and therfore there is no reason, why you should grieue that it is required againe, whe^ he would haue it so, that gaue it; but rather should giue God thanks for granting you the vse of so great and so fruitfull a pledge for certaine yeares, and should reco^pence the prese^t disco^moditie, with memorie of the former commodities. And he promised them to do his best endeuour, in some sort to supply the great losse, which they had receiued by the departure of the heauenly gift, and to satisfie their desire towardes so great a good: For in the very impression of the most Sacred Chappell, he was determined to erect such an other house to the B. Virgin, that it might be as well a monument of so great a thing to posteritie, as a solace to them for their grieuous losse, whereby he was in good
hope, though the natiue House of the B. Virgin was wanting, that her helpe would not be wanting vnto them. And indeed the Presidents wordes were not more magnificent then his workes. For within few yeares at his owne cost and charge, he caused a new Chappel to be placed in the same impressions, which was dedicated to the mother of God, and inuironed it with a Church, magnificent for workmanship and reuerence, which at this day is extant, for no lesse a monument of the Frangipanes munificence, then of so great a miracle. Neither did the B. Virgin suffer the wordes of the fou^der of her Church to be vttered in vaine: for afterward sundry miracles were wrought in that place, to shew plainely that the seat it selfe was pleasing to the B. Virgin, and her helpe not wanting to the Sclauonians. And the said Church at this day is committed to the gouernment of the Franciscans,The desire of the Dalmatians to the most sacred House. which are called De obseruantia, and is most famous for celebritie and fame in those partes. But this did not so much extinguish as enkindle the Dalmatians desire to the House of Nazareth: for it is now three hundred yeares since it departed thence, and yet they bewayle to remember that so great a good was taken from them, as if the domage
were newly done them. Proofe is, that yearly passing the Adriaticke sea, and comming to Loreto in great troupes, they do not seeme to do more reuerence to the natiue House of the B. Virgin, then to lament the detriment of their nation: whose solemne plaintes, Returne to vs O MARY, Returne to vs, do not a little signifie, that their desire shall be euerlasting, seeing it is nothing at all abated in the space of three hu^dred yeares, and also witnes that the House of Nazareth was transported out of Sclauonie into Italy.


The Sacred House is transported into Picene, and seated in a wood of Recanati. CHAP. VI.
Praep. Terem. Hier. Angel.THIS heauenly gift was passed ouer into Italy very happily the yeare, 1294. at which time, Italy being diuided with the deadly factions of the Guelses and Gibellines, was all miserably vexed with hatreds


and more then ciuill warres. Therfore in the inter-raigne, when Bonifacius the 8. was created Pope, the fourth of the Ides of December, a remarkable day, and worthy euerlasting memorie, the B. mother of God, bringing peace and quietnes to Italy, chose her House a seate in Picene.In Italia^ called Marc-Aneona. Picene is a Prouince of Italy of no small renowne and wealth, situ^ted ouer against Dalmatia, the Adriaticke sea flowing betweene, which also is called the Superum. And this most sacred House being brought out or Dalmatia into Picene ouer the Adria icke sea, where the passage is n^e^e an hundred miles, was seated in a wood of the territorie of Recanati, about a mile from the sea, which belonged to a certaine matrone of Recanati, both rich and godly, whose name was Laureta: of whom euer after b^ing called the House of Loreto, it gaue immortall prayse to her, from whom it tooke that name. The report goeth (neither is it without truth) that the trees which were in the way as the little House of our B. Lady came thither, bowed downe as it were to reuerence it; and afterward remayned stooping vntill they were consumed with age, with wind or with the axe. And as long as the wood stood (which at this present is cut downe)
the said trees were wont to be shewed to the Pilgrimes in a long ranke, to witnesse so great a miracle. Which some do yet well remember; for a man of good credit tolde me, that sundry times with great admiration, he him selfe had seene very many of those trees, not much aboue twentie yeares agoe; that is to say, stooping with all their bodies, and bowing towards that part of the sea, ouer which the most sacred House passed on high, to her ordained seat in the wood. And the same trees being preserued for deuotio^ sake, did also remaine long after the vnderwood was destroyed: but at last about 20. yeares agone, they were cutt downe by the foolishnes of the rude husbandmen, lest they should hinder their tillage. In the quiet night the sacred House of the B. Virgin was seated in a void place of the aforesaid wood. At which time the sheepheards of Recanati keeping their flocks in the next chase, and diuiding the vigill of the night amongst them (as their maner is) suddainly a great light inuironing the sacred House, drew the eyes of the warders vnto it: To whom it seemed wonderfu^l vpon the suddaine, to see a new house in that solitary place, but specially glittering with great brightnes: and there was one
among them who auouched that he saw it, whe^ it came on high ouer the sea. Wherfore awaking their fellowes to behold the spectacle, first they questioned among the^ selues (as the fashion of wonderers is) and then with mutuall wordes animating ech other to go see what it was, all began to coniecture, as in deed it was, to wit, that it was some heauenly thing. Whe^ they came vnto it, they went into the House it selfe, and assoone as they had passed the threshold, a great dread came suddainly vpon the^; but presently being replenished with a certaine vnwonted sweetnes, they spent the night deuoutly in prayer, dilige^tly viewing whatsoeuer was vnder the roofe. Wherupon at the breake of day certaine of them went to Recanati (almost foure miles from that place) to relate vnto their maisters, what they had seene. At first for their simplicitie, they did not only contemne them, but also the matter it selfe, supposing that they related a vaine thing, and peraduenture a fancie represented vnto the^ in their dreame. But the sheepheardes affirming with all asseueration, that their owne eyes might witnesse it vnto the^, if they would, their maisters were more willing to belieue them, them indeed they durst. And at
last, lest it should either be thought, that they had giue^ to rash credit to so vnwonted a miracle, at the testimonie of those simple men, or els lest by their negligence they might let that passe as vaine, which might be true indeed, they went with them to see what it was. When they came to the place of the wood foretold, and the sheepheardes newes proued true; none almost belieued their owne eyes, nor them selues: for in very deed, that House was neuer seene there before, nor newly built, as the antiquitie therof did manifestly shew.
Doubtles therfore it was brought from some other place by miracle, or sent from heauen it selfe. And with great wonder discoursing thus among them selues, they went neerer vnto it, to behold the roofe, not so much to be noted for fashion, as for antiquitie: and greatly admired that such ancie^t building could stand without a fou^dation or any support at all. Forthwith putting away these cogitations, they went into the House it selfe, and suppliantly reuerenced the B. Virgin, imbracing the sweet child Iesus in her armes. Neither did their pietie want her reward: For vpon the suddaine, such sacred dread and ioy was powred into them, that they confessed, they neuer
felt the power of God more present in all their liues. Wherupo^ they ranne backe againe to the Cittie with all speed, reioycing much among them selues, that Almightie God had vouchsafed to bestow so rare a gift on them, and on their Cou^trey: which was exceeding ioy to the deuout matrone Laureta, in whose wood the sacred House had seated it selfe.The concourse of the people of Recanati. And assoone as the newes of so great a miracle came into the Cittie, a wonderfull concourse of people, of all sortes and degrees repaired vnto the wood, as if a set signe had beene giuen, coueting to satisfie the desire they had to see that admirable spectacle; in so much, that boyes, girles, old and feeble folkes could not stay them selues at home. The diseased also forsaking their bedds, crepte along; their very desire to see it (as sometimes it happeneth) yeelding them strength therfore. And many running with a certaine veheme^cie of feruour, striued to come thither before other, that they might be the first, that might behold that heauenly spectacle with their eyes. The neerer their hope was of approaching vnto it, the more the multitude of the concurrents, and their desire to see it increased: so that, when the most Sacred House (which all this
while was intercepted and hidden from them with the boughes of the trees) suddainly appeared vnto them by entering into the sheerer wood, speedily all at once began to hasten vnto it, and incontinent so great concourse was made on euery side from all partes of the wood, couering to go, to touch and to kisse the sacred walles, that pressing neere togither they were like to fall ouer each other. And assoone as they came into the maiesticall seat it selfe, and deuoutly saluted the B. Virgin, they were all replenished with such deuotion, and powred out so many teares, that they purposed the amendment of their liues and could not be drawne from it. This meane while great noyse was heard on euery side, specially of the diseased and feeble, with confused speaches inuocating their Patronesse, their mother, the Queene of heauen, the mother of God, and with earnest prayer intreating for recouerie and health. Neither were their plaintes vnaccepted, nor their petitions vnheard. For by and by the power and vertue of God, appeared in curing of diseases, and in restoring of strength to many: wherupo^ the noyse of the tha^ksgiuers was doubled, that they might giue Almightie God and his B. mother hartie
thankes, and publish the heauenly vertue and helpe which they had now obtained. Wherfore assoone as this light of Gods liberalitie shewed it selfe to the people of Recanati, with striuing emulation they began to reuerence and adorne the Cell of the B. Virgin; but among all those publike honors, the priuate indeuours of Laureta did excell,The Lady to vvhom the vvood of Laureta did belong called the Sacred House by the same name. wherby euer after it was called the House of Loreto. In this meane while, fame (then the which in like cases nothing is swifter) flew to the bordering people to bring news that the House of Loreto was glorified with miracles; wherwith out of hand, as euery ones deuotion or necessitie did vrge, all began to runne vnto the wood, to bring or conuey them that were molested with any infirmitie, to intreat helpe and to make vowes. That they obtained their vowes, their often thansgiuing to Almightie God and his B. mother, and their votiue tablets hanging openly about the walles did euidently shew: for the mother of God was a clement and a potent Patronesse in the sight of the diuine maiestie, both to shew them the way which sought it, and also to intreat helpe and health for them that request it. And the solitarines of the place did greatly reco^mend the deuotion of the
assembled people. For then there was no house, no lodging, nor any little receptacle in the wood, but trees, which being void of leaues in the winter time, gaue but cold hospitalitie to the Pilgrims. Yet there might you haue seene many, both wealthie and delicate in their owne houses, lodge abroad in the ayer, annoied with raine, cold, snow, and tempestes. Likewise all the people, diuiding them selues into companies about the most sacred House, and sitting down on the grasse among the trees, did there eate their meate, and afterward lodged on the bare ground, not to sleepe and take their rest, but to sing psalmes and hymnes, without any feare at all of wilde beastes or theeues, such inflamed pietie might easily ouercome all disco^modities and dangers.



The Sacred House is transported out of this wood into the hill of the two Brothers. CHAP. VII.
BVT the euerlasting enemie of mankind being nothing g^ad at this honour of the heauenly Queene and so great good of Christia^s,Praep. Ter^m. Hie^o. Angel. with all his might decreed to disturbe the exceeding ioy and re^igion of the Picentians. Therfore lest the sacred place should increase the deuotion of the people, before it was of so great reuerence as in likelihood it would be, he purposed to make warre against; the Pilgrimes and strangers as they came vnto it. The Chappell of our B. Lady was in a solitary place, neere to the sea, and compassed about with a thicke wood and high trees: and though there was no way vnto it, but among these thicke bushes and trees; yet many went without weapons, putting great considence in the P. Virgin, the defendresse of the place. Whe^upon certaine notorious wretches of desperate boldnes,
not more allured with a fitt opportunitie of preying, then stirred with infernall furies, as it may be supposed, beset the wayes that went vnto the sacred House, and began to ly in ambush in places compassed about with thicke bushes. From whence rushing forth, they tooke the Pilgrimes as they went vnto it, sett on them vnawares, robbed them of their money and cloathes, yea and of their liues also, if so be they resisted by force. Wherby in short space all that Wood being infested and notoriously reproached with robberies and murders, was reduced to a wildernes, by reason that the Pilgrimes were frighted thence: and the reuerence and deuotion of this holy place waxing daily lesse and lesse, the most sacred House it selfe departed thence. For Almightie God thinking it an indignitie, that the malice of the infernall enemie should turne to the destructio^ of mankind, the refuge which he had prouided for their saluation; he chose a safer and a fitter seat for Pilgrimes, for his owne, and his B. mothers little House. There was a little hill not very steepy almost a mile from that place, neerer to Recanati, and not far from the high Way, whither the sacred House was carried on high by Angells and placed
in the top therof, about eight monethes after it was seated in the wood. Two brothers of Recanati possessed the said hill in common with mutuall agreement, and taking exceeding ioy in the heauenly gift, began to reuerence the most sacred House, with brotherlike endeuours. And as the mutation of the place, and the fame of the new miracle increased admiration, so likewise the deuotion of the inhabitants and strangers. For assoone as it was spread abroad, that the House of Loreto had changed her place, and forsaken the wood, which was infested with robberies, and seated it selfe on a hill free fro^ theeues and conuenient for pilgrimes; forthwith it enkindled a desire in adioining people to reuisit it. Therfore either to recompence the benefit of so greate a good omitted for feare of theeues, or els couerting to see with their eyes the new migration, which they heard reported with their eares, many flocked vnto it from all partes with great willingnes: wherof diuers had worshipped the same house lately in the wood, which now they reuerence out of the same in the top of the hill, to their great admiration and wonder. For which cause, with vowes and feruent prayer, the inhabitants did co^tendingly
reuerence this most holy Chappell, venerable as well for ancient wonders as lastly for the miracle of her changed seat. And euery one for his owne particular, gaue Almightie God and his B. mother great thankes, that they had not remooued the most religious seat, defiled with robberies and murders, to some other p^ace; but had seated it on a safe hill, conuenient for the deuotion of Pilgrims. Wherby the multitude of Pilgrimes daily increasing, increased also the celebritie of the Sacred House, that the walles began to be couered with votiue tables, with Images of wax, with precious hangings, and the Altar to be heaped with giftes and money. But the wealth of the sacred Chappell thus increasing, lessened their deuotion, whose feruour should chiefly haue increased. So that auarice now againe, made the aboade therof shorter in the hill, then it had done in the wood.



It departeth from the hill of the two Brothers, by reason of their auarice and discord. CHAP. VIII.
THE said hill (as we shewed before) was common to two Brothers,Praepos. Terem. Hieron. Angel. who at first reuerenced the most sacred House godly and deuoutly, as was most meet they should: happy they, if they had vsed the heauenly gift rather for deuotion, then abused it for gaine. For when they saw that the most religious House was adorned with richer donaries, couertousnes ouercame their greedy mindes, and wholly extinguished pietie and deuotion. Therfore both supposing that the inheritance of the said hill came wholly to him selfe; first they began to couet the sacred gold and siluer, but afterward, auarice egging them on, to disagree betweene themselues, with more the^ brotherly hatred. Finally whiles either striued to get all the commoditie for him selfe, and reasoned the matter with altercation, from wrath they fell to armes.
And there letted not much, that two brothers had not defiled them selues, and the most maiesticall Cell of the mother of God with brothers bloud (for nothing is so holy that auarice defileth not:) had not God preuented so great wickednes, by taking away the occasion therof. Wherfore being no lesse offended with the discord of these brothers, then with the robberies which were committed in the wood, he remoued his mothers House vnto the next hill towardes the sea, being about an arrowes flight from that place, and seated it in the very high way that goeth to the hauen of Recanati, being also about two miles from the sea; so the cause both of discord and theft was taken away, and at last a stedfast and firme remayning seat was giuen to the most sacred House, which stood but a few monethes in the hill of the two brothers. For it is well knowne that within lesse then a yeare, after it came into Italy, it was seated on that hill where at this present it remayneth: so that either through the default of the inhabitants, or rather by the prouidence of Almightie God, within the compasse of a yeare, she changed her seat three times in the territorie of Recanati; and within fiue yeares after her departure
out of Galiley, honoured soure places with her residence: yet by change of place she changed not religion, but more and more increased the same.


The impressions of the places, where the Sacred House did stand. CHAP. IX.
AND at this day there are extant in all these places,Hiero. Angel. vndoubted proofes hereof. For Nicolas Frangipane (as we shewed before) builte a magnificent Church about the new House, which he caused to be made to resemble that of Nazareth, and set it in the very impressions where the other stood; calling it the Church of our B. Lady of Tersact, either for an ancie^t memorie of the most sacred Chappell, or els for that it was honoured with new miracles. And in this Church not farre from the dore of the resembled house of Nazareth, there is yet a worthy monument of Nicolas Frangipane, who founding that Church, in token o^ his great deuotion, towardes the
natiue House of the B. Virgin, chose for him selfe and his posteritie, a tombe neere to the impressions therof: where also remaineth a very ancient marble table, to witnesse so great a miracle to posteritie, wherin is engrauen: THIS IS THE PLACE, VVHERE THE MOST SACRED HOVSE OF THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO SOMETIME VVAS, NOVV REVERENCED IN THE TERRITORIES OF RECANATI. Which many of good credit haue reported, assuring me, that the^ selues haue seene them. And in that place where it rested, when it came first into Picene, as long as the wood stood (and it stood vntill the 75. yeare of this age) there appeared no obscure signes of the remouall of the sacred House, and of the miracle. For that parcell of ground on which it was seated, was alwaies beautified with greene herbes and flowers, when all the rest thereabout being ouer-growne with thicke bushes and thornes, were sauage and rude. Neither is the thing doubtfull. For Hierome Angelita doth so deliuer it in his storie of the B. Virgin of Loreto, which he dedicated to Pope Clement the 7. at that very time, when this was a miracle to the beholders
holders. And with this part of ground were seene the impressions of the sacred walles, imprinted in the earth, representing holines, and as it were some diuine thing. In so much that I my selfe receiued the same from Raphael Riera, a man of sincere credit and religion, who was wont to tell that he often beheld the impressions of the sacred House, and the beautie of this parcell of ground with great delight. But the wood being lately cutt downe, and the land made arable, this exceeding pleasantnes therof was so spoiled by the rude husbandmen with diging and sowing, that it vtterly decayed. Yet to preserue the religion of the place, in those very impressions, the said Riera raised little low walles, both for a monument to posteritie, that the sacred House of Loreto had in time past beene there, as also for a defence against the abuses of cattle and simple men. I my selfe saw and viewed this place, when I committed these thinges to writing, and obserued that the parcell of ground inclosed within those walles was euery way answerable, both in length and breadth, to the House of Loreto. But now it is altogeather like to the other ground thereabout; hauing lost the exceeding pleasantnes
which it had, before the rude husba^dmen violated the sanctitie of the place: yet truely it hath so lost the sweetnes, that it retaineth the religion. For at this day it is visited of many for deuotio^ sake, and would also be visited of more, but that the place is vnknowne to the common people. In time past when it was more knowne, either by reason of the exceeding pleasantnes or better commoditie of the wayes, it was wont to be so reuerenced of the Pilgrimes, that none almost would belieue, that he had visited the Cell of the B. Virgin of Loreto, that had not also reuerenced those first impressions of the same Cell. Now the place is altogeather vnfrequented and without passage, neither hath it a knowne way vnto it, so that if any will visit it, he hath need of a skilfull guide. It is distant from the towne of Loreto almost a mile, and as much also from the sea, not so much right on, as by many turnings. It is situated betweene the mont Vrsus and the Riuer Musion, with almost the like distance, as betweene Loreto and the sea, and is commonly called Banderola, peraduenture of a banner, which in time past was sett vp in a certaine tree, to demonstrate to Pilgrimes as they came, and to seafaring men sayling
along that coast, that the most sacred Chappell was seated in that wood: Certes the Italians do call a litle Banner, Banderola. By the sacred part of ground, wherof I haue spoken, there is a great well, which continually yeldeth water, and easie to be drawne of: you may belieue that this vnusuall and large well was made for the vse of some great multitude, to wit, for people which came to visit the sacred House. But in the hill of the two Brothers, the signes are more obscure; for that hill was leuelled to fill vp the valleys to make them commodious for bulding, and also built vpon when the towne of Loreto was built, yet the place, or rather a signe therof remaineth. For without the walles of some priuate houses, there is a certaine rude and a round peece of a hill, like to a bound-marke, which is graced with a little house, being now the only signe of the seate that our B. Lady made choise of there, and forsooke againe. The house wherunto this bou^dmarke is ioyned, being situated not farre from the gate of the Bishops Pallace on the right hand as we enter, is as it were the nauell or midst of the towne of Loreto. And if that part of the Bishops Pallace which is already begunne be continued, it will occupie
almost all that space, but then also (as I suppose) some monume^t of this place and miracle shall be left, that the signe of so memorable a thing may not perish.


The speciall place, and the admirable situation of the house of Loreto. CHAP. X.
IN the afore named places the B. Virgin mother of God, chose her self a seate rather to rest in than to dwell, that is to say, of no long continuance, because she determined euer from the beginning to make a setled seate in this place, where at this present she remaineth, and (vnles some offence of the inhabitants or borderers do hinder it) we hope an euerlasting. Neither is it lawfull to doubte, but as the mother of God from the beginning foresaw, so could she haue auoided the indiligence of the Dalmatians in Sclauonie, the crueltie of the theeues in the wood, and the detestable hatred of the two brothers in
the hill, that was common vnto them. For well knowing all this, euen from the time that her sacred house departed first from Nazareth, and forsooke her natiue soile, she her selfe made speciall choise of this place, to settle her a firme and a perpetuall seate. And in very deed to giue credit to so vnusuall a miracle,The cause of her manifolde remoouall. and neuer heard of before, the repetio^ of the same miracle was needfull, that the often mutation of the place in so few yeares might make a thing of it selfe incredible, credible inough. For how could mortall men doubt, whether that House was brought from Galiley; when them selues had heard that in their owne age, the same was transported out of Sclauonie into Picene; and had seene, that in Picene it selfe within lesse then the compasse of a mile it changed seat and place, thrice before the yeare was expired. This third and last mutation fell in the yeare of our Redemption 1295.Prep. Tere^. Hier. Angel. which ensued after the co^ming of the sacred House into Italy. And it is a thing worth the labour to know the admirable situatio^ therof, which doth easily shew that the most sacred Cell was not so placed by humane, but by diuine prouidence and power. For it is situated, if euer any were, iust to the foure regio^s of heauen
and earth, according to the rule of the Mathematicians: And not according to that rule only, but also by an ancient institution of the holy Fathers, who commanded that the Altars of sacred houses, should sta^d towardes the rising of the Sunne. Therfore the fore-wall of this most sacred House (beautified with the window wherat the Angell is said to haue entred) doth stand towardes the Sunne sett; and the hinder (adorned with the Altar standing before the Image of our B. Lady) looketh so directly towardes the Sunne rising, that in either Equinoctiall, for the space often dayes,In eyther Equinoctiall the Su^ne doth seeme to reuerence and salute our B. Lady. the Sunne when he riseth, shineth on the hinder part, and when he setteth on the former part therof: wherby a little before he setteth, the Sunne shining in at the window, which I haue mentioned, commeth to the B. Virgin, as it were to salute her at night, sith he cannot salute her in the morning, being excluded by the interposed wall of the sacred House it selfe: which also as they report was obscrued to be so, since the Sacred House, was inuironed within a Church, vntill the forefront of the Bishoppes Pallace, being opposite vnto the Church, was placed on the west side. Yet neuerthelesse I doubt not, but when the
gate thereof shall stand open (which can not be vntill the worke be finished) it will easile yield againe, the self same view of the sunne by the window of the sacred Chappell, that it may salute the B. Mother of God from the enterance of the Church it self. The left wall of this moste sacred Chappell doth stand towards the north, and the right towards the south: and therefore when the magnificent porch of the Bishops pallace standing against the south (for the B. Virgin by the situation of her Cell, prescribed as it were to the Architect the situation of the Bishops pallace) doth daylie receiue the sunne directlie into it, infalliblie it betokeneth high noone. And that this so admirable a situation of the moste sacred Chappell, happened not by chance, but was so appointed by the prouidence of God; proofe hereof be the impressions in the wood it self, yet extant (as I my self haue diligentlie obserued) which do sufficientlie shew that the B. Virgin herself did delight in such a situation. The same peraduenture happened in the hill of the two brothers, but it can not be iudged by reason that the impressions are obscure. And percha^ce also the same happened by course in the Dalmatian seate; yet we haue no certaintie
thereof, but that the thing it self is consonant vnto the others. And two chiefe mysteries, to witt, the natiuitie of the B. Virgin, and the Conception of the Eternall VVord, haue made this sacred house most illustrious; whereof that happeneth in the Autumne, and this in the Equinoctiall spring. Wherefore as the sunne hath iust cause to visit her in either Equinoctiall; so likewise (being as it were mindefull of these sacred mysteries) with a certaine kinde of ambition, a litle after his rising, and before his setting, he seemeth to comme to the B. Virgin mother of God, to salute her.



By manifestation of the Dalmatians, the Picentians know that the natiue house of the B. Virgin is brought vnto them. CHAP. XI.
BVT to returne to the order of the mateer whence the wonder of the rare situation made vs to digresse; at first the new migratio^ of this sacred house, seemed wonderfull to the people of Recanati, but afterward gratefull and pleasant. And as the same and admiration of the place was more increased by the miraculous multiplication of the triple transmigration of the holie Cell; so likewise did Alm. God, dilate the honour of his B. Mother, both among the inhabitants and strangers. For the remoouall of this moste sacred house from Nazareth and Dalmatia, being spoken of,Praep. Terem. Hier. Angel. and crediblie reported much about this time, strooke the Picentians into greate feare, leste it might also in time forsake
them, specially being already dishonoured in two places of their Countrey. Newes of the House of Loreto, and of these her wonders, being lately reported in Sclauonie, by certaine marchants, enkindled the Dalmatians (beginning to suspect something) to visit the House that was so glorified with miracles, and to emulate the pietie of the Picentians. Wherupon certaine of them beholding the Chappell of Loreto (for the reme^brance of her departure from Sclauonie was yet fresh) acknowledged it not vnwillingly to be the same, and performed their dutifull veneration with flowing teares: and presently renewing their former griefe, and sighing with the desire they had to see their lost treasure, thus they began to bewaile their late domage. This House which now is honoured in Picene, with so great concourse of mortall men, was lately reuerenced in Dalmatia, with almost the like endeuours of our people. This natiue House of the B. Virgin was first co^ueied by heauenly power from Galiley into Sclauonie, that afterward the Picentians might haue it brought vnto them out of Dalmatia it selfe. This wonder was shewed to the Dalmatians by a heauenly signe, and made manifest by certaine men sent into Galiley.
Therfore let them acknowledge, and reuerence this heauenly gift, with great deuotion, lest the same happen to them, which they heare hath chanced vnto others: and what manner of gift it is, they may rather knowe by wanting, then by enioying the same. Neyther do we despaire (if our deedes were answerable to our desires) but that this very House of the Blessed Virgin, would returne into Sclauonie againe, from whence it departed not many yeares agon. But because these and such like speaches of the Sclauonians were strange and wonderfull to the Picentians (for as yet they had heard nothing of her transmigration from Nazareth and Dalmatia) many esteemed the^ vaine and foolish. But in short time a new wonder from heaue^ declared them to be true indeed.



By reuelation of our B. Lady, an Hermite importuneth the Picentians to inquire of the matter. CHAP. XII.
NEERE to the wood and seat which the B. Virgin mother of God did first make choise of in Picene,Praep. Terem. Hiero. Angel. there is a litle hill called the mount Vrsus, whither a holy man of great sanctitie had retired him selfe not many yeares agone, coueting to be neere the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin; his name is not deliuered, but my mind inclineth to thinke that it was Paul de Silua of who^ afterward we are to speake: who being wholy deuoted to our B. Lady, came daily to visit her seat of Loreto, where he spent many houres in deuout prayer. And hauing a great desire to be present at the miracles which were done by the helpe of the B. Virgin, or els were related by strangers, as already done; he gaue diligent eare to those wonderfull thinges, which
the Dalmatians had published with great asseueration: now and then also he heard the Dalmatians the^ selues lament their mischance, and bewaile the losse of their nation, that the natiue House of the B. Virgin was taken from them, and they depriued of the protection of so great a Patronesse. The godly Hermite reioycing at the other prayses of our B. Lady, was amazed when he vnderstood that it was her natiue House. And truely to him the thing seemed almost incredible, but yet worthy to be inquired of with all diligence; because when so worthy a thing was found out and knowne, it would add great name and honour to the House of Loreto, to the which he was exceedingly deuoted. And hauing a vehement affection to know the truth, and to increase deuotion to our B. Lady, he desired to vnderstand from heauen whether that were true or false. Wherupon without delay; he punished his body with fasting, with haircloth, and stripes, gaue him selfe to prayer, and omitted nothing wherby he thought he might please and pacifie Almightie God: specially he prayed and besought the B. Virgin mother of God by some certaine signe to manifest what Chappell it was, or from whence it
came. Neither did the B. Virgin frustrate his inflamed pietie and desire.The sacred House is knovvne by reuelation of our B. Lady. For the second yeare after the comming of the sacred House into Italy, our B. Lady appearing vnto him in his sleepe, and bidding him be of good comfort, told him that in Italy she had chosen a seat for the little House, wherin her selfe did liue on earth; which because it was negligently reuerenced in Galiley, was now by the ordination of Almightie God transported thence by handworke of Angells, that it might be brought into Dalmatia, and so into Picene it self. There she her selfe was borne, and there also did she conceiue the diuine issue: for which cause that House was, and euer shall be deare to God and her selfe. She likewise declared all that she had related to Alexander Bishop of Tersact in his sleepe, as before hath beene said; concluding at last that by the speciall grace and fauour of the Almightie, that heauenly gift was giuen to the Picentians and Italians, as a solace to their euills, and as a pledge of pardon and peace in time of so many stormes and calamities of their Cou^trey; and then as a most certaine refuge and defence vnto all nations in the perills and dangers of this mortall life: commanding him to go and to declare these thinges to
the Citizens of Recanati, and to the adioyning people: wherwith awaking out of his sleepe, with exceeding ioy of mind for the heauenly warning, he straight fulfilled the commandment of the B. Virgin. And first going to Recanati, he declared his vision to the people of the Cittie, and related vnto them the rest, protesting that our B. Lady her selfe was the authour of his speaches. Leauing the people of Recanati in a wonderfull maze, he made great haste vnto other places, to declare the same to them, with like ^eruour of mind. But at first the Pi^emi^ns esteemed it a vaine fancie, and many reputed the reporter for a teller of dreames: Yet afterward because about that time, there was a certaine flying fame, that this very Chappell was giuen and taken againe fro^ the Dalmatians by the handworke of God; and also now the Dalmatians them selues acknowledged it at Loreto, they remembred them selues, and thought that so weighty a matter was in no wise to be neglected. And likewise calling to mind the late wonder, how the most sacred House had changed her seate three times in one yeare, in their owne territorie of Picene, they were mooued therwith to send messengers to and fro, to inquire therof. And
at last the Citizens of Recanati propounding the matter, by common aduice of the Picentians, it was decreed, that with generall contributio^ of money, certaine men should be sent into Sclauonie, and fro^ thence to Galiley, to seeke out the truth of the matter, by the testimonie of their owne eies, and other certaine and manifest tokens.


Sixteene men sent into Dalmatia and Galiley, confirme the truth of the miracle. CHAP. XIII.
SIXTEENE men honourable for faith, religion,Praep. Terem. Hiero. Angel. and authoritie, were chosen out of all Picene; to whom commandment was giuen, that first inquiring in Dalmatia, and then in Galiley, they should diligently seeke out the whole matter, and should bring them word of all that they found concerning the natiue House of the B. Virgin, which was said to be in those partes: who forthwith passing the Adriaticke sea, and arriuing at Tersact, opened
to the inhabitants the cause of their comming; who yet smarted with the griefe of their late wound, and lamented to remember, that such a treasure was taken from the^, witnessing the great desire they had vnto it, with many plaints and teares. At the intreatie of these Embassadours they shewed them the floore, and the house, which they had built very proportionable and like to that of Loreto for a monument therof. And there againe renewing their lamentation, they grieued to thinke, that those were the only signes which the Sclauouians had of the heauenly gift, that the glory therof was granted to others; and the bare fame left vnto them. Wherupon the Picentian Embassadours applying a measure of the House of Loreto, (which for that purpose they had brought with them) to euery side of the vacant space, found it in all respectes agreeable to the House of Loreto. Then demanding of them how long since the most sacred Chappell departed from them, they assuredly know, that at the very same time that it was take^ from the Sclauonians, it was giuen to the Picentians. And hauing well sought out the matter, and ech recounted the chiefest miracles wrought in either place, they parted with aboundance
of teares, the one sorrowfull with desire, the others reioycing with gladnes. So out of hand the Embassadors returning againe to sea, and passing the Superum and the Siculum seas, and speedily sayling along by Corcyra, by Creet, and Cypresse, they arriued at Palestine with good successe. And vnderstanding that the wayes were nothing secure, by reason that the Turkish armies wa^dred vp and downe all Syria; they hired a Conuoy which conducted them safe into Galiley, and from thence backe againe to their shippe. When they had worshipped the most glorious Sepulcher of CHRIST our Lord at Hierusalem, they held on their iorney to Galiley, and comming to Nazareth, inquired of the natiue House of our B. Lady, and diligently demaunded of it of the Christians, who (such as they were) dwelt in the midst of that depraued nation, of whom being told, what they had receiued from their forefathers, and what they had seene with their owne eyes, whilst the Christian religion remained in Syria, they brought them to the desired place, that they might behold the floore, with the foundations of a house raised vp from thence, yet in the ground to be seene: which measuring with very diligent care, they found
that in euery respect, all thinges did agree with the impressions in Sclauonie, with the floore and the walles of the House of Loreto. And hauing dispatched their busines in both places, according to their owne desire, they shipped them selues with great gladnes, and with happie passage were recarried safe to Ancona, whe^ce they set forth. Wherupon making haste home, and relating all that they had found to the Magistrates and Gouernours of the Citties, from whence they were sent, they imparted vnto the^ what great ioy they conceiued therwith. And the Cittizens of Recanati being very glad of the good successe of this Embassage, wherof they were the Authours, and desiring to haue a monument there to remayne, registred the whole matter in publicke record,Hier. Angel. Praep. Terem. adding therunto the names and testimonies of the 16. Embassadours, that the matter might be well witnessed to all posteritie. Certaine copies wherof being reserued in the houses of priuate men are yet to be seene. And thus much was knowne and found by these Embassadours, the yeare of our Redemptio^ one thousand, two hundred, nintie and six.



The Picentians choose the B. Virgin of Loreto for their Patronesse. CHAP. XIIII.
FORTHVVITH newes, as it is wont, was speedily carried to the Citties and townes adioining, that 16. Embassadours returning from Sclauonie and Galiley, had found by manifest signes that the House of Loreto, was the very same where the mother of God was borne and saluted by the Angell, and that by heauenly power, it was first transported out of Galiley into Sclauonie, and from thence into Picene it selfe. And much about this time the same fame diuulgating the third remoouall therof in the terrtories of Recanati, many greatly desired (conceiuing as it were more feruour of mind by this new report) to see and honour, in this new seat, the heauenly pledge which was brought vnto them from the Fast it selfe. For all did verily thinke and say, that the mother of God had speciall care to protect the Picentians; in
regard wherof, they thought it most meet to commit them selues to her protection and defence. Wherupon in continent the inhabitants of all the townes of Picene,The concourse of the Picentians. filling all the passages and wayes that went to the House of Loreto, began to set forward in this iorney: neither did the healthfull and strong alone make hast to do it, but also the diseased and feeble, neglecting the Phisitians command, crept along, if they were able, if not, they desired to be carried in what sort soeuer. And the people of the wealthiest Citties and townes of Picene, went in surplisses, diuiding them selues into seuerall companies, adorned with ensignes and colours, like bands of men vnder their Ancients, who with great emulatio^, singing solemne praise to God and his B. mother, filled all round about, with the pleasant sound of their tymbrels, fruits, and instruments. After whom followed boyes, and girles, among the women, as it were in a company among them selues. When they came to the Chappell of the B. Virgin (because the straitnes of the place would not admit so great a multitude of people) at the very sight of the most sacred House, bowing downe their knees, and giuing most hartie thankes to God and his
B. mother, they most deuoutly intreated for pardon and peace among so many euils, as they already suffered, or els were likelie to do: and earnestly besought the B. mother of God, because she had offered her selfe a voluntary Patronesse vnto Picene, afflicted with diuers miseries and calamities, that she would also receiue the Picentians themselues, into her protection and patronage, and willingly and fauourably would alwaies vouchsafe to defend their people. The name of her protection and patronage was not in vaine: For since that time the B. Virgin hath shewed her selfe a most assured patronesse to the Picentians, and they in like maner them selues alwayes deuout clients of our B. Lady, not only in adorning, but also in defending her House of Loreto.



The sacred House is honoured with heauenly flames, and reuerenced daily more and more. CHAP. XV.
TO the daily miracles in restoring health to humane bodies, now and then were added heauenly signes, not obscurely signifying that the B. Virgin did fauour and protect the Picentians. For many times vpon the suddaine a flame of fire was seene to spread it selfe abroad and to come fro^ heauen in the night time,Hiero. Angel. which at first glittering, as though it were dispersed in sundry places, but afterward making as it were one streame, and going towards the Cell of the mother of God, filled all round about with heauenly lightes. And the roofe it selfe was often seene to flame with great brightnes, with such admiratio^ of the beholders, that you would thinke you had seene an armie of Angells, warding the House of the heauenly Queene. Wherupon the Bishop of Recanati, in whose Diocesse
it happened, thinking it an honour of religion, according to his office, aduertised Boniface the 8. therof, of whom obtayning the gouernment of the Chappell of Loreto, and thinking it most conuenient to make roome for the Pilgrims out of ha^d, he cosecrated all the ground that was about the sacred House, to the B. Virgin by gift of the Cittizens of Recanati, wherwith the celebritie of the place was also increased. For first they began to build cabbines, and cottages to entertaine the Pilgrimes (who before that time thronging together in the open ayre, lodged in the high waye,The tovvne of Loreto is built.) but afterward larger houses. And because the vneuennes of either hill (specially a valley lying betweene) was no fit seat for building, the hill of the two brothers being higher then was conuenient for their enterprized worke, was leuelled; the valley filled vp, and the vneuennes plained; that there might be leuell ground inough to build vpon by the high way side. Wherby in short time, what with rude cottages and houses, there was erected no small village, extended on the toppe of either hill, and called Loreto, that both the village and the House, might take their names from that LAVRETA, who was so singularly
deuoted to our B. Lady. This commoditie of lodging ioyned to the Religion of the place, meruailously increased the multitude of guestes and strangers,S. Anto. part. 3. Plat. in Boni. 8. Ioan. Villan. lib. 1 which shortly after was not a little forwarded by a thing of new celebritie. For about that time Bonifacius the 8. (whose Popedome the comming of the sacred House into Italy hath made very famous) being much mooued with the vehement earthquakes and afflictions of Italy, partly past, and partly neere at hand; and bending all his care how he might turne from the^ the heauenly wrath, with happie resolution either instituted the secular yeare (called the Iubiley) or els renewed it, granting to all that rightly visited the Territories of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, release of all the paine due to their offences. Wherupon the yeare of our Redemption 1300. being the first that was memorable for the celebritie of the Iubiley, the fame of this new Pontificall Indulgence co^ming into all the countreys of the Christian world, caused an innumerable multitude of all nations, and specially of the West, to trauell to Rome it self. For euery way there was such confluence of all nations to the Cittie, that albeit it be very large, yet could it scarce containe
so great a multitude of strangers, for in a manner there passed no day, that the Cittie gaue not hospitalitie to two hundred thousand Pilgrimes, besides an innumerable multitude, which was on the way. Wherof many (specially to whom Recanati was not much out of the way) being moued with the fame of these miracles, went to the house of Loreto, that euery one might be witnesses and messengers to their owne countrey people: of all which they receiued of so vnusuall and vnknowne a miracle, not by the report of others, but saw with the view of their owne eyes.



The walles adioyned to the sacred House for a support, giue backe: to the which notwithstanding large Cloisters are added. CHAP. XVI.
MEANE while, the people of Recanati;Hier. Angel. Bap. Mant. being mooued with this greate concourse of Pilgrimes, determined to reuerence and defend the most sacred Chappell with all care. For seeing that the walles were both weake and ancient, and had stood many yeares without a foundation, they were very solicitous and fearefull, lest by little and little they might faile by iniurie of the weather, and also lest the worthiest memorie of the B. Virgin in the whole world, might vtterly decay and come to ruine. Therfore thinking it for the best, to defend on euery side (as much as by humane art and industrie they might) the sacred House, seeming much decayed, they went about to lay foundations, as well as they could, and to compasse it about
with a bricke wall. But it is reported by no fayned writers, that the new foundations would by no meanes adhere to the sacred walles; that you may thinke the fortunate House of our B. Lady standing by diuine power,Trad. Laur. Bapt. Mant. conte^ned all humane helpe and industrie. Moreouer in processe of time, the new walles adioyned to the old for a support, by little and little gaue backe so farre, that betweene the two walles, as often as it was needfull, a boy might go with a burning torch, therby to make the credit of the disioyned walles manifest to them that desired to see it. Neither is it long since it was well reme^bred: for there liued diuers honest and godly men, not many yeares agone, who told Raphael Riera, a man of approued vertue and testimonie (of whom we made mention before, and afterward are to make, and of whom I also learned it) that they had seene a boy passe with ease betweene the said walles. To whom also Raynerius Nerusius, an excellent Architect, and ouerseer of the worke of Loreto, for the familiaritie that was betweene them, reported that by commandment of Pope Clement the 7. the pulling downe of these bricke walles being committed to his charge, when in steed therof the Pope we^t
about to set vp the marble Crust which at this day all behold with great admiration, then to his owne wonder he found, that against all reason of Architecture, these walles were remooued fro^ the sacred Cha^ber; neither were they ruined so much with antiquitie, as by a certaine hidden iudgement of Alm. God; that it might sufficiently appeare that the B. Virgin mother of God would exclude all humane industrie,Trad. Laur. from the supporting of her House, to th'end the diuine power might be more notable, if that a most ancient house could stand so many ages without a foundation or any human helpe.The Image of Christ Crucified doth returne into the most Sacred House of it selfe. The report also goeth, that the most ancient Image of Christ Crucified, brought thither with the sacred house, about that time became very famous for the iteration of a strange miracle; for when the Bishop and Citizens of Recanati had remooued it thence, and placed it in a Chappell adorned of purpose for it, that it might be reuerenced with great honour, the holy Crucifix remoouing thence of it selfe, and returning into the most sacred House, it seated it selfe in his owne place againe: who often reassaying the same without effecting their purpose, at last they desisted, and turned their care an
other way. For seeing that neither the houses nor cottages were able to receiue so great a multitude of strangers, nor in the sacred House any vacant place for votiue Images and Donaries; and also lest the Pilgrimes (whereof many deuoid of houseroome and lodging as it were in Stations, should be enforced to remaine all night in the open ayre:) or lest their votiue giftes exposed to the injury of the weather, should perish, neere to the sacred Chappell, they built very large Cloisters, to receiue strangers and their Donaries. And also erected an Altar without the sacred Chappell, that the Pilgrimes who were excluded by the straitnes of the place, might there behold the Priest exercising his holy function. To these Cloisters, as it is reported, were adioined houses, where the Priestes, the keepers, and other officers of the most sacred Cell should dwell. And in the walles of the said Cloisters,Hiero. Angel. the chiefest mysteries of the sacred House, and her manifold remoouall, were exposed in colours, by an excellent painter of those dayes.



Heauenly lightes make the day of the B. Virgins Natiuitie more solemnized in her natiue House. CHAP. XVII.
IN the meane season a heaue^ly visio^ wonderfull to be spoken or seene,Bapt. Niant. Hier. Aug. signified to mortall men, at what time the B. Virgin desired to haue her natiue House reuerenced with greatest deuotion. There was a certaine solitarie man called Paul, venerable for the gift of abstinence and sanctimonie,Paul de Silua. surnamed A Silua, that is to say, Of the wood, where he dwelt, from the first comming of the sacred House into Italy: which assoone as it had remooued out of the wood, this holy man thinking it also his best to depart thence; built a cottage in a conuenient place of the next wood, from whence he might both easily behold and go to the most sacred House: for of an ancient custome he daily went vnto it, to adore God and his B. mother in
the place where his seet had stood: Wherupon Paul giuing him selfe to prayer, and to the meditation of heauenly thinges, in the sight of the most sacred Chappell (as his custome was) as if it were in the fight of our B. Lady her selfe, he often obserued that a heauenly flame spreading abroad far and wide,Heauenly fire doth rest ouer the sacred House. in manner of a great blazing starre, rested ouer the Cell of the B. Virgin. And obseruing the thing, and the time very diligently, he found that on the 6. of the Ides of September, that is to say, on the very day of the B. Virgins birth, yearly about the fourth Vigill of the night, a great flame falling from heauen, and couering the roofe of her sacred house with an vniforme brightnes, within a while asce^ded on high from whence it came. Which wonderfull spectacle did not only replenish him with great ioy, but also amazed him. And as he was a man of true simplicitie, he supposed that the B. Virgin her selfe came from heauen into her natiue House, in likenes of a flame to celebrate her birth. Wherupon hauing a desire to behold so great a wonder neere at hand, he began to expect the opportunity of the time, the^ the which nothing seemed longer vnto him. At length when the yeare came about, and that
heauenly flame shewed it selfe againe, he speedily ranne vnto it, to behold with his eyes (as he beleeued) and with all deuotio^ to salute the Queene of heauen inuironed with blisle. But the neerer his hope was of approaching vnto it, the more the thing and the flame at first diminished, and at last vanished away, and withdrew it selfe quite out of sight; leauing the credulous beholder frustrate of his expectation; which inflamed his godly hart with a more ardent affection and desire, as if he had receiued all that heauenly fire into him selfe, though he was altogeather ignora^t, what it might portend. And hauing thus spent ten whole yeares, yeare by yeare alwayes the selfe same day, this heauenly flame hanging ouer the sacred House, deceiuing the hope of the beholder, more and more inflamed his godly desire. But at length obtaining it of Almightie God by prayer, he had his wish. For in his quiet rest in the night time, he learned by a heauenly vision, that the natiue House of the B. Virgin, was honoured with an anniuersary flame, the very day of her natiuitie, because it was to her liking to haue that day to be kept and reuerenced there with great solemnitie. Wherfore
Paul, who vntill this day had concealed this admirable spectacle in great silence, now either vpon deuotion, or els (as it may be supposed) compelled by the B. Virgin in his rest, went speedily to Recanati, and declared the whole matter to the Bishop, and to the Magistrates of the Cittie; who through the opinion of his sanctitie, was esteemed a graue authour, euen of so great a thing. And the Bishop being moued with the authoritie of the man, and with the congruencie of the thing, and the time, beleeued that the heauenly vision was vnfayned, and presently published it abroad, that the people of Recanati might reuerence the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, with speciall honour and deuotio^, the very day of her natiuitie. Wherby it came to passe, that afterward the adioyning, and also remote people either imitating the example of the people of Recanati,The day of our B. Ladies natiuitie is had in greatest reuerence. or els stirred with the fame of this miracle, chiefly in the month of Septe^ber, asse^bled to Loreto with great zeale, to celebrate the day of our B. Ladies birth. And shortly after, the new bountie of the Popes, increased the deuotion of the people, who chieflie at that time (as in due place we are to declare)
granted most ample Indulgences to the House of Loreto. And these spectacles of the heauenly flames continued not only many yeares, but also many ages. For about 20. yeares agone, diuers Cittizens of Recanati,The vvonder of the heauenly fiers is renevved. remarkable for vertue and grauitie, reported to Raphael Riera, of whom I receiued it, that about the day of the B. Virgins natiuitie, flames of fire were seene to fall from heauen in the night time, on the House of Loreto, all the whole Cittie of Recanati looking on, and that them selues had seene the same many times, with exceeding ioy of mind: adding withall that the day before, about night, when it began to be darke, the Cittizens of Recanati hauing a great desire to see so gratefull and so pleasant a sight, flocked commonly to the houses and walles, whence they might behold the House of Loreto, that they might delight their eyes and mindes, with the admirable beautie of that heauenly flame: which euery yeare was seene (as it was reported) vntill the time of Pope Paul the third:Riera in Annal. Laur. Ambro. Noui. Fast. l. 9. so that among all the wonders of Loreto there is scarce any more notable than this: which not only historiographers set downe in writing, but also Nouidius a famous Poet, recorded it in a notable poeme, which he dedicated to
Pope Paul the third, which we thought good to insert in this historie. Wherfore thus he writeth, extolling the B. Virgin with worthy praise.

To thee therfore are temples built; rare monuments of loue,
As many as be tongues on earth; or shyning starres aboue.
Yet none with that may be compard; in which the Virgin bright,
The Queene of heauen to blesse the world; at first was brought to light.
VVith wonder great this worthy House; to good for Parthia land,
Did mount into the lofty ayer; borne vp by Angells hand.
VVhen after stay in diuers coastes; to Italie it came:
And of the Picene people there; did lastlie beare the name.
And lest succeeding ages, should the truth hereof suspect,
This night strang lights vpon the roofe; do glittering beames reflect.




VVhen the towne of Loreto was gouerned by lawes, the Cittizens of Recanati inuironed the Sacred House with a Church. CHAP. XVIII.
THE Cittizens of Recanati being mooued with these heauenly signes,Bap. Mant. Hiero. Angel. determined to defend and adorne the House of Loreto with their vttermost endeuours. For when the towne of Loreto was daily more and more frequented, by reason that many came thither fro^ all places to dwell, either vpon deuotion to the B. Virgin, or els for desire of traffique, the Cittizens of Recanati thinking it most conuenient to order them by lawes and statutes,The tovvn of Loreto hath a Gouernour giuen vnto it. set them downe lawes and gaue them a Magistrate for execution of Iustice. Hauing disposed matters in the towne, they turned their care to thinges abroad. For certaine necessitous and notorious wretches allured either with a fit occasion
of robbing, or els with the sweetnes of the prey it selfe, spoiled many straying and wandering Pilgrimes, setting on them among bushes and woodes adioyning to the high way; which seeming to concerne the dignitie and reputatio^ of the Cittizens of Recanati, they charged the gouernour of the Cittie, that with a great companie of souldiers, he should make the waies that went to the House of Loreto, secure from theeues. And as their counsaile was godly, so had it good successe. For the Gouernour him selfe most dilige^tly searching the most hidden and lurking places of the wood, put the malefactours to death, and in short space purged all that countrey with great commendation: whose praise redounding to the Cittie that made him Gouernour, from that time the Cittie of Recanati was surnamed the Most Iust. Shortly after a new calamitie of those times, and the neglect of sacred thinges,S. Anto. Par. 3 Plat. in Clem. 5 The Pontificall sea is translated into France. made the pietie of the people of Recanati very famous. Whiles these things were done in Picene, Clement the 5. the third Pope after Bonifacius (for Benedict the 11. the successour of Bonifacius was Pope but a few moneths) the 5. yeare of that age translated the Apostolicke Sea into France, to the great detriment of Italy, and almost of all
the Christia^ comon wealth; which doubtles the casuall burning of the Latera^ Church at that time, did portend to the Cittie of Rome. For whiles Clement the Roman Bishop established a new Sea at Lions, the Lateran Church at Rome being the ancient seat of the Roman Bishops was set on fire, whether by malice or by cha^ce, it is not known. Neither was the state of Italy much better vnder Iohn the 22. who succeeding Clement, established the Pontificall Sea at Auinigon, nor vnder Benedict the XII. nor the rest of the Roman Bishoppes, who afterward through Iohns exa^ple sate at the same place. But the pietie and deuotion of the people of Recanati did flourish in building of a new Church to our B. Lady this most distressed time, both of all the Christian, and specially of their owne common wealth. For of late, that is to say, the yeare of our Redemption 1322. the Cittie of Recanati was throwne downe by commandment of Iohn the XXII. because it had reuolted from the Pope,Ioan. Villar. lib. 9. and the Cittizens compelled to prouide them dwelling in an other place. But when they had made their agreement with the Pope, and built their towne in that place, where at this present it standeth, their wealth was almost consumed,
either with the ouerthrow of their Cittie, or els with bulding this new towne. Yet notwithstanding their deuotion to our B. Lady their Patronesse prouoking the^, they inte^ded to build a Church about the Chappell of Loreto. For when the adioyned cloisters could neither containe the Pilgrimes, their tablets, nor votiue Images, by reason that they, and their donaries daily increased; the Bishop of Macerata, in whose Diocesse Recanati was, with great approbation of the people of Recanati, we^t about to build a Church about the most sacred Chappell. For which purpose easily obtaining a great space of ground lying there about, he pulled downe the Cloisters, and at the common charge built a new Church from the foundation, low indeed for the greatnes,The sacred House is inuironed vvith a Church. but wide and large inough: wherunto he adioyned larger houses for the Priestes and ministers to dwell in, and for the hospitalitie of the better sort of Pilgrimes; there also shortly after erecting an hospitall for the reliefe of poore Pilgrimes.



VVhen Benedict the XII. had adorned the new Church of Loreto with Indulgences, it was frequented with greater deuotion. CHAP. XIX.
WHEN the Church was finished, a greater ornament was done vnto it. For the Cittizens of Recanati making humble request to Benedict the 12. to grantremissio^ of sinnes to all that rightly visited the Church of Loreto,Hero. Angel. The Indulgences of Benedict the XII. easily obtained it. From which time so great feruour was enkindled in the hartes of the people of Recanati, that most of the^ would not be hindered almost by any busines, to go euery day three miles to visit the House of Loreto, for so far is it distant from their towne. Moreouer euery morning assoone as the little children came out of their cha^bers, their parents and nourses taught the^to turne them selues straight towardes the natiue House of the B. Virgin, and deuoutly
to acknowledge and salute the mother of Loreto. But old and sicke folkes being hindered with age or sicknes, not able to go to the Church of Loreto as the custome was, procured that the Image of our B. Lady of Loreto, expressed in colours, should be sett vp in the market place: about which, building a Chappell and an Altar, they obtained of Benedict aforesaid, a Breue ingrauen in golden letters, wherin was granted remission of sinnes, to them that prayed at the said Altar. Hierome Angelita one of the Magistrates of the Cittie of Recanati (who flourished about 70. yeares agone) affirmeth that himselfe hath seene the same Breue, defaced with rottennes and antiquitie. Moreouer the Bishop of Macerata (who at that time was also Bishop of Recanati) thinking it good to deliuer to Posteritie the true relation of the House of Loreto, tooke order that a litle booke might be published, wherin was co^tained the admirable comming of the most sacred House into Italy, her triple transmigration in the territories of Recanati, and the chiefest wonders and miracles of our B. Lady of Loreto. And because the people of Recanati had a speciall desire to imprint in the hartes of tender yeares great deuotion towardes the B. Virgin
of Loreto, they made a Decree that all schoolemaisters in teaching the first principles of learning, should first inure childrens eares and mindes with such discourses, and by little and little should accustome te^der age to the reading of that little booke; which ingraffed in them an exceeding deuotion and pietie towards the natiue House of the B. Virgin.


The state of the House of Loreto, whiles the Roman Bishops sate at Auinigon. CHAP. XX.
BVT what deepe impression the religion of the House of Loreto made in the harts of the Picentians at that time, this one thing may shew, that being nothing almost furthered by the Roman Bishops, it flourished of it selfe. For about that time, as before hath bene said, the Roman Sea passed into France. And because the Pope was absent from the Cittie, and from Italy it selfe, the House of Loreto wanted many ornaments and furderances, which
now it hath, and then also had had, but that this most sacred House ennobled with so many miracles and signes, was so far fro^ the sight and intelligence of the Popes. But euen in that state, she wa^ted not their Pontificall ornaments, albeit the Po^tificall Sea was the onely cause, that she was not so much adorned, as not neglected of the Roman Bishops, whiles they sate in France. For when Benedict the XII. had graced the House of Loreto with a gift of Indulgences, Clement the VI. his Successour being absent from the Cittie (for he sate at Auinigon) published and kept the celebritie of the secular Iubiley,S. Anto. par. 3. Plat. Cle. vt. reducing it to the 50. yeare: wherby the multitude of people which came from all places to Rome, was almost incredible, wherof many, to wit the Inhabitants of Flaminia, and Emilia, came out of their way to go to the House of Loreto most illustrious with fame. But shortly after a horrible plague begining at Rome it selfe (the head Cittie of the world) wasted all Italy almost with funeralles, and continued three whole yeares, at which time euery hundredth person scarce remaining aliue, the Citties of Italy were reduced euen to waste and desolation. Which infinite calamitie (as I may terme it) in very deed
inforced many Italians to implore the helpe of our B. Lady of Loreto, that in so horrible a tempest and storme, they might be protected with the shadow of heauenly helpe. About twentie yeares after, Vrbane the V. succeeding Clement, at last reuisited Rome, but not so much to recall thither the Pontificall Sea, as to compose the affaires of the Cittie, and the troubles of Italy. But soone after his returne from the Cittie into Fra^ce, he departed this life. After whome Gregory the XI. receiued the Popedome: who was so mooued with the miseries of Italy, and with the worthy prayers of S. Catherine of Siena, a virgin of admirable sanctitie, that at length he returned the Pontificall Sea to Rome, about 70. yeares after it was translated into France.



The continuance of Schisme depriueth the House of Loreto of many benefites of the Popes. CHAP. XXI.
SHORTLY after Gregory being taken out of this mortall life, Vrbane the VI. was created Pope, against whom the French factio^ subrogated Clement the VII. a false Pope, who opposed his Auinigon seat, against the Sea of Rome, which he would haue to be called the Roman, wherby the Church was troubled and diuided into two partes. But what hinderance the absence of the Roman Bishop was to the ornament and commodities of the House of Loreto, was well perceiued euen at that time by his presence. For though Vrbane the Pope was molested and disquieted with schisme,The Indulgences of Vrbane the V I. and with the armes and treacherie of schismaticall Princes: yet in the midst of so many troubles and cares, he had some regard to adorne
the B. Virgin of Loreto. For being acertained of the heaue^ly flames wont to be seene ouer the House of Loreto, the 6. of the Ides of September; he applied his mind to honour the heauenly Queene, and with Pontificall giftes fro^ the Vicar of God, thought good to adorne the natiue habitation of the B. Virgin, beautified with heauenly signes from God him selfe. Wherefore to them that visited the House of Loreto, the day of the B. Virgins natiuitie, he granted most bountifull remission of their sinnes, the 90. yeare of that age, in very fit time. For Bonifacius the IX. succeeding Vrbane, did not only by example of his Predecessour adorne the House of Loreto with new Indulgences, but also kept the celebritie of the Iubiley, which according to the institution of Bonifacius the VIII. fell in the yeare of our Redemption 1400. And as the Pontificall Sea recalled againe to Rome, and a desire to see the Pope, drew an innumerable multitude from all partes to the Cittie, to visit the Churches of the Apostles, so also the fame of these heaue^ly flames and Pontificall Indulgences excited many of them to visit the Cell of Loreto, chiefly in the month of September, and ther to celebrate the natiuitie of the Blessed Virgin.
About the same time,Hier. Ang. the Cittizens of Recanati (that also in the winter time people might haue free passage to the most sacred House) tooke order that the way which went to Loreto should be paued and bordered with bricke; by which they erected little oratories of like distance from ech other, as instigations to increase deuotion and to succour the Pilgrimes in stormie weather. This example of the people of Recanati, prouoked the people of Picene to imitate that pious worke; wherby the wayes which went to Loreto from the bordering Citties, and townes, began straight to be paued: and from Ancona, Auximo, Montesanto, and Firmo, were brought euen to Loreto it selfe. Also bridges were made ouer the Riuers, which ranne through Pecene, that they might giue secure and speedy passage to the Pilgrimes. But the continuall disturbance of the Christian state, did no lesse hinder the ornaments of the House of Loreto then the aboad of the Romane Bishopps in France had donne. For that long and variable schisme (wherof the like hath neuer bin) troubled many Popes for fortie yeares togeather,S. Anto. par. 3. vntill Martin the V. with the great liking of all, was created Pope in the Councell of Constance,
who at last brought peace and concord to the Christian world. And truely as that foule tempest of discord, oppressed the Church and the Popes with many euills; so in like maner it depriued the House of Loreto of no small heape of commodities, and that the times ensuing did well declare.


Martin the V. adorneth the House of Loreto with Indulgences and faires. CHAP. XXII.
HITHER TO I haue rehearsed many things not very manifest, not only for their antiquitie and the disquiet of the whole world, but also for that they were badly committed to writing in good part of the time, which happened from the translation of the House of our B. Lady out of Galiley, till she was setled at Loreto, and began to be more and more frequented, in this great varietie and disturbance of the Christian state. Also if there were any thinges, in the recordes of Recanati, or in other publicke or priuate
monuments, which might giue light to this Historie, for the most part they perished (as we said before) when the Registry, togeather with the Cittie was consumed with fire. But the industrie of the Dalmatians supplied the want of the Cittizens of Recanati; For the Flumentians bordering on Tersact,Hier. Angel. in time of Pope Leo the 10. did giue no small light to the first beginning of the historie of Loreto, sending those things to the people of Recanati, signed in writing, which they found in the ancient Chronicles of their forefathers, concerning the first remoouall of this most sacred House into Dalmatia, their inquisition, reuerence, and the miracles of the same. Wherof the Cittizens of Recanati certified Leo the Pope, as witnesseth Hierome Angelita, who at that very time, was Secretarie to the Cittie of Recanati, and afterward dedicated his historie of Loreto (where he deliuered these thinges to posteritie) to Clement the VII. Cosin-german to Leo, and partaker of his secrets. So hauing followed Angelita, an authour of no small reputation and credit, out of the chronicles of Sclauonio, we haue collected the first part of this historie, adding therunto out of the proper monume^ts of Recanati, what the mercilesse fire left vnconsumed.
But hereafter all that we are to relate, will be more euident and copious, because greater diligence was vsed not only to deliuer them to posteritie, but also to preserue the^ by record, that they might come safe to our age and handes.The Indulgences and benefits of Martin the V. Martin therfore bringing peace and quietnes to the Church, desired nothing more, then to leaue the House of Loreto (famous for miracles and wonders) graced with some gift of his: wherupon granting many and great Indulgences to the most sacred House, he inuited all to visit and reuerence the Chappell of Loreto, chiefly in the moneth of September. Moreouer about the 20. yeare of that age, this benefit he augmented with an other, instituting solemne faires at Recanati, to the praise, glory, and honour of the B. Virgin of Loreto (as in the Apostolicke Breue he deliuereth) ayming at that which prooued true, that by propinquitie and neerenes of the places the celebritie of the mart of Recanati, would also increase the celebritie of the House of Loreto: seeing the choise of wares might draw the bordering people, and Indulgences of sinnes, those marchants to reuerence the sacred House: which Indulgences he granted for three monethes, answerable to the mart of Recanati, so that
in any part of Septe^ber, October, and Nouember (all which the mart of Recanati was to be held) these Indulge^ces might be gained at Loreto by them, that with due deuouotion went to visit the House of the B. Virgin. Afterward many Popes following the example of Martin, as Iulius the 2. Xystus the 4. and Leo the 10. (as in due place shall be said) confirmed the mart of Recanati by their authoritie, and graced the Church of Loreto with Pontificall benefits. But vnder Martin the V. not only the celebritie, but also the ornaments of the House of Loreto had good increase. For the goodly buildings (now called the Chanonry) were raised on the south side, for the Priestes, which voluntarily came to serue in the House of Loreto. And also a Pallace and an Hospitall were then built, to entertaine as well the noble as the poorer sort of Pilgrimes.



The wealth of the Church of Loreto in time of Pope Eugenius the IIII. CHAP. XXIII.
EVGENIVS succeeded Martin, but he was so troubled with the garboiles of the Cittie, and with the wicked decrees of the Cou^cell of Basill, now corrupted, and also with the schisme of Felix V. the Antipope, and so solicitous for the Councell of Florence, which him selfe had summoned, that he had almost no leisure to thinke of adoring the House of Loreto. Notwithstanding Flauius Blondus Secretarie to Eugenius,The testimonie of Flauius Blondus. and no obscure historiographer of those times, performing as it were the, Popes duetie, graced the Cell of Loreto with these eloquent wordes.
Betwixt Recanati and the Adriaticke Sea (sayth he) a litle from the Riuer Musion, in an open and vnsensed towne, is seated the most famous Chappell of the glorious Virgin MARY in all Italy, called our Lady of Loreto. In which that the prayers of suppliants are heard of Almightie God, by the intercession
of his B. mother, this is a great and a most certaine argument, that they, who haue obtained their vowes, haue hung vp donaries of gold, siluer, wax, cloth, linnen and wollen, of great estimation and worth, filling almost all the whole Church, which the Bishop preserueth vntoucht, to the glorie of God, and of his B. Mother. Whereby it well appeareth, what fame, what religion, and what celebritie the House of Loreto was of, and also what varietie and plentie of donaries it had, Eugenius the fourth being Pope, that is to say, about the yeare of our Redemption 1450. which being famous and memorable for the Iubiley, increased the celebritie and the wealth of Loreto, as it was wont to do. About the same time, by the instigation of Philip Vicecount, Duke of Milan,Blond. lib. 5. Dec. 3. Sabel. l. 2. En. 10. Francis Ssorza making warre against the Pope, and bringing Picene by force and policie into his power, the victor purposed to visit the most illustrious Church of our B. Lady of Loreto. But Iohn Vitellescus Bishop of Recanati,Iohn Vitellescus Bishop of Recanati. an actiue and a wise man gouerning Picene with great command, and fearing lest the Chappell of our B. Lady (very wealthy by reason of so many donaries) might be ransackt by a souldier puffed vp with victorie, went about to remooue the occasion of auarice, and conueying the chiefest ornaments of
the Church of Loreto secretly into a shippe prepared for that purpose, he himselfe speedily transported them first to Venice, and then to Rauenna, to take away the occasion of sacriledge, and to preserue the sacred donaries in safetie; and after that tempest was asswaged, brought them backe againe to Loreto. But the protection of the B. Virgin was not doubtfull in defending her owne House in time of these stirres. For when so many armies of Ssorza, of the Pope, and of Alsonsus King of Naples wandered freely vp and downe all Picene in this long and cruell war, and so many Captaines of ba^ds came to Loreto; yet in the ransacking of so many townes and Citties, a village vnfortified, and famous for the wealth of the Church, (as then things stood) remained alwayes vntoucht and vndefiled: so much either the sanctitie of the place, or els the protection of the B. Virgin towardes her owne state, preuailed with mortall men.



The House of Loreto is enriched with Indulgences by Nicolas the V. and fortified against the force of the Turkes. CHAP. XXIIII.
AFTER the death of Eugenius,The benefites of Nicolas the V. Nicolas the 5. receiued the Popedome, who not to be ouercome by Martin in honouring of our B. Lady,Hiero. Angel. graced the Cell of Loreto with Pontificall giftes. For knowing that the festiuall day of the B. Virgins salutation by the Angell, was most famous and memorable in that House (because God him selfe put on humane nature the same day in that very place) he adorned the most ioyfull light, in which was layd the foundation of mans saluation with an anniuersarie Indulgence: wherby the Church of Loreto (as the memory of so great a mysterie well deserued) yearely on that day began to be exceedingly reuerenced. And when Nicolas had adorned the House of Loreto with these Indulge^ces, he thought
good also to prouide for the wealth of the same, straitly ordaining that the donaries of Loreto should not be alienated nor sold, suspending the Bishop of Recanati from his function in the Church, if hereafter he presumed to diminish the lest iote therof, or turne them to other vses. And if he did not recouer them already sold and dispersed within the space of a moneth, he should be put out of his Bishopricke. Also in the same Breue he gaue commandment to the Cittizens of Recanati, both to recouer and defend the donaries of Loreto. Not only in peace but also in warlike tumult, the worthie pietie of Nicolas the Pope was very notable towardes the House of Loreto. For about that time Mahomet king of the Turkes,S. Anto. p. 3. The Turks do take Constantinople. hauing slaine Constantine Paleolagus the Emperour of the East, and taken Constantinople by force, and filthily spoiled it, translated the seat of the Turkish Empyre into Europe, the yeare of our Redemptio^ 1452. wherupon as soone as it was spread abroad, that Constantinople, the fortresse of the Christian Empyre was taken by the Barbarians: that the Emperour him selfe, with the nobilitie, was slaine, and that the Emperour of the Turks, pussed vp with so great a victorie, neere at hand insulted ouer Greece, and
also threatned destruction to Italy it selfe, truely so great terrour was striken into the Christian forces, that all Italy trembled. Wherfore Nicolas hauing great care of the House of Loreto, fortified her against the inuasion of the Barbarians with strong defence, and prepared to rise against them with all his forces, to represse their furie.


The House of Loreto is fortified against the Turkes, by Callistus the III. and putteth the Barbarians to flight, much frighted with a great ouerthrow. CHAP. XXV.
NICOLAS departing this life with griefe in the very preparation and meditation of the Turkish war (as it is reported) Callistus the III. succeeded;S. Anto. par. 3. Plat. in Call. 3. who, because it was giuen out, that the Turkes (hauing conquered P^loponesus and subdued part of Epyrus) were bent into Dalmatia,The benefites of Calli^tus the (...). and into Italy it selfe with great furie and madnes, desired nothing more, then to
defend the House of Loreto; not doubting but if she were safe, all the rest of Italy would be in safetie, by the protection of the mother of God. Wherupon he committed his forces to Rodericke Borgia his brothers sonne, and to Lord Iohn Milianus his sisters sonne, with the office and title of his Legates, out of ha^d sending the one into Picene, to whose speciall charge he committed the House of Loreto, and the other to Bolognia. Both these Legates comming to Loreto with their armies, and intreating peace and pardon of Almightie God and his B. mother, strengthened the House of Loreto (void of walles and fortifications) with rampiers and other fortresses made vp in haste and vnorderly. But though the B. Virgin contemned not the good will of the Pope and his Captaines towardes her, yet she her selfe defended her owne House, taming, and turning the furious Turkes an other way. For at that time the Popes nauie (albeit not very big) spoiling the coastes of Asia with happie aduenture and successe,Anton. p. 3. Sabel. A^ne. 10. lib. 6. and vanquishing the huge forces of Barbarie, vnder the gouernement of the Patriarch of Aquileia, ouercame the Turkish nauie in battaile, and tooke most of their Gallies. Moreouer by the instigation of Calistus Vsumcassanus King of Persia,
roading into the borders of the Turkes with a strong armie, obtained famous victories of the most insolent enemie, not so much by humane force (as him selfe confessed in his letters sent vnto the Pope) as by heauenly ayde. And much about the same time, Iohn Humatez President of Hungarie setting on the Turkes as they besieged Belgrade (a famous towne of Hungarie) with great forces and strength, made great slaughter among the^ with a few souldiers, which seemed not to be the worke of man. For when Iohn Capistranus a holy man of the familie of S. Francis, brought in the signe of Christ Crucified, the Barbarians were put to flight and slaine, and Mahomet their Emperour was wounded; which doubtles did proceed from the goodnes of God: for the Captaines them selues acknowledged that so notable a victorie was gotten by heauenly fauour. Wherfore hauing obtained so many and so great victories of so mighty an enemie by heauenly aide, as all confessed, it animated the Christia^s to hope well of their common cause. And shortly after, no small thing to be spoken of, increased their godly hope, and carried the name of our B. Lady of Loreto, into all the Christian world.



By restoring of health to Pius the second, the House of Loreto began to be far more reuerenced and famous. CHAP. XXVI.
PIVS the second a wise and a vertuous man was elected for Callistus,Plat. in Pio. 2. who not only by his letters and Legates, but also by his owne prese^ce and words animating Christian Kings and Princes to the Turkish warre in the Councell of Mantua, with the labours of his iourney fell into a long and a dangerous sicknes, this most distressed time of the Christian common wealth. For great part of the sacred souldiers, who had receiued the Cruzado, and giuen their names to the sacred war, were to meete at Ancona by Pius his commandme^t, and there to expect his comming, as was agreed vpon. But a burning feuer and a most vehement cough, did so afflict the aged and ouer-wearied body of Pius in this most aduerse time of the Christian state,
that he was not only, not able to go, but euen out of hope to come to Amona, as he had appointed. Therfore relecting the hope and helpe of the Phisitians, he impsored the assistance of our B. Lady of Loreto, whose worthy power in curing of diseases was miraculous as he vnderstood, not so much desiring to seeke a remedie for his present sicknes, as for his iourney to Ancona. And doubting not, but that his prayers were heard, forth with he gaue and dedicated to the B. Virgin, a golden Chalice very notable for workmanship and weight, wherin the Pope him selfe caused this writing to be incised, for a monument of his vow and gift.




HOLY MOTHER OF GOD,
Though thy power be not restrained to any copasse, but filleth the whole world with miracles, yet because it is thy will oftentimes to be delighted more with one place then with an other: and day by daie adornest thy beloued seat
of Loreto, with innumerable graces and miracles: I vnhappie sinner, with hart and mind, recurre vnto thee, suppliantly beseeching thee to take from me this burning feuer, and most troublesome cough, and to restore my feeble bodie his wonted health, profitable, as we hope, to the Christia^ co^mon wealth: In the meane time accept this gift, as a token of my seruice.

POPE PIVS
 THE II. THE YEARE OF OVR SALVATION M.CCCC.LXIV.





His gift was so pleasing to the B. Virgin, that the hope of Pius the Pope deceiued him not any iote at all. A wonder to be spoke^: For he had no sooner made his vow, but the heat of the feuer began to relent, the cough to diminish, and strength to returne to his diseased body almost consumed with
sicknes and age. Wherupon Pius vnwilling to delay the time (though he had not yet recouered perfect strength) vndertooke his iourney towards Ancona,Pius the 2. doth Visit the B. Virgin of Loreto. by the way to performe the vow which he had made to visit the B. Virgin of Loreto. Many Cardinalls and Peeres of Rome went with him, riding in a horse-litter, whom partly the charitable and reuerend respect they bare vnto him, as also the fame of the miracle, and partly the desire they had to see the sacred armie caused to accompany fro^ the Cittie it selfe. In this iourney the neerer the Pope came to the House of Loreto, the better he felt him selfe, that it might plainly appeare how he recouered his strength: For when he came to present him selfe before the B. Virgin his Patronesse, he was perfect well: and well remembring the helpe which he had receiued in the Cittie, and likewise in they way, he performed his vow with great deuotion, wherby the maiestie of Loreto did appeare more then euer at any time before. For at the same instant, you might haue seene many Cardinalls and Peeres of Rome, attending on Pius, and many famous Captaines of the warre which came from Ancona to meete the Pope, and the high Priest him selfe praying with feruent deuotion
before the B. Virgin of Loreto. And when Pius had religiously performed his vow, he went to Ancona with all that co^pany waiting on him. But the delay of the Captaines of the sacred warre, was the only hinderance, that he receiued no such benefitt as he desired, by the vow which he obtained by the intercession of the B. Virgin of Loreto. For being more and more impaired with age and feeblenes, and fitting at Ancona in all the summer heates, expecting the Venetian fleet, and other confederates of the warre, he began to pine away, either ouer-wearied with their delay, or els with old age oppressing his feeble body, wherwith falling into a gentle and a continuall feuer, he was at last consumed, and departed to heauen to receiue the reward of his labours, and of that most worthy endeuour, the 66. yeare of that age, deseruing worthy remembrance as well for his notable giftes of mind, as for his pietie and religion. Neither is it to be reckoned amo^g the least of Pius praises, that such a man recouering his health by the helpe of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and so many Princes and Nations reporting it abroad, greatly increased the worthie name and reuerence of the House of Loreto. For vntill that time (very neere
a hundred and sixtie yeares from her comming into Italy the fame of the House of Loreto) did not much passe the boundes of Picene: so that a certaine obscure or doubtfull rumour therof scarce came into the bordering or into remote Countreys: that none may thinke it strange, that newes of the transportatio^ of the sacred House from Galiley into Italy, had neither pierced to S. Vincent Ferrier in Spaine, intangled in the schisme of Auinigon, and busied in the religion of Mont-Seratto, nor to S. Antoninus, nor other Tuscane writers of former times in Tuscane, all miserably vexed and diuided with Ciuill warres. Which truely was the cause why S. Vincent in a certaine sermon, following the ancient report, affirmed that the B. Virgins House was then in Galilie: and S. Antoninus and other ancient Historiographers of Tuscane, made no mention at all of the House of Loreto, as ignorant of her memorable translatio^ and comming into Italie. Yet Blondus the Historiographer, almost equall with the aboue mentioned, being the Popes seruant, and hauing sufficient knowledge therof, left (as we shewed before) a worthy testimonie of the sacred House of Loreto. And of her miraculous transportation, therfore
peraduenture ancienter Historiographers made no mention at all, lest they might seeme to haue reported a vaine and an incredible thing, specially seeing so vnusuall a miracle, neuer heard of from the beginning of the world, was not as yet confirmed by the Popes authoritie. But assoone as Pius the Pope, readie to dye, in the sight of the Cittie, and as it were of the whole Christia^ world, was restored to his health by so euident a miracle, at the intercession of our B. Lady of Loreto; it so meruailously increased her religion and honour, that from that time the House of Loreto filled the remotest Countreis with the fame of her name: and out of the fardest part of the world inuited Pilgrimes to Loreto; where a few yeares before the diuine prouidence had prepared a very conuenient refuge and succour for all.



The sacred House is endowed with goodly possessions by the Bishop of Recanati, for the reliefe of poore Pilgrimes. CHAP. XXVII
NICOLAS ASTIVS a man famous for sanctimonie and learning,Hier. Angel. being Bishop of Recanati, by reason of his exceeding deuotio^ to the B. Virgin of Loreto,Out of the Bull of Iulius the second. purposed to augment and maintaine her honour, with his vttermost endeuour. For a great multitude of poore Pilgrimes resorted daily to Loreto either to performe their vowes, or els to gaine the Indulgences, whom the treasurie of Loreto verie bountifully relieued for her abilitie, bestowing large portions to euery one. And lest the fountaine of this benignitie might in time decrease, the Bishoppe of Recanati thought good to increase it with the reuenues of certaine landes. For hauing many pleasant and fruitfull possessions, neere to the House of Loreto, he gaue and dedicated
them to the B. Virgin mother of God, the 58. yeare of that age. The Charter of which Donation, we thought good to insert in this place, that all might not only know the exceeding pietie or Nicolas the Bishop towards the B. Virgin of Loreto; but also how much money the House of Loreto bestowed on poore Pilgrimes,The liberalitie of the Sacred H^use to the poore. when she had no possessions at all. And thus it is: Nicolas Bishop of Recanati and Macerata obtaining the gouernment of the Church of our B. Ladie of Loreto in the Diocesse of Recanat^, by dispensation of the Sea Apostolicke; and ^onsidering the continuall deuotion and sincere loue, which he alwaies had to the a^ores^id Church of our B. Ladie, the great multitude of Pilgrimes and of other people w^i^^ came thither to per^orme their vowes, and to gaine the Indulgences, and o^ many feeble and poore men, who daily resorted to the said Church of our B. Ladie (^esides the festiuall d^ie of the aforesaid most glorious Virgin Marie) AND ALSO THE EXCEEDING GREAT ALMES, VVHICH CHRISTES POORE RECEIVED OVT OF THE HOVSES OF THE AFORESAID CHVRCH, AND NECESSARILIE MVST RECEIVE, and the rest that followeth. Which is so much the certainer, for that it was committed to writing by him, who by reason of his office and function, must needes best know the state of Loreto.
And the house of Loreto being enriched with these reuenewes, increased her liberalitie to the poore, in such sort that the fame of this bountie ioyned to her religion propagated the most comfortable name of the House of Loreto farre and neere, inuiting the people of all nations to visit the House of Loreto. For assoone as the poore Pilgrimes of the remotest countreys (Who had beene partakers of that necessary reliefe) returned home; they did no lesse prayse the liberalitie, then the religion of the B. Virgin of Loreto; which stirred others to experience that, which they heard the^ report. And very opportunely, a small thing to be spoken of, did not alittle increase this report beginning to be much spread abroad in Citties and forraine Countreys.



The summe of the Historie of Loreto is set vp in the Church by Tereman the Gouernour. CHAP. XXVIII.
PETER GEORGE TEREMAN the Gouernour, a man of great integritie and wisdome, hauing gouerned the House of Loreto many yeares,Hiero. Angel. after the death of Nicolas Astius, was also made Bishop of Recanati: who in time of Pius the second, about the 60. yeare of that age, in fauour of the Pilgrimes, set vp in the House of Loreto, the summe of that historie (gathered out of that little booke which in time past, as we shewed before, was published at Recanati) that all might haue meanes to know it; which he caused to be set downe in a simple and a plaine stile, comformable to the vnderstanding of the Communaltie, that it might be an acceptable and gratefull repast to the Pilgrimes not altogeather vnlearned, and no small orname^t of the House of Loreto it selfe. And this endeuour of Tereman was so allowed by
posteritie, that as often as that writing decayed with antiquitie, they repaired it againe. For indeed the Historie it selfe, is repeated from the first remembrance of the people of Recanati; and the religion and diligence of Tereman did not a little authorize the thing it selfe: who demanding it by oath of the witnesses which then were liuing, desired to haue so great a thing testified as much as might be. Wherupon he alledgeth two sufficient witnesses, Paul Rinalducius, and Francis surnamed Prior, both Cittizens of Recanati, good men and of approoued credit. And first Rinalducius often witnessed before Tereman the Gouernour (as he him selfe deliuereth) that he had heard his grandfather sundry times report, how he saw the House of the B. Virgin when the Angells carried it on high ouer the sea, and placed it in Recanati wood: and that he had also gone sundry times vnto it with many Cittizens of Recanati, whiles it stood in the wood. And also Francis Prior often heard his grandfather, being a man of a hundred and twentie yeares of age, and hauing the perfect vse of his senses, report (as for his testimonie he deliuereth) that he had gone very often with many others to the sacred House, whiles it stood in the
wood, and that in his remembrance it was translated into the hill of the two Brothers. Moreouer Hierome Angelita, continuall Secretarie to the Cittie of Recanati, in his Historie of the B. Virgin of Loreto doth deliuer; that Paul Kinalducius and Francis Prior vpon their oathes ministred vnto them by Tereman the Gouernour, who was not only Rector of the Church of Loreto, but also Bishop of Recanati, did testifie those things to be, euen as Tereman the Gouernour had related them. Wherby it may sufficiently appeare, that Tereman the Gouernour, when he rightly tooke their testimonie of this so great a miracle, was as well Bishop of Recanati, as Gouernour of the House of Loreto. And lest any should doubt of Teremans sinceritie, Nicolas Astius Bishop of Recanati, in the booke of his Donation (which we mentioned before) doth set downe a worthy testimonie of his sinceritie and religion in these wordes. Considering the gratefull offices of deuotion, the sincere fidelitie, and the verie great dilige^ce, which the Venerable and circumspect men, Sigor. Pietro Giorgio Rector of the Church of S. Sinideus of Teramo, Gouernour of the sacred House, and also Sigor. Antonio etc. Priests, Reside^ts in the said house, for a long time haue bestowed in spirituall matters, and in other affaires and temporall businesse of the
same Church, and of the beloued house, and yet saile not daylie to bestow and exhibite, with diligent and vigilant care, with prudent endeuours, and solicitude: and the rest that followeth. Wherefore the approoued religion and authoritie of such a man, must needes make much for the credit of this short Historie, and from that time, either the health of Pius restored vnto him by miracle, or the fame of her liberalitie towardes poore Pilgrimes, or els the publication of the Historie of Loreto, made the B. Virgin of Loreto famous and illustrious among all nations.





THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reuerend F. HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS, Of the Societie of IESVS.

POPE PAVL THE SECOND being cured of the plague, goeth about to beautifie the house of LORETO with a new Church, and to adorne it with his Decrees. CHAP. I.
HEREAFTER I will continue and go forward with the miracles and ornaments of the House of Loreto renowned and illustrious, in all the Christian world: for that their fame hath now
filled mens eares and mindes. After the decease of Pius the Pope; the Cardinalls who acco^panied him to Ancona, determining to go to Rome, to the election of the new Pope, a horrible plague began at Ancona, by reason of so great an assembly of people (as commonly it happeneth) being much distempered, with the exceeding heates of of the summer; which at the first, infected the communa^tie, but then the nobilitie and Peeres them selues. Therfore, the terrour of the present danger hastened the departure, or rather flight of the Fathers; though truely the flight it selfe, deliuered not one of them from the sicknes,Hier. Ang. to be an occasion of glorie to Loreto. Peter Barbus Cardinall of S. Marke (remarkable amo^g the rest, for yeares, wisdome and experience) being infected with the sicknes, began to be grieued in mind,The Cardipall of S. Marke is cu^ed of the plague in the House of Loreto. to see the dreadfull shape of imminent death before his eyes. But Pope Pius the second, was a fresh example of the helpe of Loreto. Calling therfore to mind, how Pius was miraculously restored to his health, forthwith he gaue commandment, that he might be carried to the Church of Loreto. Whither assoone as he came, the multitude was remooued, and he him selfe was brought into the sacred Cell of the mother
of God; where with great deuotion, lying downe on the ground, he put all the hope of cure (next after God) in the B. Virgin, craued remedy against the danger of imminent death, and hartily reco^mended the Christian common wealth, depriued of her Bishop, to God and the B. Virgin. Neither in vaine: For as he was in prayer, a certaine gentle and sweet sleepe came vpon him, in which (as it is reported) the mother of God appeared vnto him, in a certaine heauenly shape: who bidding him be of good comfort, told him that his prayers were heard; that e^^soones the sicknes should be taken away, and that ere long, through the prouidence of God, he should be created Pope. The eue^t shewed that the vision was vnfained. For when he awaked, the sicknes was gone: and by vertue of his vow, he recouered strength both of body and mind, beyond all expectation. Wherof being exceeding glad, and ioyfully acknowledging the manifold benefites of God and his B. mother, he gaue hartie thankes to them both, and came safe and sound out of the sacred Chappell, leauing all that were priuie to his sicknes, amazed and astonished, with the admiration of the thing. And being put in good
hope of the high Priesthood, by the promise of the B. Virgin, and also well reme^bring the benefit, which he had receiued, he co^manded the Gouernour of the House of Loreto forthwith to be sent for. To who^ he openly declared, how he purposed to build, a most magnificent Church, in honour of our B. Lady of Loreto; out of hand in his name, and at his cost, willing him to prouide lime, morter, and other stuffe, sufficie^t for such a worke. Departing the^ce to Rome, to the election of the new Pope, he him selfe was created Pope, taking on him the name of Paul the second:Paul the 2. doth build a nevv Church about the House of Loreto and hauing scarce entered into his Popedome, he determined to begin the Church of Loreto; as not vnmindfull by whose helpe, he obtained not only health of body, but euen the highest dignitie that may be. And foreseeing alreadie in his mind, the greatnes of that place in time to come, assoone as the old Church was taken downe, he occupied great space of the ground adioyning, with goodly foundations, and speedily went forward with the worke it selfe. That a great part of the Church of Loreto was built by Paul the second, Baptista Mantuanus doth testifie, by whom in his Poeme Agelariorum, that is, Of the Shepheards, the Gouernour of
the shippe, speaketh this to Antonie, a princ pall man sayling along the Picene shore.Bapt. Mant. lib. 6.


That building which on Picene shores, you now farre of behold,


Belongs to Her, that did Gods Sonne, in Virgins wombe infold;

VVhich hither from Assyria once, by powerfull Angells aide,

VVith passage strange, aboue the seas, was through the ayre conueyd.


And a little after.


Laureta's House they doe it call, yet must it not be thought,


That this high Temple also was, from forraine Countreys brought.


These ornaments were added since, to grace the House withall,


At charge and great deuotion of the Prince of Prelates, Paul.


Wherby we may co^iecture, that he brought the Church of Loreto, almost vnto the roofe. And whiles the Church was forwarded with all expedition, the Pope did not only adorne the House of the mother of God with buildings,The Indulgences of Paul the 2. but also with letters and Pontificall gifts. For to them that visited the House of Loreto, all the festiuall dayes of
our B. Lady, and the sundayes of the yeare ben^ides, he granted full remission of their sinnes. It seemeth a thing worth the labour, to insert the beginning of both his Breues, that all may see the worthy testimonie of the high Bishop, co^cerning the great sanctatie of the House of Loreto, and a monume^t of his owne health restored vnto him by miracle.The testi^^^^ie of Paul the 2. Hauing therfore spoken a few things, according to the ancient vse of the Roman Bishops, thus he writeth. Though for the Greatnes of the graces which by the intercession of the glorious Virgin MARIE, the Mother of his Sonne, the Almightie, dailie worketh to the faithfull, making their godlie Vowes vnto her, holie Churches, dedicated in honour of her name, are to be reuerenced with great deuotion; notwi^hstanding that honour is to be exhibited more carefullie ton ardes those, in which by the intercession of the said B. Virgin, the Highest worketh greatest, and most euident miracles: as the experience therof is manisest at the Church of our B. Ladie of Loreto in the Diocesse of Recan^^^i, where miraculouslie was placed the true Image of the B. Virgin her selfe; and whither deuout people assembled fro^ diuers parts of the world, by reason of the great, of the wonderfull, and innumerable miracles, which there are wrought by the helpe of the glorious Virgin: AND VVE IN OVR
OVVNE PERSON HAVE EXPERIENCED THE SAME,The b^^^e^^ (...). and the rest that followeth. Moreouer with these Indulgences, he granted singular priu^edges.The House of Loreto S. ^^^pted fro^ (...) iurisdict^o^ o^ the Bishop of Recana^i For he ex^mpted the House of Loreto, togeather with her ministers, and all things therunto belonging, out of the iurisdiction o^ the Bishop of Recana^i, receiuing it into his, into the protection of the Sea Apostolike, and of the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul: and graunted most ample ^acult^e to the Priestes of Loreto, to abso^ue Pilgrimes, from sinnes and offences, reserued to the Bishop,An other testimonie of Paul the 2. or to the Sea Apostolike. I thought good also to set downe the proeme of this ^ater Decree, in which he maketh very honourable mentio^ of the House of Loreto, as followeth. Seeing to the Church of our B. Ladie of Loreto, seated on one side the walles of the Cittie of Recana^i, in which through the great cleme^cie of God (as credible persons haue deliuered) the House and the Image of the glorious Virgin her selse was placed by the handworke of Angells, and to the which, for the often and the wonderfull miracles, which by the meri^es and intercession of the same glorious Virgin, the Almightie worketh on all that recurre vnto her, and with humilitie implore her helpe, daily out of diuers, euen the remotest
partes of the world, multitudes of people being deliuered by the aide of the said glorious Virgin, do flocke and assemble: and the rest that followeth.


Iames a Franciscan is deliuered fro^ an incurable disease, and from the assaultes of Diuells. CHAP. II.
CERTAINE miracles of this time are deliuered, which are not to be omitted. Iames of Picene, a holy and a learned man, of the familie of the Franciscans, being a worthy preacher of the Gospell,Chron. Franc. li. 6. c. 3. et 4. about the 70. yeare of that age, was taken with an incurable disease, which did much disquiet his mind: for so great was the force of his sicknes, that the very name therof, tooke from him all hope of helping people, by meane of holy sermons: wherupon despairing of humane helpe, he turned his hope and his vow to God and his B. mother; and forth with, notwithstanding his infirmitie, comming to Loreto in manner of a Pilgrime, in the sacred Cell of the
B. Virgin, in time of the dreadfull sacrificewith flowing teares he earnestly besought the Queene or heauen, that through the mercie or Iesus her sonne, she would obtaine for him hearth of body, which peraduenture might be to the saluation of many people, by preaching his holy Ghospell. Without delay our B. Lady appeared vnto him, bidding him aske of her some other thing, for that which he requested was already granted. And Iames in co^tinent perceiuing, that he was restored vnto his health, gaue hartie thankes vnto the B. Virgin, and returned home, not so much ioying his owne happe, as theirs whose saluation he tendered. Neither in this onely, was he made partaker of the helpe of our B. Ladie of Loreto. For certaine yeares after, being long and much vexed with the importunate feinds, he made haste to Loreto, the most certaine solace of his euills; where as he was celebrating at the Altar of the B. Virgin, with much greife and sorrow of minde, he besought her experienced helpe, and intreated that at last his trouble some and dangerous combat might haue an end. His prayers were heard: For as he was feruent in prayer, our B. Lady appeared vnto him againe, and sayd: Sonne be of good comfort,
and be thankfull to the giuer of all goodnes: the end of thy combat is at hand, and a celestiall Crowne remaineth for thee the Conqueror. And the euent approoued the predictio^. For not lo^g after, the sorces of the cu^bersome enemies were vanquished, ioyfull peace suddainly followed, and then was he called into heauen to be rewarded with celestiall blisse


Pope Xystus the fourth increaseth, and graceth the old Decrees, with new-ones. CHAP. III.
NEITHER was Xystus the fourth the successour of Paul inferiour to him in adorning the B. Virgin of Loreto.Hier. Angel. Bern. Cyril. For he granted new Indulgences vnto the old, and confirming the priuiledges of Paul with his authoritie, he freed the Priestes of Loreto from paying of tithes, and increasing their number, gaue the^ facultie to dispence with vowes. Moreouer the 75. yeare of that age (memorable for the celebritie of the Iubiley) with Pontificall authoritie he ratified
the Donation of Nicolas Astius Bishop of Recanati (wherof we spake before) and witnessed his hartie affection and pietie towardes the B. Virgin of Loreto in the beginning of a certaine Breue in these wordes. Being desirous that the Church of Loreto, to the which we beare speciall affection of deuotion, should be frequented with due honour, and that faithfull people may more willingly recurre thither for deuotion sake, we confirme; and the rest which followeth. Neither doth it a little redound to the praise of Xystus, and to the dignitie of the House of Loreto, that when the Carmelites had vndoubtedly acertained him, that all the holy places of Palestine (and among the^ the natiue House or the B. Virgin) before the Sarace^s tooke the^ by force of armes, were credited and committed to them, in their fauour, he witnessed the same in Apostolicall writing: which was the cause,Hierome Cardinal Roboreo is made Patron of the House of Loreto why afterward the gouernme^t of the most sacred House was redeliuered vnto the Carmelites, as in due place we are to declare. Besides Xystus committed the patro^ship of the House of Loreto, together with the Bishopricke of Recanati, to Hierome Cardinall Roboreo his sisters sonne, to no small good of the sacred House it selfe. For what at his vnckles request, and his owne godly
disposition, he finished the Church which Paul the second had begunne, and increased the celebritie therof, with sacred ornaments, with selected Priestes and Quiristers.


A great armie of Turkes readie to spoile the wealth of Loreto, is put to flight by miracle. CHAP. IIII.
ABOVT that time there hapned a great storme, to shew both the wealth and religion of the House of Loreto.Hier. Aug For when Mahomet the Turkish Emperour, had assaulted the Iland of Rhodes in vaine, he sent one of his Captains with his nauie into Italie: who about the 70. yeare of that age, co^ming on the suddaine to the noble towne Otranto, in the prouince of the Salentines, got euen the key of Italie: And hauing ransackt the places ther-about, he was readie to spoile the other maritime coastes of the Adriaticke sea. Wherupon the people of Recanati (albeit much terrified with newes of imminent danger) without regard of their owne Countrey, purposed to defend the
House of Loreto with all their might, and putting a strong garrison into the towne, kept watch day and night. And lest a vaine hope of getting the wealthy prey might allure the Barbarians to assault the sacred House of Loreto, they resolued to conuey the cheefest Donaries of Loreto into safe custodie: so taking them out, and recording them as the manner is, by certaine men they were brought to Recanati, and laid vp safe in the Castle, being then estimated at six thousand Crownes. Among which there was a siluer statua of Laurence Medices (the sonne of Peter, who was nephew to great Cosmo) which kneeling, was aboue a Cubite high; and peraduenture the short inscription therof (wherin was Laurence P. F. Medices) deceiued Angelita, to interprete that Laurence Per-sancis, which signifieth Petrifilium, that is to say, the sonne of Peter. Truely I beleeue that when Laurence was so pressed with the Armes of Xystus the Pope and his Colleges, that he was constrained to fly to Ferdinand King of Naples his deadly enemie, he vowed that gift, and when the warre and danger was past, he either brought or sent it to the B. Virgin of Loreto. But the godly resolution of the people of Recanati, and the remoouall of the sacred gold
and siluer out of danger, hindered not the Barbarians from assaying their mische^^e. For comming with their nauie to the castle of the hauen of Recanati, to ransacke and sposse, and neglecting small preyes, they made haste to the prey of Loreto, which they vnderstood to be most wealthie, not knowing that it was transported thence: The Cittizens of Recanati defended the House of Loreto, as we haue said, but to small purpose truely against so greate an armie of Barbarians, puffed vp with victorie, vnlesse the Gouernesse of the place, had beene the saseguarde of her owne house. For at the verie sight of the Sacred House, such terrour came suddainlie on all the Turkish armie, that most vnwillinglie it caused the^ forthwith to retire, all together dismaying them, and making the^ to confesse that God himselfe did protect and defed that sacred House. Neither was their sacrilegious attempt long vnpunished. For soone after the most proud Tyrant, was taken away by suddaine death, Otranto recouered by the Christians, and the Turkes driuen out of Italy. And this very danger moouing Card. Roboreo Patron of Loreto, to fortifie the Church of Loreto, with the intended fortifications, soone after the Church it selfe was fenced in ma^ner
of a Castle, against the suddaine incursions of the enemie.


Pope Innocentius the VIII. doth honour the sacred House with gifts, and committeth it to the gouernment of the Carmelites. CHAP. V
AFTER Xystus, Innocentius the eight was chosen, whose raigne was so molested with his owne and with the troubles of the Cittie, and so intangled with the Neapolitan warre, that he had almost no abilitie nor leisure, to deserue well of the Church of Loreto: yet he was not altogeather without this praise. For Innocentius sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift a golden tablet of great beautie adorned with the armes of his gentrie,Cod. Laur. to hang about her necke, as a token of his deuotion towardes her; an ornament of veluet for the Bishop (called a Cope) set forth magnificently with excellent flowers of gold, well imbrodered and glittering
with pearle, and tapestrie made of silke and golde.Bapt. Mant. In whose Popedome Cardinall Roboreo, as well Patron of the House of Loreto, as of the amilie of the Carmeli es, calling to mind how those Fathers had vndoubtedly acertained Xystus the IIII. his vnckle, that the sacred house before it departed out of Galiley, was committed to their gouernment, by the Popes authoritie, he appointed them to gouerne it againe: who many yeares agone being driuen out of Asia by the Barbarians, filled Europe no lesse with good examples then with Monasteries; and in Italy latelie reformed their discipline with new rules by little and little decaying. Also out of their whole number, they selected thirtie fittest for the gouernment of Loreto, wherof Bapt. Mantuanus, Vicar generall of the congregation of Mantua was one, who wrote the Historie of the House of Loreto, and dedicated it to Card. Roboreo, the same yeare that he came to Loreto, which was 1489.



The testimonie of Baptista Mantuanus. CHAP. VI.
BAPTISTA MANTVANVS a deuine and an excellent Poet,The testimonie of Baptista Matuanus. in the beginning of his historie doth set downe a worthy testimonie of the House of Loreto, which shall not be amisse to insert in this place. VVhen of late (saith he) I came to the sacred House of the most holy Virgin Marie, and saw how great and wonderfull miracles Almightie God did work there, as most manifest signes of his vertue and clemencie; a horror came suddainly vpon me, and me thought I heard the voice of our Lord saying to Moyses; approach not hither, but put of thy shooes, for the place in which thou standest, is holy earth. And soone after he deliuereth, that in the Church of Loreto he had read a table, fastened to a wall, defaced and spoiled with moisture and antiquitie, wherin was written the historie, how, and by what meanes, that place came to be of so great fame: hauing, I say, spoken thus, he addeth. The Historie therfore contained in that table was thus:
The Church of the B. Mother of God at Loreto, was sometime the Chamber of the B. Virgin herselfe, where she was borne, brought vp, saluted by the Angell Gabriell, and ouershaddowed by the Holy Ghost. And he relateth the rest which Tereman the gouernour deliuered to memorie, and sett vp in the Church of Loreto, that it may plainly appeare, that he tooke them out of the Table of Tereman. Finally beginning to praise this most maiesticall House, he doth not onely compare it to the earthly Paradise, where Eue was framed of Adams side; To the mount Sinay, where the law was giuen; To the Temple of King Salomon, ennobled with the speciall prese^ce of Almighty God; To the denne of Bethleem, the birth place of our Sauiour; To the mount Thabor, where Christ our Lord inuironed with most beautifull brightnes appeared talking with Moyses and Elias; To the mount Oliuet whence he triumphantlie ascended into heauen: but also preferreth it much, and far be^ore the most sacred Sepulcher of Christ, then the which, nothing on earth, is accompted more holy: Specially because God himself taking vpo^ him our humanitie in that Sacred place, laid there the fou^dations of ma^s saluation. Of which praise this truly is aworthy and a fruitfull conclusion. But why
proceed I to say more of the ineffable dignitie of this most Sacrea House? For I may well conclude with the saying of the Patriarch Iacob: This place is terrible here is nothing els but the House of God, and the gate of heauen. And assoone as the Historie of Loreto was committed to writing, by Mantuan a most famous man, (vntill that day deliuered by word of mouth) it was straight published with great increase of deuotion to Loreto, and good of mortall men. For this Historie wherof I speake, being spread abroad in a litle volume, and being greedily and euerie where read, stirred manie to visit and reuerence the sacred house of Loreto. But this verie yeare is not onlie memorable for the historie of Mantuan, but also ^or the gift of a moste noble Prince. Stephen Bathorius Prince of Transiluania (whome they call the Vayuode) sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, a siluer Image of our B. Ladie,The gift of the Vauode of Transyluania. almost a cubite and a halfe, of excellent workmanship, and curiouslie inlaied with gold. At whose feet the Vayuode him selfe being all in armour is expressed in a siluer Image as if he were praying, which the Inscription of the base declareth to be a vot^ue gift.






THE MAGNIFICENT LORD STEPHEN EARLE OF BATHOR, VAYVODE OF TRANSILVANIA, EARLE OF SICVLVM AND IVDGE OF THE COVRT OF THE MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE, MATTHIAS, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF HVNGARIE, BOHEMIA etc.


DEDICATED THIS SILVER IMAGE IN HONOVR OF GOD, AND OF HIS MOST BLESSED MOTHER,


FOR THAT BY THE INTERCESSION OF THE SAID GLORIOVS VIRGIN, HE VVAS DELIVERED OF A CERTAINE GREAT DANGER THE YEARE, M.CCCC.LXXXIX.








A noble woman of France being possessed with seauen Diuells is deliuered. CHAP. VII.
AND the same yeare is memorable for a worthy miracle.Bapt. Mant. Hier. Ang. Peter surnamed Argentorix, a noble and wealthy Cittizen of Grenoble, hauing Antonia his wife, a woman of like nobilitie possessed with seauen horrible Diuells, was so solicitous for her deliuerance, that when he had left nothing vnexperie^ced in France, he brought her into Italy, where solemne exorcismes were vsed to litle auaile: first at S. Iulius in the territorie of Nouara, then in Modena, at S. Geminian, and lastly at the sacred Pillar in Rome, God reseruing the honour of this womans deliuerie to the B. Virgin of Loreto. Wherby Argentorix getting neither remedie for her, nor knowing what course to take, despaired of his purpose, and thought to returne into his Countrey: but meeting with a knight of Rhodes of his acquaintance
who knew very wel what cures were done by the helpe of the B. Virgin of Loreto, he perswaded him to bring her thither with great confidence, the 89. yeare of that age. Whither assoone as they came, the woman striuing with great force, was lifted vp by ten strong men, who bringing her into the most sacred Cell, presented her before the Image of our B. Lady. Stephen Francigena a Cham^n of Osimo (a man of approoued honestie and vertue) being then keeper of the most holy Chappell, began to coniure the most troublesome Diuells, with exorcismes a the manner is; and at his command they confessed their names, but obstinatlie refused to go forth. Yet the constancie of the Priest, and doubtles the power of god, ouercame the obstinacie of the diuells.A possessed vvoma^ (...) deliuered from Diuells For in the vertue of God, and in the name of the B. Virgin of Loreto, foure of the^ being driuen out one after an other, filled the sacred house with great roring. The three which remained were more obstinate then the former, whome Stephen encountering with greater feruour, pressed to cast them out, often calling on the name of our B. Lady. Whereby not long after, the fift (whose name was Heroth) being wearied with the torments, went his waie, as by the signe
was vnderstood, and speaking to Stephen said vnto him; Mary hath cast vs out, and not thou. Shortly after the sixt breaking forth cried with mornfull plaint, Marie, Marie, thou art to cruell against vs. When the rest were cast forth, the last named Arctus, more stubborne the^ all the other, with sorrowfull lamentation and howling began to say: M^^ie thou art to potent, specially in this place, where thou doest thrust vs out of our possession most vnwillingly. The Diuell making such honourable mention of that place, put into Stephen a desire, to question with him ther-about. Wherfore to wrest the truth out of a liar, he was fully determined neither to cease to dema^d of him, what manner of place it was, nor to desist to commaund him, in the name of God and his B. Mother to tell the truth. Neither in vaine: for Arctus being constrained by vertue of the exorcismes, at last co^fessed that it was the Chamber of the Mother of God, where the conceiued Almightie God by the foretelling of Gabriel; adding withall that Almightie God enforced him to tell him the truth. Which enkindled in Stephen a desire to know where the Angell stood, when he saluted the B. Virgin; and where the B. Virgin prayed, when
she was saluted by the Angell. Therfore to wrest the truth out of the father of lies, he was most diligent to compell him with solemne exorcismes, to shew both places out of hand. Who at last compelled by diuine power, declared, that indeed the B. Virgin praying to Almighty God, in the angle of the sacred Cell, a little beyond the place where the Gospell is read being on the right hand of the most sacred Chymney (where at this present standeth a footstoole to kneele vpon) was there saluted by Gabriell; and that the Angell stood right against her in the co^trary angle, on the right hand of the window, that it may easily appeare, the Angell for reuerence of the B. Virgin, sought out the remotest place, within the walls of the sacred Cell. And when Arctus had declared these things, he was at last forced out of the body of the possessed woma^, leauing her without sense: who not long after, comming to her selfe, and arising fro^ the floore, where she lay prostrate, togeather with her husband, gaue manifold thankes to the B. Virgin of Loreto, and deuoutly performed her vow. There is scarce any thing of this kinde more notable, and better witnessed. For many of the magistrates of the Cittie of Recanati were present, amongst
whome was Iohn Francis Angelita, his father that composed the history of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Antonie Bonsino Asculanus, he that wrote the Decades of the Kingdome of Hungarie was there, and also Iohn Baptista Ma^tuanus, as in his Historie of Loreto, he himselfe deliuereth; who to that which we haue said, addeth this. That the said Arctus being rightly compelled by vertue of the exorcismes, told this also amo^g the rest, that the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, before it departed out of Nazareth, was committed to the gouernment of the Carmelites. Which albeit they were declared by the manifestation of the lying Deuill; yet because they were extorted in the power and name, of the true and omnipotent God, they are not to be esteemed as vaine, specially seeing they may be true, and may increase the reuerence of the Christian Religion.



The gift of the Cittie of Recanati, for her deliuerance from the plague. And the departure of the Carmelites. CHAP. VIII.
AFTER Innocentius the VIII. Alexander the VI. succeeded, whose Popedome was nothing more peaceable the^ that of Innocentius, because Italy burned still with Ciuill and forraine warres, albeit more memorable, for the celebritie of the Iubiley which fell in the yeare of our saluation, 1500. About which time a horrible plague was so fierce at Recanati, that the infection increased more and more, and consumed many of the Cittizens, daylie threatning greater calamitie to that Cittie. Wherupon by aduice of the nobilitie, the magistrates resoluing to go in sole^ne procession to the House of Loreto, made a publicke vow. Neither was their hope and prayer in vaine. For presently by the votiue supplicatio^, the plague was (as it were)
taken away by the hand of God, and the Cittie deliuered out of danger. Wherfore the Cittizens of Recanati,The gift of the Cittie of Recanati. in due of their vowe, gathering a great summe of money towards a votiue gift, according to euery mans ability, in solemne procession carried to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, a golden Crownet, besett with pretious Iewells, the 96. yeare of that age: which Crownet being putt on the B. Virgin, they obtained of Cardinall Roboreo, that it might neuer be remooued; and got the Cardinalls benefit confirmed by the authority of Iulius the 11. and afterward of other Popes. And the example of this gratefull pietie preuailed so much with the bordering people, that hence proceeded that religious custome which at this present is so much vsed, to witt that the Citties and townes of Picene, with solemne supplication and pompe, bring yearely a Crownet to the B. Virgin of Loreto. Not long after Hierome Roboreo the Cardin all perceiuing that the floore of the most sacred Cell was decayed partly with kneeling and partly scraped vp with mens hands (for the stones were taken thence, and wrapt in silke to be preserued for reliques) paued it very beauti ullie with souare spotted marble, which was so notable a checker worke,
that in as great magnificence, as the Church of Loreto now is, the same remaineth yet to be seene. Neere to the porch of the Church by the Popes consent, Roboreo began to build most magnificent houses, plotted by Brama^t, an excellent Architect of that time: and also opened and adorned a well of huge bignes in the Cloister of the Church, that the townesfolke and strangers might not want water: and prouiding for the welfare of the Inhabitants, and of the Pilgrimes, he put the ancient Procurators of the Church of Loreto in office againe. For the grosnes of the ayre which was then at Loreto (proceeding from the woodes and ditches therabout) hauing consumed many of the Carmelites, Peter Taruisine their Vicar Generall commanded them to forsake the gouernement of the Church of Loreto, and to depart to more healthfull places about nine yeares after they came thither. In whose place the Cardinall Patron substituted certaine godlie, but hired Priestes, who continued till the raigne of Leo the 10. in whose time the gouernment came at last to Chanons.



The Decrees of Iulius the second, his workes in the new Church, and the Donaries of Noble men. CHAP. IX.
ALEXANDER the VI. being take^ out of this mortall life, Pius the 4. was chosen Pope; but his raigne was so short, that it hardlie continued aboue three weekes. After Pius, Iulius the second succeeded, second to none of the precedent Popes, in deuotion towardes the B. Virgin of Loreto. For the IIII. yeare of his Popedome, either by the exa^ple of Xystus the fourth his vncle, or els because in recouering the Popes dominion by war, our B. Lady of Loreto had obtained for him the helpe which he desired, he began to adorne her House to the vttermost of his abilitie. And first of all he thought good to impresse the ancient report of the sacred house more deeply in the hartes of mortall men, with Pontificall authoritie, as a thing most effectuall to increase the religion of the place
it selfe. Therfore in the beginning of his first Breue,The Bull and testimonie of Iulius the 2. recounting the Decrees of his predecessours, very honourable to the house of Loreto, of Vrbane the 6. of Bonifacius the 9. and Martin the 5. and then relating the cause of so great deuotion to the House of Loreto, he saith that it is the Chamber of our B. Lady (as it is piously belieued, and the report goeth) where she was co^ceiued, where she was brought vp, where by the salutatio^ of the Angell she conceiued and nourished Christ: which House since that time being consecrated by the Apostles, first by miracle departed out of Nazareth, then out of the wood infested with theeues into the hill of the two brothers; from thence by reason of the brothers discord, into the hill where at this present it standeth. And afterward declaring that he was bound to adorne the House of Loreto with no lesse care then Paul the second, or Xistus the fourth (whose worthy benefits towards the same were well knowne to all) he confirmeth their gifts and immunities, and rceiuing the House of Loreto into the protection of the Sea Apostolike,The benefits of Iulius the 2. calleth it the Popes Chappell, co^manding that diuine seruice should be celebrated there with folemne rites, in like manner, as in the Popes Chappell at Rome.
He also priuiledged all the Ministers of the Church of Loreto, to be of the Popes familie and retinue with as much prerogatiue as the best: and ordained a Gouernour ouer Loreto to be chosen by the Pope himselfe, to whome he gaue mixt authoritie. From which time the towne of Loreto,The tovvne of Loreto is exempted from the iurisdietio^ of other Citties being exempted out of the Iurisdiction of Recanati, began to be free of it selfe. Moreouer he gaue co^mandment that ^^ey, which brought prouision of victualls, or other vendible thinges to Loreto, should be freed of portage and tole. And straitly ordained that none should pilfer, neither the Donaries, nor the money which was offered to our B. Lady of Loreto, vnder the paine of excommunication, Latae Sententiae. For about that time I find that the sacred House was enriched, not only with money, but also with giftes. George Monachus of Padua,The gift of George Monachus brought for a gift a siluer Image of our B. Lady of Loreto of fiue pound weight. Cardinall Tranensis an other of the same substance and forme, but of double weight And others brought other Donaries not needfull to be rehearsed.



A noble woman is cured of the Palsey. CHAP. X.
THIS time was also memorable for miracles; whereof that was the chiefest which fell in the yeare 1508. The king of Naples had a certaine person of his Councell called Lo^gus,Bern. Cyril. famous for manie notable thinges, whose wife being a woma^ of great accompt, and also called Longa by the surname of her husband, was so taken in all her bodie, and tormented with such bitter paine, that she lead a most miserable life, more like to death then life: who at last reiecting the help of Physitians, intreated her husband that she might be carried to Loreto, When she came thither, she requested her sonne-in-law (who accompanied her in that iourney) to procure a certaine Masse to be said in the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, agreeable to her purpose, the beginning wherof is, Repleatur os meum laude: Let my mouth be filled with praise: in which is recited the gospell of the palseyma^ whome
Christ our Sauiour did cure: which being assigned for the friday in Whitso^ week, was not the proper of that time, seing that day was past long since; but Longa desired that votiue Masse. She had scarce giuen this co^mandment to her sonne-in-law, when she her self (her sonne-in-law atte^ding on her) was brought into the most sacred nouse, and presented before the B. Virgin, not doubting but that our B. Ladies prayers, would be profitable vnto her. Behould, before her sonne-in-law could fullsill his mother-in-lawes comma^d, a strange Priest came to the Altar, who beginning diuine seruice with this Introite, Let my mouth be silled with praise, stroke her into so great admiration, that she remained a while dismayed therwith. But presentlie turning to her so^ne-in-law (who was not yet gone to procure that Masse, but now prepared to go) stay, said she, it is booteles for thee to go, for this is the verie Masse which I desired. And when it was come to that place of the gospell, He said to the sicke of the palsey, I say to thee arise: a wo^derfull thing to be spoken and seene, the Palsey woma^ perceiuing, that by a certaine supernaturall grace, her bodie was suddainlie cured, and her soule replenished with vnwonted sweetnes, arose presentlie out of her
chaire with greatioy, leauing all amazed at the strangnes of the thing; with flowing teares of ^oy made no end of thankes giuing to the B. Virgin. And when Masse was donne, went on foote to her lodging to the greate astonishment of all her acquaintance, who were present at the miracle of so great a thing. At which time the Duke of Termero being by chance at Loreto with a chiefe company of horse-men, to go to the war of Lombardie, as Iulius the second had appointed, and knowing Lo^ga, and her incurable disease verie well, and also seeing her go on her feete, was first amazed at the noueltie of the thing: but presentlie being moued with so euident a miracle, he ioyned with her in praysing Almightie God. And eftsoones a new wonder made the miracle it selfe most euident. For the Priest who had said Masse to Longa, being long and much sought for, was not to be found; that you may belieue, he was sent by miracle, to be the minister of the heauenly worke. And Longa hauing obtained her vow, returned to Naples, purposing to consecrate to Alm. God, her health restored vnto her by miracle. Wherupon building a Monasterie of sacred Virgins at Naples, she betooke herselfe to the seruice of incurable diseases, whiles Raymund Cardona was Vice-roy of Naples.



Pope Iulius the second finisheth, and fortifieth the Church of Loreto. CHAP. XI.
MOREOVER Iulius granted many other benefits, to the former which are declared and set downe in a long Breue not needfull to be rehearsed. And whe^ he had graced the house of Loreto with these immunities, he was very care^ull to fortifie the same. Therfore begining the workes of peace with no lesse courage, the^ he waged his huge and troublesome war, he prepared not to build vp, but also to fortifie the Church of Loreto, which Paul the 2. had begunne; the finishing wherof was hindered by diuers accidents and misfortunes. Co^sidering therfore that this most sacred House (not only illustrious for her wealth, but also for the fame of her sanctimonie) was seated in an vnfenced towne, as a prey to the auarice of souldiers and Barbarians, by the aduise and helpe of Bramant
the notable Architect, he beganne to forward this his intended worke by Hierome Roboreo Patrone of Loreto. And Hierome thinking it the office and honour of his familie, to adorne the House of Loreto with all his might, built and fortified the Church in manner or a Castle: for the very Chappells the^ selues are made like to bulwarkes; and round about in the top of the Church walles, are conueied little p^nnacles and passages vnder the roofe, that on euery side the souldiers may passe safelie vp and downe for defence therof. To the beholder a far of, it hath the forme, rather of a Castle then of a Church. And a little hill doth helpe the fortification therof, in the top wherof it is seated, specially on that side which standeth towardes the sea. The bodie of the Church doth stand on twelue great Columnes, like to pillars, wherof six on each side support the vauted roofe. And the said bodie hath also on either side, as it were, two winges, in which are erected six little Chappels, answering to one another betweene the pillars Al^o about the head of the Church, are placed seauen greater Chappells, among the which are foure Vestries, wherin all the Donaries of Loreto are reserued. Vnder the thole, which is as
the head of the Church, the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin hath the most principall place, and on euery side perspicuous, many caire Chappells of admirable workmanship, as we haue said, erected round about.


Pope Iulius the second, is protected from a great shot, and adorneth the House of Loreto with gifts. CHAP. XII.
MEANE time by an euident miracle, the Pope was more enkindled to honour and salute the B. Virgin of Loreto: for going to Bologna to represse the commotion of the Bentiuolians he came to Loreto; and the very day of the B. Virgins natiuitie said Masse in her natiue Chappell. After Masse with sole^ne pompe, he went into a pulpit prepared of purpose for him, where blessing the people, who flocked thither, more then vsually, by reason of the Popes comming, he graunted remission of sinnes, vnto all that
rightly visited the sacred House of Loreto that day. Some there be, who write, that Iulius made a vow to the B. Virgin at that time, going to prosecute the Tyrants with godlie and iust war: and truly the euent therof and the donaries which he sent, for the victorie obtained, do testifie the same. Iulius therfore comming to Bologna,Vicciar. lib. 9. On. fr. in ^ul. 2. expelled the Bentiuolians, and pacified the Citty. And when he had taken Fauentia, Foroliuio, Raue^na and other Citties and townes of the Popes Dominio^s by force, and seeing that the siege of Mira^dula was prolonged by the neglige^ce of his captaines, by a new exa^ple, he himselfe went into the Tents, to animate the Captaines and souldiers with his presence. Where, as he was consulting of the war with the Cardinall in a Pauilion, he escaped manifest danger by heauenly protection. For an iron bullet as bigge as a mans head, being suddenly shotte out of a great brazen peece by the enemie, ouerthrew the Consistorie, but hurt the Pope nothing at all, nor any that was with him in Councell. Wherupon the Pope confessed, that he was wholly bound to the B. Virgin of Loreto, for that good benefit, either because he had made a vow vnto her, when he we^t vnto the war, or els for that at the first noise
of the peece, he inuocated the said B. Virgin of Loreto. Hauing therfore taken Mirandula with honour, and gotten other victories, he came to Loreto to performe his vow, and when he had giue^ hartie thanks to God and his B. mother, he commanded that the bullet should be reserued in the most sacred Chappell, for a monument to posteritie, how great danger he eschued, by the protection of the B. Virgin of Loreto: which was hong vp on the left wall of the Altar, commonly called the Epistle side, there now remayning to be seene. But afterward Iulius the Pope, that he might not be onely deuout, but also gratefull to the B. Virgin, began carefully to adorne the Church of Loreto. And thinking it best, to enrich the high Altar with sacred ornature, he sent from the Cittie an excelle^t sute for the Altar, of tissue cloth of gold, a siluer Crosse of fortie pound weight parcell guilt and carued with excellent workmanship; two Candlestickes of a cubite and a halfe, of the same substance and worke, of 26. pound weight. And in the round base of the Crosse, there is an inscription, for no small token that the Popes victories were gotten by the helpe of the B. Virgin mother of God.






POPE IVLIVS THE SECOND DEDICATED IT TO THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO THE YEARE M.D.X.


IN THIS SIGNE THOV SHALT OVERCOME.





But Iulius thinking these giftes not sufficient, gaue also two ornaments of blew veluet for the Altar, (called frontlets) adorned with gold, precious stones, and imbroderie: wherwith he sent ornature for the Ministers, a Myter of excellent workmanship, and other Pontificall vestments for Popes or Bishops to vse in time of Masse. Besides he gaue and dedicated to the B. Virgin of Loreto purple tapestrie to adorne the walles of the Church, and many other giftes.



A girle of seauen yeares of age, is brought to Loreto by the B. Virgin her selfe. CHAP. XIII.
MVCH about the same time that the B. Virgin of Loreto defended the Pope in the war, she in time of peace, made sure to her selfe a poore girle, by an vnwo^ted miracle. One Sabine, of no meane village in the countrey of Picene, (called Roccha Co^trada) had a daughter named Alexandra seauen yeares of age, who kept his sheepe not far fro^ the towne; and whiles the sheepe were feeding, the girle was accustomed to pray to almightie God with great deuotio^ vnder trees, whereby before she was ^ullie of age, she dedicated her self to Almightie God by miracle; and by the iustruction and teaching of so good a maister, perseuering still in her prayer to reuerence the mother of God with great deuotio^, a Ladie appeared sudde^lie vnto her in heauenlie brightnes (without doubt it was the mother of
God) who taking the girle by the hand, co^manded her to follow her. A wonderfull thing to be spoken, the Queene of heauen herselfe brought the little maid to the House of Loreto, thirtie miles fro^ that place, and when she had replenished her with great ioy, at the sight of her Image and of her House, she brought her backe againe to her sheepe. Whereupon Alexandra had a great desire to see that place and sight againe (though she was ignorant what the House and Virgin was:) for whe^ the tasted sweetnes of the House of Loreto, once entred into her minde, with flowing teares she neuer ceased to intreat and importune Sabine her father to bring her to that house which shined with so many lightes (for otherwise she could not describe the place) where that most beautifull Virgin dwelt. The father iested at his daughters request, either thinking it to be a childish toy, or els ignorant what place she described: but not long after it happened, that Sabine with his familie pilgrimaging to Loreto, Alexandra straight acknowledged the place, triumphed and exulted for ioy; and turning to her father; Behold father, said she, this is the house, whither that most beautifull Virgin, cloathed in white brought me: hither
I desired to returne, and this is the sight that I was so willing to enioy againe. Wherat the father was amazed, but pondering in his mind the exceeding deuotion of his daughter to the mother of God, he perceyued that she was deare to the B. Virgin her selfe; specially seeing the mother of God drew her vnto her from her tender yeares, by a certaine vnwonted course. For which cause, he neither foreslowed to further the pietie of his daughter, nor thought good for him to co^ceale this wonder. And Alexandra her selfe, when she came to riper yeares, tould it often to godlie men, who afterward related it to others, and to me my selfe. This miracle happened the 7. yeare of this age: neither in vaine. For Alexandra being trained in this Nouiceship, liued alwayes a Virgin, and lead a most holy life, vntill she was 90. yeares of age, euery yeare reuisiting the B. Virgin of Loreto. And so great was the fame of her sanctimonie, that she was made Abbesse of a Monasterie of Virgins, in the towne Montabodo, where she flourished not onely with vertues, but also with miracles.



Neere to the Porch of the Church of Loreto, the Popes Pallace is begunne, by Iulius the II. and the caruing of the most sacred House is purposed. CHAP. XIIII.
IVLIVS vsing all diligence to finish and adorne the House of Loreto, was easily induced to greater expences. For when the most sacred Chappell was fenced with the walles of the Church, he thought good to ad a fortification to the towne it selfe, against the assault and suddaine incursions of the enemie. Hierome Roboreo Patron of Loreto of worthy memorie, who vndertooke that worke lately departed this life, hauing scarce laid the first fou^dations therof. Therfore Iulius the Pope, prosecuting those worthy beginnings by meanes o the said Bramant (whom we mentioned before) began the Popes Pallace
neere to the Church, being a great and a magnificent worke, cheefly designed for the intertainement of noble men. The forme whereof is such. That part of the Pallace (where the entrance is into the square Court) being right against the Church, doth compasse it with two wings as it were with armes. The foure angles haue as manie turrets. All the whole worke doth beare the true forme of a square Castle, hauing the Church for a fortresse. And at this day with the continuall labour and expe^ces of many yeares, the one halfe therof is hardly finished. Nether did Iulius,Hier. Ang. Bern. Cyril, whiles the Popes Pallace was in hand, desist to adorne the Church it selfe. A Quire for the singers, made for the ornament of the place, the excellent Organs of musicke set forth with statelie worke and gold, two bells notable for bignes and forme, and the foundations of the Bellfray were the worthy workes of Iulius the second. When he had adorned the Church, he prepared costly marble inough to garnish the most maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin on the outside: which doubtles had bene the greatest of all his workes, if speedie death had not euen then preuented his designments, Almightie God reseruing that excellent
praise to another. And it is not to be esteemed the least, which in this kind was the last of his mortall workes.The gift of Antonie Perotto. Peter Antonie Perotto, Generall of the Siluestrines, bearing great affection and deuotion to our B. Lady of Loreto, gaue the Abbey of S. Laurence neere to Loreto (to wit in the territorie of Castro Ficardo) with all the villages, houses, meadowes, fieldes, oliueries, and woods therunto belonging, to the Church of Loreto, with the Popes approbation, the 12. yeare of this age. Wherupon a few dayes before his death, in behalfe of the House of Loreto, he confirmed the Donation of that Abbey, with his Pontificall Breue, and ordained Perotto him selfe Gouernour of Loreto, supposing (as it fell out) that he, who tooke contentment to increase the wealth of Loreto, would also be carefull to preserue and defend the same when it was increased.



The Queenes of Naples visite the House of Loreto CHAP. XV.
POPE Leo the X. succeeding Iulius not only in the Apostolicke Chaire, but also in his good purpose, desired nothing more, the^ to yeeld to none in honouring the sacred House of Loreto. And to manifest this his desire, God gaue fitt occasio^ in the verie beginning of his ^eigne. For at that time the fame of the celebritie of the House of Loreto, comming to Naples, prouoked the two Ioanes of Aragon the elder, and the yonger (by the commonaltie called the Queenes of Naples, because they were desce^ded of the royall bloud) to visit the Church, which was glorified with so many miracles. Who with a greate traine passing through good part of the Kingdome of Naples, and comming by Abruzzo into Picene, were receiued of the people with great ioy and preparation, which way soeuer they went. At which time the munificence of Leo was very notable: for in all the townes
of the Popes dominions, through which they were to passe, he co^manded that these Queenes should be receiued with princely entertainment; not so much for their owne honour, as for the celebritie of the House of Loreto: and granted full remission of sinnes, not onely to the Queenes themselues, but likewise to all that resorted to Loreto at their comming thither, and rightly reuerenced the sacred House of our B. Lady the same day. The 14. yeare of this age, those Queenes came to visit the House of Loreto: and in Picene there is exta^t a famous monume^t therof. For the report goeth, that by this occasion in the territory of Mo^te-Sancto (a towne betweene Loreto and Firmo) the faire beaten way was paued, which at this day is called the way of the Queenes, being so called in time past of these Queenes, in whose honour it was made.



Pope Leo the X. adorneth the Sacred House with ample Decrees. CHAP. XVI.
AFTERVVARD Leo commanded, that all the Indusgences, Immunities,The benefits of Leo the X. and benefittes of Iulius the second, and of the precedent Popes, granted to the House of Loreto, should be ratified with an expresse Breue: which donne, he carefullie added more to more, aboundantly. For he made the Church of Loreto a Collegiate Church, giuing it the seale and other dignities of such Churches: where he ordained 12. Chanons (out of which number the Archpriest, and the keeper of the befoued House were to be chosen) as many resident Priests (called Mansioners) and six clergy men to be adiutors in the Quyre, assigning to euery one his yearely pension, according to a rate. Moreouer to the House of Loreto, he granted all the Indulgences, which Rome enioyeth in the Stations of the Churches, that at the same time stra^gers might gaine in one Church at Loreto, which at Rome
may be gained in many. We thought good to insert the worthy Proeme of his Breue. Recalling to mind the great and almost the innumerable cominuall benefittes,The testimonie of Leo the X. which by the intercession of the most glorious Virgin, her only be^gotte^ the Almightie, worketh at the Church of Loreto, to many of Christs, faithfull, in what place soeuer they are afflicted, with misfortunes and griefes, flying vnto the said Church of Loreto, with good disposition onely of mind: we hold it iust and due, to maintayne and preserue the aforesaid Church of Loreto vnblemished, not onely in the ancient graces of former grants, but also daily to adorne her with new giftes, liberalities, and bounties of prerogatiues. Then abrogating the summer fayers of Ancona, of Pisaurus, and of other bordering townes, he co^manded that at Recanati onely, in the month of September, (to honour the day of our B. Ladies birth) the mart should be celebrated and kept. Newes of the fayre of Recanati, and of her immunities being sent round about, not onely to Christian, but also to barbarous nations to allure people from all places vnto it, prouoked the merchants of all nations and trades, to flocke to Recanati, to the denounced mart; as the Italians, Dalmatians, Germans, Flemings, Grecians, Armenians, Iewes and Turkes, lately expelled out of Spaine. Wherby it is euide^t that many merchants
of euery sorte, either vpon deuotion, or els for the wonders of the place, (wherunto the neernes inuited the^) came to visit the House of Loreto. Neither were any prohibited to come vnto it, sauing Turkes and Iewes obstinate in their ancie^t superstition, to the end, Margarites should not be cast before swine. Truely we vnderstood, that the Grecians and Armenians (though most of them were Schismatiks) striued with the Latines in deuotion towards the B. Virgin; for in the very entrance of the Church, many pulling of their shoes, and listing vp both handes and eies to heauen, approached in that manner to the most sacred House. Whither assoone as they came, they fell downe at the threshold most religiously; then prostrating their bodies on the ground, they adored God and his B. Mother, and to the presence of the B. Virgin and of the Altar, crept on their knees, earnestly inuocating the names of Iesus and Mary. And this celebritie of the mart of Recanati, commenced vnder Leo, continued afterward many yeares, with great increase of glorie to Loreto. But because he would omit no occasion whereby he might seeme to honour the House of Loreto, at last he ordained that vowes made to visite our B.
Ladie of Loreto, by any meanes should not be changed into other workes of pietie; wherby this vow was added, to those fiue, commonly knowne to be exempted.An other testimonie of Leo the X. And the Breue is graced with a worthy Proeme, which because it is to the excellent praise of the B. Virgin of Loreto, we thought good to relate, As it is lawfull for none, to be silent in the praises of the most glorious Virgin Mary the mother of God; so to declare them, we thinke none sufficient. For seeing there is found no surer a refuge, for the wretched, nor more effectuall for sinners in the sight of God, worthily and with all the affectio^s of soule and mind deuoutly acknowledging, that she is first to be worshipped in heauen, then to be reuerenced euery where on earth: we thinke it sitt that the places dedicated to her name, should be adorned with all care, but those chiefly, which the B. Virgin herselfe, accompanied with Quires of Angells, hath chosen to herselfe, and daily in the same, worketh allmost innumerable miracles, for the help and succour of Christs faithfull. Among which, by the consent, testimonie, and deuotion of all, her seat of Loreto, celebrated with fame, and most honoured with the concourse of deuout people, is worthily esteemed the first. For whe^ the most B. Virgin, by the appointment of Almightie God (as credible persons haue deliuered) translated her Image and her Chamber, from Nazareth, that she might place it, first at Flumen, a towne of
Dalmatia, then in the territorie of Recanati, in a wooddte place, and againe in a certaine hill in the same territorie, belonging to particuler persons; last of all in the high way (where now it remaineth) she chose herselfe a seat, placing it there by the hands of Angells, where the highest worketh innumerable miracles by her merites. For which cause many of the Roman Bishops, our Predecessours, but chiefly Paul the second, Xystus the fourth, and Iulius the second, of happie memorie, hauing great reason to be exceedingly deuoted to the sacred Virgin, to make the Christia^ people more acceptable to Almightie God and his B. Mother, adorned with diuers, but chiefly with spirituall giftes, the Church of Loreto, which hath increased by so great a miracle, and daily doth increase. And the rest that followeth.



The sacred House is adorned with worthy ornaments and Donaries. CHAP. XVII.
LEO the Pope would not haue the House of Loreto to be more adorned with Apostolical letters,The ornaments of Leo the X. then with Po^tificall riches: for in this meane time he speedilie forwarded the building of the Church and of the sacred House of Loreto: adorned two Oratories of the Church with turrets, which he caused to be garnished about with checker worke, and applied his mind to adorne the most sacred Cell it selfe: yet he thought it not good to beautifie the sacred walls on the inside, that there might be no other ornature in them, besides the very walles, which the habitatio^ and touchings of Christ and the B. Virgin did inough and abundantly adorne. Endeuouring therfore to adorne the most sacred Chappell magnificently on the outside (and the stuffe lately prepared by Iulius for that
purpose prouoking him on) he conceiued in his mind so sumptuous an ornament, as might well beseeme the B. Virigin Mother of God, the Roman Bishop the vicar of Christ, and the maiestie and religion of the place it selfe, as far forth as the imbecillity and weaknes of man could attaine vnto. Wherupon he co^mitted the drawing of the modell of this worke to Sansouino a notable Architect and Statuarie of those times, co^ma^ding him to deliuer his owne opinio^ therof, for that he purposed to go about such a peece of worke, as in a small subiect he might happily excell all the magnificence of his time. The industrie of the wise Architect, did not faile the Princely mind of the Pope, for he drew such a forme, as was answerable to Leo his wishes, who was as diligent to finish the worke it selfe, as to desire and approue the modell. But because there was not inough of the richest marble, and the forme described required great peeces of the same, he commanded that they should be fetched from Carrara (which is a quarrey of white marble of most estimatio^ in all Liguria) and not regarding the charges, he tooke order that Ligurian marble should be layd into vessells, to be brought about a long circuit (for it must needes be conueyed
by the Inferu^, and Superum seas, almost all the coast of Italy, as long as it is) which at last being vnladen either at Ancona, or els at the hauen of Recanati, were carried to Loreto in cartes, where they were polished with the antique worke of the Greekes and Romans, by the rarest workmen of that age, hired with great expences. Meane while Leo bestowed no small benefit on the Church of Loreto,The gift of Leo the X. to increase the maiestie and religion of the place. For to make the representatio^ of the Seate of Loreto more maiesticall,God. Laur. he made Peter Antonie Perotto the Gouernour, when he celebrated Masse, the more venerable not onely with Episcopall, but also with other ornature and attire: and gra^ted vnto him, whe^ he said Masse, to blesse the people with Episcopall authoritie and priuiledge. Neither was Leo more carefull to adorne the Prelate of Loreto, then the Altar with Pontificall gifts. Foure siluer Candlesticks of a cubite and a halfe, parcell guilt, and ingraue^ with curious worke, about 50. pound weight, and a square Canopy, were the worthy Donaries of Leo. About the same time the House of Loreto was honoured with other gifts of most noble persons.Of Antonie Leiua and others. Antonie Leiua, Generall of the Spanish Armie, sent for a gift, a vestment of damaske for the Preist,
curiously wrought with curled gold. The Queene of Hungary, her owne Image of siluer, as if she were praying, of XXX. pound weight. The Marquesse of Mantua, vestme^ts for the Priest and Ministers sacrificing with solemnitie, made of siluer and gold. And others presented other Donaries; who although they were noble personages: yet they desired to haue their names concealed in their gi ts, of which these be the cheifest. A siluer statua of the B. Virgin, with the Image of the most sweet child IESVS, holding a globe in his hand, of 8. pound weight. To this was added an other of equall weight and like fashion, differing onely in this, that Christ the little Childe doth sitt in his mothers lappe, holding a peare in his right hand. Besides there is an other Image of our B. Lady pourtraited in siluer of XI. pound weight. And also an other of like weight, with the ensignes of the Imperiall Eagle, that it may not obscurely appeare whence it was sent.



A Dalmatian Priest commeth to Loreto, carrying vp, with his hand, his bowells pulled out of his bellie. CHAP. XVIII.
MVCH about the same time, a wonderfull thing and more credible for the infinite power of God, then for the strangenes of the fact, made the House of Loreto much more illustrious in all the whole world. A Dalmatian Priest, a man of true simplicitie, and of great deuotion to the B. Virgin of Loreto, being take^ by cha^ce by the Turkes, and by all subtill meanes vrged to renounce his religion, would in no wise admitt such wicked persuasions, neither into eare nor mind; but greatly disdained those importunate wretches, and the more to offend them, freely called on Christ and likewise on Marie: which they stomaking, and demanding why he repeated those names so often; he answered, because they be fixed in my bowells. Wherupo^
the Turkes threatned, that they would pull forth his very bowells, vnlesse in continent he would abiure Christ and Marie, You are deceiued, said he, my bowells indeed you may take from me, but Christ and Marie you cannot take from me. Then in great rage, they assaulted the Priest with a drawne sword, who calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto, made a vow vnto her, that with the first oportunitie, he would go to Loreto, to visit her, if life would giue him leaue. Which speach did more enkindle the inraged Turkes: for compassing him about, and cutting and opening his breast, they drew out his bowells, tearing them from the vppermost partes, and deliuered them to him selfe now halfe dead, and by and by, as they supposed, ready to fall downe, scorning him in this manner. Go, make haste, and carrie thy bowells in which thou saist Marie of Loreto doth adhere, vnto her, as thou hast vowed. And albeit it exceed all credit, which we are now to deliuer: yet neither the power nor the goodnes of Almightie God. For the Priest who was readie to die (God prolonging death and giuing him sufficient strength) began to set forward, and speedilie dispatching a iourney of many dayes, came to Loreto, carrying
his bowells in his hand. Which way soeuer he went, great resort was made vnto him, with desire to see and to know the matter. Wherupon the Preist (but cheifly to the ministers of the Church of Loreto) shewing his open and emptie breast, and his bowells, which he held vp with his hand, declared breifly the whole matter, leauing them all amazed, with the admiration of so great a thing. And when he had giuen harty thankes to the B. Virgin, and armed himselfe with the comfortable succours of Co^fession, and of the holy Eucharist, in the sight and imbracements of the Mother of God (as we may belieue) he yielded vp his soule. The very bowells of the Dalmatian Preist, were hong vp hard by the most sacred Cell for strangers to behold, and as soone as they were consumed with corruption, counterfaite bowells made of wood, and affiged in the same place, remained there many yeares for a monument of that miracle. But because the rude people, which came to the Church of Loreto, busied their mindes in such spectacles, and reuerenced the mother of God with lesse care, the^ they ought to haue donne, they were at last remoued thence. Yet in time of Pope Paul the III. by occasion of strengthening the pillers which support
the thole, the rafter on which they did hang, being by chance cast downe, it was decreed, that a Preist holding vp his bowells with his hand, and a short narration of the whole matter, should be expressed in a table, to preserue the memory of so great a miracle to posteritie, and sett vp in the Church for all to beholde, which at this day is there to be seene. And the miracle it selfe is so witnessed, that it is wickednes to doubt therof. For many do yet liue, who affirme that the^ selues haue seene the bowells, which were made of wood, and haue heard many of the Inhabitants report, that they had seene the very bowells of the Dalmatian Priest, when they were fresh and in their naturall state.



Diuers assaultes of the Turkes are repelled from the House of Loreto by diuine power. CHAP. XIX.
ABOVT the same time, the B. Virgin shewed by vndoubted meanes, how pleasing the House of Loreto was vnto her.Annal. Laur. Rier. Selime the Turkish Emperour, and the Nephew of Mahomet, comming to spoile the euer-vnuiolated treasures of the Cell of Loreto, attempted so great a wickednes, with no better successe, then did Mohomet his vncle long before. For being puffed vp with his owne, and with the victories of his ancestours, he had almost all the seas pestered with his nauies, purposing to subdue all Europe, and the fardest partes of the West, vnto his Empire. Wherupon through his command, a great nauie of Pirates arriued in Italy, and after they had ransackt the shores of Dalmatia and Apulia, they sayled into Picene, hoping to get the spoile of Loreto; where landing their men, and taking
the Castle of the haue^ of Recanati, they desired and defaced the houses with slaughter and with fire, and seeing that none did beare armes against them, the miscreants made hast to Loreto it selfe. But they quickly perceiued that the Sacred House (forsake^ of mortall ayde) was protected and guarded with heauenly defe^dants: for the very sight of the House of Loreto, stroke so great dread into them, that out of hand forgoing their attempt, they retyred backe vnto their nauie, nothing at all doubting, but that very House, deare to heauen it selfe, was defended by the celestiall power. And Sclime the author of this attempted mischeise, not lo^g after perished of the canker, miserably consumed by the wrath of God, with a most filthy and lothsome disease. Yet this misfortunate end of Sclime, did not represse the boldnesse of others: for afterwards certaine that had beene Captiues in Turkie, escaping by flight, and comming to Loreto to performe their vowes to the B. Virgin, reported that the Archpyrats whome themselues had serued, su^dry times set forth towards Loreto with a furnished nauie, intending to robbe and to spoile the Church. But assoone as they came in sight of the most sacred House, they were brought into
such suddaine feare by miracle, that they were compelled to retire, co^fessing indeede, that there was some secret diuine power: wherby audacity turned to veneratio^. For when this wonder was diuulgated and knowne among the Barbarians, from that time the skulking Pyrats which robbed on the shores of Picene, durst scarce attempt any hostility, in sight of the House of Loreto, much lesse approach to ransacke the House it selfe. Once onely two Turkish Gallies presuming to take a prey out of the territories of Loreto, presently perceiued, that the B. Virgin Mother of God did reuenge her owne goods. For the same day being take^ by Canaletto Captaine of the Venetian fleete, they were hanged: all the prey recouered: and the good of Loreto established by the death of those barbarous people.



It deceyueth the auarice of the Christian armie. CHAP. XX
ABOVT the same time by the protection of Almightie God the House of Loreto remained vntoucht, not onely from the power of the Barbarians, but also from the couetousnesse of Christia^ souldiers. Francis Maria Duke of Vrbine,Annal. Laur. Rier. being lately depriued of his Signiorie by Leo the X. and afterward recouering it againe by armes, voluntarily ouerranne the Countrey of Picene, with great spoile, to reuenge, as he gaue out, the wrong the Pope had done him. His armie was leuied of the risfraffe of many nations, among whome there was neither manners, nor common language, and a prey was more esteemed then religion; so that by the Dukes owne co^mandment, it could neither be well gouerned, nor by any meanes persuaded from co^mitting of sacriledge. For many of the Captaines and Centurions hauing long and vehemently desired the sacred treasures of Loreto,
dealt by messengers secretly among the^ serues to take them by violence, and of purpose stayed all night at Monte-Faltrano not farre from Loreto, purposing to ransacke the House of Loreto destitute of defence, as soone as the day appeared. The wicked designment of the armie was not vnknowne to the Duke, both godly and wise. For which cause he laboured hard by interpreters to auert the desperate Captaines of those barbarous people from their wicked determination, and forced to hinder their lewd purpose by his Italian companies: he did all that he could, he laboured to his vttermost, to turne their inflamed desire of robbing rather an other way. But the eares of all being dease and stopt with auarice, the greater part (as many times it happeneth) ouercame the better, and sending before their scoutes, they them selues began to march forward before it was cleere day. The Duke dissuaded them againe, and intermingling threates with faire speeches, requested them to desist from that sacrilegious iourney: when nothing preuailed, he besought them (if they were resolued to go to Lore^o) to change their minds to the contrary, and to go to the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin mother of God for deuotion
sake, as all others did: If they did otherwise, he did not only threaten them with his, but also with the wrath of God, setting before them the late examples of the Turkes. But hauing their mindes filled with furie and couetousnes, and reiecting all good Counsaile, they went forward, veheme^tly desiring to lay hands on the spoile, which alreadie (in hope and opinion) they had wholy deuoured. The Duke followed the Armie, which he could not rule, to mitigate the sacriledge that he could not hinder. But the protection of the B. Virgin was not wanting to her most sacred Cell. For the scoutes who were sent before, approaching neere to Loreto, and vaunting for ioy to see that all was cleere, suddainly a multitude of fierce wolues (that sauage beastes might represse the sauagenesse of men) rushed forth of the next wood, and as it were in battell order gaue an assault on the forerunners; deuoured and tore in peeces most of them, frighted out of their witts with the suddaine terrour; and made the rest to flie, more desirous to saue them selues, then to seeke after the prey which they went about. Who assoone as they came to the first squadron, halfe dead with feare, with running, and with wearisomnes
and recouering some sparkle of life, after so great feare, they opened to the fellowes of their wickednes, the cause of their desperate flight and terrour; aduised them againe and againe, to beware what they did: that God was the Protectour and the reuenger of the sacred House of Loreto, that so great an armie of wolues, and such huge shapes of sauage beastes, came not out of that wood, but by miracle were let loose on the robbers of that holy House: neither were they to fight so much with the armie of those beastes, as with God and his Saintes. But the furious guiders of the Armie, scoffing with soldier-like termes at the terrour of the scoutes, as vaine, made haste to lay handes on their intended prey. But in very deed assoone as the sacred House shewed it selfe, suddainely great feare, came on all the armie, and like distracted people all began to tremble, with the dread that God stroke into their harts. Wherby their furie was so appeased, that the authours of the wickednes remembred them selues. and either the wrath of God, or els the religion of the Church so affrighted them, that at one instant they desisted from their premeditated theft. But lest they might returne againe to execute their intended
purpose, a new miracle happened to them, before this astonishment was gone. For when much of the day (as it is said) was spent, a cloud fell suddainly from heauen, which by little and little thickening about the Church, tooke away the sight therof, when notwithstanding all the places therabout, were bright with the sunne-shine: which once being cast before the souldiers eyes, made their mindes immooucable, and filled them with so great dread that they fell downe on their knees, and turning presumption into pietie, intended to go to Loreto to pacifie the wrath of God, and his B. mother. Whither assoone as they came, all (and chiefly the Captaines of the Companies) with great deuotion went into the sacred House of Loreto, and kneeling downe besought pardon of their intended wickednes. Besides they honoured the B. Virgin with giftes, whome they purposed to haue robbed: so that they beganne their iourney with a mad attempt, but concluded it with a happie ending. The Duke of Vrbine being exceeding glad at the vnexpected issue of their wickednes, gaue hartie thankes to God and the B. Virgin for the auerted sacriledge; and forth with in the first entrance of the most maiesticall Cell,
hu^g vp his armour, in memorie of so great a miracle, and vowed to with-draw his forces out of the territorie of Picene. Neither did he faile therin. For in continent the terrible armie was with drawne, wherby both the House of Loreto, and the Countrey of Picene, were deliuered from feare of ransacking and spoiling by a worthie miracle.


The towne of Loreto is walled about by Pope Leo the X. and the worthy worke of the caruing, is hastened on. CHAP. XXI.
THE rumour of the manifold dangers of Loreto, and of the heauenly protection of the B. Virgin, excited Pope Leo to prouide, that hereafter the like dangers might be withstood and resisted by the endeuours of man, especially because the^ enterprize of the Popes Pallace, intended for a fortification of the sacred House, was so great a worke, that the continuall
labour of many yeares, could hardly finish it. Therfore misliking a thing of so long expectation, and the better to resist the suddaine incurfio^s of the enemies, he co^passed Loreto about with ditches, rampiers, bulwarks, and walls, the XX, yeare of this age: and planted there many brazen peeces for defence of the towne, and to keepe of the enemie. So the Church of Loreto being compassed about with the fortifications of the towne, by surderance of a little hill, euen a far of, hath the true forme of a fortified Castle. The fame wherof did not onely allure Pilgrims to visit it, but also the borderers to inhabit it, and quailed the Barbarians and others, from attempting any mischeife hereafter against it. In this meane season Cardinall Roboreo Patron of Loreto departing this life,Cardinall Bibiana ^ made Patron of Loreto. Bernard Cardinall Bibiana was made Patron of Loreto, whose substitute the Pope appointed Iulianus Rodulphus, the Prior of Capua; who at Leo his command (because lodging for the Nobles was already prepared) forthwith bulltan Hospitall for the poore Pilgrims. And when the fortifications of Loreto were finished, the Pope caused a bell of huge bignes to be cast, to witt of twe^ty thousad pound weight, and called it Loreto, by the name
of the towne. And being allwayes very mindfull of the worthy ornament, which he endeauoured to leaue about the most sacred Chappell, he was most carefull to solicite Sansouino, and the rest of the Artificers with letters, rewards, and promises, to finish so famous a worke whiles he liued. The letter which Leo sent to Sansouino concerning that matter is yet extant,The third restimony of Leo X. the beginning wherof, because it maketh to the worthy praise of the House of Loreto, we thought good to relate in this place. Thus it is. For the immensiue and infinite benefits, bestowed on mankinde, and cheisly on vs our selfe, by the immaculate Mother of the high God our Redeemer, we deuoutly and piously belieue, that the most sacred Church of Loreto (venerable throughout the whole world) was the little Cell of the B. Virgin, whiles she carried the burden of our flesh, and the place of the message of the Angelicall salutation, and of her conceiuing of the diuine issue, which she was to bring into this worlde, and in which the B. Virgin doth dayly shew her selse a very bountisull giuer of graces, speedily condescending to the vowes of all saith sull people: and the rest that followeth: the summe wherof is this. The most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, is worthy indeed to be had in great honour; therfore with speed and might, we must endeauour to dispatch her
ornament with all expedition. Notwithstanding whiles Leo liued, the finishing of that worke could not be accomplished: for truly the kinde of the embosment, and the aboundance of those most excelle^t statuaes, required more then one Popes reigne. After Leo, Adrian the VI. was chosen, a man otherwise godly and learned, but either the troubles of the time, or else the shortnes of his reigne (for it was scarce a yeare) was the cause, that he lest almost no signe of his deuotion towards the House of Loreto; specially because he was wholly imployed in building of a su^ptuous and a statelie Church at Rome, for the Flemings, (of which nation he was) dedicated to our B. Ladie surnamed Dell' Anima. But how propense his good will towards the House of Loreto was likely to haue beene, if life had permitted him, his letters written to the Gouernour of Loreto, do plainly shew, and the benefits, immunities and Indulgences of the precedent Popes which he confirmed. And although I find but few particulars of the donaries which were giuen to Loreto at this time, because they were negligently recorded, yet they were not altogeather wanting. For there is extant a memoriall of Donaries, albeit the names of them that
gaue them are not set downe, because (as I belieue) they them selues would haue them suppressed, that they might be more gratefull to God and his B. Mother. Notwithstanding I find the particular monuments of some. Iohn Baptista Caraffa of Naples, Iohn Caponaccia of Padua, Philip Barbo of Venice, Laurence an Hungarian, Duke of Vilaco, and Vrsino Vrsinio a Roman, dedicated euery one his owne siluer Image to our B. Ladie of Loreto, and the Marquesse of Mantua brought worthie ornaments of gold and siluer for the Priest and ministers, celebrating with sole^nitie.



Pope Clement the seauenth, doth adorne the House of Loreto with Decrees, and continueth the adorning of the most sacred Cell. CHAP. XXII.
AFTER Adrian, Cleme^t the VII. Cosin-german to Leo the X. was created Pope, whose Pope dome, being disquieted with domestical and forraine warres, not only the ransacking of the Cittie of Rome, but also his deuotion towardes the House of Loreto, made very famous. For in the beginning of his raigne he esteemed nothing more, then to adorne the House of Loreto with Pontificall Decrees, wherin he might both confirme the ancient, and also bestow new benefitts. In this place I cannot omitt the beginning of a certaine Breue of his, very honorable to the B. Virgin of Loreto, which is thus. Seeing diuers of the Roman Bishops, but speciallie Pope Leo X. of
happie memorie our Predecessour, and Cosin-german according to the flesh, beholding the mani^old and great miracles, which the highest worketh daily in our Church of our B. Ladie of Loreto, and mooued with singular deuotion and pietie at d^uers times, granted very many pri^iledges, immunities, and grates to the Church it selfe, and to the Chapter, Chanons, and other persons of the said House: the who haue alwaies beene singularly deuoted towards the B. Virgin (vnder whose Patronage the said Church was built) and hauing speciall care that whatsoeuer hath beene granted in fauour of the said Church, should be sasely preserued. And the rest that followeth. Among the benefits of Clement one was, to take fro^ the people of Recanati all iurisdictio^ ouer Loreto, if they had any remaining. Also it was no small benefit of his, to promote Iohn Matthew Gibert of Verona, a man famous for learning and vertue, to the Patronship of Loreto, by whom the House of Loreto was furnished and adorned with sacred ornature; with choise Chanons, and solemne Cerimonies. The porch of the Bishops Pallace was vaulted: the well which (as we said before Cardinall Roboreo caused to be made in the Cloister) was couered with a roose to the great good both of the inhabitants and of strangers. But aboue all things Clement was most solicitous and carefull to
finish the notable ornament of the most maiesticall chappell, with like magnifice^ce as Leo had begunne it. Wherunto he was incensed either with the pietie, or els with the honour of his house, that the same familie, which had the reputation for vndertaking the carued worke of the House of Loreto, might also haue it for finishing he same. Therfore with great expences he hired Antonie Sangall, Raphaell Baccio, Nicolas Tribulo, and other most famous Statuaries of that time, and commanded that Raynerio Nerusio of Pisa should be ouerseer of the building of Loreto, but specially of that worthy worke, that it might be curiously finished, according to the dignitie therof. When the rich marble was for the most part carued and polished, and the rest in hand, Nerusio beate downe the bricke walls, which were built for a prop to the sacred Cell, and by miracle put of and remoued from the same (as we said before) and layd them aside for the people to beholde. Then leauing like space betweene, to be monument of the olde miracle, they thought it best to inuiron the sacred House with new walles and to couer the^ with the carued marble, that they might not onely adorne the sacred Chappell on the outside, but also support
the new vaute to be built therupon, when the olde vaute and roose was remooued and taken downe. It pleased the Pope, that the sacred House should be vauted with stone, fearing if that the olde arched roofe, subiect to many lightes continually burning should once be fired, it might bring vtter destruction to the most sacred Cell. Therfore art required, that deeper foundations and more firme ground-workes should be laid to make that worthie and precious worke secure on euery side from earthquakes. Wherfore lest the sacred house should receiue any alteration or detriment, by taking the earth from vnderneath, in opening the foundatio^s of the new walls, it was bound about with Carpets and ropes, as the vse is, and lifted vp with strong cables, that it might hang in the aire by engines, vntill the trenches were filled vp, and the new foundations raised. At which time it is euident (for the thing was witnessed by the eyes of many) that whiles the earth for these new foundations was digged from vnder the bottome of the olde walles,Hier. Trad. Laur. the dustie and the beaten ground, and the hedge of the next close trodden downe, and other signes of the high way, where the sacred House did seat it selfe,
were found, as new monuments of the old miracle. Which many noting and obseruing, Hierome Angelita him selfe about the same time, set them downe in writing in his Historie of the B. Virgin of Loreto.


The Architect presuming to worke through the sacred walles, by miracle fell downe as dead. CHAP. XXIII.
AT that time the celebrity of the Church of Loreto beginning to increase, they thought it behoouefull that the most sacred House it selfe, should haue more dores; for the^ there was but one (as we shewed before) almost in midst of the wall that standeth towards the north: by which onely, all commers and goers had entrance and regresse. Therfore in so great a multitude and concourse of strangers, one pressing an other, diuers were stifled by thronging and pressing of people, because the last gaue no place vnto the first, as many times it happeneth. It was thought good therefore (which many long agoe did ernestly
wish, and Leo the X. had so appointed it, in the modell of the outward ornament) that the sacred Cell should be made a through-fare, by opening of two doores at the angles of two walls. But assoone as the aduise of the Architect was noised abroad,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. in verie deed it seemed wickednes, not only to the inhabitants, but euen to the Pilgrimes them selues, to defile those walls with iron, which the deuine prouidence had preserued safe and vntoucht for so manie ages togeather. Wherupon manie openly pronounced and said, that whosoeuer would aduenture it, would not trulie escape vnpunished; therefore the feare of Gods wrath deterred the masons from vndertaking the worke; and the euent shewed that it was no vaine imagination. For to Nerusio the Architect himselfe (going about the same) there hapned a thing wonderfull to be spoken and seene. For when the masons refused to do it, he himselfe went to digge through the sacred wall, with greater confidence in his art, then reuerence to the place. But assoone as he had forced his hammer against the sacred wall, suddenly his hand became nummed, an vnwonted trembling inuaded the rest of his body, the^ his countenance waxed pale, as a messenger
of great euill, and shortly his hart fainting, they that were present, supported him falling downe, and carried him home in their armes, like to one giuing vp the ghost, and void of all sense. He lay almost 8. houres without life, vntill his wife a godly woma^, and much deuoted to our B. Lady of Loreto, with prayers and vowes had pacified the wrath of allmighty God and his B. Mother in behalfe of her husband: wherby the vitall heate hauing almost forsaken all the body, was at last restored to the ioynts, and breath began to passe more freely: so that Nerusio lifting vp his eyes, and life returning vnto him by degrees, knew the standers about, and comming to himselfe accused his owne rashnes and asked help and pardon of our B. Lady. Neither in vaine. For his sinne being forgiuen him and taken away by deuotion, did also take away the sicknes of the body, that the care might demo^strate the cause of the disease. Assoone as he recouered, he aduertised the Pope of the whole matter, and asked his aduise what was best to be done: who being well assured that the said euill happened vnto him more through to much confidence in him selfe, then the indignation of the B. Virgin (tempering his co^mand with godly admonitions)
persuaded Nerusio, that vnder the authority of the Vicar of God, and without any feare at all, he should go forward with the worke which he had begunne, and seriously admonished him, to digge through the sacred walls, not so much with his hammer and boldnes, as armed with fasting and veneration towards the B. Virgin, so at last the thing would succeed according to desire. For it is not to be feared, that the B. Virgin Mother of God, will not haue her House to become a through-fare, who will haue it open to Pilgrims, not only without their danger, but also for their good. But the Popes authority it self could not inforce Nerusio, much frighted allready with the late euill of his presumption, to experience that againe, which he assayed a little before, with so great danger to him selfe. At last because the Popes command did vrge, and the delay of opening these doores hindred the building of the worke; there was a yong man, who seemed nothing fearfull to do it, who relying on the Popes authoritie, and much intreated by his friendes, would aduenture the thing. He was one of the Cleargie of the Church of Loreto, and was called Ventura Perino; who arming him selfe with three dayes fast, came with his hammer
very reuerently to the sacred wall. About whome there flocked a multitude of strangers and of the Cleargie, these solicitous of the yong mans confidence, those in suspence with the expectatio^ of the thing. But with humble supplicatio^, Perino is said to haue spoken thus. Sacred House of the B. Virgin, pardon Innocencie, for I do not digge thee through with this hammer, but Clement the Vicar of God, desirous of thy ornament: he coueteth to haue thee adorned, he, to haue thee a through-fare: Therfore let it please the Mother of God, which pleaseth the Vicar of God. Hauing prayed thus, he digged through the designed place of the wall without any punishment at all. And afterward the Masons (prepared with like fasting and reuerence) followed him, iterating his blowes with safetie, and opened three dores, wherof two giue free entrance and regresse to the people, and the third maketh way for the Priestes to the holier part of the sacred Chappell, where the Image of the B. Virgin is reuerenced neere at hand. At the same time the little window, being alone in the fore wall, right almost against the Image, was made wider to receiue the light, and strenghned with brazen barres, beautifully guilt. And whe^ the rubbish was taken out, the olde dore
being to bigge and open in the midst of the sacred wall, was also mured vp. And then the new walles bega^ to be raised, to be couered, and vested with the notable Crust of the carued worke.


Pope Clement being holpen by the aide of the B. Virgin of Loreto, doth adorne her with great care. CHAP. XXIIII
ABOVT that time Clement vsing all diligence to adorne the House of Loreto, eschewed great danger by the protectio^ of the B. Virgin Mother of God. For the Cittie of Rome being taken by fraud and guile of the enemie, he retyred himselfe into the Castle of Adrians Forte; where the Imperialls besieging him, till he was able to withstand their forces no longer, he implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, not onely by vow, but also by letters. Which was to good effect: for not long after, he escaped from amidst the enemies bullets with safetie; and
being in great want, was relieued with three thousand Crownes of the gold and siluer of Loreto.Bern. Cyril. So that by double benefit of the B. Virgin of Loreto, Clement escaped present danger and necessitie, and at last dashing the imminent storme of war, brought peace and repose to his people. Being deliuered from danger of life, and from feare of war, he thought good, not onely to giue thanks to the B. Virgin of Loreto, but also (as much as lay in mans power) to requite it. Hauing therfore inuested Charles the V. with the Imperiall Crowne at Bologna, and returning backe againe to Rome, he came to the House of Loreto, to salute his Patronesse and deliueresse: and performing his vow to God and the B. Virgin with harty thanks (that the grace of so many merits towards him might not be forgotten) he resolued with himselfe by all meanes to hasten on the building of Loreto, and to solicite the Architect and masons therunto, hauing a speciall desire to bring the Church at least vnto the toppe. To dispatch these workes, he repayed the money which he receiued in loane fro^ the B. Virgin, wherby in his Popedome, both the Bishops Pallace at Loreto was speedily forewarded, and also a roofe put on the Church
with the admirable thole, which is as high from the roofe, as the roofe from the grou^d. Meanewhile it was not Clements least care to finish that worthy Crust of the carued worke, which (as the beginnings made shew) was not vnlikely to be the most curious worke of the whole world.


Loreto is made more healthfull by cutting downe the woods and drying vp the lakes. CHAP. XXV.
WHILES the House of Loreto was daily more and more adorned with excellent works, by cutting downe the woods, and drying vp the waters neere vnto it, the towne it selfe was made more healthfull.Bern. Cyril. For at that season the aire was generally misliked, by reason of the diseases and death of the Inhabitants: because (for the most part) being marish and vnwholsome, it caused such distemperature in their bodies, that a good part of the yeare, the inhabitants: were all rhewmatike and full of fleame: were weake and
diseased, and children cheifly were taken away with vntimely death, who for the weaknes of their bodies could hardly brooke the vnwholsomnes of the next lake, and the grosse ayre of the place it selfe. And albeit Loreto is seated on a little hill which looketh towards the South, and the sunnerising; yet on the West and the North being inclosed with wooddy fenns, and interposed hills, all the wholsome ayre was taken from it, and contrary, being on the other part open, it admitted the vnhealthfull and grossest windes. Not far of, there was a plaine, allwaies foggie, by reason of the fennes, which came by the ouer-flowing of the riuer Musion, and also slymie with the winter fludds, which by little and little gathering together, for want of motion became noisome. You may beleiue that this vnwholsome seate was pleasing to the Mother of God, that the wholsomnes of her help might more appeare in an vnhealthful place. But at last newes came to the Pope, how in the towne of Loreto, many infants and children perishing with the foggie aire before they came to mans estate, by little and little the towne it selfe would become desolate, if that the inhabitants (as they intended) departed thence to other
places, for want of posteritie. Therfore thinking it to the glory of the B. Virgin of Loreto, to haue the towne most frequented, and the place very healthfull, by aduise of the Architects, he thought it most conuenient, to dry vp the lakes adioyning, to cut downe the woods, to leuell the hills which ouer-looked the Church (by the inhabitants called Monte Regal and Montinorum) that by taking away the orige^ of the mistes, and making the heauens discouerable, the cleare and open winde might blowe into the towne with many wholsome blasts, to make the place more healthfull. Wherupon he wrote to Iohn Antonie a Statis Gouernour of Loreto, and to Antonie Sansouino the Architect in manner following. Vnderstanding that the aire in those partes (but speciallie in the summer-time) is very vnhealthfull, partlie for that a certaine hill ouerlooking the said Chappell and Church excludeth the vplandish windes, healthfull to the place, partlie also because in a plaine neere to the said church for fiue miles togeather, manie lakes and woods almost allwaies slymie, breed much vnhealthfulnes: and desiring to make that Church (famons throughout the whole worlde for the merits of the most glorious Virgin Marie, and the multitude of people reso^ing thither) healthfull by taking away the asoresaid causes; we haue now ordained, that the high
hill which ouer-looketh the Church shall be plained, the lakes dryed vp by ditches, and the woods cut downe. Wherupon the Gouernour of Loreto (euen with greater care then he was co^manded) beginning so healthfull a worke, the 33. yeare of this age, and speedily hyring a great number of workmen by the Architect (and also intreating poore Pilgrims to sett to their helping hands) made haste to cutt downe the wood next vnto the towne, to draine the lakes by ditches into the riuer running by, or into the next part of the sea, to leuell the hill that ouerlooked the towne, which because it was a long and almost an infinite worke was then rather begunne then finished: but that very beginning brought some better health to the inhabitants for the present, and also much hope in time to come, as the worke proceeded on.



Pope Cleme^t sendeth 3. of his Cha^ber into Dalmatia and Galiley, to seeke out the remoueall of the house of Loreto. CHAP. XXVI.
WHEN the dwelling of Loreto was made more healthfull, the Historie of the House of Loreto was made more manifest. Hierome Angelita, a Cittize^ of Recanati an honour to his familie many waies, not only for the nobilitie of his pare^tage, but also for the integritie of his life.Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. Who at that time dedicated to Clement the Pope, the Historie of the B. Virgin of Loreto which him selfe co^posed. The cause wherof was this: Because about that time, as before hath bene said, out of the Chronicles of Flumen, certaine Dalmatians brought to the Cittizens of Recanati, the relation of the transportation of the sacred House, from Galiley into Dalmatia, and from thence into Picene. Therfore either by reading the historie of Angelita, or at the request of his friends
or rather being mooued by heauenly inspiration, Clement had a vehement desire, to seeke out the remoouall of the sacred House in Galiley it selfe. And albeit he was not ignora^t that, that very thing was made euident inough, both by the Dalmatians (Frangipane being the authour therof) as also by the common consent of Picene, at the suite of the Cittize^s of Recanati; yet he held it to be the speciall office of the Pope himselfe, last of all by speciall men to seeke out the certaintie of so vnusuall and almost so incredible a thing, that the authoritie of the Pontificall Sea, might confirme other folkes endeuours, vtterly to take away all doubt out of the hartes of men, if percha^ce any should remaine. Wherupon out of the number of his familie, he chose three of his Chamber of approued religion and credit, whome he commanded to set forward, as soone as he had giuen them notice what they must do, and aboundantly furnished them with all things necessarie for them, wishing them a happie iourney. Who going to Loreto, and viewing and measuring the sacred House with diligent care, shipped them selues for Sclauonie. Assoone as they came thither, they found a little ancient house like to that of Loreto, famous
with the monumentes of miracles; on a wall wherof was written, that in times past the House of Loreto had beene seated there. These thinges the inhabitants them selues did shew them, and that they reported no vntruth, their true teares trickling downe aboundantly of zeale was no small assurance. Wherupon the Legates laying to their measures, and finding all things exactly to agree, co^tinued on their iourney, and ariuing in Galiley, came to Nazareth: where the inhabitants shewed them the foundations of the sacred House, which viewing and measuring round about, they found all things to accord. Among these Embassadours, there was one Iohn N. of Sienna, who thinking to confirme the truth of the old miracle with some new signe brought thence two of the stones wherof the houses of Nazareth are commonly built: which by his naturall forme is like to slate (such as in some places is digged out of quarries easie to be hewed) but markt and distinguished with yellow veines. And Iohn returning to the House of Loreto with his fellow-Legates, compared tho^^ stones of Nazareth with the stones of the sacred house and found them to be of the same kind and very like: which also did increase the certaintie
of the miracle, seeing it is euident that no such quarrie of stones is in Picene, where all buildings (though very ancient) for want of stuffe and such stones are knowne to be made of bricke. Wherfore being very glad of their good successe, they made haste to Rome, and after long expectation they came at last vnto the Pope, and related vnto him all that they had found. More-ouer Iohn shewed him the stones of Nazareth, very like to them of Loreto, as witnesses of so great a miracle: which was imbraced with exceeding ioy of the Pope, and with speciall applause of his retinew.



Three worthie men are deliuered from danger of death. CHAP. XXVII
ABOVT the same time, the House of Loreto was ennobled with most worthie miracles.Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. Iulianus Caesarin us is cured of a very da^gerous disease. Iulianus Caesarinus one of the Peeres of the Cittie of Rome, being brought to the last cast with a grieuous sicknes at Bologna, the 33. yeare of this age, and being also giuen ouer by the Phisitians, perceiued death to be at hand, but imploring the helpe of the B. Virgin of Loreto, he suddainly recouered therof. The same yeare the Vayoud of Transiluania being ouercome and taken in battaile by Abrahim the Kings Lieuetenant of Turkie (whome they call the Bassa) by co^mandment of the wrathfull Co^querour, was to be cast headlong from a very high cliffe: but calling on B. Marie of Loreto he eschewed not onely present death, but also seruitude it selfe. For by chance discoursing with the Bassa of religion, he so mitigated his outragious mind by heauenly helpe, that the Barbarian
turning hatred into loue, dismissed him with all the Transiluania^ capitues without any ransome at all. And at this day there is extant at Loreto, a great Tablet, curiously painted, and garnished with gold, where this very thing is not onely expressed in colours, but also in writing.The fall and gift of Ferdinando Gonzaga. About the same time, a yong noble man called Ferdinando Gonzaga, managing a very fierce horse at Mantua, by his forcible stirring, was throwne against the iro^ grates of a Church which was hard by, but imploring the helpe of our B. Lady of Loreto (a maruailous thing to be spoken) he had no harme at all in so grieuous and so dangerous a fall: and being very mindfull of his vow, he himselfe brought to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, the siluer Statua of a horsman, and afterward as long as he liued did co^tinnally weare about his necke a siluer Image of the said B. Virgin, either for a monument of that miracle, or else as a protection vnto him in the perills of this mortall life. Neither in vaine: for in great dangers in time of the battaile, the soldierlike man allwaies experienced and felt the fauourable help of the B. Virgin Mother of God. Wherfore the Pope being exceeding glad, with the newes of these miracles, and also with the
certainty of the remoouall of the House of Loreto, from Galiley and Dalmatia, began earnestly to solicite Nerusio, to finish the most worthy ornament of the sacred Cell with all speed. But it seemed otherwise to God, who giuing Clement the reputation for desiring to effect so notable a worke, reserued the honour for finishing and ending it to an other. In setting vp so famous an orname^t, and in bringing it to perfection (as much as lay in him) not onely his diligence, but also his magnifice^ce was so remarkable, that not vnworthily fame doth report him the author of it. And albeit the armes and ensignes of Leo are inserted in many places of the worke it selfe; yet Clement put there no monument at all of himselfe; truely a rare example, and pleasing to God, that doubtles by his prouide^ce, the glorie of so excellent a worke fled from him that desired it, and followed him that fled from it. When they came to the backe of the worke, which standeth to the sunne-rising, Clement being asked of the Cittizens of Recanati, whether he would haue the History of Loreto writte^ on that part, he answered, it seemed better to haue it likewise carued in marble, as the rest of the workes of the B. Virgin were, both because the History would be sufficiently
knowne and manifest of it self, as also, because the caruing thereof would satisfie aswell the learned as the vnlearned. But it pleased Clement the VIII. and Card. Gallo Patron of Loreto, to haue the summe of the historie of Loreto, written in a marble table, which was vnder the carued worke, that the monument of so great and so vnusuall a thing, might be more famous and more knowne to posteritie.


The testimonie of Friar Leander Albertus, of the house of Loreto. CHAP. XXVIII.
ABOVT that time, a new testimonie of no meane Historiographer graced the house of Loreto. Leander Albertus a learned and a godlie man of the familie of S. Dominicke, in the booke which he sett forth of the description of Italie, describing Picene, maketh worthie mention of the house of Loreto, which place we haue turned out of Italian into latin, almost word for word: so therfore he writeth.
Betwixt Recanati and the Adriaticke sea, not far from the Riuer Musion, on a little hill is seated the Church of B. Mary of Loreto, most famous throughout the whole world, which togeather with the towne is fenced with strong walls: where there be manie inhabitants, to intertaine the Pilgrims with hospitality, who out of all parts of Europe, resort thither to performe their vowes at all times of the yeare, but speciallie in the spring, and in the Autumne. And being to speake of so great a Church, whence I shall beginne I know not: For on the one part the exceeding religion of the place, and on the other the great wealth of the Church doth present it self vnto my minde; so that in verie deede my forces do faile me, endeuouring to speake of that most holie and most religious cha^ber, where the Queene of Heauen, a perpetuall Virgin, and Mary the mother of God, and a mediatrice vnto her sonne for wretched mortall men, was borne, and brought vp. Where by fortelling of Gabriell the Archangell, she was made and called the mother of God, where god himself putt on humane nature, to deliuer vs out of the iawes of the infernall dragon, and to sett open the entrance of the heauenlie
kingdome, shutte so manie ages by the default of the parents of mankind. And (as I haue said) whence I shall beginne the description of such a place, I am ignorant: But to satisfie the godlie and the curious reader, I will say something. Therefore first of all it is not to be doubted, but that this is the very chamber, where the Queene of Heaue^ was brought into this world: For besides most certaine monuments of writing, which witnes it to be the cha^ber of the B. Virgin mother of God, translated hither by Angells, there is none so barbarous and obdurate, none defiled with so manie and so great offences and crimes, that in the verie entra^ce of this sacred house (being as it were replenished with the present religion of the diuine maiestie) feeleth not his hart to be so mollified, that with all deuotion doth not implore the help of B. Mary, and by her suppliantlie intreate pardon of his sinnes from Christ; and trulie me thinkes the power of God doth inforce them to this verie thing. To these are added the signes and miracles wrought there by heauenlie vertue, and the benefits bestowed on them, which humblie recurre to the mother of God for help, which not onelie monuments of
writing do testifie to be true, but also golden, siluer and waxen Images, and votiue tablets, which (for the space of manie yeares and ages also) haue beene gathered and heaped togeather. I should be long, if by number, I should rehearse, the heauenlie wonders and benefits imparted there to mortall men, which trulie are so manie and so greate, that they may seeme incredible to them, who are not easilie brought to belieue that God doth heare his mothers praiers: and trulie Leander hath not desiuered these things with more eloquence than truth.


The House of Loreto is honoured with many worthie Donaries. CHAP. XXIX.
NEVER before was the House of Loreto more honoured with votiue giftes. For I find in the bookes of the House of Loreto, that at these times in their supplications, almost al the Picene people were wont yearlie to bring manie siluer Crownets to the B. Virgin,Cod. Laur. sometimes one, sometimes two, sometimes three, and
sometimes no lesse than seuen,Many Donaries of diuers kindes. either vpon vow or deuotion. And because there were now Crownets good store (for they amounted to 70.) they borrowed the^ of the Keepers of the sacred house, for which they gaue a reward. Also manie Castles, townes and Citties of Picene, in there supplications presented the siluer purtraicte of their towne, whereby at that time, of Citties, townes, and Castles, there were Images of siluer, to the number of eighteene: among which the purtraicte of Firmo, of almost twentie pound weight, for fashion and value did excell. And these also, the keepers of the sacred house did lend to other people that wanted goldsmiths, to be carried in sole^ne processio^, who gaue monie for their lone. And either custome (towit) of Crownets, or of Images of this sort hath so preuailed, that now it is chiefelie vsed. Neither did this godlie vse conteine it self in the bounds of Picene: for at the same time the people of Pisaurus, sent a siluer purtraicte of their towne of curious workmanship. But that the pietie of Citties and Contreys might not be greater then that of Cittizens and moble men; Ascanius Columna famous amo^g the Peeres of Rome for parentage and wealth, brought for a gift to the
B. Virgin, a siluer Image of S. Rocke, of one pound weight, and a vestment of cloth of siluer for the priest, celebrating with sole^nitie. The Cardinall of the Foure-Crowned-Martyrs, a head of siluer, of foure pound weight. The Earle Rangonto of Modena, and Iohn Francis Bossius of Milan, ech of them a siluer thigh, of one pound weight. Pyrrhus Gonzaga a foote of the same matter and weight. Pardus Pappacoda a Neapolita^, his own Image of siluer, of double weight to the other. Alexander Calgagnino his owne Image of siluer engrauen, of three pound weight. The Marques Tripaldo, a siluer lampe of like weight. The great Prior of the knights of Rhodes an other lampe of the same substance, but in weight some thing greater. Vincent Alsano o Perugia, his owne Image of siluer, of XV. pound weight. There were also sixteene Images of siluer presented by others, (whose names are not knowne) of 77. pound weight. But much before all the Donaries of this time, was the siluer Image of Lewes Gisilardo a Cittizen of Bologna, of more than fiftie pound weight: Then also was the sacred furniture increased. Cardinall Montino (who afterward was Pope by the name of Iulius the third) presented for a gift, a curious vestment for the
priest, of tissue-cloth of gold. Card. Palmerio ornature for the Altar and the priest of cloth of golde. The duke of Maestricht vestments of blew veluet, adorned with golde, for the priest and ministers celebrating with sole^nitie. Oliuer Fagnano of Milan ornature for the Altar, and the priest of the same stuffe. The Marques Bitonta a vestment of Damaske with workes of golde. And others either brought or sent to the B. Virgin mother of God other ornature, for the Altar and the Priests, as Crownets of siluer, chalices and other such like, which to rehearse were long. But this praise was not due onelie to men. A crownet of golde of one pound weight, her owne Image of siluer, praying to the B. Virgin, of one pound weight and a halfe, a siluer foote of one pound weight, a Casket of the same substance and weight curiouslie wrought, two cruets of golde of fourteene ounces, and golden bracelets of antique worke, were the giftes of Isabell Cardona the Vice-royes wife of Naples. The Marquesse of Guasto a siluer Image of the B. Virgin, holding the sweete child Iesus in her lap, of foure pound weight. And also the Turks sent gifts to our B. Ladie. For it is well knowne, that the XXIX. yeare of this age, a Bassa of the
Turks (his name and the cause is not deliuered) sent a siluer suite, beset and garnished with pearle, to adorne the Altar of the B. Virgin of Loreto, Clement the VII. being Pope; that we may vnderstand that the B. Virgin of Loreto, is the generall Patronesse of all nations, which desire to vse her Patronage.




THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF LORE TO: Collected by the Reuerend F. HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS Of the Societie of IESVS.

POPE PAVL THE THIRD adorneth the Sacred House with benefittes and Decrees. CHA
AFTERVVARD Paul the III. succeeded in the Pontificall Sea, who in adorning and amplifying the state of the House of Loreto, contended euen with Cleme^t himselfe: and in the beginning of his Popedome bestowed many Indulgences and
benefits on the same. For thinking it an vnseemly thing, that the officers of the sacred House should hardly prouide salte for money for their necessary vses, he gaue them yearly twentie sacks of salt out of Ceruia, a benefit truly not to be contemned, whether you consider the perpetuity of the gift, or the necessity of the receiuers, or els the mind of the giuer, which doth well appeare in the beginning of a certaine Breue, which we thought good to annexe. VVhen our Predecessour Pope Xystus the fourth of happie memorie, among other things of his meere motion had made honour able me^tion of the Church of B. Mary of Loreto, lo^g agone miraculoufly founded in honour of the B. Virgin her selse, in which through the meruailous clemencie of God, was placed (as credible persons haue declared) the glorious Image of the B. Virgin accompanied with a multitude of Angells, and to the which for the manifold and wonderful miracles, which by the merits and intercession of the said glorious Virgin, the higehst daily worketh in that place, out of diuers, euen the remotest parts of the world, doth daylie resort a great multitude of people, receiuing cure and help, by the fauour of the aforesaid glorious Virgin etc. And a little after: Our Predecessour Pope Iulius the Second of happie memorie considering that in the said Church of Loreto, there was not onlie the true Image of the B. Virgin Marie; but (as
it is piouslie belieued, and the report goeth) the Cell or the Chamber, where most B. Marie was conceiued and brought vp; and where also she herself conceiued the Sauiour of the world, when she was saluted by the Angell etc. And he also relateth other things, which Iulius the second sett downe in his decrees.


Loreto is committed to the protection of the people of Recanati. CHAP. II.
BVT Paul the Pope well knowing, how much good there is in a good President, had allwaies speciall care to prouide good gouernours for Loreto, the greatest gift perchance of all. Whereupon making Alexander Argolus Bishop of Terracina Patron of Loreto, he notablie ordered and aduanced the state of the sacred 08 seate, placed manie learned and graue men in the Colledge of the Chanons, performed the Cerimonies of diuine prayer with solemne and Pontificall pompe, and finallie for foure yeares togeather, fullfilled his office
in all things, belonging either to diuine or humane seruice, with great praise of religion and benignitie. After whome succeeded Gaspar Contareno the Cardinall,Card. Contareno Patron of Loreto. a man famous for learning and pregnancie of wit, and also a verie good Patrone of Loreto, but of short co^tinuance by reason of death. For whiles he worthilie gouerned the state of Loreto by Galeatius Floremonius (who afterward was Bishop of Aquino) with great expectation of his vertue, he departed this life. In whose place the Pope appointed Rodulphus Pius the Cardinall of Carpa,Card. of Carpa Patron of Loreto a good Patron, and of long continuance, who trulie for his worthie pietie, would haue gained to himself the surname of Pius, though he had not receined it from his ancestours. For there was neuer anie more carefull to adorne the sacred house; as in the Church of Loreto, and in the adioyned houses may well appeare, where at this day are extant many and worthie monuments of his. This meane while, newes of the Turkish war being more and more spread abroad, which Selime the Turkish Emperour threatened towardes Italie, assoone as he subdued the kingdome of Tunis, by Ariadenus Enobarbus, Paul the Pope ioyned straight in league with Charles the Christian Emperour,
and with the Venetians, and bent all his care and forces against the Turks, first of all intending to prouide for the Church of Loreto: but because his treasure was wasted with preparation for the war, and scarcity of money hindered his godlie purpose, he suffered not an occasion offered by chance, to passe vnaccepted. For at that time the Embassadours of Recanati came to Rome to the Pope,The Embassage of the people of Recanati to Pope Paul the 3. to complaine that Loreto their ancient possession was taken from them by Iulius his Predecessour with great domage, but with greater disgrace to their Cittie. For who would haue thought, that without a grieuous crime, the Prince of Bishops, and the Vicar of Christ, would haue taken from the people of Recanati their most ancie^t possessio^ of Loreto against their wills? and for what desert of theirs, should so shamefull a spot of infamie be laid on their well deseruing Cittie? Whether because from the beginning, she carefullie maynteined, reuerenced with gists, adorned with a Church, graced with buildings, for almost two hundred and fiftie yeares, iustlie and holily gouerned the seate of the B. Virgin of Loreto? When at anie time did the Magistrates of Recanati gouerne it with auarice or pride? When was the protection of the Church, of the Inhabitants, or Pilgrims neglected? How often haue the waies, which were pestered
with theeues, and the audacitie of way-laiers been repressed? And how often also hath the sacred house it self, beene defended from hoflilitie with greate forces of armed men? Beholde why the people of Recanati should willinglie recount these things: For the B. Virgin mother of God, transferring her natiue house into Italie, chose her self a seate, specially in our woode: and changing the same three times within sew moneths, departed not out of our territories, but made three places of our liberties, famous with her footsteps. We therefore bestowed on her, sufficient space for a Church: we built the Church and the towne about her, and we gaue to the Inhabitants both Magistrates and Lawes. VVhich truely are of such importance, and auaile so much, that they may seeme to possesse that place by good right, seeing they were depriued of their ancient possession without triall of their cause. But if it may be thought fitt, that the Vicar of God should restore to the people of Recanati, the gift which God and his B. Mother bestowed vpon them, indeed they will do their endeuour, that neither the Pope nor they of Loreto shall repent them of the protection and gouernement of the Cittie of Recanati. And that both parties may remaine satisfied, the people of Recanati will refuse no condition, that the most iust Pope shall impose vpon them. when Paul had graciouslie heard the Embassadours, he followed a certaine meane, both to restore to the people
of Recanati their right,Loreto is restored to the Gouernment of the people of Recanati. and notwithstanding to preserue the benefits of former Popes, granted in fauour of the House of Loreto. Whereupon with these conditions, he restored to the Cittizens of Recanati, their towne of Loreto, (exempting onely the Church and the Gouernours iurisdiction ouer townes-folkes and strangers) to defend the sacred House of Loreto, against the Turkes, with a strong garrison; to repaire the walles and fortifications as need required; to make the wayes secure from theeues, in fauour of the Pilgrims that came vp and downe. Besides to repay into the Popes treasurie, to the vse of the Turkish war, eight thousand Crownes which Leo the tenth had spent in fortifying of Loreto. So Loreto returned to the Iurisdiction and Gouernment of Recanati, the 35. yeare of this age, and about 20. yeares after it was made free by Iulius the second. But assoone as Paul the Pope saw himself deliuered from the feare of this new war, he thought good to enrich the House of Loreto with lands, being now well defended with fortifications. Whereupon by his command, of the Magistrates Duumuiri of Castro-Ficardo, were purchased the woods neere to Loreto, with the vineyards, meadowes and Oliueries
adioyning, for which purchase he gaue six thousand Crownes out of his owne treasurie: and also purchased other landes neere to the Riuer Musion, and gaue them to the B. Virgin of Loreto.


A Fraternitie of Childre is instituted, to sing solemne praise and laude, to the B. Virgin of Loreto. CHAP. III.
AT that time the House of Loreto was not onelie enriched with wealth, but also with Ministers. For Paul the Pope, verie well considering that the praiers of persect puritie were most acceptable to God and his B. Mother, instituted a Colledge of twelue children, where he appointed that the choicest and wittiest children of all Picene, should be instructed to sing seruice with solemnitie in honour of our B. Ladie of Loreto. In choosing of whome, he commanded that regard should be had to the integritie both of bodie and
minde, and greate diligence of the best maisters to instruct them. Speciall care was vsed, that they might incline the most holie Virgin, no lesse with the chastitie of their manners, then with the sweetnes of their voices. Who by the Popes appointment being brought vp and taught in a conuenient place, (called the Chanonry) dayly at certaine houres song hymnes to our B. Ladie in her sacred Chappell, beseeching peace and pardon of God and his B. Mother, and intreating help and fauour for Italie against the furie of the Turks. The Childrens pietie deceiued not the Pope, nor the B. Virgin failed not the Childrens prayers. For although the discord of the leaders, made the nauie of the confederate Princes vnprofitable, notwithsta^ding the B. Virgin herfelf brought peace to Italie, and vanquished the audacitie of the Turkes. For shortlie after, all controuersies betweene the Emperour and the King of France, were so luckilie concluded, that of sorrowfull war, ioyfull peace came by and by to Italie.Paul. Iou. lib. 41. Annal. Laur. Rier. And in the moneth of August, vnder the conduct of Ariadenus Enobardus, a great and strong nauie of Turkes threatning vtter ouerthrow to Italie, was beaten against the rocks of Acroceraunion and
suffered shipwrack, almost in sight of the House of Loreto it self. By which shipwracke it is verie euident, that the greatest part of their nauie was lost, twentie thousand of the Barbarians swallowed vp in the sea, and almost all the Adriaticke shore couered with the carkasses of their enemies, with weapons, with bordes, with munition, and other signes of shipwracke. Whose armour sloting vp towards Loreto, and being knowne on the shore, almost before newes thereof could be brought, made the ouerthrow of the enemies verie notorious. Whereupon the people of Loreto and strangers reioyced, that Almightie God and his B. Mother had heard the praiers of the children and of the godlie; and that Almightie God himself reuenging their wickednes, had also at last opened the eyes of their filthie pride. For which cause, they exhorted one an other, to reuerence such a Patronesse with speciall honour, by whose protection they saw all that coast of Italie, deliuered from the present feare of the Turkes.



The Hospitall, and the Spittle, to receaue Pilgrims, are opened: the sacred House is adorned with buildings. CHAP. IIII.
AND the Pope himself being most glad of such newes, and not to be more bountifull to the Inhabita^ts than to strangers,The Hospital and the Spitle. opened the Hospitall of Loreto (finished much about this time) chieflie for the cure of diseased Pilgrims, and appointed an other place without the walls, for scabbed and leaprous people, lest their infection might hurt the healthfull. Then from the sicke, turning his care to the sound, he erected an Hospitall for poore Pilgrimes,The Hospitalitie of the house of Loreto. where they were well relieued, for the space of three dayes; and at their departure were furnished with bread, wine, shooes, and money. It is wonderfull how much this fame of Hospitalitie and Christian Charitie, increased the deuotion
of strangers, and the wealth of the Church of Loreto; all forraine nations allmost recompensing the benignitie, which Loreto bestowed on their Pilgrims: wherby we may see that true liberalitie towards the poore, doth rather increase wealth than diminish it. For lest the fountaine of their bountie should be wasted, Almightie God doth make it to abound with riches, and doth graciously bestow greater wealth on bountifull giuers, that they may eftsoones the better giue vnto the needie. Whiles these offices of Christian Charitie were feruent, the workes of Loreto which Clement had begunne, were not altogeather omitted. For by commandment of Paul the Pope, the hurtfull woods were cut downe, the mystie lakes were dried vp, the hills offensiue to the Sacred Seate were throwne downe to the ground. At the same time, the Bishops Pallace was forewarded; the porch was built; the thole of the Church was couered with sheetes of lead; that magnifice^t carued Crust of the most Sacred House (which was not far from finishing) was chiefelie sollicited. And now at this time, by the Popes authoritie the Architect pulled downe the old smoakie beame and the roofe; and (because the vauting of the
sacred Chappell so required it) he also beate downe the vppermost part of the walles, adorned with semicircles and paynted potts, togeather with the tops of the bell-turret, and of the chymnie, and built a solide vaut thereon, supported more with the new then the old walles; which at that time was bright and beautifull, but now by reason of the aboundance of lights, blacke and smoakie. And lest the negligence of men should leese those things, which necessitie had caused to be parted and taken fro^ the maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, the sacred beames, the rafters, tiles, and boardes, and what els soeuer belonged to the roofe of the most sacred House, was buried vnder the paueme^t of the same House, and reserued there with record thereof, that being remoued out of their due place, they might cha^ge their place as litle as might be.



The Reliques of the Chappell of Loreto, are honoured with miracles: and propagate the religion of the Sacred House. CHAP. V.
THE earthen vessells and certaine Peeces of the vauted roofe being reserued for Sacred Reliques, as they were, partlie ministred occasion of miracles, and partlie also carried the religion of the House of Loreto far and neere. The ancient opinion is, that those earthen Vessells were found long agone by the Apostles, in the Armorie of the B. Virgin, and therfore whe^ they co^secrated her natiue House they co^maunded that they should be put in the toppe of the walles of that Chappell, not so much to adorne her sacred House, as to preserue a religious memorie of those things. No light coniectures do confirme this opinion, which seeme, to make it credible to many, that those earthe^ Vessells were of the houshold stuffe of the Mother of God. For
(as we may coniecture by them which at this day are extant) they do not much differ from the meane sorte, and such as are commonlie vsed: and in bignes there is greate inequalitie among them, whereas indeed the ornature of the Sacred House, and the compasse of the semicircles, required them to be of like equalitie; that we may vnderstand, they were not so much prouided for the ornature of the sacred Chappell, as the ornament it self accommodated to them. But whether they were of our B. Ladies housholde stuffe, or els were prouided of purpose for the ornature of her sacred Cell onelie, being dedicated togeather with her fortunate House, with great reason they were euer religiouslie esteemed. Yet now I find manie of them to haue perished, pilfered away (as I imagin) to propagate the Religion of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Wherupon diuers of them which were left, were placed in the wall of the Church of Loreto, by the doore which is in the side, where at this day they remanie to be seene. Few of the^ are reserued without some miracle or other. For I am sure that a Priest of Loreto of my acquaintance, being much troubled with the head-ach, was presently cured by applying a sacred potte
vnto his head. And an other Priest tormented with a grieuous feuer, and drinking colde water in the same, by and by had his sicknes taken away. But the reliques of the sacred boardes, carried the religion of the House of Loreto almost throughout the whole world. For being dispersed abroad and distributed from one to another, they came almost into all Countreys, who esteeming them for sacred reliques, as reason required, they exceedinglie increased the reuerence of the B. Virgin of Loreto, with whose religion (as it may well be supposed) they were, after a certaine sort, indued. And it is verie likelie that by this occasion Oratories were erected in honour of the B. Virgin of Loreto, in diuers parts of the world, either as monuments to their people of her singular protection, or els as solaces to them, whome sicknes, busines, or other impediments hindred from going to Loreto. For it is well knowne (but at this time speciallie) not in Picene and Italie onelie; but also beyond the Alpes, and in far remote Countreys, many Chappells were erected to the B. Virgin of Loreto. To the builders whereof, what could be more wished to increase the religion of those sacred places, then to haue some reliques of the House
of Loreto? What could be more desired, when religion forbad to take thence the sacred stones, than to intreate a particle of the roofe, which the keepers of their liberality would not vnwillinglie bestow? Truly much about this time, I finde that many Sacred Houses were dedicated to the B. Mother of Loreto in all places of the world, which in very deed, I put not among the least of the B. Virgin of Loreto her praises, her memorie to haue beene so gratesull and deere vnto strangers, that they would haue a perpetuall monument and an Image of her, at home in their owne countrey. And to say nothing of Picene, wherof there is no Cittie,Churches built to our B. Ladie of Loreto. nor towne almost, where there is not some Church in memorie of the B. Virgin of Loreto, the noblest Citties of Italie haue erected no ordinarie Churches in honour of our B. Ladie of Loreto. At Rome there is a magnifice^t Church of the B. Virgin of Loreto,At Rome. and worthie the Roman munificence, the modell wherof, as the report goeth, was plotted and drawne by Michaell Archangell Bonaroto, a most notable Architect.At Neples* And Naples also hath no meane Church of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and graced with an hospitall of poore Orphans. Besides (as now I vndersta^^ for certaine) in the two noblest Cit^^^^^
Sicilie (at Palermo I say and at Messina) there is a most holie memorie of the B. Virgin of Loreto.At Palermo and Messina. And in Palermo, the Church which is dedicated to her name, is within the Cittie, but at Messina in the Suburbs. Neither did this deuotion towards the sacred House of Loreto, containe it self in the boundes of Italie, but speedilie passed beyond the Alpes. For Friar Vincent a good and a godly ma^, and a deuout Priest of the Order of the Franciscans, returning from Loreto into France,In France at Laual. in the Suburbs of Laual (a towne of the diocesse of Mayin) built a litle House like to the Chapell of Loreto, and called it the B. Virgin of Loreto, which at this day is exceedinglie reuerenced, both of the inhabitants and strangers. And albeit Portugall be indued with most famous and religious Houses of the B. Virgin mother of God; notwithstanding it imitated this deuotion towards the House of Loreto.In Portugall at Conymbria. For the Cittizens of Conymbria not far fro^ their Cittie (to witte in a most pleasant place of the Suburbs) dedicated a Church in honour of the B. Virgin of Loreto, which is celebrated with great concourse of the adioyning people.At Compostella. At Lisbone. At Compostella there is an other, and a third at Lisbone, most maiesticall: which abeit it were built and magnifice^tlie
adorned by the Italians, notwithsta^ding the inhabita^ts the^selues do religiously frequent it. Besides, I find by approued authors that manie yeares agone, two Churches were erected to our B. Ladie of Loreto in the Kingdome of Scotland;In Scotla^d At Saint Iohns. At Edenburrovv. the one in the towne Perth, otherwise called S. Iohns, the other by the high way that goeth to Missilburrow, not far from Edenburrow, the chiefe cittie of Scotland. In both places, the B. Virgin of Loreto was most religiouslie reuerenced; and that in the Suburbs of Missilburrow was most famous for the resort and concourse of Pilgrims, and the miracles of our B. Ladie, as long as the Catholicke Religion remayned in Scotland. But after Caluins pestiferous doctrine began to rage and raigne in that Kingdome (heretofore most religious) those furies destroied that sacred House of our B. Ladie, but so notwithsta^ding, that the ruines therof might remaine, both as tokens of their madnes, and also as manifest signes of the ancient religion of the Scottish people. And this (as we vnderstand) was the beginning of the Chappell of Missiburrow. Manie yeares agone, in the attire and habit of a Pilgrime, a Scottish Eremite came to Loreto to salute the B. Virgin, who at his departure carried
with him into his Countrey, a small part of the sacred roofe, and begging money of godlie men, not far from the towne of Missilburrow, erected a litle Church some thing like to the sacred House of Loreto: which was verie famous, aswell for reuerence of the sacred reliques, which were placed there, as also for the deuotion of the people to the B. Virgin herself (whose name was illustrious among them) vntill, as we said before, the mad furie of Hereticks threw it downe.


The description of the carued-worke, wherwith the most sacred House is adorned round about. CHAP. VI.
AT that time, the reuerence of the House of Loreto, was propagated abroad, and increased at home. The 38. yeare of this age, Paul the Pope opened that most famous monument of Po^tificall magnificence, designed by Iulius, begunne by Leo, effected by Clement, but not wholy perfected (for many of the Statuaes,
and all the brazen leaues of the dores were wanting) yet was it brought to that passe, that it might seeme as finished. Truly a worke so excellent, and so admirable, that the new and most magnificent workmanship therof, was yet neuer equalled in like quantity, for it doth very well appeare by the books of accompt, that the sayd worke, stood in two and twenty thousa^d Crownes, besides twenty Statuaes, liuely wrought, and foure brazen leaues curiously ingrauen, which cost almost as much. The most worthy ornament which doth inuiron the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin is foure-square, almost all of white solid marble, and carued with admirable art; in length about 50. foote, in breadth about 30. and the height almost equall to the breadth. The whole worke is made of Carrara marble, of great beautie, and notably graced with striged Pillars, of Corinth worke, wherof six adorne the larger sides, and foure the lesser. A fascia of Lucullan marble, about a foote broad, is curiously wrought about the lowest part of this ornament, in steed of the groundworke. Then arise the Cornisht Pedestalls, which fitlie distinguish and adorne the spaces. And in the spaces and Pedestalls the^selues, are placed, either the armes of Descent or
Acquist of Pope Leo, or els memories of his vertues, in carued scutchions, some of a foot, some of a cubite, set forth with great art and skill. Vpon the Pedestalls are placed two Pillars at euerie corner, but in the longer sides two also in the middle, that is to say by the two dores, with equall distance from ech other. In the compartments betweene the Pillars are two rankes of Imagerie, inclosed within their Nicets, incrusted in Porphyry-tables of excellent workmanship; the one beneath at the bases of the holie Prophetes, the other aboue at the Architrane, of the Sybills, who prophesied of the birth of Christ, and of the B. Virgin Mother of God. In the wider spaces, betweene the bodies of the Pillars, are great tables of white marble, solid and whole, where the notable works of our B. Ladie, are so admirablie carued in embossed Images, almost of naturall stature, that all do greatly admire them. Moreouer a double Cornish doth adorne the Architrane of these Pillars, excellently graced with Cornish worke; the vnder spaces wherof, two Eagles holding in their beackes, branches of fruit-workes, as stalkes of apples and other fruites of admirable workmanship (with Lions faces placed here and
there betweene) do not alittle adorne. In briefe, on the top of this worthie orname^t, doth sta^d a beautifull ranke of little Pillars cornished, fitlie and orderly distinguished, with the figures or Angels embossed, which go about the whole worke, insteed of a garland: and the orname^t it selfe hath a free walke round about, to hang vp such votiue giftes, as herafter were to be brought to the B. Virgin. I thinke it not a thing worth the labour, to describe it with more wordes, seing it may be seene. A work verily worth the beholding, whose exceeding beautie none ca^ co^ceiue in mind, that hath not seen it before with his eyes. Wherfore assoone as it was spread abroad, that the most admirable orname^t of the sacred Cell was opened, forthwith great co^course of Inhabita^ts and stra^gers, was made to Loreto. For of purpose the workmen did vse all diligence, to keepe close the frame of that curious ornament with couerings vntill it was finished, that people might behold it with greater admiration and maiestie, when the fresh and entire beautie of the finished worke should come newlie to their eyes. And with this inco^parable sight, and most excellent for proportion and curiositie, all men did earnestlie delight, both eyes and mind.



The Thole of the Church beginning to cleaue, is strengthned. CHAP. VII.
AS the Inhabitants were solacing and taking great delight in so worthie a sight, they were brought into a suddaine feare, lest in a moment, they should be depriued of that which they beheld with so great admiration and pleasure, and (which was worse) euen of the thing it self whereof that was but the ornament. The vaute of the Church (in the middle wherof, as we said before, was placed the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin) stood supported on eight columnes of bricke: but either with the height of the walls built thereon, or els with too great weight of lead ouerburdening, suddainly it began to yield to the burden, and to cleaue, threatening vtter ruine not onelie to the new ornament of the sacred Cell, but also to the Cell it self ouer which it stood. Therefore the Pope being mooued with so dreadfull a message, forthwith commanded
Antonie Sangall his Architect to hasten to Loreto, and by all meanes to preuent that so great an inconuenience, lest the labour of so manie yeares, and of so manie Popes, in a moment should be brought to nothing, and also lest the suddaine fall of the Church, should destroy the two chiefest wonders of the world; the one of diuine power, the other of humane art. Sangall being styrred with this fearfull charge, made hast to Loreto, and conferring the matter with Nerusio the Architect, forthwith by common aduice he went about to fortifie and strengthen the Columnes insufficient to sustaine so great a burden. Wereuppon in contine^t he vnderpropped the vaut with strong supporters, and speedilie digging vp the foundations round about it, he couered the colu^nes with square stones, and stre^gthened them with foure litle arches, framed betweene euerie other Pillar, that they might be able to support the burden layd vpon them. And lest anie fortification, not onelie necessarie, but also conuenie^t should be omitted, the Columes and the walls were so fastened together with great barres of yron, that the barres the^selues do neuer, or not vndece^tlie appeare. Other things were so perfected, that you would haue thought
they had not prouided for the strength, but for the ornament of the Church. And to dispatch this worke with greater speed, the diligence of the Pilgrims did not a little forward the endeauour of the masons, and of the Architects. For a great multitude of them, to preuent the imminent danger, wherein they saw the Sacred House of Loreto, striuinglie carried stones, brought burdens, and holpe about the engines, glad to bestow their endeauour and trauell, on the B. Virgin of Loreto, the holiest Cell of the world, and the refuge of all people and natio^s. Wherby the whole worke was finished sooner the^ any would haue thought, and the imminent danger of the Sacred House was taken away, no lesse by good prouidence, then speed.



The House of Loreto is enriched with new Donaries. CHAP. VIII.
ABOVT that time,Cod. Lau. a great multitude of Donaries were giuen by Noble men and Noble women.The gift of the Duke of Milan and of diuers others. Francis Sforza the la^^ Duke of Milan, sent worthie ornature of cloth of gold, flourished with costlie workes, for the Priest and Ministers celebrating diuine seruice with so emnitie. Sigismund of Est, a siluer Image of his sonne Hercules of 4. pound, and an other of himself of the same substance, but of double weight to the other. Bassanus of Mantua, his owne Image also of siluer, of more than 8. pound weight. Honorius Sabellus a siluer Crownet, of three pound weight: Octauius Farnesius a golden Crosse hanging in a chaine of gold. Bonisacius Cetanus Duke of Sermoneta, a siluer Image of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and an other of his sonne, of no meane weight. Hercules Maria Sforza, two Images of siluer, both of eight pou^d weight Bernardine Sanquinius of Naples two carued
Images of Siluer, of foure pound weighte. Leonard Bona-fide, Bishop of Cortona, his owne Image of siluer of 4. pound weight. Iulius Monaldus of Mantua, such an other Image of like matter and weight. But among all the Images of this time, the solid Image of siluer of a Captaine, all in armour, and polished verie curiouslie, from Pompilius a certaine person of Bologna, more knowne to God than to men, (for his surname is not deliuered) doth far excell. Antony Pignatellus of Naples a chaine of golde: also an other from Lewis Earle of Vmbria. Leonard Venerius a Senatour of Venice, a siluer chalice, notable for workmanship and weight. Neither were the gifts of Noble women, of small value. For Marie of Austria the Emperours daughter, presented a siluer hart of two pound weight. Constantia Duchesse of Amalpha her owne Image of siluer of fiue pound weight. The Viceroyes wife of Abruzzo golden bracelets of notable fashion. The Princesse of Bisinia, a golden head of two pound weight. Portia the Countesse of Populo, an other head of the same substance and weight. Marie of Aragon, Marquesse of Guasto, the siluer Image
of a yong man, of three pound weight, wherin the cause is written in manner following.
MARIE OF ARAGON MARQVESSE OF GVASTO, SENT IT, IN PERFORMANCE OF AVOVV, FOR RESTORING OF HEALTH, TO ANTONIE, A YONG MAN, MY BROTHERS SONNE.
Iulia Verona Duchesse of Vrbine, a golden hart, o^ no small weight. Neither did Citties and Townes faile to send their Donaries. A siluer Image of the towne Vico Varone, of three pound weight. An Image of Sarnano of the same substance, but of thrice double weight: and a Crowner of siluer of excellent workmanship from Macerata, were all at this time presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto. Moreouer other gifts of no small value, were giuen by vnknowne persons. Six siluer Statuaes of S. Rocke, of no meane weight. Fortie Crowners of siluer, whereof the greatest part was of one pounde weight, many of two and diuers of three, for the most part from Cittes and
Townes. Votiue Images of siluer, aboue threescore; whereof many were of one, many of two, and three pound weight. Few lesse of Chalices of siluer, and many ornaments for the Altars and Priests, not onelie of silke, but also of siluer and golde. Trulie great humilitie appeared in diuers of the giuers. For many gifts (as appeareth in the booke of Donaries) were put secretlie on the Altar,The humilitie of manie vvhich presented vvorthie gifts. or els deliuered by the giuers themselues, who would not by any meanes haue their names set downe in record. And many also suppressing their surnames, insteed thereof set downe the names of their Countrey: which sinceritie is likewise seene, in the title of many Donaries, that it may sufficientlie appeare, they were vnwilling (which Christ forbad) to haue the Trumpet to sound before them, that they might not receiue the glorie and reward of their pietie from men, but expect it from God, who, seeth it in secret.



The Captaine of a Band of hors-men is carried away headlong by the force of a Riuer, and deliuered from euident danger of life. CHAP. IX.
IN the territorie of Reate (said to be the Nauill of Italie) there is a great Lake, caused by the Riuer Velinus, wherof it taketh the name: which running againe out of the said Lake, for a little way, doth flow gently and pleasantly, but afterward shooting downe from a high Cliffe by rockes and stones, it falleth on a rocke beneath, with great hurrying and noise of the waters, commonly called The ruines of Pedilucus. Not far from the rocke, of which I haue spoken, by chance passed a band of hors-men, of Peter Aloysius Farnesius, who at that time was Duke of Castro, the Captaine wherof being called the Marshall, was Peter Terenatico of Sienna, who had a great desire to behold the Riuer falling
from aboue. Therfore taking with him two horse-men, he went vnto the place, from whence Velinus falleth, with desire to see it. But his horse entring into the Riuer to drinke, and going on by little and little, carried him vnawares into the maine screame. Without delay Terenatico perceauing himselfe to be carried by force of the water, into the dangerous place which he came to behold, and which is worse, being also cast from his horse by violence of the streame and in great danger of drowning, with pittifull moane he called on the B. Virgin o^ Loreto. He prayed not to them that were dea^e. For in the very fall of the Riuer, the B. Virgin did protect the partie in hazard, and reaching forth her right hand, susteined him, as he tumbled downe among the waues and rockes, and desended him vntill he came to the bottome: a wonder ull thing to be said, that a rocke should receiue him safe, and preserue him vnhurt, when he was cast headlong from the high Cliffe aboue. Wherupon, comming presently to Loreto to performe his vow to the mother of God, and desiring to haue a votiue table to witnes so great: miracle, he caused the whole matter to be set downe in order, which at
this day is to be seene on a Pillar, on the right hand of the most sacred Chappell, wherin was written this which followeth. I Peter Terenatico Knight, and Marshall of the hors-men, of the Duke of Castro, and the rest of the hors-men going out of Picene to Vico Varone, and comming to the lake Velinus on the Ides of march, the yeare 1543. I and two other Souldiours, Tiberius de Grau^sco, and Antonie Cortona, departed from the rest of the hors-men, to see that place, from whence Velinus doth fall into Nar. And watering my horse not far from thence, I and my horse fell into certaine straites of the Riuer; from which falling headlong a wonderfull way, to wit aboue a hundred Cubits, a certaine rocke receiued me with safetie, as I implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto the mother of God, much wondering, and amazed in my self at the thing: wherefore estsoones I performed my vow, to the most B. Virgin, whome at that time I experienced, to be present, and mercifull, as two Centurions and eyewitnesses thereof, Chiniacius Vrbiuetanus and Raymund, with the whole wing of hors-men can testifie. This inscription we haue inserted word for word, that it may the better appeare, how witnessed and certaine this miracle is.



Pope Paul the third, doth twice visit the House of Loreto, and hasteneth on the worke of the Popes Pallace. CHAP. X.
MEANE-WHILE Paul the Pope hauing adorned the House of Loreto with worthie workes,Annal. Laur. Raph. Rier. did also honour the great solemnitie of the same with his presence, thinking to make himself an example to principall men, not onelie to beautifie, but also to frequent the natiue Cell of the B. Virgin. For within three yeares he twice visited the sacred House of the B. Virgin of Loreto. First the one and fortith yeare of that ^ge, when from the Cittie of Luca (after he had saluted the Emperour, and also donne his endeauour to dissuade the expeditio^ to Algell) he returned vnto the Cittie by Aemilia and Flaminia. Againe almost three yeares after, when after the misfortune of Algell, he went to meet the Emperour at Bologna, making hast
to the warres in Flanders. For then the Pope passing speedilie through his owne State, that he might meet him in conuenient time, came to Loreto, and at either time, tooke exceeding ioy, to see the sacred House of the B. Virgin,The gift of Paul the 3. and brought with him worthie Donaries: Golden Vestments for the Bishop, Priest, and A tars, in token o^ his deuotion and munificence. Also he tooke no small contentment to see the ^ruit of his liberalitie, as well in his other workes, as chiefelie in the incomparable forme and beautie of the most magnificent worke, wherwith the sacred Chappell is inu^roned on the outside. At which time beholding the difficultie of leuelling a hill, that stood against it, on the west side, and thinking it to be a worke, not onely of great charge, but also of infinite labour, and the profit nothing answerable vnto the labour, he is reported to haue said. VVe must des^st from a vaine worke, and imploy our selues in more profitable and certainer commodities of the House of Loreto which may correspond to the expectation of men. So from leuelling the hill, he bent his care and industrie to build the Popes Pallace, appointed for the intertaynment of Noble men. Whereupon in short time great part thereof was finished, polished,
and furnished so magnificently, that in the same, Kings and Popes themselues might lodge most honourablie. Of three partes therof, one was then finished, which being seated on the right hand of the Church, is directly extended from the setting of the sunne, which in length is an hundred Cubits, in breadth foure and twentie, and fiue and twentie in height; besides the greate ground-works added on the North side, to make the building equall. And this part of the Pallace hath a double Porch of great State, which doth consist of 15. Arches, and almost as manie great Columnes, of large compasse, as well aboue, as below. Truly a notable worke, and very excellent, both for sight and vse.



The House of Loreto is adorned with Chappels, and Heauenlie Signes. CHAP. XI.
THIS part of the building of Loreto, was not who^^e finished by the Pope, when principall Men began to adorne the Chappells of the Church. The chiefest in that worke, was Rodulphus Pius the Cardinall of Carpa, who (as we said before) succeeded Card Contareno in the Patronship of the House of Loreto: and being a very godly and vertuous man, he adorned the Chappell, which was designed to keepe, and Minister the most holie bodie of Christ,The Chappell of the Prince of Bisinia. Of the Archb. of Altouico. Of the Card. of Trent. Of the Card. of Augusta. with excellent pictures of marble worke, guilt: whose example stirred other great Men to imitate that ornament of piety. The Prince of Bisinia adorned the Chappell of S. Anne: the Bishop of Al^o-Vico the Chappell of the B. Virgin, visiting S. Elizabeth: the Cardinall of Trent the Chappell of the Rosarie: the Cardinal of Augusta the Chappell of S. Iohn Baptist, some with
pictures, and others with pictures and implastered workes.Of the Duke of Vrbine. But of all in this kinde, the munificence of the Duke of Vrbine did far excell, who adorned his Chappel; not onely with white marble, carued with maruailous art, but also with most beautifull pictures, made by Bacorio, and Zuchero two notable Painters. Whiles the Church was adorned of mortall men with striuing emulation, it altogeather wanted not immortall ornaments. For at that time I find that the olde wonder, of the flames of Loreto, was renewed after a new manner. In the night time, a fierie Pillar (as it were) shyning with great brightnes, was seene to stand ouer the Church of Loreto:Annal. Laur. Rier. from whence by litle and litle, it went towards Macerata, a famous towne of Picene, 14. miles from Loreto, and at last rested ouer the Church of S. Marie surnamed of the Virgins, in the Suburbes of Macerata, which wonder the Fra^ciscan Capuchines (whose Monastery was in the Suburbes) very carefully and often obseruing, after the morning office of diuine seruice, whe^ before day (as their manner was) they retired themselues into the next wood to serue God, they gaue it out, that, to their thinking, our B. Ladie did descend from heauen in likenes of a heauenly
flame, vpon her Natiue House, and from thence went vnto another Church which was dedicated to her name, by that meanes to make it knowne to mortall me^, that, that Church was also deare vnto her. And the wo^derfull multitude of miracles, which shortly after were wrought in the same place, seeme most manifest proofes of the heaue^ly signe, which did illustrate that yeare, which was memorable for the departure of Paul the third, who publishing the celebritie of the Iubiley, against the 50. yeare, put of mortalitie, and passed to an immortall life, leauing the care, and the praise of the Iubiley to his Successour.


Pope Iulius the III. instituteth a Colledg of the Society of IESVS at Loreto. CHAP. XII.
IVLIVS the third, according to the vse of former Popes, with his authoritie co^firmed the Indulgences, Immunities,Annal. Laur. Rier. and Benefits of the House of Loreto. And calling to mind that deuine
saying,The benefits of Iulius the 3. Holynes beco^meth thy House, O Lord, by lawes which he caused to be set downe by the Cardinal of Carpa, excited the Clergie and People of Loreto to greater perfection of life. Then from the discipline of the Inhabitants, turning his care to the ornature of the place it self, he also caused the sacred furniture to be well increased; the marble staires in the Church Porch to be laid; the entrie to be paued with brick, for seemlinesse of the place; diuers priuate houses to be built ouer against the Porch, whereof we haue spoken; either to grace the street, or els for benifitt of the Inhabitantes. At last the vppermost roomes, and next to the Bishops lodging, before rude and inhabitable were well fitted to dwell in, and assigned to the Societie of Iesus. For the Pope well knowing, that the amendment of corrupt manners by meane of a well ordered Confession, is the greatest fruite of holy Pilgrimage, decreed to prouide fit Penitentiaries for the Church of Loreto, most famous with the Pilgrimages of all Nations. And albeit there wanted not holie and godlie Priests; yet their scarcitie, or vnskillfulnes in strang languages, made lesse profit, than indeed was requisite. Therefore the Pope considering all thinges, through the exhortatio^
of the Cardinall of Carpa, thought it for the best, to admit the Fathers of the Societie of Iesus to help the Priests of Loreto: that there might be some, who with their knowledge of languages, might inuite the Pilgrims to the expiation o^ their sinnes, and might also imploy continuall and diligent labour, in hearing the Confessions of strangers. Twelue Fathers were chosen for that purpose; for whose mayntena^ce, allowance sufficient was made, out of the reuenewes of the House of Loreto. Their dwelling was in the vppermost part of the buildings (which at that time were voide) assigned them the 54. yeare of this age. This was the beginning of the Colledge of the Societie of Iesus at Loreto: small truly, but to no small good of the Inhabitants and Pilgrims. For the greatest care of the Fathers, was to purge the soules of the Pilgrimes and them that dwelt beyond the Alpes, by confession; to instruct all such rude people as were ignorant of the mysteries of Christian beliefe, and to excite euery one to the zeale of a godly and Christianlike life. And how fruitfull and profitable their labour was, both to the Inhabitants and strangers, is more fitting to leaue it for others to coniecture, than for me
to write. But that this College of the Fathers was not onelie pleasing to mortall men, but euen to our B. Ladie her self, the daylie increase and greater progresse therof, doth playnlie shew.


The wonder of the heauenlie flames is renewed at Loreto. CHAP. XIII.
NOt lo^g after, heaue^lie signes drew a far greater multitude of people to Loreto the^ was wont,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. and brought them to the Fathers to be confessed and instructed. Before the yeare was expired, night-fiers like vnto Starres, were seene to breake out of the Thole of the Church of Loreto, and as it were in one streame to go sensiblie towards Monte-Filatrano, the village next to Loreto: where mouing vp and downe a little while in a round, ouer an ancient House of our B. Ladie, they retired straight to the House of Loreto, from whence they came. This wonder was first obserued by the sheepheards which dwelled hard by that Village, by whose shewing, it was afterward noted of the Inhabitants, and of
all the people, with so great admiration, that a certaine astonishment seized all their harts. Neither was the spectacle short, or of small continuance, but durable and almost as long as the night it self: For from the second vigill of the night, it continued till the breake of day. Wherupon many coueting to see the thing neere at hand, ranne to the place, which seemed to shine with heauenlie flames: but when they came thither, by and by that admirable spectacle beheld a far of, vanished out of their sight, that desired to see it neere at hand: when neuerthelesse at the same time, it shewed it self to the lookers on a far of Newes of these heauenlie lights, being speedilie diuulgated ouer all Picene, enkindled a desire in the bordering people to see so gratefull a sight, who lodging abroad all night, in such places as they might conuenientlie beholde them, saw the heauenlie flames shine out of the House of Loreto, and passe ouer their heads, with no lesse admiration than ioy. That they were no vaine sightes, the Miracles presentlie ensuing did euidentlie shew. For it is constantlie reported, that many which came to visit that little House, by gift of God, and his B. Mother, returned home
to their owne houses, cured of many diseases, wherof there were lame, deafe, ruptured, and possessed people. You may thinke that these excursions of the light of Loreto to other Churches of our B. Ladie, signified to mortall men, that the House of Loreto, far excelled the rest, both in state and dignitie: sithence our B. Ladie seemed to stay with them onelie in passage: but heere, in a sort, to dwell.


Heauenly flames are seene in the Church of Loreto it selfe. CHAP. XIIII.
NOT onely abroad,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. but also within the Church it selfe, hauenly flames haue sometymes beene seene. The yeare that next ensued, which was 1555. when one of the Fathers of the Societie of Iesus, was preaching vnto the people in the Church of Loreto (as their custome is) in the cleere day-light, certaine bright fiers, salling downe from heauen rested ouer the most sacred Chappell in the prese^ce of many people: which by and by spreding
more and more abroad, went about the assembled multitude, and then presently into heauen againe, with great admiration and wonder of all the audience. It is scarce credible, what deuotion and ioy this celestiall sight enkindled in the harts of the beholders. Raphaell Riera a learned and a godlie Priest of the Societie of Iesus by chance being present among the multitude, afterward set down in writing this very thing, and also many others pertayning to the historie of Loreto, and was so astonished at the wonder and strangenes of the thing, that presentlie he fell downe on the ground for reuerence sake; and rendering due thankes to God and his B. mother, who vouchsafed to make him partaker of that heauenlie sight, he affirmeth that he felt such aboundance of heauenly ioy at that present, that it continued with him many daies, his hart being once inflamed with the charitie of God, and deuotion towards our B. Ladie. Neither did this wonder (as he deliuereth) happen to him alone, but also to manie others, who after the Sermon, both with their speeches, gestures, and teares, witnessed that the same happened likewise vnto them: such was the vnwonted ioy and sacred dread, which appeared in the countenance,
eyes and gestures of them all. That it was no vaine sight, the iteration of the same miracle doth testifie. For two yeares after, when one of the same Fathers, according to their custome, was preaching to the Chanons, and the assembled multitude, and some hearing the Confessions of Pilgrims, others praying to Almightie God in the most maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, suddainly in the top of the thole, a heauenlie flame (like vnto a Comet or blazing star) was perceiued to glitter and shine, which falling downe vpo^ the sacred Chappell, stood there a little while: then going towards the multitude, made a gratefull shew to all the audience, much admiring so great a miracle and wonder: but by and by turning his course an other way (to wit, towards the place appointed to heare Confessions, called the Penitentiarie) moued vp and downe ouer the heads of the Priests and them that confessed their sinnes: And finallie resting a while ouer the Image of Christ Crucified (which is religiouslie reuerenced in the most Sacred Chappell) it mounted againe on high, replenishing their hartes with deuotion and zeale, who had seene that heauenlie vision with their eyes.



Two Capuchines are deliuered from the raging sea. CHAP. XV.
THERE wanted not other miracles at that time,Trad. Laur. Annal. Rier. wherof we will relate the most famous, according to our purpose. About the yeare 1553. two Franciscan Capuchines, hauing saluted the B. Virgin of Loreto, set out of Ancona to saile into Dalmatia, but in the midle of their voyage a foule storme arising, threatned destruction to all the company. Therfore the Maister prouyding to disburde^ the shippe of her weight, and casting the baggage and merch and ize into the sea, the Franciscans began to pacifie the wrath of God by praier, in an angle of the ship. But the Marchants being mad, either with the griefe of their losse, or els stirred with diuellish furie, turned their range on the Franciscans, secure from danger, as they thought, saying vnto them: Seeing the storme arose by your default, by your destruction it shall be asswaged. Exclayming
in this ma^ner, they flew vpo^ the^, and assaulting the Innocents, apprehended them, and cast them into the sea. But the Franciscans calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto, (whome they inuocated when the storme beganne) ceased not to crie vnto her among the waues. A wonderfull thing to be spoken and seene: For by the great goodnes of God, they were holden vp so high, that their brests did appeare all aboue the water: and singing praises to God and his B. Mother, and also lifting vp their handes towards heauen, they were verie quietlie carried amidst the violence of the outragious sea. Whereby in short time by the guiding and direction of Almighty God, they arriued both togeather at the hauen of Ancona; and in their wet garments, as they were, returning speedilie to Loreto to render due thankes to our B. Ladie, they prostrated their bodies on the ground before her Sacred Image; and with trickling teares gaue hartie tha^kes to God and his B. Mother for their deliuerie. Among the Guardians of Loreto, there was one Bernardine Galiard, a man of good credit, and of long time host to the Capuchines, with whome they lodged both before they we^t to Ancona, and after they returned to Loreto.
Who intertayning these Francisca^s (of whom I haue spoken) all wet with the sea, and demanding the cause therof, at last they opened it vnto him, with this condition, that he should co^ceale their names. Wheruppon Galiard suppressing their names, related it to others, as he receiued it from them.


A yong man is deliuered from the whirle-poole of a Riuer. CHAP. XVI.
BY the fauour of the B. Virgin of Loreto,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. an other eschewed nolesse da^ger in a Riuer, than the Franciscans did in the sea. Angelus Autanus, a yo^g ma^ in the Territory of Salerno, of great toward lines and pietie, went into the Riuer Vulturnus, which passeth by Capua, to wash his bodie, with a fellow and companio^ of his. But his fellow going forward without regard, and falling into the vnknowne whirl-pooles of the Riuer, was in great danger of drowning. Whereuppon Autanus making hast to aide his co^panio^ in hazard, fell himself into the same danger, out of which he laboured in vaine to deliuer the other. For he himself being swallowed vp among the whirl-pooles of the
swift streame, but after some time cast vp againe from the bottome, in the conflict of death called on our B. Ladie of Loreto, as well as he could: and the B. Virgin whome he inuocated was presently at hand, who taking the young man out of the whirle-poole, when he was almost dead, receiued him into her lap, and carrying him ouer the riuer for the space of a mile, sett him downe in a conuenient shore. Who remayned long amazed, with dread of the danger and of the miracle. But assoone as he came to himself, he acknowleged the heauenly benefit, fell downe on his knees, and carefully saluting our B. Ladie his deliueresse, with thankfullnes extolled her worthie praise, and out of hand went to Loreto, to worship the moher of God, and to publish the miracle.



A maide of Loreto is deliuered out of a well: a Cittizen of Caieta out of prison. CHAP. XVII.
NEither did Loreto it self want the held of her Patronesse,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. in like danger of her people. A yong maide co^ming to draw water at a well in the Gouernours House of Loreto, as she was accustomed, let downe her bucket tied fast vnto a rope, and careleslie pulling it vp againe full of water, with the weigh to the bucket tu^bled headlong into the well, calling on our B. Ladie of Loreto. By cha^ce, one of the chiefe Ministers of the sacred House, standing in a window, and seeing the maid fall into the well, implored the help of the B. Virgin in her behalfe, and forth with, with the rest of his houshold, ranne vnto the well it self. A wonder to be spoken. When they saw that she was in no danger at all, but sate on the water, with ioyfull countenance, in continent they let downe a great bucket fastened
to a strong rope, and warning the maide what she must do, without delay endeauored to draw her vp: who sitting in the bucket, and holding the rope in her hands, was a length brought to the top of the well; but among so many hands, vncertaine what to doo, and rashly letting go the rope, before any had holde of her, she tumbled downe the same way againe. Whereupon all that were present inuocating the Mother of God in her behalf, the maid was conueyed downe againe to the water without any harme at all, though many sherds of broken potts were vnderneath. For which cause letting downe ladders, they got her out a slower, but a safer way: and presently the maide her self tolde them, how a Lady of great beautie, did protect her as she fell into the well, in whose handes she swomme on the water, without any danger or grieuance at all. The same also happened vnto her, as she fell downe the second time, for our B. Lady receiuing her with her hands, made her to sit in her lappe vpon the water, vntill ladders were sought out and fastened togeather, to be let downe into the well, that she might be preserued by this double miracle, to be no small document,
of the B. Virgin of Loreto's protection. But a man was as infallible an argument of her help at Rome, as the maide was at Loreto. A certaine Cittizen of Caeta, borne of honest parentage, but of litle courage and m^^^nimity, and of a tender disposition by nature and education, being accused of murder by false witnesses, was so frighted at the vnwonted sight of the torments, that he had rather, as often it chanceth, suffer execution by confessing that which was false, than auoide the same by denying it in torture. Being condemned to die, he washed away the blemishes of his soule, by sacred Confession, and by exhortation of the Priest committed his cause to the heauenly Iudge, intreating the assistance of the B. Virgin of Loreto. His prayers were heard. For within a while being ouertaken with a sweete sleepe, he seemed to see the B. Virgin of Loreto, who bidding him be of good comfort, put him in hope of life and liberty. Whereuppon the innocency of the man was presently knowne by miracle, and the authors of that wickednes, and the workers of the false crime conuicted, who suffered the same death, which they prepared for the innocent.



A Bassa of the Turkes, being cured by the B. Virgin of Loreto, doth honour her with gifts. CHAP. XVIII.
Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.NEITHER were the Barbarians deuoid of the help of Loreto, Corcutus a President of the Turkes (whome they call the Bassa) being at Consta^tinople the yeare 1552. was brought into euident danger of death by a grieuous and a secret impostume of the brest. A certaine honest and godlie Christian, serued him as a slaue, who thinking the danger of his maister the occasion of his liberty, went vnto the President ready to dye, and certifying him of the admirable power of the B. Virgin of Loreto, in curing all manner of diseases, put him in good hope of recouery; and without great difficulty, persuaded him, to call on the B. Virgin of Loreto with him, and to make this vow: If she tooke away his disease, for her sake he would giue him liberty, and release him from bondage. Neither
did the slaue deceiue his maister, nor Marie her godly Client. For within a while the impostume brake, and the President was cured, who giuing good testimonie therof, set his slaue at libertie, and sent him to the B. Virgin of Loreto with letters and gifts. The gifts were, a mantle of notable workmanship, great wax candles, no small store of siluer, a bow and an excellent quiuer of arrowes, not so gratefull and acceptable for value, as because the gifts were rare and the giuer himselfe to be admired. At that time Gaspar Doctus a Venetian was Gouernour of Loreto, who putting the other Donaries on the Altar, co^manded that the bow and the quiuer of arrowes, should be set vp ouer the doore of the most Sacred Cell, for a monument of the miracle to posteritie. Also the partie of whome I haue spoken, being set at libertie by the Bassa, brought with him the hand-writing of his Patrone, for a testimonie of the miracle, which Gaspar translating out of Arabian into the vulgar tongue, would haue preserued for an euerlasting memoriall therof. and the same turned into latin, is this. That which the great and mercifull Lord of the world would haue to happen vnto vs. A certaine thing chauncing to me my self
from aboue, I Corcutte the Bassa (not to faile in my dutie, and to haue some monument of so greate a wonder to be extant to posteritie) will relate the whole matter in order. A great impostume growing in our breast, and certaine death being at hand (and also despayring of health by means of Physitians) my slaue came vnto me, and with great confidence vttered these wordes vnto me. If you will promise me libertie, I will pray to the Mother of my God, to restore you your former health. Out of hand, sending for the notarie, I secured him libertie, if he performed his promise. Whereuppon my slaue kneeling downe presently on the ground, and making certaine signes on himselse with his hand, requested me to say after him, repeating these words before me, I implore the helpe of our B. Ladie of Loreto. Saying after, through the goodnes of God, I recouered. For which cause manumitting my slaue, I gaue him this testimonie, with votiue gifts, for a monument of my Reuerence, and gratefull mind towards B. Marie, the mother of God the Almightie, who hath made vs whole.



The House of Loreto is enriched with the Donaries of Noble men. CHAP. XIX.
THE House of Loreto was not more graced with miracles, tha^ with gifts in time of Iulius the third. The Cardinall of Augusta brought to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift,The gift of the Card. of Augusta, and of many others. a vestment of gold of curious worke; a neck-lace of a 150. orient pearles, notablie graced with golden stones of equall distance, and a coyne of gold ha^ging, beautified with gemmes and precious stones. Cardinall Cesius, siluer ornature for the Altar. The Cardinall of Carpa costlie furniture, of cloth of gold for the Bishop, celebrating diuine seruice with solemnitie, and an other of cloth of siluer, wrought with curled gold. Cardinall Medices (who afterward was created Pope by the name of Pius the 4.) a suite for the Altar, of cloth of gold. Bernardine San-Seuerino Prince of Bisinia, his owne Image of siluer to the brest, of no small weight; and ornature of crimson veluet, for the Priest and the Altar. Hercules Duke of Ferrara goodly ornature
of damaske, wrought with great flowres of golde, for the Altar, Priest, and Ministers, celebrating diuine seruice with solemnitie. Vidobaldus Duke of Vrbine, a suite for the Altar and the Priest, of cloth of gold. The Duke of Grauine, ornature for the Priest, of the same stuffe. The Viceroy of Naples, golden vestments imbrodered, for the Priest and ministers to vse in time of solemne seruice. The Marques of Mantua vestments of siluer for the same, to vse in like solemnitie. Portia Cesia a golden Cope. The Countesse of Palena in Abruzzo, a necklace of golde and precious stones. Constantia Leiua a Spaniard, a Crownet of gold of one pound weight. There was also a worthie gift sent out of Germanie; from Ferdinand king of the Romanes; that is to say, a siluer Image of the B. Virgin of a foote and a half, of 31. pound weight, at whose feete doth lye prostrate Anne the Queene of Bohemia pourtured in siluer: which hath a double inscription in the base. The one before.





FERDINAND THE MIGHTIE AND POTENT KING OF THE ROMANES, OF HVNGARIE AND BOHEMIA, ARCHDVKE OF AVSTRIA. etc.



SENT THIS SILVER IMAGE TO BE OFFERED, TO THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO, THE YEARE M. D. LII. IN THE MONETH OF MAY.





The other behinde.





FERDINAND KING OF THE ROMANES, OF HVNGARIE, AND BOHEMIA, ARCHDVKE OF AVSTRIA etc.


IN MEMORIE OF ANNE HIS BELOVED VVIFE, DEDICATED AND CONSECRATED THIS HER IMAGE OF SILVER, TO THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO, IN PERFORMANCE OF A VOVV VVHICH VVAS MADE FOR HER RECOVERIE.








Marcellus Ceruinus the Cardinall knoweth by reuelation in the sacred Chappell, that he should be Pope. CHAP. XX.
IN this meane while Marcellus Ceruinus the Cardinall (a man famous for learning and sanctitie) had made his dwelling in a towne neere to the House of Loreto,Annal. Laur. Rier.The piet^e and deuotion of Card. Cerninus. called Monte-fano, which he accompted his natiue soile, choosing indeed a very conuenient place to visit the natiue Cell of the B. Virgin; from whence he came to Loreto with great zeale and deuotion, to say masse in the most Maiesticall Chappell of the whole worlde. After the decease of Iulius the third, there happeneda certaine thing (in sight and euent most meruailous) to Marcellus Ceruinus the Cardinall celebrating diuine seruice at Loreto, as he was accustomed. A very white and a beautifull doue, flying peaceably vp and downe ouer his head, in the presence of
many people, sometimes rested on the ha^ds of the Sacrificant, sometimes on the Missal it self; which filled them that were present* with great admiratio^ and wo^der. The Priest, who (as the vse is) assisted the Card. in tyme of the dreadfull Sacrifice, thinking it to be some ordinary doue come thither by cha^ce, assaied to driue her away. But the Cardinall well remembring that here to sore in former ages, sometimes Bishops had beene designed from aboue, by the manifestation and shewing of a white doue, forbad him to disquiet her. Whereuppon he permitted the heauenly doue to rest, till the Sacrifice being ended, she flew away of her owne accorde. Shortly after, a heauenly vision confirmed the truth hereof vnto him. For Marcellus being called to Rome by a messenger of the Popes death, would not commit himself to his iourney, and to the election of the new Pope, vntill he had saluted the B. Virgin of Loreto, according to his custom. And the sacred day of the B. Virgins Annunciation being at hand, did more inuite his godly minde. Therfore co^ming to Loreto the day before, and shutting out the rude people on the Festiuall day, he began to say masse with great attention in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin.
And in time of the dreadfull Sacrifice, a litle after the beginning of the Canon, remembring the Church depriued of her Pastour, and recommending her most effectually to God and the B. Virgin, our B. Lady accompanied with many heauenly spirits,The reuelation vvhich vvas shevved to Card Ceruinus in the House of Loreto. appeared vnto him in celestiall brightnes, as he was earnest in prayer, and replenishing his soule with diuine light and sweetnes, tolde him he should be Pope, forthwith vanishing out of the sight of his astonished minde. So admirable and so stra^ge a thing happening to Marcellus on the suddaine, stroke him into such a feare, that trembling at the Altar, he could scarce sta^d on his feete. Whereuppon the Priest who assisted him in time of the dreadfull Sacrifice, perceiued that something was reuealed to the Cardinall from aboue: specially because his face seemed to shine with a certaine vnwonted brightnes, and also, all his body to be inuironed with a new light: which with great familiarity he reported to many others, and also to Raphael Riera, who set it downe in writing. Yea and the Card. himself being importuned with the intreaty of his friends, who were present at that heauenly vision, tolde the whole matter, as it happened; adding withall that so
great an office, as that of the high Bishop, was far beyond his desert; and therefore peraduenture Almighty God would prouide an other Vicar for himself. But if it were the will of God, to haue such a Vicar on earth, truly the first thing that he would do, should be to preserue the Christian Common-Wealth in good state, and to propagate the reuerence of the House of Loreto far and neere. Whereuppon returning to Monte-Fano, and sending for the notarie, he comma^ded to be set downe in publicke record, what he was determined to do, in honour of our B. Ladie of Loreto; to the end the publicke records might binde him to performe his promise to the Mother of God; and that the same (if percha^ce death preuented him, as it happened) might witnes his propensiue good will towards her. The records of Marcellus Ceruinus the Cardinall are yet extant in the towne, which I haue mentioned, whereby it doth well appeare, that he purposed with himself, to increase the number of the Chanons, of the Singers, of the Ministers, and also the Priests of the Societie of Iesus, that the sacred House might be reuere^ced with greater deuotion and zeale of the Pilgrims, which came to visit it. Moreouer he purposed
to inlarge the circuit of Loreto, and to raise walls and fortresses about it: to build a new towne and a new Cittie: to grace it with a Bishops Sea, and with absolute and mixt gouernment: and also to make eight bordering Townes tributary vnto it. And to build this Cittie, he inuented this easie and expedite way, that is to say, to inuite the poorest families of all the Popes dominions, to inhabite the new Towne, partly with hope of reward, partly also with the deuotion of our B. Lady of Loreto: to diuide in common to the new Inhabitants, the next wood purchased with the Common treasure, that they might cut downe the trees, and destroy the copses, for their greater commodity and better tilling of their land: So in short time the new Citty would be well prouided of fruite, wine and oile inough: neither would Merchants (allured with hope of gaine) faile to be there: by reason that great resort would be vnto the place; whereby in time exceeding honour and reuerence would be donne to the B. Virgin of Loreto. But it seemed otherwise to God, whose iudgements are inscrutable: for it was his holy will, that he should rather set down, in writing, his worthy purposes towards the House of Loreto, than performe
the^ indeed. Yet assoone as Marcellus came to Rome that was easily effected, which Almighty God would haue to come to passe, to wit that he should be created Pope; wher by the promise of the B. Virgin was performed, but the Popes could not be; because within xxij daies, hauing scarce begun his Popedome, he departed this life. A Bishop more memorable for his worthy determinations, than his deedes; for diuers Popes imitating his godly purpose adorned the Church and the sacred House of Ioreto, with many goodly fortifications and gifts.


The Colledge of the Iesuits is enlarged by Pope Paul the IV. also the celebrity and wealth of Loreto is increased. CHAP. XXI.
PAVL the fourth was of the number of them, who succeding Marcellus and following his good determinations, did not onely beginne to reforme the decayed discipline and manners of the Church; but also firmely purposed to amplifie
the state of the House of Loreto. Therfore in the beginning of his Popedome, he confirmed the ancient benefits of other Popes with a new Breue: dilige^tly forewarded the building: increased the number of the Ministers: and finally omitted nothing, which he thought might pertaine, to increase the religion of the place it selfe. But this was his chiefest care, grounded on the determinatio^s of Marcellus, to inlarge the Colledge of the Society of Iesus. For although those Fathers, which were then at Loreto, bestowed greater labour on the Pilgrimes, then was conuenient for so small a number: yet so few were not able to deale with such a multitude of strangers, as dayly increased, specially when out of remote Contreys, many of different language resorted more and more vnto it, whereof diuers could not be confessed, for want of Priests to vnderstand them. The Fathers of the Society, were as sorrowfull as themselues, that they should returne home againe, frustrated of their hope and vow, which prouoked the Cardinall of Carpa, to thinke how he might increase the number of those Fathers. For being very glad that the Colledge which he had procured to be planted in the soile of Loreto (albeit yet slender
and new) partly brought forth, and partly made shew of much spirituall fruite; he healt earnestly with the Pope to inlarge it, supposing that, that would happen, which came to passe, to witt, that it would bring forth a most fruitfull and plentifull haruest, when the fruites themselues were fullie increased and ripe. Wherefore the 55 yeare of this age, by the Popes approbation and allowance, he effected, that thirty lacking two, should be added to the former number, that fortie of the Society of IESVS might be mayntained at Loreto. And the Society deceiued not the hope of the Cardinall nor of the Pope. For their Colledge being thus increased with Priests expert in forraine tongues, was a great increase to the deuotion of Pilgrims, and no small benefit to the House of Loreto it self. Because from that time, the Pilgrims of most Nations, fynding Priests of their owne Contrey, with whome they might freely deale without an interpreter, by their helpe returned home againe, not only purged of their sinnes, but also instructed with Christian institutions and precepts. Likewise the Religion, and wealth of the House of Loreto increased in such abounda^t manner, that it doth well appeare, the accesse
of strangers, and the multitude of Donaries to be far greater than euer was wo^t. For the multitude of Pilgrims increased so much, that euerie way people resorted to Loreto in great troupes. So that oftentimes ten thousand, now and then twentie, and sometimes also more then thirtie thousand Pilgrims, came to Loreto, about the Natiultie of the B. Virgin, wherof many getting no repose, neither in the Church nor Towne, filled the fieldes and woodes round about.


The House of Loreto is enriched with new Donaries. CHAP. XXII.
AND with this multitude of strangers, the wealth of the House of Loreto was not a litle increased; For it is verie well knowne, that from this time forward, ten, twelue, fourteene, sixteene, and sometimes also twentie thousand Crownes, were giuen yearelie to the treasurie of the House of Loreto. Neither did any Pope euer apply any of the said treasure to
his owne vse, and accounting the end wherfore it was giuen, so holie as it was. Two times onelie,Ber. Ciril. certaine money came so from the^ce vnto the Popes, that within a while after, they repayed it thither againe. For to represse the spoiles of Francis Maria Duke of Vrbine, the Capitaines of Leo the X. tooke six thousand Crownes out of the Sacred Arcke, to pay their souldiours. But whe^ the Pope had notice therof, forthwith he toke order with the Treasurer of Picene, to repay that summe to the B. Virgin. Afterward Clement the VII. being in great want of money at the ransacke of the Citty (as we shewed before) receiued three thousand Crownes in loane from the B. Virgin of Loreto; which after the danger escaped, he carefullie repaied vnto her againe: Wherby all the money, which was put into the Sacred Arcke, was imployed on the building of Loreto, and on other vses of the Sacred House it self. But in time of Paul the 4. other Donaries were giuen with that money which appertained to the Sacred Ornature. A siluer Image of reasonable bignes of Christ our Sauiour Crucified vpon mount Caluary,The gift of the Card. of Carpa, and of others. with the Image of the B. Virgin and S. Iohn expressed in siluer; two siluer Candlestickes
a Cubit long, a siluer boole of two pound weight curiously wrought; worthy ornature for the Bishop of cloth of gold, the chiefest grace wherof was a golde^ butto^ of good bignes, besett with three degrees of pearle, commonly vsed by Cardinals and Bishops, and a picture representing the birth of Christ, made of silke and gold, with admirable art and skill, were the Donaries of the Cardinall of Carpa. The Duke of Vrbine, golden vestme^ts for the Priest and Ministers. The Duke of Albania gaue the like gift, and also the Duke of Mantua; sauing that these were made of gold and siluer. The Duke of Bouino a costlie Pix of siluer, for the most holie Eucharist, standing on the figures of Angells, a foot long. Honoratus Caietan Duke of Sermoneta, a golden vestment for the Priest, and ornature for the Altar, of cloth of gold. Augustine Auria, a siluer head and two vestments for the Priest of cloth of golde. Margaret of Austria the daughter of Charles the V. a rich suite for the Altar and the Priest, of siluer-cloth of tissue. The Marquesse of Guasto a golden Casket of excellent workmanship of two pound weight: and an other from the Duchesse of Ariano, adorned with pillars of siluer, guilt. The Duchesse of Mantua or nature of siluer for the Priest
and ministers celebrating with solemnitie. Finally a worthie vestment of gold for the Priest, adorned with gold and precious iewells, and also with a faire picture of the B. Virgin, co^passed about with the sunne, on the backe of the vestment was the gift of the Queene of Hungarie.


The House of Loreto is honoured of the French Armie, with the saluation of many souldiours CHAP. XXIII.
ABOVT that time war beginning betwene the King of Spaine and the Pope,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. the new tempest of war which troubled Italie, did not a little grace the House of Loreto, The Duke of Guise being called in by the Pope, with consent of the French King, brought with him into Italie great forces of the French, to defend the Pope, and to recouer the Kingdome of Naples. At which time, the religion of the House of Loreto, and the diuine prouidence towards her, greatlie flourished. For when
great Companies of souldiours gathered out of diuers Nations, wandered freely vp and downe all Picene, this sacred House of Loreto (famous for her wealth) permitted not any one of all those Companies to couet her inestimable treasure; such, and so great deuotion towardes her sacred House, did the B. Virgin imprint in the hartes of all these souldiours, in time of this tumultuous warre. And as long as Guise made his station in Picene, the Companies of so great an army, were rather a spectacle than any domage at all to the people of Loreto, by fauour of the Mother of God, who did not onely protect and defend her owne state, but also her Clients. For although many of this army were infected with Caluins heresie; yet there was no Band, nor any Company at all, which at the very first sight of the Church of Loreto (stirred as it were with deuotion towards her) came not straight to visit and reuerence her, made not vowes, presented not gifts. Whereby the Captaines of these Companies and Bands, came vnto the sacred House one after another, with great quietnes of their souldiours, and departed more peaceably than they came, promising or performing their vowes before the
Altar of the B. Virgin. Besides in honour of our B. Lady, they did skirmish in warlike fashion with their weapons and furniture, before her sacred House. But shortly after, the deuotion and piety of the souldiours made a more gratefull spectacle in the sight of god, and is holy Mother. For many washing away their sinnes by sacred Confession, rested in peace, hauing before receiued the most holy ba^quet of the Eucharist. And certaine of the heretickes, reduced to the way of truth, and abiuring their errours, were reconciled to the Catholicke Church, and also purified with the Sacraments of Confession, and of the Eucharist, by fauour of the Mother of God, who turneth the perfidiousnes of the impious, to the worship and piety of Almighty God.



By making a vow to our B. Lady of Loreto, the Citty of Vtina is preserued from the sicknes, increasing round about. CHAP. XXIIII.
AT that time,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. the House of Loreto was innobled with many and sundry miracles. Vtina, a Citie of Carinthia, for greatnes and worth, second onely to Aquileia, eschewed great danger of sicknes by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto. The yeare 1555. a terrible plague spreading abroad in the Territories of Venice and Carinthia, made euery where great immortalitie among the Inhabitants. And the Magistrates of the Cittie of Vtina, seeing the sicknes creepe on, and dayly approach vnto them, entred into Counsell of necessitie, and resoluing to make a publicke Vow, inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto, committing their Cittie to her protection and patronage: who frustrated not the
supplication and praier of her Clients. Because for space of two yeares (all which time the plague was very hoat, and wasted all the townes thereabout) the protection of our B. Lady was so present vnto them, that onely Vtina remained free from the common euill. Wherefore the Citty of Vtina not more religious in making, than in performing her vow, set forward a solemne supplication to the House of Loreto. Three hundred gentlemen, before whome was carried a most curious Image of Christ Crucified, came all in white garments, and regardable in one liuery, to present either publicke or priuate Donaries to the B. Virgin of Loreto. Who at their entring into the Church, with much emulation began to cast their bodies on the ground, and with weeping eyes to giue manifold thankes to God and his Mother, not onely in the name of their whole Citty, but euery one also for his owne particuler. Then rising vp, and imbracing ech other with brotherly affection, they renewed their weeping, and bedewed themselues with mutuall teares. And so notable a wayling springing from piety, caused the like in them that were standers by, none almost of the beholders
forbearing teares in the pious lamentation of such men. Which donne, going into the most sacred Cell, and most deuoutly saluting the B. Virgin Mother of God, they set downe their gifts before her, among which there was a votiue Table, curiously painted with this inscription.





THE CONFRATERNITY OF THE MOST HOLIE CRVCIFIX, BROVGHT, AND DEDICATED IT TO THE MOST GLORIOVS VIRGIN OF LORETO, FOR PRESERVING THE CITTIE OF VTINA, AND HER TERRITORIES, FROM THE PLAGVE; THE YEARE OF MANS SALVATION M. D. LVI.








Sight is restored to two that were blinde. CHAP. XXV.
THREE yeares after,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. the B. Virgin of Loreto shewed a more admirable spectacle, both to the inhabitants and Pilgrims. A yong maide of Sienna, wayting on no meane Matron of Venice, had her sight so decayed in the seruice of her Mistresse, that at last she saw nothing at all, and there appeared signes in her eyes, which gaue euident testimony therof. When she had assaied the helpe of Physitians in vaine, by commandment of her Mistresse, she was brought to Loreto by two women, not doubting, but that her sight would be restored vnto her, by the help and prayer of our B. Lady. The yong maid being brought into the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin betweene those two women, eft-soones kneeled downe, and with many teares, ernestly began to call on the Mother of God.
The Chappell was full of Inhabitants and strangers, who likewise prayed to the B. Virgin, either moued with pitty of the maide, or els in suspence with the expection of the thing: And beholde, as she was praying to our B. Lady with feruent deuotion and trickling teares, vpon the suddaine she was so comforted, that she cried out; Now I see some light: And withall earnestly intreated the^ that were present, to assist her with their deuout and godly prayers. All being feruent in praier to Almighty God for her, within a while the maide (ioyfull at the successe) cried out againe; Now I see the burning torthes and lampes before the B. Virgin: which did so vehemently inflame the burning zeale of the suppliants, that it caused teares of ioy to issue out of all their eyes. And at length the maide herself vttered these wordes with thankfullnes. Now I see the Image of our B. Lady; Now I see the Donaries which are about her. O clemencie of God, and his B. Mother! O diuine and memorable benefit of them both! As she repeated these and such like words, with teares of ioy in her tha^ksgiuing, all bega^ to weepe in toke^ of tha^ksgiuing to god and the B. Virgin which co^tinued half an houre. And the same remayning with many of
the^ after their departure out of the sacred Chappell, filled the harts of them which came thither with like feeling and admiratlo^: specially whe^ those, who a little before saw that the yong maide was blinde, now perceiued that her sight was cleere and perfect. There was scarce any thing of like qualitie, do^ne in a greater assembly of people. For this wonder happened at the feast of Easter, at which time the House of Loreto is vsually frequented with great concourse of people. Raphaell Riera: who committed it to writing, deliuereth, that himselfe was present at the miracle; and I my selfe receiued it of others of vndoubted credit, who said that they were also present, to witt, the 59. yeare of this age, Gaspar Doctus being Couernour of Loreto, who commanded that so euident a miracle should be set downe in publicke record. But the thing was donne with true simplicitie: For the names of the maide, and of her Mistresse were omitted, as though they nothing at all pertayned to giue credit vnto the miracle. I belieue they saw the Euangelists do the like in euident miracles. Lesse famous, but no lesse admirable is that, which is rehearsed of Thomas of Parma, who being quite blinde with a grieuous infirmity of his eyes, and a
certayne night much molested with bitter paine therof, erected himself on the bed where he lay, and kneeling downe, implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto with many teares; adding this vow vnto his prayer, if he recouered his sight, he would go to the House of Loreto to giue her thankes: and so reposed againe, putting great confidence in the B. Virgin. His hope deceiued him not. For in the morning when he awaked, he saw the light with sound and perfect eyes, and giuing due thankes to the Mother of God, went to Loreto and performed his vow.



A Shipmaister of Genua is deliuered from double danger. CHAP. XXVI.
AT that time another came to Loreto bound by double vow,Annal. Laur. Rier. and fauoured with a double miracle. Paul a famous Pilot of Genua, returning from Gasconie in France to Genua, was suddainlie brought into great feare of shipwrack by a raging tempest, which inforced him to cast all the merchandize into the sea. And the storme beginning to force the ship more veheme^tly, all co^ceiued so great feare therewith, that the Passengers and Mariners forsaking the vessell to saue themselues by swimming, he alone remayned in his shippe, desiring to preserue it in as great safetie as himself, being indeed the chiefest part of all his wealth. When he saw his vessell full of water, he trusted wholie in his vow, and inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto for himself and his shippe. Not in vaine: For that inuocation gaue him such strength
and courage, that he alone (assaying it with great force,) hoised vp the saile, and hoping that his praiers were heard, endeuoured to pumpe the water out of the ship. Meane while the tempest was asswaged, and the shippe, with the winde and our B. Ladie guiding her, came to the hauen of Genua, with no lesse admiration of himself, them of others, to see a great shippe half full of water, arriue safe at the harbour, guided by the Pilot alone, executing the office of all the Mariners. But Paul hauing obtained his vow, was slower in performing it then was fitting, either expecting a more conuenient time afterward, or els thinking to preferre other things before that busines. But his delay was not long vnpunished. For when the yeare came about, the verie same day, as he sailed in the same shippe (that the time might put him in minde both of the benefitt and also of the offence) he suffered shipwracke againe with his little sonne. Whereuppon presently the memorie of the danger which he latelie auoided by the help of the B. Virgin, and of his neglige^ce in performing his votiue pilgrimage pricking his guiltie co^science, with abounda^t teares he asked pardon of God, and intreated the experie^ced help of the B. Virgin
of Loreto, for himself and his sonne, binding the promise of the olde, with a new vow. His praier deceiued him not. For seeking his litle sonne among the waues, he found him without any harme at all, and taking him vp on his shoulders, carried him safe to land, swymming a great way along the furious sea, all the rest of the Passengers and Mariners being ouerwhelmed and drowned, that the destruction of others might make the heauenlie gift, more notable. Assoone as he came to the shore, not more ioying his owne, then the safetie of his little sonne in the midst of such imminent danger, he fell downe on his knees, co^ma^ding his so^ne to do the same: and lifting vp his hands towards heaue^, with flowing teares of ioy gaue hartie thankes (next after God) to the B. Marie, that she did not frustrate the vow of an vngratefull man, that failed in his. And because doubtles the delay of performing his deuotio^, caused him this new danger, he promised that no neglige^t stay, should now hinder him. Wherfore fearing if that he we^t vnto his owne house, some domesticall care might also deferre his pilgrimage, and the better to recompence the great negligence which he co^mitted in performing his former vow, he set forward
towards Loreto, omitting to visit his House and Countrey: and intreating and begging victualls to sustaine himself and his litler sonne, he came to the sacred House, deseruing to be remembred, not onelie for recouering of his shipp in his first danger, but afterwards for loosing it, and finding and sauing of his sonne; and now also as much co^mendatio^ for performing his vow with deuotion, as blame at first for neglecting it.


A yong man is deliuered out of prison: another twice hanged is deliuered from death and punishment. CHAP. XXVII.
ABOVT that time the B. Virgin of Loreto shewed her self as admirable in deliuering men from punishment,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. as in calming the sea. Augustine of Rocca Valdonia (a towne of the territorie of Sienna) was accused of a salfe crime and commited to prison where the innocent man suffering much torture, called on the B. Virgin of Loreto to whome he was exceedinglie deuoted. Neither in vaine. For awaking
out of his sleepe in the quiet night, he saw the iron manacles wher-with he was fettered, fall from his hands of themselues, and in contine^t our B. Ladie giuing him aduice and strength to flie, himself indeuouring to dig through the wall of the prison, pulled out certaine morter with his hand, and opened a hole which gaue him meanes to escape. But two dores remayned that hindered his flight, which by chance finding miraculously ope^ and vnguarded, he escaped with safetie, not onelie finding free egresse, but also secure defence, by gift of our B. Ladie. But this ma^ was deliuered fro^ immine^t, another from present death. Francis of Ferrara, a simple but a deuout man, trauailing through Picene the 56. yeare of this age, fell into the forces of the Duke of Guise, who waged war for Paul the 4. against Philip King of Spaine, of whom being demanded the cause of traue I and courteouslie intertained, he sent him to the Generall of the Popes Army, with the letters of the French Captaine and certaine Characters (wherof they were agreed betweene themselues) sowed in his doublet, altogether ignorant therof. But being intercepted and searched by the watch of the aduerse Army, he was brought to Marcus
Antonius Columna at Anagnia a Cittie of Campania, who by the letters and characters of the enemy found in his doublet, thinking him verilie to be a spie, forthwith commaunded the simple Contrey-man to be hanged. And albeit he was presentlie led vnto the place of execution, with a great troupe of souldiours, and Cittizens of Anagnia following him; yet he did not despaire of himself. For hauing leaue to say a few praiers, he fell downe on his knees, and first asking pardon for his sinnes, and then calling on our B. Ladie of Loreto. It is not vnknowne to thee B. Virgin Mother of God (saith he) that I dye guiltlesse, and in no wise priuie to these letters. Therefore I pray and beseech thee, to make thy sonne mercifull vnto me, that of his great clemencie forgiuing me my other offences (wherby I confesse to haue deserued greater punishment) by some signe or other he may vouchsafe to declare my innocencie. Hauing spoken thus in a loude voice, he went to dye with a confident minde, Whereuppon the hangma^ tying him to the gallowes, cast him of the ladder, pressing his shoulders with his feete, that he might leaue him for dead. A wonderfull thing to be spoken and seene: For the seelie man
had hung but a while, but the rope brake of it selt, and he fell downe to the ground, seeming to be safe and sound. But the miracle was esteemed a chaunce, that it might be more notable. For the hangman tying a stronger rope about his necke, present^^e^ed the poore wretch to the gallows againe, and cast him of the ladder, wresting his necke more forciblie them before. But beholde, by the pouidence of God and his B. Mother, the rope burst againe, and Francis falling downe to the ground, and breaking his head with the fall, lay as it were without life, Whereuppon the miserable sight of the poore Countreyman mooued the multitude there-about, and the strong rope breaking of it self, brought them into such admiration, that all recalled to minde his prayer and inuocation of the B. Virgin of Loreto, when he went to suffer. For which cause many intreating pardon for the innocent yong man, and the beloued of our B Ladie, thought it wickednes to haue him made away by mortall men, who was twice preserued by the goodnes of God. And Marcus Antonius of his owne naturall disposition, and exceeding deuotion towards the B. Virgin of Loreto, pardoned him more willinglie the^ he was
requested. Also the Cittie Anagnia rightlie setting downe a testimonie of the miracle, as it happened, deliuered it to Ferrara himself, which he, comming to Loreto to giue thankes to the B. Virgin, left there with her, for a perpetuall monument therof to posteritie.


A woman of Sicilie hauing her throate cutt, is cured. CHAP. XXVIII.
IT is nothing leffe,Annal. Laur. Rier. but peraduenture more admirable, which now is deliuered of a woman. A yong maide of Sicilie of more beautie then honestie, (whose name we thought good to suppresse to saue her credit) being brought from Sicilie to Venice, and there many yeares together making gaine of her dishonest bodie, and heaping vp good store of wealth, at last had a desire to see her Countrey and returne home againe. Therefore turning all her wealth into money, with a familiar mate of hers she went towards Loreto, intending to
wash away the filth of her former life by Co^feslio^, and to salute the B. Virgin of Loreto, that then she might go more ioyfullie into Sicilie. But assoone as they came to the wood of Rauenna, that good companion seeing all round about secure, and the hope of the prey greatly prouoking him, set on her vnawares with a drawne sword; vpon with a deadlie weapon, inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto. But the thiefe (our B. Ladie deferring her helpe to haue it more notable) cast her from the horse wheron she rode with the wound of the sword, pursued her when she was downe, and gaue her many blowes ernestlie imploring the help of our B. Ladie. At length lest any hope of life should remaine, the cruell wretch cut her throate, whe^ she was halfe dead, and taking away her golde and iewells, and leauing her miserablie wounded, departed from her. Who tumbling in her owne bloud euen readie to yeeld vp the ghost, recommended her agonizing soule to the B. Virgin; and in that verie instant was made partaker of the vndoubted help of her Patronesse. For presentlie with great glorie of heauenlie brightnes, our B. Ladie appeared
vnto her in a white garment, and bidding her be of good comfort, gentlie imbraced her, cherished her in her lap in this her extremitie, healed the wounds of her body with her touch, replenished her sorrowfull hart with heauenly ioy, and then admonishing her to lead a chaste life, vanished out of her sight. Wherewith the woman awaking, as it were out of a heauie sleepe, and viewing her body all ouer, saw that the scarres of her late wounds were closed vp: and feeling with her hand perceiued also that the deadly wou^d of her throate was perfectly cured. Wherfore with exceeding ioy, she fel downe on her knees, and next after God, gaue manifold thankes to her most assured Patronesse for so worthie a benefit. Yet one thing did disturbe her great ioy, which was, to be left in the wood by the thiefe in her bloudie and torne smocke. But the B. Virgin Mother of God, was as carefull to prouide for the naked shamefastnes of the woma^, as she had beene to preue^t the immine^t da^ger of death. For beholde, as she was giuing tha^kes to our B. Ladie with great deuotion, certaine Mulatiers passed that way by cha^ce, who taking compassion to see a yong woman without clothes, and imbrued with bloud, and also
pilgrimaging to Loreto (as by herself they vnderstood) forth with clothed her with a couerlet, and putting her on a mule carried her to Ancona, in token of their deuotio^ to the B. Virgin of Loreto. Whereuppo^ assoone as she had begged some meane apparell, she went reioycing to Loreto, to wash away the blemishes of her life by sacred Co^fessio^, and to performe her vow to our B. Ladie; euerie where intending to publish her singular help, by whose benefit without all doubt (next after God) she was preserued aliue, and restored to perfect health, when she was at the pointe of death it self. To confirme the truth of this miracle, she shewed the new signe of the deadlie wou^d in her throate, and by the prouidence of God, there appeared no obscure token of so great a wonder. For about her necke did glitter a golden scarre, in ma^ner of a chaine, that you may playnlie vnderstand, that her deadlie wound was toucht and cured by the heauenlie hand of our B. Ladie. Which trulie to all that beheld it (wherof Raphaell Riera, who set it downe in writing, was one) was not onely a great monume^t of the miracle, but euen a miracle of it self. And the woman being either allured with the sweetnes of the House of Loreto, or els desiring
to render due thankes to the Mother of God so well deseruing of her, preferred Loreto before her Countrey; where she liued many yeares so deuoutlie, that she would receiue the holie mysteries verie often, and then also reuisit the B. Virgin of Loreto, to excite the Inhabitants to the seruice of God and his B. Mother, with singular example of innocencie and pietie.


A certaine man of Genua doubting of the House of Loreto, being well punished, repenteth. CHAP. XXIX.
ABOVT that time Almighty God established the religion of the Cell of Loreto with a famous miracle,Annal. Laur. Rier. lest any hereafter should doubt therof. The yeare 1557. a certaine Genuese (whose name we conceale to saue his credit) borne of no meane parentage, but more curious then godlie, went on horsbacke from Genua to Loreto. Who in the way, by instinct doubtles of the diuell, first began to suspect,
then also to belieue, that the House of Loreto was no ancient monument of our B. Ladie, but a new muention or superstition and auarice. But the wicked cogitation of the mad man was not long vnpun shed. For the verie same day, the horse on which he rode fell downe vpon him, and oppressed him so greatlie with the weight of all his bodie, that the miserable man lay bruized and halfe dead vnder his horse in the high way, without any hope of helpe, because he had none in his companie, to do any thing for him. His miserie gaue him vnderstanding. Whereuppon turning rashues into deuotion, he called on our B. Ladie of Loreto Neither in vaine. For being presently desiuered of the horse, he rose vp safe and sound. But the present clemencie of God, did not expell the conceiued frenzie of the mad man; who within a while returning to his wicked conceite againe, made the miracle more notable. For hauing gone but a little way, and the diuell tempting him more vehementlie then before, he thought with himself, that the wonders which were reported of the House of Loreto, were altogether false. But not without punishment. For the House of Loreto being now
in sight, the blindenes of his minde brake out into the bodie, by a dymnesse which tooke away his sight, and presentlie strength began to faile him, not well in his witts. Therfore trembling for feare, and seeming like to one dismaied, and not able to guide his horse, by the horse himself he was brought to Loreto, which stood still at the next Inne, where almost faynting and readie to fall downe, he was supported by the host, who taking him by the hand, lead him into a cha^ber, and laid him in a bed: where carefullie recalling to minde the manifest wrath of Almightie God twice experienced in the same iourney; and also fearing greater punishment by the present losse of his sight, he began to weepe bitterlie. This feare was his health. For being assisted by the grace of God, he repented, and hoping that a penitent might haue safe reguge, by the fauour and clemencie of the B. Virgin, he besought pardon of God and his B. Mother: promised and vowed, that he would neuer after, otherwise belieue of the Cell of Loreto, the^ the Christian world belieued. A wo^der to be spoken: The sight of his eyes came vnto him with the light of his mind. Wherupon going to the House of Loreto, and wyping away the blemishes
of his life by sacred Confession, he entred into the most Maiesticall Cell, and deuoutly saluted the B. Virgin, reioycing to see her with those eyes, which of late he lost by offending her, and now by pleasing her, receiued againe.


The Violatours of the most sacred Chappell are punished by miracle for their rashnesse. CHAP. XXX.
SHORTLIE after Almighty God did euidently punish the Violatours of the most sacred House.Annal. Laur. Rier. For about the 58. yeare of this age a certaine Noble and a wealthy person of a chiefe Citty of Italy (the name of the man and his countrey is passed in silence, because he himself would haue it concealed) came to visit the House of Loreto, and to be a document, that the rashnes of them which aduenture the like, is not vnounished. Who at the same time taking a litle stone out of the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, reserued it at his
House, with all honour and reuerence: Yet that reuerence mitigated not the wrath of God. For Almighty God rustly reuenging the iniury of his B. Mother, that miserable ma^ paied for his sacriledge, with the depriueme^t of his children, and the losse of all his goods, and also bega^ to be troubled and vexed with a disease more continuall then dangerous. Therefore being a man otherwise prudent and graue, at last he opened his eyes, and perceiued that Almighty God did punish him for some wickednes, which he had committed. And though he saw all things happen vnto him, in such sort, as they might playnly set before him the wrath of Almighty God; yet by what default of his it came, he saw not. Therefore being much disquieted with heauines both of body and mind, he endeuoured to mitigate the wrath of God with all his might. But the occasion therof, remayning with him, albeit ignorant therof, made all in vaine. The^ an other hope (this prouing of no ^orce) came vnto his minde: which was the B. Virgin of Loreto, to whome he was meruailously addicted, whose aduice and he^pe, he deuoutly implored. Without delay, by our B. Lady herself he was certified, that the stone which he had take^ out of the
House of Loreto, was the cause of the heauenly wrath, which in no wise could be pacified, but by restoring the sacred stone thither againe. Then with flowing teares, the poore man besought pardon of God and his B. Mother, for his religious boldnes, as he thought, and desired himself to bring backe to Loreto, that which he had taken thence. His praiers were to good effect: For this also the Mother of God forgaue him, as soone as he acknowledged his fault, whereby the disease was taken away, and he going cheerfully to Loreto, restored the stone, and performed his vow. At that time there happened another, not much vnlike to this. A woman of the Territory of Picene, being lo^g married and hauing no children, was greatly troubled in mind, how she might seeke euery where for remedy against her barennesse. Therfore, I know not who said vnto her, to gaine the womans fauour, there was no presenter remedy against sterility, then the reliques of the House of Loreto, preserued with pious and Religious respect: if she tooke neuer so little thence, she was promised to be a Mother in short time; which was as foolishly belieued as promised. But by the manifest wrath of God,
reuenging her bolde acte, she carried home the stone which she had taken thence, with an ague on her. And the sicknes of the body did molest and trouble her minde so much, that she was not more tormented with the burning of the feuer, then of her Conscie^ce. Neither was she deliuered from that disquiet, vntill she sent to Loreto for a Priest, powering out manie teares, in token of true repentance, restored the stone which she had taken from the sacred House: wherby she obtained not onely pardon, but also perfect health. The like boldnes cost the Sclauonian Merchants deerly, who buying corne in Picene, priuilie hidde in their shippe, a stone which they had stollen out of the sacred Cell of the Mother of God. But albeit they deceiued men; yet they could not deceiue God, the reuenger of their sacriledge. For as soone as they were gone out of the hauen, a foule storme of tempestuous weather by and by arising, brought them into so great feare, that with trembling it enforced them to cast their Merchandize into the sea: and when they saw themselues in danger of drowning, at last they preceiued that Almighty God did punish them for his B. Mothers sake. Then weeping and holding vp their handes towards
heauen, all at once began to intreate and craue pardon of God. And the wrath of God being mitigated with their praiers and teares, did also asswage and calme the sea. Whereuppon assoone as they were deliuered out of this danger, they returned backe to Loreto, to restore the sacred stone to the B. Virgin, and then sailed into Dalmatia with good successe. Sicknes also (as if it were the executioner of Gods iustice) chastised diuers of the Pilgrims, who at their departure had taken with them some particle of the sacred stones, or of the morter of the beloued House, which left them not, vntill they returned backe againe, and with teares confessing their temerity and rashnesse, restored to the Mother of God, that which they had stollen and taken from her.



The robbers of the Sacred Chappell are apprehended by miracle, and put to death. CHAP. XXXI.
BVT the Iustice of Almightie God shewed it self more gentle to those whome some colour of religion deceiued, and more grieuously punished the boldnes of others, whome auarice prouoked to commit a most wicked act. About that time certaine Officers of the House of Loreto, of purpose conueyed away the sacred treasures, which they ought to haue defended from such as went about to steale them. But Almightie God speedily chastised their hainous sacriledge, with deserued punishment. For assoone as they had hid all that they had stolne, in a ship which was in the harbour, they made hast to steale away. But as they sailed along the shore of Picene, foule weather brought them back to the place, where they shipped themselues:
wherby falling into the hands of the Officers of Recanati, they were apprehended in their manifest theft: and for examples sake (lest others should aduenture the like) were presently hanged before the House of Loreto, paying for their wicked sacriledge, with that ignominious death. But others hoping to escape shortly after, were prouoked and tempted to assay the like mischiefe. For a certaine forlorne wretch hauing a great desire to rob the most sacred Chappell, and getting a fit companion for his sacrilegious attempt, prepared engines to open the lockes of the dores, and of the chest where the money is kept: and when he had prouided all things for that purpose, craftily hid himself in the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin. Whereuppon going about to execute his sacrilegious desire in the dead of the night, he gathered the sacred Donaries of gold and siluer into one place; And when he had opened the Arcke and the doores of the sacred Chappell, he also assayed to burst open the leaues of the Church-doore it self: which assoone as he had broken open, he began to looke about to seeke the complice of his wickednes; who at that very houre (for
so they had agreed) was to be in readines in the Church porch, to hide the sacred gifts, and the money in an appointed place. But beholde whiles he intentiuely looked about, he saw a companie of armed people at hand (a multitude of heauenly spirits, as it was supposed) watching the House of the B. Virgin, whose vnexpected presence stroke him into so great feare, that he speedily shut to the doores, and hid himself, thinking they sought his life. But the vnhappy man hauing escaped that danger (as he thought) and auarice egging him on, began to aduenture the thing againe. Wheruppon opening the dores of the Church againe, and the third time, to seeke out the complice of his mischiefe, allwaies that heauenly company met him in armes, and with all speed forced him to fly againe into the Church. Hauing thus spent the night betweene hope and feare, at last he was more sollicitous of his life, then of the prey, and determined to depart without his purpose. For the morning being ready to approach, he assayed to get away by a back doore of the Church; but still being frighted with the encounter of that heauenly watch, which we haue mentioned, he fled back againe into the most sacred
Cell, where remained manifest signes of his attempted sacriledge, that, the place which was the witnes of his wickednes, might also manifestlie declare the same. And the keepers of the most sacred Chappell, comming vpon him vnawares, and finding the dores broken open, and the sacred Donaries gathered into one place, began easilie to suspect his intent and purpose. And the lewd fellow himself tre^bling with a guiltie co^scie^ce, seeming to discouer his intended wickednes, was straight apprehended: and being examined, confessed the whole matter. Wherefore with the partner of his filthie sacriledge, he suffered deserued punishment, to be no small document of the prouidence of Almightie God, towards the well-fare and good of the sacred House of Loreto.



Two yong men are deliuered from the seruitude of the Diuell. CHAP. XXXII.
MOREOVER other wicked, and almost forlorne men, were reduced to an honest life, and to the way of saluation, by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto. There was a certaine yong man, as notorious for his birth, as for his wicked life; who in a quarrell receiued a grieuous wound in his knee, for offending Alm. God; for which cause he could not cure the wound, vntill he began to mitigate the wrath of God. For hauing wasted good part of his substance in physicke and surgerie, the cure was more likelie to bring him into feare of greater inco^uenience, the^ any good hope of recouerie,Annal. Laur. Rier. wherby he mightilie feared speedie death, or at least perpetuall lamenesse. For which cause reiecting help of Surgeons, he put all his hope and trust in the B. Virgin of Loreto, and repenting with teares (the truest signes of pennance) began to pacifie the wrath
of God, and to implore the help of his B. Mother, making this vow vnto her, if he escaped this danger, he would go to the House of Loreto with gifts, to giue her thankes. A wonderfull thing to be sayd. Speaking these wordes with great repentance of minde, the wound was presentlie cured, and he recouered perfect health of bodie. But health restored to an vngratefull and dissolute man, was almost his destruction: who quite forgetting so great a benefit, thought it not inough to neglect his vow, vnles he also abused the benefit of his recouerie, with the licenciousnes of his former life. For being inclined to worser things, at last he came to that passe, by giuing himself wholy to lust, that he had scarce the grace to repent: So much were his later workes, worse than his former. He had beene vndone, if Alm. God had not looked on the out-cast man, and by heauenlie fauour brought him againe into the way of saluation. For shortlie after, he seemed to heare a silent voice, bidding him go to Loreto, and speedilie performe the vow, which he had made: and then (lo) he obeyed, and went to Loreto, to worship the Mother of God with gifts. But no small thing to be spoke^ of, preuented the fruite of his votiue pilgrimage.
For lust had so thralled him vnto her, that still sticking in the same filth, he refused to go to Confession, though Alm. God reached forth his helping hand. Yet because his conscience pricked him, and permitted him to haue no rest, first he began to go round about the sacred House of the B. Virgin, and the place appointed to heare Confessions; then leasurelie to view the forme of the Church, and the votiue tables hanging about the walles: within a while by impulsion of the wicked diuell he also departed out the Church it self, but presently by heaue^ly grace returned thither againe. You would haue thought he had beene mad, and distracted in minde, so far did it repe^t him, sometimes of his purpose, sometimes of his pe^nance. And being scarce well in his wittes, he was so disquieted in mind and in bodie, that he could neither abide the sight of the Priests, nor the remorse of his owne conscience. And also being in great perplexitie, and doubtfull what to doe, he remayned three dayes in these cogitations: But at last through the goodnes of God and his B. Mother, new zeale of saluation was enkindled in him. For by chance being present at diuine seruice, he seemed to heare a voyce fro^ heauen
blaming his delay, and commanding him to go to one of the Priests there prepared, and to disburden his soule of his offences with purpose of better life. That voice pierced and bowed his obstinate minde, and so at last being ouercome, or rather ouerco^ming all impediments, he peesentlie changed his minde^, and did as he was commanded. Whereby getting happilie out of the sinke of lust, he washed away all the blemishes of his life with great abounda^ce of teares, and reioycing with heauenlie ioy, as men are wont to doe, gaue manifolde thankes to God and his B. Mother, that he was twice deliuered from imminent danger of bodie and soule, by her protection and fauour. There was the like condition of an other yong ma^, and the eue^t not vnlike, who being wholie giuen to lust, and those things that follow it, in short time spent all his Fathers substance in wickednes and filthines of life: and whiles he striued to bring himself to all naughtines and dishonestie, at last the matter came to that passe, that he was a scorne, not onelie to mortall men, but euen to the mo^sters of hell. For the diuells appearing vnto him in horrible shapes, and co^te^ptuously beating him with stripes as their slaue, did not onely insult ouer the body,
but also ouer the soule of the vnhappie yo^g man, threatning to lay vpon him more grieuous and horrible punishment (I belieue) to the end he might despaire with the grieuousnes of his torme^ts; so cruell and incessant is the gouerment of the diuell ouer wicked men. And the wretch being thus oppressed with misery on euery side, was euen now almost ouercome with desperation. But as he was thus torme^ted in himself, and looking to and fro, a light appearing suddainlie vnto him, put him in hope of saluation, and brought him in mind of the B. Virgin of Loreto, of whose power and benignitie, he had heard many wonderfull things. Wherby his guiltie soule being trulie penite^t for the impuritie of his former life, with flowing teares he began to inuocate the Mother of God, that by her fauour he might pacifie Almightie God, and turne from him his heaue^lie wrath. But forthwith that infernall companie resisted him, going about to imbrace this wholsome determination; who turning conte^pt into hatred, and mingling threats with stripes, indeauoured to frighten and withdraw the poore man from his good purpose. But at last Christian constancy ouercame the importunitie of the diuells, and by the fauour and protection
of the Mother of God, the yong man determined to perseuere in his purpose well begunne. Therfore prostrating his body and mind before his most benigne Patronesse, with all hope and confidence he implored her aide against those infernall furies; beseeching her to take from his necke, the yoke of that most miserable bondage, that being once deliuered and freed therof, he might go ioyfully to Loreto, to purifie his soule from sinne, and to giue due thankes to her his Deliueresse. His hope and praier was not in vaine. For out of hand Alm. God gaue him great hope of heauenlie help, and replenished him with no small ioy, driuing those troublesome tormentors far away, whose noise and roring was so easilie perceiued, that they confessed (though with much vnwillingnes) that they could do nothing against Marie. Wheruppo^ scarce his owne ma^ for ioy, he went presentlie to Loreto as he vowed, and washing away all the blemishes of his life in the Sacrame^t of Co^fession, gaue hartie tha^kes to God and the B. Virgin; and to certaine Priests (wherof Raphaell Riera was one, desirous of such newes in few) he ioyfullie declared the heauenlie benefit, which he had receiued by the fauour of the B. Virgin of Loreto.



She also deliuereth a yong man whome the diuell had brought into bondage, by restoring vnto him a writing of his owne hand. CHAP. XXXIII.
MOREOVER the Patronage of the B. Virgin of Loreto saued another yong man,Annal. Laur. Rier. whome raging lust drew headlong to vtter perdition, For being of desperate affection, desire and audacitie; he gaue himself wholy to forbidde^ pleasures; and ouercomming many matrons with his dishonestie, he burned with the excessiue loue of a certaine woman, whome seeing he could gaine, neither by increatie, nor money, nor force, nor deceite, he determined to experience the most desperate course of all. Making meanes therfore to the diuell by Art-magicke, he reouested to be made partaker of his desire, shew^ng himself ready to condescend to all, to enioy that which he so ernestly sought. Wheruppon by co^mandme^t of the diuel, he forsooke Christ,
and gaue and deliuered himselfe wholy to him, and which is more, did also sweare vnto him by prescript wordes, and bound himselfe vnto it by hand-writing: so far doth the loue of pleasure blind impure mindes. But when he had obtained his desire, satietie (as it happeneth) bred loath somnes, and by the goodnes and grace of god, he weighed the greatnes of his offence with mature consideration. And being truely penite^t for his wicked sinne, and conceiuing some hope of pardon, he began to seeke for heauenly help, and to call on Almightie God, and his B. Mother, Meane time the B. Virgin of Loreto, and the Priests of the sacred House (endued with most ample faculty to release sinnes) comming to his mind, without delay made him to go to Loreto A mightie God being the author and guid of his iourney; not doubting but there to find remedy against so many euills. His hope deceiued him not. For assoone as he came thither, making meanes to confer with a discreet Priest, he declared vnto him his mournful state, and asked him, whether he might haue any hope to be saued. And first the Priest remayned somewhat am^zed at the grieuousnes of the offence, but the^ declaring vnto him the greatnes
therof; he put him in hope of saluation, if by praier, fasting and voluntary punishment of his body, he would wholy giue himself to pacifie Almighty God. When he refused no punishment at all, the Priest promised him, if he did what he was comma^ded, he would willingly heare him, and by the grace of God, would also take away so great an offence. At parting he exhorted him, to punish his body with fasting, with hair-cloth and stripes, for the space of three daies, to implore the help of the B. Virgin, and by her, to aske humble pardon of Almighty God for his grieuous sinne; and he also promised to say Masse for his saluation all that time; whereby there was good confidence on either side. The three daies being so spent, before he gaue him absolution, the Priest thought good to wrest his ha^d-writing from the diuell, that he might haue no right nor interest at all in him. Therfore he exhorted the Penitent to retire himself into the most Maiesticall Chappell, and ernestly to importune the Mother of God with praier and teares, vntill he got his hand-writing, out of the diuells hands. He obeyed, very desirous of saluation and security, with vndoubted hope to obtaine it by the intercession
of the B. Virgin Mother of God. Wheruppon prostrating his body before the B. Virgin, with flowing teares he earnestly besought her, that she would vouchsafe to get him his wicked handwriting, and to worke his saluation and health. By a great Miracle he had his desire. For as he repeated these verses with all deuotion,
A Mother shew thy self,He take our plaints by the,That being for vs borne,Vouchsaft thy Sonne to be. He saw the hand-writing fall suddenly into his hands, and scarce crediting himself for the vnexpected ioy therof, with new teares he gaue manifold thankes to the B. Virgin. Wheruppo^ departing presently out of the sacred Chappell, he went ioyfully vnto the Priest, and shewed him his handwriting gotten againe by the benefit of the Mother of God, which was stuffed with so many horrible execrations and curses against Christ, and himself that wrote it, that it may easily appeare to be dictated by the euerlasting enemy of mankind. Notwithstanding the power of God, more pote^t than all diabolical deceipt, loosed so
great a band, wherby that sinnefull soule giue^ by vow to hell it self, by fauour of the Mother of God, was set in the liberty of the childre^ of God, that no wicked nor desperate man should despaire of saluation (if he himselfe will not perish) nor doubt of the clemencie of God, who hath freelie giuen his B. Mother, a Patronesse to offenders for their saluation.

The end of the third Booke.



THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reuerend F. HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS Of the Society of IESVS.

The care of Pope Pius IIII. and of the Cardinall of Vrbine, in adorning the House of Loreto. CHAP. I.
THIS meane while Pius succeeded Paul the IV. whose Popedome,Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. as it was more ioyfull to Italy by reason of peace, so was it more notable in adorning the House of Lerote. For Pius built most of the higher
porch of the Bishops Pallace;The benefits and giftes of Pius the 4. made the old hospitall more conuenient and commodious, by adding new building vnto it: and exempting the House of Loreto out of the Iurisdiction of the people of Recanati, made it a free State, the 65. yeare of this age. The cause wherof was, for that they were accused to be negligent in execution of Iustice, and suffering the walls to decay in many places. Wheruppon the towne of Loreto, was restored to her former liberty by Pius the IIII. about 30. yeares after Paul the III. had committed it to the Gouernment of the Citty of Recanati; who also commanded the Gouernour of Loreto, to repay eight thousand Crownes to the Cittizens of Recanati, albeit they should refuse it. But the piety of the good Pope, was not more notable in augmenting the State of Loreto, then in adorning the B. Virgin herself. For he supplied the number of the Chanons, and of the Officers not a litle diminished; with his Pontificall Breue established the Colledge of the Society of IESVS, which Paul had inlarged, and also increased it with reuenewes. About which time, the Cardinall of Carpa departing this mortall life, he gaue the Patronship of Loreto to the Cardinall of Vrbine
who in piety and care towards the B. Virgin of Loreto was inferiour to none of the former Patrons. For first he committed the Gouernment of the House of Loreto to Pompeius Pallanterius; by whose direction he caused the Thole of the Church to be adorned on the inside with costly marble worke. Also at the foote of a hill which is neere to Loreto, and in the high way that goeth to the hauen of Recanati, he made a commodious and well adorned fountaine for Pilgrims, and afterward by other Gouernours, did many more notable things as in due place shall be sayd.


The care of the Picentians in defending the House of Loreto against the Turkes: and the protection of the B. Virgin towards her owne House. CHAP. II.
AT that time the terrour of the Turkish nauy comming to Loreto,Annal. Laur. Rier. did manifestly shew the deuotion of the Picentians to our B. Lady, and likewise the beneuolence of our B. Lady towards
the Picentians. Word was brought by the Scoutes, that a great nauy of Turkes (in which were a hundred and fifty galleys) had set out of Epyrus, intending to assault Ancona assoone as they had spoiled the Church of Loreto. And within few dayes, a speach of their nauy being seene vpon the coast of Italy, caused the Picentians to assemble themselues with great strength. Among the first multitude, the flower of Recanati flocked to Loreto, to defend the Sacred House with fortifications and armes, who (neglecting their Countrey and friends) fortified Loreto with rampiers and bulwarkes. And other people of Picene, filling all the shores round about with armed men, hasted thither with no lesse emulation, chiefly to defend the Sacred House of Loreto, with all their might, against the Barbarians: for with all willingnes they desired (if necessity required) to dye a glorious death for her, and in her sight. To these forces of armed men, were conioyned cruell weapo^s against the outragious Barbarians, to wit, the continuall prayers of the godly. For all the Priests and deuout people of Loreto, and of the bordering townes round about, ceased not to pacifie Almighty God by praier, and by supplication to inuocate the B. Virgin,
that she her self would vouchsafe to defend her owne House and Clients. Their praier and vow had effect. For the B. Virgin mother of God, did not onelie keepe the force of the Barbarians from her natiue House, but also from the Territorie of Picene it self. Because the Captaines of the Turkish nauy suddainlie changed their determination of attempting Ancona, and turned their fury on the maritime people of Abruzzo; where setting their men a land, and taking Ortona, Guasto, Francauilla, and other no meane townes of Abruzzo by force, they destroied them with fier and sword. Hauing for the most part ransackt Abruzzo, yet they durst not touch the bordering Countrey, wholy exposed to their prey; euen so present was the protection of the B. Virgin of Loreto vnto her owne people. Whereuppon the Pope himself, being most glad, that the House of Loreto, was deliuered out of such imminent danger by heauenlie protection, thought it also his dutie to prouide, that heereafter it might not onelie be far from danger; but euen from any feare therof. For which cause by aduise of the Architects, he determined to fortifie the hills neere to the towne (whence the enemy might easilie assault the sacred
House) with walls, fortresses, ditches, and rampiers; to the end that it might not onelie be able to withstand their suddaine incursions, but also notablie sustaine a siege. But one care after another put of this holie determination of the Pope; and finallie, vntimelie death wholie dissolued his holie and godlie purpose.


The Bishop of Conymbria, being taught by his owne harme, restoreth a stone which he procured to be taken out of the House of Loreto. CHAP. III.
THIS time was not without miracles and Donaries.Annal. Laur. Rier. For neuer before in so few yeares, did there happen a greater number better witnessed, and more knowne among all people, wherof this was most famous in all the Christian world. The 61. yeare of this age, Iohn
Suarez Bishop of Conymbria (a man famous for learning and pietie) going to the Cou^cell of Trent su^moned by Pius the IIII. came out of his way to go to Loreto, about the Natiuitie of the B. Virgin: where dutifullie making his prayer and performing his vow, he had a great desire to build in his Bishopricke, a litle House like to that of Loreto, for which purpose he desired to take some one stone out of the House of Loreto it self. But the Gouernour of the place, and the Patron withstood it, menacing him with the Popes inhibition: Yet Suarez, making honourable shew to propagate the reuerence of the B. Virgin of Loreto in Portugall, obtayned his desire of the Pope by an Authenticall Breue, which by Francis Stella his Chapline (for he himself was gone to Trent) he sent to the Gouernour of Loreto, who at that time was Pompeius Pallanterius. But assoone as it was reported abroad, that a Priest of the Bishop of Conymbria was come, authorized with the Popes Breue, to diminish the wall of the most Maiesticall Cell, in verie deed the thing seemed verie vnfitting, not onelie to the Gouernour and Chanons, but also to townesfolkes and strangers, and no lesse pernicious,
for the present domage, then for future example. Whereupon euerie one pronounced, that there would be an end of the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin: For if once they began to take away the stones of the sacred House, in short time not so much as one would be left. Notwithstanding because the Popes authoritie did vrge, after diuine seruice and a solemne procession, the Chanons and the Priests of Loreto assembled themselues into the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, rather to suffer, then to do that which was commanded. For all resolutelie refusing such a seruice, with a fit instrument, Stella himself pulled and tooke the stone out of the wall, all the keepers of the sacred House saying confidently vnto him, that it would be but short ioy vnto his Bishop, that the Minister of sacriledge might take that from God and his B. Mother, which doubtlesse by the manifest indignation of them both, he would shortlie bring back againe. It was a Prophesie. For these wordes seeming to come from heauen, pierced the brest of the audacious man, and filled it with anxious cares. Whereuppon vncertaine what to do (albeit the command of his Bishop did vrge) he staied eight whole
daies at Loreto, and spent all that time in vaine to pacific Almightie God. For how could he asswage the heauenly wrath, who suffered the cause therof to remaine about him? At last on the Calendes of December he began his iourney, much troubled in minde with a certaine religious dread and sollicitude. And coming to Anconae without any inconuenience, and holding on his iourney without feare of ill successe, he presentlie perceiued that Almightie God did punish him for his rashnesse. Because from that time he was alwaies so molested with raine and tempestuous weather (yet perseuering still to go whither he intended) that euerie moment he escaped many and great dangers of life. For most of the waies were almost vnpassable by reason of lakes and streames which hindered him. Also furious waters encountering, threatened him destruction. Likewise the horse on which he rode being not able to stand, fell downe; and he himself tumbling after, was so moiled in the lakes, that he was enforced to change his horses, but he had no better successe with any. And thus diuers accidents hindering his vnluckie iourney, he came at length to Trent, in the end of the moneth of December
(hauing passed many inconueniences and dangers) and deliuered the sacred stone vnto the Bishop, telling him how deerlie he had bought it. But the Bishop being made nothing more circumspect therby (hauing space strangelie giuen him to repent) nor willing to learne by an others perill, was taught by his owne. For about the end of Februarie, inclosing the sacred stone in a siluer case and preparing to send it into Portugall, he was suddainlie taken with an extreme burning feuer, and began to be miserablie anguished and molested therwith; which brought with it a more grieuous and cruell disease, to witt most bitter paine of the groine, which permitted him to take no rest at all. Forthwith Phisitians are set aworke, who applying all things in vaine (because his sicknes comming to him as a punishment from God, the cure therof might verie well surpasse their skill) they constantlie pronounced, that the force and cause of his griefe, seemed not to them any humane thing. Therefore it was best for him to consider, whether peraduenture Almighty God might not inflict that horrible punishment vpon him, for offending him:
And so fearing vnfortunate euent of the cure, they departed, despairing of his recouerie. Wheruppon the Bishop was verie sollicitous and much perplexed in himself, whether for any secret offence, Alm. God had inflicted such horrible punishment on him. And being thus forsaken of the Physitians, he began to be tormented more in minde then in bodie, to looke diligentlie into himself. And because he was troubled with a scruple about the stone which he procured from Loreto, he ceased not to mitigate the wrath of God by all the meanes he could, and with sighes and feruent praier, to aske pardon of the B. Virgin of Loreto, if perchance he had offended, by violating her sacred House, and to confesse that he was ready to co^descend to all to make satisfactio^. His praier was not vnheard, assoone as in some sort he acknowledged and detested his fault. For within a while, he seemed to heare a silent voice (as it were from heauen) commanding him to restore the stone which he had taken from the B. Virgin of Loreto. But fearing leste it might be the vaine immagination of a weake minde, both because he had gotten it by the Popes authoritie, and also for that he
would not defraud Portugall of so great a good, now obtained for her; he remayned doubtfull what to do. In this meane while some weekes were spent. Wheruppon by commandement of his Lord, at last Stella carefully recommended the Bishop verie dangerously sicke, to two holy monasteries of sacred Virgins in the Cittie of Trent. And within two dayes, one of the chiefe of either Monasterie brought answere, if that the Bishop would be cured, he must restore that which he had taken from the B. Virgin of Loreto. when Stella heard what they said, he was amazed, admiring how Virgins shutt vp in their Cloisters, could know of the stone of Loreto, which truly at Trent besides himself and the Bishop none knew, because he commanded the thing to be concealed with all care, Not doubting therefore, but that the whole matter was shewed vnto them by a heauenlie signe, he tolde his Lord what he had heard. Whereat the Bishop remained like one astonished; and wounded with remorse, gaue many sighes. And by and by with his elbow lifting himself vp vpon the bed where he lay, and holding vp both hands and eyes to heauen, with trickling teares, he ernestly intreated
pardon of the Mother of God. That the mercifull Mother would vouchsafe to pardon his pious errour: that she would forgiue him, acknowledging his fault. For he would keepe nothing of the House of Loreto, against her will; he was resolued and determined forthwith to restore that, which he had receiued thence, and mistrusted not but to recouer health by her meanes, assoone as he had restored the sacred stone vnto her; that she would therfore help him, who had giuen him this hope. He failed not in his promise, nor the B. Virgin his hope. For presently Suarez commanded Stella himself (who brought it) to recarry it backe to Loreto, with all the speed he could. Neither in vaine. For he was scarce gone out of the gate of the Citty on a horse of good speed, but the Bishop began to feele himself better, and out of hand sent after him, another Post, to charge Stella to make as much hast as might be. Wheruppon taking fresh horses, and little regarding his owne rest, he posted speedily day and night, making hast to come to Loreto. A wonder to be spoken. The neerer he came to Loreto (as afterward by conferring togeather the times was vnderstood) the b^tter the Bishop felt himself: So that at the self same
time, the sacred stone was restored to the B. Virgin, and health to the Bishop. This seemed not to be without miracle, that Stella in taking away the sacred stone, had no harder and troublesome a iourney, than facile and expedite, when he brought it backe againe. For it is euident, that he posted from Trent to Ancona (which is but xv. miles from Loreto) within foure daies; so much did not the speed of horses, as a certaine prouidence of Almighty God forward his returne. And all this, euen as I haue related it, Stella himself reported to Raphaell Riera, who was then at Loreto. And in good sooth for the euidence of the miracle, all men do speake of it.



The Sacred stone is put into his place, and reuerenced with great solemnity and concourse of people. CHAP. IV.
STELLA comming to Loreto,Annal. Laur. Rier. in the beginning of April, forthwith related the whole matter to the Gouernour, and with the letter of his Bishop, deliuered the sacred stone, in the Siluer case, as it was: wherof as soone as the Priests of Loreto had vnderstanding (who foretold ill hap to them that would aduenture such a thing) euery one pronounced, that the B. Virgin of Loreto, iustly reuenging him for his rashnes towards her natiue House, at last had made him to see his owne folly; and lest others should aduenture the like, had giuen a worthy example to mortall men. Assoone as it was published abroad, that the sacred stone was brought backe by an euide^t miracle; all the townes-folkes and strangers made hast to the gate of the towne to
see it, whither comming in solemne procession, the letter of the Bishop of Conymbria (which declared all the matter in order) was openly read, and the sacred stone (graced with this worthy miracle) was put into a gorgeous tabernacle, and by the Gouernour, Chanons, and Priests, was carried about with as great pompe as might be, and put into his owne place, with more than two thousand people following it. Whereunto was added a double holde of iron, to be a monument to posterity, that it was taken thence by the rashnes of men, and restored againe by the prouidence of God. And the letter of the Bishop was sent to Pius the Pope, in token of the miracle, which at this day is reserued at Rome in the Castle of S. Angelo with other letters of the Popes, whence we had a coppy, which we thought good to insert in this place. And the letter translated word for word into latin, is thus. To the Gouernour of Loreto, Iohn Bishop of Conymbria S. D. (that is to say) sendeth greeting. By reason of my deuotion to the B. Virgin of Loreto, with all diligence and trauell, labouring to get a stone of that sacred house (as it is not vnknowne to you) at last I obteined of the
high Bishop, to be free from the Censure of the Pontificall inhibition, the Cardinall of Carpa, Patron of Loreto not vnwilling thereof. But God and his B. Mother shewed me by manifest signes, that I should send back to Loreto, the stone which I had taken thence. For both an vnusuall disease, did by miracle disquiet my prosperous health, and also by the admonition of holy men, acceptable to Almighty God, I perceiued that this was the cause of my sicknes. Therefore without delay, intreating pardon and peace of God and his most holy Mother, I commanded that the most sacred stone should be brought back by the same Francis Stella of Arezzo my Chaplin, who tooke it thence. I request and beseech you, to receiue the sacred stone which is sent vnto you, with such deuotion and solemnity as is fitting, and to put it into his own place, togeather with the morter, which likewise is sent back vnto you. One thing I entreate you, to keepe the siluer case wherein it is inclosed, as witnes of the miracle for euerlasting memory to posterity. You shall also do a thing very gratefull vnto me, if you certifie the Cardinall Patrone, and the Pope himself of
the whole matter, that they may ratifie and confirme the Ecclesiasticall Ce^sures against the Violatours of the sacred House of Loreto, least hereafter any part therof should be take^ the^ce. Also with all the deuout Priests of that sacred House, I request you to pray to the B. Virgin of Loreto, that whether this offence be of errour or default, that she would mercifully vouchsafe to pardon me. Dated at Trent, the VI. of the Ides of April, the yeare. M.D.LXII. The fame of so certaine and so witnessed a miracle being presently diuulged in Picene, and in all Italy, greatly increased the Religion and reuerence of the sacred place, and from all parts prouoked a great multitude of Pilgrims, to come to visit and reuerence the House of Loreto with Donaries. For it is well knowne, that within the space of one moneth, aboue fifty thousand strangers came to Loreto, to see and to kisse this famous sacred stone, at which time, there was nothing more spoken of among deuout people.



Manie are deliuered from very great danger. CHAP. V.
AT that time the B. Virgin Mother of God,Annal. Laur. Rier. shewed by euident tokens, that she did no lesse respect the health and safety of mortall men, than the good of her owne House. Troylus Ribera a Gentleman, comming to Loreto vpon vow, trauelled on horsbacke among broke^ rocks (called the Cripts) not far from the maritime Castle of Picene; where his horse stumbling, Ribera himself tumbled downe from the steepe rocks on horsbacke, to the shore of the dangerous sea below; often calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto: And heauenly help did not faile him. A wonderfull thing to be spoken and seene. For the horse and the man who were throwne downe from the Cliffe, stucke fast in the way by the sea side, and albeit he had his sword and dagger buckled about him, notwithstanding he escaped safe,
and hurt in no part at all: and so went to Loreto ioyfull and glad, to performe his double vow. Such, and the like danger, by help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, eschewed Sal^stius the Captaine of a Band of horsemen, or Pius IIII. who as he trauelled ouer a highe Cliffe of Vmbria, fell downe headlong likewise on hors-backe. But the B. Virgin of Loreto (whome heretofore he had visited) co^ming to his minde in this imminent danger, with flowing teares he called on her, who doubtles was with him in his fall, speedily bringing him desired help. For although he tumbled downe to the bottome of the hill it selfe; yet he escaped without any harme at all. And the height of the Cliffe whence he fell, was almost a hundred Cubits, least any should exempt it from miracle. Ioseph of Monte-Feltrio found the like fauour, by the help of the B. Virgin in like danger, who climing vp to a high Tower, to settle there a peece of timber, fell downe headlong mistaking of his footing; but calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto, forth with he seemed to himself to be sustained by a certaine heauenly vertue, seeming, as it were, a ha^d, and by litle and litle to be let downe without any grieuance or danger, so that he came to the ground, not
onelie sound in bodie, but also in senses, This is more admirable. Augustine of Cremona was at Catara a Cittie of Dalmatia, the yeare 1563. in the beginning of Iune; at which time a great earth-quake swallowed and ouerthrew good part of the Cittie, oppressing Francis Priulus the Gouernour, and his whole familie, with a destruction altogeather as miserable, as any wise memorable. Wherby Augustine being partaker of the common danger, implored the help of our B. Ladie of Loreto. Neither in vaine. For although he was beaten downe with the suddaine fall of a wall, yet his clothes onely were torne, and his skinne some thing bruized. Wheruppon all thinking him to be dead, by and by, by the protection of our B. Ladie, he was safe and sound; whose preseruation, the foule and miserable death of others, who were in like danger, made more notable.



A Sailer loosing his ship, is saued by the help of the B. Virgin. CHAP. VI.
THE power of the B. Virgin of Loreto was as notable in calming the sea,Annal. Laur. Rier. as in deliuering men from the earth-quake. A certaine man of Sardinia a skillfull and discreete Pilot, bringing a ship laden with wares from Constantinople, the 60. yeare of this age, in the Vigill of S. Andrew the Apostle; and being in sight of Miletus a Cittie of Asia minor, the vessell was suddainlie tossed with so vehement a tempest, and beaten so furiouslie with waues, that she began to leake. There was no hope of recouering harbour: and when the Pilot and Mariners saw that the keele it self began to cleaue more and more, and to let in water aboundantlie, they despaired of humane help, and suppliantlie inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto. They praied not to them that were deafe. For although the ship began
to sinke by little and little, till she was readie to be swallowed vp in the sea; yet suddainlie in the darknes of the night, a heauenlie light shined to the sailers and passengers, crauing pardon of God and striuinglie imploring the help of his B. Mother, which gaue both courage, and shewed the way of health to them in horrible feare. For seeing a boat stand almost immoueable amidst the waues, prouided, as it were, by miracle for their safetie, all speedilie went into it, and followed the heauenlie light going before them, as the guide of their way, thinking it to be the B. Virgin of Loreto. And hauing sailed but a little way, they looked backe to see what was become of the ship which they had forsaken, which by and by they saw swallowed vp in the sea. Wheruppon all the companie doubling thankes and laudes to God and his B. Mother, by conduct of the heauenlie light, came safelie sayling into the Adriaticke sea; and speedilie sayling along the coast of Italie ariued at the hauen of Ancona, the verie festiuall day of S. Andrew the Apostle. When they came to land, the speed of their iourney was held for no lesse a miracle, then the benignitie of their guide. For it is euident, that within
the space of a few houres, the boate sailed more then a thousand miles. Wherefore out of hand going to Loreto, and rightly purifying their soules with the sacred mysteries, they performed their Vow to the B. Virgin Mother of God, and declared and published this worthy miracle.


Two men are deliuered from lightening: Also two barren women are made fruitfull. CHAP. VII.
THE protection of our B. Lady of Loreto,Annal. Laur. Rier. was as powerable against lightening, as against the raging sea. Antony de San-Stephano of Castello in the Territorie of Luca, in time of a horrible tempest, went vp to the steeple to ring the bell, as the custome is: but behold lightning falling suddainlie fro^ heauen, ouerthrew the Tower together with Antony, who being blasted with the lightening, and beaten downe with the fall of the steeple, lay foure houres without life, couered in a great
heape of stones. But at that time his kinsfolkes and friends made many vowes to the B. Virgin of Loreto, for his preseruation and safetie, which proued not in vaine. For when the heape of stones was remooued, Antonie was found aliue and well, who, in short time recouering strength, came to Loreto the yeare 1565. to performe his vow to the Mother of God, and most willing to publish her singular fauour towards him. And about the same time there happened an other like vnto this. Marcus Antonius Fecinus of Monte-Feltrio, Curate of the Parish Carpenia, going vp to the bell-fray to ring the bell to Masse, was suddainlie stroken with lightening, but calling on the B Virgin of Loreto, with a little scorching of his shoulder, and burning of his clothes, he escaped safe by the vndoubted help of our B. Ladie, and out of hand making hast to Loreto to performe his vow to the Mother of God, he left behinde him a faire votiue table to witnes the miracle to posterity, And at the same time also, two noble women getting help for their sterilitie, did as much illustrate the B. Virgin of Loreto, as the former did. Iulia Roborea wife of Alfonsus of Est, hauing liued many yeares with her husband in wedlocke without issue,
determined to reiect all physicall remedie, and to turne herself to heauenlie aide. Wheruppon co^ming to Loreto, and rightlie purifying her soule, she besought the B. Virgin, to obtaine for her, issue male; making this vow with her praier, if she had a sonne, she promised to returne to the House of Loreto with gifts, vnles she were hindered by some mischance, which notwithstanding she would performe by godlie men, whome she would send in her roome with the Donaries. When she had made her Vow, she returned home, and conceiued issue; and being happilie deliuered, brought forth a goodlie child. And not to be vnmindefull of her Vow, out of hand she sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, the Image of the infant curiouslie wrought in a plate of siluer, of eight pound weight: Whereunto was added this inscription in token of the benefit receiued.

ALFONSVS OF EST, THE SONNE OF ALFONSVS, NEPHEVV OF ALFONSVS DVKE OF FERRARA, BORNE THE IDES OF NOVEMBER THE YEARE OF OVR LORD M.D.LX.


Such another confirmed the certaintie of this miracle. Bernardine San-Seuerino Prince of Bisinia (the Father of him that now is) liuing many yeares with his wife, had no children by her. And being long frustrated by the hope of Physitians and physicke, he was grieued not onelie for want, but also because he had no hope of issue, whome he might leaue heyre of so great a Signiory. At last that which nature denied, he thought good to beg of God and his B. Mother by praier. Wheruppon making a vow, he and his wife came to Loreto, where both praied deuoutlie to our B. Ladie, intreating desired issue. The B. Virgin did not long prolong their hope. For before the Prince departed from Loreto, by manifest signes he perceiued his wife to be with child: and in short time it appeared, that she co^ceiued this issue, when she made her vow at home. But I know not by what chance that benefit was short, and of small continuance. For within few yeares after he became a Father, the Prince was depriued of his onelie Sonne: yet the B. Virgin did not frustrate his hope and vow. For within a while he had another sonne, who suruyuing his Father, now gouerneth the Signiory of Bisinia.



Many despayring of their recouerie are cured by miracle. CHAP. VIII.
Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier.ABOVT that time, health was restored to many by miracle, the Phisitia^s despairing therof. Cardinall Morono being molested with a dangerous sicknes, suddainlie recouered by calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto, and forth with came thither to giue due thanks to our B. Ladie, and to performe his vow, greatly desiring to haue a monument of the heauenlie benefit to remaine there: Wheruppon he left behind him, a votiue table with this inscription.





IOHN CARDINAL MORONO BISHOP OF PORT;
The vovv of Card. Morono.
BEING MOLESTED VVITH A MOST GRIEVOVS INFIRMITY, VVAS DELIVERED THEREOF BY THE INTERCESSION OF B. MARIE, ALVVAIES A VIRGIN, AND CAME TO PERFORME HIS VOVV THE YEARE OF OVR SALVATION. M. D. LXV.






Another more admirable,Iulianus Cesarinus is deliuered from danger of death. but a litle more ancient. Iulianus Cesarinus one of the Peeres of Rome (of whome we spake before, the 60. yeare of this age) lay pining away with a dangerous and a long bloudy flux, whose strength being taken away with voiding of bloud, not only the Physitians, but euen his domesticalls and friends, belieued that he could not possibly escape. But Iulianus well remembring what fauour and help, he had found heretofore at Loreto, called on the Mother of God, and forthwith was deliuered out of danger, leauing all amazed at the wonder of so great a thing. For the neerer he was to his death, the more euident was the miracle. Here followeth an other vnlike in kinde, but like in certainty. Iohn Baptista Asculanus was troubled many yeares so grieuously with the goute, that he was not able to go alone. Therfore hauing no hope to recouer by physicke, he implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and without delay came to Loreto on horsbacke. Assoone as he came thither, he was carried into the most Maiesticall Cell by two of his seruants, where as he was praying deuoutly to our B. Lady, he presently recouered his former health, in such sort, that by himself alone he went on foote to the
Inne, whence, immediatly before, it was well knowne that he was carried into the most sacred Cell, lame of the goute.


Two possessed persons are deliuered from the tormenting Diuells. CHAP. IX.
OVR B. Lady was as fauourable in expelling of Diuells, as in curing of diseases. Soone after Paula a Sclauonian woman being long and much vexed with a company of wicked diuells, wherewith she was possessed, was the occasion of a meruailous and frequent spectacle, both to the Inhabitants and Pilgrims of Loreto, For hauing assaied to small effect, other humane and diuine remedies, she determined to come to the B. Virgin of Loreto, the most certaine refuge of all that be in misery. But the Diuels hindered her wholsome determination and iourney with all their might: and first with roaring and horrible noise, endeuoured to make her to desist from the iourney which she had vndertaken to Loreto: Then seeing that she would go forward, they cast her on the
ground with a kind of obstinacy: and othertimes incensed her so fiercely against them which went with her, that by striking and biting, she might fright them all our of her company. But at last either the piety of men, or els the goodnes of God, ouercame the Diuells deuices. For (albe it with much resistance) a strong and couragious company of men brought her by force into the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, and prouided for her a godly and a discreet Priest in such affaires, by whome, the Diuells being commanded to depart by the Word made flesh in that most holy place, at last they went their waies, leauing her without sense. But when she had recouered strength, and giuen due thankes to our B. Lady, they assalted her againe not far from Loreto, as she returned home. Wheruppon being haled backe to the House of the B. Virgin, she began to vtter certaine wonders, to diuine, to disclose the secrets of many hartes, and to speake in strange tongues. They that were present first wo^dered at the suddaine alteratio^, but presently turning admiratio^ into compassio^, with many teares they implored the B. Virgin in her behalf; who speedily expelled the wicked Diuells wherwith she was tormented. Yet
assoone as the woman set her foote out of the gate of Loreto, by and by those troublesome fiends were at hand, who entred into her againe, as into their ancient possession. Which when it happened the second and third time, at last the woman perceyuing that out of Loreto, she could not be safe and secure from those monsters, resolued with her self to lead her life at Loreto, that she might hide herself vnder the shaddow and protection of the B. Virgin, and dedicate herself wholy to her seruice; where spending some yeares in such things, she accomplished her last day with a happy end. About the same time, there happened an other not vnlike to this. Alexander Galiardino of Bologna an Inne-keeper of no small accompt, had his dearest daughter miserably vexed with foure terrible diuells. Therfore with great hope and confidence, he recommended her to the fidelity and protection of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Neither in vaine. For within a while, those troublesome tormentors were cast forth, and he receiued his daughter free and in good health. Hauing obtained his vow he brought her to Loreto, to giue due thankes to the B. Virgin Mother of God, and to witnes the help, which she receiued from our B. Lady of Loreto.



Sight is restored to two blind-men. CHAP. X.
AT the same time sight was restored to blind-men.Annal. Laur. Rier. Peter Romanius a yong man of Fauen^ia, being depriued of both his eyes, and many yeares leading a sorrowfull life in perpetuall darknes, at la^^ by newes of the miracles of the B. Virgin of Loreto comming to Fauentia, he conceiued some hope of recouery. Wheruppon with much confidence he implored the B. Virgin of Loreto. A wonderfull thing to be said. As he was praying to our B. Lady with great hope, the darknes was suddenly taken away, and he recouered his desired sight. The thing is well witnessed. For he came to Loreto the yeare 1564. and brought with him the letters of Annibal Cassalius the Protonotary Apostolicall and Vicar of Fauentia, in witnes of the miracle.



The B. Virgin cureth two that were dumbe, restoring to the one, the vse of his tongue, and to the other, his tongue when it was cut out CHAP. XI.
THE B. Virgin was not more bountifull to the blind,Annal. Laur. Rier. then to the dumbe. A little boy of Iohn Vbaldus of Padua, a famous Captaine in the warr, was so troubled with the falling sicknes, that it tooke from him the vse of his tongue. And hauing layne three yeares both dumbe and sicke, the father of the child despayring of help by meanes of Phisitians, implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, in behalf of his sonne: and his prayer was heard. For in continent the child did not only recouer his former speach, but also health of body by miracle. Whereupon his father brought him to Loreto, the yeare 1563. that both might giue due thankes to the B. Virgin
Mother of God, and performe their vow; who related the whole matter to the Gouernour of Loreto, and to many others. But this is most admirable. The president of Abruzzo comming to Loreto, went out of his way to go to Cluitella, where he apprehended a wicked man vsing now and then to vtter impious speeches, against Alm. God, and the B. Virgin of Loreto. Wherewith the Preside^t being incensed to great wrath, for example sake, presently reuenged his filthy ^a^guage, by cutting out his sacrilegious tongue. And not contenting himself with this, he deliuered him ouer to prison, commanding him to be carefully kept, vntill he returned from Loreto, that then he might determine, whether he deserued to be punished with greater torment. But the poore wretch being in great paine with the inflicted punishment, and also solicitous for that which was past, at last repe^ted, and turning wickednes into reuerence, vsed all diligence both day and night to mitigate the B. Virgin of Loreto, by silent prayer, and vow, beseeching her to asswage the Viceroyes anger against him, and to giue him meanes to cleanse his soule of sinne by sacred Confessio^. The praier of the wicked man repe^ting and detesting his fault, did not mislike the
B. Virgin of Loreto. For within a while the Mother of God appeared vnto him in his sleepe, bidding him be of god comfort; for in short time he should be deliuered out of prison, that he might go to the House of Loreto, and there confesse his sinnes by means of a new tongue. The euent approued the prediction. When he awaked, a certaine tongue (as it may seeme) began to grow againe, by which he vttered the conceite of his mind, without any difficulty at all. And the Viceroy returning from Loreto, and vnderstanding of the matter, thought good to pardo^ him, whom the B. Virgin herself had pardoned. Therfore in co^tinent he set him at liberty, hereafter aduising him to be wiser by his owne perill, and giuing him letters to the Penitentiaries, in token of the miracle, he sent him to Loreto to performe his vow. When he came thither, not only the Viceroyes letter, but also the thing it self witnessed the miracle to all. For when he opened his mouth (a wonderfull thing to be seene) they saw that his tongue was cut out, and that a certaine little tongue did grow vnderneath in place of the other, wherewith when he himself would (albeit with stammering) they heard him
speake. This was not all. For returning home and receiuing the sacred mysteries twice or thrice, a new tongue increased by a new miracle, to the iust bignes. Wheruppon comming againe to Loreto, to giue due thankes to the Mother of God; to the very same, who a little before had seene his tongue cut out (wherof Raphaell Riera, who set it downe in writing, was one) he shewed it growne out againe by the immortall gift of our B. Ladie to the admiration and wonder of all, extolling the B. Virgin for so notable, and so worthie a miracle.


A Iew is deliuered out of prison by the B. Virgin, and baptized at Loreto. CHAP. XII.
THE B. Virgin of Loreto did not onelie make the Christians,Annal. Laur. Rier. but also the Iewes partakers of her benignitie and help. A certaine Hebrue of Nazareth (a man in other respects graue
and wise) dwelled at Nazareth in the ver^e street where (as we said before) the impressions of the House of Loreto, were yet in the ground to be seene: who by neernes of the place (of which by report he had heard many admirable things, had gotten some sparkle of religion. For knowing that the Christians did reuerence Mary his Cittizen with great deuotion and respect, he also began to honour her, and for the same cause, was not far from belieuing in Christ himself. But, as they are a kinde of people hard and peruerse, he continued in the old superstition wherin he was inured from his Childhood by continuall vse. But at last extreme miserie bowed his obstinate mind. For at 60. yeares of age, he being apprehended by the Turkes (for what wickednes I know not) and condemned to perpetuall imprisonment, he pined away with miserie, and despayring of bodilie health, began to thinke of his soule. And hauing a great care and zeale of saluation inspired into him from aboue, he prayed suppliantlie for pardon, to God the Cre^tour of the world, whereby obstinacy was ouercome by myserie, and heauenlie light shined to his blinded mind. Therefore with great deuotion he called on
Iesus the Messias of the Christians, and on Marie the Mother of the Messias. When he had sollicitouslie do^ne so, he we^t to bed full of hope and confidence: and his hope was not in vaine. For the same night Christ appearing vnto him in his sleepe, and the Nazaren knowing him by the similitude in which the Christians did worship him, he confessed him to be the true God and the Messias of the world, and suppliantlie adored him in his sleep. And presentlie the likenes of a Virgin of exceeding beautie and maiestie was also represented vnto him, by whose co^mand, an other Virgin her co^panion, vnloosed him out of the irons, wherwith he was fettered; and opening the doores of the prison brought him to the hauen, yet fast asleep, but seeing in his dreame what was donne in verie deed. Then the more powerfull Virgin seeming to be the others Mistresse, shewed him a boat in readines, and said vnto him: Now thou art free, therfore be mindefull of thy Deliuerefle, for beholde I haue prepared thee a meane to escape; neither will I faile to helpe thee, as thou fliest away. ^or thy part go to Loreto, which is a Towne of Picene in the Prouince of Italie, there receiue Christian Baptisme, and offer vp thy self
at the Altar of Mary, with purpose of better life. And the Iew giuing thankes to both, but chieflie to her, who seemed the worthier, prayed his deliueresse, to vouchsafe to tell her name. And when she had said, that she was Mary of Loreto, and her companion Lucie, presentlie with her Companion she with-drew herself out of his sight. Wheruppon the Hebrue a waking, perceiued that the representation of the thing shewed him in his sleep was true, and much admiring so great a wonder, and making no end of thanksgiuing to the B. Virgin of Loreto, the boat into which he entred by persuasion of our B. Ladie, of it self sailed along the seas with wonderfull speed; and so by heauenlie conduct and aide, he arriued at Ancona within two daies. When the miracle was published abroad, he was curteouslie intertained by the chiefest of the Cittie, who vrging him to be baptized there: Nay, said he, Marie the Mother of Christ commanded me to be baptized at Loreto. Wheruppon the Gouernour of Ancona dismissed him with letters of commendation, and sent him straight to Loreto, where being sufficientlie instructed in the mysteries of Christian religion, he was baptized to
his owne great ioy, and also others, the 60. yeare of this age, declaring the whole matter to Riera. and to many others by an Interpreter.


The chiefest gifts brought or sent to Loreto, Pius the IV. being Pope. CHAP. XIII.
THis time which was so graced with miracles,Cod. Laur. was not without Donaries. The Card. of S. Praxedes presented his owne Image of siluer to the brest,The gift of the Card. of S. Praxedes, and of others. of fiue pound weight. Francis Caietan a noble man of Rome, golden ornature for the Altar. Cardinall Arigonio another of siluer imbrodered, and besett with pearle. Others of lesse accompt, brought to the B. Virgin, other meaner gifts, not needfull to be rehearsed. Also the pietie of noble wome^ was not of small regard. For Iulia Roborea presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, a vestment for the Priest of cloth of siluer, magnificentlie imbrodered.
The Duchesse of Grauine ornature for the Altar, of tissue-cloth of gold. The Duchesse of Mont-Alto, a Cope of cloth of gold. Clelia Farnesia, another of satten, garnished with golden lyllies. Happily at no time before in so few yeares, were worthier gifts presented from Citties and Townes. Spello a Towne of Vmbria, sent a siluer Image of three pound weight. Another from Sarnano in Picene of ten pound weight. Another from Arezzo in Tuscany of eight pound weight. Also an other siluer Image, from the Citty of Firmo of xxij. pound weight, for about 30. yeares before, she had sent another, whereunto now at this very time, she adioyned a third, notable for bignes and weight, to wit of xxxiij. pound weight, the inscription wherof doth make the votiue gift more gracious; thus. IN PERFORMANCE OF A PVBLICKE VOVV THE CITTIE OF FIRMO

DEDICATED THIS SILVER IMAGE TO OVR B. LADY OF LORETO, FOR THE RECOVERY OF HER COMMON VVEALTH.


And these be the chiefest miracles and Donaries of the Chappell of Loreto, which I finde set downe in writing, whiles Pius the IIII. was Pope.


The testimonie of Pius V. of the House of Loreto: and the workes of Robert Saxatellus, whiles he was Pope. CHAP. XIIII.
AFTERVVARD Pius V. was aduanced to the Apostolicke Chaire,Annal. Laur. Rier. whose singular piety in all things, concerning the honour of our B. Ladie of Loreto, was very notable. For desiring nothing more then to grace the sacred Cell with some speciall gift, in the very beginning of his Raigne, he gaue worthie testimonie of the House of Loreto in a monume^t of his. Who being to consecrate Agnus Dei (as the manner is) commanded that the figure of the House of Loreto,The testimony of Pius V. supported
on the shoulders of Angells, should be imprinted in many of them, with this poesy: THE TRVE FLOVRISHING HOVSE, VVHICH VVAS IN NAZARETH. Which testimonie of such and so great a Pope, is to be esteemed so much the more, for that it was carried into most partes of the Christian world, with the figures of those sacred Agnus Dei. And not contenting himselfe with this, he carefullie committed the protection of the House of Loreto to the Cardinall of Vrbine, seriouslie exhorting him to omit nothing, which he thought might adorne and grace the same. And the good Cardinall being prone thereunto of his owne disposition, by instigation of the Pope, wholie imployed himself in that care. For when Iohn Baptista Maremontius, the successour of Pallanterius, had beene Gouernour of Loreto six monethes; and after him, Vbaldus Venturellus (who also after a few moneths departed this life) the Cardinall of Vrbine, performing the command of Pius the Pope with like greatnes and pietie of minde, appointed Robert Saxatellus,Robert Saxatellus. an actiue and a wise man, to gouerne Loreto with great authoritie. Whose worthie industry
deceiued, neither the Cardinall nor the Pope. For he made a speciall choise of Priests and Chanons, to increase the Maiesty of the Church of Loreto, and euery where sought out the chiefest Quiristers with great expences, that he might haue a Quire of Musicke inferiour to none. Also with the sacred ornature, with tables curiously painted, and with the tapestry which he bought, Maiesty to the Altar; beauty was added to the Church. And these were the chiefest ornaments of the most Maiesticall Cell.Tvvelue Images of the Sybils. Twelue images of the Sybills of Ligurian Marble of costly worke, placed in their Nicets: foure brazen leaues distended on the doores,Four brazen leaues for the dores of the Church engrauen with admirable art, by Hierome Lombardo, a notable Statuary and Caruer of that age: two Images of the Princes of the Apostles of siluer, of a cubit and a half,Tvvo Images of the Apostles. of rare worke, to be an ornament for the Altar on high festiuall daies. Moreouer to carry the most holy Eucharist honourably and reuerently to the sicke, to bury the dead with solemnity, to maintaine due deuotion to the Names of IESVS and MARIE, he instituted foure Sodalities, to wit, of Corpus Christi, of Mercie, of The name of IESVS, and of the
Rosarie of our B. Lady; appointing to euery one their proper Chappell, their sacred ornature, their place of meeting, and their speciall lawes: by which Sodalities, great good came to the people of Loreto, and honour to the Church. But the care of Saxatellus did not containe it self within the limits of the Church. For he furnished a common Library with all sortes of bookes, cut downe the hurtfull woods which remained, wholy dried vp the lakes therabout; and turning the channell of the Riuer Musion (running vnder the walls) another way, made the dwelling at Loreto far more healthfull. Then, to make free and expedite accesse for the Pilgrims which came to visit the sacred House of Loreto, he repaired all the waies that were worne out, or much decaied with long vse, partly with bricke, and partly with grauell. But albeit most of these workes were begunne vnder Pius V. yet they were finished vnder Gregory the xiij. And last of all Saxatellus made a goodly Barke to fetch great peeces of stone out of Dalmatia for the building of Loreto, and procured great store therof to be brought thither, with which the notable forefront of the Church of Loreto began to be
couered with antique worke, by Iohn Baccalino a famous Architect of those dayes.


The Hospitality and Almes of the House of Loreto. CHAP. XV.
SAXATELLVS vsing all diligence to adorne the Church,The Hospitality of the House of Loreto. the towne, and the waies of Loreto, omitted not the offices of charity and Christian benignity. For first he dayly relicued an hundred, then two hundred, and sometimes also more then three hundred poore Pilgrims, intertaining them with good Hospitality. And because the old Hospitall was assigned for men, and the multitude also of women dayly increased, he built and furnished a new Hospitall for the^. The honester sort of poore Pilgrims, whome sha^fastnes did let to aske almes openly, he relieued by secret means. Principall me^ he intertained curteously and very bou^tifully, that
you might thinke the B. Virgin of Loreto was the receiuer of all Nations, and almost of all sortes of people. Happily at no time before, did Allmighty God more concurre in helping the benignity of men: for there was such aboundance of almes and votiue money, that they did not only suffice so many and so great offices of piety and Christian benignity, but also far exceeded them. Whereby we see that wealth bestowed for Gods cause, by his goodnes doth returne more aboundantly. Therfore Saxatellus the onely Steward wholy bent to increase the State of Loreto, with the money which auaunced (that the fountaine of this benignity might be perpetual) purchased goodly and fruitfull groundes. Of the Earle Bonarello in the Territory of Recanati, he bought the Mount-Vrsus for ten thousand Crownes: for as much more, Tuscion in Osimo, and also other lands in Castro-Ficardo, a notable peece of ground (called Aqua-viua) for two thousand and two hundred Crownes, and the vineyards for three thousand. And lest the meadowes and wooddy groundes should be voide and vnoccupied, he filled them with heards of Oxen, Mares, Buflers, flocks of sheep, goates, and other cattell. Out of which, aswell other commodities, as an yearely reuenew
of almost three thousand crownes, came to the House of Loreto, to be no small furderance to her bounty, and the seruice of Almighty God. And most of these things were purchased with the money, which auaunced whiles Pius V. was Bishop. For truly that which was bountifully giuen vnto the poore, was restored with so great increase, that you would thinke God striued with men in liberality. Moreouer, as much as lay in him, Pius the Vicar of God,The Decree of Pius V. did also furder this prouidence of Allmighty God. For neither the loue, nor the intreaty of any, could euer mooue him, to turne any thing falling to the profit of the House of Loreto, into other workes of piety: so resolute was he, that vowes made to our B. Lady should be performed where they that made them receiued benefit by them; specially seeing that their votiue gifts could no where be better imploied, then in the ornaments and Hosspitality of the House of Loreto it self.



The Donaries of Pius V. and of other Princes. CHAP. XVI.
AND Pius the Popereceiued no small grace and reward of his merit towards our B. Lady of Loreto.Annal. Laur. Rier. For bewailing Michaell Bonello the Cardinall of Alexandria,The vovv and gift of Pius V. and of others. his sisters sonne, brought to the point of death with a grieuous and dangerous sicknes, he made a Vow to the B. Virgin of Loreto in his behalf. Neither in vaine. For presently the praier of the godly Pope was heard, health was restored to the Cardinall ready to die; and Pius obtayning this vow and fauour of our B. Lady, was correspondent to the speedines of the heauenly benefit, with like speede of deuotion. For which cause as soone as Michaell was able to performe that iourney by reason of his weaknes, he sent him to the B. Virgin of Loreto with a votiue gift, that he himself might witnes his miraculous recouery. The Donary
was an excelle^t suite of siluer cloth of tissue, for the Altar, and the Priest; the worthier, for that it was sent for the health of a worthy Cardinall, and from Pius. V. the Pope. Neither at any time heretofore in so few yeares, did the rest of the Cardinalls send more gifts to the sacred House of Loreto. The Cardinall of Mantua presented ornature for the Altar of cloth of gold. The Cardinall of S. George a Vestment for the Priest of the same stuffe. Cardinall Montino a suite for the Altar of cloth of gold, double curled. Cardinall Riario ornature for the Altar and the Priest of Damaske, with an Image of Christ, and siluer Candlestickes, a Cubit long, of very costly worke. Cardinall Mont-Alto (who afterward was Pope by the name of Xystus V.) double ornature for the Altar, and single for the Priest and Ministers celebrating with solemnity, of Damaske beautified and finely flourished with great golden flowers. Cardinall Sittico ab-Altempts, a Vestment for the Priest wrought with gold and siluer, like net-worke, imbrodered. Cardinall Perusino furniture for the Priest well imbrodered: another allmost like to this of the same stuffe and worke from Cardinall Paceco. Finally
Cardinall Vinerio gaue a worthy Cope, and golden Vestments, for the Priest and Ministers celebrating diuine seruice with solemnity, garnished with great flowers, curled gold and imbroderie. Neither wanted there gifts fro^ Citties and Townes. The people of Camerino brought to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, a Cope of cloth of gold. The people of Fabriano a siluer Chalice, notable for bignes and weight. The people of Viterbo ornature for the Altar made of gold and siluer. With these also came other Donaries from worthy, but from vnknowne persons, whose memory hath perished I know not by what mischance. There is a Statua almost a Cubit long of solid gold, representing a naked Child, wrought with meruailous art, the giuer whereof and the cause is not expressed. Diuers deliuer it in diuers manners. The more co^mon report is, that it was a votiue gift of the Prince Asculano, one of the Peeres of the kingdo^e of Naples: who hauing a sonne to succeed in the State of his Ancestors, was deformed with contraction of hands and feete. But his parents inuocating the B. Virgin of Loreto, and making a vow for the recouery of their Child, the vse of his feeble members was restored vnto him by miracle: and truely the shape
and fashion of the Statua it self doth fauour this report. Besides there are other such like gifts, whereof there is no memory in the monuments of Record, for ought that I know. For the booke of the Donaries of this time, comprehending almost ten yeares, either perished or els came not to my hands. Therefore of those gifts, which were giuen in the end of Pius V. and in the beginning of Gregory the xiij. I can make no mention, because I neuer receiued any memory of them, but the rest I haue deliuered with fidelity, as I receiued them out of their monuments of Record. Therefore now at this time, as I imagine, the siluer Images of Ascolo, Recanati, Monte-Santo, Bologna, Milan, and others (at this day to be seene in the Vestries) were dedicated to the B. Virgin of Loreto.



Some are deliuered from the inundation of a Riuer: others from tempest of the sea, and from theeues. CHAP. XVII.
MANIE miracles of this time are deliuered.Trad. Laur. Annal. Laur. Rier. Dominicke a Castro-Florentino a Contrey-man, dwelt in a cottage not far from the Riuer Elsa, with two companions of his. Which on a certaine night breaking ouer the bankes with great aboundance of rayne, began to ouer-flow the next fieldes far and wide; and flowing thence with great violence, carried away floting with it, whatsoeuer it met. Wheruppon Dominicke awaking out of his sleepe with the noyse of the raging streame, and putting his head out of his cottage, beheld the fields round about, ouerflowne with water, and the floud ready to come vpo^ him. So fearing lest the present deluge would make an end of him, forthwith he and his fellowes climbed vp to the toppe of the Cottage, and there remained, the danger still increasing, often
calling on the B. Virgin of Loreto. The cottage was built of wattles and straw, and ^^ood on postes not verie deepe in the ground, which the swift water raising vp from thence, carried cleane away, with those three sitting on the top of it. And the implored help of our B. Lady did not faile them. For the cottage running to and fro, with force of the wandering streame, for the space of two mile, came at last to a great tree, which they esteeming a heauenly benefit, let go the cottage, climbed into the tree with speed, and stayed there vntill the violence of the water ceasing, and the floud it self decreasing, returned into the channell againe: Wherby they were all saued, not so much by help of the tree, as by the B. Virgin, next after God. Furthermore by double benefit of the B. Virgin of Loreto, others were deliuered from imminent danger of Pirats, and from a great tempest. A ship of Ancona loaden with merchandize of Alexandria, being espied by many Pyraticall Pinnaces, as she returned to Italie, was presently beset round about, and cruellie assaulted with Ordinance and weapons. And albeit the Christia^s were much vnequal in number and strength; yet they sustained the
assault of the Barbarians in hope of heauenly alde. Meane while by mutuall exhortation, all at once called on the B. Virgin of Loreto, and made their praier more effectuall with a vow. A maruailous thing to be spoken. Forthwith such courage and strength was giuen to al their companie, that renewing the fight, they notablie resisted the force of their enemies, and by sauour of the B. Virgin were deliuered out of present danger. But hauing escaped this danger of the Pirats, and sayling along with a prosperous winde, without any feare at all, suddainly by change of weather, they were brought into greater danger by the sea it self. For not far from the towne Aulon, situated by the Acroceraunion Rocks (which, by corruption, the Inhabitants call Velona) a foule tempest threatned them present destruction, and made them all so fearefull, that they made a vow to our B. Ladie of Loreto, and resolued to go thither in pilgrimage, as saylers are wont to do. Wherby the te^pest was presently asswaged, and the shippe returning to her course came to Ancona without any harme at all; the speed wherof was such, that within the space of six houres, she sailed from Aulon to Ancona. Wherfore all the Passengers
and marriners came cheerefully to Loreto to performe their Vow, and to diuulgate and witnes this double miracle.


Many are deliuered from the Captiuity of the Turkes. CHAP. XVIII.
THESE were deliuered from the danger of the Turkes,Annal. Laur. Rier. but others from their captiuity. Michaell Boleta no meane Cittizen of Catara, being taken by the Turkes in the towne Cabala, remayned captiue not far from Galipolis, and when he had serued fiue yeares, he was so wearied with captiuity, that he began to long for liberty, and with two fellow-Captiues consulted about their flight: who finding an empty vessell in the harbour without a keeper, went into it as they had agreed, and speedily thrust it from the shore. But their flight was not vnknowne to the Turkes, who out of hand with two swist and well furnished Pirats
barks, made hast to pursue their slaues flying away; and there wanted not much, that Michaell and his fellowes had not beene taken and brought backe againe by the Barbarians, to be punished with great torture and paine. Wheruppon by his persuasion, all besought pardon and helpe of God and his glorious Mother, the B. Virgin of Loreto. A strange thing to be spoke^ and seene: For by and by a foule tempest so inraged the sea and the wind, that it droue the Barbarians ships far away. And the thing it self well shewed that it was sent on the enemies by miracle. For at the self same time, and in the same course of the sea, the Turkes were tossed with the furious waues, and the Christians sailed on with great quietnes of the sea, and with a prosperous gale: Who looking back to see how far of the Barbarians were, as by the Turbants of their heads (which the Turkes vse in steed of hattes) which sometimes seeing to be tossed vp, then to fall downe againe, they perceiued that their enemies were tumbled with the furious waues, and striued with the aduerse weather, not so sollicitous for the flight of others, as for their owne safety, so greatly did the terrour which Almighty God cast into them by miracle, auert their
mindes from pursuing others, to care how they might escape with their owne liues. Wherby not onely with the winde, but also with the help of our B. Ladie, the Christians came to Catara with incredible speed; and being very mindefull of their vow, and of the heauenlie benefit, went spedily to Loreto, where righty receauing the Christian mysteries, they gaue manifold thankes to the B. Virgin, and recounted her exceeding benefit.


A man who was hanged is deliuered from death. CHAP. XIX.
EVEN life it self was restored to others,Annal. Laur. Rier. when they suffered capitall punishment. Thomas a Venetian, being Captaine of a Band of souldiours in the garrison of Zebenico, was not able to order the rude souldiours; who being frighted with newes of the Turkish nauy comming to assault that fortification, ranne all away, and Thomas seeing the garrison forsaken, out of hand with one souldiour his companion
(which onelie remained) went to Iadera, commonlie called Zara, to declare to the Generall of the Venetian Fleete the escape of the souldiours, and the danger of Zebenico, thinking nothing of his owne perill. But the Generall being prouoked to anger by such a message, forthwith commanded that Thomas and his companion should be hanged; yet giuing time to prouide for their soules, as the manner is. Wheruppon Thomas hauing rightly purified his soule by sacred Confession, inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto, and making a vow, put his necke into the halter, with vndoubted hope of heauenly help. The rope was fastened to the end of the yard of a shippe, and the yard was lifted vp with Thomas hanging thero^, hauing great weight of iron tied to his feete. Wheruppon the hangman hoysing vp the vard, and suddainly letting it fall againe of purpose three or foure times, squatted the body of him whome he was executing: whereby all thinking him to be dead, (for he had hung foure houres) he was taken downe from the torture to be buried. But albeit this which we are now to deliuer may seeme to surpasse all credit; yet trulie neither the power of God, nor his
B. Mother. For he who was thought to be dead, was found aliue and lusty, when the souldiour who was his companion in punishment and vsed in like manner of torture, had giuen vp the ghost. Thomas therefore leauing all astonished with the admiration of so great a wonder, went forthwith to Loreto, to giue due thankes to God and the B. Virgin, by whose immortall benefit, he was preserued in this mortall life. And the thing remayneth well witnessed among the Priests of Loreto. Knowing many more not vnlike to this, I passe them ouer, because they seeme not so well witnessed, as to be deliuered to memory by him, who will set downe nothing without good ground.



Two are deliuered from very great danger of death. CHAP. XX.
BVT this is well knowne and witnessed,Annal. Laur. Rier. though seldome heard of from the time of the Apostles, that the old example of Peter the Apostle deliuered out of prison by miracle, in a sort should be renewed in our time. The yeare after Christs Natiuity 1570. a certaine person, Noble both by bloud and deedes (Authors deliuer not his name, I thinke that himself would haue it suppressed) was detayned in irons, by one of the chiefest Peeres of Italy, and charged with false crimes before a wicked and a wrathfull Iudge. Therefore without doubt thinking that he should be put to death, he called on the B. Virgin of Loreto, beseeching her that before he departed this life, he might haue opportunity to visit the Cell of Loreto. And the godly prayers of the innocent, were pleasing to the Mother of God. For in
the night, sound sleepe came vpon his body oppressed with anxiety of mind, and in his sleepe a beautifull shape of our B. Lady of Loreto was presented vnto him, who mollified his mournfull hart with great ioy, and presently breaking of his fetters, and opening the dores of the prison by miracle (and that which was donne out of sleepe, was shewed to him that was a sleepe) compelled him to go out of the prison, admiring the wonder of so great a thing; and after he was set at liberty, brought him to the next street of the Citty, yet fast a sleep, and then in continent vanished out of his sight. Wherwith the man awaking, and seeing himself deliuered out of irons and prison it self, perceiued that no vaine imagination was shewed him in his rest. Therfore giuing harty thankes to the B. Virgin, and exulting with ioy after so great sorrow, he aduentured to go vnto his owne House. But knowing that he should be sought with great dilige^ce by the Officers of the Prince, to be punished more cruelly as a fugit^ue, calling againe on the B. Virgin of Loreto, he did a memorable act. Betimes in the morning (hauing before armed himself with heauenly confidence)
of his owne accord he went vnto the enraged Prince, who was greatly astonished to see him, and related vnto him the whole matter in order as it happened. Neither did the B. Virgin faile to help her Client in so great danger. For the Prince thought it sacriledge to hurt him, whome the Mother of God would haue to be saued; supposing that it was no small token of his innocency, and being assisted with heauenly grace: Seeing, saith he, the B. Virgin of Loreto hath deliuered thee by so great a miracle, I also by my sente^ce do deliuer thee: Go therfore, and make hast to that most maiesticall Cell, as thou hast vowed, and remember to make the Mother of God fauorable vnto vs. The innocent man being bound by double vow, came to Loreto, to wash away his offences by Co^fession, where he ioyfully performed his vowes to our B. Lady, and related so worthy a miracle to Riera the Penitentiary, who deliuered it to writing for euerlasting memory to posterity. At that time a Gentleman of Spaine (whose name we suppresse to saue his credit) being condemned to die for a wicked fact, wherof he was guilty, was kept in prison, hourly expecting execution. In the meane time, the B. Virgin of Loreto comming
to his minde (of whose wonderfull vertue, he had heard much talke long since in Italy, by report of others) made him to conceiue good hope of life and liberty, and to beseech pardon of God and his B. Mother, and to intreat mercy and help of both; making this vow with his praier, assoone as possibly he might, out of Spaine (where then he was) he would go a foote to the House of Loreto, and liue by almes like a poore Pilgrim. An incredibile thing to be said: within three houres, the iudges being reconciled to the delinquent by miracle, reuoked and disanulled the sentence, and deliuered the offender from punishment and prison. But hauing made this vow in his feare, in his security he was so vnmindefull therof, that he had almost forgotten so great a benefit with long delay, had not Allmighty God, iustly reuenging him for his irreuerence, punished his delay and his forgetfullnes. For as he was shooting of an hargabuse, the iron barrell breaking in his hands without any harme at al, put him in mind both of the present perill auoided by heauenly protection, and also of the old benefit and vow. Whereuppon in continent true deuotion, and the dread of God offended with him, entring into his hart, without furder
delay made him to set forward towards Loreto as he had promised, to performe his Vow to the Mother of God, where he himself declared the whole matter to the said Riera, euen as I haue related it.


The manifold help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, in the victory gotten of the Turkes by sea. CHAP. XXI.
AT those times in the extreme danger of the Christian State, the power and help of the B. Virgin of Loreto was most notable. For whe^ Selime the Turkish Emperour had taken Cyprus by force of armes, he threatned destruction to the rest of the State of Veni^e, and of the Christian world. Therfore Pius V. thinking to withstand the common danger with common forces, ioyned with the Venetians, and with the King of Spaine against the Turkish war,
and began to make great preparation for it. Duke Marcus Antonius Columna most illustrious among the Romanes for parentage and fame, being Generall of the Popes Nauy, was commanded to set forward against the Turks with all speed. Whose wife, Felix Vrsina, a woman of like Nobility, fearing that she might be depriued of husband and children, thought it her safest course to recurre to the B. Virgin of Loreto, in so many aduentures of war by sea. Whereuppon she came to Loreto with an honourable traine, not doubting but by the intercession of the Mother of God, the King of Heaue^ would be merciful to her husba^d. After she had receiued the sacred mysteries, she remayned deuoutly all night in the most sacred Cell, hu^bly beseeching pardon and help of God and his B. Mother for her self and her husba^d. And assoone as she had reuere^ced the B. Virgin with feruent deuotion and votiue gifts, in honour of our B. Lady, she was God-mother at Baptisme to a yong man of the Hebrew nation, on whome bestowing a chaine of gold, she receiued him into her family. Neither was her supplication and fauour vnrewarded. For within a short time, she obtained her vow, and receiued her husband not only safely returned from so
cruell a battaile with victorie, but also with great ioy, beheld him triumphing with notable pompe in the Cittie of Rome, after the ancient manner of the Romanes. But in the same warre, Pius the Pope receiued as certaine help from the B. Virgin of Loreto, in behalfe of the publicke cause, as she did in the priuate matter. For he commanded the Christian nauie to be in readines, and verie carefull about the battaile, knowing verie well that the Christian State did depend therof. Meane time Pius V. the Pope (pious indeed) vsed all diligence to pacifie Almightie God both by publicke and priuate prayer: speciallie in the most maiesticall Cell of Loreto he co^manded that continuall prayer should be made vnto the Mother of God, that in the extreme danger of their State, the godly Mother would vouchsafe to assist and aide the Christians. The hope of Pius the Pope, and of Godly men deceiued them not. For when the battaile at sea was begunne, a thing not so much of humane, as of heauenly vertue and fauour was seene. For the winde turning for the Christians (which before the battaile was against them) and beating the smoake of the ordinance, and the muskets
of the enemies on their owne heads, a most famous victorie was gotten of Barbarians: most of the enemies were slaine, their shipps sunke or taken, a great prey, a multitude of Captiues, aboue ten thousand Christians were deliuered from their seruitude, wherof trulie the far greater part, came afterward to Loreto to performe their vowes. And it is certaine, that the very day of the fight, before the trumpets sounded, the Christian slaues whome the Turkes had condemned to the oar, made vowes to our B. Lady of Loreto for their liberty; and the like also did many Captaines and souldiours of the Christian Nauy for life and victory, that none may doubt, but next after God, so worthy a victory was due to the Mother of God. Wherefore not onely the slaues of the Turkes which rowed, but also many souldiours and Christian Captaines came to Loreto to giue due thankes to God and our B. Lady, and to performe their vowes. And both the one and the other would haue monuments of the heauenly benefit to remaine there.Annal. Laur. Rier. For some left with their Deliueresse, the chaines wherewith they were fettered to the oars; and others dedicated vnto her, as author of the victory, the
spoile which they got from the enemy. And this was the last, and I know not, whether the greatest of all the humane workes of Pius Quintus.


The sacred House is adorned by Gregory the xiij. with Indulgences and notable wayes. CHAP. XXII.
GREGORIE the xiij. succeeded Pius:Annal. Laur. Rier. who as in the longnesse of his raigne; so in deuotion towards the B. Virgin of Loreto, and in greatnes of minde, he passed the former Popes. For he had nothing in greater estimation, then most munificently to adorne the most famous Church of the whole world, not onely in confirming the Indulgences of former Popes by his authority, but also by his wisdome augmenting them, and giuing remission of sinnes to all that rightly visited the sacred House of Loreto. Moreouer he increased the authority of the Penitentiaries, and gaue them faculty to absolue all religious persons from reserued sinnes. This
truly was a worthy fauour of Gregory, who publishing the celebrity of the Iubiley, for the 75. yeare of this age, and suspe^ding all the Indulgences of the whole world in fauour of the Cittie, as the manner is, thought it good to exempt this one House of Loreto, which, no lesse then in other yeares, he would haue to enioy all her Priuiledges this holy yeare of the Roman celebrity, lest the frequencie to Rome should diminish peoples deuotion and reuerence to our B. Lady of Loreto. Also when the yeare of Iubiley was ended, he granted that very Indulgence, which was at Rome to the Church of Loreto, which many gayning at Rome, might get againe at Loreto, if they performed the conditions. And shortlie after, Gregory began a magnificent worke worthy such a Pope, and the Maiesty of Loreto it self. For well knowing that euen in many places of the Popes Dominions, the waies which went to Loreto were so difficult and strait, that they scarce affoarded free passage to horse or man, and thinking it would be glorious to B. Mary of Loreto, to haue them so broad and so repaired, that it might easilie and securely be gone vnto with coaches; he opened and playned the chiefest wayes through
Rockes and Cliffes, with such Princely cost, that they may be compared to any munificent workes of the ancie^t Romanes in this kind. For in the very toppe of the Apennines, the way is so broad, that wagons meeting togeather, may passe without any danger at all. Whereby the Pope effected (which vnles we saw donne, none would belieue could be donne) that with Chariots and Coaches here might be free passage ouer the Apennine Mountaines fro^ the Citty, not onely into Picene, but also into Aemilia, Lo^bardy, Polony, and Germany it self. So that now out of the remotest partes of the Christian world, many come in wagons and Coaches, to visit the sacred House of Loreto, the commodity of the way inuiting those, whome before the difficulty therof did hinder. Meantime by the cheefest wayes about Loreto (already couered with grauell or stone) Saxatellus made goodly fountaines, to be no small ornament to the Pilgrimage of Loreto, and comfort to the Pilgrims themselues.



The celebrity of Loreto in the yeare of Iubiley CHAP. XXIII.
IN the meane time, whiles these waies were in hand the yeare 1576. which was remarkable for the celebrity of the Iubiley, without the Cittie, such a multitude of people resorted to Loreto, as the like was neuer remembred. In very deed the pompe was so notable, that it will be memorable to all posterity. Euery day, seauen, eight, and sometimes ten Citties, little Townes and Villages, came in seuerall Companies to Loreto, bringing to our B. Lady siluer Crownets, great torches of wax couered with siluer and golden coine, sacred vestments, Chalices, and other gifts. And the order and ornature of them that came with this solemnity, betokened great piety and religion. For the holy Sodalities themselues, were graced with seuerall Companies and Ensignes, and euerie company adorned their Society, not
onely with notable Crosses glittering with gold and siluer, but also with curious Banners, and with Images of Angells and Saintes. Likewise in all the said Companies there were some that went barefooted, others that with disciplines did beat their naked and bloudy backs, and others that song deuout hymnes and praiers to God and our B. Lady with great solemnity. But among all, the Sodalities of Picene did excell; who represented the sacred Histories both of ancient and later times, by speciall persons, orderly placed here and there amongst them, and with great grace of the Actors, shewed most gratefull spectacles, to heauen and earth, in the Cloister of the Church of Loreto. There is a towne in Picene of no small reputation and fame, which hath chosen S. Genesius (of a stage-plaier a Martyr) for her Patron, whose name she beareth. Who with godly zeale and religious emulation imitating the ancient praise of her Patron, deserued the chiefest commendation, for holie spectacles and sacred pompe, of all the Sodalities that came to the House of Loreto. For about a thousand people of this towne (besides women and the disordered multitude) comming to the sacred House of Loreto with singular deuotion, were, as
it were, a wonder to them that met them. Their solemnity was this. Many went before in the habit of Penitents, carrying the figures of the torments and death of Christ our Lord, who attiring themselues in sackcloath, went in a long and a well disposed companie, sprinckling their heades with ashes, barefooted, and beating their backs with continuall stripes. After whome followed three most adorned Sodalities, garnished with diuers liueries and colours, and euerie company was graced with Crosses and Banners, which glittered with gold and siluer. All the Companies a like did shine with the burning torches of their fellowes, and sounded far and neere with worthy Quires of musicke. Next went, as it were, three Bands of men. The first carried the ancient figures and mysteries of the sacred Historie which they represented:Annal. Laur. Rier. the other, worthie docume^ts of vertue, out of the Gospell, and Ecclesiasticall Histories: the third, the glorie of the Martyrs and of the milita^t Church, and the noble victories, which they got of their persecutours. The Image of the persons and thing represented, were expressed so liuely, that they seemed not to be shewed, but to be donne and acted, so in very deed, that you would
thinke that those spectacles had not beene fained for the present, but that they had beene true indeed, and donne in their very times. A pageant of the triumphant Church set forth with Ensignes and ornaments of euery kind, and with meruailous variety of the things and persons represented, did conclude the last Companie. Christ our Sauiour rising from death to life, was represented with great Maiesty in a triumphall Chariot; who sitting ouer the globe of the world, shyned on euery side with glorious brightnes, and lifting vp his right hand, seemed to blesse the people that met him. About whome, little children with instruments, representing the countenances of Angells, delighted all with their most sweet and pleasant melody. And a great multitude of Martyrs, and Saints of euery order and kind, of men, of women, of Virgins, followed the Chariot in Crownes of glorie and with Ensignes of victory, inuiting the multitude of the beholders, to the like glorie by their happy example. Truly all the action was not only a spectacle, but a great instigation to piety and deuotion.



The notable piety of Don Iohn de Austria in visiting the House of Loreto. CHAP. XXIIII.
Annal. Laur. Rier.THE House of Loreto was not more reuerenced with these spectacles of the people, than with the presence of Princes. Don Iohn de Austria, a man most worthily deseruing so noble a Father as Charles the Emperour (though not more famous by his Fathers glory, than his owne vertue) by reason of a vow came this yeare to visit the House of Loreto;The piety and deuotio^ of Don Iohn de Austria and his gifts. who fiue yeares before being to fight against the Turkes in a battaile by sea, had made a vow to the B. Virgin to visit her sacred House, if he were liuing, when the victory was gotten of the Barbarians. But hauing obtained this vow, publicke affaires one after an other hindered him, that vntill this time he could not performe his promise. Now therfore
being at Naples with a little more quietnes and freedome of minde, neither the horrour of the sharp winter, nor the care of publicke and priuate busines, nor the intreaty of the Nobility and people, could make him to giue ouer this iourney to the House of Loreto in the depth of winter, whe^ the waies were couered with ice and snow, and riuers for the most part, ouerflowen. And foule tempestuous weather, made the piety of the good Prince more notable. For passing on horsbacke by the Port of Recanati, and beholding the House of Loreto a far of, with great deuotion, he put of his hat, to salute and reuerence the B. Virgin Mother of God: and setting aside all care towards himself, he turned it to the veneration of the heauenly Queene. For neither the raine, nor the sharpnes of the weather, could once moue him to couer his head, so greatly had he deuoted himself, and his head to the B. Virgin, by whose protection (as he belieued) he was preserued aliue and well. Assoone as he came to the sacred House, he washed away all the sinnes of his former life by Confession, and gaue manifold thankes to our B. Lady, offering a great summe of money when he performed his vow, and both by word and
example stirred his companions to like deuotion. And after he had dutifully performed this vow, he returned to Naples, carryng with him great loue and affection to the B. Virgin of Loreto.


The singular pietie and munificence of Ioane de Austria the great Duchesse of Tuscanie. CHAP. XXV.
AT that time most Noble Wome^ did not yield to Princes in piety and deuotion towards the B. Virgin of Loreto. Foure yeares before (for it behooueth him that followeth the course of things and persons, some times to neglect the order of the times) in the entrance and beginning of the Popedome of Gregory the xiij. Ioane de Austria the daughter of Ferdina^d the Emperour, and wife of Francis the Great Duke of Tuscany, came to Loreto, intending to satisfy her lo^g desire of seeing the B. Virgin. Wheruppo^ by the Popes co^mandement, she was receiued with Princely intertainme^t in
all his Dominions, by Paul Odescalco Bishop of Atria and Pena; who for that purpose was sent from the Citty by the Pope himself, that he might accompany her to the most desired House of the B. Virgin. Vnder the walls of Recanati, the godly woman beholding the House of Loreto a far of, forthwith came out of her Coach, and kneeling downe, reuerently saluted the Mother of God: from whence performing the rest of that iourney on foote, all her traine followed the example of their Lady, who came into Loreto in a white and a plaine garment, shewing therby the great purity of her mind. Her modesty was also very singular. For being brought into the most sacred House of the B. Virgin by two Bishops, without regard of Cushins or Tapestry, she fell downe on her knees on the bare floore; deuoutly worshipped the King and the Queene of heauen, in time past the Inhabitants, but now the Gouernours of that House: with flowing teares besought pardon for herself and her hu^band, and by praier intreated peaceable wedlocke and issue-male. Soone after deuoutly receiuing the sacred Mysteries, she spent all the night following in praier, with humble supplication before the B.
Virgin, doing also the like the two daies and nights that followed: such strength did her feruent deuotion and piety bring vnto her. And at her departure,The vvorthy gifts or the great Duchesse of Tuscany. she hung vp two harts of gold in golden chaines, to be a monument, that she was either most deare to her and her husband, or els that the B. Virgin, the author of concord, would make her nusbands hart such a one vnto her, as she knew hers to be vnto him. And not cote^ting herself with these Donaries, she departed fully determined to honour the B. Virgin of Loreto with some yearly gift, which as lo^g as she liued, she did more carefully the^ she purposed. A worthy Image of siluer of Christ Crucified, with a great Crosse of Ebony, foure curious Candlestickes of siluer, of a cubite and a half, ornaments for the Bishop, Priest, Ministers, and the Altar, made of gold and siluer, double curled and imbrodered, a golden garment for the B. Virgin made with meruailous art; also other furniture for the Altar and the holy Chalices, beautified with imbrodery, iewells, gold, and siluer, were the worthiest gifts of Ioane de Austria: whose praier and Donaries obtained her desire. For soone after this Pilgrimage to Loreto, she had issue-male by
her husba^d, a patterne of his Mothers piety, borne in expectance of his Fathers, and almost of a Kingly State; who a while suruiuing his Mother, erected the mindes of his people to the hope of vndoubted felicity. But afterward the Mother dying, and by the secret iudgment of God, the yong child also following his Mother, filled Tuscany with sorrow and lamentation. And Ioane de Austria did not onely adorne the House of Loreto with her act, but also with her example. For not long after Margaret de Austria (that out of the same family examples may be shewed, not only of vertue in men, but also of piety in women) the daughter of Charles the V. and wife of Octauius Farnesius Duke of Parma, came to Loreto with a great company of Noble me^: where rightly receauing the mysteries of Confession and the most holy Eucharist, for the space of three daies, she was allwaies present in the Church at diuine seruice, and in the most Maiesticall Chappell it self praied to God and his B. Mother, not so long,The gift of Margaret de Austria. as deuoutly: and last of all putting a great quantity of gold into the arke, honoured the B. Virgin with gifts worthy such a woman.



The Duchesse of Loraine being brought to Loreto sicke of the Palsey, is cured by Miracle. CHAP. XXVI.
THIS praise was not proper to the women of Austria and Italy.Annal. Laur. Rier. Victo. Brigant. Christerne or Christine the daughter of the King of Denmarke, and of the Emperours sister, Charles the V. being Duchesse of Loraine, and a woman of manlike valour, exceeding piety, great age, and much hindered with age and the palsey determined to come to Loreto to performe her vow: who at the intreaty of her friends, would neuer giue consent that the Pope himself should exchange that vow into other workes of piety; so feruent was her desire to see the B. Virgin of Loreto. Therefore assoone as she and her most Princely traine came into Italy (but specially into Picene) she made hast to the place, whether
she was bound, well hoping to recouer perfect health, by the help of our B. Lady. Wheruppon in the very entrance of the most sacred House, her soule was not only replenished with heauenly ioy, but also her body restored to perfect health. And perceyuing that the vse and strength of those members (wherin she was molested) was restored vnto her by miracle, first beyond her custome she stood on her feet by her self alone, to make triall of her strength: then seeing the thing succeeded well, without any help at all, she went ioyfully about the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, all her familiar friends admiring the miracle, and greatly extolling the worthy benefit of God and his B. Mother. But Christine, whome that thing did most concerne, entring againe into the most Maiesticall Chappell, with flowing teares of ioy, fell downe before the Queene of heauen; made no end of praising the diuine benefit, no end of thanksgiuing; and dedicated her self and all hers to God and his B. Mother. And afterward that a monume^t of so great a benefit might euer remaine at Loreto, in sight of the B. Virgin, she hung vp in a chaine of gold, a great hart crowned with solid gold, which for that purpose she
brought with her from home: which donne, she layd out Princely gifts, a Crownet of vnions and orient pearles, a Carkanet of precious stones, siluer vestments of very curious damaske-worke for the Altar, Priest and Ministers sacrificing with solemnity: and last of all, she increased these Princely gifts with a great summe of money. Neither did she depart thence vnrewarded. For Pope Gregory the xiij. sent vnto her from the Citty a most ample Iubiley, which she with her whole traine (in which were almost fiue hu^dred people) rightly receiued. But the sorrowful message of the death of Sebastian, King of Portugall (her sisters sonne) did not a little trouble her hart being made most ioyfull with these heauenly gifts: yet in so great and suddaine a griefe, the worthy vertue of the couragious and godly woman was not a little manifested: because from mourning for the King her Cousin, she imployed her self to help his soule, and celebrated his funeralls with the greatest pompe that might be; but so, that in the House of Loreto it self she procured very many masses to be said for him. And finally being inflamed with Christia^ charity, she her self did twice visit the hospitall of Loreto, bestowing on euery sicke
body two Crownes in golde, with no lesse praise of humanity then liberality.


Two, throwne very dangerously from their horses, are deliuered from death. CHAP. XXVII.
IT is lesse admirable if you consider the persons,Annal. Laur. Rier. but if the things themselues, more meruailous, which happened few yeares before.The Lady Susan Thainonio is deliuered from death The Lady Susan wife of Iames Thainonio a worthy Knight of Cordauella, being throwne to the ground by the horse wheron she rode, came to exceeding danger by so great a fall: For she lost all sense, by the breaking or disioynting of her bones, and by little and little the vitall heate forsaking all the body, the skillfullest Phisitians despaired of her life. Wheruppon the Priest recommending her (as the vse is) to God and his Saintes, and now and then sprikling her with holy water, prouided for the saluation of her soule, being ready to depart. Meanwhile Iames much grieuing the misfortune of his
most deere wife, entred into the next Church, where kneeling downe, and lifting vp both eyes and handes to heauen with many teares he deuoutlie inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto, promising and vowing to go to the House of Loreto, if she preserued her by her helpe, whome no humane helpe could saue. His vow had good effect. For he had scarce made this promise, but the woman began to be better, and in short time recouered, hauing her bones and lymmes cured by miracle. And because the Knight would in no wise neglect his vow, he and his wife came to Loreto the yeare 1576. (famous and memorable for the Iubiley) and brought to the Mother of God for a votiue gift, a siluer plate, with the Image of the B. Virgin of Loreto, by which on the one side, the Image of the man, on the other the Image of the woman prayin deuoutly: And the plate it self hath a short inscription which doth briefly relate the miracle, for a monument therof to posterity. About the same time there happened such an other.Nicolas Pauonius is also deliuered from death Nicolas Pauonius a worthy Cittizen of Catana, managing his horse among his companions, was cast headlong on the ground by the horse falling in his swift course; where he
lay without life with the bruize of his body, and the bursting of his arme all to peeces. Forthwith his seruants tooke him vp like to one giuing vp the ghost, and carried him home, hauing little vse of reason, and also sent presently for Surgeons, who being ouercome with the greatnes of his danger, pronounced that there was no way but one. Wheruppon by persuasion of his friends, Pauonius called on our B. Lady of Loreto, with this vow, if he recouered his health, he promised to go to the House of Loreto, to giue her thankes. And soone after, a most pleasant sleepe came vpon him, in which a glorious forme of the B. Virgin of Loreto was presented vnto him, who with the touch of her hand presently cured his grieued members. And the euent shewed that it was no deceitfull dreame. For Nicolas awaking out of his sleepe, and fynding that his lymmes were cured by miracle, lept ioyfully out of his bed, made hast to Loreto and performed his vow.



A certaine person, who was taken out of the hands of his enemies, when he had receaued twelue deadly wounds, is cured by miracle. CHAP. XXVIII.
HERE followeth another in another kind,Annal. Laur. Rier. of speciall admiratio^. Iohn Philip Ambrose, a Neapolita^, a ma^ of small substance, but greatly deuoted to the B. Virgin of Loreto, the 79. yeare of this age, going vnarmed amongst his armed enemies, was most tumultuously circumuented and wounded to death. For being thrust in with many wounds, how could he be far from his end, whe^ he had none in his co^panie to aid him? and they were so inraged, that they would not cease to wound him, vntill they saw him throughly dead. Wheruppon Ambrose being at the point of death, deuoutly called on the B. Virgin of Loreto; and his praier was to good effect. For
he was presently taken out of the hands of these furious men, and by heauenly protectio^ escaped present death. He himself (as afterward he reported) perceiued that he was carried miraculously from thence about an arrowes flight,The present help of our B. Lady at the houre of death. where his friends receauing him, conueyed him hom languishing and half dead. But for all that he had not escaped the danger of death, vnles he had gotten new helpe from our B. Lady in the said perill. For his enemies had giuen him no lesse then twelue woundes, wherof many were deadly, which the Physitians beholding, vtterly despaired of his life. But the sicke man calling to mind the heauenly helpe, which he had lately obtained of our B. Lady, belieued that so great a miracle, was to some great purpose. Therfore whence he receaued help against the weapons of his enemies, thence he began to hope for cure of his woundes. And behold a new miracle. For presently the B. Virgin, whome he deuoutly inuocated, making heauenly salue for his sores, made him who was held for a dead man to arise out of his bed safe and sound, and to go in continent to Loreto, to performe his vow, and to be a worthy document of the help which he had receaued from Loreto: For
twice at the same time, he was deliuered from death it self, and by knowne and vnknowne, was no more called Iohn Philip, but Lazarus reuiued.


The Mother and the Daughter are deliuered from death, others from other diseases. CHAP. XXIX.
Annal. Laur. Rier.ABOVT the same time the B. Virgin of Loreto was as fauourable in curing of diseases as wounds. There was one Melido a Cittizen of Guasto in Abruzzo, whose wife and daughter were afflicted with so grieuous and long a feuer, that being in great extremity, and hauing hallowed Candles burning at their heads (as the vse is) both at once were vpon departing. But Melido, who loued them both entirely, purposing to trie the last refuge of all, with great sorrow sell downe on his knees, and with gushing teares implored the help of the (...) Virgin of Loreto, making a vow with his pra^er, and putting
great co^fidence in her benignity and help. His hope deceaued him not. A meruailous thing. Suddainly his wife and his daughter were deliuered out of danger, and in few dayes perfect well; and being brought to Loreto by Melido himself, the yeare 1579. they performed to the B. Virgin Mother of God, the vow which he made for their recouerie. The yeare following Iohn Peter of Florence hauing a daughter by Anne. Bassa of Verselli, his wife, blind in both her eyes, assoone as she was rightly baptized, Anne her Mother deuoutly inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto with this vow; If sight of one eye onely were giuen vnto her child, she promised to bring her to Loreto with the first conueniencie. It appeared straight that her vow was pleasing to our B. Lady. For by and by, without the helpe of man,A blind infant is restored vnto her eight. the blind infant began to see with one eye. And the Mother being very carefull of her vow went spedily to Loreto, carrying her one eyed daughter in her lap, to be an occasion of a new miracle, and not onely a witnes of the olde. For the neerer she came to the House of Loreto, the better the girle saw, so that when she entred into the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, to giue her due thankes (which was on the 3. of the Nones
of May the 80. yeare of this age) the child saw perfectly with the right eye, and instantly also began to see with the left; so much doth God and his B. Mother surpasse the vowes of godly people. Here followeth another in a different kind, but peraduenture no lesse a miracle. Angelus Bernardinus,A childe doth get vp a bone that stucke ouerthvvart in his throte. of Aemilia, had a litle sonne, who as he was eating, had a bone (of meate, as I imagine, for it is not related) stucke ouerthwart in his throate: so that by no humane help it could be pulled forth. And the swelling of his throate, bringing with it an ague, tormented the child so pittifully, that he liued in litle hope of amendement. But the Father beholding his most deere sonne at the point of death, with flowing teares suppliantly implored the B. Virgin of Loreto for his recouery. And without delay, the child coughing vp the bone, was deliuered from the imminent danger by miracle, and out of hand was brought to Loreto by his Father, and presented before our B. Lady; where, as he was performing his vow, the ague which came with the other griefe was also taken away, that the benefit might be doubled. There is another more vsuall, but yet not to be omitted. Peter Maria of Florence
pyning away with lo^g paine of the goute,The gout is cured. was so taken in his feete, that without the helpe of crutches, he was not able to goe: who at last reiecting the help of Physitians, earnestly inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto. His praier had effect. Forth with the disease was miraculously taken away, and he recouering the vse of his feete, went to Loreto to giue harty thankes to the B. Virgin, and in token of the Miracle, before her most sacred Chappell, hung vp the very Crutches whereon he was accustomed to layne, when he was sicke.


Three Citties are deliuered from the plague. CHAP. XXX.
Annal. Laur. Rier.AT those times the B. Virgin of Loreto did not only impart present help to particular Cittizens, but euen to whole Citties, in time of their distresse. A great sicknes spreading much abroad the 77. yeare of this age, and going almost
ouer all Sicily, wasted her most noble Citties with continuall funeralls, to shew dreadfull spectacles to them that remained aliue.Palermo is deliuered from the plague. Whereuppon the Citty of Palermo seeing the sicknes still encrease, and doing what she could to appease the wrath of Almighty God, by vow and inuocation of the B. Virgin of Loreto happily escaped that danger, and faithfully performed her vow. At this day there is extant a great siluer plate of 9. pound weight, wherein is expressed the purtraite of our B.The gift of the Cittizens of Palermo Lady of Loreto, sitting on a House: vnder which is a worthy figure of the Citty Palermo, with this inscription, in token that she was deliuered from the sicknes by heauenly protection.

THE HAPPIE CITTIE OF PALERMO METROPOLITAN OF TRINACRIA, DEDICATED IT TO THE B. VIRGIN OF LORETO FORESCAPING THE PLAGVE, BY HER PROTECTION, THE YEARE OF OVR SALVATION M.D.LXXVII.

Almost two yeares after, Puy no meane Citty of France, distant three daies iourney from Lions, was made partaker of the like
help of the B. Virgin of Loreto in greater danger. For being wasted of her inhabitants and Cittizens with a long and a vehement plague, she seemed not far from vtter desolation. Therfore the Cittizens (whome the sicknes had spared) being frighted with so cruell and desperate and euill, thought it most conuenient, to pacity the wrath of Alm. God by the intercession of his most B. Mother. Wheruppon by common consent, making a solemne vow to the B. Virgin of Loreto, and prostrating themselues euery where in their Churches, by humble praier they intreated pardon of their sinnes, and an end of that sicknes. Neither in vaine. For assoone as they had made this vow, their Citty was deliuered and restored to her former state. Whereuppon certaine men brought votiue gifts to Loreto,The gift of the Citty of Puy. with publicke testimony, to be a monument of the vow of the Cittizens of Puy, and of their deliuery from the sicknes, by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Lions a chiefe and a noble Citty of France,The Citty of Lions is deliuered from the plague. was neither free from the common calamity, nor deuoid of the protection of Loreto. A great plague consuming housholders, rich and poore, made the Magistrates (void of humane help) to turne peoples harts and vowes
to God and his B. Mother. So by a publicke vow, which they made for deliuerance of their Citty, they implored the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto: whose praier was presently heard, the infected cured, and the plague taken away.The gift of the Citty of Lios. Whereuppon the 81. of this age, the gratefull Citty sent a votiue gift to the B. Virgin, neither vnbeseeming the deuotion of the Cittize^s, nor the magnificence of the Citty it self; to wit: a Chalice of siluer, engrauen and guilt, excelling others, aswell for workmanship as greatnes, and other gifts of no small price, in token of the help which they receiued from Loreto, and of their deuotion to the B. Virgin herself. In the meane season, Robert Saxatellus being created Bishop of Pisaurus, Iulius Amicus was elected Gouernour of Loreto, who albeit he had no ioyfull times by reason of the plague of Lombardy; yet in his time the sacred House it self, was not only well adorned, but also the sacred furniture and ornaments therof had good increase. The Princesse of Venusia preseted certaine eyes of gold, and a Crownet of siluer.The donaries of others. Sforza Pallauicino a siluer Galley of 5. pound weight. Card. Sittico Ab-Alte^ps for health restored to a child his neere kinsma^, his Image of siluer, of ten pound weight. Delia Sanseuerina Countesse of
Briatico, a worthy lampe of siluer hanging, of xxij. pound weight. The Cardinall of Est, a golden hart. The Marquesse of Guasto a Casket of siluer, about xvj. pou^d weight. The Princesse of Sulmo, a siluer bason and ewer, of no meane workmanship and weight. Card. Riario, a golden Crosse, notable for fashion and valew. All the lesser I omit, as a thing not worth the labour to recount.




THE FIFT BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF LORETO: Collected by the Reuerend F. HORATIVS TVRSELLINVS Of the Society of IESYS.

The gifts of the Cardinall of Vrbine, and of other Princes. CHAP. I.
THE death and piety of the Patron,Cod. Laur. Vict. Brig. augmented the wealth of the House of Loreto. For the Cardinall of Vrbine (to be no lesse liberall to the B. Virgin of Loreto at his death,The gift of the Card. of Vrbine. than he had beene in his life) giuing most of the sacred ornature of his Chappel,
which was very rich and costly, to our B. Lady by his will; his Executors sent a goodly Crosse of siluer, two Candlesticks of notable workmanship, two Pontificall vestments of cloth of gold, as many for the Altar and the Priest of cloth of gold, linnen for Altars, veiles and holy Chalices, wrought with gold and siluer; a moueable Altar, (called the Altar-stone) well set with pre^^ons stones, certaine Chalices of gold, two Cruets of siluer with their ewer, richly engrauen, and other such like, in token of the Roborean munificence. And to the Cardinall of Vrbine in the Patronship of Loreto, succeeded Card. Morono, who appointed Vi^uent Casale (a man of approued piety and e^^^^t) to gouerne the State of Loreto. In ^hose times, the ornaments and furniture therof had no small increase. A curious lampe of siluer, with the bowle of the same substance, of xv. pound weight, and a siluer Censer for perfumes, were the gifts of the Marquesse of the Holy Crosse. A peece of gold from Charles the Archduke of Austria, with his name written therein. Maximiliana daughter to the Duke of Bauaria, a Crownet of rich amber* adorned with gold and precious stones, vsed rather in banketting than in deuotion, a golde^ Crosse garnished with
pearle and workes engrauen, and besides those, other iewells. Albertus Marques of Aquauiua his owne Image of siluer, as if he were praying, of ten pound weight. Albertus Duke of Bauaria a great Crosse of ^meralds, garnished with gold and Carbuncles, and set as it were in a mountaine of Christall, which, as they say, is thought to be worth twelue thousand Crownes. And this notable gift, the co^ueyance of the giuer made more notable. For it is very euide^t, that this Princely gift was wrapt in ordinary linne^, and brought to Loreto, by an obscure man, who by no meanes would tell who sent it; wherby the giuer of so worthy a gift, was a long time vnknowne to mortall men. But by the prouidence of Almighty God (to whome not onelie so worthy a gift, but also the singular disposition of him that gaue it, was very acceptable) the giuer himself was at last disclosed, with no lesse praise of Christian modesty, then of Princely munificence. Amadeus a Noble man (sonne of Emanuell Philibertus the Duke) his owne Image in plate of siluer, set in gold and precious stones. Virginia Sabellia Vi^ellia, a votiue Image a plate of gold, inclosed in Ebony, and couered on the inside with veluet. Constantia Caretta a golden Crowne,
adorned with precious stones and orient pearls. Cardinall Madruzzo a great golden button (such as Cardinalls and Bishops are wont to vse in their Pontificall robes) beautified with three ranks of pearle in knotts. The Cardinall of Austria a Crosse of gold, standing in a golden mountaine, adorned with most precious iewells. And these were the worthie gifts of Noble men and Noble women. Other ordinary donaries were sent from meaner men, which is not our inte^t to rehearse. Notwithstanding I can not conceale one of this kind, not so much worth for the value, as for the prayer of the giuer. A gold ring enriched with a faire Emeralde, being the gift of a man vnknowne to mortall men, though well knowne to heauen, was found in a Chalice, with these words written in a schedle.

O Peerles Virgin make vs meeke and chast
O loue which still dost burne and neuer wast,
Inflame my frozen hart; accept of me
Thy seruant, though I much vnworthy be.




The solemnity of the Church of Loreto is more graced CHAP. II.
MEANE time according to his office,Annal. Laur. Rier. Casale the Gouernour burning with zeale of the dignity of Loreto, vsed all diligence to enkindle the deuotion and endeuours of the Chanons, and of all the Cleargy. For sometimes by exhortation and intreaty, he excited ech in particular, then all in generall to performe their Offices and duety with diligence and care; who not onely with wordes, but also (which is the effectuallest kind of persuasion) with deed and example, mooued them to imploy their diligent trauell in that most maiesticall Cell, in behalf of God and his B. Mother. For when the Gouernour himself was the first, that performed all the offices of the Chanons, either in singing of diuine praier, or els in hearing of Confessio^s, shame did not a litle excite the Chano^s and others to do the like. And albeit their labour was doubled, yet all did willingly
imitate his vertuous example, none withdrawing himself from that worke, which he vndertooke. Wheruppon Casale vsing the oportunity of their diligent and faithfull trauell, delt and effected with the Patrone and with the Pope himself, seeing the the labours of the Clergy of Loreto were increased, that their pensions might likewise be amended; which made them all more diligent and carefull. Hauing prouoked the Chanons to mayntaine the solemnity of the Church with hope of this new liberality, he adorned the Penitentiaries with surplisses and silke labells (called stoles) wherby as great grace was donne to the Church it self, as to them that vsed them. The^ to twelue boyes, which himself had instituted to helpe at Masse, he gaue for habit the red garment. And because the old Quyre was too straight for the Priests and Quyristers not a little increased,The Prince of Bysinia doth garnish and adorne the Quire he made and adorned a new one far more large and commodious at the cost of the Prince of Bisinia: which being beautifully vauted and adorned with curious pictures drawne in tables, and with seates, is now vsed. Moreouer for solemne ornature of the Altar, he made the siluer Image of the twelue Apostles of a Cubit and a half, of
excellent workmanship; which (as it is said) were all made of the votiue Images of siluer, defaced and spoiled with antiquity, being euery one about 60. pou^d in weight. Wherby we may coniecture, what plenty there was of such Images in those daies, which made the summe of seauen hundred and twenty pound weight; and also what aboundance and multitude there is at this present of such kinde of gifts. This doubtles was a worthy and a frutifull inuention of Casale,Vict. Brigant. that the strangers of all nations might haue meanes to know the history of Loreto, the summe wherof being long agone set out by Tereman the Gouernour,The history of the house of Loreto is s^t forth in the Church in 8. languages. he procured to be translated into the eight chiefest languages, to wit, Greeke, Arabicke, Spanish, French, Dutch, Sclauonian, Latin, Italian and causing the same to be curiously set forth, in as many great tables, he placed them in the midst of the Church, thinking it no lesse decorum to our B. Lady of Loreto, to haue her History published in all languages, then her House honoured of all nations.



A Colledge of Sclauonians is instituted: and Pilgrims (specially of the better sort) are bountifully intertained. CHAP. III.
BVT Pope Gregory not forgetting that which he determined in the beginning of his Popedome, that is to say, to amplify the State of the House of Loreto, and of the Christian world, as at Rome, and els where, of diuers Nations: so at last he determined at Loreto to institute a Colledge of Sclauonians, that it might be a great solace and aide to that afflicted Nation. Wheruppon he gaue commaundment that three hundred yong men should be instructed there in learning and good manners, not onely to be a glory to the Sclauonian people, but also an ornament to the House of Loreto it self. To whome he allowed sufficient mayntenance
out of the treasury of Loreto, and certaine houses, where the hospitall was before, building a new hospitall in an other place. These Sclauonian students were appointed to be present in the Church, on festiuall daies in their surplisses, to assist and serue at high Masse: and to be instructed and taught, were committed to the Fathers of the Society of Iesus. Meane while the Pope vsing all diligence to increase and beautify the sacred ornature of the Church, set vp an other paire of Organes, of great variety and curiosity, garnished with gold and paynting. From which time the Church of Loreto hath had two notable paire of Organes, to witt, them of Iulius, and of Gregory, that great variety of musicke might grace the solemne seruice. Cardinall Morono departing this life, the Pope preferred Cardinall Vastauillanus, his sisters sonne, to that dignity,Vitalis Leonorius Gouernour of Loreto. who assoone as Vincent Casale was elected Bishop of Massa, appointed Vitalis Leonorius (a man not to be misliked) to gouerne Loreto; who, being a very industrious man, with carefull manuring of the ground, increased the reuenewes of the House of Loreto, and nothing at all
diminishing her benignity to poore Pilgrims,The hospitalyty of the House of Loreto. prouided to intertaine Noble men very liberally and bountifully. For which purpose he magnificently adorned the new and goodly parlour, lately built in the Popes Pallace, where he intertained principall men very carefully, prouiding for them whatsoeuer belonged to good hospitality. Wheruppon all returned home full of ioy and comfort, reporting that they were very liberally vsed and intreated at Loreto; which was as profitable to the sacred House, as honourable to our B. Lady.


The piety and munificence of Duke Ioyeuse, and of the King of France. CHAP. IIII.
NEVER before did more Peeres of diuers Nations honour the House of Loreto,Vict Brigant. with their presence and gifts, as witnesseth Victor Brigantius (who being a godly Priest and Resident at Loreto, wrote an Appe^dix of the History of Loreto)
affirming that now at this time many principall men came to visit the sacred House of Loreto, and to present most worthy gifts. Duke Ioyeuse comming out of France to Loreto to salute the Mother of God, and shewing no lesse singes of deuotion then of liberality, spent eight whole daies in the seruice of our B. Lady, and in admiration of the House of Loreto, within which time he thrice receaued the heaue^ly banquet in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, and at his departure put foure thousand Crownes into the arke with memorable munificence. But not contenting himself with this gift, as he returned by Flore^ce from Rome from reuerencing the Pope in dutifull sort, he sent the like summe of gold to the B. Virgin fo^ a gift, adding thereunto two siluer lamps of great weight, which burne continually before the B. Virgin, in token of the notable and almost Princely munificence of Duke Ioyeuse. This money built good part of the lodgings which were appointed to intertaine principall men, to wit, those which at this day do stand right against the Church of Loreto: which albeit they were quickly brought vnto their full height; notwithstanding they remaine rude and vnperfect. Neither
did the King of France himself yield vnto the Princely munifice^ce of a Duke of Fra^ce.A vvorrhy gift of the King of France. For when by reason of publicke affaires, Henry the iij. could not himself visit and honour the B. Virgin of Loreto with gifts, in his place he sent vnto her a Princely gift by a Portugese, one of the chiefe Peeres of France, the yeare 1584. which was a worthy Cuppe, to obtaine by the intercession of the B. Virgin, issue male for the King and his Kingdome; a gift for substance and worke most excellent. For the Cuppe it self is of a hollowed gemme, at this day called the Azure-stone, ancient writers call it a Saphire (as some thinke.) It is also very big and intermingled with golden veines, the couer wherof is of turned Chrystall set in gold, and adorned with many excellentiewells. In the toppe of the couer an Angell of gold doth hold in his hand a lilly of Diamo^des, the armes of the Kingdome of France; which lilly doth consist of three Diamondes ioyned togeather in the gold with admirable art. The foote of the Cuppe being Emerald is bound about and supported with gold, which is notably adorned with precious stones and rich orie^t pearls. In the bottome of the Emerald foote, which we said to be of gold, the
giuer, and the cause of his gift, is engrauen in manner following.





O Queene, who by thy worthy Sonne,
Didst ioyfull blessing bring
To all the world, blesse with a Sonne
The Kingdome and the King.


HENRY THE III. KING OF FRANCE AND POLONY,

 THE YEARE OF OVR SALVATION M.D.LXXXIV.






But by the secret iudgment of God, somtimes that effect is not giuen to our praiers, as we wish, that they may be heard for our good: The gift was accepted, but the vow not obtained.



Other gifts of the Nobility of France. CHAP. V.
AFTERWARD the Duke D'Oaumale one of the chiefe Princes of France,Vict. Brigant. came to visit the House of Loreto, where rightly receauing the sacred mysteries, he spent almost foure daies in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin very deuoutly in praier, and at his departure henoured the Mother of God with gifts. Shortly after, a worthy gift of the Duke of Espernon was brought to Loreto,The fall of the Duke of Espernon. graced with a notable miracle. The Duke of Espernon going from Gascony to Lions, to Henry King of France, in the way met the Duke of Ioyeuse traualling to the same place. Who after mutuall salutations, began to trauell together, and comming to a narrow way among steepy hills, the horse of Espernon began to fling, which turned to the danger of his Maister. For as he ernestly endeuoured, to stoppe his horse from yearking and plunging, he was cast headlong from a high
rocke, where his seruants taking him vp for dead, carried him speedily to the village next vnto Lions. Of all others, Espernon was most deere to the King, and the King himself being moued with this dreadfull message, made haft vnto him, and there passed all the night, procuring remedies to be applied to his most deere friend with all diligence. For whome also Ioyeuse being very solicitous, made a vow to the B. Virgin of Loreto, for his recouery, and to good effect. For within few houres, breath beginning to passe more freely, Espernon lifted vp his eyes, and by litle and litle comming to himself, knew his friends about him. Wheruppon Ioyeuse seeing him of vnderstanding (for the vehemency of his paine was something abated) and perceiuing that he felt the greatnes of his danger, he came vnto him, and bydding him be of good comfort, persuaded him to haue great confidence, that our B. Lady of Loreto would help him, to whome a litle before, he had made a vow in his behalfe, asking him whether he would ratify it; which seeing he could not confirme by wordes, he signified by the becke of his head. An admirable thing to be said: within few houres he receaued all his senses, to geather with his voice, and in
few dayes arose out of his bed in perfect health. Wherfore being very mindefull of so great a benefit, he sent a certaine man to Loreto, to performe the said vow with reuerence.The gift of the Duke of Espernon. By whome he dedicated two Angells of a Cubit, of solid siluer, which shine continually with burning lights on either side the feete of our B. Lady, to be a monument to posterity, that the vse of that light was restored vnto him, by the intercession of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Claudia of Turnon imitating this piety of the French Princes, sent a siluer figure of the Castle of Turnon, either as a votiue gift, for the preseruing of her Castle, or els as a voluntary, to obtaine the protection of the B. Virgin for the same: wherin was written. THIS IS THE FIGVRE OF THE CASTLE OF TVRNON.



The worthy gifts and piety of William Duke of Bauaria, and of other Princes of Germany. CHAP. VI.
AS SOONE as the constant fame of so euide^t a miracle in a most noble Prince,Vict. Brig. was published and knowne in Germany, many of the Nobility were stirred to visit and reuerence the House of Loreto with gifts. Of whome VVilliam Duke of Bauaria deserued the first praise and commendation, a man for wealth and piety, without controuersy the chiefest of the German Nation; who taking no small ioy for the recouery of the Marques of Baden his kinsman, and also well remembring his Fathers munificence to the B. Virgin of Loreto, sent and brought to Loreto, donaries of Princely munificence. Among the gifts which he sent were a most excellent
horse; a plate of siluer inclosed in Ebony, which doth represent our B. Lady carrying the sweet child IESVS in her lappe, with S. Ioseph, the companion of her slight into Egipt; a siluer Candlesticke hanging, very notable for weight and workmanship. For the weight is eighty pound, and the worke such, that foure and twenty branches, as it may seeme, shoot out of the same ste^me, all so exquisitly and orderly disposed, that they may distinctly hold so many wax candles; which doth hang continually in the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin before her glorious Image, as a very worthy gift of the Duke of Bauaria. But in this it is more notable, that he hath also endued it with a yearly pension. For by name of a dowry, the Duke sent with it a perpetuall stipend, that euery yeare vpon forty festiuall and solemne dayes, the same might burne before the B. Virgin, with foure and twenty white Candles of wax. Soone after the Duke himself followed his gifts, and foure onely accompanying him to Loreto, with fresh horses he posted thither vnknowne, the yeare 1585. The exceeding modesty of so great a Prince, made his piety the more notable. For contemning humane delicacies, that he might tast the diuine more
aboundantly, he esteemed the publicke and magnificent lodgings assigned for the intertaynment of Princes, lesse then a priuate and meane hospitall. For insteed of the trouble and state of a Princely Court, desiring to giue himself to religious quietnes, he went very familiarily to the Fathers of the Society of Iesus, of which order he hath deserued great honour, and lodged with them certaine dayes, being very well contented with ordinary fare and intertaynment. But so great vertue could not long be kept secret. For the Gouernour of Loreto, vnderstanding of the comming of the Duke of Bauaria, came presently vnto him, and very curteously inuited, requested, vrged, importuned to giue him intertaynme^t; but at last seeing that he refused it with a most resolute mind, he departed frustrated of his desire. And the modesty of the Duke was as notable in the Church as in his lodging. For a footstoole to kneele vpon, and a chaire to sit in, being prepared for him with Princely state, he so contemned them, that he did not so much as looke at them, because he came not to seeke sumptuousnes, but piety and deuotion in the House of our B. Lady of Loreto. Further in the most maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, his christian
humility and piety was so notable, that others may admire it. For he prayed among the multitude, with such submission of mind and body, as that you would haue taken him for one of the people: because he did often (as I belieue) recall to mind the humility of the Sonne of God, who when he was in the forme of God, there exinanited himself, taking the forme of a seruant. He was so long in praier, that he might seeme to dwell in the sacred House of the B. Virgin, and at his departure left behind him, as notable signes of his munificence, as of his piety and deuotion.The vvorthy gift of the Duke of Bauaria. His chiefest gift was a little booke of solid gold, which being diuided three manner of wayes, in foure leaues, seemeth to containe beautifull pictures and Images wrought in precious stone. The couer wherof is made of gold, orient pearle and rich iewells, with admirable art, and hangeth by three chaines of gold, comming through a gold ring to be fastened in a great Saphire. This gift is said to be worth eight thousand Crownes: and there is scarce an other to be found among all the donaries and Treasure of the House of Loreto, which strangers behold with more delight, and desire; so greatly doth the ornature, and the exceeding beauty
of the inward pictures and Images themselues, delight the eyes of the beholders, art seeming to contend with the value of the thing it self. He also gaue a golden Image of Christ our Lord, representing his glorious Resurrection and his comming out of the Sepulcher, which doth glitter with diamondes and Carbuncles. This exceeding piety of the Duke of Bauaria, was an example to many great men of Germany, to salute and reuerence the B. Virgin of Loreto with gifts, whose co^ming happened afterward, in the Popedome of Xystus. V. Notwithstanding the Duchesse of Brunswicke brought siluer attire for the B. Virgin imbrodered with gold,The gift of the Duchesse of Bru^svvick. and goodly furniture for the Altar, shyning with pearle, diamond, and Carbuncle, Gregory the xiij. being Pope. Also after his Embassage to Rodulph the Emperour, Cardinall Madruzzo presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift,The gift of Cardinall, Madruzzo. a siluer Crosse (being the ensigne of such Legates) in token of his Legacie happily performed by her protection and help.



The piety and gifts of the Princes of Italy. CHAP. VII.
AT that time the piety and liberality of the Nobility of Italy was very notable.Vict Brigant. Iohn Piccolhomini sent a siluer plate representing two mules carrying a horslitter,The gift of Iohn Picolhomini and of many others. wherof the one doth strike with his heeles a man lying on the ground, no doubtfull argument of danger eschewed by the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto. Iohn Baptista Duara Gonzaga siluer fetters, insteed of the yron-ones, wherwith he was fettered, in token that he got his liberty by the fauour of our B. Lady of Loreto. Lewis Martinengo of Bressa, foure Chalices of siluer, guilt. The Marquesse of Est, her owne, and the Image of her sonne praying to our B. Lady in plate of siluer, of 14. pound weight. The Duke of Atria, two Images of Angells, of a Cubit and a half, of excellent worke, of xxxvj. pound weight, which are placed before
the B. Virgin on the Altar, and present continually burning lights, which the inscription engrauen in the base, doth shew to be votiue gifts. The Duke of Terra-Noua, a siluer lampe hanging, of xxij. pound, very notable both for workmanship and weight. Emanuell Philibertus Duke of Sauoy his owne Image, adorned with a Crowne and a scepter, made all of pure gold in manner of a suppliant, of ten pound weight. Cardinall Columna the Legate of Picene, a siluer Cuppe of excellent worke, of no small weight. Cardinall Arigonio a golden Chalice of great price, by reason of iewells and pearls; a Chrystall Crosse with the Image of Christ of gold, and foure siluer Candlesticks of great beauty. Cardinall Riario ornature of damaske for the Altar and the Priest. Augustine Cusano (who afterward was admitted into the Colledge of the Cardinalls) furniture for the Priest and the Altar of gold and siluer; And Pope Gregory himself much reioycing, that the sacred House of Loreto was thus reuerenced and adorned with gifts, desired to haue a speciall gift of his owne, to remaine there for euer. The fourth Sunday of Lent (called Dominica Laetare, of the Introite of the Masse) of
an ancient and solemne custome, the Roma^ Bishops do consecrate a golden Rose: The stemme or plant wherof is of flourishing roses of gold, which being put into a golden Cuppe, and standing on a triple foote of gold, is more the^ a Cubit and half in height, said to be worth a thousand Crownes. And this Pontificall gift, wont (for the most part) to be presented to Queenes, Gregory sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto, as Queene of Heauen and earth. And in the midle of the Cuppe, there is a godly inscription, for a remembrance of him that gaue it. About the same time Nicolas Caietan, the Cardinall of Sermoneta, honoured the House of Loreto with a new kind of gift: who either for the generall deuotion of his family (for he was of the House of Boniface the eight, whose Popedome the comming of the most sacred Cell into Italy made very famous) or els of a certaine priuate affection, was wholy deuoted to the B. Virgin of Loreto. For being well and in good heath, he chose a place for his sepulcher in the Church of Loreto, not far from the Cell of the Mother of God, and caused it to be beautified with magnificent worke. The forme wherof is very notable and large, adorned with sundry sorts of
marble, and graced with a brazen Image of Nicolas the Cardinall of great curiosity and beauty. The marble stone vnderneath hath this Epitaph.
NICOLAS CAIETAN THE CARDINALL OF SERMONETA, OF THE FAMILIE OF POPE BONIFACIVS THE 8. CALLING TO MIND THAT THIS MOST SACRED HOVSE VVAS SEATED HEERE BY THE HAND-VVORKE OF GOD, ABOVT THE TIME THAT HE ENTRED INTO HIS POPEDOME, AND THAT HIMSELF HATH OBTAINED MANY THINGS OF ALMIGHTY GOD, BY THE PRAIER OF THE B. VIRGIN THE MOTHER OF GOD, AND ALSO HOPING THAT HER HELP VVIL NOT FAILE HIM AT HIS DEATH: ALIVVE, AND IN GOOD HEALTH, HATH PROCVRED THIS MONVMENT OF MARBLE TO BE MADE FOR HIM; THAT HIS BODY MAY BE BVRIED IN IT, VVHEN HE SHAL DEPART THIS MORTALL LIFE:

BEING NOVV 54. YEARES OF AGE. HE DIED ALMOST AT THREESCORE, THE YEARE OF OVR SALVATION M.D.LXXXV. IN THE MONETH OF MAY.
And Nicolas departing this life, was brought from Rome to Loreto, where his funeralls were made with great honour and solemnity; and the Sepulcher being finished long agoe, his body was laid into it, and a stone put ouer it with this title.

HEERE I VVIL DVVELL, BECAVSE I HAVE CHOSEN IT

At this day in the Church of Loreto, there is a great Hearse of cloth of gold, bordered about with a great border of black Veluet, in some places magnificently adorned with the armes of the Caietan family, and in other, with golden Crosses, in token of his stately funeralls.



The rashnesse of those, which tooke away small peeces of the stones, and the morter of the most sacred House, is punished from heauen. CHAP. VIII.
THE same yeare, to wit 1585. by a new Miracle, Almighty God shewed what care he hath of the sacred House of Loreto. For a particle of one of the sacred stones was brought backe out of Sicily, long after the fault was committed and punishme^t suffered therfore. Aboue twenty yeares, a Cittizen of Palermo comming to Loreto, and secretly taking a litle stone out of the sacred Cell of the Mother of God, by no shew of piety in that rash deed, nor the ignorance of the Pontificall inhibition, by any meanes could be deliuered from the wrath of God. For assoone as he returned home, forthwith he was troubled with a grieuous sicknes. And lest the cause of his suddaine griefe might be doubtfull, yearly
about the same time, that he committed the fault, he suffered punishment for it. Wheruppon stre^gth suddainly fayling him, in the moneth of September or October, he was molested with a grieuous feuer, and by iudgment of the Physitians, there could be no naturall cause therof; and he acknowledged not his fault, coloured vnder the name of piety. But it continued 20. yeares. all which time there was neither cause nor end of his incurable disease. And at last, when no other cause of the sicknes (still returning by course) could be found, Religion entred into his heauy mind, and being much tormented with a guilty conscience, he opened the wound vnto a Priest; who told him that the cause of his sicknes, was his rash piety, earnestly exhorting him to restore the sacred stone, if he would make sure way for his health. It was spoken to no deafe eares. For the sicke man being commanded as it were by a heaue^ly voice, deliuered him the sacred stone, to be sent backe to the place from whence he had taken it long agoe. Assoone as it was restored, he recouered his former health. The thing is well witnessed. Iohn Baptista Carminata, Superiour of the Society of IESVS in the Prouince of Sicily, sent the
sacred stone, with letters declaring the whole matter, to Rome, to Cardinall Vastauillano Patron of Loreto, who sent it straight to Leonorius Gouernour of Loreto, with the letter which he receiued out of Sicily, comma^ding that it should be carefully put into the place where it was before. Wheruppon assoone as it came to Loreto, Leonorius commanding a solemne procession, and going to the gate to meet it, recarried it to the most sacred House, with the greatest pompe that might be. A meruailous thing to be spoken and seene. It was scant brought vnto the fortunate House of our B. Lady; when by and by (as if God had shewed it) the voide place appeared, whence it was euident, that fragment was taken twenty yeares agone; and assoone as it was put into his owne place againe, a remembrance was made in token of the miracle, to represse the boldnes of other Pilgrims. About the same time, the new rashnes of mortall men, gaue God occasion to shew new example, in the lesser peeces of stones. I finde many exa^ples of many, who adue^turing the same, quickly smarted for their folly, vntill they had learned by their owne harme, to restore that which they had take^ fro^ thence. But we will omit
them, lest many things of one kind should breed tediousnes. Neither did Almighty God seeme to be more carefull to preserue the sacred stones, tha^ the morter, wherwith the stones themselues are ioyned togeather. Alexandria is no meane Citty of Lombardy, built and so called by the Confederate Citties, in fauour of Pope Alexander the third. A Cittize^ of which place comming to visit the House of Loreto, stole a litle morter out of the most sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, and returning home bruized it, and put it into a siluer case, togeather with an AGNVS DEI. But his foolish piety was nothing pleasing to God and his B. Mother. For assoone as he hung that case about his wiues necke (for what cause it is vncertaine) the Prince of Diuells entred into her, with no small company of his attendants: wherwith the vnhappy woma^ being miserably vexed for the space of nine yeares, to her husbands great griefe, at last, God of his goodnes sent her remedy. Iohn Baptista Vauninus a Priest of the Society of IESVS, preached at that time to the people of Alexandria, as the manner is. Who vnderstanding of the matter by her husba^d (the author of so wicked a thing) forthwith exhorted him to restore the sacred
dust; if he did, no doubt, but in short time his wife would be deliuered from diuells wherewith she was tormented. He was easily persuaded. For taking the sacred morter out of the siluer case, he himself deliuered it to Vauninus, beseeching him to send it to Loreto with all speed. Their hope deceiued them not. For within few daies, three of the tormenting diuells, were expelled out of the body of the possessed woman, not so much by vertue of the Exorcismes, as by the praier of our B. Lady. Wheruppon Vauninus putting the said morter into a case, sent it presently to Loreto, to the Rector of the Society of IESVS, intreating him by letter, with all speed to restore it, to the sacred House of our B. Lady, whence it was taken, and to intreate peace and pardon of the B. Virgin for that miserable woman, that by expelling the rest of the torme^ting diuells, she would vouchsafe to restore vnto her, her former health; which afterward was found to haue happened as he desired. And assoone as the morter was brought backe to Loreto, it was reserued in a conuenient place, to be a document to mortall men, not to aduenture the like. Also the letter of Vauninus dated on the third of the Ides of Nouember, the yeare of our Redemption
1579. is preserued likewise there in token of the miracle.


A ship of Epidaurus is deliuered out of the hands of Pirats by a worthy Miracle. CHAP. IX.
WITH a notable and a famous Miracle, we will conclude the most worthy and most illustrious Popedome of Gregory. About that time a shippe of Epidaurus being laden with rich merchandize of Constantinople returned to Epidaurus, by the Commonalty called Ragusa. Which in the mid-way, suddainly sustained such quietnes and calme of sea, that for want of wind she could not mooue out of the place. Wherby many sculking Pirats were presently at hand, who spreading round about, began to assault the destitute ship withall their force. And albeit the Christia^s were fewer in number; yet at first they notably withstood the assault of the Barbarians; but at last being ouercome with
labour and woundes, they failed, as equall vnto them, neither in courage nor strength. Wheruppon being in great danger of taking by the Barbarians, and deuoutly calling to mind the manifold fauours of our B* Lady of Loreto, all called on her with humble supplication, and vowed, if she deliuered them out of that imminent danger, they would carry a goodly Chalice to the House of Loreto for a gift, and withall would there wash away the blemishes of their sinnes by sacred Confession. Their praier and vow proued not in vaine. For by and by a thicke mist arising, so obscured the light with her darknes, that it tooke from the Pirats (greedily desiring so wealthy a prey) the sight of the ship of Epidaurus. For which cause the Christians acknowledged the help of the Mother of God, and exulting with ioy amidst their feare, gaue deuout thankes to God and his B. Mother. Contrarily the Barbarians raging and grieuing to see the prey taken out of their handes, endeuoured what they could, to recouer the ship which they had lost. But in vaine. For a certaine night, as it were, hanging ouer the sea, tooke from the^ the sight of the vessell which they pursued, and they the^selues wandred euen as men in
darknes. Meanwhile a prosperous winde blowing in the cloud, carried the ship along, which escaping all danger by fauour of our B. Lady, arriued safe at Epidaurus, whence the Marriners and Passengers came to Loreto, to performe their vow. And this was almost all that happened at Loreto, whiles Gregory was Pope.


Loreto is made a Citty by Xistus V. and adorned with a Bishops Sea. CHAP. X.
AS Xystus V. the emulator of Gregory, would not seeme his inferiour in other things; so would he be accounted more forward and diligent in augmenting the state of the House of Loreto. For being borne in Picene, he thought good to adorne the chiefe Patronesse of the Picentians with all care. Therfore as it were to execute the determination of Pope Marcellus the seco^d, he gaue Loreto the title of a Citty, adorning her with a Bishops Sea, and assigning
certaine townes there about to her Iurisdiction. The first Bishop of Loreto was Francis Cantucius a Cittizen of Perugia, famous for learning and sanctimony: who endued that new feate with worthy institutions and examples. But that Loreto might not haue the name of a Citty in vaine or impertinently, Xystus bought the hill next to Loreto (by the inhabitants called Monte-Regal) and purposed to leuell it, that he might make more space on that side, to enlarge the new Citty. And for furnishing the same with building, he gaue commandement to all the Citties of Picene, that euery one should build there, their seuerall houses, which they willingly obeyed. Meane time, not onely with force but also with money and good policy, the Pope pacified Picene, and the rest of his owne dominions infested with theeues. For incensing the theeues themselues, and the banished men against their fellowes, with hope of impunity and reward, he procured the Captaines to be slaine, and many of their followers, to be either killed by their owne fellowes, or els reduced, by reason that their associats were destroied and made away. For which cause the Citties of Picene erected a worthy Statua of brasse
of a Picene Pope, well deseruing of their people, and of the House of Loreto. At which time, the sacred house of our B. Lady wanted not her ornaments. For the Pillars, which (insteed of Columnes) support the vauted roofe, and the vaut it self of the Church, was adorned with marble worke, at the charge of Cantucius the Bishop. One of the bigger Chappells was adorned by Cardinall Arigonio,The chappell of Cardinall Arigonio with notable pictures, expressing the worthy deedes of S. Thomas of Aquine, in pariecting and guilding. And the greatest of all the Chappells (desired by the Dukes of Tuscany and Bauaria) to take away co^tention was adorned by the Co^monalty of Picene,The chappell of the Co^monalty of Picene. with curious workes both of paynting and plaistering, and also garnished with much gold. This meane while Leonorius the Gouernour, vsing all diligence to adorne and augment the State of Loreto, by means of Lactantius Ventura a notable Architect, brought the forefront of the Church almost vnto the top (a worke for the most part finished by Gregory) and built good part of the Bishops pallace ouer against the Church.The gift of the Archduke of Austria. Also Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, hauing vnderstanding of the building of Loreto by the Duke of Bauaria, by his persuasion gaue great store of
timber out of his woods, to the B. Virgin of Loreto; which being put into a vessel, and sent by the Adriaticke sea, by fauour of our B. Lady, came safe to Loreto, among which was such aboundance of huge beames and boardes, as were thought to be well worth three thousand Crownes.


Cardinall Ioyeuse recommendeth his Protection of France, to the B. Virgin of Loreto. CHAP. XI.
ABOVT seauen Moneths after Cantucius the first Bishop of Loreto entred into his Bishopricke,Vict. Brigant. he departed this life, leauing behind him great loue of all towards him, specially of the poore, whose Father he was accompted. So great fame of sanctimony is related of him, that it may easily appeare to be true, which is holden for a Prouerbe, that the first Bishop of euery Citty must be a Saint. After Cantucius Rutilius Benzonius
a Cittizen of Rome (famous for learning and zeale of Ecclesiasticall dignity) was elected Bishop of Loreto;Rutitius ^enzonius Bishop of Loreto. who graced the house so notably with holy sermons, and worthy institutions, that now for sacred pompe and Maiesty, she is inferiour to none of the holiest Churches. About that time, Cardinall Ioyeuse the new Protector of France, comming out of France to Rome, and turning to Loreto with a traine of Noble men, was brought to the most sacred House by Mattheucius Archbishop of Ragusa and Gouernour of Ancona, by Octanio Bandino President of Picene, and by Rutilius Benzonius Bishop of Loreto, who went to meet the Cardinall, as he was co^ming thither. And when Ioyeuse had said Masse very deuoutly in the sacred Cell of the B. Virgin, he said that he seriously determined, to recommend his Protection of France, to the most certaine Patronesse of mortall men. For which cause he procured the solemne praier of the Forty Houres: whose godly endeauour the Bishop of Loreto did not onely approue by his authority, but also with a worthy Sermon, After the Sermon, a solemne procession was performed with great zeale of all the people, aswell of the Cleargie and townesfolkes
of Loreto, as of a good company of Capuchines, which Ioyeuse had brought with him for that purpose. And the Cardinall yielding to none, in that wherof himselfe was the Author, was an example of piety and modesty, to his, and all the rest.


The worthy indeauours of Cardinall Gallo Patron of Loreto, towards the B. Virgin. CHAP. XII.
BVT this yeare was not so famous, as lamentable for the affaires of Loreto.Vict. Brigant. Two daies after the publicke praier, Leonorius the Gouernour of Loreto, then the Cardinall Patron Vastau^^lano himself, died one after an other, of a pestiferous disease.Card. Gallo Patron of Loreto. Francis Gallo Gouernour of Loreto. Wheruppon the Patronship of Loreto was giuen to Antonio Maria Gallo, the Cardinall, then Bishop of Perugia (now of Auximo) who preferred Iohn Francis Gallo his Vncle, to the Gouernment of Loreto.
And shortly after by the Popes commandment, Cardinall Gallo the new Patron co^ming to Loreto, and being receiued with great ioy and gratulation of all sortes, set downe Lawes and Decrees to the Citty of Loreto, for creating of magistrates, they yeare of our Redemption 1587. Also this very yeare the brazen Statua of Xystus V. the Pope, made most curiously by Bernardine, was set vp on the staires of the Church, with great gladnes of the people of Loreto, and of all the Picentians; and also with great concourse of borderers and strangers And whiles Iohn Francis Gallo was Gouernour of Loreto,The forefro^t of the Church of Loroto. the forefront of the Church was at last finished, to be a most notable ornament to the sacred House of our B. Lady. For it was magnificently set forth and curiously ended, and all made of Istrian stone, exactly squared, (which being brought from Istria, doth seeme like to that of Tybur, in old time, and also at this day much vsed by the Romanes) and also finished with such art, that you would say so great a worke, were almost all one stone. In the midst of this forefront, the great Gate (being as it were the mouth therof) is adorned with striged Pillars of marble, and with an
arched Coron. Also the sides haue two lesser dores, with Pedestalls and Pillars, called Ionickes, on which the forefront it self doth stand. Ouer the great Gates, was set vp a brazen Image of our B. Lady imbracing her little sonne, polished most curiously by Lombardo the Statuary. Vnder the roofe of the forefront a great window (being as it were the eye of the worke) adorned with striged Pillars and workes engrauen, doth giue light vnto the Church. Ouer the window, the Title of the House of Loreto is engrauen in Lucullan Marble with golden letters, THE HOVSE OF THE MOTHER OF GOD, VVHERE THE VVORD VVAS MADE FLESH. Meaner windowes were made to the lesser dores, to giue light to the wing of the Church. And aboue both these windowes, there is a particular inscription, engrauen also with golden letters, in such kind of marble. The one is, XYSTVS V. THE POPE, A PICENTIAN, OF A COLLEGIATE, MADE THIS A CATHEDRAL CHVRCH, ON THE XVI. OF THE CALENDS OF APRIL, THE YEARE OF OVR REDEMPTION M.D.LXXXVI.
THE FIRST YEARE OF HIS POPEDOME The other,
XYSTVS V. THE POPE BEING BORNE IN PICENE, AND ADORNING THE HOVSE OF LORETO VVITH EPISCOPAL DIGNITY, MADE IT A CITTY THE YEARE M.D.LXXXVI. THE FIRST YEARE OF HIS POPEDOME.
The worke was all finished, but that there wanted staires to ascend into the Church. wheruppon with great magnificence and compastle inough, Hierom Gabutio the successour of Iohn Francis Gallo, did finish the new staires, which he had begun with Istrian stone, and put an excellent lanterne on the hemisphere of the Church, made also of the same stone, and of pillers of eight or nine foote of Ionicke worke. The spaces wherof haue eight arched windowes, aboue which are 8. more equall in breadth, but lesse in height. And ouer the said windowes is a Corone, which doth support the vppermost worke, diuided, as it were, into eight quarters, which togeather with ^^e hemisphere of the Church, being couered with sheetes of lead, is seene far and neere. And his owne piety and deuotion moouing him therunto, assoone as Card. Gallo had adorned the sacred House of Loreto, he prouided to relieue the poore. For with a great summe
of money which he collected, he made a Banke of piety at Loreto, whence he appointed that money should be lent to the towne gratis, lest they should be enforced to be at the mercy of Vsurers. But this was a most memorable gift of Xystus V. the Pope (others attribute it to Gregory the xiij.) to procure the brazen leaues of the Church of Loreto, to be engraue^ for forty thousand Crownes. For the leaues of the three dores shall be of brasse, where a representation of all the sacred History is to be engrauen with admirable art: verily a great worke, and of many yeares, and (as by the beginuings it may be coniectured) very notable and admirable, so indeed, as they who haue seene both, may worthily compare them to the most excellent leaues of the Church of S. Iohn Baptist at Florence which all do hould for a wonder. Truly it will be a worthy ornament to the Church of Loreto, and a most pleasing spectacle to Pilgrims.



Donaries brought or sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto. CHAP. XIII.
MEANE time,Cod. Laur. the House of Loreto prouiding for the wellfare of the poore Inhabitants, wanted not the gifts of Pilgrims.The gift of the Sodality of the Smiths of Bologna The Sodality of the Black-smiths of Bologna, for their Donary, brought a great Ca^dlesticke of copper, very notable both for workmanship, and also for the vnusuall greatnes and weight. Catherine Medices Queene of France, and Mother of Kings,The gift of the Queene of France and of others. sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto, a siluer lampe, notable for weight and workmanship, with a pension to haue it burne continually. The Duchesse of Cleeue golden attire for the B. Virgin, imbrodered with siluer, and her owne Image in a siluer plate praying to our B. Lady of Loreto; but this later is an ordinary Donary of many. A daughter of the Duke of Parma two; Fredericke Tomacellus, and Antony Spinellus Neapolitans; Alfonsus Vice-count a Milanese; the
Marques Carpucius, and the Bishop of Eugubine, euery one his owne Image, supplia^twise in a plate of siluer, of foure pou^d weight. Also at the same time the Marques of Guasto presented his owne Image in a golden globe, shyning round about with litle diamondes and Carbuncles. And that many of them were votiue gifts, the title of the plate of Eugubine doth shew, THY PRAIER IS HEARD. But these sent their owne, others presented the votiue Images of their frie^ds. The Prince of Stiliano dedicated to the Mother of God a siluer Image of his sonne, as if he were praying. Liuia Pignatella a Neapolitan the Image of her husband offering to our B. Lady a litle child purtured in siluer, of foure pound weight. The Prince of Amalpha an infant of siluer in his swathbands, in weight, half as much more. Philibertus Emanuell Duke of Sauoy the worthiest gift in this kind, to wit, the golden Image of an infant of iust stature, wrapt in his swath-bands, for a sonne borne of late wedlocke, by the intercessio^ of our B. Lady. The Citty Corneta, the purtraiture of her Citty, in a plate of siluer inclosed in Ebony, with a worthy title below, CORNETA THY FAITHFVLL CITTY. Also others presented goodly ornature for the Church and the Altar.
VVilliam Duke of Mantua sent to the B. Virgin, two Candlesticks of siluer, of a Cubit and a halfe, and a worthy Image of gold, on a golden Crosse, representing the Crucifying of our Sauiour, all made with admirable workmanship and art. Not long after, the Prince of Mantua, emulating his Fathers piety, brought votiue gifts for receiuing of issue by the fauour of our B. Lady, furniture of siluer for the Altar, Priest, and Ministers sacrificing with solemnity, adorned with imbrodery, precious stones and gold. Ferdinand Cardona, a siluer Chalice curiously wrought. Iohn Spinota, Hippolitus Bensinotus, and Octauius Peregrinus a Neapolitan, besides euery one his Chalice of siluer, brought also two crewers with little ewers of the same substance. Peter Demetrius Prince of Valachia a golden Chalice and a Paten. And Auria Marques of the Empire, for his singular deuotion to the B. Virgin of Loreto, to his golden Chalice, added a triple lampe of siluer, notable for weight and workmanship, which he endued with a certaine stipend, that it might burne in the midst of the sacred Chappell, on chiefe festiuall daies. Heere also hangeth an other siluer lampe of excellent worke, beautified with three diuisions, said to be the votiue gift of Marques
Lippeo of Milan. The Earle Oliuarus (Embassador for the Catholicke King with the Pope) co^ming with his wife to Loreto, presented to our B. Lady for a gift, a siluer lampe and ornature for the Altar and the Priest, glittering with gold and siluer, of curious Portugall worke; which Donaries he increased with a great summe of money. The Viceroies wife of Naples a casket of silner guilt, and engrauen with very curious worke. Portia Vitelia a golden Image of Christ Crucified, inclosed in Ebony. The Cardinall of Austria, two Candlestickes of solid Ebony, adorned with precious stone and gold. Hierome Grimaldus of Genua as many Candlesticks of siluer, a Cubit high, of xv-pound weight. And many siluer lampes of no small weight and workmanship, were presented by such as were vnwilling to haue their names knowne. One of gold in steed of many, is the gift of Francis Maria Duke of Vrbine, not only notable for substance and beauty; but also for workmanship. For the lamp it self is supported on the shoulders of three Angels, holding in their hands, boughes of an oake (the armes of the Roborean family) all made of solid gold with admirable art, thought to be about ten pound weight, and therfore chiefe place
is assigned vnto it, for the speciall worth therof, hanging in a golden chaine amidst the siluer lampes, that it may allwaies burne before the face of our B. Lady. Marques Roboreo, Benedict Card. Iustinian, and Camilla Peretta sister to Xystus V. gaue euery one a single suite of gold for the Altar, and Camilla also brought worthy attire for our B. Lady, wrought with gold and worke imbrodered. The Duchesse of Bouine, an honourable Lady, sent other ornature of violet satten, adorned with margarites and pearles, after a Princely munificence, but for the shortnes therof. Also Iustus Iusteius Earle of Verona consecrated to our B. Lady (as author of the victory) an ornature of cloth of gold, faced with precious skinnes, being the prize of the Tilters, gotten at the games of Florence. Others also sent other Donaries to our B. Lady, the most part from women. The Duchesse of Cleeue, a woman of great piety, presented to the B. Virgin for a gift, a chaine of gold, notable for weight and workmanship; golden bracelets beset with Carbuncles and diamonds, and a gold ring of great worth by reason of a notable iewell. Vidobonus the knight and Steward of the Duke of Bauaria, in his owne name and his wiues,
two gold rings ioyned in one, adorned with diamond and Carbuncle, wherin is written, VVHICH GOD HATH IOYNED, LET NOT MAN SEPARATE. Lewis George of Papia, a chaine of gold made of curious worke, of one pound weight. Marchius Antonius Blanchettus of Bologna, a Crownet of precious stones featly fastened in gold. The Princesse of Castel-uetrano a round peece of gold, like vnto a great coyne, glittering with diamond, Emerald and pearle. But this following is not only memorable for value; but also for the order and manner how it was presented. Antony Martinengo the Earle, hauing contended many yeares with a daughter of Marques Carata, about a Crosse of precious stones of small quantity but of great value, and seeing no end therof could be had by law, they agreed betweene themselues, that the Crosse in controuersy, should be adiudged to the B. Virgin of Loreto. And the euent shewed that their gift was gratefull to the Mother of God. Hieronyma Columna Duchesse of Monte-Leone had that Crosse in her custody: And by a certaine prouidence of Allmighty God it chanced, that Martinengo comming to the sacred House of our B. Lady vpon deuotio^, in the beginning
of May, at the same time and on that very day, Hieronyma also came, altogether ignorant of the comming of Martinengo. Therfore seeing him on the suddaine at Loreto, at first she was arnazed therat; but then saluting ech other, she said vnto him: In very good time I haue brought with me the Crosse adindged to our B. Lady; for the solemne day of the inuention of the Crosse of Christ is now at hand. Wherfore admiring the wonder of the thing ordered from aboue, they went both together to the most sacred Cell, and dedicated this Crosse of Iewells to the B. Virgin, on the festiuall day of the holy Crosse: that you may say, she required her depositum in due time. At this day, the said Crosse doth hang at the girdle of rewells of the B. Virgin, as a chiese grace of her worthy ornament: for it is made of nine faire diamonds beautified with three orie^t pearles, as big as cherries, valued at foure thousand Crownes.



An Irish Bishop doth twice escape the hands of Hereticall Pirats: A yong man is deliuered from present shipwrack. CHAP. XIV.
AT that time the House of Loreto as not onely honoured with gifts but also miracles. For Edmund an Irish-Man, Bishop of Ardach, came to Loreto, to performe his double vow. The cause wherof was this. Being driuen into banishment for religio^, by Elizabeth Queene of England, he fled into Scotland with certaine trustie seruants. But where he sought succour, was his danger. For at the intreaty of the Queene of England, the Nobility of Scotland commanded that he should be cast into prison. But Edmund vnderstanding of the matter, secretly shipped himself, and very prudently eschewed the snares of the Queene. Wherby escaping that manifest peril, soone after he fell into an other hidden danger, which was not casuall, but by sufferance from aboue, as doubtles both the time of the danger, and the heauenly help
se^t the^ in due time did manifestly shew. For as Edmund sailed towards France, he fell into the hands of one Drake an Archpirate of England, the day before the Natiuity of our B. Lady, which the Bishop and his seruants kept with great reuerence and deuotion. And a vision shewed to one of his company in his sleep, put them all in good hope of security. For the night before they met their enemies, as he was asleep, one of his seruants seemed to fight naked with heretickes in a great assembly of men: and being ashamed of his nakednes, a Lady of great beauty came vnto him in a white garme^t, whome he earnestly intreating to couer his nakednes, curteously and willingly she couered him with her cloake. When he related this vision vnto the Bishop, with common co^sent they agreed, that the Virgin whome he saw in his sleepe, was the Mother of God, by whose protection they should be all defended. Wheruppon assoone as the nauy of the enemies approached, Edmund and his seruants seeing no humane meanes to escape, implored our B. Lady of Loreto, whose Natiue day put them all in good hope of safety, making this vow with their petition: If they eschewed the hands of their enemies, they would go to the
House of Loreto, and there for the space of three daies, would giue themselues to praier. Their praier and vow had effect. For the Maister of the shippe, wherin they sayled, albeit in shew an Hereticke; yet at that instant shewed himself a fauourer of Catholicks. For seeing the English nauy at hand, and supposing (as it was) that the Catholicks whome he transported, were sought, for their destruction, he hid the Bishop and his seruants, in a most obscure place of the pumpe, and far out of sight. The ship was taken by the English, and brought in to England, and the serua^ts of God lay close eight daies in the pumpe, the Maister secretly conueying them victuals once a day; all which time the English Pyrats did not negligently search the vessell which they had taken. For euery day with great rage, they searched euery corner, hoping to finde out the Bishop and his company, of whose flight and escape they had notice. So at last reuiewing all places carefully with lights, they happened on the pumpe, and came to the secret place. But the more present that their danger was, the more euident was the help of the Mother of God. For apprehending the Priest, who had seene the aforesaid
vision in his sleep, they drew him vnto the next decke to seeke out the rest, but euen at that very instant they perceiued, that Almightie God did protect the Catholicks with heauenly help. For the Priest (of whome we speake) escaping out of their ha^ds by miracle, was neuer after to be fou^d. Therefore hauing searched eight whole daies, till they were wearie, at last they gaue ouer to seeke after the Bisshop, and dismissed the shippe, that she might returne vnto her course. But behold one danger after an other. In the same voiage to France, an other Nauy of Pirats met them, more cruell then the former, who by the instigation of Queene Elizabeth, sought Edmund the Bishop for his destruction: and out of hand taking the shippe wherin he sailed, they boarded her, ouerturned all the Merchandize, and with lights searched all places with diligent care: wherby they came to the secret place, and at last apprehended the Bishop himself. They had preuailed, if the present protection of our B. Lady had not quailed the rage of their enemies. For behold as they were about to draw forth their prisoner, they were striken with suddaine blindnesse, and began to wander like blind men. Wheruppon being frighted with the
vndoubted wrath of God punishing their wickednes, they let go the vessell which they had taken, and she holding on her course, by fauour of our B. Lady arriued at the desired harbour, hauing twice in few daies escaped these exceeding dangers. For which cause the Bishop and his retinew, being very mindefull of their vow, forthwith from the place where they landed, came to Loreto on foote, the yere 1586. where the Bishop rightly performing his vow, left the whole matter set downe in writing in the House of Loreto, in token of the double help of our B. Lady in his double danger. The yeare ensuing, the B. Virgin of Loreto, by as great a miracle deliuered another fro^ the raging sea, as she had donne these from the wicked Pirats. Iohn Baptista Capra a Monte-Albodo (the name of a towne in Picene) a good and a godly yong ma^, sayling in a Galcot toward the coast of Calabria, and comming in sight of the Iland Vulcana (which lieth ouer against the Ila^d of Si^ilie) was brought into imminent danger, by a suddaine tempest. For the oars were broken, the saile was lost, and the little vessell being tossed to and fro with the waues, was in great danger of drowning. But he conceiuing good hope of safe deliuerance, and inuocating the B.
Virgin of Loreto, cried vnto her: As the Angells brought thy House into Picene, where at this present it remayneth; so thou B. Virgin Mother of God, bring this litle vessell to the harbour. A meruailous thing. The tempest ceased as if it had beene controulled or bridled by his prayer, and presently a prosperous wind beginning to blow, made the Galcot ariue with safety, that you may thinke the B. Virgin fauoured her Client, and the report of the transportation of her sacred House, by the hand-worke of Angells.


Two Priests hauing stolne a little morter out of the House of Loreto, by their owne harme, are taught to restore it thither againe. CHAP. XV.
Vict. Brigant.THE report of the History of Loreto is confirmed by the former miracle, but the religion of the most sacred House is established with this. The same yeare, two Priests of Placentia tooke alittle morter
out of the sacred walls, with intent to carrie it about them, as a monument of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and as a defence vnto them in the perills of this mortall life. But protection sought against the will of God, turned to their danger. For assone as they returned into their Contrey, they were punished with a terrible and a cruell feuer, wherewith being much vexed for the space of three moneths, at last they repented. And calling to mind the late example of the Bishop of Portugall, who albeit by the Popes permission had taken a stone out of the House of Loreto; yet God was so offended therwith, that he was punished with a cruell sicknes, and recouered not, vntill he restored the sacred stone to the B. Virgin. Therefore with common consent, both determined to restore to our B. Lady, that which they had taken from her, earnestly requesting her to pardon their folly, and to restore them their former health, when she receiued her owne againe. Wheruppon presently putting the morter into a silke purse, and witnessing the miracle by their letters, they deliuered it to the Pilgrims, which came to Loreto, and so recouered their health. And the morter remayning
in the silke purse (as it was) was brought to Loreto by the Pilgrims of Placentia to Rutilius Benzonius the Bishop, who assoone as he read their letter, gaue credit to the miracle, and published it abroad; to represse the boldnes of others by their example.


Our B. Lady appearing to two, in the same forme wherin she is reuere^ced at Loreto, restoreth them their health despaired of by Physitians. CHAP. XVI.
Vict. Brigant.ABOVT that time the B. Virgin did shew by euident tokens, that her Image in the House of Loreto, was as deere vnto her, as her natiue House it self-Tiberius Delphinus a seruant of the Duke of Mantua, being deere vnto him many waies, and consuming with a grieuous and a long ague, by vehmency of the sicknes was vpon departing. Wheruppon as the Priest
was carefully reco^mending his soule (armed with christian mysteries) to the protectio^ of God and his Saints, the House of Loreto innobled with many famous miracles, came to the mind of him that lay a dying, which whiles he was in health, he could not visit by reason of busines. And soone after a representation of the same House, and of the B. Virgin appearing vnto him in his rest, stirred him to make a vow to the Mother of God, and to hope well of himself: which was to good effect. For he, who euen now lay void of all sense, beginning to reuiue, and opening his eyes, spake more cheerfully to them that were present, and told them how he had made a vow to visit the B. Virgin of Loreto, leauing them all dismaied at the wonder of the thing. Within few dayes he throughly recouered, and assoone as by any meanes health permitted him to performe the iourney of his votiue Pilgrimage, he went to Loreto before he had gotten sufficient strength, so feruent was his desire to be free fro^ the vow which he had made. And assoone as he came thither, with harty thankes to God and his B. Mother, he performed his vow, and nigh at hand beholding the most religious Image of our B. Lady with dilige^t care: Truly (said he) in this
very likenes and similitude, I saw our B. Lady in my sleep when I was at the point of death: that it may playnly appeare the Image at Loreto to be most like, or els most deare vnto her. Soone after, this miracle was confirmed by an other of the same kind. Iohn Raffrede a yong man of Lasturo, a Village of the State of Venice, lay sicke not far from Bergamo of an incurable disease: and the anguish of his infirmity, wherwith he was most miserably vexed, brought with it cruell, and almost perpetuall paine in all his members. Therfore despayring of help by Physitians, he inuocated the B. Virgin of Loreto, giuing himself wholy vnto her by vow: which if he obtayned, he promised to performe with all speed. His vow had effect. Being giuen ouer by the Physitians, he did not so much wrestle with the disease, as with death it self. But suddainly in the very agony he had present help. For our B. Lady (as it were vnlooked for) appearing vnto him in the same shape, wherein she is reuerenced at Loreto, which before that time he neuer saw so much as in picture, and bidding him be of good comfort, replenished him with great ioy and comfort. Wheruppon out of hand for deuotion sake, the sicke man endeuoured
to kneele downe on his bed as well as he could, and with great confidence in this exceeding da^ger of death, began to implore the assistance of the Mother of God. And she, with a meeke and a motherly countenance, said vnto him: Sonne, put away feare, thou shalt not dy of this sicknes; be thankfull and mindfull of thy Vow. For which cause calling to his houshold, that they might hasten thither, to reuerence the Queene of Heauen with due deuotion, our B. Lady went suddainly out of his sight. And the promise was performed on both sides. For the sicke man recouering a litle after, came to Loreto to performe his vow, the 90. yeare of this age; where leasurely viewing the Image of the Mother of God, he affirmed to those, to whome he related this miracle, that the B. Virgin appeared vnto him in his sleep, in that very forme and attire: that you may thinke that shape and habit was pleasing to our B. Lady.



A Knight of Flanders being deliuered from his enemies by an euident miracle, dedicateth a wax-candle of huge bignesse, to our B. Lady of Loreto. CHAP. XVII.
Vict. Brig.ABOVT the same time a Knight of Flanders presented to the B. Virgin of Loreto. For a gift, a votiue candle of huge bignes, to wit of 300. pound weight, in token of a miracle almost incredible. The cause of his vow and gift was this. The said Knight (his name is not set downe, for he himself would haue it concealed) escaped manifest perill of life in Flanders by help of our B. Lady: who by commandment of the Prince of Parma going on improuidently with eight horsemen to view the coast, fell into the ambush of the enemy. The enemies were about eight hundred, some horsmen some footemen, who quickly spreading themselues abroad tooke from the^ all hope
of escape. Notwithstanding the Fleming wanted not courage. For inuocating our B. Lady of Loreto, and animating his fellowes theru^to, they valiantly fought with them, their confidence in the B. Virgin preuailing so much with them, that it easily put away the cogitation of so great danger: Such was the courage and strength which was giuen to that small company, by the vertue of the heauenly help which they besought, not failing them in their fight. For when on euery side they were assaulted with so many handes and weapons of sundry sortes, by the protection of the Mother of God, they sustayned the violence of their enemies and the multitude of their weapons so long, till the Spanish forces came to rescue them, and then the danger turned on their enemies themselues, wherof many were slayne or taken. And that there may be no doubt at all of the vertue of the heauenly help, neither the Knight himself, nor any of his fellowes, nor yet any of their horses were hurt the least iote in so cruell a fight, which held for the space of two houres; that you may thinke they fought vnder the protection of God, who fighting for them made them to ouercome. In regard wherof the Knight desiring to
haue a perpetuall monument of so worthy a miracle to remayne at Loreto, sent the wax-candle of huge bignes, wherof I haue spoken, with intent, that on certaine festiuall daies it should burne before the Maiesticall House of the B. Virgin. And it is said, that he also gaue a certaine stipend, that when the same was consumed, an other candle of like bignes should be put in his place, for euerlasting memory to posterity.


A deafe-man recouereth his hearing. CHAP. XVIII.
THIS which I am to relate is not so meruailous, Annal. Laur. Rier. Vict. Brig. but better witnessed. Erasmus Deane of the Cathedrall Church of Cracouia in Polonia, being deafe in either eare, heard almost nothing at all, so that they must deale with him not so much by wordes as by signes. But before his hearing was taken from him, by report
he had heard many admirable things of the B. Virgin of Loreto: and seeing he could get no help by means of physicke, and that the heauenly vertue of the House of Loreto came often to his mind, much grieued and perplexed with the infirmity; it stirred him to come to the sacred House of our B. Lady, that with great confidence he might say Masse in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, and implore her help, where he found most present remedy for his griefe. For assoone as he had ended Masse, he perceiued that his left eare was opened and cured; and the next day saying Masse in the same place, he likewise recouered the vse of his right: Whereby he, who came to the most sacred House halfe deafe, or rather deafe indeed, within two dayes departed thence full glad to haue recouered the perfect vse of hearing. Andrevv Be^tiuoglio Gouernour of Loreto. He himself told the whole matter with teares of ioy to Rutilius Benzonius the Bishop, and to Andrew Bentiuoglio Gouernour of Loreto, on the Nones of Aprill, the yeare of our Redemption 1590. At which time the new Citty of Loreto being built with great speed on the inlarged space, was suddainly interrupted by the vntimely death of Xystus, assaied also by other Popes to small purpose.
For Monte-Regal was pared about and left half plained: the new Houses which were crected without the old circuite, be now insteed of Suburbs, wherof many remayne vnfinished, that you may thinke, the renowme of a Citty was not pleasing to our B. Lady of Loreto, who chose her self a seate in a desert place, lest the fame of the Citty, rather then the Religion of the place, should inuite the Pilgrims to visit her. About that time, Andrew Bentiuoglio departing this life, Fuluius Paulucius Gouernour of Loreto.Fuluius Paulucius the Protonotary Apostolicall succeeded in the Gouernement of Loreto, whose vertue, troublesome times did both exercise and illustrate.



Donaries brought or sent to the B. Virgin of Loreto, in the troublesome time of Gregory the XIIII. CHAP. XIX.
SHORTLIE after in the same yeare of our Redemption, to witt, 1590. in the moneth of September, Vrbane the vij. was created Pope, who was as memorable for the shortnes of his Popedome as the loue of all men towards him. Gregorie the 14. a good and a godly man was chosen after Vrbane, but being weake and sickly most of his raigne, he sate but twelue moneths. This time was most miserable and wicked, and no kind of mischiefe was wanting. For the Bandites which reuolted in the later time of Xystus, ranged freely vp and downe in troupes, much infesting the wayes of the Popes dominio^s with armes. Besides there was a penury with great dearth. Aboue all, a grieuous mortality, the companion of extreme famine, spread almost
ouer all Italy, among all degrees and ages. Neither was this yeare onely, but also the next as fatall to Italy, wherwith the fields were almost depriued of husbandme^, the Citties of Cittizens, and townes and villages of inhabitants, not so much with sicknes, as (which is most miserable) with hunger and famine. Wherby there came fewer Pilgrims and Donaries to Loreto, then were wont, but more vowes to visit and adorne the House of Loreto, as the yeares ensuing did well declare. Yet notwithstanding this very time, which wasted so many Citties of their Cittizens, and townes and villages of their Inhabitants, did not wholy depriue the House of Loreto of gifts. The gift of Lelius Pignatellus and of others.Lelius Pignatellus of Naples dedicated to the B. Virgin a siluer lampe of two pound weight. Cardinall Sfondrato nephew to Gregory the 14. the Image of our B. Lady of Loreto, purtured in a plate of siluer, of three pound weight. Hercules Sfondrato the Earle such an other siluer Image of our B. Lady of ten pound weight, with a siluer plate of like worke, but of different weight, and two Crewets of siluer. Alfonsus Coroneus a goblet of iewells of great price, which being turned of one entire hollowed gemme, seemeth to be a kind of
Achates, commonly called an Agat. Dionyse Delphinus a Venetian, worthy ornature of cloth of siluer, for the Priest when he sacrificeth. N. Pernestaina sister to the Viceroies wife of Boeme, a golden Pall, curiously and richly adorned with siluer flowers, like vnto starres, which made goodly ornature for the Bishop. This gift is most memorable, aswell for profit as bounty. Peter Tyrannus Calliensis,The inheritance of Peter Tyrannus. a very rich and a wealthy man, by his will made the B. Virgin of Loreto the sole heire of his patrimony. The chiefest of his inheritance was Falconaria a rich Farme, which being very fruitfull both for corne and wine, is situated most conueniently, to wit, not far from Ancona and the sea, that from thence the commodities and fruites may be conueyed to Loreto by boate. The whole inheritance, is thought to be worth about three score thousa^d Crownes, which must needes be a very great furderance to supplie all the necessities of the House of Loreto, either present or to come. And truly the great dearth and scarcity, which at that time afflicted Italy, exceedingly increased the huge expences of the House of Loreto, and for the most part
hindered the commodity of her Almes and donaries. For besides 800. Crownes, which the Treasury of Loreto payeth yearely to the Bishop, she disburseth six thousand Crownes to twelue Chanons, to twelue mansionary Priests (as they call them) to six Cleargy men, Coadiutors of the Quyre, to diuers Quyristers, and many other Officers of the Church, besides prouision of wax, oile, and other necessaries for the sacred House it self. Also it mayntaineth all the companie of the Gouernour of Loreto, a great family of Artificers, of husbandmen and sheepheards: wherunto are added two Colledges, the one of the Society of Iesus, the other of Sclauonians, which when the times were better, receiued almost fiuethousand Crownes out of the reuenewe^ of the House of Loreto. In the hospitall and spittle, many Pilgrims both sicke and poore are cherished; to religious men ad Priests, diet is giuen for three dayes: to other poore strangers, bread is publickely destributed. Bishops, Cardinals. and other principall men, are curteously and bountifully intertayned; and the sumptuous and honourable building of our B. Lady, is neuer allmost intermitted. Whereby these so great and huge yearely expences are said
to exceed twenty thousa^d crownes, which seeing the wealth of Loreto did with difficulty discharge in the abounda^ce and plenty of things, at those times the expences must needes be much increased. And the scarcity of victualls continued almost foure yeares; all which time the reuenewes of the Land, and of the Treasury, were double or triple lesse then was wont; and yet the charges were almost doubled. Wherefore the inheritance of Calliensis did relieue the necessities of Loreto in very fit oportunity, but not more for the present, then for the time to come. Shortly after a small thing to be spoken of, did not a little illustrate the religion of the House of Loreto. Marcus Sara a famous Captaine of the Bandites infesting the popes dominions with armes, VVhat respect Marcus Sara vsed to the most Sacred House and comming into Picene with a great company of wicked confederates, was euen ouercome by the respect which all do commonly beare to the B. Virgin of Loreto. For passing by Loreto, and comming to a conuenient place, he saluted our B. Lady with a ioyfull peale of shotte of all his co^panies, and was so far from violating the treasures of Loreto, as that he reuerenced the sacred House with gifts. Being kept our of the Church and the Citty it self, he
sent a certaine man to Loreto with a gift, that money might be liberally giuen to the Mother of God by them, who by violence and murder are accustomed to get it: God of his godnes mitigating such stony hartes in fauour of his B. Mother. Meane-while albeit there was great dearth and scarcity of corne, neuerthelesse Paulucius the Gouernour dayly distributed great quantity of bread to the poore Pilgrims; a gift most gratefull vnto them, because the famine which they sustained was very great.


The chiefest Indulgence of Clement the VIII. CHAP. XX.
INNOCENTIVS the ix. sitting about two moneths, succeeded after the one yeares raigne of Gregory the xiiij. who hauing donne many worthy things in the beginning of his raigne, frustrated the notable hope of all good men, being quickly taken away by suddaine death. After whome Clement the
viij. succeeding, deserued worthy remembrance for his Fatherly prouidence and solicitude. For in the beginning of his Popedome with all diligence he lessened the dearth of corne, increased by the wickednes of men, and putting the theeues to flight, opened the wayes which they had besieged, with great good of the pilgrimage of Loreto. Who by reason of his exceeding piety to the B. Virgin Mother of God, graced the House of Loreto with so worthy a gift of Indulgences, that now nothing may seeme to be added therunto. For knowing very well that many Pilgrims did resort to the sacred House of Loreto at all times of the yeare; and also considering that the Indulgences of former Popes were restrayned to certaine times, he thought it an indignity, that so many deuout people ouercomming great labours and perills of trauell, euen in the winter time, should depart from the B. Virgin of Loreto, without the benefit of Indulgences: specially being a knowne custome, that nothing is more vsed in the Pilgrimage of Loreto, then carefully to purifie their soules by sacred Confession, and afterward to lead a new life. Therefore Clement the Pope thinking it for the best,
and for the honour of our B. Lady to haue none to depart sorrowfull from her, most bountifuly granted remission of sins to all that rightly visited the Cell of the B. Virgin of Loreto at all times of the yeare: And also commanded that the day of the Transportation of the sacred House into Picene, should yearely be celebrated on the 4. of the Ides of December. In the meane time, multitudes of strangers resorting thither from all places, the ancient grace and beauty of the Maiesty of Loreto began to be renewed, not onely by zeale of peoples hartes, but also by votaries and gifts increasing in these difficult times. Cardinall Sfondrato Legate to Bologna, comming to Loreto and deuoutly saluting the Mother of God, The gift of Card. Sfondrato and of others. had a great desire to behold the Image of Loreto neere at hand. Wheruppon setting to a ladder, and going vp with great deuouotion, after he had well viewed the proportion of the B. Virgin, he priuately tooke of a ring of great worth (the ensigne of his Cardinalty) and at his comming downe dedicated it to our B. Lady, either as a pledge of his deuotion towards her, or els as a token of her Patronage towards him. The ring is of gold, enriched with a precious diamond, estimated at fiue hundred
Crownes. But this is the chiefest praise of Cardinall Sfondrato, who in the compasse of two yeares visited the B. Virgin of Loreto three times, and reuerenced her with three excellent gifts; such sweetnes did his soule find in the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin. The same yeare returning from Bologna to Rome, and comming to Loreto to salute his Patronesse, he would not shew himself in her sight without a donary. For he dedicated to the B. Virgin a Crosse of gold, adorned with beautifull Emeralds, said to be worth foure thousand Crownes: which hangeth at the most rich chayne of precious stones of our B. Lady, as a notable ornament therof. The next yeare after, Cardinal Sfondrato going to Milan, reuisited the B. Virgin of Loreto againe, and for a gift gaue her a gold ring with a rare diamond. The diamond is bigger than the nayle of a mans hand, which being put on the finger of the sweet child IESVS, with the reflection of the lights, doth shine like vnto a star, a gift so much the more to be esteemed, because it is well knowne that he bought it for that purpose, for two thousand Crownes. Antony Pallauicino of Cremona brought an other diamond in a gold ring, with peraduenture the like minde, but not
of like price, for it is worth but a hundred Crownes. Also the Cardinall of LORAINE sent diuers gifts of Princely munificence by certaine men: A chrystall Crosse with the Image of Christ of gold, a golden Chalice standing on a foote of chrystall, two Candlestickes and two Crewets with their ewer, a Cup and a sprinkle for holy water, a Pix and a Pax, all of excellent chrystall, gold, and amber, esteemed at two or three thousand Crownes. The heires of Cardinall Caesius an Image most excellently wrought, representing the B. Virgin of Loreto, sitting on a House with many Angells attending round about her. The worke it self is most notable, all wouen with silke and gold, euery way almost three Cubits broad: and the Images of the Mother of God and of the Angels, are made with so great are, as they seeme to haue life. Cardinall RVSTICVCIO, furniture of siluer for the Altar and the Priest, beautified with an Image of the B. Virgin of Loreto, and the armes of his family. VICTORIVS LABDAMARVS LAVDENSIS Worthy ornature for the Altar, of siluer-cloth of tissue, garnished with great flowers. The Prince Venusinus other ornature for the Altar,
of tissue-cloth of gold. Iason Villanus a Cittizen of Bologna, a Vestment for the Priest of tissue-cloth of gold; adorned with the armes of his family. Bernard Strozzio a Florentine, double furniture for the Altar, and as much for the Priest, glittering with gold and siluer. Marques Riano siluer vestments for the Priest and Ministers celebrating with solemnity, set forth with silke flowers of equall distance; and ornature for the Bishop of the same stuffe and worke. Luke Turregianus of Florence furniture for the Altar and the Priest of cloth of siluer, flourished with great golden flowers of curled worke. Ferdinando Gonzaga an ornament of gold for the Altar imbrodered and beset with pearle. Scipio Spinelli Duke of Seminario two standing pots of siluer a Cubit long, wrought and engrauen with rare art, and adorned with Images and acts of our B. Lady: wherof the one doth hold a great lilly of siluer, the other a golden bough of flourishing roses, placed on each side the feet of the B. Virgin. Marcus Germanus Baron of Valcassano, a Crownet of pearle and iewells, seeming like vnto Roses, featly fastened in gold. Iohn Baptista Cigola of Bressa, a siluer plate with his owne Image
as if he were praying. Maximilian Archduke of Austria his owne Image of the same fashion and substance, but of far greater beauty. The Duke of Terra-Noua a Prelate praying to our B. Lady, engrauen in a golden plate, and a Chalice and Paten of gold. The wife of Virginius Vrsinius of Nomentana the siluer Image of a supplia^t, about two pound weight. Luke Turregianus of Florence a siluer Image of himself and his wife in manner of suppliants of no small weight. Finally others dedicated other Images purtured in plates of siluer, of two and three pound weight, wherof this is the worthiest. Peter Lomellinus of Genua presented a siluer infant of naturall stature wrapt in his swath-ba^ds, said to be about ten pound weight, which we may easily co^iecture to be a votiue gift. But these without doubt were votiues. A mans head of gold of reasonable bignes and weight, from Iohn Iacob Grimano. A iaw with teeth of siluer, adorned with two diamonds and three Carbuncles from Francis Deitristan, neerest to Clement the Pope in his Chamber. And many siluer lampes were presented, notable for workmanship and weight, But one doth excell among them all. The gift of Iohn Charles Imperialis of Genua, adorned, as it were, with three armes of Imagery, giuing
light in ech therof, being about thirty pound in weight. There is also an other worthy gift in another kinde from Ferdinando Medices Great Duke of Tuscany; to wit, a siluer Galley two Cubits high, furnished and set forth with oars, and all manner of tackling, about 40. pound weight: which the wordes engrauen in either side of the oar declare to be a votiue gift.

FERDINAND MEDICES GREAT DVKE OF TVSCANY, DEDICATED IT TO THE B. VIRGIN MOTHER OF GOD, FOR PRESERVING HIS GALLIES FROM THE PLAGVE, THE YEARE M.D.XCIII.

And the gift of Cardinall Mont-alto was notable for value and weight, who dedicated to the B. Virgin of Loreto, a siluer Image of himself and his brother of great beauty, and of a hundred and fifty pound weight, with this deuour inscription.

ALEXANDER PERETTO CARD. MONTALTO VICECHANCELLOVR OF THE HOLY ROMAN CHVRCH, THE NEPHEVV OF XYSTVS V. BEING MINDFVLL AND GRATEFVLL TO OVR B. LADY OF LORETO, FOR PRESERVING HIM AND MICHAEL HIS BROTHER, GAVE IT FOR DEVOTION SAKE, THE YEARE M.D.XCIV.


The worke is said to haue stood in more than two thousand Crownes.


The gifts of Noble women. CHAP. XXI.
The gift of the Viceroyes vvife of Boemia and of other Noble vvomen.AT that time the liberality of noble wome^ was very notable. Polixena Pernestaina the Viceroies wife of Boemia, prese^ted to the B. Virgin of Loreto for a gift, the head of S. Gerio^, Captaine of the Thebeans, inclosed in a worthy case, which being parcell guilt and curiously wrought, fro^ the brest representeth S. Gerio^ in armour. The armour it self is adorned with gold and siluer, and on the Martyrs head doth stand a Crowne of precious stones, vnder which a base of Ebony and siluer sheweth the reliques of the Thebean Martyrs inclosed in chrystall: which Polixena sent as a votiue gift to our B. Lady, for restoring of health vnto her husband. The Princesse of Vastalla dedicated to the B. Virgin two golden Images, the one of her self, the other of her husband, with two hartes of gold, the whole of six
pound weight. Mary Boadilia, a Galley in a plate of siluer, with a high Image of our B. Lady of Loreto. The Princesse of Castro-uetrano a Crosse of gold, litle truly for quantity, but notable for substa^ce, for it is adorned with six diamonds, set in gold. The Duchesse of Niuers presented by her husband two siluer Candlesticks of costly worke, of eight pound weight. Hieronyma Spinula ornature for the Altar of violet damaske, wrought with gold, and two Crewets of siluer with their ewer curiously and richly engrauen. Violanta Farnesia two siluer Candle sticks of good worke. Salustia Crescentia a Roman, siluer attire for the B. Virgin flourished with golden starres. The Princesse of Bisinia, a golden Dragon beautified with iewells, valewed at 700. Crownes. Iustina Vice-Count ornature of needle-worke, of gold, siluer, and silke, flourished with admirable and new worke. For the worke it self being laid on no ground nor directio^, is wrought with the needle, with continued and intermingled threeds of gold, siluer, and silke of diuers colours, void spaces left betweene, commonly called A point in the aire. A worke of secret skill, and almost of infinite labour. For the ornature wherof we speake, being made for the Altar,
and also of the said worke, contayneth the xv. Mysteries of the Rosary of our B. Lady, very curiously expressed within square spaces; wherof euery other is adorned with great flowres, as it were of Checker-worke, and that these voide spaces might not be vnfilled, all the ornature is stitched with twisted siluer: which truly (if we belieue the report) was not only the gift of Vicecount, a most worthy Matron, but also her owne worke; which may very well be, co^sidering that there are many gifts of other noble women, which themselues did also worke, specially veiles for Chalices, and attire for our B. Lady. Isabell Cosen-German to the Duke of Sauoy, and wife of the Lord Siluester N. sent a worthy gift, wrought (as they say) with her owne hands, to wit, ornature for the Altar, Priest and Ministers, celebrating with solemnity, made of silke and gold, with new and admirable worke. Iacoba Duchesse of Cleeue sister to the Marques of Saltzthurg a chayne of gold, adorned with a hanging globe of carbuncle and diamond.



The comming, and gift of Christine wife to the Great Duke of Tuscany. CHAP. XXII.
THE comming of Christine wife to the Great Duke of Tuscany, was very memorable, for many tokens of piety and munificence: who setting forth towards Loreto with a most Princely trayne, brought with her great gifts: and not forgetting Christian modesty and holy S. Francis, put on a plaine garment of ash-colour, and laid aside gold and iewells, that in such simple attire, she might delight the eyes of the heauenly Queene, whome she knew allwaies to loue pouerty. And the example of the deuout Lady, preuailed so much with her maids, matrons, seruants, and the guard of her person, that all that did accompany her in this pilgrimage did imitate her modesty and attire. Neither did Clement the Pope faile to forward her worthy piety. For as she passed through the
townes of the Popes Dominions, which way soeuer she went, intertaynment was giuen her after a Princely sort, when not onely the playnesse of her attire was holde^ for a wonder, but also her exceeding piety for an example, specialy after she approached neere to Loreto. For assoone as she came out of Recanaty, and beheld the Church of Loreto a far of, forth with she made hast out of the horslitter wherin she rode, fell downe on her knees, and in the very way saluted the B. Virgin, none of her traine refusing to do that worke of piety, which their Lady performed. Going thence afoote to Loreto with certaine Bishops, and the rest of her retinew, she went straight to the House of our B. Lady, and contemning cushions and all other Princely furniture, kneeled downe very deuoutly in the Porch of the most sacred House. But the Bishops and Card. Gallo himself ernestly persuading her to come into the sacred Cell of the Mother of God, she answered, that it did not beseeme her to passe that most Maiesticall threshold, and to present herselfe before the most holy Virgin, vntill she had cleansed her sinnes by sacred Confession. Neither could their intreaties make her to alter her determination;
such singular deuotion did her deuout soule shew, towards the B. Virgin of Loreto: Wherefore at last hauing rightly purified her soule, and receiued the heauenly banquet, she entred into the most sacred Cell, the feruour of her piety (as it happeneth) much increasing by delay: For this meane while hauing a more feruent desire to see and reuerence our B. Lady, she kneeled downe very reuerently, and spent many houres deuoutly in prayer: which she did not once onely, but three dayes together for so long she remayned at Loreto. All which time she was so conuersant in the Church, and attentiue to diuine prayer, that you would haue thought, she had dwelt in the Church. Like magnificence corresponded to these tokens of piety. For at her departure, she sent children into the Church with gifts of Princely munifice^ce: Among which were ornaments for the Altar, Priest and Ministers, celebrating with solemnity curled three manner of waies with gold and siluer, of admirable workmanship and art: Lynnen for the Altar of most excellent stuffe, and worke: For it is wrought all-ouer with excellent pictures of the Prophetes, Sybills, Apostles and Euangelists, curiously inserted amo^g boughes and flowers with such
admirable needle-worke, that I dare affirme, scarce any thing in this kind, euer to haue beene more curious, more precious, more admirable. For it well appeareth by her owne hand-writing, that the price amounted to eight thousand Crownes. Notable veiles for holy Chalices, and other such like, were also presented with her other gifts.


The testimony and gift of a Spanish Priest, honoured with a miracle. CHAP. XXIII.
ABOVT that time, Alfonsus Sancius a Spanish Priest both learned and godly, hauing lately returned from the East, and the Ilands of China called the Philippines, came to visit the House of Loreto. And before he departed thence, I my self found him admiring the religion of the place, and familiarly asking the cause of his wonder, he answered me with admiration. O good God! what manner
of thing is this! Truly I neuer felt the like vnto this; nor neuer found God more present in all my life; so doth a certaine heauenly sweetnes flow into my soule, in this most sacred House. He also recounted vnto me, how he had beene at Vadalupe, Monte-Seratto, and other notable Houses of the B. Virgin in Spaine, but neuer felt the grace of God so present; for there seemeth to be the barke, but heere indeed the marrow it self. And obtayning of the Gouernour of Loreto by means of Cardinall Caietan, in whose company he came, to remayne all night in the holier part of the sacred Cell, he passed the same in watching and prayer, and afterward reported to his familiar friends, that in all his life he neuer spent a more pleasant and more blessed night. In regard whereof he desired to grace the most Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin with some gift of his: and hauing brought with him (euen from China it self) a white damaske vestment, with this he determined to beautify the Nicet of the B. Virgin Mother of God, and the Image of Christ Crucified, which came with the sacred house. A taylour therfore was sent for, who spreading abroad and measuring the damaske, first denied that
there was stuffe inough for both those purposes. But Sancius vrging him to measure it againe with more diligent care, he staied a while; and when he had often turned it to and fro, he began to affirme, that at last he had found a meanes to effect that which he desired, but so, that those ornaments would be something shorter, then was fitting. Go to therefore, said Sancius, and follow this course, if any thing, be wanting, our B. Lady her self will supplie it. He obeyed, and lest there might be any suspition of errour, he had the old ornature of the Nicet at hand, according to which he determined to make the forme of the new, and so cutt it out, Sancius himself looking on, and tooke it with him to his shoppe. But the next day assoone as it was light, the tailour came vnto him crying out like one dismayed: Without doubt our B. Lady hath wrought a miracle in her ornament. For the new furniture of her Nicet, which yesterday was too short, is now longer by a handfull. Sancius followed the man into his shoppe, to belieue his owne eyes and not his wordes, and found that he reported no vntruth, neither could he deuise any
thing to hinder it from a miracle. For he saw that the veile of the Crucifix (which he caused to be made) was iust and nothing at all diminished: and the damaske was made of a certaine strange worke, that the deceit of adding such as ours is, could not deceiue one skilfull in such things: albeit in such things, no feare is to be had of adding, but rather of diminishing. Sancius himself, with many others, stood by the taylour when he measured, and cut out the vestment, that it may be euident no errour was committed by improuidence: wherfore by him and others it was holden for a Miracle: but we will leaue the thing indifferent.



Bracelets which were offered to the B. Virgin, do fasten themselues on the hands of Christ her little Child. CHAP. XXIV.
BVT this is not so meruailous for the gift it self, as for the euent therof. Beatrice Gazea a Matron of great delicacie and riches, was married to a most worthy Cittizen of Rome; who for deuotion comming to Loreto in the moneth of May, the 93. yeare of this age, forthwith went into the inward part of the sacred Cell, where the most religious Image of the B. Virgin of Loreto, holding the sweet child IESVS in her lap, is scene and reuerenced neere at hand; which is adorned with a most precious garment, and decked in magnificent sort. Praying there with feruour to Christ and his B. Mother, Gazea had a great desire to behold the countenance and ornature of the B. Virgin with more attention: And blaming the imperfection of
her sight, requested the keeper (who at that time was Papyrius N.) to shew her the Image of the Mother of God, more exquisitly with the light of a torch. He willingly condescended vnto it. For with a burning torch, he shewed her the B. Virgin, and at her intreaty told also who gaue all the donaries that were about her. Among the rest, there was a fro^tlet of orie^t pearle of good bignes and beauty, dedicated to the B. Virgin by a Matron of Rome, who being giuen to many delightes and pleasures, lately departed this life, albeit of a cruell kind of death, yet very Christianlike and godly. Beatrice hearing this woman named, and knowing her familiarly, forthwith burst into admiration. Behold the cause, why she by the grace of the B. Virgin, had so godly an end of her delicate life! Then turning to the keeper: And I (said she) would willingly dedicate these bracelets (then the which I esteeme nothing more) to Christ and his B. Mother, if I thought that the gift of a wicked woman, would not be vngratefull vnto them. The keeper animated the woman seeming too fearfull, saying that Christ was the Sauiour, and Marie the Patronesse of the wicked. Wheruppon in continent she pulled of her bracelets made of antique
worke, of iewells and gold, and gaue them to the keeper to be offered to Iesus and his B. mother. And presently the Keeper tooke a little forke prepared for such vses, and put theron both the bracelets, to direct them to the most sacred Statua, intending to hang them on the erected singers of the right hand of the sweet child Christ Iesus, for at that present there was no fitter a place. But as he was drawing backe the sticke, he obserued that one of the bracelets remained on the forke, and that the other hauing passed the singers of the sweet child Iesus, was fastened on his hand, so fitly, that fitter it could not be. A meruailous thing. Though the Keeper saw it, yet he thought it might be donne by chance. But afterward putting the sticke thither againe nothing moued out of his place. To hang there also the other bracelet, there happened another vndoubted miracle. For by little and little drawing the forke towards him, thinking that the gifte remained on the same hand of Christ, on which he left it, suddainly he saw the bracelett remooued from the right to the left hand (the golden globe which he held in that hand, laid downe in the B. Virgins lap) and
the said bracelet fastened theron so fitlie and so elegantly, that by setting of ladders, with leisure and of purpose, it could not be done more aptly and seemely. Wherupon the Keeper being suddainly stroken with a certaine sacred dread at the admiration of the thing, said to the woman: And Christ himselfe doth shew, that thy gift is very gratefull vnto him; for he hath put both thy bracelets on his owne hands, whiles I was doing another thing. Wherwith the woman (heauenly grace assisting her) sighed; and whether for the riot of her former life, or els for the late token of the diuine beneuole^ce, in her sighing powred forth such aboundance of teares, that the sighes and sobs of her weeping, were heard of them that prayed in the other part of the sacred Chamber. Which moouing diuers of the company, they came straight to the holier part of the sacred Chamber, to see the woman ouercome with teares and deuotion, and the Keeper himself admiring the wonder of so great a thing: Who afterward with many others told me this very thing as it happened, which seemed wonderfull to all that considered the order and euent therof; and was much spoken of both by word and writing of many. Also
at this day the sweet Child IESVS doth weare the said bracelets on his hands, for a monument of the Miracle.


Two are deliuered from danger of death. CHAP. XXV.
BVT to many, peradue^ture, this may rather seeme a wonder then a miracle, but it is an euident miracle. The same yeare Bartholomew Meliorinus, no meane Cittizen of Genua, being at Placemia, from altercation (as it happeneth) fell to blowes. He was alone. The contention began in the House of a Merchant of Florence, with the maister of the House himself. Wheruppon the houshold running at the first noise therof, layd hands on their weapons to help their Maister. In the fray Meliorinus receiued a grieuous wound in the shoulder; and to make it more grieous, the dagger being thrust in with great force, brake in the midst. At the intreaty of others the quarrell was ended. Meliorinus was carried
home dangerously wounded. Forthwith Surgeons are sent for, who wyping the wound looked on it, and found that the dagger being thrust deep into the bone stucke so fast, that it could not otherwise be gotten out, then by launcing and making the wound greater, that they might haue meanes to come vnto the broken weapon. When they had cut the flesh foure waies about the wound in manner of a Crosse, they assaied to pull out the peece of the dagger with pinchers. When that preuailed not, they inuented a new and a paynfull remedy to bring it forth, by beating of his brest on the contrary side, which did much increase the most bitter payne of the wou^d it self. After the dagger was both beaten and drawne with the pinchers, and mooued nothing at all, they constantly pronounced that he could not liue, vnles God tooke mercy on him. Wheruppon newes of his death comming to Genua, his friends lamented him as dead. But he thinking to adde diuine to humane help, implored the aide of the B. Virgin of Loreto. A wonderfull thing to be spoken and seene. The dagger mooued so easily out of the place to follow the pinchers, that you may playnly perceiue it came not out so much by the endeauour
of man, as the goodnes of God. And the sicke man obtaining his vow, and recouering of that wound, came to Loreto this very yeare 1594. euen as we were committing these things to writing; and giuing manifold thankes to the B. Virgin, left with her the peece of the dagger, in token of so great a benefit. About the same time Iohn Baptista Iudex, a yong man of the same Citty, noble for descent and wealth, came to Loreto in performance of a Vow. Who being at Venice the yeare before, and falling into a grieuous and troublesome ague, was so cruelly afflicted therwith, that it brought him to the last cast, and being forsaken by the Physitians, he had no hope at all of recouering his health. But being verie much deuoted to the B. Virgin of Loreto, he confidently implored the help of his patronesse in this extremitie. His trust deceiued him not. For though the Phisitians despaired of the sick-mans amendment, and thought verily that he could not liue; yet being called vnto him againe by his houshold, to feele his pulse, they were presently put in so good comfort by signes of health, that they conceiued great hope of his recouerie, and deliuered the like to the sick-man and his frends. Their
hope deceiued them not. Because from that time, he began to be better euery houre, and almost euerie moment, vntill the ague quite forsooke him, that in few dayes he throughly recouered, and the yeare after came to Loreto to performe his vow, where as I was committing these things to writing, he himselfe told me the whole matter, as I haue related it.


A notorious wicked man was miraculously debarred from comming into the most sacred Cell, before he had made his Confession. CHAP. XXVI.
ALSO at this very time Almightie God shewed by new miracles, what care he hath of the sanctity of the House of Loreto. A certaine Pilgrime came to Loreto loaden with all kind of wickednes, and exceedingly giuen to an vngodly and a desperate life. Before whome, as he presumed to passe the threshold of this
most sacred Cell, in the very entrance was presented a certaine ghost of horrible shape, which deterred the desperate bold wretch, and draue him backe againe with exceeding feare. Wheruppo^ being touched with remorse for his sinnes, he went vnto the Priest to purge his soule. But to remember the sinnes of so many yeares, much time was requisite, and great feeling of repentance. For he came to Confession nothing prepared, nor thinking therof. Wherfore the Priest persuaded him, to retire him self into the most sacred Chappell, to implore the help of God and his B. Mother, to looke diligently into his former life, and then to come to Confession better prepared. When the Priest had dismissed him, he went about that which he was co^manded, but wicked custome did prolong true pennance, and sorrow of his shame, rather then of his sinnes, did molest and trouble his mind. For which cause the said ghost, appearing vnto him, as he went backe to the sacred Chamber of the B. Virgin, forbad him entrance againe: which made him exceeding sorrowfull, to be twice kept out of the most maiesticall Cell and sight of the Mother of God, as a most wicked and defiled fellow. Wherby true griefe and sorrow for offending
God was giuen vnto him, assoone as he was truely compunct for the loathsomnes of his wicked and filthy life. Wherfore after diligent examination of his conscience, he returned vnto the Priest with weeping eyes to wash away his sinnes aswell with teares, as by Confession: and at last hauing rightly purified his soule, he went to the Maiesticall Cell of the B. Virgin, shamefastly and fearfully. A wonder to be spoken. The entrance which was shut vnto his impudency, was opened to his shamefastnes.


A certaine man intending to commit murder in the House of Loreto, by miracle is changed to the contrary. CHAP. XXVII.
ABOVT the same time there happened an other not vnlike to this. An honest and a rich Cittizen of Ascolo, hauing a sonne, the seauenth moneth of his new marriage, committed him to a
Nourse to be brought vp; and because he was his onely child, and borne before the time, he did often visit him with great sollicitude and care. But it chanced that suddaine death tooke away the weake child without the Nourses fault. Who well knowing what danger she was likely to incurre by the father of the Child, a man of fierce disposition, forthwith fled secretly to Loreto, putting great confidence in the Mother of God. Her hope deceiued her not. For when he saw his onely child dead, he was so enraged with griefe and wrath, that he began to blaspheme God and his Saintes, and to seeke the Nourses death. But when she appeared not, he turned his wrath on her husband, whome he left for dead, hauing giuen him many dangerous woundes. Neither did his fury, being once imbrued in bloud, stay it self heere. For knowing of the Nourses flight, forthwith he tooke his weapo^s, made hast to Loreto, and rusht into the Church, with intent to kill the Nourse, euen in the most sacred Cell it self, before the B. Virgins face. When he had searched euery corner of the Church in vaine, he came to the Cell of the Mother of God, where a little before, the Nourse hauing washed away
the blemishes of her soule, very deuoutly implored the assistance of our B. Lady, hyding her self vnder her protection and shaddow. But this cogitation came into the mind of this furious man, wholy bent to do murder. If that he entred into the sacred Chappell, without doubt his hart would be so mollified therewith, that he should thinke no more of reuenge. Therefore turning an other way, he began to seeke all the corners of the Church. But behold as he went to and fro like one distracted, vnawares he passed by the Altar famous for the title of the Annunciation of our B. Lady, which is without the most sacred Chappell vnder the window wherat Gabriell the Archangell is said to haue entred. And by chance seeing the lights through the window (wherof many burne continually before the B. Virgin) he was so mooued with the present religion of the place, that he fell downe on his knees. A meruailous thing to be said. The fierce and hardned man was presently so mollified that he changed his mind to the contrary, we^t vnto one of the Priests, laid aside his weapo^, fell downe at his feete, and told him how he desired to turne a iorney which he had vndertaken for the destruction of
others to his owne saluation. And in this the protection of the Mother of God was very apparant, that he went vnto the same Priest, to whome the nourse had gone a little before. Wherby the Priest hauing sufficient notice of the whole successe of the matter, as soone as he had heard the Confession of the Cittizen of Ascolo, easily persuaded him, being now well pacified, to pardon the innocent woman, and made him faithfully to promise, and to shew, that in good sooth he was friends with her. His deedes were more bountifull than his wordes. For assoone as the woman returned home, he preferred her to gouerne his houshould, and her husband (whome he charitably cured) ouer his husbandry: wherby the danger turned to their good, by the help of the Mother of God. About the same time it was determined to remooue the Sclauonian Colledge to Rome, that the students might more dilige^tly be instructed in good disciplyne. Wherfore by commandment of Pope Clement the eight, the Collegialls being called to Rome, and put into the Roman Seminary, in their part do mayntaine the right and title of the Sclauonian Colledge. This remoouall happened the yeare 1594. which is the last of our History, that
it may comprehend the full three hundred yeares of the House of Loreto. And these we haue chosen among many, and almost innumerable things, to commit to writing, being content to admonish the Reader, that the aboundance of the matter and miracles of Loreto is so great, that so many and so great can be related by none, but many more and greater may remaine to be rehearsed.


The Celebrity and Maiesty of the House of Loreto. CHAP. XXVIII.
TRVELY I thinke I may do a thing worth my labour, to co^clude this History of Loreto with a short rehearsall of the incredibile Celebrity and Maiesty of the House of Loreto it self. There passeth no time of the yeare, no moneth, no day, in which the Cell of the most B. Virgin is not reuere^ced of many stra^gers. This co^mendation of piety, is not proper to the Pice^tians and Italians, but co^mon to the Tra^salpines, and the^ that dwell beyo^d the seas, specially to
Sclauonians, French and Flemings. Neither do Spaniards, Portugals, Polonians, or Germanes faile therin. Notwithstanding two times of the yeare are of speciall respect, for the confluence and celebrity of all people and nations, the Spring, and the Autumne; wherof to the one, the sacred Conception of God, to the other, the Birth of the B. Virgin Mother of God, do giue beginning to the solemnity. And ech doth continue three moneths; all which time the House of Loreto is almost dayly honoured with great concourse of people. For there is no Citty, no Towne, no Village, nor no Streete of the Territory of Picene, which doth not yearly in troupes and multitudes, visit the B. Virgin of Loreto. Whose example doth inuite the borderers therabout, to wit, of Abruzzo, Vmbria, Flaminia, Aemilia, and the rest of Italy to deserue the like praise of pietie. Their manner of comming, for the most part, is thus. The Sodalities go before, euery one both beautified and distinguished with their speciall Ensignes and Banners: Wherof diuers (besides the Image of Christ Crucified) do carry before them the Image of the Mother of God, and of other Saintes excellently represented. The moderators of these Sodalities, and the Priests, with the
musicke of ech company, be the last of the assembly. Then follow their Donaries, siluer Crownets, Chalices, Ca^dles beset with money, rich clothing, siluer Images of Citties and townes and votiue tables betokening the diuine benefitts, which they haue obtayned by the intercessio^ of our B. Lady. Many times men like vnto Angells, and sometimes also like to the Prophets and Sybills, prophesying of the B. Virgin, are graciously placed among them, with other persons singular for the presentation of their attire. And last of all the disordered and confused multitude of the people, doth many times follow this solemnity. In the way, they sing sole^ne praise to God, to his B. Mother, and to the Saintes by turnes; and when they passe by any Citty, they excite the Inhabitants therof, to the religion and reuerence of the B. Virgin of Loreto, by the vertuous example of their piety. But assoone as they behold the House of Loreto (which is seene a far of being seated on a hill) forthwith all prostrate their bodies, and with flowing teares of ioy, salute the Mother of God. Then ordering themselues and going in disposed Companies, they sing Lytanies and Hymnes. Neither are they
without some, who spedily put of their clothes, to put on sack-cloth prepared for that purpose, and follow their fellowes disciplining their naked backes. The Priests of Loreto go in surplisses to the gate of the Towne, to meete these Sodalities of the Pilgrims, and bring the^ into the Church with ringing of bells, and Musicke. When they come to the Porch of the sacred House, with prostrate bodies all the Pilgrimes salute the B. Virgin, with so great feruour and compunction of hart, that they who are present, are so mollified with their deuotio^, that they are compelled to weep for co^pany. But assoone as they come into the sacred Cell of the Mother of God shyning with torches and lampes, and beginne to behold and view the Image of our B. Lady, it is incredible to say, what plaints, what sighes, what teares, are euery where heard. You would easily belieue, that Almighty God himself were present among them. Further, many are replenished with such heauenly dread and vnwonted ioy and do so adhere to those sacred walls, that they can scarce be pulled and drawne for thence. And whiles with great deuotio^ they behold the Altar of the Apostles, the sacred Armory, the dore mured vp, and the chymney, whiles the B. Virgin, doing
any thing in these places, doth occurre to the mindes of the^ that do meditate, they would make no end of beholding, nor no end of kissing those sacred things, if the feruour of many coueting to do the same, did not hinder the^. This in effect is the manner of the bordering people. But the Pilgrims of forraine Nations, come thither in great troupes, some on foote, some on horsbacke, or els in Coaches, most of the^ remarkable in the habit and signes of Pilgrimes: Yet notwithsta^ding their different habit, the reuere^ce which they vse to the House of Loreto, is the self same to the^ all. This is almost co^mon to all, to be fed at the Heaue^ly Table, after the expiation of their sinnes: wherof many do enrich the Altar of the B. Virgin with money and precious Donaries. Howbeit the worthiest gifts are vsually deliuered to the Keepers of the sacred Chappell, that they may be recorded in the bookes of Loreto, that memory, both of them, and of the giuers may be knowne to posterity. The Altar of the Apostles, but specially the Image of the Mother of God, is allwaies magnifice^tly adorned with iewels and other gifts according to the variety of the time. And the sacred Chapel it self doth allwayes shine with white wax-candles, and many siluer lampes;
and for the most part soundeth continually with Musicke and instruments. And (which is chiefe of all) doth allwaies abound with the present grace of Almighty God, which floweth into the hartes of the Pilgrims, that come to visit it: In such sort truly, as it replenisheth the goldy with a certaine vnwonted ioy, the wicked with horrour, to the sicke it giueth remedy, co^fort to the sorrowfull, spirit to theslow, aide to the distressed, health to the forlorne. But the greatest concourse to the Chappell of Loreto is about Easter, Whitsontide, and the Natiuity of the B. Virgin. For besides others innumerable, which come to Loreto, about Easter on foote, on horsbacke, or in Coaches, out of Lo^bardy, Venice, and Dalmatia, many come in great multitudes to Ancona by shipping, whence (for the most part) all go afoot to the sacred House of Loreto. And the day after Easter (in which is read the Gospell of the Pilgrims going to Emmaus) most of them attyre themselues in the habit of Pilgrims, and after the Benediction of their Prelates, begin to set forward by the direction of their Priests, the Keepers of Innocency: of which Pilgrims there is such a multitude, as they may happily exceed twelue thousand: who receiue an incredible concourse of people
from the adioyning Villages, Townes, and Citties, and oftentimes many and great companies of haruest folkes and mowers. But specially the Natiuity of our B. Lady is illustrated with far greater multitude of strangers; almost all Picene (to say nothing of other Cou^treys) resorting to Loreto. For it is well knowne, that in those two dayes, aboue two hundred thousand people came of late to the House of Loreto: and therfore necessity doth inforce the keepers of the most sacred Chappell, at that time to compasse the inward part therof on the outside with railes, that they may easily admit, or exclude whome they will, and keepe of the multitude. Likewise at all times of the yeare, Bands of souldiours and Troupes of Horsmen going to the war, come to Loreto, and when they haue receiued the holy Mysteries, they honour the B. Virgin with sporting-shewes in warlike fashion. And this incredible confluence of strangers hath made the waies which go to Loreto to be most frequented with Innes, the opportunity wherof (ioyned to the commodity of the wayes themselues) yieldeth no difficult Pilgrimage to footmen, howbeit delicate and feeble. Moreouer the sayd wayes are so much frequented, that diuers troupes of
Pilgrims do euery where meete: which is so great an instigation to piety, and ease of trauell, that Marcus Antonius Columna himself (to say nothing of others) a man famous for riches and warlike affaires, was able to performe his votiue Pilgrimage to Loreto on foote. And in very deed when at le^gth they come thither, and behold and see the Mother of God, all receiue so great co^fort of heauenly ioy (Alm. God replenishing their godly hartes therwith) that they co^fesse they haue receiued a very great reward, though their Pilgrimage were difficult and paynefull vnto the^. What should I heere relate how many make vowes to the B. Virgin? How many performe them? How many come out of the sinke of wickednes? How many free their soules from the vnexplicable snares of incestuous delectations? How many forget old enmities, and long continued hatreds? How many despairing of saluation, and making league with Hell, are pulled out of the iawes of Hell it self? For by how much the soules are worthier than the bodies; by so much, more and greater miracles of the B. Virgin of Loreto are manifestly seene, in curing the soules rather than the bodies of men. But because it is the endeauour of man, to explicate by wordes, these and other
things which we haue recounted, seeming to measure the manifold fauours of Alim. God (which do very specially appeare at his beloued Loreto) by humane imbecillity; therfore I thinke it fitter to yield to the burden, than to goe about to say more of those things, which I should but impayre and lessen by my discourse. But this I dare boldly affirme, that the Celebrity and Maiesty of Loreto is so great, as they, who haue not seene it with their eyes, can not conceiue it in their mindes: so that, if hereafter you conferre that which you haue heard, with these things which we haue rehearsed, you shall find the fame to be much lesse, than the thing it self. So much by her incredible Maiesty and dignity, doth one Loreto on earth, not only surpasse all credit, but euen very fame it self, which is wont to declare and explicate all things to the vttermost.
To the greater glory of God, and of our B. Lady of Loreto.


