


A SILVER Watch-bell.

CHAP. I. Of the shortnesse, frailtie, and miseries of mans life.
THis present transitorie life in the Scriptures is called a Pilgrimage,Gen. 47. Sirac. 40. Psal. 1. a Trauaile, and a Waye, bicause it co^tinually plieth to an ende. For as they which are carried in Coaches, or sayle in shippes, do finish their voyage, though they sit stil and sleepe: euen so euery one of vs albeit we be busied about other matters, and perceiue not how the course of our life passeth away, being sometime at rest, sometime idle, and sometime in sport and dalliance, yet our life alway wasteth, and we in poasting
 speede hasten toward our ende.
2 The wayfaring man trauelleth apace, and leaueth many things behind him. In his way he seeth stately Bowers and buildings, he beholdeth them awhile, he admireth them, and so passeth from them: Afterwards he seeeth fields, medowe, flourishing pastures, and goodly vineyards: Vpon these also he looketh a while, he wondreth at the sight, and so passeth by. Then he meeteth with fruitfull Orchards, greene Forrests, sweete Riuers with siluer streames, and behaueth himselfe as before. At the length he meeteth with desarts, hard waies, rough and vnpleasant, foule, and ouergrowne with briers and thornes: heere also he is enforced for a time to stay. He laboureth, sweateth, and is greeued: but when he hath gone a while, he ouercommeth these difficulties, and remembreth no more the former griefes.
3 Euen so it fareth with vs: One while we meet with pleasant and delightfull things, another while with sorrowfull and greeuous crosses. But they all in a moment passe away.
4 In like manner, some one is cast into prison, the same is tormented, vexed and afflicted: he is now in the brambles, and troublesome
 place, but he shal quickly come forth againe, and then hee will forget all his misery.
5 Furthermore, in highwaies and footepaths this commonly we see, that where one hath set his foote, there soone after another taketh his steppe, a third defaceth the print of his predecessors foot, and then another doth the like: neither is there any which long time holdeth his place. And is not mans life such? Aske (saith Basil) thy fieldes and possessions, how many names they haue now changed. In former age they were saide to be such a mans, then his, afterward anothers. Now they are saide to be this mans, and in short time to come, they shall be called I cannot tell whose possessions. And why so? Because mans life is a certaine way, wherin one succeedeth and expelleth another.
6 Beholde the seates of States and Potentates, of Emperors and Kings, how many in euery age haue aspired to these dignities? and when they haue attained them, after long labors and trauailes, in short time they are compelled to giue place to their successors, before they had wel warmed their seat. Yesterday one raigned to day he is dead, and an other possesseth his throne: To morrow
 this man shall die, and another shal sit in his seat, none as yet, could therein sit fast. They all play this part as on a stage: they ascend, they sit, they salute, they descend, and suddenly they are gone.
7 Therefore deerly beloued, mans life is a way, and a seducing way to them which forget themselues that they are Pilgrimes, and trauellers, and do stand too much vpon those thinges which are oceurrent in their iourney with long delay. For the night will come, and it wil come quickly, wherein no man can walke, and these men shal not come vnto that heauenly Hierusalem, but shall be a praie for the wilde beasts which walke in the night, and for the infernall wolues. For the which cause our Sauiour Christ crieth in the Gospel,Iohn, 12. Walke, walke while ye haue the light, lest the darknesse come vpon you.
8 There is nothing that doth so euidently set before mens eyes the deceits of the world, and the vanitie of thinges present, as doth the due and diligent consideration of the incertaintie, shortnesse, frailtie, and of other greeuances, and calamities of mans life. For all humane pride, and the whole glorie and aboundance of the world, (hauing mans life for a staie and foundation) can certainly no
 longer endure then the same life abideth.Witnes the death of many thousands of late amongst vs, and let our mercifull deliuerance neuer, O neuer be forgotten. So that riches, dignities, honors, Offices, and such like, which men here in earth haue in great regard, do many times forsake a man, he being yet aliue, and do neuer continue longer with him then vnto the graue: For then when the foundation faileth, the whole building must needs fall.
9. These claie Tabernacles (as Iob calleth them) do faile daily. The Prophet Dauid therefore compareth our life to the fat of Lambs, which wasteth away in the rosting: and to a new coate, which soone waxeth olde, and is eaten with mothes. Isai, to grasse, and the flower of the field, which to day florisheth, and to morow is cutte down and withered. Iob, to the burning of a candle, which in the end anoyeth, and then euery man crieth, Put it out. What thing els is mans life but a bubble, vp with the water, and downe with winde? What then is to be thought of humane pompe and glorie, the which is more transitorie and fraile then life it selfe?
10 This consideration verelie,Humbling themselues before the Lord in prayer. hath opened the eyes of many; and hath brought to passe in them, that they begin to wonder at the common blindnes of men: the which effect, that it may worke in vs, let vs call to
 minde a fewe things concerning the breuitie and miseries of mans life. And to the end our meditation may haue an order, and that we may keepe the parts thereof in memorie, it shal principally consist vpon the words of holy Iob, written in the beginning of the fourteene Chapter of his Booke, where he saith thus: Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuance and full of miseries. He shooteth foorth as a flower, and is cut downe: hee vanisheth also as a shadowe, and continueth not.
11 To the end we might want nothing in this description of humane calamities, it seemeth that his purpose was to begin with the verie matter it selfe, of the which man was made. For he saith not Vir, but Homo, that he might expresse the basenes of the matter, of the which this most proude creature was made. For hee is called Homo, ab humo, because he was procreated and made of the earth. Neither was he made of the best of the earth, but of the slime of the earth, (as the scripture testifieth) being the most filthy and abiect part of the earth. Among all bodies the most vile element: among all the elements the earth is the basest: among all the parts of the earth, none is more filthy and abiect
 then the slime. Wherefore, man was made of that matter, then the which there is nothing more vile and base.
12 And wheras he saith, that he was born of a woman, he hath in fewe words comprehended many miseries of humane condition. For first of all, our very fashioning and originall is so impure and vncleane, that it is not for chast eares to heare, but to be passed ouer in silence, as a thing most filthie and horrible to be tolde. This one thing I say, mans conception is so foule, that our most mercifull Lord, taking vpon him all our sorrowes and calamities, for our redemption, would in no wise beare this: and although he vouchsafed to take vpo^ him our humane nature, and to suffer many reproches of his enemies; as, to be mocked, blasphemed, spit vpon, bound, whipped, and in the ende most shamefully crucified: yet he thought it vnseeming his Maiesty, to be conceiued in the womb of the blessed Virgin Marie, after the same sinfull manner that other men be.
13 Furthermore, after that man is once conceiued, doth he not indure great calamities in his mothers wombe, as it were in a filthy and vncleane prison, where euery moment he is in perill of his life? At the last, hee
 is borne naked, weake, ignorant, destitute of all help and counsell, not able to go, to speak, nor to helpe himselfe, all that he can do, is to cry, and that is to set foorth his miseries: for he is born to labor, a banished man from his Country, the enemy of God, in possibilitie to liue a fewe dayes, and the same fewe dayes full of miserie, deuoide of all quietnesse and rest.
14 Beholde then the very beginnings, from whence man hath his first originall, who notwithstanding thinketh himselfe to be born to pride, who mingleth and co^foundeth all things, who ouerturneth, troubleth, and subdueth kingdomes, he turmoyleth the seas, and thinketh not the whole world sufficient for him.
15 Iob saith further, that man is of short continuance. Behold another calamitie of mans bodie. The building is scarce finished, but it is readie to totter, and to fall, and sure it is ere long to fal. Man is scarce entered into the worlde, when as hee is admonished to remember his departure out of the same againe. The dayes of man (saith the Prophet Dauid) are threescore yeeres and tenne,Psal. 90. and though some be so strong that they come to fourscore yeeres, yet is their strength the^ but
 labour and sorrow, etc. Therefore the summe of our yeeres, whereunto all do not attaine, is theeescore yeeres and ten; the stronger bodies sometimes continue till fourscore. From which yeeres, first of all we do deduct those yeeres which Infancie and childhood spendeth: for all that time we liue not like men, neither are gouerned with a certaine violent motion like vnto bruite beastes, which are deuoide of reason and vnderstanding. If also we take away that time which passeth away when we fleep (for sleeping, we liue not the life of beasts when they wake, much lesse of men) and that time will rather seeme a liuing death, then a liuely life. If, I say, we deduct all the time of childhood and sleep, that which remaineth wil scarcely amount to fortie yeeres: And of these fortie yeeres, we haue not one moment of time in such wise in our power, that we can assuredly say, that we shall not die therein. For whether we eate, drinke, or sleepe, whether we be in labor, or in rest, we are alwaies in perils. Wherefore not without cause our Sauior crieth so often in the Gospel: Watch,Mar. 13. because ye knowe not the day, nor the houre. The which is as much, as if he had more plainly said, Because ye know not that hour, watch euery houre: and because ye knowe
 not that day, watch euery day: and because yee know not the moneth, and the yeare, watch therefore euery moneth and yeare.
16 And to make this matter more plain by a similitude: If thou shouldst be requested to a feast, and being set at the table, seest before thee many and sundrie sortes of meate, a friende of thine secretly admonisheth thee, that among so many daintie dishes, there is one poysoned, what in this case wouldst thou doe? which of them darest thou touch, or tast of? wouldst not thou suspect them all? I think though thou were extreamely hungry, thou wouldest refraine from all, for feare of that one where the poyson is. It is made manifest vnto thee already, that in one of thy forty yeares, thy death lieth hidde^ from thee, and thou art vtterly ignorant which that yeare shal be: how then can it be but that thou must suspect them all, and feare them all? O that we vnderstoode the shortnesse of our life, how great profit and commoditie should wee then receiue by the meditation thereof.
17 The Peacock, a glorious fowle, when hee beheld that comely fan and circle which hee maketh of the beautifull feathers of his taile, hee reioyceth, he ietteth, and beholdeth euery part thereof: but when he looketh on
 his feet, which he perceiueth to be black, and foule, he by and by with great misliking vaileth his toppe gallant, and seemeth to sorrow. In like manner, a great many know by experience, that when they see themselues to abound in riches and honors, they glory, and are deepelie conceited of themselues, they praise their fortune, and admire themselues, they make plots, and appoint much for them selues to performe in many yeares to come: this yeare, say they, we wil beare this office, and the next yeare that: afterward wee shall haue the rule of such a Prouince: then we wil builde a pallace in such a Citie, whereunto we wil adioyn such gardens of pleasure, and such vineyardes: and thus they make a very large reckoning afore-hand, who if they did but once beholde their feete, if they did but thinke vpon the shortnes of their life, so transitorie and inconstant, how soone would they let fall their proud feathers, forsake their arrogancie, and change their purposes, their mindes, their liues, and their manners.
18 And this breuitie and inconstancie of life is appointed vs before wee be borne. For man is scarce conceiued, when as he is condemned to death: and when he commeth out of the wombe, he co^meth out of a prison,
 not to be free, but to vndergoe the crosse. And we all doe tende and hasten, as it were, to death: some at one miles ende, some at two, and some at three, and other some when they haue gone further. And thus it commeth to passe, that some are taken out of this life sooner, and some tarry longer. Since then the case standeth thus, who can sufficiently wonder at our madnesse? for we are going, as it were, to the gibbet, and we dance, we laugh, and reioyce in the way, as if we were secure from all maner of euils. But we are in this error, because we know not the shortnesse of our life.
19 Here then we see two wonderfull and monstrous things: one is, that man being scarcely borne, dieth, when as notwithstanstanding, he hath a forme and shewe of immortalitie: other thinges how long they retaine their forme, so long they remaine: A house falleth not all the time that his forme and fashion lasteth: The bruite beast dieth not, except first he forgo his life, which is his forme. But man hath a forme which neuer is dissolued, namely, a mind endued with reason, and yet he liueth a very short time.
20 But yet there is another thing to be seene farre more monstrous in this creature,
 that whereas hee is indued with reason and counsell, and knoweth that his life is like vnto a shadowe, to a dreame, to a tale that is tolde, to a watch in the night, to smoake, to chaffe which the winde scattereth, to a water bubble, and such like fading things: and that the life to come shall neuer haue end, and yet neuerthelesse setteth his whole mind most carefullie vpon this present life, which is to day, and to morrowe is not: but of the life which is euerlasting, he doeth not so much as thinke. If this be not a monster, I know not what may be called monstrous.
21 Thus hauing seene the shortnesse and mutabilitie of mans life, let vs now also see the miserie thereof. Man (saith holy Iob) being borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of miseries. Euery word hath a great emphasis: Hee is full of miserie, euen from the sole of the foote to the crowne of the head; not onely the bodie, but the mind also, so long as it is captiued in the prison of the bodie. Thus no place is left emptie and free from miseries.
22 Mans miseries are many and great, there is no member, no sence, no one facultie in man, so long as he is here vpo^ earth, which suffereth not his hell. Nay, all the elementes,
 all liuing creatures, al the diuels, yea, the angels, and God himselfe also, bende themselues against man for sinne. To beginne with the sence of seeing, with how many kind of feauers, impostumes, vlcers, sores, and other diseases is it afflicted? The volumes of Physitions are full of diseases, and remedies for the same: and yet for all this, there are daily new diseases, and new remdeies found out for them: and among the remedies themselues, it were to be wished that there were one to be found, yt were not more vehement to vexe the sick, then the disease it selfe. Long fasting and extreame hunger, is a bitter medicin, the cutting of veines, the incision of wounds and sores, the cutting off of members, the searing of flesh and sinewes, the pulling out of teeth, are remedies for griefes and diseases, but yet such, that many had rather choose to die, then to vse these and such like remedies. Furthermore, immoderate heate, exceeding cold, one while too much drougth, another while excesse of moisture, doeth offende and hurt the very sence of feeling.
23 The sence of tasting is most of all troubled with hunger and thirst: and manie times medicines and meats that are bitter, sharpe, salt, and vnsauerie, do distemper it.
24 The sence of smelling is compelled to endure and suffer many times al manner of stinkes, all vapors and fogges, and things of bad sent.
25 As touching the sence of hearing, what il tidings, how many cursed speakings, and iniuries doth it heare, which like sharpe swords doe pearce the heart?
26 The sence of seeing, how many things doth it beholde which it would not, and how many things doeth it not see, which it desireth?
27 As for thought, how many horrible and feareful things doeth it imagine and faine?
28 What shall wee say of vnderstanding? to what an innumerable sort of errors is it subiect? so as it seemeth to be like vnto a little child, to whom a tedious and very hard knot to be dissolued, is deliuered, and he contendeth what hee can to vndoe it, and when the knot beginneth in one part to be opened, hee sheweth it and reioyceth, and seeth not that the knot in the other part is more fast shutte: So in like manner, God hath made this generalitie of all things, and hath set the same before mans minde to be considered, and saith, seeke and search out the reasons and the causes
 of all these things, if thou canst: when as indeede the truth of the thing is more secret and profound, then mans vnderstanding, being placed in the prison of the body, can reach vnto. This is the cause that the phylosophers and worldly wise men, haue fallen into so many and sundrie sects, and dissentio^s about all things, euen of least moment. And they doe so co^tend among themselues, vntill falsehoode hauing put on the habite and vizor of trueth, deceiueth them all. Hereunto accordeth the saying of the Preacher, chap. 3, God hath set the worlde in their heart.Eccles. c. 3. v. 11. Or, God hath giuen them the worlde to dispute of, yet cannot man finde out the worke that God hath wrought from the beginning, euen to the end. Be not curious therfore saith Syrach, chap. 3. ver. 24. in superfluous things, for many things are shewed vnto thee aboue the capacitie of men. And yet we see, that the most ignorant do many times soonest offend herein, rushing into those matters whereof they haue no knowledge, and nothing belonging vnto them. They will build Tabernacles with Peter, and lay platformes for the Church, whereof they haue no skill. Euerie common person will bee an Agryppa ouer Paul, and euery woman a Bernice, and euery
 meane person make a shoppe a Consistory to controll a State, forgetting the Prouerb, Ne sutor vltra crepidam: The shoomaker is not to exceede his pantofle.
29 But a greater miserie as yet holdeth our actiue and practising vnderstanding. For how many meanes, how many reasons and waies doth it deuise to clime vp higher, and to growe in the opinion and estimation of men. For the which cause the Prophet Dauid in his Psalmes saith, that our whole life is like a copwebbe: For as the Spider is occupied all his life time in weauing of copwebbes, and draweth out of his own bowels those threeds, wherwith he knitteth his nets to catch flies: and oftentimes it commeth to passe, that when the Spider suspecteth no ill, a seruant that goeth about to make clean the house, sweepeth downe both the copweb, and the Spider, and throweth them together into the fire: Euen so, the greatest part of men consume their whole time, spende all their witte and strength, and labour most painfully to haue their nettes in a readines, with the which they may catch the flies of honors and of riches. And when they glorie in the multitude of the flies which they haue taken, and promise vnto the^selues rest in time to com^
 beholde, death (Gods handmaide) is present with the broom of diuers sicknesses and griefes, and sweepeth these men away to hell fire, they being fast asleepe in the chaire of securitie: and so the worke, together with the workemaster, in a moment of time doe perish.
30 Neither is the man of meanest capacity, and of least vnderstanding, free from miseries. Who can number the suspitions, the hatreds, the iealousies, the enuies, the feares, the desires, the vaine hopes, the greefs and anguishes of mans mind? If he do euil, he feareth the Iudges, banishment, whipping, reproaches and tormentes: If hee doe wel, he feareth euil tongues. Who is able to expresse with what miserable desire all men are inflamed, in so much that no man liuing is contented with his estate: but we are all like vnto sick men, which turmoile and tosse, first from one side of the bed, and then to the other, and yet neuer find rest?
31 After these things, behold and consider all ages. How weake is infancie? how ignorant is childehood? how light and inconstant is adolescencie? how rash and confident be young men? how greeuous and irkesome (...) olde age? What is a young boy but as a
 bruite beast, hauing the forme and shape of a man? what is a flourishing yonker, but as an vntamed horse? what is an olde man, but the receptacle of all maladies and sicknesses? And in all these ages, with how great a heap of miseries and necessities are we ouerwhelmed? We must daily eate, drink, and sleepe, we are daily compelled to serue many other necessities: and (which is much more miserable and vnhappy) we must of necessity purchase vnto our selues these occupations, with infinite labors and sweatings.
32 Now who is not astonished, if hee co^sider how al the creatures which compasse vs round about, doe bend their whole force, and fight against mankinde: as if the things which haue bene already repeated, were not sufficient to fil the bosome of mans hart with miseries? That same most cleere brightnesse which we call the Sunne, which is as a certaine generall father to all liuing things, doeth sometimes so scorch with his beames, that all things are parched and burnt vp with the heate thereof: at another time he taketh his course so farre from vs, that all thinges die with colde.
32 The earth also, which is the mother of vs all, how many men doth she swallowe
 vp with her downfalles, gulphes, and quakings?
33 And what doe the seas? how many doe they deuour? Verely they haue so many rocks, so many flats and sands, so many sirts, so many Charibdes, and so many perillous places, that it is a most harde thing of all other, to escape the danger of shipwrack: and they which are most safe in the ship, haue but the thicknesse of a planke between them and death.
34 What shal we say of our aire? Is it not many times corrupted? and doeth it not ingender and gather clowdes, thicke mistes, pestilences and sicknesses?
35 As for the bruite beasts, they yeeld no reuerence to man their Prince, and not only the Lyons, Beares, Tygers, Dragons, and other greater wild beastes, but the very flies also, gnats, fleas, and other of the most smal sort of liuing creatures, doe wonderfully and very vehemently trouble, vexe, afflict and disquiet man.
36 It were to be wished that wee had no worse enemies then the bruite beasts, and that we had no cause to stand in feare of men themselues: But these also are ful of fraudes, deceits, iniuries, euill practises, then ye which
 what can be more intollerable? And what meaneth so much armour, pikes, bowes, bils, swords and gunnes, with diuers other instruments of mans malice, doe not these destroy and consume moe men, then doe sicknesses, and diseases? Histories report, that by one onely, Iulius Caesar, which is said to haue bin a most curteous and gentle Emperour, there were slaine in seuerall battels, eleuen hundred thousand men. And if a man of mildnes and meeke spirit did this, what shall we looke for at the hands of most cruell men? Neither lands, nor seas, nor desart places, nor priuate houses, nor open streetes, are safe from ambushments, conspiracies, hatreds, emulations, theeues and pyrates. Are there not vexations innumerable, persecutions infinite, spoyling of fields, sacking of cities, praying vppon mens goods, fiering of houses, imprisonments, captiuities, gally-slaueries, renegations of Christianity by torments inforced, beside death it selfe, which men daily suffer at the hands of men? And this is that ciuill and sociable creature, which is called humane, which is borne without clawes and hornes, in token of peace and loue which hee ought to imbrace. Moreouer, not onely enemies, but also friends, and the mainteiners
 of peace and iustice, are fierce and cruel against men. O man, the very storehouse of calamities, and yet thou canst not be humbled, but art proud still.
37 Neither haue wee onely those foresaid corporal enemies which we may see and shun: but which is more perillous, we haue also ghostly enemies, which see vs, and wee not them. For the diuels, which are most crafty, cruel, and most mighty in number, and strength, doe nothing, practise nothing, and thinke vpon nothing else, then how they may tempt, deceiue, hurte, and cast men downe headlong into hell fire.
38 The holy and blessed Angels also, do many times fight against sinful men. For who burnt Sodom and Gomorrah, with the inhabitants thereof, with fire and brimstone? The Angels. Who slew the fourescore and fiue thousand men in the hoast of Senacharib? The Angels. Who afflicted the Egyptians with al those plagues mentioned in Exodus? The Angels. Who assisted Ioshua against the Cananites and Iebusites? Gods Angels.
39 Not onely the Angels, but God himself also, sometime shewing himself towards man as towards an enimy: which caused holy Iob to say, Why doest thou hide away thy
 face, and takest mee for thy enemie? what meaneth this O lord God? Thou also which wast woont to be my father and keeper, hast now bidden battell against me.
40 Moreouer and beside all these things, there is yet a ciuill and internall war, which man hath within his owne bowels continually. For what man is he which doth not feele the striuings and contentious of his affection, will, sense, and reason? Insomuch that man himselfe doth afflict himselfe, and vnderstandeth it not, and is a greater enemie to himselfe then any other can be. For who doth greater harme to thee, then thou doest to thy selfe? who more then thy selfe letteth thee, and turneth thee away from thy felicitie?
41 Who then seeth not how truely it is saide, Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full of miseries? who seeth not that man is set in the very center of the sphere, that miseries may fall vppon him from euery part; and as the white in a butte, that the arrowes and dartes of all miseries may be directed vnto him?
42 But let vs see what followeth, Hee shooteth foorth as a flower, and is cut downe. Whereby he teacheth, that mans life is fraile and transitorie. A flower v rily is a comely
 and beautifull thing: and yet for all that, it is nothing, because ther is nothing found more fading and vanishing: Euen so man, during the time of his childehoode and flourishing youth, he seemeth to be of a wonderful comelinesse: but this beautie is of small price, because it is more brittle then the glasse: for that man carrieth alwaies the cause of death in his veines and bowels.
43 Mans fading away is such and so sodaine oftentimes, that there can be no reason giuen of his death: for many haue gone to bed well in the euening, that in the morning are found dead in their beds: and many very sodainly haue dropped down in the highwaies and streetes, as they haue walked about their affaires. And this is no woonder, if we consider the substance of mans body, which being a building compact of greene clay, is easily ouerthrowne with a small puffe of wind.
44 And how, I pray you, commeth it to passe, that clocks are so easily stopped from their course? is it not because they are made by arte and skill, with so many wheeles, that if one be staide, all the rest are letted? If this befall clockes that haue wheeles of Iron and steele, how much more easily may it come to passe in the humane clock of life: the wheeles
 and engines whereof, are not of Iron, but of clay. Therefore let vs not woonder at the frailtie of mans body, but at the foolishnes of mans minde, which vpon so fraile a foundation is woont to erect and builde such lofty Towers.
45 Furthermore, there is another miserie which is signified vnto vs by the comparison of a flower, namely, the deceitfulnes of mans life, the which indeed is the greatest misery: For as fained vertue is double iniquitie, so counterfeyt felicitie is a twofolde miserie and calamitie. If this present life would shew it selfe to be such as it is indeed, the misery therof should not greatly hurt vs: But it doth now greatly damnifie vs, bicause it it is false and deceitful: and being foule, it maketh a very faire and glorious shew: being euer mutable, it will seeme to be stable and constant: being most short, it beareth vs in hand that it is co^tinuall, that men being deceiued, they may beleeue that they shal haue time to fulfill all their lustes, and yet time and space enough to repent them.
46 Holy Iob concludeth his sentence thus: Hee vanisheth also as a shadowe, and neuer continueth in one staie. To make this more plaine, behold and consider the ages of
 man, and thou shalt euidently perceiue the alterations of humane life. Childehoode is weake, as well in mind as in body: Florishing youth is weake in minde but strong in body: Ripe and manly age, is strong both in mind and in body: Old age strong in minde and weake in body: Crooked olde age, is in this twise a childe, weake both in mind and body: Therefore hee fleeth as it were a shadow, and neuer continueth in one stay.
47 Beside this, hee is now wise, now foolish: now merry, now sad: now in health, now sick: now strong, now weake: now rich, now poore: now hee loueth, anon he hateth: now hee hopeth, by and by hee feareth: one while he laugheth, another while he weepeth: now he will, anon he wil not. To conclude, the Moone, nor any other thing that is mutable, sheweth not so many cha^ges vnto vs, as do the daily and almost sodaine alterations of men. And yet for all this, they liue as men in a frensie, which knowe not their miseries. And although they cannot repose their hope and assurance in the present things of this life, yet they doe not transferre and remoue the thoughts of their minde, their counselles, their works and endeudurs, vnto the happinesse to come. And if it were possible, they
 would make the place of their exile and banishment, their Countrey and inheritance. But in vaine they desire this, for death commeth and playeth the last Pageant, shutting and finishing the life of all calamities.


CHAP. II. Concerning Death, and the meditation thereof.
THe errors of al men, for the most part, take their originall fro^ hence, that they forget the end of their life, which they ought to haue alway before their eyes. For here-hence commeth Pride, Ambition, too much carefulnesse for the body: hereof also come these Towers, which we build vpon the sand. For if we did consider what wee should be after a few dayes, our maner of liuing would be, parrduenture, more humble and temperate. For who would haue a high looke and proud stomacke, if hee would with the eyes of his mind behold what manner of one shortly after hee shall bee in his graue?
 Who would then worship his belly for a God, when he wayeth with himselfe that the same must in a short time be wormes meat? Who would be so in loue with money, that he would run like a mad man by sea and land, and as it were through water and fire, if he vnderstood that he must leaue all behinde him sauing his winding sheete? If this were thought vpon, all our errors would soone be corrected.
2 The word of God telleth vs in many places of this vanitie, to the ende we might the more earnestly seeke a better course and more happy life. The Prophet desireth of God,Psal. 90. that he may learn to number his ^aies, to the end he may applie his heart vnto wisdome. For vnlesse wee thinke vpon death, we cannot applie and fashion our selues to a godly life. Yea we finde daily in our selues, by experience, that the forgetfulnes of death, makes vs applie our heartes to follie, and all kinde of vanity. The holy men of olde time, were wont in such wise to keepe an account of their dayes, that aboue all things they might apply their hearts to wisedome. Of all Arithmeticall Rules this is the hardest, to number our dayes. Men can number their heardes, and droues of oxen, and of sheepe:
 they can account the reuenues of theyr manners and farmes: they can with a little paines number and tell their coyne: and yet they are perswaded that their dayes are infinite and innumerable, and therefore doo neuer begin to number them. Who saith not vpon the viewe of another, surely yonder man looketh by his countenance as if he would not liue long? or, yonder woman is olde, her dayes cannot be many. Thus we can number other mens dayes and yeeres, and vtterly forget our owne. Therefore this is the true wisedome of mortall men, to number theyr owne dayes: and like skilfull Geometricians, to measure all theyr actions, all their studies, all theyr cares, all their thoughtes, all theyr desires, and all theyr counsells, by their departure out of this life, as by the end whereto they are referred, as it were by a certaine rule, and thereunto to direct all things: and so to finish the course of our life which God hath giuen vnto vs, that at the last we may come to the happy hauen of rest.
3 The case standing thus: we cannot, nor ought not to doubt, but that the diuell a most cruell enemy of mankind, laboreth all that he can, to take away from vs, the most wholesome remembrance of death, which by most
 euident demonstrations setteth before our eyes, the breuity of our life, the miserie of our flesh, the deceits of the world, the vanity of things present, and whereunto all humane beauty, and the vniuersall glory of the world, shall come at the last. For otherwise, how could it be, that we should at any time forget a thing so fearefull, and which by no manner of meanes we can shunne and auoid.
4 If a light suspition of some losse, eyther of our goods, or of honour, doth preuaile so greatly with vs, that many times it taketh from vs our sleepe, what might the meditation of most assured death doe, which is more terrible then all other terrors beside?
5 Wherefore, as they which in open games of actiuitie, as of shooting, and wrestling, and such like, doe long before the day come, thinke vpon the same, and doe exercise their hand and bow, spending and consuming many arrowes at the marke, that in the day of trial ^or the best game, they may shoot neerest the marke: and as Fencers which are to play their prizes of triall, doe daily try their strength, and exercise their weapons, bending their whole minde how they may best foyle their enemies, that when the day commeth they may haue honour and triumph:
 Euen so ought we to do, for whom a greater reward without all comparison is set, if wee die wel: and if otherwise it come to passe, wee shall be punished with vnspeakeable shame and reproach.
6 And this our meditation of death, shal be handled in no other order, then the same which our death and departure from this life bringeth with it. For as they which are to runne a race, do oftentimes lead their horses vp and downe the running place, that they may see and be acquainted with all the stones, vneuen places, and other impedimentes in the same: that when the day commeth, they may finish the race without stay or stop: Euen so wee, which whether wee will or no, must measure and pace the race of death, shal doe very well, if now in our mind and memorie we frame this race, and doe diligently consider all those things which are in the same: especially, seeing the way is most obscure, and ful of sundry impediments, and is so perillous, that there are very fewe which finish the same happily. They which slip and stumble in it, shal neuer more find any hope of saluation.
7 Therefore, that we may begin there where this most bloody battell hath his originall,
 wee ought diligentlie to consider the same: namely, that then death doth especially come, when men doe least thinke of it. Herevpon the Apostle Paul salth, The day of the Lorde shall come as a theefe in the night. And in the Apocalips, Beholde I come as a theefe. And theeues haue this propertie, that they breake vp houses to steale, when men are most fast asleepe, and when they least suspect any such thing.
8 Hereupon also the Prophet Amos hath these words, In that day will I cause the sun to goe downe at noone,Amos. 8. and I will darken the earth in the cleere day. That is to say, when men thinke it to bee the high noone of their age; when they thinke that they haue yet many yeeres to liue; when their minde is occupied about their gaine, about theyr affaires, about their honors, buildings, mariages and pleasures: when they say vnto their soule, Soule, thou hast much goods laid vp in store for thee for many yeeres, eate, drink, rest, and be merrie: then it shall suddenly be saide vnto them, Behold death is at the doore, thou foole, this night shall thy life be taken away from thee;Eccl. 41. and whose are then those things which thou hast gotten?
9 Then death vnlooked for, frustrateth
 all our counsels, cutting off the webs of our deuises, and with on stroke she casteth down and layeth flatte on the ground, al those Towers builded in the ayer: and then what a wound doeth the heart of the sinner receiue, which loueth this present life, when the Physitian saith vnto him, Thou must from he^ceforth thinke no more of life, but of death?
10 Here first of all, all those things which he loued in time past, offer themselues vnto him, from the which he shalbe pulled away, and seperated by death, whether he wil or no. The body shal dye once, but the heart shal dye so often as the things be in number which he loued. Then in very deede shal the most cleere light be turned into darkenesse, because those things which were aforetime occasions of great ioy, shal be now horrible vexations and torments. It is a most sweete and pleasant thing to them which liue, to see their louing and faithful friendes, to remember their honors, to think vpon the pleasures past and to come: But all these things in the time of death, shalbe as swords, as torments, and most bitter potions.
11 But if it be so harde a matter to bee pulled away from those things which do not so neerely touch man, how bitter, I pray you,
 will the seperation bee of the body from the life and soule? For such two louing familiars, which haue alwaies liued sweetly together, euen from the mothers wombe, cannot be seperated without great greef. If the Oxe do commonly lowe and mourn, when his yokefellow which was wont to draw with him is taken away, how will euery one of vs mourn when the minde shal be seperated from the body? Then wil the body and the mind with teares repeate againe and againe, doest thou thus seperate bitter death? O death, dost thou thus seperate?
12 And when the cogitation of so sharp a seperation is deeply setled in our mind, then greefes follow greefes, and sorrow commeth vpon sorrow: for then it commeth presently into the minde, what a miserable condition the body and soule shalbe in after the seperation. And first of all, when a man beginneth to recount with himselfe, that his body after a fewe houres, shall be buried in a graue, or dark tombe, he cannot cease from wondring at so abiect and miserable a condition. What? the body that now liueth, which seeth, which heareth, whith speaketh, shal it be made (after one houre, in a moment) blinde, deaffe, dumbe, without sense, without spirit, without
 life? Shal I haue then in stead of a large pallace, a base sepulchre? in stead of a soft bed, the hard ground? for delights, rottennesse? for sweete smelles, stinkes? and in stead of seruants and familiar freends, wormes? And thus this cogitation of the graue will verie sore trouble and terrifle a man in these extremities.
13 But yet notwithstanding, euery man feareth much more when he beginneth to consider what condition remaineth for the soule. For when he beholdeth that eternity, and that new Region, vnknown to all men liuing, which hee then alone and naked is to enter: and againe, when he vnderstandeth, that there is to be founde in the same, both euerlasting glorie, and perpetual paine and misery, and knoweth not of which hee shal take his part: it cannot bee tolde, with how great feare, with what carefulnes, and with what exceeding sorrow he shalbe tormented. When hee perceiueth plainly that after two houres he shaibe either in eternal ioyes, or in euerlasting paines: Is not this a crosse farre surpassing all other crosses?
14 This incertainty therefore of blisse, or of a cursed estate, which after two houres the sinner expecteth that remembreth his
 sinnes, and feareth the iust iudgement of God, without hope of remission or faith in Christ) bringeth a hell in minde not to be expressed. For by how much the kingdome which hee desireth is of largenes, and by how much the fierie furnace which he feareth is terrible, by so much greater shal this perturbation be. For from the one, Angels shal come, to carie the faithful vp into heauen: and from the other, diuels shal come, to cary the wicked and infidels into hell fire.
15 But there is yet a farre greater perturbation then this: namely, that he shal cal to mind the account which he is to make to God, of all his words, deedes, and thoughts. For of it selfe it is a horrible thing to enter into iudgement with God: the which horror wil wonderfully vexe and disquiet the diuels themselues. For as, so long as we liue they set forth vnto vs the mercie of God, and doe also commend the same, and do striue all that they can, to keepe vs from meditating of his iustice and iudgements: Euen so now on the contrary part, they extenuate and make his mercy insufficient, and doe set before our eies the greatnesse and seuerity of the Lords Iustice.
16 Then the sinner wil begin to tremble,
 and to fall into desperation, and wil begin to reason thus with himselfe: If God for the sinnes of others spared not his onely sonne, wil he spare me which am guiltie of so many sinnes? If this be done in the greene tree, what shal befal that which is feare and drie? If the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Martyres, after they liued godly so many yeares, entred not into the kingdome of heauen without tribulations, what other place can be left for me, but that of hell fire, which know no good that I haue done?
17If the Scripture be true which saith, He wil render to euery man according to his works, I which haue done so great wickednesses, what should I looke for but eternal torments? If the Apostle lye not (as indeede he doth not) when he saith, That which a man soweth, that shall hee reape,Gal. 6. what shal hee reape but eternall death, which hath made so cursed sowing? If no polluted thing shal enter into the kingdome of God, how shal I which am altogether filthy and vncleane, haue hope to make so happie and blessed an entrance?
18 Then therefore all his sinnes, which he committed with so great facility when hee liued, shal violently inuade the sinful man
 like an hoast of his enemies. Then the feare of punishment wil open the eyes, which sleeping securitie in sinne, before had shut. Then ambition, pride, thefts, murthers, adulteries, fornications, gluttonies, drunkennesse, lying, periurie, idle words, vncleane thoughts, and negligent slacknesse in all good workes, wil come to remembrance. O how heauy and greeuous wil they then seeme to bee, which now seeme so light, and are done with so much sweetnesse and pleasure? And how greatly wil they then torment the mind of the Sinner?
19 For who is able to expresse that last agonie, wherein the soule fighteth with sore and paineful sicknesse, with the temptations of diuels, with feare of the iudgement to come, and al this at one instant? Then commeth that same last perturbation, the failing of all the sences, as the forerunner of death approaching, which vehemently terrifieth: at what time the breast swelleth, the speech groweth hoarse, faint, and hollowe, the eyes sinke, the nose beginneth to be sharpe, the countenance waxeth pale, the feet die, and the Arteries send forth a colde sweat.
20 These thinges which appeare outwardly are grieuous and ful of horror: but
 they are without al comparison, more greeuous and horrible which are felt inwardly. For if they (as Saint Hierome writeth of blessed Hilarion) which haue many yeares serued God, doe feare at the time of their departure, what shal they doe which many yeares haue serued the diuel, and their execrable wickednesses, and which haue prouoked God vnto wrath? Whither shal they go? whose help shal they craue? what counsel shal they take? If they looke vpwarde, they shal see the drawne sword of Gods Iustice? if downeward, they shal see a great gulfe gaping, and hel fire: if the time past, they shal see al things vanished away like a shadowe: if the time to come, they shal beholde the eternitie of worldes, which shal last without ende.
21 But how I pray you shal they be able to resist and abide the assaults of the Diuels, who wil then bestir them with all their might and maine? What shal sinful men doe which are left in this state? Returne they cannot, and longer to abide in this state, wil not be permitted them.
22 O that we might vnderstande and knowe what manner of battel this is, and what maner of burthen is to be borne in this
 houre: we would then verily be other manner of persons then heretofore we haue bene. Al these things Faith teacheth, Nature proclaimeth, Experience testifieth, and it is euident to euery one of vs, that we shal come vnto that state, wherein we wil desire with all our heart, that wee had brideled our selues from al wickednesse, that we had exercised al the works of vertue, that we had liued in all holines, and not spent our time in vaine. Let vs not imitate foolish men, which looke vpon present things onely: let vs wisely prouide for things to come, and so by the grace of God we shal bring to passe, that the same houre which to others is the beginning of sorowes, to vs shal bee the beginning of ioy and felicitie.
23 Thus farre wee haue shewed what may befal a man at the point of death, vntil the moment of his departure: now let vs see how the body is bestowed after the horrible seperatio^ of the life from the same. The soule therefore being dissolued, there lyeth vppon the ground, not a humane body, but a dead carkasse, without life, without sense, without strength, and so feareful to looke vpon, that the sight thereof may hardly be endured. To be short, it is little better (as touching the
 substance) then the body of a horse, or a dog, which lieth dead in the fieldes, and al that passe by stoppe their noses, and make hast away, that they be not annoyed with the sight and stinke thereof. Such is mans body now become, yea though it be ye body of a monarch, emperour, or king. Where is now that Maiestie, that Excellencie, that authority which it had aforetime, when men trembled to beholde it, and might not come in presence therof without al reuerence and obeysance? where are al those things become? were they a dreame, or a shadow?
24 After these thinges the funeral is prepared, the which is al that men can carry with them, of al their riches and kingdomes: and this also they should not haue, if in their life time they did not appoint it for their dignitie and honour.Psal 49. For the Prophet Dauid saith truly, Bee not thou afraid though one bee made rich, or if the glory of his house be increased: for hee shall carry nothing away with him when he dieth, neither shal his pompe follow him.
25 Here now a pitte is digged, seuen or eight foote long, as if it should serue for Alexander the great, whom the world coulde not conteine: and therin the dead carkasse is contented
 to dwell alone continually, the which so soone as it is come, the wormes doe welcome, and the bones of other dead men are constrained to giue place.
26 In this house of perpetuall obliuion and silence, the carkasse being wound in a sheet, and bound hand and foote, is shut vp, though it neede not to haue so great labour bestowed vpon it: for it would not runne away out of that prison, though the hands and feet were loose.
27 And now, if we do but consider a little of the Tombes and Sepulchres of Princes, and Noble-men, whose glory and maiestie wee haue seene when they liued here in earth, and doe beholde the horrible formes and shapes which they now haue, shall wee not cry out as men amazed, Is this that glory? is this that highnes and excellencie? whither now are the degrees of their waiting seruants gone? where are their ornaments and ieweis? where is their pompe, their delicacie and nicenes? Al these things are vanished away like the smoake, and there is now nothing left but dust, horror and stinke.
28 But now leauing the body in the graue, let vs consider how the soule entereth into the new world. Therfore so soone as the
 soule of the sinner is dissolued from the flesh, it beginneth to passe through a Region vnknowen, where there are new Inhabitants, and a new manner of liuing. What then shal the miserable and sinful Pilgrime do, when he shal see him selfe alone in such an vnknowen Region full of horror? How and by what meanes shall he defende himselfe from those most fierce theeues, and horrible monsters, which in those vast desarts do assaile passengers? This verily is a fearefuli iourney.
29 And yet the iudgement is much more fearefull, which in that place is exercised. Who is able to expresse the vprightnesse of the Iudge, the seueritie of the iudgement, the diligence of inquisition, and the multitude of witnesses?
30 In this iudgement teares will not preuaile; praiers will not be heard; promises will not be admitted; repentance will be too late; and as for riches, honorable titles, scepters, and diadems, these wil profit much lesse. And the Inquisition shal be so curious and diligent, that not one light thought, nor one idle word (not repented of in the life past) shall be forgotten. For trueth it selfe hath saide, not in iest, but in earnest, Of euery idle word which men haue spoken, they shall giue an
 account in the day of iudgement.
31 O how many which now sinne with great delight, yea euen with greedines, as if we serued a God of wood, or of stone, which seeth nothing, or can do nothing, wil be then astonished, ashamed, and silent. Then shal the daies of thy mirth be ended, and thou shalt be ouerwhelmed with euerlasting darknes, and in stead of thy pleasures, thou shalt haue euerlasting torments.
When Ieremy had imbraced all the calamities and sinnes of the Iewes, at the last he imputed al to this; She remembred not her end: Lam. 1.9. So if I may iudge why natural men care for nothing but their pompe, why great men care for nothing but their honour and dignity, why couetous persons care for nothing but their golden gaine, why voluptuous Epicures care for nothing but their pleasure, why the pastor careth not for his flocke, nor the people for their pastor: I may say with Ieremy, they remembred not their end. When Salomon had spoken of al the vanities of men, at last he opposeth this memorandome as a counterpoyse against them al; Remember that for all these things thou shalt come to iudgement: as if he should haue said, men would neuer speake as they
 speake, think as they thinke, nor doe as they doe, if they were perswaded, that these thoughts, words, and deedes, should come to iudgeme^t. What if we had dyed in the daies if our ignorance, like Iudas that hanged himself before he could see the passion, resurection, or ascension of Christ Iesus? we should haue numbred our dayes and our sins too: but alas how many dayes haue we spent, and yet neuer thought why any day was giuen vs? but as the old yeare went, and a new come, so we thought that a new would follow that: and so wee thinke that an other will followe this: and God knoweth how soone we shal be deceiued, for so they thought too, that are now in their graues. O deare brethren, this is not to number our dayes, but to prouoke God to shorten our dayes; I that writ this, thou that readest this, and all you that heare this, which of vs haue not liued twenty yeares, yea and some thirty or forty, and happily some many more; and yet we haue neuer applyed our hearts aright vnto wisdome. O if wee had learned but euery yeare one vertue since we were borne, we might by this time haue bin like saints among men; whereas if God at this present time should cal vs to iudgement, it would appeare that we had applyed our
 heartes, our mindes, our hands, and feet, or tongues: yea and our whole bodies to riches and pleasures, to lying and deceiuing, to swearing, and forswearing, yea and to all kinde of sin and wickednesse, but to true vertue and wisdome, we haue not applyed our heartes. God of his mery giue vs grace to see our former sins, truly to repent vs of them, and to amend our liues hereafter, that we may liue with him for euer. Surely if man could perswade himselfe that this were his last day, as it may be if God so please, he would not defer his repentance vntil to morrow. If he could thinke that this is his last meat that euer he shal eate, he would not surfet: if he could beleeue that the words which he doth speake to day, should be the last words that euer hee should speake, he would not offend with his tongue in lying, swearing, and blaspheming: if he could be perswaded that this were the last lesson, the last admonition, or the last sermon that euer God would affoord him to cal him to repentance, hee would reade it, or heare it, with more diligence then euer he hath done before. O I beseech you remember your selues while it is to day, lest you repent
 your selues when it is too late: of all we that be here, which of vs can assure our selues of life til to morrow? or what if we should liue three, foure, or fiue yeares, or what if twenty yeares, who would not liue like a christian twenty yeares, to liue in heauen with Christ eternally? we can be content to serue seauen yeares prentise, with great labour and toyle, to be instructed in some trade that we may liue the more easily the rest of our dayes, and we must labour notwithstanding afterwards: and can we not be content to labour in the things of God a little while, that wee may rest from our labours euer after. Christ said to his disciples when he found them sleeping, could yee not watch one houre? so I say vnto you, and to my selfe, can we not pray, can we not fast? can wee not suffer a little while? he which is tyred, can trauaile a little further, one steppe more to saue his life: and therefore God would not haue men knowe when they shall dye, because they should make ready at all times, hauing no more certainty of one houre then an other.
32 Seeing therefore the case standeth
 thus, let vs looke to our selues, and let vs take counsel of him, which would be an Aduocate before he be a Iudge: For no man knoweth so wel what is necessary for vs against that day, as he that shalbe the Iudge of our cause. Hee therefore cryeth thus vnto vs.Iohn. 12. Mar. 13. Luke. 12. Walke while yee haue the light, least the darkenesse come vpon you. Take heede, watch and pray, for ye knowe not when the time is. Be ye like men waiting the comming of their Lorde; etc.
33 They that thus watch and waite, are sure to make a most ioyful departure fro^ this life, and to be receiued into the Lordes ioy, of the which happy dissolution the scriptures thus record: I am now ready to bee offered, and the time of my departure, or dissoluing, is at hand. I haue fought a good fight, and haue finished my course: I haue kept the faith: Hencefoorth there is laide vp for mee the Crowne of righteousnesse, etc. 2. Tim. 4.6.

As the Hart brayeth for the Riuers of water, so panteth my soule after thee, O God. My soule thirsteth for God, euen for the liuing God* when shal I come and appeare before the presence of God? Psalme 41.1.



The righteous shall liue for euer: their reward also is with the Lord, and the most high hath care of them. Therefore shall they receiue a glorious kingdome, and a beautifull crowne of the Lords hand: For with his right hand shall he couer them, and with his arme shall he defend them. Wisdome, Chap. 5.15.


Bring my soule out of prison, that I may praise thy name, Psal. 142.7.


I desire to be losed, and to bee with Christ, which is best of all, Philip 1.23.

Reade also the fifth Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, the first and second verses.
And let these things be oftentimes thy meditation and standing, that so despising the things of this transitory life, and pacing thy steppes in the path-way to felicitie, thou mayest at the last, obtaine the reward which our Sauiour Christ hath promised, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Which Lord for thy mercie sake graunt vs, Amen.



CHAP. III. Concerning the generall day of Doome.
FOrsomuch as the feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome, and al for the most part are restrayned from sinne and wickednes, by the feare of punishment and paines, and are brought to a good mind and purpose, they which exclude this feare out of their hearts, doe shut vp against themselues the true and wholesome repentance. For as the Scripture testifieth, the feare of the Lord expelleth sinne, and he which is without feare cannot he iustified.August. in Ioan. Tract. 9. The which St. Augustine by a very proper similitude setteth foorth: If there be no feare, there is no entrance for loue: eue^ as we see when a man soweth, the threed is brought in with a needle, the needle first entereth, but except the needle goe out also, the threed followeth not: Euen so, feare first possesseth the minde, but feare remaineth not there alone, because it therefore entred to bring in loue. Wherefore to awake vs sleeping
 in sinnes, and to ingender feare in our minds, the Lord doth oftentimes in the Gospel threaten vtter darknes, gnashing of teeth, euerlasting fire, and other torments of hell, that at the leastwise for feare of paines and torments, we might bridle our mindes, our eyes, and our hands, from sinne and wickednesse.
2 This feare is not onely probable, but also very necessarie. For if now after so many threatnings of our Creator, so fearefull and so greeuous, we scarcely forsake our sins, what would we do if God did not threaten at all? Therefore I holde this, that the feare of the Lord is, as it were, the parent and keeper of righteousnesse, temperance, loue, and of all vertues.
3 But there is nothing that doeth more worke this feare in vs, then the remembra^ce of that great day, wherein al the causes of al men are to be pleaded, and their matters determined. Insomuch that Saint Augustine affirmeth, if Christian men should heare no other Gospel then that wherein the general iudgement is set foorth, that one might suffice both to reuoke sinnefull men from their wickednesses, and also being reuoked, to co^teine them in their dutie.
4 Wherefore, in this Chapter wee will handle two notable points concerning the iudgement to come. The first shal be concerning the greatnes and horror of that day, and of the fearefull signes that shall go before the same. The second shalbe concerning the raising vp of the dead bodies, and the comming of the Iudge.
5 The greatnesse and horror of that last day may be knowen hereby, that it is called in holy Scripture, a great day, and the day of the Lord. And shall it not indeede be a very great day, which shal co^prehend all the daies of all ages, aswell those that are past, as those that are to come? For in that day men shall render an account of all the dayes that are past. In that day God will poure out that infinite treasure of his wrath and indignation, which he hath heaped vp in the space of al the worlds that are past. In that day the motions of the heauens shall cease, the course of the starres, the reuolution of yeeres, the vicissitude or returne of moneths and dayes, the decay of mortal things, al the cogitations of men, al their studies, al their Artes, al their disciplines, all their affaires, shall rest in eternall silence.
6 Also in that day it shal be decreed by
 the sentence and irreuocable constitution of the most high and eternal Iudge, what state and condition euery one of vs shall haue and retaine in al eternitie of worlds.
7 And not without cause the holy scriptures haue called it the day of the Lord. For as al the dayes of men going before, are called their dayes, because men watch in them, and do whatsoeuer they will: and God beareth, suffereth, endureth, expecteth, and after a sort, sleepeth and resteth in them: Euen so then, the day of the Lorde shal shine, wherein hee shal be continually waking and shal do whatsoeuer he wil, and we (whether we wil or no) must suffer and endure.
8 Thou now doest adde sin vnto sinnes, and ceasest not to offend God dayly: and God is silent at al these things. And why so? Because this day is thy day: But the day shall come, beleeue me, the day of the Lorde shall come, which shal bring an ende to so long silence, and wherein he wil take vengeaunce of all the iniuries that haue beene done vnto him.
9 Thus we see that al Eternitie comprehendeth two dayes onely: The one of man, the other of God. In the one, men shal watch, and God shal sleepe; In the other,
 men shal sleepe, and God shal watch.
10 How horrible this day shall bee, wee cannot plainly vnderstand, and yet we may gesse at it by the present calamities: For then the hoast of al punishments, which their confederate battel of al offences, shal assaile vs with maine force.
11 But as in the warres of men, before the last and general battel, there are many excursions, and short skirmishes: euen so, before that great and most fearefull conflict, which shalbe in the day of the Lorde, God is wont with his seueral bands to make certaine excursions, and one while to send vpon vs famine, another while pestilence, another while warre, another while earth-quakes, another while floods of waters, and another while drougth, as it were his horsemen to inuade vs, who when they haue damnified vs, retire and abide in their tents. If therefore, we so greatly feare pestilence, warre, famine, earth-quakes, and such like, when as they are but the beginning of sorrowes and short excursions, what I pray you, wil wee doe, when the last and general conflict shal come? at what time al tribulations, extremities, calamities, and miseries, shal also fight against vs?
12 And if wee doe yet more fully desire to know the greatnes and horror of that last day, let vs consider those signes which shal a little while come before that day. Therefore before the comming of that great day, heaue^ and earth, and all the Elements, shall giue signes: For there shal be signes in the Sun, in the Moone, and in the stars,Luke 21. and vpon the earth, trouble among the nations, with perplexitie: the Sea and waters shal roare, and mens heartes shal faile them for feare, and for looking after those things which shal come vpon the world.
13 For as man (which is a litle worlde) when he draweth neere to his end, ye humors in him, as certaine Elements are troubled, and his eyes, which are as the Sunne and Moone, are obscured and lose their light, and the rest of the sences, as the lesser Starres, do by little and little fall and faile, and yet his minde and reason, as the power of heauen is mooued from his seate, wandereth and erreth: Euen so in the dissolution and fall of this whole frame, which is called the great worlde, the Sunne shal be turned into darknes, and the Moone into blood, and the Starres shal fall from heauen, the Ayer shall be full of whirlewindes, stormes, corruscations, slashing meteors,
 and thunders, the earth with fearefull tremblings, and swallowing gulphes: the floods of the sea shal swel so high, as if they would ouer flow the whole world: and the roaring and raging noyse of the fretting billowes and tossing waues, shal greatly terrifie. Men therefore shal wither, and waxe pale with feare; and horror and trembling shal vexe them more and more, expecting what these new monsters wil bring foorth at the last, and what wil be the end of such horrible beginnings.
14 When a tempest ariseth at the Sea, and the boisterous waues begin to tosse and beat the shippe, and the men which are in the same do beholde the horrible lightnings and fierie flashings in the ayre, and the furious winds also, making the sea to swel and rage, in such wise, that now they see themselues tossed aloft, and then anon caried down into the deepe: they begin presently to cry, to feare, to tremble, to call for mercie, to multiplie their prayers, to craue time of repentance, to commend their saluation to almightie God: and to be short, they begin to thinke of the amendement of their manners, and to haue better purposes. Then thinke with thy selfe what manner of minde men wil haue, when
 they shal see heauen and earth, and all the elementes, to haue their peculiar and proper tempestes; when the Sun shal strike a horror into mens harts with his fearful darkenesse, and the Moone being turned into blood, shal terrifie them that beholde it, and the starres with their falles shal threaten, for they shal fal so thicke, that the Firmament shal seeme to be quite without light, and the aire with continual fierie meteors shal seeme to burne, the sea shal swel exceedingly, and the most high mountaines being shake^ with earthquakes, shal fal with exceeding great noise.
15 Who then wil take pleasure to eate? who wil take delight in drinke? who wil then haue any desire to sleep? Nay, who dare once then slumber, or take the least rest, amidst so many tempests and stormes? O miserable and vnhappy sinners, ouer whose heads al these signes doe hang, and doe foreshew vnto them extreame calamitie. O happie men, yea thrise, four times, tenne times, yea a thousand times happie and blessed, whose conscience in that time wil make them merry and glad.
16 Thus farre we haue considered the greatnesse of the last day, and the signes going
 before the same: now let vs cal to minde certaine thinges concerning the resurrection of the dead, and the comming of the Iudge.
17 Therefore after those signes and wonders, which shal goe before the day of the Lord, an Archangel shal come downe from heauen, and with the feareful sounde of a Trumpette shal giue a signe to all that are dead, to rise againe, and to come to Gods iudgement. This is that Trumpet which Saint Hierome thought that hee euer heard sounding in his eares, whatsoeuer he were doing: and not without cause. For who can appeale from this citation? who can refuse this iudgeme^t? who can pretend sicknes, busines, or any other excuse?
18 Then shal death be compelled to make surrender of al the spoiles in a mome^t, which hee had taken away from the world: and she shalbe sent away into euerlasting banishment, beyond al lands and seas, and beyonde the world, and the borders of al liuing things. For as Saint Iohn sheweth in his Reuelation, then shal the sea yeelde vp her dead which it hath swallowed, and death and hel shal doe the like.
19 What a sight shal there bee then, when sea and land shal bring forth in al places
 so many bodies, so vnlike one to the other, so different, and so vnequal? And when as at one and the selfe same place, so many armies shal come together from all parts of the world? In that place, Adam the father of al the Nations of the earth, shal see al his posteritie come together, and shal meruaile. There we shal see Xerxes, Darius, Alexander, Caesar, and other Monarches of the world, but yet hauing another forme, other maners, and other mindes, then they had when they liued here. For at the sound of the Trumpet kings and Nations, and all the worlde shal tremble, they shal strike their breastes, and mourne.
20 Moreouer, although all men shal be restored vnto life, yet neuerthelesse, there shalbe great difference between those bodies which shal be restored to holy men, and those which the wicked and vngodly shal receiue. For they shal be more shining then the sun, and shal bee beautified with vnspeakeable brightnes: but the others most foule and vgly, and more terrible then death it selfe.
21 What pleasure I pray you, shal the blessed soules haue, when they shalbe ioyned againe to their bodies, as to their most sweet brethren, after so long banishment, neuer to
 feare any more a seperation? What I beseech you, shal flesh feele, when it shal be raysed from dust, and shal see an vnwonted light, and when the soule shal come vnto it, and say, God saue thee my sister, and most sweete Spouse, the winter is now gone, the storme is past away, arise my beloued and come, the Lord hath fulfilled our desire, thou hast bene the companion of my trauels and laboures, thou hast for the Lordes sake suffered with me persecutions and iniuries, thou hast bene with me in watchings, in fastings, and vnder the crosse of repentance, thou hast liued with a temperate and spare diet, to feede the poore, thou hast not exceeded in apparrel, that thou mightst cloath the naked: Equitie therefore, and reason requireth, that the things which thou hast sowen with mee in teares, thou shouldest also reape with me in ioy: and that seeing thou hast bene a companion with mee in my labours, thou shouldst also be partaker with me of my pleasures, riches, and glorie. Then shal the soule sweetely imbrace the bodie, and the bodie ioyfully kisse the soule, and they shal be ioined together with most happy and indissoluble knots: And then with how great ioy and gladnesse shal they dwel together in one: for from thencefoorth appetite
 shal not contend with wil; nor sence with reason: but being ioined together in one with the league of amity, peace and concord, they shal enioy the delights and ioyes of heauen euerlastingly.
22 And contrariwise, with what anguish shal the soule of the sinner be tormented, whe^ that foule, il fauoured, deformed and feareful body is offered vnto him? With what words thinkest thou wil they salute one another? O vnhappy body wil the soule say; O the beginning and end of my calamities; thou hast brought me to these torments with thy entisements: and now I am come, not as it were into a house to rest, but as it were into a prison to be tormented. I am compelled to enter into thee againe against my wil. Is this that fleshe for the which I haue committed so many fornications, so many wickednesses? For the which I haue so many times giuen my selfe to gluttonie and carnal pleasures? Is this that face, which with so great care I haue kept from sunburning? O vnhappy pallace, for thy sake I haue wearied my selfe by land and by seas. O vnfortunate belly, how became I such a foole, that I would worship thee for God? Haue I lost the kingdome of heauen for this most abiect
 body, for this most foule stinke of al filthinesse, and haue purchased to my selfe euerlasting torments? O ye furies, O ye spirits of hel, why doe ye stay, why teare ye me not in peeces? why doe ye not bring me to nothing? These and such like words shal the soule vtter against the flesh with exceeding rage and hatred, the which notwithstanding, it liued so wel when it was here vppon earth, that it worshipped the same for a Lady and God: and to fulfil the lustes thereof, if feared not to violate and breake the lawe and commandements of God.
23 And when all are risen againe, and are gathered together into the place which God hath appointed for this iudgement: then shal hee appeare in the clowdes of heauen, with power and great maiestie, whom God hath appointed to be the iudge of the quicke and dead. And he shal not come alone, but accompanied with an innumerable multitude of heauenly Princes.
24 The feare which shal come by reason of that maiestie, shal be so great, that the prophet Isaias saith,Isay. 2. They shall goe into the holes of rockes, and into the caues of the earth, from before the face of the Lord, and from the glory of his maiestie, when he shal arise to destroy
 the earth.Apoc. 20. And the Apostle Saint Iohn addeth, I sawe a great white throne, and one that sat on it, fron whose face fledde away both the earth and heauen: For as when the flood of the Ocean swelleth, they are wont to tremble which dwel vpon the shore, and yet can take no harme: euen so when the Lord beginneth to poure foorth his wrath and indignation vpon wicked men, the Saints also and the Angels, and men which are in no peril, shal after a sort tremble and feare. If therefore the iust shal feare, and the pillers of heauen shal shake, what shal the wicked and vngodly doe?
25 And in very deed, so soone as the Lord shal appeare, there shal be heard immediatly a great cry and howling among the Nations:Mat. 24. Apoc. 1. Zach. 12. for then (as the Lord himselfe saith) shal al the kinreds of the earth mourne; and they shal see him whom they pearced, and they shal lament for him, as one mourneth for his onely son, and he sorie for him, as one is sorry for his first borne. O how many causes of weeping and howling, shal miserable and vnhappy men then haue? They shal weepe, because they shal see that their euils and miseries are past all remedy. They shal weepe, because they shal see that their repentance
 is too late, and vnprofitable. They shal weepe, because they cannot appeale from Gods sentence, neither can flee the iudgement at hand, and it shal seeme a thing intollerable to bee at the iudgement, and to heare the sentence of euerlasting condemnation. They shal weepe, because when they liued here on earth, they despised those which forewarned them. They shal weepe, because the pleasures which are gone as a shadow, haue brought vpon them endlesse sorrowes and torments. To be briefe, as men beset on euery side, and brought into ineuitable straights, destitute of al counsaile and hope, they shal weepe, because they shal see that they cannot preuaile any thing at all, neither with weeping, nor yet with scratching and tearing of themselues.
26 Neither wil the Iudge bee moued by any meanes with these cries and sorrowes, but wil rather seperate the weepers from those that reioyce, that is to say, the wicked from the godly, euen as a Shepheard diuideth the Sheepe from the Goates, and shal set the godly on his right hand, and the wicked on his left.
27 And then hee wil beginne to discusse the cause of euery one, and hee wil not forget
 any one offence. For wee shal see all things registred in perfect bookes; by which bookes all men shal be iudged. I sawe (saith Saint Iohn) the dead both great and small stand before God: and the bookes were opened, and another booke was opened, which is the booke of life, and the dead were iudged of those things which were written in the bookes, according to their workes. So that al our workes are written in those euerlasting bookes. Thou hast scarcely committed an adulterous thought, but the same wickednesse is written in Gods booke.
28 And not onely Church-robbings and sacrileges, parricides, periuries and such like faults, but also impure thoughtes and idle wordes, the neglecting of good workes, or the same done to no good ende, shal bee brought into iudgement. For so great is the excellencie and estimation of Christian integritie and purity, that no one, or the very least vice that may be, is not permitted to Christian men.
29 The cafe standing thus, whereof I beseech you commeth it, that there is in vs so great loosenesse, so great carelesnesse so great sloothfulnesse, and such securitie? Do we not flatter our selues, when so great iudgement
 hangeth ouer our heades. Holy was the prophet Dauid, a man after Gods own hart, and yet he so feared this iudgement, that hee saide, Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant, O Lord, for no man liuing shal bee iustified in thy sight. Holy was the Apostle Paul, and yet he saith, I knowe nought by my selfe, and yet hereby I am not iustified, it is the Lord that iudgeth me: as if he should say, therefore I dare not pronounce my selfe iust, because he that iudgeth me is the Lord. For such are the eyes of the Lord, that the starres are not cleane in his sight: and many times his eyes doe beholde wickednesse, where we see nothing but holines. Holy also was the friende of God,Iob. 31. Iob, and yet he said, What shall I doe when God ariseth to iudgement? and when he maketh inquisition, what answere shal I giue him? Why doeth this man of God, so commended of Gods owne mouth, who was so iust and simple, that hee could say without lying, I was an eye to the blinde, and a foote to the lame:Iob. 29.27 and againe. My heart doeth not reproue mee in all my life: why (I say) is a man of such singular innocencie, so afearde of Gods iudgement? namely, because he knoweth that God hath no eyes of flesh
 and that he iudgeth far otherwhise then men doe.
30 Moreouer, when all mens causes are diligently discussed and examined, the Iudge wil pronounce against the wicked, the irreuocable sentence of eternall damnation, Depart from me yee cursed, into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the diuell and his Angels. O bitter word, which wil make the eares of them that heare it, to tingle. O sentence intollerable, which depriueth sinners of all good things, and bringeth them to all woe. The Lord sometime accursed the Fig-tree, and immediately, not onely the leaues, but also the body and rootes were wholy withered: Euen so, that feareful curse of the last day, shal be no lesse effectual. For on whomsoeuer it falleth, it shal so scortch them, and shal so make them destitute of Gods grace, that they shal neuer more be able to doe, to speake, to thinke, or to hope for any good thing.
31 Then therefore the wicked being stricken with this thundering sentence, will lift vp their mouthes towards heauen; wil spue foorth their shamefull blasphemies against God the Iudge; they will curse this day? and the houre wherein they were borne
 and their Parents which begat them, and the wombs which bare them; the aier which gaue them breath; and the Earth which hath borne them: but they shal not be suffered any long time to speake these things against the Iudge.
32 For suddenly the Spirite of the Lord shal ouerwhelm them, and shal with great violence caste them downe headlong into the deepe,Apoc. 18. as in Saint Iohns Reuelation appeareth in these wordes, Then a mightie, angell tooke vp a stone, like a great Milstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, With such violence shall the Citie of Babilon bee cast,Apoc. 20. and be found no more. And againe, Whosoeuer was not found written in the booke of life, was cast into the Lake of fire. And this deepe shal be shut vp with gates of brasse, and with yron barres, which cannot bee broken with any force, nor cut in sunder by any arte: and there they shal drinke of the cup of the Lords wrath, and the smoke of their torments shal ascend worlde wtout end: and they shal not rest day nor night.
33 On the contrarie part, the iust being in the fruition of ful blessednesse, and of euerlasting glorie, shall haue in their mouthes the prayses of the Lorde, and giuing
 of thankes: and shal with singing and with mirth extol the name of their Lorde and God, with whom they shal reigne without ende.
34 But although wee heare of those things often, yet neuerthelesse, wee are not awaked from the sleepe of sinne, before wee be ouerwhelmed with the night of death, and of darkenes: Why doe we which haue this time now, looke for another time, which peraduenture wee shal neuer haue? Now is the accepted time, now is the day of saluation, There is nothing more profitable for a man, then to knowe his time, and therefore in our worldly businesse, wee obserue times and seasons: as a conuenient time to eare, a fitte time to sowe, to plant, and such like. Yea, the brute beast, by the instinct of nature, can make choyce of his time for benefite. The Swallowe, when winter approacheth, prepareth himselfe to take his flight into a warmer Countrey. The Bee, and the Ant, in the time of summer prepare their foode against winter. And the Prophet Ieremie saith, that the Storke knoweth his appointed time. If brute beastes, deuoide of reason, haue this foresight to make choise of time for their good: and if man him
 selfe, in a worldly regarde, can make choyse of a fitte and due time to gette earthly and transitorie things, how much more prouident ought hee to bee for heauenly things, that to attaine these, hee lose not his fittest time to attaine saluation?
35 The olde worlde that liued in the dayes of Noah, knewe not their time, and that was the cause they then perished with the flood. The Cities of Sodome and Gomer, knew not their time, and that brought fire and brimstone from heauen vpon their heads to their destruction. The foolish Virgins knewe not their time, and therefore when their Lorde came, they (being altogether vnready) were shut out of the Lords ioy.

Let vs then knowe the season, how it is time now that wee should awake out of sleepe.
Rom. 13.36 1. Thes. 5.
Let vs watch and be sober for they that sleepe* sleepe in the night, and they that are drunken, are drunken in the night: But let vs which are of the day, be sober, least the darkenesse come vpon vs, wherein we can neither walke nor worke.

Let vs alwayes haue before our eyes that day and time, wherein we shall appeare before God, and his Angels, and before the whole worlde, to answere our cause: and either
 to receiue a Crown of glory, or else perpetual shame and confusion.
Let vs know that we haue here a very short time limitted vnto vs. wherein wee must so endeuour our selues, that for short and transitory things, we lose not that which is eternall.
If wee haue this consideration of that great day of the Lorde, wee shal not only be the more secure in death, but also be the better prepared to meet with our Lord and Sauiour, when he shal come to iudgement.


CHAP. IIII. Concerning Hell and the torments thereof.
THere is nothing that the Diuell laboureth more, then to perswade men that there is no hel, that so the more easily hee may leade them thether, as it were blindfolde; by the way of sinnes, while they haue no feare of any punishment? euen as sheeues are wont to bee ledde with a vaile before
 their faces, when they are going to the gallowes: and as Ezechias was serued, whose eyes Nabuchadnezer commanded to be put out, whe^ he was caried away captiue into Babilo^.
2 But it may bee shewed by many reasons and authorities that there is a hel. For as a Princely magnificence requireth that a King haue a beautiful Pallace, for to entertaine the best sort of men, and a prison for the worst: Euen so the king of kings, and Lord of all glorie and principalities, hath a Pallace, wherein there are many mansions (as our Sauiour Christ in the Gospel testifieth which is the kingdom of heauen: and he hath also a darke prison or dungeon which is hel.
3 The lawe of nations requireth that malefactors for their offences be driuen into exile for euer: euen so God doth banish from his presence,Luke. 16. the impenitent sinners into hel. For so it is said of Diues that he dyed, and was carried into hel.Esay. 5 And ye prophet saith, Hel hath inlarged it self, and hath opened his mouth with out measure, and their glorie, and their multitude, and their pompe, and he that reioyceth among them shall discend into it. Also S. Iohn saith that the feareful, and vnbeleeuing, and murderers,Apoc. 21. the whormongers, sorcerers,
 and Idolaters and all lyers, shall haue their part in the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, And Christ Iesus saith, Feare him, which hath power to cast body and soule into hell.
4 But forsomuch as God hath not made Death, nor the kingdom of Hell vpon earth.Wisd. 1. We must vnderstand that the principal procurer of this Hell, is Sathan the Prince of darkenesse, who beeing in his first Creation a bright shining Lucifer, beautified as a precious stone, and more excellent than al the Angels of Heauen in resplendant brightnesse, through his pride against God, lost his light, glory and beautie, and as he was worthy became a foule feend, deiected from heauen into this Elementall world, lower than al the Spheares into the Fire, Ayre, Earth and Water.
5 I saw (saith S. Iohn) a starre fall from Heauen to the earth,Apoc. 1. and to him was giuen the key of the bottomlesse pit.
Further he saith: There was a battel in heauen, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon,Chap. 12. and the Dragon fought and his angels. But they preuailed not neither was their place found any more in Heauen. And the great dragon, that olde Serpent, called the Deuill
 and Sathan, was cast out which deceiueth all the world: He was cast euen into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. And being thus deiected hee now neuer ceaseth compassing the whole earth,Iob. 1. but in his circuite seeketh like a roaring Lyon whom hee may deuoure.1. Pet. 5. Luk. 22. Apoc. 12. For the which cause S. Iohn pronounceth this woo saying: Wo to the inhabitants of the earth and of the Sea, for the diuel is come down vnto you which hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time.
6 For albeit the world seemeth to be the parent, the bringer foorth and nourisher of bodies: yet is it the prison of Spirits, the exiling of soules, and a place of all wretchednesse and paines, For as the worlde is a place of sinne and transgression a Station of Pilgrimage and of woe, a habitation of wailing and of teares, of trauaile and of wearines, of fearefulnesse and of shame, of mouing and of changing, of passing and of corruption, of insolence and of perturbation, of violence and opprssion, of deceit and of guile, and finally the laystall of all wickednesse and abhomination: so also by GODS Iustice it is appointed the place and pitte of punishment and euerlasting torment, wherin the euill Angels that rebelled with Lucifer,
 and the damned spirites of wicked men departed this life, haue endlesse paine without rest.
7 And albeit the Apostle calleth Sathan a Prince that ruleth in the Ayre:Ephe. 2. yet is that Rule so slane-like, and his power so weakened by the Almightie, that when the Lorde intending to punish the sonnes of Adam, and to strike the earth with tempestes of lightning and thunder. Hee thereby also beateth Sathan and the whole rable of his hellish feendes, that in their fury and rage therewith they terrifie men by ougly shapes and aparitions, and (by GODS permission) to murther man and beast, sometimes, do ouer-throwe buildings,Iob. 1. and doe fire, and consumne houses, leauing a most noysome and horrible stinke behinde them of the hellish place from whence they come. For it is not the diuell, but the glorious God that maketh the thunder: and as testifieth Syrach:Psal. 29. Eccle. 43. It is the sound of the Lords thunder that beateth the earth.
8 Thus by Gods iust iudgement hee raungeth like a runagate in the sphere of his Hell vntill the day of doome, for which season he is let loose: and yet with such prohibition
 and restraint, that in his mallice hee can proceed no further, than shal seeme fit to the mightie Iehouah his Creator: and then hee shall receiue that punishment whereof S. Iude speaketh in these words: The Angels which kept not their first estate,2. Pet. 3. Apoc. 21. but left thier owne habitation, hee hath reserued in euerlasting chaines vnder darknesse vnto the Iudgment of the great day: at which time there shall be a new heauen and a newe earth wherein shall dwell nothing but righteousnes, when the are refined with the fire of Gods iustice: and then al the creatures of those new heauens, and new earth shall be made perfit: for which perfection and restauration, euery creature waiteth being now subiect to vanitie,Rom. 8. for the which they groane, that they may be deliuered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious libertie of the sonnes of God. For albeit the fashion and forme of this world goeth away (as saith the Apostle) yet they subtance shall reamine,1. Cor. 7. whether of the heauens themselues, or of the Elements, or of men, al which shall abide for euer.
9 At this time of restauration, when al things shall become new, and when the dead are raised vp againe to life in their corporall bodyes, then shal be prepared an out-set habitation,
 which shal be a Chaos ful of confusion, deuoyd of the first most excellent thing that God made, Light: and in steed thereof replenished with darknesse, a thousand times worse the^ the palpable darknes of Aegypts plague,Exod. 10. wherein the burning and intollerable tormenting fire giueth no light, and where the freezing colde which causeth gnashing of teeth,Iob. 10. mittigateth nothing at al the burning heate.
10 The holy Scripture, to inable the weake capacitie of man, to comprehend and vnderstand the exceeding horror, and most feareful torment of this place calles it a Bottomles pit: ^ophet: a Dunge on deepe and large,Apoc. 1. Esai. 30. Apoc. 21 the burning whereof is fyer and brimstone the lake of ye second death which burneth with fyer and brimstone. And in regard of the weeping, howling, roaring, and secreetching in that place, it is compared to the valley of Hynnom neere Hierusalem, where the idolatrous people at the sacrificing of their children so the Idole Moloch,Iere. 32. made a confused noyse of crying, and howling, together with singing and sounding of Instrumments that the pitifull screetching of the children tormented in that diuellesh sacrifice, might not be heard. And for this cause Christ calleth Hell, Gehennon,
 which the Prophet Dauid calleth the neithermost Hell.
11 And albeit to men that measure all things by Philosophy and humane reason, it may seeme absurde that Fyer should aflict the soules of the reprobate departed, and the damned spirites in Hell, forsomuch as the Agent is euer reputed more noble than the patient: but no corporal body is more noble than the Spirit: and according to the minde of the Philosopher in his booke of Generation, Those things are only agent and patient in themselues which communicate in the same matter: yet in this poynt as also in many other things which leane onely on Faith, and not on humane reason, we must beleeue it because the word of God so deliuereth it. For the soule of Diues in Hell, cryeth and shall crye for euer,Luke 16. I am tormented in this flame. Which is no Parable, but really acted.
This then is no immaginarie fyer, but a true corporal fyer working really vpon body and soule, on the soule before the day of Iudgement, and on both together in a higher degree of torment after the day of doome: not by a proper vertue and naturall action
 which the fyer hath, but as the instrument of Gods iustice, not consuming, but afflicting after a certaine manner of perpetuall detaining in the torment of reall punishment.
12 But is this place of Hell, so to bee vpholden onely by Faith, that humane reason cannot conceiue it to be such, or as it is deliuered to be in the word of God? yes verely, and for this cause the conceite of Poets was not altogether idle and deuoyde of reason, in saying that Saturnus deuiding his Kingdome among his sonnes, gaue the West part toward the lower Sea, to Pluto his yongest sonne: the East part to Iupiter: and the Ile-landes to Neptune of the Sea. And heeuppon they fayned that Iupiter was King and God of Heauen: Pluto of Hell: and Neptune of the Sea.
And to describe Hell, they could not bethinke them of a more fit place in the earth to make a resemblance thereof, than a certain territory in Italie, betweene Baiae and Cuniae where the Cimerii inhabite: a place in very deede so inuironed with high hilles, that the Sunne from the first rising to the setting
 thereof, neuer shineth there, by reason of which continual darknesse this Prouerbe is vsed.
Cimmeriis tenebris atrior.
More blacke then the darknesse of Cimmeria. And here they place Acherusia, a darke Dungeon or way to Hell. Out of which Hercules drew Cerberus the dogge of Hel Thus these Poeticall fictions grou^ded vpon earthly darknesse represent and set before vs, that inuisible darknes, which no man euer liuing on earth hath seene, nor tongue is able sufficiently to expresse,
13 Geographers tell vs of the mountaine Aetna in Cicile,Plinie. at this day called Gibello Monte, on the toppe whereof is a barren ground mixt with ashes, in the winter time couered with snowe: the circuit of which mountaine is twentie furlongs, and is inuironed with a banke of ashes on the height of a wall. In the middle of this mount, is also a round hill of the same cooller and matter wherein be two great holes called Crateres, out of which do rise sometimes sundry great flames of fyer, sometime horrible smoke, sometime are blowne out burning stones in infinite numbers: before the visible fight of which fyer there is also heard within
 the ground terrible noise and roaring.
14 What else can these fearefull fierie flames, horrible smoke, burning stones, in such hydeous manner blowen vp, and the terrible roaring within that Mountaine Aetna import, but a certaine subterraneall part of Hell? As also it may bee in like manner thought of the marine Rocke of Barry in Glamorgan-shire in Wales,Giraldus. by a certaine cleft or rift whereof, (if a man lay his eare thereon) is heard the worke as it were of a Smythes Forge, one while the blowing of bellowes, another while the sound of hammers beating on a stithie or Anuile, the noyse of knyues made sharpe on a Whet-stone and the cracking of fyer in a Furnace and such like, very strange and admirable to heare.
15 Nauigators report, that there is a sea in the Voiages to the West Indyes, called the Burmudas, which is a most hellish Sea for thunder, lightning and stormes. Also they assure vs of an Ile-lande, which they call the Ile-lande of Diuels, for that to such as approach neere the same there doth not only appeare fearefull sights of Diuels and euill spirits, but also mightie tempests with most terrible and continuall thunder and lightning,
 and the noise of horrible cries with screeching which doth in such wise afright and amaze those that come nere that place, that they are glad with all might and mayne to ply and speede them thence wi^h all possible haste they can.
16 Cosmographers also informe vs of a certaine wonderfull Whirle-poole in the frozen sea not farre from Ise-land towards the Ile-la^ds of the Hebreedes, whereunto al the waues of the sea fro^ far haue their course and recourse without stop: with their conueying the^selues into the secret receptacles of nature, are swallowed vp as it were into a bottomles pit and if chance any ship to passe this way, it is pulled and drawen with such violence of the waues that eftesoones without remedy, the force of the Whirle-poole deuoureth the same.
17 I doubt not, but there are some which ascribe all these things to natural causes and workings, or els will account them no better than fables, as they do all things els which concerne Religion. But yet let such men now know (as one day with wofull experience they shall feele) that these and many mo wonderfull workes of God in earth, and his wonders in the deepe, beside his counsels and iudgements reuealed in his word, doth assure those which feare God, that there is a Hell.
18 Who is so ignorant that hee doth not see and knowe, how in all things both naturall and supernaturall there is an opposition and a contrarietie, and therefore also a God, and a Diuel, a Heauen and a Hell. This Hell in the day of doome, as touching the paynes and torments to be layed on the diuel and his adherents shall be therein so inlarged and redoubled, that the darkenes of Cimeria, and all the darknesse of the earth beside the fire in the Region that compasseth the earth, the fierie flames, lightnings, thunder and tempestes; the smoke, terrible noyce and roaring in the mountaine Aetna: the fearefull visions, neere the Ile-land of Deuils: the chilling colde, and frozen Ise in Frygida Zona: the indraughts and swallowing Gulphes of Waters: the whole barrennesse of the earth with all bitternesse, stench, and whatsoeuer else may offend the sences of damned men (the punishments of sinne) shall bee gathered together into one Chaos of confusion, whereinto Sathan with his Legions of damned Spirites which are nowe for a time let loose to remaine and conuerse in the fierie Region in the Ayre, in the hollowe Caues and Dungeons of
 the earth, and in the waters, and where it hath pleased God to appoint them, shal bee plunged for euer and euer.
19 Therefore let Hell be where it hath pleased God in his secret counsel to place it, to men vnknowne, whether in the North, or in the South, vnder the frozen zoane, or vnder the burning zoane, Or in a pit or gulph, that shal exceedingly participate of both, it maketh to vs no matter of exception. For most true it is that Saint Gregory saith,Gregor. super illud, Mat. Ei^cientur in tenebras The wicked shall be cast into vtter darkenesse, that they may there gnash their teeth, which delighted here in nothing but gluttonie: For heat and burning co^monly maketh men to weep, and colde causeth men to beate and gnashe their teeth. In Hell (saith he) there shall be cold intollerable, fire vnquenchable, the worme immortal, stinke that cannot be indured, darkenes palpable, the horrible scourges of diuels, and the fearefull sight of diuels.
20 Thus much then we learne hereby concerning Hell, that it is a most feareful and horrible place, into the which the soules of all that lyue vngodly in this present world,Esay. 5.14. and in vnbeleefe, are carried after death by the diuel and his angels, euen as contrariwise, the soules of Gods children, which liue in his
 feare and in Christian obedience in this world, are caryed vp into Abrahams bosome, as was Lazarus, and are in the hands of God,Luke 16. Wisd 3. Greg. lib. 9. moraliu^. where no torment can come neere them. For as S. Gregory saith, Inasmuch as the wicked haue in this life forsaken their Creator, both in body and in minde, they shall in hell fire bee tormented both in body and in minde together.
And now that we haue hitherto spoken at large concerning Hell, it resteth that somewhat be declared, as touching the paines and torments that are now, and shall be for euer in the same. In the which, albeit there is but one fire, yet saith S. Gregory it doth not torment sinners after one manner. For euery one shall be punished according to the qualitie, and quantitie of his sinnes.
22 As in sin there are to be seene 2. turnings, namely, a turning away fro^ the chiefe and increate good or felicitie, called Summum bonu^, and a conuersion or turning to the lesser and created good, which be ye things of this world: Euen so in the punishme^t, which is answerable to that sinne, there shal bee found two sorrowes: The one, which shal arise of ye losse of euerlasting blessednes, and the other, which shall arise of the paine and torments which shalbe brought vpon the body and soule. Both
 which sorrowes and torments, the Schoolemen cal, the pain of losse, and the paine of sence.
23 But first of all we wil speak of the losse of felicitie, which is the greater punishment. There cannot be immagined or deuised any paine or punishment so greiuous, which is comparable to the losse of felicitie. For if to liue in exile and banishment in a close prison from our deare friends in this world, it may seeme a punishment how greatly wil that seperatio^ from God, vexe and torment vs, whose onely sight is so great happines, that sodainly it maketh a man blessed and happy?
24 It was to the Cittizens of Rome, a great punishment, and almost the greatest of all other when for some great offences they were compelled to forsake the Citie, and the company of Cittizens, and to dwel in certain desert Ilands, among the Barbarians.
Wherfore Marcus Tullius, when he was brought againe from banishment, as if hee had entred into a new world, and had gotten heauen for earth, said, as a man amazed, how beautifull is Italie? how faire are the regions thereof? what goodly fieldes? what pleasant fruites? what famous cities? how great humanitie of Citizens? what an excellent common wealth? and so forth. How great griefe
 and sorrow then shal they feele, which are absent from the Pallaces of heauen, from the commonwealth of Saints, from those most happy Regions; where peace, charitie, tranquilitie, and ioy raigneth, where the voyce of praise and reioysing, and a continual Alleluia is sung? And finally to be absent from that most pure light, which maketh the beholders ioyful and happy: and when they shal bee compelled to dwell for euer in most filthy prisons, and as it were in a sinke of al filthinesse: where there shall bee no order, but continual horror: where there shall bee no voice, but of such as mourne, and blaspheme: where there shal be heard no sound, but of beating maules, and of whips: and with a rable of all sorts of diuels, both barbarous and cruel, and also in the companie and fellowship of most wicked men,
25 Then shal their eyes be opened: then shal the vaile be taken away fro^ before their face: then shal they see with exceeding sorrow, that betweene the euerlasting felicitie, and these fraile and transitory things there is incomperable difference: when they shal behold most euidently that they haue lost the ioyes not to bee tolde, and permanent for euer, for certaine shadowes and dreames.
26 Here shal be so great sorrow, that although the damned doe know that al accesse vnto euerlasting blessednes is shutte vp from them,O Lord open our hearts, and giue vs grace to seeke thee while thou art to be found, and that there is a most great Chaos, and vniuersal confusion set betweene them, and the place of the elect and blessed, yet being compelled with a certaine natural desire, they shal not refraine themselues from these cries, Lorde, Lorde, open to vs, Lorde, Lorde, open to vs.
27 Hell, therefore, is an intollerable thing, and the paine therof most horrible: and yet if it were a thousand times bigger, yet is it not comparable to the separation from the honor of that blessed glorie in the kingdome of heauen, and to the hatred of Christ,Math. 25. O remember the poore me^bers of Christ Iesus, and the Lord vvill remember you. when he shall say, I knowe you not, and to this reproach and checke, When I was hungry and thirstie, ye gaue me no meate nor drinke etc. For we shall more easily endure a thousand thunder-claps, then to haue his most meeke and louing countenance turned away from vs.
28 Moreouer the losse of this felicitie bringeth with it selfe the losse of all good things. For the eyes of the damned shall see no comely shape or forme: their eares shall heare no manner of harmony: their tast shal
 haue no sweete or sauerie thing to delight it: their feeling shal haue no safte thing to serue it: and their smelling shal haue no fragrant sauours to refresh and comfort it. For they which shal bee once shutte out from the companie of God, are at one instant drowned in the Ocean of all calamities and miseries, without hope of deliuerance. Let vs then deeply weigh and consider, how great a matter it is to lose felicitie.
29 Now let vs come to intreat of that torment, which is therefore called the paine of sence by the schoolmen, because it is as wel laied vpon the outwarde sences of the bodie, as vpon the inward faculties of the minde. And that wee may first deale with the torment of the inward sence, yee shal obserue, that there are foure faculties of ye soule, which shall bee vexed in hell with wonderful torments. The first is that which the Grecians cal Phantasia, and we Cogitation. The second is memory. The third vnderstanding. And the last will.
30 Cogitation therefore, shall be most vehemently vexed with the feeling of those tormentes, into the which both the body and the minde shal be cast. For if now some great griefe doe so possesse our Cogitation,
 that a man cannot, would hee neuer so faine, but thinke of that griefe; what wil the torments of hel doe in the mindes of the damned, which shal bee greater without al comparison? Therefore cogitation shal increase the griefes and sorrowes: and those sorrowes shal whette and stirre vp cogitation: and they both shal so feede one another, that they shal leaue no place of rest, neither in ye mind, nor in the body of the damned. These therefore,Holy mediditation. shalbe the contemplations of those men, who when they might in this life fruitfully haue thought vpon these things, would not: and they which disdained here to vse these most profitable meditations, as a bridle of their lustes, shal in that time suffer them, as most cruel torments.
13 Furthermore, the memorie shal bee no smal crosse to the mindes of the damned, when they shal beginne to cal to mind their former delights, and the pleasures past, for the which, they are now come vnto these torments. For then too late they shal perceiue, with what bitter sauce they were seasoned. which in times past seemed so sweete vnto them. But they shal much more vehemently bee tormented, when they shal compare the breuitie of the pleasures past, with the eternity
 of the present sorrowes. For what Mathematician so skilful can bee found out, which can declare vnto vs how much greter that euerlasting time shalbe then the time of those transitorie pleasures? How shal they then groane and mourne, and what great deepe sighes shal they fetch, when they shal finde by experience that their pleasures were most momentanie, and that they are gone as a dreame and shadow, and that their sorrowes shal haue no end?
14 But the vnderstanding, as it is a faculty more excellent and perspicuous,Vnderstanding. so shal it bee tormented with a more intollerable crosse. In this facultie shal that worme be, which the Scriptures so oftentimes threaten to sinners, where it is saide, that their worme dyeth not, and the fire shal not be quenched. For as the worme hath his original from the wood, and yet doeth continually eate and consume the woode, whereof it commeth: Euen so this worme springeth from sinne, and holdeth a perpetual warre with sinne, and is nothing else but a continual repentance, and sorrow, ful of rage and desperation, which they haue by reason of their sinnes, when they see and feele, that for them they haue lost the kingdome of heauen, and
 haue incurred those vnspeakeable torments. This worme of the damned resteth, neither day nor night, but biteth and gnaweth continually, and feedeth vpon the bowels of those miserable men, alwaies bringing to their remembrance, the notable opportunitie which they had here in earth, not onely with verie small labour to haue escaped those punishments, but also without mony, or money worth, to haue gotten the kingdome of heauen. Therefore they shall euermore contend with themselues, and say, O miserable men that we be, to whom the kingdome of heauen was sometimes offered freely to receiue and possesse: the which, the Preachers of Gods word did humbly and louingly beseech vs, to imbrace, and we refused, If we had truly repented vs of our sins, all had ben forgiuen. How small a thing had it beene to haue repented? If we had craued mercy, we had easily obtayned it: If wee had called for helpe and grace faithfully, it had beene at hande: If wee had giuen but a cuppe of cold water for the Lords sake, wee had not bene vnrewarded But now wee fast continually, and shal bee tormented, we shal be afflicted, and shal reap no fruite thereof. O that golden time misspent, how is it now gone and neuer shal returne
 again? Who bereaued vs of our wits? Who shutte our eyes? Who stopt our eares? Whoso bewitched vs, that we neuer thought vpon these punishments, that wee neuer had regard to these times, that we neuer foresaw this misery, and that we harkened not vnto them which forewarned vs?
30 And if the vnderstanding shal feele these thinges, what shal wee then say of the wil, which is the chiefe and principal cause of sinnes? The wil therefore, shal bee euermore tormented with a certaine outragious enuie, which it shal conceiue of the honour and glory of Almighty God, and of all the Saints in heauen, according as it is set down in the Psalme: The vngodly shall see it, and it shall grieue him, hee shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away: the desire of the vngodly shall perish.Psal. 112.10. ver. Also in the willes of these sinners, there shalbe ioyned with enuy, an extreme hatred against God, from whe^ce shal arise horrible curses and blasphemies,Heare and tremble oh wicked and prophane. which shal neuer cease in their mouthes. For when they shal perceiue that there is no hope any more to recouer their saluation, and shal also be assured that they shal at no time come into the fauor of God, and that their torme^ts shal neuer haue ende. And further, when
 they shal see that it is God himselfe which keepeth them, as it were fast bounde with chaines, in those perpetual torments: and that it is hee which doeth from an high cast downe vpon them thundring tempests: and with his omnipote^t breath doth kindle those furnaces of hel fire: then they wil rage, and some like mad dogges, and wil neuer cease from barking, from blasphemies, and cursed speakings. They wil curse him, because hee created them, and adiudged them to death, and yet dying, are neuer dead They wil curse his punishmentes, because hee tormenteth them so vehemently.from wicked blasphemies good Lord deliuer vs. They wil curse his benignitie, because it is now turned into seuerity. They wil curse his crosse, and his blood shedde vpon the same, because it hath bene profitable to so many, and nothing auaileable vnto them.
31 To co^clude, they wil curse al the saints and Angels of heauen, because they shall see them in ioy and felicitie, and themselues in euerlasting miserie. This shal be ther perpetual simphonie and melodie: these shall bee their euening and morning songs: these their Psalmes and Himnes, which they shal sing in those doleful Temples of diuels, where they shal haue fire and brimstone, in steede
 of frankencense, and the noyse of stripes, with whips and maules which shal inforce weeping, howling, and gnashing of teeth, in stead of Organes, Trumpettes, Cornettes, and Harpes.
32 Thus farre concerning the sorrow, which ariseth of the losse of the chiefe felicity, and which the inward faculties of the mind doe suffer, which hath beene shewed to be the greatest, and vnspeakeable: Nowe also we wil shewe that to bee an exceeding sorrowe, which the very tormentes shal worke in the external sences of men.
33 Therefore, as the reward of the blessed is not some certaine particular goodnesse, seuered and deuided from other good thinges, but a certaine common and general good, or felicitie, wherein al good thinges, al delights and pleasures are contained: So the paine and torment of the damned is not one kinde of sorrowe, as of the head, of the eyes, of the teeth, of the raines, and so forth: But it is a certaine general punishment, which comprehendeth all the sorrowes, of al the members and sences together.
34 If the sorrow and paine of a woman trauailing in childbirth, bee so great, and so general, that it inuadeth euery part: what
 shal become of them, vpon whom all maner of sorrowes shal come? If a man cannot indure a little fire in one part of his body, as on his little finger, but one houre: how intollerable shal the paine of the damned be, when they shal wholly burne within and without? Which of you (saith the Prophet Isaias) can dwel with burning fire? And yet our fire here is but a picture and shadowe of that vnquenchable fire there in hel: where one drop of colde water wil be more worth, then all the iewelles of the worlde, though onely to coole the tongue.
35 All the sences of the body shall bee here tormented, and that not with heat only, but also with extreame, and moste freezing colde, as Gregorie affirmeth in these words, In hel is intollerable colde, vnquenchable heate, an immortal worme, a stinch not to be endured, a scourge euer striking, darkenesse palpable, a feareful vision of diuels, confusion of sinnes, and a desperation of all good things.
36 This endlesse miserie shal enforce them to houle and cry, cursed be the day wherein I was borne, and let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed. Cursed be the man that shewed my father saying. A
 man child is borne vnto thee, and comforted him. Cursed be he that he slue me not:Ier. 20. euen from the wombe, or that my mother might haue bene my graue, or her wombe a perpetual conception. How is it that I came forth of the wombe to see labour, paine, and sorrow, that my dayes should be consumed with shame.
37 Three things, among many other torments shal enforce the wicked to blasphemie and curse: first, that before the day of doome, they daily see the downefal of those into Hell, of whose damnation, they themselues haue bene the authors. And for this cause Diues in Hell prayed Abraham to send Lazarus to his fathers house to forewarne his brethren that they might not come into that place of torment.
38 Secondly because in Hel, the waters which they could wish might serue for their refreshing shalbe like to burning pitch which shal neuer be quenched, the smoke whereof shal ascend for euer.
39 Thirdly because they shal be gathereth, together as the prisoners in the pit and fagoted vp in a band like a bundel of stickes, for the fire.
For as heauen is (as touching the many
 ma^sions wherof christ speaketh) is in it self infinit, answering the esse^ce, maiesty, and power of God, being placed aboue all orbes and spheres, and farre beyond all circle and compasse of mans capacitie: euen so Hell is limited in a smal orbe, capeable of no more than the damned, and the instrumentes of their torments: which cannot be very spacious, in regard the whole earth is much lesse then the circumference of the Sun. The straitenesse of which place shal bring to the huge heapes of the damned packt vp therein, increase of torment, with palpable darkenesse.
40 Now, if this Hell were but a temporal paine (as Origen thought) then hope would cheare the tormented sinner: but the torments are eternal, and the tormented quite destitute of hope. The worme of conscience is ther for euer without solace, and gnashing of teeth shal be continually without gladnes. Thus the torments of the damned shal continue so many worlds, as there be starres in the firmament, as there be graines of sand by the sea shoare, and as there be droppes of water found in the sea. And when these worldes are ended, the paines and torments shal not cease but begin afresh: and thus this wheele shal turne round without ende.
41 For when the motion of the Primum Mobile, and of the Heauens shall cease, then shal time also cease. Now in this world, there is a time past: now there is a time present, and a time to come: but then there shall bee no time past, nor any time to come, no week, no moneth, no yeare, nor any variation of time.Apoc. 10. It shalbee as the day wherof the Prophet speaketh, which shal be neither day nor night. This shal bee a very long daye:Zach. 14. For it shal bee for euer and euer. For one day is with the Lord as a thousand yeares,Pet. 3. and a thousand of yeares, but as one daye of darkenesse, and of blacknesse.
42 What ^an considering these things, will endure these hellish torments, euerlastingly, to inioy for a litle while the vain pleasures of the flesh? Although a man by liuing in sin, might procure vnto himselfe the wisedome of Salomon, the strength of Sampson, the beauty of Absolom and Susanna, the riches of Cressus, the power of Augustus, and the yeares of Mathusalah: what would all these profit at the last, if after a while being in death, thou canst neither deliuer thy body from wormes, nor thy soule from hel fire? and as our Sauiour Christ saith; What
 doth it profit a man to win all the world, and to loose his own soule? If thou ofte^ meditate these things, thou shalt both leade a good and holy life, and after a while make a blessed and happy ende of thy pilgrimage.


The fifth houre. Concerning the small number of them that shall be saued.
STriue to enter in at the narrow gate: for many, I say vnto you wil seeke to enter in, and shall not be able. Luk 13.24. With what purpose* and meaning ha^ (...) Lord vttered this sente^ce? Verily to no other end as it may be gathered by the words going before) then to shewe, that they are few in number, which are saued, and many which perish.
2 For there are some which had propounded this question to the Lord, saying* Lord are there fewe that be saued? To the which question the Lord aunswered so wisely that by his answere, he taught that they were but few which would be saued, and also rendreth a reason why they were but few, Striue (saith hee) to enter in at the straight gate, for many, I say vnto you, will striue to
 enter, and shall not be able: the which is all one as it hee had more plainely said, they are but fewe which shalbe saued, and that for no other cause, but for that the gate of life and saluation is straight and narrow.
3 This thing the Lord goeth about to print in our minds, whe^ as he so often times repeateth, Many are called, but fewe are chosen: And when hee cryed againe, Wide and broade is the way which leadeth to perdition, and many there bee which enter thereat: but narrowe and straight is the way which leadeth vnto life,Mat. 7.1.3 and fewe there bee which finde it.
4 This thing Isaias setteth before our eyes by a very plaine, and yet feareful similitude: For thus he speaketh, Surely thus shal it be in the middest of the earth among the people, as the shaking of an Oliue tree, and as the grapes when the vintage is ended. Isaias, Chap. 24.13. These shal lift vp their voice, and shall sing praises, when the Lord is glorious and magnificent: that is to say, how seldome doe Oliues hang vpon the tree after they are shaken: and how seldom are grapes found vppon the vines after the vintage, euen so few shal be saued out of the nubmer of men. Who wil not tremble? who wil not forget
 his sport and mirth, and delights, if he begin to thinke vpon this thing?
5 Againe in Esdras it is saide; The most highe made this world for many:2. Esd. 8.1 but the world to come for fewe: The earth yeeldeth great store of clay to make pots, but little golde: So it is with the worke of this world: There bee many created, but fewe shalbe saued. Wee see hereby that euen in natural things, those that be most excellent, are most rare: much clay, but little gold: great plenty of common stones, but of precious stones very fewe: vnprofitable hearbes spring euery where, but wholesome and m^dicinable hearbs are more geason.
6 How many millions of Infidels, Barbarians, Turkes, Iewes, which remaine in the darknes of their own ignora^ce, are damned? and among Christians so many as hold not their profession truly, or otherwise are euil liuers therein? Also before the comming of Christ, all the world went the broad way to damnation, for many thousand yeares together, excepting a few Iewes, which were a peculiar people vnto God: and yet amongst them also it seemeth, the greater part were not saued:
7 If this be so, that God damneth so many
 thousands for one that he saueth,Psal. 144. Iames. 2. how is it true, that his mercie is aboue al his works, and doe surmount his iudgements? For if the number of the damned, do so much exceed the number that are saued, it may seeme that the worke of iustice doeth exceede the worke of mercy.
8 To this obiection it may thus bee answered: First, that mercy may bee saide to exceede his iustice,2. Esdr. 7.69. for that our whole saluation is of his mercy, and our damnation of our selues, as from the first and principall cause thereof.Ose. 13. Thy onely perdition is from thy selfe (O Israel) and thine assistance to doe good, is onely from me.
9 Secondly, in that hee desireth that all men might be saued. Whereby it appeareth, that hee offereth his mercy to all willingly and freely, and is constrained to execute his iustice by our obstinate behauiour onely. Mat. 23.37.
10 Thirdly, in that hee vseth many meanes to saue the damned in this life.1. Tim. 2.9 Iere. 3. First by calling them and assisting them somtimes with his grace to doe good, by mouing them inwardly with infinite good inspirations: secondly, by alluring them outwardly with exhortations, promises and examples of others:
 thirdly, by aduersities: forthly by prosperities: fiftly, by giuing speace to repent: lastly, by threatnings, This must needes make the very damned confesse in hel, that his iudgements are nothing comparable with the greatnesse of his mercies.
11 But to returne to our purpose: Seeing they are so few that shall be saued if they bee compared with those which shal perish, Isaias saith full truly,Isaias. 24. These shall lift vp their voyce: they shall shout for the magnificence of the Lord. That is to say, when (the kingdome of Antichrist being finished) Christ shal come in the clowdes of Heauen with power and maiesty: when hee hath cast innumerable multitudes of the wicked into hel fire: when he hath iudged all blasphemers, all fornicators, all drunkards, and al vncleane persons to eternal torments: and when he hath tumbled downe headlong all proud persons: then those few which are left shal lift vp their voices, and shal breake forth into the praises of the Lord.
12 Now let men which are louers of themselues, eate, drinke, play, laugh, liue in security, and giue themselues to delights, and they shall see what wil come vpon them soone after. Verily if there bee but a fewe that
 be saued, these are not like to be in that number, but are rather to to bee reckoned among those which play vpon the Simphony and Harpe, liuing in prosperitie and pleasure all their dayes, and at last descende into their graues.
13 Thus haue we the meaning and purpose of our Sauiour Christ in the former sentence, now we will begin briefly to expound the same.
Striue (saith hee) to enter by the straight gate: one moued the question, but the Lord maketh answere not to one onely, but to many. Striue ye to enter in at the straight gate. For although one had propounded the question, yet there were many which desired to heare the solution of the question.
15 But what is that straight gate, by which we are commanded to enter? Surely no other thing then Christ himselfe. For in another place he saith plainly, I am the doore,Iohn 10.9 by me if any man enter, he shall be safe: And againe, I am the way,Iohn 14.6 the truth and the life
16 After what manner then do men enter by Christ? Two things are required for this entrance by Christ into Heauen: The one is, on the behalfe of Christ, the other is on our behalfe. That which is required on
 Christs part is,Apoc. 3.7. that he open the gate, for hee hath the key of Dauid, and openeth, and no man can shut: and he shutteth and no man openeth: and this is done long since. For Christ then opened vnto vs the gate of euerlasting life, when liuing here vpon earth hee was obedient to his Father, humbling himselfe to the death, the most shamefull death of the Crosse. For as the disobedience and pride of the first Adam did shut vp the gate of the kingdome of Heauen: so the obedience of the second Adam and his humilitie, opened the same againe. Therefore that which is required on the part of Christ is already done. For the gate standeth wide open, and shall so stand vnto the end of the world.
17 But on our part this is required, that we striue and labour by Gods assistance to enter in at this gate, which (as is said) standeth open. And we enter, when wee vse and receiue those meanes to obtaine saluation which Christ hath appointed:Faith commeth by hearing the word of God preached. Gael. 5.22. namely, Faith and Repentance. For this was the first sermon the preached, Repent and beleeue the Gospell. These two doe worke hope, charity, humility, chastitie, patience, etc. But because these things are hard to the carnall man and vnregenerate, therefore the gate of saluation
 is called the straight gate.
18 But some man peraduenture will say, if the Law of the Lord be a straight way or gate, why doth the same Lord in another place affirme, that his yoake is sweet, and his burden light? How doe these things agree, Striue yee to enter by the straite gate:Math. 11.30. and my yoake is sweete, and my burthen light? This knot may be vndone many wayes. S. Chrisostome expounding the seuenth Chapter of S. Mathewes Gospel, affirmeth that the law of the Lord in it selfe is grieuous and hard: but yet also that it is light and sweete, if the rewards to come, and the torments to come, be co^sidered.Rom. 8.18 For the sufferings of this life, are nothing in comparison of the glorie that shall be shewed vpon vs.
19 If the sicke man for the loue of his health, is very willing to drinke most bitter potions: If the husband-man in hope of the haruest to come, setteth light by the scorching heate of Sommer, and the pinching colde of Winter: If the Marchaunt feareth not the danger of ship-wracke, nor the lying in wait of Pirats when he aduentureth for gold: If the souldier for vaine glory and a shadowe of honour, thinketh the burthen of his armour light, and is contented to vndergoe hunger,
 thirst, watchings, labours, wounds, perils, and death it selfe: how can it be but that those things which God commandeth, must bee easie and light to a Christian man, especially if he consider that great and sempiternal glory which God promiseth to his souldiers?
20 The holy Apostle writing* to the Ephesians doth not without cause say that hee prayeth with so great carefulnesse,Eph. 1.18. that the God of glory would vouchsafe to giue them, the spirit of wisedom, and illumined eyes of the heart, that they might know what is the hope of his calling, and what is the riches of his glory, and of his inheritance in the Saints. For hee knew that the greatnes of the heauenly reward was such that the onely consideration thereof was able to make all grieuous and bitter things sweet and light. These cogitations (saith S. Cyprian) what persecution,Cyprian. de exhor. Martirij. what torments can ouercome? The minde which is setled vpon religious Meditations standeth firme and stable: and the same minde standeth immoueable against all the terrors of the diuel, and the threatnings of the world, being confirmed by a stedfast faith of the things to come.
21 The punishments also and torments which are to come, are so continual and greiuous,
 that to escape them, all the labours that we suffer here in earth, are not to be accounted labours.
22 But yet let vs see another answere to the former question. The way of the Lord in the beginning is very straight, but by little and little it is enlarged. In the beginning it seemeth hard and bitter: but by vse it groweth easie, by little and little; and by custome it is made light and sweete.
23 Hereupon Saint Bernard saith, The commaundements of God, at the first seeme importable, afterward, not so heauie: Then not heauy at at all: And in the ende they delight. To this agreeth the saying of Saint Hierom. Vertues are hard to him that first taketh them in hand, easie to him that profiteth in them, and sweete to him that exerciseth them. And Saint Augustine saith, The paths of equitie, when a man first entreth to them, are straight and narrowe, but when hee hath gone foreward in them a time, they seeme spacious and broade.Pro. 4.11. Also Salomon in his Prouerbes saith: I haue taught thee in the waye of Wisedome, and leade thee in the pathes of righteousnesse: wherein when thou goest, thy gate shall not be straight, and when thou runnest thou shalt not fall. That is to say, before
 thou entrest, thou shalt be discouraged, but when thou art entred, thou shalt feele little difficultie or none at all.
24 Homer the Prince of Greeke Poets, a Heathen man, but yet wise, writteth, that when Vlisses should passe by those places, where Circe a famous woman in inchauntments, (wherby she turned men into beasts) dwelt, caryed with him a certaine hearbe, by the force whereof, he fortified himself against her power: the rootes of the which are most foule and stinking, but the flowers most faire and white as milke. The purpose of Homer is, hereby to shew, that wise men (whom he describeth in the person of Vlisses) are wont to guard and fortifie themselues with vertue, which is stronger then any armour of proofe, least being vanquished with diuers desires and lustes, they be transformed and made like vnto brute beastes: and that vertue is like to the said hearbe which hath blacke rootes, and white flowers, for that the beginnings of vertue are hard and vnpleasant, but the fruit thereof most sweete and good.
25 Moreouer, experience and daily vse, proueth this. For there are many to whom if we should say thus. This must be your life hereafter: ye shall abstaine fro^ pastimes and
 pleasures: ye shal seldome walke abroad out of your houses: ye shall not hunt after feasts and banquets: ye shal not vse wanton daliaunce with women: but yee shall followe your vocation at home, wherein ye shall be conuersant: and hereunto ye shal ioyne prayer, reading, and godly Meditation. To this they would answere, we can in no wise performe this, without God should worke a great myracle in vs: this is no humane life, but a life for Angels.
26 But if these men would begin to enter the kingdome of heauen, as it were with strong hand, to resist their euill customes, to exercise themselues in good workes, and willingly to vse those remedies which helpe to roote out sin and wickednes, as often prayer, and fasting, the receiuing of the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the diligent reading of the Scriptures and other good bookes, the companie and fellowship of good men: who doubteth but yt vpon these religious exercises, there will follow such good successe, that the way of the Lord shalbe opened vnto them more and more: and that in a short time they shall see themselues in that place with exceeding ioy of minde, wherunto afore they thought they should neuer come?
 And thus they shal not only without labour and paine but also with delight and pleasure abstaine from sin and wickednesse, and liue a holy and blessed life.
27 For the Philosopher, though an Ethnicke, saw this plainely and so taught, that it is a pleasure to a vertuous man to liue vertuously: and Salomon expresseth the same thing in others words: The righteous man reioyceth, to deale righteously.
28 Moreouer this question may be answered another way, If wee say with Theophilact that Christ is a straight gate, and narrow way, so called, not so much because he is so, but because hee seemeth so, to the louers of the worlde, to wealthie and riche men. For in very deede if men were humble, if they would lay aside many vnprofitable burthens, and put off the garment of the flesh, they should (peraduenture) finde no straites in the way and gate of the Lord: Whereas now they think vpon nothing, but how they may rise continually, howe they may waxe fat in body, swell in minde, howe they may extend and inlarge their possessions, how they may abound and flow in wealth: neither doe they cease at any time to lade themselues with the heauie burthens of the cares of this
 life. And what maruel then if to such men, the gate of the heauenly kingdome seeme to be straite and narrowe?
29 It seemed not a hard and straite way to the Apostles of our Lord: It seemed not so to them which succeeded them in profession, who forsooke all that they possessed, and would needes follow poore Christ in pouertie. For it cannot bee expressed in wordes how ample and large the way of the Lorde shal be made vnto all them, which can set their heart vpon Heauen, contemne earthly vanities, with great feruencie of minde to cleaue whollie vnto God, and which can cut off the desires of vnprofitable things.
30 Last of all this may be added also for the explication of our question, that the lawe and commandementes of God are a straite way and gate, if they be considered by themselues, and alone. But if the grace and helpe of God be ioyned vnto them, they ought not to be called a straite gate, but a sweete yoke and a light burthen.
31 For this is the difference betweene the law and the Gospel. The law commanded that wee should bee holie, but it gaue no grace by which men are sanctified: It commanded vs to fight against the deuill, but it
 gaue not vnto vs necessary armor and weapons to fight: It commanded vs of carnall to become spiritual, but it gaue not the holy Ghost by which we might be made spiritual: It commanded vs to goe forward towardes Heauen, but it giueth not vnto vs Ladders and steppes by which wee may ascend into Heauen.
32 Therefore the Law was a yoke, but not a sweete yoke: It was a burthen, but not a light one. But the Gospel commanding the selfe-same things, giueth helpe and strength, that they may not onely bee done, but also that they may be easily done.
33 Wherefore the Gospel is a yoke, but sweete: It is a burthen, but light. It is also a strait and a broad way: it is a sharpe, and pleasant way. Let vs heare the words of the Prophet saying, Because of the words of thy mouth,Psal. 119. I haue kept hard wayes. Beholde a yoke and a burthen, a strait and a narrowe way. Let vs heare the same Prophet again: In the way of thy Commandements I haue had as great delight, as in in all manner of riches. Againe, I haue runne the way of thy commandements, when thou hast set my heart at libertie. Behold a helpe of grace.
4 For then the way is inlarged, and the
 course easily finished, when the heart is made spatious and voyd with the fire of loue: What is the cause that all the saintes did so great and wonderfull workes, and wee so small, and the same not without the compulsion of law many times? Surely there is no other cause but this: they were feruent, and we are colde. Finally they which complaine of the straitnes of the Lordes wayes, seeme to mee not to haue knowne as yet what the Gospel signifieth. For what doth the gospel signifie? what grace? what the Law of loue? what the holy Ghost? what Christ? what Iesus? and what a deliuer? but a deliuerance, but libertie, and charitie, but sweetnesse, and facilitie?
35 What this gate is, wherof the Lorde speaketh, why it is called straite, wee haue hitherto shewed: now these words are to bee considered, Because many I say vnto you, shall seeke to enter in, and cannot.
36 There are three sorts of men, which shal seeke to enter in, and yet notwithstanding cannot: and there is also a fourth kinde, which doe not so much as seeke to enter in.
37 There are some therefore which seeke to enter into the kingdom of heauen but they do not therefore enter, because they doe not
 seeke to passe and enter by the straite gate, but by the broad way. And of this sort are the Mahometans, the Iewes, Heretickes, Papists, Sectaries, and all Infidels. The Mahometans seeke to ender and to be saued, but therefore they enter not, and cannot be saued, because they enter not by the strait gate Christ, but by the broad gate Mahomet. For when Mahomet saw the straitnesse of Christian Religion, hee opened a certaine other gate, broad and wide, which leadeth the direct way vnto hell.
38 Behold and see what a wide gate Mahomet hath set open: he hath taught nothing to bee beleeued which exceedeth mans vnderstanding; no Trinitie, no Incarnation, no death or resurrection of the Sonne of God. Also hee hath taught to hope for nothing, which the eye seeth not, and the eare heareth not, but floods of milke, honey and wine, fulnesse of venerie, and fulfilling of lusts, multitude of seruants, continuall sportes and banquets: this he would haue to be the felicitie of the blessed.
39 The Papistes also set open a very wide gate, when they teach men to merite heauen by workes; to purchase vnto themselues with mony, pardon for their sins past,
 and to come; to redeeme their soules out of Purgatory fire, by purchasing infinite Masses and Dirges with money to be sung after their death; to haue absolution of their sinnes, by confessio^ to a Priest, with diuers other points of like sort: which maketh the way very broad and open for rich men, but straite and narrow for the poore.
40 In like manner al Heretikes and Scismatickes, which cannot endure and abide the straits of this gate, doe open euery one to himselfe a proper gate: The Family of Loue hath a peculiar gate: the Anabaptists and Libertines, a wide gate: and the Brownists, and Barrowists at this time a fantasticall gate, all which seeke an equalitie of states and persons, a common participation of other mens portions, a sacrilegious spoyle of the Lordes treasurie and sanctuary with Athalia: whereby they open the broad way of disorder and confusion, and a libertie to all sinne and wickednes: and yet by these gates which stand so wide open, a great multitude of men doe dayly enter.
41 All which the Lord calleth back with these words, Striue ye to enter in at the strait gate, for many, I say vnto you, haue sought to enter (namely into life) and cannot: because
 they enter not in by the straite gate, which onelie leadeth vnto life.
42 Let not the largenes of the gate moue you. What doth it profite to enter easily, and not by the straits, if ye enter into Hell? Nay rather, if ye be wise, suspect and stand in feare of the broadnes of the gate, and of the facility of faith. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth vnto life. And that is true Christian faith, which for the deepnes and excellencie of her mysteries requireth this, that vnderstanding be captiued of will.
43 There are yet another sort, which desire to enter in by the straite gate, but they come too late, and therfore seeking to enter in cannot. Hee that stept not in quickly, and at the first into the water of the poole Bethesda, after the Angell had stirred the same,Io^^. ^. lost the benefite of healing: and great were the liberties and priuiledges which the Israelites had in that great yeere of Iubile, which was euery fifty yeere: and he that chalenged not his freedome in this time, afterwares lost it. Euen so now is ye time of health, wherein the Archangell Christ Iesus maketh the water of life effectuall to our saluation: now also is that great Iubile, wherein we are to challenge the benefite of Christs death and passion, and the
 gate of Heauen is set open: but the said water of life must haue his vse in time, or els it helpeth not: and when the yeere of Iubile is past, the gate of Heauen wil be fast shut vp. Euery mans life is his yeere of Iubile, so that when his life is ended, the Iubile is past, and hee is barred from the gate of life.
44 And because manie while they liue here, are ouerwhelmed with the cares of this worlde, and passing on in their way, do promise vnto themselues a long life, and a large yeere of Iubile: the Lord foreseeing their perill, doth after this mnaner carefully admonish them, Striue yee to enter in at the straite gate: as if he should say, vse no delaies in the way, but make haste, runne apace while the yeere of Iubile lasteth, while ye haue time of repentance, and while the gate of saluation is open. For many shall seeke to enter in, but because they come too late, they shall not enter. They shall knocke in vaine at the gate, they shall crie in vaine, Lorde, Lorde,Math. 25. open to vs, and in vaine they shall wishe to haue one day of repentance.
45 And for whome, I beseeche you, are these thinges so often spoken? Are they spoken for those that are dead, and stand without knocking and saying, Lorde open to vs? No
 verily, they are not spoken vnto them, for they haue no profite thereby. But they are spoken to vs, and for vs, and to him (I say) this is spoken: The gate of heauen is nowe opened vnto you, now is the time of your Iubile come, now the kingdome of Heauen is offered vnto you, ye are now called vpon to enter by the straite gate, loose not this oportunitie, for the gate will be shut much sooner then you think of, euen before you be aware, then shal ye be most miserable and vnhappy for euer: yee shall desire but one houre to be giuen you of this most pretious time, wherof now ye make so little account, and it shall not be giuen vnto you.
46 There is a third sort of men, which seeke soone enough to enter in by the straite gate, but yet being ouercome with the straits in the way, doe not at last enter in. To these the Lord speaketh, Striue ye to enter in by the straite gate, because many, I say vnto you, shall seeke to enter: that is to say, they shall make a proofe whether they can enter or not, but they shal make it daungerous: they shal assay whether they can enter by those straites, but because they seeke not with all their strength to enter, therefore in the ende they shall not enter.
47 There are of this sort an innumerable multitude of men, which whe^ they heare their sinnes and wickednesses by the word of God condemned, doe for a while purpose to forsake them, and to enter in at the straite gate of vertuous life, and to forsake their drunkennesse, fornication, contention, strifes, and such like, from which the Apostle commaundeth vs to abstaine: So that these seeke to enter, and begin to enter, but soone after they returne with the dogge to his vomite, and with the sow to her mire againe.
48 And some, many times, renue their desires: they oftentimes conceiue the spirit, and yet neuer bring foorth. But the Lord is not fed with barren desires, it is not enough to haue a will to enter, but we must also labour and striue to enter. For I say vnto you, many shal seeke to enter, many shall haue a will to enter, many shal haue a desire to enter, many shal prooue to enter: but because they wil not striue, and labour with all their strength, therefore they shal not enter. For the kingdome of God suffereth violence, and the violent draw it vnto them.
49 When there is a Comicall or Tragicall play at the Theater or Curten, doe yee not see many times, how men do throng and
 shooue with great labour to enter betimes, that they may heare and behold the same: for the which they think their pains, their, time, their labour and their cost well bestowed? But in the kingdome of heauen there shal be such glorious sights, and so far excelling those worldly vanities, and prophane delights, that the beholders of them shall bee made happy with the beholding therof: And we must not tarry til our seruants go before vs to prepare the way, but euery man by himselfe, be hee rich, be he poore, be hee noble, or vnnoble, euerie one must seeke to prepare and make his owne way, and must striue, labour and endeuour all that wee can, if wee will bee at those delightfull and happy sights,
50 These things considered, which of vs will not sustaine the labour and trauell to enter in at the straite gate? Who wil not willingly suffer himselfe to be pained and aflicted for a time? I doubt not, but that there are many which would enter but they cannot, and therefore they cannot, because they know not how to enter. For without skill we must not looke to enter by those straite and low gates. If the gate belowly, and thou lookest to go in without stooping, with a fight vp body, not once bowing downe thy heade, is it not like
 that thou shalt hurt thy forehead, and yet be stopt from entrance? Euen so the gate being strait, except thou know how to conforme thy selfe to the fashion of the crosse, and to enter as it were stooping, or side-waies, thou shalt desire to enter in vaine. Therfore this is that which the Lord saith heere, Striue to enter in at the straite gate, because many, I say vnto you, shall seeke to enter in and cannot: and all because they ca^not fashion themselues to the crosse, and know not the manner of entring in by the straites. Therefore thou must conforme thy selfe to the maner of the crosse: that is to say, thou must determine with thy selfe to endure with a valiant mind all manner of afflictions and tribulations, and after this maner thou shalt easily enter.
51 Thus the Lord himselfe entred. For thus it behoued Christ to suffer: that is to say, it was requisite for Christ to be crucified, and so to enter into his glorie. Thus the Apostle Peter, Thus the Apostle Saint Andrew, and thus all the elect haue entered into the kingdome of heauen. For they all following the figure of the crosse, with many tribulations, and with great labour, haue entred into the straits of this gate.
5 But now to come to the last, and most
 vnhappy sort of men, which do not onely not striue to come in, but also doe not so much as thinke vpon any entrance. And how many thinke you are there to be found in this number? verily there are very few, which are not to be reckned amo^g this kind of men. What man is hee that forgetteth not the feare of God and his own saluation? To how many doe these words agree?Isaiah. 5.12 The harpe and Viole, Timbrell, and Pipe, and Wine, are in their feastes: but they regard not the worke of the Lord.Iob. 21.12. And againe, They take the Tabret and Harpe, and reioyce in the sound of the Organs: They spend their daies in wealth, and suddainly they goe down to the graue. They say also vnto God, depart from vs: for wee desire not the knowledge of thy waies, etc. That is to say, we wil not walke in that straite way which thou commandest vs to walke in, but we wil goe the broad way.
53 When the Phrigians, first became christian, the gouernor of the citie desired to be resolued by the Bishop (who was then about to baptise him) of this question: namely whether those that shalbe saued, or those that shalbe damned, shalbe the greater number. The bishop answered, that the greater number should be lost. And I quoth the Gouernour
 will do as the most doe: and so refused his Baptisme. Many men at thsi day peraduenture will be ashamed, openly to say thus, as this Gouernour did, and yet in deeds proclaime it.
54 Wherefore the greater part of men shalbe adiudged to euerlasting paines. Few are chosen. Many goe the broad way: Fewe there be that enter the straite gate: the which is not onely proued vnto vs by wordes, but also by many tipes and figures of the scripture.
55 God in that old world, wherin Noah liued, entred into iudgement with mankind,Gen. 7. and destroyed the euill and the wicked with the flood, but saued the good and godly. And how many were saued in that great multitude? A few (saith Saint Peter) that is to say,2. Pet. 2.5 eight soules, etc.
56 Furthermore in the dayes of Abraham, by another figure, hee setteth before our eyes, the small number of them that shalbe saued:Gen. 19. for when hee destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and brimstone from heauen, hee among so many people saued only three.
57 Moreouer in the time of Moses,1. Cor. 10. God brought the people of Israel out of Egypt, to
 plant them in the land of promise, a land flowing with milke and hony: All which things happened to them in a figure, and were done to admonish vs vpon whom the endes of the world are come. How many were ther think you of this people, which came out of Egypt? Six hundred and three thousand,Num. 1. fiue hundred and fifty, beside women and children, and old men. How many of this exceeding multitude entered into the lande of promise?Num. 26. No more but Iosua and Caleb.
58 To conclude, what other thing was the transfiguration of the Lord in the mount, but a most manifest figure of blessednes? but how many were admitted to this blessednes? onely fiue: Moses, Helias, Peter, Iames and Iohn: to giue vs to vnderstand, not only that they are few that shalbe saued (because there are but few Christians,Mat. 17.1. if they bee compared with Ethnicks, Iews, Sarasins, Heretikes, and such like, which without al doubt perish) but also because among Christans few shall be saued. Wherefore whosoeuer loueth God truly, and his owne soule, let him labour and striue to enter in at the straite gate, during the time of this pilgrimage.



CHAP. VI. Concernining repentance without delay.
IEsus the son of Syrach,2. Eccle. 5. giueth vs a very profitable admonition, to turne vnto God from sinne and wickednesse, so speedily as possibly we can, in these words: Because thy sin is forgiuen, be not without feare, to heape sinne vpon sinne: And say not the mercy of God is great: he will forgiue my manifold sinnes: for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation commeth downe vpon sinners. Make no tarrying to turne vnto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for sodainly shall the wrath of the Lord breake forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed. Also,Eccle. 12. Salomon to the same effect giueth vs most excellent counsail: saying; Remember now thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, while the euill dayes come not, nor the yeares approach, wherein thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in them. Heereunto agreeth the saying of Saint Augustine;

Age poenitentiam dum sanus es: sic si ages, dico tibi quod securus es: quia poenitentiam egisti eo tempore, quo peccare potuisti, that is, Repent thee while thou art in health: so doing, I say vnto thee thou art without da^ger, because thou hast repented, at what time thou mightest haue sinned.
2 Although these diuine testimonies might satisfie a christian man, that their hope is vaine and full of perill, which deferre their conuersion and repentance, albeit but for one houre: yet it shalbe shewed by other reasons, that it may the more plainely appeare, how needful a thing it is, for man with all speede to repent him.
3 There are foure principal causes, why a man cannot without great labour and difficulty, forsake sinne and followe righteousnesse. The first cause is, a custome of sinning, the which, being now made as it were another nature, can very hardly be ouercome. For as Mithridates vsed to eate poyson so long, that nature in the ende could very wel brooke and digest it, and the people called Gemerij, are so well acquainted with darknesse wherein they liue continually, that they cannot well endure the light: Euen so men that liue continually in sinne and wickednesse,
(...)
 thus brought vs to his allure, then his care is, to hold vs still in his bondage, and for feare that we should make conscience of sinne, and so turne vnto the Lord by repentance, he putteth a faire vizor ouer the ougly face of sinne, and so disguiseth her, that the proud person which exceedeth in apparell, saith that his or her pride, is cleanlinesse and decensie: The whoremonger and fornicator, taketh his filthy life to bee but the course of youth: The drunkard and riotous person, perswadeth himselfe, that his excesse is but good fellowship: The couetous person, beleeueth that his couetousnesse is good husbandry: The idle person which spendeth his whole time in dice, cardes, and such like, neglecting his vocation, flattereth himselfe that his time thus wickedly spent, is honest recreation. Whereas if the diuell had not blinded them, so as they might see sinne in her colours, she would seem such a deformed monster, as they would loathe her for euer. For her eyes are ful of Adultrie: her eares are very large and great, open to heare all vaine delights: her tongue swollen with lying and deceit: her throate is an open sepulchre: her lippes are boulstred vp with the poyson of Aspes: her hands are large to receiue bribes: her belly hath a timpanie
 of surfetting and gluttonie: her back is laden with idlenesse: and yet her feete are swift to shead blood: with her heart she thinketh vpon nothing, but how to betray the innocent, and oppresse the widow and the fatherlesse: Yea, from the very top of the head vnto the sole of the foote, she is ful of botches and sores, and hath no whole part. What man will be coupled with this monster, who hath no other dowrie and portion of her father the diuell but hell fire? Lette him then that hath beene inchanted with her adulterous eyes, diuorce himselfe betimes from her company without delay: for delay is perilous. Her handmaide Security will peraduenture flatter vs and say, It is yet too soone to depart, and so to craue further companie: much like vnto Swetonius Tranquillus crowe, which in the Emperour Domitians dayes, stoode vppon the Capitoll, and saide thus, All shall be well. It is the diuels voyce, which saith, Cras, Cras, to morrowe, hereafter: but God saith, Hodie, Today if ye will heare his voyce, harden not your heartes. If we harken to the diuels voice, he wil serue vs as he serued Adam and Eue, and wil lay open our nakednesse and shame.
5 A third cause of our delaied repentance,
 is the absence of the holy Ghost from vs. For as the spirite of the Lorde dwelling in our heartes, maketh the way of vertue easie and sweete, insomuch that the Prophet Dauid saith,Psal. 119. I haue as great delight in the way of thy commaundementes, as in all maner of riches: and againe, I haue runne the way of thy commandementes, when thou hast set my heart at libertie: Euen so contrariwise the absence of the holy Ghost, maketh the same way hard and vnpleasant. And as the light of the Sun cheereth vp mens spirits to goe to their labour: euen so the sonne of righteousnesse shining in our heartes, with the bright beames of his grace, maketh vs to haue a delight in the way of his commandementes. The first outward meane of Paules conuersion, was the great light which he saw from heauen: then he was cast down to the ground, and humbled: he heareth a voice, and acknowledgeth it to be Gods voice:Act. 9 3. Act. 26. and 22. And then ariseth vp and saith, Quid faciam Domine? What shall I doe? It is the celestiall illumination that worketh our conuersion vnto God, and which frameth our hearts to his obedience. And therefore the Lord saith by the mouth of the Prophet Ose thus to sinful men,Ose. 9.12. Woe vnto them when I shall depart
 away from them. And by the Prophet Ieremie: Vnderstand and know what a grieuous thing it is, that the Lord thy God hath forsaken thee.
6 The last cause, is a certaine sicknesse, and languishing of all the faculties of our soule. For the apple is not so eaten of worms, nor the garment with moathes, as the powers of the soule are corrupted with sins and wickednesses, as the vnderstanding is darkned, the iudgement dulled, and the wil depraued. Whereof it commeth, that now to liue a holy and godly life, is a very hard and painfull matter. Who seeth it not then, in what perill, and error they are in, who putting off their repentunce and conuersion, from day to day, doe thinke that the same which is now hard vnto them, they shall finde afterwardes more easie, when all the causes of difficulty and hardnesse are increased: when they haue increased the causes of their labour and difficultie, by adding sinnes vnto sinnes: and when an euil custome hath taken more deepe roote: Shall not the Diuell then more fortifie his castle, which is thy soule? Shall not GOD whirh is thy light, depart further off from thee? Shall not the powers of thy soule then, hauing receiued many woundes, bee made
 more weake and insufficient to goodnes? Beside this, thou must greatly hazard the losse of heauenly treasures, by thy long delay. God hath thought vpon and loued vs from euerlasting, and hath prepared for vs an eternal reward? with what face then canst thou holde from God a little momentarie seruice, which owest vnto God all that thou art able to doo for euer?
7 God hath giuen vnto thee, the life of his onely begotten sonne, the which is of greater price then the life of all men, and of the Angels: and by what right and prerogatiue darest thou denie vnto him the flower of thy youth, and to spend the same in other things then in the seruice of God, and to offer vnto him the dregs and rottennes of old age onely?Mala. 1. Consider what the Prophet Malachie saith, If yee offer the blinde for sacrifice, is it not euill? and if yee offer the lame and sicke, is it not euill? Offer it now vnto thy Prince, will hee bee content with thee, or accept thy person, saith the Lord of hostes? But cursed be the deceiuer, which hath in his flocke a male, and voweth and sacrificeth vnto the Lord a corrupt thing. All that we haue, and our selues wholy, are not sufficient to serue the Lord. Therefore let our youth bee dedicated
 to his seruice as well as our age. Let vs serue him not onely in sicknesse, but also in health; Let vs turne vnto him not onely when we are in affliction, and vnder the crosse, but also in prosperity. For forced holinesse is of no great account. Pharaos repentance, Festus trembling, and Iudas sorrowe, auailed them nothing. Saint Augustine in his second booke of true and false Repentance, speaking of that Repentance which affliction wringeth fro^ men, saith, Vis dicam liberaliter, etc. Wilt thou haue me speake my minde freely? I do neither say, nor will say, that he shall be damned. But saith he, will ye put the matter out of doubt? Repent then whilest thou art in health: otherwise whether a man doe safely depart out of this life, I my selfe am not sure. And the same Author in another place, saith us: Wilt thou repent thee, when thou canst sinne no longer? Thy sinnes then haue forsaken thee, and not thou thy sinnes.
8 Sinne is common to all times and ages of mans life; yea, to fraile youth more then to olde age, which caused King Dauid to say, Remember not O Lord the sinnes of my youth: There is then at no time want of matter in vs for repentance: and yet our sinnes are much more then our sacrifices. Sinne is
 common to all: but timely and speedy repentance to fewe.
9 But let the exhortation of our Sauiour mooue vs, which hee so oftentimes repeateth,Math. 24. Mar. 13. Watche, watche, because yee knowe not the day nor the howre. For I demaund of thee whosoeuer thou bee, which assurest thy selfe that after a fewe yeeres be past, thou wilt repent thee: who made thee an vndoubted promise (I will not say of yeeres and moneths) but of the morow, which is but one day? nay, who can assure thee of one hower? And what greater follie and rashnesse can there bee deuised, then for a worme of the earth, to determine anie thing certaine, concerning the times and seasons which the Father hath set in his owne power? Art thou ignorant how many this vaine confidence hath deceiued, euen to this day?
10 But thou wilt say, the Lorde is full of compassion and mercy, who hath made large promises to those that trust in him; who sent his Sonne into the world for mee, and therefore hee wil not suffer mee to perish. O man, thou greatly deceiuest thy selfe. Truth it is, the promises of God are great, and greater then thou canst well consider. And yet they appertaine not to thee, if thou canst make no
 better vse of them. Thinke vpon that Prouerbe of Salomon, Mel inuenisti? Haste thou found honny? eate not too much. Haste thou the sweete and most comfortable promises of God in the Gospel? vse them to thy comfort, yet presume not therby to liue securely in sin. For Iacob must change his garments before he can obtaine a blessing.Gen. 27. Hester. 2. And Hester must decke her selfe when she commeth into the presence of the King. That is to say, we must put off the garment of sinne, by speedy repentance, and we must be cloathed with vertue and godlines, as pilgrims, with Scrip and staffe for celestiall glory.

CHAP. VII. Of the Remission of our sinnes by Christ, and of our loue to our brethren.AMong manifolde things which doe set foorth the wonderfull power and exceeding mercy of God, there is nothing that doth so much expresse the same, as doth the great mysterie of the Incarnation and Passion of Iesus Christ, whereby we haue free pardon
 and remission of all our sinnes, and that Benediction whereof the Prophet speaketh, saying; Blessed are they whose sinnes are couered,Psal. 32. and whose iniquities are forgiuen.2 Wonderfull was the wisedome of God in the redemption of mankinde, from the thraldome of sinne, death and hell, in that he hath made Mercy and Truth, Righteousnes and Peace, to be conioyned in one.3 The first Adam sinned so damnation, from the which, neither he, nor his posteritie could deliuer themselues. God neuerthelesse will not haue Adam and his posteritie vtterly to perish, and therefore in vnspeakable mercie, he deuiseth the meane, that his Iustice and righteousnes might be satisfied, and yet man saued. No Saint, nor Patriarch, nor any other were he neuer so holy, which came out of the loines of Adam, were able to make satisfaction to God, for that first tra^sgression. No Angel nor Archangel in heauen, was fit to take this great taske in hand. Because man had sinned, Iustice required that man likewise should make satisfaction.4 Behold here then the infinite loue and mercie of God, who for mans redemption sent his sonne from heauen,Phil. 2. Luke 2. so far to bee abased, as to take vppon him our flesh, conceiued
 in the wombe of the holy virgin Marie by the holy Ghost,Luke. 2. that so of God and man, hee might be Emanuel, that is, one Christ, in whome Mercie and Truth are met together, Righteousnes and Peace haue kissed each other.5 Of this great worke of wonder, wherin God hath thus conioyned his mercie and his Iustice, the Prophet long before prophesied thus: Vnto vs a Childe is borne, and vnto vs a Sonne is giuen, and the gouernement is vppon his shoulder: and hee shall call his name Wonderfull,Isai. 9. Counseller, the mighty God, the euerlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.6 This childe our Emanuel, and Iesus the Lords Christ, approoued himselfe wonderfull in person, and in al his works. Three things (saith S Bernard) are singularly wonderfull, and wonderfully singular: that the Godheade, and the Manhood should be vnited in one person: that one should be both a Virgin and a Mother: that faith should dwell in the heart of man, things in nature and reason so contrarie.7 This wonderfull Christ, is not to bee comprehended with corporal eyes alone, and with a carnal heart, but also with the eyes of a liuely faith, whereby we haue remission of sinnes.Iohn. 3. For God so loued the world that he gaue his onely begotte^ Sonne, that all that beleeue in
 him should not perish, but haue euerlasting life.8 He then that will be saued must come to him. Whosoeuer wil come to the father, must come by him, who not only is the way to life, but is both the way and life. For as ther was no come to be had in Aegipt, but only by the handes of Ioseph, who after long affliction was so highlie exalted: so there is no grace, nor life, no remission, no holie Ghost now to bee looked for, but at the hands of our Crucified Ioseph. Hee is the Brasen Serpent, which onelie healeth the infernal serpents wounds. Hee is that holy Temple, where only God is to be worshipped, and no where els: without him ther is no hearing God, no helping God, no God for vs at all.9 Onely the Faith which is effectuall and auaileable to Iustifie vs before God, is that, whose obiect is the body and passion of Christ Iesus crucified,Rom. 4. Act, 16. and whose frutes are the workes of charity. Therfore (saith the Apostle) by faith cometh the inheritance, as after grace, bicause ye promise might be firme and sure to al the seede.10 The meanes to haue this faith, is the worde of God preached, that hearing it, wee may beleeue it to be the worde of life. For so it is also manifest in the Acts of the Apostle,Act. 10.44 Act. 4.4. where it is saide, While Peter yet spake, the
 Holie Ghoste fell downe vppon them which heard him.Rom. 10.17. And Paule to the Romanes saith, Faith commeth by hearing. So as the Church preaching continually the worde of God by her ministers, and offring reconciliation by Christ, giueth remission of sinnes: in that by the outwarde ministerie it pronounceth the same out of the word of the Scripture, by the which, through attentiue eares (as through a Conduit) both the grace and spirite of Christ do flowe in, euen into our heart.11 As the word soundeth and is heard in the voice: so in a visible and euident signe, the sacraments do speake, vnto the which we giuing credit, obtaine in very deede, that which they promise and signifie. So that how often soeuer wee heare the worde, or receiue the sacraments in faith, remission of sinnes is assured vnto vs: whereby no small faith is inwardly wrought in vs.12 Thus then we see, that remission of sinnes, is openly published by proclamation, ratified by promise: confirmed by will and testament: stablished in blood: and sealed with Sacraments. And thus much concerning the first meane to get remission of sinnes.13 The second meane, is Charitie in vs, in pardoning and forgiuing the offences and
(...)
16 But they which haue the greatest iniuries done vnto them, ought to be alwayes prepared and ready to forgiue, according as we are taught in the Scriptures:Eccle. 29 Haue the patience with him that humbleth himselfe, and keepe not mercie from him. Our Sauiour Christ commaundeth vs to forgiue our brother that offendeth seuentie times seuen times: and which is more, to loue our very enemies. Also the Apostle Paul doth not only exhort vs to loue our enemies, but also if they be hungry to feed them, and if they thirst to giue them drinke. Rom. 12.
17 Yet such is the corruption of our nature, that there is nothing that we can more hardly digest, then the forgiuing of iniuries. For the which cause, let vs vnderstand and knowe, that by how much this forgiuenesse which God requireth is hard vnto vs, by so much it is a greater argument vnto men, that they are the sonnes of God, which doe easily forgiue and forget iniuries, and with their heart loue their enemies. For herein they do shew foorth a certaine likenes vnto God their Father, who loued vs, as the Apostle saith, when we were his enemies, and reconciled vnto himselfe, being redeemed by the death of his onely Sonne, from eternall
 damnation. Pray (saith our Sauiour Christ) for them that persecute you,Mat 5. and say all maner of euill sayings against you, that ye may be the children of your Father in heauen, who suffereth his sunne to shine vpon the iust and vpon the vniust.
18 The example also of our Sauiour Christ maketh this matter yet more manifest, the which we ought alwaies to haue before our eyes. For he hauing not so much as any suspition of sinne, yet being buffeted, spit vpon, whipped, blasphemed, crowned with thornes, and nayled to the Crosse, prayed thus for his enemies:Luke 23. Father forgiue them, for they wote not what they doe.
19 There are many other most waightie reasons, which the Fathers haue vsed, to suppresse their frowardnesse, which are most obstinate and wilfully bent to reuenge. One is, to giue him to vnderstande that hath the iniurie done vnto him, that the same is not the principall cause of the iniurie, which he desireth to reuenge. For all those things whatsoeuer, which we suffer in this life, doe come from the Lord, who is the author and fountaine of all righteousnes and mercie. For God doth correct and chastice vs as his sonnes, wherein he vseth his creatures
 as his ministers, which can hurt vs in nothing, but in those things which befall outwardly. But euery man may most wickedly hurt himselfe, and defile his owne mind, with hatred and enuy. These things, that most rare man Iob vnderstood, who being vexed of the Sebeans, Caldeans, and the diuel himselfe, vsed these words, The Lord gaue,Iob. 1.21. Gen 45. 2. Sam. 19 and the Lord hath taken. Thus Ioseph forgaue the iniuries which his brethren did vnto him. Thus Dauid bare patiently the iniuries which Shemei did vnto him. It is great magnanimitie in a man, when he hath receiued a wound, not to feele or regard the harme.
20 A second reason is, that they which do not forgiue, shall not be forgiuen of the Lord. For,1. Iohn 3. Eccle. 28. he that hateth his brother (as S. Iohn saith) abideth in death. And Sirach saith, Hee that seeketh vengeance, shall find vengeance of the Lord.
21 The third reason comprehendeth those incommodities, into the which we then fall, when we will not forgiue the iniuries that are done vnto vs. For it is most certaine that hatred is not onely a grieuous sin in it selfe, but also by continuance it striketh more fast into our mindes, and is made greater. In so much that the man which fostereth hatred
 in minde, and desireth reuenge, with hope to preuaile against his enemie at the last, is so continually troubled day and night, that hee neuer can put that wicked cogitation out of his minde: whereby oft times it commeth to passe, that the malicious man, will sooner goe downe into hell, then be brought to forgiue, and with his whole heart to remit the iniurie. Wherefore hatred is rightly compared to a wound, wherein the head of the dart or arrow remaineth fast still.
22 There are many other inconueniences and sinnes, which are fast linked to this sinne of hatred. Therefore Saint Iohn saith, He which hateth his brother is in darkenesse, and walketh in darknesse, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because the darknesse hath blinded his eyes. Therefore of necessitie he cannot but stumble and fall. For how is it possible, that a man should allowe or like eyther of his words or deeds, whom he hateth? Heereof therefore come rash iudgementes, wrath, enuie, slaunderings, reprochfull raylings, and many such like, euery one of the which bring men in danger of hel-fire: wherof he is guiltie (as appeareth by the testimonie of Christ) which saith but so much, as Thou foole.Math. 5. What then doth continuall hatred,
 and back-biting raylers, and slaunderers deserue?
23 Let vs therefore follow the counsell and admonition of Iesus Christ, as wee tender the remission of our sinnes, Forgiue, and ye shall be forgiuen. For as Tertullian saith most comfortably, Si apud Deum deposueris iniuriam, ipse vlt^r est: Si damnum, restitutor est: Si dolore^, medicus est: Si morte^, resuscitator est. That is to say, If thou lay downe the iniurie that is done vnto thee before Gods tribunall seate, he is thy reuenger: If thy losse, he is thy restorer: If thy griefe, he is thy Physition: If thy death, he is thy resurrection, and thy life.
Now therefore as Gods elect, put on the bowels of mercy, kindnesse, humblenesse of minde, meeknesse, long suffering,Coloss. 3. forbearing one another, and forgiuing one another, if any haue a quarrell to another: as Christ forgaue, euen so doe yee: So shalt thou peaceably proceede in thy pilgrimage.



CHAP. VIII. Concerning Blessednesse and Felicitie.
IT is written in the ninetie one Psalme, There shal no euill happen vnto thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. These wordes of the Prophet Dauid, may beare a two folde interpretation. First, that they which are heere in this life vnder the protection of the Almightie, are free from all euil. Secondly, they containe a propheticall promise concerning the life to come. And whe^ we be in that heauenly Tabernacle, of the which it is said in another place,Psal. 84. O Lord of Hostes, how amiable are thy tabernacles? My soule longeth, yea and fainteth for the Courtes of the Lord. And the Lord in the Gospel saith,Lu. 9.16. I say vnto you, make you friendes of the vnrighteous Mammon, that when yee want, they may receiue you into their euerlasting habitations. And the Authour of the Epistle to the Hebrewes saith,Heb. 9. Christ beeing a High Priest of good
 things to come, by a greater and a more perfect Tabernacle, not made with handes, that is, not of this building, neither by the blood of Goates and calues: but by his owne blood entred hee in once into the Holy place, and obtained eternall redemption for vs. Also Saint Iohn in his Apocalips, Beholde,Apoc. 21. the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he wil dwell with them, and they shall bee his people, and God himselfe shall bee their God with them. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes, and there shall bee no more death, neither sorrowe, neither crying, neither shall there bee any more paine: for the first things are passed. When, I say, wee bee in this heauenly Tabernacle, then shal no euill happen vnto vs, neither shal any plague come nigh our dwelling. O most blessed Tabernacle! O most safe refuge! O region most resplendant and glorious! All thy inhabitants weare crownes of glory, sit in thrones of Maiestie, liue in life eternall, and possesse a paradice of infinite pleasures: which as S. Bernard saith, are so many that they cannot bee numbred: of such eternitie that they are without all ende: so precious, as they cannot be estimated: and so great, as they cannot bee measured. For the which cause, the Apostle
 saith, neither the eye hath seene, nor eare heaerd:1. Cor. 2. Apoc, 2. nor the heart of man conceiued, what things God hath prepared for those that loue him. And Christ saith, No man knoweth it, but he that enioyeth it.
2 Yet notwithstanding, as it is reported of a skilfull Geometrician, that finding the length of Hercules foote vpon the hill Olympus, made a portraiture of his whole bodie by that one part: Euen so by those demonstrations which in Gods word are found, we may make a coniecture of this Tabernacle, and the felicitie in the same, although we can not expresse the full perfection thereof.
3 We haue therefore a most comfortable description of this Tabernacle, in the 21. and 22. chapters of Saint Iohns reuelation, comparing it vnto a citie which is made of pure gold, with a great and high wall of the pretious stone called Iaspis. The wal wherof had also twelue foundations, made of twelue distinct precious stones, which he ther nameth: also 12. gates made of 12. rich stones called Margarites, and euery gate was an entire Margarite. The streetes of the citie were paued with gold, enterlayed also with pearles, and pretious stones. The light of the Cittie was the clearenesse and shining of Christ himself,
 sitting in the middest therof: from whose seat proceeded a riuer of water as cleare as Christall to refresh the Cittie: and on both sides of the bankes, there grew the tree of life, giuing out perpetual and continual fruit: there was no night in that Cittie, nor any defiled thing entred there: but they (saith he) which are within shal raigne for euer and euer.
4 By this description, wherein Saint Iohn vseth such words as hee could, and not as hee would, hee giueth vs to vnderstand, that the greatnes of the felicity prepared for vs in heauen, is such, that as I noted before, we may very well thinke with S, Paul that no tongue of man is able to declare it, nor heart imagine it.
5 This cittie or tabernacle shall in amplenes and in beauty, be far beyond the reach of mans reaso^ to comprehend. Yet the greatnes and amplenes, may partly be conceiued by the view of the starres. For if the least of them be of such greatnes, as all the Princes of the world haue not within their power so much compasse and space, and yet an innumerable multitude of stars haue place in the firmament, where there remaineth stil roome and space for many moe: how great then is the amplenes and capacity of heauen it selfe?
 The which giueth iust cause to the Prophet Baruch to cry out and say;Bar. 3.24 O Israell, how great is the house of God, and how large is the place of his possession?
5 And now what shal wee say of beautie, delicacie, and glory of paradice? This our earthly worlde, which is as it were in comparison of that other, but a stable of beasts, a place of exile, and a vale of misery and tears: if this be so decked and garnished by the great and most skilful worke-maister, that it seemeth not to be a stable of beasts, but a garden of delight and pleasures: the firmament adorned with so many stars like golde^ knops, the earth paued with sweet smelling hearbs, and glorious flowers: decked shith flourishing trees and greene woodes: watered with seas, and riuers: replenished with great maiestie of cities and townes: garnished with all manner of fruits and spices: and furnished with all liuing creatures, as beastes, fowles, and fishes, scruing for mans necessary vse and pleasure: If I say, this frame of the world be made so glorious for man which is but a seruant, and also for so smal a time, in respect of the eternity to come: what then shal wee imagine that the habitation prepared for the eternity, and the Kings pallace it self shal
 be? Surely, no lesse, then the power and wisdome of the maker (who is omnipotent, and wisdome it selfe) could make and finish.
6 But the chiefe praise of a citie consisteth in this, to haue many Citizens which are noble, peaceable, and quiet: the which are to bee found in most excellent manner in the celestiall Hierusalem. For if wee consider the holy Angels, doth not Iob say,Iob. 25.3. Can his Souldiers bee numbred? And the Prophet Daniel saith,Dan. 7.10 A hundred thousand ministred vnto him: and tenne thousand thousands stood before him. And if wee consider the number of holy men that shall bee there, then harken to the wordes of Saint Iohn in the Reuelation, I beheld,Apoc. 7.9 and loe a great multitude, which no man coulde number, of all nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stoode before the throane, and before the Lambe, cloathed with white long Robes, and Palmes in their hands. And this multitude shal not be confused, but passing wel ordered
7 As touching the Nobilitie of these heauenly Citizens, what shal wee say, when as they shal be triumphant kinges, princes, the sonnes of God, and after a sorte Gods themselues, and inhabitants of the kingdome
(...)
 belongeth to the body, co^sisteth in the change and glorification of our flesh after the general resurrection: that is to say, whereby this corrupted body of ours shal put on incorruption, and of mortal, become immortall. All this flesh, I say of ours, which now so burdeneth and grieueth the soule, which is now subiect to so many chaunges, vexed with so many sicknesses, infected with so many corruptions: oppressed with so many crosses and vexations, shall bee freed from all these, and made perfect to endure for euer with the soul, without any alteration. For it shal be deliuered from al the infirmities, diseases, pains, troubles, and incombrances of this life, and in steed thereof, it shal haue a most perfect and glorious estate, which shall neuer fade and decay any more.Mat. 15. And then (saith Christ) they shall shine as the Sunne in the kingdome of their Father. And if one Sunne can lighten and fil the whole world with his brightnes: if the maiesty and glory of his beames be such and so great, that some Ethnickes, doe worship him for God: and if he haue bene called of the auncients, the Father of gladnesse, the eye of the world, and the fountaine of light: What shal so many glorified bodies of the blessed be? surely they shal be so many suns,
 so many lampes, and so many shining lights to lighten the heauenly Hierusalem.
11 Nowe to say somewhat concerning the soule as the principal part of man: Wee must vnderstand, that although there be many things which make vs happie, yet they all are no wher else to be found but in God. For then at the last we shal be happy and blessed, when we shalbe like vnto God, which by nature is blessed. And wee shal bee like vnto God, when we shal see him as hee is. As the Euangelist Saint Iohn testifieth, saying; Dearely beloued,Iohn. 3. wee are now the sonnes of God, and it hath not yet appeared what wee shall be: and we knowe that when we shall appeare, wee shall bee like him: for wee shall see him as hee is. Saint Paul also putteth our felicity in seeing God face to face. And therefore Saint Austine saith,1. Cor. 13. This onely sight of God is our happinesse.
12 For as God is hereof blessed, because he seeth and beholdeth himselfe being the first and the chiefe truth: euen so wee also shal be blessed and like vnto God, according to our measure: namely, when we shal beholde and see him as hee is, the first and most principal trueth.
13 Furthermore, if the Moone and Stars
 doe receiue their light, and are made like vnto the Sunne, when they are opposite vnto him, and doe after a sort behold him: howe much more shall the pure mindes of the blessed receiue the diuine light, and be made like vnto God, when as they shal no more in a glasse or darke speech, but face to face, behold the vncreated sunne and light of righteousnesse?
14 O what a ioye shal it bee, when at one view wee behold the most high and hidden mistery of the inseperable Trinity, and of the loue of God therein towards vs? and when wee shal see all things whatsoeuer in God. For what shal not he see who seeth him that seeth all things? Then shal mans minde haue perpetual rest and peace, neither shal it desire any further vnderstanding, when he hath all before his eyes that may be vnderstood. Then shal mans wil bee quiet, when he enioyeth that felicitie, wherein al other good things, as in the fountaine and Ocean of all happinesse, are contained. Then shal faith haue her perfect worke: hope shal enioy that which she long desired, but charity shal abide for euer. Then shal be sung continual praises vnto the Lambe: and the song although it be alwaies sung, yet it shal be euer new.
15 Therefore our true and onely blessednes consisteth in the sight of God: as our Lord Christ hath testified.Mat. 5. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. This is life euerlasting,Iohn. 17. that men knowe thee the true God, and Iesus Christ whome thou hast sent.
16 This blessednesse, though it be but one simple thing, yet hath it riches, power and pleasure. In this worlde no man is rich, no man is satisfied: for the heart of man is greater then all the worlde can content. But in that most blessed life, the soules of the blessed shal be rich and satisfied with God whom it shal possesse. This abundance of all things the Lord promised saying.Luke. 6. Good measure and running ouer, and pressed down, shall men giue into your bosomes. And in another place,Mat. 24. Verily, verily I say vnto you, he shall make him ruler ouer all his substance.
17 The blessed soules also shall haue their honour and power. For if they shal be Princes, if Kings, if the sonnes of God, and petty Gods, and if they shall sitte in Gods throne: how can it be, but that they shall bee most mighty and glorious? For thus saith God in the Reuelation of Saint Iohn; To him that ouercommeth,Apoc. 3. will I graunt to sit with
 me in my throne, euen as I ouercame, and sitte with my father in his throne. O incredible glorie, what labours and sorrowes wil not they forget, which shall be inuested into Gods throne, and haue palmes of victory put into their handes, and crowns set vpon their heads by Gods owne hands, before all the Princes of heauen? Therefore the Apostle Paul most truely crieth out saying:Rom. 8. The afflictions of this life are nothing in comparison of the glory that shall be shewed vpon vs.2. Cor. 4. And againe: Our tribulation which is momentany and light, prepareth an exceeding ioy and waight of glory vnto vs. etc.
18 The ioy and pleasure that the soules of the blessed shall haue cannot be expressed, especially when soule and body shall be vnited againe in the resurrection. O ioy aboue all ioyes, surmounting all ioyes, and without the which there is no ioy, when shall I enter into thee (saith Saint Augustine) when shal I enioy thee to see my God that dwelleth in thee?35 solilo quiorum. O euerlasting kingdome: O kingdome of all eternities: O light without end: O peace of God that passeth all vnderstanding, in which the souls of saints do rest with thee, and euerlasting ioy is vpon their heads: they possesse ioy and gladnes, and all paine and
 sorrow is fled from them: O how glorious a kingdome is thine O Lord, wherin all saints doe raigne with thee, adorned with light as with apparell: and hauing crownes of precious stones vpon their heads? O kingdom of euerlasting blisse, where thou, O Lord, the hope of all saints art, and the ^adem of their perpetuall glory, reioycing them on euery side, with thy blessed sight. In this kingdome of thine there is infinit ioy and mirth, without sadnes: health without sorrow: life without labour: light without darkenes: felicity without ceasing: all goodnesse without any euill. Where youth florisheth that neuer waxeth old: life that knoweth no end: beauty that neuer fadeth: loue that neuer vanisheth: health that neuer diminisheth ioy that neuer endeth. Wher sorrow is neuer felt: complaint neuer heard: matter of sadnesse is neuer seene: nor euill successe is euer feared: Because they possesse thee, O Lord, which art the perfection of their felicity.
19 Let vs enter into these godly meditations with this holy ma^: let vs not neglect so great felicity, for the loue of transitorie things which are meere vanity: why doe we so earnestly labour for things of no moment, and haue that most happy and blessed life offered
 vnto vs, wherein all felicity consisteth? Thebrotus when hee had read the booke of Plato of the immortality of the soule, was so moued therewith, that immediately hee cast downe himselfe headlong from a high wall. Shall Platos heathen Philosophy so much preuaile with an Ethnicke, which had no feeling of this felicitie, that in hope of immortality he bereft himselfe of life, and shall not the sweete and most comfortable promises of the Gospell much more perswade vs, which haue the true knowledge of Christ and his heauenly kingdom, to forsake these vanities, and delights and pleasures of the world? Remember often that worthy sentence: Hoc momentum, vnde pendet aeternitas: that is, This life is a moment of time, whereof al eternity of death or life to come dependeth. If it be a moment, the ioyes thereof must needs be momentany: and miserable is that ioy which hath an end. But the ioyes of heauen are so perfect, that nothing can be added to them, nor taken away from them, and therefore perpetual. This therefore is the moste happy and blessed place to build and set vp a Tabernacle, where no manner of euill shall happen vnto vs, nor any plague come neare vs. Therfore stand fast in this station against
 all temptation, so shalt thou the more chearefully shake off all carnall burdens, and recreate thy selfe in this paineful pilgrimage.


CHAP. IX. Concerning the libertie of Gods children.
LIbertie is a thing very pleasant and delectable, and more wished for then any thing in the world: in so much that we by experience see, that not only men, but also beasts, doe greatly desire liberty, and do prefer it before all other things. The little birds, whether it be that of Canary, or the Nightingale, with whose sweete tunes men are delighted, being shut in cages are serued most daintily, without their wonted labour to seeke their foode: and yet for al this, so great is the loue of liberty, that many times they wil neither sing nor eate being sullen and full of sorrow, and if they can they will gladly escape out of their cage, more desiring to get their liuing
 with labour and in the cold aire, then to be kept captiue in Pallaces, with the delightes of Kings. It this desire be in beasts, and birdes which are deuoide of reason, what great account ought man to make of liberty, who alone should be freed, and yet neuertheles, is ofte^ times co^pelled to serue most cruel maisters.
2 There are two sorts of liberty: The one is a true liberty: the other is false. The true liberty is that which we haue by regeneration, by which we haue the participation of the spirite of Christ, through the which wee are freed from the tyranny and inuasion of sinne, and our mindes prepared vnto good workes: by the power whereof the Apostle Paul saith thus: I can doe all things through him that strengtheneth me. And againe: It is God that worketh in you both the will,Philip. 4. Philip. 2. Iohn. 8. and also the deed. Wherfore our sauiour Christ saith, If the Sonne make you free, then are you free in deede.
3 And although all corruption of the affections of mans minde, be not taken away, yet it is so maimed and weakened, by the power of the holy ghost, that it is not able, as afore, to hinder the making of a right choise: and this is the true freedome and liberty which we haue by our regeneration. Of this libertie
 Saint Augustine speaketh thus.August. in sententiis suis sententia 53. A good man is neuer seruant, but is alway Lord of all things, howsoeuer hee seemeth to bee in seruitude and bondage. And contrariwise a wicked man, although hee seeme to be free, yet hee is a seruant, and that not of one man alone, but hee serueth so many maisters as hee hath sinnes.
4 Then, that is a false liberty, which maketh the body onely free, and leaueth the minde subiect to sinne and wickednesse, most miserably to serue them. For I am perswaded, that neither Alexander nor Caesar were free, although they commaunded the whole world, so long as they most filthily serued their sins. Neither can I say that Peter and Paul were seruants being imprisoned, and kept in chaines and bondes, when as notwithstanding in minde, they went freely throughout the world, and by their letters, as by a kings letters pattents, deliuered, and set at liberty daily an infinite sort of men. For as man differeth from bruite beasts, not so much in the members of his body, as in the vertues of the minde, euen so not the liberty of the body, but the liberty of the mind is the true liberty, and alone is to be called mans liberty. Of the which freedome and bondage
 Christ speaketh thus. Euery one that doth sinne,Iohn. 8. is the seruant of sinne: and if the Sonne shall make you free, then are you free indeede. And the Apostle Paul in like manner saith;Rom. 6. Knowe yee not that to whom so euer yee giue your selues, as seruants to obey: his seruants ye are, to whom ye obey: whether it be of sin vnto death, or of obedience vnto righteousnes: when ye were the seruants of sinne, ye were free from righteousnesse.
5 To restore vs vnto this freedome and libertie, from the intollerable bondage, and most cruell tyrannie of sinne, from the horrible wages, and reward thereof, which is death, our Sauiour Christ hath taken vpon him, and vndergone that which is vnspeakable.
6 What Orator is able sufficiently to vnfold and declare the tyrannie of sinne and concupiscence? First of all doe but consider what a cruell tyrannie the sinne of whordom exerciseth vppon those that are in bondage thereunto. And see what an adulterous woman will doe to satisfie and fulfill the command of this tyrant. Shee knoweth verie well, that if her husband happily take her in her wickednes she shal without all doubt he vtterly vndone: she shal beside the losse of
 her good name, riches, friendes, and credite with her parents, children, and and kindred, loose, which is more, her soule, and whatsoeuer is both good in this worlde, and in the world to come, and shall leaue behinde her perpetuall matter of sorrow and griefe: And yet for all this, so great is the force of her affection, and the tyranny of this wickednesse so insatiable, that this miserable woman is constrained to incurre all these perils though very fearefull and euident, and to deuoure al troubles, so that shee may serue her vncleane lust. What tyrant hath bene euer heard of, so cruel, that would haue his captiues to obey and serue him with so great perill and detriment?
7 Yea, this and the like wickednesses at this day, do swallow men vp, and so deuoure their whole time, that they suffer them to do, to say, to thinke, and to dreame vpon nothing else. Wine and Women (saith Syrach) make wise men runnagates: Because men being made drunken with the loue of carnal pleasures, are no lesse witlesse to doe all other things, and so farre from reason and iudgement, as if they had quaffed vp an exceeding quantitie of most strong wine. For reason, (which the fathers call Noct^^am cerebri,
 the braines Gloweworme) being once extinguished, what are we better then beasts? Therefore such men, neither the feare of God, neither the pricke of conscience, neither death, neither iudgement, neither paradice, neither hell, nor any other thing, wil call backe to a better life. And the more secure they are, the more busily they endeuour, and apply themselues to all manner of wickednesse. And they doe constraine not onely the members of their body, but also their minde and vnderstanding, which by nature is the Lady and most noble part of man, to watch day and night, and to labour, to finde out the meanes and the wayes how to satisfie the lusts of the flesh, how to endite songs and Sonnets of loue full of wantonnes and deceite, how to decke and set out themselues with fine apparel, with sweete smelles, with daunces, and other like allurements. The which to doe is no better, then to wrest the heauenly light of the minde, which was made to beholde God, to the obedience of a most wicked bond-slaue: and to make the minde, being withdrawne from heauenly exercises, to be subiect vnto the appetites of a most abiect hand-maide.
8 Therefore whoredome is a great and
 intollerable tyranny ouer the minde of man: And no lesse is that tyranny of Ambition. For behold and see what a heauie yoke ambition layeth vpon his bondmen, commanding them that al their words and workes bee wholly imployed as nets and snares, to get the common praise and fame of men: and it compelleth them also to creepe as it were vpon the ground: and to flye through the ayre. For man at the commandement of Ambition, seeketh to climbe higher then all men, to bee subiect to none, to rule al men: and yet sometime when occasion serueth, he prostrateth himselfe, and humbleth himselfe to al men. Thus the miserable man being contrary to himselfe, and deuided in himselfe, outwardly preferreth humilitie, and in heart, pride.
9 Furthermore, the lawes of this most cruel tyrant are such, that if a man doe receiue a litle reproache or detriment eyther by right or by wrong, he thinketh that he is vtterly disgraced, if hee doe not presently reuenge it, and if by no other meanes, then to prouoke his enemie to some singular combat, and so rather to loose his soule and body, then to hazard the least part of his dignitie.
10 I omit the tyranny of couetousnes,
 and of other vices which are innumerable: affirming with the Prophet Dauid, that all the seruants of sinne, do sit in darknes, and in the shadowe of death, fast bound in miserie and iron. For what greater blindnesse can be imagined, then that man should not know himselfe, that he should not know God, that he should not know wherefore he liueth, and seeth not his bondes, his miseries, his perils, and his harmes?
11 And what greater miserie can there be, then that miserable man should haue an infinite sort of desires, as it were an infinite sort of mouthes and stomacks, which alwayes barke, alwayes craue, alwayes hunger, and is not able to satisfie and fill so much as one of them?
12 But now let vs see, what reward sin giueth vnto her seruants, for so great labors? Let vs harken to the Apostle, and he wil tell vs, The wages of sinne (saith he) is death: that is to say, both the first and the second death. For what gall is to the lips: a Cockatrice to the eyes: a dead carcasse to the nose: and Alowes to the taste: the same, and more, is sin to the soule of man.
23 Therefore let the bond-slaues of sin and wickednes go, and serue their masters:
 let them run into all dangers: let them not spare for cost nor labors: let them watch day and night, least peraduenture they be beguiled of so great a stipend. O fooles, which for the wages of eternal death, will willingly beare so heauie a yoke, when as with much lesse labour ye might serue righteousnesse, who rewardeth her seruants with eternall li^e in the kingdome of heauen. Wicked men labor, and good men labour also: both suffer, both sweate, both delue and digge: but good and godly men, till that ground, (likewise husbandmen) which is firme, sound, and fruitfull, that is to say, they exercise themselues in good workes and in sound vertues, whereby they rearpe in the ende euerlasting life: but wicked and vngodly men, plow in the sand, and sowe in the flesh, and of the same, shall receiue the wages of sinne, eternal death.
14 Therefore, whether yee consider the wickednesses by themselues or the wages of the same: the seruice of sin must needs be horrible and wofull. But yet there is nothing which doth so much set foorth the miserie of seruitude and the excellency of libertie, as the manner of our setting at liberty, and the passion of the Deliuerer. For God which made the world without labour, and as it were
 with a becke onelie at his will: that he might deliuer vs from bondage and slauery, thought it good to be borne in a stable, and was content to die in sorowes and paines. But what manner of sorrowes? Verilie such, that the onely cogitation and expectation of them, might haue bin able to haue brought him into a bitter agonie, to sweate water and bloud plentifullie. The suffering of them, made the most hard stones to rent, the earth to tremble, and heauen it selfe to be abashed.
15 If God made so great a reckoning of thy libertie, that hee vouchsafed to take vpon him the forme of a seruaunt, and to liue three and thirtie yeares, in hunger and thirst, in colde, in nakednes, in fastings, in watchings, in iorneys, in persecutions, and in the end to shead forth his most precious heart bloud vppon the Crosse, rather then hee would suffer this precious gemme to be taken from out of his handes: let vs then acknowledge that exceeding glorie of the sonnes of God, wherevnto wee are called, which is the mother of all good things, which alone is able to giue true peace, perfite ioye, blessed rest, and tranquilitie.
If the heathen Romains of olde time, for a false and fading libertie, suffered great perils,
 and death it selfe; as Quintus Mutius Scaeuola thrust into the fire his right hand: the Decii vowed themselues to the death, that their legions of souldiers might bee preserued and get the victory: Curtius being armed at all points, and mounted vpon a horse, threwe himselfe willingly into a gulphe of the earth, that the Cittie of Rome might be deliuered from the pestilence: for so had the Oracle giuen answere, that the wrath of the gods would cease, if that which the Romains esteemed best, were throwne into that gulph. Brutus also for the preseruation of the libertie of his Countrey, did not sticke to slay his owne children: If the heathen I say esteemed thus of their liberty, (which is in no point comparable to ours) how much ought we to esteeme of that most true liberty, wherby we are deliuered from sinne, from sathan, from death, and from the wrath of GOD. They sought humaine praise, a thing doubtlesse vnconstant, and of small force, as appeareth by the saying of the Poet Virgill concerning Brutus, His Countries loue him driues, and greedie lust of endlesse same. But our ende is to approue our selues vnto God, whose iudgment cannot be deceiued: and to get the prize of the kingdome of heauen, and the fellowship
 of Angels, which is set before vs as the ende of our libertie, which we seeke to attaine by this Pilgrimage.


CHAP. X. Concerning the Imitation of Christ.
THe true and sound perfection of a Christian man co^sisteth in this, to imitate Christ so neere as possibly he can: for he is the head, we are his members: he is the captaine, we his souldiers: he is ye Doctor, we are his disciples. It is said of Platoes Schollers, that both their diet, and their apparel, was alwayes like vnto that of their Masters. And the Heathen could say, that the perfection of a man is to be like Iupiter. So in like manner, Christians must doe all things after the example of Christ: because the perfection of Christianitie is to bee like Christ.
2 But let no man be afraid or troubled: Let no man say with dispaire, how can it be
 that men which are made of dust, shoulde imitate GOD? that we which are a masse or lumpe of sinne, shoulde bee like the vnspotted lambe of God? For we are not commanded to immitate and followe Christ in that glory and maiesty, wherein he sitteth in heauen at the right hand of his Father: nor yet in that power and vertue, by which he gouerneth the whole world, and worketh signs and woonders: but onely in that patterne of holines which hee set before vs in our fleshe, when he was here on earth.
3 For thou shalt neuer finde these precepts in Scripture: hee which walketh not vpon the sea, is not worthy of me: he that doth not daily raise vp dead men vnto life, cannot be my disciple: and blessed is hee which foresheweth things to come, and is mighty in signes and woonders, because to such belongeth the kingdome of heauen. These are not the things that we are commanded to follow in Christ: but these rather, Learne of me for I am meeke and humble in hart,Mat. 11. Christi exemplum (saith Saint Augustine) est medicament^m vn^rum. etc. The example of Christ is a remedy to amend wickednes in vs: but especially it is (saith hee) a medicine for pride, and a paterne of humility. For both his doctrine,
 and his whole life was nothing els but an example of meekenes and humilitie: what man bearing the name of a Christian, is not ashamed to see Christ so humble and meeke, and himselfe so proud?Math. 10. (Againe hee saith) Hee that taketh not vppe his Crosse and followeth mee, is not worthy of mee: Also blessed are the meeke,Math. 5. blessed are the poore in spirite: blessed are they which mourne: blessed are the mercyfull: blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdome of Heauen.
4 This thing our Captaines and guides the Apostles, very wel vnderstoode, who albeit they spake the languages of all nations, and were moste famous in working of miracles, knowing themselues to bee the teachers of the whole world: yet herein alone they reioyced, that they were counted worthie to suffer contumelie for the name of Iesus. And the blessed Apostle Paul, beside those things which hee had in common with the other Apostles, beeing rapt vp into the third heauens heard certaine things which are secrete, and yet for all that, hee iudged not himselfe any whit the more like or neare vnto Christ: but for those things onely which hee rehearseth in the latter Epistle to the Corinthians:2. Cor. 12. they
 (saith he) are minsters of Christ, (I speake as a foole) I am more: In labours more abundant: In stripes aboue measure: in prison more plentiously: In death often.
5 These are the things which we are to imitate in our great Commaunder and captaine: namely, in aduersitie, patience: In hard matters, fortitude: In all perill and labour, constancie. What heart is so cold and cowardly, which considering the inestimable greatnesse of the gift that God hath bestowed vpon vs, in giuing vnto vs his owne so well beloued Sonne with all his perfection, is not enflamed with an exceeding earnest desire, to becom like vnto him in good works? especially seeing the Father hath giuen him vnto vs for an example, whereon we must continually looke, framing our life after such a sort, as it may be a true counterpaine of the life of Iesus Christ (as saith saint Peter) For as much as Christ hath suffered for vs,1. Tet. 2. leauing vs an example, to the end that we shoulde followe his foote-steps. Out of this consideration followeth the whole frame and fashioning of our selues like vnto him in all his deedes, words, and thoughts, leauing our former wicked life, and decking our selues with the new life, that is to witte, with the
 life of Christ. By reason wherof Saint Paul saith: Let vs cast away the workes of darkenesse, and put on the armour of life, not in feasting nor in drunkennesse, nor in chambering and wantonnesse, nor in strife: but put you on the Lorde Iesus Christ, and make no preparation for the flesh, nor for the lusts therof.
6 Hereuppon the true Christian beeing in loue with Iesus Christ, saith in himselfe: Sith that Iesus Christ, not hauing any neede of me, hath redeemed me with his own bloud, and is become poore to inrich mee: I wil likewise giue my goods, yea and my very life, for the loue and welfare of my neighbour. Hee that hath not this affection, is no true Christian: For hee cannot say that hee loueth Iesus Christ, if he loue not his members: and if we loue not our neighbour, for whose sake Christ hath shed his bloud, we cannot truely say that we loue Iesus Christ: who being equal with God, was obedient to his Father, euen to the death of the crosse, and hath loued and redeemed vs, giuing himselfe vnto vs, with all that euer he hath. After the same maner, wee being rich, and hauing aboundance of good things at Christs hand, must also bee obedient vnto God, to offer and giue our workes, and al that we haue, yea and euen our selues
 to our neighbours and brethren in Iesus Christ, seruing them, and helping them at their neede, and being vnto them as another Christ.
7 And as Iesus Christ hath endured all the persecutions and spites of the world for the glory of God: so must wee with al patientnes, cheerfully beare the persecutions, and reproaches that are done by false Christians, to all such as wil liue faithfullie in Iesus Christ, who gaue his life for his enemies, and prayed for them vppon the Crosse. And this is to followe Christes steppes according to Saint Peters saying.
8 But now turne thy eyes a while vnto thy selfe, and diligentlie beholde and see what thou doest imitate and followe in the life of Christ. Thou delightest in sumptuous wardroabes, and in many suites of costlie apparell: But Christ in the most colde time of Winter, was layed naked in a Manger. Thou spendest howers and dayes in feasting and banquetting, amidst thy daintie dishes, talking, and seruing thy bellie: and the Son of God afflicted his moste innocent bodie with hunger and thirst. Thou liuest in peace and pleasure, in recreations, in playes, in pastimes, and art delighted in idlenes, passing thy time
 in singing, laughing and sporting: And the Sonne of God came down from heauen for our saluation, that we might not perish eternally, and for this cause was a pilgrim, preached, labored, tooke no rest, and spent whole nights in prayer for vs. Thou earth and ashes, canst not digest the least iniurie of wordes without displeasure: but God sent his sonne for vs to suffer most meekely of wicked men euil sayings, reproaches, spitting vpon, buffetings, whipping, crowning with thornes, wounding, and at last death it selfe. Thou contemnest great things, and magnifiest smal trifles, if thou sinnest, thou sayest it is nothing: if thy head doe ake but a little, thou thinkest it to bee a great matter: To loose thy soule thou makest no great reckoning: but if thou be in perill to loose but a finger, thou wilt call together all the Physitions and Chirurgians in the Cittie. But Christ with his true example of life, taught that there is no euil so much to bee feared, as sinne and hel: that nothing was so much to be desired as God, the glorie of God, saluation, and vertue: and that he is rich, noble, wise, and beautifull indeede, which is indued with patience, humilitie, charity, chastity, and with other vertues: and that he is a poore man,
 vile, deformed, and witlesse, which is a fornicator, a drunkard, a couetous and proude person, and which is polluted with other vices, as with a leprie and scabbe. For Christ being God, and hauing all thing in his power, to choose what manner of life hee would, during the time that hee liued on earth, chose the most vile and abiect state of life: and therfore for his house, had a stable: for his bed, a manger: for clothes of Tapistry, hay, and the same none of his owne: a poore mother: thin and a spare diet, apparel suteable: to bee short, he sought no manner of pompe, riches, or pleasure of this world. And contrariwise, he refused no labours, no afflictions, no miseries, nor any euils, sauing onely sinne, only which euil hee would haue his Disciples and professors vtterly to abhorre.
9 And thou canst not say, that he neither could, nor knew how to choose a better state. For hee which was God most mightie, was also most wise. And what other thing doth Isaias commend in him more,Isaia. 7. then that hee should bee called Emanuel, and hee should know how to shun the euill, and choose the good? Hath not Christ then plainely and euidenly by his example of life taught, that there is no euil so much to be eschewed,
(...)
 thee, as with a shielde, who hath saide, I am the way, the truih, and the life: him therfore follow in this pilgrimage here on earth, so shalt thou neuer erre.


CHAP. XI. Concerning the crosse and tribulations of this life.
IF in all other things, it behooueth a wise man to haue skill to behaue and gouerne himselfe, how much more in aduersity, the which is of such force to shake and discomfort the mind of man, that thereof come heresies, desperation, thefts, homicides, and all manner of wickednesse, with the which all men doe so abound, that whether we be small or great, rich or poore, noble or base, or whatsoeuer else, we haue more calamity, then felicity.
2 The efficient cause of these calamities, is God himselfe, as he testifieth by the mouth of Isay the Prophet saying:Isay 45.7. I am the Lord, and there is no other: I forme the light,
 and create darkenesse: I make peace, and create euill: I the Lord doe all these things. And holy Iob, whenin one day he had lost all his riches, all his children, and the health of his body, and vnderstanding that hee was thus afflicted, partly by the Sabeians, and partly by the Chaldeans, partly by the winde, and partly by fire, which the diuell in his malice raised, and therewithall consumed and spoiled his goods: did hee say, the Lord hath giuen, and the diuell hath taken? No verily, but hee saide; The Lord hath giuen,Iob. 1. and the Lord hath taken, blessed bee the name of the Lord. And in another place, Shall we receiue good from the handes of the Lord, and not euill also?
3 Wherefore whatsoeuer befall vs, whether storme or tempest: theeues or murderers: losses at the sea or on the land: famin or pestilence: sicknesses or imprisonment: or whether we be afflicted with heretiques, or scismatiques: with Angels or diuels: with heauen or earth: or from whence soeuer any tribulation doth come, God alone is to be feared, to be prayed vnto, and to be pacified, to his will and commaundement all things obey. For fire, water, haile, snowe, frost, raine, winde, storme and tempest, these when they
 seeme to be grieuous vnto men, what do they else but fulfil his word?
4 There are two gates then to be considered, by which tribulations doe enter into the worlde: the one is Gods prouidence, the other is sinne. Concerning his prouidence, Salomon saith:Wisdo. 6. Chap. 14. Hee hath made the small and great, and careth for all alike. And againe; Thy prouidence, O Father, gouerneth it. And our Sauiour Christ himselfe saith: Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? and one of them falleth not to the ground without your heauenly father.Math. 6. The very haires of your head are numbred.
5 Not only the scriptures, but that most excellent and comely order, by which we see so many seuerall things gouerned, being so different, so diuers, and so disagreeing in natures, and in places, doth proue vnto vs, that all things in the world, are gouerned and ruled, not by fortune and chance, but by the prouidence of God. Euen as, if thou heare a harpe sound pleasantly, or if thou see a wagon or a ship to goe forward by arte, reason, and order, although thou see not the harper, wagoner, or maister of the ship, yet thou art out of doubt, that there is a harper which causeth the hary to sound in good tune, a wagoner,
 and a shipmaister, which maketh both the wagon and ship, to moue and goe.
6 We are two maner of waies afflicted by God. For sometimes we are troubled by those things, which without any fault of their owne, doe hurt vs: and sometime by those things, which hurt vs not without their fault and sinne. The first followe the lawes of nature, by which it is ordained that among mortall creatures, the weaker shal alwaies giue place vnto the stronger. The other doe breake the lawe of God. As when we suffer and sustaine any thing at the hands of wicked men, God hath a worke therein, so farreforth as it may be to our good, and therefore suffereth the euil to be done, drawing out of the euil a greater good.
7 For God is said to work in that which is good: for there is nothing so euill, which hath not some good ioyned with it. And there is no good so small, whereof God ca^not make a bottomlesse fountaine, and as it were an Ocean of all good things. As for example, behold a lame man. What is it to halt? To halt, is to walke: but yet, not without a maladie. To walke is good, but the maladie is euil: Whereof or from whence hath the man that walking which is good? From ye power
 of his wil and mouing instrument of the mind. From whence commeth the maladie? commeth it from his will? No verily: but either of the shortnesse, or crookednesse of his legge, or from such like cause. After the same maner, a theefe stretcheth forth his hand, he shaketh his sword, and it is of God, and is good. But to kill him whom he should not, is euill, and commeth from the wicked wil of man, which God neither co^pelleth, nor mooueth, nor helpeth to euill: and yet neuerthelesse suffereth that to be done, which he desireth. Thus then we see how farre God hath his worke in the sinnes of men, in suffering them to be done. And although it is in him not to suffer euil, the which without his sufferance coulde not bee, yet notwithstanding (that I may vse Saint Augustines words) hee thinketh it better to drawe that wich is good from euill, then not to suffer any euill at all. For God would not suffer any sinne to be, if hee were not so mighty, so prudent, and so good, that both hee knoweth how, and also can and wil out of sinne, worke greater good.
8 What greater euill could there be, then so many Prophets, so many Apostles, so many Martirs, and Christ himselfe to be slaine?
 Could not God haue hindred this? No doubt most easily: but he would not. By which we see how great glary and felicity he hath brought to them that suffered: how great honour and praise they haue yeelded to God, for whome they suffered, and how great profit and commoditie their deathes and sufferings hath brought to the whole world. Neither did the Church at any time suffer the persecutions of the heathen, but it was thereby made the better, the more vigilant, the more glorious, and like gold, which comming out of the furnace, is more fine and pure.
9 The other cause of all our calamities, miseries, and afflictions of this life is sinne. By reason wherof, so soone as we are borne, wee bring with vs the sentence of death. Much like vnto those sicke men, of whose life the physitians hauing no hope, do onely for a time maintaine life with preseruatiues, that so a little while he may linger to make his testament, and then depart. Euen so it fareth with vs all, who do not therefore, eate, drinke and sleepe, that we may neuer dye (for that cannot be) but that we may prolong our life for a fewe daies, and so prepare our selues to (...)? And as Pyrates, which are taken at the sea by the royall ships, and are brought to the
 shoare there to be hanged, and haue no longer hope of life, then there is space betweene the ship and the land: euen so euery one of vs which like Roauers saile heere in the sea of this world, being once taken and holden captiue by the ministers of Gods iustice, when we are come to a certaine place and point of our age, shall without all doubt, or mercy, abide there, and suffer death.
10 Sinne therefore hath opened the passage vnto death: and the whole host of tribulations do follow death as their captaine and guide, and do enter in vppon vs by the same breach of sinne. And as we do read of sinne, The wages of sinne is death: euen so also wee reade of tribulations, Miseros fucit populos peccatum* That is: Sin is the cause of many tribulations.
11 Neither is it for one sinne of Adams that so many tribulations come vppon vs: but also for an innumerable sort of sinnes, which we haue added, and do adde daily, as the holy ghost by the mouth of the Prophet Dauid hath pronounced: If their children forsake my lawe, and walke not in my iudgeme^ts: if they breake my statutes and keepe not my co^mandements,Psal. 89. I will visit their iniquities (...) the rod, and their sins with scourges.
12 God afflicted the Iewish nation, one while by the Philistines, another while by the Madianits: another while by the Assyrians: and also by the Romanes: but alwaies first they sinned and prouoked God to anger: as the booke of Iudges, the bookes of Kings, and of the Prophets do declare. God also afflicted the Church of Christians by tyrants, as Neroes, Dioclesians, and such like, which most cruelly persecuted the Church: the cause of all which persecutions, was the sinnes and wickednesses of the Christians, as appeareth by Cyprian and Eusebius.
13 Thus farre concerning the causes of tribulations: now wee wil speake of the effects. Concerning the effect and fruit of tribulation,Chap. 12. the author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes writeth thus: Now, no chastising for the present time seemeth to bee ioyfull, but grieuous: but afterward it bringeth the quiet fruite of righteousnesse, vnto them which are thereby exercised. Although therefore wee cannot plainely know the fruites of tribulation, before such time as wee come to that blessed and heauenly life, which is free from all misery and trouble: yet notwithstanding it will be very profitable for vs, to speake and thinke vppon the same diligently
(...)
 to desperation. But as the phisitian of things venemous and hurtful, maketh most healthful medicines: euen so Almighty God by his wisedome, out of afflictions (although they be euill things) bringeth forth in his electe most excellent vertues, among which patience is one.
17 This patience worketh experience also, the which is a certaine tryal both of our selues, and of our own strength: and especially of the might and goodnes of God. For in suffering of aduersities, we learn how great the corruption of our nature is, which being touched with any aduersity, straight way (except the holy Ghost helpe) breaketh forth into murmurings, grudgings, and into blasphemies, and complaints against the prouidence of God. Whereof we haue a liuely example set forth in Iob, who being deliuered by God vnto the diuel, to be tried: how great blasphemies powred he out in his afflictions? how much complaineth he of the prouidence and iustice of God? But the light of the holy Ghost had no sooner illumined him, but how did he plucke vp his spirits againe? Howe godly and rightly doth he iudge of God? The crookednes of our nature is hidden from vs: for the heart of man is vnsearcheable. But
 looke how soone the fire is stricken out of the flint stone, so soone breaketh out our peruerse nature, whe^ tribulation oppresseth vs. This tryall (as Peter saith) is euen as a furnace vnto gold. And therefore God answered Abraham, when hee was now ready to sacrifice his Sonne; Now I knowe that thou fearest God, No doubt, that was knowne vnto God afore. But by that fact he brought to passe, that this obedience was the better knowne vnto others. For we are like vnto certaine spices, whose sweete sauour is not felt, vnlesse a man bruse them well. Wee are also like to stones called Piridites, which shew not forth that force which they haue to burne, except, when they be pressed hard with the fingers.
18 The triall also (before spoken of) bringeth hope. Whereby wee see that God hath so disposed those instruments of his, as that they should one helpe another, and the one bring in the other. By reason of the hope of the glory of God, afflictions are not troublesom vnto vs: but God giuing vs strength wee bare them with a valiant minde. And in the very suffering, we haue a greater triall and proofe of the goodnes of God towards vs: wherevpon wee conceiue the greater
 hope. So hope breedeth and bringeth in patience: and patience hope. For when we consider that God was present with vs, in suffering our afflictions patiently, we hope also that he wil hereafter be present with vs, and at the length make vs blessed. The sick man because he hath confidence in the Physition, suffereth his impostume to be cut. Afterward as hee feeleth himselfe relieued, he putteth confidence more and more in the Physitian: so as if neede were, that his foote should be cut off also, hee would nothing doubt to commit himselfe to his fidelity. The diuel so much as in him lyeth driueth vs to desperation: and by afflictio^s goeth about to perswade vs, that God is our enemy. But contrariwise the holy Ghost saith: Because thou hast quietly and patiently borne affliction, it may be a sure token vnto thee, that God therein declareth his fauour towards thee. Wherefore haue thou a good trust, for he vndoubtedly wil deliuer thee.
19 This confidence wil make vs to resolue with the Apostle Paul,Rom. 8. that no maner of tribulation shal be able to remoue vs from the loue of God which is in Christ: Neither the losse of goods, of wife, childien, friends, lands, and possessions, nor any thing in the
 world: because wee are verily perswaded that his loue and bounty towards vs is such, that often times he most aboundantly restoreth those things which are lost for his sake: and that sometimes in the middest of tribulation, and euen in the very crosse and death, hee giueth to his children so much strength and consolation, that in very deede, it is more then a hundred folde. The losse of the said worldly things is to many a great griefe: but is not the winning of a hundred fold so much, and the obtaining of an euerlasting kingdom a good salue for this sore? If we gaine with the losse of transitore things, heauenly treasures: with the forsaking of worldly friends, Christ to be our deare and sure friend: and with the refusing father, mother, brother, sister, wife, children, purchase God to be our heauenly father, Christ our most louing brother, and to be loued of the Sonne of God, as his deare dearlings, and only beloued spouse, what haue we lost? what greater gaine can we haue? or what more profitable exchange can be made? This bargaine and profit, hath our heauenly Father promised vnto vs, by a bill of his owne hand, sealed with the blood of his onely Sonne, testified by the witnes of his Apostles, and left with vs in our own custody
 to be paide at the sight, whensoeuer wee shall require it. Whereof this is the content: Who so hath forsaken house, brother, sister, father, mother, wife, children, or land, for my names sake, hee shall receiue an hundred foulde, and the inheritance of euerlasting life. Who will deny, but that hunger, cold, nakednes, cxtreame pouerty, and want of thinges partly necessary, are a heauy burden for a man to beare? But the waight hereof is lightened and made easie to them that with a right eye, and vnfainedly do beleeue Gods promise, and cast their care on him. Cast thy care vpon the Lord, for he careth for thee. Your heauenly father knoweth that ye haue need of al these things, meate, drinke, and cloathes. He ministreth these things in due time to the beasts of the earth, the foules of the ayre, the fishes of the Sea, and wil he not keepe his promise vnto vs, for whose sakes he hath made these creatures, and hath made vs Lords ouer the^? What cause haue we to mistrust his promise, rather then the byrd that flyeth forth in the morning vppon this naturall perswasion, that hee shall finde foode, not doubting but that hee who made him, will not suffer him to starue with hunger:
 Haue we seen such as put their trust in him starue with hunger, dye with colde, or perish through nakednesse? It hath not been heard of, that the righteous hath beene forsaken, or his seede begge, wanting bread? For they that know the name of the Lorde wil trust therein: for he forsaketh not them, that seeke after him. And he hath willed vs in the day of our troubles, to call vpon him, adding this promise that he wil deliuer vs. Wherevnto the Prophet Dauid did so trust, feeling the comfortable trueth thereof at sundry times, in many and dangerous perils, that he perswaded himselfe al feare set apart, to vndergoe one painful danger or other whatsoeuer: yea, if it were to wake in the valley of the shadowe of death, that hee should not haue cause to feare, comforting himself with this saying, (which was Gods promise made vnto all) For thou art with me: thy rodde and thy staffe, euen they shall comfort mee.Psal. 23. Is Gods staffe waxen so weake, that wee dare not now leane too much theron, least it should break? Or is he now such a changeling, that he wil not be with vs in our troubles, according to thy promise? Wil he not giue vs his staffe to stay vs by, and reache vs his hand to hold vs vp as he hath beene woont to do? No
 doubt but that he wil bee most ready in all extremitie to helpe according to his promise: The Lord that made thee (O Iacob) and hee that fashioned thee (O Israel) saith thus,Esay. 43. feare not, for I wil defend thee, etc.
20 He is that mightie Captaine, who hauing vnder his gouernement many souldiers and seruants,Math. 8. hath them so at his commandement, that when he biddeth them go, they go: when he saith abide, they abide: and when he willeth them to do this or that, they obey his word. For paine, pleasure, griefe, ease, sicknesse, health, life and death, are at the becke and call of God, and do come and go at his appointment, as the faithfull Centurion confesseth in the Gospel;Math. 8. Yea, hee worketh so forceably in his childre^ that leane wholy vnto his promise, that hee maketh to them, of paine, a pleasure: of griefe, ease: of sicknesse, health: and of death, life: As contrariwise to the vnbeleeuing, pleasure, ease, health, and life, is a wearie, irkesome, and painfull death.
21 But reason and our flesh are hardly perswaded, that we are beloued of GOD, when we be exercised with afflictions, and yet the author of the epistle to the Hebrews saith, That if we be not vnder chastisement,Heb. 12. (wherof
 all are partakers) we are bastards and not sons.Rom. 8. And S. Paul to the Romanes bringeth in the complaints of the Saintes which were tormented and afflicted before Christes time:Psal. 44. For thy sake are we deliuered to the death all the day long: we are accounted as sheep to the slaughter. They which made this complaint were (as cannot be denied) most deare vnto God: and yet they make this sorrowfull complaint, wee are accompted as sheepe to the slaughter. As if they had sayd, Wee are otherwise dealt with, then the Fathers in the olde time were dealt withal, vnto whom God seemed to beare great fauour, when as hee enriched them, fought for the^, gaue them the victorie, and with excellent names and titles, made them famous and honourable: we say they are nowe otherwise dealt with, for wee are deliuered vnto the enemies as sheepe to be slaine: as vnto whom they may doe what pleaseth them: death hangeth all the day long ouer our heads, and we are neuer in securitie: but yet herein we are comforted, that we are not in this perill as men that suffer for euill doing, but, For thy sake, that is for Religion and godlinesse.
22 Wherby also we are admonished, that paines, punishments, and death, make not
 Martirs, but the cause: For otherwise many suffer many grieuous things, and yet are not martyrs, nor confessors. If punishments mke martyrs, then the Papists at this day, might truely boast of Martyrdome, when for their traitrous deserts to their Prince and Countrey, they are rightly executed. And some Sectaries and Scismatickes, which would faine be reputed Confessors, might then haue some iust colour to complaine of persecution, when they are by Ecclesiastical censures iustly punished. But these are such Martirs and Confessors, of whom S. Augustine writing to Boniface, de correctione Donatistatum, and in many other places, complaineth, saying that in his time ther were Circumcellions, a furious kind of men, which if they could finde none that would kill them, would often times breake their owne neckes headlong, and would slay themselues. These men (sayth hee) must not be counted martirs. These are not sheep, but Goates: these are not led against their wils: but runne headlong through ambition, and proud conceit. These Rammes follow not the example of Christ, of whom it is written, that when he was led like a sheepe vnto death, yet did he not open his mouth: for these
 open their mouthes too too wide, vttering blasphemies against Magistrates. These haue forgotten the sentence of the Apostle, If I shall deliuer my body to bee burnt,1. Cor. 13. and haue no charitie, it profiteth mee nothing. Therefore Martyrs and confessors, beside the goodnesse of the cause, must be meeke, patient, and charitable.
23 Wherefore wee hauing a good cause, ought with patience and meekenesse be ready prepared, when trial shal be to suffer persecution and tribulation, after the example of the holy Martirs of olde time, because the crosse alwayes followeth them which wil liue godly in Christ Iesus: Then hee, who hath promised vs, that neither in fire, water, no nor yet in the shadowe of death hee wil bee from vs, but wil bee our buckler, defender, and shield: faithfully wil performe the same, in such wise, that no temptation shal so assayle vs, but that he wil giue vs a ioyfull end and deliuerance.
24 The holy Ghost hath caused many histories to bee kept in writing for vs, that liue now in the latter age of the worlde, to this end, that we should not onely beholde in them, the fiery raging of the world, from the beginning, against the people of God, and
 how stoutly they withstood and ouercame by faithful patience the mallice thereof, but also by reading of them, wee should in our like troubles, learne like patience, receiue the same comfort, and beeing throughly tryed, conceiue a sure hope of the same victorie, which they after many and sundry trials, did win, whereof we shal not be disappointed, if we to the end, striue lawfully. If it be too hard and aboue your capacity, to behold al the hystories and examples propounded in the scriptures, and the chronicles of Christs Church, with such consideration that you may espye and behold in them the order of Gods working with his Church in al ages: and if you doe not vnderstand in diligent perusing the^, that the end and issue was euer ioyful, and glorious victorie and deliuerance, wherwith to comfort your selues in the middest of miseries, take into your handes the comfortable historie of king Dauid: marke his whole life from that time hee was taken from his Fathers sheepe, vntil his death: beholde in him your selues, whensoeuer you shal be afflicted with any kinde of Crosse.
25 After that the Lorde had found out Dauid, a man after his owne mind, and appointed him king ouer his people, who labored
 worthily to deliuer and defend Gods people from their enemies the Idolaters, that dwelt neare about him he did not grant vnto him such quietnesse, neither to his people, but that he was in continual troubles, and no smal dangers, during the life of Saule, and also after Saules death, the Idolators, and also Saules friendes, seeking al the waies that might be, to depose him from his kingdome.
26 And not onely was hee thus vexed with his forraine enemies, but also most grieuously of all other by those of his household, who should haue beene his most deare friends, his owne natural sonne Absolom, his most priuie Counsailers,2. Sam. 15 the nobilitie of his realme, and the most part of his subiects. Absalom pretending to his father Dauid a great holinesse (as the maner of hipocrites is) desired to haue leaue to goe into Hebron, there to sacrifice for the performance of a vow, which he had made in the time of his being in Siria: but his meaning was to obtaine the kingdome from his Father, and to stirre all Israel against him, which hee brought to passe. Dauid was banished, and pursued vnto the death by his own sonne: who wrought so much villany against his owne Father,
 that he did not forbear in the despight of him to misuse his Fathers wiues in the sight of all the people. How grieuous and dangerous this suddain change was to Dauid, and to the godly people, which were but a few in respect of the great number of the malicious Hipocrites which followed Absolom, it appeareth plainly in the story, and you may easily consider.
27 The best that was like to come of the matter was, that while the kingdome of Israel was thus diuided, Gods enemies the Pbilistines, which had lien long in wait therfore, should snatch vp from both the parties the kingdome of Israel, and not only vtterly banish Gods true Religion from among the Israelites: but also bring them, their countrey, and their posterity, into most miserable bondage and thraldome, and that to Gods enemies the most vile people, and hated of all the world.
28 Dauid in all these perlious dangers of his owne life, losse of his kingdome, and vtter destruction of Gods people, did not discourage himselfe, but vnderstanding all this to be the worke of Gods own hand, acknowledging the true cause vnfaignedly, did perswade himselfe that the Lorde after a time,
 when his good will should bee, would giue a comfortable end to all these stormes and bitter pangues. His whole behauiour hee himselfe describeth in a Psalme, which is left in writing for vs, to learne thereafter how to behaue our selues in the like persecutions.
29 When he was fled from Hierusalem, and the priests were departed from him with the Arke of the Lords couenant, he went vppon Mount Cliuet barefoote, wept as he went, and had his head couered: and so did all the people that were with him. And he made his mone vnto the Lord, saying: O Iehoua how are they increased that trouble me? How many are they that rise against me? Howe many are they that say of my soule, there is no helpe for him in his God?
30 Wonder not though this good King with a heauy heart, and sorrowfull cheare, doth lament and bewaile his dolourous estate. Would it not grieue a King when hee thinketh of no such matter, sodainly to be cast out of his royall seate, and brought in danger of his life, and that by his owne naturall sonne? Can the displeasure of any enemie so much pearce the heart of a kind Father, as the vnnaturall cruelty of the son, to seeke his death, of whom he himselfe had his life? It grieued
 him no smal deale to perceiue such as had bin his wise counsailers, whom he much trusted, (whose duty it had bene, with the spending of their own liues, to haue defended the common weale, brought to good and quiet order, both in matter of pollicy, and of Gods true Religion) to bee the supporters and maintainers of an Hipocrite, who had neither respect to Gods true honour, nor yet consideration of duty to his most honourable Father, neither yet regard to the prosperous weale of his natiue countrey. But nothing of all these grieued him so much as this one thing: the remembrance and true acknowledging in himselfe, that hee himielfe was the onely cause of all these euils. Hee called to remembrance that these plagues fell vppon him sent from God, whose worke it was, and that for his sinnes, which were the cause thereof, and this made him weepe and mourne. For so soone as the Prophet Nathan had warned him of his offence, he cried peccaui, I haue sinned: and afterward when he saw this grieuous and sodain change follow, hee perceiued it came partly for his sin, by the worke of God, and therefore submitted himselfe wholly to Gods wil, saying: If I shal finde fauour in the eyes of the Lorde,
 he will bring me againe, and shew me both his Arke and the Tabernacle thereof.2. Sam. 15 But and the Lord thus say, I haue no lust vnto thee: behold here I am, let him doe with me, what seemeth him good in his eyes.
31 Thus the worthie man of God acknowledgeth his trobles to be of Gods hand, his sinnes to be the cause, and therefore humbly and faithfully submitteth himselfe to Gods ^ordering, well content to receiue whatsoeuer should be laid vpon him. He assured him selfe, that when he himselfe were most weakest, then God would declare his strength for his owne glories sake, and after he were reduced to faithful repentance by the correction of his merciful father, then the rod should be cast into the fire.
32 This consideration of plagues and tribulations, both to priuate men particularly, and also of Realms and whole common wealthes is diligently to be weyed, that as they come from God, so haue they this ende, that they tend partly to his own glory, partly to our profit and amendment. For although sinne be the general cause wherefore all mankinde was, is, and shal bee molested with many and sundry kindes of troubles and calamities, yet the calamities and afflictions,
 are not all kinde of men alike, nor yet for one end and purpose. For the wicked and reprobate are punished, and whipped of God, to a far other end and meaning, then the godly and chosen children, who are the true Church of God, the liuely members of Christ, and such as shall be neuer seperated from God, and his louing fauour in Christ Iesus.
33 These although they be neuer without trouble in this world, but alwaies exercised vnder the crosse, yet the cause and consideration, why God will haue them thus exercised, is either for the honor and glory of his owne name, or the profite, commodity, and exceeding benefit of them, whom hee thus afflicteth, either else for both these considerations together: for that there is no trouble that comes to Christes Church, or any member thereof, which appeareth not plainly to redound to Gods glory, and the profit of the afflicted, if it be well and iustly considered.
34 Thus may you plainly see, how God hath wrought with his Church in olde time, and therefore shoulde not discourage your selues, for any sodaine chaunge: but with Dauid acknowledge your sinnes to God, declare
 vnto him how many they be that vexe you, and rise against you, naming you Hugonotes, Lutherians, Heretiques, and the children of Belial, as they named Dauid. Let the wicked Idolaters boast and bragge, that they will preuaile against you and ouercome you, and that God hath giuen you ouer, and will bee no more your God: let them put their trust in Absolom with his large golden lockes, and in the wisedome of Achitophel, the wise counsailer, yet say you with Dauid, Thou O Lord art my defender, and the lifter vp of my head. Perswade your selues with Dauid, that the Lord is your defender, who hath compassed you round about and is as it were a shielde, that doth couer you on euery side: it is hee onely that may and will compasse you about with glory and honour: It is he that wil thrust downe those proud hypocrites from their seate, and exalt his lowly and meeke: It is hee which will smite your enemies on the cheeke-boane, and burst all their feeth in sunder: hee will hang vp Absolom, by his owne long haire: and Achitophel through desperation, shall hang himselfe: the bandes shal be broken, and you deliuered: for this belongeth vnto the Lord, to saue his from their enemies, and to blesse
 his people, that they may safely proceed in their pilgrimage to heauen without feare.


CHAP. XII. Concerning the alterations of true Religion in all ages.
ALbeit Dauid and his kingdome, after he was annointed king ouer Gods people, were exercised with many troubles, during his time: yet he obserued the ordinances of the Lord, and kept the true Religion, among his people, according to the commandement of God. After him Salomon had gouernance of Gods people, who in the beginning of his raigne walked after his father Dauid, did build Gods temple, and obserued the true Religion: but that lasted but a while: for in his latter yeares, he fell to Idolatry and the seruice of false Gods, so that the true seruice of God began then to be corrupted.
2 After him, his sonne Roboam reigned, at whose beginning that realm had such a miserable change, that it could neuer after recouer it selfe againe: sor the kingdome
 was diuided, and tenne tribes which were called afterward Israel, fell from Roboam, and from the true Religion, vnto Idolatrie, and false seruing of God, and so continued in false superstitious Religion, alwaies hating the true religion of God, killing the Prophets, that did teach the trueth, and the godly people, that co^fessed the same many years, and yet all that time perswaded themselues, that they had the true seruice of God, and that their doings did much please God: yea, the face of Gods Church was so blemished, and brought to such a small number of true professors, that the Prophet Elyas complayneth, that there was not one left, but he himselfe alone, whose life also they sought after. Consider wil this historie and the working of God with his Church and true Religion. The Prophet Samuel, had taught the people the true seruice of God: the worthie king Dauid maintained the same all his time, but with great difficultie. Salomon his sonne, a Prince of most singular wisedom and knowledge, perfectly instructed in the wayes of the Lord fel from God, and corrupted Gods Religion, with the false seruices inuented by man, so yt the Lord was so offended therwith, that hee cut off from the rule of his posteritie,
 the most part of the kingdome: For the ten Tribes were neuer after him vnder ye gouernance of his successio^, neither did they afterward walke in the feare of God, but in Idolatrie and false Religion, till at the last God sent the Assyrians to inuade them in that wise, that they ouercame them, carried them forth of their owne countrey, dispersed them in many countries among the heathen, sent strangers to inhabite their land, and so vtterly destroyed that kingdome.
3 This was a fearefull iudgement of God, where he had but one small kingdome in the whole world, that bare the face of his Church, where his true honour was maintained, and that so dodainly of twelue tribes, ten should fall from God, to Idolatry, and false Religion: yea, and the other also, during all the time of Roboam, and his sonne Abia after him: so that during all this time, there was not in the world any Church, or people, where the sincere Religion, and pure word of God, was receiued by publique authority and co^mon order: although God reserued alwaies some that priuatly serued him, and feared his name faithfully, who were alwaies so hated and punished by the Idolaters, that their liues were bitter vnto them.
4 In those dayes did the Idolaters make
 the selfe same reasons and arguments against the Prophets and their doctrine, which Idolaters do make nowe against Gods people, and his true Religion concerning generalitie. The faithfull the^ liued among those Idoters with no lesse perill and danger, then the Christians haue done in Spaine, and in other Countries, where the Gospell hath not free passage. The Prophets were then imprisoned, and driuen out of their countrey like seditious heritiques, the causers of all euill, as the true preachers in some places of Christendome now are.
5 After the death of the wicked Kinges of Iehuda, God visited his people with some light of the truth by the meanes of Asa: and King Iosaphat after him: who restored (although not perfectly) the true Religion, banished the false, and destroyed the Altars of the Idolaters. The which reformation was done not without great difficultie and trouble, and continued but a small time in that same order. For Ioram the sonne of King Iosaphat, ouerthrew the true seruice of God, condemned it, and brought in the place therof, the superstitions and Idolatries of the Kings of Israel: and so the Church continued neuer perfectly reformed, but alwayes afflicted,
 till the time of Ezekias. For although Aza, Iosaphat, Ioaz, Amazias, Vzzias, and Ioatham, attempted a reformation, and were indifferently good Kings, yet was not the Church cleansed of all the Idolatries, and false counterfait Religion, as it appeareth by the Prophets, E^ia, Amos, Isai, Osea, Micha. But the worthy King Ezechia in the first yeare of his raine, began to reforme Religion, brake downe and banished all Idols and Images, hill Altars, and what so euer was against Gods commandement, restoring Gods true Religion after the rule of Gods word. The which thing as he brought to passe, not without great troubles and difficulties, so it continued in puritie but a little time. For his sonne, wicked Manasses, who raigned after him, put away, and did forsake the true way, and brought in againe al manner of Idolatry and false Religion: and did grieuously punish and persecute, the faithful people and true Prophets. Hee shed (saith the Scripture) innocent blood exceeding abundantly. In like manner did his sonne Ammon also, who raigned after him.
6 This grieuous change remained thus, vntill the good king Iosias made a newe and godly reformation, which ought to be a glasse
 to all Princes to behold themselues in. But this godly reformation of this good king did not continue, for his sonne and all the kings of Iuda after him forsooke the waies of God, and restored againe the idolatrie, and false religion of their fore-fathers, and so continued, till God sent the king of Babylon to destroy their Cittie, Temple, and countrey: who also led them captiue into Babylon, where they continued many yeares in great affliction: as it appeareth by the Prophets Ieremie and Daniel: so that in fiue hundred years and aboue, in the dayes of all the kings of Iehuda, Gods religion was set forth, and receiued in publique order sincerely and perfectly, and the contrary vtterly banished and abolished. But in the times of Dauid, Ezechias, and Iosias, (as Iesus the sonne of Syrach witnesseth,) All Kings except Dauid, Ezechias, and Iosias, committed wickednesse: For euen the Kings of Iehuda also forsake the lawes of God.
7 With what difficultie and troubles, Gods religion and true seruice was restored after the returne of Gods people from Babylon, and how short a time it co^tinued in puritie, what trobles and grieuous persecutio^s the true seruants of the Lord suffered, it is partly set
 foorth in Esdras and Nehemiah: after in Hester, and then in Machabes: And although vnto the comming of Christ, there was an outward face and beautifull shewe of Gods religion among the Iewes, yet was it so defaced, and vtterly falsified with traditions of the Pharises, who were at that time in estimation, that Christ himselfe doth testifie, that their seruice was but vain traditions of men,Mat. 15. and the commandemnet of God was not obserued. All that time there were no Prophets, to instruct them in the right way: for immediatly after the captiuitie, al prophesying ceassed in Israel. Nowe peruse the Historie of our Sauiour Christ in the foure Euangelists, and you shal perceiue in what state Christ found his true religion: what paines and trauaile he tooke to restore the true and sincere honouring of God: with how great difficultie he brought it to passe: and at the last, how it cost him his life. After whose death the crueltie of the^, who would seeme to haue and maintaine the true honouring of God ceassed not, but stirred most vehement persecution against the true Church of Christ, and dispersed it thoughout all the worlde: With what paines, troubles, and difficultie true Christianitie was planted, and false
 Religion put awaye, Saint Lucas partly mentioneth in the Acts of the Apostles, who spent their liues in the building of Christes Church.
8 After Christs death, the cruell tyrant Nero the Emperor, did persecute the Church most cruelly, after whose time, the Church was in some quiet, but not long. For Domitian the Emperour, did persecute Christes Church to destroy his true religion most hainously. Nerua his successor was friendly to the Christians. Traian after him, a cruell persecuter and enemie: And then Hadrian after whose time the Church had rest for a while. For shortly after, the Christians that were in Asia, and also in the West partes, were cruelly disquieted. Shortly after this time* did England receiue the Christian Faith, and was the first Countrey of all the world, that receiued the Faith of Christ by publicke authoritie. Lucius being the first Christian King. But the puritie of Christes truth did not long here continue, not much aboue one hundreth yeares.
9 Seuerus the Emperour, wrought all the meanes that might be to destroy Christes Church, and to subuert the true Religion with most sharpe persecution: after whose
 time, there was some quiet. But shortly after the cruell tyrant Maximinus did sore molest the faithfull, and likewise after him Decius, Gallus, Hostilianus, Lucius, Valerianus. Galienus granted the Christians peace: Aurelianus did persecute them. And Dioclesianus, more like an infernall Serpent, then an earthly man, did as it were deuoure the Church most cruelly. In this time, was the greatest persecution that hath been before: the tormentors were much more weary in shedding the Christian blood, and cruelly tormenting the faithfull, the^ the holy Martyrs were in suffering the paines. There were in this persecution within thirty daies, aboue seuenteene thousand Christians killed most spitefully.
Eusebius Eccle. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 9.10 But Constantine the good Emperour became a Christian, set the Church in peace, and was the first Emperour that did by publike authoritie put downe Gentilitie, and truely maintained Christianitie. But that lasted not long. For within short time after, Iulianus the Apostata, beeing Emperour, went about to vndoe all that Constantine had done: vsed wonderfull pollicies to destroy the Christian Religion, and did afflict the faithfull very greeuously. After this time the
 Church was greeuously molested by the Arrians, after with Humes, Vandales and Gothes, and so continued many yeares, till all good learning began wonderfully to bee decayed. And at the length, albeit the Church seemed to be at rest, yet hath it beene euen vnto this day miserably afflicted and wonderfully defaced, by two Vicars of the Diuell, put in commission at one time, about eight hundred years since: The one, Mahomet for the Eest: the other, Antichrist of Rome, for the West. The one forraine, the other a more neere and domestical enemie to Christians. For during these foure hundred yeares Rome hath beene Topheth, and the valley of Hynnom, and the very Altar, whereon hath been sacrificed the body of Gods children. Whose tyranny and outrage is such, that the Kings and Potentates of the world, haue beene and are greatly damnified and iniured by her, as appeareth by many notable pageantes, which shee hath played afore our time: among which, this one shal serue for many.
11 Pope Innocent being displeased with George Pogiebracius, king of Bohemia, for fauouring of Iohn Hus, and his religion: that is to say, for playing the part of a godly Prince, did excommunicate and depose him,
 appointed his kingdome to Mathias. But Fredericke the Emperour would not thereto consent: and especially after the death of the aforesaid George, when the Emperour and the Bohemians leauing out Mathias, did nominate Vladislaus, sonne of Casimirus King of Polonie, to bee king of Boheme, for the which, great warre and trouble kindled betweene him, and Fredericke the Emperour: wherein the Emperour, had beene vtterly ouerthrown, had not Albertus Duke of Saxonie, rescued the Emperour, and expressed the vehemencie of Mathias. This fire of dissention being kindled by the terrible thunderbolt of the Popes Excommunication, did yet a greater mischiefe. For it hindered the sayd Mathias in his expeditio^ against the Turkes, wherein he should haue been set forward and aided, by Christian Princes and Byshops.
The like curse and excommunication hath been denounced by the Antichristian Byshop Pius Quintus, for the like cause, as wee all know, against Q. Elizabeth, but the same hath been altogither turned to her and her peoples good, by him that can and will blesse, where Baalam curseth. What should I need to set before you the bloody broiles of France, and of the Low-countries thereto adioyning,
 wrought and brought to passe, by this domestical enemy, vnder the colour and name of a holy league, therby to maintaine Idolatry and superstition, and to roote out the religion and seruice of almighty God? It is too too manifest, they haue felt it, and all the world cannot but condemne it. But what better can be expected? Can any good come from Rome? No verily. For as Babylon is full of Ostriches: as Africa yearely breedeth some monster, and as Sodome and Gomer sendeth forth yearely noysome stinches: So the Church of Rome, is the nource and fountaine, which sendeth forth error, treason, rebellion, and vtter desolation (if it were possible) of all christian kingdomes.
12 Now weigh and consider with your selues this same briefe rehearsal of the seate of Gods church, how the church of the Israelites was afflicted in the time of the kinges: then carried into a strange country captiues: after their returne and redeifiyng of the temple, what great perils and troubles it sustained, till after the dayes of the Machabees: next, consider the historie of Christ, and the Acts of the Apostles. After this the ten not able persecutions, which the Church suffered vnder most cruell tyrants, from the eight
 yeare of Nero, by the space of three hundred and twenty yeers, vnto the time of Constantine: and from his time three hundred yeares after by the Arrians and barbarous Hunnes, Vandals and Gothes, by whose meanes good learning was decaied, and ignorance brought in: and then marke with aduisement, how that from that time hitherto, Mahomet hath vsurped and afflicted the East Church, and the Pope the West: (for he began to exercise his proud power ouer the Church, about the same time, that Mahomet brought in his religion.) Consider I say with aduisement, in all these times, how little while Gods Religion was maintained in the church: what perillous changes were in the kingdome: what exceeding cruelty was alwaies vsed against the people of God, as though they had bin heretiques, his word condemned as heresy, and the cause of all euils: and you shall easily perceiue that neither Gugall, Silo, nor Mispah, can assure the Lords tabernacle any rest: and that Religion keepeth not her place and standing any long time.
13 The vse and profite which is to bee made heereof vnto our selues is this: that forsomuch as God hath giuen vnto vs his word, and the ministerie thereof, in such wise that
 we haue amongest vs (blessed be his name therefore) his true religion and seruice: let vs not grow secure, forgetting our duties vnto him, in regard of so vnspeakable a blessing, least he come shortly and remoue our candlestick from vs.Apoc. 2. For he hath no lesse cause to execute this iudgement against vs now, then he had of old time against the obstinate, and vnthankful Iewes, of whome he complayneth thus: What shall I doe vnto thee,2. Esdr. 1. O Iacob, thou Iuda wouldest not obay? I will turne me to other nations, and to those will I giue my name. For hee entreateth vs continually as a father doth his sonnes: as a mother her daughters: and as her nourse her young babes, that we would be his people: and loe by our disobedience wee refuse. It is therefore to be feared, that the kingdome of God shall be taken from vs, and giuen to a nation,Math. 21. which will bring forth fruites of the same. For I am verily perswaded, there is nothing that will more speedily depriue vs of Gods fauour, and that will sooner bring vppon vs his heauy iudgements, then our vnthankfulnes, in abusing his word and ministerie.
14 It fareth with vs, as it did with the Israelites, after their mighty deliuerance out of
 Egypt, in the wildernesse: who at the first when Manna was strange vnto them, liked it wonderfully, so that they would runne out euen on the sabboth, although they were forbidde^ to gather it, but soone after waxed weary of it. Euen so in the beginning of Queene Elizabeth, most happy raigne, we al as me^ almost hunger-starued for lack of ye spirituall food of Gods word, the Manna of our soule, were right glad by what occasion, or from what maner of perso^ soeuer we might heare that Angelical tidings as it were from heaue^, of our saluation in Christ, and of our iustification through faith in him: yea, how ioyful were we then to heare God serued in our vulgar tongue, with that same forme of praier now vsed in the Church, which some nice wantons at this day condemne, saying: Nauseat anima nostra, wee loath this, wee wil haue a better forme: wee wil set vp a Temple in Gerezin, in stead of that in Hierusalem.
15 Through this fulnes, some are growen so lasie and vnlusty towards the spiritual Manna, that they wil no more goe seeke it abroad, as in former time of need, but they wil haue it brought home to their houses, and so make the publick minister, a parlor preacher,
 as if it were now a time of persecutio^: wheras Ely hath his open place by one of the pillers of the Temple, wher any man may find him, which is desirous of knowledge. For they which desired to be instructed by Christ, asked him: Rabbi, vbi habitas? Maister wher dwellest thou? He answered, Come and see. And they came to him: not he to them: he himselfe commanding it should be so: If any man thirst let him come to me.
16 And as touching Religion, many be of Gallios mind, yt it is nothing but a question of names: or of Pharaos minde, that it is but a vaine thing: or at most of king Agrippas minde, to be halfe Christians. But Nazianzene to the Arrians saith, Aut totum honora, aut totum abijce: Either honor Christ wholely, or cast Christ wholly away.
17 There be also many which deale with Gods word and his religion, as doth the Butter-flye with the sweet flowers: and that is, euen to dye their wings with them, that they may seem to be of a fair painted cullor. These thinke that holines consisteth in often, and much hearing, how litle soeuer they practise. They can endure the sowing of a Gomer, although thy reape but an Epha. To these it may bee said, as Phocion said sometime to the Athenian ha^ds, O quam multos duces, quam pauces
 milites: more teachers then followers.
18 And as for the ministerie, it serueth for nothing now adaies but euen for a whetstone to set the peoples tongs on edge withal: Come (say they) let vs smite Ieremy with the to^ng, and giue no heede vnto his words, Gods Ministers haue cause to co^plaine as Ezech. in his time, that they be iudged and condemned at the dores of mens houses: or as christ, and his apostles, by the fire side: and as Iohn Baptist* yt they receiue their iudgement at the tablecloth or carpet, not from any iudiciall seat.
19 Do we think yt God wil suffer stil this co^tempt of his word and ministery vnpunished: he hath already looked a long time for our amending, and hath long borne with our euil doing. And although it is truly said of God, in respect of his long suffera^ce, that he hath lea^^^ feete: so as truly it may be said in respect of his any iudgeme^ts following the same, that he hath yron hands. Hee commeth against vs slowly, but when he comes, he payeth home surely.
20 For these forty and sixe yeares past, who hath ledde the life of delights but wee? What nation vnder heauen hath bene happy, but our English nation? Our God hath long loued vs: Our God hath long suffered
 vs, and with his cheerfull countenance hath most louingly looked vpon vs: But euen as the Troians, when their citie was beaten downe flat to the ground, saide thus; Troia fuit, there was a Troy, or we had a Troy: so the time may come, wherein we may say, God was in this place, and we wist it not: we had once Gods fauour, and we acknowledged it not.
21 Lt vs then in time recall our selues to a better consideration, and let vs constantly and thankfully imbrace the word of God, and perseuer in the way of godlinesse. It was king Hezechias singular commendation, that he did cleaue vnto the Lord, and departed not from him. And it was a Christian resolution of Policarpe to the Leefetenant of Anthony, who incited him to deliuer himselfe from imprisonment and bonds by blaspheming Christ: to whom he made this answer; These eighty sixe yeares haue I serued him, and yet did he neuer hurt me: and sure,Gal. 3. I will not forsake him now. Euen so let vs resolue, that for so much as we haue begun our pilgrimage in the spirit, neuer to ende it in the fleshe: And that if all the worlde would fall away from God and his word, yet wee, and ours, will serue the Lorde.Iosua. 24.
(...)
 would admonish thee to enter into the Court of Conscience, and examine thy selfe, especially in these foure points following.




THE COVRT OF CONSCIENCE: Wherein euery Sinner may examine and trie himselfe, whether he be fitly prepared to receiue the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
DEarely beloued in our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, If we will be worthy receiuers of the holy Supper of our most blessed Sauiour and Redeemer, it is necessarie that we hearken vnto the holy Apostle S. Paule, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chapter 11. verse 27. Where he saith thus: Whosoeuer shall eate this bread, and drinke the Cuppe of the Lord vnworthyly, shall be guiltie of the body and blood of the Lord, 28. Let a man therefore examine himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread, and drinke of this Cup. 29. For he that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnatio^ because he discerneth not the Lords body. etc. Here the Apostle sheweth vs the danger of the vnworthy receiuing the Lordes body and blood, and also the meanes how we may
 bee worthy receiuers of the same: namely, by examining our selues: which examinatio^ consisteth chiefly in foure pointes: That is to say, in Faith, Kepentance, Giuing of thanks to God, and loue towards our neighbours. First, we must haue Faith, that is to say, a certaine and infallible assurance, and firme perswasion that God is a mercifull Father vnto vs, in the name of his Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, whom he deliuered to death for vs. Yea, euery sinner must apply Christ his merites particularly vnto himselfe. This Faith commeth not of vs, neither is it grounded vpon vs, or vpon any thing that is in vs, but it commeth from God, and is grounded vpon God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, and vpon the promises of the Gospell confirmed inwardly within vs, by the working of the holy Ghost, which cryeth in our hearts Abba,Rom. 8, 15 Gal. 4.6. that is to say, Father. Furthermore, this faith is nourished, confirmed, and increased in vs by the holy Sacraments. For in the Supper, God as a good father (after that he had once brought vs into his Church by Baptisme) nourisheth vs spiritually with the proper substance of his Sonne Iesus Christ, applying and making proper vnto euery one of vs, the merit of his
 death and passion. To this ende and purpose is it, that Iesus Christ himselfe, giueth vs the Bread and Wine: that he commandeth vs,Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.21. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor 11.14. to eate and drinke it: that he saith, that the Bread is his body which is giuen for vs, and that the Wine is his blood which is shed for the remission of our sinnes: by which words he giueth himselfe wholly vnto vs, he will be out nourishment and spirituall life: he wil dwell in vs by his holy Spirit, and will that we abide in him by faith, that through beliefe we may not perish, but haue eternall life,Iohn 3 36.18. Psal. 8.7. Mat. 11. Heb. 1.2. Iohn 17.12.27. and 28. whereof he is the onely heyre and giuer. In like sort the breaking of the Bread of the Supper, serueth to the confirmation of our Faith, and sure warranting of our saluation: insomuch as it assureth vs, and causeth vs to see with spirituall eyes, that Iesus Christ was once broken with the paines of death in Hierusalem, to deliuer vs from the same, and to get vs eternall life. Also, in that, that by the Commandement of Christ Iesus, we take the Bread in our hands, and then the Cup: moreouer in that, that we eate the Bread, and drinke the Wine, which turne into the nourishment of our bodies: we are certified, that by the hands of Faith, we take and imbrace Iesus Christ our Lorde, for our onely
 Sauiour and Redeemer, and that by the same Faith we eate his body spiritually, and drinke his blood, to the hope of eternall life.
Nowe, euery one of vs must liue by his owne faith, according as wee may make our Confession in the Beliefe, which is called the Apostles, in that euery man saith by himselfe, I beleeue in God, and saith not, Wee beleeue. We must not here cast our braines, or thinke vpon the beleeuing or vnbeleeuing, vpon the worthynesse or vnworthynesse of an other man, but vpon our owne. For S. Paul doth not teach vs to examine other men, or that other men should examine vs, but he saith, namely, Let a man examine himselfe. Therefore let euery one of vs for his owne part be assured in his heart, that Iesus Christ the true Messias, is come into the world to saue sinners, amongst whom hee ought to account and esteeme himselfe (by the example of S. Paul) the chiefest. Let him beleeue that Iesus Christ came downe from Heauen into earth, to lift him vp from earth to heauen, that he was made the Sonne of man, to make him the child of God: that hee was conceyued by the holy Ghost, and that he was borne of the Virgin Marie: to purifie and cleanse his wicked conception
 and birth.. Let him perswade himselfe that the Sonne of God hath ourcome the Diuel, to deliuer him from the tyranny and slauish subiection of the Diuell: that he hath fulfilled all the Lawe, (louing God his Father with all his heart, strength and might, and his neighbour as himselfe) to get him iustice: that hee appeared before Pilate an earthly Iudge, and receiued as an euill doer, sentence of condemnation for this life: to exempt him fro^ appearing before the terrible iudgement seate of Gods iustice, to receiue sentence of death and euerlasting damnation, for that he had offended one eternal and euerlasting God. Let him assure himselfe,Psal. 22.1 that the same Iesus Christ went downe to Hell for him, that is to say, that hee suffered the sorrowes and terrours of the second death, and of the sincere wrath of God to deliuer him, that hee died a death accursed of God, in that hee was hanged on the Crosse, to purchase him life and blessing before God: that hee rose againe, for a gage and assurance of his resurrection: that he ascended into Heauen, for a certaine token, that hee also shall ascend thither, that hee sitteth on the right hand of God his Father: to be for him an euerlasting Priest, Teacher, King, defender, reconciler,
 and aduocate: to be short, that he shall come at his last comming, for his comfort and full redemption. We must also euery one of vs for his owne part make proper vnto our selues: yea, and make ours all the goodnesse and all the riches that is in Iesus Christ: because that in giuing himselfe to vs, he giueth vs also his benefits. So then in that, that Iesus Christ is God, it is to make vs partakers of his Diuinitie: in that, that he is heyre and Lord of the world, it is to make vs partakers of his Lordship and inheritance, and that we recouer in him the gouernment of all things, which we lost in Adam: in that, that he is well beloued of his Father: it is that we may be acceptable vnto him: in that, that he is rich it is to make vs partakers of his riches: in that, that he hath all power against the Diuel, Sinne, Hell, Antichrist, the Worlde, and all our enemies, it is to defend and shield vs: in that, that he is iust and good, it is to iustifie vs, and make vs good: in that, that he is happy and immortall, it is to make vs partakers of his blessednesse and immortalitie.
When we shall thus particularly apply all the actions and benefites of Iesus Christ our Lord, and also all his essentiall qualities
 vnto our selues, putting our whole trust in him, and in his promises, and distrusting our selues, then may we boldly come to the Lords Table, whereat we shall enioy Iesus Christ, God and man, by the benefit of faith, and shall feele moreouer a great increase and augmentation of the same.
But we must note, that it is vnpossible for vs to be vnite and made one with Christ, and to be made partakers of the treasures and riches which are in him, vnlesse we first renounce Antichrist and his kingdome, and vnlesse we detest all Idolatrie, superstition and traditions of men, directly contrary to the pure seruice of God, bounded and limitted out in his word. For seeing that God is our onely Creator: and hee giueth himselfe wholy vnto vs in the person of his Sonne IESVS CHRIST, the true Isaac,Gene. 17.18. in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed, it is great reason, that likewise by Faith wee giue vp our selues,Gen. 12.18. and yeelde vs wholy vnto God. And thence is it that God in his Lawe doth rightfully require of his people, that they haue no other Gods but him:Eccle. 20.2. And that they loue him with all their heart, with all their soule, with all their strength, and vnderstanding, that is to say, with all their
 parts, aswel inward as outward. And thence is it also, that God doth not only rebuke and reprooue al them that halt on both sides: but commandeth also,1. Reg. 18.20. Deut. 13.1. and 17.5. that they which sacrifice vnto strange Gods, should be put to death. And to this purpose S. Paul (minding to warne the Corinthians to flee from Idolatry, vseth an argument taken from the knittting together and vnion that we haue with Iesus Christ our Lord in the Supper,1. Cor. 10.16. speaking after this sort. The cup of blessing which wee blesse, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? And the bread which wee breake, is it not the Commmunion of the body of Christ? As if he would say, that seeing the Corinthians came not to the Supper to bee partakers simply of earthly Elements, but to be partakers really and in deede of the body and blood of our Lord Iesus Christ, to bee made one with him by faith, and to be made flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, that therefore it were too great wickednesse and abhomination, to be present in the assemblies of Infidels, or to be partakers of their idolatrie. And therefore the Apostle addeth afterward,1. Cor. 10.21. that the Corinthians cannot drinke of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of diuels: and that they cannot bee partakers of the
 Lords Table, and of the table of Diuels. Whereby he signifieth, that it is impossible to serue God, and the diuel together, and that whosoeuer doth communicate with Idolatrie, doeth manifestly renounce our Lorde Iesus Christ. Therefore, seeing that darkenesse is no more contrarie to light, vice to vertue, death to life, Paradice to Hell, then the Pope and his doctrine is contrary to our Lord Iesus Christ and to his holy Gospel: it behooueth all true faithfull people to withdraw themselues wholy from Poperie, and cast off without delay the yoke of that Romish Antichrist, that they may giue themselues wholy to the seruice of this Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ. But if so be that the Co^munion that we haue with the sonne of God, and the promises of the heauenly Father, cannot intice and perswade vs to yeeld our selues wholy to God, to put our trust in him onely, to serue and worship him onely, according to his will, but that we wil yet cleaue vnto Antichrist and his seruants and Ministers: yet at the least, let the threatnings and iudgements of God hinder vs, and feare vs so to doe: as when it is sayde, Goe out of her my people, that ye bee not partakers in her sinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues.

And againe,Apoc. 14.9.^0.11. If any man worship the beast and his image, and receiue his marke in his foreheade, or in his hand, the same shal drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine, which is powred into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lambe. And that stinke of their torment shal ascend-euermore: and they shal haue no rest, day nor night, which worship the beast and his image, and whosoeuer receiueth the print of his name. And againe, The fearefull and vnbeleeuing, the abhominable murtherers,Apo. 21.8. whoremongers, sorcerers, idolatrors, and all lyers, shal haue their part in the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Let this therefore be well printed in our hearts, that we be not seduced and destroyed with the vaine seruers of this worlde, which thinke it is a thing not impossible to serue God and the Diuell. Iesus Christ and Antichrist, to follow the commandements of God, and of men, and to satisfie the affections of the spirite, and of the flesh, all at once.


2. We must haue repentance.
THe preparation whereof we spake before touching faith, which applyed vnto euery one of vs particularly, Iesus Christ with all his riches and blessings, can haue no place in vs, vnlesse it bring foorth also in vs a true repentance: that is to say, a true misliking of euill, and a burning loue and affection of goodnesse: as we see the example in Dauid, Peter, Paul, and other holy men. We must haue a sorrow and vnfeined grief, for that we haue offended God, for that wee haue before times wickedly abused our creation, redemption, and Baptisme, for that wee haue prouoked God with all our members, for that we haue abused our vnderstanding, heart, tongue, feete, and hands: for that wee haue giuen and set foorth our soules and bodies (which are the Temples wherein God would dwell) to infidelitie, idolatrie, superstition, filthinesse, blasphemie, whoredome, extortion, vsurie, robberie, gluttonie, drunkennesse, ambition, excesse, ryot, and other worldly vanities, which is asmuch as if we would haue lodged God the father, the sonne, and the Ghost, in a most stinking and filthy
 priuie. Wee must therefore bee sorry for our wicked life passed, vsing a true and seuere examining of our selues, which may bring foorth in vs a displeasantnesse and horrour of our forepassed renting and breaking by al manner of meanes of the Lawe of God, to follow the will of the Diuell, of the world, and of the flesh. Nowe the breaking of the breade of the Supper (which is omitted in the Passeouer of the Papists) should cause vs to acknowledge and detest our wickednesse, that is to say, whatsoeuer is founde in vs, contrary and repugnant to the pure and holy Lawe of GOD. For, in that, that the bread is broken for vs, or rather in that, that wee breake the bread of the Supper of our Lorde Iesus Christ: it signifieth vnto vs, that in deede it is we, that it is our sinnes and iniquities, which haue crucified and put to death the Lorde of life, who is the very same Iesus Christ our Lorde, So that wee must not doe, as in times passed the Infidels did, which made great lamentations and inuectiues against the Iewes, Pontius Pilate, Herode, Iudas, and them that had executed and put Christ to death, and in the meane season flattered themselues: vaunting of
 their owne merites and desertes, and did not narrowly consider, that Iudas, Pontius Pilate, Herode, were but executers and ministers of their impieties and sinnes.
Let vs therefore consider in the breaking of the breade, that our sinnes, yea, the sinnes of euery one of vs seuerally, crucified the sonne of God, and brake him with the sorrowes of the first and second death, as namely the wordes of the Supper doe shew, that the body of Iesus Christ was broken for vs, and his blood was shed for the remission of our sinnes. And our heauenly Father witnesseth the same, speaking of the death of his Sonne,Esa. 53.3. For the sinnes of my people, haue I smitten him. Then if it bee so, that our sinnes being weighed in the ballaunce of the iustice of GOD, were found to bee so weightie, and of so great importaunce, that his wrath coulde neuer haue beene appeased towardes vs, but by the death of his onely Sonne, which maketh full satisfaction, I say, by the cruell ignominious deathe of the Crosse: how should not wee hence forward detest and abhorre our sinne, as that which is the cruell and bloody murderer of the only Sonne of God?Mat. 27 451. Beholde the Sunne and
 the Moone, beholde the Element, beholde the vaile of the Temple, beholde the stones and rockes, which were moued at the death of Iesus Christ, which shewed foorth tokens of sorrowe, and wee which beare within our selues the cause of his death, shal not wee haue in horrour and detestation this cursed enemie sinne, that is lodged within vs?
Shall wee suffer him to rule and dwell in vs, as before, that il may bring home death vnto vs? Not so: but wee must detest it, as that, that before time separated vs from God our chiefest happinesse: as that, that caused vs to loose the image and similitude of God, according to which wee were created at the beginning by GOD. It is that, that hath wholy destroyed vs, that hath depriued vs of holinesse and righteousnesse, that hath banished vs out of Paradice, that hath made vs slaues to the tyranny of the Diuell, that hath made vs subiect to so many miseries and diseases: and to be short, both to the first and second death. It is that, which after it had set a barre and diuision between God and vs, caused vs to see our owne filthinesse, purchased vnto vs shameful and vilainous infamy, made vs to tremble at the voyce of our God,
 which was before most pleasant and louing vnto vs. It is that, wherby the wrath of God is heaped vpon men: that maketh the earth to become barren, and to bring forth thornes and thistles: that causes women to bring forth in sorrow, and that men eate their bread in the sweat and labour of their bodies. Seeing then that sinne bringeth forth, and procureth vnto vs daily so many miseries: it followeth that we ought to withdrawe our selues from it, if we wil not be wilful enemies of our owne happinesse and saluation. Now then, I cite here all disordered and slanderous persons, which notwithstnading are so impudent to present themselues to the Lords holy Table. I aske them what it is that they promised to God and his Church in Baptisme? They wil answere me, that they promised God to renounce the Diuel and all his workes. But one of the chiefe and principall workes of the Diuel, is sinne. Why doe they not then abstaine from it? Why are they traytours, and disobedient to God and his Church? Why haue they conspired with the Diuel, the world, and the flesh, against their own saluation? How dare they peesent themselues before God, to aske him pardon and remission of their sins: seeing that more and more they heape sin vpon sin, and crucifie and
 kill againe (as much as in them lieth) the son of God, or at the least make a scorne and a scoffe of the purging of this blood, which was appli-vnto them in Baptisme. Put the case that a wicked man, poore, and destitute of all helpe, wete fallen into a mire, whence out he could by no meanes rayse vp himselfe, and that some young Prince passing that way, tooke the paines to draw him out of the ditch, to make him cleane, to cloath him with gorgious and precious apparell: if this wicked man, and poore miserable caytife, fall againe into this myre wilfully by his own folly, and beray both himselfe and his apparell, being moreouer in great daunger of his life: would not one think that this man were maruellously vnkind, and a contemner of that princely bounty and goodnesse, and on the other side, a wilful and sworne enemy of his owne health, worthy to be lost and cast away without any helpe or assistance? Euen so standeth our cause with Iesus Christ. We fel al into the puddle of sinne, in the person of Adam,Gen. 3.6 Psal. 39.15 we are all wicked doers, and worthy of an hundred thousande gibbets before God, we can by no meanes get out of our selues, and out of the ditche of destruction, whereinto we are all fallen by our owne fault.

Behold the son of God, the king of kings, the Lord of Lordes, which commeth to draw vs out of this puddle, which co^meth to wash vs with his precious blood, which vouchsafeth to cloath vs with the proper cloake of his righteousnesse and innocency. If we come againe to wallowe our selues in the puddle of sinne, if we please our selues in it, if we defile and bedurt the robe of innocency which he hath giuen vs in Baptisme, are we not manifest contemners of the inestimable loue and gift of Iesus Christ, and are moreouer worthy to rot a thousand times in our filthinesse, or rather to gnash our teeth euerlastingly with the diuels in hel? It is euident.
Seeing then that it is so, that the end of our redemptio^, baptisme, and iustification, requireth of vs to abstaine from sin, (so farforth as possibly we may, and our fleshly infirmitie wil suffer) we must take all paines and diligence by the vertue of the spirit of God, to cast out from vs all foulenesse and filthinesse: Idolatry, blasphemy, rebellion, hatred, murther, whordome, theft, and vsury, and all other things contrary to the holy Lawe, if we will not bee more than ingrateful towards Iesus Christ, and open enemies of his Churche, and our owne saluation. But because it is not sufficient
 for the inducing of a true and he althful repentance, to acknowledge our misery, to abhorre it, to confesse it, and to abstaine from it, but we must also know, desire, and do that good which God co^mandeth in his word: we must consider the argument which ought earnestly to stirre vs vp to the sanctifying of the name of God. First, in that we are ioined and made one with Christ Iesus in the supper, in that we are made flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, in that we liue by his holy spirit. ought not this vpon good cause to exhort vs to conforme our selues to the Image and likenesse of the holines of our Lord Iesus Christ? Can he dwel in vs, nourish vs with his own substance, quicken vs with his holy spirit: ioyne vs vnto himself by the bond of Faith, yet so, that he, his holy spirit, and faith, bring not forth in vs good and holy works? Moreouer, for so much as he doth not giue himselfe vnto vs halfemeale, and destitute of his qualities and riches, and accompanied with all spirituall giftes and blessings, adorned with righteousnesse and perfection, accompanied with innocencie and sanctification: how can we receiue Iesus Christ enriched with all his graces, that the righteousnesse of our head, may not shine in vs which are members:
 yea, shine in all our parts as well inward as outward: Must it needs be, that the two partes of our soule, that is to say, our mind and heart, which ought to apprehende and take hold of the promises of God, which ought to receiue by faith the body and blood of our lord Iesus Christ, that is to say, whole Iesus Christ true God, equal in euery respect to God his father, and true man made of humane body and soule: that this minde and heart (I say) must be applyed to the meditation and loue of worldly and wicked things, being destitute of the knowledge and loue of God, and of the loue of our neighbour: Doth it behoue our body, which is the temple of God, to be prophaned? That our eares, which were created of God to heare his voice, shuld be stopped against it, and be opened to vanities, wanton talke, and vnchast worldly songes. Doth it behooue our tongue, which is bound by the right of creation, to sing the praises of God, and by the right of redemption, to shew forth the Lords death till he come: h That this tongue, which is so proper an instrument of the glory of God, should be mute to goodnesse, incessantly occupied in backbiting, slaundering, blaspheming, or at the least in speaking idle words, whereof one day wee
 shal yeeld an account before the throne of the Maiesty of God?Mat. 12.36 Doeth it behoue our mouth, which ought to receiue the blessed signe of the body and blood of our Lord Iesus, to suppresse the benefit of our redemption, and to haue adders poyson in it? Doeth it behooue our hands, which ought to take (at the supper) the assured gage of the loue of God, the infallible pledges of his league with vs, the earnest penny of our saluation, to be voide of goodnesse? and beside that, be giuen to extortion, theft, murther, oppression, and violence? Doth it behooue our feete, which ought to runne and make hast to goodnesse, to be ready and light to runne to mischiefe: No surely, but as he which calleth vs, is holy, so likewise must we also be wholy holy: as he hath brought vs by holy Baptisme into his holy house, which is his Church, the Co^munion of Saints: Euen so likewise must we lead therein a good and holy conuersation: as he hath washed vs from our sinnes, by the precious blood of his sonne Iesus Christ, so must we dye to them, and liue in righteousnesse: as he hath called vs to the the incorruptible hope of the blessed resurrection and eternal life: so must we lift vp our harts on high, and not be buried like Moles in this fraile and transitorie earth. To be short, seeing
 that the grace of God is set before vs euery day, and his holy word soundeth in our eares,Tit. 2.11 12.13.14. to this onely end, that it may be saluation vnto vs, and that (renouncing all vngodlinesse, and worldly desires) we should liue soberly, iustly, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. We must pray vnto this good God, that he would giue vs grace, so to behaue our selues towardes him in liuing godly, so towards our neighbours in liuing iustly, so towards the poore in releeuing them charitably, and so towards our selues in liuing soberly, that we may be found at the day irreprehensible, by the meanes of that his wel beloued Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ.
3 Thirdly,Of thankes giuing. we must giue thanks to this good God, for the benefit of our redemption: and for this cause it is, that the Auncients called the holy supper, Eucharistia, that is to say, gratefulnesse, good grace, giuing of thankes. For if so be that our ordinary food, and daily bread, which GOD giueth vs for the nourishme^t of our bodies, ought to be sanctified by the word, and receiued with thankesgiuing: ought we not much more to thanke God for the heauenly bread, and for the nourishment of our
 soules, which is offered vnto vs, and really giuen vs in the holy Supper of Iesus Christ?
And we see also, how Iesus Christ himselfe sheweth vs an example hereof. For when he tooke the bread of the Supper, S Matthewe, and S. Marke say, that Iesus Christ blessed. And S. Luke expoundeth this word to blesse, when he saith, that he gaue thankes.
Now then, seeing that we see, that Iesus Christ, when he tooke the bread of the supper, gaue thankes to God his father, as he did also when he tooke the cup, and that for the redemption of ma^kind: it is our duty to do the like. And that we may be the better moued to giue thanks to God, we haue to consider, the greatnesse of the benefit of our redemption, and the excellency of the gift which God giueth vs at his holy table, which cannot bee done, vnlesse we consider our miserable condition, which was before figured by the temporall captiuitie of Egypt.
We see there, how Pharaoh was strong and mighty, how he knew not the generall, how he went about to kill all the seede of the Israelites,Exe, 1.3. by the suppression and death of their men children: we see also how excessiuely he caused the Israelites to worke without any hope of wages, how he would not suffer
 them by any meanes to sacrifice to the Lord, nor to goe forth of the land of Egypt.
Which thing continued not for one yeare or two: but for the space of foure hundred and thirtieExo. 12.30. yeares. Here may we liuely beholde a draught of our misery. We were all lost and destroyed in Adam. Wee were holden captiues in the helly Egypt, vnder the Tyranny of a spirituall Pharaoh, which is the Diuell. This Tyrant was strong and mighty: hee suffered vs not to serue our GOD. He made vs to labour incessantly in slauish and vnfruitfull workes of sinne, to the establishment of his owne kingdome. He slew not onely our men children, but he led vs all indifferently, to vtter ruine and destruction. And this Tyranny had not onely continued for a certaine time, but had beene eternall and for euer permanent, if the mercy and power of our God had not plucked vs out of it by the ministery of the true Moses, which is our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the true Lambe which the heauenly father hath deliuered to death, to deliuer vs from it, and purchase vs eternall life. As it is saide, that God so loued the world,Ioh. 3.16 that he hath giuen his onely begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him should not perish, but haue
 euerlasting life. Now then seeing this good God hath done in vs so great a pleasure, as to free vs from the tyranny of the Diuel, of sinne, of death, of hel: seeing that his loue was so great, that he deliuered his onely Sonne to the cruel and ignominious death of the Crosse, for vs, which were the seruants and bondslaues of Sathan: his welbeloued, for vs, which were his enemies: the iust, and the Lambe without spotte, for vs, which were sinners and corrupt: the onely heire of Paradice, for vs, which were worthily heires of hel: ought we not to be rauished with admiration of this great and vnspeakeable loue of God towards vs: and our tongues to be for euer displayed to publish with a loud voyce the praise of the benefit of our redemption? It is very reasonable, and therefore we see, that Iesus Christ admonisheth vs of our dutie in this behalfe,Luk. 22.19 1. Cor. 11.24. speaking of the celebration of the holy Supper. Doe this in remembrance of me. And S. Paul expresseth what remembrance this is, when he aduertiseth vs,1. Cor. 11. that as often as wee shall eate this bread, and drinke this cuppe, wee shewe the Lords death till he come. Seeing the^ that God requireth of vs a true acknowledging of his benefits, which wee receiue
 at his hands and bountifulnesse, by the meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ: let vs take heede, that we be not spotted with the fault of ingratitude, especially, if we will not incurre the wrathful displeasure of God, and acknowledge him for Iudge, whom we would not acknowledge for a gentle and mercifull father: as Saint Paul also to this purpose threatneth the ingrate and forgetful, when he saith, Whosoeuer shal eate this bread, and drinke the cup of the Lord vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation. And rightfully is the vengeance of God displayed against them, which wickedly suppresse the glory of God, in that, that concerneth their owne saluation. For if so be that a murtherer ready to be hanged for his wicked deedes, casting away and reiecting his princes gratious pardon (and not vouchsafing to thanke him for it) deserueth worthily the gallowes: or if a childe deserue the rod, for not giuing once I thanke you to his father, when he hath receiued at his handes great and singular benefits: much more wee, which for our sinfull and wicked deedes deserue to bee hanged in hell, if wee contemne the grace of God our soueraigne Prince, and make no count of this euerlasting benefite,
 which our heaue^ly father presenteth vs withal in Iesus Christ, who is offered to vs in the supper, by good right and reason we are worthy to perish for our vnkindnesse and vnthankfulnesse. But here must we diligently marke the pointes that followe.
First, this acknowledging must be made to one onely God, by his onely sonne Iesus Christ. For euen as God by his onely sonne hath created vs, and redeemd vs fro^ euerlasting death: so wil he that to him alone, and by him alone, in whom he is well pleased, we render thanks for all his benefits. As we see how S. Paul setteth this forth vnto vs in many places, and precisely in the Epistle to the Ephesians, where he saith, Blessed be God, euen the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which hath blessed vs with all his spirituall blessing in Heauenly things in Christ, as hee hath chosen vs in him before the foundation of the world: but they which call vpon Saints, and put their trust in them, or in their merites, they also which make them patrons and aduocates to GOD warde, and likewise they which trust in their owne strength, in their owne free will or good workes, robbe God of his glorie, and cannot giue him true thankes for the benefit of redemption. For we cannot giue to any creature, the least ioy
 that may be in the matter of our saluation: but we commit sacriledge against God the Creator.
And therefore renouncing our selues and euery liuing creature, let vs say with the Apostle, Vnto the king euerlasting, immortall,1. Tim. 1.17 inuisible, vnto God only wise, be honour and glory for euer and euer.
Secondly, thanks must be giuen, not with the mouth onely: but with the hart also. For, seeing that God is a spirit, he requireth a seruice of vs, that is agreeable to his nature: that is to say, he will be serued of vs in spirit and truth. And therefore, when that praysing of God for the benefit of redemption, commeth in question, we must haue our hearts lift vp on high, and there must be a consent and mutuall agreement between our inward affections and our tongues, as we see how Dauid exhorteth himselfe to the same, when he saith, My soule praise thou the Lord, and all that is within mee praise his holy name. My soule (I say) praise thou the Lord,Psa. 103.1 and forget not all his benefits. And the blessed Virgin singeth the selfe same in her song,Luke. 1.46 saying: My soule magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit reioyceth in God my Sauiour. Now all hypocrites, and wicked persons, also
 they that sing and praise in an vnknowne tongue, are here reproued. For where there is no vnderstanding, there is no affection nor wil, and consequently no faith, without which, whatsoeuer we doe, bee it neuer so faire and glorious before men, it is but sinne and abhomination before God. Let vs take heede therefore that in this behalfe we wander not, and goe astray, least we be condemned with the Iewish people, which honoured and serued God in vaine, insomuch as they came neare vnto him onely with their mouthes,Esa. 29.13 Mat. 15.8 and honoured him with their lips, but not with their hearts.
Thirdly, it must be done at all times and seasons,Psal. 34.1 that is to say aswel in affliction, as in prosperity: and to this purpose Dauid protesteth, That he will alwaies giue thanks vnto his Lord,1. Thes. 5.18. and that his prayse shall be in his month continually. And Saint Paul admonisheth the Thessalonians. To giue thanks in all things: adding, For this is the wil of God in Christ Iesus. But this is cleane contrarie to time seruers, and to all them which in time of prosperity lawn vpon the Gospell, and are wel co^tent for that time to praise God, whom afterward in time of affliction they defie and set at naught.

The cause of this mischiefe is, for that they haue not yeelded themselues to the Church of GOD, for a good end and purpose, as to extoll the glory of God, to seeke their own saluation, and the saluation of their brethren, but rather to make themselues greater in their goods and honours, and to satisfie their owne affections. And therefore it commeth to passe, that as soone as the diuell lifteth vp his hornes against the Church of God, and persecutions be at hand, they melt away by and by in afflictions, as doth waxe before the fire: they are offended, and parched with the Sunne of the crosse, they are sorie for the good they haue done, they repent themselues that they were so hasty to confesse the name of our Lord Iesus Christ in the assembly of the faithful, they wish they had neuer known GOD, nor his word, nor his Church, nor his Ministers, because they make greater account (as Esau did) of one messe of pottage,Ge. 25.38 than of the birth-right and blessing of the heauenly father. But let such manner of persons knowe, that it shall no more profit them, that they made a faire beginning and iolly holding vp of their buckler: then it did Cain, Esau, Saule, Iudas. For seeing that sentence is generall, that whosoeuer
 continueth vnto the end, he shall be saued: it followeth by the contrary, that all they which doe not continue constantly in the confession of the sonne of God, and are hindered by their goods and honours, loue of the world, ease of their flesh, to set forth and declare with a continuall traine, the benefit of our redemption: it followeth (I say) that such persons shal goe to ruine and euerlasting destruction.
Last of all, this acknowledging must not onely be priuate, but publike, in the face and presence of the whole Church: and therefore as Dauid saith,Psa. 116 12.13.14. What shall I render vnto the Lord for all his benefites towardes me? I wil take the cuppe of saluation, and cal vpon the name of the Lord. I wil pay my vowes vnto the Lord, euen now in the presence of all his people,Psal. 40.9.10. And againe, (I haue declared thy righteousnesse in the great congregation: Loe, I haue not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest, I haue not hid thy righteousnesse within my heart, but I haue declared thy truth and thy saluation. I haue not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the great congregation. So then this ought to be wel printed in the heart of the weake, and those that are ashamed to confesse and praise openly our Lord Iesus Christ. For
 seeing that God doeth auouch vs openly for his people, and giueth himselfe freely vnto vs, and to our children, in the person of his welbeloued Sonne our Lorde Iesus Christ, wee can doe no lesse, then auouche him publikely for our God and Sauiour, in the person of that same his welbeloued sonne Iesus Christ our Lord.


4. Of Loue.
FAith, Repentance, and Acknowledging of GODS benefits, cannot haue place in vs, and in vaine are we called Christians, or that we bragge of our selues for the practise of the Commandements of the first Table, which concerne the seruice of God before mentioned: vnlesse we shew the effects by the keeping of the Co^mandements of the second Table, which concerne the loue of our neighbor, without which wee ca^not worthily present our selues to the holy Table of Iesus Christ our Lord. And therefore it is, that Iesus Christ himselfe in the Sermon of the Supper, which he made to his Apostles the same night that he was betrayed and deliueuered to death for vs, did diligently beat this point into their heads, saying, By this shall all
 men knowe that yee are my Disciples,Iohn, 13 35. if yee haue loue one to another.Iho. 15.12.13.14. And againe, This is my commandement, that yee loue one another, as I haue loued you. Greater loue than this hath no man, when any man bestoweth his life for his friendes. Yee are my friendes: if yee doe whatsoeuer I commaunde you. To this same ende tendeth also that, that the same night IESVS CHRIST washed the feete of the Apostles:Ihon. 13.12.13.14 15. after which washing, hee said vnto them, Knowe yee what I haue done to you? yee call mee Maister and Lorde, and yee say well, for so I am. If I then your Lorde and Maister haue washed your feete: yee also ought to wash one anothers feete. For I haue giuen you an example, that yee should doe euen as I haue done to you.
Wee must therefore (according to the commaundement and example of the Sonne of GOD) be furnished with true and hote loue, that we may worthily present our selues to the Lordes Table. If wee will haue a true description of this loue, wee must take it of Saint Paule, which painteth it out in liuely colours, writing to the Corinthians in this sorte.1. Co 13 4. Loue (saith hee) suffreth long, and is bountifull, Loue enuyeth not, loue doeth not boast it selfe, it is not puffed vp, it disdaineth
 not, it seeketh not her owne things, it is not prouoked to Anger, it thinketh not euill, it reioyceth not in iniquitie, but reioyceth in the trueth. It suffereth all things, it beleeueth all things, it hopeth all things, it endureth all things. See what manner of loue ours ought to bee, euerie one of vs must endeuour, that all the partes of this description may rightly agree vnto vs. Wee are many wayes and in sundrie sortes exhorted to this loue, and brotherly concorde in the holy Supper of our Lorde Iesus Christ.
First in that, that wee must waite one for another,1. Cor. 1.35. and that it is not lawful for euery one of vs to celebrate the Supper particularlie and aparte: but when the whole congregation is assembled together, all the faithfull together must take, eate, and drinke, the Bread and Wine of the Supper, according to the commandement of Iesus Christ.Mat. 26.26. Mark. 14.21. Luk. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11 14. Take yee, eat yee, and drinke yee all of thit. It is a true figure anst testimonie of the vanitie that ought to bee among vs.
Moreouer, in that, that wee beeing all gathered togeather in one house of God, which is his Church, wee do there all call vpon one selfe same father, which is in Heauen, wee haue all one selfe same heade, Aduocate,
 and intercessour,Mat. 12. Iohn. 11.17. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Iohn. 2. which is Iesus Christ: We are all quickened with his holy Spirit which dwelleth in vs; in that, that we all haue one selfe same Word of God, in that, that we all eate of one selfe same Spiritual meate, and drinke all of the selfesame spirituall drinke, in that also that we all pretend as brethren to one selfesame inheritance, which is the kingdome of heauen: ought not this to enflame vs with true and hote loue?
Finally, the making of the bread and Wine of the Supper, doth teach vs also what vnitie and concord we ought to haue one with another: for as we see, that the bread is made of many cornes, and yet notwithstanding afterwardes is but one selfe same lumpe of bread: as wee see also that the Wine is made of many clusters of grapes, and yet after it is made, is but one onely wine: in like sort must the Christians, which are many in themselues, bee ioyned together throught loue into one body, which is the Church, whereof Iesus Christ ought to bee the onely head and leader. But wee must note, that this loue, whereunto we are exhorted by so many reasons of the Supper, cannot bee where there is enuie, brawling, contentions, rancour, debate, and diuision:
 and therefore, before wee come to the Supper, (which is a witnes of our agreement as well with Christ, as with his congregation) if wee haue had any strife and contention with our brethren: wee must louinglie reconcile our selues vnto them. If any man haue offended vs, wee must franckely and freely forgiue our brethren,Mat. 5.23.44. yea our enemies, as wee would that our good GOD should pardon vs, and as wee see how IESVS CHRIST our Lorde hath left vs an example of his loue, when he praied to GOD his Father for his enemies which put him to death:Luke. 23.34. as wee read also that Saint Stephen did the same.Acts. 7.60. Againe, wee must also marke, that this loue ought to bee practised in all estates. Kings must loue their subiects, they must be NurcesEsai. 49.23. of the Churche of GOD, louers of common peace, they must vse their people with all moderation and clemencie. So likewise must the people honor the King,1. Pet. 2.13 14.15. Ro. 13.2.3. they must pay him their tribute faithfullie, they must be obedient to all his Lieftenants and Officers. The Pastour must loue his flocke,Acts. 20.28.31. 1. Pet. 5.2.3. hee must watch, take paines, and pray incessantly for it.Sa. 12.13. So likewise must the sheepe loue their Pastour, the fathers their children, the children their fathers and mothers,
 the wife the husband, and the husband the wife, the maisters their seruantes, and the seruants their maisters: and euery one in his calling must endeuour to exercise loue in that vocation wherevnto God hath called him. For otherwise it wil be impossible for vs to doe our dueties faithfully, aswel towards God, as towards men, if the rule of loue doe not guide and gouerne vs in all our doings.


Other necessarie obseruations for them that will come to the Lordes Table.
IN the foure Articles aforesaid, consisteth the true examining of our selues: notwithstanding, we must take good heede to these poynts and notes which follow.
First wee haue to note, that wee must not cast our heads, and bende our braines to examine curiously another ma^s life: as many do which stretch out and scanne so narrowly the blemishes of their brethren, that they forget their owne. It is to be wished, and wee must procure it as much as lyeth in vs, that the Church of God may be maintained in purity,
 without shew of offence. But forsomuch as in this world corne shall alwaies be mixed with chaffe, weedes with wheate,Mat. 3.12 Mat. 13 24 Mat. 13.47. Mat, 10. Mat. 25. good fishe with bad, Iudas with true Apostles, foolishe Virgins with wise, yet none of vs must be affended therefore. And moreouer, let euery man indeuour to finde that perfection in himselfe, which he desireth to bring into an other.
Secondly, we must not thinke that faith, repentance, giuing of thankes, and loue, and other vertues which GOD requireth of vs, can be perfect here in this worlde: for there will be alwaies in vs, what regenerate and newe borne soeuer wee be) some remnantes of sinne, of incredulitie, of lacke of repentance, of vnthankfulnesse, and selfe loue, which is directly contrary and opposite to the true loue of our neighbour. As long as we liue, the flesh will fight against the Spirit,Rom. 7.23.8.6.7. Galat. 5.1. 1. Pet. 5.8. the Diuel and the worlde will make warre against vs: as the life of the Patriarches, Prophettes, and Apostles, doe sufficiently witnesse vnto vs: so that, euen to the last breath of our life we shall haue neede to craue of our God, that he would forgiue vs our sinnes, through his sonne Iesus Christ.
Notwithstanding, so farre it is that the
 imperfections which are in vs, should cause vs to drawe backe from God, and from this holy banquet, that rather (so that we are displeased with our selues for them) they ought to cause vs to come the sooner, to the intent, that as poore famished creatures, we might more greedily, and with greater desire, receiue Iesus Christ, which is the true shepheard of our soules.
Thirdly, although it be not required of the worthy comming to the Supper, to haue a perfect faith, perfect repentance, perfect giuing of thanks, perfect Loue: yet must they be (notwithstanding) true, and proceede from the heart, and from the spirit. Our faith must not be feigned, our repentance must not bee counterfeit and painted, as that of hipocrites: the thanks which we giue to GOD, must not come onely from the mouth, neither must we loue our brethren in word onely, and not in deede: but let the whole profession of our faith, and Christian life, aboue all things, bee farre from ostentation and hypocrisie, so that we take more paines to be good Christians in deede, and before God, then to be so counted and taken before men.



Of those that refuse wilfully.
BVt as there are many which do amisse in presenting themselues vnworthily to the Communion: so there are manie which doe amisse on the contrary side, in that they wil by no meanes come, nor present themselues to this holie banket, for feare of communicating (as they say) vnwoorthily: and so consequently to be culpable of the body and blood of Iesus Christ. But let them that abstaine of set purpose from the Lordes holy table, knowe, that it is no lesse faulte, vpon an vnthankfulnesse and contempte, to abstaine from the holie and sacred meates which God presenteth to vs at the Supper, then to receiue it vnworthily: as we see that a Patient, which being very sicke, maketh no account of the receyte and dyet which the Phisitian hath prescribed: is no lesse faultie then hee which abuseth, or vseth it not competently, as the Phisitian hath appointed.
Therefore, let not this sorte of people flatter themselees, as though by this meanes they could be excused doth before God and men, seeing that it is a most certaine truthe* that so hainous an ingratitude is in no wise to be admitted,
 or worthy excuse. For first of all, such men doe willingly contemne the commandement of Iesus Christ, which saith to all his, Do this, take yee, eate yee.
Secondlie, they contemne the blessed remembraunce of the death and Passion of the Sonne of GOD, who commaundeth all the faithfull to celebrate the Supper in remembraunce of him.
Thirdly, they contemne the price of their redemption: that is to say, the precious body and blood of Iesus Christ, which are giuen and distributed to all faithfull Christians in the Supper: according as it is saide, This is my body, which is giuen for you: This is my blood, which is shed for the remission of your sinnes. Finally they despise the church, and the vnity thereof, and willingly excommunicate themselues from the communion which the faithfull haue in the Supper, as well with Iesus Christ, as one with another. Wee see therefore, how fondely these contemners of the Lordes holy Supper doe fall, and are vtterly inexcusable. And therefore let vs take good heede, that wee followe them not, if wee will not bee punished with them, which for their Oxen,Mat. 12.7. Luke. 14.22. Farmes, Wiues, and Trafficque of Marchaundize, refused is come to the marriage in the Gospel.



Contrariwise, of them which come vnwoorthily to the holie Supper of the Lorde, or ought not to be thervnto admitted.
AL Atheistes, that is, suche as are without GOD,These haue not faith. misbeleeuers ignoraunt of God and his worde, all heretiques and false Prophetes, all Magicians, Idolaters, and superstitious, which are partakers of the table of Diuels: likewise all they which haue but an hystorical faith, all the adherents and ministers of the Romish Antichrist, and they that establishe by any manner (whatsoeuer) his kingdome, or depende thereon: also all they which haue not yeelded themselues to the Churche of God, and haue not made profession of their faith. Finally, all they that customably sweare eyther by the name of God, or by their faith, and applie it to vaine matters, and causes of no value: all these ought to abstaine from the Lords table: for so much as they haue not a true trust in God, without the which wee cannot be members of Iesus Christe, nor consequently be apte and meete to receiue life of him, which is the onely head of the true fatthfull.



These haue not repentance.
AL they which liue slaunderously, all impenitentes, and vnthriftes, al contemners of God, of his worde, and of his holy assemblies, al blasphemers, and denyers of the name of God, al despisers of correction, and Ecclesiastical Discipline: they also that haunt and frequent ordinarilie euill companie, which walke in the counsel of the wicked,Psal. 1.1. which stand in the way of sinners, which sit in the seate of the scorneful. To be shorte, they in whome appeereth no amendement of life, no regeneration, and they that committe heynous and infamous vices, and suche as are to bee punished by the Magistrate: all these, after that they are knowne to be suche, ought not to be admitted to the Supper: and if they present themselues vnto it, they ought not to be receiued, least that, that is holy, bee giuen to dogges and Swyne,Mat. 7.6 to the great dishonour of GOD, and slaunder of his Churche.


Of them which sinne against the third Article, which consisteth in giuing of thankes.

VVIthout true faith and repentance,These are not thankful to God. wee can not be meete to set foorth the praises of GOD, who wil not bee praised by the mouth of the wicked,Psal. 50.16. and therefore al Infidels, Ignorants, and Impenitents, sinne also against this Article, and ought not to be receiued to the Lordes Supper. Also, they that are madde, or fooles, either by nature, or some other accident. They also, which by reason that they be vnder age, (as little children) cannot shew forth neither the Lords death fit he come, nor are capable of the Supper of the Lord.
Finally, they which by fragilitie, vnkindnesse, and contempt, in time of persecution did forsake Gods cause, and renounce the name of our Lorde Iesus Christe, ought not also to bee admitted thither: vnlesse that they doe first make open confession of their faulte, and be reconciled to the Church of God.


Of them which sinne against the fourth Article, which consisteth in loue towardes our Neighbour.
THe disobedience to father and mother,These are voyde of loue. to the Magistrate, and to al superiours, the seditious conspiratours, fighters,
 murderers, and such as beare malice and hatred against their neighbours, they that are carried away with the fire of reuengement, whoremongers, adulterers, incontinent buggerers, Drunkards and Gluttons, Deceiuers, Theeues and Vsurers, Backebyters, Mockers, False witnesses, Lyers and common periured Persons: and in summe, all they which make an Arte of the breache of Loue towarde their Neighbours, conteined in the second Table of the Lawe of GOD, ought not to bee receiued to the Supper. For, seeing that the Scripture pronounceth thus, that such sort of men haue none acquaintance of God, are shut out of the kingdome of Heauen,Eph. 5.5. Psal. 15. and shall not dwell in the Lordes holy Mountaine: they ought of right to bee shutte out from the sacred signes, wherby the faithfull are ioyned to IESVS CHRIST, and made possessors of eternall life.

FINIS.


