The golden fleece diuided into three parts, vnder which are discouered the errours of religion, the vices and decayes of the kingdome, and lastly the wayes to get wealth, and to restore trading so much complayned of. Transported from Cambrioll Colchos, out of the southermost part of the iland, commonly called the Newfoundland, by Orpheus Iunior, for the generall and perpetuall good of Great Britaine. Vaughan, William, 1577-1641. The golden fleece diuided into three parts, vnder which are discouered the errours of religion, the vices and decayes of the kingdome, and lastly the wayes to get wealth, and to restore trading so much complayned of. Transported from Cambrioll Colchos, out of the southermost part of the iland, commonly called the Newfoundland, by Orpheus Iunior, for the generall and perpetuall good of Great Britaine. Vaughan, William, 1577-1641. Mason, John, 1586-1635. NEWFOVND LAND THE MUSES AND THE GRACES, BY THE hands of Orpheus Iunior, doe here present this Treatise of the Golden Fleece at the Feet of the most Noble, Mightie, and hopefull King of Great Britaine. GReat Monarch, though You with Apollo's lore, And with your Fathers rules are polisht more: Though You of riper Iudgements doe not want Proiectours rare, and full as elegant; Disdaine not yet to marke what we entend, And to Your Grace by Orpheus recommend. Though we no Gold, nor Precious Stones present, The value notwithstanding here is sent; King Gyges Ring to see the Cause of harmes, A New-found Fleece to rayse both Arts and Armes. Christ was wel pleas'd with the poore widowes mite; No lesse a Larke excels the greatest Kite. A little Part a wise King will preferre Of Practick Art before all Dreames, that erre. An Emperour, one of Your Name the fift Commines Bookes held as a peerelesse Gift. So did King Phillips valiant Sonne account Poore Homers Workes rich Iewels to surmount. This no Eutopia is, nor Common-wealth Which Plato faign'd. Wee bring Your Kingdomes health By true Receits; which You will rellish well, If Humours ranke by Physicke You expell. In pithy fresh Conceits Your mind may ioy, When sundry Troupes of weightie Cares annoy. Musae & Charites hoc Opus de Aureo Uellere Orphei Iunioris manibus tradi∣tum ad Pedes Potentissimi & maximae spei Magnae BRITANNIAE Regis humillimè sub∣mittunt. Magne Monarcha, licet scriptis ab Apolline magno A Patre Praeceptis perpoliare tuo. Nec Polypragmatici pollentes munere fandi, Nec tibi deficiant Cognitione graues. Ne de digneris tamen haec Documen aprobare, Quae tibi nunc Orphei mittimus hausta manu. Non Aurum Gemmas{que} tibi sed ditius Auro Et gemmis dignum Principe portat Opus. Vota Preces{que} Deo, viduae Munuscula Christo Regibus egregijs & placuere Libri. Carolus Historiam Cominaei Quintus amabat, Sub Ceruicali deposuit{que} su . Nec minus Iliados Proles animosa Philippi Inter bellandum saepe legebat Opus. Non hîc Eutopiam, non hic Phantasma Platonis, Regi nil praeter materiale damus. Dulce reale tibi, cuius Mens obruta Curis Multiplici rerum mole vacare neguit. To the indifferent Readers. I Vdicious Readers, in this busie time I know you will won∣der, how I dare bring forth new Proiects shadowed vn∣der a glorious Title to re∣forme Errours, and to re∣store Trading, when men of farre greater vnderstanding doe find themselues puzled, grauelled, and almost at their wits end, accounting the taske to exceed all the labours of Hercules. The presumption, I con∣fesse, is great. Yet when I had called to mind that Action of Diogenes, how he tumbled vp and downe his Tub very laboriously at such time, when all his Neighbours prepared themselues for Armes, I re∣solued likewise to do somewhat, and by toffing too and fro the barrell of my Conceits, albeit barren and inferiour vnto many thousands in this King∣dome, to encourage others to lend their hands vn∣to the Publicke prop, if not perpetually to secure it, yet for a time to stay it, vntill their wisdomes had concluded on stronger meanes. Among many Re∣medies, which I haue heere produced, perhaps they may light on some not to bee contemned. At the least those which are Thriftie, will con mee thankes for reprehending of multiplicities of Law Suits and Prodigality: Both which do keep our State in an vn∣der ballance. The one vice disunites our hearts from the harmony of Concord; making vs vnworthy of the Communion of Saints, and consequently of the Lords Table, and the other disperseth our substance, that wee cannot yeeld sufficient supplies to saue the honour of our Countrey. What a masse of treasure doe we yeerely spend in forreigne Com∣modities? What abundance of Silkes doe we con∣sume on our backes? What a deale of Gold and Siluer lace? while the wary Spaniard, who hath the Indies in possession, contents himselfe with his owne Fashion and lesser moderation both in Apparell and Diet. The Dutch they follow no ex∣trauagant Attires. Euery man is distinguished in his Ranke: some by wearing a Copper Chaine, o∣thers a Siluer; and the Nobler of Gold. In France the meaner sort of women weare Hoods of Taffa∣ta, other of Satten, and the better of Veluet. No man intrudes into anothers vocation. But with vs, Ioane is as good as my Lady, Citizens Wiues are of late growne Gallants. The Yeoman doth gentilize it. The Gentleman scornes to be behind the Noble∣man. Yea, many are not ashamed to goe as braue as the King. And if a Wiseman chance to taxe them for their prodigall humour: They will an∣swere, that it is for the credit of the Kingdome; which indeed is a most weake excuse: for what re∣dounds to the publike damage, and losse ought not to be termed honourable, as not safe nor wor∣thy for a discreet Inhabitant to vaunt of. Such gau∣die sights neuer last aboue a nine dayes wonder, nay, sometimes one only day, like your Pageants, and then the memory becomes stale, their Silkes out of fashion. But the example, like a Leprosie, is transferred from the Court to the Citie, from the Citie to the Countrey. Of these and many other abuses, which our State had need to looke into, I purpose in this Treatise to discourse, submitting the necessitie of their Reformation to the Higher Powers consideration, as is meete and conuenient. In the first Part I will endeuour to remoue the Er∣rours of Religion, in the Second the Diseases of the Common-wealth: And in the Third Part I will discouer the certainty of the Golden Fleece, which shall restore vs to all worldly Happi∣nesse. To the vncharitable Readers or Deriders of our GOL∣DEN FLEECE. M Y Masters, You that slight the first Lesson of the Psalmes, you that plot at home, like craftie Crowders, torcape the fruits of all painfull Trades without wet∣ting your Cats feet, though the Fish bee neuer so dearely prized, you I say, who repos your chiefest Felicitie in playing on the Violl of Fraud, and in ido∣lizing a painted Strumpet, come not at Colchos, nor presume yee once, more then Tantalus, to touch the Golden Apples of our Hesperides. There lies a Couple of Dragons in the way. Pinge duos Angues, sacer est locus. The Place is not for you. They that labour not with sweate, shall not taste of our Sweete. Keepe yee then at home, like Clinicall Apes to your Clogges. As a blacke Sheepe among some of you is accounted a perillous beast; no lesse offensiue is the grimme Porter of the Golden Ile. Yea and the Ramme, which beares the precious Fleece, hath Hornes more piercing then Pikes to assault the assay∣lant Lozell. It is good sleeping in a whole Skin. Fol∣low the example of Gryllus, who liked so well of his Epicurean and Swinish shape, that when the wise V∣lysses had wrought the meanes for all his Companions to resame their manly formes from their sensuall and beastly shapes, into which the Witches of this en∣chanting World had metamorphosed them, he vtterly refused to returne into a reasonable Creature, saying, that of all formes, hee best agreed with the Hogges, Epicurus de grege Porci. It is pittie therefore to reforme and reclaime any against their wills. If wallowing in mire doe so de∣light you, returne to your dunghils, vntill you grow fit for fat Bacon. Or else you may petition to Circe and Calypso to conferre on you the shape of Gan∣ders, and to hisse brauely vntill the Foxes steale vpon you. O imprudent Readers! Will you still lull in the bosome of carelesse Securitie? Will you neuer leaue your carping at vertuous Proiects? When the Raine raineth, & the Goose winketh, Little knowes the Gander, what the Goose thin∣keth. Little know you what your Wiues and children are like to suffer after these stormes. Little know you, or at least your hearts, like Pharaohes, are so hardned that you seeme not to know it, that the chiefest Cause of our Decay of Trading proceeds by Prodigality & the multiplicities of Law Suites nourished for some priuat mens aduantage. Veritas non quaerit angulos. The way of Truth is plaine without indirect turnings. This is the effect and euent of your vncharitablenesse. I write not in passion, that our indicious Senatours should esteeme my words, like the fortune of Cassan∣dra, who was said to haue the Gift of true Prophesie, but withall such ill lucke, that none would belieue whatsoeuer shee prophesied. Now the Impost me is ripened, and Time the Discouerer of deceits hath made it manifest, that nothing hinders neighbourly loue, and the vnion of mindes for the execution of Noble Actions, as much as malicious rancour and ciuill discord at home. It is in vaine for mee to diswade you from enuying and inueighing at our Golden Fleece, seeing our Preachers with their more Diuine admonitions haue missed to conuert you. Hisse then and spare not. Con∣tinue still in your customary courses of scoffing and scorning, vntill you smart at last for your Sardoni∣call Spleenes and ominous laughter. But what a preposterous thing is it, That the Member which Nature formed to vtter the glory of the Creatour, to serue like a Golden Trumpet, or sweet sounding clapper in the Bell of Gods Temple to con∣uert Sinners, to comfort the sorrowfull should degene∣rate from the proper Office, for which it was ordained? and now to become so much peruerted, as to flout at all good endeuours? Eyther leaue off your mocking, or make the World partaker of a better worke. Cum tus non aedas, carpis mea Opuscula, Mome; Carpere vel noli nostra, vel aede tua. Thou putst not out thy works, yet carpst at mine; Leaue off to carpe at mine, or put out thine. In the meane space, as long as like Mules you cla one another, I assure your wise Masterships, that you shall but minister matter to Buffones of rederision, as some of your alliance sometimes felt from the mouth of Tarleton, who being vpon the Stage in a Towne where he expected for ciuill attention to his Prologue, and seeing no end of their hissing, hee brake forth at last into this Sarcasmicall taunt: I liu'd not in that Golden Age, When Iason wonne the Fleece: But now I am on Gotams Stage, Where Fooles doe hisse like G ese. In Commendation of the Golden Fleece produced by Orpheus lunior. VVE need not now cōplaine for want of Tra e Sith frō the West we golden wares may lade; Which Orpheus shewes in this his Golden Fleece, A Trade more rich, then Iason brought to Greece From Cotchos Land; if by our slouthfull ease And wanton Peace we lose not the encrease. What I first chalkt two yeeres at Cuperts Cone, New Cambriols Planter sprung from golden-groue, Old Cambriaes Soile, vp to the Skies doth rayse. For which let Fame crown him with sacred Bayes. IOHN GVY. An Epigram vpon the Golden Fleece, moralized by the Authour for the good of Great BRITAINE. ORpheus but late our Woods did make to ring, Cambrens, Ca∣roleia. And to his Harp great Charles his Carols sing. Since that he toucht vpon th' Italian shore, The New sound Politicke. Whence Boccalinies Newes of State he bore. But Orpheus now for saking Easterne Greece, From Westerne Colchos brings the Golden Fleece; Which no Eutopia is, nor Fairy-land, Yet Colchos in Elisian Fields doth stand. Three luckie Births his Braine makes to appeare, Whereas most Creatures breed but once a yeare. Men Hercules among the Starres did put, 'Cause Hydraes triple Head He off had cut. Vnto the Spheare shall He aduanced bee? And our new Orpheus haue no high degree? Three Monsters Heads that lops off at one blow, Errour, Vice, Want, which in our Country grow? The One foule mouthed Cerberus did quell, And chayning fast, him dragged about Hell: The Other Errour, which in Hell was bred, Hath by strong Reasons bound and Captiueled. The Augean Stables He of filth did cleanse: The Other Men, of vice and foule Offence. Th' Hesperian Apples He by waking got: But Orpheus greater Gaine doth vs allot. For which let Paris iudge, who now shall haue The Golden Apple, which the World doth craue? STEPHEN BERRIER. In Honour of the Golden Fleece described by Orpheus Iunior. O How my heart doth leape with Ioy to heare, Our New-found Ile by Britaines prized deare! That hopefull Land, which Winters sixe I tri'd, And for our Profit meet, at full descri'd. If Hope of Fame, of quiet Life, or Gaine May kindle Flames within our minds againe: Then let vs ioyne to seeke this Golden Fleece, The like ne're came from Colchos into Greece. Orphens remoues all Errours from the way, And how this Land shall thriue, he doth bewray. Thus ships & coine increase, whē least we thought, For Fish and Traines Exchange, and all vnbought, IOHN MASON. OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE: THE FIRST PART. The occasion of this Treatise, called the Golden Fleece. And the Reasons which moued the Author to inter∣mingle merrie and light conceites among matters of Consequence. I N the Moneth when the Celestiall Ram famous for the Grecians Golden Fleece had renewed the last Spring 1626. with an equall Proportion of Dayes and Nights; the one presiguring Ioy for the Second Yeeres Raigne of our Rising Sunne, and the other Sorrow for our crying and presumptuous sinnes; while I attended at Court to know his Royall Pleasure about our Fishing Fleets and Plātations of the Iland commonly called the Newfound∣land, in the latter whereof, I haue for these ten yeeres together, engaged both my selfe and a great part of my fortunes: it was my good hap among other Noble Courtiers, to become acquainted with Sir William A∣lexander Master of the Requests, and Secretarie for Scot∣land. After some formall Complements, it pleased him and my ancient Friend Master William Elueston, sometimes Secretary to the most Excellent Princesse Elizabeth, and now Cupbearer to his Maiestie, to ap∣point a Meeting at the Chamber of Sir William Alex∣ander; where all three of vs being met together, this learned Knight with a ioyfull countenance and alacrity of mind, taking me by the hand thus began: I haue oftentimes wisht to conferre with you, but vntill this present, I could not find the opportunitie. It is neces∣sary, and this necessitie iumps with the sympathy of our constellations (for I thinke wee were borne both vnder the same Horoscope) that wee aduise and deuise some Proiect for the proceedings and successefull ma∣naging of our Plantations. As you obtayned a Patent of the Southermost part of Newfoundland, and transplanted thither some of your countrimen of Wales, baptizing the same by the name of Cambrioll: so haue I got a Patent of the neighbouring Country vnto yours West ward beyond Cape Briton, Christning it New Scotland. You haue spent much, and so haue I in aduancing these hopefull Aduentures. But as yet neither of vs arriued at the Hauen of our expectations. Onely, like a wary Politician, you suspend your breath for a time, vntill you can repaire your losses sustained by some of Sir Walter Raleighs company in their returne from Guiana, while your Neighbours the Right Honourable the Lord Viscount Falkland, and my Lord Baltimore, to whom you assigned the Northerly part of your Grant, doe vn∣dergoe the whole burthen, supporting it with a brane resolution, and a great deale of expence, which other∣wise you were obliged to performe. The like inconue∣niences I haue felt, euen in the insancie of my Attempt, whether the defects proceeded through the late season of the yeare, when wee set out the Colony, or by the slownesse of our People, who wearied in their passage at Sea, by reason of contrarie winds rested themselues too long at Saint Iohns Harbour, and at my Lord of Bal∣timores Plantation, I know not; but sure I am, it cost me and my friends very deare, and brought vs into much decrements; and hath wel-nigh disheartned my poore countrymen, if at my humble Suit, our most Noble and Generous King Charles had not out of his Royall magnificence and respectiue care to vs and our Poste∣rities restored and reuiued our courages by conferring such monies as might arise by the creation of Knight Ba∣ronets in Scotland, towards the erecting of this new fabricke and heroicall Action. And yet I feare all this will not suffice and defray the charge. In such abun∣dance doth my natiue Countrie of Scotland, ouer∣swarme with people, that if new habitations bee not suddenly prouided for them, as Hiues for Bees, they must either miscarie of want, or turne Droanes vnpro∣fitable to the Owner, as you well remembred in your Poeticall workes, which you termed Cambrensium Ca∣roleia. Si noua non apibus condas, Rex, aluea, Fuci Ignani fient, nec tibi lucra ferent. Wee need not complaine with our Sauiour in the Gospell, that the Haruest is great, and the Labourers few; for we haue many Labourers, which would willingly manure this maiden Soile, and with the painfull sweate of their browes reape what they sow. But the charge of transporting them with such implements and domesticall cattell, as must be had now at the first, cannot but grow to an excessiue cost. To expect more helpes then it pleased our most bountifull King al∣ready to bestow vpon vs will bee in vaine, I doubt, considering the scarcity of mony in these dayes, which not only Scotland, but likewise all his Maiesties Domi∣nions doe affirme to be true. The natiue and genuine salt of the earth, which fructified our Corne fields with so many infinite ploughings of our Ancestors and ours is spent; nor will Lime or Marle euer recouer them to the pristine and ancient vigour and fertilitie. English Cloth, which heretofore was dignified with the Title of the Golden Fleece, growes out of request, yea (and with inward griefe I speake it) in contempt also among the Owners and Inhabitants themselues. Our Tinne, Lead, and Coale-mines begin to faile. Our Woods, which Nature produced, and our Fathers left vs for firing, for reparations of decayed Houses, Ploughes, and Ship∣ping, is lately wasted by the Couetousnesse of a few Ironmasters. What then remaines in this famous Ile? Except we relieue our wants by Nauigation, and these must bee by Fishing, by hooke or by crooke, by Letters of Mart, by way of reprizals or reuenge, or else by Traffique and Commerce with other Nations besides Spaniards. I would we could inuent and hit vpon some profitable meanes for the setling of these glorious workes, whereto it seemes the diuine Prouidence hath elected vs as instruments vnder our Earthly Soue∣raigne. Heere Sir William Alexander stopt. To whom I re∣turned this answere: Much honoured Sir, I grant the setting forwards of Plantations, with all needfull appur∣tenances, requires the purse of rich Spencer, or of weal∣thy Sutton, in regard of the many difficulties and di∣sturbances, which either Malice, Enuie, causelesse di∣struct, casualties vnlookt for, or the carelesnesse of vn∣expert Agents may procure now at the beginning to blast our hopes in the blossome. Neuerthelesse, inuitâ Inuidiâ, in despite of Enuie, and of all malicious An∣gels, which by their inuisible wheeling about the brains of Castawayes, doe vse to seduce their phantasies to crosse the very best Designes, whereof no man li∣uing hath more cause then my selfe to complaine: wee ought to perseuere in constancie, and to out-dare For∣tune vnder the Almighties Banner. What incumbran∣ces did the Israelites feele, before they conquered the Land of Canaan? How many Persecutions did the Church endure, before the true Christian Faith was planted? None enters into Heauen without Crosses and fierie tryals composed of briers and brambles, which the Romanes termed the vnluckie Woods. There∣fore let vs lay aside all scrupulous doubts. Let vs cut our Coats according to the cloath, taking care thrif∣tily to husband the meanes allotted to our Plantations; which we shall the more easily accomplish, if we haue not passionate Superiours to controll vs, nor Coadin∣tors in counsell to condemne vs. Commonly where many Directors are, the Directions prooue confused: which is the cause, that priuate houses be better built, & with lesser charge then publicke edifices of the like proportion. Yea and we shall doe more in these places, where we haue eleuated our cogitations, and leuelled our ends for a thousand pounds, then others haue in Virginia or the Summer Ilands for forty thousand, so that wee transport for the space of the first two or three yeeres none but Fishermen and Labourers. By these we shall performe miracles, and returne yeerely into Great Brittaine a surer Gaine, then Iasons Golden Fleece from Colchos; euen with sixe moneths prouision and Nets, three men in one Boat shall reape a Golden Haruest, and get worth ten pound a weeke in Fish being brought into Europe or exchanged there in the Coun∣trey; which besides the increase of Shipping and Mari∣ners will propagate our Plantations in a short time. Only heere lyes the Gordian knot to vndoe, a Rich man will not forgoe his natiue smoke, nor are poore men of abilitie now at first to get thither. For although we haue his Maiesties countenance propitious vnto these profitable Enterprizes, specially you of New-Scotland, yet all our wits cannot worke that impres∣sion in Misers heads to lend their helping hands to this goodly Proiect. We sue for no Lottries, wee beg for no Bene olences, as others in the like cases haue done. And if we should, men are now-adaies so Penny-wise and Pound foolish, they will sooner bestow fortie pounds vpon a glorious suit of apparell, then fortie shillings to better their brethren. Although these Golden hopes doe shine as cleere as the noonetide Sunne, yet will not they enlighten muddie apprehensions, nor quick∣en earth-creeping wits, vnlesse we could more firmely build vp and restore the Office of Assurance, which the Moorish Pirats haue lately endamaged. After I had en∣ded my Answer, Master Elueston thus addressed his speech vnto vs: In my iudgement you are both too suspicious and distrustfull of our noble Countrymen. For some particulars you must not taxe the generall. Although some rake to themselues, neglecting the fruits of their Christian Faith: yet many loue their Neighbours as themselues, and will straine the vtter∣most of their powers to succour the poore members of Christ. There bee Heauenly bodies aswell as Earthly Bodies. Me thinkes, you beeing both iudicious and Publishers of Bookes might so combine and contriue your studies together, that the World, were it as blind as Beetles, might see with Lynceus eyes the certaintie of the Commodities, the conueniencie of the Trade, and the infinite benefits which may arise by these heroicall enterprizes, which you Sir William Alexander for your part haue alreadie chalked out, and delineated in Print. And I doubt not but this Gentleman euen by a vertu∣ous emulation, may if he please, second you with some pleasing Motiues of substance and spirit able to insinu∣ate into the minds of the dullest Creatures, the sweete fruition of the Golden Fleece, and like another Iason with a braue Companie of Argonauticks, stirre vp the most stonie-hearted to relent and relieue their distressed Brethren, which now grone, and in a manner saint vn∣der their penurious state. What will not patheticall perswasions worke? Orpheus, as Poets faigned, with his harmonious Harpe, drew a farre more hard-hear∣ted Nation to follow his tune, and to dance after his motions. To this Sir William Alexander replied, wee liue not now, Master Elueston, in such simplicitie and candour of mind, as those people of the Golden Age. Men for the most part are now become peruerse Pigmeyes in re∣spect of their generous Ancestours. They are better fed then taught, faire without, and foule within, if not rotten like that Spaniards apple: —Como la Mancana De dentro podrida, y de fuera galana. They are more heauie-spirited, dull-headed, and al∣most growne out of kind. He had need of a choise con∣ceit, of a quaint and transcendent wit, which will at∣tract the minds of Earthlings to these braue Flames. An Ape will be an Ape though you clothe him in pur∣ple; and a Hog will wallow in mire, though you feed him neuer so daintily. Doe not we find by experience that the Bookes of many rare Diuines lye on the Statio∣ners hands, as it were moth-eaten, or inuerted to base Offices, and solde for wast leaues to Apothecaries, to Glouers, Cookes, and Bakers? Nay said Master Elueston, I dare assume, Sir Willi∣am Alexander, that your Bookes shall neuer bee put to such vile and seruile vses; nor any liuely monument, which issues from a well tempered braine, like an old bough full ripe with bark, vt ra ale vetus. No Worke lights on that fatall period, but some frothie and abor∣tiue Birth, which the Muses disdayned to inspire; or some melancholy grosse burthen, which Lucina that skilfull Midwife condemned for a Monster; or else some Booke which wants the true symmetry and pro∣portion of Seasoning, it being not composed accor∣ding to the capacitie of the Reader. Heere consists the magisteriall secret, the mysterie discouered and pra∣ctised by few Writers in our dayes. And I pray what mysticall Receit might that be, quoth Sir William Alex∣ander. which may heale the Lethargie of our moderne Readers, or inflame the slow Spirits of the multitude? Haue not Bookes their Destinies as well as Common-wealths? Must not all things vnder the Sunne wax old, fraile, and faile at last? Senescente mundo consenescunt omnia. The neerer we are to the end of the world, the more childish and doting is the iudgement of the wi∣sest man. How much more then must wee beare with the Common sort, whose wils change with the weather∣cocke? If great Schollers, whose liues Learning ought to purifie, doe feele their fancies tossed with strange Chy nes, with many capricious temptations; why apply we not our selues a little to temporize with them who are yet children in wit? St ltiti st lare loco Prudentia summa est. It is no lesse prudence to dally and put on the Fooles coat sometimes, as to seeme an anstere Cat at some other times. Doe not wee see Pamphlets, Ballads, and Play-bookes sooner sold, then elegant Sermons and Bookes of Pietie? The most part are disposed to fopperies and worldly vanities, insomuch, that ma∣ny worthy Preachers are saine to conceale their talent, and to couer their admonitions vnder a cunning me∣thod, according to the times importunitie, and to the nature of their Chamelion Flockes. Yea, and these profound Teachers doe oftentimes curtall their sacred Lessons, or else their Auditours ouer-cloyed with graue Doctrine will either despise them, or fall asleepe during their Sermons. Therefore vnlesse a Booke con∣taine light matters aswell as serious, it cannot flourish nor liue Iouially, but like leaden Saturne stand still in the stall, or languish like a bedred Creature. At this discourse of Sir William Alexanders, Ma∣ster Elueston as a man rauished with admiration, went forward in the like Proposition. Now, quoth he, in∣deed you haue traced my meaning, and happily conie∣ctured at that, which renders grace to the wise and e∣ternall Muses. Whosoeuer will commit to Presse that mixture, which sauours of some trifling fragments and historicall figments enterlaced among waightie and se∣rious matters shall please the Iudicious and the Simple. Now adayes it is wisdom for a Writer to produce wis∣dome vnder a disguised stile, and so to weane the nurce∣lings of his braine, that the Common People may bee edified by a discreet kinde of Folly. Let vs follow the example of Saint Paul, who ministred milke only vn∣to Babes; and not meat of too solid and hard digesti∣on. The Bible comprehends pleasing Relations, as∣well as profound mysteries, gellies for the Sicke, and venison for the strong; where likewise a Lamb may wade and an Elephant swimme. To this end doe wee vse Oliues, Capers, Oranges, and Limonds for sauceto tender stomackes, when as men of abler Constitutions can feede on meat without such prouocations. Excellent in this Art of Cookerie were those Spaniards, which wrot the life of Guz∣man the Rogue, and the Aduentures of Don Quixot de la Mancha, the former seruing to withdraw a licentious young man from Prodigalitie, Whore∣dome, and Deceit; and the latter to reclaime a riotous running wit from taking delight in those prodigious, idle, and time-wasting Bookes, cal∣led the Mirrour of Knighthood, the Knights of the Round Table, Palmerin de Oliua, and the like rabblement, deuised no doubt by the Deuill to con∣firme soules in the knowledge of euill, Honest Mirth I like, but if it bee accompanied with Scur∣rilitie, Baudrie, notorious lyes, or with prophane and too friuolous fopperies, I vtterly dislike all such pretended recreations. As the former is necessarie for the prolonging of health and life: so likewise it is for the sale and approbation of a Booke, wherein triuiall toyes and tales shall bee intermixt among matters of importance, that they may breede a longing desire in the Hearers to haue such nouelties repeated againe and againe. Foras Marsilius Ficinus writes concerning a Heauenly body heere on earth What Old man soeuer will renue his age, and re∣duce his bodie to a youthfull temper, hee must lay aside his grauitie, and be a child in mind. Oportet prius, vt repuerascat animo. This Discourse of Master Elueston did highly sa∣tisfie Sir William Alexander, and confirme him in his resolution of applauding Bookes of this stampe and miscellaneous humour: so that conuerting his speech to me who attentiuely listned to their com∣munication, he said: Noble Friend, by our caue∣ats you may obserue what course you must take to winne the good will of our Ilanders; for except you season your Anisoes with some light passages with wits, fits, & fancies, like ballads & bables to refresh the capacities of your Auditours, as Aesop the Phry∣gian vnder Fables couched and shadowed Policies of great moment, they will hardly yeeld due at∣tention to your Counsels, be they neuer so impor∣tant, and consequently neuer assist vs for the get∣ting of the Golden Fleece, so requisite for the sup∣plies of this Monarchie, that in all likelihood it can∣not long subsist without this maine and speciall Trade, which rightly may be termed the Nurcerie of Mariners, the propagation of shipping, Great Brittaines Indies, Corn copia Amalthea. You shall doe a worke of Charitie, yea and of Liberalitie, for this free-hearted vertue consists in distributing good Counsell aswell as of money, to animate our carelesse Countrymen. The Planets delight in mo∣tion; and by so much the neerer doe our Spirits ap∣proach to these superiour bodies, when with a re∣solution vndaunted, wee vndertake noble enter∣prises, tending to the publick good as to our owne particular. Goe on then, deare Friend, hauing vertue for thy Guide. What will it auaile a Scholler to reserue his knowledge to himselfe, to hide his Candle vnder a bushell, or to vaunt: Wee write to our selues and to the Sonnes of Art? Who will take notice of such a Mystery? Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc seiat alter. After these and the like Discourses were ended, we departed, they to the Court, and I to my studie; where I began to rouze vp my thoughts, and tho∣rowly to ruminate on some Plot, which might in∣uite our Worldlings for their present and future Good to embrace those fortunes, which with open armes this Sister-land offers vnto vs. For the ac∣complishing whereof, vnder a Poeticall stile not too much degenerating from the Euangelicall grauitie, I haue resolued to vse the name of the great Apollo, not Heathenish, but Christian, after the example of Traiane Boccalini, who vnder that Title brought forth most plausible Raggualioes, and by mee now of late communicated to our English Readers: or rather imitation of the ancient Romish Church, which beautified their Temples with painted Ba∣bles, as baits in worldly policie to allure the barba∣rous Gothes, and the wauering-minded Romanes of thosetimes to repaire thither from their more Superstitious Idols, lest otherwise the Religion, which they had planted, might haue falne to con∣tempt, like the Sanctum Sanct rum of the Iewes Temple, which when the Romanes vnder Titus at the destruction of Ierusalem had obserued to bee bare without any grauen Images, or other outward garnishing, they despised the same as a Monument of no value, and at length consumed it with fire. For the like cause Apothecaries doe sometimes gild ouer their vgly and bitter Pills to please the Sicke mans view, which to other Patients for want of such deceitfull daubing, haue beene so fastidious and lothsome, that euen at the very sight of the Pils, their Imaginations preuayling so powerfully ouer their bodies, their stomackes wambled, and they haue fal e into as violent a Purge, as if they had al∣readie swallowed them downe. So nice and tender is many a mans nature, whereof wee cannot ascribe any other reason, then the depraued Phantasie, and the sundrie mixtures of the Spirits partaking of the Elementall Qualities corrupted, which cause vs to delight in faire outward shewes and varieties, but commonly of the daintiest taste, of the newest Cooking. To which I adde this one Accident more, as a speciall motiue to my Apologie, for inserting vul∣gar Toyes among matters of Consequence, Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis. As A sonius writes in his Catoes Morals. Since the Conference I had with those iudicious Gentle∣men aforespecified, it was my chance to be present at a Booksellers shop, where I saw the Writings of the learned Bullinger, one of the chiefe Pillars of our Reformed Religion, and the Workes of that curious Schooleman, whom the Romists terme the Angelicall Doctor, sold for wast Paper, euen for two pence a quire. Which when I beheld to my great wonder, I thus expostulated with my selfe: what then shall become of my Bookes, which I haue al∣readie published to the World with so many houres paines and vigilant cares? Or of those, which hereafter vpon vrgent occasions I may wrest from my indulgent Minerua, seeing that Bookes of a higher Genius, of a more sublime nature proue thus vnfortunate, and vilified? Shall I write or betake my Muse to Melancholy? On the one side the Iniquitie of the times terrifies me from further writing. On the otherside, the care of my Coun∣tries welfare sollicits, nay, exacteth my present helpe, at the least some lenitiue Medicines towards her recouerie, which now pants with a difficult breathing, whether the Infirmitie proceeds ex an∣gustia praecordiorum, from some straightnesse in the midriffes; or of a bastard Plurisie, which requires bloud-letting; or of some abstruse and secret cause in the lungs; or of some superfluous humour in∣gendred in the braine, where the Intellectuall Fa∣culties ought to reside, and to direct the inferiour Functions. How soeuer, the Cure is not impossible: yet perhaps a thanklesse Office for a man vncalled to take in hand. This last is the cause, and none but this, which makes mee the more sparing of my re∣medies. In this confusion of thoughts fearing to play with Iupiters beard, or to dally with Saints and higher Powers, who might misconster my Good∣will, I thought once to be silent, left in lending my hand to saue others, of tender charitie and com∣passion, I might fal my selfe into the Whirle-poole, and there sinke or swimme, I should rather be laug∣hed at then pitied. Sic aliquis nanti dextram dum porrigit, ipse Incidit in liquidas non bene cautus aquat. For this cause I minded to lay afide my Melodie, one of my chiefest Receits, to restore mad men to their wits, in respect of these thanklesse times; and thus to lament my doubtfull disaster, as Sir Walter Raleigh did to our late Queene Anne of happy memory: My broken pipes shall on the willow hang, Like those, which on the Babylonian bankes, These ioyes foredone, their present sorrow sang; These times to worth yeelding but frozen thankes. At last, the Cloudie sable vaile of iealous doubts being remoued, which for a while had interposed themselues betwixt the Light of my vnderstanding and the other attributes of my Soule: I valiantly resolued on this Treatise of the Golden Fleece, and in regard of the fraikies, which the greatest part of my fellow-subiects doe, as it were, by some vnlue∣kie influence of the Starres, participate, I haue pre∣pared sundry kinds of arti ce; so that if some proue distastfull and nau eati e, yet others may sort out well according to my expectation. I will therefore diuide this Worke into three Parts. In the first, I will refute the Errours of Re∣ligion, preparing the way to V ilie. In the second I will endeuour to remoue the Diseases of our King∣dome, that Contraries may be cured by Contraries. And lastly, I will lay downe those Helps, which may repaire the ruines of our State, as the surest Elixir, and Restoratiue, which my poore Experience hath attained vnto. THE FIRST PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE, Discouering the Errours of Religion with the remedies. CHAP. 1. The greatest care, which Apollo takes for the Mo∣narchy of Great Britaine. The singular and respectiue loue, which hee beares towards the hopefull & magnanimous King Charles. And how by his Proclamation, he caused Mariana the Iesuite to be apprehended for animating Subiects against their naturall Prince. A Boue all the magnificent courts, which the sun beholds from East to West, and from the one Pole to the other, It is noted that Apollo, as it were by Sympathy of some Heauenly Influence beares particular affection to the Regall Court of Great Brittaine, and tenders the welfare thereof as of his owne Parnassus: Insomuch that his Imperiall Maiestie, foreseeing that G y Faux and his damned Confederates would haue blowne vp the Parliament house, with the King and Estates there assembled vpon the fift day of Nouember in the yeere 1605. and that they afterwards inten∣ded to set vp their Romish Religion, hee first caused one of the Aeriall Spirits to insinuate into Tressams braine, and by often nibling on his imagination to procure from him that Aenigmaticall Letter vnto his brother in Law the Lord Mounteagle. Then out of his diuine loue towards this Monarchy, he assisted the Genius of the learned and most noble King Iames to discouer the whole plot, by vnlocking with the key of Prophesie the Mysterie of that in∣tricate Letter more intricate and darke then Sphinx his Riddle. So odious appeared this Butcherly and Diabolicall Treason vnto his Sacred Spirit, That no Scrutinies of Triall, nor legall Consultations were by him omitted to know the hidden motiues and quintessence of this bloudie and vnnaturall practice, so much degenerating from mans nature, as with the Giants of old time to scale the Heauens, and to assault the Authour of nature, by whom they liued, moued, and had their being. But for all his Examinations and vigilant cares Apollo could by no meanes ferret out the Fox; for the Deuill had transformed the beast into an Angell of light, vntill Ra illiac that monster of Mankind had massacred the great Hercules of France King Henry the fourth. Vpon which Accident one Peter Ramus a learned Parisian, whom the Papists sometimes nicknamed the Hugenotes Champion, informed Apollo, that the said Rauilliac, the very morning of the same day when he committed this lamentable murther, was heard to maintaine that Paradoxe, how iustifiable and glorious an Act it were for a Subiect to kill a Tyrannicall or Hereticall Prince. For the verifying and approuing of which position, he quoted down certaine leaues of Mariana the Iesuites Booke de Rege & Reg. Instit. cap. 6. whereby hee subiects all Powers and Dominions to the becke and dispose of his earthly God my Lord the Pope, and frees them from their alleageance to their natiue Prince, if his Holinesse storme, or themselues doe imagine him to become an Apostata, or to fauour Apostasie or Heresie. Apolloes griefe, conceiued by this Assas∣sinate and Tragicall euent became somewhat as∣swaged, when he knew the cause of this inhumane butchery proceeded through the Kings owne cre∣dulitie and tendernesse of heart in admitting the Iesuits into France, against the will of his judicious Sorbonists, and afterwards sostering them like Aesopes Snake in the Louvre his Regall Palace: whose common Maxime he knew to bee: One God in Heauen, one God on Earth, and one Catholike King. Yet notwithstanding to let his vertuous fol∣lowers vnderstand how heynous crying sinnes, and the treacherous shedding of humane bloud, seemed in his vnspotted presence, Apollo commanded Ro∣bert Earle of Essex, Lord High Marshall of his Em∣pire, and Sir I hilip Sidney the Prouost Marshall of his Court, to make diligent search and inquirie within the Precincts of his Territories for the bodie of Mariana, and him to apprehend, and in sure and safe manner to bring before his Imperiall Highnes. These Noble Gentlemen endeuoured to performe the contents of his command, but in no wise could they light on Mariana's person. For while the war∣rant was a writing by the Clarke of the Counsell, it chanced that Pererius, Tolet, Posseuinus, Bellarmine, & Cotton of Paris ouer-heard the charge and tenour thereof. And it is to bee suspected, that they gaue him notice, for the repute and credit of their Socie∣tie to hide himselfe, for indeed the Varlet fled be∣fore the Warrant was signed. Apollo perceiuing that his Marshals had taken exceeding great paines, and yet in vaine, for his attaching hee caused a publike Proclamation to be fixed on the Gate of his Palace at Parnassus, that what persons soeuer could bring this fugitiue Iesuite before him, his Maiestie would preferre him to some Office or place about his Court. For all this, no man could finde out his haunt or tracke. So wary and carefull were these subtill Iesuits to preserue their wicked brood, ac∣cording to the old saying: Birds of a feather will cling together. Euery yeere continually for these sixteene yeres space this Proclamation was renued. Now about the first of Aprill last according to the antient stile after many yeeres inquirie and busie search, it was Mariana's fatall luck to bee discouered and appre∣hended. And because the manner, meanes, and persons, whereby this egregious and notable ad∣uenture came to light, may bee knowne to after a∣ges for the honour of Great Brittaines Court, I will lay downe my knowledge. When swift winged Fame by sound of Trumpet had published at Par∣nassus, what great contentment and pleasing com∣fort the wise and couragious Prince Charles Mo∣narch of Great Brittaine, tooke in reading the Rag∣ualioes and Auisoes of this high and transcendent Court, written by Boccalini in Italian, and with kind and gracious acceptation receiued them Eng∣lished at the hands of one Vaughan a Cambrobritain together with certaine presents called Cambren∣sium Caroleia, which were sent from the Muses and the Graces by the said Messenger, and withall, that his Highnesse had deuoted himselfe and his King∣domes to bee perpetually gouerned by the Lawes, Charters, and Prescriptions of Apolloes Court, be∣ing fully resolued to settle Charitie in his Subiects mindes, to cut off multiplicities of wrangling suits, Extortions, Heresies, Arminianisme, Excesse of Apparell, Tobacco, Drunkennesse, and Gluttony and other vaine expences which in these moderne times, haue well-nigh beggered the most part of his Ilanders. Vpon the Relation of these Reformati∣ons, deliberated by this Thrice famous Prince there shined in all mens hearts (the Papists and some Lawyers excepted) such lightsome gratulations and apparant demonstrations of ioyes, that Apollo him∣selfe not able to conceale the exorbitant pleasure he conceiued at this gladsome newes, caused all the Bells of Parnassus, Del s, Pindus, Libethrum, and of all his other Temples to be rung for three dayes together, and bonfires to be made of Iuniper, Ci∣presse, Aloes, Storax, Frankincense, and other Aromaticall Gumms abundantly strewed & burnt. And because the said Vaughan, whom his Maiestie graced with the title of Orpheus Iunior, and one De∣mocritus Iunior, which published the Anatomie of Melancholie, and one Iohn Florio a learned Italian were the first messengers which blazed and repor∣ted these ioyfull tidings, Apollo admitted them all three into his Palace, as extraordinarie Waiters. Where when Orpheus Iunior had attended a while, and obserued the small pittance he was like to bee fed withall, drinking only of the liquor of the pale Pirene, while Prodigals, Papists, and Idolaters were glutted with Ambrosia and Nectar (for indeed the Learned of all Religions were fauoured at Parnas∣sus, so that they behaued themselues morally ho∣nest) meeting one day with his friends Democritus, a new commer as himselfe, and with Iohn Florio aforenamed, sometimes seruant to the vertuous Queene Anne, hee brake forth into these speeches? How long shall wee suffer our selues to be dallied with hopes of preferment in this Learned Court? Wee are heere daily besprinkled with holy water, tired with complements, and welcommed with many ceremonious salutations, without any pro∣fit at all, so that wee spend our precious times in attendance, which auaileth as much, as if we prick flies with Domitian? And we are like as I see, after a few Summers spent in tedious and toylesome ex∣pectation, to starue with cold in the first hard win∣ter. How happie should our wiues and children haue beene if we had betaken our selues to some base mechanicall trade, and so by cogging and ly∣ing to aduance our fortunes? If we had studied Di∣uinity, we might haue had some fat benifice. If wee had spared but two houres or three in a weeke from our more serious imployments, in the Lawes which they terme Common, though sometimes wrested according to priuat fancies, by this time wee had heaped together whole pyles of treasure by the ru∣ines of such Clients as runne headlong, like tame Woodcocks, into knowne nets. If wee had pra∣ctised Physicks, by the death of some few Patients, wee might haue scraped together a better estate, then thus to consume our fruitlesse laboursin awai∣ting for Offices, which no sooner become vacant, but others doe step before vs, like the sicke at the Poole of Bethesda. For my part, except I find my worth better respected and requited, Ile retire my selfe from Court, and bend my fortunes to the New∣foundland, whereby Ciuilizing the Satyres and ma∣nuring that Maiden earth, I may like the Gracian Orpheus, leaue this memoriall to posteritie, that a Cambrobritain hath founded a new Cambrioll, where he made the deafe to heare, and the woods to mo e. To this Democritus Iunior answered: My noble friend, I must confesse, that true and solid Learning is al∣most downe the wind in this decrepit age of the world, by reason of the multitude of scambling Schollers and riotous Writers, who like emptie barrels yeeld a hollow sound without substantiall fruit. Your many swarmes of ouer-swaying Law∣yers lend their greedie hands to pull downe this fa∣mous fabrick: Since hired double Tongues grew in request, Nor Armes nor Arts could take their wonted Rest. In regard of the many emulous concurrents for places here in Court, which importunately prosse vpon his Maiestie for promotion, it is difficult and in a manner impossible for such modest persons, as wee are, who out of our magnanimitie of spirit scorne to fawne like spaniells, to climbe into any high vocation. There bee two kinds of Factions heere, the Papists and the Lawyers, who although their number be but few in this vertuous Court, yet powerfull enough to suppresse and supplant a grea∣ter man then you, if they ioyne together and ban∣die against you. The one you haue exasperated and angred in your Bookes, specially in your Golden Groue, and your Circles called the Spirit of detracti∣on coniured and conuicted. And the Lawyers vow to bee reuenged on you for seeking to diminish their Gaine (as Luther did the bellies of the Monkes) in your late Cambrensium Caroleia. And if that sen∣tence of Politick Philosophie bee true, that it is no hard matter to discouer ones gui ie mind by his countenance; O quam difficile est vultu non prodere crimen. Me thinkes I read in Robert Parsons lookes yester∣day last, when he eyed you so intentiuely and wist∣lie, this reuengefull threat: I owe you an ill turne. But, said Flori , if you will be both ruled by mee wee shall not onely wind our selues into Apolloes better liking, but winne eternall honour, and tri∣umph at length ouer our enuious aduersaries. Yee see what a strict Proclamation there is yonder fixt vpon the Gate of his Maiesties Palace, for the arre∣sting of Mariana the Iesuite. Now if by our indu∣strie this seditious Sectarie may bee brought before Apollo, doubtlesse we shal both receiue condigne re∣compence and conuenient satisfaction. To this re∣plied Orpheus Iunior, and doe you beleeue that it is possible to hood winke the Serpent, and to goe be∣yond the Iesuites the cunningest race of all man∣kind? I assure you, it is easier to plough vp Godwins sands and to make them habitable, then to find out Marianaes hole; except you haue the Spirit of Eli∣za the Prophet. But I guesse at a readie way indeed how we may come by this hidden Traitor, and that is this: I haue lately reteyned into my seruice old Argus, whom the Poets faigne to see with an hun∣dred eyes, because of his watchfulnesse and inde∣satigable cares about any matter committed to his trust, hee sees by night aswell as by day, and neuer goes without a perspectiue glasse, through which hee will discouer aboue thirtie miles off. Euer since his misfortune in loosing his sweet charge, The most beautifull lō, hee wandred vp and downe the world very melancholick and deiected in mind, as one much ashamed, that hauing so many eyes in his noddle he could not keepe one creature in sa e∣custodie. Yet many noble Personages haue offered him large Stipends to looke vnto their wiues and daughters, which he would neuer more vndertake by reason of the losse of lō, whom he made full ac∣count to guard against the cra tiest soliciter of the world. For as he saith, let a man looke vnto a wo∣man neuer so narrowly, nay, let him lock her vp in a close chamber after the Italian manner: her owne free heart cannot say nay, if she be wantonly dis osed, and meetes with an earnest Suiter. This old Lad will I imploy sentinell or scout about the Iesuites houses, in one of the which he resides with∣out question. In the meane time repaire you to your friend Master Secretarie Walsingham, & get of him a warrant dormant, and let him alone to act the rest. At these words they departed. And the next day meeting together againe, Orpheus Iunior acquainted them, that Argus had spied about an houre before day a man with long locks, like a swaggering Gallant, disguised in a light coloured suit of apparell, entring into Claudius Aquauiuaes house, the Generall of the Iesuits, and by all likeli∣hood it could be no other then Mariana, whereto Florio all rauished with ioy said: O happie man borne vnder a luckie constellation, and reserued by destinie for great enterprizes. It is not for nought that thy surging seas refused to swallow the honest corpse, when in a violent storme thou didst fall ouerboord the ship. It is not for small or ignoble effects, that thou wert saued, as a firebrand taken out of the flames, in that fatall accident, when thy house was battered about thy eares with thunder and lightning, those fearefull artilleries of GODs glorie. My mind giues me, it can be no other then Mariana: And here is a straight warrant for his ap∣prehension. Let vs immediatly get some Pegasean horses, for delayes breed danger. And so without more words they procured post horses for them∣selues and a dozen more of their friends, in whom they reposed most confidence, and about the daw∣ning of the day the next morning they arriued neere Claudius Aquauiuaes house, which lay about tenne leagues distant from his Maiesties Court at Parnassus, where finding Argus very circumspect and watchfull, they certainly vnderstood of him, that the partie was still within without the least mi∣strust or alteration. Whereupon, as soone as the Ie∣suites meniall seruants had opened the Gates, they suddenly rushed in, not omitting to leaue Argus and a competent companie without doores, for feare of an escape at the Posterne. After some search they found Mariana closely cubd vp in Aquauiuaes Librarie, with a new begun Treatise before him, wherein these Questions of maine consequence were to be decided: Whether it were more commo∣dious for his Catholick Maiestie to bend his forces a∣gainst his Neighbours the Moores, or against the Lu∣therans? The other Question was, whether it were expediens for the better maintenance of Saint Peters Chaire, and for the propagation of the societie of Ie∣sus (at whose name all Creatures were to bow) to seize vpon the reuenues and liuings of all other inferiou orders whatsoeuer, and to conuert the same to nobler v∣ses, the one moytie betwixt his Holinesse and the Catho∣lick Princes, and the other to the most worthie? In his Maiesties name both Mariana and Aquauiua were arrested, and presently set vpon a couple of Pega∣sean S eeds, who no sooner mounted and placed in the saddle, but the horses began furiously to winch and fling like mad creatures, and the Riders were most violently cast downe from their backs, so that if the standers by had not rescued them from the furie of these incensed horses, doubtlesse they had there breathed their last with their Braines about their Eares. For the nature of these kind of Horses, which are bred in Hellicon and alwaies watered at Bellerophons Well, is to hate, kicke, and trample vn∣der their feete all factious, proud, and presumptu∣ous spirits; As on the contrarie to shew themselues, as obedient as Bucephalus to Alexander, very tract∣able, and milder then Lambes vnto the learned Ri∣ders, who acknowledge their owne infirmities, with a lowly conceit of their braines capacities and vertues, though neuer so much extolled by others. These new Officers informed by Argus of the Hor∣ses disposition, would no longer contend against nature, nor worke against Antipathie, but made my two graue Gentlemen for all their bruises verie orderly to march a foote, vntill they came to Par∣nassus, where being returned about foure in the night they deliuered them ouer to the Lieutenant criminall at the Tower ergastulare, who immediat∣ly committed them to Sysiphus his rowling mount, which the Poets called the Roome of little Ease. CHAP. II. The Conuiction of Mariana the Iesuite by the Te∣stimonies of the Scriptures, and of the Ancient Fa∣thers. Apollo condemnes Mariana the Iesuite, to be tor∣tured in Phalaris his Brazen Bull, and banisheth the pernicious Sect of Iesuits out of the Territories of Parnassus. APollo being informed by his Marshals, That both the Iesuites were now in safe custodie, as∣sembled all his Estates vpon the fifth of Nouember last, 1625. in the great Senate House at Parnassus, and caused Mariana and Claudius Aquauina to be brought forth: Vnto whom his Maiestie spake in this manner: How long, O disloyall Ignatians, haue yee tempted our Patience in broaching out your virulent doctrine, for the dethroning and destroy∣ing of Princes, whom the Eternall Mouer and King of Kings had ordayned out of his inscrutable pro∣uidence, to be his Deputies here on earth, for sweet or for sowre, as a blessing or a plague? Could not their awfull state and Maiesticall Authoritie dazle your corporall eyes, and astonish your inward sen∣ses from scribling such prodigious positions, as did animate subiects against their Natiue Kings, euen to seeke their dearest bloud? Could not the exam∣ple of Machiauell, whom yee knew to bee bani∣shed from our peaceable Court, terrifie your turbu∣lent spirits from putting Dogges teeth in Sheepes mouthes, to the apparant danger of their Sheep∣heards, and the vnspeakable discommoditie of all humane kinde, who must now defend themselues from these profitable beasts, as from rauenous Wolues? By your meanes Garnet and many o∣thers lost their liues, who might haue succoured and relieued your owne Sect, if relying on these cruell teeth of yours, they had not sought vtterly to vndoe, and to deuoure both their Pastors and quiet Owners; yee professe your selues to bee Ie∣suits, that is, Sauiours, O Iesu esto mihi Iesu, but yet meant nothing lesse. If yee did, why followed yee not the Lanthorne of your Sauiours life: Hee paid tribute to Caesar, though an Infidell; when hee was smitten he opened not his mouth, but stood silent, like a Lambe before the Shearer. When Peter strooke of Malchus eare, hee rebuked the Act and mira∣culously set it on againe: his Kingdome was not of this World. His chiefest and last command was loue and not Reuenge, Charitie and not debate, peace and not dissention. This loue, as an accident inse∣parable, his Apostle Saint Iohn recommends; And this not onely in one to another, but towards all the World, whether they bee Iewes or Gentiles, as Saint Paul confirmes: haue peace with all men, as much as in you lyeth. This peace haue yee most traiterously and feloniously infringed in plotting to blow vp the King and Estates of great Brittaine; This sacred bond haue ye cancelled, when Rauilliac that deuill of men, by the instigation of your sedi∣tious Booke, did massacre the Prince of his natiue soyle Victorious Henry the vnderminer of that Catholicke Monarchie, which the Spaniards drea∣med of. This Chaine of Charitie haue yee viola∣ted and torne asunder, when at sundry times yee whetted on simple Creatures more silly then Sheep to take armes against their Natiue Prince. Heere Apollo paused. And then asked of Mariana, and of Aquauiua, what they could alledge in their De∣fence? Mariana answered, that he published that Doctrine for no ill intent or trecherous plot, which he euer minded to put in execution against Princes, but because he hoped by humouring the Pope, hee might enioy the happinesse to become one day in∣uested with a Cardinals Robes and the red Hat. But for the Doctrine it selfe, said Aquauiua, howsoeuer our tender Consciences serue not to act, yet the same must needs remaine authenticke, vntill a ge∣nerall Councell shall mediate and interpose their opinions betwixt his Holinesse and Kings, how farre one anothers powers shall extend, and for what occasions hee may pronounce the dismal Sentence against them. Apollo much incensed at these obstinate positions replyed. And must my vertuous Princes liue in continuall iealousies in the interim? What if my Lord the Pope doe neuer call a Councell, shall I en∣dure to see these bloudie Plots and Practices acted in my presence? Know then, O yee vertuous of Par∣nassus, among whom I reckon not these Caitiues, that by the will of God all Kings doe raigne; that the most High beareth rule ouer the Kingdomes of men, Prouerb. cap. Daniel cap. 4. and giueth them to whom he will. It was out of the Apostles Commission to meddle with earthly Pow∣ers, but with Heauenly, whereof they had the keyes to open the entry vnto the Penitent. It was out of their element to dispose of Soueraignties. Did Saint Peter, Saint Iohn, or Saint Paul, suborne Traitours by word or deed against the Caesars, who persecuted them and their new Church? Nay, so obedient were the Christians of the Primitiue Church vnto those tyrannous Emperours, that they prayed for their prosperitie, health and life; as we may reade in Iustine Martyr and Tertullian. Many of them ser∣ued Souldiers in M. Aurelius Campe, and by their Prayers caused Raine to descend in a great drouth, when the Riuer of Danubius scarce yeelded water Tertul. Apolog. cap. 30. to beare a Boate. The Donatists first sought to exempt themselues from the Emperour in Spirituall matters. Where∣vpon a learned Father of that Age accounted Do∣natus a mad man for that his foolish Opinion. Do∣natus, saith hee, inflamed with his wonted madnesse, Optat. con . Par∣men, lib. 3. burst out into these wordes: Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesiâ? What hath the Emperour to doe with the Church? To shut vp my Iesuits mouthes for the Empe∣rours superioritie ouer the Pope himselfe, let them consider of these following Examples. First, of Donatus lately specified, who accusing Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage to Constantine the Emperour: His Imperiall Maiestie commanded Caecilianus to re∣paire at a prefixed time to Rome, and by his Com∣mission, Euseb. l. 10. c. 5. the Copie whereof is extant in Eusebius, authorized Miltiades Bishop of Rome, with some o∣thers ioyned with him to heare and determine the Complaint. These Commissioners examined the matter, and finding Caecilianus innocent, they con∣demned the Accuser Donatus and his Complices. Whereupon he and they appealed to the Emperour himselfe after the example of Saint Paul, who ap∣pealed to Caesar from Festus and Agrippa, as his Act. Apo. cap. supreme Iudge on Earth. Which Appeale the Em∣perour Constantine accepted, and ordred the diffe∣rence. The Eight first Councels were appointed by the Emperours, which no learned Papists can deny. Insomuch that Leo Bishop of Rome, made earnest suite to Theodosius the yonger, that the Councell which afterwards was kept at Calcedō, might be held in Italy, the which the Emperour by no mean s would assent vnto. For all that, the Bishop of Rome continued his supplications by the Princesse Pul∣ heria, an earnest Mediatrix for him, and also by sundry Noble Courtiers, who interceded likewise. But all of them missing to preuaile, the Councell was kept at Calcedon. And afterwards the Bishop of Rome to testifie his obedience to the Emperour, that had thus slighted his supplications, he with the o∣ther Bishops of his Iurisdiction and limitation subscribed to the Canons agreed vpon in that Councell, as himselfe records in these words: Be∣cause Leo. Epist. 59. I must shew my selfe obedient to your Religious and sacred will, I haue laid downe my consent vnto those constitutions. The like obedience Gregory another famous Bishop of Rome about fiue hundred yeeres after Christ shewed, as his Predecessours had done, and caused a Law, which himselfe much disliked to be published throughout his limits, returning this Certificate to the Emperour: I being subiect vnto your commandement haue caused the same Law to be sent into diuers parts. What more euidence will my Ignatians require? Heere they may see three seuerall Bishops of Rome obedient to the Emperours as their Supreame Head, yea, for Ecclesiasticall matters, much more in Temporall Iurisdictions. If these Examples cannot satisfie their turbulent fantasies, let them yet remember these further speeches of Gregorie Bishop of Rome, wherein hee frankly confesseth the Emperours Superioritie, and cals him his Lord: Gregor. Epist. 2. vnto my Lords pietie is giuen power ouer all men from Heauen: which likewise a more ancient Fa∣ther iustifieth in these words: Aboue the Emperour there is none but God, which made the Emperour. Optatus con ra Parm. lib. 3. Aeneas Siluius, who was afterwards Pope by the name of Pius the Second, expounding that place of Saint Paul, Let euery soule bee subiect to the higher powers, confesseth this Superioritie. Nei∣ther, saith he, doth hee except the Soule of the Pope Aeneas Siluius, l. 1. de Basiliens. Concil. himselfe. Reuerend Bede interpreting that place in Samuel, where Dauids heart smote within him, because hee did but cut the lap of Sauls garment, vtterly con∣demneth these Regicides, and dethroners of Kings in these words: This Action of Dauid doth morally teach vs, that wee must not smite our Princes with the sword of our Lips, though they wrong vs, nor that we teare the hemme of their superfluous deeds. Beda lib. 4. Ex∣posit. in Samuel. If wee approoue not the holinesst of their liues, let vs applaud the holinesse of their Vnctions. In the English Chronicles, euen when the Pope was at the highest staire of worldly triumph, it is re∣gistred, that Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, in some difference betwixt him and King William Rufus, would haue appealed to the Pope: And that the King and the Bishops withstood it. In the Raigne of King Henry the Second, a Law was made on paine of Treason, not to appeale out of the Kingdome of England. Thus from time to time, it is manifest that the Popes power hath beene inferiour and subiect to Earthly Princes. And therefore to broach out such damnable Paradoxes for the iustification of mur∣ther, and the warranting of priuate men to conspire against their Soueraignes, is a Doctrine, which God hates. Somtimes men are plagued by the immediate hand of God, sometimes by mediate and secondary means for their sins. Sometimes men are forced to endure extraordinary stormes, tempests, famine, warres, and also crosses at their very friends hands. Sometimes their women are deliuered of abortiues or mishapen Creatures. All which they must pa∣tiently brooke: Much more must they beare with the spots of Princes, who haue long Eares and long hands. It is not safe or vertuous to meddle with liti∣gious wares, nor to trouble the braine with these kind of Problemes. For if men liue in a Monarchy, which is hereditary, the Fault is the greater. If in other Kingdomes, the fundamentall Lawes must be regarded by the publike States, and not by pri∣uate persons; If the Kingdome be Electiue as Po∣land, let the Chancelor looke to it. If in Germanie it belongs to the Electors to decide the quarrell be∣twixt the Emperour and the Subiects. Wee doe therefore vtterly detest these Iesuites, for maintayning of these bloudy Tragedies; and from henceforth wee banish that pestilent Race of Sectaries out of our Iurisdiction of Parnassus. Ma∣riana heere we doe order to bee perpetually tortu∣red in Phalaris his Brazen Bull, and his Bookes also to be burnt, and the ashes to be scattered in the Ri∣uer of Lethe. CHAP. III. Now Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford, espying in a Church at Athens, a Franciscan Frier a kissing of a Maide of Honour belonging to the Princesse Thalia brought Saint Frances to surprize them, who of meere Idiotisme applaudes the Fact. IN May last, when all liuing Creatures followed their naturall motions and kinds, Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford who in King Richard the Seconds time, by the countenance of Iohn of Gaunt and the Lon∣doners opposed himselfe against the Romish Cler∣gie, as hee was entring into the Temple of the vn∣knowne God at Athens, espied a Franciscan Frier very heartily kissing a Gentlewoman, which in that jouiall and merrie time, had made choise of that lustie Frier to confesse her, whereupon Doctor Wi∣cliffe being euer held to be of an vnblemisht beha∣uiour, and as chaste as Origen, but that he had not gelt himselfe as Origen did, burned with Zeale, and like another Phinehes, thought once to haue runne vpon them both, to haue scratcht their eyes out, for weapons he had none to offend with (such was the Law of Apolloes Court) But remembring him∣selfe of a place in Homer, how Achilles, as he inten∣ded to draw out his Sword against Agamemnon, was preuented by the Ladie Pallas, who inuisibly restrai∣ned his hand from that reprochfull Act, he reculed backe vnseene by the youthfull Couple, whose lips were so fastned together, that, as if they had beene in a trance, the Church might haue falne by piece-meales about their eares, before they would been parted from their sugred kisses, and like an Ar∣row out of a Bow hee rushed into Saint Frances cloyster, where meeting with the Old man a mum∣bling on his Orisons and Rosaries, he desired him in all haste to come and visit the Corpse of one of his Friers, which was strooke dead by the Planet Venus, together with a Maide of Honour, belonging to the Princesse Thalia. At these words Saint Fran∣ces flung away his deuout Offices, and went a long with Doctor Wicliffe to the place, where he found the Frier and the gentlewoman a kissing. After that Saint Frances had considerately noted, how lo ing∣ly the Frier lay, as it were in an extasie, with his lips as close as Iuy to an Elme, vnto the Maides lips: the good man fell downe vpon his knees, and thanked God, that he had seene so much Loue and Charitie in the World, which before hee doubted had forsaken all humane race. CHAP. IIII. Doctor Wicliffe connents Saint Frances and the kissing Frier before Apollo. Saint Frances defendeth the cause, and discouereth seuen sorts of kisses. Apollo refuteth his Defence, condemnes the Frier, and abolisheth all Monasticall Orders. DWicliffe the next day after this aduenture, loth to be accessary to such baudy deeds, made the matter knowne vnto Apolloes Maiestie, who immediately sent Mercury for both the Friers. And vpon the Friday after appointed a speciall Conuo∣cation for the ordering of this lasciuious Cause. About nine a clocke in the morning vpon the pre∣fixed day, both the Friers being brought before the Lords of the Connocations, Apollo spake in this wise to Saint Frances: The first time that you were ini∣tiated in morall Precepts, and sithence matricula∣ted in our Court, you vndertooke aswell for your Monasticall Order as your selfe to liue chast, and not to minister occasion of scandall to the married So∣cietie, to suspect the least token of incontinencie in your carriages. But we find that you are flesh and bloud, subiect to concupiscence as well as others. Saint Paul therefore aduiseth you rather to marrie then to burne. But you on the contrary doe forbid your Clergy to marry at all, although in your con∣sciences you know it a most grieuous yoke, the which our Sauiour Christ said that no man can beare, vnlesse as a speciall Gift some few receiue it from Heauen. And therefore Saint Paul tels you, It is the doctrine of deuils to forbid Marriage. Why then haue you imposed such a burthen, such a vow on these silly Nouices of your Fraternitie, which they can neuer keep without hinneying and lusting after the Female Sexe? Haue not you heard that a certaine Hermite cockolded the chiefest Nobles of a Princes Court, whose Wiues vsed to repaire to his Cell for Spirituall Physicke, as if he had beene ano∣ther Baptist? Endeauour yee neuer so violently to expell the affections of nature, they will breake in∣to your thoughts and bodies doe what yee can, as on a time another Hermit, but more holy of life ex∣perimented in a Nephew of his, who notwithstan∣ding that hee had brought him vp euen from his cradle in his hermitage shut vp from the sight of all Women-kinde, and afterwards by chance following his Ghostly Father to a Towne when he had looked on the Sexe of women, and askt his Father what creatures those prettie things were, to whom though the old man answered, that they were a kind of Goslings, yet the yong Religious man could not rest so satisfied, but he would needes haue one of those Goslings home with him for his recreation. There is a Record yet to bee seene in England of a Grant made by an Abb t of certaine lands, vpon condition the Tenant would prouide a pretty yong wench once a moneth for my Lord Abbot ad pur∣gandos renes, to purge his reines. Many other exam∣ples may be produced to proue the impossibility of fulfilling your monasticall vowes. Why then doe you tollerate with vnlawfull lust, with billing and bussing like Owles, while yee may goe neately a∣bout it without any disparage, and marrie in the open face of the Church. To this Saint Francis an∣swered, that hee measured other mens dispositions by his owne; and for his poore brother, if he erred, he erred not of any malicious thought, but of pure Loue, which is the Soueraignest blessing required in all honest men, to root out the contrarie, which is Hatred. Likewise, hee shewed out of profound Schoolemen, that there were seuen kinds of Kissing. The first a charitable kisse, a kisse of charitie, which the Patriarkes and the Saints in old time vsed one to another, as also in the Scripture is implied by our Sauiour: Kisse the Sonne least he be angry. And againe, Let him kisse me with the kisses of his mouth. Psal 2. Cant c. cap. 1. This sacred kisse did his louing Brother substan∣tially engraue on the lips of his sweet Sister. And because the memoriall of his vertuous Loue might sticke there, he infused it with a long temporizing breath of halfe an houre together, as with a deepe Seale and Character not to bee forgotten by her, which kisse being so imprinted could not but argue an entire vnion in their Soules by a pleasing har∣monie, and a honeyed participation of excellent Charitie. As for Doctor Wicliffe impeachment, hee hoped that an Hereticks supercilious taxation was not of force to condemne an act of Charitie, being a man euer reputed euen among his own Sect too rigorous & austere, whose teeth might perhaps water at such a daintie obiect, because hee had not met with the like happinesse himselfe. And if the said Doctor Wicliffe did misconster their true in∣tent, he retorted that embleme, which the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, by the Institution of Edward the third King of England, vsed for many yeeres to embellize: Honte soit qui maly pensoit. Shame to him that euill thinketh. The second sort of Kissing is called a Complementall Kisse, which the English allow by way of Complement and friend∣ly ceremonie, to salute their friends wiues withall, or any of the Feminine kind, often-times giuing it with a smacke to rellish the better. This is a harm∣lesse Kisse, iustifiable both at comming and parting. But more then two Kisses at one meeting, a seuere Lord President of Wales could not endure. The third kind of Kissing is a naturall token of Loue among the married couples, whereof let them discourse whom the Church hath so conioyned in the Honourable state of Matrimonie. The fourth degree of Kissing is called a Leche∣rous kisse, vsed vnlawfully among them that shunne the light, or in the Stewes, to despite their Angell Guardians, and to call the Sunne as a witnesse of their obstinate standing out against their Great Creatour. The fift sort of Kissing is termed an unnaturall kisse of man with man, a minion-kisse, such as Iupiter vsed to Ganymede his Cup-bearer, and which I am sorrie to heare of, such as some of our Italians doe practize to the obloquie of our Catholicke Romish Church. This kind of kissing, Pygmalion falling in loue with an Image of his owne caruing, often vsed: It seem'd a virgin full of liuing flame, Master Sands in O ids Meta lib. 10. That would haue mou'd, if not with-held by shame So Art it selfe conceald. His Art admires. From th' Image drawes imaginarie fires, And often feeles it with his hands to try, If 'twere a Bodie or cold Iuorie. Nor could resolue. Who kissing thought it kist. He courts, embraces, wrings it by the wrist. There is a sixt kind of Kissing called a Iudas kisse, where with he bearing honey in his mouth, and gall in his heart, mel in ore, fel in corde, did most treache∣rously betray his Master Christ, such a kisse like∣wise as Ioab gaue to Amasa at the instant, when hee killed him, being compared to the salutation of the antient Irish, who when they purposed to doe an ill turne, laughed and smiled, thereby to make the innocent stranger secure and carelesse of his safetie. The seuenth sort of Kissing is stiled the kisse of Grace, or Honour, which Potentates and great Princes haue vsed to conferre on inferiour Persons by reaching their hands or feet to be kissed by them This last of the Foot doth properly belong to my Lord the Pope, to countenance and fauour Empe∣rours and Kings, like the Sunne, which lends the beautie of his rayes to the Moone and lesser Starres though in very deede they are no more worthy (being worldly-minded creatures) to kisse his holy and sanctified Foot, then Saint Iohn Baptist to ap∣proach vnto Christ, whose shooe latchet hee con∣fessed that hee was no way worthy to vndoe. I know Doctor Raynolds in his workes de Romana I∣dololatria mislikes this, as a marke of Antichri∣stian Pride not accepted by Saint Peter, though a meaner man then an Emperour would haue done that vassalage vnto his Holinesse. But Heretickes know not the reason of Saint Peters refusall. Let them therefore vnderstand, that the Triple Crowne was not at that time settled on Peters head; and withall, that Saint Peters deniall, saying, My selfe am also a man, sauoured not so much of modestie, as of a Courtly putting by the vrgent presumption of such an inferiour Person, as Cornelius was. For perhaps if the Roman Emperour himselfe would haue sued for that Honour with teares and humi∣litie, he might haue had the grace to kisse his Foot. When a subiect sues to a King for some extraordi∣narie Gift, which he is not willing to bestow, hee will not daunt him with a rigorous repulse, but answeres him, that he will consider of it, Le Roy se auisera. Of these sixe last kisses I dare cleere my good Franciscan. He is as harmelesse as my selfe I can assure your Maiestie, being of my owne educa∣tion, and like me in conditions. And a very Ideot then replied Apollo. But the young Fellow lookes as if he had more wit then his Tutour, more Knaue then Foole. You haue discoursed of sundrie kindes of Kisses. Yet for all your simplicitie you haue learnt that magisteriall trick of State, for the credit of your Order propter bonestatem domus to couer the sinfull pollutions of your Brood, because they are sweet veniall sinnes. But if a Lay man had committed such a crime in the Church, it had beene exorbitant, worthy of fire and faggot. Old Couper of Westminster found no such fauor nor Aduocate to defend his innocen∣cie for one poore kisse which hee vnwittingly gaue to a Lady Abbesse in Siuil. For when this honest man at the time when K. Philip of Castile by his marriage with Q Mary was also K. of England, & by that occa∣sion freedome of Commerce betwixt both Nations allowed, he being Factor for certaine Merchants of London, arriued at Siuill, where hearing that an Ab∣besse would buy some of his butter, hee went with his Broker and others to compound for the price with her. Couper, the chamber being somewhat darke, thinking after the manner of England, that the Broker and the rest that bare him company, & he the hindermost, had saluted the Ladie Abbesse on the mouth, whereas they kissed but her vesture, he as his course came, popt a swinging kisse on her bare lips. Whereupon, as a woman rauished, not with ioy, but of her personall honestie, she exclay∣med; O Vellaco, Lutherano, Perro. Villaine, Luthe∣ran, Dog. No excuses could serue his turne, but all the Merchants goods and ship vnder his charge were confiscated to the Holy House, together with his Person, where after much intreatie hee got the fauour at last, only with the forfeit of the ship and goods, to doe a yeeres penance there in the Inqui∣sition house with wearing a Iackanapes Coat of ma ny colours, which they call Saint Benets hood or Sanbenita, euery Holy-day during the time of Masse for one whole yeare. I like very well of your distin∣ction of kisses. To these you might likewise adioyne the Fatall or Pocky kisse, which some Gallants vse to infuse with their contagious breath, as a signe of their seruice to their Mistresses, in imitation of that East-Indian King, whose breath being tainted with the often vse of poysons, neuer kissed any of his Concubines, but they dyed within foure and twen∣tie houres after his kissing. But your approbation of kissing the Popes foot, as if he were no mortall man, subiect to Peters infirmities, but an Angelicall Creature, I vtterly abhorre with that Noble Eng∣lish Gentleman, who bearing Charles the fift compa∣nie, as one of his neerest attendants to kisse his Ho∣linesse Foot, assoone as hee saw the Emperour fall downe on his maribones, and to kisse that contem∣tible place, he ranne out with great speed, which the Emperour much wondred at. After these Cere∣monies were ended, hee called for the Gentleman, and askt him why hee forsooke him so rudely, and staid not for the happinesse to kisse his Holinesse Foot? To whom he answered, that when hee saw so great a Prince stoope to receiue a kisse at that vn∣worthy place, he verily thought, that in regard hee was but a priuate person, the Pope would not haue done him that Imperiall grace, but that hee would haue turned his back-side vnto him to bee kist. If a Kisse proceedes from a Superiour to a mea∣ner Person, not of Pompe and Pride, but of a sweet tempered nature to honour precious worth, it is like a showre of raine in a drie Summer, and may cause the partie that receiues it to encrease in ver∣tue. Sometimes a Kisse may be vnexpectedly wre∣sted from a Superiour, as lately fell out by a Gen∣tleman of the Innes at Court, who trauelling home∣wards with some of his Cameradoes, layd a wager that by drawing lots one of them should kisse the the first Ladie they met. The lot arriuing to this Gentleman, it chanced that a great Countesse passed by, which somewhat amazed the Gentleman: yet loth to pay the wager and remembring the old say∣ing: Faint heart neuer kist faire Ladie, hee boldly repaired to the Countesse, & related the occurrence. The Noble Lady vnderstanding his demand, bid him thence forwards to take heede how he laid any such rash wagers. And with that askt to see his knife, which he drew out, and humbly presented the same vnto her. The Countesse after that she well lookt on it, returned it backe saying, that because he had kept his knife so neat and cleane, he seemed to bee a spruce Gentleman, and therefore deserued a kisse, which she presently gaue him. The like fa∣uour Queene Anne of France the wife of Lewis the twelfth, voluntarily imparted, in her loue to lear∣ning, vnto Allen Chartier. This Queene passing on a time from her lodging towards the Kings side, saw in a gallerie Allen Chartier a famous Scholler, lea∣ning on a tables end fast asleepe, which this Prin∣cesse espying, shee stooped downe to kisse him, vt∣tering these words in all their hearing: Wee may not of Princely courtesie passe by and not honour with our kisse the mouth from whence so many golden Poems haue issued. All these examples can∣not excuse your Pupils long breathd kisse. For if Cat the Censour banished a Senatour of Rome for kissing his owne wife in presence of his daughter, how much more to blame is a Religious man, which vowes Chastitie, and vnder colour of auricular confession layes an ambush for his Patient? Oscula qui sumpsit, si non & coetera sumpsit, Haec quoque quae sumpsit perdere dignus erat. He which kisses once receiu'd, Faint-hearted Gull is foule deceiu'd, If after fauours such he misse, To crop the flowre and rightly kisse. This is the end of most of your Confessions, like vnto Boccalini his Whelpes, who at first did no∣thing but snarle, bawle, and barke aloose. Then they fell to gamboling, to play, and to tosse one a∣nother vpon their backes, vntill at last they round∣ly rode and mounted vpon each others backe. In regard of these grosse abuses wee decree, that all your Orders of Monkes and Friers shall from henceforth cease, and if any Spirituall person finde in himselfe those prickes in the Flesh, that without too much striuing and strugling with nature, he can∣not liue continently, wee counsell him to marry in the Name of God. Or if his conscience permit him not so to doe, lest his Wife, as Salomons, draw him from the contemplation of Spirituall matters, let him imitate the Monkes of the Primitiue Church, conioyning bodily labours to his mentall. Saint Paul was a Tent-maker, Many of the Apostles Fi∣shermen. The Monkes of Bangor liued on their handy-workes, that thereby contiguous busines∣ses might weare out phantastick and idle thoughts, the procurers of succeeding Acts. What stratagems will not a Souldier of Cupids Campe worke for the fruition of his sweete conceiued pleasures & beau∣teous booties, as those ancient Verses insinuate: Non audet Daemon facinus tentare, quod audent Effroenis Monachus plena{que} Fraudis anus. The deuill himselfe dares not attempt that fact, Which the vnbridled Monke and Baud dare act. To conclude our Sentence is that this lusty Fran∣ciscan Frier for prophaning our sacred Temple bee had to the House of Correction called of the Spa∣niards Tescuto, and there by inter changeable cour∣ses to assist Sysiphus in rowling the painfull stone; for it is fit, Compulsory labour should bee imposed on them, who of their owne accord would not fall to it to preuent the baites of Asmodeus the lustfull Spirit. Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus. This Sentence pronounced, his Imperiall Maie∣stie caused the Clerke of the Crowne to publish it. CHAP. V. Apollo censureth Thalia and her Gentlewoman for their lasciuious prankes; and reformeth the Co∣micall Court. IN the afternoone of the said Friday Apollo fate againe with a full intent to reforme the World, specially, the Christian World, of such venerëous stolne pleasures, which by the Prohibition of Mar∣riage to the Clergie, were continually fo ered in in hugger mugger. And for this cause his Maiestie had willed the Comicke Princesse Thalia with her Maide of Honour, whom Doctor Wicliffe had sur∣prized with the Franciscan in their kissing sport, to be present. Where the Parties being come, Apollo demanded of the Maide, whether she was not asha∣med of her late kissing. Whereto she answered that none but the faulty ought to bee ashamed. Shee af∣firmed, it was a sinne in the Frier by reason of his vow to kisse, and to entice her to such game-some∣nesse, who might very well haue beene without it, or receiued the like pleasure from another as good as hee. But for her part, as long as she attended on the Comedian Lady, she hoped, that she might enioy the like contentment, which her Fellowes partaked off. That she was tutoured by the famous Anacr on and Catullus, two of the principall Fauourites in her Ladies Court, and euer since she attayned to a doozen yeeres of age, shee had learned this concei∣ted Lesson of her said Tutours, To looke amiably, to speake merrily, to write wantonly, and to kisse kindly. That to doe these parts was no dishonour to the vertuous Corporation; as long as she kept her selfe from a great belly. That shee was skilled in Poetrie, which could not bee exquisite without some loose straines, as her Master Catullus had pro∣claimed in these Verses: Nam castum esse decet pi m Poetam: Ipsos versicul s nihil necesse est; Tunc verum retinent salem & leporem, Si sint molliculi ac parum pudici. A Poet by Vertues education, Must chaste be in life and conuersation. But if his Verses light and wanton proue, They rellish best of Salt and gracefull loue. Apollo much incensed at this shamelesse Apo∣logie found great fault with the Princesse Thalia, for not teaching more Ciuilitie to her Maid. Thalia toucht to the quicke, fearing least this frowning of the Emperour might eclipse the honour of her Pa∣lace, and cause contempt to her Followers, whereby Beare-bayting, hawking, and hunting might per∣haps grow in more request then Stage-playes, and lazinesse, which shee patronized; and not out of hope yet to salue her reputation, she begged leaue of Apollo to speake for her selfe; which being gran∣ted vnto her, shee thus began: It is no maruell, Re∣nowmed Soueraigne, if women, whose sexe is accoun∣ted the weaker vessell, not enabled with the No∣ble courage of a man hath obtayned the preroga∣tiue and toleration at the Husbands hand to speake what they list, yea, and otherwhiles for matters of profit to scold and play the Shrewes, so that they fooled them not afterwards by Satyres Garlands, by Antique Dances, or by graffing Actaeons badge on their manly foreheads. For indeed all our power lies in our Tongues. Giue mee leaue, then Noble Prince, while others fawne and wag their tailes, to wag this little member of mine in my Maides De∣fence. Haue I flourished and liued vncontrouled for many hundred yeeres, euen before Pla tus, Te∣rence, Roscius, and Martiall published their workes, inspiring Poeticall wits to vent most rare conceits, and am I now questioned after so many ages for my Gentlewomens gamesome behauiour? Where∣fore haue not I beene traduced in former times for the like petulance. If it bee a fault to kisse, it is a greater fault to doe worse. If your Maiestie had an Opticke Glasse to see into all the Ladies and Gentlewomens hearts attending on this vertuous Court, the very palest of them would quickly change their hew into a Scarlet die. Let her which is innocent of these raging flames fling the first stone at my Gentlewoman, who erred (If it bee an er∣rour) not of beastly lust, but of harmelesse igno∣rance, following the custome of my Court, who euer allowed clipping and kissing, the more the sweeter. My Maid did but that which her Mistris hath done a thousand times before her. Such a destinie was read at my Birth: Comica lasciuo ga det sermone Thalia. The Comick Muse in wanton speech delights. Heere Thalia ended. His Maiestie perceiuing that most of the wanton abuses incident to the wilfull vnmaried Romish Clergy, to Comedies, and Court∣ly Dames, yea and to many Citizens wiues and their daughters proceeded from the mistaking of Thaliaes Desteny, he out of hand sent for the Prin∣cesse Minerua and the Ladie Mnemosyne Thaliaes Mother to know the certaintie. Presently the No∣ble Ladies appeared as it were in the twinkling of an eye; whom Apollo caused to sit in two stately Thrones richer then the King of Chinaes golden chaire, the great Queene Minerua on his right hand, and the Lady Mnemosyne the Princesse of Memo∣rie on his left hand, to whom he related the whole passage of the businesse, how a certaine Sect pre∣tending themselues to be Christians, but far remote from their Masters Doctrine, had troubled the So∣cietie of Mankind by a counterfeit abstinence from the Nuptiall bed, because they would seeme more holy then God made them; and all this, because they might cloke their sequestration from marriage and their foolish vowes vnder the Lady Thaliaes licentious birth-right; that the Fates had ordained her and all her Attendants to delight in wanton dalliance and Confession in corners, by which meanes the men sounded not onely into the Se∣crets of his Court, but also into the Ladies inward dispositions, so that after amorous conference they fell roundly to kissing: a thing prodigious and in∣tolerable in his vertuous Court. Therefore hee now desired them to declare there openly, whether the Destenies had prescribed such a baudie sentence at the birth of Thalia, that she should ioy in lasciuious Discourses, the fore-runners of beastly acts. To this the Lady Mnemosyne answered, that at the birth of Thalia, shee had gotten a sodaine cold, which produced a thicknesse in her hearing, where∣by shee did not perfectly vnderstand, whether shee was alloted to wantonnesse, or to a harmelesse pleasing solace: for the Lady Venus contended, that the Fates had predestinated her for wanton∣nesse, but the rest of the Gossip-Goddesses conte∣sted otherwise. Whereupon Apollo askt the Prin∣cesse Minerua, what she knew of that matter; The very troth is, said this prudent Goddesse that this & no other sentence did I heare, and I thinke that my hearing was as perfect as anothers: Comica festiuo gaudet sermone Thalia. The Comicke Muse in pleasant speech delights. That the Generation of mankind euer addicted to the worse, had peruerted the sense, and inserted lasciuo for festiuo, wanton for pleasant, or gracefull. Apollo thus informed of the truth, conuerted his speech to the Comicke Princesse; Madame, said he, such hath beene the disorders of your Court, that the stinking smell of them is ascended vp vnto the Heauens, & the infamy heere on earth so exorbi∣tant, that your selfe for not reforming the depraued liues of your Dependants haue had your Pallace enstiled the Baudie-court, as bad as Messalinaes or Queene Iones of Naples, who for their strange lusts were commonly called the Salt-bitches. The Nun∣neries by your inspiration cannot saue their credit. Yea, the Pope himselfe by your conuinence, or ra∣ther by your allowance doth openly tolerate Courtezans and Stewes in his Holy Citie, and by them reapes a yeerely Tribute, which I may no longer endure in any, which pretend themselues free of my Court. And whereas you claime pre∣scription of time, and many hundred of yeeres to warrant these enormities, you may aswell alledge, that the wearing of Codpieces, which men vsed in ancient times, ought still to be continued. Because the World before Linus and Orpheus conuerted them, did eate Acornes like Sauages, will you haue men to returne to their old vomits? This is like the Iewes Opinion. They will not belieue Christian Religion, because the Law of Moses was the more ancient. The Papists in all their Disputations relye vpon Antiquitie, for all that Paul tels them, that there must be an Apostasie and a generall departure from the Faith, before the Sonne of Perdition bee made knowne. Speake no more of Antiquitie, for without Truth and the Scripture, it is but an old doting Sinne. Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via. The way to good manners is neuer too late. Re∣pent of your light-heeld trickes, for perhaps there is mercie in store. You heare, what a mistaking fell out at the reading of your Desteny. Let Apelles in steed of that idle Verse engraue these regenera∣ted lines on the forefront of your Pallace: The Comicke Muse makes this report, Shee loues no more dishonest sport. For now she finds, that at her birth, She was ordain'd for harmelesse mirth. If hereafter I heare of any lasciuious prankes practized by your countenance in your Palace, I will discard you from my Court, and accept of the chast Lady Sapho in your place. The Sabboth Day, which the very Iewes and Turkes doe obserue holy and reuerently sacred, you haue hitherto profaned in licensing your women debauchedly to daunce the Cushion kissing Daunce, with Roysters and Ruffians, yea, and with Hob, Dick, and Hick, vn∣till the vertuous and magnanimous Prince Charles of Great Brittaine made a late Statute at Oxford to restraine such vnlawfull sport, on that Sancti∣fied Day. How many Religious persons vnder colour of your wanton Genius infused into their changeable phantasies, haue plaid the parts of rutting Bucks? How many of them haue taken sacred Orders, and made Vowes impossible to be kept in their thoughts, (for if a mans wandring fancy longs after his neigh∣bours Wife it is Adulterie, though hee neuer per∣forme the deed) and these pollutions onely they co∣uer vnder your Maske of holy wantonnesse? It is not long agoe, that a Protestant being to marrie with a Papists Daughter, the Parents liked so well of the Match in regard of neighbourhood, and the vniting of their Mannors, which bounded neere to the other, that the parties should be Contracted. The Maide desired first that she might consult with a Frier her Confessor, who was instantly sent for. With him shee went into the Garden, and hauing declared the agreement, the Frier made a difficult matter of it, in respect of their dinersities of Religi∣on. But the Conclusion was, that her Wombe must be first sanctified by his deuout person, which she contradicting, he pronounced her a lost sheepe out of the Catholicke Flocke. Vpon which words of his shee departed from him, and grew in such detestation of that hypocriticall dangerous Reli∣gion, that she became a reformed Christian, and by opening the cause to her Parents, shee likewise wonne them to be conuerted. But these Examples are rare. Where one such sadgeth, wee finde many on the contrary seduced by this secret whispering, and diuing into the affections of the simpler sort, so that your Comicall beginnings end in Melpome∣nes Tragedies. How many idle Comedies haue you permitted vnder your name, to entrap ingenu∣ous and soft natured people? Knauery once disco∣uered, you will say, may be euer after the more ea∣sily auoyded, as the burnt-child will take eed of the fire. But you know Lady, euerie one is not an in∣dustrious Bee to sucke the choisest floure, and to make vse of what they find. Most men are enclined to embrace the worst. A wittie Comedie, I con∣fesse, represents the liuely Actions of fraile persons, if the Lookers on were endued with the like equall discretion to discerne true Gold from Alchymie. Those Caueats I wish you to imprint in your flexi∣ble braine, and not to suffer your giddie-headed Gi les to gad abroad without some staid person to ouer-see and curbe their naturall disposition. After Apollo had thus ended his Discourse, to the intent that some good effect should ensue after his admonitions, and knowing how exemplary and vsefull the presence of gra e Personages serued to reclayme lewd people, hee cashiered Catullus, and in his rome appointed Iohn Flori Deane of the Prin∣cesse Thaliaes Chappell, as a Reward for his care and paines in the apprehension of Mariana. CHAP. VI. The Author of the Nunnes discouery at Lisbon ex∣hibites a complaint to Apollo against Father Foster the Frier, Confessor to the English Nunnery at Lis∣bone, for committing carnall copulation with sundry of them. Apollo makes a Discourse of Auricular Confessi∣on, adiudgeth Foster to Ixions wheele, and suppres∣seth all Nunneries. AT the second Sessions of Parliament holden at Parnassus in Lent last, 1626. according to the antient stile, the said Informer framed a hey∣nous Accusation against Frier Foster Confessour of the Nunnarie at Lisbone, that he being an old man almost destitute of natures heat, had vnder colour of sanctifying them, deflowred some of them. To this the Frier answered, that for all his old age hee might haue a Colts tooth in his head; that yet not∣withstanding he entred not into these venereous en∣counters of doting lust, but as a considerate Con∣fessour, supplying the place of a Master of a Family and of a Physician, to purge those Nunnes of their superfluous and depraued humours, who were so full of the Greene Sicknes, that he feared an incurable Melancholie or Lunacie, as bad as Sauls might pos∣sesse them, if hee had not taken some paines in his owne proper person to helpe their indispositions, or acting at fit times these deedes of Charitie in meere pittie and commiseration. Apollo hauing heard the Accusation, and the weake defense of Frier Foster, to let the wauering-minded Christians of his Court vnderstand the true vse of Auricular Confession discoursed, as followeth There is no Discipline nor Tradition inuented by man, but may bee corrupted for some sinister respect or other, to the end that the Elect of God may know, how all things deuised by worldlings, shall perish with the world, and that no Law nor Cu∣stome, though for a time it seeme neuer so vsefull can long stand, except it bee firmely grounded on the Scripture. Witnesse this Tradition of the Con∣fession in the Eare, an excellent Policie of the Church to force obedience vnto the Clergie, and to worke regeneration in the milde spirited. But be∣cause it was not soundly grounded on the Word of God, it growes contemptible, and worthy to bee suppressed for the monstrous abuses which we find in these times to flow by the indirect vse thereof. In the Apostles time it was no other then an hum∣ble acknowledging of one Neighbours Infirmitie to the other, and an asking of forgiuenesse recipro∣cally at their hands, whom they had offended, in remembrance of that clause in the Lords Prayer: as wee forgiue them which trespasse against vs, that thereby they might the more confidently receiue the Communion. This the Apostle aduiseth in these words: Confesse your sinnes one to another, and pray yee one for another. Which Confession they vsed Iames cap . publikely and priuately: Publikely before all the Congregation, if the Sinne were great, as that of the Incestuous person in Saint Paul, that Shame might worke the fruits of repentance in the Offen∣dors Corinth. heart; Priuately, as Saint Iames aduised by way of Charitie, to succor one anothers conscience. Afterwards Confession became farre more priuat, and their mindes being puft vp with Pride, or asha∣med to let many know their dissimulations, they repayred to some one of the Elders of the Church, as Patients to a Physician to bee cured, or to receiue Counsell for their Soules health. At last, the Cler∣gie noting the simplicitie of the vnlettered people in those dayes, they got them in lieu of Penance to disburse pence & pounds, sometimes to the Poore, sometimes to build Churches, Chappels, Monaste∣ries, and to offer presents to the honour of their Pa∣rish Saints, as the Heathen in those dayes did to their Idols. All this while there was no great fault, sa∣uing that they began to make it somewhat merito∣rious. But when the Popes had forbidden Marri∣ages, & in time had barred the Clergie of their Con∣cubines, which was for a long time dispensed with, then this laudable Order of Confession began to be grossely abused, and womens Chastities suffered shipw ack . For themselues being to continue for euer vnmarried, they burned in lust, and left no trick vnattempted to beguile wiues and maides. But among all their sleights, they preuayled aboue all, when they drew men to build Nu eries, that they might allure prettie wenches thither, with whom they might ioyne the more freely to coole their raging lusts. Insomuch, that the wariest of them seeing some of their sweet hearts too fruitfull, they studied Physicke, and gaue them drenches to destroy their Fruit; or if that wrought not the ef∣fect, for the credit of their V taries they held it no great sinne to murther it, assoone as euer it came to light: which Diuelish Acts of theirs since the prea∣ching of the Gospell are daily discouered in Ponds and other hidden places, where the skuls of many Infants haue beene lately found. What mad men are they, which will commit their daughters to a Confessors charge, as lambes to wolues, knowing that flaxe will flame, if it bee too neere the fire? Lust by degrees corrupts. The wi∣sest man liues not without some touch of folly. Shall wee then thinke, that Flesh and Bloud can waxe cold, finding sweet opportunitie and solitari∣nesse to warme sensible nature? At first, they look babies in their eyes, they wring or kisse their lil∣lyed hands, and induce them to read their Loue∣sonnets, Madrigalls, and other Poems of Cupids baites. Then, they fall to a neerer forme, the pre∣ambles and fore-runners of beastly pleasure, they obtaine the gracelesse grace to play with their iuory breasts, and to endure writes that vn∣mannerly Grobi : Tange eti partes qu g t F mina t gi. Arriued to this happinesse, they must needs sanctifi their lips with Nectarean kisses, vowing that they would not for all the King of Spaines I dies proceed to a further Act. So meane perhaps, but Time brings alteration, And a faire woman is a shrewd Temptation. As George Withers notes. Hauing thus seduced these weaker vessels to condiscend to the elements of Loue, they teach them the baudie A. B. C. in∣stead of Aue Maria. Were I disdainfull or vnkind, Or coy to learne, or dull of mind. But no such thing remaines in me To let mee learne my A. B. C. At last, they winne the precious Fort, which once they doubted to bee inexp gnable. The whole building is razed; and these poore Soules pend in this pound of bo dage, forsaken of their friends, find no other ease for this disease, but to sang this dolefull Di tie, to the t e of too late Repeatance: Which shall I doe? or weepe, or sing? Neither of them will helpe mourning. The Treasure's stolne, the Thiefe is fled, And I lye bleeding in my bed. If it were not for these , Confussion in the Eare would much benefit a diseased Consci∣ence, and the whole Common-wealth of the Chri∣stian Corporation. And we could wish it still in vse: yet with this limitation, that no Papist presume to confesse any woman vnder 50. yeares of age, except he be first soundly gelded. And for your part, Frier Foster, who claime the prerogatiue to haue a seare top with a green root, to mingle a dead coarse with a liuing body, after the example of Maxentius the Tyrant, without regard had to your old age and decayed nature, wee Order you to bee tortured on Ixions wheele, because you haue profaned the vestall house, Ixion henceforth to bee set at libertie for his petulant attempt against Iuno, and all Nunneries to bee dissolued, which af∣ter the imitation of the Gentiles, you procured to be built more for your lecherous interest, then for the honour of your Sauiour. Whereby I let you all good Catholickes to vnderstand, that we suppresse them for the same reason, as Hezechias supplanted the Brazen Serpent, good of it selfe and of the first erecting, being a figure of Christs sauing Office and healing vertue, but since, a cause of Idolatrie, as the Crosse also which the Reformed Churches by reason of the fottish misvsage haue lately put downe, to take away the occasions of Idolatrie. CHAP. VII. Thomas Becket of Canterburie, accuseth before Apollo Walter de Mapes Arch-deacon of Oxford in King Henry the Seconds time, for defending the Marriage of Priests against the Pope of Romes Decree. THomas Becket of Canterburie, that opposed himselfe so obstinatly against his anointed King heere in England, about some liuings which he pre∣tended to belong to the Sea of his Archbishoprick appealing to the Pope from his Countryes Censure, exhibited an Information before Apollo, against his antient Friend Walter de Mapes Arch-deacon of Ox∣ford, for withstanding the Popes Legat, that came to London with a strict Decree to command all the Clergie men in England to put away their wiues. Walter de Mapes was sent for, at whose comming Th. Becket hauing license to make good his Informa∣tion, spake as followeth: Most Puissant Emperour, Our Holy Father the Pope, the visible Head of the Roman Church, Saint Peters famous Successor, whe∣ther by Reuelation from Heauen, or by the Spirit of Saint Peter, points not to bee questioned by Earthly men, or else by the motion of his owne Transcendent and neuer erring Braine wee know not, nor matters it much to speake off (for Ipse dixit his Godhead will haue it) in his reuerend regard vnto these remote Flocks of his, sent ouer his Ho∣ly Legat to me and my Brother of Yorke, to prohi∣bit all Religious Persons, of what qualitie soeuer, from thenceforth to defile their sacred bodies with those imperfect animals called Women, aswell be∣cause they might follow their bookes the better, not caring for the vanities of this transitorie world as also lest like New Fues they might tempt vs to taste what God had forbidden, that is, Iealousie, Anger, Deceit, Simony, and Pride to compasse meanes for their haughtie minds. After much diffi∣cultie we executed his Holinesse good will and plea∣sure. Neuerthelesse, this Seditious Sectarie, not onely openly with opprobrious words, but with an infamous Libell hee presumed to taxe our Holy Father of Errour (or Heresie if hee durst) for this Diuine Ordinance. The Contents of his Libell are these: That it was a grieuous torment for a Priest to put away his wife, because shee was his darling, affirming that the Bishop of Rome made an il Decree, and wisht him to beware hee dyed not in so great a Sinne. That his Holinesse forbad that pleasure now in his old age, which he loued in his youth. That Mapes defended his Errour by the authoritie of the Old and New Testament, citing Zacharie the Priest to be the Father of Saint Iohn Baptist, and that S. Paul allowed a Clergie man to be the Husband of one Wife: That it became a Priest better to marrie then to borrow or deflowre his Neighbours daughter, Niece, or Wife. And in Conclusion, hee was so impudent as to require all Priests to bestow toge∣ther with their Sweet Hearts a Pater noster a piece for this his goodly Apish Apologie. His Maiestie smiled to heare the Conceit. And thereupon caused the Pronotarie to reade the Libell as Walter de Mapes had framed it, who with an au∣dible voice did recite as followeth O quam d l r anxius, quam tormentum gra e Nobis dimittere, quoniam suaue. O Romane Pontifex, stat isti pra e Ne in ta t crimine moriaris, caue. Non est innocentius imo nocens verè, Qui quid facto d cuit, studet abolere. Et quod olim luuenis voluit habere, Modo vetus Pontifex studet prohibere. Giguere nos praecipit vetus Testamentum, Vbi Nouum prohibet nusquam est inuentum. Praesul qui contrarium donat Documentum, Nullum necessarium his dat Argumentum. Dedit enim Dominus maledictionem Viro, qui non fecerit generationem: Ergo tibi consulo per hanc rationem Gignere, vt habea Benedictionem. Nonne de Militibus Milites procedunt, Et Reges à Regibus qui sibi succedunt. Per Locum à Simili, Omnes Iura laedunt, Clericos qui gignere crimen esse credunt, Zacharias habuit prolem & vxorem; Per virum quem genuit adeptus honorem, Baptizauit enim nostrum Saluatorem. Pereat qui te eat nouum hunc Errorem. Paulus Coelos rapitur ad superiores, Vbi multas didicit res secretiores, Ad nos tandem rediens, i struens{que} mores, Suas, inquit, habeat quilibet vxores. Propter haec & alia Dogmata Doctorum, Reor esse meliu , & magis decorum Quisque suam habeat, & non proximorum, Ne incurrat odium & iram eorum. Proximorum Foeminas, Filias, & Neptes Violare nefas est. Quare nil disceptes. Verè tuam habeas, & in hac delectes, Diem vt sic vltimum tutius expectes. Ecce iam pro Clericis multum allegani, Nec non pro Presbyteris plura comprobaui. Pater Noster nunc pro me quoniam peccaui, Dicat quis{que} Presbiter cum sua Suaui. CHAP. VIII. Walter de Mapes is commanded by Apollo to de∣fend his Positions against the Pope, and Becket who accordingly obeyeth, and prooues the lawfulnesse of Clergie-mens Marriage, both by the Testimonie of the Scripture, and of the Ancient Fathers. AFter the Pronotarie had ended, Apollo com∣manded Walter de Mapes to defend his cause who thus began: I am glad, Most Noble Emperour, that my Aduersarie hath cited mee to defend my Cause in this judicious Court; where Bribes, blind∣nesse of Affection, and Passion cannot wrest the infallible reasons of Truth, as oftentimes wee see fall out in worldly Iudgements. Heere I need not feare the Popes Thunderbolt of Excommunicati∣on. And therefore with a resolued countenance and a minde vndaunted, I will proue out of the Holy Scriptures, and by the authoritie of the Primitiue Church, that wee Clergie-men may and ought to marrie as well as others. By the Old Testament, it is euident, that the Le∣uits, as Aaron, Phinehes, Eleazar, Zadock, Samuel, and Zachary were married men. Saint Peter him∣selfe, as we reade in the New Testament was like∣wise married, for our Sauiour Christ cured his Wiues Mother of an Ague. Saint Paul aduiseth a Bishop to be the Husband of one onely wife, and in another place auoucheth, that it is better to marrie then to burne. Yea and Christ himselfe a∣uoucheth it to be a very hard matter for any man whatsoeuer to continue chast, except it were giuen him from heauen as a special gift (as rare a Miracle, as a blacke Swan or a white Crow.) And shall we expect such miraculous and rare sightes in these tempestuous times, when the Church it selfe hath much adoe to steale out of Babylon? When the purest of vs all doe feele tumultuous Hurliburlies in our members striuing and strugling to ouer-ma∣ster the faculties of our Soules? As we are men we know our vnresistable frailties. We must acknow∣ledge our naturall Infirmities; or else we are Liers, and the Truth dwels not in vs. How much better then were it for vs to ioyne in lawfull Marriage, then to stay as stale Batchelers, and hypocritically to take vpon vs that taske, which our weake Ta∣bernacles cannot support? Sometimes wee saue those Soules by Marriage, which perhaps might proue lost, were they not our wiues. By these wee beget children, whom we traine vp and graffe into Christ. We enioy this happinesse oftentimes in our wiues and children, that by our examples and so∣cietie they shine as Starres heere on Earth, giuing light to them that sit in darknesse, we encrease the Kingdome of Heauen; and heere in this World wee leaue no scandall behind vs, as the vnmarried Ro∣mists doe by their Stewes, and stolne pleasures. Haue not we power to lead about a Sister, aswell as the rest of 1. Cor. cap. 9. the Apostles. This Tertullian one of the first Latine Fathers auerreth in these words: It was lawfull for In Exh r. ad Cast. the Apostles to marrie, and to lead their Wiues about with them in their iournies. What plainer instance can there be, then Saint Pauls aduise to Bishops and Deacons to content themselues with one Wife a∣piece, hauing children in subiection. For if a man T tas 1. knowes not how to rule his owne house, how shall hee care for the Church of God. Thus in admonishing the Clergie to satisfie themselues with one wife, the Apostle leaues the Temporall to their choise, who accounted it in those times one of their chiefest fe∣licities to haue many children. And therefore in re∣gard of their Custome, of their hot Climate, being farre more vnfit for procreation, of children then the cold Countries, as also for that their wiues were busied in giuing sucke themselues two or three yeeres vnto their little Ones, Saint Paul meddles onely with the Clergy-mens marriage, which lau∣dable custome none contradicted, vntill the Mani∣chees and Ebienites first beganne to taxe them for Marriage. So we reade, that Saint Gregory Bishop of Nazianzen had a Sonne called Gregorie, who succeeded him in his Bishopricke. Saint Ierome a Bi∣shop of Africke had a Daughter called Leonti , who was martyred by the Arrians. Saint Athanasius writing to Dragontius saith, that he knew many Bi∣shops vnmarried, and Monkes married; as also hee saw Bishops married, and many Monkes single∣men. The sixt generall Councell kept at Trulla did In Can. 3 much detest this Antichristian Policie against Priests Marriage; and therefore made this Consti∣tution. For as much as we are informed, that a Canon hath beene lately enacted by the Romane Church, that no Priest or Deacon shall haue to doe with a Wife: Wee following the Apostles Orders and Discipline doe order that the lawfull Marriage of Priests be for euer vsefull and auaileable. And a little after they yeeld the rea∣son why they did it: lest, say they, we bee compelled to dishonour Marriage, which was first instituted by God, and sanctified by his presence. What greater euidence will my friend Becket ex∣pect then these Primitiue Lights. If these will not satisfie his curious Iudgement, but that he yet re∣lies on the Decree of the Romish Church, let him belieue the Deuill himselfe out of the heard of Swine confessing the Truth of my allegations; euen your famous Canonist Cardinall Panormitane; conti∣nencie, Panormit d Cler. coning. ca . comoli . saith hee, in clericis Secularibus, in Secular Clergy-men is not of the substance of their Order, nor of the Law diuine, because otherwise the Greeke Church should sinne, nor could their custome excuse them. It followes, and I doe not onely belieue, that the Church hath power to make such a Law: but I like∣wise belieue, that such a Statute were expedient for the health of their Soules, that all that were willing might marrie; seeing that Experience teacheth, how a con∣trary effect ensues out of that Law of Continencie, seeing they liue not spiritually, nor are they cleane, but defiled with vnlawfull copulation to their most grie∣uous sinning; whereas they might liue chastly with their owne wiues. If this mans authoritie, who was one of your principall Darlings, seemes but a Conceit in your Saint-like vnderstanding; yet, me thinkes, my Lord the Pope, vpon your discreet mo∣tion might mitigate his rigour, and tolerate with vs to marrie, as well as hee tolerates the Iewes and Stewes at Rome. What stirres and tumults haue lately ensued vpon this Edict in the Church of Saint Dauid in Wales, our friend Giraldus Cambrensis, who is our Coaetaneus with many honest Clergy∣men can assure you. For when you sent this Canon vnder colour of your Metropolitane Visitation, that whole Diocesse withstood not onely this Canon, but also your owne Prerogatiue pretended from the Romish Church, clayming themselues, as heere∣tofore for the keeping of their Easter, to liue accor∣ding to the Rites of the Greeke Church, at Constan∣tinople, to which place, as the Seat of the Romane Empire appointed by Constantine, they appealed for the deciding of all doubts. Insomuch that our King Henry the Second, was faine to intreate for aide from the Lord Rice Prince of South Wales, to bring in your Visitation of Canterbury. If these cloudes of witnesses serue not to confirme the truth of my Poeme, which you terme a Libell, let vs then bee dispenced withall to keepe prettie Wenches in cor∣ners, and these to be dignified with the old Titles, The Lords Concubine, the Priests Leman, and the Kna es Whore. Apollo reuerseth the Popes Canon made against the Marriage of the Clergie, and to that pur∣pose sends out a Proclamation. APollo well noting the speeches of Walter de Mapes, and the great inconuenience, which the Prohibition of Marriage to the Clergie, had wrought in the Christian Church, with the Consent of al his Parliament assembled at Parnassus, reuersed that Canon, whereof Saint Paul had prophesied, that it was the doctrine of deuils to forbid Marriage, and withall caused this Proclamation to bee fixed in all places subiect to his populous Iurisdiction. Of late there rose a Sect of Caiphas kind, Which great renowme with Pen & tongue assign'd To Wedlock-bands, and with a large extent Confirm'd the same to be a Sacrament: Yet ne'rethelesse by quirks and tricks they push, As if they found a knot within a rush, Forbidding it to all the Clergy-men: A doctrine sure come from the Deuils de . But whats the fruit? Their bodies Lust inflames, That they doe burne, as scorcht in Aetnaes flames. Enamoured they wish for cruell death To end their watchfull cares, and wearied breath. Their mind runnes all on Loue. Loue moues the braine To muse vpon sweet Beauty dy'd in graine. This is the vpshot of their rash made vowes, Vnlesse the Baudy-house, which Rome allowes, Like to a lakes, doe ease their pampred reines, Or like a Horse-leach suck their puft vp veines. Returne then, Marriage to thy free estate. Repent, yee Shauelings, ere it be too late. Vse lawfull meanes, and leaue of stolne pleasure, Account of Marriage as the Churches treasure. Christs easie yoke (yee need not stand in awe) Dissolues old vowes, and for Dianaes Law. Christs easie yoke yeelds Priests a freer life, That one man be the Husband of one wife. CHAP. IX. Apollo vpon Information giuen him by the Greek Church of Images, erected by the Pope in the We∣sterne Churches, and of Inuocations on Saints confu∣teth these Idolatrous Traditions, both by the Testimo∣ny of the Scripture, and by the Positions of the Pri∣mitiue Church. THe Greeke Church, seeing that by no perswa∣sions the Pope would condiscend to abolish Idols & grauen Images out of the Romane Church, but that still he suffered euen in the chiefe Temples at Rome, the Pictures of the Virgin Mary, and of many other Saints to bee worshiped and called vp∣on with Prayers and Oblations, they resorted to Parnassus on Good Friday last, shewing to Apollo that the Popes not satisfied by their cunning practi∣ses and treasons to defeat them of the Primacie be∣longing to Constantinople, as to the Head Citie of New Rome, but likewise they set vp Charles of France, about the yeere 801. to inuest himselfe in the Empire of the West, and so by their Confedera∣cie to compel all Christendome to wander after the strange Beast of the seuen hilled Citie, which now grew to such a height, that his voice stood peremp∣tory as a Law, & Idolatry he accounted the Mother of Deuotion. The Romish Church were summoned to answere these Accusations, who made choice of Thomas Aquinas the famous Schooleman for their Aduocate, and him they sent to patronize their Cause before his Maiestie vpon the first of Aprill last according to the ancient stile 1626. this Doctor appeared in the Delphick Hall before Apollo, and said, that he came thither on the behalfe of the La∣tine Church to maintaine the lawfulnesse of Images in their Church. Apollo bad him proceed, and shew what hee could in their Defence, Aquinas then be∣gan in this manner: Most sacred Prince, farre be it from vs to adore any grauen Images. Wee that are learned know it is damnable. But when your Ma∣iestie shall vnderstand the reasons why wee tolerate them in our Churches, we shall not be found much in fault. For herein wee follow the counsell of the famous Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome. This Grgor. Sereno. lib. 7. Epist. 109. learned Father hearing that Serenus his fellow Bi∣shop had defaced and broken all the Images in his Church, he commended his Zeale therein. But af∣terwards wished him to permit them in Churches, to the intent that the vnlettered might bee edified by their view on the wals, seeing they could not reade them in Bookes. Yet with a prouiso, that those ignorant people should bee admonished not to worship them. The like aduice doe wee giue to our vnlearned people, that they adore not Idols, but onely that they inuocate and honour the Saints which those Idols doe represent. We worship not the Images of Christ or of the Virgin Mary be∣cause it is Idolatry so to doe. But we worship Christ and his Mother before their Images, because their Images doe allure vs to loue them. For mine owne part, I confesse it were good to abolish them, but we are constrained to tolerate them, to the end the simple sort of people might be won by the sight of them to giue the more reuerence to holy mysteries. Apollo hauing heard this glozing Apologie an∣swered: By your subtill speech you would make the Learned belieue, that you worship not these Images at all, but onely that you offer your seruice vnto them, like a Courtier. Yet neuerthelesse you bow your bodies and kneele vnto them; you begge for their fauours to be intercessors for you. Saint Anthony must helpe you for the Poxe, Saint Mar∣garet must come from Heauen to assist women in Child-bed: Saint Vitus must learne you to dance. Saint Iames must defend you in your Pilgrimage. The Pagan Poets neuer had so many houshold Gods Lares & D s Tutelares, as your Superstitious Reli∣gion allowes you to haue. O foolish men! will ye still repaire to muddie pooles, neglecting the Foun∣taine of liuing waters? God is a spirit, and they Ioh. cap. 4. which worship him must worship him in Spirit and Truth. He is inuisible to mortall eyes, so that no man should presume to mould his likenesse into Gold or Siluer Plates. His Saints are at rest, and must not bee raised vp, like Samuel, by any Endor Witches. The Virgin Mary liues in eternall ioyes, not to bee disturbed with the clamorous inuocations of worldly Creatures. This was the Heresie of the Collyridians, as our vertuous Epiphanius, who flou∣rished within foure hundred yeares after Christ, quotes downe to the memoriall of all Posterities Whose Arguments with the Cause I will not re∣peat vnto you, because all yee which goe vnder the naked name of Catholickes, may leaue off to ten∣der your seruice to the Creatures, iniuring your Creator, who will not communicate his glory to any whatsoeuer Saint, Angell, or Principality, ac∣cording to our Sauiours speech: Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue. Matth. cap. 4 In Arabia certaine women vsed vpon some Holy-dayes in the yeare to beare about a foure squa∣red Table with a cloth spred, and Bread thereon laid, which they offered to the name of the Virgin Marie. Epiphanius confutes this Heresie, saying, that Epiphan. in He∣res. 79. this was meere madnes, & a Sicknes of Eue now a∣gaine deceiued, nay, of the Serpent, which abused Eue. His Arguments are these. First, No women euer sacrificed in the Old Testament. Secondly, If any women, it had beene a regular Custome in the Church, that Mary her selfe did sacrifice in the New Testament, which wee neuer read of. Thirdly, Nor was the Sacrament of Baptisme euer committed to Mary. Or else her Sonne would haue made choise of her and not of Iohn. The Gospell was committed to the care of the Apostles, and not to any woman. Fourthly, The Daughters of Philip did prophecie, but neuer medled with those mysteries which be∣long to men, who onely executed the Priestly office. Fistly, Women were forbidden to speake in the Church. Out of these Propositions he proues, that the Virgin Mary is not to be worshipped. First, Because he is a Deuill, which making a God of a mortall na∣ture in the eyes of men, doth expresse by the varie∣ties of Art any carued Images, which represent the shape of man. Secondly, Because the minde com∣mits adulterie, which falls from the euer-liuing God to honour the Images of the Dead, like to a Whore, which forgoes the lawfull vse of a Husband to lye with others. Thirdly, Because Mary was not giuen vs to be worshipped, but that her selfe should wor∣ship her Sonne. Fourthly, For that these words in the Gospel doth warne vs to take heed: Woman, what haue I to doe with thee? That by these words wee might note in calling her Woman, that others might not admire her, as a Virgin too holy and sacred. Fiftly, Because in the Scriptures wee doe not find, that any of the Prophets euer commanded vs to worship any man, much lesse a woman. Sixtly, God allowes vs not to worship Angels. Therefore hee will not haue vs to worship Mary. Shee may bee mentioned with honour. But Worship and Ado∣ration is a mysterie due onely vnto God. The grea∣test Angels receiue not that Glorification. These bee the reasons which Epiphanius exhibited against the Collyridians. There was a Sect called Caianes, which Epipha∣nius noted likewise to call vpon the Angels. The which also Saint Augustine ascribed to those He∣retickes which were termed Angelici. The same Augustine mentioneth another sort of Heretickes called the Carpocratians, which worshipped the I∣mages of Iesus and Saint Paul. Saint Ambrose auer∣reth Augustin n. He∣res 71. Ambros. de Obi∣tu. beodos. Ierem. cap. 17. Epiphan. in Epist. ad Iohan. Epis op. Hieros. it an Heathenish I dolatrie for any man to wor∣ship the Crosse, whereon Christ suffered. The Pro∣phet also denounceth him accursed, which reposeth hope in man, saying, Cursed is the man which put∣teth his trust in man. Singular is that Example of Epiphanius, who on a time beholding a vaile in a Church painted with the Image of Christ thereon, hanging on the doores contrarie to the Authoritie of the Scriptures, hee tore it downe, and deliuered it so defaced to the Wardens, bidding them to be∣stow it for a shrowd on the next poore body, that died. And when the Churchwardens murmured, saying, that seeing he had tore it, he ought to haue bought a new one, or not to haue rent it so much as he did; Epiphanius promised to send them ano∣ther vaile to bee hanged vp in lieu thereof, which afterwards he performed, & in a letter to that effect to Iohn Bishop of Ierusalem, hee recommends the said vaile, charging him to beware how he permit∣ted any such Idolatrous things to bee set vp in any place within his Iurisdiction. To conclude, let it suffice, that Christians honor the memorie of the blessed Saints vpon those Daies which the Church haue allotted for that purpose. Let them glorifie God for vouchsafing to send those Seruants of his as the chiefe Elders and Pillars vn∣der their Sauiour Christ the Head of their corpora∣tion. But in no wise let them pray vnto them for feare of that Iealous Eare, which heareth euery word No man can come to the Father but by the Sonne. Nor can any man come to the Sonne, except the Father who sent the Sonne, doe draw him. Our Sauiour by his Godhead knowes the secrets of our hearts, Hee alone is enabled with power to helpe vs. He alone is the Master of Gods Court of Requests. Come vnto him all yee which are heauie laden, and he will re∣fresh you without suing vnto any other Mediatour whatsoeuer. Remember the words of Saint Paul, that Iesus Christ alone is our Aduocate with the Fa∣ther. One God, one Mediatour. CHAP. X. Martine Luther arriuing at Parnassus, shewes to Apollo, how the Popes vnder colour of redeeming mens Soules out of Purgatorie, vsed to conicatch Christians by the sale of Pardons. Apollo condemnes both the Fable of Purgatorie, and the vse of Popish Pardons. MArtine Luther a famous Diuine of Germany, whom some of his Countrymen call the se∣cond Elias, for his bold and constant asseueration of the Truth against the Ahabs of his time, came in great pompe to Parnassus on Tuesday in the Ea∣ster weeke last, 1626. associated with Er smus, Me∣lancton, Bucer, and many other valiant Champions of the Protestant Religion. And hauing lighted off their Pegasean horses, they entred into the Parlia∣ment house, where they attended vntill Apollo, the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and other Prince∣ly Courtiers of his Maiesties traine, were seated in their classicke ranks. Assoone as they saw the Ce∣remonies ended, Martin Luther made this Oration Most noble Emperour, It is now aboue an hundred yeares since I first preached against the inualiditie of Popish Pardons grounded on those dreames of Purgatorie (for the life of these Pardons is deriued from this Acheron) and as farre as I see, notwith∣standing all my vigilant cares and toilesome labors, matters are like to issue to their first elements and former confused Chaos, except some course bee so∣dainly taken to banish these Indulgences and do∣ting Pardons into the abisme of Lethe, neuer more to be remembred. What a shamefull thing is it for the Pope to vsurpe a higher prerogatiue then our Sauiour himselfe euer affirmed that his Almightie Father left vnto him? Hee knew not the Day of Doome, nor did hee seeke to know more then be∣came the Sonne of Man to know. And yet the Pope in worldly craft to bring more sacks to his mill, and a concourse of trading to his Babilon, hath granted a Pardon of 6000. yeares to come, vnto all such as shall resort to the Church of Saint Iohn de Late∣rane in Rome, and also an absolute Pardon of eight and twentie thousand yeares, with plenary remissi∣on of their Sinnes, to as many people as shall re∣payre thither vpon the Feast day of Saint Iohn the Euangelist: when as the Elect of God doe surely be∣lieue that this world cannot last so long, but that the Sunne of Righteousnesse shall shine before that time, and descend from the Heauens to iudge all the Sonnes of Adam. Many of my poore Coun∣trymen of late since the Conquest of the Palatinate haue beene forced to shift their Religion, and to ac∣cept of these idle Pardons against their consciences. Our humble motions now are to your Imperiall Highnesse, that you will curb this Man of Sinne in making frustrate histricks of Legerdemaine. Let Purgatorie fables bee taken away, these Indulgen∣ces and Pardons will cease. And if they cease, the Reuenues which support his Pride will become a∣bated. But as long as this Gulph doth lie open, the Christian World shall neuer enioy peace in bo∣die or mind. Apollo at these speeches of Luther seemed much to bewaile the condition of the times. And to fir∣ret out the better the Originall of Purgatory, and of the Popish Pardons he asked Peter Lumbard Ma∣ster of the Sentences, who flourished about fiue hundred yeeres agoe, whether in his time the world did belieue, there was any such place as Purgatory. Peter Lumbard answered, that there was not the least thought of such a place in his time. Nor doe the Greekes to this houre (said hee) credit any such matter. And shall I sleepe still, replied Apollo, while this Enchanter beguiles with his false lure the ares of simple Soules? The Poets had their Elisian fields, as this Fellow his Fable of Purgatory. They deuised theirs of pleasure. But He inuented his of base couetousnesse to rake to his Treasury what o∣thers got with infinite troubles. Hence arose that Prouerbe, that the Pope can neuer want money, as long as he hath a hand to hold a pen. While euerie Chimney in England paid the taxation called Pe∣ter-pence, they wanted not sanctified wares, like amulets and charmed scrowles, to defend their soules from Belsebub Princes of Deuils. They wan∣ted no Pardons to ransome them from the iawes of Cerberus. But if they slighted them, as scar-crowes, no peny no Pater noster, sinke or swimme, they were abandoned and left to the fatall Ferriman. O childish Popelines, shall papers thus bewitch you? Shall Pedlers deceiue you with false trinkets? Shall Iugglers and Mountebankes circumuent your vnderstanding with trifles and nifles in a bag, or with a pigge in a poke? Here in this World is your Purgatory, your place of triall, where the Righ∣teous, which liues by Faith, which loues his fellow Christian, shall possesse Heauen for his Reward, as on the contrary; Hell, if hee bee ouer worldly min∣ded, and cares for no man but himselfe and his own Family. Dust returnes, as the Prophet testified, into Eccles. cap. 12. dust from whence it came, and his soule returnes to God, from whence it came. Saint Cyprian makes no doubt of any other place. When men (saith he) are once Cypr. contra De∣ netrium. departed out of this life, then there is no place of Repen∣tance left. There is no more effect of any satisfaction. Heere in this World euerlasting life is either lost or gi∣uen. Saint Augustine who liued aboue a hundred yeeres after Saint Cyprian, writes that some in his time began to mooue the question, whether there were any such third place after this life? Yet for his owne part, he positiuely concludes vpon those two, of Heauen and Hell: But, quoth he, of a third place Aug. in Hipo∣gnost. contra Pe∣lag lib. 5. we know not. Neither doe we find any such in the ho∣ly Scriptures. Therefore let no man trust to the moon-shine in the water by other mens merits, his Sauiour excep∣ted, to redeeme his soule from the place where God appoints it. Dauid when hee vnderstood that his child got on Bethsabe was dead, left off his lamen∣tation and comforted himselfe. It is in vaine and too late for a man to seeke the reuersing of the di∣uine Iudgement, when he hath not the Grace to goe to the Physician, before he fall sicke. It is a sacri∣legious sinne in the Pope to make men belieue, that it lieth in his power to redeeme any mans soule from the place where the Almightie hath seated it seeing that hee cannot adde one yeere more to his owne life, then is allotted him by the course of na∣ture, nor borrow one minute of an houre to allay the pangs of his owne death. The very Best haue enough to doe to saue their owne soules without presuming to vndergoe a fruitlesse labour for ano∣ther man. Yea, though these three men were among them, Noah, Daniel, and Iob, they should deliuer Ezeth. cap. 14. but their owne soules by their righteousnesse, saith the Lord God. Seeing that Iesus Christ by his death and Passion hath satisfied his Fathers Iustice, and makes continuall intercession for the Penitent, let none despaire, nor trust any other besides this powerfull Mediatour. CHAP. XI. Gratian the Canonist conuents the Waldenses and Albigenses before Apollo for celebrating diuine Seruice in their Country Language, and not according to the Rites of the Romish Church. Zuinglius defends their cause by the Authoritie of the Scriptures and of the Primitiue Church. Apollo pronounceth a definitiue Sentence against the Pope, on the behalfe of the Waldenses and Al∣bigienses. NO sooner had Apollo refelled the vse of Po∣pish Pardons inuented of purpose to make good the old saying, that Purgatory is a very pick-parse, but Gratian the Canonist framed a supplicatiō against the Waldenses and Albigienses, wherein he shewed, that whereas Ignorance was the Mother of Deuo∣tion, and thereupon the Church of Rome to retaine true hearted simplicitie in the bowels of her chil∣dren, had like a politicke Mother, forbidden the reading of the Scripture in their Countries lan∣guage, to the intent that green-headed people, sow∣gelders, and base Mechanickes should not dispute of diuine Mysteries, which surpassed their vulgar capacities: yet those rude mountanists, Montanae belluae presumed to vnlocke the cabinet of the Bi∣ble, and to reade Gods Seruice in their barbarous Tongue. Whereby much euill, contentions, and continuall bangling arose of late yeeres among Christians, which otherwise might haue lyen co∣uered, as fire vnder ashes. Zuinglius a notable Diuine of Suitzzerland, being deputed by the Waldenses & Albigienses to defend their cause stood vp and said: with what face can you, O Gratian, blame these honest men for seeking the surest meanes of Saluation? Who will still stand groping in the darke, that may enioy the free light of the Sunne? Haue not they soules to looke vnto aswell as the Pope himselfe and his Cardinals? In reading the Word of God, Faith increaseth. And the Gifts of the Holy Ghost multiplyeth in relen∣ ing hearts. So that Peace, Vnitie and Loue as a uster of Grapes doe spring vp together, and beare downe the wrangling opposites. Neither is it any new Religion which they professe. For all your Chronicles can testifie, that these people haue de∣parted from the Romish Church, and proclaymed the Pope to be Antichrist aboue three hundred yeers before Luther was borne. And for the reading of diuine Seruice in a more familiar language, they haue the Scriptures for their warrant and the Pri∣mitiue Church for a patterne. The Prophet Dauid pronounceth that man bles∣sed, Psalme 1▪ which studies the Lawes of the Lord, and there∣in exerciseth himselfe day and night. Saint Iohn re∣commends them to the weaker sexe and children, as appeares by his Epistle written to the Elect Lady, and her children. Saint Paul protesteth, that hee had rather speake fiue words to bee vnderstood, then ten thousand in a strange language. And in another place he prayseth Timothy, that hee knew the Holy Scriptures of a child. Saint Basill in his infancie was 2. Tim. 13. 1 . Basil. Epist. 74. instructed in the Bible by his Nurse Macrina. Saint Ierome extols Paula a learned Matron for teaching her Maides to vnderstand the Scripture. Theodoret speaking of the ancient Christians in his time; You shall, saith he, see euery where the chiefe points of our Theod de Cu∣rand. Graecor. Assect. lib. 5. Faith read and vnderstood not onely of our Doctors, but also of shoo-makers, Smiths, and weauers, and of all kind of Artificers: not onely of our learned women, but likewise of them which get their liuing by their Needles, and of M id seruants not onely of citizens, but also of Husbandmen, insomuch that you shall be among us ditchers and Heardsmen arguing of Trinitie, of the Worlds creation, and of other deep points of diuinitie. Saint Chrysostome called for his Eloquence the Golden mouthed Doctour, exhorteth all men to reade the Scriptures. Heare me all yee Laymen, get yee Bibles, which are Physicke for the Soule, Or at least wise prouide your selues of the New Testament. Saint Paul prophesied, that Antichrist In hom. 9. in Coloss. 1. pist. 2. Thess. cap. should bee consumed with the Spirit of the Lords mouth. What is the meaning of this, but that hee must bee condemned by the Word of God, declared in the Canonicall Scripture? Euen by this Testimo∣ny, the Sword of the Spirit, at the bright brandi∣shing whereof the Romish Clerkes runne away like Cowards, and flye from them as if they were their mortall Enemies, relying in stead of God Spirit, vpon the Spirit of man, which speaking without such immediate Reuelations cannot but Erre, and grossely Erre. The consideration of this weightie point enforced Doctor Fisher Bishop of R chester in Rossens. Artic. 37. aduer. Luth. Apocalyps. cap his Booke against Luther, to wish for some other meanes to put downe the Protestants, then the Ho∣ly Scriptures. Therefore (quoth he) when Hereticks contend with vs, we must defend our cause by some other helpes, then by the sacred Scripture. In this they verifie the effects of that wonderfull Booke, which Saint Iohn in the Reuelation auerred to be as sweet as Honey in the mouth, but afterwards bitter in the belly, that is to say, sweet to read, because it promised euerlasting life, but for all that bitter in the stomacke when Crosses came to bee digested, when they were to forsake the pomps and vanities of this seducing world, and specially, when that counsell of our Sauiour came to be put in execution Sell all that which thou hast and come and follow mee. No wonder then, that the Pope and his Cardinalls delighting in temporall glorie, cannot abide to try their Controuersies by the euidence thereof, but with the hazard of some poore Schollers liues, they send them abroad as Frogs out of the Dragons mouth, to croke and crake of Antiquitie and Tra∣ditions, Ibid but in no wise to contend with vs by the Bibles Testimonie. This Booke proues indeed very bitter to their stomacks, who hunt after worldly Preferments. While the Bodies of the two Testa∣ments lay despised, moth eaten, and shut vp in their libraries, the Great Men of the world after their massacring in the Cities of spirituall Sodome and Apoc. cap. Aegypt, sent Gifts and Presents, the one to the other in token of gladnesse. So iocond were worldlings, as long as they might do what they list, and at the last obtaine for a little money full remission of all their Sinnes, mortall as veniall. But now that the Spirit of life is entred into their Carcasses, and they Ibid. stand vpon their feet, according to Saint Iohns Pro∣phecie, Feare seizeth on them, they waxe amazed, shunning their glorious Light. They reele to and fro, Psalme: and stagger like drunken men. Apollo liked exceeding well of Z ing lius his zea∣lous speech. And further adioyned this Admoni∣tion to Gratian and the rest of the Popes Fauorites; Not without a profound mysterie did Saint Iohn in the Reuelation compare the Romishh Curch to Spi∣rituall Aegypt. For euen as the Children of Israell were for many yeares kept in Bondage vnder the yoke of Pharaoh: so the Soules of Christians in the times of the generall Apostasie and departure from the true Faith were miserably subiected vnder the Popes Tyrannicall Command: insomuch that they were prohibited to haue Seruice in any other lan∣guage saue in the Romane, whose chiefe Citie the Tyrant himselfe vsurped, and in subtile policie would admit of no other Tongue then of his own Latine, which some hold to comprehend the my∣sticall name of the Beast, who possesseth that seuen hilled Citie. We doe therefore ordaine, that it shall bee lawfull for euer hereafter to euery Kingdome and Prouince to celebrate Diuine Seruice, and to read the Scripture in the Mother tongue, following the examples of the Primitiue Church. And euen as the Greeke Church, the Georgians in Armenia, the Abis ines in Aethiopia vnder Precious Iohn, and other Christians in the East, haue from the first time of their Conuersions vsed their Godly sacrifices, prayers, and thanksgiuing, euery Nation in their owne language: so now wee doe here allow, ratifie, and decree, that the Waldenses and Albigienses shall honour and glorifie their Creator in Vnitie and Tri∣nitie after the same manner in their owne knowne Tongue, as they haue accustomed for these fiue hundred yeres last past. And if any person be so har∣die as to bring in a Bull of Excommunication from the Pope against them for so doing, we doe by these Presents pronounce the same to bee void, siustrate, and of no effect; and that the Publishers of that thundring Libell, bee laesa Maiestatis reus, guiltie for wounding our Royall Maiestie, and to suff the Punishment due for Capitall Treason. CHAP. XII. Berengarius reneweth his opinion of the Lords supper, and proues both by the Scriptures and by the Authoritie of the most antient Fathers of the Pri∣mitiue Church, that the same is to bee taken after a spirituall manner, and in commemoration of the Lords death. VVIcklisse vnderstanding that his old Master This Berengari∣us was famous about 260. yeeres past. Berengarius had for feare of Death recan∣ted his notable Demonstration of the vse of the Lords Supper, which in his flourishing yeares hee had maintayned against the Pope and all the Romish Clergie, caused him to bee cited into his Maiesties Court at Parnassus to shew the reasons of his Re∣cantation, and whether hee did the same in good earnest, or else out of the frailtie of flesh and bloud. Berengarius appeared, and being asked of Apollo, wherefore hee made that attestation contrary to his Conscience? Berengarius trembling with teares confessed, that the Pope extorted that Recantation from him with menaces and threats; but that like to Hippolitus in Euripides hee kept a mind vnsworne: and that hee still perseuered in the truth of the Do∣ctrine which he formerly had taught, that the Body and bloud of Christ ought to be taken spiritually and not really. Apollo obseruing his contrition and in∣ward sorrow, freely forgaue him vpon condition, that hee would yeeld sound proofes out of the Scriptures, and the ancient Fathers of the Primitiue Church to conuince the Papists, wherby they might be thenceforth toungtied, and fully satisfied touch∣ing that materiall point of Faith. Berengarius glad of his Maiesties pardon, promised to declare his full knowledge, and out of hand drew out of his pocket this schedule, which Apollo presently caused Saint Bernard to read before all his learned Cour∣tiers. Saint Bernard obeyed his Soueraignes com∣mand, and publikely read the Contents, as follow: Euen as by the Law of Moses there were two Sacra∣ments ordayned to bee kept vntill the comming of Christ that great Prophet, whom God promised to raise vp like vnto Moses, viz. Circumcision and the Passeouer, or the sacrifice of the Lamb at Easter, the one seruing to bridle their carnall affections, the other to prefigure the eternall Lamb, which was to be crucified: so in the New Testament two Sacra∣ments were instituted to Christians in their stead. Baptisme and the Lords Supper, the one supplying the vse of Circumcision, the other of the Lamb at Easter, both to testifie our admittance and incor∣poration into the Christian Church, as ou ward vi∣sible markes, signes, or badges of our Faith onely in Christ. To these the Pope added fine Sacraments more in worldly policie to gaine money, Confirma∣tion, Penance, Orders, Extreme vnction, and Mar∣riage, which last his Holinesse debarres his Clergie of, because Gods Elect might suspect the rest as hu∣mane Traditions. These fiue sometimes may bee necessarie, as other Diuine vertues, Loue, Humi∣litie, Sobrietie, and such like, but not properly to be called Sacraments. Which Saint Augustine very plainely affirmeth in these words: Christ and his Disciples deliuered vnto vs a few Sacraments instead August. lib. 3. de Doctrina Christ. cap, 9. of many, Baptisme and the Lords Supper. Neither was the Pope content onely so to adde more yokes of bondage to the free Church of Christ, but like∣wise for his further condemnation hee peruerted with those old Heretickes the Capernaites, the true sense of those words, This is my Body, saying, they must be taken literally, and really, which a sober minded Christian lothes to heare asmuch as Auer∣roes the Moore, who detested Christian Religion for nothing more then for that they did eate their God with their teeth, and sought to hale their Sauiour from the Right hand of God, where his Father had placed him vntill the Day of Iudgement. After the Consecration of the Bread and Wine we confesse that there is an alteration in respect of the End and vse of this mysticall Sacrament, to put vs in minde of the Lords death, vntill hee comes to iudge the world, but we vtterly deny that there is any altera∣tion at all in the substance of the Bread and Wine, which remaines as it did before, and enters into our Bodies to be digested and concocted, like vnto other naturall and corruptible Food. Yet most sig∣nificantly they may bee called Sacramentall Bread and Sacramentall Wine, representing the Body and Bloud of Christ, if they bee taken with a spirituall mouth and a deuout mind, that is, by Faith, and not receaued with a carnall mouth and bodily ap∣petite. For, as Saint Paul wrot, haue not wee hou∣ses for that purpose? As a bodily mouth requires bodily meat, so a spirituall mouth must haue spiri∣tuall Food to refresh and nourish the Soule. And this manner of Eating Christs Body did himselfe ex∣pound, when some grew displeased, saying, that it was a hard speech for a man to eat his Body, and to drinke his Bloud, by adioyning these words after∣wards: It is the Spirit which quickneth, the Flesh pro∣fiteth Ioh. cap. 6. nothing. The words which I speake vnto y n are spirit and life. What plainer sense will any man looke for, then the speech it selfe? This is my Body, that is, this very Bread is my Body; which bread he broke into pieces before he suffred on the Crosse and gaue it in commemoration and remembrance of his after-passion. The Papists will not allow, that the bread is broken, but that it is transubstantiated and changed into his very Body, which the Apo∣stle vtterly conuinceth, saying, the bread which wee breake is the Communion of the Body of Christ. And in another place he writes, that it is to bee taken in 1 Cor. cap. 10. remembrance of the Lords death vntill he comes. To which manner of taking it, all the antient Fathers of the Primitiue Church subscribe with one consent. Iustine Martyr, who liued within one hundred and In Tri on. p. 2. Propos. 3. 6. fiftie yeares after Christ, protesteth, that the Lords Supper is recordatio a remembrance of the Incarnation and Passion, which Christ sustai∣ned for penitent sinners. Irenaus who liued about the same time calls it Res terre as earthly things. Clemens Alexandrinus, who liued about ninescore yeares after our Sauiour, saith, that it is the Body and Bloud of Christ allegorice allegorically, or by Lib. 2. Ta ageg. an obscure Figure. Origen which flourished with∣in two hundred yeares after Christ, writes, that it is the Image of Spirituall things, and words fee∣ding the Soule. Tertullian the first Latine Father, which wrot about two hundred yeares after Christ, Contra Mar 4 termes it the Figure of the Body and Bloud of Christ. Dionysius Areopagita saith, that the Bread and Wine at the Communion were sensible images and apparell symbolically put about our Sauiour Di n s. l. de Ecclesia . Hic∣ a ch ap. 1. Chrysost. ad Caesar Ho∣ 15. Mat. Christ. . Bishop Chrysostome that was called the Golden-mouthed Father, makes this protestation of it: The Bread after that is sanctified, is worthily termed the Lords Body, although the nature of Bread doe still remaine in it. Of this beliefe was Saint Augustine. To eat the flesh of a man (saith he) and to drinke his bloud, one would thinke it were a heynous matter. Therefore it is a figure which August de Doct. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16. our Sauiour vsed, commanding vs to communicate his Passion, and in our memories profitably to lay vp, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for vs. CHAP. XIII. The Romish Church accuseth the Church of Ae∣thiopia, for denying to acknowledge her to be the Mo∣ther and Catholike Church. The Patriarch of Alexandria challengeth the pri∣macie ouer that Church, and proues the Pope of Rome to be an Intruder, and to haue no Right at all ouer the Church of Aethiopia. Apollo determineth the Difference by discouering the wayes how the Pope got the Supremacie ouer the Westerne Churches, and how both he and the Gene∣rall Councels erre in matters of Faith. THe Church of Rome seeing that by the helpe of Printing, the Spirits of the Westerne Empire were illuminated with the bright Rayes of the Go∣spell, and thereby had shaken her Foundations, Su∣perstitions, and Traditions, which shee had inuen∣ted to inueigle mens Soules, and to maintayne her temporall Ambition, by diuing into their secrets and treasurie, and that which was was the greatest Corrosiue to her heart, shee had found Apollo and the most part of his learned Troope, ardently bent to crosse her proceedings by trying her impostures and suggestions on the Touch-stone of the sacred Scriptures, shee vtterly despayring of repayring her credit in that Part of the world, before her last mo∣tion to enter into the herd of Swine, with the vn∣cleane spirits in the Gospel, made intercession vnto Apollo, by some neutrall Papists, and luke warme Lutheranes, that shee might haue some Soueraign∣tie ouer those Countryes, which lay remote from his Maiesties Court at Par ssus. Apollo not accu∣stomed to grant any Charters, Monopolies, nor o∣ther appendants to the state of his Empire, which might preiudice either the Reuenues of his Crown, or the weale of his Subiects, without the aduise of his Parliament, willed her to preferre her Suit on the sixteenth day of Iune next after 1626. at the first Sessions of the Parliament to be held at Parnassus. The Romish Church failed not to motion vpon the said day, and signified, that whereas she had liued in infinite glorie and pompe for the space of eight hundred yeeres, and that now in her old Age like to the decrepit Lyon in Aesops Fables, euery beast had a fling at her, euen the veriest Asse and coward∣ly Hare began to contemne her commands, to vi∣lifie her Iurisdiction, and to esteeme no otherwise of her thundring Buls, then if they were the windie brauadoes of a Braggadochian, or the bellowings of the Buls of Basan. The consideration whereof did now prick her to intreat a Boone at his Maie∣sties hands, that it might be lawfull for her to exact the same obedience of the Christians in Aethiopia, vnder Precious Iohns Scepter, which sometimes she had extorted from the Christians of Great Brittaine, Germanie, and other Prouinces in Europe; whereby she might liue in some reputation as yet in her anci∣ent yeares. The Patriarke of Alexandria netled with this request, and fearing les by the suffrages of those luke-warme Ecclesiasticks, which like Iacks on both sides, stood as it were betwixt Heauen and Hell, this Imperious Lady might preuayle and depriue him of the Primacie which he and his Predecessors had successiuely enioyed from the Apostles time, opposed her with this Oration: Was it not enough for you, O Ambitious Dame, to tyrannize in your youth, to prostitute your body for gaine to all com∣mers, but now you must bee like another Romane Flora, after your abominable whoredomes adored for a Goddesse? and triumph ouer those innocents, which the scorching Sunne hath diuided by the Aequinoctia line from the Meridian of Rome? what interest? what colour of Title can you prescribe to haue in those places where your Constantine, your Phocas, and your Charles of France neuer trod, nor euer any of the Roman Legions? These People were first conuerted to the Christian Faith by the Eunuch in the Acts of the Apostles, Seruant to the Queene Candace, not without a singular mysterie, that there shee might soiourne during the time of the Great Apostasie, when Faith was departed according to Saint Pauls prophesie, and the Bible represented by the two Witnesses in the Reuelation of Saint Iohn did lye worme-eaten in the Sodomites Libraries. Saint Matthew confirmed them afterwards in the Truth; And from his time vntill this present, we the Patri∣arkes of Alexandria haue had the Prerogatiue to in∣stall their Bishops, to institute their Priests, and to order their controuersies. Nor did you, proud La∣dy heare of the manner of their Liturgie and Ec∣clesiasticall policie, but within these seuenscore yeares. It is true you sent your flying Spirits thi∣ther of late sundrie times to peruert them and to kindle a combustion in their Religion, but all in vaine, for they smelt out your drift, and banished your Iesuites to requite some part of your hospita∣litie to strangers, in that for the space of a whole yeere and better you restrayned their Embassadour at Lisbone from entring into your Hypocriticall Church. And as he wrot to Damianus a Goes, such was your insolencie, that by no meanes you would admit them to communicate nor keepe companie with you, as if they were the arrantest Heretickes of the world. The Romish Church much agrieued that the Patriarke of Alexandria had preuented her in a Suit, which shee had cunningly canuased, and almost brought to perfection, pleaded, that all the world ought to be vnder her Gouernment. For our Sauiour Christ after his Passion said, that all Power was giuen vnto him in Heauen and Earth. And this Power with the keyes did Hee before his Ascension into Heauen commit vnto Peter. Which Soue∣raigne Authoritie after Peters death, rested, like the Spirit of Elias on Eliza the Prophet, vpon the Suc∣cessors of Peter. For proofe of which Princely pre∣heminence, shee alledged the testimonie of Pope Gregorie the ninth, who flourished in the yeare 1225. how God made two great Lights in the firma∣ment of Heauen, that is to say, of the Catholicke Church, the which two Lights are the Pontificall Au∣thoritie, Greg. 9. lib. 1. Decret. tit. 33. and the Regall Power whereby men might know, that there is as much difference betwixt Popes and Kings, as betwixt the Sunne and the Moone. At these words the Patriarke reioynd, and said, these arrogant words of yours, pronounced now in your drooping and declining Age, doe decipher you to be like an old Bawd and gracelesse Strumpet. Was not the cure of Soules sufficient for you, but you must also domineere ouer their bodies, and more ouer their Purses? This last is the cause of your discontent. How doth the Spirit of Saint Peter rest on you more then the Spirit of Saint Matthew or Saint Philip rest on mee or my Aethiopian Clergie? By that similitude Caiphas might vaunt, that he had the spirit of Aaron. But their Glorie ought not to countenance our Infirmities. Neither, as Saint Chry∣sostome said, is the Place able to sanctifie the Succes∣sor, nor can the Chaire make a Priest. Saint Peter was Chrysost. dist. 40. of a higher Function then a Pope, an Apostle to trauell from one place to the other, hauing the charge of the Circumcision, as Saint Paul of the Gen∣tiles. Hee was not tied to any one peculiar City. O I would, that both of vs were able to follow his godly steps, and to labour vp and downe the world in conuerting of Idolaters, and to preach nothing but Christ crucified, without collaterall Mediators and worldly respects of Dignities, Pompes, or in hunting for Superioritie, Gaine and fat Benefices. Saint Peter had no Gold nor Siluer to giue, as him∣selfe Act. cap. 3. told the Creeple in Salomons Porch. Hee wore no Triple Crowne, but reioyced in the Crowne, in his Masters thornie Crowne, the Crowne of Mar∣tyrdome. Hee wore no filuer Crucifixe, but in his heart hee bore the contemplation of the bloudie Crosse, which day and night hee earnestly beheld. He taught his conuerted Flock to bee subiect vnto Kings. The Pope exalts himselfe aboue all Kings, 1. Pet. cap. 2. aboue the Generall Councels. Saint Peter would not suffer Cornelius to kneele vnto him. The Pope expecteth that euen the mightiest Monarchs should kisse his Feet. Et mihi & Petro. Saint Peter willingly endured reproofe at the hands of Paul. But who dares rebuke the Pope and tell him of his faults? Galat. cap. 2. Saint Peter acknowledged the rest of the Apostles for his Brethren and Fellowes. The Pope allowes of no Patriarch, nor Bishop to be his equall, nor of any Clergie man to be made but by his Authoritie. Saint Peter and Saint Paul preached that Christ was the Head of the Church, as the Husband of the Wife, and for that end hee sent the Holy Ghost as his Vicar generall to direct the Soules of the Elect in spirituall mysteries during his residence in Heauen, without apointing any Earthly Potentate or visible Head to execute that high Office, and left their bo∣dies to the Gods of the Earth, to bee tried, as Gold in the fornace. It is the Soule, the noblest part of man, which hee takes most care of. Why should He then ordaine a visible Head, an ambitious Pope to domineere, nay to tyrannize ouer that I uisible Part? What neede any other Head as ministeriall ouer our Consciences? He that ouerlookt the seuen Golden Candlestickes, that is, the seuen Churches in the Reuelation, and further promised the presence of his God-head, I am with you to the Worlds end, no Math. cap. 18. doubt, but hee will supply the place of a spirituall Head, and infuse both spirituall nourishment into our Soules, as also afford food and necessaries to our bodies, though not according to the vaine de∣sires of flesh and bloud, which gape after superflui∣ties, yet enough to content nature. O miserable state of Rome! In what danger lyes thy Soule? Saint Bernard long agoe reprehended this aspiring humour of the Romish Clergie. And yet such is the force of tempting Gaine, dolosinummi, that if Mo∣ses himselfe and the Prophets arose from the dead, they would not heare them as long as they spake against their worldly profit. At first you beganne saith he, to vsurpe as Lords ouer the Clergie, contrary to Saint Peters admonition, and within awhile after a∣gainst Be . Epist. 230 Saint Pauls counsell, who was Peters fellow A∣postle, yee got the rule ouer the Faith of men. Nor yet doe yee stay heere, but yee haue gone further and obtai∣ned a peremptorie dominion ouer Religion it selfe. What remaines now, but that yee climbe on high to bring in∣to subiection the very Angels of Heauen? Apollo very well approued the Catriarkes re∣proofe of the Romish Church, and fell into such de∣testation of her intolerable ambition, that he made this speech against her: Three things haue wrought this absurditie in the Religion of the Westerne Chri∣stians, the one hapned by the Opinion of the Popes extraordinarie Power imprinted in mens minds by their Ghostly Fathers, that his Holinesse, as Saint Peters Successour cannot erre in matters of Faith. The second, and most craftie, that all men whatso∣euer, who beleeue not in the Catholick Church, which you must perswade your selfe to bee onely the Romish, are vndoubtedly in the state of Damna∣tion. The third are the lyes of Purgatorie, the which being at his dispose as Iudge & Iayler, made euery man, specially the melancholick, to take heed of angring him or any of his tribe, as on the contra∣rie to appease his humour with Gifts and the buy∣ing of his idle Pardons. But now, my Beloued of Par nassus, the vaile is taken from his painted face, and you shall see and read in his eyes the affections of his heart. And least some of you bee not so quicke sighted as others, I will briefely runne ouer the two first causes of his Greatnesse. After our Sauiours death for the space welnigh of three hundred yeeres, the Christian Religion was so persecuted by the Romane Emperours, specially, at Rome it selfe, and in the neerest places adioyning vnto Rome, that no Ecclesiasticall Policie could stand on foote, nor erect publicke Churches, and consequently no Mitred Bishops, to solemnize or order the affaires of that spiritual Common-wealth in any complete forme, no more then at this day we see in France, a few places onely by their Ciuill Warres tolerated: Specially in Paris the chiefe Ci∣tie, they of the Reformed Religion cannot haue any, but by permission about two leagues from the Ci∣tie they are allowed their Diuine Seruice. The like, though not so openly, those ancient Christians were tolerated to enioy priuately in their Houses, as in hugger-mugger at Rome, the Capitall Seate of that Empire. In processe of time Constantine the Great attained to the Empire, who for some causes, and principally because he would bee a neerer Neigh∣bour to the Northerne Nations, and also to the Persians, who infested his State with sundry inrodes and hostile inuasions, he was constrained to remoue the Imperiall Seate to Constantinople, leauing the Bishop of Rome some power at old Rome, whereby in his absence hee might, as a Reuerend Prelate with his graue and Christianly exhortations retaine the Citizens in their Alleageance. In this sort these good Bishops continued loyall to their Prince and subiect to their Command and to their Successours in the Empire, vntill the yeere of our Lord, 606. a∣bout which time after a great contention for the Primacie betwixt them and the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, which then was called New Rome, Pho∣cas by the murther of his Lord and Master Maurice the Emperour, hauing gotten the Soueraigntie made Boniface the Third Supreme Bishop aboue all other Bishops, and to that end sent forth a Decree, that all the Churches in his Empire should obey him as their Soueraigne Bishop, which Iurisdiction he held onely Naucler. in Spiritull matters. After this the Emperour Iustine Iustinians Sonne raigned; who sent Longinus as his Deputy into Italy, to settle the confused state there∣of after the expulsion of the Gothes, who altered the forme of Gouernment in Rome, and abrogated the Senate and Consulary Dignities, which till that time continued and carried with it a glimpse of the ancient Maiestie of the Romane State, and in steed of them appointed one Principall Gouernour, whom he called an Exarch or Viceroy. This innouation ministred an occasion to the Lumbards to enter into Italie. And then the Citie of Rome felt new trou∣bles. But at last, Theodoricus King of the Goths by the Popes Counsell remoued from Rome, and e∣rected Rauenna to be the Head Citie of his King∣dome, and there keeping his Royall Court gaue room to the Popes to flourish in Rome. Sometimes they tooke part with the Emperour, some other times with the Lumbards, accommodating their fortunes warily to the strongest parties liking. Thus they continued vntill the Emperour Heraclius his time, who being oppressed by the Persians, Saracens, and Arabians vnder Mahomet, was so farre from loo∣king into the affaires of Italy, and into the Popes as∣piring designes, that he found much adoe to defend his neerer territories from those bloudy Enemies and Infidels. The Popes watchfull to take aduan∣tage partly by their Religious carriage among the common people, and partly by Rewards got them∣selues to be equall in Power with the Kings of the Lumbards. And then Pope Gregorie finding him∣selfe reasonable strong, assaulted Ra enna the chiefe Citie of Italie and tooke it. But being presently expulsed out of it by Astulfus King of the Lum∣bards, hee was reseized thereof againe by succours sent vnto him from Pipin King of France. After A∣stulfus death the Pope falling at ods with Desiderius the sonne of Astulfus, hee sent for aide to Charles the Great King Pipins Sonne, who in proper person came into Italie, tooke Desiderius Prisoner, aug∣mented the Popes Dominion, and at his motion crowned himselfe Emperour of the West at Rome. At which time he againe to requite his good will ena∣cted, that from thenceforth the Bishop of Rome as Christs Vicar should neuer more bee subiect to any Earthly Potentate. And whereas before that time they were themselues confirmed Bishops by the Emperour at Constantinople, now by this new Em∣perour of the West, they began to be of themselues, and by their wits got the Emperours to be inuested at their hands. This Pope was Leo the third. And this notable Accident and alteration fell out about 801. yeares after Christ. After Leo his decease, Pope Paschale after the example of his Predecessour Leo; who had wrested the nomination of the Pope from the people of Rome, and also the confirmation from the Emperour at Constantinople, caused those Priests of the Citie, who had elected him as the next neigh∣bours to be enobled with a glorious Title, and to be called Cardinalls. Thus in lesse then two hundred yeares after their Supremacie, obtayned from Pho∣cas in spirituall matters, the Popes aspired to a Su∣premacie in temporall affaires, not so much for their hypocriticall holinesse, as indeed for the Dig∣nitie and repute of the Place and Seat, their Citie of Rome hauing beene the Lady of the world, and the eyes of all men being fixt on that Place, brought at length most Princes of Christendome, as Factions grew betwixt them, to make profitable vse of their friendship, either to appease their Aduerfaries, or vnder colour of their Excommunications and Saint Peters keyes to oppresse one another. Yea, and that which was most strange, as Machiauell obserues in his Florentine Historie, King Iohn of England vpon the dissention betweene him and his Subiects yeel∣ded himselfe at the Popes dispose, when hee dur not shew his face in Rome, by reason of the Facti∣ons of the Orsini and Columneses, and of the Gu ses and the Gibellines, but was faine to translate the Papacie to A inion in France. Whereby our Politi∣cians may gather this remarkable Rule, that things which seeme to bee and are not such in very de d, are more feared or regarded afarre off, then at home by reason of the vncertaine knowledge, which strangers haue of other mens states. Thus may all good Christians note by what meanes the Church of Rome arriued to her Greatnesse, and how like a Foxe by little and little the Pope crept vp to the double Supremacie, which Saint Peter and the bles∣sed Apostles neuer once dreamed, nor would our Sauiour Christ by any meanes accept of the Tem∣porall Sword. For hee vtterly defied the Deuill, when hee motioned vnto him of an Earthly King∣dome. And when some purposed afterwards to make him King, he forsooke that Coast. To con∣clude this point of the Popes Supremacie, Pope Hil∣debrand, whom some call Gregory the seuenth, after much contestation with the Emperour and his Gi∣bellines was the first which triumphed ouer him a∣bout one thousand yeeres after Christ. Of whom an ancient Historiographer thus testifieth: To this man only doth the Latin Church ascribe, that she is free, and pluckt out of the Emperours hands. By his meanes she stands enriched with so much wealth Onuph. in vit Greg. 7. and Temporall Power. By his meanes shee stands inriched with so much wealth and temporall Pow∣er. By his meanes shee got the Soueraigntie ouer all Emperours, Kings, and Christian Princes; where∣as before shee was kept vnder like a base maid ser∣uant not only by the Emperour, but by any Prince assisted by the Emperour. To returne now to the other cause, which aug∣mented the Popes Greatnesse, that he cannot erre in matters of Faith, and therefore men are perswaded to beleeue in his Church, as the onely Catholick in the world, or indeed as if shee were equall vnto Christ in Puritie, and therefore partaker of our Creede. But the Truth auoucheth otherwise, that all men are Lyers and full of Sinne, euen from the beginning. The most Righteous man sinnes euery day in the weeke. The Apostles in Christs time contended for Dignitie. After his death Peter and Paul varied in opinion. Paul and Barnabas could not agree. Liberius Bishop of Rome subscribed to the Arrian Heresie. Honorius Bishop of Rome was a Monothelite, and condemned for the same Heresie by the Generall Councell held at Constantinople. Saint Augustine mentions of the Errour maintayned by Innocent Bishop of Rome, that Innocents could not be saued, except they receiued the Communion. And as Popes erred thus in matters of Faith: so did Generall Councels themselues most grossely erre. The Councell of Arimine established the Arria Here∣sie. The Councell of Nice decreed the Soules of An∣gels and men had bodily shapes. The Councell of Ephes s enacted Canons on the behalfe of the Ne∣storian Heresie. The consideration of which Errors, whereto all mortall Creatures are subiect while they soiourne in their earthly tabernacles, moued holy Augustine to reiect the authoritie of a Gene∣rall Aug co t. Ma lib. 3. cap 4. Councell, which Maximinus alledged against him. Neither ought I, said he, to be tyed to try my cause by the Councell of Nice, or the Councell of Ari∣mine, to better or preiudice one anothers cause, but to decide the Question to the Holy Scriptures Testimonie which are indifferent to both of vs, and not partially bound to either of vs. And indeed there may bee yeelded a reason of Policie for not standing to any Humane Positions. In a Generall meeting all men are not of the same mind, nor of the same opinion but euery particular man as hee hath his voice, so hee hath his seuerall will. Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vinitur vno. Commonly where many meet, some are selfe o∣pinionated, some factious, others ouer-swayed by the most voices; so that the Godliest being the few∣est are abandoned; and then the Canons doe passe according to mens affections, and very oftentimes in fauour of the Pope and his Cardinals in hope of worldly preferments, dispensations, or for feare of angring their Superiors in Authoritie, which the Holy Ghost obseruing, he withdrawes his powerfull presence from their Consciences, and leaues them puris naturalibus, to their owne naturall endow∣ments, and consequently to bee seduced by the world. Which of the ancient Fathers liued free from Errours? Iustine Martyr, Irenaeus, and Tertul∣lian held the Millenarian Heresie. Saint Cyprian er∣red in his iudgement of Rebaptization. Why then doth the Church of Rome arrogate to her selfe such Holinesse as to condemne all other Churches, because they conforme not themselues with her Doctrine and Traditions? It is one thing to belieue that there is a Catholicke Church, and another thing though blasphemous, to beleeue in the Catholick Church. And now for the concluding of this present difference betwixt the Church of Rome and the Aethiopian, whereof the Patriarch of Alexandria challengeth the Primacie, wee doe or∣der that euery Nation be allowed their seuerall Iu∣risdictions. As in like manner hath heeretofore beene enacted by the Councell of Nice, in the yeere 325. Let the ancient custome bee still in vse, that the Concil. Nicen. Canon. 6. Bishop of Alexandria haue the Iurisdiction ouer Ae∣gypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, euen as the Bishop of Rome enioyeth the like libertie in his Parts. And so let the Churches of Antioch, and of other Prouinces haue their preheminences maintained as informer times. CHAP. XIIII. Scotus the Master of Subtile Questions connents Sir Geffrey Chaucer for calling the Pope Antichrist, and comparing the Romish Church to the griping Griffon and the true Church to the tender Pel∣lican. SCotus that famous Schooleman for subtile qui ks and quiddities hauing watched for these two hundred and sixtie yeeres, opportunitie to insinu∣ate himselfe into his Maiesties fauour by some no∣table exploit, and ow seeing that the Church of Rome began to totter, he repayred to the Delphick Hall vpon the sixteenth of Iune last 1626. Where after an eloquent Oration against the Lutherans, hee complayned of Sir Geffrey Chaucer the English Poet, that he about the latter end of King Edward the thirds Raigne, had published in his Plo -mans Tale most abhominable Doctrine, which infected not only diuers rare wits of that Age, but likewise wrought so much alteration in succeeding times, that Iohn Wickliffe, Iohn Husse, Ierome of Prague, Luther, and others now stiling themselues Prote∣stants, had quite abandoned their Mother Church of Rome, which had flourished in stately Pompe and Pontificalibus for many hundred of yeares be∣fore. And particularly hee charged Chaucer for calling the Pope Antichrist, and for comparing his Followers to the Griffon, and the pretended Reformed Church to the Pellican. Apollo willing now vtterly to abolish those Pa∣trons of Equiuocations, lyes, and deceits, was glad of this occasion, which so fairely presented it selfe vnto him. And to that end iudicially to proceed against them, he caused the chiefe points of the said Ploughmans Tale to bee openly read by the Pronotarie of the Court, who with a loud voice thus repeated the same. Euen as I wandred in a wro, In a Wood beside a wall, Two Fowles saw I sit th . The falser foule mought him befall. That one did plead on the Popes side A Griffon of a grimme stature, A Pellican withouten pride To these Lollers laid his lure: Hee mused his matter in measure: To counsell Christ euer gan he call. The Griffon shewed as sharpe as fire. But falshood foule mought him befall. The Pellican began to preach Both of mercie, and of meeknesse. And said Christ so gan vs teach, And eeke and mercifull gan blesse. The Euangelists doe beare witnesse, A Lambe he likeneth Christ ouer all, In tokening that he meekest was: Sith pride was out of Heauen fall. And so should euery Christian be Priests, Peters Successours Both humble and of low degree. And sen none earthly honours, Neither Crowne nor curious couetours, Nor Pillour, nor other proud Pall. Nor ought to coffren vp great treasures, For falshood foule mought them befall, Priests should for no cattell pleade, But chasten them in charitee. Nor vnto battell should men leade, For enhaunsing of their owne degree. Not wilne sittings in high Sea, Nor Soueraig tie, in house, nor hall. All worldly worship defie and flee. For who so willeth Highnesse foule shall fall. Alas who may such Saints call, That wil eth weld earthly honour. As low as Lucifer such shall fall, In balefull blacknesse ybuilden their bowre, That eggeth the people to Errour. And maketh them to them thrall: To Christ I hold such one Traytour. As low as Lucifer shall fall. That willeth to be Kings Peeres, And higher then the Emperour. Some that were but poore Freeres, Now wolden waxe a Warriour. God is not their Gouernour, That holdeth no man his Permagall. While Couetise is their Counsellour, All such falshood mo ght need fall. With Pride they punish the poore, And some they sustaine with sale, Of holy Church making a Wh re. And glut their bellies with Wine and Ale, With Money they fill many a male: And chaffren Churches when they fall, And tellen the people a lewd tale. Such false faitours foule them befall. And Mitres more then one or two, Y perled as the Queenes head. A staffe of Gold and pirrie too, As heauie as it were made of lead: VVith Cloth of Gold both new and red: VVith glitter and Gold, as greene as gall. By doome they damne men to dead. All such faitours foule them befall. And Christs people proudly curse VVith broad Booke and braying Bell. To put pennies in their purse, They will sell both Heauen and Hell. And in their sentence thou wilt dwell: They willen gesse in their gay hall. And though the sooth thou of them tell, In great cursings shalt thou fall. Christs Ministers clepen they beene, And rulen all in robbery; But Antichrist they seruen cleane. Attired all in Tyranny: VVitnesse of Iohns Prophesie, That Anticrist is their Admirall, Tiffelers attired in Treacherie. All such faitours foule them fall. VVho saith that some of them may sinne, He shall be doomed to be dead. Some of them would gladly winne, Against that which God forbad. All Holy they clepen their Head, That of their Rule is Regall. Alas, that euer they eaten bread, For all such falshood will foule fall. Their Head loueth all Honour, And to be worshipped in word and deed. Kings must to him kneele and cour, To the Apostles which Christ forbad. To Popes Hests, such taken more heed, Then to keepe Christs Commandement. Of Gold and Siluer be their weed, Who hold him whole Omnipotent. He ordaineth by his Ordinance To Parish Priests a power. To another a greater aduaunce. A greater point to his mystery. But for he is Highest in Earth heere, To him reserueth he many a point. But to Christ, that hath no Peere, Reserueth he neither rib nor ioynt. So seemeth He aboue all, And Christ aboue him nothing, When he sitteth in his stall, Damneth and saueth, as him thinke. Such pride before God doth stinke. An Angell bad Iohn to him not kneele, But onely to God doe his bowing. Such willers of worship must needs fall. There was more mercy in Maximian, And in Nero, which neuer was good, Then is now in some of them, VVhen he hath on his furred Hood, They follow Christ, which shead his bloud, To Heauen, as Bucket to the wall. Such wretches be worse then wood, And all such faitours foule them fall. They maken Parsons for the penny, And of Canons their Cardinals. And Y scarce amongst them all is any, That hath not glozed the Gospell false. For Christ did neuer make Cathedrals Nor yet with him was Cardinall VVith a Red Hat, as vsen Minstrels: But falshood foule mought it befall. That say that Peter had the Key Of Heauen and Hell to haue and hold. I trow Peter tooke no Money For any mens Sinnes, which he sold. Such Successours be too bold, In winning all their wit they wrall. Their Conscience is waxen cold, And all such faitours foule them fall. Peter was neuer so great a foole, To leaue his Key with such a Lorrell, Or to take such a cursed toole: He was aduised nothing well. I trow they haue the Key of Hell, Their Master is of that place Marshall. For there they dresse them to dwell, And with false Lucifer there to fall. Christ had twelue Apostles heere; Now, say they, there may be but one That may not erre in no manner. Who loueth not this be lost each one. Peter erred: so did not Iohn: Why then is he clept the principall? Christ clept him Peter; but him selfe the Stone, All false faitours foule them befall. VVhat is Antichrist to say? But euen Christs Aduersary? Such hath now beene many a day, To Christs bidding full contrary, That from the Truth cleane vary. Out of the way they beene quite wend, And Christs people vntruly cary. God of his pittie it amend. They liue contrary to Christs life, In high pride against meeknesse. Against patience they vsen strife, And anger against sobern sse, Against wisdome wilfulnesse. To Christs words they little tend, Against measure outragiousnesse. But when God will it may amend. A token of Antichrists they be; His charactes now beene wide yknow. Receiued to preach shall no man be VVithout token of him I trow. Ech Christen Priest to preaching ow, From God aboue to them been send The Word, to all folk for to show, Sinfull man their sinnes to amend. Christ sent the poore for to preach, The Royall Rich he did not so. Now dare no poore the people teach, For Antichrist is all their Foe. Among the people he must goe, Whom he hath bid; But such suspend, Some hath he hent, and thinks yet mo. But all this God may well amend. The Emperour gaue the Pope sometime So high Lordship him about; That at the last the seely kime The proud Pope did pull him out. So of this Realme is in great doubt But, Lords beware, and them defend, For now these folk be wondrous stout. The King and Lords now this amend, Antichrist they seruen all: Who I pray you can say nay? With Antichrist such shall fall. They fellow him in deed and fay, They seruen him in rich array: To serue Christ they falsly faine. Why? at the dreadfull doomes-day Shall they not fellow him to paine? Popes, Bishops, and Cardinals, Chanons, Parsons, and Vicar In Gods Seruice I trow been false, That Sacraments selle heere; And been as proud as Lucifere. Ech man looke whether that I lie. Who so speaketh against their power It shall be holden Heresie. The Griffon said, th canst no good Thou neuer camst of Gentle kind Eyther I trow thou waxest wood, Or else thou hast lost thy mind. And the Pope were purely poore, Needy and nothing he had: He should be driuen from doore to doore, The wicked of him would not be dread: Of such a Head men would be sad. If the Pope and Prelates would So beg, and bid, bow, and borrow: Holy Church should stand full cold, Her seruants sit, and sup sorrow. The Pellican cast a huge cry, And said: Alas, why sayest thou so? Christ is our Head, that sits on high. Heads ought we not for to haue m , We be his members both also. And Father he taught vs to cal him als, Masters to be called defended he tho. All other Maisters be wicked and false, That doe take maistry in his name Ghostly, all for earthly good. Kings and Lords should Lordships ha , And rule the people with mild moode Christ, for vs that shead his blo d, Bad his Priests no Mastership haue, Nor to carke for cloth, or for food. From euery mischiefe he would them saue. Their Clothing should be Righteousnesse, Their Treasure pure life should be. Charity should be their Riches: Their Lordship should be vnitee. Hope in God their Honestie: Their vessell cleane Conscience. Poore in spirit, and Humilitie Should be Holy Churches defence. The Griffon said, thou shalt abie, Thou shalt be burnt in balefull fire; And all thy Sect I shall destry. You shall be hanged by the swire. Ile cause you soone to hang and draw. VVho giueth you leaue for to preach: Or thus to speake against Gods Law? And the people thus false to teach? Thou shalt be cursed with Booke and Bell, And disseuer'd from Holy Church, And cleane ydamned into Hell, Otherwise but you will worke. The Pellican said, I doe not dread. Your Cursing is of little value; Of God I hope to have my meed, For it is falshood, which you shew. For you beene out of Charity, And would doe vengeance, as did Nero. To suffer I will ready be, I dread not that, what thou ca st doe. CHAP. XV. Sir Geffrey Chaucer being pro oked by Scotus to defend his Cause, proues the Pope to bee the great and vniuersall Antichrist prophesied in the Scrip∣tures. AFter that the Pronotarie had read that Part of the Plowmans Tale, which Sir Geffrey Chaucer had published against the Pope & the Romish Church hee was commanded by Apollo to defend his Do∣ctrine. Sir Geffrey Chaucer obeyed, and framed this extemporary Oration: Most high and redoubted Em∣perour, I am glad that Scotus hath prouoked mee this day to open that Secret; which by the craft of our Arch sorcerer of the Christian Church hath beene concealed from the vulgars knowledge vn∣till this fulnesse of Time, which the Holy Ghost hath appointed for his Discouerie. The Waldenses, Albi∣gienses, and many others long before my time haue done their endeauors in other Countryes to re∣ueale him: but here in England Abbot Ioachim ex∣cepted, who in K. Rich. the firsts dayes proclaymed the Pope Antichrist, no man durst for feare of his formidable Tyrannie disclose what they knew in their Consciences to bee apparantly true. This Il∣lumination and Gift of discerning Spirits was indeed kept from the Common people, by that execrable Policie of with-holding the Bible from our English translation, so that these two Witnesses, which lay martyred and yet vnburied in the streets of Spiri∣tuall Sodome and Aegypt, could not performe their proper offices. Now that it hath pleased God to re∣moue that palpable Darknesse, they begin to re∣uiue and to stand vpon their feet to the amazement of the Carnall Beholders. By their sacred motion the eyes of my vnderstanding are likewise opened: and I doubt not but all your Maiesties Court shall know out of my mouth this day, that the Pope and none but he is that Antichrist, which was so long agoe prophesied to come and seduce the Christian Church with lyes, Equiuocations, and the wonders of Sathan. For the manifestation of which damna∣ble practices, inspire my heart, O fierie Comforter; Inflame my mind with true Zeale, the seale of thy sacred Spirit, that I may soare vp, like an Eagle, to the Sunne of thy Grace with feruencie founded on Diuine Discretion, for Feruencie is but foolish fu∣rie without Diuine Discretion. The first marke of Antichrist I gather from our Sauiour himselfe, who prophefied, many shall come Matth. cap. 24. in my name, and shall say, I am Christ, vnder this Ti∣tle the Pope doth most blasphemously co er his Temporall Power. For what signifies the word Christ but Anointed? Insomuch, that whensoeuer any of his Clergie hath offended, the Temporall sword must not punish them; but for their protection his Holinesse wardeth them with that saying of the Pro∣phet Dauid, Touch not mine Anointed: Meddle not Psalme 105. with my Christs. Though they be taken fighting in the Field with Armour on their backs, hee termes them his Sons, the Conqueror must leaue them to depart in peace. Which made a Prince sometime to returne him this Answer: I haue sent your Holi∣nesse your Sonnes Coat, the Armour, in which I found your Bishop fighting, when I tooke him Pri∣soner. And if you be as quick-sighted as Iacob, let me know, whether this be your Iosephs Coat? vntill King Edward the first his time, Clergie men were the Lawyers in England, as an Ancient Writer testified: Nullus Clericus nisi Causidicus. They sate as supreme Iudges in Temporall Causes. But when their King should chastize them for their briberies and extor∣tions, then they shrowded themselues vnder the Spirituall keyes, and appealing to the Pope they freed themselues from all Accusations. Thus did Errors play vpon the preheminence of Kings, vntill they were beaten out from their Law, and at the last from their chiefest holds by the valour of King Henry the Eight; and well worthy, seeing that they presumed to make vse of the name of Christ to cloke their falsehoods and lewd tricks. The second Mark of Antichrist I collect out of Saint Paul, that in the last dayes men should bee high∣minded, 2. Tim. cap 3. louers of pleasures more then louers of God, hauing a shew of godlines, but denying the power there∣of. All these are verified in the Pope and his Clergie Hee exalteth himselfe aboue Emperours and Kings, comparing himselfe to the Sunne, and them to the Moone and lesser starres. Yea, he ranketh his Court∣ly Cardinals with Kings. Which ambition moued Cardinall Wolsey to place himselfe aboue his King: Ego & Rex meus. What greater pleasure can worldly men enioy more then the Pope and his Hierarchie doe? They haue a large command of Cities, and huge Territories. Besides Rome, Romania, Bolonia, Ferrara, Auinion, the Pope is like to possesse very shortly the Dutchie of Vrbin. Nor doth his Am∣bition cease in these pleasant places, many other Episcopall Seates out of Italie doth hee dispose of. In Humilitie farre from Christs life, yet pretending sanctimonie, and a vertuous life, but denying the effects thereof, as his tolleration of the Iewes and Stewes, his seruing of Idols, his vnlawfull Dispen∣sations, and monstrous Pardons doe plainly de∣monstrate. The third marke of Antichrist is deriued from another place of Saint Paul, Now the spirit speaketh euidently, that some should fall from the Faith, gi∣uing heede to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Deuils, speaking lyes in hypocrifie, forbidding Marriage and Meates. 2. Tim, cap. 4. Now what Church is the same which for∣biddeth Marriage and the eating of flesh at pre∣fixed times? Is it not the Romish? The Greeke Church, whom for Antiquitie none can deny but they stand parraleld and equall with the Romane, doe prohibit no such things. Their Clergie, as the Abissines in Aethiopia haue alwayes continued marriage. Therefore let this Marke serue for one to conuince the Pope of the Doctrine of Deuils, as Saint Paul calls it. And for their prohibition of meates, who doe insist more strongly then the Pope and his Clergie? To eate Flesh vpon some dayes is a mortall sinne, vnlesse it bee with their speciall dis∣pensation, as the Castilians haue bought out their freedome vpon some forbidden dayes. To abstaine from Flesh they account it meri∣torious, and yet to eat Fish, Caueare, Almonds, Figs, and other lustfull viands they professe it law∣full. Our Sauiour notwithstanding warrants vs to eate Flesh, saying, that which goeth into the mouth defileth not a man. And this hee proues by a for∣cible reason: because that whatsoeuer entreth into Matth. cap. 15. the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out. I condemne not the true vse of Fasting with bread and water, in them, who finde their bodies carnally bent, or so full of grosse humours, that they breathe vp into their heads, like cloudie and foggie vapours, to ecclipse and darken their vnderstanding, wills, and memories, those noble Organs of the Soule, if they cannot otherwise without such mortification subdue their fleshly longing desires, and fall to fer∣uent Prayers. Likewise I commend Fasting to all the vnmarried and lazie Persons, who haue liued without much exercise, faring well and lying in downie beds. Such indeed haue reason aboue o∣thers to embrace Abstinence as a Iewell, least their Gluttonic with ease should fill their veines with too much blood, least their spleene grow to a bigger proportion then is fitting, least through oppilati∣ons and obstructions, feuers, the small poxe, the plurisie, the greene sicknesse, the consumption, and chefly the Scuruie, that vnsuspected Guest, and hardly discerned Traitouresse at the first approch to the wisest Physician, doe seize vpon them as their slaues, neuer to bee redeemed. But to make it a point of Religion, and to per∣swade men, that Fasting can satisfie Gods iustice, or appease his wrath iustly conceiued against vs for sinne, is the Doctrine of Diuels, and a marke of An∣tichrist. To the cleane all things are cleane, as the Apostle said. And the Elders of the Church ought Tit. cap. 1. not to clog and burthen the consciences of their yonger brethren, with such yokes of mens inuen∣tions and Traditions, as Touch not, taste not, handle not, which as Saint Paul againe saith, bee things of no value, sith they belong to the filling of the Flesh. For it is the soule and not the Flesh, which good Colos. cap. 2. Christians ought to keep pure and vndefiled. Which moued that ancient Father Tertullian, who liued Tertul. contra Psych. cap. 2. within lesse then two hundred yeares after Christ to auerre: that the Apostles imposed no burthen of set and solemne Fasting, but left it to our libertie, as euery man saw his occasion. The fourth marke of Antichrist is manifested that he must be a mysterie, the mysterie of Iniquitie; hee must sit in the Temple of God. For the expoun∣ding 2 Thes. cap. 2 of which place Saint Chrysostome deliuers a notable Commentarie: Antichrist saith bee, being seated in the Church, and possessing the chiefest places of the Church, is to hold all that in shew, which the Chr in Oper. imper n Matth. 49: true Church of Christ holds in truth, that is, hee shall haue Churches, Scriptures, Bishops, Priests, Baptisme, and the Communion, &c. Hee is a mysterie, that is close and hidden, vntill the Prophesie be winded to the bottome. For as Saint Paul wrot, before the time of his reueali g must come, their must needes fall out a departure from the Faith, and then that Man of Sinne should bee knowne, which had abu∣sed the world with lying signes and deceits. The fist marke is expressed out of the Reuelation of Saint Iohn, where Antichrist is termed the Where of Babilon, the Beast, the false Prophet, all signifying the same, hauing his power from the Spirituall Dragon, which fought with Michael and his An∣gels. By the name of Whore wee must note, that none is called by that name, but one which had beene once an honest woman. The Church of Rome was once pure, but afterwards by pride and ambi∣tion grew to be impure, as now wee see her domi∣neering Head sitting in the great Citie on the seuen Hills, adored aboue all, which is called God. As on the Triumphall Arch engrauen in Lions 1555. was proclaymed: Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas, Et merito in terris diceris esse Deu . By thy Tongues mightie Oracle The World thou gouern'st all. On Earth thee without obstacle Of right a God wee call. The sixt marke of Antichrist is taken out of Saint Paul, that he began mystically to worke in his time: But that which then with-held and let his reuealing, did let and hinder vntill the splendour and glorie thereof, that is, the Maiestic of the Roman Empire was taken out of the way, which afterwards in fulnesse of time came to passe, when the Impe∣riall Seat was translated from Old Rome to New Rome, which Constantine called after his own name Constantinople. In Saint Pauls time hee o ept on his feet and hands like an Infant, about three hun∣dred yeares after hee grew to his stripling age. But about the yeere 666. which is the number assigned in the Re elation, hee was in his strength, and euer since vntill my time he shewed himselfe in his owne colours, a mightie Potentate, with a Triple Crowne and vnder colour of Saint Peters keyes he arrogates to himselfe a higher Power then Nabuchadonozor, the Caesars, or the great Turke euer presumed to haue heere on Earth. As long as the Roman Empe∣rors liued in the great Citie, the Bishops stood inawe and followed their bookes, not carking for the va∣nities of the world. But when the Place by the Em∣perours absence became an habitation for his Ho∣linesse, then that Barre which with-held his disco∣uerie, was also taken out of the way, so that now all men of Iudgement may clearely see the mysterie of I iquitie manifestly discouered. The seuenth marke of Antichrist is the great wonder and maruell, which Saint Iohn had, when Apoc. cap. 17. he saw this vnlookt for alteration, which he would not haue confessed, if in his vision he had beheld an Heathen Antichrist or any Infidell Tyrants. For hee had sufficient triall of their Tyrannies. But when he saw in the Temple of God a Reuerend Prelate attired in Purple and Scarlet with Imperiall Ornaments and Princely Authoritie, which Christ forewarned his Apostles to take heede of, hee could not choose but wonder. The eight marke of the Antichrist is, that his Sect shall magnifie him with one consent and with one mind. In this they glorie, and in all their com∣munications you shall heare them brag of Catho∣licke Antiquitie, and of the Popes succession, neuer heeding Saint Pauls prophecie, that before the dis∣couerie of Antichrist, a generall defection of the Faith was necessarily to come, nor yet giuing cre∣dit to Saint Iohn, that the Church was to flye into a Desert. This very ostentasion passed of the Iewes that they crucified the Lord of life, and persecuted the Apostles as the Founders of a new Religion. Vpon this did the Romane Idolators insist, and by Antiquitie defended their idle Opinions. The ninth marke of Antichrist is apparantly deciphered by his vaunting of Miracles, a token which our Sauiour deliuers, that there should arise false Christs, and false Prophets, which should doe great wonders and signes, so that if it were possible, they should deceiue the very Elect, if it were possible. Matth. cap. 24. The like admonition Saint Paul giues vs, that in the Church vnder Antichrist, there should bee working of Sat n with all Power, Signes, and lying 2. Thes. cap. 2. Apoc. cap. 16. wonders. The like doth Saint Iohn prophesie of Spirits of Deuils working wonders. In the Primi∣tiue Church, when the Gospell was setled, Miracles ceased. Which made Saint Chrysostome to answer their curiositie, which looked for such rare signes in this wise: There be some, saith he, that aske why men now ada es doe not worke Miracles, as the Apo∣stles did? If thou beleeuest Christ, as thou oughtest, thou hast no neede of Miracles, for these were giuen Chrys. in Iohan. cap. 2. to vnbeleeuers, and not to beleeuers. Sometimes God permits men with iugling trickes and legerdemaine or by the Deuils deuises to deceiue them, either to rie the soundnesse of their Faith, or to confirme them in their Errors. As heretofore he suffered the Israelites to bee deluded with Baals Priests and the Golden Calfe, who assuredly produced the like Mi∣racles, as the Iesuites boast of. The tenth marke of Antichrist, whom Saint Iohn calls the Wh re of Babilon, the mother of Har∣lots and abhominations of the Earth, is that shee shall be drunken with the bloud of the Saints and the Mar∣tyrs of Christ Iesus. Of whom may this bee more significantly spoken, then of the Pope? How many thousands haue beene murthered in France, in the Low Countryes, and other places of Christendome by his procurement, euen those which acknowledge Christ Ies for their onely Mediatour with the Fa∣ther, which confesse the euer-liuing God in Vnitie and Trinitie, hath hee caused to bee burnt for He∣reticks, or made to row as slaues in Spaines Gallies. O bloudy Tyrannie! O poisonous Imposture! which vnder the colour of the Catholicke Faith doth shed the bloud of Innocents, like mercilesse H r d, not sticking to wound Christ anew through his seruants sides! CHAP. XVI. Apolloes iudgement of Chau ers Apologie con∣cluding that the Pope is the great A tichrist. AFter that Sir Geffrey Chaucer had ended his speech, Apollo gaue his definitiue sentence in this wise: Euen as all the lesser sicknesses in mans bodie doth grow and descend into the Plague, when contagion raignes: And as by reason of op∣pilations, the shutting vp of the spirits passages, and their want of transpiration through the veynes, all other inferiour diseases fall into the miserable Se r∣ y, and principally for want of the Sunnes presence in the winter: So for want of the Holy Spirits illu∣mination caused through the corruptions of mens depraued wills, by little and little the Antichrist in∣creased, and grew as it were with an inundation in∣to one great Sea, the Romish Sea. Euen as Mahomet composed his Alcoran of many Sects, so the Romish Religion by the policie of the Pope, is stuffed and stored with many Heresies, which all meeting to∣gether in his ambitious spirit, and transferred to his successours, doe make him that great Antichrist. From Elixay the Heretick hee borrowed his Do∣ctrine of celebrating Diuine seruice in an vnknown language. For such was his Heresie. From Monta∣n s pipb Heres. 14 Euse . l 5. c. 18. Aug. Heres. 71. the Heretick he learned to prescribe his rules of Fasts. For hee first limited times of Fasting. From the Collyridians he was inspired to worship the Vir∣gin Marie: From the Caianes to inuocate on Angels From the Carpocratians to adore the Image of le∣sus and Saint Paul. From the Manichees and the Aebionites he got that damnable precept, to prohi∣bit Marriage vnto the Clergie. Euen as all true Christians haue a relation vnto Christ their Head, being through Faith his ingraf∣fed members, like as also the Patriarkes and Pro∣phets vntill Christ, had a dependance vpon that great, Prophet, whom God promised to raise vp like vnto Aloses: so on the other side all the lesser Heretickes depend vpon Antichrist, through whose lying mouth they oppose the Truth and the Apo∣stles Humilitie: And as Machiauellian members they ioyne with one consent to aduance his Maie∣sticall power, though many of them in their consci∣ences are fully perswaded, that such state and pomp in a Clergie man, cannot but displease the Author of Humilitie, who pronounced them blessed, which are poore in spirit. CHAP. XVII. Apolloes sentence promulgated for the Impurity of the Church Militant. D. Whitgift Arch bishop of Canterbury complaines against Cartwright, Browne, and other Puritane Separists, for inuaighing against their Superiours. Apollo condemnes th Sect, exhorting them to vnitie & to return to the bosom of their Mother Church. AFter Apollo had condemned the Arch-hereticks of the Christian Church, he caused that saying of that Ancient Father to bee retorted against the like erroneous seducers: Ecclesia non di post Apo∣stolorum tempora mansit virgo. That the Church Eusebius. after the Apostles time continued not long a Virgin. And this his Maiestie did to the end all mouthes should bee stopt, which arrogate to themselues ex∣traordinarie Holinesse, as the Popes doe, who as his Courtly Cardinalls affirme, cannot erre; or which ascribe to themselues a degree of greater puritie, in calling and conuersation then others of their Brethren in Christ, forgetting his neuer fayling pro∣phesie: All men are liers. Another cause, why his Ma∣iestie aduised his Religious Christians to remember that saying, was to the end that they should not become amazed nor troubled, when any hot-spurs and busie braind people doe maintaine new opini∣ons differing from the old; but rather to call into their memories▪ that many false Christs, ma∣ny fraudulent Sects must from time to time spring vp in the Church like taxes among the good seede, to shewe likewise that no Creatures can bee long pure without some spots or taint, and that God alone, who created them, is only pure. No sooner had Apollo ended these reasons for the Churches Impuritie, but the graue and learned Whitgift Archbishop of Canterburie informed his Maiestie, that one Cartwright, Browne, and others stiling themselues Puritans, Precisians, and holy ly Separists, inueighed against him and his fellow Bishops with Libels and defamations, worse then O id against Ibis, or any woman scold put in a Cuckinstoole; because hee gaue order in his visita∣tions to present refractaries and stubborne minded persons, disobedient to Authoritie, and kicking against things indifferent, triuiall, and indeed very bables in respect of Faith, Humilitie, Charitie, and Diuine Gifts, which they had now more cause to pray for, then to spend their precious times in rai∣ling and withstanding those outward things, ten∣ding only to distinguish the Leuits from the Tem∣porall Tribes, to the view of the outward man, whose fancie must bee stirred by outward obiects aswell as inward. Apollo at the report of these selfe-opinions like to breake into a schismatick combustion, became mightily perplext. Yet like himselfe recollecting his spirituall tempers, and resuming his wonted Maiestie, hee said to Cartwright, Browne, and the rest of the P rit icall Sect: How long will you persist by your peenish positions to minister scan∣dall vnto your Christian Corporation? I haue long since heard of your rash and turbulent oppositions against your Churches Canons. But I hoped, that the calme dew, which awaites on the iluer and staid age of Maturitie, had by this time cooled your ouer feruent humours, and amed your win∣ching tricks. Saint Paul became a Iew among the Iewes, a Gentile among the Gentiles in his outward and ceremonious habits. The like the subtile Iesu∣ites, who take vpon them to bee Puritane Papists haue lately imitated him like Apes, in disguizing themselues, not like ruffians, as sometimes they doe in England, but in the Priestly attires of the Chinensian Bunzies, because they might either con∣uert soules in China, or in default of such meritori∣ous workes search into the nature of their State af∣faires, because they would not bee said to come home emptie. But you striue not altogether for ap∣parell; you would haue an equalitie, as in Sir Tho∣mas Moore Eutopia of Degrees and Liuings, vnder pretext of the Apostles paritie, that none of them should be greater then the other, euery one would be a Pope in his Parish. But I must put you in mind that this paritie and good order ceased at the Apo∣stles death. They were endued with equall autho∣ritie to worke Miracles, to conuert vnbeleeuers, to lay the foundation of the Churches. After their death, Miracles ceased, which were but to confirme the Euangelicall Doctrine, to be heauenly and not humane. And then men hauing no such extraordi∣narie callings, apparant Gifts of discerning Spirits no visible and suddaine illumination of the Holy Ghost, they returned in worldly businesses to their old bl s, and left off their rare and Angelicall Com∣munion, in hauing goods in common, in liuing by their handie workes, and in their mutuall Charitie. Yet not withstanding, euen in the Apostles time, Bishops, Deacons, and Elders began to beare sway aboue others, being appointed to those offices, by impositions, of hands and benedictions of their Elders, as also by the suffrages of the Paro∣chians themselues. Their charge was to keepe good order to represse the proud young people, to re∣buke sinne, and to suppresse the fierie comm tions of vnexperienced persons, who breaking the bonds of Vnitie might broach innouations. Therefore obey your Elders, wherin your mother Church hath ordayned Tutors ouer you, seeke not to crucifie your Sauiour againe, by seperating your selues from the Communion of your fellow members: for in so doing, you diuide his bodie into parcels, who ought to bee respected entirely one, and identified in your soules, without the least rent or scandall. Submit your bodies in ciuill policie, and in mat∣ters indifferent, Apocryphall, or Temporall to the Gods of the Earth. Offer vp your Soules vnto God by Faith as an holy Priesthood, and a spirituall sacri∣fice 1. Pet, cap. 2. in Christ Iesus. And for your Puritie, seeing that Peter confessed himselfe for all his Apostleship to be chiefe among Sinners, vsurpe not the name of a Puritane. For the Angels are faine to become vai∣led before the Maiestie of God, who alone is p re and vndefiled. Let the worme of Conscience sa∣tisfie your ouer-weening imaginations, that all your consiste rather in the of your Sinnes by the spirituall apprehension of, Christ crucified, then in the Puritie of any vertue whatsoeuer. CHAP. XVIII. The memorable Synod of Dort accuseth Arminius before Apollo, for broaching out of new Opinions in the Church to trouble the braines of the weaker. Apollo confutes Arminius, and sheweth what a sober minded Christian ought to conceiue of deepe My∣steries. Arminius is commanded to recant. ABout a moneth after that Apollo had establish∣ed concord and vnitie in the hearts of sober∣minded Christians, when all the members of the Church Militant thought that they were restored againe to the earthly paradise, and there should sit ouery man vnder his vine and Fig-trees, as in the Golden Age of Peace, vpon wednesday in the Easter weeke, 1626. the famous Synod of Dort, exhi∣bited the names of sundry persons, who relying on Arminius his idolized Patronage for some new paradoxes in Diuinitie, had refused vpon Easter day to communicate with them and others their fellow Christians. Apollo asked Arminius what moued him to breed and hatch new conceits, and those to scatter abroad for the offending of tender consci∣ences. Arminius answered, that the Opinion which hee maintayned, was not new, but grounded on the Scriptures. And hee hoped that all Positions which did not diameter wise and flatly oppugne the Word of God, might still be held and questioned if for no other end, then for the triall and exercising of one anothers wits, which might like Iron, waxe rustie without some vse or furbushing. And what might your quaint Question bee, replyed Apollo, which tends now at this sacred time to refine wits, when men should ioyne together in commemora∣tion of the Lords last Supper, to sanctifie and purifie their humane wills? Most dread Soueraigne, said Arminius, It is not vnknowne vnto your blessed Maiestie, how many Communicants doe yeerely resort vnto the Lords Table, more fit to bee whipt at a Carts tayle, or to be thrust into the Spanish in∣quisition, then to keepe companie with regenerated persons at the celebration of the holy Sacrifice, which whosoeuer presumes to touch vnworthily being vnprepared, eates his owne Damnation, or in the mildest censure he deserues to be made an vgly Leper with King Vzziah. The zealous considera∣tion of this imminent danger, which might ensue to my sicke Brethren, moued mee to take care for their Soules health, and to require them to try their Spirits, whether they were in the state of Grace or back-sliders? whether they feit an alternate moti∣on, not often subiect to alteration in the bottome of their hearts, pricking them forwards to doe good workes. If they did, I told them that the Spirit of God cooperating with those sweet moti∣ons of theirs, would frame an harmonious sym∣phonie in their Soules, which so contuned and con∣tinued would likewise sympathize with Heauenly Mysteries. But if they found their wills depraued, led with the least concupiscence, they should not aduenture like Iudas to come neere their Sauiour, or partake in the Eucharist at this Feast of Easter. Now because I catechized them in this manner, ad∣ding further for their greater terrour from sinne, and that they might repent in time, that though they were elected and iustified by Grace, according to the purpose of God, yet they might totally and finally fall, vnlesse their owne free will did worke with the will and Grace of the fierie Comforter. Apollo hearing this protestation of Arminius told him, that hee was like a skittish Cow, which giues a good pailefull of milke, and afterwards flings it downe with her foot. And moreouer ad∣ioyned this paraneticall counsell, I liked very well of your whole narration, vntill you arriued at the period of your Apologie. If you did it in terrorem tantúm, to scare them from sinne, and to prepare their minds to Repentance, you shewed your selfe a cunning Merchant in the spirituall Trade, or ra∣ther a politicke Statesman; both which agree not with Christs candour, with the Holy Spirits ingenu∣itie. Plaine dealing is euer best in matters of Con∣science. For whatsoeuer proceedes not from Faith, is Sinne. You did very ill thus to offend the weake constitution of their braines, who without such ter∣rors might walke on simply and sincerely towards the Feast of the Lamb. But this is not the first Ea∣ster, which you haue disturbed. For the common voice goes, that your Sect vnder your name haue alienated one Neighbours loue from the other, and done more harme in the Low Countryes, then all their warres with Spaine. Which inconuenience Affricke sometimes felt, as an ancient Writer te∣stified, plus incommodi capiebat Africa ex Secta Arriana, qua insecti erant Vandali, quam ab auaritiâ corundem, vel crudelitate ijs innata, Africke recei∣ued greater hurt from the Arrian Sect, wherewith the Vandals were infected, then by their griping co∣uetousnesse, or crueltie, though the same were na∣turall vnto them. In alledging that mans free will must aide and cooperate with the Grace of God, you cannot but ascribe glorie vnto flesh and bloud, which is fraile and honour vnto Nature, which the Serpent woun∣ded with a mortall sting. For what is Free will but an Electiue power to deliberate and determine what it pleaseth. In naturall things, as to eate and drinke, to sit or walke, to sing or play, I allow of such a Free will in humane affections. But in hea∣uenly matters it is sacriledge worse then Prometheus his flealth, whom the Poets fabled feloniously to conuey away some of Iupiters fire. It is indeed trai∣torous impietie to rob God of his Prerogatiue. Grace is only his to conferre on his vessell of honor nto men shame only belongeth, as the Prophet pro∣tested. And as another confirmeth of more anci∣ent writ: The way of man is not in himselfe, neither Ier . cap. 6. is it man to walke and to direct his steps, meaning any power to make vse of in Godly Actions. Man plan∣teth, Apollo watereth, but when all comes to the vp∣shot, it is God which giues the increase, as Saint Paul confesseth. How dare yee, O bewitched Arminians, attribute the least glorie to a putrifide carcasse? How dare yee auouch that a man being called and iustified according to Gods purpose, which neuer changeth, may fall away from Grace, wholy and finally? To bring in a Decree respectiuely argues you are better seene in Tautologie then in Theo∣logie, in Sophistrie then in the Doctrine of Prede∣stination. This is to ecclipse Gods Sunne-shine of Grace, and to set vp Phacton, to pull downe his power and to set a beggar a horsebacke. For in af∣fording such excellencie to a man, you must needes ascribe somewhat to his worth and merit, which can bee no other then Damnation. Though man hath Faith, Loue and Charitie, hee cannot say, that God made choice of him for one of his Elect number, because hee foresaw that man was able to take hold of these Diuine Gifts, for these are not the causes but the effects of his calling, but onely because of his owne absolute pleasure, it see∣med good vnto his wisdom to choose him without any such cause of merit, foreseene in man, though afterwards, when he had called him, hee bestowed vpon him these Heauenly gifts at the intercession of his Sonne, who was to bee incarnate for mans salua∣tion. By this meanes and for this cause were sinfull men elected, called, iustified, and glorified before the world began, euen for his owne honour and for our Redeemers sake, by whom and in whom we were to bee incorporated and ingraffed as bastard∣slips quite salne from the state of innocencie by A∣dams succeeding fall, which his all-seeing Maiestie saw as in a liuely Map alreadie come to passe, as afterwards Adam and his whole Progenie sensi∣bly perceiued. And there by the way I signifie vn∣to you, O heedlesse Arm nians, that your too much regard of naturall causes and effects, your humane calculating and intentiue computation of Time, ac∣cording to the errors of the outward man, hath beene the prime cause of this absurditie. For God seeth not as man seeth. His foresight is eternall, that . Sam. cap. 16. is, alwaies present. There is no Time past nor fu∣ture tense declined by his euerlasting Grammar; though mortall race in respect of their limited ca∣pacities vse this manner of calculation, A thousand yeares in his fight are but as yesterday: Hee is Alpha & Omega, the beginning and last, vncircumscribed, Psalme. 90. infinite, and without end. So that hee which sear∣cheth, and diueth ouercuriously into this depth of Predestination, hee may fall into the Gulfe of Scil∣la by seeking to auoide the danger of Charybdis. Therefore the safest way for man is with Saint Paul, to reioyce in his infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in him. His Grace is sufficient for him, for his power is made perfect through mans weak∣nesse. Let not your eyes gaze too long vpon the Sunnes beames, lest they become dazeled or blin∣ded with the glorious Maiestie thereof. Content your selues with such nourishment as serues fittest for your tender constitutions, and for the reach of your humane capacities. I say, as the Apostle said, through the grace that is giuen vnto me, I say to eue∣ry one that is among you, that no man presume to vn∣derstand Rom. cap. 12. aboue that, which is meet to bee vnderstood; but that hee vnderstand according to Sobri tie. Leaue off your curious inquisitions, and doe your best en∣deauours to let the world know that you are of Gods elected number by your Faith, Loue, Cha∣ritie, and Humilitie. And for you, Arminius, wee take it in ill part, that you without acquainting vs with your theori∣call Proiect, would diuulge abroad your Theses and Problemes to confound the Intelligence of your yonger brethren. How much better and safer had it beene for you to smother your profound doubts then to work confusion by the publishing of them, vnlesse you thought by this improuident dispersing of the notions of your braine, to goe beyond Ero∣stratus, who fired Dianaes Temple at Ephesus, for no other intent, then to be spoken of in after ages to haue done some Act worthy to bee recorded in the Chronicles; as likewise Guy Faukes attempted in England to blow vp the Parliament house. Wee doe now order, that you for these presumptions do openly before our Congregation, to bee held at Li∣bethrum, vpon the M nday following after Trinity Sunday next, make a full recantation of your scru∣pulous Paradoxe, and there penitently confesse that God called and elected sinfull man out of his owne free, secret, and vnquestionable pléasure, without hauing any respect at all to ma s ensuing merit, or free will, but onely to his owne attribute of Mercie to the absolute power which his Deity hath ouer the workmanship of his hands, as the Potter ouer his vessels, and to the righteousnesse of his Sonne, the vndefiled Lamb, which redeemed Sinners out of the Deuils iawes. And also you shall here pro∣test, that all men whatsoeuer, though they were as iust as Henoch, as faithfull as Abraham, as meck as Moses, as zealous as Phinehes, as patient as lob, as penitent as Dauid, as constant as Elias, as wise as Daniel, as godly as Saint Iohn Baptist, who wasmore then a Prophet; yet all these notwithstanding were predestinated to bee saued, not for any deseruing vertues, which God foresaw in their owne humane wils, able to iustifie them, but because they were clothed with their Redeemers merits, and through Faith and Gods mercie from the beginning of the world, promised and prophesied by him, ingraffed into this mysticall Head, who bruised that of the Serpents, and consequently repayred the breach be∣tweene the Angels and them, healing also the lepro∣sie of Sinne, deriued from Adams bloud into all his Posteritie, for in him all men liued, and from him all men are equally descended. Besides, you shall acknowledge, that those whom God hath elected he iustifieth, and whom he iustifieth hee glorifieth; And that whomsoeuer hee once hath elected, hee euer loueth, and in despite of all temp lous ee will leade them safely to their Redeemer, who con∣tinually makes intercession for them at the right hand of his Father, according to the Diuine agree∣ment made in Heauen for their reconciliation and fortunate attonement. Lastly, you shall protest, that as God predestinated some to damnation for their Sinnes, which Hee foresaw, leauing them in the corrupted lump, with the other vessels of dis∣honour: so hee predestinated some to Saluation for his Sonnes sake, not in regard of any Goodnesse at all which hee fo saw in them, or because that they were any whit better then the rest, but to the end that hee might make them better; For as I said be∣fore, mortall men can haueno more goodnesse, then it pleaseth him out of his superabundant grace freely to infuse into them. The Creatour is the Authour and Cooperator of all the vertues which are in the Creatures, according to that saying of Dionysius Areopagita: Euery good thing springs from God, and Lib. 1. de Hier. Coelest. cap. 1. the same returnes againe to him, as to the Soueraigne Cause and last end. It is a foule shame for men of the Reformed Church to shew themselues worse then the Iesuites in this profound mysterie, who of late being conuinced with a Cloud of Witnesses, haue beene like Balaam and Caiphas, enforced to enrank their Opinions with ours in this Question; as Bel∣larmine confesseth in these words: Non elegit Deus . 2. de . A. bit. cap. . homines, quia vidit ipsos boni operis fructum allaturos & in b no per seueraturos, sed elegit vt faciat bene ope∣ra tes & in b persenerantes. God chose not men because they should bring forth the fruits of good workes, and perseuer in those workes, but he chose them because hee might make them doers of good workes, and so in them to perseuer. The Conclusion of the First Part SInce the Discouerie of these Errors at Parnassus, which I quoted downe of purpose to remoue the stoniest rubbes, which might stand betwixt vs and Felicitie, the true scope and end of the Golden Fleece, I was informed, that some pettish Monitors doe vpbraid mee for writing of serious matters in an extraordinarie forme, disguized vnder the name of Apollo. To you that are Iudicious I neede not yeeld any satisfaction in this point. But lest Errour play vpon mee too violently, by mistaking my meaning, and the true sense of the morall, let the Ignorant know, that this worke alludes to a Poeti∣call rapture, wherein the names of Apollo, of Pal∣las, the Muses, the Graces, and of Parnassus are ta∣ken for Wisedome, and the Court of wisedome ey∣ther Diuine or Humane. If they regard the Cele∣stiall Globe, the precisest Criticks shall find the name of Apollo or Phoebus still in vse. The seuen dayes of the weeke haue their denomination from the Pa∣gan Gods, among whom Apollo re∣ceiues the appellation, as the Prince of . That Diuine Poet Salust Lord of Bartas in parts of his Books vseth this name for the as he doth also Minerua and the Muses for Lear∣ning, Mars and Beliona for warre, Bacchus for wine, Ceres for Corne, V lcan for fire, Venus for lust, Diana for chastitie, Neptune for the sea, ∣olus for the windes, Styx and Ach ron for hell. It is not the bare name but the inward sense, which a discreet Reader should pry into. Saint Paul ex∣pounded the Heathens vnknowne God at Athens according to his owne beliefe of the true God. Because those fond people at Ephesus, preferred the worship of Diana, Great is Diana of Ephesus, before Saint Pauls Doctrine, it were great folly in a Minister to refuse the Christning of a childe by that name, though neuer so Idolatrous in those times of darknesse. While men of vnder∣standing know the moralized sense, they will not mislike this course. They which haue read the workes of the Nominalists and the Realists, can distinguish betwixt substance and shadowes. They will respect matter more then forme, and the Spirit of Euidence and power more then the enticing words of mens wisedome. By either of which kinds, who so hath the happinesse to edi∣fie the Church of Christ, to reforme Errors, or to restore decaied Trading to his languishing Coun trey, hee ought not to bee accused, whether hee the part of tickling Horace, or of carping I all, of an Oratour, or of a Poet; whether puts on the large Surplice of a reuerend inister, or the curtalld gowne of a crabbed Stoick. For it is not the Outside, but the preci∣ous Inside, which the Eye of wisedome lookes in∣to. And I haue seene more pride vnder a course cloth garment, then vnder a silken Robe. To satisfie further their Obiections, I haue couched the subiect of my Discourse vnder the Titles of Apollo, Walter de Mapes, Sir Geffrey Chaucer, Berengarius, Wicliffe, and other famous persons, which flourished many yeares before Luther was borne, euen by the selfe same Autho∣ritie, as Vigilantius the Martyr confuted the He∣reticks of his time. In his fift booke against Eu∣tyches, this antient Writer testifieth, that he pub∣lished workes in Athanasius his name against Sabellius, Photinus, and Arrius, to the end that they being present, he might seeme to treat with the present, vt cum praesentibus videretur agere. If these reasons cannot preuaile, but that still they will mutter, and seeke a hole where none is, I must referre them to the reading of Sir Thomas Moores Eutopia, and to Plat s imaginarie Com∣mon-wealth, on which as hymerizing notions or Ayrie Castles let their Phantasies pore, while I runne ouer those reall and actuall vices, which lately haue gotten the vpper hand ouer their mindes, and bodies to the scandall of their Chri∣stian Profession, and the decay of their worldly fortunes. And if for all that my curious Masters will not desist, but menace mee with more violent animad∣uersions, euen to fire and fagot, or rather to a milder punishment of Banishment, I shall much more con∣tentedly embrace this last with Boetius, then to con∣tinue in their Neighbourhood, like a lazie Drone, and to consume the fruits of the Earth, which the industrious Bees haue laboured for, thereby to ve∣rifie that saying of the Poet: fruges consumerenatus; And so at last to hazard the late Grace, which I re∣ceiued in the Court of Wisedome: where at my ma∣triculation I vowed to disclose all such enormities which might preiudice the mysterie of the Golden Fleece, and to liue vpon mine owne without extor∣ting from others. To conclude, if notwithstanding all my allega∣tions, these B sie-bodies will play the clamorous Stentors, and refuse to allow, either the forme, mat∣ter, or Decrees set out in this Treatise, let them lay them by, as vnripe fruit, or Orders fitter for me to diuulge in the Newfoundland, and there to see them executed among my owne Tenants. The end of the First Part. THE SECOND PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE. CHAP. 1. Malines and Misselden, two Marchants of Great Brit∣taine, do seuerally declare their Opinions touching the Decay of Trade, and the Causes of the vnder∣ballance of their Natiue Commodities with the Forraigne, which were brought into that King∣dome. Apollo bewrayeth their misery, and commands a fur∣ther enquiry to be made of the Causes. A Pon a grieuous Complaint made before his sacred Maiesty, as he deliberated with some grand Statesmen of England for the restoring of decayed Trade, certaine Marchants experimented in the Art of Commerce, offered their seruice to discouer those se∣crets, which they vnderstood of in that kind. Apollo commended them for their respectiue care and du∣ty, in tendring themselues so voluntarily like honest Patri ts to succour their diseased Countrey; And bade them seuerally to deliuer their knowledge. Gerrard de Malines first related his Opinion: That the wealth of a Kingdome could not decrease but by three manner of wa es, viz. 1. by the transportation of ready money, or bullich out of the same. 2. by sel∣ling their owne Commodities too good cheap. 3. or The Canker of Englands Common∣wealth. by buying forraigne Commodities at too deare a rate, and that in the inequality of one of these consi∣sted the one ouerballācing of Trade, like the fortune of an House-holder, whose ruine and downfall may befor seene and foretold if he continually buyeth at the dearest rate and neuer sels. As contrariwise he is obserued to thriue, if hee sels, and seldome buyes. Then he shewed, that Money, which ought to bee the square or measure of a Kingdome to set a price vnto euery thing, and therefore in permutation and Exchange among Marchants it was termed Par, yet lately this Regina Pecunia, this Queene of the Re∣publick, was vnnaturally sold to be deflowrd by some of her neerest kinsfolkes; who not looking into her beauty, nor regarding the finenesse & waight of her metall, as politicke Exchangers ought to doe, but al∣together carelesse of their Countries good, they bar∣gained by bils of Exchange to pay or receiue for Commodities, as the Money is valued in other parts transmarine. If the price of Exchange bee there high, where generally our Marchants are the deli∣uerers of money, then they must giue much to haue their Moneyes made ouer, whereby the gaine of their Commodities being formerly sold, is clipped. And yet most commonly they giue no more then the value of our money is; for the money, which they deliuer there, is according to the toleration by them receiued at high rates fatre aboue the value, and in the same manner payed out. But when the Exchange goes high, our Marchants buy Forraigne Commo∣dities, or barter theirs for the same. Wherein they lose, in taking these at their forraigners owne Pri∣ces; and their natiue Countrey suffers for it at their returne together with the Marchants, the one in sel∣ling deare, the other in buying deare. So that our home Commodities are abated foure manner of waies by the abuse of this Exchange. 1. by searcity of Mo∣ney, which maketh things good cheape, occasioned by the Exchange. Secondly, by the gaine sought vp∣on Money, which otherwise would be sought vpon the commodities. Thirdly, by a high Exchange with vs, which causeth men to deliuer that money by Ex∣change in nature of Trade, which otherwise might be employed by some vpon the Commodities; as likewise by a low Exchange, which causeth expor∣tation of our Money. Fourthly, by the rash sale of our Commodities by young Marchants, or Factors, that driuen to pay Mony taken vp by Exchange in England, thereby spoyling the Market of others. In like manner to make this probably seem true, Malines manifested, that Forraigne Commo∣dities were raised and enhansed foure manner of waies. First, by plenty of moneyes out of our own store transported into other Countries. Secondly, by a high Exchange beyond the Seas. Thirdly, by the toleration of moneyes beyond the Seaes, to goe cur∣rant farre aboue their value. For by the alteration of moneyes, the price of Commodities doth alter also. Fourthly, for that the principall Commodities Veluets, Silkes, Fustians, &c. are ingrossed by the Bankers that sell them at their pleasure, our immo∣derate vse giuing them the greater cause. By this meanes hapens an ouerballancing of outlandish Commodities with those of our owne Countrey, which also carries away out of this Kingdome fiue hundred thousand pounds a yeere at the least, when wee are thus enforced to giue both money and our home Commodities for Forraigne wares at a most excessiue rate. Edward Misselden a learned Marchant vtterly mis∣liked. Malines Par in Exchange, saying that there were two manner of Exchanges, the one Personall, The Circle of Commerce. the other Prouinciall, & that it was not possible that the Personall, which respected only the Contracts made betwixt priuate men, or party & party, should so much preiudice the Common-wealth, vnlesse there were an inequality in the Prouincial Exchange betweene our Kingdome and other Neighbouring Kingdomes or States. The losses whereof, as also of the Personall, could not be known, vntil the returnes thereof be made, that is, vntill the Forraigne Com∣modities were brought in for the natiue Commodi∣ties carried out, and then both cast into the ballance of Trade, to be waighed and tried the one against the other. For if the home Commodities carried out of the Kingdome, doe downe-waigh and exceed in va∣lue the Forraigne Cōmodities imported & brought into the Kingdome, it is a signe, that the Kingdome growes rich and prospers, because the ouerplus must needs come in in treasure. But if the cōtrary chance, that the Forraigne Commodities brought in, doe ex∣ceed the Natiue in value, it is most certaine that the Stocke of the Kingdome wasteth, and that Treasure goes out of the Land. To discerne this, there is no surer way then by the Customes, where in the goods of this Land exported & imported, being multipli∣ed by twenty, will appeare; for of euery pound there is twelue pence for Custome. As for example, wee find to our great griefe, that there were brought in∣to this Land of Forraigne goods by the Customes for the same payd, and thus multiplied by 20. for one whole yeere from Christmas Anno. 1621. to Christ∣mas 1622. The totall Summe of 2619315 l . 00 00. The totall Summe of goods carried out of the Kingdome, frō the said Christmas 1621. vntill Christ∣mas 1622. amounted to 2320436 l . 12 s . 10 d . which la∣mentable president sheweth, that there was more that yeere brought in of Forraigne goods, then carried out of the home Commodities by the Sum of 298878 l . 7 s . 2 d . By this positiue forme of a Ballance truely made and taken out of the Custome-houses, our State may see how we are falne into a great vnder-ballance of Trade with other Nations, & that it is high time now or neuer to looke about, before wee bee driuen to a narrower pinch. The causes, in two words, of this o∣uer-ballancing, is Prodigality and Pouerty. The one brings in by Excesse of Forraigne goods into the Kingdome an ouerballancing. The other by the Defect and hauing too little from their partiall Mo∣ther, keeps our Trading backe in vnder ballance. Apollo sighed at the relation; and all his Court which fauoured the Protestant Religion, both outwardly and inwardly demonstrated great heaui∣nes for this Decay of Trade in Great Brittaine, that in the dayes of peace vnder a Religious King, this vn∣der-ballance should happen, and openly protested, that Peace consumed more men and goods in that Kingdom, then all their Warres with Spaine and Ty∣rone. Likewise, his Maiesty said, that if the Noble King Iames had not betimes raised the Iacobus piece to twenty two shillings, and his other Gold to the like proportion, other Nations had by this time at∣tracted all the treasure of this land vnto themselues, and that the riotous flaunting in Apparell with their prodigall Feasts, did helpe to vnder-ballance their Trading, which together with many other abuses crept into that State. hee wished some of the Inhabi∣tants, if they had any feeling of their Countreyes smart, should present without delay or partiality. CHAP. 2. Apollo causeth a Iury to be impanelled out of the Vni∣uersities of Oxford, Cambridge S • . A drews, Aberdine, and the Colledge at Dubin, to find out those persons which sold Ecclesiasticall Li∣uings. The Pres ntours discouering some, bring them before Apollo. His Maiesties, censure, with his discourse of the Right of Tithes. APollo perceiuing, that one of the chiefest causes of the miseries which perplexed Great Brittain, proceeded from Si ny, and the enforced Periury of some Ministers, who being driuen by meete neces∣sity, were faine to accommodate themselues to the iniquity of the times, caused about Whitsontide last. 1626. a Iury to be impanelled of the precisest Prea∣chers in that Monarchy, viz. sixe out of the Vni∣uersit of Oxford, sixe out of Cambridge, sixe out of S t . Andrewes, sixe out of Aberdine, and the like number out of the Colledge at Dublin in Ireland. 30. in all, integros vitae sceleris{que} puros, men of vnattainted liues, and pure from notorious vices. These his Imperiall Maiesty appointed to enquire of such Patrons as presumed directly or indirectly to play the Mar∣chants, and sell those worldly meanes, which God himselfe had allotted to his earthly Angels, towards their maintenance and wages, in labouring to reduce his astrayed flocke to their true Shepheard. Ou r this impanelled ranke he placed D. Raynolds, a man of very austere Conuersation, so temperate in his af∣fections, that hee made choise rather to bee Head Corpus Christs Colledge in Oxford, then to become a Bishop, which the famous Queene Elizabeth offere vnto him. About ten dayes after, the Inquisitors re∣turned and presented the names of 40. Patrons, and so many Ministers, which had truckt and bargai∣ned for Benefices. Likewise they presented that 6. Widdowes, whose Husbands had coped and giuen 4. yeers purchase for Benefices, were ready to starue, some of them hauing seuen or eight children lying on their hands: And that before the first fruits were satisfied, without receiuing one penny for their pur∣chase, their poore Husbands died. Apollo moued to Commiseration, to see the wretched estate of the Church brought to this wo∣full plight, said, that it was no maruell all things went to wrack and ruine in that Noble Iland, when the Patrimony of the Church became a prey and pillage to Marchandizing Greedy-guts. For how, (quoth he) can vertue harbour in their hearts, when the Rewards of vertue are rauished, embezeled, and turned topsy turuy? This inequality compelled many braue Spirits, desperately to runne into the gulfe of discontentment. This made Campian, Par∣sons, Harding, Stapleton, Creswell, Dallison, Garnet, and infinite others to forgo their natiue Countrey, and betake themselues to the Seminary Colledges in Doway, in Valladolide, Ciuill, Rome, and other Po∣pish places. After these speeches, his Maiesty ask't the delinquent Patrons, what infernall fury possessed them to wrong the Ministers the selected seruants of their Heauenly Father? Why they forced them to buy their owne Right and due? The Patrons an∣swered, that they held a hand ouer the Aduowsons and Ecclesiasticall liuings in their gifts, aswell as o∣uer the impropriate Tithes. Both which being wre∣sted and extorted by the Clergy-men themselues heretofore in time of Popery, towards the Religious houses, belonged as a lawfull spoile vnto them for ridding the Land of such Lazy Lordanes & Abbey-lubbers. Likewise, they alleged, that they could not support their magnifique Port and pompe, without making sale of such Benefices, as were in their do∣nations. To this Apollo replied: Though yee haue beene tolerated to detaine the impropriate Ti hes, dare ye aduenture to take money for those Spirituall Liuings, which appertaine not vnto you? yee againe deuoure the forbidden Fruit? Could not the many examples of them, which felt the Stroke of Diuine vengeance for purloyning of forbidden Wares, terrify your mercenary minds? Ach n, for the wedge of Gold and the Baby o ish ayment, was stoned to death. Gehezi, for receiuing the two Ta∣lents and the change of garments from Naaman, was strucken with Leprosie. No ill gotten goods can long thriue with any man. Male parta, male dilabun∣tur, which yee might obserue by the Crane in the Embleme, which hauing a wrongfull prey, could not digest it. As in like manner it befell to an Eagle, which snatching a Coale from the Altar, fired her nest therewith. Famous are the destructions of sacri∣legious persons in all ages. Of Heliodorus, who was scourged by an Angell, for seeking to rob the treasure of the Templeat Ierusalem: of Pompey, which tooke away the Golden Table out of that sanctified place; of the Galles, which spoyled the Delphicke Church; of C pi , who robbed the Church of Toloza, that gaue an occasion to the Prouerb, Aurum Toloza∣num, which proued fatall to the takers. Although these two last serue not so fit for our turne, because they were Heathenish yet in as much as they por∣tend fatal success, Mal omē to the rakers of Church goods, let men feare to share in Sacred things, or in any Commodity annexed to the Spiritualty. But now-a-dayes yee are not content onely to exact of the poore Ministers such vnreasonable prizes, but yee must get some by humane reasons and vnwarrantable authority to iustifie your Acts, training their ouerfluent wits, to proue the Word of God, to become mutable in matters of Tithe; for the onfounding of which leprous opinion, I will now onuert my speech vnto you, my learned Courtiers: Be it knowne vnto you, that Tithes are due to the Clergy Iure Diuino, before the Law, by the Law of Moses, and vnder the Gospell. Before the Law Abra∣ham payed Tithes to Melchised ch, euen the tenth Gen. Cap. 14. Heb. Cap. 7. part of all which he had, as the Authour to the He∣brewes explayned. Hee payd Tithes as a temporall Prince to a spirituall Prince. But now vice versa, con∣trariwise the spirituall person is constrayned to pay Tithes to the temporall Parsons. The Patriarke Iacob made a vow vnto God, that if hee would bee with him and keep him in the way which he should go, giuing him bread to eat, and rayment to put on, he would surely gi e the Tenth vnto him. Whereby Gen. Cap. 28. it appeares, that the Tenth is still reserued by the Law of Nature, imprinted by the Diuine character in mens hearts before the Law, as a certaine and vn∣changeable portion to the instruments of Gods glo∣ry, his sacred Ministers. Likewise by the Ceremonial Law, All the Tithe of the Land, whether of the seed of Leu. Cap. 27. the Land, or of the fruit of the Tree, is the Lords, it is holy vnto the Lord. And the like Tenth was alotted of their flockes of Cattell. All which God bestowed vpon the Tribe of Leui for their paines, care, and N m. Cap. 18. maintenance in attending his seruice. The detay∣ning of these Tithes afterwards from the lawfull Owners, procured the curse of God vpon the Land of Iewry, as the Prophet protested: Yee haue robbed Mal. 3. 8, &c. God. But ye say, Wherein haue we robbed thee? In tithes and offring. Yee are cursed with a Curse, for yet haue robbed me, euen this whole Nation. Bring then all the Tithes into the S rchouses, that there may bee meat in my House, and proue me herewith, saith the Lord of Hostes, if I will not open the windowes of Hea en, and powre you out a Blessing, that there shall not bee roome nough to receiue it. By the Morall Law vnder the Gospell, where our Sauiour reproued the Pharises Hypocrisie, it appeares how iniurious a deed it is, to keepe the Tithes from the rightfull Prop ieta ies; when the Pharise iustifieth himselfe with this point, which the English Patrons would countermaund, I Luk Cap. . pay Tithe of all that I h e. The which the Diuine Wisdom liked, as he had told the Pharises before, that those things ought to be done, and not to leaue the other vndone. Neither let them colour their Prome∣thean thefts, as , as theeues of the Godhead, by abr gating all the Lawes of Moses, as if they were all void at the comming of Christ. For those onely were , which ood for types and figures of his , Passon, and Resurrection; as Cir∣cumcisio for Baptisme, and the Feast of the Passeouer, for the Feast at Easter. Some other petty things appropriated to that Nation, in regard of their hot Climate and natures, are also abolished. But for the lawfulnesse of Tithes payable to the reuerend Clergy, it was neuer questioned for these 5000. yeers and vpwards: yea, so powerfull a respect did the Frimitiue Church attribute vnto the Lawes of Moses, that Ele therius Bishop of Rome, at such time as Lu∣cius King of Great Brittaine, or as others think, Vice∣roy vnder the Romane Emperour, sent vnto him for some good and wholsome Lawes, this holy Prelate wrote vnto him, that hee should collect out of the Diuine Lawes, what he thought most agreeable and conuenient. If this will not satisfie their couetous apprehen∣sions, let them beleeue the Apostle S . Paul, who confirmed the paying of Tythes after the abolishing of the Ceremoniall Law. eb. Cap. 7. In former times Priests would take the fattest of the meat, but now-a-daies Phinehes and Samuel must catch at the crummes which fall from their Patrons tables. In those purer times the Children of Israel offered so plentifully, that Moses was faine to re∣straine their bounties. Yea the women offered their Bracelets, Iewels, and Looking-glasses, in which they tooke much delight. But now temporall per∣sons must haue a large summe of Aaron and Eleazar, for Presentations, to buy their wiues Iewels and stately Looking-glasses, to view the picture of Pride and the face of Simon Magus. In time of Popery there was a Law enacted of Mortmaine, to keepe backe and cu be the charity of deuout persons, for feare lest all the reuenewes of the Land might in time be conferred on the Church. So freely did men in those dayes dispose of their temporall meanes to aduance the House of Prayer, and the Master of that house, that they thought all which they possessed, to be too little to pleasure their Ghostly Father. The Galatians would haue pulled out their eyes to haue done Paul good. But now some are so farre from doing any good to their Ministers, that they would put out their eyes, if they durst. Let any of the poore Ministers shew himselfe neuer so vpright , zealous, painefull in his vocation, if his purse, grauity, and precise carriage sure not with the Patr humour roundly come off, hee will sooner accept of a brutish Dunce, that scarce knowes the Canonicall Scriptures from the Apocrypha, then of this Elect Seruant of God. Nor yet perhaps will he dismisse him so clean, but at his departure and after, he will besmeare his coat with the filthiest lees of oyle, & lay an aspersion on his good name and fame, that he is a peevish Pu∣rita e, vnworthy of his presentation. Thus do those Patrons, like the Ammonites, curtall the skirts of Dauids Embassadours garments, playing the Barbers with their Beards, vntill God sends his Nemesis, his three-stringed whip of Famine, the Pestilence, and the Sword, to afflict them for their gree∣dinesse. The Poet Mantuan bewayled the state of the Ro∣mish Clergy, that all things belōging to the Church, were Simoniously exposed to sale, as at Mart or Market; Venalia Romae Iura, sacerdotes, al∣taria, &c. Lawes, Priest-hoods, Masses, what you will, for money; For money giuen, all sinnes forgiuen, as the Popes Pardoner proclaimes. From hence arose that prouerbe against a Simoniack Pope, who had sold much Church-liuings. Vendere iure potest, e erat ille priùs. By right he sels what he had bought before. It is a farre greater fault to purchase a Bishoprick, then for a poore Minister to buy a benefice. For the one doth it of an ambitious mind to beare rule ouer his brethren, I meane him that gets in by Sim ∣ny: and the other is meerely compelled and driuen, as iron, by the Patrons heart of Adamant to giue all the temporall meanes hee hath, and perhaps more then his owne, if his credit serues him to borrow. The one might liue contentedly, without aspiring to Lordly superiority, except he be called gratis, or deemed worthy of that Reuerend place. But he that inioyes nothing after all his watch fulnes, study, spen∣ding his spirits, impayring his health, and wasting all his heritage, or meanes in food, apparell, and bookes, after 20. 30. or 40. yeeres attendance, but is enforced, poore man, vnfortunate man, to compound by some sinister contract with him, which makes no conscience to see another periured, though him∣selfe thinke, that by a tricke of wit he may auoid it. I could willingly pardon him, yea and reward him well for discou ring the necessity of his for∣tunes, and the rauening pillage of the Patron. Vntill this cloud be remoued, Faith, loue, and charity can∣no set le in me s h arts. What wr ught the ruine of the Romish Church, but the Bishops iming vp to the highest place by the golden Ladder? About the y re 605. he obtained the spirituall supr y at the hands of the Tyrant Phoc and in the yeere 801, he got his Temporall power ouer all things that may be called God. And the most part of these popes, which sithence haue beene elated to that eminent seat, came in by indirect wayes, and for Money, as Platina and other Papists haue obserued: so that if the succession of the keyes were bequeathed to Rome, Simony hath made that place vacant aboue 800. yeeres agoe: We doe therefore order and decree, that if any Clergy-man doe buy a Bishoprick, hee shall lose it, and be vtterly banished out of our Iurisdicti∣on. If any Patron receiue the least gratuity of a Mi∣nister, hee shall for euer forfeit that Presentation to the Bishop. And now, for these poore widdowe , wee adiudge that the Patrons shall restore such moneyes, as their Husbands gaue for their Benehces, twice so much of currant English money. CHAP. 3. Vpon a Bill of Complaint exhibited by Aeschines and apinian, a aiust Rewards v equally c fer∣re o persons of meane desert and escent, A∣pollo pro ounceth a pere ptory Doo ne. AT the great Assembly held at Parnassus, on the fourth of une last 1626. the e was exhibited a Bill of Complaint by Aechine, Deane of the Lycea Colledge at A hens, & by Pa in an the famous Law∣yer, Aduocate to the Lady Thermis on the behalfe of the Students of the Empire of Greece, That wheras Re∣wards ought to be confe red on the vertuous, which wore out many nights in cares and thoughts, how they might increase Trade lately decaied, how they might cut off superfluous suits of L w, whereby Cha∣rity might heat mens hearts, as in the Golden Age, and Iustice flourish without the least pollution now to their great grief they foūd many Offices bestowed on one man, which might serue sundry more suf∣ficient persons, and which worke some of those of the meanest ranke, to sit in the supremest places, whilest that many generous Spirits of Noble descent and of brauer flames, adorned with multiplicities of knowledge, whom, as Scaliger wrote of Picus Miran∣dula, the Muses themselues would pronounce to be of that immortall race, adiudged from Heauen to passe for great and wonderfull Sp sits, whiles these lay con∣temned, without any preferment at all. For which cause they humbly begged at his Maiesties hands, that some course might be taken, whereby Rewards should bee thenceforth conferred more equally on men of good desert and of Noble descent. Apollo at these ominous tidings, as it were with Commotion of mind, estranged some what from that sweet com∣position of gracious manners which he was wont to deliuer, with a voice more fearefull then ordinary, sounded out these Verses following, which argue, that his Maiesty tooke great indig tion at the con∣tents of the Bill exhibited. Why keepes one man three Offices alone, Another yet deseruing more, hath none? Eyther the Starres shoot out some crooked rayes, On this low world, or Fortune on it playes. Or else the Ayry Prince this busines guides: For surely God more equally diuides. More Offices then one, 'tis great pitty. That any in Countrey hold or Citty. One Charge, and yet I am no puritan, Will serue one man, and that a carefull man. Graces and Muses twelue in number are; Which for their Troupes looke equally to share. A Prince had need to marke, and well to know, On whom he doth great Offices bestow. In Horses race men looke into the Si es. Like Crow like Egge. The gracious Grace inspires. Heere Apollo stopt, and about halfe a quarter of an houre after renewed his speech in this manner: Sith with the Parents seed their manners slow, And in the Sonnes deriu'd by Birth doe grow, Why doe some Lawyers prey on Labours hires, This Lesson they haue conu'd from Clownish Sires. Those Clowns their Sires, which hating Heauēl right, Them from their Birth defil'd with Earths delight. Whereby their Sonnes so trained vp at first, By natures kinde commit that act accurst. Tis seldome seene, that one of Noble Race, Peruerts Tribunall Seates by trickes so base. Tis seldome seene that one of Noble bloud, B trayes his King, or sels his Countries good. If one among a thousand such you finde, Some Treacher him se uced of Clownish kind. If any Lawyers play the Tyrants part, Thundring out fines, to make the vertuous smart, Or proue notorious for deceit and bribes, They are descended of base Clownish Tribes. Nothing more base then is the Ruling Clowne, Not Antichrist for fraud can put him downe. No change of manners, though he change his weed, He what his father wore, doth neuer heed. Whiles that such Moles in nought but Earth delight, They snort in ease, and snatch at others right. Nobles like Planets mo e with noble thought. A Royall Virgin forth our Sauiour brought. The Commons should be ruled, the Nobles rule, Lawes rule them both, as Bits the Horse and ule. Peeres plac't in Office, by their peerelesse King, Are iust, least blots they to their Honour bring. The vulgar Sort fit for Mechanick Trade, May helpe their country with the Plough and Spade. CHAP. 4. Hugh Broughton vpon some discontentment taken in seeing his inferiours promoted to e ine t places be∣fore himselfe, complaineth vnto Apollo, that Florio, Deane of Thaliaes Chappell, prophaned the sacred name of the Letany, by singing the same in∣termixt with triuiall toyes. Apollo causeth Florio to repeat his Letany. HVgh Broughton, a very learned Diuine, and an admirable Linguist, specially in the Hebrew and Chaldaick tongues, hauing for a long time awaited in Apolloes Court for some place of preferment, and seeing many persons, whom he thought to be farre beneath him in knowledge, or at least, that his penny was as good siluer as theirs, exalted to promotion, grew about this time of the Moone maruellously discontent; and chiefly for that Signior Florio, a new commer into Parnassus, had beene lately promoted to be Deane of the Lady Thaliaes Chappell, a place of honour more fit for a Cabalisticall Rabbine, as him∣selfe was, then for a Nouelist Italian; hee fumed, he fietted to see the world thus runne on wheeles, veri∣fying those words of Seneca, that there was neuer as yet any great wit, without som touch of madnes o folly. Hugh Broughton thus pe plext, less his swoh e con∣ceits, like the embotteled ane for want of vent, might burst their bodily instruments, repayred o the f teenth of May last 1626. vnto Apollo, complayning that Fiorio, Deane of Thal aes Chappell, had is Princes Birth day sung a strange morall Letany, more agreeable to a Sceltonical Dogrell Rimer, which shootes verses at andome, then to the reuerend Pre∣late of the Comicall Court. Which fault of he aggrauated, by fetching the Genealogy of the word Letan, not onely from the Greeke s u r d Dialects of the Atti kes, the Dorickes, the Ion kes, the Aeolickes and other exotick pronunciations, but also from the misticall Thalmuds of the Iewes, wherein he surpasled most of the Phoebean Academy; Apollo wōdred much a this sar-fetcht Etymology, and sublimated pedegree, and therefore willed Flo∣rio to repeat in his presence that morall Letany, which ministred such an occasion to this high-spi∣rited Scholler, so to traduce the memoriall of it with such curious aggrauations. Florio obeyed, and with a mild-composed gesture reiterated his Letany. FRom blaspheming of Gods name, From recanting words with shame, From Damnation eternall, From a sicke Soule internall, From a Sinner will not mend, From a friend, that will not lend, From all moderne abuses, From much things to no vses, From Ignatians cursed swords, From an Alchymists faire words, From those Friers, which Cloakes vse, As from such that haunt the Stewes, From such Sins as doe delight vs, As from dreames which doe affright vs, From Parasites, that stroake vs, From morsels, that will choake vs, From false Sycophants, that sooth vs, As from those in Sinne doe smooth vs, From all profane Discourses, From all vngodly Courses, Sweet Angell free, deliuer me. From Craggy hils and mountaines, From mire and muddy Fountaines, From touching Toades and Spiders, From Shooters hill ranke Riders, From th' Exchequer Promooters, From prying Spies and Tooters, From Baylifes & Informers, That faigne to be Reformers, Frō Cutthroat City Catchpoles, That care not how they vexe soules, From Bridewell and from Newgate, From deare wit, that's bought too late, From the Law of Halifaxe, From the loane of the Tower axe, From fraies & causelesse battell, From murren in our Cattell, From one thats euer prating, From Entortion & grating, From S Nicholas Clarkes at night, From such crue, as shun the light, Sweet Angel free, deliuer me. From flowtes, which friendship sunder, From Lightning, Stormes, and thunder, From Nouelists coind rumours, From all Phantasticke humours, From such scolds as bite and scratch, From a causelesse masticke patch, From all such as purses cut, From a filthy durty slut, From an old man luxurious, From a yong man litigious, From a riggish wanton Trul, That her Louer seekes to gull, From Setters, Canters, Cheaters, No better then men-eaters, From an ill name and bad fame, From much need and open shame, From stolne Goods receauers, From closesly Deceauers, From a wanton that will rig, And delight to daunce a lig, Sweet Angell free, deliuer me. From a Priest that will mumble, From a Nuune that will iumble, From rude Knaues that Mai s tumble, From Cattes and Rattes, which rumble, From seruants, that will grumble, From a Iade, that will stumble, From Drunkennes and Lechery, From scarcity and Penury, From excesse of meat as drinke, From Tobaccoes no some s nke, From opinions of Doctors, From busines with Proctors, From conuersing with wranglers, From the patience of Anglers, From Lawyers visitation, From waste and desolation, From one that delights in Law, From a Lions bloudy claw, From bawdy Court Citations, From Excommunications, From a State full of factions, From all vngodly Actions, Sweet Angell free deliuer me. From all hard-hearted Masters, Which vse not words, but wasier, From a new O st, proud and poore: From a stale and gracelesse whore, From bold Bayards downe right blowes, From sly pe kings of night-crowes, From Musicians Phantasticke, From Tradesmen growne scholasticke, From any Bonds to marchants, From acquaintance with Serieants, From the mercy of aylors, From the long Bils of Taylors, From Bankrouts too latewishes, From all vnwholsome dishes, From conuersation with Clownes, Which wil sel both Verbes & Nownes, From a Castellian drugger, That poyson sels for Suger, From the Sicilian vesper, From bits more hard then I sper, Sweet Angell free deliuer me. From men with Murthe tainted, From women which are painted, From all far fetcht New fangles, From him that euer wrangles, From euery arlot-mo ger, From heat, cold, thirst and hunger, From a rough-handed Barber, As from an Irish Caruer, From o e that is brow branded, From him that is left handed, From a feast without some wine, B to Supper or to dine, From drinking much cold water, From a coozening false Cater, From po dred Beefe sans mustard, From a thin and s wre Custard, From rotten Chee e and addle Eggs, From broken Shins and gowty Legs, From a decrepit Capon, From stinking fish and Bacon, From stale and filthy Sturgeon, A from a foolish Surgeon, From a Pudding hath no end, From a Bow that will not bend, Sweet Angell free, deliuer me. From straggling on a strange heath, Which once had neere wrought my death, From bribing and vile Trafficke, From Monsters bred in Affrik, From daily Contributions, From partiall distributions, From a Cooke that is a slut. From a knife, that will not cut, From a short-heeld skittish wife, Worse then any Cut-purse knife, From men too rash and testy, As from wild Iades or resty, From Essex stiles, and Norfolke wiles, From Yorke miles & theeues night files, From Shopmen that will palter, As Knaues deserue a halter, From a bribing Consiable, From the winds of Dunstable, From a young Iustice of Peace, That from prating doth not cease. From his Fellow that ne're speakes A wise word, but Currat Lex, Sweet Angell free, deliuer me. From men cleane voyd of Reason, From dishes out of season, From men too nice and curious, From men too rash & furious, From Courtiers honey-spoken, From Marchants that be broken, From Chanceries Iniunctions, From dearely bought Presumptions, From any rash Intrusions, From purchased Pollutions, From strong Beere and heady Ale, From a long and tedious Tale, From a Sophistick Bruer, Then whom the Diuell is truer, From anguish, griefe, and sorrow, From any need to borrow, From the Counter or the Fleet, From doing Penance in a sheet, From all straight and pinching shooes, From all Cornes on Feet or Toes, From a light and Pennilesse Purse, As from a sore and dismall Curse, From Suites by Friends procurmēts, From all the worlds allurements, Sweet Angell free, deliuer me. CHAP. 5. Apollo, after som shew of distaste against Florio, for his new morall Letany, at the last giues him leaue to defend it. Florio in a briefe Oration declares the reasons, why hee inuented such a strange forme of Letany. Apollo pronounceth his Censure. APollo hauing heard this kind of Letany, more for the appeasing of Hugh Broughtons precisi∣an humour, then for any dislike, which his wisedome found in it, seemed to frowne at Florio, for vttering in such a forme and vnusuall tune the sacred Letany. Florio doubting lest his Maiesty had in good ear∣nest controuled his merry-conceited Letany, which as a new Liturgy he deuised of purpose to insinuate himselfe into the good grace of his Princesse, whom he knew was naturally affected with mirth and iolli∣ty, desired of Apollo, that he might speake what hee could in his defence. His Maiesty gaue him leaue. And presently without further premeditation, Florio made this Apology: It is not vnknowne, most il∣lustrious Prince, both to your matchlesse prudence, and to all discreet Politicks, that a new broome sweepes cleane, that euery Seruant at his first entertainement into a great Ladies Court, must sute his affections to hers, as neere as possibly he can with conueniency, and study by all meanes of solace to giue her con∣tent in some degree or other. To this end I inuented this new Letany, knowing that my gracious Mi∣stresse liked pleasant raptures, better then the graue and austere rules of the Stoicks. As for the pro a ing of the name of Letany, while vnder the shadow thereof I couch matters of some moment, I hope, it redounds not so preiudicially infamous to your ver∣tuous Court, as for a Papist to be called a Catholicke, or for a smatterer in Logick, to be termed a Sophi∣ster, or for a peeuish Diuine, to be stiled a Puritane. If my Letany be throughly scanned, vnder that title M . Broughton shall meet with as much substance to edifie the common sort of people, as with his Hebrew Genealogies to enrich the learned. It is not a Cowle or hood which makes a Monke: Cucullus non facit Monachum. nor is it a shauen or bald Crown which makes a Priest: for a man may lose his haire with the Poxe, or for want of radicall moisture in that part of the head, as chanced to the Poet Aeschylus, on whose bald pate an high soaring Eagle did let fall a shel∣fish, with intent to breake it, as on a stone. Nor doth along beard make a man aiudicious Socrates. bar batum hoc crede Magistrum Dicere, sorbitio quem tollit dira Cicutae. Pers. Sat. 4. whom a forc't draught of Hemblocks iuyce did kill. We see the Goat stalking with a long beard. Yet who will take him for a religious beast, that climbes vp to the Altar, and feedes on the sacred flowers? Barbatus, li Caper, tamen esse negamus Hunc recta et purâ Relligione pecus. It is not the ba e outside, the vsurping of a naked name, which can disgrace an honest Action. If vnder the name of Letany, I haue alluded to any lewd passage, whereby youth may be corrupted, or the state of Parnassus defamed, I appeale to Caesar, to your Maiesties iudgement. Apollo, after that Florio had thus defended his cause, yeelded his censure in these few words: Whosoeuer goes about to depriue men of all kinde of pleasure, seekes to depriue them of freedome and of a cheerefull nature, which God preferres before a sullen crabbed mind, as was that of Cains. Beeing tempred, it consorts well in an ingenuous Scholler. For thereby hee shall auoid the name of a laughing Democritus, with his tickling spleene, and also of a weeping Heraclitus, with his melancholy passion. The title of Letany, derogates not frō grauity, while it tends not to base scurrility, but rather to a vertu∣ous morality. There is a time to teach, to exhort, and there is a time to fling stones against the wind. There is a time of earnest things to write, A time to talke of matters small & light, A time to walk, to run, to ride, or praunce, A time to sit and laugh, or lead a Daunce. There is a time for men to fast and pray, And so a time to sing like Birds in May. CHAP. 6. Apollo asketh the Author of the Golden Fleece, wherefore his Countreymen of Wales, hauing the commodiousnesse of the Sea with a large scope of land, are notwithstanding very much impouerished of late. The Author imputes the cause vnto the multitude of Law Suites. Vpon Thursday in the Easter weeke 1626 while the rest of his Maiesties Subiects of Great Brittaine consulted how they might repaire the decay of Trade, lately hapned by Prodigality, Ex∣cesse of Aparrell, Tobacco, and other enormities in this Iland fostred and cherished, besides our losses a broad by the M rish Pirates, and now of late by the Dunkirkes, it was my good fortune to be present at Apolloes Court in Parnassus: Where likewise his Imperiall Maiesty sate in Councell, about the same af∣faires, because there might bee a perpetuall corre∣spondency betwixt his diuine Court & our humane actions. As soone as Apollo saw Orpheus Iunior, it plea∣sed him to demaund of him the resolution of Questions, which he presently proposed. Whereof the former was, wherefore his natiue Cou Wales being a Peninsula, almost an Iland, compassed about with the Sea, in forme of an horse-shoo, like little Brittaine in France, from the riuer Dee and Chester, round about to Glocester, hauing aboue 100. Riuers running out into the Sea, beside Seuerne, and Dee: yet for all this large Tract & commodiousnesse, they had not ten Ships; whereas Deuo shire alone our neighbour vpon Seuerne, not contayning the tenth part of land, flourished with 150. ships. The other Question was, wherefore their enclosed lands, as also their mountaines and Commons lay desolate, not halfe stockt, and their Corne fields in most places so bare of Corne, that a stranger would thinke, eyther that the earth produced such graine naturally wild, or else that the Locusts of Aethiopia had wasted and harried the same? Vnto these demands hee craued an houres respit to answer. At the end whereof he returned his reso∣lutions in this wise: I could haue wisht that these Questions had been askt of some iudicious Gentle∣men of these parts, whom p tly by familiar ac∣quaintance, and partly by fame, I know to be far bet∣ter experienced; and consequently more sufficient to yeeld your Highnesse satisfaction in these demands of import. But seeing (most vertuous Emperour) the Fates, that is, your incuitable pleasure, allotted this charge vnto my weake capacity, I will not spare to display the causes, according to that measure and ta∣lēt which God hath giuē me. In the entrance where∣of, a Story comes into my mind, out of an old Spanish Booke printed at Salamanca, aboue one hundred thirty yeeres past, entituled, The causes of the pouerty of Spain, dedicated to F rdinand and Isabella, before the con∣quest of Granata, and the discouery of the West In∣dies by Columbus. Among other reasons the Author imputes the breeding of Asses, and the vse of barren Mules, in stead of B ls and Oxen, to be the prime and waightiest cause of their necessities. For whereas in Hercules time the goodliest Kine of the world were found with Gerion and Cacus in that Countrey, since the rearing of those vnprofitable Beasts, and the Golden Mines of Bebellio in the P renean Moun∣taines, and the graines of Gold in Tagus Sands were exhaust d dry, Spaine became the most miserable Region of Europe. Now, my Countrey of Wales appeares, in my iudgement, to haue some resemblance with Spaine, as it stood in those dayes, being like vnto it for si∣tuat n, and the vneuen esse of ground, vp hill, and downe hill; yet enriched with faire vallies, and a boue all, with the benefit of the Sea, as your Maiesty hath well obserued. But our grieuance is, that in stead of plentifull droues of Cattell, which heretofore serued vs, as∣well for our sustentation, as to supply our necessi∣ties abroad, wee haue studied that fabulous Booke of Ouids Metamorphosis so much, that our stocke is decayed, and now-a dayes we reare vp two-leg∣ged Asses, which doe nothing but wrangle in Law the one with the other. By this meanes wee consume our precious time not to bee redeemed. By this vngracious brood wee become so impo∣uerished, that our Neighbours of Deuo shire, not∣withstanding our large Circuit of the Sea, and our infinite extent of land, goe farre beyond vs in ship∣ping and necessary Trading. Apollo informed of this heynous abuse, replied, No man proues vnfortunate, but by his owne pro∣curement. In whom lies this fault, but in your selues? Who can redresse this grosse absurdity better then your owne selues? Pardon mee, most Noble Prince, said Orpheus Iu∣nior. It consists not in our powers to withstand what Heauen hath decreed, as a punishment for our An∣cest ours sinnes and ours. The meanes for our Education, are farre short in espect of the wise English Nation. In times of Superstition, most of our Church∣liuings, by our too much simplicity became a pr y to Religious houses. Which being dissolued in King Henry the Eights dayes, and by Act of Parliament confiscate to the Crowne as Impropriations, our Curates stand, as be∣fore, but reasonably prouided for, not able scarce to haue Whay to themselues, much lesse to feed their weanelings with milke, as Saint Paul ad∣uiseth. I know many Parishes, whereof the Tithes of euery one amount to two hundred pound a yere, and yet the poore Ministers receiue not ten pounds a piece, yea, and some of them but twenty nobles: out of which they pay Tenths, Subsidies, and o∣ther impositions. So that for want of maintenance both Shep∣heards and Flockes doe oftentimes miscarrie; and wee two-legged Asses can hardly recouer true hu∣mane shapes. Nor is this the onely cause of our Pouertie. We are subiect to more inconueniences then the English Nation; for we stand in feare (and our feares are not in vaine) continually without in∣termission to be sued at the Courts of Westminster, at the Counsell of the Marches, at the Spirituall Courts at home and in London, notwithstanding that wee haue the Courts of Assize of double the terme, then they haue in England, besides our Quarterly Sessions of the Peace, our Countie and Stewards Courts. Nor yet haue I ended all the af∣flictions of poore Wales. Within these two and twentie yeeres, the number of Clerkes and Solli∣citours, at the Counsell of the Marches, haue encrea∣sed so exorbitantly, if not prodigiously, that where∣as I knew not aboue one or two of these Clerkes in a Shire, now I can point at a doozen and more in most Shires, whereof many of them haue three or foure Foot-posts, which they call Cursitors be∣longing vnto euery of them, whose Office is con∣tinually to runne for Processes: insomuch that one of these Clerkes sent for a hundred and fortie Pro∣cesses, against one of their times called the Appea∣rance, for they sit ofner then Westminster, the most part of them for matter not appertaining to the Iu∣risdiction of that Court. I haue knowne men sued for a shilling and vnder, to that remote place. I will speake all I know: for the reuerence I beare to Authoritie, and to the Seate of Iustice, which ought to be sacred. But I could wish all Courts to liue within their Precincts, and not to goe one inch from their Instructions; to take away the occasions of debate, and not as our late King Iames of blessed memory noted, to seeke more moulture to their Mill, then of right belongs. In former times they neuer vsed to direct binding Processes, but against Fugitiues. They neuer sent Pursuiuants nor Ser∣ieants at Armes in matters of Debt betwixt Partie and Party, but onely in Criminall and high natu∣red Causes, where the King was immediately in∣teressed. They seldome vsed to fine the Plaintiffe for charitable yeelding to an attonement at home, or if they did, it was but small in the nature of a mild amercement. They endeuoured by all meanes to establish Loue and Charity among Neighbours, and were glad to heare those good newes of their Conuersions, though their Gaine came in the lesse. They often vsed to repeate that Prouerbe of Salo∣mon, euen at their meales: Better it is to sup a messe of Pottage with quietnesse of minde, then to haue a whole Oxe with strife. They trembled and made a conscience to take money of any fellow Christian, though due vnto them for sentence or verdict, if the same came like so many drops of life-bloud from his heart. They cared more for the Defendant, then for the Plaintiffe, vnlesse the Cause were too abho∣minable. Why then I see, said Apollo, if some of your Courts were abolished, you might quickly grow wealthy both by Sea and Land. For if the Occa∣sions of Suites were taken away, men would follow their Husbandry diligently at home, fall to enclo∣sures, plant Orchards, marle their Lands, and not scratch the Earth with weake Heyfers or Steeres. They might then keepe strong Oxen to plough withall, which now they are enforced to sell for their Lawiers vse. The Sea might be aswell frequen∣ted by you, as by the Deuonshire men. Surely, if the Noble King of great Britaine would release you from the Courts of London, or else discharge the Court in the Marches, I see no reason but you might fall to industrious courses, aswell as others. Dcuon∣shire and Cornwall are a great deale further from London, then the remotest Part of Wales and their Termes of Assizes shorter by halfe then yours. And yet they liue in good securitie one Neighbour with the other, and doe all ioyne in honest Trading both at home and in the Newfoundland, augmenting their fortunes, and breeding store of Mariners and ship∣ping. Your Court at the Marches was first instituted to suppresse rebellious Attempts, and Traitours, specially Owen Glyndowrdie, who was so called for taking part with King Richard the Second. But now, me thinkes, it might very well be spared, see∣ing that those stormes bee long sithence, by King Henry the Seuenth, comming to the English Crowne quite vanished, and that now-adayes a man may trauell in Wales, as safely as in any other Part of the Kingdome. The consideration of the Premisses we doe neuerthelesse referre to your Prudent and gene∣rous King. And I belieue, there is neuer a poore man worth fortie shillings but will contribute som∣what with all his heart towards the Wars, or for a gratefull Beneuolence to his Prince, to be acquited of some of these Courts. For indeed I heard that a Knight of Staffordshire, who dwelt but three miles distant from the Iurisdiction of the Marches, should say, that he would not for a 1000. Markes his house had stood those three miles further towards Wales, by reason of those troubles which they were sub∣iect vnto more then his Countrey. CHAP. VII. Orpheus Iunior exhibits a Petition vnto Apollo to diminish the number of Lawyers, and to punish their offences. Apolloes Answere, shewing how they may be restrai∣ned and punished. ORpheus Iunior vnderstanding that Apollo bur∣ned with Zeale and Charitie, to reforme the superfluiries of Law-suits, which were not the least causes of the Decay of Trades in great Brittaine, and fearing that in time to come, their sufferance and continuance might yet worke a greater impedi∣ment to his Proiect of the Golden Fleece, which with infinite care, paines, and some charge he hath for many yeeres managed, and almost now brought to perfection, vpon the abouesaid Thursday in the after-noone, he exhibited this Petition vnto his Ma∣iestie, as he came out of the Delphick garden. The contents as follow. Magnus honos extra pacem componere, maior Discordes animos conciliare domi. Erga viciuos Amor incipit. Ard a quaero, Eripe os odijs viscera chara Dei. Membra licet collisa sumus: Rex vniat aequus, Subdola si studeat subdere bella Fori. Rabula Bella mouet plusquam Cinilia Legum Pratextu: liber nullus, Auarus eget. Tis honour great abroad to settle peace, But greater farre our countries broyles t'appease. Towards the Next true Loue must first begin. High things I begge. From iars defend Gods Kin. Though mangled we, you may vnite vs all, If you reforme the subtill pleading Hall. The Lawyer maskt with Law on vs doth feed. Few men escape. The Niggard stands in need. Apollo after he had perused the Petition, deliuered it to Doctor Haddon one of the Masters of Requests, charging him to remember the redeliuery thereof vnto him backe at the first sitting of the next Court, which was about two dayes after. At the time and place limited, Doctor Haddon fayled not to restore the Petition to his Maiestie, who instantly made a full demonstration of the effects, that it was high time to bridle the insolencies of those fellowes, which studied more to driue the Holy Ghost with his Heauenly Gifts, of Loue, Charitie, and Humi∣litie out of their owne and Neigbours hearts, then to informe their Clients of the truth of their cause. First, therefore he enacted, that euery man should lay downe his matter in the briefest manner. Se∣condly, that no Aduocate should defend a wrong∣full Cause. Thirdly, that the Aduocate must pay his Client all his money backe againe with arbitra∣rie dammage by Apolloes prescription, if the Cause by his Counsell went forwards, and afterwards chanced to be ordred against him. Fourthly, that no Attourney nor Aduocate must delay or lose the benefit of one houre in aduancing to a hearing their Clients Suite. Fiftly, that the Iudges, as in Den∣marke, follow the Reports and Iudgements for∣merly put downe in Bookes, without adding or al∣tering any new Opinions out of their own, though more solid, heads. Sixtly, that no man presume to become a Iudge in the Newfoundland, which euer receiued a Bribe; or which tooke a Fee within the space of seuen yeeres, before he enter there; for that Countrey being as yet pure, wee will suffer no im∣pure hands to touch her, nor impure lips to Court her. Seuenthly, that whosoeuer takes a Bribe in the Newfoundland directly or indirectly, or tolerates with any Gehezi to receiue it, hee shalbe conuicted of Rape, for polluting that blessed Nymph, with a∣dulterous iniustice, & to be punished more Maiorum, as the Senate of Rome had adiudged Nero; or to be vsed as a Blasphemer against Saint Marke at Venice. Eightly, That no Lawyer nor Officer should exact more fees, then were appointed in those Tables, which hee caused to be publickly engrauen and set forth vpon paine to forfeit his Eares. After the promulging of these Ordinances, which his Maiestie willed to be engrauen on Cedar-boords, and to bee inuiolably obserued like the Lawes of the Medes and Persians; for the further rooting out of Extortions, Bribes, and Exactions of Lawyers, Apollo with a loud voice, which made all the Earth to tremble, pronounced this Oracle: Crimina non potuit Rex extirpare Iohannes Strata Lutherana quae modò cernis ope. Et Coelum Pelagus{que} suo discrimine distant: Vt variant mundi Climata Tempus crit; Cum Themidos pariles noua Constellatio libras Reddet, &, vt Daniae, singula nota libris. Arcanam proprio Cabalam nec pectore seruent Vt semel optasti, Diue Iacobe, tuis. Iuridicus peccans non coram Iudice Sectae Eiusdem poenas supplicium{que} luat. Nobilis, aut gratis conuincat Episcopus illum Pro repetundarum crimine, Fraude, mora. Altervtras Partes non Conciliarius audax Fulmine fucato, seu reticendo iuuet. Dic mihi, quid differt multos tolerare Tyrannos, Radere Caufidicos aut aliena pati? His domit is: Martis Seruorum millia multa Sustineas Auro, quod modò praeda Midis. King Iohn his Crowne did to the Pope expose, Which, as you saw, poore Luther durst oppose. Both Skie and Seas with sundry motions rage; Yet now is come Astreaes Golden Age. A King of Denmarks Bloud Lawes out of ioyns, As there in written Bookes here shall appoint. None then shal wrest, as would K. Iames ordaine, A secret Law hatcht in one Lawyers braine. If he offend for Bribes, Fraud, or Delay, Twere fit that Noblemen or Bishops may Iudge him, where he shal not preuaile with gold, With Friendship, quirks, Demurres, nor facing What differs it to see a Tyrant rule? Or a rau nous Iudge riding on his Mule? A King may keepe his daring Foes in awe, With lesser charge then men doe spend in Law. CHAP. VIII. Bartolus and Plowden, by the instigation of the Ie∣suiticall Faction, doe appeach Orpheus Iunior be∣fore Apollo, for certaine Offences supposed to bee committed by him. LOng did Robert Parsons, Father Cotton, Cardi∣nall Bellarmine, and others of the turbulent Ig∣natian Sect consult together, how they might bee reuenged on Orpheus Iunior, for his discouery of Mariana, and the publike shame, which all their Societie had incurred euer since their restraint, after the said Marianes conuiction. But finding, that Orpheus had smelt out their drift, and for that cause kept himselfe continually at the Wel head, neere to his Maiesties Court, and commonly in Court, they deferred the shooting of their enuenomed arrowes at a person of that eminencie, whom not onely A∣pollo graced with more then ordinary fauours and familiaritie for frequenting the sacred Cloysters of the Muses, but likewise all the Noble Spirits of Par∣nassus, loued and respected him for his care, paines, and charge in aduancing forwards the Golden Fleece, and the Plantation of the New found Ile. But at last these Hamans sate in Counsell, and deuised together, how they might cunningly wound the honour of this carefull Mardocheus, who had dis∣couered the treacheries, falshoods and knauish trickes of many persons, who had sometimes liued gloriously in Parnassus; as the other Mardocheus had reuealed to the Persian King, the Treasons of his Seruants. They wonne Bartolus and Plowden, two notable Lawyers, who were also grieuously offen∣ded for the Petition he preferred against the multi∣plicities of Suites to take their parts, and by some scandalous surmises to lay an ambush for the sur∣prizal of his rising Fame. For the intrapping where∣of they heaped together Articles of sundry natures, which going currant this day, they would them∣selues condemne the next day. Neuerthelesse, being egged on by the Iesuites, they tooke heart at grasse, and at length with two tedious Orations more bit∣ter and violent then the Phillipica, which Cic ro fra∣med against Marcus Anthonius, they inueighed in their Preambles, most sharply and Satyrically a∣gainst Orphens Iuniors Booke, called Cambrensium Caroleia, saying, that hee had openly discouered with Cham Noahs nakednesse, hee had polluted his fathers ashes, and ragingly snatcht at Iupiters golden Beard in disclosing the mysticall secrets. Of the Cabalisticall Science, whereon as the Mercurian Grinder, the wits of many Proficients in the Lawes, were so finely whe ed, that some would gaine whole Manours with a shrill whyning voice, yea, and they held one another a begger, vnlesse a Kite could lie about their Purchases in one day. Others with a Stertorean roaring throat vsed to astonish the Auditours, as if Thunder had come out of the Cloudes sodainly to destroy them. The Report of which noyse, like a Canon or Basilic did so terrifie some faint-hearted Meacocks, that they fled out of the Countrie into the Iles of Creete, Lesbos, and the Rhodes, perpetually abandoning all their Right, Title, and interest in such Lands hereditarie, or pur∣chased, which they had or might haue in time to come within the Territories of Parnassus, & quite clayming the same vnto those terrible Roaters. So powerfull, said they, was the red clapper, before these Mysteries were made manifest by this Cam∣br -Britaine, like Greene the Detectour of Coni∣catching, that a Lawyers Tongue could doe many feats, trot, or amble, gallop or halt, saue or slay, chide or charme, with more prettie and proper con∣ditions then the Sorcerers of Aegypt could vaunt in the presence of Pharaoh. The Delphicke Sword, which did cut, file, saw, and shaue, came not neere in operation to this pleading member, which all the vertuous applauded, Orpheus excepted; and must stil domineere it in the World, as long as the e ∣mity shal last betwixt the womans seed & the Serpent. They further alledged, that this Authour of the Golden Fleece had vsurped the name of Orphens Iu∣nior, which he ought not to haue done, vnlesse hee could draw life out of the Rockes, and by melo∣dious straines enduce the greatest Oake in this Kingdome to dance the Canaries. Likwise, they found fault with him for disswading men from going to law, like an Anabaptist, for spea∣king against their Profit, for seeking to lessen their numbers, and to debarre them, like Charles the Fift, from dwelling in the West Indies, and conse∣quently, in the Newfoundland, where they hoped one day to get a good bootie among the simple Fi∣shermen, if the Monyed Queene chanced hereafter to withdraw the sweet influence of her Countenance from them in this flourishing Kingdome. Finally, they charged him particularly with these Verses by him published in his said Booke, tending to discourage men from spending their meanes in Law; so that this Corporation might put vp their pipes, and in time fall into disgrace to the great scandall of the Lady Themis, their Soueraigne; if such a Toy should take men in the heads to liue at home quietly, and not to pay their quarterly rents. No peny, no Pater noster, was the Song of some Di∣uines heretofore. But for Lawyers rents, it was ne∣uer questioned since Demosthenes his time till now. Therefore as a Libeller against the sacred persons of Lawyers they desired Apollo to censure him, which presumed to set out these vnluckie Verses: Fulmina Iuris huic, Fauor illi, casus at idem: Explicitus{que} rigor, implicitus{que} d lus. Omnes venantur questum qui lura sequuntur Nummus vbi tinnit, candida lura silent. Spem tibi vox nutrit, Mens dāna. Colūba fit Aspis, Mel Fel. Conueniunt quam malè Lis & Amor! One's thunder strooke, Another's grac't amaine. The cause the same. Such is the force of Gaine. Without deare coine, the Lawyer sayes but mum: Yet when it sounds, the lawes thēselues are dūbe. The tongue vowes hope, his mind losse. Doues turn'd Aspes. Sweet hony gall. How ill Loue Hatred claspes! CHAP. IX. Apollo commands Orpheus Iunior to answere the Accusation of Bartolus and Plowden, who obey∣ing extolleth Charitie, taxeth Conicatching and Hatred, and commends the Lawes. Apollo smiled to see the impudencie of these Law∣yers, yet not to seeme partiall in his Seruants cause, he commanded Orpheus to defend himselfe, who thus began. BRight Light of Loue, which knowest the Origi∣nals, And Principles of Supernaturals, Which measur'st Globes, & the 7. wādring Spheares, Inspire my heart. Let not subrustick Feares, Nor bashfulnesse of Virgins crimson hew Astonish me from speaking what is true; But that with free and lofty voice I sound Sweet Peace, which may strife, and not Lawes, con∣found. Doues build in holes of Rockes: but thou, my Doue, In holes of bloudied Rocke must build thy Loue. My Soule, like to a Doue with siluer wings, Flies to Christ's wounds for feare of Vipers stings. He is my Rocke, my Sauiour, and Defence, While I stand cloth'd in Robes of innocence. Hee knowes my aime is faire, jarres to sub due And Charitie in Lawyers to renew. Some thinke it a hard taske, impossible; But vnto God all things are possible. Others subiect mens fraile intelligence, And Reformations to Starres Influence: As though Errours waite on Reuolutions, Bald times pleasure, or Constellations. First, let thē learne; although the Suns cleere beames With his pale Sister, Lady of the streames, Doe rule the World, and worke in Trees and Flowers, Yet can they not controule Diuiner Powers, Such as our Spirits be, nor yet our wits, Which Policie refines with sacred Writs. Who can deny, but Craft's the cause of Euill? As Truth will shame Promooters and the Deuill? As Vnicie and Iustice I adore, So these turn'd topsie turuy I deplore. Of Old it was not so. Then, no Surmizes Could wrest Lawes, nor Pleas m k in disguises. Few Sentences then serued to vnfold Great matters. Then they pleaded not for Gold; But eu'ry man in person to the Iudge, As vnto God, his Case shew'd without grudge. This made them quiet, and stor'd with Treasure, Where we spend, attending Misers leasure. We spend our Thrift, our Braines, and precious times By lewd mens counsels fild with heynous crimes In needlesse Suits, whom they hold for Clients, Or Tenants, like greedy Leaches Patients. Through thicke and thinne vp to the eares and chin, They make vs drudge to bring them mony in. But what's the end? Their Heires do seldom thriue. Although in Pomps their aged Starlings liue, And sucking Pidgeons bloud turne Cormorants: Yet neuer Apes will grow to Elephants; Nor will God suffer an Impostors Race To flourish long, nor wisdome, to embrace. Some Nations He plagues for their Drunkennesse With bloudy warres; some for their Beastlinesse With Famine of his Word. But vs He smites By letting double Tongues, vse base despites. Then friske like Foxes brisk, and fqueak like Rats; Or barke like Curres, or caterwaule like Cats. Feare no thornes, lift vp your hornes; each Brother, Like juggling Gypsies, deceiue another. This man rake, him to the stake; hold your owne. Cheat kindly, my Maisters; There's Gold in Towne. By Hook or by Crook, by Right or by Wrong Cramme Purses with Curses. O dismall Song! All's Fish that comes to Net in Sea or Brooke. No surer angling then the Golden Hooke. Glad is false Iudas of his siluer pouch; Glad is fond Midas of his golden Touch, As Whales doe play vpon the lesser Fish, Till Harping-irons spoyle their latest wish; So These wound Christ againe through Neighbours sides, Till Earth denoures her due, their hideous hides. O curuae in terras Animae Coelestium inanes! O stooping Soules to Earthly trumperies, And quite deuoid of Heauenly Mysteries! Shall I sleepe on both eares, as the Prouerbe saith, while these indignities range abroad vnpunished, or conniued at among the learned Societie of Par∣nassus? No, mighty Monarch, I feele an inward mo∣tion in my Soule pricking me, like a spurre, to run as at a deified Deuill, against the defied foes of Cha∣ritie; And now the rather, being heere enforced in your Maiesties Court of Parliament, the transcen∣dent Light of all worldly Actions. Take away the chaine of Charitie, take away the Communion of Saints established on the eternall vnion of the Sonne of God, who left vs at his departure this last Com∣mandent: Loue one another. And doe we loue one another, if we liue in hatred, and watch opportunitie to hurt the members of Christ? Decretum pro∣fer Apollo. I appeale to this high Tribunall. How can we say, that God is in vs, if our Soules and Bo∣dies bee not his Temple? The Ground-worke of this Temple is Faith, as Saint Paul writes, Faith is the ground of things hoped for. The walles are the Gifts of Hope, without which, wee of all men were most miserable. And what is the perfection of the Heb. cap. 11. 1. Cor. cap. 15. Roofe, which couers this Temple, but Charitie? This is the fruit of all our Actions both immanent and transient. This brightsome vertue extends to God and man, to Heauen and Earth. It lifts it selfe vp to God, as the prime Mouer of our wils, to the Angels, as our Guardians, and to the triumphant Saints for their participation and spirituall fellow∣ship with our Soules in the harmonious concent and agreement of Holy Workes, expecting our hu∣mane minds, to ioyne with them in their vniuersall Alleluiahs without iarres, discord, or disproportio∣ned tunes. O Angelicall Concord, which requirest this Contemplation and Practice of all such, which are predestinated to be saued! O the depth of Gods scope, which exacteth this obedience of the true Catholike Church, to loue our Neigbours, as wee would haue him to loue vs, to doe euill to no man, to wish well to all the World, like vnto the Sunne, which not onely casts his beames vpon all, but re∣fresheth the very earth, which beareth weeds! In what a miserable case then stand those Law∣yers, which polish their wits, and with hired tongues goe about to defeat O phans, Widowes, and other innocents, by desending wrong-doers? Cursed be yee, which speake good of euill, and euill of Esay cap. 5. good, saith the Prophet. Which likewise the Wise∣man testified: He that iustifieth the wicked, and he Prou. cap. 17. that condemneth the Iust, they both are abhominable vnto God. What auailes it a man to gather wealth for a small time, when hee knowes hee must leaue them behind him and answere for euery idle word and sentence, which he produced to disgrace or hin∣der his Neighbour, whom he was bound to tender and loue as himselfe? What profit shal he get by his golden fees, when Death dogges him at the heeles? When his pulses shall faintly beat, his senses faile, and his eye-lids shut, neuer more to open, vntill they see the gates of New Ierusalem shut fast against their wretched Master? No doubt, but some of our Lawyers doe happily thinke vpon this fatall stroke, but (alas) that weake thought for want of Zeale quickly perisheth, like those seedes, which were sowne by the Husbandman, and afterwards for want of care suffered to be ouergrowne with weeds and choaked with auarice. The want of employ∣ments in some other Professions or Trades which might benefit them in their worldly thoughts and dreaming conceits of priuate lucre doe constraine many great Spirits to fall to this wrangling course of life, who otherwise would proue more notable members for their Countries Good. But seeing no other way then this to arriue without danger of a bloudie nose to a great estate, they forgoe those braue flames, which Nature had kindled in them, and in their steed doe harbour earthy and slimy co∣gitations, like the Serpent, whom God cursed, and destinated to creepe vpon his belly, and to licke the dust of the earth. All their mind runnes on Gaine. Gaine is their God, the God which deliuers them out of the Land of bondage, out of the iawes of Pouertie. Gaine is the golden Angell, which leades them out of the Wildernesse into the Land of Ca∣naan. Gaine is their Iosuah, that gouernes their bat∣tels, and giues them superioritie and victory, not ouer the vncircumcised Philistines, but ouer their owne Brethren, the heires of Saluation in the world to come. What faire protestations, and goodly hopes will they not faile to promise at the first ope∣ning of their Clients Cause? yet when the matter by their vnluckie Counsell succeeds not, as they pro∣mised, they will shamelesly stand vnto it, that their Clients had not throughly informed them, or else with admiration and eyes lift vp towards Heauen, they will ioyne to lay an aspersion on the Iudge, whereas themselues were the chiefe Procurers of the Suite. About twenty yeeres past it was my for∣tune to bee present in a Counsellers Chamber at the Counsell of the Marches, where a Gentleman of Wor∣cestershire bitterly complained, that the Counsell had ordred him to pay seuenscore pounds, which hee might haue compounded for fiftie pounds. And that this rigorous sentence proceeded by his rely∣ing altogether vpon his Opinion, that the Counsell would not deale in matters aboue fiftie pounds, be∣ing limited by their Instructions from the King. To which the Lawyer answered, that he had hard mea∣sure offered him, that the Counsell reduced his Cause from a Common Law businesse to bee a matter of Conscience, wherein the King had left vnto them the determining at large without tying their pow∣ers to a certaine Summe. That hee was sory to see such extreme seueritie. Yet notwithstanding some∣what glad, that the matter hauing beene so charge∣able and trouble some for a long time he might now enioy the continuall company of his wife and chil∣dren at home, which before he could not doe. That Peace was a blessed thing, and Patience an excellent vertue. Which the Gentleman hearing, and hauing no comfort else for his great expence, paines, and troubles, he brake forth into Passion, saying, what doe you tell me of Peace and Patience, and going home to haue the company of my wife and chil∣dren? All this I had before I met with your vnfor∣tunate Counsell, and but for you I might haue had more meanes to doe for them, then now I haue. Which Answere of his cals backe into my memo∣ry Captaine Eliots Tragedie, which about fiue and twentie yeeres agoe he related vnto me at Paris. In Queene Elizabeths dayes being enticed by a Iesuite heere in England this Captaine Eliot went to Lis∣bone, with a Pinnasse of the Queenes, which hee purposed thence forwards to employ for his New Masters seruice the King of Spaine. And for this cause, with his commendatory Letters from a Ie∣suite in England, to his brother Iesuite Robert Par∣sons at Madrid, he posted thither in hope of high preferment. In the meane time his men, which hee left a ship-boord finding themselues betrayed by Captaine Eliot, and destitute of necessaries to re∣lieue their wants, they complotted to steale the Pin∣nasse away. But the matter casually discouered, some of them were hanged, and the rest made Gal∣ly-slaues, which comming to the eares of Captaine Eliot at Madrid, and hearing, that his Brother, whom he had left to ouer-see the Pinnasse, had like∣wise tasted of this Spanish Courtesie, hee repayred in this male-content to Father Parsons, pittifully complayning of his cruell fortune, and this bloudie course extended toward his people, which hee brought of purpose to serue the King of Spaine, ho∣ping of reward rather then to bee so inhumanely dealtwith. Father Parsons at that time being more in a moode of deuotion, then willing to shew himselfe a Statesman, began to reade a Lecture to Captaine Eliot of Patience, Humilitie, and of Mortification. The which hee for a while gaue eare vnto; but at last perceiuing that his speeches tended to defeate him of his Ship, and to get him into a Cloyster: he brake into these impatient termes: What doe you preach vnto mee of Patience and Mortification? Can flesh and bloud rest satisfied with this vsage? Can I be patient, when I see my brother and my friends executed, and the rest of my men condem∣ned to the Gallies? Had it not beene for the aduise which your friend and brother Iesuit gaue me to be∣tray the Q Pinnasse, I might haue liued in my own Countrie a happy man, far from this barbarous end. Surely it were fitting that those which vndertake for money to direct their Clients, should requite them for their charges, if by following their sini∣ster Counsell the matter goes against them. If a Smith hauing but a penny for his paines, vnwitting ly chance to prick a horse to the quick, whereby the horse is the worse for it, there lyes an Action of the . d na r. eu. Case against the Smith. How much more then ought a poore Country fellow altogether without the ru∣diments of Law haue remedie against a learned Master of the Lawes, which takes vpon him to know the whole proceedings of Iustice, aswell as the wi∣sest Iudge of the Kingdome? O I would that men would become more charitable the one to the other that I might heare from time to time the like com∣plaints as Lawyers made at the end of Michaelmus Terme last, 1625. They bewailed their misfor∣tune, that whereas some one of them vsed to haue sixtie Clients, hee had scarce eight at that Redding Terme, which complaints moued mee no more to pittie, then to see a Goose goe bare foot. I rather reioyced to heare the tidings, that Suites of Law were not become eternall; And presently I mini∣stred this Pill vnto them: My Masters, said I, you seeme for all the world to bee like the Sextons and Diggers of Graues now of late in London, who when any askt them how they did; they answered with you, Neuer worse. It is a hard time. For where∣as one of vs haue receiued fees for ringing and ope∣ning of foure hundred graues a weeke, now the Plague being abated, wee receiue not money for eight graues. A pitifull Case. To end this my Apologie against Doctor Barto∣lus and Master Plowden, for my vsurping of Orpheus Iuniors Title, I doe it, permissu Superiorum by your Maiesties command, emboldned by the examples of those, which in the like matters borrowed the like Titles, as Terentius Christianus and Democri∣tus Iunior lately haue done to their great honour and the Readers satisfaction; euen as Ausonius be∣fore them had imposed the name of Cato to his lit∣tle Booke of Manners. Nor can any man much blame me, if hee compare the Aduentures of our New∣foundland with the Argona ticks Golden Fleece, though more sweetly sounded by the elder Orpheus Apollo after this Apologie seemed highly to ex∣toll it. And further to let the world know his fuller resolution, hee vttered these words: God forbid, that Vice should raigne without controulement. If my Attendants shall bee tongue tied, when such vncharitablenesse possesseth mortall men, it is to be feared that men wil sooner glory in euill, then turne to good; nay more, it is to be suspected, the whole world but for our peales of Charitie and sounding retraits from Hatred will fall vnder a generall Ex∣communication from the presence of God. Take away the abuse, which is meerely accidentall; and let the substance of Law remaine still. Long may Iustice flourish without ecclipse or stormie opposi∣tions. Florescat viuat, vigeat, celebretur, ametur. CHAP. XII. The learned Vniuersities of Great Brittaine doe finde themselues agrieued, that Popish Physicians are permitted to practice Physick in this Kingdome. Apollo remedies their grieuances; and decreeth that the Popish presume not to minister Physick to any Protestant, but to them of their owne Sect. VPpon the Wednesday after Low Easter Sunday, there arriued at Parnassus certaine Deputies sent from the Learned Vniuersities of Great Brit∣taine, pitifully complaining, that whereas sundrie honest Persons of wonderfull rare Spirits, and sin∣gular dexteritie, had spent the most part of their time in ruminating & reuoluing the workes of Hip∣pocrates, Cornelius Celsus, Galen, and also had read the volumes of other Physicians, aswell Arabian as Paracelsian, Antient as moderne, there crept not∣withstanding some false Brethren, seruants to the Mysticall Whore, as Drones, which vnder a counter∣feit maske of more pregnant knowledge, had in∣grossed the Gaine and Rewards due vnto them, as the laborious Bees of their Country, and wrought so effectually with some of the Greater sort, that by their example others repaired to them for helps in their Bodily Infirmities, forsaking them being of the same Religion, and no way inferiour vnto these Romish Physicians. The danger both emi∣nent and imminent which by this conniuence might happen, they submitted to his Maiesties good will and pleasure. Apollo nettled at this complaint cal∣led for the Romish Physicians, and caused some Pati∣ents which had lately taken Physick at their hands to be brought before him to whom he said: O yee of little Faith, what a lunacie and distemper of the Braine hath peruerted your vnderstanding, as to moue you to abandon the medicinable waters of Silo and Bethesdae, and to haue recourse vnto mud∣die Pooles not deriued from the Rocke of liuing wa∣ters? Is it because there is not a God in Israel, that yee goe to the God of Ekron to enquire and looke counsell. Did the example of Lopez the Portugall, who by warrant from the great Dispencer of Murthers poy∣soned some Noble Personages of your Countrie, no∣thing terrifie your mutable phantasies, but ye must resort for cure vnto your knowne Foes, the Foes of Christ? Is it possible, that my Remedies shall worke their proper effect, which are ministred by profane hands? but rather the contrary, being ac∣cursed like the Fig-tree in the Gospell? It was a sinne in Asa King of Iuda, for putting his trust in Physici∣ans of his owne Religion. How much more had it beene, if he had relied on succour from the vncir∣cumcised? If God blesse not the Physicke it proues ominously vnluckie, and perhaps to the ruine of the Patient; though for a time it may seeme to ease. Doe we not often see, that many men rise vp mira∣culously, as it were from death to life like Hezechias when all earthly helpes proue vaine and fruitlesse, euen by Kitchen Physicke? So all blessings with Faith must concurre together with the Medecine, or commonly it ill succeeds. In tender consideration of these ensuing perils, and in commiseration to the states of your Soules and Bodies, which may suffer for want of mature Discretion to discerne Friends from Foes, We Or∣der, that no Papisticall Physician minister Counsell, nor Receit in Physicke to any Protestant from this day forward: but that euery Patient do repaire to some of their owne Religion, to whom Rewards belong, and whom God hath ordained for a vertuous pur∣pose. We do also order that these Verses of Orphcus Iuniors, be annexed to this Decree. Misso pecunifices volo te Medicosque cauere, Caedere Magnates quos Mariana, docet, &c. Beware of Physicke mixt by Romish brood, Whom Mariane taught to let great Princes bloud. By Lopez learne by poyson hir'd to kill, What mind those haue a Christians bloud to spill. Tobacco, late which men haue brought frō Spain, Is thought to taint the bloud, heart, lungs, & brain. The Iesuits this teach, as a point of merit, To murther some, and Heauen to inherit. Lust creepes and Theft by opportunitie. Then cheere not Aesops Snake with iollitie. CHAP. XI. The Nobilitie of Parnassus doe complaine, that their Inferiours with their Wiues doe weare richer Ap∣parell then themselues, shewing likewise, that they haue encroached on other Priuiledges of theirs to be hurried in Coaches, by which presumptions many other Corruptions are lately crept into Apol∣loes Court. VPon Thursday in the Easter-weeke last 1626. the Noble Families of the Fabricy, and Len∣ ul , and others aswell of the Romanes, as of the an∣cient Bloud of the Argines, complayned vnto his Maiestie shewing, that one of the chiefest Causes of the decay of Trading and of the want of Money in these Times proceeded through the proud affe∣ctation of men of Inferiour Rankes, who con∣trary to the Prescriptions of Ciuill Gouernment, following the Example of Lucifer the Prince of Pride, had perked vp so high, that they wore gorgeous Garments, more glorious then Princes. And not so content, they pestered the streets of Parnassus, with needlesse Coaches, so that Carters and Wainmen could hardly passe to and fro with necessary prouision and commodities for the Cour∣tiers and Citizens vse. Apollo informed of these in∣dignities sent for the Lords Reformers before him, and askt how this Excesse got into his Imperiall Ci∣tie, which ought to bee the mirrour and sountaine of moralitie. They answered that the World as it grew in Age, so it multiplied in Infirmities. That the Prince of this World perceiuing the state of Re∣ligion to become better purified then in former times, whereby he lost many Soules, had infected a great number of his Maiesties Subiects with the poyson of Toades, to make them swell with Ambiti∣on, to the end they might burst, and that he by that meanes might repaire his great losses, which the Protestant Religion had caused to his Infernall Kingdome; And that for the further setling of his poysonous power, hee had employed Asmodeus the Spirit of Lust, and other petty Agents of his to sow Tares in the night season after the Dinine Prea∣chers had in the day time plowed and sowed pure seed in mens hearts. That likewise he had seduced their embosomed second selues, whom they terme the Night-crowes, to insin ate on his behalfe the Pompes and vaine glory of humane loftinesse into their Husbands Heads, and neuer to cease pecking, vntill they preuailed of their purpose to expell his mortall Enemie the Spirit of Humilitic, which the Holy Ghost had placed for his Deputie Guardian in their minds. The Reformers also declared that the Deuill had so strongly possessed some of them both men and women, that to continue their brauery of Apparell and charge of Coaches, they mutually a∣greed sometimes to horne the other, but yet so slily and politickly, that they might take off their Hornes at set times, and lay them in their pockets to keepe, for feare of too grieuous a head-ach. To this end they vsed this Song the one to the other: It matters not so much to weare the Horne, If that it might be free from others scorne. Hornes haue no cure, but when thy selfe art sped, To graffe those Hornes vpon anothers head. If the Wife want embroydered Peticoates and Wastcoates, if her Husbands meanes and credit extend not to furnish her with Iewels equiualent to the greatest Countesse, or if shee cannot honestly deuise how to maintaine her Caroach, the debau∣ched Gallant will in this distresse and exigent lay that which shee can spare, euen Honestie it selfe to pawne. In the meane time my Cuckoldly Gentle∣man winkes for his profit. Non omnibus dormio, sed Mecenati solum. He will not dissemble sleeping for any mans pleasure, but onely for hope of treasure. And if any of vs your Maiesties Officers should chance to cry out vpon it, or to say with that inno∣cent King Henry the Sixt, Forsooth you are to blame, when he beheld certaine Ladies, with their breasts nakedly discouered, with their haire cut like a Tomboy, one of these horned ranke will retort no other counterplea, then Tarletons: Woe to thee, Tarleton, that euer thou wert borne, Thy Wife hath made thee a Cuckold, and thou must weare the Horne, What and if she hath? Am I a whit the worse? She keeps me like a Gentleman with mony in my Purse. Hope of Gaine to supply immoderate expenses extorteth a thousand complements & ceremonious seruices; so that it is not Lust alone (for indeed To∣bacco hath almost mortified that motion) which causeth many to Court their Mistresses, or these to entertaine Seruants, but the in finite charge of New Fashions of Apparell, one while with the Spanish, another while Frenchified, doth make Clownes to weare Gownes, to polish their dul wits, and of Car∣terly dispositions to become Courtly Musicians and Poeticall Courtiers: As that English Satyrist obserued: O those faire starlike eyes of thine, one sayes, thers in his Sa y . When to my seeming she hath look nine wayes. And that sweet breath, when I thinke out vpon it It would blast a flowre, if she breathed on it. But bee she neuer so well qualified in affections, neuer so full of vertuous qualities, Maide, Widow, or Wife, vnlesse shee haue sufficient to defray this endlesse cost of prodigalitie, she may stand long e∣nough without courting, euen vntill mosse grow to the soles of her feet. Apollo hauing bewayled with teares the mise∣rable Condition of his vertuous Followers seduced now of late to regard the out-side more then the precious in-side, which of old was reputed for the Temple of the Holy Ghost: and so to respect gay Clothing and pompous Formalities, that euen his chiefe Dependants for Diuinitie with Aarons siluer Bell in their mouthes beganne to be polluted with this enormitie to ruffle in rich Robes, and to flaunt with silken Sailes, he first commanded the English∣mans Picture standing like a Taylour with a paire of Sheares in one hand, and Stuffe in the other hand to apply himselfe to any New Fashion, to be presently defaced; and one proper comely Fashion, to bee ac∣comodated to euery seuerall Nation specially, to the English, of whom there was a Prouerbe, that no sooner sprung vp a Fashion among the Lackies at Paris, but the Gallants in London would like Apes take it vp as a patterne. Item, that all persons, which attired themselues in time to come, contrary to this Edict, should bee branded with Infamy, and to we are Saint Bene s Hood of Red, Greene, Blew, and Yellow Colours, which the Spanish Inquisition haue ordayned for their Heretickes conuerted vpon eue∣ry estiuall Day for the space of one whole yeere next after the Offence committed. Item, that no Nation should hereafter presume to weare Ray∣ments of any other stuffe, then was wrought with∣in their natiue Countrey, the Nobilitie onely ex∣cepted. Item, that none should goe vp and downe hurried in Coaches to trouble the Carters and Pas∣sengers, vnlesse they would giue a thousand pounds towards the Plantations in America, the Nobilitie alwayes excepted. And lastly, his Maiestie know∣ing that without seuere Executioners, this De∣cree of his could not bee kept inuiolably sacred, but that some would escape vnpunished by some Protection, or potent meane, like the Spiders Cob∣web, where the lesser Flies were entangled, and the Greater did easily & robustuously breake through, hee charged Cato the Censor to see the due perfor∣mance without partialitie. CHAP. XII. Apollo commands certaine of his Attendants to pre∣scribe remedies, how Husbands should liue with their Wiues chastly, and without iea sie to bee Cuckolded, as also how men should contemne the baits of Beautifull Women. APollo hauing obserued, that many Women cuc∣kolded their Husbands, and by their cunning pretenses had so gulled them, as to forsake their se∣cure Demaynes in the Countrey, and to compa le Offices in the populous Citie of Parnassus, where they might enioy their vnlawfull pleasures, caused the Noble Knight Sir Philip Sidney, together with Sir Iohn Harrington the Translatour of Orlando, the Satyrist Master Whatley the Preacher of Ban∣bury and Orpheus Iunior to set downe some whole∣some remedies for married men to gouerne their Wiues, that they horne them not; and also that themselues might not be surprized with the subtil∣ties, or outward seeming beautie of strange women. Whereto they all obeyed, and Sir Philip Sydney thus beganne: Who doth desire that chast his Wife should be, Sir Philip S d∣ney. First, be he true, for Truth doth Truth deserue. Then be he such as she his worth may see, And one man still credit with her preserue. Not toying kind, nor toy shly vnkind: Not stirring thoughts, nor yet denying right: Nor spying faults, nor in plaine Errours blind: Neuer hard hand, nor euer reines too light: As farre from want, as farre from vaine expence: The one doth force, the latter doth entice. Allow good Company, but keepe from thence, All fil hy mouthes, that glory in their vice. This done thou hast no more, but leaue the rest Vnto thy Fortune, time, and womans brest. Concerning wiues take this a certaine Rule, That if at first you let her haue the rule, Sir Iohn Har∣ g on. Your selfe at length with her shall beare no rule, Except you let her euer more to rule. Yet in the house, as busie as a Bee, I am content my Wife sting all but me. O rather let me loue, then be in loue; So let me chuse as Wife and Friend to find. Sir Thomas Ouer ery. Let me forget her Sexe, when I approue. Beasts liknesse lies in shape, but ours in mind. Our Soules no Sexes haue. Their Loue is cleane. No Sexe, both in the better part are men. Domestick Charge doth best that Sex besit Contiguous businesse so to fixe the mind. That leasure space for fancies not admit. Their leisure tis corrupteth woman-kind Else being plast from many vices free, They had to Heau'n a shorter cut then we. Womens behauiour is a surer barre, Then is their No. That fairely doth deny Without denying; thereby kept they are Safe eu'n from hope. In part too blame is shee Which hath without Consent beene onely tride. He comes too neere that comes to be denide. Like a true Turtle with thine owne Doue stay, Else others twixt thy sheets may falsly play. If thou wilt haue her loue and honour thee, A i s . First, let her thine Affections largely see. What shee doth for thee kindly that respect, And shew how thou her loue dost well affect. Remember she is neighbour to thy heart, And not thy slaue: shee is thy better part. Thinke tis enough that her thou mighst command: Whilest she in Marriage bonds doth loyall stand, Although thy power thou neuer doe approue, For thats the way to make her leaue to loue. To goe to Feasts and Weddings' mongst the Best, Tis not amisse: for their suspect is least. Nor is it meet that shee the Church refraine, Sith there is vertue, and her Noble Traine. You haue accutely runne ouer, O immortall Spirits, said Master Whately of Banburie, the duties of man and wife reciprocally, as they ought to beare the one to the other if they liued vertuously; But what if the wife exceed in wilfull repugnancie or rather rebellion against her Husband, who is her Lord and Head, as Christ is the Head and Crowne of the Husband according to S. Paul, and as I haue punctually proued in my Worke called the Bride∣bush, shall the Man degenerate from his virilitie and Christian vigour, as to suffer his Subiect and vnder∣ling to waxe proud and to weare the Breeches? Shall he like Sardanapalus, or effeminated Hercules sit spinning in a Petticoate among her Maides, whiles shee flaunts it, like an vntamed Gallant, and iadishly kicks vp her heeles with a knaue, making her Lord accessarie to capitall baudry? This were an argument of base stupiditie in the Husband. Vp∣on such an occasion, or the like intollerable misde∣meanure, as causelesse scolding, or for fooling her selfe and her Head before companie by nicknaming him, or wantonly detracting from his reuerend au∣thoritie, with the abbreuiated words of Iack, Tom, or Dick, he must shew his manly prerogatiue, and rebuke her for such ridiculous carriage. Yea, and if there because hee must like a wise Surgeon, vse Cauteries and sharpe medecines. Hee must let her know the wise mans sentence, that a Rod becomes the back of a Foole. Orpheus Iunior here interrupted Master Whatley. You neede not cite Scripture for beating a woman for thats her hearts desire, to verifie the prophane Prouerbe, that an Asse, a Nut, and a Woman will neuer be good without beating. And at Constanti∣nople our Merchants report, that where a Turke hath three or foure wiues, that wife esteemes her selfe happy and best beloued of her husband, whom he most often graceth with correction. The Mosco∣uites doe commonly practice this kinde of Bencuo∣lence on their wiues skinnes. But whether our wo∣mens hides can brooke such fauours, I doe much doubt. For the truth is, their skinnes in Moscouie are thicker, tougher, and buffe leather in compari∣son of our soft skind Creatures; as also in all such cold Countryes, Nature hath armed the very Fowle and Beasts with strong thick out sides, to weather out and endure the blustring blastes, and penetrable ioye cold the better. Whereas in our Climate, and from thence to the Tropickes the wo∣mens skinnes are tender, and silken, which makes mee somewhat to mislike that course, except her Husband bee well assured by some skilfull Tanner that his Wiues skinne is as hard as the Serpents both in the temper and the superficiall toughnesse. For then hee may beelabour her coat soundly without danger. But if hee feeles her more smoothe then Beuer, or softer then the Lambs, let him suspend his passion, and referre his lambs skin to his arbitre∣ment, that other whiles is forced to hold the Wolfe by the eares. Neither yet am I so obsequious a Ser∣uant to the Femal Sex, nor care I to become an Ido∣list of a painted shrine (for whatsoeuer earthly thing a man doth too much magnifie, or to speake more significantly, what hee dotes vpon, is to commit Idolatrie with that thing) but that I wish the Hus∣band to esteeme Discretion more then debate, In∣struction more then Discipline, and to doe as hee would bee done vnto. Aboue all things I aduise him which lothes the brand of a Cuckold, not on∣ly to looke into his wiues inward disposition with the warie eyes of Discretion, and to obserue what companie shee affecteth: but likewise that him∣selfe beware how hee glance and gad abroad after strange flesh. Which because hee may the more easily performe, let him fixe this rule in his imagi∣nation, that his Soule combined with his wiues makes an harmonious vnion; that all women, spe∣cially other mens wiues haue many foule defects. And if for all this, his iudgement bee so crackt, that another woman becomes his amorous Saint, the onely Shee in the world, and the very Paragon of Beautie, with her haire, as Democritus Iunior writes, more yellow then Gold, with black eyes, a little D. Barton in his Anat. of Mclancholy. mouth, white teeth, of a pure sanguine complexi∣on, soft and plump; an absolute piece, her head from Prague, her paps from Austria, her belly from France, her back from Brabant, her hands out of England, her feet from Rhine, her buttockes from Switzerland, with the Spanish gate, the Venetian Tire, Italian complements and endowments, let him neuerthelesse remember the continuall casu∣alties of humane natures, how that a little Sicknes, a Feuer, the small poxe, a scarre, losse of an eye or limme, excessiue heat or cold, child-bearing, en∣crease of Age will riuell, marre, and dis-figure her all on a sodaine; insomuch, that he himselfe would scarce know her, whom hee before did adore and admire. Whereto let a man adde her wanton face, and varieties of longing fits after those things which will alter farre stronger bodies then hers, as sweete wines, strong drinke, spiced caudells, slibber sau∣ces, Suckets, Aqua vit , Balme, or wormewood water, being perswaded by idle-headed Midwiues and tattling Gossips, that they are wholesome for the Bodie, whereas indeed they destroy the true heat of life, so that by the vse of these vnnecessarie drugs and liquors, wherewith they glut themselues in corners, you shall not finde one among a thou∣sand women, specially after Marriage, but shee is diseased, either with vnnaturall heat, a stinking breath, rotten teeth, a withered face, with a windie mattrie stomack, casting vp whole gobbets of snot∣tie flegme, like rotten oysters, with the dropsie, or lothsome issue in her legs; or else shee is inwardly possessed by reason of those inflammations, with intollerable peeuishnesse, haughtinesse of mind, or with such rayling scolding moodes, that shee is fit∣ter to be cubd vp in Bedlem, then to cohabit with a ciuill Gentleman. I say nothing of the disease cal∣led Pi a, breaking out to the Greene Sicknesse in the vnmarried, and in both sorts to a monstrous stupendious lusting after such offensiues to nature, that I blush to name them, being fully assured by him that wrot the Treatise of the passion of the mind, that a woman of a temperate sparing dyet wil hard∣ly bee ouertaken with this Infirmitie. What if this Goddesse of his bee not such beautie in very deede, as hee beleeues, but so fashioned by Art, perhaps her face is painted, done ouer with some curious lick, as few of them are without it. Or else it is her gaudie clothes, that set her out, so to beguile his eyes. There be other circumstances, which an vn∣derstanding man will muse vpon, before hee yeeld himselfe a slaue to an vnconstant woman. A puling Female Creature, which hath smiles Like Sirens Songs, and teares like Crocodiles. As Withers exclaimes in his Satyres. I haue spoken the more pathetically of this abuse, because I know it is one of the chiefe Causes, which makes our Gentlemen to linger at home degenerating from their Ancestors, while the industrious Spaniard ho∣uers abroad, and takes vp the principall Harbours of the Newfound World. To conclude, It is not Force, Feare, faire words, Gifts, nor deeds of due beneuolence can keepe a woman honest, if she bee borne and bred of a skit∣tish Mother. For Cat after kind, shee will follow nature, doe what you can. To verifie this, let Man and Wife looke on this Glasse of faire Susannaes education; and by the modell of her nurture, let man learne a Mate to chuse: Vita piae Matris Susannae regula morum Ex Aglaiâ in Cambrens. Ca∣rol. Ad M riam Reginam. Qualis erat Mater, Filia talis erat. A cunis odit Miracula ficta Baalis Polluit indignânec simulachra prece. Non Abrahae, Mosi, Samueli, vota nec vlli Sanctorum, soli fudit at ista Deo. Vt scopulos fugit consortia vana malor m, Nunquam suspectos passa venire proc s. Quando rebellantes, quos rarò, sentijt astus Hos ieiunandicum precemulsit aquâ. Debita pensa suiper soluens muneris aequè, Multiplici formâ lintea pinxit acu. Mollia filatrahens, fusis praestabat Arachnen Siue nouum tenui pectine finxit opus. Nablia laeta sonis, operis pertaesa Dauidis Increpat, & te ero pollice filatrahit. Psalmata saepe iu at modulari voce recenset Gesta Creatoris, Plasmata viua Dei. Nunc canit Aegypti Miracula, Praeli , Mannam; Nunc sonat Haebraei rudera clara soli. Inter dum Diuina legit, mox scribere tentat; Ipsa quod exarat scribere tentat Opus, Ne testudo domi videatur tetrica custos Alterna visit rura paterna vice. Interbum cum Matre piâloca publica visit, Nec sine Teste foris contulit illa gradum. As Mothers are, so will the Daughters be: Chast was Susannaes Mother, chaste was she. Baals Miracles she from her Cradle knew, As how vaines Tombes with Idols to eschew, She honour'd Abram, Moses, and the Saints; But vnto God she framed her Complaints. Bad Company she shunn'd, as Rockie shelues, And fear'd suspected Suiters worse then Elues. If Flesh and Bloud in her began to tickle, She mortified her thoughts, that were so fickle. She fasted oft, but oftner vs'd to pray; To which she ioyn'd some labour eu'ry day. No Day without a Line. She daily wrought, Somtimes on Needle, when she fitting thought. Or spunne by Distaffe, or the Wheele she rowld, Somtimes on Loome, her skil she would vnfold. At times she stirr'd more busie then the Bee, And was well pleas'd the Maids to ouer-see. Tir'd with houshold busines on Harp she playes Or Violl, which she tunes to Dauids Layes. One while she sings for her recreation Of Noahs Arke, and the first Creation. Another whiles of Aegypts Miracles, Her Nation blest with Sinaes Oracles; Their wandring forty yeeres with Manna fed, And in the Desert by an Angell led. Now of their Wars she tels with warbling voice, Anon of Iewries fall with dolefull noyse. One while she reades, another while she writes; She writes those rules, which she herself endites. Some other time, to draw the Countries Aire, She went abroad, but neuer to a Faire. Least, Tortoiselike cub'd vp, shee might take harme, She goes abroad to see her Fathers Farme. The Fields shee likes, but more the Garden walkes, To note Gods workes in seedes, herbes, flowres, and stalkes, Yea, & though seldome, she the Towne suruayes With her deere Mother witnesse of her wayes. CHAP. XIII. A Corollary or an epitomized Censure of Apollo pronounced after the aforesaid Opinions deliuered touching the Election of Wines and their vsage. AFter these Gentlemen had deliuered their seue∣rall Iudgements how men should not onely chuse their wines, and conforme them to their wils but like wise take away all the Occasions of vnlaw∣full Loue, ie pleased his Imperiall Maiestie to adde these few Admonitions: Well haue yee, O my ver∣tnous Minions, discoursed of the affections of the Female Sexe. And I doe approoue and confirme your positions, with this Caueat to the Man, that he make choise of a Wise by the Eares, and not by the Eyes. And to the woman, I aduise her not to pre∣sume on her owne Conceit, either of her honestie, wit, or loue of Company, as to giue way vnto fl t∣tering and idle speeches of any Man whatsoeuer, but at the first touch with a braue, yet modest dis∣daine to bid Sathan a oid, though hee speake in an Angels shape, lest otherwise shee bee misconstrued loose. For it is enough for a Man, because hee is a Man to bee honest, though hee doth but seeme so. But for a woman, because shee is a woman, it is not enough to be chaste, if shee bee not knowne to bee chaste; yea and apparantly knowne, in despite of the Deuill and all his Followers. CHAP. XIIII. Cato the Censour of good manners hauing arrested certaine Persons a drinking more then the Lawes prescribed them, brings them before Apollo. His Maiestie reproues them for their Drunkennesse, and banisheth them for euer out of the precincts of Parnassus. VPon the tenth of Iune last, 1626. Cato the diligent Inquisitour and Censour of good manners hauing apprehended foure persons in a Wine-tauerne, which had drunke ten quarts of strong wine at a sitting, brought them before Apol∣lo to be censured, and humbly desired his Maiestie that he would shew some exemplarie punishment on those bestiall persons, who albeit they dranke more then a dozen, yet could they not performe the deeds of two able men, either in the bodies Actions, or in the Spirits functions. Apollo asked them what tempted them to lade their bodies with so much strong Liquor? They answered, that it was not the loue of the wine, but of the Compa∣nie, which drew them to carowse so many pots. And further they alledged, that their natures be∣ing accustomed to drinke, they bare it out well without the least giddinesse in the head, reeling, or staggering, which as long as they could so doe, they hoped no man might taxe them of Drunkennesse. To this Apollo replied, that by the late Statutes of England no Trauellers might drinke aboue one q rt of Ale or Beere at a penny the quart, vpon one itting or meale: so that to drinke more then that measure prescribed by Law, ought to bee con∣strued Drunkennesse, because the wise Law-makers of that State foresaw, that so much would serue any reasonable Creature. But to exceed that quan∣titie in a stronger kind of liquor, in Corsicke, Greeke or Falerne wines could not but redound to Drun∣kennesse in the superlatiue degree. And whereas (said he) yee would couer your Drunkennesse with the ablenesse of your braine, I must tell you, that he is to bee termed a reall Drunkard which surpas∣seth the set stint of his Countryes Lawes, or if hee enters after his bibbing into any vnseemely passion or borrowes the gesture of a raging Lion, of the toyish Ape, of the sensuall Hog, or of the lasciui∣ous Goat, pratling or acting any feates more then are decent, or more then he vsed at other times, he may be branded with the note of a Drunkard, then which nothing is more odious in the sight of our vertuous Societie. Bring a horse to the water, all the world cannot vrge him to drinke more then sufficeth nature at that time. And yet man a Creature enriched with free will in naturall things, wil proue himselfe worse then the Beasts which haue no vn∣derstanding. Most honourable be those Masters of Families, which hate and curb this wanton excesse of Drinking in their Seruants. And worthy of ap∣plause in our Court is that Nobleman, who seeing no admonitions nor change of Butlers could restraine his vnruly Seruants from this Swinish vice, caused his seller to bee remoued, by building one within his Parlour, whereby shame, his Eye being vpon them, might bridle their inordinate affections, free∣ly protesting, that hee would haue nothing spent which might be honestly spared, nor any thing spa∣red which might be honestly spent; that it was not the expence, but ciuill gouernment to settle sobrie∣tie in his house, which made him to take so strict a course. In this he imitated that Learned Emperour Antonius Pius, which banished all the Wine∣tauernes in Rome, because hee saw his Subiects be∣gin to turne Drunkards, and that none but Apo∣thecaries should presume to sell any wine; and that, as Phy sick to the sick and weake. Heeretofore a King of England noting that by the Companie of the Daues all his Subiects were infected with this Sinne, he imposed a fit and limited measure for eue∣ry man to drinke by. Within these fiftie yeeres Drunkennesse was scarce knowne in England. At such time as the Low Countrey warres began, the souldiers at their returne by the Diuels temptations brought it thither to impouerish their natiue Coun∣try. And vntill a set s int bee prouided for pledging and carowsing with a Law to make the misdoers infamous and vncapable of promotion, it wil hard∣ly be rooted out. What a preposterous thing is it, that one man should drinke more then might satis∣fie soure honester men then himselfe? What a shame is it that the Ilanders of Great Brittaine should wast in wine, malt, and hops more then would serue to maintaine fortie thousand men in the Field? How simple is that excuse of yours, O yee chil∣dren of Bacchus, that yee care more for the compa∣nie then for the liquor? Doe not yee know, that hee which toucheth pitch shall become defiled therewith? In Holy writ it is registred: Thou shalt not follow a maltitude to doe euill. And againe, haue Exod. cap. 23. no fellowship with the Instruments of Sathan, but re∣ther reproue them. Which likewise King Salomon Ephes. cap. 5. long before admonished to take heed of. Bee not (saith hee) of the number of them, which are bibbers P ou. cap. 23. of wine, for the Drinker and the Feaster shall become poore. In like manner the Prophet rouzeth them vp with an alarme: Awake, yee Drunkards, weepe and howle. And in another place, the Wise man denoun∣ceth a woe vnto them which rise vp early to follow locl. cap. 1. Prou. cap. 5. Drunkards. If the feare of Gods Iudgements work not in your heedlesse wills, yet the daily tortures, wherein ye see before your eyes thousands afflected ought, to imprint some sensible motion in you to beware by others harmes of drunken Companie. The Apoplexie, the Gout, Dropsie, Ague, spring out of this enchanting fountaine. In regard of these grosse abuses, wee doe vtterly banish these present Drunkards out of our Territo∣ries of Parnassus; And we doe also enact that none of this infamous rout presume heereafter to touch our sacred two topt Mount. Prouided neuerthelesse and be it excepted out of the Premises, that it shall be lawfull at the end of euery meale for any honest man, without impeachment of Drunkennesse to pledge and carowse one draught of good liquor to their gracious Aduersaries, as a token of reconcili∣ation, as the cup of Charitie, poculum Charitat is, which the Founder of Trinitie Colledge in Oxford decreed for euer among his Fellowes and Schollers, or poculum boni Genij, the cup of good fellowship to the health of their cheerefull nature, which the Romans practised at their Feasts. And because the Coel. R odigi . lib. 28. cap. 6. representation of this vgly vice may appeare in mens imaginations with some more feeling dint, we require our Pronotarie to publish these verses: What at this day doe Brittaines Tongues bewray? That by strong liquor some haue gone astray. Faiths Temple they pollute with Cup and Can, In Duties fayling towards God and Man. They spend their wealth, spoile their health, mar their wits By drinking more then sober men befits. Thus haue our bordring Dutehmen lately swill'd, Vntill their Pots with Neighbours bloud are fill'd, Repent, be wise in time by others harmes; Flie witching Cups for feare of after-harmes. If not: your King your Tauernes must destroy, Least suffring Sinne himselfe doe feele annoy. Curtua vox titubat, mea magna Britannia? Baccho Dederis, & Templum contemerare Dei. Euphrosine in Cam rens. Caro. Ebrietate scatet Germania; pocula vindex Replet at humano plena cruore Deus. Tolle moras, iubet ipse Deus, resipisce, Tabernas Effuge Circ as: Luxuriare caue. Qui mala non prohibet, cum possit, conscius esto: Has potes infames, Rex, prohibere domos. CHAP. XV. The Author of this Treatise called the Golden Fleece exhibits a Bill of Complaint against the Tobacco∣nists of Great Brittaine. Apollo condemnes the immoderate vse of Tobacco, and recommends the care of the extermination thereof to the Clerg e and the Temporall Magi∣strate. THe Author and Publisher of this present Trea∣tise, seeing the beastly vice of Drunkennes like to be quite cashierd out of his natiue Country, with a streit commandement from his Maiestie to the Coustables of euery seuerall Diuision, to con∣ueigh the Offenders, from Parish to Parish towards the Sea-side, where they should take shipping for the Low Countries or Germanie, from whence they first had it: hee like wise burned with zeale to haue the common Takers of Tobacco sent after them. For, as he informed Apollo, it was not possible vt∣terly to banish Drunkennesse out of the Land, as long as the shooinhorne sta d behinde, that Tobac∣co-taking of late yeeres supplied the vse of Prepa∣ratiues, Leaders, or drawers on of drinke, such as Caueare and salt meates were vsed among the Si∣barites. To this Apollo answered, that it were fit Physicians should cause some skilfull Surgeons to let them bloud, in vena cephalica, in the head veine, or to purge them with black Hellebore, for surely men beganne to grow mad and crazed in the brain in that they would aduenture to suck the smoke of a weed, nay if it were neuer so Catholick Medecin, at all times, feasting and fasting, in health aswell as sicknesse, without regard had to the persons, ages, sexes, times, temperatures, moist or dry, hot or cold. All this hath beene sundrie times repeated vnto them by many zealous Physicians of the Soule and Bodie, replyed the Complaynant. And for my poore Talent, albeit neither Diuine nor Physician I haue not buried the same, but in most of my workes I haue rebuked the excessiue taking of Tobacco, and chiefly, in my Booke entituled Directions for Health, I haue canuased this abomi∣nable vice, I freely shewed, that by the inordinate taking of it, the course of Nature was peruerted, the state of the bodie turned topsie turuie, when the Nose, like a Chimney, did vent out vnnaturall smokes, which ought to exhale and breathe with naturall Aire, when the mouth ordained by nature to receiue in sustenance for the whole body is now become a priuy hole to spet, to spew, to spatter, and bel h without need, yea and to cast vp whole gob∣bets of most necessary fleame, like stinking Oy∣sters: when the stomack the bodies Kitchin, which ought to bee kept sweete, must harbour lothsome dampes, filthy excrements, and bad smels worse then the snuffe of a Candle, which otherwise would quickly passe through the guts to the sinke of the bodie. Apollo at this relation demonstrated apparant tokens of sorrow, and commanded all the deuout Preachers of Parnassus to ioyne their heads toge∣ther to beate the inconueniences into their Audi∣tours consciences, and vnder paine of the Thun∣derbolt of Excommunication to will them to de∣sist from making that crooked, which God had made straight, from defiling the house where the Holy Spirit ought to reside as a sanctified seate. Whereto the sacred Ministers made answere, that they had employed the vttermost of their endea∣uours to clense that pure place, but by reason of sundry inuisible spirits, which the Deuill sent to tempt their Flockes, they contemned their whol∣some counsels. And for the other point of Excons∣munication, that wrought lesse effect, by reason that that spirituall power in these dayes degenerated from the proper vse, being too commonly wrested and fulminated against men, euen for not paying of some pettie Fees due to the Officers of the Court. Well then, said Apollo, if Saint Peters Keyes can∣not prenayle, let Saint Pauls Sword, or rather that of Saint Peters, where with he strooke off Malchus Eare, serue to cut off this superfluous member. And to this end I require the Politicke Magistrates for their Countries good to punish all such common Tobacco-takers; and because they may doe it with our warrantable authoritie, let them proclaime these rules in euery place within their Iurisdictions. Regna Britanna libras ter centum mille quotannè Expendunt morbos accelerando nouos. Non opus Helleboro: iam quis{que} Tobaccon ab Aula Principi ad caulam pauperis vs{que} bibit. Vnde duplex vacuum sentit Respublica, Nummi Et Cerebri: vacuo gaudet vtro{que} Satan. Cur tuba tardescit? Cur non taratantara Martis Horrida crudeli vis nec ab hoste venit? Corporis & Belli neruos Gens Anglica per dit; Deficit Argentum, deficit humor alens. Qui fumo gaudet, pereat caligine fumi; Pectoris arctati nec bene purgat aquam. Hecticus hinc morbus crassis{que} mephitibus auctus, Qui Climacterico tempore finit opus: Finit opus Fatale; facit quo{que} Prolis abortum. Ah nimium Veneris perfidus hostis Odor! Eius at Hyssopi substantia mixta liquore Conferat Asthmaticis vt medicina data. Three hundred thousand pounds yee yearely spend In hastning griefes vnto a deadly end. Yee need not Hellebore. Tobaccoes fume From Court and Cottage wil expell the rheume. Alas fond Fooles! which spend your meanes and health, With Sathans ioy, and hurt to Common-wealth. Why come not in your Foes to doe you harme? The English faint, if they but heare Alarme. When Humors quaile, the Spirits moue but dul, When Subiects faile, th' Exchequer is not full. Let them, that loue the Smoake, fall with the smell. Tis true, Tobacconists; why do yee swell With anger at the truth? Ere seuen yeeres end Tobacco will the banefull force extend. It breeds a wheezing in a narrow breast, The Hecktick Feuer, or thick Fleame at least. A bastard heat within the veines it leaues, Which spoyles the Infant, if the Wife conceiues. Yet sipt with Hysops iuyce, or held in mouth, Or snuft, it cures the Lungs, and Tisickes growth. CHAP. XVI. Traiano Boccalini the Author of the Booke called the New-found Politick complayneth to Apollo, that the Seuen Wisemen of Greece, who were put in trust to reforme the World, did deceiue his Maie∣sties expectation; and that the World was worse then euer it was. Apollo retires himselfe in discontent; but at length by the Fraternitie of the Rosie Crosse, he is comfor∣ted and walkes along with them in Procession. TRaiano Boccalini the late Publisher of the Newes of Parnassus, whether of Zeale, or of Ambition, or of enuie to see many of his equals promoted in Apolloes Court, informed his Maiestie, that the Seuen Wisemen of Greece and others, whom he had deputed to reforme the World of their late corruptions, had more theorically and scholastical∣ly discoursed of remedies, then really found out any in substance to curbe or cure them. The Wise∣man Thales, hee said, would faine haue a Surgeon of the Fairy-land to open a little window in the heart of man, whereby all his deceitfulnesse might appeare to one anothers sight. But forsooth for feare of a greater perill in launcing a musckle or principall veine in this miraculous fabrick of mans body, this speculatiue window must bee let alone. Solon perswaded them to take away the inequality of Mine and Thine, and to diuide the whole world anew, whereby euery man the Begger aswell as the King, might haue his iust share. Chilon aduised to banish the vse of those Mettals of Gold and Sil∣uer, as the pestiferous root of all Euill. Pittacus laid the fault of the moderne abuses vpon Rewards conferred on men of meane deserts, who entring in∣to the sacred seats of Iustice peruerted all the Bles∣sings, which God bestowed on Mankind, and cau∣sed their Attendants and Officers to be nicknamed Leaches, Butchers, and Tyrants. Periander would haue the imaginary vertues of Fidelitie and Secre∣cie restored and stampt in mens mindes. Bias his Proiect was to hunt men into their ancient habita∣tions, where their old Ancestors inhabited a thou∣sand yeeres past to giue elbow roome to the right∣full Owners. Cleobulus pronounced his definitiue sentence, that all the scope of the worlds reforma∣tion consisted in Rewarding the Good, and in punish∣ing the wicked. Cato would haue the Catarrattes and windowes of Heauen opened and the whole World drowned againe, excepting some few of the male Children, to whom hee wished an in∣gendring and spreading power to bee giuen like Bees, to continue the race of men without being beholding vnto any more women, whose vn∣vnluckinesse, pride, and vanitie, as he said, occasio∣ned all the villanies, which deformed the present World. In conclusion, Traiano Boccalini accused these Reformers for their Hypocriticall suggestions and conspiracies against the sacred honour of Apol∣lo, in setting out Proclamations onely to please Fooles, that no Hucksters should sell oaten meale, or pease by a false dish, and such like trifling mat∣ters. And these friuolous Proclamations they di∣vulged of purpose to blinde the eyes of the multi∣tude, to seeme to doe somewhat, when as their Office and charge was to see a general Reformation of all the most notorious Vices, which infected the Generation of humane kinde, as Simony, sale of Iudges places, Bribery, and the like. Apollo knowing this to bee true, which Boccalini with his too too lauish tongue had blabbed a∣broad, and ashamed, that euery common Citizen of Parnassus began now to smell out the drist of his Statesmen, and could readily descant of those se∣crets, which in ancient times as a diuine mysterie they concealed from vulgar minds, he retired him∣selfe much discontented aswell in respect of this cause, as for that it lay not in his absolute will to root out the knowledge of Euill from the Christian World. The Lady Minerua and the nine Muses laboured to mitigate his Matesties griefe; telling him, that Sinne must raigne, as long as men beare sway in the World, vitia erunt donec homines. But no perswasions preuayled. No Company pleased his humour, saue sad Melpomenes, insomuch that many doubted lest some strange kinde of Melan∣choly, which the Physicians neuer heard of, would whirle about the braines of the vertuous, and at the last eclipse the glorious light of their vnderstan∣ding, if the chiefe Lord of wisdomes Society should continue long in his retired Lodge. While both the Head and members of this sa∣cred Corporation suffered in this Labyrinth of sor∣row and shame, the Lady Mnemosyne brought his Maiestie word, that foure graue personages were newly arriued at his Court Gate, stiling themselues the Fraternitie of the Rosie Crosse. At the first hee seemed to slight the newes, thinking they might be some of those Cabalisticall Mountebankes, which went abroad selling of smoke, and making credu∣lous persons to belieue, that they were of a Mathe∣maticall fry, and race of wise Philosophers, to whom Mercurius Trismegistius had transferred the neuer erring Art of discerning Truth from falshood, the meanes to vnite the variable will of man, and that which Worldlings doe most prize, to make the Philosophers Stone. But when hee better vnderstood, that this Fraternitie were attired in long white Robes, with Oliue branches in their hands, and that they were the foure famous Patrones of Great Brittaines Monarchie, Saint George, Saint An∣drew, Saint Dauid, and Saint Patricke, and that they attended at his Pallace Gate for his comming forth to Procession, great was his Ioy; and pre∣sently without intermission his Imperiall Maiestie came forth, and after hee had reuerently embraced and graced this Noble Fraternitie, hee told them the Causes of his late discontent, and that he tooke himselfe to bee much fauoured, that they resorted to visit him now in his griefes extremitie. Saint George answered, that the causes of his sadnesse conceiued for the vices and decayes of Great Brit∣taine proceeded of a fellow-feeling of a vertuous Conscience, and to that end they came now to discouer their knowldge, and to lay open the ge∣nerall faults of that Monarchie in a new kinde of tickling straine, not so much to content the Iudici∣ous, for they that be whole need no Physicians, as to draw the carnall minds of the Common people to heare their vices blamed, and consequently to make them ashamed, which are not altogether past grace. And now, said hee, if it please your Maiestie and your Learned Traine to walke along with vs in Procession round about this eminent Ci∣tie of Parnassus, wee will consecrate the Churches anew, which perhaps will worke some remorse and contrition; and for the obstinate, wee will blesse our selues and the Godly from their conta∣gious Company. Apollo bad them goe forwards, and that himselfe, the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and all his Court euen from his Bedchamber to the Kitchin should follow to see the Consecration, and to heare the Vices and Errours of the Brittaines discouered. The famous Patriarchs went forwards in such manner as the moderne Clergie are wont to goe in Procession, and euery one of them successiuely sung as followeth against the Corruptions of the Times. CHAP. XVII. The foure Patrones or Patriarches of Great Britaine doe sing in Procession the ensuing Rithmes. Apollo pronounceth a conclusiue Oracle to remedie all Abuses, preparing the way to the Golden Fleece. S. George. FRom painting of the Trinitie From iesting with high Maiestie, From th' Alcoran and Papistry, From Brokers rotten Tapistry. From deepe Mysteries too holy: From mad Fits and Melancholy; From Iesuits Monkes, and Friers: From Hypocrites, Knaues and Liers. From trusting Saints, distrusting God From feeling of his wrath and rod. From Romes Pardons, Bulls and Masses: From Wine Lees, and broken Glasses. From Sale of Soules, and Heauens Gifts; From Beades and bables, Whoorish shifts. From wounding Christ on Gods right hand: From grounding Faith vpon the sand. From parting thence by any way His Bodie plac't vntill Doomesday. From condemning sacred Marriage: From secret shrift, and lust full rage. From Trust to Merits, except Christs From Iuglers trickes and Antichrists. Our Christs great Genius Blesse and defend vs. S. Andrew. FRom blaming things indifferent: From working in our Faith a rent. From aselfe-will'd rash Puritane, As from a Foole, or Mauritane. From him that railes against a Cope, And yet would be his Parish Pope. From ingrossing from a Brother Goods or Charge due to another. From many Offices alone, Or Benefices more then One. From causing Scandall to my Place, Vsurping much with shamelesse face. From Clergy-men non Residents: From such as shew ill Presidents. From s it Pick-locks, and Cut-purse Knines: From stealing Honey from Bee- ines. From sta ting in anothers Coat, Like Aesops Daw, preaching by roat, From Dancing on the Sabaoth Day: From shewing Youth lewd Cupids way. Our Sauiours Genius Shield and protect vs. S. Dauid. FRom swallowing Law with greedie throat: From tearing Christ his seamelesse Coat. From selling Christ for Earthly drosse; From wealth gain'd by good Christians losse. From Iudges sentence after Sacke: From Thunder, Tempests, and Sea-wracke. From those, which Plaintiffes most approue; As from Munkeyes, which Spiders loue. From Lawes, which wrest the Sickmans staffe: From Swine, which ate mo e Foule then draffe. From letting Lawyers haue their wils: From Scammonie made into Pils. From hirelings Tongues, and Make-bates hisse, Betraying Law with Iudas kisse. From a corrupted starely Iudge, Which makes good Clients moyle and drudge. From Magistrates too insolent: From needlesse Courts impertinent. From them which speake not what they thinke; Which blame small faults, at greater winke. From Iudges vpstars late from Clownes: From Serpents stings, or Tyrants frownes. The Worlds bright Genius Keepe and defend vs. S. Patrick. FRom hired Spies, and hidden Foes, More dangerous then any woes. From Leaders young, or too too Old: From Souldiers knowne of nature Cold. From Butchers, which mans bloud doe spill: From sparing those, whom God bids, kill. From a Commander meanly borne: From reaping Tares ins eed of Corne. From hopes in Captaines not belou'd; From ordring Bees, when they are mou'd. From meeting Straglers night or day Left vnprouided by the way. From Souldiers tumul s, ta ts, and quips, If long vnpaid in Forts or Ships. From Leaders without stratagems; From letting Hogs haue precious Gems. From a Leader too out-ragious: From a Captaine not couragious. From filthy moores and Irish bogs, From Scottish mists and English fogs. Discretions Genius Shield and preuent vs. S. George. FRom Spanish Pensions, and their Spies: From weeping Cheese with Argus eyes, From slumbring long in carelesse Peace: From dreaming oft of curelesse ease. From fond Maskes, and idle mumming: From fain'd Playes and causelesse drumming. From preferring Peace with danger Before iust Warre, wrongs reuenger. From suffering Foes to triumph still; From letting Sathan haue his will. From falling from Saint Michaels armes, Not taking heed by others harmes. From puffing vp proud Giants growne: From pulling Dauids courage downe. From louing Money more then God; From keeping Beanes within the cod. From disbursing needfull treasure, To maintayne phant astick pleasure. From greasing Lawyers hands with Gold, Which better serues to keepe a Hold. From fostring Suites (O poys ous Toad) For Money, which ends Warres abroad. From those men, which sue Protections To shrowd their lewd shrewd Defections. Great Brittaines Genius Guard and restore vs. S. Andrew. FRom Iesuits old conuerted, As from Brownists young per erted. From the Simony of a Priest; From Mills, which spoyle the Owners griests. From glorying in an outward Robe: From tainting Faith. The Saints Wardrobe. From a Priest, that couets money; From a Bee-hiue without Honey, From Preachers, which to Pride encline, Or from old plainnesse may decline. From those, which in silke Robes doe ruffle, Which more for Goods then Good doe scuffle. From such as line vpon the l rch, Like Dogs and Hogs within the Church. From men, whose wits lie in their beards; From Goats, and all such impious heards. From the Bibles false construction, As from ruine and destruction. From all Aequiuocation, With mentall reseruation. From Romes Charmes and Babels Ballets: From Lumbards bits and Spanish Sallets. Our Christian Genius, Saue and protect vs. S. Dauid. FRom Westminster Hals Out-laries: From causelesse long vagaries. From meeting strong Competitours: From Iudges growne Sollicitours. From contesting with Superiours, Or despising r feriours, From contending with our Equals, Procuring anger, blowes, or brawles. From crossing men in their disputes; From losing loue, and Friends salutes: From angring Lords, or Court Minions: From selfe-will and wits opinions. From Law-suits worse, then Spanish Poxe, As bad as Hornes, or Widowes boxe. From ignorant Clerkes and Deacons; From seeing of fired Beacons. From angring God with Cup or Can: From drinking more, then serues one man. From keeping Drunkards company: From Agues, Coughes, or Timpany. From Ale-houses, Bowling Allies; From Bulls Pizzles, and Spaines Gallies. Sweet vertues Genius Blesse, shield, and saue vs. S. Patrick. FRom all Actions, which are euill; From vaine shewes, the Flesh, and Deuill. From all State Reason hatcht in Spaine, Which will doe wrong, and wrong maintaine. From bloudy Clements cursed Knife, That sought to spoyle his Souereignes life. From Rauiliacks dawned Dagger: From Iesuits, that will swagger. From Forraigne F s inuasions: From Papisticall perswasions. From them, which make free Christians . Ambitious Do s with Moorish branes. From sudden Insurrections: From poysoned Confections. From the Spanish Inquisition: From want of good Munition. From false and lewd Conspiracies: From Rouers and Sea Pi acies. From rampant Nuns now clad in gray: From Strumpets wholy giu'n to play. From burning baits and Sinnes desire; As from the smoke of Sea-coale fire. Our Sauiours Genius Saue and defend vs. S. George. FRom carrying Coine out of this Land Without the which it cannot stand. From Wares and Bils of Bankers strange, Except we cloth and fish exchange. From bringing backe the Foxes Taile For many Skins sold by retaile. From priuate Gaine by publicke losse: From comming home by weeping Crosse. From wasting Woods for Timber fit; From Troians too late after wit. From high Sayles, and costly Coaches: From Pickpurse Drugs, and much Loches. From all Tobaccoes stinking fume: From a foule breath, and store of Rheume. From wearing Gold or Siluer-lace, While Dearth and Warres rush on apace. From Meate and Drinke seru'd in much Plate, When Pe ry afflicts the State. From such, as English Carzey slight, Preferring Spaines Silkes weake and light. Our States great Genius Blesse and defend vs. S. Andrew. FRom eating Flesh insteed of Fish: From hauing Scandall in my dish. From spending time at Tragedies: Or hard got Coine at Comedies. From reading foolish Rimers Bookes, Or lying Tales, like bayted hookes. From much Play at Noddy and Trumpe: As from the Smell of foule ship-pumpe. From many Horses, Hounds, and Hawkes Actaeons end, or plots of Faukes. From idle Tales, Wares and Fables: From Primero, Gleeke, and Tables. From Irish, Lurch, Chance, and Ticktack. The Boot deseruing or the Racke. From the Truth maskt in disguises: From all friuolus surmises. From Cursing and from Periury: From Coyning and from Forgery. From Parasites, Knaues, and Sharkers, From such Dogs, as are no barkers. From an Alchymist growne threed-bare: From much carke, and foolish care The Heauens high Genius. Guard and refine vs. S. Dauid. FRom being vnthankfull vnto friends: From leauing Angels, louing f ends. From all Physicians Recipes, Which commonly proue Decipes. From Physicke at a Papists hand: From him, which hat es his Natiue Land. From an Emperickes experience: From a Scriueners straight-lac't Conscience. From Tauernes, Tables, Cards, and Dice; From Beggery, bad Name, and Lice. From boystrous stormes and blustring blasts: From ships at Sea, which haue no masts. From Pot-bardhs and Poetasters: From all vnthrifts, and great wasters. From them, which dine alwayes in Powles: From all Carousers in great bowles. From a Crab face, which neuer smiles: From Lawyers full of quirkes and wiles. From Vsurers, and base Brokers; From Attourneyes, that be soakers. From Cut-throat Mercers baits and Bookes: From Beares, big bugs, and rauenous Rookes. From womens smiles and tempting lookes: From Crocodiles and Cheaters hookes. From a woman, which is franticke: From a Seruingman Pedantick. From too much sweat and trudging toyle, As from a Lampe without some Oyle. Heauens bright G nius Shield and preuent vs. S. Patrick. FRom Vagabonds, Kn nes, and Gypsies: From Comets and Sunnes Eclipses. From bloudie Surgeons, that would purge vs: From cruell Iudges, that would scourge vs. From a young Physicians Physicke; From the Lungs, Consumption, T sick. From brain sicke Louers f nd Conceits: From coozening Pedlers strange deceits. From Coughes, Blindnesse, and Vettigo: From Biles, Tetters, and Serpigo. From all Poxes and the Meazels; From a House too full of Weazels. From the Plague and putrid Feuer Blesse me, Lord, and keepe me euer. From the Scuruie, Crampe, and Itches, From Bone-aches, and sore Stiches. From the Gout, the Stone and Collicke; Which some hinder to be frollicke. From numme Palsies, and p le Dropsies; From secret Griefes and Pleurisies. From Scabbedhands and foule Blisters: From Purgations and much Glisters. From Gluttonie and Drunkennesse Causing these, and eu'ry sicknesse. True Physicks Genius. Conuert and heale vs. FRom Seruingmen without good parts: From feeding such fit for dung-carts. From Lubbers that will eate and drinke, Doing nothing else, but lie and stinke. From r de Carters, and raw Saylers; From Quick-sands, and Bedlem-Raylers. From Bonds for Debts, or Indentures; As from perillous Aduentures. From one that feares to tame a Scold: From a Coward and a Cuckold. From proud Ladies vse of Pattens: From the Popes and Paris Mattens. From those which scorne their Countries tire, And to Out-landish bend, like Wire. From those, which long for each trifle. And their Husbands Purses rifle. From those, which hunt for curious cheere, Chicken Peepers, and Phesants deere. From Ladies vse of waters hot; From pimpled faces, and teeths rot. From them, which loue themselues alone; Or such, as loue more Mates then one. From a woman, thats wont to friske: From Wine, which tasts not liuely brisk. Our Soules bright Genius Diuert and keepe vs. S. Andrew. FRom Mens long locks, and Maids cut haire; From these with points, those painted faire. From Citizens like Gallants drest: From Apes vngrac't, and so vnblest. From things, Scandall which engender; Geese with Ganders changing gender; From Periwickes and curled lockes: From Womanizers, and Smel-smockes. From Newfangles, and Fond-fashions; From fooles fancies, and wild Passions. From setting Maids to Dancing Schooles, Or Musicke much, to make them Fooles. From a Cockney shallow-headed, Tells not what legs a Sheepe hath dead. From gazing on a Beauteous skin: From a faire Apple, foule within. From kissing much a Damsell sweet, Though for a Pope a morsell meet. From sucking on a lickrish bait: From making crooked what is strait. From faire Gazers out at Casements; From false Mistresses embracements. From Slanders cutting worse then Swords; From bawdy Iests, and beastly words. The Starres faire Genius Saue and direct vs. S. Dauid. FRom lulling in a Ladies lap, Like a great Foole, which longs for pap. From Time ill spent, and vaine Repute: From Apple-trees without some fruit. From Faith without wrought Charitie; From false pretending Pietie. From loue of Pelfe and worldly wealth, Not carking most for my Soules health. From Siluer Pictures loue or Gold; From fancying Earth, when I am old. From buying Lands Old and cruell; From losing Heauen, gayning Hell From Diues fare, and hardned mind; While Lazarus with hunger's pin'd. From tumbling in a downy bed, While Godlier men for cold lie dead. From Misers, and those greedy Elues, Which loue no Creatures but themselues. From wishing Neighbours lazie bones, When Hiues are full, to play the Drones. From sneaking like a Snaile at home; When Forraigne Climes yeeld elbow rome; From them which hate Plantations: From Sathans combinations. Our Christ's bright Genius Blesse and reforme vs S. Patrick. FRom a faire House which seldome smoakes, While the Owner in Riot soakes. From slauish prodigalitie: From miserable frug alitie. From a Cloake that's full of patches: From a Hen which neuer hatches. From seeing Elues or strange Monsters; Or those men my mind misconsters. From those which causlesse doe arrest vs. When we would gladly sit and rest vs. From such sights make vs amazed: From a Chamber not well glazed. From rude people in a furie: From a false and partiall Iurie. From Almanacks false predictions: From th' Exchange and Currents fictions. From White Spaniards, or Red headed: From all Women which are bearded. From Black-haird Women, stubborne proud: From Little Deuils scolding loud. From the Faire-snouted held for Fooles; From all long slow-backs, idle tooles. From Red-hair'd Foxes, closely bad: From pale and leane, too peeuish sad. The Worlds great Genius, Blesse and defend vs. After these deuout Patriarchs and famous Fra∣ternitie of the Rosie Crosse, had made an end of their Hymnes with an applauding Alleluiah to the Di∣uine Maiestie, for the discouery of themselues now at a pinch, when Sathan thought to sist vs all as Wheate, and vtterly to eclipse the glory of this Monarchie, they interceded vnto Apolloes Ma∣iestie, that hee would proclaime some fauourable Edict on the behalfe of their humble and penitent Clients. Whereupon the Noble Emperour rose vp from his Sunny Throne, and pronounced his Oracle. If Brittaines King like valiant Hercules, His Stables cleanse, and those Foxes footlesse, Apolloes Oracle. Which Christian Vines destroy, do firret out; His Prouinces shall rise without all doubt. And brauely flourish by our Golden Fleece; As Rome was, sau'd once by the noyse of Geese, So he restraine some of these vagaries: For Contraries are cur'd by Contraries. CHAP. XVIII. Orpheus Iunior sheweth that one of the chiefest causes of the Decay of Trading in Great Brittaine pro∣ceeded by the rash Aduentures of the Westerne Merchants in passing the Straites of Gibraltar, and in fishing on the Coast of Newfoundland, without wafting ships to defend them from Pirats. THe next day after this memorable Procession of the famous Fraternity. Apollo caused a publick Proclamation to bee set vp on the great Porch of Neptunes Royall Exchange, willing and requiring all such as wished well to Great Britaine to repaire with their grieuances before him into the Hall of the said Exchange, where hee had appointed a par∣ticular meeting for the affaires of that Common∣wealth in the afternoone of the said day. Orpheus Iunior finding by experience, that one of the late causes of the Decay of Trade arose by the misgo∣uerned and stragling courses of the Westerne Mer∣chants, which either of foole-hardinesse, carelesse∣nesse, or of a griping humour to saue a little charge, aduentured in their returne from Newfoundland, without Fleets, or Wafters to guard them, or any politicke Order to passe through the Straits of Gi∣braltar, to the Dominions of the King of Spaine, to Marseilles, or Italy, where yeerly they met with the Moorish Pirats, who by the conniuance of the Great Turk, were suffered to prey vpon al Christiās, which they encountred. With these inconueniences Or∣pheus Iunior being grieued to see his Countrie suf∣fer through these Merchants sides, he exhibited a Petition to his Imperiall Maiestie. Shewing these irregular courses, as also how that the Golden Fleece which now became rife in all mens mouthes might bee quickly surprized and anihilated, if his Proui∣dence did not becimes take some safe course to se∣cure the labours of those new Argonautickes, which spared no shipping to saile into those Coasts, where this precious Fleece flourished on the backes of Neptunes Sheepe. Apollo vpon this Information examined the pro∣ceedings of the English, and comparing them with the Hollanders, as also with those of other Com∣panies established with Priuiledges and Ciuill Or∣der; found more confusion among the Fishermen of New foundland, then in any other. For where soe∣uer the Hollanders either fished or traded, they went strongly guarded with wasting Ships to pre∣uent all casualties. The Spaniards likewise being taught in Queene Elizabeths time by the English, & sithence by the Moorish Pirats to go wel prouided with some ships of Defence. Yea, and all those Com∣panies in London, which the King of Great Britaine had graced with Charters and Freedomes prospe∣red, and neuer went abroad without sufficient strength. Onely, those petty Merchants, which were led with desire of Gaine, not willing to en∣ranke themselues into an orderly Societie, but as it were in despite of Gouernment singled and seue∣red from Fleets, these became continually a spoyle to the Pirats. His Maiesty viewed the East India Company, and found them Rich with many braue seruiceable Ships. He searched into the strength of the Turkie Mer∣chants, and saw them stored with warlike Muni∣tion and abounding in wealth; yea, and by their painfull Trading getting the start of the Italians, which heretofore in Argosies gained and exported great treasure out of this Kingdome. He pryed into the state of the Moscouie Compa∣ny, and found them very able subsisting of them∣selues, and readie to supply their Countrey with many rich Commodities. He entred into the Mystery of the French Socie∣tie, and also into the Easterne Merchants, and be∣held them winning the Trade from the Balticke Sea, and the Hans Towne in Germany. Onely the Westerne Trading he saw out of square, and all for want of setled Fleets. At last it came into his Maiesties minde, that the Noble King Iames of happy memory did about three yeeres past see into these discommodities, and thereupon directed out a Commission at the suite of the Corporation for the Plantation of the New∣foundland, to prouide a couple of good Ships on the charge of the Fishermen, which yeerely fre∣quented that Coast, continually to assist them a∣gainst the inuasions of Pirats, who had in a few yeeres before pillaged them to the damage of fortie thousand pounds, besides a hundred Peeces of Ordnance, and had taken away aboue fifteene hun∣dred Mariners to the great hinderance of Nauiga∣tion and terrour of the Planters. Vpon mature consideration of this Royall Commission Apollo pronounced, that it was neces∣sary to keepe this Commission still a foot, aswell in time of peace as of Warre, both for the rearing of expert Commanders at Sea, as for the securing of that most hopefull Country. And to this purpose he commanded Orpheus Iunior to attend at his Ma∣iesties Court of Great Britaine, and to sollicit his Soueraigne to conclude that Noble Designe, which his Royall Father vpon most weightie deliberation had formerly granted. The end of the Second Part. THE THIRD PART OF The Golden Fleece. CHAP. I. Orpheus Iunior is required by Apollo to discouer where the Golden Fleece lies. Orpheus performes his Maiesties commandement, shewes that there be sundry kindes of the Golden Fleece, all which, after an allusion to the En∣glish natures, hee reduceth into one maine Trade, to the Plantation and Fishing in the Newfoundland. The generall cause, which moued Orpheus to regard this Golden Fleece. A Pollo secretly informed by the Fra∣ternity of the Rosie Crosse, that Or∣pheus Iunior could well tell where the King of great Britaine might perpetually finde Trading both in time of Warres, as Peace, to inrich himselfe and his subiects; which Trading they stiled the Golden Fleece, more certaine then Iasons Fleece transported from Colchos, or the Phi∣losophers Stone, so much dreamed on by the Chy∣mists, because the sheepe which yeelds this preti∣ous Gaine, were to be shorne for eight moneths space without intermission, and of bodies farre bigger then the Peru sheepe, which the Spaniards br gge to equalize Asses for proportionable greatnesse. In May last, 1626. he commanded Or∣pheus Iunior, as hee tendred his seruice, and the good of his languishing Countrey, to discouer where these Golden-coated sheepe pastured, and the manner how the noble Britaines might attaine vn∣to them. Orpheus Iunior answered, that the Golden Fleece which the fraternity of the rosie Crosse insinuated to his Maiestie, was parti-coloured like the Raine∣bow, so produced by the Patriarch Iacobs Art, ac∣cording to the seuerall obiects represented, and likewise diuided into the Naturall, the Artificiall, and the Mysticall; sometimes singled out the one from the other, sometimes mixt, as politike Mer∣chants and Diers know best; yet all of them com∣prehended vnder one generall name, viz. Tra∣ding. That it was necessary for the Common-wealth of Great Britaine, to pursue all the kindes of these obiects, lest the English Nation, who neuer likes any thing how profitable soeuer, vnlesse it be diuersified, Pragmata non Angli invariata probant. might take surfet of one sort of Trading, and at length fall to a loathing thereof. Whereto he ad∣ioyned, that by many yeares experience, hee had learnt the skill of discerning spirits. And that hee found out this quality of the English, to delight in varieties; of Newes, though for the most part false; of Apparell, though they sold their lands for it; of multiplicities of Law suits, though oftentimes they knew themselues bought and sold by them which they most trusted; of meate and drinke, though they felt the euent in grieuous torments. And as in their natures they respected choise and change, so in their outward senses hee obserued first that their sight receiued more contentment in many colours, then in one alone; specially, those colours of Gold and Siluer, they preferred be∣fore the pure and simple, which they held in con∣tempt as fitter for Hob-lurkins, then for generous spirits. As for their smelling, they approued of sundry sorts, as Ciuet, Amber-Greece, Muske, Storax, and aboue all, of Tobacco, though some of them lost their wits and the vse of their senses in the taking of it; and though most of them were ready to choake for good fellowship. The like he said, he could discourse of the rest of their senses, outward and inward. But these instances would suffice, as he conceiued, to open the way to many kindes of Trading, as well to furnish that Nation with those seuerall Commodities, though super∣fluous, as to replenish the Kingdome with more supplies, lest in prouiding themselues barely on their Countries charge with all those wares which their newfangled imagination prouoketh them to long for, their Countrie might in a small while deuour her selfe, or else eate vp her owne tayle like a Munkey. Now to explaine what hee had spoken of the mysticall Golden Fleece, hee onely at that time of∣fered to declare the nature, vse, and place where it flourisheth, as how he came to the knowledge of it, if it pleased his Maiestie to affoord him audi∣ence. Apollo bad him proceed, signifying vnto him, that the principall scope of the Meeting at that season, was to haue that beneficiall Trade communicated to all his vertuous Attendants in Great Britaine. Orpheus Iunior then went forward in this dis∣course: About ten yeares past, most mighty Prince, musing with my selfe what might be the Psalmists meaning of those words: Their sound is gone out into all Nations, I happily coniectured at the last, that the Word of God should not onely be spread abroad and planted by those which ought of zeale and charity to teach it; but by those, which like the frogs out of the Dragons mouth, might publish it for temporall ends. And when I had throughly Apocalyp. lookt into these ends, the one neglected by the Professors of the Gospell, the other begun and con∣tinued with prosperous successe by the Spaniards in the West-Indies, where within these 120. yeares, many thousand Heathen people haue receiued the Christian Religion, though not so purely, as wee could wish, I collected this memorable obseruati∣on, that our Sauiour makes vse of our worlaly desires to serue his diuine intentions. In this fashion deales an Earthly Father with an vntoward Daughter, for whose aduancement in mariage, he giues a large portion to counteruaile her imperfections. By which meditations of mine, I perceiued, that nothing but gaine could moue the carelesse minds of our Ilanders to seeke abroad for new habitati∣ons. I lookt into the Plantations at the Summer Iles, Virginia, yea into Affrick, as farre as the Cape of good hope, where for the ease of our East-Indian Fleetes, I conceiued at Sancta Helena, or Soldana, a fit Plantation might be erected. But after that I had considered the many difficulties by reason of the tediousnesse of the voyage, the charge, and aboue all, the malice of the Spaniards, who being like to the Dogge in the Manger, doe want people to plant, and yet they will not permit others to plant. I saw that God had reserued the Newfound∣land for vs Britaines, as the next land beyond Ire∣land, and not aboue nine or tenne dayes saile from thence. I saw that he had bestowed a large portion for this Countries mariage with our Kingdomes, euen this great Fishing, that by this meanes it might be frequented and inhabited the sooner by vs. And I verily thinke, that his Heauenly proui∣dence ordained this Iland not without a Mystery for vs of Great Britaine, that Ilanders should dwel in Ilands; and that wee should ponder on this en∣suing Morall: Euen as our Sauiour Christ making Fishermen, Fishers of men, preferred, Peter, Andrew, & others his Apostles, being plaine persons and simple, be∣fore the great Lords of the earth, as also the Lillies of the field, before the Royalties of Salomon: so in these latter daies, his vnsearchable wisedome preferring necessary maintenance, before need∣lesse superfluity, hath allotted Newfoundland, the grand Port of Fishing, to the Professors of the Gospell. And because the depraued nature of man∣kinde delighteth in appetite and some appearance of profit; therefore his sacred Maiestie discouered that plentifull Fishing vnto vs, to allure vs from our home-bred idlenesse, to this necessary place of Plantation. It is not Gold, nor a Siluer mine, which can feed either body or soule; but the one requires nourishment to be gotten by the sweat of the browes, the other must haue spirituall repast by the Word of God. Before the Spaniards inhabited the West-Indies, and had found those rich treasures in Peru; Sincerity raigned among the Nobles, and Simplicity among the Commons. But now money being growne in some places more rife then in times past, neighbourly Loue and Humility are fled backe into Heauen: so that we may well curse the time when these Mines were first seized on by the Spaniards. For, as the Author de la nouvelle Fraunce affirmeth: when I confider, saith hee, that by these Golden mines, the Spaniards haue kindled and entertained wars in all parts of Chri∣stendome, and haue studied to ruinate their neigh∣bours, and not the Turke; I cannot thinke, faith this French writer, that any other then the Deuill, hath beene the Author of their voyages. Ie ne puis penser qu' autre que le Diable ait esté Autheur de leurs voyages. In this resolution being confirmed, I transported two seuerall Colonies of men and wo∣men into those parts with full intent to follow af∣ter, and to lead the remnant of my life in this new Plantation. It seemes strange vnto my vertuous followers in Parnassus, replied Apollo, that a man of your fashion, not driuen by need, which as the prouerbe saies, makes the old wife trot, but sufficiently proui∣ded for in your natiue Countrie, should now in the midst of your age, spend the best and rarest part of your life, which is yet to come, in building and tilling of new places. To this Orpheus Iunior answered; I confesse, most Noble Prince, that sometimes I feele my Pil∣low very vneuen, my head tossed and turmoyled with many a netled thought, and my minde playing loath to depart from my natiue soile. One while the conceit of my supposed worth, reputa∣tion, kindred, acquaintance, ease, conuenience of meanes at home, and other symbolized ornaments of this present world, doe recall mee backe, like another Demas, from this charitable worke in the Newfoundland. But instantly I blush for shame, when I thinke on the magnanimity of Heathenish men, who may rise against vs at the iudgement day, and plead their good deserts before our fro∣zen zeale; That a Citizen of Rome, for the safety of his City of Rome, sacrificed his life in that horrible gulfe; That Codrus of Athens, though a King, did disguise himselfe as a priuate Souldier, of set pur∣pose to dye for the sauing of his people; That the chiefest Nobility among the Gothes and Vandales, forsooke their owne habitations, to accompany the meaner sort of people, and to lead them into forraigne Countries, who without their personall presence, would haue staid at home like Drones, and pined for want of liuing. Patria magnanimis est vbicunque bene, That's my Countrie which giues me my wel∣being. Euery place agrees with an honest minde, and that as naturally, as the Sea with the Fish, as the Ayre with the Fowle. Another while I me∣ditate on that saying of S. Paul: He which prouides not for them of his owne houshold, is worse then an Infidell: Whereby the care of my Wife and Chil∣dren, kindling an indulgent loue within mee, reuokes my resolution from this enterprize. But presently after I see the same God ouerlooking Newfoundland, which ouerlookes Europe, and all the world ouer, sounding out this Proclamation: He that loues his Father and Mother aboue me, is not worthy of me: which the Iesuites imbracing some∣what too meritoriously, doe to our shame, put in practice, abandoning all the pleasures of their na∣tiue Countrie, and betaking themselues to the vttermost parts of the earth, so that China and Iapan doe ring out the name of our Sauiour Christ by their meanes and trauels. Sometimes I suspect the Action, because I see men of my ranke so much giuen to lazinesse, and the loue of their dunghils at home, that they will indure any smart of oppression or cracke of credit, rather then they wil depart into a remoter place to liue in perpetuall plenty. But this cogitation quickly vanisheth, when I consider the estates of our rich and poore, how the one will not, the other cannot. The one lies besotted with the lullabies of carnall ease, caring more for this worlds vanity, then for heauenly Blisse purchased by workes of charity, which as S. Iames wrote, will helpe to couer multitudes of sinnes. And the other for want of meanes, cannot get thither without some good peoples deuotions. In which latter discommodity I am sory to find so many helplesse in my Coun∣try of Wales. Wheras close by vs, I see our neigh∣bours of Deuonshire scorning to become Gossips to pouerty, yearely to send aboue 150 ships to salute the Newfoundland, transporting therehence those Commodities, without which, Spaine and Italy can hardly liue. This is our Colchos, where the Golden Fleece flourisheth on the backes of Neptunes sheepe, conti∣nually to be shorne. This is Great Britaines Indies, neuer to be exhausted dry. This pretious Treasure surmounts the Duke of Burgundies Golden Flecce, which hee called after that name by reason of his large customs which he receiued from our English Woolls and Cloth in the Low Countries. From this Iland, our English transport worth 20000. pound; and might yeerely treble this summe, if the Plantations goe forward as happily as they doe, and may with the tenth part of the charge, which hath beene defrayed about other Plantati∣ons. So many men, so many mindes. Euery man hath his peculiar fancie, either by the motions of good Angels, or by the instigation of the Spirituall Tempter, or by the constitution of the braine, hot cold, or deprauedly mixt. But let men in cold blood lay aside their crotchets, and the sparkling flames of imagination, and iudiciously weigh the vtility of this businesse, comparing the dangers, the remotenesse, and charge of other voyages, and no doubt but God will giue them a new heart, to imbrace this proiect, which experience for these 80. yeares space hath confirmed vnto vs to bee more beneficiall, then any other whatsoeuer. Here Orpheus Iunior suspended his speech; when as all the Auditors and standers by shouted for ioy, to heare that a new Colchos was found out for the restoring of Trading, which lately began to faile in the North-west parts of Europe. There were many Ladies which purposed out of hand to imitate Isabella Queene of Castile, in selling their Iewels, Rings, and Bracelets, for the furthering of this Plantation and Fishing, as the other had done to furnish out Columbus for the first discouery of the West-Indies. Great was the zeale, & most hope∣full the Charity like to spring from this zeale, (for euery man prepared an auspicious offring for the gratulation of these ioyfull newes) when they also vnderstood that all the profits of this Golden Fleece were to be distributed among the Professors of the Gospel, & that Great Britaines Monarchy might in a short time arriue to as great riches as the Spanish. After these applauses, his Maiestie beckned to Or∣pheus Iunior, that hee should proceed in his dis∣course. But suddenly the Lady Pallas interrupted him, saying, that it were requisite, all his Nobles and Gouernours of Prouinces should be present at the discouery of the Golden Fleece, whereby some timely order might bee taken for the guarding of the Coast, which produced this pretious increase of Trade. Apollo liked very wel of this wise admo∣nition, & against that day seuennight, required his Pegasean Postmasters to summon his Prouinciall Gouernours, all other businesses set aside, that they should appeare before him in the great Hall of the Court of Audience at Parnassus. CHAP. 2. Orpheus Iunior particularizeth the manifold bene∣fits of the Golden Fleece, which might serue to repaire the decay of Trade, lately complained of in Great Britaine, and to restore that Mo∣narchy to all earthly happinesse. IVst on the prefixed day, the afore-mentioned Gouernors appeared before his Maiestie, at the place appointed, where Apollo, the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, the Nymphs of Great Bri∣taine and Ireland, and all the wise Councellors of State, with the choise spirits of his Empire atten∣ding on his Maiestie, hee commanded Orpheus Iunior particularly to certifie vnto them the neces∣sity and commodity of the Golden Fleece, which might supply the defects of Great Britaine, and restore it to the most flourishing estate, wherein it euer stood in former times. Orpheus Iunior after some few excuses of his disability, proceeded to epitomize the singular properties of the Golden Fleece so much expected in this wise: Most redoubted Emperor, and next to our great Creator, the prime Author of our worldly happi∣nesse, I am glad after the manifold crosses, which I haue sustained by sundry accidents, that God hath reserued me an Instrument this day to discouer that gaine, which helpes our Commerce personall betwixt party and party, and the Prouinciall be∣twixt our Kingdomes and the foraigne, and both in the scale and ballance of Trade. But before I de∣clare the Commodities of this Trade, I wil first shew the Necessity wherein we stand, if it be not sudden∣ly aduanced forwards. To begin with my Natiue Countrey Wales; Al∣though many strange sicknesses haue diuers times of late yeares afflicted vs, yet notwithstan∣ding the multitudes of people are here so great, that thousands yearly doe perish for want of re∣liefe. Yea, I haue known in these last deare yeares, that 100. persons haue yearly died in a parish, where the Tithes amounted not to fourscore pounds a yeare, the most part for lacke of food, fire and rai∣ment, the which the poorer sort of that Country stand in greater need of, then the Inhabitants of the Champion Countreyes, by reason of their Mountaines and hills, which cause the winter there to be most bitter with stormy winds, raine, or snow, and that for the space of eight moneths. As also experience teacheth that Mountainous people require more store of nourishment for their bodies, then they which dwell in the plaines or vallies: which was the reason, that in the North parts of England, Seruants vsed to couenant here∣tofore with their Masters to feed them with bread made with Beanes, and not of Barly from Allhalontide vntill May. Another point of Necessity to procure vs to set 2 forwards this most hopeful Plantation, and conse∣quētly the Fishing, proceeds of the want of woods. For the Ironmongers vpon what warrant I cannot learne, haue lately consumed our woods, and those fit for timber, within lesse thē miles to the Sea, so that we must shortly repaire to other Countryes for woods to be employed towards shipping, buil∣ding, husbandry, &c. which poore men are not able to do. The decay of these woods also wil cause our breed of Cattle to decrease, which hereto∣fore stood as a shelter vnto them against tempestu∣ous blastes. Thirdly, this maine businesse is to be promoted 3 in regard of the Generall Populousnesse of Great Britaine, which is the cheife cause, that Charity waxeth cold. Euery man hath enough to doe, to shift for his owne maintenance, so that the greatest part are driuen to extremities, and many to get their liuing by other mens losses; witnes our Ex∣tortioners, Periurers, Pet ifoggers at Law, Co∣nycatchers, Theeues, Cottagers, Inmates, vnne∣cessary Alesellers, Beggers, burners of hedges, to the hindrance of Husbandry, and such like, which might perhaps proue profitable members in the Newfoundland. But aboue all, the state of younger Brothers is to the pitied, who by the rigour of our Norman Lawes being left vnprouided of mainte∣nance are oftentimes constrained to turne Py∣rats, Papists, fugitiues, or to take some other violent course to the preiudice of the Common-wealth. For these important reasons arising out of meere necessity, Pantations ought suddenly to be erected. And where with lesser charge then in the New∣foundland? Where can they liue to helpe them∣selues, and benefit their Country better, then in ioyning to encrease the reuenewes of the Crowne of Great Britaine by the rich trade of Fishing? The Commodities whereof, I will here cursorily re∣peat. First, this Trade of Fishing multiplyeth shipping and Mariners, the principall props of this King∣dome. 1 It yearely maintaineth 8000 persons for 6. moneths in the Newfoundland, which were they at home would consume in Tobacco and the Ale∣house twice as much as they spend abroad. It re∣leeues after their returne home with the labour of their hands yearely their wiues and children, and many thousand families within this King∣dome besides, which aduentured with them, or were employed in preparing of nets, caskes, victu∣alls, &c. or in repayring of ships for that voyage. Secondly, It is neer vnto Great Britane, the next Land beyond Ireland, in a temperate Aire, the 2 south part thereof being of equall Climate with Little Britaine in France, where the Sunne shines almost halfe an houre longer in the shortest day in the yeare, then it doth in England. Thirdly, it will be a meanes for vs to reape the rest of the commodities of that Countrey, which 3 now we cannot enioy for want of people to looke after them, and also for want of leasure, our men there being busied in the Summer about the fish∣ing, or in preparing of their stages and boats, and afterward returning home against winter. The commodities of the Land are Furres of Beuer, Sables, Blacke Foxes, Marternes, Musk-rats, Ot∣ters, and such like skinnes, as also of greater beasts; as Deere, and other wild creatures. To this I ad∣ioyne the benefit, which may be made by woods, being pine, birch, spruce, Furre, &c. fit for boords, Masts, barke for tanning, and dying, Charcoales for making of Iron. Out of these woods we may haue pitch, Tarre, Rosen, Turpentine, Frankin∣scence, and honey out of the hollow trees, as in Muscouy, and heretofore in our owne woods be∣fore they were conuerted to the Iron Mills. There is great store of Mettals, if they be lookt after. The Plantations well and orderly there once erected, will helpe vs to settle our Fishing Trade 4 farre more commodiously, then now it is. For whereas our Fisher-men set out at the end of Fe∣bruary, they may choose to set out before the end March, if euery man hath his stages there ready against their comming, and not by the first com∣mers destroyed most barbarously & maliciously, because their country men which come next after them may be behind them a fortnight in building of others. And likewise the Planters themselues may fish for Cod there a moneth before our Eng∣lish men can arriue thither, and also after they are gone they may fish almost all the yeare after. They may fish there for other kindes of fish besides Cod, as Mackerels, Salmons, Herrings, and Eeles, salting them and barrelling them vp: 5 which will much aduantage this Kingdome being hither transported. They may erect salt houses there, hauing woods 6 sufficient for that purpose, which may saue this Kingdome much money, which now goes out to other Countreyes for the same. The Plantations may in a short time supply vs with Corne here in England, when the same 7 growes deare, as commonly it doth within the space of euery fiue yeares, whereby wee are faine to be beholding to Danzk, and Poland, expending that way much of our Treasure. That Land hauing the vegetatiue salt and vertue of it vnwearied, en∣tire, and fresh, cannot but beare a world of corne, considering also the gummes and liquors which from time to time since the Flood or the Creation haue with the heate of the Sunne distilled out of the trees into the earth, which renders it most fruitfull. The which may be likewise gathered by obseruing the commodities and fruits, which now the earth produceth without the industry of man. No place of the world brings naturally more store of Gooseburies, and those bigger then our Garden ones, R sburies, Mulburies, Filbirdes, Straburies, H irtles, Cherries, wilde Pease, and b undance of Roses. By this Trading into Newfoundland, no com∣moditie is caried out of the Kingdome, as in other 8 voyages, which is a matter of great consequence. But by the labour of their hands they bring home Fish wet and dry, and Traine Oile; Or else they bring home Salt, Wines, Spice, Sugar, &c. in ex∣change of their Fish out of France and Spaine, a speciall enriching of this Realme, and an augmen∣ting of the Kings Customes and Impostes. The Plantations there will saue many a poore 9 mans life, who falling sicke, as among so great a number some may chance to be, may quickly re∣couer their healths by fresh victualls and good lodging. This Plantation will preuent other Nations from engrossing the Countrey and the Fishing to 10 themselues, as perhaps hereafter some may goe about such a Plot. It will reduce such as resort thither, to acknowledge our Kings soueraignty o∣uer that Land. It will serue to bridle their out∣rages, and also the abuses committed by our owne Countrymen about the taking away with strong hand one anothers stages and boates. It will serue to restraine their insolencies, who now bragging, that they are there West and by Law, doe wilfully set fire on the woods. It will bridle their thefts, which filch at their departure all the railes of other mens stages, together with their salt, which being full laden with fish, they are forced oftentimes to leaue behind them. It will serue likewise to hin∣der their barbarous casting of their ballast into the harbours, which in a short time will ouerthrow both the hauens and the Fishing. To these motiues I could ioyne others; But be∣cause I thinke here are sufficient to lead men of vnderstanding to see into their profit, & what may most easily be performed, I will leaue off to trou∣ble your patient eares any longer with a more te∣dious discourse, hoping that these wil suffice as re∣storatiues to repaire the languishing humours of our Country. To the furtherance of which wor∣thy worke I inuite the Inhabitants of Great Bri∣taine, like true Christian Patriots, to put to their helping hands. What for mine owne particulars I haue done, our Newland Merchants know. And more as yet I would doe, were my meanes answe∣rable to my mind; Howsoeuer, during my life I shall reioyce that in this vale of misery I haue set out my talent to some good behoofe. And in the houre of death it shall be my comfort, that I haue laboured to keepe the Faith not altogether fruit∣lesse and imaginary, but accompanied with some actuall deeds of Charity. CHAP. 3. Apollo calls an Assembly of the Company, for the Plantation of Newfoundland, where Mr. Slany, Mr. Guy, and others, meeting by his Maiesties Commandement, Captain Iohn Ma∣son is willed to disclose, whether the Golden Fleece be there, where Orpheus Iunior all ad∣ged it to be. Captaine Mason auerreth it to be in the same Iland more abundantly then in any other place. APollo hauing with acute iudgment, and ma∣ture deliberation resolued to countenance and continue the Plantation of the Iland commonly called the Newfoundland, after his Ma∣iestie had by publike proclamation commanded the same to be hereafter called Britannioll, & to be diuided into three parts, as Great. Britaine was at the first planting by the Troians, or as others af∣firme by the valiant Cimbrians, hee assembled all those expert gentlemen, which had either aduen∣tured their fortunes or persons in that hopefull Countrey. And in the magnificent Hall of the Delphicke Palace, there appeared the noble mind∣ed Iohn Slany Treasurer of the society for that Plantation, Humphrey Slany his brother, & others of the Corporation out of London and Bristow; Then entred Iohn Guy Alderman of Bristow, who was the first Christian, that planted and wintered in that Iland, establishing an English Colony at Cuperts Coue within the Bay of Conception, about 13. years past. After him, came Captaine Iohn Ma∣son, who dwelt in that Country sixe yeares. Next to these, many others out of Bristow and Wales suc∣ceeded, who had spent some few yeares in that Land. And particularly, one Captaine Winne a Cambro-Britan was much noted in this Assembly for his personall abode and painefull care in set∣ling the Plantation at Feriland in the South part of this Coast, where for the space of 4 yeares hee did more good for my Lord Baltimore, then o∣thers had done in double the time. Apollo not mindfull, that there were any more Aduenturers & Planters of eminency then these, which he beheld there present, was about to frame a speech vnto them, when the Lady Mnemosyne Princesse of Memory whispered his Maiestie in the eare, that there were other Noble Britaines, which had likewise aduanced this glorious enterprize. And why said Apollo, doe they absent themselues from this Assembly? They haue reason for it, answered the Lady Pallas; For if they repaire hi∣ther to your Maiesties Court, and their Enemies watching that opportunity should enter into their charge, the remedies which you consult vpon at this present, will fall out to bee applyed, as Phy∣sicke to a dead Coarse; Some of the Dunkirkes may take their progesse into your Britanniol, to solace themselues there with your Nimphs, and to glut their greedy throats with Cods-heads. In what a case thinke you will your Iasons bee with their Fishing for the Golden Fleece, if some of these Raggamu ins make hauocke of their Ships, Mariners, Goods, and Plantations? Before you borrow the personal presence of those Gentlemen who are here wanting, it were fit you tooke some order to secure that Coast from Piraticall rouers. The Lord Vicount Falkland looketh vnto his great Gouernement in Ireland, to see the same well for∣tified and guarded. The Lord Baltimore is likewise busie in supplying his Colony at Feriland. Sir William Alexander attends on the valiant King of Great Britaine, night and day, taking care by what meanes he may most commodiously transport his Scottish Colonies into those parts. Sir Francis Tanfield, and Sir Arthur Aston, two generous Knights, which to their immortall glory, doe im∣ploy their times in building and manuring that new ground, cannot be spared from their Planta∣tions, lest the wild Boares breake into their Gar∣dens. I thinke, said Apollo, I must send for Hercules from his starry Spheare, or get another Medusa, whose very sight shall turne these Dunkirkes into stones, before my vertuous followers shall endure the least affront at the hands of malicious Erynnis, that Patronesse of barbarous Pirates. In the mean time we will thinke on some conuenient course to restraine these threatned thunders and blustering blasts. And seeing that you my deare seruants, are here assembled at this time, I must haue you to satisfie the wauering world, whether the Golden Fleece be in greater plenty and abundance in this Iland or in New England, Virginia, the Summer Iles, or in some other forraigne Coast, which your Nation may easily possesse. At these words, there was much muttering among the English and Scottish. For some contended on the behalfe of Virginia; others contested for New England. Euery man had his opinion according to his imaginary obiect, wherein most preferred priuate fantasies, before the intellectuall facultie. His Maiestie hauing pa∣tiently awayted for their vnanimous resolution, like Brethren of the same Iland, borne vnder the same Prince, Religion and Gouernement, and see∣ing no end of their disputes, hee willed Captaine Mason to breake the Ice, in respect he had beene sixe yeares acquainted with ice and frosts at Cu∣pert Coue, one of the coldest places of those Coun∣tries, and boldly without partiality, feare, or sini∣ster regard, to disclose the secrets of the Soile, the benefits of the Land, and whether this Plan∣tation were such an inestimable iewell as Orpheus Iunior had deliuered, or to be had in more estima∣tion then any other place. Captaine Mason after some complementall ex∣cuse of his disability, answered in this wise: I could haue wishe that M r . Iohn Guy, my predeces∣sor in Britannioll, a man both learned & experien∣ced in these exploits, had spared me the relation, which your Maiestie hath imposed on me: But seeing the lot is falne into my share, I will repeat those passages, which hee and others here know better then my selfe. This Iland now in question is altogether as large as England, without Scotland. And at the degree of 51. of Northerly latitude. Where Eng∣land ends, there this blessed Land beginnes, and extends it selfe almost as farre as the degree of 46. iust in a manner as the climate lieth from Caleis to Rochell. The weather in the winter somewhat like vnto it in Yorkeshire, but farre shorter, for the Sun shines aboue halfe an houre long r in the shortest day, then it doth in London. The Summer much hotter then in England, and lasteth from lune vn∣to Michaelmas, specially in the Southerly part. I haue knowne September, October, and Nouem∣ber, much warmer then in England. But one thing more I found worthy of an Astrologers search, wherefore the Spring begins not there before the end of Aprill, and the winter comes not in before December or Ianuary: the causes I know not, vnlesse Nature recompenceth the defect of the timely Spring, with the backward and later winter. Or else because our Plantations lay open to the Easterly windes, which partaking of the large tract of the Sea, and of the icie mountaines, which flote there, being driuen by the current from the Northerly parts of the world, might happily proue the accidentall cause of the Springs backwardnesse; yet tolerable enough, and well agreeing with our constitutiōs. Towards the North, the land is more hilly and woody; but the South part, from Renoos, to Trepassa, plaine and champaine euen for 30. miles in extent. It abounds with Deere, as well fallow Deere, as Ellans, which are as bigge as our Oxen. And of all other sorts of wilde Beasts, as here in Europe, Beuers, Hares, &c. The like I may say for Fowle and Fish. I knew one Fowler in a winter, which killed aboue 700. Partridges him∣selfe at Renoos. But for the Fish, specially the Cod, which drawes all the chiefe Port townes in Chri∣stendome to send thither some ships euery yeare, either to fish, or to buy the same; it is most won∣derfull, and almost incredible, vnlesse a man were there present to be hold it. Of these, three men at Sea in a Boat, with some on shoare to dresse and dry them, in thirty dayes will kill commonly be∣twixt fiue and twenty and thirty thousand, worth with the Traine oyle arising from them, one hun∣dred or sixe score pounds. I haue heard of some Countries, commended for their twofold haruest, which here we haue, although in a different kinde: yet both as profitable, I dare say, as theirs so much extolld. There is no such place againe in the world for a poore man to raise his fortunes, comparable to this Plantation; for in one moneths space, with reasonable paines, he may get as much as will pay both Land-lords Rent, Seruants wages, and all Houshold charges, for the whole yeare, and so the rest of his gaine to increase. As for the other question, whether the title of the Golden Fleece may bee conferred more de∣seruedly vpon this Iland, then on any other for∣raigne place, where his Maiesties Subiects of Great Britaine doe vse to Trade? By the last part of my Discourse, it is plaine, that it goes farre be∣yond all other places of Trade whatsoeuer, and iustly to be preferred before New England, Virgi∣nia, and other Plantations, for these foure reasons: First, it lieth neerer to Great Britaine, by three or foure hundred leagues, then eyther of them. For wee may saile hither within twelue or fourteene daies, being not aboue sixe or seuen hundred leagues passage: whereas Virginia lieth as far again. Secondly, it is better in respect of Trade, and the concourse of people, which with 500. or 600. Ships, doe yearly resort thither. By which meanes they augment their Princes Customes, and doe maintaine many thousands of their fellow-sub∣iects, their wiues and children. Thirdly, he con∣ueniency of transporting Planters thither at tenne shillings a man, and twenty shillings the Tunne of goods. And if the party be a Labourer, it will cost him nothing for his passage, but rather hee shall receiue foure or fiue pound for his hire to helpe the Fishermen on the Land for the drying of their Fish: whereas euery man which goeth to Virginia, must pay fiue pound for his passage. Lastly, wee are better secured from Enemies, for we haue no Sauages to annoy vs in the South∣parts: And if any warres should happen betwixt Great Britaine and Spaine, we need not feare their insolent inuasions. For wee haue a Garrison of three or foure hundred Ships, of our owne Nati∣on, which fish at our doores all the summer, and are able to withstand an Armada, if their King would but confirme that Commission, which his blessed Father, about three yeares already past granted, that two warlike Ships be yearely sent as waftors to defend the Coast, and to be authorized with power to leuy men & Ships there, if occasion so require; and all vpon the charges of the Fishing fleete. This Commission I obtained, and sithence I left it with my friend Orpheus Iunior, to bring to perfection, who as I am informed, is at this pre∣sent in the Court of Great Britaine, an earnest soli∣citor to that effect. To conclude, after the Fishing Fleetes are returned homewards, we are safe, for the windes are commonly from August out Westerly, whereby none can come to vs. And if they should; we haue other places in the Country to goe to, till our Enemies bee gone. For there long they dare not stay for feare of the Frosts, which perhaps their tender complexions can∣not brooke as well as our Northerly Nations. CHAP. 4. Apollo commands Iohn Guy, Alderman of Bri∣stow, to shew how the Plantations in the Newfoundland might be established & secu∣red from the cold vapours, and foggy mists which in the Spring are supposed to molest that Country. APollo hauing noted how important to Great Britaine the Plantations are like to succeed and fall out for the restoring of their State to worldly felicity, that it proue a paralleled Monarchy to the proudest of the borde∣ring kingdomes, made choise of Iohn Guy, Alder∣man of Bristow, to shew in what manner the Bri∣taines should order their Plantations in this Golden Iland, and secure their new habitations from the icie and cold foggy Aire, which in some seasons of the yeare were reported by the Fishermen, to molest and damnifie the Inhabitants. Master Guy earnestly sought to post ouer the handling of this serious determination to Captaine Mason, in respect hee had wintred there longer then he had. But Apollo by no meanes would al∣ter his imposition, saying, that in regard that Mr. Guy had oftentimes beene personally in the Land, and wintred there twise, being the first Christian, which made it apparent to the world that it was habitable & commodious for the vse of mankinde, and also for that he had calculated the mutations of the seasons, keeping a Iournall of euery Acci∣dent during his abode in the Country; hee, and none but he should direct what might be conue∣nient for the setling and prosperous propagation of these most hopefull Plantations. Mr. Guy seeing that by no entreaty or excuse, he could put the taske off from himselfe, with a lowly reuerence to his Maiestie, he said; If the Noble Emperour had askt my poore iudgement a dozen yeares past, concerning these secrets, it may be, I might haue giuen him more agreeable con∣tentment, then at this time. For then the modell of the Country and Climat lay more fresh in my apprehension. Notwithstanding, seeing the lot is cast vpon me, I will produce the best remedies which I know for the correcting of the malignant ayre, if so I may without scandall call it. The Country I assure your Maiestie, is as tolerable as England, Caeteris paribus, comparing all the sea∣sons together. And if some nice persons feele one winter a∣mong many, more snowy and frosty then other, they seeme to forget their owne Country, where the like inconuenience hapneth. But to auoid the worst, if euery Householder digge vp the next ground to his habitation, and round about the same, and then burne it, those moyst foggy va∣pours will not appeare, specially after the Sunne hath once warmed and pierced into the earth so dismantled and layd bare. Secondly, let them dig welles neere their houses against winter, that they may haue water in despite of the frost or snow. Thirdly, let them prouide them of fewell enough before winter, to haue the same more seare and dried. Fourthly, let them build their houses with a hill, or great store of trees interposed as a shelter betwixt them and the sea-windes, which there are Easterly and very nipping. There is no winter to speake of before the midst of Ianuary. And when the Easterly windes blow, the weather is no other, then it is in Holland. And I verily beleeue, that in the south part of the Land, where it trends to∣wards the west, and where the ground is eauen and plaine without hilles, it differs not much from the temperature of the south part of Germany. And for the further encouragement of our Planters, I can auow this for a certaine rule, that once being passed a mile or two into the Land, the weather is farre hotter. I found Filberds fixe miles distant from the Sea side, very ripe a moneth before they were fit to be eaten by the Seaside. So great an al∣teration there is within sixe miles space, by rea∣son that those raging Easterly windes are defended and asswaged by the hilles and woods which stand as walles to fence and breake their force. Aboue all things, I wish the Planters to sleepe in boorded roomes, and not to be too idle the first winter for feare of the Scuruy. For in all Plantati∣ons this disease commonly seaseth vpon lazy peo∣ple the first winter. Yea, Sir Walter Rawleighs Colony in Virginia, though a hotter Country, 1586. could not auoid this mortall sicknesse. These rules obserued, our Planters may liue hap∣pily. They may fish a moneth before others, which come out of England thither to fish, & they may fish three moneths or more for Cod and Her∣ring, after they are departed, which will much en∣rich them. CHAP. 5. Sir Ferdinando Gorge is accused by the western Fi∣shermen of England, for hindering thē of their stages, to dry their Fish in New England, and from trading with the Sauages for Furres and other Commodities. Ferdinando Gorge his answer. Apollo reconcileth their differences. VPon the Friday seuen night before Easter, in Lent last, 1626. there arriued here at Parnassus, certaine Westerne Merchants out of England, iust about that time, as Apollo had decreed straight execution against some for the ea∣ting of Flesh on some prescribed dayes, for that weighty and politicall respect of maintaining Na∣uigation, wherein the workes of our Creator doe shew themselues no lesse admirable, then the land. Assoone as these Merchants had heard this neces∣sary Law, with the execution, one of them, a per∣son of very discreet behauiour, desired liberty to speake on the behalfe of his poore Countrey men for some oppressions, which Ferdinando Gorge Gouernour of the Fort at Plimouth, whom they pointed at, present in the great Hall of the Court of Audience, had vnder colour of a Patent deriued from his Earthly Soueraigne of great Britains Pre∣rogatiue, most vncharitably & vnlawfully commit∣ted against them, their Factors, and Mariners on the Coast of New England in America. Apollo willed them to declare their grieuances. First, they particularly shewed that this place was an Hea∣thenish Coast, vntilled, and voyd of Christian Inhabi∣tants: in regard whereof they tooke it to be law∣full for them being Christians, who in such re∣mote wild Countreyes were to passe for Free∣men, and equal for right with Alexander the great, that went into the East Indies, as they into the West, there to enioy the benefit of the Law of Nations, to discouer new Countries, to exchange wares for wares, Cloath for Furres, Ciuility for rudenesse, and likewise to transport Fish, which they laboured hardly for, Pitch, Tarre, Masts, and such like, which they could not haue in Europe, without a farre greater charge. All this notwith∣standing, Sir Ferdinando Gorge by his Lieutenant and Agents, opposed their Commerce, forced them to compound for their Stages, and preten∣ded the Commodities of the Country to bee due to him, and his Associates, who first discouered the same, and afterwards had obtained a Patent thereof, of the Noble King Iames for their vse. Likewise, they intimated, that the Sea was free and common to all men, more common then Er∣go in the Schooles, or the word Homo; which the Grammarians, euen since Orbilius, Quintilian, and Priscians time, haue stoutly maintained to bee a common name to all men, ciuill and sauage; yea, and to all sorts of women, the chast, as the strum∣pet. In respect of which Community, warranted by the Lawes of the Rhodes, the statutes of Oleron, by the Constitutions of Holland, and lastly, by his transcendent authority which wrote the Booke called Mare liberum, they hoped to settle a bene∣ficiall Trading, as well for Fishing on these for∣raigne Coasts, as for such Land-Commodities, which the Sauages would trucke with them. Apollo vnderstanding of these oppositions, ten∣ding in appearance to be a publike grieuance, de∣manded of Sir Ferdinando Gorge, wherefore hee sought to engrosse those merchandizes, and to make a monopoly of the Furres, which being bought of the Sauages, might in time by this con∣course of his fellow Christians, proue a meane to ciuilize those rude Nations; and specially his Ma∣iestie askt him why he went about to appropriate the Sea Coasts to some few of his adherents, which ought to be common, which serued to ex∣ercise honest men in industrious courses, and to make good his Law against the eating of flesh vpon prefixed dayes? Sir Ferdinando Gorge answered: Most dread Soueraigne, the honour of a King consisteth as well in aduancing the building vp his Sauiours Church, as the inlarging of his Territories, which may proue an addition to the strengthening of his Forces, and the inriching of his Crowne. For the perfection of which glorious worke, it pleased God to raise mee and others to aduenture our meanes for the discouery of this Country called New England, which before lay vnknowne. Ha∣uing found it a habitable place, commodious for the vse of many distressed people, whom I saw to grone vnder the burthen of pouerty in my natiue Soile; I resolued to imitate the painefull Bees, to build houses, like Hiues, and therein to transplant them. For which purpose to auoyd the confused state of an Anarchy, I prepared the Plantation intended with the support of the Regall counte∣nance, and to that end got the Patent specified by my Aduersaries with large priuiledges, immuni∣ties, and power, whereby our Planters might rest assured, not onely of security against Drones, but also of the quiet fruition of their profitable ende∣uours hazarded with their liues, and not to bee attained without labours and the sweat of their browes. Of what consequence not only this Plan∣tation is, but likewise all others of the like nature, who knowes better then your Maiestie, who once a yeare suruayes the vttermost parts of the earth, euen to the Southerne Pole? For what is it, which renders a Nation vnhappy? Next to the want of Gods knowledge, which the Scripture termes Dark∣nesse, it is the want of necessaries for the sustenta∣tion of life, as meat, drinke, and apparell. And when through a long peace, and their ouerspent fields, their Country-men doe increase and mul∣ply, so that the extent of their natiue Land is not capable nor sufficient to maintaine them, what (poore soules) shall they doe? If they rob or steale, they are hanged. If they looke for worke, perhaps they may meet with some couetous wretch that will retaine them during the haruest of Hay and Corne: but in the Winter, which in this Climat is longer then the Summer, they may starue for lacke of food, rayment and fyring. This inconuenience was foreseene aboue 100. yeares since by Sir Thomas Moore, who grieuously be∣wailes the ouer-sight of our Policies, for condem∣ning men to be hanged, who robd of meere neces∣sity; In lib. de Eutopia. whereas their Country, like a prouident Mother, ought rather to prouide them reliefe, whereby they might liue like men borne of a wise and politike mother. Some mothers haue loued their children, that they haue hazarded their own liues, to get heritages for their younger children: yea, and were content to suffer want themselues, rather then their ofspring should miscarry. Examples we can produce many. How came the world first to be planted? If the first Generati∣ons after Noahs Flood, had all abode in Armenia, Chaldea, and Assyria, the rest of the world had beene created in vaine. Therefore God sundred them by confounding their languages at Babell, that the glory of his power might be noised in all Regions, and the sound of his Name, throughout all Nations. This made Saturne to plant in Italy. This made Hercules to trauell to the Atlantique Iles, and to ingraue his name on those memorable Pillars at the Straights of Gibraltar. This made Iaso with his braue Fleete of Argonantickes to saile into Cholchos, in hope of a perpetuall Trade for the Gold of that place with his Grecian Com∣modities. How came the Iles, the Iles of the Gen∣tiles to be peopled, but by Plantations transported vpon the charge of able and substantiall persons. Marseiles was ciuilized and inhabited with a Greeke Colony. From whence are we all come into these parts? We are not Natiues, but after many hands led into this Kingdome. Wee came from Saxony our selues, as the most of Italy doe descend from the Northerly parts of Germany. The Spaniards deriue their pedegrees from the runnagate Gothes, or from the Moores, who likewise glory to bee a remnant of the fugitiue Arabes. O what a shame is it vnto vs at this day, to see whole numbers of our English and Scottish disper∣sed abroad in Popish and Moorish Countries, tur∣ned Apostataes, and in time forgoing the memory of their naturall Mother-tongue, as of the tue Faith, wherein they were baptized! Now how easily might this monstrous and inhumane absur∣dity be preuented by a timely Plantation? To this end haue I and my Copartners labou∣red. But as we were laying the foundation, these Antiplanters enuying at those hopefull attempts like those which repined at the rebuilding of Ieru∣salem, would needs inioy the fruits of our labours, despoyling vs of our Stages, and the plaine plats of ground bounding on the Sea; and not thus con∣tent, they would cut downe a tree worth forty shillings, fit for a Mast, where a tree of two shil∣lings might serue their turne. Sometimes they would either of despite to the Planters, or in a wanton vnbrideled humour, set fire on the woods two or three miles together. We neuer gaine-said them to fish vpon our Coast, but on the contrary, we were very glad of the occasiō. Only we sought to curbe their in solencies, which committed these outrages. We endeuoured to hinder their wilfull casting their ballast into the harbours, which in small time will quickly decide this present contro∣uersie, when the harbours shall by this outragious abuse, bee choakt and dammed vp without any hope of recouery. As for the Trade of Furs, how can this be a grie∣uance more then it is in England, where the petty Lords of Mannors clayme a farre greater Iurisdi∣ction there, to enlarge their Forrests and games: yea and some haue obtained a Free Warren, that none whatsoeuer should hawke or hunt vpon their Lands, or within their Precincts. If this be allow∣ed in Old England, much more ought we to stand vpon out Royalties in New England, in lieu of our infinite charge and paines taken in our voyages, and setling there our new inhabitants. What Gentlemen of fashion will forsake their Country, except they shall haue a larger extent of com∣mand, and more hopes of benefit then at home? To suffer such barbarous insolencies to bee done on a mans Free-hold, cannot but trouble the mee∣kest man on the earth: yea, another Moses, ano∣ther Iob. To this I adde, how some of these An∣tiplanters led by an vnheard-of greedinesse of gaine, haue sold vnto the Sauages, Muskets, Fowling-Peeces, Powder, Shot, Swords, Arrow∣heads, and other Armes, wherewith the Sauages slew some of those Fishermen, which had so in∣considerately sold such dangerous wares to Infi∣dels. By which means they are now become dan∣gerous & formidable to the Planters themselues. And farre more fearefull would they haue proued vnto vs, if the King of Great Britain our Soueraign, had not strictly made a Proclamation to the contra∣ry, that no Subiect of his should presume to sel thē any such vnlawfull ware. Vp on the brute of which Proclamation, the Sauages being hopelesse euer to receiue of our Nation more Gunpowder; they very circumspectly sowed in the best cornefields they had all the Powder which remained, with full expectation to reape a goodly haruest thereof, as of Mastard or other seedes. Apollo according to his wonted manner, hauing paused and meditated on the Plaintiffes and Defendants allegations about one quarter of an houre: at last pronounced this definitiue sentence. Forasmuch as wee conceiue both this Plantation, and the Fishing Trade to be very ex∣pedient to Great Britaine: we order both of them, like Hippocrates Twinnes, to consociate together in brotherly amity, and to assist one another with∣out malicious emulation. That the Fishermen haue conuenient places for the drying of their Fish on the land, with as much woods as will serue for their fewell during their abode in that Country, and for their returne homewards by the way, and also as much woods as will build vp on repaire their Ships & Stages; prouided that the common sort of Marriners shall not of their owne heads, without their Master of the Ship, and one of the chiefe of the Planters be present, cut or cast down any woods, but what by them shall be seene fit for those necessary vses. Secondly, that none of the Fishermen shall throw their Ballast into the Har∣bours to deface the same. Thirdly, that for some few yeares, they shall not traffique with the Saua∣ges, but shall leaue the same to the Planters, vntill the Plantations be compleately strengthened, and of sufficient power to liue of themselues, and bee conueniently armed against those barbarous peo∣ple. Fourthly, that all such plats of plaine lands, neere to the Harbours, which the Planters shall from henceforth rid of woods, and make apt for Stages to dry fish vpon, shall belong to the Plan∣ters: And that all such places which the Fisher∣men haue already rid, and built Stages vpon, shall appertaine to them for euer. As also al such Stages, which they shall hereafter build for that purpose. In lieu of which priuiledges, euery Ship shall transport a Tunne of such prouisions which the Plantations want, receiuing for the same, tenne shillings, towards the fraught, and the price of the goods by them disbursed in England. Fiftly, that both the Planters and the Fishermen shall ioyne and suddenly assemble all their forces together with their best endeuours to expell Pirates, and their Countries enemies; if any arriue on that Coast, with intent to prey vpon eyther of them. Sixtly, if any dissention happen betwixt the Fi∣shermen and the Planters, the matter shall be com∣promitted to twelue mens arbitrement, sixe of the one side, and sixe of the other, and if they misse to accord the parties difference, then the chiefe per∣son in the Plantation, and the Master of the Ship, whereof the Fisherman is, to end the businesse as Vmpires and principall Iudges. CHAP. 6. Apollo moued to pitty vpon a Petition preferred vn∣to him by certaine Saylers Widowes, whose Husbands perished in the voyages vnder the East Indies Company, causeth foure famous Knights of Great Britain, Sir Francis Drake, Sir M in Furbisher, Sir Henry Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button, to signifie their opi∣nions, whereabout the best passage to the East Indies did lye. VPon the Feast day of Saint Marke the Euan∣gelist last past, 1626. as Apollo was confer∣ring with certaine Cosmographers, for the aduancing of the East Indy Trade, the Lady Pallas whispered his Maiestie in the eare, to admit some into that conference, which had beene principall Nauigators imployed for discoueries towards those Coasts. For said she, though speculation bee the most noble Science in Philosophy, yet for the atchieuement of a reall and beneficiall Trade, it serues to no other vse, then as a Preparatiue in Phi∣sicke to make the humours pliable and tractable for the insuing Purgation: the which notwith∣standing may proue erroneous and deceiueable, if it meetes with a malignant, stubborne, or peruerse matter. For who can by a coniecturall knowledge, pierce into more hidden occurrences? There is as much difference betwixt speculation and pra∣ctise, as is betwixt a clinicall scholler, discoursing of Countries by his Map or Globe on a Table, as a Mariner trauersing the Ocean, where oftentimes he meetes with such difficulties, that hee is forced to returne home, and to wait for a more seasona∣ble opportunity. Therefore if you meane to hold vp and continue this Company, it were good you sent for some choyse and well experienced Naui∣gators which may direct this businesse, associated with the Gentlemen aboue named. Apollo liked very well of this aduise, and pre∣sently caused these foure famous Knights to bee sent for, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Martin Furbisher, Sir Henry Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button. As soone as they were come into his Maiesties pre∣sence, he related vnto them, that vpon a Petition exhibited vnto him by many poore Widowes of the City of London, and of other Cities & Towns in Great Britaine, how their Husbands perished in their voyages to the East Indies, by the distempe∣rature of the climate, in passing so often vnder the Tropickes, and the burning Zones, they therfore de∣sired eyther that he should dissolue the East Indie Company, or finde out a more conuenient passage to these Countries, where the Spices grew, which their Country men wanted. Otherwise they must of necessity continue still vnmaried; or liue in dai∣ly feares to lose their succeeding Husbands, who for their reliefe would hazard their liues, as the others had formerly done. For such was their ine∣uitable Fate, they said, that none would aduen∣ture on Sailers Widowes, but men of the same vocation. Vpon which clamors of these distressed Creatures, his Maiestie being moued to pitty and commiseration, required them to yeeld their seue∣rall censures, by what passage the English Nation might traffique into those Lands of Spiceries with lesse perils and losses of Sailers. Sir Francis Drake first deliuered his opinion, that the moderne Cos∣mographers agreed vpon foure waies to the East Indies: Two imaginary, by the Northeast, which Pliny mentioned, Sir Hugh Willowby attempted, and the Hollanders prosecuted vpon the North of Muscouy to Noua Zembla, Waygate, and the Ri er Ob, but all in vaine: and by the North-west, which Sir Martin Furbisher first entred into, and Sir Tho∣mas Button sithence pursued, but without fortu∣nate successe. The other two waies to aile into the Lands and Ilands of Spices, were famous, which himselfe had past. The one through the Streights of Magellan, the other by the Cape of good Hope. Of these, he liked those of Magellan, and now the rather, for that Tierra del fuego, which is the South part of those Streights, is lately found out by certaine Hollanders, to be an Iland: And that himselfe had beene driuen by foule weather, as farre as 57. degrees of Southerly latitude, where he found some Ilands, and in all likelihood, an open passage about the 60. degree, which the Hollanders tried to be true, now stiling the same, Lameers Streights. This way hee approued lesse dangerous then the other, specially to the Molucca Ilands: so that they would begin their voyage a∣bout the end of August from England: that they might arriue there by the end of December, which falls out to be the first of Iune, or end of May, in these Streights. Sir Maurice Abbot con∣tradicted Sir Francis Drake, and said, that the greatest comfort in such long voyages, was to be sure of fresh victuals, which they could not bee assured of, by those Southwest Streights. To this Sir Francis Drake answered: that for Wood, Water, Fish and Fowle, they might haue enough on this side, and neere the Streights; that they might be relieued in distresse at the Riuer of Amazous by their Countrymen, where Captaine North, Captaine Parker, and Captaine Christmas had planted, whereof the two last liued there of late, foure years in despite of the Spaniards, whom they wearied out of the Country with the helpe of the Natiues, for all that they came with 1500. men to surprize them. Being past the Streights, they might haue fresh victuals in abundance at the Iland of Mocha in the height of 38. degree, which is subiect to the States of Arauco, deadly enemies to the Spamards, and but fiue or sixe leagues from that Centinent. Or else they may get some with ease at the Iland of Saint Maries, twenty or thirty leagues further. If the Trade be to the Moluccaes, they may spare two moneths voyage this way; and also they shall meet with Salomons Iles, and many rich places vpon the Coast of New Guinea, which affoord plenty of victuals, Gold, Pearles, and Spice. Sir Henry Middleton much misliked this Southwest way, because of the vncertainty of prouision, and the solitarinesse of the voyage; whereas hee was sure all the way by the Cape of good Hope, at Sancta Helena, Soldana, at the Iland of Madagascar, to be stored with necessaries vntill he came to his iourneyes end. Further, hee said, as also the East India Company confirmed the very same to be true, that they had small doings now to the Moluccaes: For their Trade lay about laua maior, where they had a Factory at Bantam, and to Serrat in Cambaia, to Sumatra, and the Persian Gulfe. After some altercation betwixt these last afore∣specified, Apollo commanded Sir Martin Furbisher to declare his opinion touching the Northwest passage, which hee accordingly did, prouing that the most part of Meta incognita, where hee had beene, seemed by all probability to bee broken lands and Ilands, and that if he had had sufficient store of prouision, hee would haue aduentured through in despite of the mountaines of Ice, which threatned to immure him in. And that hee much maruelled at their slownesse of late, which finding the passage cleere and open in a farre more tem∣perate climate, then where he had beene, did not∣withstanding misse to finde it out. Sir Thomas Button much incensed to bee taxed for slownesse, who had busied himselfe all the daies of his life in warrelike actions, hauing beene at the sacking of Cales, and imployed in Ireland against the Spaniards, in Hispaniola, at the voyage of Al∣giere, and many other Sea voyages, for answere said, That if Sir Martin Furbisher had wintred in the 58. degree in America, which experience taught to be as the 63. degree of Europes coldnes, hee would not haue beene so briefe to impute slownesse vnto him. As for the Passage, hee verily beleeued as Sir Martin did, it lay open. And that hee would haue done his endeuour to haue sailed through. For in Hudsons Bay, hee saw two very likely passages towards the Northwest, to enter in; but that hee was otherwise authorized and com∣manded to goe on Southwestwards to the bottome of Hudsons Bay, so that hee durst not but follow the tenor of his Commission. Yet notwithstanding he hoped, that he had not spent his time in vaine, during his voyage in those angry climates. For first he discouered, that those Seas could not bee sailed through, but in Iune, Iuly, and August, be∣ing alwaies subiect to foggs, ice, stormes, and sud∣den windes. The sunne seldome seene, so that the best Nauigator can hardly obserue the certaine height thereof. Onely his chiefest comfort during his abode there, was, that the dayes were very long, with very short nights: though otherwise the want of cleernesse to obserue either sunne or starre, were able vtterly to ouerthrow the whole voyage. Further, he noted, that Trumpets might not be spared, but most necessary to be had of such as passe in those Seas. For if two ships went toge∣ther, they would quickly lose one another by rea∣son of the thicke mist, though they went so neere as they might hallow one to the other. Likewise, he said, that shirts of male might not be spared, for feare of the sauages arrowes out of some ambusca∣do: Or else thicke leather Targets made of Buffe, as the Spaniards vse. To this hee added, that by experience hee found another necessary note, which hee wished all such as were imployed in these remote Enterprizes to beare in minde, to carry with them good tooles, as well for repay∣ring of their Ships, as to dig on the land, if they suffer shipwracke: And withall, the fittest engines which can bee deuised for weighing of shipping vpon such occasions; and in any case a couple of Crabs to be brought along with them in these vn∣knowne Discoueries, for the hoising and landing of their Ships, or other heauy necessaries, as Artil∣lery, Timber, &c. Also, that the Discouerer should marke the set of the Tide. For whensoeuer he loseth his strong Tide, or findes ground in 100 fathomes, let him rest assured, that he goes out of his direct course, for the finding of this hopefull passage. To conclude, Sir Thomas Button deliue∣red two notes more of great consequence for the preseruation of the Discouerers healths and liues, which Apollo better liked then all the former Dis∣courses; whereof the one was, that hee obserued Aqua vita, Sacke, and such hot liquors, to become most hurtfull to his men in the cold Winter, and on the other side, small drinke and Barly water most soueraine to maintaine them in health. The other obseruation was, that the iuyce of th se ten∣der branches or sprigs of trees which flourished fresh and greene in the Winter, out-daring the bitter blasts, and withstanding the extremity of the frosts, being pressed out, and ministred to the sicke, did miraculously restore them to their health, And the meanes of his first knowledge thereof, proceeded by seeing of the multitudes of Partrid∣ges, which fed and liued thereon all the Winter, to become fat and plumpe. CHAP. 7. Apolloes Censure of Sir Thomas Buttons voyage to the Northwest Passage. His Directions for the preseruation of health in fro∣sty seasons, and for the preuenting of the Scuruy. An Elegy in their commendations which aduentu∣red their persons for the discouery of the afore∣said Passage. APollo seemed much delighted with these narrations of Sir Thomas Button; and to let the vertuous of Parnassus know some∣what more of these remarkeable euents, hee made this discourse: How many famous Captaines here haue I admitted into my Court, which neuer entred into these hidden and magisteriall secrets of nature? Nay, how many wise Philosophers bee there here graced with my fauours, which vnder∣stand not these wonders of naturall effects? This Gentleman hath sufficiently performed his part in the discouery of the Northwest passage, conside∣ring the power limited vnto him by his Commissi∣on, which hee might not with safety transgresse. Yet I could wish such as bee in authority in assigning the like Commissions hereafter, to adde that Clause, which King Henry the eight of Eng∣land sometimes vsed to enable his Generals with, that if that seruice proued disastrous and vnfortu∣nate, notwithstanding the former words of the Commission, they should preserue the Honour of their King and Country by some braue exploit of their owne proiecting. For many occurrences may, like rubbes, light in their way, which the cleerest Eyes of State could not possibly foresee. Sometimes the Enemy may haue a siluer bridge by slye intelligencers into his Neighbours Land. Sometimes a Commander may meet with a good booty at Sea, though he were beaten off from the Land. Or if one place be strongly barricadoed, hee may finde another most easily to be wonne. What ouerthrew and vtterly dispersed the inuincible Ar∣mada in 1588. but the precise relye, which the Spanish Admirall stood vpon in regard of his Com∣mission limited by the Councell of Spaine? Let this suffice to excuse Sir Thomas Button for his not entring into one of the two passages, which he suspected to crowne the Discouerers voyage with eternall fame. And now to enter into the lat∣ter points of those secrets, which he mentions to haue tried, so vsefull for his peoples health; know this, O ye that study Physicke, that as Hippocrates wrote, mens inward parts, specially the stomacke, is hotter in Winter then in Summer. Looke in an extreame frosty Winter, how all the sap and ver∣tue of Plants and Hearbs, shoote inwardly, and descend into the root, running thither as to their sanctuary, refuge, and last helpe in nature. Euen so stands it with the body of man, which for ve∣getation and vigorous constitution, may in some sort be compared to a Plant. In Summer, the heat and radicall moysture is dispersed here and there, vp and downe, and through all the parts of the body, so that the heat in the stomacke is of a mild oily warmth, and at that time more truely natu∣rall, then in the winter. For Experience teacheth, and Anatomists confirme it, that in the winter, chiefly in frosty weather, mans liueliest heate set∣leth it selfe in the stomacke, neere the heart, the center and root of life, the other parts being op∣pressed with cold. There likewise it will beginne quickly to inflame in frosty seasons. When the raw ayre gets into the body at the mouth, and at the pores, or at such time, when these pores of the skinne and outward superficies become thick∣ned, whereby the spirits may not haue their free euaporation. Hence grow oppilations and obstru∣ctions; and consequently the Scuruy, being aided on by the meseraicall veines, full of putrified dam∣pish blood, or by the melancholike spleen, swolne with too much windy nourishment. For the aba∣ting of which infirmities, moyst opening medi∣cines of a biting nature, cooling and piercing liquors, somewhat of a milky mildnesse, and the iuyce of springing hearbs, must bee regarded by a wise Phisitian, and preferred before strong liquors and fiery Drinkes, which commonly are too too binding. I doe therefore much commend this Knight for this carefull obseruation, as for the discouering of those tender Plants which Iaques Cartier applaudes to be so soueraigne against the Scuruy, and called Anneda, by the Sauages of Ca∣nada. But now of late yeares, this precious Plant hath beene sought after by Champleine and other Frenchmen, albeit without successe; vntill this Gen∣tleman renewed the memorie therof. And most fa∣mous had he yet been, if he had transported hither some Setsor Slips of these powerful Plants, which by this time might haue increased to succour many an honest mans life distressed by this hidden & tre∣cherous Guest. I haue spoken the more largely of this sicknesse, because our moderne Practitioners in Phisicke should take this obseruation for a watch∣word, that most of the new diseases, Agues, pu∣tride Feuers, and such sicknesses as spring in the winter or in the beginning of the Spring, they be but waiting-Maids to this traiterous Lady; & for this cause, let them beginne their Cure with the Scuruy, and with the cleansing of the Bloud, and the rest will vanish away, as it were by miracle. As soone as Apollo had ended this speech, hee charged Hippocrates, Galen, Aegineta, and other famous Phisicians, to take care ouer all the English Sailers, which from thenceforth, should hazard their liues to the Indies. He likewise commanded the East Indies Company to be more bountifull to the poore Widowes, whose Husbands chanced to miscarry in their seruice. Lastly, his Maiestie cau∣sed the London Merchants to ioyne together for the prosecuting further of the Northwest passage, and for the honour of those braue spirits, which had already aduentured their persons in the disco∣uery, to ingraue on a brazen Table these verses following, and the same to place as a Frontispice on the Delphicke Palace: Orbis in Occiduâ latitat via parte sub Arcto, Ducit ad Eoum qu magis apta mare. Dux Frobisherus, Dauis, Hudson, et inclitus ausis Buttonus validis hanc petiere viam. Cambria non tantum, sed et Anglia laudibus effert Te, Buttone, suis; aequiparátque D ako. De quot te memorem saluum euasisse periclis? Sint testes Indus, Maurus, Iērnus, Iber. Non glomerata tibi Glacies imperuia ferro, Non Hyemis longae nix numerosa nocet: Quin tunc vlterius transisses, altera naui; Obuia succedens sireleuasset onus: Albioné mque nouam nobis incognita Meta Tum benc vulgasset per fretanostramaris. Neere to the Pole, there lurkes within the West, A shorter way to saile into the East. Braue Furbisher, Danis, and bold Hudson Sought out this way with the valiant Button. Not onely Wales, but England rings his name, And with great Drake compares our Buttons fame Though Ireland, Spaine, India, and Affrick rage, To beare the brunts of his stout Pilgrimage: Yet they will prize him more, when more they know How he endur'd a winter deep with' Snow. For eight moneths space, besides the Icy hills, Which Natures eares with strange amazemēt fils. And if supplies had come in his distresse, New Pillars he, like those of Hercules, Had raisd, but with Plus vltra in the place, Where Drakes new Albion waites for Britaines race. CHAP. 8. The Merchants of Lisbone doe complaine on the English and Hollanders, for trading into the East Indies for Spices, Drugs, and other Com∣modities. Apollo reiecteth their complaints, and aduiseth, how they may saile thither with lesser inconueniences, then heretosore. APollo hauing giuen order to the Inhabi∣tants of Great Britaine, to set forwards some Shippes for the discouery of the North west passage: word was presently brought to the Portingals, that his Maiestie had interessed the Protestants in the Trade of Spiceries. Where∣upon the City of Lisbone sent to Parnassus foure of their most substantiall Citizens, where being arri∣ued, they made meanes by Osorius one of their learned Bishops, to haue a full Audience of their matter the next Court day, which fell out on the fift of Iune last, 1626. as Menante the grand Post-master deliuered the last weeke at Paris. But Mercurius Gallobelgicus affirmeth otherwise, that this weighty cause was discussed on the ninth of Iune. Such is the disparity of iudgements, and inequality of reports, that wee cannot rightly be informed by any of these Currents concerning those passages, which happen in our neerest times. How much lesse then shall we credit Historiogra∣phers of elder ages, which haue left vs the occur∣rences of many memorable affaires, which ought to serue as mirrours to posterity? Howso∣euer, most true it is, that the East Indy Cause was decided before the sunne entred into the Tropick of Cancer, in this Moneth of Iune last. The ground of the Plaintiffes suit was fixed most vpon the Di∣uision, which Pope Alexander the sixt made be∣twixt the House of Castile, and the House of Por∣tingall, about 120. yeares past, that all the whole world then newly discouered, or to bee discoue∣red, should equally be shared betwixt them both; the East Indies to belong vnto the Portingals, and the West Indies to the Castilians; the same to haue and to hold to either of the said Nations, their Factors, and Agents for euer warranted contra omnes gentes. Vnder colour of which authenticke Patent, they freely inioyed the same, vntill the bold English and Hollanders lately intr ded into their Liberties, and haue vsurped many of the Coasts in those rich Countries. Apollo not wont suddenly without mature deliberation to order causes of such high consequences, sent for Peter Martyr the Author of the Decades, and asked him, how that Partition became ratified? Peter Martyr now a member of the Corporation of Par∣nass s, and not daring to conceale the verity of that businesse from the sincere Head of the vertu∣ous Society, answered, that indeed such a Capitu∣lation was treated of betwixt those Princes, and that iust, as the said Commissioners intended to diuide the whole world by certaine Lines and imaginary points in the Globe, they were quite put out of their agreements by a Knauish Boy, who at that time accidentally bathed himselfe in a riuer neere vnto them, as they debated of these Lines, and hearing the Commissioners varying and wrangling about the drawing of these new Lines, he turned his backe side vnto them, and wished them to forme the same equally, as if they should delineat from the Center of his Ano, and so taking the same for a patterne, the one halfe should appertaine to the one, and the other halfe to the other. Vpon which ridiculous interrupti∣on, the Commissioners being abashed and asha∣med, that a Childe should touch so seriously vpon their Masters ambition, they departed, leauing the partition vnperfect. Apollo perceiuing that the Portingals drift was to ingrosse the whole Trade of Spiceties as a Mo∣nopoly preiudiciall to others of the Christian Pro∣fession, vtterly misliked their a spiring and greedy purposes, and after some bitter exprobration of their Couetousnesse, hee framed this speech vnto them: In going about to appropriate the whole world to your selues, yee seeke to ecclipse the power of the Omnipotent, to forestall the wonder∣full Art of Nauigation, and by keeping backe the Protestants, to let the Mahumetans still to ioyne with you in this beneficiall Trade. I confesse your Nation deserues to be commended for your dis∣coueries of the Cape of Good Hope vnder Vasco de Gama. But afterwards, for you to ingrosse into your hands more Coasts and Trades then yee are able to mannage, is meere auarice, and a wrong to your Creator, who happily by these your Neighbours aduentures, may in time to come discouer as yet more vnknowne Countries, and settle in those remote places the word of God, euen beyond New Guiny, where more Noble Nations doe yet reside then yee haue found out. What greater glory can arriue to this part of the world, then to search into the vttermost parts of those Southerne Regions? In all ciuill Countries, the Inhabitants must as well looke into the Artificiall waies of acquiring wealth, as into the naturall meanes abounding in the places of their abode. This consists in Corne, Cattell, Wooll, Lead, Tinne, or in the like Commodities, which are or∣dinarily and without much Art deriued from their natiue Seates. The other depends on their in∣dustry and more curious skill to work vpon those materialls, as by their Wooll to Compose Stuffes of Serges, Perpetuanaes, Paropous, or the like; or else by Commerce and Traffique to exchange some of their superfluous wares with Forraigners, for some of their superfluities. Now in trading to these remote Countries, questionlesse some of these goods are exported to counteruaile those Wares, which Strangers might otherwise, to the preiudice of the Kingdome, import and bring in. Before the Londoners and the Hollanders did set out Fleetes to the East Indies, the Turkes vsed to share with the Portingalls in those Commodities which now the Protestants trade for. Heretofore they paid at Lisbone, Aleppo, or Alexandria for eue∣ry pound of Pepper, two shillings, whereas now they pay but three pence in the East Indies, for Mace foure shillings sixe pence, which now stands them but in nine pence. Cloues at Lisbone or A∣leppo, foure shillings sixe pence, and now but tenne pence. Nutmegs there two shillings, here but foure pence. Indico foure shillings, here twelue pence the pound. Likewise they paid for raw Silkes out of Persia, twelue shillings, but now they pay at the Persian Gulfe, not eight shillings the pound. Whereby a good Commonwealths∣man may obserue, what Gaine there may re∣dound to Great Britaine, if this rich Trade be gra∣ced and followed. And if they transport no coine out of this Kingdome, but Spanish Reals, Dolers, or outlandish monyes, carying also some of their Tinne, Carzeyes, and Broad cloathes, to the Persian Gulfe, where they are best vendible; there is no question, but this Kingdome will become much inriched. For the sound of Denmarke, the Hans-townes, and France will returne vs more money, then they haue need to bring into the Indies. But first I could wish Aesculapius to call a con∣sultation of his best experimented Physicians, and to lay downe a dietary for their healths, for a Nor∣therne man taken out of his naturall Element, and placed but for a small while in those fiery Cli∣mates, will quickly droope. And now in the inte∣rim vntill this consultation bee concluded, out of the experience of such as trauelled into those par∣ched Countries, I wish them to ballast their ships with Turneps, as a Defensatiue against the Scuruy, to carry along with them the salt or iuyce of Scur∣uygrasse well sodden, and stopt vp in glasses, and a∣boue all, the iuyce of Lemons. Item, to bring along with them, good store of White wine Vineger to mingle with water, a li∣quor which preserued Sir Francis Drake in his long voyage round about the world. Item, to vse Cider, and such cooling drinkes, more then Wines or Aqua vitae; sauing at times of excessiue heat, when the body becomes fainty, and the spirits are withdrawne into the outward parts. Then, a little draught of their hot waters, or a cup of Sacke, will refresh nature, although they sweat neuer so much. For it is found out by experience, that the moisture which lies within the body, is exhaled and forced into the exteriour parts, and that the inward part then forsaken of that moist comfortable humour, and being cold, gladly receiueth a sudden restoratiue to repaire those annoyances, which the violence of that vn∣usuall heat hath extracted. Item, to feed betimes in the morning, and not at noone, when the Sunne is vehemently hot, or else late in the euenings, once or twise a day, as their stomackes serue them. To winde vp this discourse in a word, I exhort our East India Merchants, to beare in minde these few verses: If Englishmen, which Indias Coast doe range, May not haue Spice for English goods exchange: Farre be it from a Christian to transport Our Treasure hence into an Heathnish Port. 'Tis better with plaine cheere to make our Feasts, Then with repentance late to welcome Guests. While these A isoes I to England giue, The Hollanders I meane not to forgiue. Beware, lest whilst great bulkes of Ships yee raise In hope of Gaine, yee reape not more dispraise. How many men by Feuers to our cost, Bred of Suns heat and salt meates haue we lost? Cùm sine Thesauri massâ, nec Aromata vendat India, nec mutet quae sua Terra refert: Absit, vt hunc Belli Neru m Mercator auarus Tranferat, a t ditet Regna inimica Deo. Quā satius foret absque dapūprandere patellis, Excidio Patriae quam saturare gulam? Dum tibi vaticinor, non Belgis parco: cauete, Ne Nautas, moles amplific ando ratum, Diminuatis opum spe; manducare salita Accelerat rabiem Sole calente Febris. CHAP. 9. Apollo sends for some of the Merchants Aduentu∣rers of euery seuerall Company out of Great Britaine, graceth them with his countenance, and promiseth them the continuance of his Fa∣uours. AFter this businesse of the East India Trade was thus recommended and blest by his Maiestie, with all auspicious graces, bonis auibus, and with sailes of comfort velis secundis committed to Neptunes protection: His Imperiall Maiestie sent for the other Aduenturers to for∣raigne Countries out of Great Britaine, some of the Moscouy Company, some of the Turky Mer∣chants, some of the French Trade, of the Sound, of the Dutch, of the Greenland Company, some of the Virginian, of the Summer Ilands, of the Riuer of Amazons, of Guiny, and Binny, and of o∣ther Aduenturers, he caused some to appeare be∣fore him, charging them to follow their Trades without any more feare of Moorish or Dunkirk Pirates. And particularly he charged the Aduen∣turers into these last recited Coasts to pursue their enterprizes, to saue their Country that wastfull expence of Tobacco, which yearely would bee ex∣ported out of their Country, if they did plant that weed in those hot places, specially at the A∣mazons, and at the vppermost part of the Riuer of Gambra in Guiny about the 13. Degree, not a Mo∣neths saile out of England, they should reape a rich haruest of Tobacco; besides in this last, they might get Hides, Elephants teeth, Cotton yarne, yea, and perhaps meet with another Golden Fleece, if it be true, as some report, that the King of Morocco hath his fine Gold in exchange of Sale, from People inhabiting not farre from this Riuer of Gambra. All these hopefull Proiects did his Ma∣iestie lay before our Britaines, exhorting them to become more industrious, to cast by the hideous coat of Pouerty, and with an vndaunted courage to saile into the vttermost Ocean. Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos, Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes. CHAP. 10. Apollo to make the Golden Fleece a complete Ca∣tholike Restoratiue to the State of Great Bri∣taine, commands the seuen wise men of Greece to declare out of their experience, some more meanes for the inriching of that State: which they seuerally performe. NOtwithstanding all these profitable pro∣iects, and more then reall appearances of the Golden Fleece, Apollo in another Assem∣bly held at Pindus by reason of the violent Sum∣mers heat, which infested the populous City of Parnassus, in a Speech reiterating that as yet the Scales were not eq all, for the benefit of Great Britaine; his Imperiall Highnesse concluded, that the Golden Fleece should be a Catholike Restora∣tiue as well for the Inlanders and the Sea Coasts, as for the Plantations to bee aduanced forwards; and therefore hee wished the seuen wise men of Greece to repaire their reputations lately lost in missing to reforme the world, and to deuise some new Remedies and Commodities for the perpe∣tuall good of that Monarchy, which hee laboured to preserue as the apple of his eye. Byas was chosen first to signifie his Opinion; who discoursed in this manner. I haue trauelled ouer all this spacious Iland, and by a curious sur∣uay, I found more Parkes for Deere inclosed in this Country, then in all Christendome besides. I found many Commons, Mountaines, Heath, and wast grounds, which might be better conuerted and seuered for bearing of Corne, Grasse, and Hay, wherein the labour will quickly defray the charge, and mightily inrich the Natiues. In Lin∣colneshire about the Washes and Marshes, there may many new habitations be erected in imitati∣on of the Low-County men, who haue wonne from the Sea, as the Venetians before them their fa∣mous City, more vnlikely grounds then any I saw in Lincolneshire. A Patterne wherefore let them take from Sir Hugh Middleton, that renowned Barronet, which makes London for euer obliged vnto him for her water, a piece of worke eterni∣zing his Name so farre, that a Spanish Embassador vpon the sight thereof rauished with admiration, protested, that if such an enterprise had beene at∣chieued in Spaine, his King had ennobled him with the Title of a Count. This industrious Gen∣tleman, together with Sir Ambrose Theloall, pur∣suing on the like profitable workes, recouered a∣boue 1000 acres of Land from the Sea, in the Ile of Wight, worth a thousand pound a yeare. And if others would follow their vertuous examples, doubtlesse the euent would crowne their designes and cost with prosperous successe. If Commons were husbanded and tilled, by such inclosures the Commoners should reape that commodity seueral∣ly in 20. Acres, which they could not in 100. while they lay confused. A little Good is better mana∣ged, t en much disorderly inioyed. Some men will get more by their Gardens and Orchards, then others by their Plow Lands. How many Mountaines, Heaths, Wasts, and Furzy grounds might be conuerted to better vses then they be at this day? Yea, and many thefts, robberies, and o∣ther intollerable abuses, might bee preuented by these inclosures. Here Bias ended; when Pittacus began to dis∣couer his Plot. Well hath my Collegiat Bias mani∣fested a matter of great import, beneficially ten∣ding to restore Great Britaine to prosperity. But what shall the Inhabitants afterwards doe, when the genuine and natiue vertue, which now is ver∣dant, of a liuely saltish vigour, spicke and spanne new, what shall they doe fiue or sixe yeares hence, when they haue throughly gotten the maiden∣head of these wastes, and wearied all the youthfull graine of these grounds with bearing of Corne? Will they feed and sucke still on the blood of their decaied veines? The best grounds will grow out of heart in a short time, vnlesse they be holpen by Art. I confesse the subiect, which I intend now to commend, is sordide, rude, and more beseeming a Clownish Coridon, then one of my education in this magnifique Court; yet neuerthelesse, because the same serues to inrich his Maiesties Territories in these Westerne Coasts, which hee holds as deere as his Thessalian Tempe, I will disclose the secret meanes to renew the life of ouer-wearied Lands. There is no ground but hath Marle, ei∣ther neere the superficies of it, or deeper in the wombe of the earth abounding. This Marle in some Countries, by the reuolution of time, is tur∣ned to lime, or limestone, and this lime in some places is growne to a finer mould, euen to chalke, which is the perfection of all Marle. Where none of these abound, nature hauing not as yet wrought her selfe to her fulnesse; I wish euery Landed man with an Augur, boarer, or piercing worme, to search and try in the deepest part of his earth, where the same lieth hid; for surely shallow or thicke, he may finde Marle vpon his Land. If it be oily, vnctuous, and clammy, then it is fat and rich. It is of sundry colours, and different likewise in the goodnesse. For there is a yellow Marle, a Red, a Grey, and Blew; all which are good, if they be oily and slippery as Sope, and mixed with earth; as also weake, if it be incorporated with gra∣uell, stone or sand. The red Marle is the worst, vnlesse it be found to lye neere the blew. For the best is the blew in operation, and will last longest. Next vnto it is the yellow, and the grey better then the red. All which may bee searched after in the veines of the earth. Hauing met with it, let the Husband man glory, that hee hath met with trea∣sure, able to supply his owne and his Countries necessities. Onely let him take this for a Caueat, that at the first marling of his ground, hee must look he plow not with broad and deepe furrowes, but narrow, lest he throw his Marle into the dead mould. For the nature of Marle is to send all the goodnesse downewards, and for that cause it must not be buried too deepe, but still kept aloft on the vpper mould. And in this it differeth much from Dung and Mucke, which spend their vertue vp∣ward, and will ascend by their misty vapour springing vp to the face of the ground, though they be buried deeper then they ought to bee. I could admonish men oftener to hearten their out∣worne grounds with other remedies, as with the soile of old Ditches, or with sand, or to transferre and temper fresh earth brought from lay grounds, with their ouerspent mould, as they vse in Deuon∣shire. Or to adde tough clay to the tender sandy, for the one is life to the other being so incorpo∣rated, specially moist with the dry. But I hope this being practised, their Corne fields will pro∣duce sufficient increase, so that they shall not be∣come too often beholding to the Sound of Den∣marke for Rie, as commonly heretofore euery fiue yeares they haue beene. Periander after this speech, produced his opini∣on: Seeing we haue, like Moles, begunne to treat of earthly Commodities to inrich this decayed Countrie, let me exhort them to plant Orchards, the benefits I dare well say, will counteruaile the French Vineyards if they be rightly followed, and need but small pruning and looking to after the first planting. By this way they shall haue Cider, which with a little helpe of some Spice, will goe beyond most of their Wines, and consequently, saue aboue sixe hundred thousand pound a yeare, which now most lauishly are consumed by them, euen to the cutting and ending of their fatall threed. Already some discreet and circumspect Landlords haue couenanted & conditioned with their Tenants, that they shall euery yeare during their Leases, plant fruit Trees: which if others will imitate, not onely wines will grow in lesse vse, but malt will be spared out of the superfluity of their store, to furnish the needy, and supply Naui∣gations and Plantations abroad. As soone as Periander had done, Thales the Mi∣lesian tooke his turne and spake: Many small pie∣ces of meat put into the Pot, make fat pottage, and as the other Prouerbe implieth, many a small makes a great, and mountaines were made of small motes or atomes, which I alleadge in my defence at this present, for though I cannot promise Gol∣den Mountaines to augment the State of Great Britaine, yet I dare auow, that I shall reueale one Proiect which shall spare them sixty thousand pounds a yeare now of meere necessity transpor∣ted into France and Spaine for Salt. Why may not they erect good store of Salt-houses in England neere those places, where Coales are digged, about New-Castle, in Lancashire, and in Wales, where late∣ly an Alderman of London had one, which suppli∣ed Bristow, and those Westerne parts with very fine Salt? I know not what makes men so backward now adaies, vnlesse they are made to beleeue by the Spirit of Errour, that a bare naked Faith will iustifie them with doing any deedes of Charity. For besides their yearely gaine, they may doe ve∣ry meritorious deedes equall to Almes giuing, which as S. Iames writes, will couer a multitude of sinnes, in setting the poore at worke. If they think it much to erect so many Salt houses, as will serue all the Ilanders, by reason of the deare rate of Coales to be conuerted for other vses, let them set vp some in Newfound land, some in New England, and others in New Scotland, where they may haue plenty of woods. And it is knowne, that Wood fire without conuerting Wood into Charcoale, wil serue to boile Salt as wel as Coal. There Salt be∣ing at hand to be had for the Fishermens vse, it will saue at the least twenty thousand pound, vnto the English, which now with the tunnage and the Salt Discouery of Newfound Land. they are forced to be at charge. Captain Whithorne in his book of the Cōmodities of that Country, among other exceeding good notes by him there deliuered, writes, that one Panne will make aboue 20. bushels of good Salt in euery 24. houres, one∣ly with mans labour and the Salt water; and not, as some doe vse to make Salt vpon Salt; which so there made, shall not stand in three pence the bu∣shell to those that prouide in that manner: Wher∣as Salt now stands them in twenty pence at the least euery bushell. And as the said Captaine Whit∣borne further affirmeth, that Salt thus orderly boy∣led, doth much better preserue Fish, whether it be Ling, Codde, or Herring, and keepe it sweeter, then if the same were seasoned with any other kind of Salt. Yea, and Fish preserued with this white fine Salt, will sell dearer in Spaine or Italy, then if it were salted with the other muddy Salt. After Thales, Chilon began his relation in this wise. I thinke there is money enough in the Land, if people would bring it forth to take the Aire, that Aire which God made common for the poore as the rich. What a deale of Plate is there in London, and in rich mens houses, which some had rather goe directly into Hell, then to sell it for the common good. It were fit that such creatures had Tutors, or as the Ciuilians say, Curators to man∣nage their Estates for them, seeing they haue not the benefit of reason to distinguish what is conue∣nient for mortall men, which must suddenly re∣turne to the dust of the earth, and then whose shall these Goods be, which these Fooles haue prepared with curses, & disquietnes of mind? If Commissi∣oners and Presenters were vpon their oathes, to sound & search into euery mans ability; Subsidies might be trebled on some, and the needier sort eased. But in vaine doe I speake of Tutors, Com∣missioners, and Iuries, if Merchants bee not lookt vnto, that they transport not Money, Plate, or Bullion, as the Statutes of Edward the 3. Richard the 2. Henry the 4. Henry the 6. Henry the 7. and Edward the 6. doe all strictly prohibite. Erasmus in King Henry the 8. daies, was like to feele the se∣uerity of those Lawes, if that Magnificent King had not highly fauoured him. For when this fa∣mous Scholler thought to take shipping to goe into the Low Countries at Grauesend, the Kings Officers con iscated 300. pound which hee had gotten in London, by the liberality of the King, Sir Thomas Moore, and other fauourers of Learning in those daies; so that poore Erasmus, like another Pauper Henricus, was constrained to returne backe to London, where after that hee had bewailed his mishap to Sir Thomas Moore, and other friends of his, hee was aduised by them to repaire to the Chamber of Presence, when this noble King sate at dinner. The King wondred to see Erasmus, who had taken his leaue of him aboue a fortnight be∣fore. And thereupon merily askt him, what winde draue him backe againe to his Court, whom hee imagined to haue beene at Rotterdam? Erasmus shewed the Case, how his Maiesties Officers vsed him. The King vnderstanding the matter, bestow∣ed on him 60. pound towards his stay, and wrote to the Searchers, commending their dutifull care, that they should repay Erasmus all his money. Many Noblemen also being present, incouraged by the Kings liberality, presented Erasmus with good gifts, which with the Kings, amounted to 300. pound more; so that hee returned home into his Country with twise so much more money, then he brought with him into England. And from thence forth in all Companies, applauded the iu∣stice and liberality of the English Nation. If Offi∣cers would watch to doe their indeauours for the seizing of Coine, which may be transported yeare∣ly in o Forraigne parts, doubtlesse money would become more plentifull within the Land. Here Chilon ended. And Cleobulus framed his speech in this manner: So great is some mens Couetousnesse at this time, that they had rather hazard their soules to hell, rather then to imploy their money for the honour and weale of their Country. They will rather keepe it by them, then lend part to releeue their dearest friends. And I know not how to compell these wretches to bring it abroad, vnlesse the Common-wealth would order Tutors ouer them, as my Brother Chilon aduised, grounding the equity of this Order vpon the anti∣ent writ, de Lunatico inquirendo. For surely a spi∣rit possesseth them worse then that, which mad∣ded Saul. There is no other way to draw money out of misers hands, but by hope of profit. Since the Statute enacted in King Iames time, for 8. in the 100. money is farre more scarce. And there∣fore in my iudgement, if that Act were repealed, there might insue a twofold benefit. First, money would become more plentifull. And then if an Act were made, that Vsurers might be tolerated to take 9. pound in the 100. pound, for one yeares vse, & that the party which borrowes, should pay 20. shillings more to make it vp 10. pound, as in former time, and this last to be conuerted towards some meritorious work, mony would waxe more abundant, and no man would grudge to pay 20. shillings for a vertuous purpose. And perhaps the same would lessen the exaction of the rest in the mercie of God. To this furtherance of money I would haue those Brokers and extorting Iackes re∣ceiue corporall punishment, who shall by indirect tricks and monthly bills exact vpon pawnes more interest, then euer the Iew of Malta tooke of his deadly enemies. After him the Lawmaker Solon discoursed, as fol∣loweth: I haue heard this day sundry pretty pro∣iects pronounced by my Colleagues for the en∣riching of Great Britaine. But if all these fall out happily, and the Deuill still continue to sow his seeds of dissention in mens hearts to goe to Law one with another for a Goats haire by the procure∣ment of Makebates, and the aduice of some coue∣tous Lawiers, to what end shall his Maiestie spend his time to succour and supply them with money, and they presently after to bestow the same on others for the molesting of Innocents. This were to make our great Appollo accessary and priuie to iniurious dealings. First, let my good Ilanders weed out, or at least wise restraine the in∣solencies, deceits, and equiuocations of Lawiers, and then seeke for remedies to heale their indispo∣sitions. Shall the mild Comforter of humane soules minister an occasion of scandall to reprobates, and fewell to their iniquities? If they get wealth, men, as I see, haue not the wit to keepe it. Therefore I thinke fit, and it is a treasure inualuable, to tame the Lawiers, before any more riches be giuen, as swords in mad mens hands, to offend the seruants of God. What intolerable knaueries haue beene exercised of late yeares by fellowes of this ranke against honest men, yea against whole Countries, whose blood, like that of Abell, doth cry for ven∣geance? I know one poore Lordship in Wales which was persecuted by them, and forced for foure thousand pounds to compound for their na∣tiue freehold, which by Records found in the Tower their Ancestors had enioyed 300. yeares, and all vpon that farre fetcht maxime, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, that no prescription of time might barre the Prince of his Right? And if the wise King Iames of blessed memory had not set a period to their insinuations, by limiting 60 yeares to his titulary demand, God knowes to what euent their dangerous positions would haue issued vnto? It is an easie thing for a man to find a staffe to beat a dog, and for a cunning Lawier with the crochet of his braine to circumuent harmelesse people. How many thousand pounds are yearely spent in Wales alone to maintaine suites at Law, which might be well spared, if the fountaine were dam'd vp? Let the King of Great Britaine shut vp the spring, which enuenomes multitudes of his poore subiects, who grone vnder their burthen, worse then the Israelies vnder the bondage of Egypt, and Wales alone shall saue aboue 40. thousand pounds a yeare, which row they consume, besides their dear time not to be redeemed, in vnnecessary suits at Law. CHAP. 11. Apollo not throughly contented with the proiects of the seuen wise men of Greece, commands others, viz. Cornelius Tacitus, Cōminaeus, the Lord Cromwell, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Secretary Walsingham, Sir Thomas Smith, and Willi∣am Lord Burleigh, who were knowne to be farre more Politicke Statesmen, to deliuer their opi∣nions, how Great Britaine might be inriched. APollo liked reasonable well of the inuenti∣ons demonstrated by the Seuen wise men of Greece. But for all that, some of them hee deemed to be more theoricall then really practick; and therefore He caused some of his vertuous At∣tendants, which had been famous for their Actiue diligence in managing matters of State, to disco∣uer more proiects, whereby Great Britaine might attaine to a present fruition of Treasure. For, as his Imperiall Maiestie said, Philosophers being Cli∣nickes, and retired to close chambers delighting more to be, as Persius notes of them Esse quod Arcesilas arumnosi{que} Solones, Obstipo capite & figentes lumine terram, Like to Arcesilas or Solons found, With down bent heads, & eies vpō the ground▪ then personally to bestirre themselues, as men of motion ought, in bringing their purposes and plots to execution, they could not proue so neces∣sary members to act what he intended, as those which had by their industry got the start of them in actuall businesse. The euent his Maiestie saw in Cicero, and Caesar, which moued our most prudent Apollo to referre these Pragmaticke affaires of Great Britaine to the experienced Cornelius Taci∣tus, to Philip Comm naus, to the Lord Cromwell, which flourished in King Henrie the 8. daies, to Sir Thomas Chaloner sometimes Ambassadour in Spain, & author of those admirable books de repub. Anglorum instaur. to Sir Francis Walsingham, to Sir Thomas Smith, which wrote the Common-wealth of England, and to William Lord Burleigh Treasurer of England. Cornelius Tacitus as the most ancient, was elected first to certifie his censure, who with a free Romane candour framed this discourse: There is asmuch difference betwixt the face and state of Great Bri∣tane at this day, and the fashion as it stood in Do∣mitian; time, when I liued there with my victori∣ous father in law Iulius Agricola, as we see betwixt it and the Countrey of the Crime Tartare. Then, there was elbow roome for the Inhabitants suffi∣cient without multiplicities of Law-suites, subtle shifts, conycatching, or contagious thronging and hudling together: But now, Sunt homines alij, natura Britannica differt. In Britanes Isle both men and Land are chang'd. We Romanes by our Legionary Cities wonne them to ciuility, which they according to their quicke capacities speedily apprehending, em∣braced the Christian Faith, paid tribute to Caesar, and continued in loyall obedience vnder his Lieutenants, vntill our Monarchy became transla∣ted to Constantinople, that so the fulnesse of time might inuest Antichrist in old Rome, the Babylon of the West. Since which time, as the Children of Israel were sometimes aloft, sometimes cast downe, this Iland indured sundry changes. But in my iudgement next vnto suits at Law, which the wise Solon obserued to begger both Towne and Country, the populousnesse of some chiefe Cities, and specially of London, doth impouerish the Roy∣all Chamber of that Empire, insomuch that it is in a manner impossible to inrich them, before the Drones, and yong hungry Bees bee remoued to some forraigne Places by an Act of Parliament, and so prest by transcendent authority. The peo∣ple which I would haue thus prest, are the Inmates, the Cottagers, the needy, and needlesse numbers. An honest Minister assured me, that in his Parish at London, there were many which perished of want, being ashamed to begge; and that he knew tenne persons hauing but a roome of twelue foot square to containe them, & but one bed for them all. Many of the like calamity might bee found in that City, two or three housholds crept into one house; that I haue diuers times wondred, that they are not euery second year visited with the Plague, or Purples, considering the multitudes of Chan∣nels, Iakes, and other vnpleasing places which in∣fect the Aire, able to poyson the strongest Snake. For the verifying of this my allegation, I will pro∣duce one example which may serue to confirme the same. I haue heard it reported by very credible persons, that about 4. yeares past in a house neere S. Dunstons of the West, the Priuies there being emptied on a night, the next morning they found not onely their Brasse and Pewter in the lower roomes soild and filth'd, but likewise their Plate two sto s higher standing on their Cupboord, tainted and corrupted with a yellowish vnseeme∣ly colour. Yea and that which Aristotle himselfe would admire at, they found their money in their purses to haue lost the colour, as if it had beene of purpose varnished with smoaky dung. If the seri∣ous regard of their healths moue them not, yet let the wisedome of Magistrates foresee the in∣conuenience which yearely accrues to the Gene∣rality, by suffering vnnecessary people to hinder the gaines of the industrious, and withall to know this, that too many of the industrious Craftsmen themselues flocking together, doe so diuide the profit, which more politikely being fitter for a few, that both the one and the other, are often seene to faint vnder their owne waight. Better it is for a City to content themselues with a few sub∣stantiall neighbours, then to be troubled with ma∣ny rakers. If the City of London, which is thought to hold eight hundred thousand Soules within it, and the Suburbes were rid of 40000 of these, the rest would thriue the better, and saue at least two hundred thousand pounds a yeare, which now are spent in vain, & hereafter wil be conuerted for the weale of the whole Iland. In one yeare there were suppressed 700. Cottagers in Glocestershire, since which time, that Country flourished. Comineus Lord of Argenton, the great States∣man of France, whom Katherine de Medicis Queen Mother, and somtimes Regent of that Kingdome, was wont to terme the Heretike of State, because he disclosed the secrets of Princes, vttered his opi∣nion next after Cornelius Tacitus. In the warres betwixt the House of Burgundy and my Soueraigne Lewis the eleuenth, I remember, that Money fell out very scarce, as it doth now in Great Britaine, for all that saying, which this wise King was accu∣stomed to repeat, that his France might be com∣pared to a Meadow ready to bee mowne twise a yeare. And one of the principall meanes, which he inuented to be stored with money, was to raise his Coine. From the Saxons time vntill my time in the Raigne of King Henry the sixt, an ounce of Sil∣uer was diuided into 20. peeces, and so passed for 20. pence. King Henry by reason of his wars with vs, and afterwards with the House of Yorke, proclai∣med the ounce at 30. pence. King Henry the 4. vp∣on the like necessity, enhansed it to 40. pence, which so lasted vntill King Henry the 8. daies, who raised the ounce to the value of 45. pence. King Edward the 6. proclaimed it at fiue shillings. If Money continues still scant, I see no reason, but that it might be raised higher, as in former times; which also would induce men to bring forth their Plate. In France, Venice, yea and in Golden Spaine, Brasse money goes current, two and thirty Mara∣uedis amounting to sixe pence; which they call a Reall. Of these Marauedis, I heard a Rhodomon∣ting Castilian vaunt, that hee would bestow 600. thousand of them with his deare Daughter, to her mariage. In some Countries they vse Shelles, Pep∣per, and lether peeces for money. In other places, gaddes of Steele or Iron. At the first troubles of the Low Countries, they made stampes on Past-Boords, which they licensed to goe current for Money. In the last warres of Ireland, base Coine was ordained to supply the vse of the finest Siluer. As long as it will passe in estimation, and warran∣ted by publike authority, either Money may bee raised, or the same of a mixt alloy, as the Venetian Liure, or the French Souls, or of such other met∣tall as the Prince liketh, may serue the Subiects turne in time of warres, as it serues those Nations both in Warre and Peace. The Lord Cromwell succeeded this Noble French∣man, and said: that hee was one of the chiefest In∣struments vnder King Henry the 8. to dissolue the Religious Houses in England, & wished, that now some of those Farmes and impropriated Tithes, were for a few yeares lent by the State of England to support Ecclesiasticall persons in the new Plan∣tations, meaning those, which the State could spare in their places. And he hoped by this meanes, the Clergy being prouided for in those New Lands, Churches would there be built the sooner, and the Plantations in a short time would helpe to inrich this Kingdome with many sorts of Commodities, specially if some of the Religious that went in per∣son, & others well beloued in their Country: that for their sakes, others of good account would ac∣company them, and so assist the Common-wealth by their power and example. Sir Thomas Chaloner renewed the old proiect of building Busses & flat Flemish boates for fishing on the Easterly coasts of this kingdome, saying, that it was a shame for his nation to looke on while the Hollanders yearely tooke worth 300000 pounds of fish vpon our sea coasts, and in our liber∣ties, although they fished farther off then they did; for the truth of which assertion of his he alleadged the testimony of Bartolus the famous Lawier. As Ilands (saith he) in the sea next adioyning, so likewise the Sea it selfe to an hundred miles extent is assigned to the bordering Countrey, I Insul ff de Iur. Secretary Walsingham was of opinion, that letters of Mart or Reprizals would furnish the land with treasure, so that they went forth in Fleetes more strongly prepared then in Queen Elizabeths daies; For that now-a-dayes the Pyrates of Algiere had taught the Spaniards more wit not to go so weak∣ly mand and stor'd as in times past. In Drakes, Hau∣kins, and other braue Aduenturers voyages, our English found a Golden age. But that now the case was otherwise. Therefore they must goe strong, if they meane to surprize any rich Carricks. Like∣wise he wished them, whose powers extended not to supply themselues with many Copartners, to watch about the lesser Ilands in America, and not to draw too neere those Forts where the Gallies frequēted, nor to be aduenturous about the time when the Spanish Fleet repaired thither. About Brazill, and the riuer of Plate hee supposed they might intercept good booties & with more safe∣ty: or if they entred into Lameeres straights, they might in the South sea meet with rich prizes. Fur∣ther, he animated the East Indy Company to ioyne with the Hollanders to driue the Portingals out of the wade of Spiceries. Further, he aduised the En∣glish to prouide the like kinde entertainment for the Spanish prisoners, if not in their owne Coun∣trey, yet in the Summer Ilands, and other Plantati∣ons where they might be put to labour as well as they employ them in their Gallies, vntil they paid sufficient ransomes. Lastly, he counselled them to erect a speciall society of men of war to ioyne to∣gether in the Nauall expedition, and to lend vpon reasonable considerations some of those shippes, which they tooke, to waft our Fishermen, and to defend the Plantations. Sir Thomas Smith protested, that there must be strait Lawes enacted against superfluous commo∣dities imported into the land out of other Coun∣treyes, before the Golden Fleece could possibly be∣come the Catholike Restoratiue. Among many superfluities hee insisted principally on three. 1. vpon the extraordinary vse of Tobacco. 2. vpon forraigne stuffes and silks, which wrought the De∣cay of English cloth, and consequently of many poore Housholds, which liued by spinning, wea∣uing, fulling and dressing of cloth. 3. He enueigh∣ed against the multitudes of wine tauernes, and Alehouses, saying that a great part of our Treasure were yearly wasted in these fiery houses; That halfe of them might well bee spared, and that in Cities and Townes, next to the contagion of the Aire formerly mentioned, they were the chiefe causes of the inflamation of mens blood, and so of Feuers, and most of our late sicknesses. And in conclusion he pronounced these verses. In anciant times they vsed much to Fast, And what was spar'd they turn'd to Almes at last: But we the Sabbaths make Saturnall Feash: On Holy dayes Drinke makes some worse then beasts. If men did Custome pay for Ale and Beere, Great Charles then Spaines King Philip richer were. Our bloods inflam'd: Diseases grow by Wine: Our Barnes waxe lesse: The Poore doe grone and pine. Tempore Maiorum leiunis multa colebant, In{que} Ele mosynas Copia versa suit. Sabbata nunc mutant in Satur nalia Bacchi, Patrum Festa di s ebri tate scatet. Si pro Ceruisid persoluer t Anglia Censum, Ditior Hispano, Carole magne, fores. Corporis hinc nimy facta ebull tio morbos Accers , minuunt Hordea, languet Egenis. Lastly, William Lord Burleigh brought forth his opinion, and said, that all the meanes, restoratiues, and good orders, which hee had heard deliuered would proue of no validity, nor euer come to per∣fection, except his Maiesty of Great Britaine might find some zealous ministers to execute the Lawes and statutes concerning the hindrance of Trade. And further he signified, that one maine point for reformation and repaire of Trading consisted in rewarding those vigilant spirits, which like Senti∣nells, awaked when others slept, or proiected for the cōmon benefit, while others spent their time like belly-gods in bibbing of sugred sack, & in pam∣pring their guts with gluttonous fare. In these two positiuely he laid the foundation of Great Bri∣taines well fare: In the execution of these new De∣crees, and in rewarding of the industrious: whereby the obstinate might be punished, and the vertuous heartned. And in conclusion, this prudent Atlas, on whose vnwearied shoulders sometimes relied the waight of Englands cares, made this discourse: In one thing more I note the prouident Remedy, which the diuine wisedome lately manifested in this Kingdome by remouing from hence many people with famine, war, plagues, feuers and other sicknes∣ses; A remedy surely applyed for two beneficiall respects; In his loue to these, by translating them to a happier place: In his mercy to the rest, which suruiue, that they take heed by such terrible & sud∣den accidents, how they wast those means where∣of they are but his Stewards in lauish feasts, in To∣bacco, Apparell, in suites at Law, or in drinking more then sufficeth nature: And to bestow the estimate of what they shall saue hereafter by their thrist on nobler monuments, in offring of sweet smelling sacrifices to his sacred nostrills, by help∣ing to build places of succour for their distressed brethren, seeing that the noney-bees doe ouer∣swarme at home; for certainely, if all these, whom He lately tooke to his mercy, had been yet liuing, their natiue Countrey could not containe them, but that a greater Decay of trading would necessa∣rily haue ensued; nor could all the wits of our wi∣sest Politicians haue deuised remedies to restore it, which now may in all humane probability serue to make the Golden Fleece an absolute Catholike Medicine. God grant, that the same may worke effectually, and conuert the steely heart into a re∣lenting, tender, and into that which is truly Chri∣stian. Let all good Christians say, Amen. Fiat voluntas Domini. CHAP. 12. The Order, which Apollo tooke for the setling of the Golden Fleece, before his late Progresse into the Tropick of Cancer, recommending the same to the care of the Fraternity of the Rosie Crosse, the foure Patrons of Great Britaine. The Consultation of the foure Patrons for the good of Great Britaine; The copy of Saint Da∣uids sonnet, which he pronounced in the Am∣phitheater at Parnassus in honour of the King of Great Britaines mariage and Coronation. THe day before the summers Solftice in Iune last 1626. Apollo sent for the famous fra∣ternity of the Rosie Crosse, St. George, St. Andrew, St. David, and St. Patrick, those care∣full Patrons of Great Britaine, and in the presence of the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and o∣ther vertuous persons his Fauorites, he deliuered this short speech: The time now drawes on, that we must take our Progresse into the Tropicke of Cancer, where we must exhilarate with our in∣fluence those rude subiects of ours, which inhabit neere the Northerne Pole, to gratifie their natures, which otherwise would proue more fullen, with some perpetuall Dayes without Nights, for their patience in tolerating so many long nights with∣out dayes at the winters Solstice, during w ch timeof our Progresse, I require you, my Gratious friends, to assist the planters of the Newfoundlle, which we haue lately styled Britanniol, and to treat on their behalfe with that magnanimous King Charles of Great Britaine, that hee confirme the commission and orders, which his Father of blessed memory granted about three yeares past for the establish∣ing of Wafting ships for the defence of that hope∣full Plantation, and of the fishing fleetes against the oppressions of Pyrats, assuring him from vs, that there lies the principall part of the Golden Fleece, which Orpheus Iunior hath sounded out in his Cambrensium Caroleia, which he published at the celebration of his Mariage with the Paragon of France; which likewise he lately renewed here before vs at Parnassus: And not onely hee, but o∣thers haue intimated the benefit of this Proiect, namely, the Noble Sir William Alexander in his New Scotland, and Master Misselden in his Circle of Commerce, who in most liuely termes paints out the substance of this Fleece. A braue Dessigne it is, as Royall as Reall, as Honourable as Profitable. It promises renowne to the King, reuenew to the Crowne, Treasure to the Kingdome, a purchase for the Land, a prize for the Sea, Ships for nauigation, Nauigation for ships, Mariners for both: Entertainment for the rich, employment for the poore, aduantage for the Aduenturers, and encrease of Trade to all the subiects. A myne of Gold it is; The Myne is deepe, the veines are great, the Oare is rare, the gold is pure, the extent vnlimited, the wealth vn∣knowne, the worth inualuable. All this you shall signifie vnto that Noble King. And in the interim of our progresse, we command all the rest of my vertuous Corporation to obey the Lady Pallas, whom wee doe substitute in our stead as Queene Regent to see our State well and peaceably goner∣ned. At these words the vigilant Emperor moun∣ted vp into his fiery Chariot, and began his state∣ly Progresse. After whose departure the foure Patrons con∣sulted how they might grace the mighty King of Great Britaine. St. George he deuised a triumphant shew to honour the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, the Portraiture whereof Menante meanes shortly to expresse. St. Andrew framed an eloquent Oration of Vnity vpon that Embleme: Henricus Rosas, Iacobus Regna. St. Patrick compo∣sed a briefe booke of the Military Science, enter∣laced with that late proiect of the double armed squadrons, wherein euery Bowman was taught to vse of the Pike as a Rest to his Bow; wherby his Country of Ireland might be secured from hostile inuasions. St. Dauid made choise to reioyce the Kings heart with a sonnet in memory of his hope∣full Mariage and Coronation. The which when he had perfected and sung in the Amphitheater at Parnassus, Scogin and Skelton the chiefe Aduo∣cates for the Dogrel Rimers by the procurement of Zoilus, Momus, and others of the Popish Sect, very saucily interrupted him. The true copy whereof as it is registred in the Library of that Court, is this that followeth: S t . Dauid. I Long to sing of Charles his Waine, And with due praise to ralse The Flowre deluce of Charle-le-maine. New dayes bring forth new Layes. O happy Starre! O hopefull daies! Braue Iasons Golden Age! Kinde Courtiers, heare S. Dauids Layes, Free from wiles, farre from rage. Who Cambriaes Ioyes then Cambers Son, Should for this match expresse? This match, whose Beames doe strike vpon Towers, Fields, and Wildernesse? Scoggins interruption. What wilt thou proue a Phaeton? Stand backe, and doe not presse: Among our wits a Coridon, Thy selfe a Swaine confesse. Base is thy tune, so seemes thy state In Courtlie Eagles eyes; None may come in at heauens Gate Without S. Peters Keyes. Without great meanes none out of Wales Shall greete our Noble King. Dar'st thou then come with Newfound tales? And them before him sing? Thy Cambria is a barren land For Goates and Satyres fram'd: Like to the Alpes, or that wild Strand, Which thou hast Cambrioll nam'd: Thy Nation meete to be still gull'd With Lawyers quirks and quips: Thy Muse vnholy, too much dull'd, No drop of life she sips. No Wedding Robe, hast thou on, Foole, Yet look'st here wedding Cheere: A Guest vnbid must bring his Stoole; Stand backe and draw not neere. S t . Dauid. Stand backe thy selfe, thou greedy Elfe, Shall Slugges the Hauen hold? And merry Greekes runne on a Shelfe From Colchos bearing Gold? Both Sea and Land in league conspire Rich Cambrioll to deface, If Argonautickes thou aspire To keepe from Courtby Grace. O how thy Midriffe swelles with Gall Against an Antient Race! Wee are no Slaues, true Britaines all May see his Highnesse face. If Cats may looke vpon a King, And Curres barke at the Moone: Arcadian Swaines like Swannes may sing, And Da y begge one Boone. That Dauid which made Pagans bow To Christ, though Fiends repine. That man which made Polagians know Then faults, and truth to shine: That name, which through Great Britaines Land The first of March doth ring: If not; the fame of Newfound land Shall lead me to our King: Whose Heart I faine with Orpheus straine Would cheere; and then salute The Queene, which Fates for him ordaine With Violl and the Lute. The sacred Muses sent me heere, And, if Might quells not Right, I will draw neere, (O doe not ieere) The Light, their Angels sight. To whom Ile show what's yet vnshowne, My Countries griefe and neede; And in thy eare (although a Clowne) Ile whisper through a Reed. Our Cambria is a fertile soile Abounding with all store; Else would not her Hells-brokers spoile, And sucke her blood so sore. Had Cambria not more Drones then need, Her shoares would yeeld good ships: Her Land more wealth, where now we feed With honey needlesse lips. Till Hydra suits bee well restraind, Our Iarres will neuer cease: Our meanes grow meane, our honour stain'd, Voyd of Grace, voyd of peace. But if our King play Hercules, And daunt them with his Mace: Old Cambria shall with Cumbers lesse Sustaine new Cambriols case. And both together Tribute pay More store then Peru's Oare, Which at his feete they'll yearely lay, With some in hand before. S. George did kill, as Legends say, A Dragon fierce of prey: Next vnder God this Monster may None but our Soueraigne flay. Marke well my words, whose Pedegree Is fetch't from Cambers line; And with our Leekes who do'st agree Thy Roses to Combine. Take wares vnbought, a thing that's strange, Fish, Iron, Salt, and Pit h, Trayne, Skinnes, and Masts: or in Exchange Fruit, Wine, Gold, Silkes most rich. Our Seuerne goes not farre behinde The Thames for fruitfull ground: Nor this my Muse shall any finde Vnrelisht or vnsound. Let Friends or Fiends, or Momes accurst Taxe her for want of life: With sweet the best, with sowre the worst She payes to end the strife. I'st not folly? and vnholy For Bayards to discerne Of doubtfull colours suddenly, Before the right they learne? Although I am no Puritane, Pure kisses I commend. Pureiests I praise in any man, So they to goodnesse tend. I haue not read, I must confesse, Those bookes cald Lutherane: And thine, O Wickliffe, haue I lesse; Yet am not I profane. These Mysteries I leaue to such, Who pale with study teach▪ Or vnto such, whom ouermuch Wants Feare commands to preach. Skeltons interruption. Why dost thou smite, O busie wight, Our eares with thy discourse? Art thou a Iew, or Rome-a-Night, A bruitish Turke, or worse? Thy Song some Welsh Sidanens Loue May gaine to thy desire: But Courtly Dames will thee reproue, Fly from high beauties fire. Haunt thou Bride-Cakes, and Country cheere As fits a Cambrian Peere. Thy Mumsimus, thy murmurs here None will but dizzards heare. Bray there aloud, and roare complete A midst thy Pipes and Ale: From Babels seat springs thy conceit, Thy sonnet is so stale. S. Dauid. I come not here for Belly-cheere, Nor for Tobaccoes fume. With mirth for mirrh my Soueraigne deare, To perfume, I presume. Whom mighty Ioue meanes to destroy, He lets them qua e a while: And mads them with a smoaky toy, Themselues till they beguile. Bayte thou those Beasts: and Ile take leaue, To greet our Charles his waine: Whose rayes shoot on, as I conceaue, The stocke of Charle le-maine. Their Starre I saw from Cambria West: Which made me Gifts prepare, Leekes crownd with Pearles; yet to contest Against me still you dare. You gape for Fees, but a Gold Ring Suits not a Meazells snout. A Lambe shall wring your Adders sting And canuase all your rout. Rather then you should terme me Iew, Leane Bacon I will eat: Or Pudding nere so blacke of hew, or Hare, though beauties meat. But if you please and stand precise, Vpon those Iewish Lawes: Your double tongue Ile Circumcise, Which marres your Clyents cause. I worship not false Mahomet, Who barres the Ivy signe, As ignorant, how some haue met In wine the sisters nine. Nor Romes good will seeke I to winne, Which orders me to plow Red furrowes vp in naked skinne, And merits seed to sow. Such Grace let Popes graue on themselues, And leaue me as I am; Who brookes it worse then Egypts Elues The Diuell, or his Dam. I count that Church Ba des Pedlery, Which all for money cares; Sells Masses, Pardons, Letchery, Soules, Beads. ô precious wares! Though lack a dandy, when he houles, Frights children from the dugges: Will men giue bribes to keepe their soules From Purgatories bugges? Though Apes weare coates, and some birds p a e, Not knowing weale from woe: Yet sober men (though somewhat late) Owles Mattins should forgoe. I hunt not for more miracles, The Gospell to confirme: Nor outward shewes, Gulls Spectacles, To hold my Inside firme. The Golden Calfe old Iewes averr'd With manly voice to crake: Christs body some are not a eard, From Gods right hand to rake: I like as ill the Cloister life, Vnlesse a Nunne I schoole. Let him that hates an honest wife Be gelt, or beg'd a foole. No Priest shall cozen me to fast To pull my courage downe, If once of Shrift my Wife had tast, Or lou'd a grasse-greene gowne. At Tombes and Shrines I dare not call, On Saints this match to guide: Nor Heauens Queene; let Idolls all Lye from this mariage wide. But vnto ONE, that's alway prone To pardon humane vice, I vow them both in Christ alone A lining Sacrifice. The Stony-heart who can deny But vnion tender makes? Of diffring Tunes an Harmony, In spight of Hellish Snake;? No venome shall their soules defile, No dreames, no magicke spells: Not Crocodile tempt them with guile. So sweet Loues Posie smells! No Beast shall touch their honey flowres, No flashing curse them sindge, What God hath set he weedes at houres; Gods knot let none infringe. With Oile of Gladnesse, Bathes of blisse Dipt shines free Maiestie In Albions Throne, where Thamesis Extolls their Amitie. The Crownes they weare, no Fiends can teare; S. Michaell guards his owne. The Golden Scepter which they beare With Lawes swayes Field and Towne. With might & maine their mind contends The Dragon to put by, Who red with blood at last intends The westerne Monarchy. Yet let him reckon with his O st For his warre-fares wages: Not all his Rents in Indiaes Coast Will pay th' arrerages. Let none wonder, if God Thunder Vengeance for our Iarres: While we vnder Sathan wander, Himselfe with Dauid warres. But reconcil'd he wils to fight His Battells valiantly. Though Dauids might Goliah slight, On God all Conquests lye. Couragious King, then bid vs smite Tyrants downe, Gyants growne; Downe with those Do s, which Britaines spight, Tara tantara downe. Me thinkes Lisbon I see now wonne, Th' Iles ransack't, th' Indies sack't, And sweet Eliza thought vndone; Rein-stald by vs swakt. In March, like Iune, their springs first light Reuiues our Garden beds With louely Roses, red and white, And Leekes with siluer'd heads. The Spirits Gardner will keepe greene With Buddes perpetually, Our Rosie King and Lillies Queene, On him if we relye. Whom last I pray, as Pageants gay, As Maskes, or Gemmes in Gold, My Muse to prize, though clad in gray, My Will, though too too bold. CHAP. 13. Vpon an Information preferred before the Lady Pal∣las, against Scoggin and Skelton for interrup∣ting S. Dauid in his Sonnet; she vtters some ob∣seruations on the behalfe of the Learned, and thereby takes an occasion to banish all Scoffing Companions from Parnassus, and from be∣comming at any time after partakers of the Gol∣den Fleece discouered in this Treatise. THe next day after this Sonnet was sung in the Amphitheater at Parnassus by S. Da∣uid, Spencer the Emperours Atturney for the English Poets, being moued with the vnman∣nerly and rude interruptions of Scoggin and Skel∣ton, informed against them as Libellers before the Lady Pallas, who sate as Queene Regent in Apol∣loes absence. These dogrell Rimers confessed their Errour, that they were seduced by the Spirit of Detraction, to disgrace this Reuerend Prelate as much as in them lay, because his Grauity had composed that Sonnet in such a homely straine, as seemed more conuenient for men of their ranke, then for a venerable Patriarch, whose veine ought rather to flow with Heroicall blood, then to bor∣row their plaine robes of Poetizing. Vpon this Confession of the Dogrell Rimers, ore tenus, the wise Regent proceeded, and vttered these notable resolutions; that Scoggin and Skelton well deserued to be punished as Libellers in that Starre-Chamber-Court. First, because they had interrup∣ted a person of that high worth, and that publike∣ly, before they had heard the Sonnet throughly repeated, which argued, that they did it more out of spleene and pre udicate iudgement, then out of the apprehension of their titulary liberties. Se∣condly, that a simple course Poeme inriched with liuely matter and iuyce, ought to be preferred be∣fore an heroicall swolne verse puft vp with the barme or froth of an inconsiderate wit. Thirdly, that no man should critickly quote downe the im∣perfections of any Booke or writing, except hee also would note the best and choisest conceits thereof, whereby it might appeare in the ballance of vnderstanding, that the one did downe-waigh the other. For it is easier to finde faults, then to mend them, to pull downe a house, then to build one vp. And whosoeuer would marke the worst things, leauing the sweetest and most worthy of commendation behinde; her Grace compared him to that Foole, which forsooke the Rose, and smelt to the pricking brier. Fourthly, that many men vsed to reprehend the works of the learned, which their owne muddy Pates could not appre∣hend nor comprehend, because they might seeme wiser to the standers by then the Muses had made them. Fiftly, that a iudicious Writer should not care what censure a malicious Sycophant gaue of his workes; For it were more honourable to bee praised of one Socrates, then of a hundred Mo ists. That Scholler therefore, which with an Apology defends his innocency against these vipers toungs the most prudent Queen likened him to that hare∣braind Traueller, which in the scorching Moneth of Iune being troubled with the croaking noise of Frogs, would needs light downe from his horse to be reuenged on them for offending of his tender eares. All this, sayd the noble Queene, did our Reue∣rend Patriarch know, when hee went forwards with his Sonnet notwithstāding the crosse-opposi∣tions of these Buffones, scorning out of a braue Bri∣taine courage to reuenge himself on such contem∣tible creatures. Neuertheles, because their floutes and taunts tended to the breach of Ciuill Orders, her Maiestie banished all scoffing companions, and base ballet Rimers quite out of the Iurisdiction of Parnassus and Colch s, and for euer after to be∣come incapable of the mystery of the golden fleece. The conclusion of Orpheus Iunior to his Soue∣raigne the King of Great Britaine. IF with kind words your Maiestie approue This Golden Fleece sprung from a subiects loue: Ile sweare you hold your Fathers worth by right, That from your lippes there shootes a quickning light. But if your mind more waighty cares withdraw, One fingers touch sufficeth me for Law. Ile dreame that you haue read, what I present, Or deem'd it meet for wisedomes Parliament, Or else Ile faine new fancies in my Braine, That to your state this worke might bring some gaine: Or that you doe of Vaughan well conceaue; But to your Cookes this as a prey you leaue: I care not, whilst crown'd Lillies you become, While Trade helpes Armes abroad, and Peace at home. Orphei Iunioris conclusio ad Magnae Britanniae Regem. SI placidis verbis tibi nostra probetur Opella, Quae Maiestatis ponitur ante pedes: Dignum iuro Patris te, maxime Carole, Sceptr , Et iuro labris lumen inesse tuis. Sin magis impediant grauiora negotia mentem, Sat mihisi digito tacta sit ipsa t . Idaeas fingam, te perlegisse: Senatu, Aut Aulae scribis hanc meruisse legi; Vel de Vauhanno bene te sentire: sed Orsa Tradere nostra Coquis igne voranda tuis. Nil moror: Albionis decorant dum Lilia Serta: Dum foris Arma, domi Pax, Noua Terra viget. FINIS.