



CAESAR BARONIVS his aduice vnto Pope PAVL the Fift, to excommunicate the Venetians.
PEters office (Holy Father) is twofold; To Feed and to Kill: for the Lord said vnto himIoh. 21.15. Feede my sheepe: and he heard a voice from heauen,Act. 10.13. Kill and Eat. To Feede the sheepe, is with care to watch ouer the faithfull and obedient Christians, resembling Sheep and Lambes in all humility and religious piety. When he hath to do, not with Sheepe and Lambes, but Lions and like beasts of fierce natures, refractary, stubborne, and disobedient, then Peter hath charge to Kill: that is, to resist, fight against and root out such: and that such killing should euer be in Charity, he is willed to Eat that which he had slaine in effect, through that Loue which he beares to them in Christ, to lay them vp within him, euen in his owne bowels, that In Christ we may
beGalat. 3.28. one, which is the Apostles owne saying:Philip. 1.8. I long after you in the bowels of Christ. And so, this killing is not Cruelty but Piety and syncere Charity: When, so by killing, he saueth that which by being suffered so to liue, had otherwise perished for euer. And therefore, as Pope Nicolas the first sheweth, Excommunication is not a poison to kill, but rather aPotion Receit to recure. And we see, that a Father thinks well of those bands wherewith the Physitian hath bound his franticke sonne, because he hopeth it will doe him good. Go on then, on Gods name, most holy Father in your course begun, and suppose not that any man can iustly tax your too great hastines in these proceedings. That which S. Paul hath written to his brethren2. Cor. 10 6. the Corinthians, that the Church is ready to reuenge all disobedience, is a Command, that the Church should bee forward to do it. Your Holinesse happily hath beene too backward, as yet not proceeding farther then to write. For my owne part, I professe I am glad and reioice in my spirit, nay I will say with the Apostle, I do2. Cor. 7.4. Ouer-abound in ioy, seeing I see now, in myThe man is about 68. years old. Gregory 7. Hilachrand. Alexander 3. Vide Plat. decrepit age, to sit on Peters seat, Gregory or Alexander (the first two liuely roots from whence the dead Church-liberty began to reuiue) both called from Siena, (the place from whenceBeing named before his Papacy Camillo Borghese of Siena. your Holinesse is extract) to the Chaire of Peter. Of which two, the one gat the better of the EmperourHenry the 4. Henry, a most wilfull and peruerse man, and the other by his incredible strange constancy vtterly vanquishedFrederick Barboross;a. Frederick. Your Holinesse hath the like cause now in hand. In your hands (to borow theEsay 3.6. Prophets words) these ruines lie to reedifie the Liberty of the Church fallen downe, deiected, and laid low on the Earth. Aduance,
with victory that attends you. For God is with vs,Matth. 16.18. The gates of hell (they be Christs wordes) shall not preuaile against you. You are placed in the Church Peters successor, and haue the promise, made to him. Let corne be giuen them out of the rocke, and as it is in the Prophecy of Ieremy, I haue made thee aIer. 1.28. piller of iron and a wall of brasse. Remember, you are placed asEsay 8 a rocke in the Church, on which all that stumble shall be dashed in pieces. But you shall continue without hurt, ioined close and vnited vnto Christ, who shall fight for you and ouercome.




THE ANSWER OF NICOLAS VIGNIER vnto Caesar Baronius.
Nicolaus de Clamengis libro de ruina and reparatione ecclae.IT is an ancient speech vsed by one, who was not vnacquainted with the dealings of Rome; That were a Painter desirous to draw the picture of Pride, his best course were to represent a Cardinall. If a modest man, and inwardly familiar with some Popes themselues, had iust cause thus to write two hundred yeeres since, how much more iustly doth it sute these times, in which they want, neither high-swelling wordes, nor detestable impieties, to effect and bring about their wicked designes? Very lately there flew abroad into the world, a certaine writing from Cardinall Baronius, concerning the excommunicating the State of Venice, directed vnto Pope Paul the fift. In which the truth is so cleerly euidenced, that though a man would deny the Sunne to shine at noone, yet could hee not at all deny it. So liuely and in such a
plain sort doth the man paint out himselfe and his Colleagues, that in them you would sweare you saw Pride herselfe. What leaueth he vndone or vnattempted, to set vp his Iuppiter Capitoline, an Idoll to be adorned in the place of Christ? And what, I pray you, be his meanes? Surely the same and no other whereby that Angell of darknesse deceiueth the simple, counterfeiting himselfe an Angell of light. For so crafty is that blood-sucker Sathan, that he neuer appeareth in his natiue shape, but putteth on the person of another. So he assaied and deceiued Saul,1. Sam. 28.14. in apparition of graue and holy Samuel. So seduced he Abab, by the mouth of his Prophets.1. Reg. 22.22. So he drowned many of the Iewes in the Sea, taking vpon him to lead them in the likenesse of Moses. So in like sort at this day he exciteth and eggeth forward Paul the fift, chiefe Bishop on earth, Vicar of Christ, Successor of Peter, Prince of Prelates, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Father of Fathers, head of the Church, the essentiall forme of Iustice, the Spouse of Christ, the Christ of God, as they instile him, to commit murthers, wage warres, become an Incendiarie, be the subuertor and ruiner of the state of Venice, the most noble and auncient Common-wealth of the world, and that in the person of a reuerend old man clad in scarlet robes, a Cardinall of marke, famous for learning, pretending nothing but alone the word of God.
Peters office (as you say Holy Father) is twofold, to Feed, and to Kill: Diuinitie not drempt of by our Predecessors. Peters office is to Feed, and to Kill. By what right? by what authoritie? Certes Christ did constitute his Apostles, Pastors, to feed that Church
which himselfe had acquired by his blood, which also is the dutie of all and euerie one which haue any charge in the church, wherunto Peter himselfe giues witnesse, when hee saith,1. Pet. 5.1.2.3. The Elders which are among you I beseech, which am also an Elder etc. Feed the flocke of God which dependeth vpon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as though you were Lords ouer the heritage of God, but that you may be ensamples vnto the flocke: and when the chiefe sheepheard shall appeare, (not that Arch Flamn of Rome, but Christ) you shall receiue an incorruptible crowne of glorie. But as for that office of Killing, not any the least mention in the booke of God, vnlesse it may be in these places, where such Pastors be deciphered, as in conditions resemble your scarlet Colledge so well, that milke cannot be more like to milke than you to them. Concerning whom we read that God of old spake in this sort vnto Ezechiel:Ezech 34.2.3. Thus saith the Lord God vnto the shepheards, Woe vnto the shepheards of Israel that feed themselues. Should not the shepheards feed the flocks? You eat the milke and cloath yourselues with the fat, you kill the best, but feed not my flocke. The weake haue you not strengthened, the sicke haue you not healed, neither haue you bound vp the broken, nor brought that againe which was driuen away, neither haue you sought that which was lost, but with cruelty and with rigour haue you ruled them. And they were scattered without a shepheard etc. Therefore o shepheards heare the word of Iehoua. Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I am against the shepheards, and will require my sheep at their hands; and cause them to cease from feeding the flocke, that
these shepheards may no longer feed themselues: for I will deliuer my sheepe from their mouthes and they shall no more deuoure them. Which Prophecy you see is fulfilled in your selues, that haue lost England, Sweland Denmarke; Norway and the greater part of Germany deliuered from your deuouring mouthes, and you can no more obtrude your merchandise vpon them, your Lambes of wax,Agnos Dei. your hallowed beades, your Bulles, your Iubiles. But come wee to the grounds whereon this paradox is built, and to those pillars that beare it vp.B The Lord said vnto him, Feed my sheep; and he heard a voice from Heauen, Kill and Eat. I maruel you deduce not your office of killing, out of the first word,Lib. 1. de Rom. Pontifice c. 15. Feed, seeing Bellarmine not the least among these scarlet Worthies hath found your Popes Regall authoritie therein. For Homer (saith the man) in his second Ilias (from whom Christ no doubt did borrow this phrase) calleth Agamemnon once and again Pastor of the people,(...). who (it is certaine) slew and sent many packing away to Pluto, and therefore shared it should seeme this office of killing with you. But passe wee from these bables, and come vnto the oracles more renowmed than the Delphian.
Peter heard a voice from heauen, Kill and eat. What if he did?B Matth. 26 52. Iohn. 18.13. He heard also from * Christs own mouth, Put vp thy sword into thy sheath; for he that striketh with the sword shall perish with the sword. Whether voice of the two, did most amate Peter? that which bid him, or that which did forbid him to kill? Either was this his voice vttered by him whom it is high impiety to disobey, whom all religion tieth to yeeld obedience vnto, who cannot lie, nor cannot deceiue. And
Peter was obedient vnto both. He did not cast away the keies, which Christ had committed to him iointly with the other * Apostles,Math. 16.19. and take him vnto his sword, as * one of the Popes of Rome is reported to haue cast Peters keies into the Tiber, and laid hold,Pope Iulv the second that Butifeu of Italy. as he called it, vpon Pauls swords; but subiected himselfe vnto Neroes sword; and as well by example taught others so to do, as by this his expresse precept:1. Peter 2.1^. Submit your selues vnto all maner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the superioror, vnto gouernours, as vnto them that are sent of him for the punishment of euill doers and for the praise of them that do well. Neither hauing receiued that message Kill and eat, did he withdraw himselfe from the society of the Gentiles, which was the scope and end both of this voice and heauenly vision. For being ignorant as then, that the ceremonies of Moses law were to be abolished, and the Gentiles to be aggregated into the people of God, without receiuing the seale of circumcision, or obseruing of other legall rites, Christ by this vision would teach him the truth: for that sheet and vessell which Peter beheld, is a resemblance of the Church of Christ, which is said to be let down from heauen, because it is on Gods prouidence more strongly suspended than if it were fastened vnto Iupiters golden chaine, wherof Homer speketh. There be within the continent of the Church, liuing creatures of euery kind vnder heauen: foure-footed, flying, creeping things, cleane and vncleane (that is to say, which as yet Peter did not know) Iewes and Gentile. That is, the mystery which in former times was not disclosed vnto men, but now is made manifest
to his Apostles and Prophets in the Spirit: that the Gentiles are to be made one body coheires and copartners of the promise in Christ by the Gospell, as Paul speaketh Eph. 3. Which vision because of some obscurity in it, is farther illustrated in course of Scripture: Kill, saith he, and Eat, without difference, cleane and vncleane beasts.Leuit. 11. per totum. For howsoeuer it was hitherto by the law forbidden, it is now permitted by grace in Christ: which to be the intendment and scope of that vision, Peter himselfe doth contest in these words of his vnto Cornelius: You know it is vnlawfull for a man that is a Iew to company or conuerse with one of another nation.Act. 10. But God hath shewed me, that I must not call any man defiled or impure. And this is the generall exposition of the Fathers, agreeing thereupon with one consent, out of whose Commentings and large enarrations Oecumenius collected those his summary notes which hee hath left vpon the Acts of the Apostles. His words be these:Oecumenius in Act. Aposto^^rum. The vessell which he saw designeth the world made of grosse substance. The beasts of diuers kinds are types of the different degrees of man. And to speake more plainly. The sheet is the Church. The liuing creatures in it be the Gentiles. Peter saw the Church tied and knit vnto the foure Euangelists, and all nations contained therein. It was said vnto him, Kill and Eat, because it was necessary that euen they should come vnto the Church.
What is heere, Baronius, that concerneth that Office of killing? By this voice, and this vision Peter is commanded to go vnto the Gentiles and feed them with the holesome and liuely food of the Gospell. This is with you to kill and slay. And happily for this
cause you take that good course, not to preach the Gospell, lest thereby you might become murtherers, or rather indeed, lest the people hating the poison of your traditions do hunger after the bread of life. But this is your maner to interpret Scriptures, vpon which you stand so much, which you learned of the great professor of your schoole and Doctor of the chaire, he I meane who in the desert, detorted and wrested (as you are wont to do) the Scriptures,Matth. 4. in his disputation with our Sauiour. Such one was Boniface the 8. (of whom the saying goeth, He entred as a fox,De Maior. and obedien. Vnam sanctam. raigned as a lion, and died as a dog) who would proue that the Pope had right to both the swords Spirituall and Temporal, out of the Euangelicall writings forsooth. Because when the Apostles said, Here are two swords, the Lord did not answer his Apostles, (speaking in the Church (Heere) it is too much, but it is inough. Certainly, whosoeuer shall denie that the temporall sword is in the power of Peter, he regardeth but little Gods word, which saith: Put vp thy sword into thy sheath.Gen. 1.16. De Maiorit. and Obed. C. solitae. And Innocent the 3. by a place of Genesis doth as soundly proue that the Imperiall maiestie is in subordination to the Pontificall. You should (saith hee) haue considered that God made two great lights in the firmament of Heauen, the greater light to rule the day, the smaller light to gouern the night, both great, but one greater than the other. In the firmament of heauen, that is, the vniuersal Church, God made two great lights, that is, appointed two estates royall, the Pontificall authoritie and Regall power, but that is the greater of the twain which is appointed ouer the day, that is, ouer spiriall things, that the lesse which hath iurisdiction in carnall:
that wee may know there is as great difference betweene Kings and Popes as there is betwixt the Sunne and Moone.Distinct. 22. sacrosancta. In like sort Anacletus, if * Gratian say true, proued the Primacie of Saint Peter out of that place where hee is called Cephas, that is, an Head and Beginning, which Etymologie euen * Bellarmine applaudeth,Lib. 1. de Roma. Pontif. c. 17. who affirmeth that Cephas is an head in Greeke,(...). whereas Cephas is not a Greeke but a Syriak word, which as himselfe auerreth, signifies a Rocke. And the same Bellarmine that Captain Iesuite, out of the selfe same place which you produce, Kill and Eat, concludeth that Peter is Head of the Church, drawing his argument, not as you do from the word Kill, but from the Commandement Eat. For saith he, It is the heads duty to eate,Bella. lib. 1. de Rom. Pontific. c. 22. Barom. Tom. 1. Annal. Eccles. and so by eating to transmit the meat into the stomack, and so to incorporate it to it selfe. And your * selfe elsewhere do bring this proofe to make the vse of shrining the reliques of Saints within the Altars, Apostolicall, because in the sixt chapter of the Reuelation, the soules of such as were slaine for the Gospell, are said to cry from vnder the Altar. But who is not acquainted with such Iuglers trickes? what man will take their counterfeit glasse for true pearle? Remember Baronius, that I may returne vpon your self an allegory, that the Chamelion a beast, which (as they say) liueth by the aire is numbred with such * as be vncleane;Leuit. 11. Allusion to the speech that Emperor. Fumum habet qui fumum vendidit. B and that vaine man, blowen vp with wind, who selleth nothing but smoke is semblably vncleane in the eyes of God. But to proceed: To feede the sheepe is with care to watch ouer the faithfull etc. And is it true indeed, Baronius, is the office of feeding to be confined only to the faithfull
and obedient Christians, and is this your will to haue all refractarie and stubborn ones led into the slaughter, whom happily you instile Lions, for that you feare the Lion the armes of Venice?Esay 11.6. But Esay prophecied otherwise of Christs Kingdome. The Wolfe shall dwell with the Lambe, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid; and the Calfe, and the Lion, and the fat beast together, and a little child shall lead them. The Cow and the Beare shall feed, their yoong ones shall lie together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullocke, the sucking child shall play vpon the hole of the Aspe, and the weined child shall thrust his hand into the Cockatrice hole. Then none shall hurt nor destroy in all the mountaine of mine holinesse.
Wee deny not but Pastors are to stand against the refractarie and the disobedient, but with what armes? Spirituall not Carnall. For as Hierome once sayd of heresie:Ieron. in prooe^. lib. 4. in Ieremiam. Heresie is to be cut off with the sword of the Spirit; let vs strike thorow with the arrowes of the Spirit, all sons and disciples of misled Heretiques, that is, with Testimonies of holy Scripture. The slaughter of Heretiks is by the word of God. So wee say and iudge of all other vices. For the Church hath no such warrant as to vse the sword of the Ciuill Magistrate, or bring in within her liberties politicke punishments, the offices of the Ciuill and Ecclesiastical Magistrate being, as Christ teacheth Matt. 20. things of diuers natures: You know, That kings of Nations rule ouer them, but with you it shall not be so. And the reason is, for that the Church is the seruant of Christ no otherwise, then as Christ is the Sauiour of the faithfull: But Christ to procure the saluation of them, neuer
vsed himselfe, nor permitted his Church to vse, the sword of the ciuill Magistrate. And this is that, if I mistake not, which your selfe in prosecution of your allegories adde, That such killing must not be but with great charitie etc. For all that we do or can conclude from hence, is this and no more, that this killing of the stubborn and disobedient is done by Excommunication, which is a spirituall and wholesome remedie. Which to grant, wee must first consider, lest we erre in ambiguitie of wordes, What excommunication is, 2. By whom it may be executed. 3. Vpon whom to be inflicted. 4. For what causes it is iust. 5. From what communion they bee barred. 6. Which bee the ends of Excommunication: that any man by these grounds may determine what is to be iudged of the Excommunication of the State of Venice, of which you intreat.
Excommunication, one of the parts of Church discipline, the other being brotherly Correction, is of two kindes; The Lesser and the Greater: The Lesse is that whereby such as grieuously offend against any point of faith, or maners, or good established order, are excommunicate; not so that absolutely they cease to bee the members of Christ, but be only for a time restrained from communion of the Sacraments, so long as, vntill either their Repentance, or Faith, or Dutie bee iudged sufficient, and publick scandall be taken away. And such the * Ancients called Restrained.Abstenti. Cyprian. in epistolis. Excommunication the Greater, is an holy action of Priesthood, by which, agreably to the rule of Christ, a brother become obstinate in his sins, is cut off from the fellowship of the faithfull, cast out of the Church, deliuered to Sathan,
that vpon correction he may repent, and vpon true repentance be againe receiued, which was vnder the law, a casting forth out from the Synagogue.
So by authoritie and warrant of Christ, to excommunicate is a power belonging vnto all,Math. 18. and none but the True Church: to be executed by the whole Presbyterie lawfully elected, to bee denounced in the open face of the assembly, with their either tacit or expresse consent. This is proued by the words of Christ, If he will not heare the Church, that is, the Presbytery and conuention of Elders, let him be to thee as an Ethnicke and a Publicane. The Apostle is yet more cleare in this point 1. Cor. 5. When you are gathered together, and my spirit in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ; let such a one be deliuered vnto Sathan. In which place he speaketh vnto the whole Church as again he doth 2. Cor. 2. It is sufficient that this man hath beene censured by many. And therfore he intreateth that with one consent they receiue againe him who had beene excommunicate. And this is the doctrine and * consent of all fathers,What, This if he meane by the Presbyterie, as he calleth it. The Church practise and doctrine of the fathers is to the contrary. as in Cyprians epistles any man may read. Wherof the reason is very euident, that matters of greatest consequence in the church are not to be proceeded in without consent and approbation of theEither tacite or expresse as before. whole Church, as the practise is in ciuill states and affaires. For that wherein euerie one is interessed, (it was the saying of Pope Leo) must haue the generall consent of all. And what of more consequence? wherein can the whole bodie be more interessed, than in the cutting of one member from the bodie? The conclusion therefore is: No man ought to bee excommunicate, without the generall assent of the whole Church in
which he liueth. And that Austen was of this minde, it is euident by this, that he thinketh that man should not be excommunicated, who hath many abetters and bearers out in his offence, with whom many do partake and are associate in sinne, reioycing in their follies, insulting on the godly, despising the sword of Excommunication, lest it proue the originall of a Schisme; and of this mind, saith he, the Apostle was. His wordes are: To this purpose the Apostle speaketh: If any one be named:August. Contra epistolam Parmen. lib. 3. In that he saith: If any one, it seemeth his meaning was that such a man might safely be put vnder censure, and for his good, who is a sinner among such as be none, that is, as be not infected with the taint of like enormity. And where he saith, be named hee letteth vs therby vnderstand it is not inough that a man be so, vnlesse withall he be named to be so, that is, notoriously knowen and diffamed, that all men may prooue and giue their consent to the sentence of excommunication throwen foorth against him. For thus the bond of peace may bee kept, correction bee done vpon him, he be striken, not to kill him, be seared, but to cure him. To this end hee saith of that man whom by such receit hee would haue to bee cured: The Rebuke of many is sufficient for him. Because such rebuke cannot be auaileable, but where one is rebuked, who hath not a multitude, his fellowes in sinne: but if the infection be gone ouer many, the godly can do nothing but sorrow and grieue.
Now for the persons liable to this censure, All, and Only they, who being in the list of brethren, continue in sin with contumacy. Only brethren, because that, Of forreiners God doth iudge, and not the Church, as
the Apostle speaketh, 1. Cor. 5. and such as neuer had any co^miunion, cannot be cut off from communion with the Church which they neuer had. Again, adde the stubbornly wilfull, not others for them, or with them. Because euery man must beare his owne burthen. And Austen doth in this point deseruedly blame Auxilius a yong man,Aug. Epist. 75. If by his own iudgement and allegation out of Austen for peril of schism excommunication must not bee inflicted on a multitude: if for nothing else, yet in that regard the censuring of greate ones, gods on earth should not so easilie haue passed his lippes. Azarias did not excommunicate Vsziah, but told him his duty, as the minister of God. Neither did they compell him to hasten out, but God did it; and had they done it, this was no excommunication. 2. Paral. 26. Theodoret. lib. 5. Hist. Eccles. ca. 18. S. Ambrose is the only example that can with probability be alleadged. But there is very much difference betweene his maner of proceeding and the Popes in his consistory, and the Ministers with their elders. Read the story in Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. ca. 17. ex interpr. Christophorsani. and somewhat elderly Bishop, as he speaketh, because that for the sole offence of Classianus, he did excommunicate his whole family. And it is against All, that No man of whatsoeuer state or condition, Ecclesiasticall or Ciuill, Superior or Inferior, may thinke himselfe exempted from that censure. The truth hereof is certaine by practise in Scripture, as for instance. Azarias the high Priest cast foorth king Ozias out of the Temple: by practise, in the prime age of the Christian Church, when as Ambrose excommunicated Theodosius: an act allowed of by all Churches, and so well liked by Theodosius himselfe, that he professed to haue met with but one Bishop in deed, Ambrose, at Millane.
The causes which procure it, are sins of Commission, done without amendment, against either First or Second Table. That appeareth by Christ his words Mat. 18. where he mentioneth Ethnicks, Transgressors of the First; and then Publicanes, delinquents against
the Second table. To which there in the 12. of Exodus, where there is charge giuen, that no Vncircumcised person, and in that, an offendor against the first Table, be admitted to the Passeouer: and secondly,1 Cor. 5.8. no Iew who had Leuen in his house, which leauen the Apostle doth interpret, of mal tiousnesse and vncleane life. Where he saith. Therfore let vs keepe the feast, not in the leauen of malice and iniquity, but with the vnleauened loues of syncerity and truth.
The communion is twofold wherefrom the Excommunicate are excluded, Internall, Externall. The Inward is that, by which euery faithfull man, in faith and charity is first knit vnto God, then to all the Saints and the whole body of the Church, with the bond of the spirit, which is in the Creed called the Communion of Saints, of which that place of Iohn is meant, 1. Ioh. 1. That which wee haueseene, that which wee haue heard, do wee preach vnto you, that you (the faithfull) might haue communion with vs: and that our communion might bee with the Father, and with his sonne Christ Iesu. From this communion, it is not the Excommunication of the Presbytery, but their owne sinnes which excludeth offendours. For the Prophet, as the mouth of God saith, Your sinnes haue diuided me and you.Esay 45. But Excommunication doth declare, and confirme by the Churches authority, that the irrepentant sinner is excluded and cut off from this communion. The saying of the Schoole to that purpose is, The Church doth not damnifie any man, but pointeth him out that is damnified. Euen as, when in the Law, the Priest did forbid the infected with the leprosie to enter within the Congregation. This
act of the Priest, did not bring the sore vpon him, but only declared that he was infected: and hence it is, the if the key go not right, as the saying is, but hit vpon such as be innocent, the sentence pronounced is void. Externall communion is of two kindes, either in Church or Common wealth. This latter concerneth negotiating, trading and commerce in matters of ciuill course belonging vnto this present life. Excommunication doth not actually depriue a man from the benefit of this, but it remaines lawfull for any, in ciuill affaires, to negotiate with him, to doe him all duties and bounden offices, such as the sonne should do the father, the wife her husband, the subiects their magistrate: for euen to Ethnickes and Pagans such natural seruices be returnable. Ecclesiastical communion is that, wherein we communicate together in those things which in the Church of God concerne his seruice, as publicke praier, preaching of the Word, participation of the Sacraments. This last is cleerly and wholly forbidden the Excommunicare, both vpon warrant of Christ his precept,Matth. 7.6. Giue not holy things vnto dogges. Cast not pearles before swine: as also in regard of their fruit and effects: lest happily they turne vnto their condemnation, because they receiue vnworthily, it being the nature of the Sacrament to profit onely the worthy receiuer. Concerning the preaching of the word, although the vnfaithfull and vnbeleeuers by warrant of the Scripture should haue accesse thereto,He vseth this word so often as being the practise where he liued. that so they may the sooner be reclamed by repentance; yet their case is otherwise who by the Presbytery are giuen vp to Sathan. And although that in former time, they were
not wholly excluded, yet neither were they licenced but respectiuely, as hauing need of rather correction than instruction, conscience than science.
Concerning the end you alleadge very fitly Pope Nicolas saying; That Excommunication, is not poison to destroy, but Physick to recure. Which is true indeed and cleane cuts the throat of your killing office: vnlesse perdy with you to kill and to heale are two words of one signification. For without all question Excommunication and brotherly correction haue both but one end; which end is this, that A brother may be gained, if it be possible, the Church edified, the glory of God therby adua^ced. So saith the apostle in expresse words: 1 Cor. 5. First it is his purpose, to deliuer vp to Sathan the incestuous person for the mortifying of his flesh, that his spirit may be saued. And secondly, the wicked man is reiected from Communion with the faithfull; Iest the Church might happily partake in his infection. His words be these:1. Cor. 5.8. Cast you out therfore the old leauen that you may be a new lumpe. Know you not that a little leauen leaueneth the whole masse? Hereout the third Gods glory, will easily be aduanced, for when mis beleeuing Infidels shall behold that wicked and notorious offendours be in no case tolerated in the Church, it cannot be but they wil greatly commend the founder thereof Iesus Christ our Lord. These things premised, so pregnant that they stand without contradiction; let vs see their agreement and coherence with the practised excommunication in the Papacy, which will appeare void and a meere nullity, Brutum fulmen rather than a censure of the Church, or an holy and sacred action.

First, it is a right resting in the whole Church. But the Pope claimes it absolutely for his owne peculiar, so farre as he may absolue and excommunicate at his pleasure, yea actually doth both bind and loose,Francis. Vargas in R^sp de iurisdict. Episcop. in the most remote places from him. The power (saith Franciscus Vargas) resteth only in his hands, to Excommunicate, Absolue, Dispence, Reserue cases, Conferre Indulgences, Benefices and such like, to make Lawes, enact Statutes, punish, reward, rule and moderate the Hier archie of the Church. All which power, and if there be any other of like nature hereto, is thought to be deriued vpon Inferior Bishops from the chiefe Bishop alone. And not only so, but to rest in him as in the Originall and sure head; from whom al other do receiue that whasoeuer which they haue. As though Christ the springing Well of life, or those Fountains from whence we are willed by Esay to draw foorth saluation with reioycing,Esay 12. were dried vp, and no hope to attaine eternall life, but by recoursing to the Cesterns of Rome. Thus neuer did the auncient Councels decree, it was not their intent that all power in the Church should be confined vpon this proud Tarquine. Read and obserue but these Canons: The 6. of the Nicene Councell: Let ancient Customes bee retained.Concil. Tom. 1. The Churches in Lybia, Egypt and Pentapolis, let them obey the Bishop of Alexandria, seeing this is the vsage in the Church of Rome. In like maner throughout all other prouinces, let the Metropolitanes of Antioch and Ierusalem retaine their rights and priuiledges without impeachment. What singular priuiledge or prerogatiue hath the Bishop of Rome bestowed on him heere, beyond the other his equall Patriarchs?
The 13. Canon of the Councell of Antioch.Concil. Tom. 1. Let no Bishop dare to passe from Prouince to Prouince, and giue orders in Churches there, vnlesse hee bee sent for by the Metrapolitane and the Bishops that bee with him. But if not beeing sent for, or called at all, he shall inordinately and insolently presume to goe and giue Orders, make Ecclesiasticall constitutions, whereto hee hath no right, let there bee a Nullitie of all his acts, himselfe be put vnder censure for his insolency, and punished for his vnreasonable attempts as condemned by this synode for such his presumption. What more can we say vnto the Bish. of Rome, who violently intrudes himselfe without being sent for into all causes in all Churches, taking euery occasion to intermeddle so insolently and impudently as he doth? Of the same argument be the 15.21. and 22. Canons, which expresly forbid all Bishops to enter vpon or meddle with ought in any Diocesse beside their owne. What neede wee more?Can. 6. In the Aphrican Councel there is a Prohibition that the Bishop of the first Sea be not called Prince of Priests or chiefe Priest, or by any such like title as these, but only Bishop of the first Sea. And the 92. Canon of that Councell prouides that no appeales do stand good which are made vnto places beyond the Sea, (that is to the seat of Rome) and if any man shall appeale, he is to be excluded from communion with any within the boundes of Africa. And hereof there were letters written vnto Caelestinus the then Bishop of Rome, wherein the Africans intreat him, that he would forbeare from thence forward to receiue into Communion with him, any man excommunicated by them: which should bee derogatorie to the authoritie
of the Churches of Africa, and the Canons of the Nicene Councell. For, say these Fathers, very wisely and equally haue they prouided, that matters be determined there, and not else, but there where first they had beginning. That it was not to be doubted, but that the spirit of grace would be in such sort present in euery prouince, as to inable the Priest of Christ wisely to see the trueth, and constantly to follow it being seene, especially seeing it was denied none, if he were aggrieued with the sentence of his Ordinarie to appeale from him to a prouinciall or to a generall Councell, vnlesse perhaps a man can imagine that God can giue seuerall men discerning iudgement, and deny it, or not giue it vnto many conuening together in a Councell. And so the first Nullitie in Excommunication Papall is, the Incompetencie (as they terme it) of the Iudge, therfore Incompetent, because hee vsurpeth on an others right, which the Scholemen themselues agnise as sufficient, to annihilate the sentence of Excommunication: vpon the 4. booke of Sentences, and 18. Distinct.
A second Nullity is, that Excommunication is by the Popes denounced against Innocents, as well as Nocents. For they vse to punish not them alone against whom their quarrells lie, but for some one, or few mens sake they rage against Cities, Prouinces, whole Kingdomes, as is to be seene in their Bulls, where Excommunicating Kings, Princes, or Magistrates; they insnare together all their Subiects; which wickednes the Lord doth condemne by his prophet:(...) Ezech. 18.20. The sonne shall not beare the fathers sinne, but the soule which hath sinned, that soule shall die. But this destroyer curseth downe to Hell and deuoureth to perdition, not only
the son for the fathers fault, but onely whole families, * which Augustine condemned,Epist. 75. but populous cities, whole kingdomes, for the offence, if yet offence, of their gouernours. Wherin there is some ods betweene Christ and him, whose Vicar neuerthelesse he needs wil be.^uk 19 10. For * Christ saith, he came to seeke, and to saue that which was lost: but the Pope little priseth myriads of soules bought and redeemed with Christs bloud, so be, he may raigne, and Lord it alone. Christ proclaimeth himselfe The annointed of Iehoua,Esay 61.1. to comfort such as mourn in Sion, to giue vnto them beauty for ashes; the oile of ioy, for mourning; the garment of gladnesse for the spirit of heauinesse, that they might build the old waste places, and raise vp the former desolations, and repaire the cities that were abandoned and waste through many generations. But the Pope turneth vpside downe Common-wealths setled well and in peace, changing mattockes into speares, sithes into swords, and sheathing swords in the bowels of men,Leo the 10. in whose time liued his like, and was a retainer vnto that house, I meane Angelus Poli who vsed to say merily vnto his fellows, Let vs goe ad audiendam fabulam de Iesu Christo. In effect, Let go to Church. forcing kings to quit their kingdomes; altering states, lawes, times at his pleasure; treading vnder foot the crownes of Emperors, by pretext of excommunication, forcing them to leaue their seat royall, and lay their neckes vnder his feet to tread vpon.
The third nullity is from the causes of Excommunication. For tell me, whom euer for Idolatry, or for Atheisme did hee excommunicate? These impieties passe without controlement euen at Rome in the Popes Court, which euery man knows that hath read their stories. For to say nothing of Idolatry, which by prescription in the Romane vse, is now receiued for Religion; was not that Pope a flat Atheist who
in a passage of speech with Cardinall Bembo, called the Gospell of Iesus Christ a fable? And what, I pray you, cause was there at all why Henry the 111. the most Christian King of France, should so be censured, vnlesse for his too great zeale and forwardnesse, in the superstitions of Rome? For as one said very truly:

At Rome you may be what you will,
So that you be a rakehell still.

But lest happily I seeme ouer seuere, against transgressions in the first Table; hearken what some ages since, an ey-witnesse did write:

I tooke a iourney to see Rome, and since I did it see
I haue inough, Then farewell Rome, I'le come againe to thee
When Pandar, Brothel, Buffon, or a Cynede I shall be.

And lest I be said to produce namelesse authours; do but marke, what Baptista Mantuan, a Carmelite Frier, hath written of the maners and customes of Rome.

S. Peters lust worn family, in riot wast their daies,
Exiling far all honesty, when buffons rents do raise
Vpon Gods owne inheritance, when hallowed altars feed
Leud losels, and loose Catamites, within his Church do breed.
What maruell though they rise in wealth, and houses build on high,
If Tyrus sends them scarlet gownes, Th'arabian spicery
And frankincense? they vent out much, temples are set to sale,
Priests, altars, praiers, crownes are sold, yea heauen, nay God and all.


But what do I insist in this, when as Iohannes Casa Archbishop of Beneuento and legat Apostolique with the Venetians in the daies of Iuly the 111. wrot and published a booke in Print in Italian rhythmes,Taxa Cancellariae Apostolicae Luter^e apud Toss. Dionysian. ^520. therein extolling the sinne of Sodomy. And to conclude, The taxing of the chancery of Rome, may witnesse without all contradiction, in what low account be at Rome the most grieuous and capitall offences. The words of that booke are these: The Absolution for him who hath carnally knowen a woman in the church,Grossus, is the 8. part of an ounce, a small fine for such a fault. gross. 6. The Absolution for him that hath had carnally to doe with his owne mother, sister, gossip or kinswoman, gross. 5. Absolution for him that hath killed his father, mother, sister, brother, or other of his kin, if he be a lay man (for were any of them a Clergy man the murtherer must be tied to visit in person the Apostolick sea, gross.) 6. or 7. at most. Absolution for a woman which hath taken downe any potion whereby to destroy the Infant conceiued within her, gross. 5. Not to runne vpon particulars, no sinne so enormous, but with mony may be wiped out, without mony no remission. For as the old rhythme hath it:

The Court of Rome but for the fleece
Seekes not the sheepe at all:
Opening the doore to all that giue,
But th^ emptie stand and call.

Or if you had rather heare the Taxing of the Apostolique Chancery, thus saith that booke: Note you diligently that such graces and indulgences be neuer granted vnto poore men, who because they are not, cannot be comforted. These are not those times, you shall know, wherein it was easier for a Camell to passe thorow the
eie of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of Heauen: But these are golden daies indeed, in which Heauen is purchased by gold, and shut against the poore man, because he hath no gold to buy it.
To the purpose. Papall Excommunication, is commonly grounded vpon these or such like causes: Priuate Hatred, The Popes Credulitie, or else Ambition. Paschall the Second Pope of that name, when Henrie the Fift Emperour Elect came (as the manner was) to Rome to receiue the Imperiall Crowne of the Popes hand, raised such hurlies against his Prince, as put him to stand vpon the guard of his life, and brought him to the hazard of his State. When matters were taken vp and pacified, and the Emperour and Pope agreed together, the Pope gaue his word not to assay to doe ought which any way might preiudice the Imperiall Maiestie; secondly to returne backe againe the right which they had in bestowing of Bishopricks. For farther confirmation of which protestation, when hee receiued the Sacrament with the Emperor, hee is said to haue vsed this execration. Let him so be diuided from the Kingdome of Christ, that shall go about to break this agreement, as this part of that life-giuing body is diuided. And yet for all this, scarse had the Emperor gone out at the City gates, when as the faithlesse and treacherous Pope, reuersed whatsoeuer hee did before, cast Excommunication out against the Emperour, and set new worke in hand against him.A^bas Vrsperg. in P^^lippo. Innocent the 111. dealt as sluttishly with the Emperor Philip, denouncing him Excommunicate for no cause else, but for pretence of his Predecessors cruelty. And when the
newes was brought him of the mans election to the Empire, hee brake out into these franticke and bedlome speeches: Either shall the Pope take Crowne and Kingdome from Philip, or Philip from the Pope his Apostolicall honor. It is impossible to summe vp into a breuiarie the froward and tyrannicall Popish designs and practise against Emperours and Kings, Princes, and Magistrates; only two examples shall be all I will touch, which both euince his great abuse of Excommunication, and touch the Venetians more neere than any else, discouering the long since practised tyranny of the Popes against them.
At Auinion, where it was for 70. yeeres and more.Pope Clement the fift, who kept his Court * in France, vnderstanding the Venetians had taken in Ferrara, presently vpon the newes became stark mad, and without delay thundred out his Excommunication against them; giuing leaue vnto any man by faire meanes or soule to kill as many as hee could,Pabel. Lib. 7. Decad. 9. beeing now iudged enemies of the Romane church, and cast forth from the communion of the faithfull,Supplementum Chronichorum. giuing libertie vnto all Christians whosoeuer, to arrest the Venetians wheresoeuer they met them, to confiscate their goods, sell their bodies as slaues in the markets: which turned so farre vnto their losse and detriment, that the State could not trade nor negotiate with any strangers at all, till at length Francis Dandalo being sent vnto France, from the Senate vnto the Pope, and with much adoe admitted vnto his presence, putting an iron chaine vpon his necke, lay vnder his table, as a suppliant so long till he got this vngentle Clement to yeeld to let fall his moodinesse and restore the Venetians to their former state. For which hee was after
that called the Dogge, because as a dogge he lay chained vnder the Popes dining table. The second example is of Pope Sixtus the Fourth, who proclaimed warres against the King of Naples, for helping Hercules of Este, Duke of Ferrara against the Venetians, whom the Pope did abet in that quarrell with his spiritual and temporall forces.Platina in vita Sixti. 4. But after their agreement with King Ferdinand, the same man with the power of Appulia set vpon the same Venetians, whom he before had fauoured: and not content, stirred vp against them the Princes of Italie, as many as hee could,Supplementum Chronicorum. sentenced them with his Spirituall curse, depriued them of all their, whatsoeuer Dominions, to the vtmost extent of his power: Neither in his life time could they obtaine to be released, hauing not any cause or pretext for his doings more than that hee feared their growing too great, would put himselfe and other Italian Princes to haue cause to looke neere vnto themselues. This was in his time a most holy Father,Petro a Ruuiere Ioan Textor. Wessel. Gron de Indulgent. whose base borne sonne, a worthie Impe of such a Sire, Peter Cardinall Priest of Rome, Patriarch of Constantinople, Legat a Latere for the Pope, prodigally stantinople, Legat a Latere for the Pope, prodigally lauished in two yeeres space 300000. duckats in luxurie and vaine expenses, who also together with the Cardinall Saint Lucy, interceded with his Father for themselues, and their families, to haue male stewes permitted them the three hottest moneths of the yeere, and had a grant from that most holy Father Sixtus, with this clause: Be it vnto you as you desire.
But it will be replied: It is a new world now, and other manners are now in vse. And this new world begun and hallowed with their Iubilies, not at Rome
alone, but euerie Hamlet and Village vnder Romane obeisance hath brought vs new causes of Excommunication. But pardon mee. The grounds vpon which the Venetians bee excommunicate, are not any whit better than those wee haue rehearsed. For neither is (I trow) the State of the Romish religion in hazard there, whereto the Venetians are most zealously inclined, nor yet that obedience due, as they call it, to the Apostolique Sea: from which they professe and protest vnto the world they detract not any thing, which is theirs by diuine right. Neither is it any question of manners, after which though neuer so corruptly depraued, the Pope makes no inquisition at al. But it is a question meerely politicall, with which the Popes should not intermeddle, if they do lust to giue eare vnto Christ his Commandement,Math. 20.26. or were disposed to follow his example, who though inuited, would not haue any thing to do with ciuill cases and legall controuersies* Luc. 12.
A fourth Nullitie is, in that Papall Excommunication, doth not only forbid the parties censured, all Ecclesiasticall Communion, but ouer and aboue, all Politicke and Ciuill:See the Bulls of Paul the iii ag. Henry the viii. of England. of Sixtus 5. against King of Nauar, and Prince of Conde. and of Pius 5. against Queene Elizabeth. as namely that in Mariage, expresly against the Apostles decrees, 1. Cor. 7.8. and lawfull subiection vnto Magistrates. For it is their manner in their Bulls Excommunicatorie, to absolue the subiects from their Othe of Obedience, and any other bond or dutie in which they bee tied: to expose the possessions and goods of Princes as a pray and a spoile to any that will seeke them, so as it shall be lawfull without denouncing warre, proclaiming hostilitie, by secret practises, or open force for any
man to pursue, to apprehend or murther them, to depriue their issue of al right to succeed, and make them infamous and vncapable: to Incite the Nobilitie and Comminaltie to armes, Interdict the suspended from any commerce or negotiation with other nations: to determine the leagues and articulations of Princes, and States made with them, to be void and of no validitie; and lastly, to forbid them Christian buriall. Which, what is it else but in detestable sort to violate the law of Nature and Nations, to set vp iniustice euerie where, to teach children to hate their parents, subiects to be periured, perfidious, rebellious, disoobedient, and practise such Papall virtues as these? And therefore it was not without cause that Laurentius Valla a Putritian of Rome, said: That Rome was a schoole wherein men learned to lie, to deceiue, sweare, forsweare. Christ taught no such lesson,Matth. 22.21. when hee bad; Giue vnto Caesar the things that bee Caesars, and vnto God that which belongs vnto him. It is not the doctrine of Saint Paul,Rom. 13.1. who willeth euerie soule to be subiect vnto higher Powers. Whether Apostle, or Euangelist, or Prophet, or whosoeuer hee bee, saith Chrysostome; for this subiection doth not in any case crosse our pietie. Peter gaue no such command, when hee willeth seruants to bee subiect in all feare vnto their Lords, not vnto the good and gentle alone,1. Pet. 2 but euen the froward and peruerse. Happily it will be said, but not Excommunicated. Surely yes, if the person which stands Excommunicate, be not any otherwise to bee accounted of, then as an Ethnicke, and a Publicane: with whom in ciuill negotiations the Iewes did not refraine to communicate. For liuing in and vnder
an * Ethnicke state,The Romans by deputies. they yeelded obedience vnto thei positiue lawes, and to the Publicans (Farmers of the common reuenues) they paied Customes and tribute mony, trading also with them in other things. Which right whensoeuer the Popes of Rome went about to infringe by thundring curses and Excommunications, God from Heauen hath disclosed the fearfulnesse of his vengeance against the forsworne Traitors: as is plaine in that miserable end of Ralfe Duke of Sweland,Antoninus vita Henr. 4. Abbas V^sperg Hen. 4. and alij. whom Gregorie the Seauenth did set vp in place of the Emperour Henrie the Fourth. Which Ralph, being at the will of the Pope crowned by the Arch-Bishop of Mentz, wretched man that he was, for in lieu of a vaine crowne which stood not long vpon his head, hee vnderwent an infortunate crosse: beeing vanquished in fight by his Prince, who when hee yeelded vp the ghost, shewed his right hand cut off in fight, as a memoriall of his treachery vnto the Bishops his Instigators, vsing withall these wordes: See you heere that hand with which I bound my selfe by solemne oth neuer to iniurie, neuer to contriue against my Lord Henrie: which oth to breake, your perswasion, and the Apostolicall commandement hath induced mee. Behold and consider, in how right a course yee haue led him that was content to be ruled by you.
The fift Nullitie of papall Excommunication remaineth behind, to bee drawen from the end of that Censure, which is the sauing of his Soule, in setting foorth the glorie of God, procuring the good of the Church. These ends how little root they haue euer taken (time out of minde) in the Popes of Rome, all good men haue well noted, and many, not the worst
haue deplored. Roderico bishop of Zamora,Roder. Zamor. lib. 2 spei vitae hum ca* 3. Castellane that is, keeper of the Castle Saint Angelo. * Castellane and Referendary to Pope Paul the 2. in his booke intituled, The glasse of mans life, where he speaketh of the anxieties and cares which do accompany al Popes, hath these words: Their first let and hinderance are domesticall cares, then their vniust desire, or to speak plaine, greedie greedinesse, to aduance their kindred, and which flesh and blood doth reueale vnto them, to perpetuate their linage, kindred and name.The house of Parma at this day from Paul the third a Farnescan. For so haue some Popes been resolued to make themselues the rootes and raisers not of one but many noble and famous houses, the first progenitors of mightie Princes. Such aspiring desires, want not the Presidents of ancient Popes, much lesse shall they want fautors and furtherers. Learned and vnlearned will perswade them to it, some will cite fables, some alleadge Scriptures and detorted authorities, to tickle the Popes itching eares. (Heare him what he saith (good Baronius) and learne of him what counsell to giue your Pope Paul.) Loe, will they say, What man euer hated his owne flesh? For Christ himself whose actions euery Pope his Vicar should follow, when he loued his owne, loued them vnto the end. He exalted those that were allied vnto him. But whether did he exalt them vnto the crosse.Caesar Borgia. Guicciard. lib. 4. Hist. Ital. And this mind doubt had Pope Alexander the sixt, when he raised his sonne Caesar, from a Cardinals hat, to the royall dignity of Duke of Valentia, by prophane chaffare of holy things. For (saith Nicolaus de Clamengijs, speaking of Popes) when exceeding great abundance of worldly plenty and insatiable auarice, associated with ambition, had seated themselues in Clergymen, treading downe the vertuous branches of ancient better daies, as it could
not but fall out, so it came to passe, Pride made themswel, desire of great place puffed them vp, they wasted their daies and bodies in wantonnesse. Three Lords they had cruell exactors to content, Luxury first, which exacted vpon them, the pleasures of wine, of sleepe, of feastings, of musicke, of Iugles, of pandars, of whores. Secondly Pride, which would haue the pompous pageantly shewes of high storied houses, Castels, Towers, Pallaces, royall and gorgeous furniture, gay apparrell, horses retinue. Thirdly, Auarice vnsatiable, which prouided and stored vp heaps of coine, to maintaine the premised brauerie; or at least if that needed not, to feede their eies, and giue them content in viewing the stamp of their come. To fulfill the behest of these Lordes, and accomplish all their desires, the golden age of Saturne (whereof the Poets fable) would vneth suffice, if againe the world might behold such times. And because not any though neuer so fatte a Bishopricke, is able sufficiently to content these three Harpyes, they haue bethought them of other helps and furtherances in the case. For the Popes perceiuing, how that the profits and reuenues of the Romane Bishoprick, the Patrimonie of Saint Peter greater than kingdomes, though none indeed very much impaired, by their negligence would not bee inough to maintaine the credit and height of that State, which they as Emperors and kings of Nations were determined to exalt: therfore they haue intruded vpon other mens flocks which broght forth yong in multitudes, yelded plenty of wool and milk. Thus you see the causes which moued the Popes to trie so many waies to bring them in treasure, abusing their office and pastorall charge in euery particular point thereof: as if Christ had commanded them not
to feed the flocke, but to fleece them, to flea them, to bowell them, to eat them. For to begin with their incroachments: they haue not onely seised the creation of Bishops, and collations of all Ecclesiasticall dignities into their owne hands, abolishing the ancient right of elections; but (to speake in the phrase of Nic. de Clamengijs) that the golden currents might flow more abundantly from all partes of the world into their Court, they haue debard and depriued all Diocesans and Patrons of their right of prese^tation, or any way disposing of their benefices; forbidding vpon pain of their curse (see what vse they make of excommunication) that they be not so presumptuously bold (for in such termes their rescripts do run) as to institute any man vnto any benefice vnder their charge, vntill those were prouided for, euery man, or did refuse to accept that benefice, vnto whom they had giuen any aduousins themselues in reuersion. Since which time, good God, what swarmes haue there been in all places, at all times, of those that haue gaped for such presentations! Men taken not from the study or from the schooles, but from the plough and manuary trades, to haue charge of soules and pastorall cares committed vnto them. Men that vnderstood the Arabian tongue aswell as they did the Latin (a perfect patern of our times) that could hardly read, nay more, I am ashamed to speake it, not able to know A from B.
And these exactions not yet sufficing to satiate the rauen of the Romish Popes and Cardinals,The words at creation of a Cardinall be: Esto Princeps mundi and frater noster. ten thousand shifts were yet further inuented to get and heape money vnto their cofers, whereof this is no place to speake. For the Colledge of Cardinals growing daily greater, the burthen grew greater vpon all countries,
Because it it was held an absurd thing, that such as were aduanced to that place in the Church, as to bee fellowes vnto kings, should not bee prouided in answerable sort, but stand as hungry and starueling mercenaries. So that to maintaine and beare out this pride, all States both Temporall and Ecclesiasticall were oppressed. From hence came the retaining of so many benefices and preferments, in nature repugnant one to another, while the same man is, both a Moncke and a Canon, Regular and Secular, vnder one seuerall hab it, hauing and enioying the Rights, Degrees, Offices, Benefices, of all Religions, Orders, Professions. Insomuch as that speech spoken of the Iesuites, A Iesuit is a man of all professions, may better be fitted vnto the Cardinals. Peter of Aliaco Cardinall of Cambray in his booke of Reforming the state of the Church which he wrot and presented to the Councell of Constance, is very earnest to haue these abuses taken away, where he calleth those Pluralities of Church-liuings, a monstrous, and many waies scandalous offence. This is the cause why Iubilies and Indulgences be so dearely bought,See the hundred grieuances of Germany. grieu 3. that they draw foorth the gold and godly life of whole kingdoms, as the Princes and States of Germany complained at the Diet at Norimberge in the yeare 1522. Their gold is purloined, being by the impious Collectors of Rome transported out of the country into Rome, godlinesse is banished and cleane extinct, while men presuming vpon absolution, let loose the reines of liberty vnto all impiety.
To conclude, this bottomlesse pit of greedy desire hath sent foorth excommunications and cursings against
Princes and Magistrates, as may plainly bee euicted by these examples. Gregory the ninth charged Frederic the Emperour, that vpon paine of the churches censure, he should with all expedition and possible speed,Platina in the life of Gregory the ninth. passe into Asia against the Infidels. And because he was thought to make no very great haste, as he had threatned, he accursed him indeed. Frederic appalled at this proceeding, besought the Pope that he might be assoiled, but could in no case obtaine it, till he had paid in, to the vie of the Church of Rome 120000. ounces of gold. King Iohn of England, standing excommunicate by Pope Innocent the 3.Paulus Aemilius. Platina in the life of Innocent the 3. fearing the French King would get his kingdome from him, whom the Pope had incited to warre against him; that he might bee receiued into grace with his fatherhood, was constrained to make England and Ireland his tributarie States, and for them to pay yearely vnto Rome 100. markes of gold: which Peter (whose successour he vaunteth to bee) I thinke would neuer haue done, who so constantly refused Simon Magus money: Thy money bee together with thee to perdition, that supposest Gods gifts can be bought with money. Their chaffaring of holy things so as they doe, is proofe they succeed Simon, not Peter, but Magus. And to draw all vnto an issue,By a statute of (...) as it were. what other cause in truth is there now of this their contending with, and excommunicating the State of Venice, but this, that the carefull wise Magistrate would restraine in some small measure that Romish rauin and insatiable rapine?
And so your Popes censure, o Baronius, being clearely proued so many waies void, ought not in any
sort to be feared, especially now in these daies of ours, in which the light of the Gospell hath certainely disclosed what is the true vse of Excommunication, which for so many ages past, the Popes haue, by exceeding strange illusions, changed into a most impious tyranny.Plinius lib. 8. ca. 16. They write, that the Lion a fierce and cruell beast, is exceedingly afraid of the running of cart wheeles, and empty coatches, but especially trembles at the sight of fire. These Lions of Venice are not so, who often heeretofore being deluded with the vaine rumbling of the Papall cursings, haue termed now at last,Galli, alluding to the French in the ambiguitie of words who heertofore sided with the Popes against Venice. The Armes of France. Saint Antonies fire. Lib. 22. cap. 19. Mushromes much eaten in Italy, and haue a poisonous qualitie in them saith Atheneus. But he meaneth the pride and vanitie, the word being fungus. In fasciculo rerum expetendarum. that your fire is no better than a painted flame, and the thunder-cracks of your terrible Salmoneus, no more to be feared then childrens rattles. For so long as the Cocks set not vp their combes, not affright with their crowing, the howling of these night birds are but toies. Or what cause is there why the Lions of Venice should be afraid of your fire who carrie about them Lilies, an excellent remedie, as Physitians write, against the disease called Ignis sacer; and not so alone, but as Pliny writeth, against the stinging of serpents and poison of mushromes?
Indeed I confesse the lightning of Gods seruants is not rashly to bee vilepended, and yet there is no cause to stand in feare therof alwaies, especially when, as Vdalrichus Huttenus a knight of Germany writeth it proceedeth from Humane passion. I tremble at the indignation of Christ; I feare not the displeasure of the Pope; and this is not Christs cause, but the Popes quarrell. These nets are not cast to catch soules, but to draw in gold and siluer: for seeing that the late Censure of Clement the Eight against the state of Ferrara,
thriued so well, as to enlarge Peters patrimonie with an accesse, of not a sew townes these Scarlet Fathers haue made them selues a promise, that this against Venice shall speed as well. But I wish them take heed, lest Ill counsell fall heauiest on the giuers.Iohan de Mandeuilla lib. 1 Venetians by their long continued trade with the Grecians, may happely haue learned to answere Paul 5. to the same purpose as the Greekes sometimes did Iohn the two and twentieth: Wee beleeue thy authoritie is within thy owne dominions supreme: we can not indure thy pride, which is extreamen: we are not able to satiate thy Auarice. The Diuell be with thee, because God is with vs.
Now therefore to returne from whence we haue digressed: by the premises (Baronius) you may perceiue, the vanitie and follie of that your exhortation which you annex vnto your Pope.B Go on then a Gods name holy Father, as you haue begun, and suppose not that no man can iustly tax your too much hastinesse, etc. For it had been your part first to haue proued the thing right and honest, wherto you would lead him, which failing to do, you shall haue no thankes for your idle attempt in seeking to match Paul your Pope in equall termes with Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles, much lesse to preferre him before, and incite him as you do, to proceed. There is no delay can excuse, much lesse commend that which originally was vniust: nay rather, the longer debated and demurred, the greater the fault in execution. But this palpable flatterie makes me remember a worthie saying of Roderigo Bishop of Zamora:In spec^ritae hum. lib. 2. c. 3. The Pope though he hath all things a yet euermore stands in need of one thing, viz.
a faithfull Counsellor to tell him the trueth: For from the highest vnto the lowest, euerie one is giuen to sooth him vp, they tell him smooth tales, but all to deceiue him: Cunningly they aduise him, for their owne aduantage: Fraudulently they supplicate to attaine their own wishes; and for that flatterie is associate with guile, as euery man can tell, they combine among themselues like craftie companions as they bee, not to crosse or thwart the one the other. And as the scope of an Orator is to perswade, the end of Physicke is to recure; so the intent of a flatterer is to colour and deceiue. The fowlers call is a pleasing note, but the end is to deceiue the bird: And as Ierome said once; Poisons are giuen mixt with hony. These are the men that make God and the Pope fellowes, ascribing some Deitie vnto him. But and if I mistake not the trueth, the Popes should indeed heerein shew themselues like God, if they would command such Varlets to the halter; but out of all doubt, true seruers of God, if such coosining deceiuers were well punished for their paines. So far that Bishop. But that which I maruell at most of all, is, that Baronius, a man who knoweth all things, the skilfullest antiquarie in the Church stories that liueth, the man, who when first hee gaue his mind to write,Genesed out of Terence. set it downe as his principall intent and purpose, that the lies he committed to the presse, might finde acceptance with the vulgar sort, that hee should set down so barsh a comparison of Paul the fift, with Gregorie the Seuenth, and Alexander the third; wherof the first was the vilest Varlet that euer sate in that sea, and the latter to bee detested for his intolerable pride.B I for my part, (so you say) do professe ingenuously that I reioice in my Spirit, I will say with the Apostle,
I do ouerabound in ioy. And let mee also speake in the Apostles wordes:Act. 23. God shall smite thee thou painted wall, that darest belch foorth of thy vnsanctified throat the wordes of so great an Apostle, who as truly canst say with a pure conscience which hee once spake, I vse great boldnesse of speech toward you,2. Cor. 7.4.I glorie greatly in you, I am filled with comfort, and am exceedingly ioyous in all our tribulation, as thou canst those former words of the same Apostle, I haue wronged no man, I haue corrupted no man, I haue defrauded no man: when the words thou speakest, these verie wordes, are only to wrong, to defraud, to corrupt.B But let vs heare the iust cause of this so supera bounding ioy. * When I behold in my decrepit age Gregorie or Alexander in Peters chaire. Heare o you Kings, hearken o Princes, giue eare o Potentates of the Christian world; by the testimonie of Caesar Baronius, a Reuerend old man, a sincere Cardinall, an eie witnesse, a man of credit, Gregorie sitteth in Peters chaire, not (you must know) Saint Gregory the first, whose Christian speech this is; I speake it with confidence,Greg. in epist. lib. 4 epist. 30. whosoeuer he be, that names himselfe, or would be named, vniuersall Bishop, in that his pride, hee sheweth himselfe the forerunner of Antichrist, that aduaunceth himselfe beyond all equalls: who calleth the Title of Vniuersall Bishop, wherein the now Popes do so much glory, a Swelling, a new name, a word of rashnesse,See the 2. and 24. episties of the 4. and 6. booke. Proud, Pompaticall, Peruerse, Superstitious, Prophane, Impious, a Name of Error, of Singularity, Vanitte, Hypocrisie, Blasphemie. That Gregorie, I say, the first of his name, who wrote with such reuerence of Arian Princes:Lib. 7. epist. 1. Whereof I would haue
you informe your gratious soueraignes,Lib. 7. Ep. ^. That seruant, would haue made my self a party in contriuing the destruction of the Lumbards, there had not been any nation at this day of that name to haue had either King, or Duke, or Earie. But because I feare God, I dare not make a party to destroy any man. This is not the man who sits in Peters chaire, but, at which my hart trembles, that Gregory, who first was called Hildebrand, as much as,see Antonin. p. 2. Benno the Cardinal, of the life, and acts of Gregory the VII. otherwise called Hildebrand the life of Henry iiii. Sigebert, and others. A fire brand of hell, Gregory, I say, that Coniurer, the Monke, who cursed the Emperour Henry iiii. and made him come vnto him so farre as Canusium, without his robes royall, in woollen cloth, bare footed and bare legged, in a sharpe winter, and there for all the meanes he could make by himselfe, by mediators, in most base sort submitting himselfe, yet made him dance attendance three whole daies. Who hauing at last receiued him to grace, vpon another forged quarrell, did accurse him again, depriued him of his ancient hereditary right in collation of Ecclesiasticall preferments, and made that most vnequall and intolerable constitution, which princes should in no case suffer: If heereafter any man do receiue the inuesture into a Bishopricke or an Abbey, at the hand of any lay persons, let him in no case be held as an Abbat or Bishop, nor haue audience, as an Abbat or Bishop: and moreouer wee denie him the grace of S. Peter and forbid him to come within the Church. That Gregory who absolued the Princes of Germanie from the oath of allegeance which they haue taken, causing them to take the field against their soueraigne and lawfull Prince by him deposed: setting vp Ralph
Duke of Sweueland in his roome, vnto whom hee sent a crowne of gold with this motto:

The rocke to Peter gaue the crowne
Peter to Radolph sends it downe.

That Gregory sate in Peters chaire, who at length was abandoned of his owne men, saw the city of Rome surprised, himselfe laid prisoner in Crescentius or Angels Castell, after that exiled to Selerno, where he confessed his capitall treason against Saint Peter, Gods Church, his Lord the Emperour, which by the Diuels perswasion hee put in practise, and so in horrible anguish and torment of mind miserably ended his wretched daies; hauing formerly in the Councels of Brixia and Mentz, beene depriued of all Papall dignitie, condemned as a breaker of good orders in the Church, as a disturber of the Empire, a sower of scandals, a church-robber, a magitian, a relapse from the saith, giuen to diuinations and to sorcery, one that had a familiar spirit with him.
And as for Alexander the third, his pride intolerable appeareth hence. Frederick the second of that name, being by him formerly excommunicate, came vnto Venice to make his peace with him, promising to vnder goe any penance; the agreement passed betweene them so, Alexander the Pope standing in the doore of S. Markes Church, in the view and sight of all people, bad the Emperour cast himselfe downe vpon the ground, and there in open audience desire absolution, which he accomplishing, the Pope setting his foot vpon the Emperors necke, said these words: It is written,Psal. 91. Thou shalt walke vpon the Aspe and the Basiliske, thou shalt tread the Lion and the Dragon vnder
foot. The Emperour heereat protesting he did it not To him but to Peter, the Pope replied, Both to mee and Peter: putting himselfe not only aboue the Emperour, but before S. Peter also.
And these are the men, Gregory the VII. and Alexander the III. whom Baronius calleth, the Principall rootes of the decaied liberty of the Church. And with whom he dareth match Paul the Fift, present Pope. Surely it bodeth no good to Kings, to Princes, to the Christian world, vnlesse he missed happily in his parallels, which I rather thinke the man did, than that the Christian world should feare any such vaine coniecturall opinion.And hee had almost beene in the Conclaue of Leo the eleuenth, wanting but 5. or 6. voices. But so the case standeth, Baronius, if he will be some body, I had almost said, if he will be Pope, must resolue vpon somewhat worthy the halter, or the hangman.
But happily heere he will except and say, The Emperour Henry was a most froward and peruerse man, and so worthy to be handled as he was by Hildebrand. But sure both are false: For neither was he such as you defame him, nor if he had beene, was he so to be vsed of Christ his Vicar, who ought to haue hearkned vnto his Masters words;Matth. 11. Infasciculo rerum expetendarum. Learne of me, for and humble minded. That the Prince was not so, appeareth by his life, written by one that lined in those daies, not very long after his death: where hee giueth him high commendations, for his loue to God, liberality to the poore, iust carriage toward all. I haue not, saith the writer, any priuate cause of griefe, piety compels me to bewaile the publick losse; when he left vs, iustice left the earth, peace went away, treachery succeeded in place of faithfulnesse, the Quire of Gods seruants
held their peace, etc. Monasteries lost their patron, Cloysters their Father, etc. Alas, what a losse hadst thou o Mentz, in so worthy a workemaster, to repaire the ruines of thy Monastery! Had he liued to consummate the worke begun in thee, he had made it answer able to that famous pile at Spire, where hee raised the Monasterie from the ground, and brought it to perfection, so huge a piece of building, so beautified exceedingly with excellent ingrauerie, equall, nay exceeding the praise and commendation of all the antick monuments of kings etc. As for you poore people, you haue cause to grieue, for now you are become poore indeed, hauing lost your comforter in your pouerty: he fed you with his owne hands, he washed you, he clothed all your nakednesse; Lazarus lay not before his gate, but was set downe at his table. But with you, Baronius, as to Kill and Feed is all one, so is there no difference betweene piety and peruersnesse: or to speake in plaine termes, Those are the Peruersest men aliue with you, who take a way knowledge of your peruersenesse. But it is no maruell this good Emperor is so stiled by you, who durst sharpen your railing pen against Henry the iiii. the presently most Christian French King, by the hand of God preserued hitherto, to suruiue all murthering emissaries subornd against him, and worthy to line Nestors yeares. For if you remember, in the Epistle to Panigarolla prefixed before the first Tome of your Annales, speaking there of the siege of Paris,1. Tem. An. ex editione Mogunt. 1601. a a towne that stood against the King, thus you write: But yet at length, though somewhat late, wicked Benadad, so you terme his most Christian Maiesty, in vain assaulting that City, wherein Eliseus you meane Panigarola,
the firebrand of war and Doctor of treason, seeing all his hopes dashed and come to naught, hath left the siege and is dislodged: which words, lest they might incense the King, are, I know not by whose aduise rased one of that copy, which is in the Kings library at Paris, the leafe being taken out of the booke, as by the letters in the Register appeares, but may bee found and seene, in all other copies whatsoeuer that go abroad in mens hands. Thus you make no bones to call the Lords anointed most Impious, Wilfull, Benadads Nay you prefer the butchering of them, for so haue some of your Popes done, before the worke of our Redemption, as is euident by the speech of Sixtus the fifth, which he made vnto the Cardinals in the Consistorie at Rome the xj of September in the yeere 1589. vpon the murther of Henrie the Third.
Come wee now to that conclusion which you deduce from the such worthy premises before specified. You haue the same triall,B you say, to try. Against whom good Sir? What, against the Venetians? See how fitly your proofe doth fit the purpose. These ruines lie,B that I may say with Esay, in your handes. I acknowledge Esaies words,Esay 3. and withall confesse that hee foresheweth the State of the people of the Iewes shall be so full of trouble, of miserie, so farre past hope of al recouery, that it shal be impossible to find a man, who vpon any intreaty wil take vpon him the gouernment, and ordering of that State, for feare of dangers and despaire of doing good. One shall take a friend of his owne kindred by the bosome and say:Esay 3 6. Thou hast cloathing, thou shalt bee our head, and stay this mine with thy hand. Then what followes? But he shall swear and
say I can not help you. I will not bee your Lord, there is neither meat nor clothing in my house, make mee therefore no ruler of the people. The Venetians, I dare say, wil vse no such speech vnto your Pope, neither if they should, would the Pope make them the Prophets answer, vnlesse peraduenture in some such sort as hee vseth in the day of his Consecration, when rising vp from his dirty seat, after the Cardinals vttered these speeches; He raiseth the lowly out of the dust, and the poore out of the mire, that he may set him with Princes,Lib. 1. Ceremon. sect. 7. and possesse the seat of glorie, to take out of the Chamberlains lappe sitting by him, as much mony as hee can graspe in his hand, (and yet there is neither siluer or gold in his lappe, nor doth hee take any out) and cast it vnto the people, with these words, Siluer and gold haue I none:Act. 4 Or else when he is bereft of all power, vsurped (as one day he must needs be, according to that Prophecy Reuel. 17.16.) then he shal be inforced to say: In my house is neither bread nor clothing. Wherto, that you haue any reference, or that it is your purpose to forspeak that, I do not, nor I can not say it.
It is not my purpose to insist vpon that which followeth in Baronius his writing, lest I might ouercloy the reader. For that which hee hath touching succession to Peter, and the promise made vnto him, hath been so often alledged and refuted, that to shape an answer thereto, were againe to do which is alreadie done, and to haue my labour for my pains. For as that vngratious Iulian being beside his right wits, would haue it be beleued,Socrates in Histor. Eccles. that the soul of Great Alexander was in him; so the Popes of Rome, out of the same phrensie, do perswade themselues that Saint
Peters soule by right of Succession dwelleth in them. And therupon whatsoeuer honour or right Saint Peter had, they claime it as hereditarie vnto themselues, and make it their owne: And so instile themselues Peters Successors. For though we should grant that this promise alleadged, And the gates of hell shall not preuaile, did belong to Peter alone, which yet is false and not granted, what hath the pope to do therewith? or what hath he to do with Saint Peter? what one thing is there wherein he doth partake with him? In preaching the Gospell? but the Pope preacheth not. In feeding the Flocke? neither doth hee feed any flocke. In exalting himselfe aboue Kings and Princes? Peter did not so, hee neuer so much as drempt thereof. What then? In succession vnto and sitting in Peters chaire at Rome? But Peter when that priuiledge was conferred on him by Christ, was in Palestina, not at Rome, and should haue enioied it, although he neuer had seene Rome. Away then with this Pythagoricall Transanimation, by which the soule of Peter, the Indowments of Peter, the Sanctitie of Peter, are transfused and go vnto all Siluesters, all Hildebrandes, all Sergiusses, or Hogges snouts, all Iulies, Sixties, Gregories the Successors of Peter.
That which you alleadge, Baronius, out of Ieremie; I haue made the a Pillar of iron, and a wall of brasse,Ier. 1. B deserueth to bee laughed at and contemned. As if that good man Ieremie, who subiected himselfe vnto the state of Kings, and by them was cast in prison, against whom the Princes, and people, men and woemen, great and small, did barke and exclaime, were masked in robes royall, and led along with
princely pompe, his Papall triple diademe on his head, to rule the rulers of the earth, and reigne ouer them with plenary power? or as if a man might imagin, not be held a mad man for his such imagination, that long before the birth of Christ the first stone of the Papacie was laid in Ieremie. Such like franticks bee those fellowes who conceit that the originall of Monckerie was from Elias, or yet more ancient from Adam, (a Gods name) before Eue was made out of his side.
This is ridiculous, but that which followeth, blasphemous; and what Christian eare can endure to hear it, that this Parasite claweth his Pope withall? Remember you stand as a rocke in the church,B Esay 8. against which which who so dasheth, shall be dashed in pieces; which euen by the witnesse of Saint Peter, is nothing else, then to cast Christ Iesus, to whom alone this doth agree,1. Pet 2. from his high Throne of Maiestie. Yet this is that smooth eloquence of Rome, not misliked by the Popes: from whence these flowers of the Canonists came; The Pope is in Primacie Abel, in Zeale Elias, in Mildnesse Dauid, in Power Peter, in Vnction Christ. From whence that acclamation came, directed once vnto the Pope: Thou art all, and ouer all.In the last laterane Councell. All power is giuen thee in Heauen and Earth. But lie and flatter as fast as you can, Christ at length will winne the day. And that seducer Sathan, together with the beast and false prophet shall bee cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,Apoc. 20. and be tormented day and night for euer and euer.

Euen so Lord Iesu come:
Apoc. 22.
Amen.





THE BVLL OF POPE PAVLVS the Fift, against the Common wealth and Senate of Venice: With the Protestation of the said Duke and senate.
PAVL Bishops, Seruant of the Seruants of God. To our most deare and venerable brethren the Patriarches, Archbishops, Bishops, and our beloued Sons, Vicars, Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates aswell Secular as Regular, and other persons Ecclesiasticall, appointed and ordeined throughout the whole Common wealth and Seigniory of Venice, Salutations and Apostolike benediction. We haue beene giuen to vnderstand that the Duke and Senate of the Common wealth and Seigniory of Venice haue for certaine yeares made in their Councels many and diuers Decrees and Statutes, contrary, not only to the authority of the Sea Apostolike, liberty and
immunity of the Church, to generall Councels and Sacred Canons: but also to the constitutions and decrees of the Bishops of Rome. And amongst others that about the 23. of May in the yeare 1602. taking occasion of certaine processe and difference moued betweene Doctor F. Zabarella, on the one part, and the Monkes of the Monastery of Praxilia of the order of S. Bennet, otherwise S. Iustin in the Diocesse of Padoua on th'other part: They had ordeined that the foresaid Monkes from thencefoorth, and for alwaies after should haue no action for, vnder any title or colour whatsoeuer, to be preferred vpon the goods Ecclesiasticall possessed by laie persons vnder title of Emphiteuse, and cannot by right of preference or reunion of the propriety with the vsufruit, or of extinction of the persons comprised in the inuestiture, or for any other cause challenge vnto themselues the propriety of the foresaid goods, but only the right of the direct dominion: declaring that this shall take place, Doresnauant, hereafter, aswel for th'other persons Ecclesiasticall, Monasteries and other religions places being in their Seigniory and territory of their obedience. And about the sixteenth of Ianuary 1603. renuing (as they say) certaine Statutes and Decrees made by their predecessors, to this effect, That any, be he Lay or Ecclesiastical, may not build Churches, Monasteries, Hospitals and other places of piety and deuotion without speciall permission of the Seigniory; they had againe ordeined in their Councell that the same should take place in all places vnder their subiection, vpon paine to all transgressors of banishment, or perpetuall imprisonment, and confiscation
of the ground and sale of the edifices. And moreouer the said Duke and Senate the 26. of March 1605. following an other decree, made by the same Senate in the yeere 1536. by the which (as they affirme) it was expresly forbidden, that any, vnder certaine penalties contained in the foresaid decree, might net alienate in the same Citie and Duchie of Venice, nor leaue by will and testament, or donation betweene the liuing any goods immoueable, for pious and religious causes, nor bind ouer or pawne to such intent, but only for a certaine time there expressed; a thing neuer before receiued or put in practise: had againe not only made the lame inhibition, but also expresly prohited the alienations of the foresaid immoueable goods made in fauour of the Ecclesiasticall persons without the permission of the said Senat: had moreouer extended the foresaid decree and penalties therein contained to all lands vnder their obedience, and had caused it to be published throughout all places and townes of their Seigniory: ordaining that all the foresaid vnmoueable goods which were sound to haue beene sold or otherwaies aliened, besides the paine of nullity, should be confiscate and sold, and the price thereof diuided betweene the Magistrate executing the tenor of the foresaid decree, his officers, and the informer and others, as hath beene reported vnto vs to be at large set out in the said decree, and mandates of the said Duke and Senate. Moreouer that the said Duke and Senate had caused to be imprisoned Scipio Sarracino Canon of Vicenza, and Brandelino Valdemariuo of Fornoue Abbat of the Monastery or Abbey of Neruesa in the Diocesse of Tarrase, persons


placed in dignity Ecclesiasticke, and this for certaine crimes, which are pretended to haue beene committed by them in the towne of Vicenza, and other places, vnder pretence that the connisance thereof belonged vnto them, and that it is of their Iurisdiction, grounding themselues vpon certain priuiledges granted, (as they pretend) to the said Duke and Senate, by certaine of our predecessours, Popes: wherein they preiudice the right of the Church, and impugne the liberty and immunity Ecclesiastical, and authority of the holy Sea Apostolike. And because this turneth to the great scandale of the Church, and the perdition of the soules of the said Duke and Senate: insomuch as hauing dared to publish the forsaid Decrees and Statutes, they haue thereby incurred the Ecclesiasticall censures ordeined by the sacred Canons of generall Councels, and by the decrees and constitutions of the Bishops of Rome, and the penaltie of goods and lands which they hold of the Church, of the which penalties and censures they cannot bee absolued nor discharged but by vs, or our successour the Pope for the time being: and that moreouer they are vnable and vncapable to enioy the benefit of the foresaid absolution, vntill they haue actually reuoked the said Statutes and Decrees by them published, and returned all againe that thereof hath ensued to his former estate. For that also the said Duke and Senate, after many fatherly admonitions, which to them haue beene made on our part, they haue made no account to reuoke the said Decrees and Statutes, and that they still keepe prisoners the said Canon Saracino, and Abbat Brandelino, and that they haue taken
no order to put them (as they ought) into the handes of our Nuntio, and of the holy Sea Apostolique.
Wee, who must in no case suffer that the libertie and immunitie of the Church, and our authoritie, and of the holy Sea Apostolique be violated, and despised, following the Decrees of many generall councels, and the examples of our predecessors, Innocentius the Third, Honorius the Third, Gregorie the Ninth, Alexander the Fourth, Clement the Fourth, Martin the Fourth, Boniface the Eight, Boniface the Ninth, Martin the Fift, Nicolas the Fift, and other Bishops of Rome, which haue held this holy Sea before vs, some whereof haue reuoked the like statures as void of themselues, and declared them void, and of no force or vertue, being made against the libertie and immunitie of the Churche, and others haue yet gone further, euen to excommunicate the authors of such statutes and ordinances; hauing duely consulted with our most venerable brethren the Cardinals of the holy Romane Church, with their counsell and consent (albeit the said decrees, edicts, and mandates be of themselues void, and of none effect) we haue notwithstanding anew declared them void and of no force and vertue, and being such, declare that no man is bound to the obseruation of them. And moreouer is the said Duke and Senate within 24. daies (reckoning from the day of the publication of these presents in this Cittie, whereof we appoint vnto them eight daies for the first, eight for the second, and the other eight for the third and last delay and for monition Canonicall) do not reuoke publiquely the foresaid
Decrees, and all that is therein conteined, and which is thereof insued, laying aside all excuse and exception; and do not cashire and deface the Recordes and Registers, and places where they shall bee kept, and cause to be published by them, and publiquely declared in all the lands and territories vnder their obedience, that no man is bound to the obseruation of them, and do not returne al that is thereon ensued to it first estate; and if they do not promise, neuer more to enterprise to make the like Decrees and Statutes against the libertie, immunitie and iurisdiction of the Church, against our authoritie, and the holy Sea Apostolique, and certifie vs of the said reuocation, cassation, restitution and promise; and if presently they do not put the foresaid Canon and Abbat into the handes of our said Nuntio: In the authoritie of God Almightie, and of the thrise-blessed Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, hauing for the present, and for heereafrer excommunicated, we pronounce and declare excommunicated the Duke and Senate of the Common-wealth of Venice, which at this present are or heereafter shall be there, their fauourers, Counsellers and adherents, and euerie one of them, albeit they be not named in these presents, as well as if the names of them and euery one of them had there been specially expressed; and so that they can not obtain absolution, nor be discharged of the said sentence of exco^munication but only at point of death, and by none other than our self, or the Pope, for time being, without all possibility of helping themselues by any facultie to them granted or to be granted in general, or to any of the^ in particular. And if it happen that in extremity of
death any of them be absolued from the said sentence of Excommunication, who afterward recouers his health, hee shall thereupon fall againe into the ^^me excommunication, vntill, as much as in him lieth, he hath obeyed. And neuerthelesse, if hee die after the obtaining of the said absolution, that he be depriued of the buriall of the Church, till that our commandement be obeyed. And if the foresaid Duke and Senate three daies after the foresaid 24. daies be expired, harden their hearts (which God forbid) enduring the said sentence of excommunication, not obeying the same, for the present, as also for hereafter, we haue and do put to the Interdict of the Church the Citie of Venice, and the other townes, burrowes, castles, seigniories, and all places whatsoeuer, and generally all the temporall demaines of the said Commonwealth; during which interdict, none may in the foresaid Citie of Venice, the burrowes, Castles, and Seigniories of the said Common-wealth, say in the Churches and places of deuotion, oratories priuate, and houshod Chappels, neither in publique, nor in priuate, any masses solemne, or not solemne, nor celebrate diuine seruice; except in cases to vs permitted and reserued, and then only in the Churches, and no where else; as also the dores shut, without sound of bell, and without the assistance of any the foresaid excommunicate and interdicted, and nor otherwise, whatsoeuer dispensations and priuiledges Apostolique, which haue beene granted to any Churches as well secular as regular, and whatsoeuer exemptions that they haue, and that they are immediately subiect to the sea Apostolique; and although they depend on
the patronage or foundation and dotation of the foresaid Duke and Senate, not in generall only, and vnder the name of the Common-wealth, but each one in particular of the Citizens and Subiects of the same, of all the fees, and goodes which they hold of the Church, vnder what title soeuer, and declare them depriued of the said fees and goodes, and of all priuiledges which haue beene granted and giuen vnto them by any of our Predecessors, as namely to take cognisance of the crimes and defaults of Ecclesiasticall persons. And neuerthelesse if the said Duke and Senate too opinatiue shall any longer harden themselues in their contumacie, wee reserue especially to our selues, and our successors the Popes, the power to aggrauate, and reaggrauate the censures and penalties Ecclesiasticall against them and their adherents, and those that shall any way aid, counsell, or abet them, and to recouer them by other remedies in time conuenient, and to proceed against them according to the disposition of the holy Canons: notwithstanding any constitutions and ordinances Apostolique, priuiledges, dispensations, grants and other letters Apostolique in fauour of the said Duke and Senate in generall, or any other persons in particular: Namely those by vertue whereof they pretend that they cannot bee interdicted, suspended, nor excommunicated, although the said letters do not make expresse mention, word for word: and with Derogatorie of Derogatories, and other clauses, as also all other Decrees, and specially all faculties of absoluing in cases reserued to vs, and the sea Apostolique, and to them granted on the contrary by our predecessors,
and approoued and confirmed by vs, and the holy sea Apostolique; all which and euery one of them, wee haue repealed, and do repeale, and all things heereto contrarie. And to the end that these presents may come to the knowledge of all, we appoint vnto you and to euery one of you most expresly enioine and command, that by vertue of the holy obedience which you ow to the holy Sea, and apprehension of the last iudgement of interdict from the entrie of the Church, of suspension of your charges, and perception of the fruits and reuenews of your houses Patriarchall, Archiepiscopall, Episcopall, as much as to you belongeth our brethren the Patriarches, Archbishops, and Bishops, and of priuation of dignities, offices, and benefices Ecclesiasticall whatsoeuer by you possessed at this present, and in hability to possesse them heereafter; and forasmuch as our Sonnes the Vicars and other forenamed, depend vpon you, that vpon paine of incurring the penalties which in case of disobedience wee shall thinke necessary, and whereof you shall receiue these presents, or that otherwise they shall come vnto your knowledge; you by your selues, or others cause to be published solemnly, euery one in his Church, when there shall be greatest number and concourse of people: and cause these to be fixed and set vpon the doores of your Churches. And moreouer we will that in euery respect like credit be giuen to the doubles and copies of these in like manner printed, so be it they be signed with the hand of some publicke Notarie, and sealed with the seale of some persons being in dignity Ecclesiasticall, as to the originall it selfe, if it were exhibited
and shewed, and that these presents, or the double and copie of them so printed, as hath beene said, being affixed to the doores of the Church of Lateran, and palace of the Prince of the Apostles, and of our Chancery Apostolike, and published in Campo de Flore, as it hath beene accustomed; haue as great force, against the foresaid Duke and Senate, and all other, and you all in generall, and euery one respectiuely, as if they had beene personally addressed, intimated and presented to euery one of them, and you. Giuen at Rome at S. Peters Sous l'aneau du pescheur, the seuenteenth of April 1606. and the first yeare of our Popedome.
M. Vestrius Barbianus.



THE PROTESTATION OF the Duke and Senat of Venice against the Bull of Pope PAVL the Fift.
LEONARD DONAT by the grace of God Duke of Venice, to the most Honourable Patriarches, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Rectors of parish Churches, and other Prelates Ecclesiasticall throughout our Common wealth and Seigniory of Venice, Salutations. We are giuen to vnderstand that by commandement of our most holy Father Paul the Fift, a certaine Briefe hath beene thundred and published at Rome the 17. of Aprill last past against our person, the Senat and Seigniory, and sent to you to bee published in our townes and territories of our obedience and subiection. And because wee who are bound to preserue the tranquillity and peace of the State and gouernment to the which we are ordeined and appointed by God, and to maintaine the authority of our Common wealth, which besides
the Maiestie Diuine acknowledgeth no Superiour in matters Temporall: we protest by these presents, before God and the whole world, that wee haue omitted nothing of that which belonged to vs to make knowen to his holinesse, the iustice and equitie of our lawes, as well by our Ambassador ordinary at Rome, and by letters, by the which wee haue sufficiently answered to the former Briefes to vs directed: as also by another Ambassadour extraordinarie sent by vs of purpose for this businesse. But hauing vnderstood that his holinesse hath from time to time set light by our remonstrances, and without giuing audience vnto our most iust reasons hath decreed this briefe against all right, against that which holy Scripture, the doctrine of the holy Fathers, and sacred Canons do teach, in preiudice of that power secular which God hath giuen into our hands, and of the libertie of our common-wealth, to the end to molest and trouble, not without great scandall, the life, the goods, and honors which our faithfull subiects do peaceably and quietly enioy vnder our authoritie: we make no doubt to esteeme the said Briefe as vnlawfull, and in it selfe void as well in fact and deed, as in law: and therfore haue thought it necessarie to take those remedies, which our predecessors and other Princes of Christendome haue vsed against the Popes, when they haue exceeded their power: assuring our selues that you, and other our faithfull subiects, and all the world will so iudge thereof: And as hitherto you haue diligently looked to the cure of the soules of our subiects, and carefully trauelled to keepe the seruice of God in his integritie, that heereafter you will continue in the
same dutie of true and good pastors: considering that our intention is to persist in the holie Catholique and Apostolique faith, and euermore to continue in the reuerence accustomed towards the holy Church of Rome: so we command you that you cause to be affixed these presents in the most open places of this town, and others of our obedience, to the end they may come to the knowledge of all our subiects, and of all those that haue heard of the foresaid briefe, so that it may come to the eares of our holy Father, whose vnderstanding we desire God by his holy Spirit so to illighten, that he may see the nullitie of all that he hath done against vs, and that hauing vnderstood the iustice and equitie of our cause, he giue vs cause to continue in the obseruance and respect which our predecessors and all the common-wealth haue hitherto rendred to the Sea Apostolique, whereto they haue alwaies shewed themselues most affectionate. Giuen in our Pallace the 16. of May, Indiction the fourth the yeere of our Lord 1606.




FATHER PAVLS Apologie for his not appearing at Rome, being called thither by citation.
To the right Honourable Lords, and most reuerend Fathers, Pinello, Ascalano, S. Cecilie de Ciury, Blanchetto, Arigonio, Bellarmino, Sappata de Bubalis, Monopolitano, Cardinals of the most holy Church of Rome, named Inquisitors Generall.

Most Noble and Reuerend Lords:

I Frier Paul, a Venetian, of the order of Seruants appeare before you by these letters, and most humbly and submissiuely intreat that ye would (reuoking those things that are inacted against mee in your congregations) daine to accept, and admit vnto due examination those my exceptions against them. For, about the twentieth day of September, it was decreed in your congregation, that a certaine booke composed by me in Italian thus intituled: Considerations vpon the
censure of the holinesse of Pope Paul the Fift against the renowmed Common wealth of Venice, should not bee diuulged abroad, or read, or yet retained by any one which had it. Neither also one other booke intituled, An Apology for the oppositions of the renowmed and reuerend Lord Cardinall Bellarmine, to the treatises and resolutions of Iohn Gerson touching the validity of excommunication. Neither yet one other booke composed by me, with sixe other bearing this inscription: A tractate of the interdict of the holinesse of Pope Paul the Fift, with some other bookes of the same Argument composed by others, with all other which should afterward be published of that argument, for that many things were found in them very rashly deliuered, calumnious, scandalous, seditious, scismaticall, erroneous and hereticall respectiuely.
In the next place, the thirtieth day of the moneth of October, a Citation was decreed against me, with Commandement that it should bee hanged in the Court at Rome, with the penalty of Excommunication, the sentence being denounced against me, as also of perpetuall infamie and depriuation from all and singular offices and dignities, and other penalties inflicted by the Canoicall constitutions and to be imposed at your pleasure, that I should within the space of twentie and foure dayes appeare in mine owne person and not by a proctor, to giue an account of my faith, and to purge my selfe from all crimes obiected against me, for that it was obiected by and vnder the lawfull oath of men of credit, and manifest by other proofes, that there was no safe accesse to be made vnto me, as it is reported to be conteined more fully and
more at large in the foresaid decrees and edicts imprinted, to which etc.
Truely most Reuerend Lordes, I am readie, according to the commandement of Saint Peter, to render an account of that faith and hope whereby I liue, to euerie one which demandeth it: and doe constantly affirm that a publique examination of our faith is most profitable and necessarie in the Church; to the intent that we may not be carried about with euerie wind of doctrine, and that we may not be deceiued at vnawarres by them who vse godlinesse as a trade to gaine by. But as the vse of this sacred and holy worke is very soueraigne, so the abuse of it is most pestilent and pernitious, when vnder pretence thereof enuie is sometimes stirred vp, contrarie to all diuine and humane lawes, and they which are not well backed are laden and oppressed with the hatred of others, and wholesome doctrine is abandoned: by which according to the instruction of the Euangelists and Apostles, both the world, and Common-wealths are gouerned, and do endure. Surely I wish and desire nothing more, than to performe all subiection and obedience vnto you, and to render an account of my faith: neither do I flee the light, who being grounded vpon the Catholique faith (according to the Commandement of the Lord) haue giuen to Caesar those things which are Caesars, and to God those things which are Gods. But such is the estate of times, and many things haue come to this passe, that all men may plainly see, that I am to be exempted from your citation and command.
For when as without obseruance of any lawfull
order, the bookes are interdicted and forbidden before the authors of them are heard to speak for themselues, neither any sentences or propositions chosen out, marked and noted with speciall censures, that it might be made manifest in euerie particular of what sort they either were or might be esteemed to be; as the custome hath beene in former times, and especially obserued in the Councell holden at Constance: but the matter deliuered after a new fashion, and vnheard of, in an elaborate oration, namely that many things in those bookes contained were very rash, calumnious, scandalous, seditious, scismaticall and hereticall respectiuely; so that by reason of the obscu the oration, and the vndetermined limitation of that aduerbe, it can not appeare, whether by all those wordes, all the foresaid bookes bee condemned, or what esteeme we are to make of euerie one of them in particular, and this done to this end, that men might reserue free libertie vnto themselues to speake when and what they would, as the occasions of the future businesse might moue them, and that the authors of the bookes might haue their answers to seeke for the defending of their bookes. And since all bookes that might afterward be written of that argument, which might containe in them the right and cause of the Common-wealth of Venice, are alreadie condemned, an end is put to any intended controuersie in respect of any one which would be a publisher or defender of their lawes and rights. Wherefore most renouned Lordes, since sentence (though ambiguous and needing a manifold explication) is alreadie denounced against me concerning
those bookes which were composed by me, after so great a preiudice brought vpon mee, before I was heard speak, it is not now lawful by any right, that any other iudgement should be pronounced against me, as if the matter were intire, or that I should be called to mine answer and cited to appeare after sentence denounced against me.
Neither besides all this can I looke for vpright iudgement, when as (among the rest) that worthy Lord Cardinall Bellarmine, sitteth as Iudge, who in a booke thus in Italian intituled An answer of Cardinall Bellarmine to a Treatise of seuen Diuines of Venice, concerning the Interdict of the holinesse of our Lord Pope Paul the Fift, and to the oppositions of Friar Paul of the order of Seruants against the first writing of the said Cardinall, doth plainly affirme that he had beene exceedingly iniured by the foresaid Apologie, and wheras he doth not answer that which was obiected against him, hee heapeth vp a multitude of taunts against me, and on euerie side breatheth out reuenge, and therefore hee ought to haue absteined from denouncing sentence against me, or else from interposing himselfe as a iudge in this matter, either for feare of God or his owne conscience terrifying him, or at least for the auoiding of scandall.
Furthermore this may bee added that sentences and censures haue beene published against our renowmed Prince, the Senate, and Common wealth of Venice, and against their fauourers, adherents, and counsellers, whom I of duty and with blessing from the Reuerend Father Prior generall of my order of Seruants do serue in place of a Diuine and an Ecclesiasticall
ciuill Lawyer; as others can not dissemble their angrie minde against me, so I can not but be in great feare: which things seeing they be manifest to all men, needed not any longer discourse.
But seeing that (as it is auerred) it is manifest vnto you by the testimonie of men of credit and other arguments, that there is no safe accesse vnto mee, to serue a personall citation, it should bee farre more apparant vnto the same men, that I should haue farre lesse safe, yea most dangerous passage vnto you: wherfore ye haue saued me a labour of prouing that which I purposed to haue done: for if ye being mightie men, bee not able to serue one citation on mee, shall I the meanest of all, being now absent from the Communion of you and yours, looke for safe conducts, shall I haue safe accesse vnto you?
Neither is this to bee last and least regarded, that by the Edict of our renouned Prince, Ecclesiasticall persons are prohibited to depart out of this dominion, whom I ought in dutie especially to obey both in regard of respects common (...) me with all others, as also for that the spirituall seruice being adioined with the regular and lawfull obedience vnto the Common-wealth, it is not only vnlawfull to depart out of the kingdome, but euen out of the Citie without leaue obtained.
As for my selfe (Reuerend Lordes) I am readie to render an account of my faith vnto any man, and to answer any not suspected Iudges: and for that purpose to take a iourney to any safe places.
Wherefore the case thus standing, I beseech you, by the comming of that great and fearefull Iudge
(with whom there shall be no respect of persons) that ye would not persecute a worme, and dead dogge, but (as right requires) ye would admit of my exceptions, against the iudgements, the iudges, and the place of triall; and pronounce them iustly made. If yee doe otherwise, I pronounce a nullity in the sight of God and his holy Church of your decrees, and all further proceedings; and commend my selfe to the protection of the almighty, and cast the care of my selfe vpon his Maiestie. And if I bee separated from your community (as you threaten to deale with mee) without all order of diuine or humane lawes, God assisting me I am ready to beare it with a patient mind, being certaine with Gelasius, that an vniust sentence can hurt no man, in the sight of God and his Church. I am lesse moued with the threatned penalty of perpetuall infamie; I will speake according to the saying of that most holy man: Thinke of Austen what you will, only let not my conscience accuse me in the sight of God. S. Peter hath long since admonished vs, that none should suffer as a man slaier, or a thiefe, or an euill speaker, or a desirer of other mens goods, but if hee suffereth as a Christian let him not bee ashamed. I shall exceedingly reioice with the holy Apostles, if I suffer reproch for the doctrine of Christ, and the holy Apostle Paul. But I am not ashamed that I am defamed for expounding and defending the right of a Catholike, most mighty and renowmed Common wealth thorow the whole earth. I will also most willingly beare the infamie which I shall suffer for defending the memory and credit of Iohn Gerson, a most Christian Doctor, and a man of admirable learning and
pietie, and exceeding good desert of the Church of Rome: Trusting that through the puritie of the Euangelicall and Apostolicall doctrine, and the renowne of so great a Common-wealth, and the renowne and fame of that most holy Doctor, the mark of vniust and vndeserued infamy shall be taken away. I nothing respect the punishment of being depriued from offices and dignities which yee threaten beside excommunication: I neither desire any offices or dignities, neither would I receiue any if they were offered. I am fully determined to applie my selfe to the seruice of God in that calling in which hee hath placed me. Let those bee moued with such scarrecrowes, who do account them punishments. I esteeme it an especiall office and dignitie to liue all my life in this most base and low degree.
But in the meane time since I can not come vnto you to render by liuely voice an account of my faith for reasons aboue mentioned, and others in their due place and time to be alledged: by my works alreadie published, and those which I shall heereafter performe, I haue and will render you a full account of it, and I will keepe entire that dutie, obedience, and faith, which I haue heeretofore borne towards you, (especially so many yeeres as I was conuersant at Rome) hoping that God will giue me opportunitie, time, and occasion to approue my innocencie vnto you, and the whole world, and heare mee in his due time, and in the meane while giue mee such successe with my tentation, that I shall be able to beare it. But I do earnestly intreat and beseech you by the comming of Christ our Lord, and your dutie and place
in the Church of God, if ye haue thought any sentences and propositions in my writing worthie reprehension, (since it can not bee coniectured from the doubtfull wordes of the former edict, what they are) that yee would command that they bee selected out, and noted with fit markes, that I, agreeing to your iudgement, to which I will alwaies attribute much, may either expound them if they bee not cleere enough, or else fortifie them with more strong reasons and arguments. For in the meane time whilest they are condemned together with other writings of other men without any speciall exception, with an amhiguous aduerb, I protest that there can be nothing found in them worthy reprehension. At Venice from the Conuent of Seruants. Nouember 29. 1606.

