Acts of the dispute and conference holden at Paris, in the moneths of Iuly and August. 1566. Betweene two doctors of Sorbon, and two ministers of the Reformed Church A most excellent tract, wherein the learned may take pleasure, and the ignorant reape knowledge. Translated out of French by Iohn Golburne, and diuided according to the daies. Actes de la dispute & conference tenue à Paris. English. Acts of the dispute and conference holden at Paris, in the moneths of Iuly and August. 1566. Betweene two doctors of Sorbon, and two ministers of the Reformed Church A most excellent tract, wherein the learned may take pleasure, and the ignorant reape knowledge. Translated out of French by Iohn Golburne, and diuided according to the daies. Actes de la dispute & conference tenue à Paris. English. Golburne, John. Vigor, Simon, d. 1575. Sainctes, Claude de, 1525-1591. Du Rosier, Hugues Sureau. L'Espine, Jean de, ca. 1506-1597. The Translator to the Christian Reader. A Mongst all the meanes, prescribed by wisedome, to attaine the perfection of true knowledge, there is none (good Reader) in my poore conceit, more ne∣cessarie for the ignorant, next to the fountaine of life, the word of God, then the reading of Controuersies; wherein the truth is debated, the reasons on both sides deduced, and laid open to the view, and Readers iudgement. For, as by striking together of the steele & flint, the fire is out forced: euen so by disputation and conference, the truth is boulted out, and decyded. But because it is hard for a blinde man to iudge of colours, and we being all blinde by nature, and ignorant of God and goodnesse, are of our selues vncapable of right iudgement in matters of faith: for flesh and bloud cannot attaine vnto it; neither can the naturall man dis∣cerne the things of God: we must therefore vse the appoin∣ted meanes of our saluation; namely, hearing, reading, and meditating of Gods sacred word: which is onely able to make vs wise vnto saluation, and to enlighten the eyes of the simple. So that by this touchstone, and faithfull inuo∣cation of God, in the name and sole mediation of Christ Ie∣sus, for the direction of his holy spirit; wee shalbe enabled to know all things, and to trye the true and pure Gold from the false and counterfeit: and then (comparing the sayings and assertions of both sides, with the sincere & vndeceiue∣able milke of Gods word) we shalbe likewise able to discerne the spirit of God, from the spirit of Error: and discerning, shall perceiue the incomparable beautie of the one, and the vgly deformitie of the other. Which thing waighing with my selfe, and finding in this Treatise, both the deepnesse of Sathan, and the inuincible force of truth, which is the po∣wer of God vnto saluation of all true beleeuers, I resolued at the speciall instance of a religious friend, who had begun the Translation, to attempt, effect, and finish the same: which by diuine assistance, I haue faithfully performed, and here present it to thy view. Read it with consideration, consider thereof with iudgement, and iudge with discreti∣on; so shalt thou finde not onely pleasure, but much profit, in matters discussed of greatest moment. For which, and all things else, giue God the glory, make vse for thine in∣struction, and accept my poore endeuour; whose desire was to do thee good. Farewell. Thine in the Lord, I. G. The Preface containing the occasions of the Dispute following. F Or that I doubt not, but many per∣sons (filled with the commō brute of the conference should bee made at the house of my Lord the Duke de Montpensier, betweene the Doc∣tors of the one part, and the Mini∣sters of the other, appointed for that purpose) desire to know the truth: and that others speake thereof diuersly, according to the reports thereof made vnto them, or their conceiued imagi∣nations concerning the same: Me seemeth, that to satisfie the one, and take from the other all occasion of lying or giuing credit to lies: it should bee good to put briefly in writing all the matter as it passed: and likewise to declare, what was the motiue, & first occasion of the same. My Lord the Duke of Montpensier, who (as each one knoweth) is very zealous of his Religion, and dearely loueth his children; seeing that his daugh∣ter the Duchesse of Buillon was departed from the Komish Religion, thenceforth to follow that of Iesus Christ: and that without chilling, shee still perseue∣red, and more and more increased in the knowledge and feare of God: in zeale, godlinesse, and all other good and commendable vertues; (his speech he had in the beginning with her, and other meanes he had since assaied, to reduce and call her backe from the way wherein shee was, nought preuailing): willed for a last remedie, to attempt if he could, to winne her by the meanes and remonstrance of a Doctor named Vigor, whom he much esteemed. And to the end that the said Lady should remaine more satisfi∣ed, hauing called my Lord of Buillon her husband, hee declared vnto him his minde, and said; hee was contented that the said remonstrance should bee made to his daughter, in the presence of some Mini∣sters; as namely of Spina, & such others as she should please to choose: to the ende that had they any thing to say against the doctrine of the saide Vigor, they should alleadge it; And if after they had con∣ferred together, they were not confuted by him, and wholly vanquished, that his daughter should then abide in her opinion; without that hee, or some others of his side would euer assay ought to di∣uert her. My Lord de Buillon promised to accomplish his commaund therein: and to shewe his obedience to him. Shortly after hee imparted the same to my Lord the Admirall; by whose aduice, and other Lords which hee spake too, De Spina was suddenly sent for; who beeing come vnto them, and hauing vnderstood all that aforesaid, said; that hee hoped for little fruite of all this Conference; considering the qualitie and humour of the man with whom hee was to deale: because hee is much more partiall for the Pope and his traditions, then zealous for the word of God, and truth of Iesus Christ. Which thing, those that were present did well approoue. Neuerthelesse, hee was purposed for two considera∣tions, to present himselfe at the said Conference: the one, to support and stablish my said Lady de Buillon, against the Sophismes, and cauillations of the said Vigor: the other, to take from him the occasion to boast (as his custome is) that the Ministers durst not appeare before him. And then was the proceeding and order aduised of, which they should hold in the said Conference. And that the said De Spina should first require, that it might be authorized by the Kings permission: Af∣terwards, that to auoyd all confusion, it should bee made in the presence of a fewe persons; Thirdly, that there should bee some certaine theame and sub∣iect proposed, wherof they should conferre: Fourth∣ly, that there should be two Moderators of the whole Action, and two others deputed, faithfully to collect all the reasons and arguments which should bee brought forth by the parties. All which things hauing beene proposed to my Lord the Duke of Buillon, as well by Monsieur the Admirall: as by the said De Spina, hee found them very reasonable, and promised to giue the best order he could to all the businesse: admonishing De Spi∣na to be readie the first day of Iuly, 1566. for after dinner hee should make the said Conference. By meanes whereof, the same De Spina to prepare him∣selfe, went to finde out Monsieur Barbaste, Minister to the Queene of Nauarre, whom hee prayed to vouchsafe to accompany, and second him in the said conference. Which he graunting, both two, together with three other Gentlemen, left by my said Lord de Buillon to conduct them; went after dinner, the day and yeare aboue said, to the house of my Lord the Duke de Montpensier; where when they were ar∣riued, the Duke de Buillon aduertised thereof by one of the said Gentlemen, came vnto them in the Hall where they were. And speaking to De Spina, de∣maunded of him (induced as is likely by the Doc∣tors, assembled in the chamber whence hee came) if he were purposed and resolued to pray, after the custome of the reformed Churches, before they be∣gan the said conference. He answered yea: and that neither he, nor his companion, could not, nor ought to attempt a thing of such importance, as to handle the Mysteries of Christian Religion; without first be∣ing prepared therevnto by the inuocation of Gods name. That heard, hee entred the chamber where the Doctors were assembled: and hauing commu∣nicated to them the answere of the said Ministers, they appointed Doctor Ruze, to declare vnto them, that they would not be present at their prayers, and that no more reasonable it was, that they should bee there, then they at their Masse. The Ministers answe∣red: that they could not with good conscience be∣gin the conference, before they had prayed vnto God: and that it was in the Doctors choise & plea∣sure to be present, or absent at their praiers; And they for their part would content themselues to pray in the place & assembly, wherin the conference should be made. But neuerthelesse, that their prayers, which are (as they themselues confesse) conformable to the pure word of God; and their Masse, wherin are ma∣ny things contrary therevnto, (as they may easily know and iudge that will trie and examine it by the rule of the scripture) were not like things; And so, by meanes of the impietie and Idolatrie which is in their Masse, they could not any way communicate thereat, without offence to God, and making them∣selues highly culpable before him: but that he, and the other Doctors his companions could not be let∣ted by any such difficulties to be present at their pray∣ers: For as much as there was no article which (by their owne confession) not holy, and according to God. Herevpon replied Doctor Ruze, that the Mi∣nisters staied on a thing of small moment. And they answered, that the principall exercise of Christian Religion, was prayer: and that it is a necessarie mean to obtaine the fauour and grace of God; without which, men cannot attaine successe, nor any good speed in all their workes: and that therfore the omis∣sion thereof was verie pernitious. And that they for their part were abashed, that he, which called him∣selfe a Doctor, and Diuine, should make so litle ac∣count of praier; which is the true practise, fruite, and vse, of all the knowledge which can be had of God, and his word: and that therein one may know what was the iudgement of them, which measure diuini∣tie by Idle and vaine speculations. Then said he vn∣them: that the Duke de Montpensier, would neuer suffer, he should so be braued in his owne house: nor that it should bee said, that the Ministers had made their prayers. Wherevnto answered the Ministers, that to braue, was a thing contrarie to their professi∣on. And that so farre off were they from brauing of Princes, (to whom they owed all honour, feare, and obedience) that they would condemne them∣selues if so be they had vsed it, to a man of the ba∣sest qualitie in the world. And added moreouer, that the Doctors, and such others, which charged them with such slaunders towards Princes, to stirre vp, and moue them against them, should be assured they should once answere before God for the same. Herevpon spake Doctor Ruze, and demaunded of the Ministers, why they stood so stifly vppon that point of prayer. They f answere proposed vnto him; first, that the end of the Conference, was to ma∣nifest the true meaning of the scripture, and make the hearers vnderstand it: which thing could not be done, without the spirit of God; who enlightneth the minde and vnderstanding to comprehend it; and openeth the mouthes to expresse the same: And therefore it behoueth to implore and obtaine his grace by prayers. Afterwards, that God commaun∣ded all those that want wisedome, to aske it of him; and to seeke what they would finde; and to knocke, if they would haue him to open vnto them. All which things cannot otherwise bee obtained, then by prayers. And therefore concluded, that for this cause they were necessary. They alledged further, that all things ought to be reduced to the glory of God: and that inuocation was therefore requisite in the beginning, and thankesgiuing at the ending and consummation of all our workes, nor more, nor lesse, then wee beginne and finish our repast, in blessing and praising the name of God. Then said Doctor Ruze vnto them, that they would not hinder them to pray vnto God: but that they should do it in their hearts. And they answered: that it was not sufficient; but that it behoued to pray also with the mouth, as S. Paul commandeth: withdraw your selues then into some place apart (said hee) and make your praiers all alone. They answered: that in such an act, it ought not so to be done: and that they were bound by the cōmandement of God, to make their light to shine before men, to the end, that seeing their good works, they might haue means to glorifie God, and to be therby edified. Also that in so doing, they might giue occasion of scandall to their neigh∣bours, confirming the euil opiniō imprinted by their aduersaries in some of their doctrine and exercises: to wit: that by reason of the errors and blasphemies which were therein; they dared not to publish the same: and that to quite them of this slaunder, meet it was, that as they spake in publike, their praiers should be also in publike. To be briefe, that they ought not, neither could they with reason refuse that which the King had graunted vnto them in the Confe∣rence of Poissy: where, in all the assemblies there made, they were alwayes permitted to pray to GOD publikely, before they spake of any matter. And added for their last reason, that it was verie needefull to comprehend in theyr prayers them, and all those that should be present at the said confe∣rence: to the end, that God might grant grace both to them and others, to dispoile them wholly of all their passions: and that there should bee nothing which might hinder them, to iudge rightly of what∣soeuer should be proposed on the one side, & on the other: And that he would also make the hearers do∣cible and attentiue to gather to themselues some pro∣fit thereof. I shame here to recite one word which scaped from Doctor Ruze in this behalfe: who in contempt of God, and his seruice, said: that if the Ministers would goe pray, he would go pisse during the time of prayer. Wherevpon the Ministers cryed out, saying: What resolution? what counsell? what good word can be hoped for, of a heart filled with so an apparant contempt of God? My Lord the Duke of Buillon, and the said Doctor Ruze, seeing the Ministers setled, and firme in this, not to enter into any conference before prayers were made, in the presence of the assembly, where the same should be made: after they had reported the same to my Lord de Montpensier, and the Doctors which were with him; they purposed to send them backe; and that on this condition they should not conferre with them. Herevpon they departed: and as they were now arriued at the little Bridge of our Lady, they called them backe, and they forth with returned; supposing they would graunt them what they requested. But herein were they deceiued. For Doctor Ruze came towards them to the gate, and for a finall resolution, said vnto them: that if they would pray, they would giue them a house neare at hand: but that my Lord de Montpensier would not permit, they should make them in his house; nor that any of his family should be present thereat. Wherevnto they answered, that they now yeelded lesse vnto them, then in the begin∣ning they had done: and therefore they could not answere otherwise then they had answered. Thē Doctor Ruze addressed particularly his speech to the Minister De Spina; to whom in scoffing maner, he said two things: that he well saw, he had no great desire to enter disputations: and that in times past he had bene of their company; but that he was now cut off from them. Wherevnto answered De Spi∣na, that had he fled the conference, he would not in that great heate, haue come eight long miles, nor left his Church, which was to him more deare and acceptable then any other thing, to finde them in their owne houses. And as touching his depar∣ting from them, that hee thanked God hee had withdrawne himselfe from them: and that it was the greatest good, that euer happened to him. And to the end that hee and his companions should no way doubt but that hee was readie to conferre with them, he shewed them a way, by which both parties might be satisfied: to wit; that they should confer to∣gether by writing: shewing, that it should be much more profitable; for as much as by that meane, they should withstand all contentions: that the argu∣ments and answeres should better be meditated and digested: that many should thereby be edified, and in so dooing, there should be no daunger, that by adding or diminishing, they should bee any way altered. Ruze answered, that they could write nothing which hath not beene written. And De Spina replied; that they could not also speake ought, which hath not bene spoken. This was the end and conclu∣sion of al their speeches. Wherby may be seene, what will the Doctors had to conferre with the Ministers: to whom, at their arriuall (to stop their passage) they proposed such a condition, as they were well assu∣red, should neuer be accepted of them: namely to enter into publike conference of the scripture, be∣fore they had publikely prayed to God in the place and assembly where it should be made. Moreouer one may also iudge, what was their intention, by the order they had giuen, to direct their conference. For in stead of procuring some place and rest to the said Ministers, which were come vnto them; there were at the least, a hundred persons of all qualities about the Ministers, to astonish them: some by scoffes: others by iniuries: others by threats: So that, had it not bene the care which the three gen∣tlemen of the Duke of Buillon had of them, and to driue them often back, which approached too neare them; they had bene in danger to haue suffered out∣rage. One may also imagine, how the Doctors do endeuour to serue God, and pray vnto him: seeing they cannot endure him to be prayed vnto in their presence. And for conclusion, what vnderstanding can they haue of the scripture? with what faithful∣nesse can they handle it? And what dexteritie and facultie can they haue to preach it, considering they disdaine, and thinke it straunge, that for the obtai∣ning of all these things, God should be prayed vnto in their presence? As though their sufficiencie were in themselues, and that it came not from him who is the wel-spring and author of all light. It followeth: of the occasions declared in the precedent Pre∣face, and first of the Dispute on Wednesday the ninth of Iuly, 1566. Albeit the Doctors by the meanes heere before declared, had sought occasion to hinder the confe∣rence which was to be made betweene them and the Ministers, in the house of my Lord De Montpensier: Neuerthelesse, to auoyd the euil opinion that might be conceiued of them, by reason of their refusall, to enter into the said conference, they raised a rumour, that the Ministers, perceiuing themselues weake, and that their doctrine was vncertaine, had fled the com∣bat. Which thing beeing come to the eares of the King and Queene, Mounsieur the Admirall, seeing it might bring some scandall and damage to the refor∣med Churches, if it were not presently met with: knowing also, that it was a false reproach which they had put vpon the Ministers, began to excuse them: assuring the King and the Queene, that the Ministers would alwaies be readie to conferre with the Doc∣tors, and to defend by the scripture, the confession of their Churches, in what place soeuer, and before such persons, as they would it should bee. So that they were permitted to pray vnto God (as they had required) in the beginning of their conference, and that they should there obserue the order and meanes which they had proposed, or other better, as they should thinke good: to the end to auoyd all wrang∣lings, and the confusion of voyce and cries, as is ordi∣narily seene in schooles, and disputes of Sophisters, and contentious persons. My Lord of Neuers hauing vnderstood these words of my Lord the Admirall, found them verie reasonable; and perswaded (as it is certaine) first by the spirit of God, and afterwards by a haughtinesse and generositie of heart; which thrust him forward, with a will to vnderstand the truth of each thing, sollicited the King and Queene, that by theyr com∣mission, and vnder their authoritie, the said Confe∣rence might bee established: And so wrought he, that hee obtained of their Maiesties what hee de∣maunded. By meanes whereof, hauing aduerti∣sed my Lord the Admirall of theyr pleasures, they consulted together, of the order should bee held in the same conference. And resolued in the end, that my Lord De Neuers, and my Lord the Duke of Buillon, should bee the chiefe Iudges therein; and that of the one side, and the other, should some Gen∣tlemen be present, to bee witnesses and beholders, of whatsoeuer should bee done in the same. And further, that there should be two Notaries of both sides, of the litle fort at Paris, which should put in wri∣ting, and signe whatsoeuer should be alleadged, and proposed by the parties. These conditions thus conceiued, and agreed of among the said Lords; were also accepted by the Doctors, Vigor and De Sanctes of the one partie, and by the Ministers De Spina, & Sureau, of the other par∣tie: Who began to assemble themselues together on Tuesday the ninth of Iuly, 1566. in the house of my said Lord of Neuers: where in his presence, and of other Lords which were with him, (after prayers made by the Ministers, in the absence of the Doctors, who because they would not be present, had with∣drawn themselues apart) Doctor Vigor spake, and be∣gan by protestation: That the cause why hee and his companion were entred into Conference with the Ministers, was not to be instructed in any point of Religion: nor any way to withstand the Constituti∣ons of the Councels, and chiefly that of Trent, by which they are forbidden to dispute with heretikes: And that they for their part, were wholly resolued to abide in the faith of the Romish Church: but that at the request and pursuite of the Lord de Montpensier, (who for the reducing of his daughter Madame de Buillon, had required the said Conference) they were come thither to the end, to satisfie him, & declare the holy zeale they haue to seeke and bring backe to the flocke, those which are thence departed. Wherevpon (their speeches ended) the Ministers speaking, protested likewise, that, that which had led thē to conference with the Doctors, was not, because they doubted of any article conteined in their con∣fession, which they knew to bee drawne frō the pure word of God: but that it was to maintaine the same, against the Sophistries and cauillations of thē which would impugne it, and to retaine Madame de Buillon, in the good and holy institution, which shee had re∣ceiued by the grace which God had giuen her. Thus the protestations on both sides made, the Ministers supposed that the Doctors (thē following the intention of my Lord de Montpensier, and the desire of Madame de Buillon) should haue begunne the Conference by the Dispute of two points, the Supper, and the Masse. But as they that will besiege and batter a Towne, begin a farre off to make their Trenches, and approaches: to prepare themselues to the deciding and conference of the said two points, they began to lay their foundation, by the authoritie of the Church: wherevpon they would establish the certaintie of the Articles of faith, and generally of all the holy Scripture. And therefore the de∣maunds and objections were proposed by the Doc∣tors. And the answeres giuen by the Ministers; De Sainctes beginning, and De Spina answering; as fol∣loweth. Actes of the Dispute and Conference holden at Paris. Question. W Herevpon doo you ground your Reli∣gion? Answere. Vpon the word of God. Question. What do you vnderstand by the word of God? Answere. The writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Question. Doo you receiue for their writings all the bookes of the Bible, as well of the olde, as the new Testament, attributing vnto all, one like authoritie? Answere. No: but following antiquitie, wee distinguish betweene the Canonicall bookes, and the Apocripha: calling those Canonicall, vpon whose doctrine, the faith and all Christian religion is builded: And those Apocripha, which haue not such authoritie that wee may build or establish vpon them any Article of faith; but are proper to teach and well go∣uerne the estate of life, and manners of Christians: by rea∣son of the goodly, and notable sentences which are compri∣sed in them. Question. By what meanes doo you know, that the one is Cano∣nicall, the other Apocripha? Answere. By the spirit of God, which is a spirit of discretion, and en∣lightneth all those vnto whom it is communicated, to make them capable, to bee able to iudge, and discerne things spiri∣tuall, and to know and apprehend the truth (when to them it is proposed) by the witnesse and assurance, which thereof it giueth them in their hearts. And as wee discerne the light from darkenesse by the facultie of seeing, which is in the eye: euen so may wee easily seperate and acknowledge the truth from vntruth, and from all things in generall, which may be false, absurd, doubtfull, or indifferent, when as we are furnished with the spirit of God, and guided by the light, which it lightneth in our hearts. Question. Yea: but some man may boast to haue the spirit of God, which hath it not. And we see by Histories, that all here∣tikes haue euer thought to haue the truth on their side, and endeuoured to authorise their doctrine by inward euela∣tions, which they feigne to haue receiued of Gods spirit: Whereby it may appeare what daunger there should bee to referre the censure of a booke, or doctrine, to the wit∣nesse of the spirit of God, which one particular man shal ima∣gine or feigne to haue receiued in his heart. Answere. Very easie it is to auoyd such daunger, in following the counsell which Saint Iohn doth giue vs in his first Catholike Epistle; not to beleeue indifferently all spirits, but to proue and diligently to examine them, before wee receiue or ap∣proue what they propose. And the triall to be made in such a case is, first to regard the ende wherevnto a doctrine ten∣deth, which shall be declared vnto vs: or a booke that shall be presented vnto vs: For if it tend to establish and aduance the glory of God; it is true: as Iesus Christ saieth in S. Iohn, That he which seeketh the glory of God, is truth, and there is no vnrighteousnesse in him. Afterwards we must consider whether being reduced to the proportion, and the analogie of faith, (as saith S. Paul) it Rom. 12. 6. well agreeth and accordeth with the principles and foun∣dations of Religion. Obiection. All say, and may say as much thereof: and therefore this reason is no sufficient argument (as I conceiue by effect and other proofes) how I ought to stay my selfe thereupon. Moreouer, this answer passeth the limits of the proposition: For it presupposeth the Scripture to be the knowne founda∣tion of Religion. And the proposition was to know the rea∣son which should assure me, that the Scripture was of God, and that it behooueth to distinguish betweene the Bookes thereof. Answere. It is easie to iudge, if the end of the doctrine proposed, tendeth to establish and aduance the honour and glorie of God. As if men were exhorted thereby to withdraw wholly their trust from creatures, wholly to settle and repose them∣selues in God; to resort to him in all their necessities, and to depend vpon his prouidence in all their affaires, to praise and thanke him for all the goodnes they haue. This presup∣posed, no man could doubt, that the doctrine which tendeth to such an end, should not be good and receiuable. And to that which hath bene proposed: that the former Answere was out of the limits of the first proposition it seemeth not: for that the first thing proposed, was: What is the foundation of our Religion? Wherunto it was answered: That it is the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Obiection. This answer is common to the Lutherans and Anabap∣tists, yea also to the Deistes, which say more then all others, that they seeke the glorie of God: and all that which in the answere is written. And generally each man that should vse the like saying, should not cease to erre in all the Articles of the Creed, the first excepted. But to returne to the point without so much wandering it seemeth to vs not lawfull to vse the foundation of the Scripture, before it bee notorious and certaine that it is the holy Scripture, and that there is difference amongst the bookes thereof. And before it bee known that I haue particular inspiration of the holy Ghost; and that such a particular inspiration of the holy Ghost be a sufficient foundation of Religion. Answere. The Deistes, and other here iques cannot bee holpen (by the foresayd answere) for confirmation of their errors: Forasmuch as the Desties, denying Jesus Christ, cannot glorifie God: seeing that to glorifie the Father, it behoo∣ueth first to know and to glorifie the Sonne; no more also other heretiques: For that, not knowing the trueth, nor consequently Iesus Christ (which is the way, the life, and the trueth) they cannot know nor glorifie God. And tou∣ching that obiected, that the answere was from the pur∣pose; that may be iudged by the conference of the demand and answere. And for the latter point of the obiection, wherein it is sayde: that the reuelation which each particu∣lar man sayth hee hath of the Spirite of God, is to him the foundation of Religion: that was not answered; But that the foundation of all true Religion, is the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Of the trueth of which, all the Church in generall, and the members thereof in particular, are assured, by the witnes e and inward reuelation of the Spirit of God. Obiection. Then it behooued to adde whatsoeuer is heere sayde to the other answere before it were good: and it seemeth, that the answere doeth containe (as it were) a mockerie. For it is certaine: that when all trueth is in the doctrine of a man, that man is no more euill, nor an heretique. But wee search out the beginning of trueth, what it shou'd bee. And touching the reply, which denieth that the particu∣lar reuelation is the foundation of Religion. There is no great difference: For if the particular reuelation bee a suf∣ficient foundation for euery one to know what is of the Apostles and Prophets, that particular reuelation by conse∣quence is the foundation of Religion. For that is the founda∣tion of knowledge, whereupon euery particular man know∣eth, and sayeth his Religion is founded. Answere. The answeres haue bene made according as the de∣maundes haue beene propounded: and it will not appeare by the reading of them that they are willing to mocke: For in such a Conference as this, where the matter is to seeke out the honour and glory of God: Mockerie should bee ioyned with impietie. And as touching reuelation, that it is equall to the Scripture (which is the foundation of Re∣ligon) wee denie it, and say: they bee things different, al∣though they be conioyned together, and that they doo fol∣low the one the other, euen as appeareth by that which is written in Esay: Behold my couenant with them (sayth the Esa. 59. 21. Lord) my Spirit that is in thee, and my wordes which I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seede. And that which followeth: From whence a man may iudge the distinction which the Prophet putteth between the reuelation of the holy Ghost, and the word. Obiection. For conclusion of this Conference, I leaue each man to iudge of the agreement of the answerers and obiections. And for that which is alledged of the vnion of the word, and of the holy Ghost, out of the text of Esay: they are things from the purpose, and new matter. And we must not compare the reuelation of euery particular person (whereof was the question) vnto that of the Prophet Esay: who had other proofes that the Spi t spake by him, and had oft times made demonstration thereof▪ And of all that aboue said, I leaue the iudgement to euery Christian. Answere. We leaue also the iudgement of what hath beene spo∣ken of the one part and the other, to the hearers and rea∣ders. And for the passage of Esay produced, the question is not of the reuelation of the Prophet, nor of the spirit, com∣municated vnto him: but of the spirit, and the words which God promised to all his people: with whom he made his co∣uenant. And as touching the other pretended proofes which the Prophet had of his vocation; we make no doubt thereof. But we say, that the principall and most assured was, that, which he had by the testimony of God his Spirit, as ap∣peareth by the sixt Chapter of his Prophecie. Obiection. Be it so, that by the person of Esay be spake to his people, it followeth not that he spake not to Esay first. And I allow that he promised indeed his spirit to his people that is to say, to his Church vniuersal. Not that he wil that euery one, yea, being in this Church, may brag and vsurpe to haue this spi∣rit particularly promised vnto him. And as touching the par∣ticular inspiration of Esay, it was not founded on his onely fancie, and presumption: but on the assurance that God gaue him by a worke supernaturall: as is said in the 6. Chap∣ter. And further, it was not yet sufficiently founded to bee beleeued, as hauing inspiration, had he not shewed the same by other effects, and by other Prophesies already come to Deut. 18. passe. As it behooueth euery Prophet should doo, before he were beleeued: But leauing all those things as farre fetched, and from the first proposition, I referre the iudgement as before. Answere. There is not one of the Church, if he be a ture member therof, vnto whom the spirit of God is not communicated: Rom. 89. 1. Ioh. 22. 27. As S. Paul, and S. Iohn in his first Catholique Epistle teach∣eth. And as touching the pretended presumption, there is great difference betweene the presumption and imaginati∣ons of the spirit of man (which is but darkenesse, and of it selfe knoweth nothing of the thing of God) and the reuela∣tions of the holy Ghost, which are certaine and assured. And where it is said, that the answeres are farre off from the first proposition; if it be so, the dema nds are so also. Obiection. The conclusion is, if each one ought to be beleeued in saying hee hath a particular reuelation of the holy Ghost, without otherwise shewing, that they are holy Scriptures: and that there is difference amongst them, let euery one iudge if the demands and answeres be pertinent to this dif∣ficultie, or no. And forasmuch as some of the newe doctrine doo shew no proofe, more then others, of their particular in∣spirations, whether the one ought to be more beleeued then the other concerning the same. Answere. By the former answeres it hath beene declared, how the reuelations pretended by particular persons, ought to be exa∣mined by the meanes, by which men may iudge whether they be of the spirit of God, or no. Then spake Doctor Ʋigor, saying: that in the discourse aforesaid, he had vnderstood many sayings contained in the answers of the Minister, which were against the word of God: as when he said, that it behooueth first to honour the Sonne before the father: Which the said Ʋigor reproouing, the said Spyna maintained that thing to bee true: affirming, such proposition to be grounded and contained in the holy Scripture; as in the Gospel, and first Catholique Epistle of Ioh. 5. 23. 1. Ioh. 2. 23. S. Iohn. Vnto which Vigor replyed; that in the said places, the word (First) is not found. Neuertheles, least he fall on that which hath beene put forth and proposed in the beginning of the conference, he wil not now enter into the confutation of that saying: reseruing it to the end of all the conferences. Answere. The said Spyna required that Vigor should quote the pla∣ces of the Scripture, which hee pretended to bee contrarie to that was contained in his answere. And where it is said, that it first behoueth to glorifie the Sonne before the Father (according as it is written in the places aboue noted) for confirmation of his saying, hee proposeth this reason, founded on the Scripture. We cannot know the Father, if we haue not knowne the Sonne. Wee cannot glorifie the Father, if we haue not knowne him. Therefore it followeth; that the knowledge and glory of the Sonne, is a degree to come to the knowledge and glory of the father: which be∣ing referred by the said Vigor, to be more amply handled in the end and conclusion of all the conference, the said Spy∣na is so contented. Obiection. The sayd Ʋigor (without wading further in this dis∣pute) obiecteth: that by the same reason alledged by the said De Spyna, It followeth: that it first behooueth to honour the Father, before the Sonne: for by the Father wee come to the knowledge of the Sonne: as it appeareth by that which our Lord sayd to Saint Peter: Caro & sanguis non reuelauit tibi: sed pater meus qui in Coelis est. Flesh and blood hath not reuealed this vnto thee, but my Father which is in the heauens. Where it is manifest, that the hea∣nenly Father did reueale to Saint Peter, that our Lord was the Sonne of the liuing God. Whereupon the sayd Vigor doeth thus argue. If the reason of the sayd De Spyna bee good: by the Father wee know the Sonne: it behooueth then to honour the Father before the Sonne. Answere. To follow the order of the knowledge we may haue of Iesus Christ, and of his Father proposed vnto vs in S. Iohn: It behooueth to beginne by the Sonne, and from the Sonne to come to the Father. For Saint Phillip, hauing once requi∣red that hee would shew vnto him▪ and his other compa∣nions, Ioh. 14. 9. his Father, hee said vnto him: Phillip, hee that hath seene me, he hath seene my Father. To teach them, that the meane to come to the knowledge of the Father, is the precedent knowledge of the Sonne: which may bee also confirmed by that which is else where written: where Iesus Christ saieth: That no man knoweth the Father but the Matth. 21 27. Sonne onely, and hee to whom the Sonne will reueale him. And to answere the authoritie of Saint Matthew, alledged by the sayd Vigor, the sayd De Spyna sayeth: that in the text by him produced, there is no mention made of the knowledge of the Father, nor of the meane to come vn∣to it. But onely of the reuelation made by the grace of GOD, and his holy Spirite vnto Saint Peter, and his o∣ther fellowes, to know IESVS CHRIST, and the Father in him. Whereupon Vigor sayde: hee referred himselfe to the hearer and reader, that his obiection is not answere, dreseruing for another Conference, to treat more amply of that point (if hee will maintaine it) least hee should fall vpon that which hath beene formerly pro∣posed; whereunto the sayd De Spyna answered, that hee so agreed. The sayde Vigor (vpon an answere made by the sayde De Spina: where hee putteth difference betweene the cer∣taine reuelation made by the Lord to a particular person, and the holy Scripture) addeth: that hee is abashed of the same answere, considering that men beleeue not the holy Scripture: But in that they are acertained, that the Lord is authour thereof, who cannot lye. Then likewise, that if a particular man haue assurance, that the reuelation is made vnto him by the Lorde: or else, that one is assured of the reuelation, made to another: as much is hee bound to giue faith to the reuelation, as to the Scripture. The which saying also, hee will not (as hee may) handle and de∣clare at large: but come presently to the first question, which is not yet resolued. And prayeth the sayd De Spina to set forward the same. Answere. Where the sayde Vigor is abashed, that the sayde De Spina should say in one of his answeres, That the reuelation of the Lord and the word, were things different, the same is befalne him for not well conceiuing the sence of the saying: For De Spina will not put difference touching the certainty, betweene the true reuelations of the Lord, and the Word: which (proceeding from him) is as true, as the reuelation; And the reuelation reciprocally, as true, as the Word. Yet doth it not therefore follow, that the word, and the reuelati∣ons of the spirit of the Lord (by the which we may be con∣ducted to the vnderstanding of the word) are not things dif∣ferent: and that the one doth not go before the other. And where the said Ʋigor prayeth the said De Spina to hasten to the point, he answereth: That he cannot else where ground his answeres, then vpon the demaundes which be made vn∣to him. Reply. Whereunto the said Vigor replyed: that hee referred himselfe touching the sence, to that which is touched in the answere of the said De Spina. And where he saith, that the word goeth before the reuelation: that is of no value to make difference vpon the question proposed. And to come to the point: the said Vigor demaundeth, whether a man may be assured that he hath reuelation from the Lord, that a booke, is a booke of the holy Scripture? and when he may iudge assuredly of his inward inspiration? Also, how he can assure any of this inspiration giuen him of the Lord? Answere. Touching the first Article of the last demaund: It is not a thing impertinent to distinguish the scripture from the interpretation thereof: ina much as they bee things diuers, and diuers gifts of the Lord. And to answer to the question proposed, how a particular man before the reuelation and inward testimonie of the spirit of God in his heart, may ac∣knowledge that it is Canonicall. The spirit of God varieth not from himselfe. And abiding in one particular man, he wil acknowledge the Scripture which is come from him▪ and beareth his markes. And for answere to the second demand, hee also saith: that the selfe same spirit, beeing likewise in a third person, will acknowledge both that the word, and the reuelation are of him, for the reasons alledged: That is to say, that the spirit of God in diuers persons is alwayes equall and like vnto himselfe. Obiection. This is no full satisfaction to the first question proposed: by the which it was demaunded, how some man may iudge in himselfe that hee hath the holy Ghost, to discerne one Booke to be the holy Scripture, and another not, but Apo∣crypha: and how he may declare vnto another, that he hath his inspiration from God. Answere. 1. Cor. I. 22. The spirit of God, is called a seale in the scripture: there∣fore is it, that the first effect which it produceth in the heart of him vnto whom it is communicated, is to assure him of his presence. As for assuring a secōd person of the reuelation that one hath receiued of the spirit of God, it is easie: Foras∣much as the spirit of God which openeth the mouth of the one to speake, doth also open the eares of the other to listen to his word, and the heart to beleeue it, & to be perswaded thereof▪ So that betweene the maister, and the scholler, be∣tween the teacher and the hearer, when they be both furni∣shed and enlightened by the Spirit of God, there is alwayes one mutuall consent to acknowledge one another. Obiection. Such certaintie, is a great incertaintie. And there is not any of what sect soeuer, which doeth not assure himselfe to haue the holy Ghost, and the trueth on his side: which is a foolish presumption. How can a man distinguish a presump∣tion, from a true inspiration? Answere. S. Iohn Chrisostome saith: that in vaine a man boasteth of the spirit, without the word: which is a meane to represse sectes and heresies, and to iudge of all things, which hereti∣ques & others would propose, vnder the authoritie & tytle of the Spirit of God. For as by the spirit we know the true sence of the word: so do we also mutually acknowledge by the word, who those be, which haue the spirit of God or no. Obiection. This is no answere to the question; For the question is not, to examine the doctrine by the word: but the questi∣on is to know, whether it be the word of God, by which a man will examine and approoue a doctrine. And how a man shall iudge assuredly that hee hath a reuelation of the Lord, that, that is the word of God. Answere. If he be faithfull, therefore shall he iudge by the Spirit of God, which is in him: as in him, which telleth the same vnto him. And if he be vnfaithfull, as impossible it is that he should iudge thereof, as it is to a blinde man to iudge and discerne of colours presented vnto him: Forasmuch saieth 1. Cor. 5. 2 S. Paul.) as the Spirit of God is he, by whom wee know, and iudge the things that are of God. Obiection. Yet is not this an answere to the question proposed, let the iudgement thereof be left to the readers and hearers. Now make they another demaund, that is to say: Whether we be not very certaine by the word of God, that the Lord doeth assist his Church, and will assist it, vnto the end of the world. And whether it be not a more assured thing to stay on the consent and iudgement of the Church, touching the determination of the Canonicall bookes of the holy Scrip∣ture, & the distinction of them, from the Apocrypha: then to leane vpon his owne iudgement: esteeming it to bee an inward inspiration; whereof a man can make no proofe: but supposeth that he hath the holy Ghost. Answere. The Doctors doo confound the opinions which fan∣tasticke men may haue, with the witnesses and reuelations of the holy Ghost: although betweene those two, there is as much distance, as is from heauen to earth: And as tou∣ching the consent of the Church, suppose that it procee∣deth from the spirit of God: Infallable it is, & also certaine, that particular reuelations may be, as of Esay and other Pro∣phets. And forasmuch as the one and the other, do proceed from one selfe same Authour (which is the Spirit of trueth) The certaintie of the reuelations of God his Spirit, made vnto all the Church in generall, and to euery member of it in particular, is of one selfe same moment. Obiection. The Minsters cannot shew to the Catholiques, nor to a∣ny others, that they are not fantasticall: for asmuch as they make no proofe (more then do other sects) of the reuelation of the holy Ghost made vnto them: and as touching that is said: suppose that it proceedeth frō the Spirit of God. They doubt it seemeth of the assistance of the holy Ghost in the Church of God: which saith S. Paul) is Columna & firmamē∣tū 1. Tim. 3. 15. veritatis, the pillar & ground of truth. And a thing it is to be wel considered, that they are more certain of the assistāce of the Lord in one particular person, then in the Church vni∣uersal. And where they say: that to know the truth, the holy Spirit assisteth as well euery member of the Church, as the whole church: By that might a man conclude, that the par∣ticular faithful could neuer erre: & that, the particular faith∣full man should be aswell the pillar of truth, as the vniuersal church. Moreouer in making of particular reuelatiō, of like waight with the iudgement of the church; they plainly con∣tradict the 4. article of their confession of faith: where it is thus written. We acknowledge those bookes to be canoni∣call, and very certaine rules of our faith, not so much by the common consent and agreement of the Church: as by the testimonie and inward perswasion of the holy Ghost: which maketh vs to discerne them, frō other Ecclesiasticall bookes. By the said article men may see, how much more they attri∣bute to themselues, then to all the vniuersall church. Which article, they now contradict: attributing as much to the one, as to the other. And also in their confessiō of faith lastly prin∣ted, the said article hath been taken away, as is seene by that which De Spina, hath now brought hither, imprinted at Ge∣neua, 1564. Whereby it appeareth, that they be retracted: as confessing that it behoueth to rest more vpon the common cōsent of the church, thē vpon any particular mās iudgemēt. Which thing is very reasonable: seeing the holy Ghost is promised to the church vniuersall, & not to euery particular person. Answere. If men may esteeme the Ministers fantasticke, although they haue the word of God: more shall the Doctors bee holden for such, in things they maintaine and defend with∣out and contrarie to the word of God. Touching the se∣cond point, where the Doctors reproach the Ministers, that they doo doubt (as it seemeth by their answere) of the assi∣stance of the spirit of God to the church. The answer is: that that is not the doubt: but to know which is the true Church. And touching the third point, whereof (say the Doctors) might bee inferred, that particular persons could not erre. The consequence is naught: for as much as the spirite of God may sometimes depart from particular persons, and in Psal. 30, this case they may faile and erre: as Dauid confesseth to haue happened to him. To the fourth point, the Ministers do answere: that they no way contradict the alledged Ar∣ticle of their confession: for that comparison is made in the answere, of two reuelations of the holy Ghost: the one made to the bodie, and the other to the members: which they maintaine to bee of like waight, touching the certain∣tie thereof. And in the confession mention is made of the reuelation of GOD his spirite, which is the cause of the Churches consent, which doth follow as the effect thereof. Now so it is, that the cause being preferred before his effect: there is great reason, that the reuelation of God his spirit, compared with the consent of his Church, be preferred vn∣to it: as the cause, to the effect which it produceth. And touching the contrarietie which they pretend to happen in the confessions, printed at diuers times, and by diuers Prin∣ters; they shall bee answered, when it shall please them to debate the Articles particularly. Obiection. Where they set foorth the doubt they haue of the true Church: as much men may say of pretended reuelations of God his spirit vnto particular persons. Of whom likewise it may bee doubted, whether they bee members of the Church. For the other point, where they denie that they contradict the fourth article of their confession, it seemeth in shew, that there is contradiction: for as much as they com∣pare the particular reuelatiō, with the consent of the church: as by their answere appeareth. Also that which is alledged, that reuelation is cause of consent; to preferre it to that, as the cause to the effect, seemeth to serue to small purpose: for it is, as if one shuld say, that the reuelation is to be preferred to the word of God, and the holy scripture. For very certaine it is, that reuelation goeth before the word, and scripture. And as it appeareth in the text of the Confession, (as e∣uery one may easily iudge) the authors thereof, speake of the certaintie and infallibilitie of two reuelations: as holding themselues more assured of that they haue in their owne spi∣rit, then that which is of the iudgement of the Church. And touching an other point; where it is said, that particular per∣sons may sometimes faile, when the holy Ghost doth leaue them; By that wee may conclude, that wee must not infal∣libly rest on the pretended inspirations of particular per∣sons: because we may doubt of them, whether they be de∣stitute of God his spirit, or no, which cannot be done of the Church. Wherefore more sure it is, to stay vpon the Church, (infallably gouerned by the holy Ghost) then vpon priuate pretended inspirations. And so do the Catholikes there∣in, neuer following their priuate iudgement, and therefore cannot be esteemed phantasticke. But rather those, which preferre their proper iudgement, which they shrowde with the title of particular inspiration. The Doctors require one text of the scripture, by the which, the holy Ghost is promi∣sed vnto euery one in particular, as it is to the Church vni∣uersall, to know, and iudge, and discerne which are the scrip∣tures. Answere. Touching the first point. As indeed they approue not all Churches to be true Churches which say they be so: So do they not also approue them all faithful, who boast them∣selues to be so. For the second point: the comparison of the Doctors is not proper, which thus they haue made: as who should say, that reuelation is to bee preferred to the word of God, &c. Forasmuch as the word of God, & all the writings aswell of the Prophets as of the Apostles, are as much of the reuelations of the Spirit of God, & that no more difference there is betweene the one and the other, then is betweene Genus and Species. And touching that which is added in this article, that the reuelation precedeth the Scripture. It be∣hooueth to distinguish betweene the reuelations made to the Prophets before they put them in writing; and those which haue beene made to them that read their writings: for the vnderstanding of them. Touching the first, we con∣fesse they goe before the Scripture. And touching the se∣cond, wee say: that they follow the same. For the third article, the Ministers doo answere: that it is easie to iudge whether the Spirit of God assist a particular person, or whe∣ther it bee withdrawne, by the things which he proposeth, when they bee reduced to the word of God, and censured by the rules which are there proposed vnto vs as is sayde. Touching the demand, it should bee too tedious a thing to alledge all the places where it is written. That the Spirit of God is communicated to the particular members of the Church onely: let them see in the 1. Cor. 2. where expresly it is said: that the Spirite of God is communicated to the chosen, to know and discerne the things which bee of God. And in Esay 55. the Lord doth promise to shed his Spirite vpon the faithfull, as water vpon the earth. And in Ioel like∣wise the second, and Ieremie 34. And the 1. Epistle of Saint Iohn 2. vnder the name of Oyntment, and in many other places. Obiection. The places heere-aboue alledged, make nothing to prooue that the Spirite was promised to all, to iudge of the doctrine: otherwise, euen women, and all faithfull Artifi∣cers should iudge of the doctrine, as the Prophets▪ and A∣postles. To the contrary whereof Saint Paul sayeth: Nun∣quid omnes Prophetae, &c. Are all Prophets? hee putteth downe expresly: that the discerning of Spirites, is to haue vnderstanding of the Scriptures: and are gifts which are not common to all the faithfull, but particular to some. Answere. The consequence which the Doctors gather, is no∣thing worth: forasmuch as the Spirit of God is more abun∣dantly oft times comunicated to some then to others. And some also are better exercised in the Scripture, then others. Touching the place of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 12. the Ministers say, It maketh nothing against them: forasmuch as the Spirit of prophec e, and the spirit of discretion are different gifts: as it appeareth by the declaration which the Apostle maketh in the same Chapter. The second dayes Dispute, beeing Wednesday, the tenth of Iuly. T HE Doctors required, that their prote∣stations the day before made, might be registred, which was such; That they protested they would not enter into any Dispute of things receiued in the vni∣uersall Church, from the Apostles time hitherto: decided and determined by holy E umenicall and generall Coun∣cells: holding them for certaine and indubitable: and that all doctrine to the contrary was false. But following the good and holy desire of the Lorde Montpensier, and Madam de Buillon his daughter, they were ready to make knowne by the verey ex resse word of God, interpreted by the sayd vniuersall Church and Councells, that their doctrine, wherein the sayd Ladie was formerly instructed, is sound and wholesome. And that the instruction which hath beene giuen her to the contrarie▪ is perni ious and damnable. And that this Conference is by way of instructi∣on, and not of Dispute. The Ministers likewise protested, that they assembled not with the Doctors, for any doubt they had, that whatso∣euer is conteined in their confessiō of faith, is not certain and true, and founded vpon the word of God: as appeareth by the places of scripture quoted in the margeant of the said confession. And doo beleeue, that whatsoeuer is contrarie and opposite therevnto, is damnable, and to be reiected: yea though an Angell from heauen should propose it. And as touching themselues, they were not come thither to be in∣structed in other doctrine, then such as they follow, and haue learned of Iesus Christ: whom they acknowledge to be the onely maister and instructor of the Church. It was declared by my Lord of Neuers, that he desi∣red (after the obiections and answeres) there should bee gi∣uen a short resolution both of the one side and the other, of that was conferred of the day before. Following which re∣monstrance the Doctors say: that to iudge of a booke whe∣ther it be the writing of holy scripture, or not: and likewise to discerne a booke Canonicall, from one Apocrypha, or Ecclesiasticall, a man must not rest on his owne priuate opi∣nion, or priuate and particular inspiration: for as much as none haue ordinarie assurance, that it is a true reuelation of the holy Ghost, without reducing himselfe to the common consent and agreement of the Church vniuersall. And also that God, albeit hee had power to reueale and imprint in each one the true knowledge necessarie to saluation: yet hath he ordained a certaine meane, whereby faith is obtai∣ned, which is a reuealed truth: that is to say, by hearing of the word of God, preached by lawfull Ministers, sent by the Pastors of the true Church: as by the text of Saint Paul to the Rom. 10. and Ephes. 4. appeareth. If then the meane to haue faith and inward reuelation of the knowledge of salua∣tion bee, by the hearing of the word of God lawfully prea∣ched by the Ministers of the same, according to the ordinary meane, to be assured that a man hath inward reuelation It behoueth necessarily to bee assured, that the word by which faith is obtained, hath bene preached by the lawfull Ministers of the true Church. And by consequence, to be first assured of the church, before his own inward reuelation, following the meane which Iesus Christ hath followed. They say further, that the true and certaine marke of a true inward reuelation is, when as it is reduced to the common consent of the Church. And contrariwise, that euery pre∣tended inward inspiration, particular and priuate, is a false perswasion, if it bee different from the common consent of the Church: For the spirite of God is not particular, but common. And say moreouer, that to finde out a false doctrine, it behoueth to examine the same, to knowe whe∣ther it bee priuate or common, euen as our Lord hath giuen the true marke in Saint Iohn. 8. saying: Qui de se loquitur, mendacium loquitur. Hee that saieth any thing of him∣selfe, and of his owne proper inspiration, is a lyer. And likewise as it is written in Ezechiel; Sonne of man, prophe∣sie Ezech. 13 against the Prophets of Israel, that prophesie: and say vnto them that prophesie out of their owne heart, heare the word of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord God: Woe to the foolish Prophets which follow their owne spirit, and haue seene nothing. And afterward, they haue seene va∣nitie, and lying diuination, saying: The Lord saieth it: and the Lord hath not sent them: and they haue made others to hope that they would confirme the word of their pro∣phesie. And the verses following doo serue to the pur∣pose. Which false Prophets said, they had an inward reuelati∣on, and the word of God. They say also, and let it be well wayed, that the proppe of Religion, grounded and assured vpon an inward inspira∣tion, is the foundation of many Sects in our time, as of Ana∣baptists, and Suencfildians: who stay their doctrines vpon priuate reuelations, and alledge the same texts, to serue them for foundation of their doctrine, which the Ministers yesterday alledged: that is to say, Ieremy in the third Chap∣ter, and Ioel. 2. and Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 2. which Brentius and Bucer considering, haue confessed: that by the onely tradition of the Church, wee are acertained of the bookes of the holy scripture, in following the doctrine of the aun∣cient Fathers, as Saint Ierome, who confesseth hee receiued by the tradition of the Church, and by the same did knowe, that there bee foure Gospels. As much thereof saith Ori∣gen, recyting the Canonicall bookes of the new Testament, saying: I haue learned by tradition, that there bee foure Gospels. And you shall not finde any auncient Catho∣licke, which hath stayed his faith to discerne and iudge of bookes vpon his onely priuate and particular inspiration. And Saint Augustine, Liber Confess. cap. 25. vseth these wordes: Ʋeritas tua domine, non mea; nec illius aut illius, sed omnium nostrum, quos ad communionem aduocas: terribiliter admonens ne priuatam veritatem habeamus, ne priuemur ea. Thy truth ô Lord, not mine, nor of him or him, but of all vs, whom thou callest to communion: terribly admoni∣shing that wee haue not the truth priuate, least wee be de∣priued thereof. And touching the bookes of the old Testament, which the Ministers will not receiue for Canonicall by the iudge∣ment of their inward reuelation; the Doctors doo shewe, that before Saint Augustines time, or (at leastwise) in his time, in the Church vniuersall, all the bookes which are con∣tained in the holy Bible without distinction, were holden and receiued for Canonicall: as witnesseth the Councell of Carthage, where S. Augustine was▪ And also the Coun∣cell of Laodicia. Now thus say the Doctors, the Fathers which were present in these Councels, (if by inward inspi∣ration wee must iudge of bookes) they had it, or at least they might perswade themselues to haue it more assuredly then many others. The Ministers say, that they iudge by their inward re∣uelation, that they be not Canonicall. The Doctors leaue it to iudgement, which men ought rather beleeue: whether the inspiration of the auncient Fathers, receiued by the Church for so many hundred yeares vntill now: or else the priuate and particular inspiration of the new Ministers. They adde further: that they submit themselues to proue, that the auncient Fathers, yea neare the time of the Apo∣stles (as Ireneus, S. Ciprian, Origen, S. Ierome, S. Augustine▪ and others) doo vse the testimonies of the bookes reiected by the Ministers: yea for proofe of the doctrine against the heretikes. And Saint Augustine himselfe in the 2. booke of Christian doctrine, Cap. 2. dooth put all those bookes by name among the bookes Canonicall. And Damascen like∣wise in his fourth booke de Orthodoxa fide. Cap. 18. To know then, whether a man haue the spirit of God, to discerne and iudge of the bookes of the scripture, he must bee reduced to the common consent and agreement of the Church: for this is the ordinarie meanes left by God to that effect: and the experience may bee made, is an argu∣ment sufficient to conuince, that the faithfull by inward in∣spiration, cannot discerne the Canonicall bookes, from the pretended Apocrypha. Which might easily bee verified, would the cause to come at this present, some of the same pretended reformed Religion, which haue not yet bene in∣structed in the diuision of the bookes; vnto whom should one propose the bookes which the Ministers hold for A∣pocrypha; they would in no wise distinguish them from other bookes of the holy Byble. And vpon the whole they conclude, that if one person hath the spirite of God, &c. vt supra. Answere. Touching the first Article, the Ministers neuer said (as may appeare by the reading of all the former answeres) that their religion is founded on their particular reuelations; but vpon the word of God, as is proposed in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Of the truth whereof, they haue said to be principally assured by the estimoni and reuelation of the holy spirit. They also say, that faith is not the truth (to speake properly): but the perswasion of the truth, which in the scripture s aught vs. Moreouer, that this faith is not of our owne getting▪ but a pure gi t of God: adding, that the Ministers to make them lawfull , ought to bee sent not from the pretended Pastors, which haue not but the y le, and onely name of Pastors: but ought to be sent from God, a it appeareth in Ieremy: where this marke is proposed, to knowe and marke a false Pastor or Shepheard when hee thrusteth in himselfe, or is sent of an other then of God. Touching the article following, they adde that the true marke whereby one may certainly iudge of the reue∣lation, is rather the word of God, then the consent of ma∣ny: for as much as it oft times happeneth, that the multitude in the Church, declining from the word doo altogether erre: as in the time of Micheas, the time of Iesus Christ, and afterward also of Constance the Empe∣rour. Concerning the Prophets, which doo follow they owne spirite (as bee those which leaue the word of God, and depend vppon the commaundements and traditions of men, or on the vanitie of their owne sence) there is no doubt but they are false Prophets; and that such per∣sons are to bee shunned and reiected. But great difference must bee put betweene the reuelations and testimonies of the spirit of God, and the vaine imaginations of the hearts of men. Touching that which the Doctors haue set foorth, that heretikes (as Anabaptists and others) doo vse for con∣firmation of their errors, the texts of scripture alledged by the Ministers. It may so bee, for as much as the scrip∣ture beeing common, may bee produced and alledged of eue ie one. And yet men must not stay vpon that which is alledged: but weigh and examine how and to what end and purpose it is alledged: and in so dooing, men shall knowe the difference betweene the Ministers and here∣tikes. And concerning that produced of Brentius and Bucer, namely, wherein they affirmed, that by the onely tradi∣tion of the Church, the Canonicall bookes may be discer∣ned from the Apocrypha. This it seemeth cannot well serue the Doctors, seeing they maintaine all the bookes of the Bible to bee Canonicall: and neuerthelesse by that they haue said of Brentius and Bucer, it appeareth that the one and the other, following the tradition (as they say) put a distinction therein: calling the one Canonicall, and the other Apocrypha. Touching the Article following, wherein the Doctors alledge certaine textes of the auntient Fathers, to take away the difference betweene the bookes Canonicall and Apo∣crypha. The Ministers do answer, that as they haue alledged some to proue the same; so can they also for their part al∣ledge some to that purpose: as Saint Ierome in his Prologue called Galeatus; and in an other which beginneth Frater Ambrosius: vnto whom, writing the summe of euery booke of the Bible, hee mentioneth those onely which the Mini∣sters call Canonicall. They may alledge also two or three Catalogues recy∣ted in Eusebius: which they receiue not for Canonicall bookes; but those which the Ministers themselues approue. Moreouer, the Councell of Laodicia, which the Doctors haue alledged, is for the Ministers: for as much as it com∣prehendeth not the bookes in question. And touching the experience, they answere: that it is a question of fact: and that it may be alledged, rather against the Doctors, then the Ministers. And finally, that they loose not more time in of∣ten repeating of one selfe-same thing, but hasten to conferre of the points of the confession, which the Doctors will de∣bate. The Ministers do shewe, that the 24. bookes of the old Testament, which are in the Canon of the Hebrewes, with all the bookes of the new Testament, be on both sides approued Canonicall. And they are wholly sufficient to decide all the points of their confession, & all that in generall which appertaineth to true religion. And by meanes there∣of, they haue no cause at all to drawe backe from the Con∣ference, for the difference betweene both parties, tou∣ching the distinction of the bookes Canonicall and Apo∣crypha. Obiection. Although the Ministers doo affirme, that they build their Religion vpon the word of God, yet build they Gods word vpon their inward reuelation. So that such a reuelati∣on is the foundation of the Word, and consequently of their religion. For they receiue not for the word of God, but that which they thinke to bee particularly reuealed to them. Touching the other Article, wherein they finde fault that the Doctors haue said, that faith is obtained by hearing of the word of God, it seemeth they will stay vpon small things, because they will not goe to the principall. And where they say, that faith is the gift of God, and therefore is not gotten▪ it is too plaine by manifold texts of Scripture, that one selfe-same thing to be giuen and obtained, is not repugnant. As the kingdome of heauen, which is giuen to the blessed, and notwithstanding men obtaine it by true faith, working by charitie. And the scripture it selfe dooth Heb. 13. call it a reward, and recompence of good workes. And Saint Paul saith: that by liberalitie and almesdeeds, the grace of God is gained. Yea that which Saint Paul saith, Fides ex auditu: Faith commeth by hearing, cannot otherwise be vn∣derstood, but that faith commeth by hearing the word of God, which is the obtaining thereof, by the meane of hea∣ring the word preached; although it be a gift of God. The like subtiltie they vse, willing to reproue that which hath bene spoken, that faith is the truth reuealed: as putting great difference betweene the truth reuealed, and the reue∣lation of truth. Meet it were, that the subtiltie were vaile∣able I. Cor. 1. 10 against S. Paul, who saith: Panis quem frangimus nonne communicatio corporis Domini est? The bread which wee breake, is it not the communion of the body of the Lord? Which is as much to say, as Panis fractio nonne, &c. The breaking of the bread, is it not, &c. And therefore to speake properly, it behoueth that the text of S. Paul bee subiect to such reprehensions. And as touching this article, that they may not enter thereinto, albeit the Ministers do reply; the Doctors will say no more of it: as beeing a thing too much impertinent. For in the end, should we speake of Merit, and from that matter fall into an other. It troubleth them to deale with the vocation of lawfull Ministers of the Church; and to eschew that matter, would not alledge (what they might without straying) that first before we receiue their doctrine, it was meete to examine, whether they were Ministers lawfully sent from the true Church, to preach the word of God, and in their preachings to be heard of the people, according to the text of S. Paul Rom. 10. aboue alledged. Which thing, had they of the new Reli∣gion well considered, a very sufficient argument should they haue had for not receiuing of their doctrine, because it is more cleare then the day, that they be not Ministers sent by the Pastors of the Church but thrust in themselues to preach, vnable to shewe any signe of their calling from men, and much lesse from God. And were it lawfull for euery one to preach the word, which saith he is sent, there would be infinite Sects: as we see at this time haue happe∣ned. And they say no more of this matter, for feare to aggra∣uate these things any further. Touching the Article, where mention is made, how a man may knowe that a reuelation is of Ood: where it is said by the Ministers, that men should rather know it by the word, then by the consent of many: that maketh no∣thing to the purpose of the Doctors. For the question is, how a man should iudge a booke to containe the word of God, and not to iudge of the doctrine, by the word alreadie receiued. The Doctors would willingly desire, and doo pray the Ministers to answere directly to the very point. Touching that they haue saide, Of the consent of many. The Doctors said not so, but spake of the consent of the Church, which is also as infallible, as the word of God. For as it is certaine that the holy Ghost is author of the Word; so also is it certaine, that hee is the soule of the Church: by whose conduct she can neuer erre: witnesse S. Paul, who calleth her Columnam & firmamentum veritatis. The ground and pillar of truth. But they will not enter into this questi∣on, whether the multitude of the Church may erre or not. Neuerthelesse it will not be found ithens the Church was planted after the death of Iesus Christ, that shee hath bene of lesse number, then the Sects of heretikes. And that al∣ledged of Constance, and of the time of the olde Testament seru th nothing to that purpose: for there is great difference betweene the Synagogue of the Iewes and the Church: which is the congregation of all Nations beleeuing in Iesus Christ, and which cannot be or consist, but in a most great multitude: otherwise the promises made to the Church of the Gentiles, should be vaine: for it is said to Abraham that his eed (this must not bee vnderstood of the carnall) should be multiplied as the starres of heauen, and the sand of the sea. Concerning the Article which beginneth, Touching the Prophets, &c. The Doctors do say, that they confesse there is great difference betweene phantasticall imaginations, and the reuelation of the holy Ghost: but the Ministers doo not answere how they would proue their particular perswa∣sions, to be reuelations, rather then the vaine and foolish imaginations of the Prophets, which Ezechiel spake of. The which notwithstanding they called inspirations: and what they said, and preached, they called also the Word of God. Concerning the Article which beginneth, Touching the Anabaptists, &c. The Doctors say, that to one selfe-same end, doo the Ministers and Anabaptists wholly produce the selfe-same places, of which mention is made: that is to say, to stay and assure their doctrine to be of God, because ther∣of they haue particular reuelation, as God hath promised them by the Prophets. And for this selfe-same cause, haue the Ministers produced the said testimonies of the scripture, to proue that euery faithfull man may indge by his particu∣lar inspiration, if a booke do containe the word of God: and distinguish a booke Canonicall from Apocrypha: to iudge and discerne the true doctrine from the false: which is the selfe-same foundation of the Anabaptists and other here∣tikes. To that Article which beginneth, touching that which is produced of Brentius, &c. The Doctors say: that the Mi∣nisters haue not well conceiued their meaning. For they bring not the saying of Brentius and Bucer, but onely be∣cause they say, that they know the Canonicall bookes of the holy Scripture, by the tradition of the Church, and not by particular inspiration, as the Ministers. Touching the Article following, the Doctors say: there was a time when some made doubt of certaine bookes of the Scripture: as of the Apocalips, the Canonicall Epi∣stle of S. Iohn, and others. But in time the Church guided by the holy Ghost, with common consent receiued indiffe∣rently for Canonicall, all the bookes that bee in the Bible; which consent (continued by so many hundred yeares) hath more authoritie then the sayings of one or two: the which neuerthelesse, spake not but of their owne time. And fur∣ther, there is no comparison betweene the sayings of one or two particular men, & the determinations of Councels, and consent of the Church: as hath already beene sayd. And it will be found, that S. Ierom hath approoued these bookes as Canonicall. And for the same, will referre themselues to the Prologue which hee made vpon the bookes of the Ma∣cabees, where he saith: Touching the Hebrewes, they are not Canonicall histories of the Church: or other wordes to the like effect. For the Councell of Laodicia, they referre Inter di∣uinorum volumi∣num ano∣tantur Historia . them to that which is contained therein. It may bee, they are deceiued, in cyting one Councell for another. For the Article beginning, Touching the experience, &c. Although it be a question of fact: yet it ceaseth not to be much auail∣able. And if it be found as the Doctors haue proposed, (of which they doubt nothing) the foundation of their particu∣lar reuelation is ouerthrowne. Touching the Ministers conclusion: the Doctors doo shew, that they haue oft times complained, they fell into by-matters. They referre themselues to the iudgement of all men, that their last resolution was deducted all of one thread, continuing without straying, in the same matter: In which, albeit they had found something wherein diffi∣cultie had beene, had the Ministers so much desired to pro∣ceed to the conference of the chiefe pointes; they might briefely haue admonished them of the said difficultie. The Doctors vpon these articles had verily said something: but to hasten the busines for the which they bee called, they do forbeare to multiply words. Where the Ministers shew, that they receiue the 24. bookes of the old Testament, with all the bookes of the Newe. The Doctors say: that that is not the point. For all the conference they haue made hitherto, that is to say: by what rules men might discerne some bookes from other some, and iudge whether they were of the Scripture or not, was to raunge them in this point, that they receiued them by the tradition of the Church: which is iudge of the num∣ber of the bookes: and by the same meanes, when the questi∣on should bee, of the vnderstanding of the word of God (euen in the conference of the places of the same Scrip∣ture) the Ministers and Doctors should haue such reuerence to the Catholique Church, that she should be of both parts accepted for iudge, of the vnderstanding of the Scripture, which they acknowledg to haue receiued of the same: wher∣of she is an infallible iudge, and more certaine, then the one or the other. And notwithstanding the Doctors doo make offer to the Ministers, that they will not vse at this time a∣gainst them, but those bookes onely, which they receiue for Canonicall. But when they shall fall into difficultie of the interpretation of some text, or of the conference of many: the Doctors esteeme it more reasonable to haue recourse to the Catholique Church, and to the auncient Fathers, then to their proper sence, or that of the Ministers. Answere. For conclusion, the Ministers do accept of the offer made them by the Doctors, to decyde the pointes and articles of their Confession, by the bookes Canonicall, whereof they are agreed: that is to say, the 24. bookes of the Hebrewes, and all the bookes of the new Testament: protesting neuerthelesse, that in the last writtings propo∣sed by the Doctors, there bee many things which they no wayes approoue, and doo hope to confute as occasions shall bee offered: and would presently haue done it, had it not beene that they will shew (against that imputed to them by the Doctors) that they will not stray, nor a∣ny way retyre from the conference of the points of their Confession. Reply. The Doctors reciprocally do agree to the Ministers in the said offer: with this moderation, to ad the authoritie of the vniuersall Church, and the auncient Doctors, for the in∣terpretation and vnderstanding of the holy Scripture, when they cannot agree. The third dayes Dispute, on Thursday, the ele∣uenth of Iuly. T HE Ministers haue shewed what are the protestations which the Doctors haue made, not for other ende to ap∣peare in this Conference, but to satisfie Madam de Buillon, and not to bee in∣structed, and otherwise informed of the pointes of Religion then they be. And those which the Ministers haue on their part made also, not to conferre with them for any doubt they haue of the pointes of their Confession, whereof they bee wholely resolued: By reason of which protestations, they haue required that the first point, whereof they shall conferre, may bee that which Ma∣dam de Buillon hath publiquely required to bee decyded: that is of the Supper, and of the Masse: that they may bee discharged of that also which hath beene imputed vn∣to them by the Doctors: that they wandered and would not come to the principall point, which is, that aforesaid of the Masse: but cōtrariwise that they fled away & drew backe from the conference. Finally, that it may bee knowne who doo flye the decyding thereof: They offer, after they haue cleared that point, to conferre with them (if they please) of all the other points which be in controuersie, as leisure and time shall therfore be granted. And doo also require, to a∣voyd all confusion (and such as happened in the Conference the day before) that the Doctors may propose their argu∣ments particularly each one apart: and that the answers al∣so may bee made vnto them particularly by the Ministers. Ir els, if they will propose all their arguments and reasons together, that one whole day may bee graunted vnto them, wherein they may doo that without any interruption: con∣ditionally that the Ministers may haue the day following to answere by order to all their arguments. The Doctors say, by that which is aboue written in the behalfe of the Ministers: That it is easie to know, they haue alwayes recoyled, and yet do recoyle from conference of the things which they haue put in controuersie: and they are maruellously abashed, that they will not now permit the articles of their confession to be examined by order: as the day of the first Conference they had required (my Lord of Neuers, my Lord and Lady of Buillion, and other Lords and Gentlemen being present) in presenting their said confessi∣ons, contained in a little guilded booke, making offer to the Doctors to examine them in order (if they pleased) which they found very reasonable. And indeed the Ministers themselues hauing demanded of the Doctors whereof they would intreate, departed yesterday, contented to begin this day to examine the Articles of the Creed. And as touching their speeche of the protestation that the assembly was made for the instruction of my Lady, who desireth (as they say in her absence) to bee first instructed concerning the Masse: The Doctors say; that the Ministers by word of mouth, haue instructed the said Lady, not onely in the error which concerneth their Supper: but also in many others, as they will make it appeare, when they shall handle the ar∣ticles of the Confession by them exhibited. Then willing to instruct the Lady by order in the Catholique Religion: they purpose to follow the order held by the Fathers of the Church; that is to say: to shew vnto her, how many er∣rors against the Articles of the faith, are contained in the Catechisme of their Ghurch: although they shew to them of their religion, that they differ in these articles nothing from the Catholiques. And because to catechise and in∣struct one, it behooueth to beginne at the foundation, and that of certaine articles of the Creed (in which the Ministers & their like do erre) dependeth the beginning of the proofe of the reall presence of the body of Iesus Christ in the Sa∣crament of the Aultar: they will holde the order which all good teachers or instructors doo keepe in all discipline, and the Ministers themselues do obserue, following in their Catechisme this method. And rightly were the Doctors to bee mocked (whom men doo take for instructors) if they should beginne (for the Ministers pleasure) to instruct one in that point, wherein they ought to ende: as endeth the same Catechisme of the Ministers vpon the matter of the Supper. Moreouer, seeing the Ministers are content (as they say) that all the articles of their confession bee examined: no priuiledge haue they, but that one begin at the first, for as much as all order so requireth: and it is alwayes at the choice of the Apponent to propound (in such order as see∣meth best to him) the questions for the Dispute, were there any. And for as much as they are bound to giue a reason of their faith, as often as they be therof required: expedient it were for the good of the Lady, & for the instruction of those that shall read the Conference, to follow this method. And if they refuse what the Doctors doo offer, they cannot a∣uoyd it, but all the world will iudge (by the eye) that distru∣sting their owne doctrine (which they dare not vphold) they confound the Conference. Whereas they require, that the Doctors in the Confe∣rence, put foorth but one reason at once: wherevnto they may answere without confusion: or else, that in one day the Doctors put forth all their reasons, and on an other day the Ministers may come to answere. The Doctors do say, that the first offer is reasonable; and to auoyd length of speech, they accept it: but they neuer heard say, that the second ma∣ner hath bene practised: and no need it were to assemble together in one place for that purpose, but to send their wri∣tings the one to the other. Answere. Touching the exhibiting of the confession, and the of∣fers which the Doctors pretend to haue beene made by the Ministers, the Ministers do report themselues to the Regi∣sters. And do adde moreouer, that it appeareth by the Doc∣tors last proposition, that it is not vpon the confession which the Doctors say was exhibited vnto them, but vpon the Ca∣techisme, that they will ground their Dispute. For conclu∣sion, the Miuisters do eftsoones protest as abouesaid, that men may know who they be that doo flye the Lists, and re∣quire that henceforth the order of arguing and answering, may be by course, betweene them and the Doctors. For as much as it behoueth that things be equall, and that it is rea∣sonable, that the Doctors as well do render a reason of their faith, as the Ministers. Reply. The Doctors do referre them to what hath bene put in writing in the two first Conferences: where speech was alwaies of examining the articles of their confession, with∣out making any mention of the Masse. And where they say that it seemeth the Doctors would examine the Catechisme, and not the articles of the confession: the Doctors are con∣tent to examine the said articles, by conferring them with the Catechisme. This considered, that these two ought to agree together: they make all men iudges that shal read these writings, in whom is the let, that they begin not the Confe∣rence. And for the order which the Ministers will now change, a new fashion it is, and also a new trouble▪ cōsidering that hitherto they haue holden the place of respondent, and haue presented to be examined, the articles of their confes∣sion. As for the Doctors, they haue bene alwaies arguers, and haue not for their part proposed ought to be examined. Ne∣uerthelesse, they are contented after examination of the said confession, that the Ministers doo propound the difficulties they shall haue against the Catholike doctrine: wherevnto by the grace of God, the Doctors will answere. Demaund. Whether the Ministers do beleeue the Creed, called the Apostles, to haue bene made by the Apostles? and whether they do beleeue all that is contained therein? Answere. It is a thing in difference, whether the Apostles being to∣gether, themselues did write it, each one of them bringing his sentence (as some do hold): or whether it hath bene ga∣thered out of diuers places of their writings. But so it is, that in the reformed Church, men beleeue euery point to bee drawne from the pure Propheticall and Apostolike doc∣trine contained in their writings: as if one should say, that it is a Summarie of the doctrine which the Apostles haue prea∣ched, because it beareth and containeth the same. Question. Leauing (to auoyd tediousnesse) whether it bee a thing indifferent for a Christian to beleeue, that a doctrine hath bene written by the Apostles, or no: if it be conformable to that which shalbe found in holy writ: they demaund whether all doctrine conformable to the said Letters, may take indif∣ferently the title of the Apostles, or other authors of the scripture? Answere. No man can faile to call it Apostolike doctrine: but in na∣ming it Apostolike writing, one might giue to vnderstand, that it was written by their owne hands▪ or spoken by them. But howsoeuer it be, where we shall acknowledge any doc∣trine to sauour of the spirit, wherwith the holy men of God haue bin moued, that call we Propheticall and Apostolike doctrine. Obiection. The demaund was not, whether the doctrine be Aposto∣like, for any such conformitie: but whether for this reason, it may be attributed to the Apostles, and of like authoritie as the Scriptures, vnto which it is conformable: forasmuch as it proceedeth from one selfe same spirit, as is sayd in the answere. Answere. The Answere thereto is made: to wit, that such a writing doth containe Apostolique doctrine, and in some sence it may be said to be the Apostles. Obiection. The Answere (vnder correction) nought pertaineth to the question. For it is not demaunded, whether men may esteeme it Apostolique in respect of the conformitie, but whether for this conformitie, men may attribute it to the Apostles, and giue vnto it the tytle and name of the Apo∣stles: and whether for the said conformitie, it be of like au∣thoritie with the proper writtings of the Apostles? Answere. The first question was, whether the Creed were made by the Apostles? Whereunto hath beene rendred sufficient answere. After which it is lawfull to make the second de∣mand, which is diuers from that. Obiection. The second, dependeth on the first, and so hath it been made. Whether it bee thought sufficiently answered, let the iudgement thereof be referred to the reader. Answere. Because it dependeth thereupon, it is not therefore the same. Question. Whether they approoue the Creed onely, because they know it to be conformable to the writings of the Apo∣stles? Or whether there any other cause, which incyteth them to beleeue it? Answere. It is not onely conformable, but the doctrine it selfe: and for that cause doo they beleeue it, and approoue it. Question. Whether a man be not bound to receiue it, but for so much as hee knoweth it to bee the same writing, or confor∣mable to the writings of the Apostles, as is aforesaid. Answere. The principall cause that may moue him that beleeueth it, to beleeue it, is the knowledge afore spoken of. Question. Although this be the principall cause, they require an ab∣solute answere, whether there be not other sufficient cause to beleeue it, in such wise as this first is necessarie. Answere. For the Creed, and euery other thing we beleeue, the prin∣cipall cause is, the knowledge we haue that the same hath bene left in writing, or collected of the writings of the Pro∣phets and Apostles. And we for our part seeke no other rea∣son but that of the faith which we haue. Obiection. They answere not (vnder correction) to the question: which is, whether to receiue the Creed of the Apostles this cause be necessary, to know the cōformitie of the said Creed, with the writings of the Apostles: and that without the same, none can or ought to receiue it. The Doctors pray them to auoyd circumlocution, and answere absolutely the one or the other. And more simply to explane the question, this it is: to wit, whether one ought not to receiue the Creed of the Apostles, but because he knoweth that it is confor∣mable to the Apostles writings? Answere. The matter considered after the doctrine of S. Paul, that there is no true faith without knowledge and assurance of the word: to beleeue, it behoueth to know that it is the word of God. Question. It would be knowne, whether they vnderstand this word to be written, or not written. Answere. The word written and reuealed by the Prophets and A∣postles, which is the foundation of the Christian faith. Obiection. The Ministers doo then maintaine, that before the be∣leeuing of the Creed, or proposing it to be beleeued, it be∣houeth to be instructed, or to instruct an other, in the wri∣tings of the Apostles and Prophets. Now that is contrary to all the order euer holden in the Church, and contrary to that which is contained in the forme, prescribed for admi∣nistration of the Sacraments in the Church at Geneua, made by Caluin, and inserted amongst his workes; which beareth these words, addressed to them that haue charge of the childe they baptise: For as much as the matter wee haue in hand, is to receiue this childe into the fellowship of the Christian Church, yea do promise whē it shal come to yeares of discretion, to instruct it in the doctrine which is receiued and approued of Gods people. And after these words, is inserted the Creed: after which, it is said they shall pro∣ceed to the instruction of the childe in all the doctrine con∣tained in the holy scripture of the olde and new Testament: so that before they propose the Creed to be beleeued, they propose not to be beleeued that there is any word of God written, nor what it is, nor that therein contained, to know the conformitie of the Creed with the same. Also they place not the foundation of the beleeuing of the Creed, vpon the knowledge and conformitie of the scripture, but vpon the doctrine receiued and approued by the people of God. As the auncient Church, yea before the scriptures of the new Testament were written, did wontedly propose both to great and small, the beliefe of the Creed, before they proposed the holy scriptures vnto them, as by Christian antiquities appeareth. And therefore the beliefe of a Chri∣stian touching the Creed, dependeth not on the written word, but vpon the word reuealed to the people and church of God. Answere. Touching the first article, it is very necessarie that in teaching a childe, or any other ignorant person, the Creed of the Apostles, they also forthwith teach him the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, seeing that which is contained in the Creed, is no other thing, but the selfe-same doctrine: and that they are things not onely conioyned, but also like, if not in words, yet at least in sence and substance. Touching the second article, they denie that that aboue∣said, is any way cōtrary to the established order in the church of Geneua, or any other well gouerned Church. And as tou∣ching the reason drawne frō the forme of the Baptisme vsed in the said Churches, it followeth not, by the alledged words and sayings thereof, that Caluin proposed thē to exclude the Creed, and to seperate the same from the writings and doc∣trine of the Prophets & Apostles, (which is impossible) but plainly to shewe, that when he added that word, hee meant therin to comprehend it, and generally (which the Doctors haue omitted in their allegation) to comprehend that which remaineth in the holy scriptures, after the deduction he had made of the points of doctrine, particularly comprised in the Creed. And for the other reason added, that the Creed was proposed to those that were catechised, before any booke of the new Testament was written, they grant it. But it follow∣eth not therefore, that it was not founded on the word and doctrine which the Apostles did preach: (although then not put in writing) And likewise on the writings of the Pro∣phets, wherevpon is founded the doctrine of the Apo∣stles. For conclusion, the Ministers put no difference as touching the sence betweene the word of God preached and written. Obiection. The Ministers (it seemeth) haue not well conceiued the meaning of the Doctors. For the question is not whether the Creed bee conformable in it selfe, to the writings Apo∣stolike; but whether it first behoueth to beleeue and vn∣derstand, that the Apostles and Prophets haue put a doc∣trine in writing, vnto which the Creed is conformable: and that otherwise, the Creed cannot bee beleeued. And for more easie explanation, the question is, whether it be not possible for a childe, (being come to yeares of discretion) or any other, by the instruction of the father and mother, or others, to beleeue the articles of the Creed, without being first instructed by them, that there are certaine Apostolike writings, vnto which, the Articles of the Creed are confor∣mable. And whether to moue them so to beleeue, it be ne∣cessary to know that conformitie; Let the Ministers abso∣lutely answere therevnto. Answere. Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: Rom. 10. wherevnto agreeth, that which Iesus Christ saith: putting the hearing of the word before the faith thereof, saying: He Ioh. 5. 24. that heareth my word, and beleeueth in him that sent me, &c. Also that which hee commaunded the Apostles, first to preach the Gospell, that the hearers might by preaching, be disposed and brought to the faith. For these reasons, know∣ledge that the doctrine which is taught, is the word of God, is necessarie to beleeue: And without that, it is not possible for a man to haue faith, or beleeue in God, except he be first assured, that what is taught him, is the word of God. And for the demaund made touching the instruction of children growne to yeares of discretion, or others, whether it be re∣quisite they should know the word, before they beleeue it. The answere is, yea. And Thomas himselfe saith, that the faith of the articles of the Creed, ought to be expounded; that is to say, cleared: which cannot be done without the knowledge of the word. Obiection. In such an answere there is multiplying of words, with∣out ought touching the point proposed: for they doubt not but that they ought to Catechise children and others, and to expound by the word of God, the Articles of the Creed vnto them: but the question is, whether they must vnderstand, that this Word is written in the bookes of the Prophets and Apostles: so that without the know∣ledge of those writings, they cannot haue the knowledge and beliefe of the articles of the faith contained in the said Creed. The Doctors pray the Ministers to answere yea or no: and after their answere, to adde what reasons they will. Which thing if they will not do, the Doctors will proceed to an other article; after notwithstanding (for conclusion of all) they haue shewed vnto them, that if this knowledge of the scriptures were necessarie to vnderstand the articles of the Creed, in examining them according to the conformitie of the same scriptures, that it behooueth (sith the founda∣tion is so necessarie) to place this among the Articles of the Creed: [I beleeue that there be holy scriptures.] And it is to be noted, that there is not any mention made in the said Creed, that there are holy scriptures. So that a man may be truly a Christian, before he vnderstand that there is any Christian doctrine, and word of God written. And therfore to beleeue and vnderstand the Creed, it is not necessary to knowe the word of God to be written. And the Doctors do protest that they will speake no more of this article. Answere. By conference of the demaunds and answeres, it is easie to iudge, who more abound in speech, they which propound, or they that answere. Touching the second article, the an∣swere is as before; that to beleeue, and be a Christian, the knowledge of Gods word is necessarie, whether the said word be written or reuealed. And as touching the remon∣strance made, the Ministers do answere, that they for their part will in no wise allow men should ought adde to the pure word of God. And they beleeue that the Creed of the Apostles is nothing else but the pure word of God, which is proposed vnto vs by his spirit, saying, that it should bee a breach against his commandement to adde therevnto new articles. And they do maintaine, that had there bene other articles which had bene necessary to saluation, the spirit of God would not haue omitted nor forgotten them. For con∣clusion, albeit no expresse mention bee made of the holy scripture in the Creed, yet so much is there couertly vnder∣stood, that the Church (which cannot stand if shee be not built and founded vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles) is there proposed for an article to beleeue. Reply. The Doctors say, that this answere is impertinent, and no more to the purpose then the former. And although the Pro∣phets and Apostles had not written, yet had the Church bin built vpon their foundation, as it was in the time of Abrahā, and before there was any scripture: which, were it necessary to saluation, it had bene put amongst the articles of faith. Answere. The Ministers say, that this reply is yet more impertiment: and for the reason thereto added, that the faith was in the time of Abraham, although there were no word written: they do agree therevnto. But it is ill inferred: there is no written word. There is therefore no word. And it is a fallacie in argument, which the Logicians doo call, A dicto secundum quid ad dictū simpliciter. From a qualified saying, to a saying simple. The fourth dayes. Dispute on Fryday the 12. of Iuly. T He Ministers do shewe, that they still continue their former requests, conside∣ring the protestations aforesaid made by the Doctors: who haue twise decla∣red, that they were not assembled, but onely to satisfie the Lord Montpensier, and my Lady of Buillon: considering al∣so the request publikely made by the said Lady in the assembly, to bee instructed in the point of the Supper, and not vpon the others, whereof she thinketh her selfe sufficiently instructed, and not to need therein any further teaching. And for these causes do the Ministers re∣quest, as before they haue done, that the first thing, whereof they shall conferre, be that of the Supper▪ and of the Masse. And the rather, for that they vnderstood by some worthy of credit, that the Doctors intend not to enter into confe∣rence vpon that point. Vpon this declaration, the Doctors say, that they are ashamed to heare so often protestations; and that the Mi∣nisters (it seemeth) will thus spend the time, to flee eftsoones the Conference of the articles of their confession: which neuerthelesse they haue oftentimes set forth to be exami∣ned. And where they say, that Madame de Buillon (for in∣struction of whom the company is assembled) hath requi∣red publikely to bee instructed in the articles of the Masse, and in no other. They say, that some mention shee made for Conference of the Masse: but they neuer heard say that she held her selfe sufficiently instructed concerning the other articles. The Doctors do offer, that if the said Lady will confesse that she beleeueth all the other articles propo∣sed by the Ministers, and their like against the doctrine of the Catholike Church, to be e ronious, they are presently readie to enter into Conference of the Masse. But contrari∣wise, if she be seduced with errors, contrary to the doctrine of the Church Catholike, to keepe the order which apper∣taineth to instructors, and to lay the foundatiō of the Masse, the Doctors haue determined, according to the good & holy des e of my lord Montpensier, to car chife & teach the Lady his daughter cōcerning euery article, & by order. And they further say, that the Ministers do what they of their Church are accustomed; which is, alwaies to flie back frō the Confe∣re ence with the Catholikes, and be for the point proposed by them be decided, they put an other in Dispute: as did Be∣ a and the Ministers with him at Poissy: who seeing the Sup∣per was to be handled against thē in the chamber of the Prior of Poissy in the pre ce of the Queen, of the Prinoes of bloud, & of the Lords of the Councell, they often requested to leaue that point vndecided, hand to enter into some other which should be more euident against the Catholikes as of Images and other things. And contrariwise, the Ministers to auoyd now the great which be in their interpretation of the Creed, would set forth the point of the Supper. The Doctors beseech, as they haue that there be no confusion in their doing; and their religio e examined by order; and that it be no thought that the Doctors doo refuse o enter into the Conference of the Masse, and the Supper, as they haue alwaies determined and neuer said (vnder correction of all persons) that they would not conferre theerof: for my La∣dies briefe instruction, they are readie to dispute thereof by word of mouth, and plainly to shewe by the expresse word of God, that Iesus Christ instituted, and said Masse, and his Apostles also. They do also offer, that whatsoeuer shall be said by word of mouth vpon this matter, be put in writing the next day after, to be placed in it order: as the instruction of my Lady doth require. And do referre them for the day, to the said Ladies opportunitie. The Ministers do answere, that all these answeres are superfluous, and vnprofitable, for as much as all such Confe∣rences are nothing but debates and al rications, which do offend and scandalize more then they edifie. The Resolution of the Doctors. THe Doctors ensuing the order alreadie begun, and their charge which is to conferre with the Ministers, and af∣terwards to giue a resolution for the instruction of my Lady of Buillon, vpon the two points proposed yesterday: to wit, whether the Apostles were authors of the Creed. And why we ought to beleeue it. They say, that to know whether the Apostles did make and erect the Creed, ought no more to be esteemed a thing indifferent, then to know whether the Apostles be authors of their owne writings. For much more is the authoritie of them, when a man is assured that they are certainly proceeded from the Apostles. And contrari∣wise, it should be far lesse, if men did doubt therof, or esteem it a thing indifferent. Moreouer they say, that it is no suffi∣cient reason to call this Creed Apostolike, and to intitle it, the Creed of the Apostles: in regard of the conformitie it hath with their writings. For by this reason, the other Creeds (as that of Nice, of Ath n sius, and all other the like writings) may as well be named the Creed of the Apostles; because they containe a doctrine agreeable to the Apostles writings. Therefore say the Doctors, it must be beleeued, that the Apostles did make it, and gaue the same Creed vn∣to Christians▪ and that it must be beleeued, as being a wri∣ting composed by the Apostles. And their proofe thereof is, that they alwayes finde since the Apostles time vntil now, that this Creed hath bene proposed in Baptisme and Cate∣chisme: as it appeareth by the authors which haue beene from the Apostles vnto vs. And also that no man can name, or note any Author or Councell (but euen before that Au∣thor, or Councell, immediately to the Apostles time) that Creed hath beene proposed in Baptisme and Cat chisme, and called among Christians, the rule of faith. And the like argument S. Augustine in many places against the Donatists, doth esteeme to be firme and in incible, to proue and shew, that something is from the Apostles. They willingly omit to auoyd ediousnesse, the aunci∣ent writers: as S. Ambrose, S. Ierome, & others, who acknow∣ledge this Creed to haue bene made and receiued, namely of the Apostles. For the second point, the Doctors do affirme, that the bond and necessitie to beleeue this Creed, doth not depend o the knowledge of the Apostolike or Prophetica scriptures, nor on the knowledge of the conformitie with them. For it was made and co ained among the Christians in Baptisme, before there was any Apostolike writing. And in Baptisme they proposed the said Creed to be beleeued, before they ent ed into the scripture, or to speake thereof. And in the Primatiue Church, they examined the scrip∣tures whether they were to be receiued or nor, and the vn∣de standing of them, and whether a doctrine were true or false by this Creed and rule of faith; and by it likenesse or conformitie with the same. Ireneus, Tertullian, and others, do teach it. And although it should so happen, that a man had neuer heard but the Creed, without knowing whether there be holy scriptures or not, hee might beleeue the said Creed, and be a true Christian: so that hee were voyd of other particular false opinion. And contrariwise, if the be∣liefe of the Creed did depend vpon the knowledge of the Propheticall o Apostolike scriptures, to vnderstand and to be assured of the conformitie that is therein, as as to beleeue it none but the learned and well exercised in the scriptures (who should bee assured of the said conformitie) should be bound to beleeue the Creed, or should at least be assured of the truth thereof. And so should there he very fewe Christians, Therfore the belle ing of the Creed, doth not depend vpon the knowledge of the scriptures. By meanes whereof the Doctors do hold by tradition of the Church by the holy Ghost, that the Creed is the Apostle and that none ought to doubt therof. And by the same tradition it must be beleeued, as of the Apostles of like authoritie with that in their wri∣tings, although they had no knowledge of the other scrip∣tures. And the Doctors are sory that they haue so much de∣clined from answering pertinently and absolutely to these two points, which they haue onely proposed to shew, what faith and authoritie men ought to giue to this Creed, and to all other doctrine receiued by tradition of the Apostles, (without Canonicall scripture) which they will proue to haue bene left by them; by the same meane and reason by which is shewed, the Creed to haue bin deliuered to the Christians by the Apostles without that they put the same in writing. Finally the Doctors do admonish such as read this Conference, not to be astonished, nor ma uell at so many perplexed de∣clinings from the true end of the said points proposed. And do pray them to remember the conferences made by S. Au∣gustine, with the Donatists and Pellagians: wherin they shall finde like maner of dealing, as that of the Ministers, with whom they do conferre. And for the present Conference, referre themselues to the readers iudgement. The Resolution of the Ministers. THe Ministers following that which before hath bene proposed, and alwaies by them maintained; and for the confirmation also of the faith of the Lady of Buillon, say that it is vncertaine (as S. Ciprien hath written) whether the Creed, called the Apostles, was made & composed by them: or else drawne or gathered out of their doctrine: and why also it is called the Apostles Creed: or whether it is because each of them added his part and portion therevnto: or else whether it be because it is a marke and certaine ensigne of Christian Religion. And as touching the same; that it is a thing indifferent to saluation: in as much as it hath alwaies one waight and authoritie, be it that the Apostles haue writ∣ten it, or that it hath beene faithfully gathered out of theyr writings. So haue also the Creeds, as well of Nice, as of A∣thanasius, whereof the Church hath neuer doubted, but that they containe a pure Apostolike doctrine, as shee hath eui∣dently declared, in ordaining that the said Nicen Creede should bee publikely proposed and published to the peo∣ple, on the dayes of theyr assembly to communicate, which at this day is yet obserued in the Church of Rome: where that Creed is read or sung euery Sabaoth in their Churches. And did it not containe Apostolike doctrine, it should withstand the 59. Article of the Councell of Laodicia: in which it is forbidden to read in the Church, any thing pro∣posed of priuate inuention, but onely the doctrine compri∣sed in the Canonicall bookes of the old and new Testament, the number whereof is there made. The Ministers say further, that the reason and princi∣pall motiue of the faith which Christians giue to the Creed, is the knowledge they haue, that it is the pure word of God, and him that teacheth it, do they also maintaine, to bee the word of God: as may appeare by that which S. Paul wri∣teth: who after he had proposed to the Corinthians, the 1. Cor. 15. death, buriall, and resurrection of Iesus Christ, which be the chiefe articles of the Creed, and those vpon which princi∣pally iustification is grounded, addeth these words. That hee deliuered vnto them, that which he receiued: to wit, that Christ died for our sinnes according to the scriptures; and that he was afterwards buried: and that he arose againe the third day, according to the scriptures. Iesus Christ also proposing his death and resurrection to the two Disciples, alledged to them the scriptures, thereby Luk. 24. to assure them, saying: O fooles and slowe of heart to be∣leeue all that the Prophets haue spoken, ought not Christ to haue suffered these things, and to enter into his glorie? And hee began at Moyses and the Prophets, and interpreted vnto them in all the scriptures, the things that were written of him. In the selfe-same Chapter, appearing after his resur∣rection, euen before the Creed was made, proposing vnto them his death and resurrection; to assure them thereof, hee alledged vnto them the scriptures, saying: It is thus written, and thus it behoued Christ to suffer and rise againe from the dead the third day. Whence may be inferred, that for the foundation of faith, and assurance of the articles of the same, there is no better means then to propose the scriptures. And although in the time of the birth of the Church, the Creed was proposed to those that were Catechised, before the A∣postles and Euangelists had put any thing in writing: it fol∣loweth not therefore that there were no other scriptures, wherevpon euery article of the faith might be builded. And to decsare the same particularly, The article of the creation hath it foundation vpon the beginning of Genesis. The ar∣ticle of the almightinesse of God, hath it foundation vpon the 40. Chapter of Esay, and diuers other places of the scrip∣ture. The article of the conception of Iesus Christ, vpon the 7. Chapter of Esay: For the place of his birth, vpon the 5. of Micheas: and in respect of the time, vpon the 49. of Ge∣nesis, and the 9. of Daniel. The article of the death and of the Crosse, vpon the 22. Psalme, 53. Chapter of Esay, and 9. of Daniel. The article of the Resurrection vpon the 16. Psalme. The article of the Ascention, vpon the 68. Psalme. The article of the iudgement, in Daniel, 12. The article of the sending of the holy Ghost, in Ioel 2. The article of the Church, Esay. 2. and Micheas. 4. The article of the remissi∣of sinnes, vpon the 32. Psalme, and 37. of Ezec. The ar∣ticle of the resurrecton of the flesh, and life eternall, in Da∣niel the 12. By this discourse, and places of scripture quoted, it may appeare to euery man, that there were cleare and euident scriptures to ground all the articles of the faith vpon, before the Creed was put in writing: and that men might & ought to alledge them to those that were catechised, to assure them of that which was proposed vnto them to be beleeued. And it is not possible that a man can beleeue, that hath not first heard and vnderstood the Word: and that is not assured thereof, and holdeth it as certaine, and more also (were it possible) then things conceiued and comprised by Mathe∣maticall demonstration: as it appeareth by the definition of faith, when the Apostle calleth it Hypostasin, & elenchon. Heb. 11. That is to say, the euidence of things which are not seene. The Ministers do adde, that it implyeth a contradiction, to call the Creed a doctrine not written▪ and yet to affirme that the Apostles haue written it. And they cannot shewe how long it was an vnwritten doctrine, and at what time it began to be written. And the Ministers are much displeased, in that they which conferre with them, doo not more propose the edification as well of those that bee present at this Confe∣rence, as of others which may see and read the Acts thereof. For where as they might handle and decide points tending to edification of the simple, they stay on proposing and handling some things whereof they no way doubt: which is as much, as to proue a thing confessed, and resolued on, and to light a candle at noone-day. And they assure them∣selues, that they which shal read the acts of this Conference, will not at all bee abashed, because they decline to treat of that point, whereof they be so oft required: for that (as Ie∣sus Christ saith) he that doth euill, fleeth the light. For conclusion, the Ministers do protest to confesse and beleeue, that the Creed of the Apostles, in euery article ther∣of, is the pure word of God, and in the faith wherof, it beho∣ueth euery faithfull man to stay and petseuere vnto the end. So that they would no way receiue nor approue the man in their Churches, that should denie, or ought doubted of the said articles. Reply. The Doctors will proue, that the doctrine of the Mini∣sters containeth points contrarie to the principall articles of the Creed. The first is against the article of the Almighti∣nesse of God, when as they say and teach, that God cannot cause one body to be in two places. The second is against the article of the creation, when as they say, that God not onely permitteth euil and sinne to be done, but also himselfe doth it. The third is, that one while they denie, and an other while they confesse for an article of faith, that the Virgin Marie remaineth a Virgin after her childe-birth. The fourth, that Iesus Christ descended not into hell, but by imagination, and not really. Also say the Ministers against the said article, that Iesus Christ dispaired of his sal∣uation vppon the tree of the Crosse: that hee was trou∣bled in conscience, fearing to bee damned: and many other errors contained in this Article. Vpon which obiecti∣ons, they warne the Ministers to be readie to answere there∣vnto. Answere. The Ministers will bee readie to answere to the slaun∣ders aforesaid. The fift dayes Dispute on Monday the fif∣teenth of Iuly. T He Ministers doo require, that the re∣quest fomerly made, and now againe repeated by the Lady of Buillon, name∣ly, that the Doctors should speedily conferre with them concerning the points of the Masse, may be registred, to the end the occasion may be knowne why the Doctors do delay and go back from the said Conference. The Doctors vnwilling to loose time, and willing to pursue the last dayes agreement, according wherevnto the Ministers ought to answere, touching the errors contained in the doctrine by them preached, against the articles of the Creed: as the Doctors haue noted and proposed the same. And to enter forthwith into the matter, they shewe that the said Ministers haue euilly alledged Saint Ciprian for them, to denie the Creed to be the Apostles. For S. Cipri∣an doubteth not, nor putteth in doubt as a thing indiffe∣rent, whether it bee the Apostles or no; but sheweth ex∣presly, that before they departed asunder, they composed the said Creed: as in the Preface of his exposition may ap∣peare. The Doctors demaund further vpon the article of the omnipotencie, (which is the foundation of the Supper, and the holy Sacrament) why the article of omnipotencie, be∣ing the first and principall article of faith, is not contained in the confession, proposed by the mouth of Beza at Poissy, before the King, and many times since, and inserted in ma∣ny bookes? And why they haue made so many different confessi∣ons of faith, taking out of one what they haue put in: and adding (contrariwise) to others that they haue omitted. And how it happeneth, that the article of the Trinitie, is not ex∣presly in the first confession of the 1564. yeare? which yet they do confesse in all obscuritie. Answere. It shall appeare by the last dayes acts, that the Ministers haue required what they yet require for the present: name∣ly, that the point of the Masse bee first put forth to be deci∣ded: because it is the chiefe occasion, for which the Confe∣rence was appointed. And concerning that they propose touching the Creed, the Ministers neuer doubted, nor yet do they doubt but that it is a pure Apostolike doctrine. Which to eue∣ry man that shall read the acts of the last day aforesaid may appeare: where (at least) in halfe a dozen places, they haue alwaies confessed and repeated the same. And that which they haue maintained to be doubtfull, is onely, whether the Creed were written by the Apostles themselues, or not: whereof nothing can appeare to be veri∣fied by the Doctors. And S. Ciprian himselfe, whom the Doctors haue produced, in his Preface doth aduertise the readers of the great varietie there is touching the said Creed: for as much as diuers Churches haue added therevnto di∣uers articles: He doth also aduertise them, that he followeth in his explication, the order of the Church of Aquilea. Yea and expounding the article of the discention into hell, (of which the Doctors make so much adoo) he specially saith: that it is not in the Creed of the Romane Church, nor yet of the Easterne Churches. Whence may bee gathered the incertaintie of that aboue said: and that there is no article of which men may reasonably doubt, whether it be of the number of those which the Apostles haue written, or whe∣ther some Church hath added the same: or else it must bee said, that the Apostles had written diuers Creeds. And for the difference which the Doctors doo pretend to be in the confessions of the reformed Churches, printed and publi∣shed at sundry times, the Ministers denie them, as touching the sence, to differ one from the other: although for more ample declaration thereof, some tearmes haue possibly bene chaunged. And where they propose that in some of them the article of the omnipotencie of God was omitted, the Ministers doo denie it, and require the Doctors to bring forth a copie of the confession, in which they maintaine the same to haue bene omitted: for were it so, it should be falsi∣fied and corrupted. Adding that there is nothing in their confession, doubtfull or obscure: which some of the said Doctors haue well declared, when they made a forme of confession by the patterne of that of the reformed Chur∣ches, vsing the proper tearmes and sentences: vnto which they added nothing to make it varie, that excepted for which they are in difference with the Ministers, and which they would hardly ground vpon the scriptures. Obiection. The Doctors say, that the Ministers by their deniall that S. Ciprian holdeth the Apostles were Authors, makers, and composers of the Creed, do sufficiently shewe, how bolde they are to denie things manifest. All which, they referre to the auditory present, and to the readers of this writing. For ground of which deniall, they rest vpon a simple reason: to wit, vpon the article of the discention into hell, whether it were inserted by the Apostles, or added by others to make it doubtfull, whether they are Authors of all the other Ar∣ticles. For it is, as if a man should say, it is vncertaine whe∣ther Saint Iohn composed his Gospell, because there bee Iohn. 8. that doubt whether the Historie of the Adulteresse bee of him. But leauing that, the Doctors demaund, whether they confesse not by their doctrine, that God by his almighti∣nesse, cannot cause one body to be in two places: two bodies in one place? Thirdly, that God cannot cause a body to be inuisible. Fourthly, that one body may be in one place with∣out holding place equall to it greatnesse. Answere. All these questions are impertinent and enstranged from the confession of the Churches: which neuerthelesse the Doctors haue chosen for foundation of all the Conference. Wherfore the Ministers require, that they dispute to the pur∣pose, and choose one article or many of the said confession, whervpon they pretend to build their said questions. Obiection. These questions are very pertinent to impugne the Ar∣ticles of the Ministers confession. For the question is not, of the proper words contained in the said confession, which is not but a Summary of the faith: but the Doctors will im∣pugne the sence of the Articles which they doo knowe by their proper writings. By which they openly witnesse, tou∣ching the article of the omnipotencie, that God cannot doo the things aforesaid. And the Doctors do shewe, that it well and fitly serueth to impugne the doctrine of heretickes, and for the true meanes to proue against them, that they receiue not the holy scripture, when they proue that they receiue not the true sence thereof. They say also, that the Ministers themselues hauing desired conference of the Masse, are the cause of such questi∣ons: and the Doctors by this meane will draw them there∣vnto. For this article of the omnipotencie, is the chiefe foun∣dation to proue and maintaine the word of God, and the reall presence of the body of Iesus Christ, in the Sacrament of the Aultar. And the Doctors are abashed at so many de∣clinings: for when their confession is spoken of, they demand the Masse: and when they come to the Masse, they demaund their confession. Answere. The Ministers do abash at so many superfluous things proposed by the Doctors. And where they say that albeit they oppugne not the words of the said confession, yet doo they oppugne the sence thereof. The Ministers answere: that the sence cannot be knowne but by the words. And for this reason they wrap themselues in a contradictiō, when as leauing the tearmes thereof, they say they will confute the sence. And as for the conclusion which they will drawe from Gods omnipotencie, affirming that one body is in di∣uers places at one selfe-same instant, the Ministers do denie that that by good consequence, can be inferred of the om∣nipotencie of God. Obiection. The Doctors say, that it doth well follow, God cannot cause one body to be in two places at one selfe-same instant. God therefore is not almightie. Answere. The Ministers denie the consequence aforesaid, and al∣ledge 2. Tim. 1. reason; because it appeareth by the holy scripture, that God cannot denie himselfe: and that it is impossible that he should lye. Neuerthelesse, it were blasphemie to inferre and Heb. 6. conclude therevpon, that he were not almightie. For the omnipotencie of God, ought to be measured according to his will, and the things agreeable to his nature; as teacheth the M r . of the sentences, saying: In that is God omnipo∣tent, wherein his power is of might, and not of infirmitie. S. Ierome writing to Eustochius, and confirming that aboue said, saith as followeth. I will boldly say, although God can do all things, yet can he not restore and reestablish a virgin after her fall. Saint Augustine likewise writeth in the fift booke of the Citie of God, cap. 10. in these words. The power of God is in nothing lessened, when it is said, he can∣not die, nor be beguiled. And a litle after, God is almigh∣tie, because there be things which he cannot do. The same Author in the 26. of the same worke, cap. 8. thus saith: He that saith, if God be almightie, let him cause the things which be made, that they be not made. Perceiueth not, that it is as much as if he said: if hee be almightie, let him make the things which are true, in as much as they be true, to be false. Teodoret also in his third Dialogue, conformable to that aboue said, saith: We must not without determination, say that all things generally, are possible to God. For hee that so saieth, absolutely comprehendeth things good and euill, which are contrary in themselues. And a little af∣ter, hee affirmeth: that God cannot sinne, because it is a thing contrary to his nature. Wherevpon hee conclu∣deth, that although many things there be which he cannot do (for as much as there bee many sinnes) yet for all that doth he not cease to be almightie. Obiection. The Doctors say, that the reasons formerly brought, do auaile and serue to shewe, that the Ministers doo con∣fesse the antecedent, which seemed onely to be supposed: to wit, God cannot cause one body at one selfe instant to bee in two places, no more then hee can make the things by them alledged. For to this end doo they alledge them, to declare that something there is which God cannot doo. And to the present question (to wit, that one body cannot be in two places) can they not apply them, but to shew that the same is impossible to God. And as touching the reasons alledged out of the holy scriptures: God cannot lye, nor denie himselfe: these places (vnder correction) serue nought to this purpose. For, as they haue brought out of the M r . of the sentences, power to lye, power to sinne, is not power, but impotencie: contrari∣wise rather, if God could sinne, he should be impotent and weake: and such thing also God cannot do, for then should he repugne and destroy himselfe. And as touching the ex∣amples brought out of S. Ierome and S. Augustine, that God cannot make a virgin deflowred to bee yet a virgin, or a thing done, not to be done, that vnderstood as the Logitians say, In sensu Composito, (that is to say, the things beeing such, and so made) is true. And the reason is, for that it would otherwise imply a contradiction. But in the question propo∣sed, there is nothing like therevnto: for the question onely demandeth, whether God by his power, can alter & change the nature and qualitie of things created: as whether he can make a thing heauie and masly, abiding in it qualitie of waight and massinesse (which naturally tendeth downe∣ward) by the onely power of God, to hang in the ayre: as in the holy scripture we read, that the fire which naturally ascendeth, doth descend by the power of God. Also that the fire naturally hot, and burning, cooleth, the qualitie thereof (that is to say the heate) remaining in the substance. As also that two bodies bee in one selfe-same place: as appeared when our Lord did enter where the Apostles were, the the doores being shut: or that a grosse and large body, re∣maining in it grossenesse and largenesse, do passe through a place vnproportionable to it greatnesse and largenesse, as a cable through the eye of a needle. All these examples are ta∣ken out of the holy scripture. And if it must be, that God cannot make one body to be in two places at once, no more should he be able to do the things aforesaid: for, the reasons to this purpose they will afterwards declare. And it will not be found, that it hath euer entered into the braine of any Interpreter, to denie such a power: And the first that euer did openly denie it, was first Peter Marter: and af∣ter him, Beza. The Doctors further say, that the forme of the argument which the Ministers do vse, doth withstand and destroy that which God vseth in the holy scripture, and the Angell spea∣king to the virgin. For God ordinarily when he will assure something impossible to nature, and which men cannot comprehend, he generally alledgeth his power. And the Angell willing to make a ground of the incarnation of our Lord, doth alledge in generall, that there is nothing impossi∣ble to God, in regard of the creatures, as the Angell spea∣keth. Now so it is, that the generalitie of an argument is destroyed by particular exceptions, and is made by this meane vnprofitable and forcelesse. When God then alled∣geth in generall, that his power can do it, one may doubt thereof, and esteeme the thing proposed of God, to bee of those, which are to him impossible, as wel as the exceptions by the Ministers alledged. And that should be false which the Angell saith: That there is nothing impossible to God: because men do alledge & propose many things to the con∣trary. To the end therefore, that God and his Angels bee maintained true in their words, it must not be doubted, but God can much more easily change and alter his creatures, and all their qualities, then a Potter can play with his clay, and forme at his pleasure some vessell thereof. Moreouer, there is daunger, that if we limit Gods pow∣er towards his creatures, wee fall to denie him his Lordship and dominion ouer them. For no other thing is it to be Lord of a creature, then to haue power to change, alter, and giue it such a nature and qualitie, best pleasing to him: as hauing the same in his owne power. And therefore God in Ieremy, Ier. 32. to shewe that hee had power to destroy and ruinate, or to maintaine Ierusalem, as seemed him good, saith: I am the Lord of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me? There∣fore the Doctors do conclude, that there is daunger (if this question bee maintained, as impossible to God) that each one therein will dare as much: alledging the same examples which the Ministers do, to exempt from the power of God, euery thing shall displease him. And when men shall pro∣duce vnto him such things out of the scripture, he may in∣terpret the scripture in an other sence, saying: that such a thing shall be impossible to God by the naturall sence of the words of the scripture: Euen as the Ministers doo change and alter the scripture, which saith that the body of Iesus Christ is in two places. To wit, the word of the Supper, compared with that of the Ascention: and say, that that of the Supper ought not to bee vnderstood litterally: for, that one body should be in two places, is impossible to God. So say the Doctors, that each one wil corrupt the litterall sence of the scriptures, saying: that the thing is impossible vnto God. And therefore must the scriptures be otherwise vn∣derstood. And notwithstanding it may bee because it dis∣pleaseth him: and yet will hee bring forth the selfe-same reasons and allegations as do the Ministers, to shewe that all things are not possible to God. The Doctors do againe conclude, that it is better to maintaine the scripture in the truth thereof, (albeit it propose in our iudgements incom∣prehensible and impossible things, then to open a gap for euery one, to depraue the word of God, to raunge and sub∣iect it to his will and iudgement, vnder shadow of saying, that it is impossible to God: and alledging for the same some examples. They will not omit that the Ministers, who haue often protested to relye vpon the pure word of God, do alledge only auncient Doctors against the power of God, flying for aide to them, against Gods expresse word, which importeth, that generally without exception there is no∣thing impossible to him. Answere. The Minister answere, that the Doctors proue not their consequence, and that they leaue it for some distrust they haue (as is likely) that they are not able to proue it. They mentiō but the antecedent of their said consequence: to the confession whereof, it is not possible for them to lead the Ministers, by their reasons and authorities alledged to wea∣ken their said consequence: for as much as of one particular, they inferre a generall: which is contrary to the rules of Lo∣gicke. And where they say that the authorities alledged by the Ministers, nothing serue to reproue their consequence, and to shew that God leaueth not to be almightie, although he cannot do any thing which doth derogate to his nature, they referre themserues therein to the said auncient authors; which for the same end and reasons as the Ministers, doo al∣ledge and propose the aboue said exceptions. Where they pretend that the authorities and sentences alledged out of the auncient Fathers, do nought appertaine to the present question: for as much as they denie that they should be vnderstood of other things, but those only which do containe in themselues contradiction. The Ministers do answere, that so also doth that which they propose of a bo∣dy, that at on selfe instant, it may be in diuers places. For as much is it, as if they should say, that a body is, and is not, at one selfe-same time: and that a body is one, and is not one. Also that a creature is incircumscriptible, and not inclosed within certaine limits: which happening, it should no more be a creature, but God. As may bee gathered of that which S. Basil writeth in his booke of the holy Ghost, Chapter 22. saying thus: The Angell that appeared to Cornelius, was not in the same place where Phillip was. And he that spake to Zacharie from the Aultar, filled not whiles hee spake vnto him, his seate and place in heauen. But the ho∣ly Ghost is in Habacuck, and Daniel in Babylon, and in Eze∣ehiel vpon the floud of Chobar, for the spirit of God doth fill the earth. And the Prophet writing thereof, saith: Where shall I hide me from thy spirit? or whither shall I flye from thy presence? Didymus in his booke of the holy Ghost, con∣firming that aboue said, saith thus: Were the spirit of God a creature, his substance should he haue circumscript and li∣mitted, as haue all things made and created. As then so it is, that the spirit of God doth fill the world, and is not cir∣cumscript, nor in any place limitted: therof it followeth, that he is God. Vigilius in the disputation hee wrote betweene Sabellius, Photius, Arrius, and Athanasius, vnder the person of Athanasius, thus writeth. Thereby may it chiefly appeare, that the spirit of God, is God: that he is euerie where, and is not contained in any one place, as the Prophet writeth: Whither shall I flye to hide me from thy spirit? Of these places may we conclude, that if a body bee not circumscript, finished and closed in certaine limits, it is not a creature: which ought to bee vn∣derstood, not onely of other bodies, but of that also of Iesus Christ himselfe: as appeareth by that which Theodoret wri∣teth in his second Dialogue, where hee thus saith: Then is the body of our Lord risen, exempted from all corruption, impassible and immortall, adorned with diuine glory, ado∣red and worshipped of the heauenly powers. Neuerthelesse, albeit it be in such sort qualified, yet ceaseth it not therefore to be circumscript, as it was before it was glorified: whereof it followeth, that being a true body, and a creature, it cannot be in diuers places at one instance. Whereas they alledge that the foresaid examples do no∣thing pertaine to the question proposed: for as much as in it, the question is onely to know, whether God can chaunge the qualities in a substance, the substance remaining. The Ministers do denie it, because in the question there is men∣tiō of a body, which cannot be without hs measure. Now the measures and demensions are not as qualities and accidents which may happen to a body, and depart from it without corrupting thereof, (which is the nature and condition of ac∣cidents) but are of it proper essence. So that it is impossible that a body should bee a body, which is not measured and circumscript. The first example they produce for confirmation of their saying is, that a massie thing (which naturally for the waight thereof declineth downward) may be lifted on high. Wherevnto the Ministers do answere, that it may be done, and that by violent motion. But that this example nought serueth to ouerthrow that they haue said, for as much as such things in themselues containe no contradiction; and that they are not contrary to the essence of the thing where they happen. For a stone which a man throweth vpward, doth not therefore cease to be a stone, neither by such a mouing, is it not depriued of the waightinesse thereof. To the ex∣ample of the fire, they answere: that it is one selfesame rea∣son of light, as of heauie things: and that without any cor∣ruption of their essence, their naturall mouings may be chan∣ged by some force and violence done vnto them. And as touching that they alledge of fire, which (contrary to it na∣ture, namely to heat and burne) refreshed the three Iewes in the Babilonian furnace: they answere, that the fire therefore was nothing altered in the essence nor qualiries thereof: which may easily appeare, in that it spared the three Iewes, and burned and consumed those which kindled the same. Whereof may be inferred, that the cause why it did not of∣fend them, proceeded not because the nature or qualities thereof were any way changed, but onely because the action thereof was suspended. And where they alledge, that two bodies may be at one instant in one selfe-same place together: and for proofe ther∣of, propose that which is written in S. Iohn, that Iesus Christ did enter where his Disciples were, the doores beeing shut: the Ministers do answere, that it is not so in the text: but the text sheweth that the Disciples beeing assembled in a place, Iesus Christ stood & appeared in the middest of them. Whereof can be no way inferred, that hee entred into the place where they were, without opening of the doores, nor that hee pierced them to enter therein. And very like it is, that they were opened and shut againe, as well as those Act. 12. Act. 5. which the Angell did open and shut againe, when hee was sent to deliuer S. Peter out of prison: and when likewise hee was sent for the Apostles deliuerance. As touching that they propose of a grosse body pas∣sing through a straight place, alledging the example of a Cable through the eye of a needle. The Ministers answere, that it is ill to the purpose alledged, and is an argument grounded vpon a thing impossible. They say moreouer that the Doctors haue all vnderstood the word Camilos: vsurped in the scripture, not for a Cable, but for a Camell: as to them it is manifest, which are but meanely seene in the antiquities of the Hebrewes. And as appeareth by that which Angelius Caninius writeth in the end of his Caldean Grammer. And for the conclusion which the Doctors drawe from the precedent examples, it is from the purpose, and founded vppon presupposed antecedents and pre∣misses by them brought; which in the sence they alledge them for the reasons aboue declared, they neither haue, nor will confesse vnto them. Where they say, that what the Ministers haue said tou∣ching a body, that it cannot be in two places at one instant, were it the body of Iesus Christ it selfe, was neuer written by any of the auncient Fathers, nor proposed before the comming of Peter Martyr, and Theodoret Beza. The Mini∣sters do maintaine that it was. And that S. Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus, saith the same in these tearmes: According to this forme (meaning the corporall forme of Iesus Christ) we must not thinke that it is euery where. And wee must beware least in establishing in him his diuinitie, we take not frō him the veritie of his body. And else-where hee saith: That by reason of the nature and measure of a true body, hee is in one place in heauen. The selfe-same thing saith Therdoret in his second Dialogue, as hath bene before alledged. And so doth Ʋigilius in his fourth booke against Eutiches: where hee writeth as followeth. If the word and flesh be but of one nature, how commeth it to passe that the flesh is not found euery where as the word (of which word it was taken, to constitute one selfe-same per∣son and Hypostaly) is euery where? for when it was on the earth, it was not in heauen: and now that it is in heauen, surely it is not on the earth. And so farre off is it that he is there, that we attend Iesus Christ to come according to his flesh: whom neuerthelesse we beleeue as he is the word, to be here on earth with vs. By these and other like authorities, often found in the wri∣tings of the Fathers, men may know that Peter Martyr and Theodoret Beza are not the first authors of this doctrine, and that it is falsly imputed to them: for as much as they haue but drawne, and word by word, copied (as it were) the same, out of the bookes of the auncient Fathers. To that which the Doctors pretend, that the forme of ar∣guing which the Ministers haue vsed, affirming some things to be impossible to God, doth not derogate his omnipotēcie: ouerthroweth the forme of the argument which the Angell speaking to the virgin, vseth for cōfirmatiō of that which he declared vnto her: that is, that nothing is impossible to God. The Ministers do answere, that it is nothing to the purpose, for as much as the question is neither of a thing which con∣taineth in it self any contradiction, nor that is contrary to the truth of God: which be the two matters they haue alledged, and yet do alledge for the expositiō of the omnipotencie of God. And touching that which the Doctors do adde, that God can change the nature and qualitie of things, there is no man doubteth the same. But whē that is done, it behoueth also to auow, that the things be changed, & that they remain not in their first nature. And the Ministers say, that it is not all one with the thing here proposed: for as much as the Doctors wil haue a thing to remain in it essence and nature, although the essentiall parts therof be changed, & altogether extinct and abolished. Touching the limitation of the power of God to∣wards his creatures, there is none so presumptuous to attempt to limit the same, in whatsoeuer he wil: and which confesseth not, that he may ordaine & dispose of all his creatures in ge∣nerall, as it pleaseth him, & as a Potter doth of his earth. And thervnto (say they) ought the authoritie of Ieremy to be refer∣red: as it appeareth very clearly by these Hebrew words. L gippale Mimmecha col-dauar. To wit, nothing shalbe hard to thee ô Lord. Concerning the danger which the Doctors pre∣tend may come of the abouesaid answeres of the Ministers, they answer, that men of sound and good judgement wil ne∣uer drawe thereof any euill consequence, seeing that all this doctrine is true, and doth containe no manner of obscuritie. And if any peraduenture take harme thereby, it must bee imputed to themselues, and their euill vnderstanding; whereby not onely some doctrine, but also the word of God it selfe, may be sometimes peruerted and corrupted. To be Tit. 1. short, all things (as saith the Apostle) be cleane to those that be cleane, and polluted to those that be polluted, and haue an euill conscience. And where the Doctors alledge that one may take occasion by the doctrine abouesaid, to inter∣pret the scriptures according to his owne sence and fantasie, the Ministers say no. And where some one would attempt the same, they say it shall be easie to reiect his interpretati∣on, as not answerable to the rules and analogie of faith: as the foresaid doctrine and interpretation of the Ministers is answerable therevnto. Where the Doctors say, that the Mi∣nisters do change and alter the scriptures. The Ministers answere, that it is a slaunder, which can no way bee proued against them: neither by their writings, nor by their spee∣ches, nor by any thing they euer said or thought. Concer∣ning what they adde, that the scripture saith that the body of Iesus Christ is in two places, the Ministers denie it, and do say, that contrariwise the scriptures do establish it in hea∣uen, and nor else-where: according as it is written. The hea∣uens Act. 3. 21. must containe him vntill the time that all things bee re∣stored which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophers since the world began. And where they alledge that the scripture ought not to bee interpreted according to euery mans sence and phantasie; the Ministers do confesse it, adding that all interpretations ought to bee examined, as S. Paul saith: but that such examination must bee done by conference of the scriptures. And where the Doctors ac∣cuse the Ministers not to haue alledged any passages of the scripture for confirmation of the foresaid doctrine, before they produced the auncient Fathers. The Ministers do an∣swere, that it is a false accusation: and that they should well haue remembred in the beginning of their discourse, that they alledged to this end, S. Paul. 2. Tim. 2. Where it is said, that God cannot denie himselfe. And that which is written Hebr. 6. It is impossible that God can lye. Which places, with those they produced out of the auncient Fathers, were not alledged to diminish ought the omnipotencie of God: But rather to establish the same; and cut off the way to ma∣ny impieties and blasphemies: which they would falsly pro∣pose and shrowde them vnder pretext of the omnipotencie of God, without hauing regard to his reuealed will, where∣vnto we must referre the Omnipotencie. The sixt dayes Dispute on Tuesday, the 16. of Iuly. T He Doctors obiect, that they haue made such an argument, God cannot cause one body to be in two places. God is not ther∣fore Omnipotent. That this cōsequence is necessarie it is most manifest: without other proofe, by the lawe of contradicti∣on. For according to the rule holden in all schooles of Philosophie, two contra∣dictions cannot be true: To haue power to do all things, and to haue no power in certain particular things, be contradic∣tions. For this particular thing, is a part of all. If thē the An∣tecedent be true, of necessitie the consequence must be false, according to the lawe of contradiction: for they two as con∣tradictories cannot be true together. And notwithstanding, albeit that by the knowledge of the termes thēselues, a man might iudge the consequence to be good: neuerthelesse, it is plainly knowne by the deduction of the obiectiō against the answere of the Ministers, that the Doctors haue proued the consequence. The reason of the Ministers was thus: God cannot lye: hee cannot sinne: hee cannot cause that things made, be not made. Therfore it either repugneth his nature, or there is repugnancie on the behalf of the creatures: bicause there is a folded contradiction. Now the Doctors in their obiection haue said, that there is nothing like in the question proposed: that is to say, whether one bodie may be in two places. Whervpon they make such an argument, taken from their obiection, God can do all things which are not repug∣nant to his nature, or where there is no repugnancie in the behalfe of things created: and that no contradiction is ther∣in implyed. But to affirme one body, may be in two places, at one selfe-same instant, is not a thing repugnant to the nature of God, and on the behalfe of the body, implyeth no con∣tradiction: God therefore can do it. Or else thus. God can∣not do it: It followeth therefore, that God is not Omnipo∣tent. And so is proposed the reason and deduction of the antecedent and consequent. Yea and the proofe of the as∣sumptiō or second proposition: For they haue proued there is no contradiction in saying that one body might be in two places; and that it doth not repugne the nature of GOD, whereof the probation hath bene made, by example of like things. As God can cause two bodies to be in one place, and other like reasons deducted in the Obiection. And where the Doctors (say they) preposterously argue from a particular to a generall, It seemeth (vnder correction) they haue forgotten the rules of Lodgicke. For very certaine it is, that this rule hath place in affirming, and not in deny∣ing. But contrariwise, when there is some thing affirmed in generall, and the default in particular proued, (as say Logi∣tians) Ad negationem particularis, sequitur negatio eius quod vniuersaliter affirmatuum est. Likewise when there is some of a whole thing which hath many parts affirmed: and de∣fault is proued in one part, the destruction of the whole fol∣loweth. As if one should say: All the bodie is sound. Hee that should proue one part of the bodie diseased, should proue this proposition [All the bodie is sound] to be false. Such is the argument which the Doctors haue made (to wit): If God cannot do one particular thing (as to cause one bodie to be in two places) then he cannot do all things. Or if he can do all things, he can do that also. They are agrieued to be sent backe to their Logicke. For they regarded no other ende, but to make the antecent to be graunted: to wit, that God cannot make one bodie to be in two places. And are verie glad, to haue vnderstood the resolution of the Ministers vpon this Article: that is to say, That God cannot cause, nor will one bodie to bee in two places: for as much as it implyeth contradiction. And where the Ministers doo say, that the Doctors by their reasons, could not thereof inferre the truth of the antecedent: The Doctors confesse the same. And thereby doo the Mini∣sters also sufficiently perceiue, that the reasons they haue brought, are nothing worth to the confirmation of the an∣tecedent, which is their resolution. But the Doctors say: that these reasons, albeit they be nought, were to this end neuer∣thelesse produced by the Ministers, to proue, that it was im∣possible to God, to make one bodie to be in two places. Concerning this Article, which beginneth [Touching that which they say that the authorities, &c.] The Doctors ob∣iect that the auncient Fathers neuer thought to make excep∣tion of any thing, which is not subiect to the power of God. For (as it is manifest) hee that saith all, excepteth nothing. Therefore, when the Scripture saith, that God is almigh∣tie, it giueth sufficiently to vnderstand, that there is no exception. And to giue exception therein, should be to contradict to many places of the word of God, and to blas∣pheme against his power. But well say the Doctors, that the Fathers haue interpreted the Omnipoteucie of God: not to comprehend that which toucheth the perfection of his nature, but that only which concerneth the Creatures: So that there were not on their part too apparant contradic∣tion, and repugnancie. Now the present question importeth not, that there is contradiction for a bodie to be a bodie, and in diuers places at one selfe-same instant. For concerning the essence of bodies, in speaking of a bodie hauing it dimensions, as speake the Philosophers, De praedicamento quantitatis: Certaine it is, that the dimensions are of the essence of a bodie; but to be circumscript and inclosed in a place, that is an acci∣dent. Which thing is shewed by Philosophie it selfe: For the most high heauen, according to all, is a bodie, and neuer∣thelesse is it not in place according to it all. Therefore is it not an essentiall thing, for a bodie to be enclosed in one place. And to speake of the present matter, the Ministers should be very much troubled to prooue, that the bodie of Iesus Christ is in one place in heauen: seeing it is written in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians, he is mounted aboue all the hea∣uens: out of which, there is no place, as they speak of places, in regard of bodies, according to nature. And were it so, that it should be essential to a body, to be in one place (according to the rule which the Ministers deliuer) an other blasphemy would follow against the Omniporencie of God, that God could not make a body, and place the same aboue all hea∣uens. And to speake more vniuersally, that God could not make a bodie without place, and roomth equall to it greatnes. Touching the Allegations proposed by the Ministers, of certaine auncient Authors, The Doctors do obiect, that the said Allegations are against themselues: For as much as to be inclosed in a place, doth not depend of the essence of a bodie, nor of it measures: as appeareth by the authorities pro∣duced, wherein there is mentiō made of Angels, which haue not bodies. It is not therefore an essentiall reason for the de∣mensions of a body to be contained in a place. And all this furniture of authorities maketh nothing to the purpose: For they tend but to shewe, that the naturall proprietie of crea∣tures, is different from the diuine nature, as S. Basil saith ex∣presly in the place by the Ministers alledged. And S. Am∣brose in his first booke of the holy Ghost, Cap. 7. where the same Authors doo declare, that God by his nature may be euery where: and the creatures by their natures, not so. But the said Authors pretend not, that God by his Omnipoten∣cie cannot make one body to be in diuers places: For the same Authors (or their like) when they come to speak of the power of God in the holy Sacrament, they affirme, that the bodie of Iesus Christ is in heauen, and in the holy Sacra∣ment. And affirme, that the Angels and spirits of the bles∣sed, may by the same power, be in many places. As the Doc∣tors will shew in their resolution. Where the Ministers say, that a body must be circumscript without place, according to the essentiall proprietie: that hath bene formerly shewed to be false. And the Ministers do confound the name of body: which sometimes doth sig∣nifie substance, sometimes quantitie, hauing it dimensions, breadth, length, and deepnesse: which dimensions be essen∣tiall in a body, taking the body for a kinde of quantitie: and not in a substantiall body: for it is an accident. Now cer∣taine it is, that God can seperate the accidents from a body, and make a substance without accidents: otherwise there would follow an other blasphemie: that God could not se∣perate the accident, from a subiect and substance. And where the Ministers say, that a stone by a violent mouing, may bee cast on high, that is no answere to the question. For the Doctors doo demaund (for as much as it is essentiall and na∣turall to a massy and terrestriall body, in regard of the massi∣nesse and waight thereof tending downeward) whether God by his onely power, contrary to the naturall proprietie of a massy and waightie body, cannot hold and hang it vp on high? And as touching the euasion which the Ministers make from a very strong and mightie argument against their doc∣trine, that two bodies may be in one place, by the proofe that is made, taken from the scripture, (not onely to proue that God can cause two bodies to be in one place, but euen that he hath done it) serueth nothing to couer their error, in saying that it is not said in S. Iohn, that our Lord did enter by Ioh. 20. 19. the shut doores: but that he was found standing in the midst of them: where the said Ministers haue concealed and omitted this verbe venit: and do stay onely vpon the verbe stetit. For the expresse text in S. Iohn. cap. 21. 19. saieth: That the doores being shut, Iesus came into the place where the Disciples were assembled, and was there in the middest of them. They demaund of them, for as much as the scrip∣ture saith, that he came thither, the doores beeing shut, and that hee was found in the middest of them: whether hee were found in the middest of them, and in the said place, without entring thereinto: or whether hee there entered, for as much as the text saith; that the doores were shut when he came; How they will proue by the scripture that he entred, if not by the shut doores? For a much greater myracle should it be, to be found in the middest of his Disci∣ples, without being entred into the place where they were. Too light is that shift, to say it is not written that he entred. For S. Augustine in his booke De agone Christiano, cap. 24. saieth thus. Nec nos moueat quod clausis hostijs subitò eum apparuisse Dicipulis scriptum est: vt propterea negemus illud fu∣isse corpus humanum, quia contra naturam huius corporis vide∣mus illudper clausa hostia intrare. Omnia enim possibilia sunt Deo, Nam & ambulare super aquas contra naturam huius cor∣poris esse manifestum est, & tamen non solum ipse Dominus ante passionem ambulauit, sed etiam Petrum ambulare fecit. Let it not moue vs, because it is written, that the doores being shut, he suddenly appeared to his Disciples; that we therefore denie that body to haue bene humane, because wee see it against the nature of this body, to enter by the closed doores. For to God are all things possible. For to walke also vpon the wa∣ters, is manifestly against the nature of this body: And yet the Lord himselfe not onely walked before his passion, but also caused Peter to walke. Where it appeareth, that S. Augustine saith plainly, that our Lord did enter by the shut doores: and referreth all to the omnipotencie of God. Moreouer, the text of S. Luke, ioyned with that of Saint Iohn, doth shewe that he entred through the doores. For no reasonable occasion had the Apostles had, to thinke it was a spirit, and not a body, seeeing him before them in the like∣nesse of a man: but for that he was entred otherwise then a true body, and very man could enter. That is, for that he was entred by the closed doores: which thing a true man, and a true body in no wise can doo. To say that the doores were opened, and afterwards shut again by myracle, or otherwise, should nothing auaile. For so may a true man, and a true bo∣dy be there: and therefore no cause can a man haue to think it a spirit, or vaine vision. The Doctors say moreouer, that all the auncient here∣tikes and Christians, did commonly agree, that Iesus Christ passed through: but such was their difference, as now it is between the Ministers & Doctors. The auncient heretikes said, that Iesus Christ after his resurrection, had not a true body, because he did workes contrary to the nature of a bo∣dy, which implied contradiction to a naturall body: to wit, that at one selfe instant, he was in one selfe-same place with an other body: as when he passed through the doores. The auncient Catholike Christians answered, that such indeed was the nature of a body, that it could not passe through the doores: through the body of the virgin in his birth, without fracture: through the stone of the Sepulchre in it resurrecti∣on: but neuerthelesse, that two bodies should be together, by the omnipotencie of God, implied no contradiction: for as much as it so hapned in the three cases done and recited. The first that speaketh therof, is Iustine Martir, in the 117. question against the Gentiles: where hee saith. If a thicke body be hindred to passe through the doores, how did our Lord after his resurrection enter the shut doores? And if it bee so, why was the stone remoued by the Angell from off the Sepulchre, to the end his body might rise againe? He answereth thus. That euen as our Lord without changing his body into a spirit, walked vpon the sea▪ but by his diuine power he made the sea solide to walke vpon; not onely for his owne body, but for that of S. Peter. So by his diuine pow∣er he came forth of the sepulchre, the stone remaining ther∣vpon, and entered to his Disciples, the doores beeing shut. Hereby we vnderstand, that the things which proceed of di∣uers vertues, ought to haue the same faith. And we must know, that the things which surpasse nature, whē they are wrought in it by diuine power, ought not to be measured according to the reason & proprietie of nature. For this cause, our Lord see∣ing his Disciples troubled at such an entry, did propose vnto them the parts of his body, and the places and markes of his wounds, to be touched, to shew he was not entred by change of his body into a spirite: but with his body composed of it dimensions and thicknesse: and by his diuine almigh∣tinesse, which made all things that surpasse the strength of nature. Saint Hillary in his third booke of the Trinitie: But thou (saith hee) which wilt search into the things insearchable, and wil be Iudge of the secrets of God▪ and his power: I aske counsell of thee, giue onely a reason and solution of this fact, to mee that and do simply beleeue in God concerning all things, euen as hee hath said and pro∣nounced them? I vnderstand that the Lord was often pre∣sent after his resurrectio to he seene and knowne of them which beleeued him not. The self-same Lord, applying him∣selfe to the weaknesse of out vnderstanding, and to satisfie the doubts of the doth shewe a secret and a worke of his almightinesse▪ Expound to me the , whosoeuer thou art, which wilt beeade archer of the omnipotencie of God, the reason of this dee t The Disciples being shut vp and withdrawne together in secret, the Lord is proposed to Thomas, to confirme his faith, according to the conditions he desired: to wit, that he might touch his body, and proue his wounds, And for this cau ent behoued him to bring the true body with him, wherein he had receiued such wounds. I de∣maund then, for as much as he was corporall, by what part of the house entred hee in? For I see that the Eu ngelist diligently expresseth, that Iesus came when the doores were shut, and was found in the middest of his Disciples: to wit, whether he pierced the thicke walles, and the great lettes of timber betweene both? Certaine it is, that without fiction or guile hee there entered. Let thy conceit followe and consider his entrie, and thy vnderstanding enter into the house shut within. All thou seest, is whole and fast locked; and yet is l ee found in the middest of his Disciples: but it is, because all things by his almightinesse are open to him. Thou slaunderest things inuisible. I aske thee againe the reason of this thing there visible? Nothing of the wall or so∣lide doores gaue backe, or made way. Contrariwise I see that wood and stones by their nature cannot receiue such an entrie. The body of our Lord was not quite vanished, to bee eft∣soones taken and made of nothing. Whence then commeth it, that he is found in the middest of them without opening? Sence and speech do herein faile, and the truth of the deed, is beyond humane reason. As then we are abused, concer∣ning the birth of the sonne of God, we lye also concerning such an entry. The deed is false say we, it so happened not, because we cannot vnderstand the reason thereof: and for that our sence and iudgemenr faileth, we say there is no such deed. But the faith and beliefe of the deed, doth conuince our lying. The Lord (the doores being shut) is found in the middest of the Apostles, and the sonne of God is borne of his Father. Denie not that hee thus entred, because by the infirmitie of thy spirit, thou canst not comprehend such an entrie. I could amplifie like deeds in all the creatures: but the Lord hath well prouided for himselfe, to haue contained vs in necessitie and modestie, by the nature of our bodies. Suffi∣ciently we shewe, that we would make our selues an other God, had we power so to do. For as much as wee cannot by the boldnesse of our wicked will, ruinate the nature of truth, we gainsay it at least, and contend with the word of God. S. Ambrose in his tenth booke vpon S. Luke, cap. 24. saith, through the doores. S. Chrysostome vpon S. Iohn, pro∣ueth by such ane ntrie, that Iesus Christ was so borne of the Virgin, that she remained a Virgin in her child-birth, and after, without any manner of fraction. And concludeth, that the one and the other deed proceedeth from the omnipo∣tencie of God. The said Chrysostome in his second Homily vpon the Apostles Creed, saith these words: How is it that Iesus Christ entred the closed doores? &c. because such things are aboue our reach, and we cannot render a reason of that myracle, we hold it by faith. S. Ierome in his first booke against Iouinian, and in the Epistle to Pamachiuns, against the errors of Iohn of Ierusa∣lem, who said, that Iesus after his resurrection, had not a true body, because it was impossible that a true body should passe through the doores: and that it should be in one self-same place with an other body) answereth: It hindereth not, but that the nature of the body remaineth, for as much as this act proceedeth from the omnipotencie of God. And thus saith: Tell me, thou subtill disputer, which is greater, to hang the huge greatnesse of the earth vpon nothing, and to ballance it aboue the bricklenesse of the waters: or for God to passe through a shut doore, & a creature to obey his Crea∣tor? To that which is the greater thou easily agreest, and slaunderest that which is lesser. S. Augustine in his 13. Epistle, for an example of the omnipotencie of God, reciteth also this deed: to shewe that our Lord was borne of the Virgin with∣out any rupture of her body: and to declare that the omni∣potencie of God is greater then we can comprehend. A∣gainct the Valentinians and others, which denied the true substance of the body of Iesus Christ, for that contrary to the nature of a body, he so passed. S. Augustine in his booke called De agone Christiano, alledgeth the same deed. Amphi∣lochius and Theodoret in the 2. Dialogue, disputing of this deed against Eutiches, who said also, that after the resurrecti∣on, the humanitie of Iesus Christ was changed into his diui∣nitie: because, contrary to the nature of a body, he so passed through the shut doores, do answere as the others. That such an effect importeth not contradiction to the nature of a bo∣dy: for as much as it proceeded of the omnipotencie of God, and not of the nature of the body. Cirell in his 12. booke vpon S. Iohn, reprehendeth those also which will measure the myracles and works of God according to their owne iudge∣ment, and the proprietie of creatures: and very sharply spea∣keth against them. S. Augustine in his first booke against Iulian, cap. 2. recyteth, That Iouinian was an heretike, because he said, that there was fraction in the virgin in her childbirth. And so said he, for feare of falling into the heresie of the Ma∣nachees, who thought that Iesus Christ had not a true bo∣dy, because he was borne without fraction of his mother. To auoyd then this heresie, hee rather denied that the rgin re∣mained a Virgin. The like heresie is imputed to Origen, and some also alledge that the Fathers (as Tertullian) had such an opinion. By these testimonies do the Doctors conclude, that two bodies to pierce themselues, and be in one self-same place, by diuine power doth not imply any contradiction. Which places were they wel considered, they would not re∣ceiue a new interpretation against the very expresse word of God: seeing the text without contradiction doth beare that Iesus Christ came to his Disciples, the doores being shut. The 4. booke. cap. 17. sect. 39 How Caluin in his Institution hath deptaued the sence of that place of S. Iohn, with other like, may plainly appeare, where he saith thus. That which they eftsoones alledge, that Iesus Christ came out of the Sepulchre without opening the same, and that hee entred in to his Disciples the doores of the chamber beeing shut, is of no value, further to main∣taine their error. For as the water serued Iesus Christ for a firme pauement, to walke vpon the lake: so also ought it not seeme straunge, if the hardnesse of the stone were softned to giue him passage. And Beza in his second Dialogue against Heshusius saith, that the stone was vanished, to the end that our Lord might passe in his resurrection: and God did af∣terwards reforme it. It followeth in the text of Caluin: As also to enter into a chamber the doores shut, is not to say that hee pierced the wood, but onely that he made an ope∣ning by his diuine power: so that by a myraculous fashion, he was found in the middest of his Disciples, although the doores were were shut. Moreouer he saith: That which they bring of S. Luke: to wit, that hee vanished suddenly from his Disciples which went to Emaus, serueth nought for them, and maketh for our aduantage. For he was not made inuisible by taking away the sight of his body: but he one∣ly vanished. As also witnesseth the same Euangelist: In wal∣king he was not transfigured nor disguised, to be made in∣uisible, but their eyes were holden. Such ridiculous and friuolous expositions are brought by Caluin and his like, to auoyd confessing, that God can make one body to be in di∣uers places. And neuerthelesse, the proper text of the scripture doth wit∣nesse that two bodies may be by the power of God, in one selfesame place. As also it witnesseth that a body hauing co∣lour, and before visible, by the power of God, was made in∣uisible, without any let to their sight that could see. As S. Luke doth confirme, saying: Aphantos Egeneto Ap'auton, Inuisibilis factus est ab ipsis. Although there was no defect on the behalfe of the Disciples. For it is said before, that their eyes were opened, that they might know him: and herevpon agreeth all antiquitie. An other act do the Doc∣tors adde, for confirmation of the penitration of dimensions. Which is, that our Lord ascended into the heauens, which he neither diuided, nor claue asunder. Therefore of necessi∣tie did hee pierce them: as the scripture it selfe in proper termes importeth. The Doctors shewe also to the said Ministers, that they cannot produce one only renowned Father, hauing expoun∣ded these places, from whom they might learne their so di∣uers interpretations. And that which they bring of the Acts of the Apostles, where mention is made, that S. Peter came forth of prison, nought serueth to colour their exposition. In which text, there is nothing spoken of the opening of the prison doores. And it is not said (as in S. Iohn) that the doores of the prison being shut, S. Peter came forth: but that the Angell came thither, when the keepers before the doore kept the prison. Where if they say, that the doores were opened to S. Peter, that agreeth not with the saying of Saint Iohn, that the doores were shut when as our Lord entered. The like reason brought by the Ministers out of the fift of the Acts of the Apostles, and for the same cause, is as vnpro∣fitable for this purpose, as the former. And to shewe clearely and euidently, that God (con∣trary to the naturall proprietie of a body) can make a great and thicke body to passe in a space and place vnequall to it greatnesse, largenesse, and thicknesse. The Doctors cy∣ted what our Lord saith in the 19. of S. Mathew: It is easi∣er for a Cable to goe through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen. Two things haue the Ministers answered vnto: the one, that in the translation wee must not vse Cable, but rather Camel: although neuertheles their own French Bible of An∣thony Rebulls impression, which they haue brought, contai∣neth the translation of this word Cable. And Caluin himself likewise in his Hermony of the foure Euangelists, saith that to bee better. But here in appeareth to be truth what Tertul∣lian against the Valentinians; and before him, Ireneus in his first booke and 14. Chapter against the Valentinians doo say: That they which seperate themselues from vs to go to an other schoole, do alwaies inuent some new thing, that the disciples may bee found more cunning then their Maisters. But well, this word [Camell] beeing yeelded vnto them, (as the Doctors doubt not to haue bene expounded by Saint Hillary, S. Ierom, and others) the reason thereof is yet more strong. For it is yet more repugnant that a crooked, grosse, and great Camell (then a Cable) should enter through the eye of a needle. The other reason giuen by the Ministers is, that God cannot make a Camel or Cable to enter throgh the eye of a needle: which is notwithstanding, against the pure word of Iesus Christ, who saith not, it is is impossible to God, but rather easie to do that, and by comparison, more easie vnto God, then to make a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen: which neuerthelesse is said by our Lord to be possible: not vnto men, but vnto God: to whom there is nothing vnpossible. Whervpō the Doctors say thus, If God can do that which is more difficult, he can doo that which is more easie. Now by the text of the scripture, it is said that God can make a rich man enter into the kingdome of heauen, which is the more difficult; he can therfore make a Camell (or Cable) to enter through the eye of a needle, which is more easie. The answeres of the Ministers here aboue confuted, tend to such absurdities and blasphemies, that Iesus Christ by his almightinesse, could not enter through the closed doores: that hee could not come forth of the belly of his mother, through her body without fraction: that he could not make a visible body, to be inuisible: that a grosse and great body might be in a place vnequall to it: that hee could not by his diuine power make penetration of dimensions: and that he could not make by the same diuine power, one body to bee in two places (for it is like reason, of the last article and of the others) albeit such things are declared in the scriptures, not onely to be possible, but euen the most part of them to haue bene done. And the Doctors do wonder how the Mi∣nisters dare denie such things, seeing themselues must ne∣cessarily confesse (if their doctrine of the Supper be true) that the body of Iesus Christ is in diuers places: which they proue thus. The faithfull really receiue in their soules the substance of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ, by the wor∣king of the holy Ghost, and not the bread and the wine one∣ly: or else (as saith Caluin in the 4 booke, 17. Chapter, and 11. section of his Institution) the effect and vertue of the same Sacrament. Now the Doctors conclude thus. It is impossible for a man to receiue into him the substance of the body of Iesus Christ, but the body of Iesus Christ is in him. But all the faithfull in the Supper do receiue the same into their soules, therefore must the body of Iesus Christ be in them: and by consequent in diuers places: to wit, in all places where their Supper is made: and likewise in heauen. They say further, that Caluin in his Institution, the fourtth booke, 17. Chap∣ter, and 24. sect. saith: That in the Supper, the power of God is required: to the ende that the flesh of Iesus Christ may pierce euen vnto vs: and that humane nature cannot comprehend the same. But it behoueth that the power of God doo worke therein. And by this meane, Caluin doth admit by the power of God, the flesh of Iesus Christ in many places: to wit, in heauen, and in vs, into whom it must pierce by the power of God. And in the tenth number he saith: That the truth signified, and represented by the signes, must bee represented and exhibited in the same place where the signes be. Which hee proueth by reason in many places: to wit, that the signes must no more bee voyd, then the Doue was voyd of the holy Ghost. But as the essence and substance of the holy Ghost was conioyned and present with the Doue: so the flesh and bloud of our Lord, before there be a true Sacrament, must be conioyned and vnited with the signes. The passages are against Heshu∣sius, and in his booke of the Supper: and vpon the first of the 11. Chapter to the Corinthians. And although the Mi∣nisters will answere: the Doctors beseech them well to weigh and consider the text of Caluin, and of the reason he giueth of the holy Ghost. They doo obiect further, that the Ministers in their Supper doo attribute more to the hu∣mane power, then to the omnipotencie of God: yea they do more then God can do: which is, that they brag to do a thing by their faith, which implyeth contradiction: saying in their confession of faith exhibited to the Bishops in the congregatiō at Poissy; That faith maketh things absent, to be present, in one selfe-same instant and place. That is to say, in the soules of the faithfull, when they celebrate their Supper: which is as much to say, as faith maketh things not present, present at one selfe-same instant and place. So that to euery faithfull in the Supper, comming worthily therevnto, is the body of Iesus Christ there present by the power of faith. And neuerthelesse it is not there present; for they say so: and that it is onely in heauen. Wherein appeareth that there is impli∣cation of contradiction: to wit, present, & not really present. And the small starting hole they told vs of, that the body is aboue corporally, and spiritually in the Supper in the harts of the faithfull, can serue for nothing. For the spiritualtie can∣not take away the substance of the thing: and their faith cannot make a body, not to be a body: and that a body haue not it dimensions, as heretofore they haue said. Therefore howsoeuer they confesse, that the faithfull in the Supper receiue into their soules the substance of the bo∣dy of Iesus Christ, will they or nill they, must they necessa∣rily confesse, that either their faith is more mightie then the infinite vertue and power of God: or else that God can make his body to be locally in heauen; and Sacramentally (really neuerthelesse and substantially) in the Sacrament of the Aultar. Thus would the Doctors desire to heare the Ministers vpon this point: and then afterwards to put their answere in writing. And the Ministers shall neuer be able to shewe by the word of God, that their faith can make at one instant, and one selfe-same place, a thing to be present, and not present. And one thing present, and not present by faith: is as much to say, as that the body of Iesus Christ is in, and not in a faithfull person. And no Coduit pipe of the power of the holy Ghost should there also be needfull, to conuey the flesh of Iesus Christ hither vnto vs from heauen, were not the said flesh but in heauen, and notwithstanding came vnto vs. And as touching the points obiected by the Doctors, that Peter Martyr and Theodoret Beza were the first which said, that God could not make one body to bee in two pla∣ces: and the Ministers haue willed to confirme by antiqui∣tie this new doctrine, which they cannot name otherwise then blasphemie. The Doctors say, they haue often pray∣ed the Ministers (that time might be spared, things better cleared) to speake nothing from the purpose. Notwithstan∣ding they bring forthwith the testimonies of Fathers, to shewe that a body by nature is circumscript, and cannot be naturally in many places: but those Authors say not that God cannot do it. But S. Augustine, and others, in the pla∣ces cyted by the Doctors, touching the article of the clo∣sed doores, do rather witnesse, that two bodies by the power of God, may occupie one selfe-same place, which is of like difficultie. And when they shall come to the proofe of the reall presence of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ, they will euidently shewe, that wholly all the auncient Fathers which haue spoken of that Sacrament, haue not onely con∣fessed that hee could make his body to bee aboue in hea∣uen, and here belowe in the Sacrament: but all with one accord, haue declared that they beleeue according to the word of Iesus Christ, that he is in heauen, and here in the Sacrament. The Doctors demaund of the Ministers, whether they haue any, that before Peter Martyr and Theo∣dor Beza, denied such power of God. And let them no more set foorth the authorities of the Fathers, to prooue that one body is not naturally in two places. The Doctors doo not maruell if the Ministers do magnifie Peter Martyr, from whom they haue taken all the places they haue brought. Concerning the Article which beginneth (Touching that which the Doctors pretend, that the forme &c.) The Doc∣tors say, that this forme is common, as often as men will de∣bate of the power of God. And they cannot be better gui∣ded to proue it, then to follow the words of the Angel: That there is nothing impossible to God. From the which, when a man will except something, hee will alwaies bring, what the Ministers do bring: that there is some repugnancy of things, whereof ensueth some implication of contradiction. As did the olde heretiques against the flesh of Iesus Christ; who brought alwayes some impossibilitie according to nature. And as much did they against the Article of the Resurrec∣tion, and incarnation: as though there had bene contradic∣tion, that God should be man, and man should be God. And it shall be alwayes easie for an euil spirit, to forge some con∣tradiction in his conceit, according to the proprieties of na∣ture. And concerning the Article beginning (As touching that which the Doctors do adde, that God can change, &c.) The Doctors say, that the Ministers haue not wel conceiued their meaning: for they take for an absurd thing, that a substance remaining affected of his qualities, can by the power of God haue effects, contrary to his qualities. As if God by his om∣nipotencie could not make the fire, hauing his naturall heate, to coole, in stead of burning, which none of sound and Christian iudgement will deny. Concerning the Article beginning (Touching the limi∣tation of the power, &c.) The Doctors say; that it seemeth by the Ministers answere, that the power of God is limited ac∣cording to his will: as much to say, as God cannot doo but what he will: which is notoriously false. For the Hebrew alledged, the Ministers (it seemeth) are willing to shew they are skilfull therin. For such summoning is not to the purpose, when as they stay chiefly vpon the word Dauar: which is as much to say, as one thing. But it ought not to bee vnder∣stood of a thing done: they said, to be done. And such is the sence of the place ad verbum. Shall there be any thing hid∣den from me? And because hard things are hidden, & things impossible also are yet more hidden; Behold why they haue translated, Is there any thing hard (or impossible) to mee▪ Which holy Pagninus, and other Interpreters of the Hebrew tongue, do wel declare, that the verbe [Pala] signifieth to hide. The Doctors had no desire to answer herevnto, but to make it bee vnderstood that an Hebrew word doth not appaule them. Cōcerning the article beginning, Touching the danger, &c. The Doctors say, that they are words superfluous; and whatsoeuer the Ministers can bring, the same may other vse, and retort against the said Ministers. And where they say it is a slaunder, in that they obiect vnto them, that they corrupt the scripture, the Doctors say, that the Ministers cannot de∣nie but they change the sence & glose the words of the Supper. This is my body. This is my bloud. And with like authoritie, as they (vnder pretence of I know not what reasons) may each one pretend to corrupt the other scriptures, & alledge some impossibilities, & contradictiōs of nature. As touching the ar∣ticle beginning, To that which they adde, that the scripture saith, that the body &c. The Doctors do say, that in time and place they will shewe what they haue obiected, when as they shall treate more amply of the Sacrament of the Aultar. Where the Doctors haue obiected that the Ministers do not ground their affirmation; to wit, that God cannot make one body to be in two places, vpon the expresse testimonie of the scripture: or can thereof deduct the same. The Mini∣sters for all places haue onely brought but these: that God cannot lye: God cannot denie himselfe. But the Doctors say that this consequence is nought worth. God cannot lye: God cannot therefore make one body to be in two places: which neuerthelesse the Ministers should haue made such had the places produced serued to that purpose. Ioyned, that when it is said God cannot lye, as the Ministers themselues haue cy∣ted, to be able to lye: is not power, but infirmitie. So that ac∣cording to the true sense, it was meet so to say; God is not weake that he can lye. Therfore God cannot make one bodie to be in two places: which consequence should be ridiculous. And where the Ministers haue brought certaine authori∣ties of the auncient Fathers, to proue there is diuersitie be∣tweene the creatures, and Creator: and that the Creator by nature is euery where, and naturally the creatures be not in diuers places: the Doctors reuerently imbrace the authoritie of the holy Fathers: But to produce the said places for cōfir∣mation of a thing so well knowne, and not doubted of, their trauell was now needlesse. But the Doctors yet attend one sole place of the scripture; or one sole testimony of the aun∣cient Fathers, which saith: That God cannot make one body to be in diuers places. The Doctors pray the Ministers, that with like reuerence, they receiue the auncient Fathers: chief∣ly touching the interpretation of holy scriptures: whose ex∣position (as are the places aboue cyted) shalbe agreed vpon betweene them and the Ministers. Vpon request made to the Lord Neuers on the behalfe of the Ministers, that hee would please to assigne a day for an∣swere, particularly to all and euery article and slaunders here aboue proposed by the Doctors in their obiection: The said Lord ordained, that the Ministers should carry with them that euening, one of the Copies of the Doctors obiections a∣gainst them; to be ready the next morrow by noone, to an∣swer thervnto: which the Doctors agreed vnto. And made likewise request to the said Lord of Neuers, to haue leaue (if it so seemed them good) to reply to the answers that the Mini∣sters should make. And therwith to deliuer their resolution, touching this article of the omnipotency of God. To th' end to proceed, and examine the reall truth of the bodie of Iesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Aultar. Whervnto the Mi∣nisters added: that they also for their parts, would deliuer a briefe resolution of all that which shall be deduced by them. The company assembled on the morrow beeing Wed∣nesday, the 17. of Iuly, My Lord of Neuers, considering that the Doctors the day before had imployed all the time, with∣out any left for the Ministers to make present answere to them: supposed no lesse time would be needfull for the Mi∣nisters to answerefully, which had bene a thing tedious and irksome. For this cause, and others by him declared: he or∣dained, they should thenceforth speake by writing. And that the Ministers should carry with them the Copie which was giuen them, to make answere therevnto: and to send it vnto him, signed by them, and two Notaries. Of which he would cause a Copie to be written by his Secretary, to giue it to the Doctors, reseruing the Originall to himselfe. And in like sort would he keepe for the Ministers the Copie of that which the Doctors should send him. Wherevnto both parts submitting themselues, they disputed afterwards by writing as followeth. The Answere of the Ministers to the Obiections of the Doctors, giuen on Tuesday the 16. of Iuly, 1566. THe Ministers deny, that the consequence proposed by the Doctors, (to wit: God cannot make one body to be in two places at one selfe-same instant. Therfore e is not omnipotent) is necessary: For as much as the omni∣potency of God ought not to be measured, but by the things only, which be agreeable to his will, and are not derogate, either to his nature, or to his wisdome, or to his truth, or to the order he established in the world. Vnto which, that di∣rectly repugneth, which the Doctors set forth: that one selfe same body, at one selfe-same instant, may be in diuers pla∣ces. For it would follow, that a body should be a body, with∣out being limitted: And by consequence, that it should be, and not be, altogither. For the measures (as to be long, large, thicke, and to be bounded & limitted with certaine bounds) are so essentiall to a body, that without that, it is no more a body. And so farre of is it, that the Ministers in so saying, do diminish the omnipotency of God: that contrariwise they establish the same; and will not attribute to him any muta∣bilitie, and chaunge in his counsaile: nor any contradiction in his will, for feare to make him lye: which by the scripture is impossible to him. And where the Doctors alledge frō the Fathers, that they haue not denied the omnipotency of God, The Ministers haue heretofore shewed, that they haue: and in what case it may happen. Tertullian in his booke written against Praxeas, speaking of this matter, saith as followeth: Surely nothing is hard vnto God. But if without iudgemēt we wil vse this sen∣tence, and interpret it according to our foolish fantasie, we may faine all things to be of God: and say, that he hath done them: because he can do them. Now must it not be belee∣ued, because he can do all things, that therfore he hath done, what he hath not done: but enquired whether he hath done it? And finally concludeth, that the power of God is his wil: and his inhabilitie, likewise his vnwillingnesse. The Doctors then, to shew that he can do it, should declare that God hath willed to make a body, which at one selfe-same instant hath bin in diuers places. And a maruellous thing it is, that they impute to the Ministers, that they derogate from the omni∣potency of God, when as they do except frō the same, what is contrary to his wil: seeing they themselues do confesse it, and except the same things. And that there is no other dif∣ference between thē & the Ministers, but that they say, that God maketh one body to be in diuers places, at one selfe in∣stāt: because he can do it. And the Ministers say, that he doth it not, and cannot do it: because he wil not do it. For as much (as is said according to Tertullian) the power of god is his wil. Touching the reason that the Doctors do alledge in Phi∣sosophie, to proue, that a bodie, for being a bodie, doth not therfore leaue to be in diuers places: The Ministers say, they suppose a falshood. To wit, that quantitie is accidentall, and not essentiall to a body. For that (to wit, that a body is mea∣sured, bounded and circumscript) is in such sort of it essence, that without that, it is no more a bodie. As S. Augustine him selfe, speaking of the glorified body of Iesus Christ, saith: That if space be taken away from a body, there is no more place where it might be: and by consequence, being no part, is no more at all. The reaso of Philosophie they propose, tou∣ching the first heauen; as, that it is not in any place: The Mi∣nisters do denie it: for to speake according to the language of the scripture, it must be confessed that there is place e en Ioh. 14. aboue the heauens. As Iesus Christ said vnto his Disciples; I go to prepare a place for you. And in the same place; In my Fathers house there are many mansions. And else where: Ioh. 12. 26. Where I am (taking the present time for the future) there shal my seruants be In the which sentence must be obserued, that there be aduerbes of place. And S. Augustine writing to Dardanus, expresly saith: That it behoueth that the body of Iesus Christ be in some place in heauē, because it is a true bo∣dy. Moreouer, in numbring of the errors sometimes cōdem∣ned by the facultie of Paris, it is expresly said: That the hea∣uen by them called Empyreum, is the place of Angels, of bles∣sed spirits, and glorified humane bodies. Where the Doc∣tors pretend, that of the doctrine (which the Ministers main∣taine, that a body cannot be without place, nor in many pla∣ces at one instant) may be inferred, that they blaspheme the omnipotencie of God. The Ministers contrariwise say, that the Doctors blaspheme his Maiestie, and diminish the same, in attributing to the creature that which appertaineth to him alone: to wit, to be vncircumscript. As it appeareth by that which Didimus saith in his booke of the holy Ghost: where he proueth, that the holy Ghost is God, & not a creature, be∣cause he is incircumscript: and that al creatures necessarily be circumscript, and limited. As much thereof also say S. Basil, and Ʋigilius, and the M r . of the sentences in his first booke. Where they confesse, that the Angels and blessed spirits be circumscript, although they be not corporall. This reason is against themselues, and proper to proue what the Ministers haue here aboue maintained of bodies: to wit, that it cannot be but that they be circumscript in some place. For by an ar∣gument frō the lesse to the more: If the Angels which want dimension and measure, (by their own confession) in as much as they be creatures, be necessarily circumscript: by a more strong reason, the bodies of men, which be creatures, and measured, shall be so likewise. And where they adde, that the auncient Fathers haue not said, that one body by the power of God could not be in di∣uers places: That is contrary to the saying of S. Augustine, in his 30. tract vpon S. Iohn, which is recited De consec: distinct▪ 2. C. Prima quidē. Where, speaking of the body of Iesus Christ, he saith: namely; It behooueth, that the body of our Lord, wherin he rose again, be in one place: teaching therby, that at one selfe-same time, it cannot be in diuers places. And tou∣ching the reason they adde, taken frō the Sacrament, to proue their assertiō: the Ministers say, that the fathers neuer vnder∣stood, nor said, that the body of Iesus Christ was in heauen, and in the Sacrament, in one selfe same sort & maner: nor do they teach, that he was otherwise then Sacramentally in the Sacrament. And wheras in their resolutiō they pretend to proue, that the Angels may at one self instant be in diuers places, when the Ministers shall haue vnderstood their reasons, then they wil answere therevnto. That which they say of a body, it be∣ing dispoiled of it dimensions, ceaseth not to be a body not∣withstanding: is a very absurd thing. For did it happen, that a corporal substance were wholly dispoiled of it dimensions, it should no more be a body, but an incorporeall substance: & of like nature as the Angels & spirits. And although God by his power can seperate the dimensiōs of a substance, with∣out corrupting it: yet can it not be, that they be seperated frō a body, without the corruptiō of the same. Because the quan∣titie & dimensions are accidents of the substance, but not of the body: which cannot subsist without them, in as much as they be of it proper essence. Whereas the Doctors say afterwards in their obiection, that the waight in a body, is a thing essentiall. The Ministers do deny it. And the reason is, that were it of the essence of a bodie, and the same wanting, the bodie should cease to bee: Neuerthelesse we see, that the glorified bodie of Iesus Christ, (wherevnto the bodies of all the elect shall be like after the resurrection) doth not leaue to be & subsist, although it be now exempted from all waight. And as touching their alledged very strong and mightie argument: That if two bodies may be in one selfe place to∣gither, one body, at one instant, may be also in diuers places. The Ministers not graunting the antecedent (vnder correc∣tion) say, that the consequence is not good: and that the ar∣gument is very weake. Adding therto, that the Doctors haue nor prooued, and neuer can prooue by the scriptures, nor by any authoritie of the auncient Fathers, nor by any sufficient reason, that which they propose in their antecedent, or the consequent which they inferre thereof to be true. Wheras the Doctors to proue that two bodies may be to∣gether in one selfe place, alledge out of the scripture, that Ie∣sus Christ entred into the house where his Disciples were, the doores being shut: The Ministers do answere: that it is not written, that he entred through the closed doores, but only the doores being shut: which the auncient Interpreter hath well giuen to vnderstand, expounding in one of the places of S. Iohn, (where mention is made of that aboue said) Cuum fores essent clausae. Then when the doores were shut, Iesus came, &c. Neuertheles the Ministers say, they verily belieue, and are assured, of that which the scripture doth clearly say, to wit, that the doores being shut, he came and stood in the midst of his Disciples. But they cannot certainly define, nor determine, which way he entered: whether it were through the walles, or doores of wood; which Hillary himselfe ma∣keth doubt of in that place of his writings, alledged by the Doctors. Howsoeuer it be, the Ministers do say: that in en∣tering, he miraculously made way. And that a body (be it the wood or wall) did yeeld and giue place to the body of Iesus Christ entering: or that an opening was made vnto him by the Angell, which opened and afterward shut againe the doores in a moment; as before hath b ne said. And that how∣soeuer it was done, two bodies were neuer found in one selfe same place together. Touching that they alledge out of S. Augustine, in his booke de agone Christiano, that Iesus Christ entered through the doores: The Ministers deny not, that he entred through the doores: but that two bodies onely were neuer in one selfe same place together. But if Iesus Christ entered through the doores, that the doores at his entire gaue him place, as is said. For that which the Doctors alledge touching the Apo∣stles suspition, that it was a vaine vision, it nought appertai∣neth to the present matter; nor that also that they maruel∣led at the maner of his entry, which was miraculous: as they euer confessed. And touching that which they adde afterwards, in the opinion held by the olde heretiques, of the bodie of Iesus Christ, that it was not a true bodie: because it did things aboue nature. The Ministers doo shewe them, that they litle think what occasion and foundation of their errour, the auncient Fathers had presented vnto them, had they confessed what the Doctors haue set foorth, and doo obstinately defend of the bodie of Iesus Christ: that it doth things, not only aboue nature, but also contrary to nature: yea euen con∣trary to the will and ordinance of God. And there is no doubt, but such an opinion should be a great proofe for Mar∣cion and other heretiques, which haue denied the true huma∣nitie of Iesus Christ: if they should confesse by the Doctors example, that the body of Iesus Christ (cōtrary to the truth, nature, and essence of a body) may be, at one self-same time in diuers places: or in one selfe same place with an other body. To that they alledge of Iustin Martir: The Ministers do answer, that the booke by them alledged, is falsly attributed to him. For it there maketh mention of Origen (to wit in the the 82. question) althogh that Origen was more then 100. yeares after him. And touching the opening of the Sepul∣chre, whereof there is mentiō made in the place by them pro∣duced, They answer, that the Euangelist reciteth clearly, that there was a great Earthquake, when Iesus Christ rose again; and that the Angel did rowle away the stone, which closed the Sepulchre. Whervnto agreeth the saying of Leo, the first Bishop of Rome, writing to the Bishops of Palestine, where he saith: That Iesus Christ rose againe, the stone which coue∣red the Sepulchre being rowled away. Touching the place alledged by the Doctors, out of the writings of S. Hillary; one word there is, shall serue them for an answer. To wit, that this holy Doctor expresly saith: that Iesus Christ (to whō all things are open (as the Doctors haue expounded the said sentence) or (as the Ministers expound it, that he maketh way euery where, by his diuine power) en∣tred, the doores being shut. For thereby also he giueth to vn∣derstand, that to enter into the house where his Disciples were, he made himselfe way & opening. And by his writing can nought else be cōcluded, but that his entry was myracu∣lous. Concerning that which the Doctors alledge of S. Am∣brose, vpon S. Luke: No more can they inferre thereof, then S. Hillary hath said. And they cannot conclude, neither of the one nor the other, but that Iesus Christ entered within the house, by a diuine and miraculous power. For that which they alledge of S. Iohn Chrisostome, tou∣ching the virgin, that Iesus Christ came forth of her wombe, her virginitie & integritie no way thereby corrupted nor de∣filed: yea & that she did remain a virgin before & after her child birth: The Ministers do beleeue, confesse, and teach the same. And yeeld a reason thereof by the scripture: for as much as she neuer had knowne man. But if thence they will infer, that in the birth of Iesus Christ, Nula intercesserit aper∣tio vteri: The wombe was not opened. The Ministers do say: that such a conclusiō▪ should be against the expresse text of the scripture; and of that said in S. Luke to that purpose: Omne masculinum ad aperiens vuluam, &c. Euery male that first openeth the wombe, &c. Ioyned therevnto, that many auncient authors haue written & approued it. as Origen vpō S. Luke: Tertullian de carne Christi: S. Ierom in his first Tome, Ad Eustochiū. Where in expresse termes he saith: that Iesus Christ came bloody forth of the virgins belly. S. Ambrose vp∣on S. Luke. Wherby it may appeare, that the virgin was truly a virgin, and truly a mother. To the authoritie which they bring of S. Ierome, The Mi∣nisters alledge no other thing for answere, then that which himselfe hath said. To wit: That when Iesus Christ came where his Disciples were, the creature obeyed his Creator. What the Doctors alledge of S. Cyril, serueth nothing to the confirmation of their purpose. Touching the heresie in Iouinian, iustly reproued by Saint Augustine: who to auoyd the error of the Manichees, fel in∣to an other: namely, that the virgin in her child-birth remai∣ned not a virgin. The Ministers say: that it was not necessary that Iouinian (to auoid the error of the Manichees) should cal in doubt the virginitie of Mary: forasmuch as the foundiō of the same virginitie, is vpon this, that she was neuer knowne of man. Touching the conclusion, that the Doctors would draw from the authorities aboue said, and apply them to their pur∣pose (which was) that one body may be in two places at one self-same instāt, or that two bodies may be in one self-same place togither: The Ministers say, that it is altogither impertinēt. And that neither by the places they alledged, nor any others that they can gather, can they any way inferre the same. Adding further, that it shall neuer be found in any good Author. By meanes wherof, they cōclude against the Doctors, that their foundatiō is nothing. And that they wil falsly authorise their error by the name & title of the auncient Fathers, for fault of good vnderstanding, and taking the terme [piercing] which some of the auncient Fathers haue vsed; and signifieth not a a confusion, and mingling togither of diuers bodies, occupy∣ing one selfe same place: but only the yeelding, that the one made, to giue the other passage. As we see, and haue experi∣ence, that the aire giueth place to a man that walketh, and birds that flye. And the Ministers for conclusion say: that, that which they maintaine, and propose by their answere, doth not derogate, nor any way diminish the greatnes, glo∣ry, and power of God: but doth establish the same; and much more aduance it, then such prodigious absurdities, (as those are, which the Doctors set foorth, and will perswade: without any reason or probable meanes) woulde doo. For they confesse, that all whatsoeuer happened, both in the entry of Iesus Christ into the house where his disciples were, and in his going out as wel of the virgins wombe, as of the Sepulchre, there was the myraculous & diuine power of God. But they denie, that thereby nothing happened, which was impossible, and contained any contradiction. What they alledge of Caluin & Beza are friuolous things: and proposed more to slaunder and contradict, then to search out and make manifest the truth. Where as they say that all antiquitie, with one consent do vnderstand by the terme Aphantos ap'aut n; That Iesus Christ made himselfe invisible to his Disciples, abiding in their pre∣sence. The Ministers for their answer, are content to alledge vnto them, one onely authoritie of S. Ambrose vpon S. Luke: who expounding these words, saith: That hee retired from them. And an other of Nicholas de Lyra, which saith vpon this place, that it was done by the agilitie of his glorious body, which can suddenly vanish away. To that they alledge of the piercing the heauens, when Iesus Christ ascended thither, the Ministers do answer, that it is very like they claue a sunder, and were opened; a when at the Baptisme of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Doue descended vpon him: And when as also S. Stephen was stoned. Touching that which they reproue in the first answere of the Ministers, saying: that in the 12▪ chap. of the Acts, there is made no mention of the opening of the prison. The Mini∣sters do admonish them to read diligently the text of the said place. And there they shal find, that whē they had passed the first & 2. watch, the vtter gate of the prisō (which was of Irō) did opē of it own accord, to make the Angel & Peter passage. Whereas the Doctors reply vpon the answer of the Mi∣nisters, to the argument of the Camell formerly proposed by them in their first answer: the Ministers say, that there is no∣thing in their said answer, against the word of God. But that they deceiue themselues: referring to the Camell, whereof hee had formerly made mention: that which ought to bee vnderstood, but of the sauing and conuersion of the rich man only. For our Lord Iesus Christ saying, that that which is impossible to men, is possible with God: nought else pretendeth, but to answere the question which the Disciples had propounded. To wit, who could be saued. Answering wherevnto, hee said: that it was indeed impossible to men: who of themselues are inclined to trust in their riches. But to God it was possible, which could pull backe or withdraw their hearts from that vaine confidence. As touching the argument which they will build vpon the presence of Iesus Christ in the Supper, (whereof they wil inferre, that it is in diuers places) the Ministers confesse the antecedent, & denie the consequence. For there is no doubt, but by faith our Lord Iesus Christ is spiritually present to all the faithfull in the Supper. Whence neuerthelesse must not be inferred, that he is there locally, definitiuely, no corpo∣rally. And wheras they say, that it is not imaginable, the Mi∣nisters do avow the same, in regard of these which are not taught and enlightned by the spirit of God, and haue no o∣ther imagination, then that which their natural facultie doth furnish them withall. But they that beeing illuminate by the grace of God, haue a true and liuely faith in their hearts: it is no more impossible to represent vnto them Iesus Christ crucified in the Supper, then it was to the Galathians to re∣present and propose him vnto them, as present and visible, at the preaching of S. Paul: and to those likewise of whom Saint Ciprian maketh mention in his Sermon of the Supper: That in celebrating the same, they embrace the Crosse of Iesus Christ, sucke his bloud, and fasten their tongues within his wounds. All which things are done by a liuely contem∣plation, and apprehension of faith: which is no other thing, then the ground of things hoped for, and an euidence of those things which are not seene: as S. Paul doth define it. Touching the truth of the thing conioyned with the signes and Sacraments: the Ministers confesse, that the out∣ward signes are neuer without their effect toward the faithfull, who cannot be partakers of the bread and wine di∣stributed in the Supper, but that they participate therwith∣all, of the flesh of Iesus Christ crucified for their sinnes, and of his bloud shead to ratifie the new couenant which God made with his people. But if the Doctors will inferre there∣of a corporall presence in the Supper, the Ministers will de∣nie it. And their reason is, because such a presence was not required among the auncient Fathers: who left not for all that, to eate one selfe-same spirituall foode, with all the faith∣full at this day: as it shalbe by the grace of God, more amply declared when the Lord of Neuers shall please to command conference of this matter. To that which the Doctors (slaundering the Ministers) do say, that they attribute more to themselues, and to hu∣mane power, then they do attribute to the power of God: when they say, that by faith they make present, the things which be absent; seeing that God (according to the doc∣trine of the Ministers) cannot make one selfe-same body to bee in diuers places at one instant. The Ministers doo an∣swere, that such antitheses be foolish, and vnfit for the pur∣pose: and that there is much more great apparance that the Doctors do presume more of their power, and that of the other Priests of the Romane Church, then of the power of God: for God created not by his word, but the heauens, the earth, and the other creatures therein contained. And they in their consecration, doo attribute vnto themselues, the power to create their Creator: as is contained in their bre∣uiarie, where the Priest saith: Qui creauit me, creatur medi∣ante me. He that created me, is created my meanes of mee. And the Ministers much maruell, that the Doctors call the vertue of faith, a humane power, seeing the great and admirable effects thereof proposed vnto vs, in so many ex∣amples of the scripture; chiefly in the eleuenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrewes: where Saint Paul saith: That the Saints, by faith, haue subdued kingdomes, &c. All which things surmount not onely the vertue, but also the ca∣pacitie of humane vnderstanding. In that immediately following this article, there is but repetitions in the reply of the Doctors: and many vn∣profitable and superfluous wordes: and little or nothing of that, should be necessary to the purpose. And as they haue answered them particularly to euery point which they repeate, they send them now backe to the former answeres: and pray them henceforth not to serue them twise with one messe. Concerning the Sacrament of the Aultar, as they call it: The Ministers neither receiue, nor any way approue, that their Masse (which they pretend to bee a Sacrament) is a Sacrament: and much lesse a sacrifice, by which re∣mission of finnes may bee any way obtained. Yea they say, that both their Priest and pretended sacrifice, with all the things thereof depending, are blasphemies, and impieties: by which GOD is dishonoured, all the benefite of Iesus Christ buried, and nought esteemed: and the Church of Iesus Christ seduced and abused; as by the pursuite of the Conference shall plainely appeare. And also, that the Ministers do no way corrupt either the sence, or the words which Iesus Christ vsed in the institu∣tion of his holy Supper. Thursday the 18. of Iuly, in the yeare aboue said. The reply or obiection of the Doctors against the answere of the Ministers, touching the Article of the Omnipotencie of God, on Satterday the 20. of Iuly. T He Doctors say, that this cosequence, God cannot by his omnipotencie, make one body to be in two places at one in∣stant, he is not therefore omnipotent: is so good and strong, that the Ministers (without wrapping, and more and more drowning themselues in execrable blas∣phemies, to the great griefe and horror of the Doctors) can no way denie the same: And besides the two blasphemies maintained by the Ministers in their former answers, (that is to say, that it was impossible for God to make one body to bee in two places: and that it was im∣possible for him to will the same) in the first article of theyr last answere, they adde foure or fiue other blasphemies, out of which doo flow yet many others: besides the absurdi∣ties, falshoods, and impostures they vse to the said Doctors. And first they set forth, that God cannot do a thing which derogateth the order which he hath established in the world. Secondly, that it should bee to establish mutabilitie, and change in the Councell of God, did they confesse, that hee can do any thing against the said order which he hath put in the world. And thirdly, that were it so, there should bee con∣tradiction in his will: whereby it would followe, that hee should be a lyar. And for the fourth blasphemie, that the power of God is his will: and that his weaknesse, is his vn∣willingnesse. And for the fift, the Ministers pretend, that God hath willed to make a body, which at one selfe instant hath beene in many places, before they beleeue that God could doo it: otherwise they intend to inferre that hee had not power, and could not do it. So that the Ministers will nought acknowledge of the power of God, but so much thereof, as hee hath shewed by effect. And to that purpose they alledge Tertullian. All which blasphemies be drawne out of the proper words of the Ministers first article. Touching the first, which is, that God cannot make a thing which derogateth the order he hath established in the world: it is very apparant that it is blasphemie by the holy scripture: which in infinite places maketh mention of the workes of God aboue nature, which the Ministers call the order established in the world. And in proper termes tea∣cheth that God can do infinite things, aboue the order by him established in the world. Namely, that Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salte: that a barren woman in her old age, hauing an old husband, brought forth a childe: that a withered Rodde budded: that an Asse spake: that the sonne stayed and went backe: and other more then innu∣merable examples, contained in the old Testament. And as touching the new, that a virgin brought forth a child. That a body walked vpō the water, & mounted into heauen. And generally all the myracles that Christ and his Apostles did aboue nature, which is contrary to the order established in the world. And of this blasphemie ensueth an other: that God since hee established his order in the world, hath not done, nor could, nor can do any myracle. Now to proue that the scripture teacheth clearely, that God can do contrary to the order established in the world, it is written in the 50. of Esay: Is my hand (that is to say my power) so shortned, that it cannot helpe? or haue I no power to deliuer? Behold at my rebuke I drie the sea: I make the flouds desart: Their fish rotteth for want of water, and dy∣eth for thirst. I cloathe the heauens with darknesse, & make a sacke their couering. And more expresly in the new Te∣stament, where it is said by S. Iohn: That God can of stones raise vp children to Abraham. Which place, although it may be expounded allegorically: yet hath S. Iohn willed in the litterall sence to shewe, that it was possible to God. And the diue did know and confesse, that if Iesus Christ were the true sonne of God, he could chaunge the stones into bread. Which is neuerthelesse contrary to the order established in the world. And it must be noted, that there is no more im∣possibilitie that the bread should bee chaunged into flesh by the omnipotencie of God, then a stone into bread. And therefore they which denie this last, done by the power of God, do shewe to beleeue lesse the almightinesse of God, then the diuels. The confutation of the second blasphemie, dependeth on the confutation of the first. For although God, a∣gainst the order established in the world, hath done many myracles (as hath beene before recyted) yet neuerthe∣lesse there is no mutabilitie, nor chaunge in his coun∣saile. Touching the third blasphemie, which is, that if God did any thing contrary to the order established in the world, there should be contradiction in his will, and he should ther∣fore be a lyar. The Doctors obiect, that it would follow, that the will of God should be such, neuer to will any thing con∣trary to the order established in the world. And that God should haue purposed and declared by his word, his will to be such. For otherwise can they not know what the will of God shuld be. And the Ministers do not, nor can they make it appeare by the word of God, the will of God to be such, that he will not do any thing against the order established in the world. And it behoueth the said Ministers to teach of such a wil of God, before they conclude that God made one body to be in two places (or other thing) against the order of nature established in the world, he should be a lyar. Touching the fourth blasphemie, which is, that the power of God is his will, and that his weaknesse is his vnwillingnes, according to the sence which the Ministers giue it (to wit, if God cannot, but that which he will) it is an heresie of the heretikes called Monarchians, in the Primitiue Church. A∣gainst whom, Tertulliā wrote, in his booke Aduersus Praxeā, and afterwards renewed by Peter Abaillardus. And since cō∣tinued by one called Wickliffe: who measured the power of God according to his will. Which is against the expresse word of God, which often declareth many things possible to God, that notwithstanding he wil not do, as by that which is written in the 2. of Wisedome appeareth: where mention is made, that God could send vpon the children of Israel, many kinds of affliction, to chasten thē, but he would not do it, ha∣uing disposed all things, by number, waight & measure. And that he could destroy those which had offended, but that he would not, vsing mercie towards thē. And in the Gospel, our Lord said to S. Peter, Thinkest thou that I could not now pray my Father, and he would send me more then 12. Legi∣ons of Angels? And notwithstanding he would not pray for that purpose. And his Father would not send them, al∣though he had power to do it to the person of his sonne. And Iesus Christ himself could haue letted his enemies frō taking away his life, but he would not. And the Father (saith S. Paul) by his power could haue saued him frō corporall death. But neuerthelesse hee would not do the one, nor the other. Not∣withstanding the Ministers might say, that it was preordai∣ned: yet the scripture saith expresly, that he could do it, al∣though it had bin preordained. And as touching the autho∣ritie of Tertullian, the Doctors are glad that the Ministers do produce it, because it maketh wholy for the truth, against the blasphemy of the Ministers, who haue omitted many words and sentences of the said Tertullian, which serued to the con∣futation of their error: as by the text here inserted, may be easily iudged. Nihil Deo difficile. Quis hoc nesciat? Et impossibi∣lia apud seculum, possibilia apud deū. Quis ignorat? Et stulta mū∣di elegit Deus, vt confundat sapientia. Ergo inquiūt haeretici (Mo∣narchiani scilicet) difficile non fuit deo ipsū se & patrem & Filiū facere, aduersus traditam formā rebus humanis. Nam & Aerilē parere contra naturam, difficile deo non fuit, sicut nec virginē pla∣nè nichil Deo difficile. Sed sitā abrupte in praesumptiombus nostris hac sententia vtamur, quid vis de Deo confingere poterimus quasi fecerit, quia facere potuerit. Non autem quia omnia potest facere, idio{que} credendū est illū fecisse etiā quod non fecerit: sed an fecerit requirendū. Potuit (ita saluus sum) Deus pennis hominē ad volan∣dū instruxisse (quod & miluis praestitit) non tamen quia potuit, sta∣tim & fecit, potuit & praxeam & omnes pariter haeriticos statim extinxisse, non tamē quia potuit, extinxit. Oportebat enim miluos esse & haereticos: oportebat & patrem crucifigi. Hac ratione erit aliquid & deo dificile, id scilicet quod non fecerit: non quia po∣tuerit, sed quia noluerit. Etenim posse, velle est, & non posse, nolle. Nothing is vnpossible to God: who knoweth not this? And things vnpossible to mē, are possible to God: who is ignorant hereof? And God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. Therefore say the heretikes (namely the Monarchians) it was not hard for God himself to make both the Father and the sonne, against the prescribed forme in humane things. For the barren to bring foorth against nature: as also a Virgin, was nothing hard vnto God. Truly for God there is nothing too hard. But if in our presumption we so abruptly vse this sentence, wee may faigne euerie thing to be of God: as though hee will do, because he can doo. We must not beleeue, because hee can doo all things, that therefore hee hath done what he hath not done: but wee must seeke if hee haue done it. God could (I am sure) haue formed man to flye with wings, (as he hath appointed the kytes) he hath not forthwith done it because he could. He could presently cut off both Praxea, and likewise all heretikes together: yet hath he not there∣fore, because he could. For it behoued there should be both kytes and heretikes: It behoued also the Father to be cruci∣fied. By this reason shall something be too hard for God, namely that which he will not do: not because hee cannot, but because he will not. For to be able, is to will: and not to be able, is not to will. By which text it is easily seene, that according to Tertullian, God can do many things which he will not do: as he can make a man to flye, and doth it not: destroy heretikes; neuerthelesse he destroyeth them not, be∣cause he will not, all that he may doo. And touching the conclusion which the Ministers draw from the said place of Tertullian, (to wit) that the power of God is his will: and his weakenesse is likewise his vnwil∣lingnesse: The Ministers shewe, that they haue not well ex∣amined the vnderstanding of that place. For Tertullian of his owne iudgement saith it not; (so should he haue conclu∣ded against what hee had said before) but hee inferreth the same against the Monarchian heretikes, which said: That what God could, he would do, and it was done. And for this reason Tertullian concludeth against them: that it behoued whatsoeuer God had not done, was to him hard and impossi∣ble. So that (after these heretikes) it was all one to be done, and to haue power to do it. And not to be done, as much as to be impossible to God. And hereof inferreth Tertullian, would follow, that the power, and the will, and the act of God, should be all one. And contrariwise, that a thing not to be done, and to be impossible for God to do it, should be all one: and so the power of God, and his wil, all one. And his weaknesse, & his vnwillingnesse be likewise all one. Which Tertullian concludeth for an absurd thing, proceeding from the opinion of the said Monarchians heretikes, and not of his owne iudgement, which was altogether contrarie. Wherein it appeareth, that the opinion of the Ministers, is like to that of the Monarchian heretikes, refuted by Ter∣tullian. And that the Ministers maintaine such an opini∣on, it is euident by that which is contained in the fift blas∣phemie. The Doctors for conclusion against the said blasphe∣mies, do shewe that God can do much more then he will do, and then he hath established in the order of the world. For otherwise, other blasphemies would yet ensue: namely, that the power of God should not be infinite, but limited. Also that all things of necessitie should bee done in this world, because God could not but maintaine the established or∣der in the world. Which Caluin himselfe detesteth, saying: That God of his omnipotencie, changeth and altereth the order established (as seemeth best vnto him) and that o∣therwise to thinke, were to limit his power and prouidence. Where the Ministers say in their said former article, that the auncient Doctors of the Church haue denied the om∣nipotencie of God: it is a manifest falshood, and they wrong them greatly. For denie it they doo not, but in∣terpret the scripture, which seemeth to denie it: and giue to vnderstand, how it ought to be taken. So that, so farre off is it, that by this scripture well vnderstood, exception may bee giuen against the omnipotencie of God; that contrariwise the same is confirmed: as saith Saint Augustine in the fift booke, and tenth Chapter of the Citie of God. The power of God (saith hee) is nothing diminished, al∣though it bee said, that hee cannot die, nor bee deceiued: for such things he cannot do: because, that could he do them, his power should thereby be lessened. And concludeth, that such things which be of infirmitie he cannot do, beccause he is almightie. The Ministers in the end of the first article, vse de∣ceit towards the Doctors, in that they affirme theyr diffe∣rence to be, because the Doctors maintaine, that a body is in many places, for as much as God can so cause it to bee: and that the Ministers on the other part hold, that it is not in the power of God to do it, because hee will not doo it. The Doctors doo shewe, that they (for their part) neuer so concluded for truth, that one true body was in two pla∣ces, because God could so cause it: but that the question was onely to knowe, whether God could doo it, to come afterwards by order, to proue by scripture that hee would doo it. And they haue alreadie heretofore cyted the scrip∣ture of the Supper and Ascention. And further added the doctrine of Caluin touching the said Supper: to shewe, that the will of God is, to make one body to be in two places, (as indeed it is) according to the expresse word of God. More∣ouer, to this selfe-same end, the Doctors haue produced the scriptures of the closed doores: of the birth of our Lord: and of the resurrection through the stone: which are made like: and by the same reason, to that of a body in many places. The Ministers on the contrary part, to denie the wil of God, and depraue the holy scriptures (which declareth the will of God to be such, that one body be in two places) alledge no∣thing more instantly, then the impossibilitie for God to doo this. Now, to the end that all the world may vnderstand the present difference, betweene the Doctors and Ministers, the Doctors declare, that no other difference there hath beene hitherto touching this article, then to know whether it be in the power of God, to make one body to be in two places at one selfe-same instant or no. And for the second article, the Doctors say, that the Ministers answere not to the purpose: for the obiection was not, whether quantitie were an accident of a Mathematicall body, Aut de praedicamento quantitatis, as speaketh the Philo∣sophers) but to know whether it were of the essence and of necessitie to the quantitie of a body, to be circumscript, and in one piace inclosed. And as touching S. Augustine, by the Ministers alledged, he speaketh expresly according to the proprieties of the diuine and humane natures. And wel saith, that the diuine, is in all places, but not the humane: because of it naturall proprietie, it requireth a place certaine. And of this make the Doctors no doubt, according to the said natu∣rall proprietie. But the question is, to wit, whether aboue na∣ture, by the omnipotencie of God, he cannot cause one body to be without place, proportionable to it greatnesse, Which S. Augustine speaking, de Ianuis clausis: not hauing regard to the nature of things, but to the power of God, plainly con∣fesseth. And the Doctors would desire the Ministers to al∣ledge this Epistle of S. Augustine, against the doctrine of Cal∣uin, and his Ministers, for the descent of the soule of Iesus Christ into hell, as often as they alledge the passage of the place of bodies, against the power of God, touching the body of Iesus Christ in the Sacrament. In the 3. article the Ministers are deceiued. For after the sayings of the Philosophers, and according to the naturall reason of a body (which the Ministers do follow) Locus est superficies Corporis continentis. Place is the ouermost part of a containing body. Wherfore it should behoue, that were the high and last heauen circumscript of place, there should be a body aboue the high and first heauen, A quo primum Caelum contineretur. Et sic in infinitum. Of which the first heauen should be cōtained. And so infinit. And moreouer the Mini∣sters answer not to the other obiectiōs made thē vpō this article. And as touching the passages of scripture, which they alledge to proue that there are toomthes & places aboue all the heauens, they captiously conclude, and with doubtfulnesse of the name of place. For in all their of the dimensions of bodies (which they haue said to require roomth and place equall and their bignesse) it is meete they vnderstand roomthes and places, euen as the dimensions and of do require the same. And now, when they speake of place meet they vnderstand thē, others then be not such roomthes & places, as these wherein now are: but incomprehensible and vnimaginable places, where bodies and spirits indifferently are, without distincti∣on for their greatnesse, of certaine spaces and places corpo∣rall. And in such places, the Ministers rule is false, by which they maintaine, that a body cannot be in one place, if it bee not as spacious, as the greatnesse of the body. Moreouer the Doctors say, that it is the manner of here∣tikes, to interpret the scriptures spiritually, when they are litterally to bee taken: and contrariwise, to expound according to the letter, that which spiritually and by figure ought to bee vnderstood. As the Ministers doo expound the house of Cod in the other world, litterally and corpo∣rally, wherein there are spaces, and corporall habitations, di∣uers and seperate one from an other: albeit it ought to bee spiritually vnderstood, for the diuersitie of degrees of bles∣sednesse. The said Doctors cannot omit, a manifest contradicti∣on of the Ministers in this selfe-same article: wherein they pre end, that the bodies and soules of the blessed, are lod∣ged aboue all the heauens. And yet they place the body of Iesus Christ within the heauen. And touching the alledged article, condemned by the facultie of diuinitie at Paris: the Doctors answere, that the Ministers do ordinarily alledge authorities, pared, or euilly applied: For the Article saith, that the Bishop of Paris, hauing called the Facultie, condemned all those, which would place two distinct heauens: one for the Angels, the other for the soules of men. Which nothing pertaineth to the present question. The Ministers in the fourth article do charge the Doc∣tors, who neuer attribute the proprietie of God to any creature: but haue often heretofore said, that to bee euerie where, and incircumscript, was not naturall to any creatures, but to God alone. And the Authors by the Ministers alledged (as Saint Basil, Didimus, and Ʋigilius, speake no otherwise thē of the proprietie of nature, to be euery where, or not. And yet they neuer denie, but it is in Gods power to cause one creature or body, aboue it nature, to be in two, or many places: but (as aforesaid) when they come to the power of God, many of the olde authors confesse, that it is possible with God, and that hee hath done the same in the Sacrament: the answere of the Ministers is there∣fore to no purpose. For the whole contention is of the po∣wer of God, and not of naturall proprieties. The Ministers in the fift article haue not well concei∣ued the reason of the Doctors: who alledge, that the An∣gels are naturally circumscript, as well as bodies: and here∣by would inferre, that the circumscription of place simply depended not as of the sole and essentiall cause of the di∣mensions of a body: as by all their said reasons, the Mini∣sters pretend. Albeit the Doctors are not ignorant that to put difference betweene the corporall and spirituall crea∣tures, they haue accustomed to distinguish in schooles, that the Angels Sunt diffinitiue in loco, and the bodies Cir∣cumscriptiue. In the sixt article to satisfie the Doctors, who made in∣stance they should produce one onely place of the auncient Fathers: where it was said, that it is not in Gods power, to make one body to be in two places. The Ministers for all the testimonies they could haue, do falsly alledge a place of S. Augustine, where it is said (as it is cyted in Gratian De con∣secra: distinct. 2. C. prima quidem) that the said Saint Au∣gustine hath written, that it behoued the body of Iesus to be in one place: wherevnto say the Doctors, that it is not so couched in the proper text of S. Augustine, which is in the 30. tract vpon Saint Iohn. For such is the tenour in all the auncient copies of S. Augustine: Corpus domini, in quo re∣surrexit, vno loco esse potest, veritas eius vbi{que} diffusa est. The body of the Lord, in which he rose againe, may be in one place, his truth is shead into euerie place. Where is not this word [Oportet] as the Ministers cyte it, hauing taken the same out of Gratian. And that men may knowe there is no great trust to be giuen to the fragments of Gratian, with∣out recourse to the copies of Saint Augustine, in the tytle of Canon, these words are there extracted out of the expo∣sition of S. Augustine, vpon the 54 Psalme. From whence hee draweth the onely beginning of his Canon: and yet doth he not truly cyte it. The est of the said Canon, is taken from diuers passages of S. Augustine. And although there should bee Oportat. S. Augustine speaketh after his wonted manner, according to the proprietie of a body, opposing the diuinitie to the humanitie: without touching the operation of Gods omnipotencie. Whereof when he maketh mention, and that he speaketh of the Sacrament, he plainly affirmeth, the body of Iesus Christ to be in diuers places; by the omni∣potencie of God. As the Doctors hope in their resolution to deduce as well out of him, as other auncients also. The 8. artide containeth many errors, against Philo∣sophie and truth. First, because the Ministers make no di∣stinction betweene the body they cab Mathematicall (to wit, hauing dimension of breadth, length, and height) and the Phisicall or naturall body: to wit, which is composed of a substantiall forme and matter: by the vnion whereof, it is made a naturall & substantiall body. Secondly, although the body should bee without quantitie, yet should it differ from our soules seperated, which bee not materiall substances: and consequently should it also differ from the Angells and spirits. Thirdly, the Ministers by the conclusion of this article, doo manifestly declare, that they acknowledge not any substantiall body. And where they say, that al∣though God might seperate the dimensiōs from a substance, without corrupting the same, that such substance should re∣maine spiritually, as the Angels, they are deceiued. For such substance should not remaine immateriall, as are our soules, and the Angels which be not capable of dimensions: and therefore should it yet bee different from Angels and our soules. Concerning the ninth article, the Ministers answere no∣thing to the purpose. For the Doctors say not, that the massinesse and waight bee essentiall in a body, but to presse downeward, is essentiall to the sadnesse and waight of a body. And by their obiection they demaunded to knowe, whether an earthly and massy body, abiding in it substance and natural waight, might not by the omnipotencie of God, be hanged in the ayre, without falling downward, albeit it were against it nature and inclination, Moreouer, for answere to many articles which concerne the act of two bodies in one place, and the passages of holy scripture, and auncient Authors produced by the Doctors, (to proue that it was in Gods power to cause two bodies to bee in one onely place: and contrariwise, that by the same reason it was in the same power, to cause one body to bee in two places). First the Doctors say, that the Mini∣sters doo wrong, to denie this consequence. Two bodies by the power of God, may be in one selfe-same place. Then on the contrarie part, one body may be in two places, by the selfe-same power. For as great repugnancie there is to Gods established order, in the one, as in the other: and as great contradiction in nature, founded vppon one selfe-same cause and reason: to wit, in the limitation, and circumscrip∣tion of a body. Which as it is naturall to be in place, so is it naturall for it, to bee in place proportioned and answera∣ble to it measures. And if for the number of diuers pla∣ces where a body should bee, one may inferre, that it should no more bee a body (as implying contradiction) by the same reason, according to one onely place, where many bodies should bee, may also bee inferred, that they should no more be many bodies: or that many bodies should be one. Which would imply the contradiction as the for∣mer. And where the Ministers denie the antecedent, which is, that two bodies may bee in one place, the Doctors to proue it, haue produced the passages of scripture, of the clo∣sed doores: the birth of the body of our Lord of the Virgin: the going out of the Sepulchre: the passage of a Camell through the eye of a needle: and the piercing of the hea∣uens made by Christ in his ascention. And for as much as the Ministers denie these actes, contained expresly in holy scripture, and expounded by the auncient Christians, and depraue the same at their pleasure. The Doctors estsoones vpō the texts of scripture do say as followeth. First as touching the closed doores, Saint Iohn saith: That Iesus came, meaning into the place where his Disciples were. But hee came not there without entering thereinto. For to bee found in the middest of them with∣out entring, there should bee a much greater myracle, then that hee entred there simply. Secondly it is said, Cum fo∣res essent clausa, or Ianuis clausis. To wit, that hee there en∣tered, the doores beeing shut. And there is no apparance that the scripture maketh mention of doores, rather then an other place, were it not to shewe the place by which hee entred. Thirdly, it is added not in vaine, that the doores were shut, without saying that any opening was myracu∣lously made. For it is alwaies said, Quod venit Ianuis clausis. That hee came the doores beeing shut. And were it true, that the doores had bin opened by diuine power, this should be false, that our Lord entred, Ianuis clausis, for hee should haue entered Ianuis apertis, howsoeuer they had bene ope∣ned. And to shewe, that the common consent of all the Aun∣cientes haue bene, that Iesus entered therein by the closed doores, the Doctors set forth foure foundations, drawne from the auncient Fathers. The first is, that all expresly confesse the myracle of such an entrie to haue bene wrought in the body of Iesus Christ. The second is, that such my∣racle was there wrought by the power of God, aboue the nature of a body. The third is, that the Fathers especially iudge, that herein consisteth the myracle, that the body pas ed through the closed doores: and that so it was with an other body. And for the fourth ground, they adde, that the Apostles by reason of such entring, supposed that the body of Iesus Christ was not a true body, but a spirit, or vaine vision: which the Ministers lightly passe ouer, without any answere. Now so it is, that if by the power of God (as the Ministers will haue it) an opening was made of the doores, or any other part of the house, to giue entrie to the bodie of Iesus Christ: then the myracle did not consist in the said body, but in the doores, or other part of the house, which was open: and nothing had beene there against the nature of the bodie of our Lorde: for it is not repugnant to any bodie whatsoeuer, to enter by an opening made by my∣racle, or otherwise. Bee it, that Iustine was not Author of the questions a∣gainst the Gentiles; yet can they not deny, but they are of some auncient Christian, of the Primitiue Church. And the Doctors haue attributed them to him, in whose name they are intituled. And so much there is, that the said Iustine in the place alledged, layeth the myracle to haue bene done in the bodie of Iesus Christ: which (being grosse and thick) en∣tered through the closed doores by the power of God; con∣trary to the nature of a bodie. And therefore the Apostles supposed it a vision: by reason of the entrie made without opening, as spirites doo wontedly enter. Let the text be seene. S. Hillary saith not only, that he there entered in what sort soeuer it were, by the omnipotencie of God, (as the Mi∣nisters will wrest his authoritie) but as if he had now to deale with the said Ministers, hee repulseth & mocketh at all their euasions and subtilties, which vpon this act they imagined. Nothing (saith he) gaue place, to open to such a bodie, and that it lost nothing of it substance: nor by it entry was ought diminished. He addeth: That the doores and clefts were shut, and fast barred. And in this neuerthelesse lyeth the my∣racle, that the true naturall bodie of Iesus Christ, contrary to nature, by the omnipotencie of God entered into a house, close and couert, without any opening: wherein hee plainly sheweth, that the myracle consisteth in the bodie of Iesus Christ. And for this let the text be viewed, which the Doc∣tors wish to be well examined by the Ministers. S. Ambrose in the place cyted saith: That S. Thomas was abashed, seeing the bodie of Iesus Christ to enter, Per in via septa corporibus. Et quod natura corporea per impenitrabile cor∣pus sese infuderit inuisibili aditu. Through closures impassable for bodies: And that the corporeall nature powred it selfe by an inuisible meane through an impenitrable bodie. S. Chrisostome in the Homely of S. Iohn Baptist, and in his Cōmentaries vpon the Gospell of S. Iohn, expresly saith: Qui intrauit per ostia clausa, non erat phantasma, non erat spiritus, ve∣re corpus erat. Quid enim dicit? Respicite & videte: quia spiri∣tus carnem & ossa non habet, quae me habere videtis. Habebat carnes, habebat & ossa, & clausa erant omnia. Quomodo clausis octijs intrauerunt ossa & caro? Clausa sunt omnia & intrat, quē intrantem non vidimus. Nescis quomodo factum sit, & das hoc po∣tentiae Dei. He that entred through the closed doores, was not a vain vision, was not a spirit, it was truly a bodie. For what saith he? Behold and see: For a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me haue. Hee had flesh, hee had also bones, and all thinges were shut. How entered bones and flesh, the doores being shut? All thinges are shut, and hee ente∣reth whome wee see not entering. How it is done thou knowest not, and attributeth this to the power of God. Where S. Chrisostome without difficultie, as doth also S. Ambrose, acknowledgeth the myracle to haue bin wrought in the body of Iesus Christ; in that hee passed through the shut doores, by the omnipotencie of God. S. Ierome in the places quoted by the Doctors manifest∣ly writeth: that the body pierced the closed doores, euen as the Poets recount that the fight of Linceus pierced the walls, to see through without opening. S. Ierome then reasoned of the nature of a bodie, which the Bishop of Ierusalem (in∣fected with the heresie of Origen) held not to bee truly in Iesus Christ after his resurrection: because contrary to the nature of a bodie, he had passed through the closed doores: wherein Saint Ierome (as the other Auncients) declareth: that it nothing derogateth from the nature of the bodie: because it proceeded from a supernaturall power. And in the first Booke against Iouinian hee saieth as much: where he vseth these words: Iesus entered through the closed doores. Quod humanorum corporum natura non pa∣titur. Which thing, the nature of humane bodies admitteth not. So that with others, he placeth the myracle in the body of Iesus Christ. There is no doubt, but S. Augustine in three places (at the least) maketh expresse mention, that this body pas∣sed through the shut doores: and that this was done by the power of God, aboue the nature of bodies: and that there∣fore heretikes ought not to denie the true bodie of Iesus Christ: besides the passages De agone Christiano, and of the Epistle Ad volusianum, alreadie alledged in the booke De Ci∣uitate Dei, he saith so also. Epiphanius in the first booke, vpon the 20. Heresie, and in the 2. booke, vpon the 64. Heresie, against the Origenists, declareth that it is but a spirituall body: to wit, which loo∣seth nothing of it corporall substance: but changeth & get∣teth new qualities and spirituall perfections, and meete for spirites: as to passe through the walles without opening. And giueth example of the body of Iesus Christ, which pierced and passed through the closed doores after his resur∣rection. And euen so iudgeth (as others do) the myracle to haue bene wrought in the body of Iesus Christ: and that be∣cause he pierced the shut doores, as a spirit, albeit hee were a true body. Cirillus Alexandrinus determineth also (as the others) this myracle to haue hapned in the body of our Lord; which by the like myracle, walked vpon the waters, against the na∣ture of a body, by the power of God; and reproueth all them, which ought suspected by this deed, that the body of Iesus Christ was not naturall. By all these authorities, the foure grounds proposed, are true. And therefore to corrupt the intention and faith of so many Auncientes and learned Christians, to bring in a confusion of new Interpretations, is ouer-great impudencie. For besides the diuersitie of Caluin and Beza, the Ministers to that ende produce two others: to wit, that the Angell opened the doore: as though Iesus had not power himselfe to open it, or else had need of ope∣ning. And the other is, that the opening was made which way he pleased. And by such diuersities, the Ministers sufficient∣ly declare, that they know not where to rest. And (which is worse) they could not alledge one only auncient Father, for author of their fictions, or that is contrary to all the others, from the Primitiue Church. And to alledge, that the Iron gate (in the Acts of the Apostles opened to S. Peter of it own accord, serueth nothing to the purpose: For the Doctors ne∣uer denied the same: but haue well saide, that the scripture spake not of the gates of the prison: and if at the entry of Ie∣sus Christ the doores had beene so opened, the Euangelist had as easily said it, as he said they were shut; and as S. Luke saith, that the Iron gate was opened of it selfe. There is no doubt, but peruerse spirits, which doubted of the truth of the bodie of Iesus Christ in this world, were not of opinion touching the passage of the doores, with other Christians. And although they thought to helpe and aide themselues herewith, to support their heresies (as of all the other myracles hapned to the body of our Lorde aboue na∣ture) the Fathers neuerthelesse haue not denied this, nor o∣thers semblable acts: for feare to giue heretikes occasion of error. But haue declared and distinguished what was of the nature of the said bodie, and what came vnto it by the om∣nipotencie of God. And the Christians (for heresies) neuer abandoned the truth: albeit heretikes thereby haue some∣times abused the same. Sith then the bodie of Iesus Christ passed through the doores without opening; sure it is, that two bodies haue bene, and may be in one selfe same place. And hereby haue the Doctors well proued their propositi∣on: which without scripture, or testimony of any Father, the Ministers deny. Concerning the Birth of Iesus Christ without fraction of the virgin, the Doctors say, that many of the Auncients pro∣duced for the passage of the doores, haue also held, that my∣racle to haue bene wrought in the bodie of our Lord, and not in the bodie of the virgin, but in as much as she remained in her purenesse, without fracture or opening. And for their reason, the Fathers haue alledged the scripture: Exce virgo concipiet & pariet. Behold a virgin shall conceaue and bring forth. And out of Ezechiel: Porta haec clausa erit. This gate shall be shut. As reciceth S. Ambrose in the 80. Epistle, where a Councell is conteined, wherein S. Ambrose was present: which determined against Iouinian and other heretikes, that the virginitie and puritie remained in her child▪birth, to the mother of God. Which thing S. Augustine in the place al∣ledged by the Doctors in the first booke, and 2. Chapter a∣gainst Iulian, repeateth. And where the Ministers say, that the virgin had not lost her virginitie, when our Lorde was borne as other men: in that they are condemned of heresie by the Fathers: which declare Iouinian to derogate her virgi∣nitie, for the like opinion as the Ministers do hold. Of whom the Doctors would willingly demaund, what myracle they acknowledge in the birth of our Lord, touching his bodie, and the virginitie of his mother, if he departed from her, as other childrē from their mothers, as the Ministers do write. And as touching that which they alledge of Tertullian, Ori∣gen, S. Ambrose, and S. Ierome; the Doctors say: that Ter∣tullian & Origen held such an heresie, and many others, which were reproued before Iouinian. And for this, were condem∣ned with him and his consorts. And for S. Ambrose, it is euident, that he beleeued the contrary; as well by the Coun∣cell where he was present: as by that which he wrote in the booke De Institutione Ʋirginis. And therefore, where hee saith: that Christus vuluam aperuerit, it must be interpreted, not that it was by rupture or fraction, but by effect of gene∣ration, and production of his true bodie, out of the wombe of the virgin, by myracle and supernaturall power. So that, as the conception was myraculous, so was his birth: Et ape∣rire vuluam, is a phrase and maner of speaking in the scrip∣ture, to call and nominate the first borne: howsoeuer he had power to be borne. And as touching S. Ierome, he speaketh nothing of the fracture, but only that the bodie islued out bloodie, as it was in the wombe of his mother: and to bee bloodie, there is no necessitie of fracture of the mother. The Doctors for conclusion of this article, would wil∣lingly demaund of the Ministers, whether they hold for an article of faith, the virginitie of the mother after the child∣birth: & whether they could proue the same by the expresse and vnreproueable word of God written. For as much as Beza when hee pleaseth, maketh doubt of these two points: and that the pretended reformed religion among the ar∣ticles of faith, of his diuers imprinted confessions, recyteth sometimes the virginitie of the mother of God after her child-birth, and sometimes omitteth the same. And in some confessions inserteth not that Iesus was borne of the Virgin Marie, but onely that hee issued of the seede of Danid. The Doctors employ for the resurrection, and issuing out of the body of Iesus Christ through the stone of the Se∣pulchre, the most part of the authorities alledged by them vpon the closed doores: as the whole lecture of the foresaid authorities, with Gregorie Nazianzene, in his tragedie of the passion of our Lord, will witnesse: which conioyneth (as do many other Auncients) these three myracles happened into the body of our Sauiour aboue nature: namely the birth without fracture of the Virgin: the resurrection through the stone: and the entrance by the closed doores. The Doctors adde, that Caluin and Beza make con∣science to say as doo the Ministers, that our Lord arose not, the Sepulchre beeing shut and closed: and rather had the said Caluin and Beza fall into friuolous abfurdities, and ridicclous expositions here afore alledged, then yeeld to the opinion of the Ministers. Because there is more appea∣rance in the text of the Gospell, that Iesus Christ was risen before the stone was rowled away by the Angell: as therein agree the most part of auncient Christians. And by this meane also is there occasion giuen, more easily to beleeue the resurrection of our Sauiour, then if the stone had beene taken away before the resurrection. For one might more easily say, that the body had bene transported and not risen againe. And the text saith not, that the Angell rowled away the stone before the resurrection, or when Iesus arose, but rather afterwards: as there is great apparance in the scripture, in reason, and all antiquitie. Pope Leo is euilly alledged by the Ministers, which well knowe to conceale what is written in the Epistle by them cyted, touching the closed doores. And they euil∣ly alledge that of the resurrection. For it is not said, that our Lord arose after the stone was rowled from the Se∣pulchre. But well is it said against the Fantasmatiques, that the substance put vpon the Crosse, and that which rested in the Sepulchre, and that which arose the third day (the stone of the graue beeing rowled away) is the true flesh of Iesus Christ. By which words, Pope Leo meaneth not to say, that our Lord was not risen, before the stone was remoued: but one∣ly sheweth, that the body of Iesus Christ risen againe; was a true, and not a phantastike body: of whose resurrection it appeared by the opening of the graue. And such is the com∣mon interpretation of old Authors touching the remouing of the stone. For conclusion of all these auncient testimonies, the Doctors are abashed that the Ministers (seeing them so manifest, and themselues conuinced, that God cannot only cause two bodies to bee in one selfe-same place, but that hee hath also done the same) dare slaunderouslye de∣praue the vnderstanding of them, which euerie man of good and sound iudgement, can by the onely reading finde out. Notwithstanding the Ministers say, that the reasons taken from such and so euident testimonies, be impertinent. So that wiah like libertie (common to heretikes) they feare not, without any text of scripture, or any place of aunci∣ent Fathers, to interpret, that two bodies to pierce one an other, is no other thing, then one body to giue place to the other. Of which false and licencious interpretation, the common phrase of speech among Philosophers themselues doth con∣demne them. And the feat example brought of them which walke through the aire beating vpon them, and of Birdes when they flye, is ouer subtill. And whereas they boast in the said article, that in denying that two bodies may be in one place by the omnipotencie of God, or one bodie in two places, they aduance and magnifie the power of God. As true is that, as when in all their other errors, by which they resist the truth of God, and blaspheme him, they euer boast to aduance the glorie of God. And the Ministers must paint and couer their filthinesse and deformitie, with some colour of speech, to blinde the simple and ignorant. Good reason also haue the Ministers not to excuse the interpretations of Caluin and Beza, as too too friuolous and ridiculous: and preferre in the meane time their owne inter∣pretation, though more ridiculous then those of their Mai∣sters: wherein appeareth the concorde betweene the Mai∣sters and Disciples; all vsing one foundation of their religi∣on: which is, to trust alwayes to their owne particular and priuate interpretation, and inspiration: and to preferre the same to all others. Where the Ministers say, that the bodie of our Lord was not inuisible to the Disciples, of whō menti∣on is made in the 24. of Luke: but that his bodie only being nimble, he suddainly withdrew himselfe: the Doctors ob∣iect, that the suddaine departing (whereof speaketh S. Am∣brose, and Lyra,) maketh not, but that the bodie was inui∣sible: as signifieth the Greeke word Aphantos: which sig∣nifieth, not a suddaine departure, but an incapacitie to be seene and knowne. And so the text of the scripture is plainly for the Doctors. Ioyned neuerthelesse, that when the olde and late Diuines wil giue examples that Iesus was made in∣uisible, they ordinarily alledge this passage. The Ministers also who boast, that they rest vpon no∣thing, but the pure word of God, (for exposition of scrip∣ture) bring their dreames, aboue their owne perswasion; as touching the closed doores appeareth. And with like libertie vse they to expound the text of Saint Paul, which expresly maintaineth, that our Lord pierced the heauens. And it is likely (say they) that the heauens claue a sunder, and were opened. And if one demaund, whence they learned such an interpretation, they answere, from the word of God, founded vpon their inward inspiration: by which, they ap∣propriate that which is written in Saint Mathew; that hea∣uens were opened when the Doue descended vpon our Lord. As though all the heauens were clest asunder, and the holy Ghost had not power to descend without the ope∣ning of them: not nothing that the scripture in many places taketh heauen for the ayre. Concerning that they alledge of S. Stephen, who when he was stoned, sawe the heauens open, more meete it were for the Ministers, to interpret such visions, to bee made in spirit, as there is great likelyhood: else should it behoue to confesse two myracles: the one in the diuision of the hea∣uens: the other in this, that the sight of S. Stephen, not one∣ly pierced vnto, but also aboue the heauens: where the Ministers confesse, the body of Iesus Christ to bee at the right hand of the Father, whom Saint Stephen sawe, which is against the order of God established in the wold: where∣by it is necessarie that there be a certaine distance betweene the eye seeing, and the thing which is seene. And no lesse hard is it, that such thing bee done, then that two bodies should pierce one an other. Nor must they forget that the scriptures oftentimes in spirituall apparitions and visions, vseth this phrase of speech, that the heauens were opened: and yet in such case was there but a spi∣rituall vision, and likewise but a spirituall opening. And euen as the Ministers will take the rigour of the word [the opening of the heauens]: so should they not thinke it straunge if the Doctors with like rigour, take [the piercing of the heauens] especially in the article of the Ascention: where the question is of the bodie of Iesus Christ, which had alreadie pierced more impenitrable bodies then the heauens. And the Doctors to auoyd tediousnesse, referre themselues to more ample debating this point [of the piercing of the heauen] hereafter. As touching the 28. article, where the Ministers against expresse scripture, do obstinately defend, that God cannot by his power, make a Camell (or Cable) to passe through the eye of a needle: the Doctors cannot sufficiently ma uel, either at the blindnesse of the Ministers, which seeme to see nothing at noone-day: or at their obstinacie and boldnesse. And that the Ministers vnderstand not their fault, the Doc∣tors cannot thinke, but that impugning the truth, well knowne to themselues, they sinne against their owne con∣science. And God suffereth that (it seemeth) to happen vnto them, in this so manifest a place and text of the scripture: to the end, that by this article, one may perceiue how much more bold they are, to giue false sences, to scriptures more ob∣scure then this, and to the sayings of the auncient Christians which make against them. Now that the great wrong may be vnderstood, which the Ministers doo, in denying that our Lord can cause a Camell (or Cable) to passe through the eye of a needle: the Doctors do obiect, that it should be impossible with God to saue a rich man: vsing such argument, taken from the text of the Gospell. More impossible or hard is it for God to saue a rich man, then to make a Camell (or Cable) to passe through the eye of a needle. But God by his omnipotencie cannot make (after the Ministers) a Camell or Cable to passe through the eye of a needle. Therefore God by his omni∣potencie cannot cause a rich man to be saued, and enter into the kingdome of heauen. The Maior is of the scrip∣ture: The Minor is confessed by the Ministers: and the consequence is necessarie. And according to all Philoso∣phie, hee that cannot doo a more easie thing, cannot doo a thing more hard. So also without contradiction haue the Auncients expounded the present scripture: as doth Ori∣gen in the Homily vpon this place, saying: that it is possible for a Camell to enter through the eye of a needle: yet not possible with men, but with God. And the manner how such thing may bee done, is knowne of God, and his sonne Iesus Christ, and of him to whom hee shall re∣ueale it. Semblably Saint Augustine in the first and fift Chap∣ter of his booke of the spirite and letter, thus speaketh to Marcellinus, whom hee wrote vnto: It seemeth to thee absurd, when I say vnto thee, that a man may bee without sinne: albeit that (Christ excepted) such a one is not founde. Should it seeme absurd vnto thee, that a thing may bee done, whereof no example can bee shewed? Seeing thou doubtest not (as I thinke) but it neuer hap∣pened that a Camell passed through the eye of a nee∣dle. And yet is it saide, that with God such thing is possible. By the Ministers answere vnto the 29. article, may ea∣sily bee seene, that they deceiue and abuse their Disciples, making them beleeue by faire words and writings, that they really receiue in the Supper, the true body of Iesus Christ, the same which issued from the belly of the Virgin, and was fastned vpon the Crosse, for the restauration of man∣kind. And wil make them to vnderstand, that they who place not with the bread and wine in the Sacrament, (as they call it) of the Supper, but some spirituall effect onely (as are the redemption, righteousnesse, sanctification, life eternall, and other gifts, and benefites, which Iesus Christ bringeth to his elect) diminish the excellencie and dignitie of the same Sa∣crament, and that they be Zuinglians. But that besides such spirituall effects, one must beleeue that hee receiueth truly the body of Iesus Christ in the Supper. They hold neuerthelesse an other opinion. For when they are pressed with arguments, and cannot defend such an imaginarie and phantastike presence, they confesse by their writings, they are become Zuinglians, and returne to the spirituall presence of Iesus Christ in the Supper: which is as much to say, as besides the bread and wine, they receiue a certaine spirituall effect, and not really the body, as the Ministers do in the present answere: which thing they make manifest, by that they cyte of the Apo∣stle S. Paul: by which citation may bee gathered, what is their opinion concerning the Supper: to wit, that the body of our Lord Iesus Christ is not really, but by spirituall effect onely in the hearts of the faithfull. For the Galathians by the hearing of S. Pauls preaching, receiued not really the body of Christ crucified, but had onely an imagination of the Crosse and passion of Iesus Christ, and receiued onely the fruite of their faith: that is to say, by this meanes they were iustified and sanctified before God: also the allegati∣on which the Ministers make of S. Ciprian, tendeth to this ende, to shewe that in the Supper are receiued some spiritu∣all effects onely: which neuerthelesse by these words, to embrace the Crosse of Iesus Christ, to sucke his bloud, &c. be allegorically signified. Wherein they denie (against the intent of S. Ciprian in the Sermon of the Supper) the reall prefence of the body of Iesus Christ. The Doctors confesse that the argument they haue made, is addressed to Calui∣nists, and not to Zuinglians. And they supposed that the Mi∣nisters would not otherwise haue thought of this Sacra∣ment, then Caluin, Beza, and the other Ministers, renow∣med to be Ministers of the Caluinist Church, which they call reformed. An other maner of speech vsed they, which exhibited the confession touching that Sacrament, to the Bishops at Poissy, who freely confessed the body of Iesus Christ to bee really present in that Sacrament: which the Ministers in conference with the Doctors, do now denie. And hereby the Ministers in the iudgement of the Doctors, of Caluenists, become Almanists. Wherewithall, they that maintaine the doctrine of the Church, which they call reformed, will not be greatly pleased: seeing their principall pillars (for not be∣ing able to answere an argument obiected by the Doctors) do leaue them in the businesse: considering that in the answer they say themselues to be so much enlightned with the holy spirit, which maketh them vnderstand & know all things. Concerninig the article following, they doo openly de∣clare what their present opinion is, touching the presence of the body of Iesus Christ in the Sacrament, by saying that the faithfull receiue no more in this time of the Gospell, then did the Fathers before, and vnder the lawe: But certaine it is, that the Fathers receiued not really the bo∣dy of Iesus Christ, which as then was not made. There∣fore the conclusion must follow, that vnder the Gospell the body of Iesus Christ is not really receiued in the Sa∣crament, which the Ministers call the Sacrament of the Supper. To the 31. article they answere not: as also they neuer could answere the same: and they must necessarily confesse, that in the power of their faith, they do that which implyeth contradiction. For they maintaine one thing to be present, and not present, at one selfe-same time and place. And their spirituall (or rather phantasticke) presence, maketh nothing to the purpose. For (according to their doctrine) the bo∣dy cannot be present but with it measures, locally, difinitiue∣ly, and corporally: otherwise the body should be wholly abrogate and corrupted. And the maner of it beeing there spiritually, would not make, that the body is not there: or otherwise they falsly say it is present in the Supper, and a∣buse the world. Wherefore it is necessarie, if the body be there (yea spiritually) and their doctrine of the nature of a body be true, that the body of Iesus Christ be corporally, difinitiuely, and locally in the Supper. Moreouer, for as much as it is absent according to their confession: it fol∣loweth, that it is not there present. And to conclude, the Ministers say, that it is there, and not there. And for the full solution, (without entering into the principall of the Ar∣gument) they suppose to escape, by obiecting to the Doc∣tors, some words of the breuiarie, which the Doctors haue not yet seene. The Ministers (they thinke) haue found them in some breuiarie of Monkes, and remember when they were in the Couent, that they were so accustomed to sing and say. But although such things were found in the bre∣uiaries, vsed in the Romane Church, such maner of speech might be defended, in the sence which the Fathers haue gi∣uen, whē they said, that the Apostles Conficiūt corpus Christi: do make the body of Christ, as the scripture it selfe saith: that they baptise, forgiue sinnes, and saue those whom they conuerted: which is meant, as the Ministers of God. Who of his owne authoritie, and as Maister, baptiseth, forgiueth sinnes, and iustifieth the faithfull persons. Where the Ministers do maruell, that the Doctors call faith a humane vertue, (the great and maruellous effects it worketh considered): the Doctors say, that the Ministers haue no great cause to maruell thereat: seeing that euerie worke, in as much as it is in man, and that he therein worketh together with God, is iudged and reputed humane. Also the scripture calleth the faith of man, the worke of man. The Doctors shewe vnto the Ministers, that after their wonted maner, they dwell alwaies on small things, and leaue that which is principall in the matter: being ignorant (or dissem∣bling ignorance) where lyeth the difficultie of that is hand∣led. As they do in their answere vpon the argument propo∣sed by the Doctors: whereby they obiect, that the Mini∣sters by their faith (call they it diuine or humane) may doo more then God can do: wherevnto the Ministers (without touching the point) do answere with songs. In the 32. article, the Ministers lightly passe ouer many obiectious made them by the Doctors. Whether there bee superfluitie, or repetition in them, or whether they be im∣pertinent, let the reader iudge. But for this cause the Doc∣tors will not cease, to require eftsoones the Ministers, that they bring some passage of the scripture, to ground that God cannot make one body to be in two places: seeing that this consequence is ouerfoolish and ridiculous: God cannot lye. Therefore can he not make one bodie to be in two pla∣ces. For so should they make their assumption. Now God hath said and ordained, that one body cannot be in two pla∣ces: therefore can he not make it so to be. But neuer will they instruct by the truth of the Assumption or Minor Pro∣position: the contrarie whereof hath bene sufficiently veri∣fied by many testimonies of the scripture. The Doctors also require the Ministers to produce some Father, yea some man, euer reputed Catholique, which hath dared to pro∣nounce, that God could not make one body to be in two places. For full answere, the said Ministers can bring forth none which euer hath vsed such a speech, except S. Augustine, but by them falsly alledged, both touching the letter, & the sence of the letter. The Doctors will not cease to beate both into the Ministers, and also all persons; that there is no place of scripture found, nor booke of any auncient Father, that God cannot make one body to be in diuers places. Concerning the last article, the Doctors haue resolued to shewe by the pure and expresse word of God, expounded by common consent of all antiquitie, that our Lord did in∣stitute the Sacrament and sacrifice of the Aultar, and will teach the effect and vertue of the Masse, according to the institution and ordinance of Iesus Christ. And will make it also to be vnderstood, that the Ministers haue polluted and defiled the Sacrament by Iesus Christ instiruted. And that the Supper which the Ministers maintaine, is no way the Sacrament, but a prophanation of holy things, containing execrable blasphemie: whereof the whole world ought to haue horror. Sunday, the 12. of Iuly, in the yeare aforesaid. The answere of the Ministers to the writing of the Doctors, sent to them by my Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 22. day of Iuly, about fiue of the Clocke in the enening. Anno. 1560. T He Ministers, before they answere particu∣larly to the obiections and slaunders of the Doctors, seeing that each way, and cause∣lesse, they taxe them for blasphemers: haue aduised to tell them in the beginning of theyr answere, that to bee wronged by them, they hold it not so great an iniurie, nor themselues the more blasphemers, for being so holden and reputed by them: no more then our Lord Iesus Christ, because he was Act. 7. so pronounced by Caiphas the high Priest, and S. St phen, to whom the like crime was imputed by the enemies of 1. King. 21. truth: And Naboth who was likewise accused to haue blas∣phemed God and the king, albeit he was innocent. For it is the manner of all them which hate the truth, and the light, to blaspheme that which they vnderstand not (as thereof 1▪ Pet. 2. write S. Peter and S. Iude) and to giue the raines sometimes to their furie: so that they shamelesly denie things most ap∣parant, and confesse others concerning the same, which bee straunge and absurd. Which thing is seene to haue befallen the Doctors about the Ministers: whom they neither can heare attentiuely, nor iudge of rightly. And the full end of their purpose (it seemeth) is, to contradict them indifferent∣ly in all things, and to say without any examination or iudge∣ment, that whatsoeuer they produce, is blasphemy and lies. For the Ministers speaking of the omnipotencie of God, according to that they haue learned thereof, and is contai∣ned in the scriptures, haue euer said, that God is almightie, in as much as he can do (without any exception) whatsoeuer he will: and that there is no power in heauen nor in earth, which is able to let, alter, or in any maner or wise hinder the full effect and perfect execution of his eternall & vnchange∣able counsailes. But neuerthelesse, that his omnipotencie must not be stretched without any discretion or distinction, to all the things generally which men can conceiue, or in their foolish phantasies imagine: but to those onely, which neither are, nor can be contrarie to his iustice, to his good∣nesse, to his wisedome: nor consequently to his holy and eternall will, wisedome, and truth: which is, and euer shalbe, to doo all things well and wisely, with number, waight, and measure: and without that there is any inequitie, disorder, or contradiction in whatsoeuer he doth. All which things be∣ing well vnderstood and considered, will discharge the Mi∣nisters among all good and iust people, from the s aunders which the Doctors impose vpon them, and fal ly published, to make them odious to all the world, and stirre vp publike hate against them. Wherefore, to make their slaunders more like to truth: by adding and diminishing, they change and alter almost the whole meaning of the Ministers: well knowing, that otherwise they could neuer haue meane to ground their slaunders, nor to giue any colour or likelihood therevnto: which thing shall now appeare by the deducti∣on and particular confutation of the pretended blasphe∣mies, obiected to the Ministers, by the said Doctors. First the Doctors accuse the Ministers, in that they haue said, that the omnipotencie of God ought not to be measu∣red, but by the things onely which bee agreeable to his will, and are not derogate either to his wisedome, his truth, his nature: nor to the order which hee hath established in the world. And to verifie their accusation and slaunder, they breake in two this whole sentence, and take thereof but the last part onely, the which they haue seperated from those going before, wherewith it was conioyned expresly by the Ministers; the more clearely to expound and shewe, how the omnipotencie of God ought to be knowne, beleeued, and adored of all the world. Moreouer, they haue not taken, nor vnderstood the word [Order] as doo the Ministers. Whereby the Ministers haue willed to signifie the estate and disposition, which God by his prouidence, and eternall, and vnchangeable will, hath established, conserueth, and en∣tertaineth in all things: rightly to gouerne, and let that no confusion happen in his workes, euen as S. Augustine hath defined it in his bookes De Ordine: and hee himselfe hath vsed the same in the fift booke of his confessions. Which the Doctors not vnderstanding, haue reduced that which the Ministers thereof said, to the ordinarie and wonted course of nature, and to the mouing of creatures which bee in the world. And to giue exception to the doctrine aforesaid, they obiect the myracles which God doth aboue nature: and thereof inferre, that God doth, and can doo many things against the order by him established and decreed. Whervnto the Ministers answer; that myracles, albeit they be done beyond & aboue the ordinary course of nature, yet are they not done against the order aforesaid. For as much as all things reduced to the prouidence, and ordinance of God, are well done and ordained, although that the reason and order therein, be oftentimes vnknowne to men: which Ecclesi. 3. Salomon wrote saying: God maketh all things good in their season. Wherevnto may be also applied, that which is read in the booke of Sentences of S. Augustine. Sent. 283. and 284. God who is the Creator and conseruer of nature, doth nothing in his myracles which are against nature. And it fol∣loweth not, that that which is new to custome, is contrary and repugnant to reason, &c. If the Doctors will know more thereof, let them reade the two bookes of Order; which this holy man composed: and that which he wrote concerning myracles, in the fift and sixt Chapter of his third booke of the Trinitie. This answere shall serue for con∣futation of two other pretended blasphemies, which follow in the obiection of the Doctors. Concerning the fourth, the Ministers for answer say, that the will of God (after the doctrine of Diuines) may in two sorts be cōsidered: to wit, according to that which by words, signes, and effects, is declared to men: and according to that which is reteined & hidden in himselfe. The one is called the will knowne by signes: and the other the will of the good pleasure of God. For the first consideration the Ministers do confesse (as heeretofore they haue to the Doctors) that God can do many things, which he will not do. But as tou∣ching the other, they say: that it is equall to his power: as is also his power (in this respect) equall to his will. According to which consideration, the sentence of Tertullian alledged by the Ministers, and to the Monarchians ill applied by the Doctors, ought to be vnderstood and expounded: As all those may iudge, which attentiuely shall read the passage by the Ministers produced. Who to answer one slaunder of the said Doctors, which accuse them to haue wronged the aun∣cient Fathers, in saying that they excepted some causes of the omnipotencie of Cod: are yet constrained here to re∣peate, that which Theodoret saith thereof in the 3. Dialogues who writeth as followeth. It must not be said without any determination, that all things are possible to God. For who so absolutely saith this, comprehendeth all things, as well good as bad, which no way ought to be attributed to God: whereby it appeareth, that this good author, and the other, before alledged by the Ministers, haue not indifferently submitted all things to the power of God: but excepted from the same, whatsoeuer is contrary to his will and es∣sence. To be briefe, but one meane there is to appease the dif∣ference between the Ministers, who say that it is impossible for one body to be in diuers places at one instant: and the Doctors, which affirme the cōtrary, to wit, that the Doctors (without taking so long circuit) loosing so many words, and alledging so many superfluous things, do proue briefly by one only passage of scripture, that God willeth the same. Whether the Ministers haue well or euilly alledged Saint Augustine, to proue that a body cannot be without place and measures: and also whether they haue well or euilly said and defended, that quantitie is essentiall to a body, and not accidentall (as hold the Doctors) they leaue the iudgement to the Readers of the Actes of this Confe∣rence. Touching that which followeth in the writing of the Doctors: to wit, that there is no place aboue the heauens, that Iesus Christ is not therein comprised nor conteined, that bodies and spirites bee indifferently there, without any distinction or distance of place: the Ministers say, that touching all these points, they rather beleeue the scripture, and expresse word of God (by them alledged) then all the subtilties & sophistries of vaine Philosophie, which the Doc∣tors, or others can propose. Ioyned herevnto, that it is expres∣ly cōteined & taught in one of the articles of our faith: where it is said; Frō whence he shall come to iudge the quick & the dead. Wherevpon must bee noted, that there is [Vnde] an Ad∣uerbe signifying place. As touching the 4. and 5. articles, to know whether the Ministers haue ought imposed vpon the Doctors which is not true, they send backe the readers to the precedent confe∣rence. And also to know in what sence, and to what end, the auncient Fathers haue bene alledged by the said Ministers; which they may easily perceiue by the reading, and diligent obseruation of the passages and sentences of the said Fathers there inserted. For the 6. article, wherein the Doctors had rather con∣fesse their Canons to be false, then (accusing their authoritie) to auouch that the body of Iesus Christ is a true dody, and that to be such, it ought necessarily to bee in one certaine place: the Ministers answere, that by the obseruation of the place of S. Augustine, (whence the said Canon is taken) it is easie to iudge, that the word [Oportet] is there much more conuenient, then that of [Potest]. To the 8. article, the Ministers answere, that a substance is not without quantitie, and whiles it is such, and so remai∣neth, it cannot any waies be a body. And the reason is, be∣cause that of the substance, and that of the quantitie, are two diuers predicaments: vnder which, one selfe-same thing, for one selfesame respect, cannot be any way comprised. More∣ouer, Iesus Christ alledged no other reason to shewe that his body was not a spirit, but that hee had members and parts, which in respect of their measures, might bee handled and touched. Whence it followeth, that without this, a substance cannot be a body. And as touching the difference which by the Doctors opinion should remaine betweene our soules and our bodies exempted from quantitie, (if that were possi∣ble) the Ministers say, that although they were substances both in number and different, they should neuerthelesse be like, as touching the kinde: and that the one and the other should be contained vnder the kinde of an incorporeall sub∣stance. The Ministers passe ouer the 9. article, because it is but a repetition, and that they haue largely answered what the Doctors there repeate. To the 10. article, the Ministers answere, that the con∣sequence whereof is the question, cannot bee otherwise de∣fended by the Doctors, but by the rule which saith: that of one absurditie may all things be inferred. Moreouer, they complaine of time, which the Doctors make them loose, by reading so many things wherevnto they haue alreadie an∣swered, and which it seemeth they repeate not for any other ende, then to fill vp paper, and to make men thinke they say something. For first the Euangelist saith not (as the Doctors pre∣tend) that Iesus Christ entered by the shut doores: but one∣ly that he came, the gates beeing shut. So that he speaketh nothing there of the maner of his entry, nor how the doores were opened, or other place about the house by the which he entered. And all that which the Doctors say, cannot be grounded neither vpon the scripture, nor vpon any authori∣tie of all the auncient Fathers by them alledged: which bee more against them, then with them. And for conclusiō, they haue no other foundation of their saying, then their owne coniectures and imaginations, and the false interpretations which they giue to the writings of the Fathers. To the faith wherof they would gladly constraine & subiect the Church: to the end, that hauing laid that foundation, they might af∣terwards build therevpon, all the absurdities and errors they shall delight in touching the same. And where they pre∣suppose when Christ entered the shut doores, walked vpon the waters, and went out of the Sepulchre: that such my∣racles were done rather in the person, then in the other things. Iustine writeth the contrarie, saying: that without a∣ny change happened, either in his body, or in that of S. Pe∣ter, he made by his diuine power the Sea against nature, to serue him to walke. As also S. Hillary to the same purpose saith: That by his power hee made all things passeable. Wherevnto likewise agreeth S. Iohn Chrisostome, attributing all that to diuine power, and freely confessing that hee knew not the maner and the fashion thereof. By meanes whereof, the Ministers are much abashed, that the Doctors are so presumptuous to determine a thing which by the scrip∣ture and Fathers hath bene left vndecided: and wherein (as S. Hillary saith wisely) sence and words do faile, & the truth of the deed, exceedeth the capacitie of humane reason. How dare then the Doctors so boldly say, that the body of Iesus Christ passed through the doores; that there was penitration of dimensions; that two bodies were in one selfe-same place? Seeing that of all that, neither in the scripture, nor in the aun∣cient Fathers, there is not one onely sillable: and that (as is said) the Fathers do confesse, that their vnderstanding and sence were too feeble to comprehend or declare the reason of such a my sterie. As touching the birth of Iesus Christ, the Ministers re∣pose themselues vpon the scripture, which saith clearly, that the Virgin was with childe, that she brought forth, that shee gaue sucke, and that Apertaest vulua, the wombe is opened in the child-birth. They adde, that the same doth nought derogate nor preiudice her virginitie and purenesse, which consisteth in this point onely, that shee knew not, not was knowne of any man, Moreouer, they say that in be∣leeuing the same, they follow the scripture: and consequent∣ly they cannot erre, nor bee heretikes: nor they likewise which subiect and subdue their sence to the word of God: as in this haue done the Fathers which are by them alled∣ged. In the following article proposed by the Doctors, tou∣ching the manner of the resurrection of Iesus Christ, there is nothing but coniectures, slaunders, & repetitions, trouble∣some and superfluous, which the Ministers by their former answeres haue largely satisfied. All that which afterwards followeth in the writings of the Doctors, are but iniuries and scoffes, in stead of reasons and arguments: which is the last recourse of contentious spirits: who seeing themselues destitute of reason, and vn∣able to giue place to the truth, defend themselues by cla∣mours and slaunders. Some reason should the Doctors haue for that which they say concerning the word Aphantos, if there followed Autois: but that which the Euangelist saith Ap'auton, shew∣eth clearely, that the interpretation of the said place, and vn∣derstanding of S. Ambrose, (where vnto the Ministers agree) is better then that of the Doctors. As touching the opening of the heauens, the Ministers answere, that (vsing the language of the scripture, which saith clearely, that in the baptisme of Iesus Christ, the hea∣uens were clouen asunder, and then opned, when S. Stephen was stoned) they cannot faile. And to apply to the ayre the signification of heauen, is a humane imagination. This also seemeth, should diminish the Maiestie of God, and of Iesus Christ, who is lifted vp aboue all the heauens, to establish so lowe as the ayre, the Throne of his Maiestie. And there is no likelyhood in that which the Doctors say, touching the being of two bodies in one selfe-same place; and that which the Ministers say of the sight of Stephen, which extended euen to the heauens: for as much as the one is a myracle of the power of God in nature, and the other a wonder against nature, and the will of God. The Doctors in the article following, do falsly impute to the Ministers, that they affirmed, it was a thing impossi∣ble for God to make a Camell to passe through the eye of a needle: for they neuer touched this point in theyr for∣mer answeres, but that part of the sentence onely, where it is spoken of rich men. Now to answere too, and resolue their obiections, the Ministers say, that euen as God can saue a rich man, by chaunging him, and emptying his heart of so much vaine trust and presumption, as is therein, and whereof beeing grosse and filled, hee is vncapeable to enter into the Kingdome of heauen: so to him it is also easie, to make a Camell passe through the eye of a needle, hauing circumcised and pared off the grossenesse thereof, and other things which might hinder the same to passe. * * * * * * First, that the Supper which is celebrated in the reformed Church, is the true institution and ordinance of the sonne of God. Afterwards, that the end for which it was instituted, is to assure the faithfull of the true participation which they haue in the flesh of Iesus Christ, crucified for their saluation, and in his bloud shead for the remission of their sinnes; and for the confirmation of the new couenant, which God hath made with his people. Thirdly they say, that it is necessarie that the bread and wine abide in their proper substance, and that after consecra∣tion: otherwise they cannot be Sacraments of the body and bloud of Christ. Lastly the Ministers say, that the vnbeleeuers presenting themselues at the Supper, by meanes of their vnbeliefe, can there no other thing receiue, then the outward signes of bread and wine, and that to their iudgement and condem∣nation. The Ministers on the other side propose vnto them touching the Masse, that such as it is, and now celebrated in the Romance Church, it is nothing but a humane inuention and tradition. Also, that it is a corruption and prophanation, as well of the holy Supper of our Lord Iesus Christ, as of the true and lawfull vse thereof. Also, that it is an abuse of the Priesthood of Popish Priests, and that there is no other Priesthood in the new Te∣stament ordained, to get and obtaine remission of sinnes; nor also to make intercession, and by prayers and merits to ob∣taine the fauour of God, then the onely Priesthood of Iesus Christ. They say moreouer, that it is a blasphemie and sacri∣ledge, but of the sacrifice of the Romish Priests, and that there is no other oblation, then that which Iesus Christ once made with his body vpon the Crosse; by which the wrath of God could be appeased, his iustice satisfied, sinners recon∣ciled to God, sinnes pardoned, and the hand-writing of eternall death cancelled and abolished. Also they say, that the seperation of the Priest in the Masse, from the rest of the people, is an abolishment of the Communion of the Supper: and consequently damnable before God. And to be briefe, the adoration of bread and wine, (be it in the Masse, or out of the Masse) is an intollerable Idolatrie. Two points yet remaine in the writing of the Doctors, whereof the Ministers will admonish them. The one is, that the said Ministers haue neuer found in the scriptures, Iohn, 6. Ephes. 1. that faith is a humane worke, but that it is the worke of God, and a gift which hee bestoweth vpon his elect. The other point is, that they confesse they cannot bring forth one auncient Author, which hath said in expresse termes, that one body could not be in diuers places at one instant: for so much as the contrarie thereof seemed so absurd and straunge vnto them, and so much against the reason and faith which all faithfull people ought to haue, that they neuer thought such an opinion had found place in the heart of any man that was called a Christian. The Ministers to ende this answere, say that it will much more please them, to handle the questions aforesaid, then to dispute of the opening of doores, of the Sepulchre, or of the heauens; as to their great griefe, they haue done these dayes passed: and that for two reasons. The one, because that the decyding and resolution of such questions, cannot bee drawne nor gathered out of the scripture. And the second, because it cannot much serue either to the aduancement of the honour and glorie of God, or the edification and in∣struction of his Church. Thursday the 25. day of Iuly, in the yeare aforesaid. The Doctors reply to the writing of the Ministers, sent vnto them by my Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 25. day of Iuly, about 8. of the clocke in the euening, the yeare, 1566. W Here the Ministers say, that they doo great wrong to call them blasphemers, seeing thereof they are innocent, as Ie∣sus Christ, S. Stephen, and Naboth, to whome men falsly imputed such like crime. The Doctors say, that the Mini∣sters therein doo imitate the good per∣sonages, the Donatists: who still com∣plained of the great iniuries and slaunders which they endu∣red (said they) of the Catholikes; and yet men know by the histories how it was, and how much they were like to Christ, S. Stephen, and Naboth: as may also be knowne the confor∣mitie of the said Ministers, to such holy examples. As much might the Anabaptists say to them of the Church cal∣led reformed, when they call them heretikes. And as much might and did Seruetus say, who for his blasphemies was burned at Geneua: reputing himselfe happie to be iudged by Caluin a blasphemer, and to suffer for his doctrine, the paines of death. We must not therfore beleeue that the Mi∣nisters are not blasphemers, because more boldly then all other heretikes, they reiect the name of blasphemer: but meet it is to examine whether their doctrine importeth blas∣phemie or not. Now the Doctors say, that there is no blas∣phemie worthy of more great execration, then to denie the omnipotencie of God: and no lesse it is then simply to de∣nie that there is a God. So that such deniall importes an Atheisme. For to take from God, that which is proper to his nature, is as much to say, as there is no God. As it well pleaseth S. Basil, writing in one of his Homilies, intituled, That God is not the Author of euill. That it is no lesse blas∣phemie to say, that God is author of euill, then to say that God is not God. In so much as to take away from God his goodnesse, which to him is naturall, is wholy to take away his diuinitie. The like also may be said of the omnipotencie, that whosoeuer denieth or diminisheth the same, he denieth also his diuinitie. The question then is, to knowe whether the Ministers will abolish the omnipotencie of God, not in proper termes (for they seeme to confesse it) but in affirming that the po∣wer of God is measured according to his will, so that he can∣not, but that which he will: and other like propositions con∣tained in the precedent answere of the Ministers. Whether the Doctors haue proued such propositions to containe blas∣phemies or no, they refer them therin to euery man of sound iudgement, who shalbe any thing conuersant in holy scrip∣tures, and the bookes of auncient Christians: which shall al∣so be knowne by the Ministers friuolous answeres in their last writing to the Doctors obiections. Who nothing maruel that the Ministers are deceiued in the nature of the omni∣potencie, seeing they erre in the foundation, and know not wherein it lyeth, and why God is called almightie. For they haue learned of the scripture (say they) that God is al∣mightie, because hee can doo whatsoeuer he will doo: and that nothing can resist him, which is rather as a signe of the power of God. But it is not that (vnder correction) where∣in it consisteth; for knowledge whereof, it must be conside∣red according to it obiect: that is to say, according to the things possible to be done: so that there is nothing possible which God cannot do. Now all without any exception, is esteemed possible, wherein is found no contradiction to be, and not to be: and that commeth not by default of the power of God (which can do all things) but of the repugnancie of the thing which cannot be. Which the Ministers from the beginning had well said in euery answere: but for that they had answered vpon some Interrogatories that the omnipo∣tencie of God must bee measured by his will, supposing to salue that error, they are plunged in many other errors, out of which (for not consessing to haue erred) they cannot rid themselues, without falling into an infinite number of ab∣surdities. Moreouer, the Ministers deceiue themselues when they will limit the power of God, and not extend it to all things gene∣rally, that humane spirit can conceiue or imagine. For con∣trariwise, it is doubtlesse that the power of God is great a∣boue all conceit, and imagination of the humane spirit, that it is infinite and incomprehensible, as saith S. Paul: God can do more then we demaund or vnderstand. And where the Ministers say, that God onely can doo all things which are not contrarie to his iustice, wisedome, goodnesse, and truth, and therefore cannot doo generally all things. It hath alreadie beene shewed them, that to bee able to doo things contrarie to the iustice, wisedome, goodnesse, and truth of God, was not power, but weakenesse. And by the selfe-same reason (as saith Saint Augustine, in the place by the Doctors in theyr former obiection alledged) that he cannot do such things, it is an argument of his omnipotencie, and not of restraint thereof. And where the Ministers inferre, that because God cannot do such things, he can (by consequence) do nothing; which is contrarie to his wisedome, and eternall will, which is, and euer shall be, to doo all things well and wisely, with number, waight, and measure, and without that there is any iniustice or contradiction in all that which he doth. Men may see how the Ministers disguise the matter in controuer∣sie, concealing haue couched in their former wri∣ting, touching the order established in the world, against which (said they) God could doo nothing: and the other words of blasphemie, whereof the Doctors rebuked them, and which they durst not insert in their last answere, because their conscience accused them, and made them know, that such affirmations could not be maintained; and from which, they cannot escape, but in denying to haue written them, and in accusing the Doctors of slaunder: as if by adding or diminishing, they had altered and chaunged the words of the Ministers. To be purged of which crime, the Doctors pray, that recourse be had to their last obiection, where these words are inserted in the first article. The which blasphemies are drawne out of the proper words of the Ministers first article. And the Doctors referre them to the conference may bee made of their last writing, with that of the Ministers. So that if it bee found (as certainly it shall be found) that the Doctors haue faithfully cyted the proper words of the Ministers writing, which the Ministers themselues will not auouch; it shall be knowne at the least, that the Ministers haue hitherto maintained blasphemous propositions, and that the Doctors therein haue no way wronged them: hauing pardoned their persons, being con∣tent (of the doctrine) to say their simple opinion. The Ministers to shewe that they haue iust cause to ac∣cuse the Doctors of slaunder, say first that the Doctors haue broken in two their proposition: which was such, that the omnipotencie of God ought not to be measured, but by the things onely which be agreeable to his will, and be not dero∣gate either to his wisedome, truth, nature, or to the order which he hath willed to establish in the world: and that the Doctors haue not taken but the last part onely. Who for their purgation, say that they haue alwaies considered what was put in difference: to wit, whether God could make one body to be in two places. And to examine the truth of this question, before they put it in writing, they haue reduced the whole to euery part of the Ministers proposition, and haue thus reasoned. God can do all things which are agree∣able to his will: the which is knowne (as the Ministers doo hold) when there is nothing that derogateth, either to his wisedome, his truth, his nature, or the order by him establi∣shed in the world. Now one body to bee in two places, de∣rogateth not from the wisedome of God. For God should therefore not leaue to be wise. Also it derogateth not from his truth: for he hath neuer said, that he could not do it: nor from his nature. For although he should do it, hee should not cease to be God. If then there be any repugnancie, it should be, because it should derogate from the order by God established in the world. Which was the cause that they stayed not but on the last article. The Ministers also would not say as the Doctors suppose) that to be able to make one body to be in two places, was a thing repugnant, either to the wisedome, truth, or nature of God: if not, in that they thinke it to repugne the order by God established in the world. Ioyned heerevnto, that the Ministers hauing put this proposition aboue said, for a rule to knowe what God can doo; when they would apply this rule to the matter in controuersie, then should they thus say: To which things, that which the Doctors put foorth (namely that one body, at one selfe-same instant, may be in diuers places) repug∣neth. But the Ministers haue only sayd & written, to which, (that is to say) order &c. For such relatiue cannot agree, but to the next antecedent. Wherein is clearly seene, that the Ministers runne into the cryme of slaunder, which they falsly obiect to the Doctors. And whereas the Ministers say, that the Doctors take not the terme of the order established in the world, in the lyke sence, as they vnderstand it: The Doctors say, that they haue taken the terme according to the vnderstanding which the Ministers haue therof giuen: euen as they haue knowne by their words, which they haue heretofore vsed. For when the questiō was to set forth some myracle done by Iesus Christ, against, or aboue the nature of things created the Ministers haue had alwayes recourse to the common order of nature. As when speech hath bene of the closed doores, of the go∣ing out of the Sepulchre, of the wombe of the virgin, and of one body in diuers places; No other reason to contradict it haue the Ministers alledged, but that it was all against the order established in the world, touching the nature of a bo∣dy: which cannot be vnderstood, but of the common order which is seene in nature. Therefore the Doctors (so taking the same, as the Ministers haue sufficiently declared in their former answeres, against the order of nature▪) haue well in∣ferred against the Ministers, that God could not then do a myracle, against the order established in the world. The Doctors know, that the auncient Fathers obserued not this difference, aboue or against nature: as by the testimony of Tertullian here before alledged, appeareth: Where it is said, that God against nature, can make a man flye as well as a byrd. But they will not stay vppon the rygor of wordes, but apply themselues to the Ministers with whome they conferre. Who call it a worke against the order establi∣shed in the world, one body to be in diuers places, for∣as much as it withstansteth the common dispositiō and pro∣prieties of bodies. And by such reason (say the Doctors) that all other myracles ought also to be esteemed against the order in the world established: because they be against the common disposition and proprietie of nature. And yet following the vnderstanding which the Mini∣sters now giue of the order established in the world, for the estate and disposition which God hath established, conser∣ueth and maintaineth all things, by his prouidence and eter∣nall and immutable will, to gouerne all things rightly, and hinder any confusion to happen to his workes. Here againe do the Ministers commit a new blasphemy against the om∣nipotencie of GOD: for hee can wholly chaunge, vn∣chaunge, and destroy such order as hee hath established in the world (albeit hee will neuer do the same) and make a new world more perfect then this. And were it so, that hee could do nothing against this order, his power should be stinted and limitted. For hee could not do but certaine effects, according to the order which hee had establi∣shed in the worlde. Which should not happen by the re∣pugnancie of the nature of Creatures: but in as much as God himselfe should bee tyed. And so (against the scrip∣ture) should his hand be shortened, and his power forced and limitted: From which blasphemy, infinite others issue, as the Doctors when occasion shall serue, haue purposed to shewe. To the 2. & third blasphemies which the Doctors haue noted, the Ministers say, by the new interpretation of the order of the world, in one word they haue fully answered. Which (to dissolue the argumēts produced by the Doctors) commeth nothing to the purpose. And the Ministers passe ouer the alledged places of scrip∣tures, which declare the blasphemie, and dissemble the con∣tradiction of their doctrine, and of that of Caluin, touching the prouidence of God, in respect of the order established in the world. And the Ministers answere not to the Doctors obiectiō, that from the third blasphemie flow many others; least in confessing the same, they might heape blasphemie vpon blasphemie, and make their doctrine by this meane, odious toall the world. For answere to the fourth blasphemie, vse the Ministers a distinction of the will of God, which may two wayes bee considered. The first is called the will knowne by signes: and the other, the will of good pleasure. The Ministers confesse, that according to the first, God can doo more then he will; and not according to the second, which is (as they say) equall to the power of God, & is hidden and vnknowne to men. The which distinction if it ought to haue place, the Doctors obiect, that the foundation of the Ministers, wherevpon they stay the pretended truth of this propositi∣on: God cannot make one body to bee in diuers places, is wholly destroyed. For the Ministers will haue the power of God to be measured according to his will, not according to the second, which is hidden vnto men. It behoueth then, that this be taken according to the first, by the which they confesse that God can do more then he will do. Whereof it followeth, that the rule by them giuen to measure Gods po∣wer, is false. For it cannot be measured by his will, seeing he can do more then he will. Moreouer the Doctors say, that the Ministers should not require thē to proue that God hath willed that one bo∣dy should be in two places, to declare that he could do it. For the Doctors might obiect, that to teach that God may doo something, it needeth not to proue, that he hath formerly willed it. For (according to the Ministers confession) God can do more then he will. The Doctors adde, for as much as the will of God appea∣reth not to vs, but by signes, words, and effects: and that the order established in the world, according to his prouidence (as the Ministers agree) is hidden vnto men: that the Mi∣nisters cannot affirme, and shewe, that God hath establi∣shed such order in the world, that one body may not bee in diuers places. For meete it were they should teach such an ordinance of God, and declaration of his will. Oft times haue the Ministers bene required, to bring one onely place of scripture, where such a will of God is manifest: and where it is said, that hee cannot make one body to bee in diuers places. As touching the place of Tertullian, the Doctors for vn∣derstanding thereof, refer themselues to euery man of sound iudgement: and say, that the Ministers haue ill to the pur∣pose alledged Theodoret: and it maketh more against them, then with them. For when he writeth that it must not be in∣determinately said, that God can do all things, comprehen∣ding therein good and euill; in that he maketh no restraint of the omnipotencie of God: but contrariwise, doth ampli∣fie the same: in so much, that not to be able to do euil things, is both a vertue and power, as before hath beene largely de∣clared. Where the Ministers do instant the Doctors to shewe, that God hath willed one body to bee in two places: the Doctors answere, that these are two different questions, whether God can do it: or whether he hath willed it. And when it shall be confessed (as it ought to bee of all Christi∣ans) that the power is in God, very easie shall it be to shewe the will, by the word, of the Supper, and of the Ascention: which they of the pretended reformed religion haue accu∣stomed to depraue, and disswade men from, by the impossi∣bilitie which they faigne to bee in God, to put one body in two places. Also the Doctors leaue it to the readers iudgement, whether S. Augustine haue bene cyted by the Ministers to the purpose or no. And to that which concerneth whether ihe quantitie be essentiall to a body, or not: the Doctors (speaking of a body as doth Philosophers, namely, In predi∣camento quantitatis) haue neuer doubted but it is essentiall. But the difficultie is to know, whether to be circumscript in a place certaine, be essentiall to a body? And the Doctors suppose they haue sufficiently proued that it is not essenti∣all, but that it is an accident naturall to a body. And they verifie their saying, by the definition of a body, where∣in all essentiall reason is comprised: and such it is, that a body is a kinde of firme quantitie of three dimensions, length, breadth, and deepenesse: where no mention is made of the circumscription of place in the saide defini∣tion. What pertaineth to the question concerning places a∣boue the heauen, the Ministers (as they are wont) do light∣ly passe ouer. And for want of good answere, they wrong the Doctors, calling them Sophisters. And that which they bring to confirme that our Lord is in one place aboue the heauen, is ouer friuolous. For by the same reason might one conclude, that the diuinitie is circumscript. And Aduerbes signifying place, shall be found in the scripture, when it spea∣keth of the diuinitie, as well as when it speaketh of the hu∣manitie of Iesus Christ. Where the Ministers impute to the Doctors that they confesse their Canons to be false, it is a manifest slaunder. For the Doctors acknoweldge not any Canons, but in as much as they are taken out of the Councels, & other bookes authenticke: and not according as they are extracted of any particular person: as is the polinge of Gratian: wherevnto they giue no credit, but as much as that which hee cyteth deserueth. For resolution of the 8. article, the Doctors send the Mi∣nisters to the schoole of Philosophers, to vnderstand, that in a predicament of substance, there is a body, which is a kind of substance: and in a predicament of quantitie, an other body, which is a kinde of quantitie. And to learne them also, that the body which is of quantitie, is accidentall (and not essen∣tiall) to a body of predicament of substance. Moreouer, the Ministers do erre against all Philosophie, calling a materiall substance, incorporall. But the Doctors will not rest vppon such things, and are much grieued that they haue not to do with people better grounded in Ppilo∣sophie. For that, being such, they could better touch the rea∣son then the Ministers do. The Doctors doo maintaine the consequence of two bodies in one placle, to infer it for necessarie, that one body may be in two places: for there is like reason, and like incon∣uenience in the one, as in the other. And therefore if the one be to be done, the other is possible: and so they referre it to the readers iudgements. Where the Ministers complaine of the time they haue lost in reading the reasons, arguments, and allegations, tou∣ching the closed doores, and other articles. The Doctors say, that in the matter in question, the Ministers haue no cause to complaine of ouer-great prolixitie, for feare of loo∣sing time. And that there is matter sufficient to spend the time withall, would they with patience (bringing with them good will, and all passion excluded) examine the testimo∣nies of the Auncients, and reasons drawne from the same. But the Doctors do wel proue, that when there is any thing which presseth the Ministers, then set they a good face on the matter, and make semblance to haue right on their side. Moreouer, the Doctors are much amazed, how the Mini∣sters are so bold to say, that Iustin and all the Auncients haue not placed the myracle of the passage of the doores, in the body of Iesus Christ: seeing that Iustin expresly proposeth the question, how it is possible that a thicke bodie is not hindered to passe through the closed doores. In the answere of which question, they conclude the same: that for as much as such myracle was done in the nature of the body of Iesus Christ, the Apostles esteemed it was not a true bodie, but a spirite: as if the bodie had beene transformed into a spirite: which Iustin saith did not hap∣pen: but that without any chaunge of nature, such an ope∣ration, to passe through the closed doore, was giuen to the body of Iesus Christ by the omnipotencie of God: and Iustin saith not, that any myracle was wrought in the sea, when Iesus walked therevpon: but that by the almigh∣tinesse which was in him, he made it walkeable, without any chaunge of the nature, either of his body, or of the sea: al∣though that the myracle were in his body, which against it nature so walked. It is not sufficient to alledge out of S. Hil∣lary, that the power of God made passage to the body of our Lord. For he saith not that onely; but addeth the man∣ner of the deed▪ to wit, that the body passed without change or diminishing of it nature, and without hauing any ope∣ning. But that by the operation of the almightinesse, he pas∣sed notwithstanding, which wrought in his body, piercing the shut and closed places: Nihil (inquit) cessit ex solido parie∣tum: nothing ceased (saith he) of the firmnesse of the walles: and other like words which he bringeth: of which can no other thing be vnderstood, but a piercing of many bodies. S. Chrisostome expresly disputeth of the body, which against it nature passed through the closed doores, as through the wombe of the virgin, without fraction. And he saith not sim∣ply that hee knoweth not wherein the worke consisted (for he describeth it) but he amplifieth the power of the worke: and saith, that he cannot comprehend the reason and great∣nesse thereof, for as much as it proceeded from the power of the incomprehensible Cod. Concerning this whole point, the Doctors refer them to the reading of the bookes, with∣out more debating thereof against the Ministers: who think alwayes to abuse the ignorance of those which beleeue thē, denying or affirming what they thinke good. And it trou∣bleth and grieueth the Doctors, that they are constrained to repeate the former reasons so familiarly, and clearly de∣ducted: But the Ministers euasions so often repeated, en∣force thē eftsoones to inculeate that, which of these articles ought to be beleeued by the common consent of the Fa∣thers. The Doctors are abashed at the maner of the Ministers answere: who without regard of that hath bene obiected to them, say what they please, without answering to the argu∣ments of the matter proposed: As they do in the article of the byrth of Iesus Christ: In the deductiō wherof the Doc∣tors haue brought many testimonies of the Ancients, which hold, that our Lord (as he was also there conceaued) myracu∣culously issued from the wombe of his mother: And that the said Fathers did witnesse, such byrth to haue bin made with∣out any fraction in the body of the virgin, and condemned of heresie all those which held the contrary. Which thing the Ministers will yet maintain, and for full answere, affirme the same: relying (as they say) vpon the scripture, and not daring to say openly, that to cleaue to their proper sence, they reiect the determination of the ancient & primitiue Church. Which is very cleare notwithstanding by their answere to this article: wherein they falsly cyte the scripture, as though it contained, that in the byrth of our Lord, Aperta fuerit vulua virginis: The wombe of the virgin was opened. And where they say, that such an opening repugneth not the cor∣porall virginitie, (whereof is the question) they belye the re∣solution of the auncient Fathers, which haue determined of that deed. Whether in the Article of the Resurrection there be but coniectures, the reading of the Doctors obiection will wit∣nesse. The which they may see, that desire to know the truth thereof. Where the Ministers do complaine in the end of the ar∣ticle of the Resurrection, that the Doctors do wrong and scoffe them; the Doctors doubt not, but the Ministers are sore troubled, that their subtilties and maner of dealing are discouered: the which, did men well vnderstand, they would not suffer themselues so easily (as heeretofore) to be decei∣ued. The solution which the Ministers pretend to giue, be∣cause it is not Aphantos autois, but Ap'auton is impertinent. For howsoeuer it was, our Lord was inuisible to his Disci∣ples, were it by suddaine vanishing, or otherwise; the which vanishing, in a body present to perfect sight, cannot be done, except the body be made to them inuisible. And howsoeuer it be, the Greeke Text beareth inuisible and vnappa∣rant. As touching the article of the opening of the heauens, the Ministers as they are wont, answere not to the purpose: For it is not said, that the heauens were clouen asunder, or opened, when he ascended thither: as at the baptisme of Ie∣sus Christ, and when it is spoken of the vision of S. Stephen. But the scripture saith expresly, that Iesus Christ pierced the Heauens, and not that the Heauens were opened vnto him. And the Ministers cannot forbeare to slaunder the Doctors, in deprauing the vnderstanding of their writings: as is seene in this present answere, where the Ministers faineto haue vnderstood, in that place of the scripture, men∣cioning Iesus Christ to haue pierced the Heauens, that the Doctors by the name of Heauen, will haue the ayre to be signified: which the Doctors neuer thought: but haue oft times sayd, that when it mencioneth the opening of the Heauens, by the Heauens it vnderstandeth the aire: which so ought not to be applyed, when our Lorde is sayd to haue pierced the Heauens. By such manner of answere do the Ministers thinke, to cause the force of the Doctors reason to be forgotten. Who said thus: If when it is said in the scripture that the Heauens were opened, the words ought strictly to be taken, and truly to be vnderstood, that the heauens were opened: It likewise behoueth, when the scripture saith, that Iesus Christ pierced the Heauens, that the word [pierced] be taken in it proper signification and strictly: which thing directly repugneth the diuision or opening, as things opposed one to another. To which reason, there is no answere giuen, more then ordi∣narily is to the other arguments of the said Doctors. Touching the differēce which the Ministers put, between the sight of S. Stephen, which stretched euen to the height of Heauen, and the being of two bodies in one selfe-same place: and that the one is a myracle in nature: and the other a wonder against nature, and the will of GOD. The Ministers (good Secretaries of Gods Counsaile and will) should do much, if they could teach the Doctors, that God hath willed the one, and that hee cannot will the other: and then shall there bee reason for their saying, to shewe the difference they haue assigned betweene these two. The inconstancie of the Ministers is knowne in the ar∣ticle where the Camell is mentioned: to wit, whether God can cause him to passe through the eye of a needle. For in the Ministers first answere, made without any distinction, haue they answered, that to make a Camell (or Cable) to passe through the eye of a needle, was a thing impossible with God. And in the second answere do they alledge, that Iesus Christ, (in saying, that what was impossible with men, was possible with God) no other thing pretended, but to an∣swere the question which his Disciples had proposed: name∣ly, who could be saued: answering wherevnto, he said: that it was impossible with men: and that such sentence of Iesus Christ, ought not to be vnderstood, but of the saluation and conuersion of rich men onely: which exclusiue speech (when the Ministers affirme, that our Lord saying, that what is impossible to man, is possible with God; must not be vn∣derstood, but of the saluation of the rich) clearely sheweth, that the Ministers intent was to say by their answere, that our Lord ment not to comprehend vnder this proposition; [That which is impossible with men, is possible with God]: the possibilitie to make a Camell passe through the eye of a needle. As if this proposition were not to be generally vn∣derstood, whereof our Lord inferreth this particular. It is possible with God to saue a rich man. And hee himselfe by expresse words speaketh generally: Omnia apud De∣um possibilia snnt. With God are all things possible. The Doctors desire, that they which can read this present writing, would note the starting holes of the Ministers, who wontedly auouch, and denie the errors they main∣taine, when they are thereof by the trueth conuinced. Now the Ministers (not daring to persist in defence, that God cannot cause a Camell to passe through the eye of a needle) haue inuented a very foolish interpretation, in con∣fessing that God can do it, but that the meanes should be in this, that God might pare off and diminish the grossenesse of a Camell, and all other things which might hinder it pas∣sage there. But that glose the Text cannot brooke: For our Lord speaketh of a thing wholy impossible to men: which should not be. For although to make and bring forth a Ca∣mell of so little stature and bignesse, that he might passe tho∣row the eye of a needle, were a thing impossible with man, yet if God brought forth such a one, or if he did so much di∣minish the greatnesse and grossenesse of a Camell, and that man might hold the same, he might well cause it to passe. But the question is not of the production of a Camell, or of making him great or small; but of causing him to passe. The which (were hee so little) should not be a myracle as touching the passage, but onely touching the pro∣duction of such a liuing Creature, or the chaunging of his quantitie. Also in taking this name Camelus, for a Ca∣ble (as Caluin thought best) the absurditie of this new expo∣sition shall better appeare. For well may man so much lessen a Cable, by the detraction of it matter, that in the ende he may make it passe through the eye of a needle. Moreouer it should be easie for a man to make a needle, whose eye should be so large, that a Cable, (yea a Camell) might passe there through. But the scripture speaketh of things impossible with man, and as they are in their owne nature. Therefore as the eye of a needle must be taken in it little and straight quanti∣tie: so also must a Camell or Cable, be taken in it naturall grossenesse. And neuer were the Auncients so subtill, to int uent such ingenious interpretations, as one could not reade without laughter. But the Ministers cannot escape with this goodly exposition, that one seeth not clearly, they deny the power of God can stretch so farre, that it can make a Camel in his crookednesse and thicknesse, to passe through the eye of a needle: but only when hee shall by the power of God, be brought into quantitie proportionable to the eye of a needle, which is against the expresse Text of the scripture, and against the expositiō of auncient interpreters: although that besides the litterall sence, the Camel be sometimes alle∣gorically expounded by them. But the allegorical expositi∣on of that place, taketh not away the truth of the litteral sēce, no more then the acts of Iesus Christ cease to be true acts, al∣beit the interpreters expound them allegorically. Wher∣in the Ministers are deceiued, supposing, because they haue read in S. Ierome some interpretation besides the litteral, that Li. de vera Circonci∣sione ad finem. the comparison which our Lord in this behalf hath vsed, was a parable, which is false. For a true argument it is which our Lord deduceth, to shewe his power to saue a rich man: be∣cause this is a thing more hard, thē to cause a Camel to passe through the eye of a needle. The Doctors to conclude vpon this article, do eftsoones shew vnto the Ministers, that of the deniall of the stretching forth of Gods almightinesse, many other absurdities, which cannot otherwise be termed then blasphemies, do follow. Namely, that two bodies cannot be in one place by the al∣mightinesse of God: that GOD cannot make a bodie without circumscription of place: that Iesus Christ ente∣red not, nor could enter through the closed doores: arose not, nor could a e, without the stone were rowled from the graue: that hee went not, nor could goe out of the Virgines wombe, without fraction in the bodie of his mother: that hee pearced not, nor could pearce the hea∣uens, without opening of them: that he made not, nor could make a bodie (no not his owne) inuisible: that he could not cause a Camell (or Cable) retaining it grossenesse, to passe through the eye of a needle. Which things do fol∣low the deniall of his almightinesse, and is an execrable blas∣phemie, and very Atheisme. Behold the enormious ab∣surdities which they are constrained to confesse, that denie the real presence of Iesus Christ in the Sacramēt of the Aul∣tar; which the Doctors pray to be well considered by the readers of this present writing. Concerning that which the Ministers make question of in the last article of their answere, that the Doctors doo call faith a humane worke, seeing that it is of God: they ought no more to wonder thereat, then infinit other truthes, which seemeth straunge to them because their doctrine is founded on the grounds of error: among which, one of the principall is; That man hath not free will: that man to thinke well, will well, and doo well, worketh not together with God: against many places of scripture which setteth downe man co-working with God: and for his faith and workes, hath of him reward and recompence. The which, without wandring from the purpose, shall more aptly be handled in an other place. The Doctors like well, that the Ministers do confesse that the anciēt Fathers haue neuer said, God could not cause one bodie to be in diuers places: which thing is true. But the reason which they yeeld, why they haue not so sayd, is of the Ministers owne forge and inuention. It remaineth, that they shewe vs so much by the testimony of the Scrip∣ture concerning the same: For no more is it therein found, then in the writings of the Fathers. Whereof the said Mini∣sters haue bene oft admonished, who say they build all their doctrine vpon the word of God. Had the Ministers in the beginning confessed the truth of the Omnipotencie, or else had they said, that they ac∣knowledged that Iesus Christ could cause his body to be a∣boue, and here belowe in the Sacrament, really and truly, if he so would: than had it bene needlesse to handle these for∣mer questions, which neuerthelesse, are not of small con∣sequence, as the Ministers do esteeme them. Which thing appeareth by the writings of the Fathers, who haue diligent∣ly handled these places, and strengthened themselues there∣with against heretiques: But because the Ministers would not agree, that God can make one body to be at one selfe-same instant, in diuers places; And that if the Doctors had begunne to declare his will to haue bene such, that he had ordained the body of Iesus Christ should be in Heauen, and in the Sacrament. The Ministers might haue sayd (as they of theyr sect doo say) that God hath not willed it, because he could not. The Doctors had rather first in∣treate of the Almightinesse, then of the will. And seeing the matter of the Omnipotencie hath bene sufficitntly tos∣sed, they are determined to prooue, that Iesus Christ hath willed and ordained, that his bodie should bee in diuers places. In the probation of which thing, when they haue vnderstood the Ministers opinion, of that they holde in theyr Churches touching that matter, they will enter into the former Conference, to the ende that theyr trauell be not in vaine. For that they follow not (it seemeth to the Doctors) that which Caluin and Beza holde concerning the same. For which cause (say the Doctors) that the Ministers abuse the people: fayning to teach that, which in the re∣formed Church they haue wontedly done: and yet their answere addressed to the Doctors, sheweth the contrary. In that the Ministers repute themselues happie, to en∣dure such reproaches, to be esteemed seducers by the Doc∣tors, let them remember, that all sects may say as much ther∣of as they: whether by right or wrong, it wil appeare by exa∣mination of their doctrine. The Doctors resolution touching the article of the Almighti∣nesse of God, in regard of foure questions by them propoun∣ded to the Ministers: which serue to the vnderstanding of the reall presence of the body and blood of Iesus Christ in the Sacrament. EVery man which can patiently cōsider by the scriptures, beginning at Abraham, the Father of the faithfull, vn∣to the last writing of the Apostles: shall finde, that the well spring of all infidelitie hath ordinarily beene, to haue regarde to the proprietie of creatures, and common order of nature, to contradict, doubt of, and distrust the word of God. For which reason, Tertullian and other former Chri∣stians sayd well: that Phylosophers, and they that stayed vpon things naturall, were the Fathers of Hereticques: be∣cause the contemplation of Nature, engendered almost all heresies: On the contrary side, shall one perceiue the al∣mightinesse of God, to be proposed by the scriptures, as a sharpe sword, cutting in peeces all arguments which might come of naturall reasons: for a certaine and finall resolution to beleeue whatsoeuer is couched & borne by the said word of God, albeit impossible & incomprehensible to euery crea∣ture: and faith to be staied on that same power in all doubts, which might be offered or proposed. All the difficultie which Abraham made vppon the promises of God to him, did proceed of certaine impossi∣bilities of nature, which he sawe in himselfe and in his wife. And it seemeth hee had alwayes regard therevnto, vntill God vsed his authoritie, and said vnto him: I am God all sufficient. Is any thing hard to the Lord? After this rebuke and remonstrance of God, Abraham did then for∣get all consideration of the proprieties of his nature, and laid hold on this shield of faith: which is to knowe, and to bee fully perswaded, that God is almightie, to whom no∣thing is hard or impossible. And after that, when questi∣on was of killing his onely sonne; albeit hee had great ap∣parance of contradiction in nature, and in the word of God, which had beene giuen him: to wit, that of the seed of that sonne should hee proceed, which should giue blessing to all Nations, and notwithstanding hee must kill him before hee had any lynage of his bodie issued. Neuerthe∣lesse hee made not protestation, opposing that contra∣diction of nature, and of the word of GOD, to main∣taine, that that which had beene said and promised vnto him was impossible: but hee had recourse to the stay of faith, and of the faithfull (saieth Saint Paul to the He∣brewes) that is to say, to the omnipotencie, esteeming that God had the meane to make true both the one and the other: namely, to cause his sonne to die, and rise againe, to drawe from him afterwards lynage and posteritie: al∣though as yet there had beene no example of the resur∣rection. Likewise the consideration of creatures, and the order of nature which Moses sawe before him, made him fall into Infidelitie. And God shewed him his fault, in that he would deny him the power, long time with flesh to nourish his peo∣ple: because the nature of the wildernes did not afford it: and did admonish him to lift vp his spirit to the omnipotency a∣gainst nature, and there to assure his faith. Moses said: Sixe hundred thousand people there are, among whom I am: and thou saist, I will giue them flesh, that they may eate therof a month long: Shall the sheepe and beeues be slaine to find them? Either shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them to suffice them? God answered Moses, Is the hand of the Lord shortnea? thou shalt now see whether my word shall come to passe, or no. In like maner, as often as one shall reade in the scriptures, that the people, or other particular persons, fell into vnbeliefe or di∣strust of Gods helpe and succor, he shall know, that the cause hath ordinarily bene, for staying vpon the nature and dispo∣sition of humane things: without sufficient apprehension of the power of God. And contrariwise, to confirme them, that this power was set before their eyes: diuers examples therof haue heretofore bene brought out of Esay and Ieremy. In the new Testament, the Virgin hauing regard to the naturall maner of conceauing, seemed to doubt of the mean of her conception. And she said: How shall this thing be, seeing I know not man? And the Angell answering, sayd vnto her: Nothing shall bee impossible with God. Drawing her backe from the cogitations of naturall proprieties, which is the roote of Infidelitie, and exhorting her to thinke vpon the Almightinesse of God, which is the chiefe stone and rocke, wherevpon true Religion is builded. Which thing considered: The Doctors for their reso∣lution of this conference with the Ministers, do say: that with good right hath the omnipotency of God very expresly ob∣tained the first place, among the articles of the Apostles Creed: as being that, by which all the other articles of faith, and the workes of God aboue nature, are belieued and maintained, against all contradiction and repugnancy of nature, or rea∣son, which may be pretended or alledged: And without the which, any article of faith, or any the workes of God surpas∣sing nature, and contained in the scriptures, could not be de∣fended and maintained, against the assaults of malice, and depriuation of humane spirit: which alwayes tendeth to in∣fidelitie, and disobedience towards his God: and from his byrth is prompt and subtil to depraue and slaunder his word and commandement. By meanes whereof (say the Doctors) that so much the more ought euery Christian to inforce him∣self, to hold and keep that article entire, without suffring any to make any exceptiō therof, or to restrain it at his pleasure, vnder any pretexts of (I know not what) repugnancies of creatures; which humane spirit proposeth, for want of vnder∣standing and comprehending the greatnesse of God. For the scriptures do euer present vnto vs this omnipotēcy generally without any restraint, in regard of creatures, or of the workes of God. And teacheth vs, that the creatures is in his hands, as the clayin the hand of the Potter, to receiue such change and forme, as shall seeme good vnto him: without that Esay 45. Iere. 18. Rom. 9. they can say, Why hast thou made or chaunged mee thus! Such similitude and words the Prophet Esay, Ieremy, and S. Paul do vse. Moreouer, the Doctors say: that men must yet lesse be lycensed to limit and bound the foresayd power, accor∣ding to the contradictions which in theyr writings they imagine of the nature, wisedome, or eternall will of God: Seeing that the scripture saith plainly, that God can doo more then wee vnderstand, and mocketh at them which will entermeddle with the nature, wisedome, and eter∣nall will of God: as though they had bene of counsell with him to know thereby the decisions and ordinances, more then his owne word pronounceth thereof. And S. Paule in the end constraineth with himselfe euery spirit created, to cry out, confessing his ignorance of the power, wisedome, Rom. 11. and workes of God: Oh the deepnesse of the riches, wisedome, and knowledge of God, how incomprehensible are his iudgements, and his wayes past finding out. For who is he that hath knowne the minde of the Lord? Or who hath bene his Counsailor? And an excellent saying of S. Augustine vpō this point is to be no∣ted, who in an Epistle Advolusianum saith: We confesse, that God can doo something, the which in searching, wee cannot finde. As if hee would say: to wit, if God can doo something, albeit in our naturall iudgement wee thinke it impossible: wee esteeme it neuerthelesse that it is possi∣ble: but that the capacitie of our spirit cannot comprehend the same. The Doctors say asso, that by such libertie and meanes that any will exempt what hee liketh from the power of God, vnder colour of some impossibilities of nature, or of repugnancie, after his owne iudgement, to the nature, wise∣dome, and will of God: each one will studie to faine the like, in all matters of faith: wherein such causes may bee easily inuented, and well disguised. And that it is so, from the first article of the Creed vnto the last, let all the heresies which haue bene there contradicted, be from time to time obserued, and it will appeare, that all haue held this way and method, to fight against euery article of faith, as impossible to God: respecting the impossibilitie of the worke ac∣cording to nature, and some pretended inconueniences, against the nature, wisedome, will, and glorie of God. The Doctors employ to this effect, the two first bookes of Tertullian: one whereof is, of the incarnation of Iesus Christ: and the other, against the Marcionists of the resurrection of the flesh: In which the Christian rea∣der shall perceiue the like arguments of those Marcionists, endeuouring to exempt from the omnipotencie of God, the incarnation of our Lord, and the resurrectiō of the flesh. Then to conclude this point, the Doctors do forewarne euery Christian, that they adde not ought to the scriptures, which speake alwaies without any limitation of the po∣wer of GOD towards the creatures: and to the ende, to praise the infinite power, wisedome, and eternall will of our Creator and Redeemer: and to the end to preserue the closet of Gods secrets from euery shamelesse and impudent person, which of his own folly wil make a law, not only to mē, of heretikes. Credendo non credunt. To wit, that in belee∣uing Gods omnipotencie, they beleeue it not. For after they haue said that no exception is to be put vnto it, on the other side they returne to declare, that it ought not bee extended to euery thing, which humane spi t can conceiue. And in∣deed, they will not apply vnto it, but what seemeth good vn∣to them: and shrowd themselues with the nature, wisdome, and eternall will of God: which to them are vnknowne, and incomprehensible, as that of the Omnipotencie. The Doc∣tors therefore do admonish all men to beware of beeing a∣bused with the words of Caluin and his Ministers: but to re∣gard the works which they denie to be in the power of God. The Doctors haue proposed to them these foure questions: to wit, whether God can make one body to be in two places: and (contrariwise) two bodies in one place: whether hee can lodge one body in a lesse space then the greatnesse thereof: and whether he can make it invisible. And such questions haue beene specially chosen: because the principall argu∣ments of the pretended reformed Religion against the true presence of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the holy Sacrament, are founded vpon the same. The Doctors beleeue simply (as all other things) that the foure questions are possible to God, and haue proued the same by the infinitenesse of his power, by the scriptures, which attribute vnto him all power without exception, o∣uer the creatures: and by written examples and straunge my racles wrought vpon their bodies, against the nature of them. Tertullian in his booke of the Resurrection, saith: To the end wee may beleeue, that our God is more mightie then all lawe and nature of all bodies: And addeth: that they knowe God amisse who thinke that is not in his power, which they in their braine cannot comprehend. From whence it commeth (as saith S. Cyrill) that such wicked spirits doo reiect and condemne all things as impossible, because they themselues do not vn∣derstand them. Moreouer the Doctors suppose they haue sufficiently shewed, as well by expresse scripture, as by the expositions thereof, taken from auncient Christians, that it was not one∣ly in the power of God to make two bodies in one place, and one body without place equall to it greatnesse, but that al∣readie it was truly done in the birth of the body of our Lord Iesus Christ: in his resurrection: in the entrie through the closed doores: and in the ascention aboue all the heauens. And the Doctors haue shewed, that there was like and sem∣blable repugnancie in these deeds, as in the other: that is, of one body in two places: which is not exempted by the scrip∣ture, from the power nor will of God, more then the others, to iudge it impossible to bee done: and that there was neuer Christian before our time, which dared to affirme that thing to be impossible, nd out of the power of God, although oc∣casion was often offered to say it, had they any way thought it impossible: as the Ministers of the pretended reformed Religion do pretend. Contrariwife, the most part of the aun∣cient authors of the Primitiue Church, haue held it expresly to be in Gods power to place one creature in many places: as held Saint Ierome against the heretike Vigillantius, that the soules of the Saints might be present in many places, with the immaculate Lambe our Lord Iesus Christ. And the que∣stion was, whether the said soules, and spirits of the Saints, were sometimes present in the Churches where their Sepul∣chres and monuments were. And so much thereof holdeth S. Augustine in the 16▪ Chap. of the booke which he wrote of the due care of the dead: where he writeth, that soules by the power of their owne nature, cannot be here belowe, and in heauen, or in many places: but that it may be done by the power of God: and will not resolue whether they vn∣derstand our affaires by such a presence in many places, or by the reuelation of Angels, or other meanes by the power and grace of God. Also it is certain, that in the matter of the holy Sacrament, the auncient Fathers of the Church haue acknowledged and maintained, that the bodie of Iesus Christ was in many places by the almightie power of God. As doth S. Ambrose vpon the tenth of the Epistle to the Hebrewes: and Saint Chrisostome in his 17. Homily vpon the same Epistle. Where both two as it were in like words do write, that although in many places there are many actions and oblations of the body of Iesus Christ: neuerthelesse (hauing regard to the thing which is offered, to wit, the true lambe and body of Christ Iesus) that this sacrifice in many places offered is but one, for so much as it is but one selfe-same thing: to wit, the true lambe, and the true body of Iesus Christ, which is but one, and abideth whole in all places where it is offered. They adde also, that the oblations of him in diuers places, is not an iteration of the sacrifice of the Crosse: but in commemora∣tion of him. So that in the sacrifice of the Masse, they ac∣knowledge and distinguish two points. The one which con∣cerneth the realtie of the thing offered: and they say, that this is the true lambe, and true body of Iesus Christ: which then remaining intierly one, is neuerthelesse in many places. And the other concerneth the action and oblation of such thing by the Priest, which is no iteration, nor like action or oblation as that of the Crosse: but diuerse, in remembrance notwithstanding of that was made vpon the Crosse. S. Chri∣sostome in the third booke of Priesthood, cryeth out saying: Oh myracle and power of God! He which sitteth on high at the right hand of his Father, is held betweene the hands of each one in the Sacrament. S. Augustine vpon the 33. Psalme sheweth, that the body of Iesus Christ in the Supper was in two places: that is to say, in it visible place among his Apostles; and neuerthelesse betweene his owne hands. So that he himselfe did beare himselfe. And before he con∣cludeth the same, Saint Augustine debateth how it was pos∣sible that one person should beare his body betweene his hands. And after he had shewed that it was impossible for Dauid, and cuerie creature, he descended at last, to the diuine power which was in Iesus Christ: by the which, to him a∣lone among all men, such myracle was possible. And to the ende that men should not depraue, nor wrest the meaning of S. Augustine, (because there is something which after a sort is carried as though it diminished the truth) let them note that the purpose of S. Augustine is, to shewe that Iesus by his almightinesse did carrie himselfe, which to any crea∣ture was impossible. Now had he onely in the Supper borne betweene his hands the figure of the Sacrament, and signe of his body, and not his true and reall body, hee should haue done nothing, but what the least man might do. For each man can carrie betwixt his hands, the figure, Image, signe or Sacrament of his body, or sticke it in his hat, without my∣racle or supernaturall power. It be houeth then, that the cer∣taine maner which S. Augustine vseth, doth nothing diminish the truth: and this it is, that betweene his hands he was in∣uisible, and in a supernaturall maner of being; reall neuer∣thelesse and true. S. Basil in his Liturgie with the others, a∣uoucheth the body of Iesus Christ to be in heauen, and by his almightinesse notwithstanding to bee present in the Sacra∣ment: although the Ministers to proue it impossible for one body, or one other creature, to be in many places, do chiefly build vpon S. Basil: but the said S. Basil, in the place by the Ministers alledged, doth expresly protest, not to speake but according to the naturall proprietie. And in his Liturgie he declareth, that it is not onely in the power of God to cause the body of Iesus Christ to be in heauen, and vpon the Aul∣tar; but that it is so truly done. The Doctors to end this question of one body in many places, say: that such matter is not onely in the power of God, but that it must so be beleeued to bee done in the holy Sacrament, that God be not found a lyar and deceiuer in his word: whereby Iesus affirmed to his Apostles, that that which he gaue with his hands, was his true body, deliuered for vs. This is an argument which Tertullian in his booke of the Resurrection maketh, after hee had disputed against them which denied the same to be possible with God. And it seemeth they then said (as the Ministers haue formerly said) that there was something by the scriture impossible with God: to wit, that he could not lye, nor deceiue: and that thereof they tooke occasion to goe further, and to dispute that the resurrection was to him also impossible. So that the Ministers, because God cannot lye, haue endeuou∣ted o inferre, that to put one body in two places, was impos∣sible for him, as well as to lye and deceiue. Tertullian in the end accordeth with the Marcionists, and saith: Rather had I confesse that God cannot deceiue, and that hee is onely weake and impotent in deceit: to the end, that thereby hee seeme not to haue taught and spoken one way, and to haue otherwise disposed of the deed contained in his word. Then if hee cannot (concludeth Tertullian) deceiue and abuse, the resurrection must be beleeued, as it is carried in his word, and not otherwise, least deceit be found in the word of God. The Doctors say also, they willingly confesse, that God cannot lye, nor deceiue: and that it must therefore be be∣leeued, that so he hath willed and ordained the truth of the Supper, in such sort, and not otherwise, as his word soundeth and beareth. Now so it is, that his word plainly and expresly beareth, that he affirmeth that what hee gaue with his hands to his Apostles to eat, was his body, deliuered for vs: we must therefore beleeue that his word saith not otherwise then his will is, least he be esteemed a lyar. And that as he saith, This is my body: This is my bloud: that it is so indeed. The which the Doctors (by Gods assistance) will declare in the next Con∣ference, to shewe that he hath not onely power to establish his body in the holy Sacrament: but also that he hath willed it, and so hath done it. Artictles proposed by the Doctosr for the next Conference, and others following, according to the order of the said Articles. A Lthough, following the order of Confe∣rence touching the Apostles Creed, they ought secondly to entreate of an other article (as the Ministers themselues in the beginning of the Conference not onely accorded, but demaunded: offering the imprinted Articles of their confession, bearing date the 1564. yeare, from the first vnto the last, to be examined by the Doctors.) Neuerthelesse, the Doctors seeing it will not be much from the purpose, after they haue intreated of the omnipotencie of God (which extendeth to bee powerfull to cause the body of Iesus Christ to be in hea∣uen, and in the Sacrament) in continuing that matter, to en∣ter into the probation of his will: they are content to shewe, that he hath not power onely, but that also he hath wil: and are consequently determined to refute all the blasphemies and heresies contained in their Supper, which are called re∣formed: to the end also they be not deemed to flye the list, touching the Supper and the Masse, as the Ministers haue reproached them. Neuerthelesse they protest, that their meaning is, after the conclusion of this matter, and resoluti∣on giuen, to returne to examine the wonderfull errors of the Ministers, which in number are many against the other articles of the Creed: which thing the Ministers (vnwilling that the Doctors should pursue the order begun, do greatly feare, as one may see, and iudge: foreseeing, that in the next Conference, an other blasphemie would be shewed them, which the Church (calling it selfe Reformed) against the goodnesse of God, after Caluins doctrine) maintaineth: to wit, that God worketh in the reprobate, the euill and sinne they commit: which is an execrable Atheisme, and no lesse then the deniall of the omnipotencie of God. And they that can read these Conferences (continuing to the ende of the discussion of the Ministers errors, and of their religiō against all the articles of the Creed) shall bee likewise abashed to vnderstand the absurdities and blasphemies issuing from the same. An other point there is yet, which inuiteth the Ministers to demaund tractation of the Supper: which is, that they haue the whole matter alreadie squared, by many of their Sect, who haue written of the same: And chiefly the great booke of Peter Martir will not faile them. Wherby they shalbe fur∣nished with I know not what infamous obiectiōs, & of some passages of the Fathers, broken & depraued, or euilly applied, to impugne in shew, the truth of the body in the Sacrament. But for defence of all other their errors, the Ministers are meanely armed: and their conscience doth sufficiently wit∣nesse, that by the scripture, decision of generall Councells, and common accord of the writings of all the auncient Fathers, (no apparance to the contrary) they are conuinced and condemned of their errors against the said Creed. Now, to enter into the examination of the Supper of the Ministers, the Doctors do maintaine, that it is a pro∣phane eating and drinking, not differing from common ea∣ting and drinking, but in that it is worse: that they abuse the holy institution of the Supper of Iesus, and pollute and de∣file such their banket with all impietie, & blasphemie. They also maintaine, that the Ministers do great iniurie to the Sa∣crament of Iesus Christ, falsly to attribute to such, their pro∣phane and polluted banket, the name of Sacrament. And to the end that the proofe thereof be more cleare, the Doctors demaund of the Ministers, whether they receiue one com∣mon doctrine, receiued not only in the Church Catholique, but also almost in all Sects which are seperated from it: That is, that in the confection of the Sacraments, there be two es∣sentiall and necessarie things: the matter (or element) and the word? Secondly, what word, with the Element, is necessary to make a Sacrament: and namely, that which the Ministers do call the Sacrament of the Supper: and whether it behoueth to vse certaine words or no? Thirdly, whether the word haue some power or effec∣tuall working in the Sacrament? & what, & whether it worke vpon something in the matter of the bread and wine? Fourthly, whether by the same word, consecration bee made of the matter of the Sacrament or no? Fiftly, whether by the word consecration, be not made of the matter? to wit, how the same consecration is made? and by what vertue the same is made? Sixtly, whether besides the bread and wine, and the spi∣rituall graces and benefites of Iesus Christ, the true body and bloud of Iesus Christ in their proper substance, and not in spirituall effect onely, be really receiued in the Sup∣per? And the Doctors do demand vpon this article, a plaine confession of the faith of the Ministers. They demaund further, whether in receiuing the bread, before taking of the wine, they receiue not by the eating of the bread, the body and bloud of Iesus Christ: or the body onely. Briefly, whether they admit that which Di∣uines call a Concomitance of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ. They demaund also, whether the Supper (ouer and be∣sides the assurance which it giueth them of the participation they haue in the flesh of Iesus Christ, for their redemption) doth worke in them remission of sinnes? Lastly they demaund, whether one receiueth any thing by the Supper, which he could not receiue without the Sup∣per? or whether without paine taking to go the Supper, or beeing present thereat, one may as well receiue the bo∣die and graces of Iesus Christ, as if hee were present at the Supper? The Doctors will afterwards debate the other articles, contained in the Ministers last writing: for as much as the precedent demaunds ought to be first examined, as grounds of other articles proposed by the Ministers. Moreouer, after the confutation of the Supper of the Ministers, and the confirmation of the reall presence of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the holy Sacrament, the Doctors by order, and without confusion, will clearly teach by the pure and expresse word of God, that the Masse was instituted and said by Iesus Christ, and that he commaunded his Apostles to say it: which thing, then following the ordi∣nance of their Maister, they afterwards performed. That the Masse is a true sacrifice of the lawe Euan∣gelique. That they which reiect the Masse, and admit in the Church no externall sacrifice, nor Priesthood, are without the true lawe, without true Religion, and therein worse then Idolaters themselues. That the Masse auaileth to obtaine remission of sinnes, fauour, and grace of God: and that it auaileth both for the quicke and the dead. That it is not an abuse in the Church, if the Priest in the Masse do communicate alone, when they that are present will not communicate. That they commit an horrible blasphemie, which call the adoration of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the Sacrament, adoration of bread and wine, and falsly call such worship of the body of Iesus Christ, Idolatrie. To be short, that there is nothing in the Masse, at this day ordained and celebrated, which in it selfe is not good, and holy, and agreeable to the word of God. The Doctors do admonish the Ministers to answere to the demaunds here aboue written, to purpose, plainely, and by order. Sunday, 28. of Iuly, in the yeare aforesaid. The Ministers answere to the writings of the Doctors, sent to thē by my Lord de Niuernois, the 28. day of Iuly, about seuen of the clocke in the euening, in the 1566. yeare. T He Doctors reproach the Ministers in the beginning of their writing, that in their former complaint against thē, they immitate the Donatists: wherein they verifie that, which the Ministers hereto∣fore haue oftentimes shewed them: to wit, that the most part of their writings are imployed in repetitions, iniuries, scoffes, and inuectiues, rather then in good arguments and reasons: And they say, that the example of the Donatists is much more proper to bee applyed to them, then to the Ministers: for as much as the Donatists would restraine the name of the Church, (which vniuersally comprehendeth all the elect and faithfull, that are, and euer were): and attribute the same to the sole company of them which fol∣low their customes and errors: as the Doctors at this day approue not others for the Catholike and vniuersall Church, then they which follow the traditions and abuses of the Ro∣mane Church. Moreouer, the Donatists did persecute them which were contrarie to their doctrine, and vsed violence and all crueltie against them, that they could deuise: as Saint Augustine in many places doth recyte. Now what in time past hath bene the rage and furie, as well of the Doctors, as of their complices, Priests, and hypocriticall Monkes, a∣gainst poore Christians, each one knoweth. And there is not he, which knoweth not now, both by their Sermons, wri∣tings, and conferences, what is their hate and spight against the children and seruants of God: and what pleasure should they haue to roote them out, were theyr power answera∣ble to their will: whereby one may iudge, whether they or the Ministers come nearer to the likenesse and example of the Donatists. And whereas the Doctors adde, that the Ministers cease not to bee blasphemers, because they reiect and detest the name thereof. The Ministers answere, that the Doctors also leaue not to be false accusers, because they disauow, and de∣nie the name. And that the effects do shewe of the one side and the other, to whom such crimes and names may apper∣taine, and be attributed. And touching that which the Doctors in the same article say, that it is blasphemy against the goodnesse of God, to im∣pute vnto him, that hee is the author of vice, and of sinne. The Ministers confesse it: and do adde, that it is blasphe∣my also against his truth, to say, that with him there is yea, and nay: as doo they, which vnder a colour and false pretext to establish the omnipotencie of GGD, doo propose, that hee can cause one bodie at one selfe-same instant to bee in diuers places: to wit, that it is, and is not. Touching that which the Doctors afterwards say, that the Ministers erre in the grounds of Gods omnipotencie: for as much as they haue said, that he was almightie, because he doth whatsoeuer hee will: and that nothing can hinder, or with-hold the execution of his counsailes. The Mini∣sters answere, that therein they haue followed Saint Augu∣stines definition of the omnipotencie of God, in the 96. Chapter of his Enchiridion: where word for word hee thus saith: For other cause is hee not truly called omnipotent: but for as much as hee can do all whatsoeuer hee will: and that the effect of the will of the Almightie, is not hindered by the will and effect of any creature. In that they consequently impute to the Ministers, that they haue said the omnipotencie of God ought not to bee generally extended to all things which men may conceiue and imagine in their mindes. The Ministers say (vnder the Doctors correction) that they said not so: but that the al∣mightinesse of God, ought not to be extended without any discretion or distinction, to all things generally, which men in their foolish phantasies might forge or imagine. Wherein to each one it may eftsoones appeare, how they curtall and falsifie the Ministers words and sentences, to haue meanes and colour for their slaunder. Afterwards, where they affirme that it is blasphemy to say that God can doo nothing against order: the Mini∣sters on the contrary part maintaine, that to thinke and say that hee can doo ought which is not well ordered, is to blaspheme the wisedome, and eternall prouidence of God. The Doctors pretend in the article following, that one body to be in diuers places at one selfe-same instant, is not a thing derogatorie to the truth of God. The Ministers doo maintaine the contrarie, that it should be derogate both to his truth; for as much as there should be in him, (as is said) yea and nay: and to his wisedome, for as much as in his words there should be disorder and confusion: and by con∣sequence to his almightinesse, because in his deeds there should be imperfection. And they further say, that it should not be onely against the disposition and ordinary course of nature, (as the Doc∣tors faigne to haue thought and vnderstood) but also a∣gainst the eternall and vnchangeable will of our God. And as touching that which the Doctors, to proue that God can do something against order, do propose that he can chaunge and alter the order established in the world. The Ministers confesse the same: but they denie that in so doo∣ing he should do any thing which were disordered. As (for example) all faithfull and Christian men doo beleeue, beleeue, that God will renew at the last the estate of the whole world: wherein there is nothing in the meane time which is not well ordained, perfect, and in all points accomplished. The Doctors in the following article, confound the distinction proposed by the Ministers, in their answere be∣tweene the will of God manifested, and that he hath hid∣den in himselfe, and is equall to his power: as the Ministers before haue at large declared. And the Doctors do falsly presuppose touching the reuealed will of God; taking that generally, which the Ministers haue graunted in some par∣ticulars onely: to wit, that God can doo more in ceraine things, then he hath declared to will: which none doubteth. As saith S. Augustine in the booke of perfect Iustice, that he cannot make a man to be perfect in this world, and sanctifie him in such sort, that there remaine no more in him any in∣firmitie or imperfection; although hee hath neuer decla∣red vnto vs by his word, that hee would do it: but contrari∣wise, that the flesh in all the regenerate will alwaies refist the spirit: so that all the time of their liues, they shall be in many points imperfect. But albeit in that, and some other like cases, God can do more then his will declareth, which he hath manifested to vs in his word: yet neuerthelesse can it not be said but that there be other cases, wherein God hath reuealed his will vnto vs, against which he can do or ordaine nothing. Things im∣possible with God. yet in these As (for example) hee hath declared vnto vs, that hee is one, that he is immutable, incomprehensible, wholly good, wholly iust, wholly perfect, and wholly true: Against all impossibili∣ties is his omnipo∣tencie esta∣blished. which things, (which to vs are manifested and clearly pro∣posed in his word) impossible it is for him, euer to thinke, say, do, or ordaine. Now the thing proposed and debated by the Doctors, touching the being of one body, at one instant in diuers pla∣ces, is comprised in that ranke, beeing (as is said) contrarie to the truth of God. Which shall serue for answere to the Doctors slaunders, and to all that they haue proposed in this article. Likewise in an other following article, where they say that God not onely can, but will also cause, that one body occupie diuers places at one selfe-same time. That shall be yet more impossible for them to proue, then the po∣wer aforesaid, for which they haue hitherto so much trauel∣led in vaine. In their definition of one bodye in the Article fol∣lowing, they contradict themselues, when they say that the measures are essentiall vnto it: and that it may neuerthe∣lesse bee incircumscript: for if it bee needfull that the di∣mensions whereof it is composed, bee finite; of necessi∣tie it followeth therevpon, that then it is finite, limited, and circumscript. To that which they afterwards say, that the reason which the Ministers haue taken of the Creed, and alledged to proue that the body of Iesus Christ is in heauen in a place certaine, is friuolous. The Ministers say; that the Doctors shewe therein what reuerence they beare to the word of GOD, and his spirite, who hath reuealed the same vnto vs, and to the Apostles, which declare them vn∣to vs. To iustifie Gracian and the Canon, which the Ministers alledge of S. Augustine, by which they proue that the bodie of Christ must necessarily be in a place certaine, the Mini∣sters bring yet for more ample confirmation, the 4. booke and 10. distinction of the Maister of the Sentences: who re∣cyting the selfe-same passage of S. Augustine, vseth the verbe [Oportet] and not [Potest]. As touching that of Iustine which the Doctors alledge, to proue the myracles which were then done; that Iesus Christ appeared in the middest of his Disciples, the gates be∣ing shut: and that hee walked vpon the waters, were done in his person. The Ministers are amazed how the Doctors doo yet repeate the same. For as much as the said Iustine (as they haue before beene answered) expresly saith: that when the said myracles were done, there was no chaunge of the body of Iesus Christ: which thing, had the myracles bene done in his person, had bene necessarie. In the meane time, the Ministers confesse (as they haue done often) that the cause of the said myracles, and the diuine power whence they proceeded, abode in Iesus Christ. As when hee hea∣led the diseased which touched him: and did the other my∣racles recyted in the Euangelicall Histories: the which were done by him, but not in him, but in the person of them that we healed. And there is great difference betweene such myracles, and those of his transfiguration, and resurrection, which were wrought by his onely power, and in his proper person. Vpon the importunate repetition which the Doctors make, as well of the meanes of the birth of our Lord Iesus Christ, as of the word Aphantos: The Ministers for sparing of time, and not troubling the readers, send them back to their former answeres. The Ministers much maruel that the Doctors to proue their pretended penetration of two bodies, and of their mea∣sures, wil ground their proofe and principal argument vpon the proper signification of the terme [Penetrer]. For be it so, that they will by this French word interpret the Greeke word Dierchestas, or the Latine word Penetrare. It shall bee euer impossible to proue their pretence. And as it is also in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 12. 10. It is said of the An∣gell and S. Peter that they passed the first and second watch. And in S. Luke. 4. 30. But they passed through the middest of them, and departed. And in S. Io. 4. 4. Now it behoued him to passe by Samaria. In all which passages the Doctors shall not find, that the word Dierchestai (in the said passages alledged) can bee a∣ny way applied to the penetration of dimensions. And no more shall they proue that the word [Penetrare] which the old Translator hath vsed in the 2. Tymo. 3. can be reduced to their said penetration. The Ministers do adde, that the Doctors ought not to hold it more straunge, that Iesus Christ ascending into hea∣uen in his finite and limited body, an opening were made for his entrance therin: then when he descendeth betweene the hands of the Priests singing their Masses: For then (as saith S. Gregorie) the heauens do open to giue him passage. Although after their imagination, his body is then seperated from it measures and dimensions. The Doctors should haue contented themselues with the Ministers answer vpon the similitude & word [Camell]. For first, they can no wayes proue, that that saying of Iesus Christ vpon the end of that speech, ought else-where to be applied, then to the nearest member of the same: where speech is made of the conu sion and sauing of a rich man. For the Pronowne demonstratiue [Hoc] doth clearly shewe it: Afterwards, although that the generall proposition in the end and conclusion of the said sentence (where it is said that all things are possible to God) extendeth (as the Doc∣tors will haue it) to the Camell, as well as the rich man: yet rightly to apply the two patts of the comparison, it beho∣ueth they confesse, that as the change is necessary for the rich man to be saued: so is it also for the body of the Camel, to cause it passe through the eye of a needle. Howsoeuer that might in some sort be done, the Doctors shal not proue, nor euer thence conclude, that two bodies can the one pierce the other. For as much as the Doctors by their thrise∣strong & powerfull arguments haue not bene able to con∣clude any of all their absurdities, nor by force of their rea∣sons to constraine the Ministers to confesse the same: they do nought else but exclaime, Blasphemy, Blasphemy; which is the last recourse of all persons, who despite and gnash the teeth against the truth, and them that maintain it, when they cannot ouercome them. Would the Ministers subscribe to the errors end abuses of the said Doctors, they should bee good and Catholike people: but because they gainsay and reproue them, they be (in their opinion) heretikes, seducers, blasphemers, and Atheists: and in so great horror doo the Doctors hold them, that it is maruel they pull not (like Cai∣phas) their horned caps and hoods in peeces, in detestation of the word of God, proposed and defended by the said Mi∣nisters, and condemned as blasphemy by the Doctors. The Doctors haue dissembled the passage of the scrip∣ture alledged by the Ministers, to proue that faith is a worke of God, which he bringeth forth in the heart of the faithfull, when he will worke his regeneration: and incidently speake of free will, and the merit of workes. Wherevnto the Mini∣sters are well resolued to answere; and by the grace of God, to maintaine the truth of these two points, against the ene∣mies of his glorie, when they shall be proposed to be deba∣ted and discussed. And for the ioy which they receiue (say they) that the Ministers haue confessed, they haue not read in any auncient Author and expresse termes, that God can∣not cause one selfe-same body to bee in diuers places at one instant: they haue no great cause thereof to reioyce: for al∣beit the said Fathers haue not in expresse termes said it: yet in termes equiualent, in infinite places haue they said and written the same. A short Resolution of all the Answeres and discourse which the Ministers haue made vpon the matter of Gods omnipotencie in the Conference which they haue had with the Doctors. THe craft and subtiltie of Sathan from the beginning of the world hath alwayes beene, to transforme him∣felfe into an Angell of light, and to search some faire pretext, to shrowd and disguise himselfe, and vn∣der that shadowe, to insinuate himselfe into the Church of GOD, and there to broach his lyes and trumpe∣ries. As we all see, that vnder pretence to honour God, he hath established all the Idolatrie which hath euer beene in the worlde: referring the adoration of Images, the Inuoca∣tion and intercession of Saintes, the worshipping of Re∣liques, and other lyke impieties to the honour of God, and perswading the ignorant that all that was done to aduance the same. Lykewise vnder pretext of his seruice, hath he brought in all the traditions and inuentions of men, and chaunged with the time, the true and lawfull seruice of God (which consisteth in the obedience of his holy will, declared vnto vs in his lawe and word) into the obseruation of theyr commaundements, and theyr inuented ceremo∣nies. Vnder shadowe and colour of the Sacraments ordai∣ned by God, for the confirmation, exercise and nourishing of the faith of the Church, there hath crept in the Masse: which is not only the ruine and totall subuersion of the Sup∣per: but also an abolishment of all the benefite of Iesus Christ: and consequently of the faith and all true Religi∣on. Vnder colour and shadowe of holinesse, and of chaste, shamefaste, and honest conuersation, which is chiefly re∣quired in the Ministers and Pastors of the Church, he hath established single life, and taken away from them the liber∣tie of marriage: which hath bene the occasion of all filthi∣nesse, and of infamous, stinking, and execrable whoredomes and luxuritie, which is seene in the Papacie. Vnder the shadowe of prayers, which men are commaunded to make one for an other: and of Charitie, whereby we are bound to succour all the needie poore: hath hee brought in all the suffrages which men sing for the dead, the merites and workes of supererogation, and other lyke abhominations. Vnder colour of the Saboth, which God had chosen and deputed to the sanctification of his holy name, to the con∣templation of his workes, in the remembrance and prea∣ching of his benefites and fauours. He hath set forth an in∣finite number of prophane Feastes, in which the name of God is blasphemed, his ordinance despised, his couenant violated. But who can recount the wickednesse and abho∣minations which are committed in these dayes? Vnder pre∣text of the keyes and discipline of the Church, the admi∣nistration and vse whereof was giuen to the Ministers law∣fully called, for a meane to conserue the doctrine in it puri∣tie, and keepe and entertaine good order in the Church, and to hinder the slaunders which by the insolencie of some might happen: hath hee established a tyrannie, whence is proceeded the whole dissipation of the Church of God, the corruption of all estates: and the diminishing of the law∣full authoritie which God hath giuen to Kings, Princes, and Magistrates. Some whereof, haue bene wholly spoy∣led, as well of theyr goods, as dignities, by the Pope, and the Bishops: and others so weakened, that they are in many places constrained to bowe the necke, and submit them∣selues to theyr yoake and puissance. To be short, this may be noted and obserued in all the purposes and actions of the diuell: that as he is a Serpent, so hath hee alwayes ramped, and secretly crept (as it were) vnder the leaues and appea∣rance of some pietie, into the house of God, to place there∣in, his pretended disorder, confusion and ruine. And we see, that now continuing and following his wonted prac∣tises, hee setteth foorth the omnipotencie of God (which to all the world is a plausible and fauourable tytle) to the ende, that vnder the lustre and brightnesse of such an oc∣casion, hee might dazell the eyes of the ignorant, and hold them still in the opinion and perswasion of theyr errorus; which haue no foundation in the word of God. The Mini∣sters beseech the Readers, and all those that haue the feare of God, or any zeale of his honour, to be wise, and atten∣tiue, to weigh and discouer the sayd subtilties and practi∣ses of the Diuell: and not to beleeue all spirites before they haue well sounded and tryed them: and that they also ap∣proue not all the things, which vnder the name of God, may be proposed vnto them; and which at the first, may seeme to tende and appertaine to his honour and glorie: but that they remember the Apostles admonition, to try the spi∣rites: 1. Ioh. 4. 1. and that they verie carefully regarde the ende, and scope of those, which propose vnto them such doctrine. And if there be any thing wherin heed must be taken of such cosonages and fraudes, which are layd to surprise the simple; it is needfull, chiefly in this matter of the Omnipotency of God: whereof is the present question. For the Ministers do confesse, that it ought to be knowne, beleeued, and vniuer∣sally adored of all creatures, in heauen and in earth. Moreo∣uer they confesse, that the faithfull cannot haue a better foundation, nor better rampert to leane vnto, and sustaine themselues against all the endeuours, as well of the diuel, the world, and their other enemies: as also (to be short) of all the temptations wherewith they might bee assayled and befie∣ged. This Omnipotency (they confesse) is the hinge of the axeltree (as it were) wherevpon the world, with all it parts is turned and sustained. They confesse moreouer, that the same Omnipotency is not only venerable to the Angels, and bles∣sed spirits in heauen, and to the elect and Saints vpon earth: but also terrible to the reprobates and diuels in hell. So that the one doth willingly embrace and submit themselues vnto it: and the others are constrained to bow vnder it, and yeeld vnto and obey the same. Lastly they confesse, that it is infinite, and of incompre∣hensible greatnesse, to all creatures, as the wisedome, good∣nesse, Iustice, truth, and the other vertues and proprieties of our God. This is that which the Ministers beleeue and confesse of the Omnipotency of God: and that which they thinke, all Christians ought thereof to beleeue and hold. Now to make good vse of this Almightinesse, and to apply it as is meete: we must iudge thereof, according to his will: and of his will, according to his word: So that we ought not to attribute in∣differently to the power of God, all things good and euill, ordered and disordered, agreeable and contrary to his nature, false and true: But to well rule and order the thoughts and cogitations of Gods Omnipotencie, presenting themselues in our hearts: we must (for our part) measure the same ac∣cording to his holy will: and beleeue that it cannot be limit∣ted, letted nor hindred by any other will or power, which wil or may be opposite vnto it. Which thing S. Augustine well teacheth in many places; as in the fift booke and 10. Chap∣ter of the Cittie of God: where speaking of God, hee saith: That he is called almightie: because he doth all whatsoeuer he will, and suffereth nothing if he will it not. Also in the se∣uenth Chapter of the 21. booke. For no other reason but this onely, is he called Almightie: that he can do all whatsoe∣uer he will doo. Also in the first Chapter of the booke De Symbolo ad Catec: Our God (saith he) doth all that which he will do: and that is his Almightinesse. Also in the 119. Ser∣mon De tempore; He is Almightie, to do all things that he will do, and ordaineth to be done. These sentences, and ma∣ny other lyke, found in the writings of that good Father, and other Auncients, do clearly teach vs, the maner how we may well make profit of the faith we haue of the omnipotency of God: That is in bringing vs backe to his will, and iudging of his will, by his word, and not by the false imaginations which therof we may conceiue in our minds: or that others would propose vnto vs: As did Sathan to Iesus Christ, whom he would haue induced to cast downe himselfe headlong, vnder a vaine trust of helpe from the omnipotencie of God. Euen so also, the Monarchians, who vnder colour and pretext of Gods omnipotencie, which of some myracles they gathered, would proue and establish their heresies, and take away the personall distinction which is betweene the Father and the sonne, saying: That God being Almightie, could therefore make himselfe Father and sonne together. Of the Anabap∣tists in these last times, is it also found, that for a vaine as∣surance, which they put in the omnipotency of God, ho∣ping he could nourish them, as he did the byrds, would not labour. Many such lyke more great inconueniences may hap∣pen to all those, that hauing such wandering and stragling thoughts of the Omnipotency of God, wil not restraine nor reduce them to his will. And this we see is besalue the Doc∣tors: who willing to apprehend and measure the omnipo∣tencie of God by their owne imaginations, rather then by his will and word, are (as saith S. Paul) become vaine in their imagination, and their foolish heart is filled with darknesse. And willing to behold the Maiestie of God out of the li∣mits and bounds which hee had shewed them in his word, haue bene intrapped and ouerwhelmed of his glorie. And that is befalne them, which in their resolution, they them∣selues haue touched: to wit, that for not hauing taken the word of God for their guide, nor followed the steppes and pathes of his holy spirit, they do erre from the faith: which (contrarie to that which the Doctors doo thinke) is not de∣stroyed nor ouerthrowne by the consideration of the crea∣tures and workes of God (which are as a myrror of his glorie and diuinitie): but in as much as by them wee were turned away from the promises of God: by the which we are assu∣red of his will, and almightinesse; which doth warrant and assure vs of the effects, and accomplishment of this holy will. Which may bee seene and clearly obserued in them that were sent by Moyses to espie out and know the Land of the Cananites. Two of which, (namely Iosua and Caleb) could neuer be withdrawne from the trust they had in theyr God. For as much as turning their mindes from the conside∣ration of all things which could make them doubt thereof, (as of the Fortresse and munition of Cities, the number, force, weapons, and experience of the countrie Inhabitants) they stayed their minds in the sole consideration of the pro∣mises which God had made vnto thē. Cōtrariwise, the others forgetting the same promises, & nought cōsidering, but that which they saw before their eyes, they fell, and caused all the people to fall with them, into that cursed and damnable infi∣delitie▪ for which they were so grieueuously punished in the wildernesse, and excluded from enterance therevnto, and en∣ioying of that thing, which God had promised to theyr Fa∣thers. And in the example of Abrahā, whose faith abode firme and stable, by the consideration chiefly of the promise and will of God, as S. Paul declareth. So that the consideration of Gods Almightinesse, came after, to maintaine & second that which he had of the promise. One may see by these ex∣amples, what daunger there is, to depart and draw backe, al∣though neuer so litle, from the word of God: by which we are guided to the knowledge of his will. And by the knowledge of his will, conducted to the consideration and iudgement, which we ought to make and haue of his Almightinesse. For want whereof, the Doctors are fallen into errors and raylings, which they propose to the Ministers by their writing and conclusion of their resolution. That is to say: that the body of Iesus Christ may be in diuers places at one selfe-same instant: which is against the faith we ought to haue, and constantly retaine of the wisedome, prouidence, and euerlasting truth of our God: and against that likewise, which wee ought to haue and keepe of our Lords true hu∣manitie. And that which they first alledge of S. Ierome against Ʋigilantius, nought serueth for the proofe and confirmation of their error. Where no other thing he saith: but that the soules of the Saints are not inclosed in a certaine prison (as dreamed Vigilantius) but do follow the Lambe whithersoe∣uer he goeth. Nor that which they alledge of Saint Au∣gustine in the booke which he made of the pure care of the dead. For in that booke hee himselfe confesseth, that he is incertaine of that which the Doctors doo propose, and are assured. And nomore doo the three authorities they al∣ledge, of Saint Iohn Chrisostome, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine: whose sentences ought to be taken, and vnder stood of the Sacrament, and not of the thing signified by the Sacrament: As in the next conference the Ministers well hope to shew. The Ministers do much maruel, that the Doctors so draw backe, and will not (but vnwillingly) enter into conference for defence of their Masse: and to gainsay the Supper ce∣lebrated in the reformed Churches. For seeing they hold it for the principall foundation of theyr Religion: and propose the same for a meane of saluation to the whole world: (That they be not seene seducers, nor ouer credulous to beleeue or teach an incertaine and vnassured thing): they should alwayes be prouided and furnished with reasons, to the end they might approue, and readily defend that which they beleeue and say: and might conuince them also, that would deny the same: But in this, it appeareth to proceed of of an euill conscience, which being timerous and fearefull, flyeth alwaies the combat, and the light. It is long time since the Ministers haue importuned them to enter into the deci∣ding and conference of these two points, and to bring them thervnto, they haue proposed vnto them, that it was the end for which the conference was appointed: which Madame de Buillon, (in whose fauour it was made) once or twise hath publikely required: and that they also had often protested, that they were not for other ende assembled with the Doc∣tors, then to satisfie therein the said Lady of Buillon: and not to be examined by them, as they do falsly pretend. For the Ministers haue no desire to be examined of such Doctors, being Priests: Ioyned, that to be taught in the points of re∣ligion, and to know the truth, they would not choose such Maisters, nor repaire vnto them, and frequent theyr schooles for that purpose. And yet notwithstanding all the foresayd remonstrances often made and repeated by the Ministers, the Doctors haue alwayes vntill now, deferred to conferre of the foresaid points: awayting (as it is likely) that some oc∣casion should be offered, to breake off, and determine the sayd conference, before they had begunne to speak thereof. Albeit, had they any zeale to th honour of God, and to the edification of his Church, they should by all meanes haue procured that the sayd two points should haue beene fully cleared and resolued: be it that they would confirme and strengthen them of their part: or withdraw (as they pretend) those of our side from their errors. For it is not much need∣full hereafter to dispute of the Saints, of Purgatory, Pilgri∣grimages, and other like points: In regard of which, the most part of the world is at this day cleared. By meanes whereof, as well the Doctors, as the Ministers, ought chiefly to insist vpon these two points, and to endeuour (with them) to make them cleare and to be vnderstood of each one, and not to vse Sophistries and cauils to make them obscure, and retaine thereby the simple in their ignorance: as the Doctors ende∣uour to do. Who (hauing left of set purpose the Theses & Ar∣ticles proposed to them by the Ministers, with order & good methode in their last answeres) do confusedly propose cer∣taine questions culled out of their schoole diuinitie: euer more and more to fold vp this matter: And in so doing they withstand (as euer hitherto they haue done) what so, and so often they haue protested: to wit, that they would examine the confession of the reformed Churches: whereof notwith∣standing, they haue not handled one only point in all the conference. Wherein they haue shewed, and yet plainly do shewe, the distrust they haue to be able to withstand so cleare and apparant trueth; as that which is proposed in the saide confession. Answeres to the Preface of the Doctors Questions. THe Doctors, before they propose their Questions, in their Preface do call the Supper celebrated in the refor-Churches, a prophane and polluted banquet. And in so saying, they neither shame, nor feare, first to blaspheme Ie∣sus Christ, who instituted the same, and is the authour ther∣of: and then to condemne the Apostles of Impietie, which so haue celebrated and taught it: together with all the aun∣cient Churches which followed and obserued (whiles it re∣remained in it puritie) the forme and maner which the Euan∣gelists and Apostles had taught, and left by their writings. But the Ministers would willingly demaund of the Lordes our Maisters, that they particularly note vnto them, wherein they can violate the institution & ordinance of Iesus Christ, and leaue his example, and that of his Apostles in the cele∣bration of the Supper? For when they will celebrate the same, they first assemble the whole Church together: as Iesus Christ did his Apostles and Disciples: where after their publike confession of sinnes, and vnderstandingly made in the name of all, they make a Sermon to the people: wherein according to the grace and power which God hath giuen them, they declare the causes, and occasions, the end, the vse, the points and effects of the holy Supper: to lift vp the hearts of the people to the consideration of the incom∣prehensible loue which the Father hath shewed towards his Church, when in fauour thereof, and for the saluation of the same, he hath not spared his owne sonne, but exposed him to a cruell and cursed death: to the end, that each one cal∣ling to minde so great a grace and mercie, be kindled and inflamed in the loue of God: and tremble at the ingrati∣tudes and rebellious offences and sinnes which he hath com∣mitted against his Maiestie: and that with the sorrow and displeasure he hath for the same, he cast himselfe betweene the armes of his sonne, stretched out vpon the Crosse, to haue thereof a generall and full abolition. And that euen so, with such a faith and repentance hee be prepared to pre∣sent himselfe worthily at the table of the Lord, and to re∣ceiue the good things which are there administred. The Sermon ended, the Minister recyteth with an high and audible voyce, and his face turned towards the people, the words of the institution and ordinance of the Sup∣per, together with a briefe and short declaration of the same. That done, he denounceth to all those, not fully instruc∣ted and Catechised, that they depart: and to all them which are excommunicated, or attainted with some sinnes or scan∣dalous crimes (whereof they haue made no satisfaction to the Church) that they abstaine therefrom, and pollute not the table of the Lord. After that, the Minister goeth to the table: where hauing taken the bread, and giuen thankes to God, he breaketh it, and giueth it to the people there as∣sembled. And also presently the Cup to all them that com∣municate: which being ended, he giueth thankes to God, and dismisseth the people. The Ministers, following in all these things the example and rule, which Iesus Christ hath giuen them, cannot ima∣gine wherevpon the Doctors haue grounded that their say∣ing of the Supper, calling it a prophane and polluted ban∣quet. And they cannot perceiue, what they could or would reproue in all theyr action: vnlesse peraduenture they will taxe them for not hauing Aulbes, stoles, fanets, Crosses, holy water, banners, Chisibles, tunicles, lights, Incense, belles, singing in a straunge and vnknowne language, Musicke, and Organes, ho∣ly napkins, Aultars, Clearkes to answere: Et cum spiritu tuo, nor words addressed to the bread and wine (which haue no eares) after the maner of Inchanters, nor the Crosse & signes, nor any eleuation of the bread and wine, to cause them to be adored: nor other like aperies of mans inuentiō, and drawne part from Iudaisme, and part from Paganisme. The obserua∣tion of which things the Ministers would make great con∣science of: because they be but Idolatries and superstitions, whereby the puritie & integritie of Christian Religion, is wholly wasted and corrupted. Answeres to the questions proposed by the Doctors touching the Supper. FOr answere to the first question, the Ministers say; that the Sacrament in perfection considered, consisteth in three things. One whereof is the Element, which Ireneus calleth a thing earthy: the other, the thing signified; called by the same author, a thing heauenly. And the third is the word, by which the earthy thing is deputed to signifie the heauenly, and assureth them of the exhibition thereof, that with faith do present themselues to receiue it. For answere to the second question, the Ministers say; that the ordinance of God, contained in his word, and de∣clared by his Minister, according to his commandement, is this word word necessary with the E ment, to consti∣tute the Sacrament: and not the onely lowe and secret pronunciation of certaine vnkowne words, addressed to the elements, nor any vertue which is hidden in the same. For answere to the third question, the Ministers say, that by the word aforesaid the signes bee chaunged, not as tou∣ching the nature: or as touching the substance: but as tou∣ching the vse onely: and that only during the action, wher∣vnto they serue. For answere to the fourth question, the Ministers say, that the bread and wine which before the action of the Supper were common, are consecrated in the Supper: that is to say, deputed by the said word and ordinance of God, declared by the Ministers, to a holy and sacred vse: which is, to re∣present and exhibit the things by them signified. The answere to the fourth question sufficeth for the fift. For answere to the sixt question, the Ministers say, that the faithfull receiue not onely in the Supper, the gifts and graces of Iesus Christ, (as his tighteousnesse, life, and the other fruites of his sacrifice) but that they also receiue and possesse himselfe: and are made one with him, no lesse truly and straightly, then the members are conioyned to the head. And they say moreouer, that this coniunction is the spring and meane of all the benefites, which flowe from the grace of God, by him into vs: but they adde, that this reception must bee wholly attributed to the free operati∣on of the holy Ghost, which maketh vs fit and capa∣ble to knowe our Lord Iesus Christ, with all his vertues and properties: and in knowing him, to trust in him: and in reposing our trust in him, to possesse and wholly en∣ioy him. For answere to the seuenth question, the Ministers say, that they reiect and reproue the word Concomitance, and more also the thing thereby signified: for as much as that hath beene the cause, for which the common people hath bene depriued and excluded from one of the essentiall parts of the Sacrament: namely, from the participation of the Cuppe. And they say, that it is an attempt against the diuine Maiestie, to seperate what the sonne of God hath ioyned together: and to deny to some of his members, that which he hath willed and commaunded to be common to all. Ioyned, that the reason of the Sacrament requireth it: which was instituted for our spirituall nourishment. The which (as doth the corporall) consisteth in drinke & meate. To the ende then, that there be some correspondency be∣tweene them two, it behoueth, that as we are fed with the flesh of Iesus Christ crucified: So be we also watered with his blood shead, for the remission of sinnes. To be short, see∣ing that the Supper was chiefly instituted to shewe foorth the Lords death: and that in his death, his blood was sepera∣ted from his bodie: Meete it is, that the bread and wine be there administred, to represent the one and the other, and more clearly to propose vnto vs, all the mistery of the death of Iesus Christ. For answere to the eight question, the Ministers do ac∣knowledge no other cause, nor meane of remission of sinnes, then the grace of God, the blood of Iesus Christ, and faith; whereby the effect of Gods grace, and the fruit of the death of Iesus Christ are applied vnto vs. For answere to the ninth question, the Ministers do say: that the faithfull comming to the Supper, do not come thi∣ther to receiue there a new Iesus Christ, with whom they had not bene formerly conioyned: nor a new righteousnes, which had not bene communicated vnto them. And they adde, that if some one did present himselfe there without faith, (for want whereof he should not be vnited, incorpo∣rated and engraffed into Iesus Christ, to bee partaker of his righteousnes, life, and all other his gifts and blessings): that the holy Supper in that case, should be as vnprofitable to him, as is meate vnptofitable to a dead man. But, if liuing by the meanes aforesayd (namely the grace of God, the blood of Iesus Christ, and faith) he present himselfe there in such an estate: that then the graces of God be multiplied, increa∣sed, and more and more confirmed in him. So that Circumcision, brought not vnto Abraham a new righteousnesse: but sealed and ratified that, which by the promise was communicated before vnto him. Which the faithfull, knowing in what degree of vertue they bee, yet ought they not to contemne the holy Supper, nor any way to abstaine from it, when occasion and meanes serue them to be there: Considering, that they cannot be so promoted nor aduaunced in the knowledge and feare of God, and in the faith of his promises, that they may not yet growe and profit (in what estate soeuer they be) by the meanes which God hath therefore left and ordained in his Church. And impossible it is, for a man hauing true faith in his heart, to do otherwise; seeing hee hath the commoditie thereof: For as much as the nature of faith is not to apprehend the promises of God onely: but also to engender, and bring forth in the heart of the faithfull, a will to obey him, and keep his com∣maundements and ordinances. For answere to the first Article which the Doctors pro∣pose touching their Masse, the Ministers say: that the Doc∣tors do openly blaspheme Iesus Christ, to authorise with his name, and by his example, such an abhomination. And that they also mocke the Church & the world, in preaching and writing such Impieties. For answere to the second Article of the Masse, the Mi∣nisters say: that there is in the Church no other sacrifice, by which men are reconciled to God, and which maketh him mercifull and fauourable towards them (by appeasing his wrath) then that onely and alone, which Iesus Christ hath once offered vpō the Crosse to his Father. The vertue wher∣of being eternall, to sanctifie all beleeuers, and to obtain vn∣to them for euer, remission and abolishment of sinnes: there is no need of any other, nor that which he hath once offe∣red, be euer reiterate. For answere to the third Article, the Ministers say: that they which approue the Masse, and other Priesthood, then that of Iesus Christ; and wil establish for remission of sinnes an other sacrifice, then that he himselfe, with his body vpon the Crosse offered, are Antichrists: and abolish (as much as in them lyeth) all the vertue and fruite of the death & sa∣crifice of the sonne of God. For answere to the fourth Article, the Ministers do al∣ledge, what S. Paul writeth, to wit: That where remission is, Hebr. 10. there is no more offering for sinne. Now so it is, that by the death of Iesus Christ, remission hath bene obtained for vs: as by infinit passages of scripture appeareth. It followeth then, that there is no more oblation for sin, neither in the Masse, nor out of the Masse. And if there be none for the liuing, lesse is there for the dead. For answere to the fift, the Ministers maintaine, that the Communion is of the essence of the Supper, as S. Paul sheweth in the first of the Corinthians, 10. and 11. Chapters. And as it is carried by the Cannon it selfe, and other things about the Masse. For answere to the sixt, the Ministers say three things: First, that the Popish Masse is no Sacrament: then that the body of Iesus Christ is not there. And therof conclude, that then the bread and wine there remaining, ought not to be adored: which being creatures cannot be adored, but that they which adore them be Idolators. For answere to the seuenth and last Article, the Mini∣sters say contrary to the Doctors, that there is not any thing in the Masse, which is not either directly, or indirectly con∣trary to the word of God. The Ministers for conclusion admonish the Doctors, & entreat them, not to depart (as they haue formerly done) out of the bounds of the matter, now proposed for disputa∣tion. To the end, that these two points which are now in debate betweene them, may be wholly and perfectly decy∣ded, to the content and edification of them that shall reade the Acts of this conference. Tuesday the 30. of Iuly, in the yeare aforesaid. A briefe Reply of the Doctors, against the last Answer of the Ministers to them, sent by my Lord the Duke de Niuer∣nois, the first of August, about seuen or eight of the clocke in the euening. 1566. T He Doctors, after their resolution giuen vpon the Artice of Gods Omnipoten∣cy, were not determined to returne any more therevnto: as hauing sufficiently handled that matter. But the horrour they haue of the new blasphemies, con∣tained in the last writing of the Mi∣nisters, hath incyted them (contrary to their purpose) although not to reply, at the least to admo∣nish the Ministers and the reader of this present Conference, of the said execrable blasphemies: which they are constrai∣ned to confesse, that will not acknowledge the Reall pre∣sence of the body of Iesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Aultar: but dare therby deny the power of God himself. The consideration wherof (as the Doctors hope) wil not only cō∣firme the Catholikes in the faith of the said article: but also (by Gods assistance) wil bring back many which are strayed, separating themselues from the Church Catholike: whē they shall vnderstand the detestable errors & blasphemies which do follow the contradiction of the reall presence of the body and bloud of our Lord in the Sacrament. Which also should serue for the conuersion of the Ministers themselues: would they without passiō examine the reasons & acts which haue bene proposed vnto them, touching the power of God: and sincerely iudge therof: as resisting the holy spirit, in stead of acknowledging their errors, they are turned to all maner of reproach and iniury against them, which of good will would admonish them; and haue taxed them, that they tended not but to roote them out. Which thing the Doctors neuer min∣ded: and desire not but the saluation of the Ministers, & of all those that are seperated from the true Catholike Church. Of which, their preachings shall beare witnesse: wherein they ordinarily exhort the people to pray vnto God for them. True it is, that they require the extirpatiō of the king∣dome of Sathan▪ and the rooting out of all heresies and per∣uerse doctrine, rather by the preaching of Gods word, then by all other meanes. And they wonder why the Ministers are so pricked against them in their two last answeres: see∣ing they haue giuen them no occasion thereof, but haue ta∣ken it lightly, for no other reason, but because the Doctors haue written, that many propositions set forth by the Mini∣sters, contained blasphemies, which they should content themselues to denie, or to proue that there are none, and leaue the iudgement thereof to the readers: without ente∣ring into such hotte coller, seeing they professe to bee so much mortified, patient, and modest, that albeit one should reproach them, they would not reproach againe. They should also well remember the faire tytles with which they honour the Catholique doctrine: as with the name of super∣stition, Idolatrie, impietie, abhomination, and many other like: yea not sparing the persons: calling the Popes, Bi∣shops, & Priests, Antichrists, & Ministers of Sathan: against which reproaches, the Doctors content themselues to shewe by the word of God, when occasion serueth, that such tytles agree neither with the persons, nor yet the doctrine by them preached. Now although that the Ministers and their furie deserue a sharpe reply, yet to mittigate their so inflamed hearts, the Doctors will not answere to the iniuries which touch their persons and estates: referring the whole to the iudgement of the vnpassionate readers: and will only touch the points which concerne the doctrine. First, the Ministers do great wrong to the Doctors and their like, in comparing them to Donatists, and falsly to im∣pute vnto them, that they tie the Church in a certaine place, (as did the Donatists) which placed it onely in Affrike. For it is manifest to all, that the Doctors know not, nor confesse any other Church, then the Catholique: which (as it name importeth) hath bene visible since the Apostles time, and hath her spreading through the world, in what region, coun∣try, or place soeuer, the faithfull beleeuing in Iesus Christ are. Although they reuerence the Church of Rome, as chiefe and principall among others: as Ireneus, Tertullian, S. Cipri∣an, S. Augustine, and other the auncient Fathers, haue giuen it this honour, to confesse it to be principall and mother (as it were) of other Churches; with more iust reason, may such obiection be retorted against the Ministers: who cannot say their Church to be Catholike: hauing taken it beginning in our time, seene & known at Geneua, founded vpō the priuate opinion of one man: without that in former time one could shewe such opinion to haue beene holden in any Nation whatsoeuer. Which thing shall be handled in it order, when they shall examine the errors by the Ministers maintai∣ned against this Article; I beleeue the holy Catholique Church. Moreouer, the Ministers should not haue alledged the violence, crueltie, and furie of the Donatists, against the Catholiques: for such example doth condemne them, and their like. But because it doth not but bring fresh to me∣morie the passed euils, which Fraunce hath endured by the instigation of the Ministers, for feare to incyte them further to say new iniuries: the Doctors will not dwell long vp∣on this matter. Neuerthelesse, they shewe vnto the Mi∣nisters, that the Donatists reproached the Catholiques, that they endured persecution by them, and that to roote them out, they sollicited the Emperours and Magistrates euen as the Ministers doo blame the Doctors. Who con∣fesse: first to desire the conuersion of all Sects, and in case they will not come to repentance, that the Magistrates by good and holy lawes may execute such punishment there∣fore, as God bee not so outragiously blasphemed, and the people grieued. And therein they follow the doctrine of Saint Augustine, expressed in an Epistle, sent Advincen∣tin contra Donatistas. Where he confesseth, that the Catho∣liques did persecute the Donatists: and that contrariwise the Donatists also afflicted the Catholiques: but that the persecutions were different. That those of the Catholiques were not executed but by the Magistrate, and came of cha∣ritie, to roote out the euill, which hindred the peace and tranquilitie publike. And contrariwise, the persecution by the Donatists, was made without authoritie of the Magi∣strate, and proceeded of malice: which pretended but mis∣chiefe and ruine: and S. Augustine declareth that the first was good, and of God: and the second wicked, and by in∣spiration of Sathan. And to this purpose he bringeth many excellent examples of holy scripture. This hath bene somewhat largely handled, to purge the Doctors of the slaunder imposed on them by the Mini∣sters: where they reproach them, that in their preachings, writings, and conferences, they search but onely to roote out the Ministers: whom they haue alwayes persecuted. And they interpret the same as therefore proceeding from a particular hate of the Doctors against them: and not of charitie, and zeale of truth, and of the conuersion, as well of the Ministers, as of those which are seduced and abused by them. The Doctors therein call God to witnesse, and doo protest the contrarie, and pray the Ministers to be∣leeue them, attending therevpon the iudgement of God, who is the onely searcher of the hearts and affections of men. As touching the Article where the Ministers say that God is almightie, because he can do whatsoeuer he will, had they listed to read the writings of Saint Thomas (whose doc∣trine they disdaine) well had they knowne, that this rea∣son is no reason. Because the Angels, and they which are blessed, conforming themselues alwayes to the will of God, can doo all things that they will doo: and there is no crea∣ture which can hinder the effect of theyr will, and yet are they not almightie. And as touching the saying of S. Augu∣stine, in taking it so as the Ministers do take it; The reason of Gods omnipotencie is ouer-weake and false. But to haue the true vnderstanding of this sentence, it behoueth to con∣sider, that there is a difference betweene the actuall will of God, and the power of will. For God can wil many things which he willeth not, nor euer will. And euen so can he will more then he actually willeth: whereby they ought rather to measure his omnipotencie, then to measure it according to his actuall will. And thus must be interpreted the text of S. Augustine, that the almigh∣tinesse extendeth to all things which he can will, and not ac∣cording to that he actually willeth. And S. Augustine is cy∣ted by the Ministers, being destitute of testimonie of scrip∣ture, albeit they vaunted in their former answere, to haue learned this reason by the scriptures. In the article following, the Ministers by slaunder doo falsly taxe the Doctors, to haue cut off some words of theyr last writing: which will not be found to bee true. For the text of the Doctors beareth these words. It is not to bee doubted, but that aboue all conceit and imagination of hu∣mane spirit, the power of God is great, infinite, and incom∣prehensible. Where it clearly appeareth, that the Doctors speake generally of all conceit and imagination, without any exception thereof, be it of wisedome or folly. Therfore was it not needfull to expresse the words of the Ministers, seeing that the Doctors spake generally. And that which goeth before doth shewe the same: as the Ministers haue cyted it: where it is said, that the Doctors reproued the said Ministers, because they gaue some restraint and limitation of the omnipotencie of God. For as much as they would not stretch it generally to all the things which men can con∣ceiue, and in their mindes imagine. Where the words gene∣rally, and all things do sufficiently declare, that the Doctors haue willed to comprehend end the foolish phantasies and ima∣ginations themselues, which men may apprehend accor∣ding to humane iudgement, and haue willed to cut off no∣thing from the writing of the Ministers: who peraduenture haue thought, the Doctors would not say, that God can doo all that which a foolish braine can imagine: as fearing they would inferre against them, that God then should commit some folly. Which would not follow: For albeit that some things be esteemed follyes in the iudgement of men, neuerthelesse seeing they be in themselues possible, they may bee done of God; but wisely, although humane sence do iudge the contrary: euen as in many iudgements man is deceiued: esteeming that folly, which (as saith Saint Paul) is wisedome to wards God. The Doctors then say, that 1. Cor. 5. all things imaginable to man, are without exception to bee done as touching God: the things excepted, which imply contradiction to be, and not to be. Which cannot be done in regard of the repugnancie comming on their part, and not by default of the power of God. The Doctors pray them that shall bee able to reade these Conferences, to note, that the Ministers are alwaies found false accusers, whē they taxe the Doctors with slaunder: as in the former wri∣ting they remaine thereof conuinced. The Ministers shall finde themselues also false accusers in the article following: there where they cut off the saying of the Doctors, and falsly impute vnto them, that they haue written, God can do something against order. The Doc∣tors haue well said, that it is blasphemy to say, that God could do nothing against the order by him established in the world. Where appeareth the slaunder of the Ministers, who haue clipped the sentence, and taken away these words [Established in the world]. In that they inferre, it is blasphe∣my to say, that God can doo a thing which is not well or∣dained. It is doublesse, but to doo some matter against the order established in the world, importeth not some thing disordered: but onely a mutation and chaunge of order, without any disorder, which the Ministers confesse in their article following. The Doctors haue in great execration the blasphemies contained in the next article. Of which the first is, that one body to bee in diuers places, is a thing derogatorie to the truth of God: for as much as in God there should bee yea and nay. So that the Ministers doo say, that God should not be true, if hee caused one body to bee in diuers places. And yet teach they not, nor can teach, that God hath euer said, that one body could not bee in diuers places. It impug∣neth the wisedome of God: because that in his workes ther should be disorder and confusion. Wherin they likewise con∣fesse, that God should not be wise, if he caused one body at one instant, to be in diuers places. The third is, that such a thing repugneth the omnipo∣tencie of God. For in such a worke there should be imper∣fection. So that, so farre off is it (after the Ministers opini∣on) that God in so dooing should bee almightie; that con∣trariwise he should be imperfect and weake. The fourth is, that were such a thing done, it should bee against the eternall and vnchangeable will of God: and therefore God should bee mutable: which blasphemies doo necessarily disgorge a manifest Atheisme: to wit, that God should not bee God, if hee made one bodie to bee in diuers places at one selfe-same instant: For God cannot be but true, wise, almightie, and vnchangeable: which blas∣phemies the Doctors doo content themselues to quote and marke onely: and to admonish what simple stuffe issueth from the doctrine of them, which denie the reall presence of the body of Iesus Christ in the holy Sacrament, without dwelling vpon further confutation of them: as beeing too manifest, and hauing regard to that which Ireneus saith: that some heresies there be: which to discouer, is to refute them. In the article following, do they gainesay that which so often they haue said, that God could not cause one bodie to be in diuers places at one instant: because it repugneth the order which he hath established in the world. As if God could not do otherwise, then according to the order alreadie by him established. In the present article they confesse, that God can change and vnchange the said order. From which confession the Doctors drawe such an argument: God can chaunge and alter the order which hee hath established in the world: and that without preiudice to his truth, wisdome, power, and vnchangeable will. Therefore can he chaunge the order, by which he hath established (as the Ministers wil say) that one body shuld be but in one place; & cause contra∣riwise, (the order being chaunged) that one body shall bee in diuers places: without that the same is any way deroga∣torie to his truth, wisedome, power, and will. And that by consequence, God of his omnipotencie can cause one body to be in diuers places. As touching the article of the distinction of the will of God, the Ministers do confound the whole: vnderstanding nothing in the said distinction, no more then in that which they say, that one body to be in two places, is in the ranke of things which God hath declared by his word, against the which he can do nothing. The question is first of the omni∣potencie of God, which is reduced to his power, and not to his essence, and to that which he is in himselfe: as to be one, wise, good: which things belong not to the matter of the om∣nipotencie, but of the essence in himselfe. Secondly, what reason is there to confer the being of one body in one place: or to know whether God can cause it to be in two or many places: with the essence of God, which is one, incomprehen∣sible, &c. seeing that such things of number, pertaine to the essence of God, and power to make one body in many pla∣ces, doth nothing properly belong vnto it, and is not refer∣red vnto the same. Thirdly, the Ministers say, that God by his word haih declared his will, because he was one: which nothing serueth to the present matter. But (pardoning the Ministers such follies) how dare they cōpare with the matter of Gods essence, that which is in question of the being of one body in one, or in diuers places? seeing God hath neuer said that he could not do it: as he hath manifestly shewed all the other perfectiōs, which pertaine to the diuine essence. Wher∣by it appeareth, that it sufficeth the Ministers to fill vp paper, without founding their saying vpon solid reason. For as much as they repute it slaunder, when one cutteth off some of their words, albeit the full sence abide: the Doctors do wonder, that the Ministers haue not feared the like obiections to them. But they are so accustomed there∣vnto, that they cannot beware thereof. As in the article where mention is made of the definitiō of a body, they passe that ouer in silence, which giueth solution to theyr difficul∣tie. The Doctors haue defined a bodie to be a kind of firme quantitie, of three dimensions, length, breadth, and deepe∣nesse: which definition comprehendeth the whole essence of one body, which is of the predicament of quantitie: and no mention is any way made of the circumscription of place. The Ministers say, that the Doctors by their definition, doo limit the body, and therefore it is circumscript. But they haue maliciously omitted (as it is to bee supposed) this little word [place]. For the question is not, whether a body be lymited, or no, seeing that no man doth call it infinite. But the question is, whether it bee essentially circum∣script of place, so that it cannot bee a body, if it bee not in place: for as much as the Ministers could not answere to the argument of the Doctors, they haue cut off that which an∣noyed them. The foure next articles deserue no new reply: and therefore the Doctors send backe the readers to that which heretofore hath bene said. They onely admonish, that it is a great matter which the Ministers do hold, that a myracle could not bee done in the body of Iesus Christ, without chaunge of his nature: and such an opinion do they impose vpon Instine, who hath said and maintained (with the other Auncients) that the body of Iesus Christ passed through the doores without chaunge of nature, albeit that the opera∣tion of the myracle, was wrought in the nature of the body, without changing the same: but in giuing it a spirituall qua∣litie and perfection, to wit, subtiltie, aboue the natural quali∣ties of a body. With like boldnesse, call the Ministers the scripture of the Camells passage through the eye of a needle, a parable and similitude: as they doo that of the Supper, and all others which withstand their errors. And the better to escape, they say that God saueth not, but changeth and con∣uerteth the rich man: and so cannot make a Camell to passe through the eye of a needle, without diminishing and chan∣ging of his grossenesse. But the Ministers will not consider, that when our Lord spake of the rich man his entrie into the kingdome of heauen, he put not the difficultie in the entring of the kingdome properly, but in the conuersion of the rich man: by which, hee should obtaine the entrie and pos∣session of heauen. Therefore when our Lord saith, that it is more easie for God, to cause a Camell (or Cable) to enter through the eye of a needle, then a rich man the kingdome of heauen: hee intendeth to compare the conuersion of a rich man (which is vnpossible with men) to the passage of a Camell abiding in his grossenesse: otherwise, there should bee no apparance of difficultie: and our Lord would not haue saide, that such a thing had beene impossible to men. The Doctors say moreouer, that they haue not produ∣ced this place, to proue and inferre properly the penitration of dimensions: but to shewe, that God can make a body to occupie place, not proportionable to it greatnesse: which is as well contrarie to the nature of a grosse and thicke body, as that one body be in diuers places. Where the Ministers do boast, that they are not con∣strained to confesse any thing of Gods workes, alledged by the Doctors out of the scripture: it followeth not that the Doctors out of the scripture: it followeth not that the Doctors haue brought forth vaine reasons to constraine and conuince them. And for the same referre them to the Acts of the Conference. And as touching the knowledge, whether God could do such myracles alledged, aboue the nature of a body, the Ministers cannot escape whatsoeuer euasion they pretend, vnconuinced (if not openly, yet silently at least) to haue denied, as well the power as the deed: For, affirming that God canot cause one body to be in diuers places, be∣cause it repugneth the order by him established in the world, and his wisdome and wil, which disposeth all by good order; and that it was against the nature of a body: albeit as much may bee said thereof, as may truly bee said of all the other things▪ mentioned touching one body: and that there are like reasons: in confessing the one, they must necessarily con∣fesse all the others, that there is the like reason. The Ministers vnable to giue any difference, and shewe why God cannot do the one, and that he can doo the others, haue silently consented thervnto. And although they would neuer confesse the debt, and yeeled themselues vanquished, as they do boast, it is no maruell: for it is the nature of here∣tikes, to be obstinate, and resist the truth, what reasons soe∣uer are proposed vnto them. The Scribes and Pharisies ne∣uer confessed to be ouercome of our Lord, albeit his argu∣ments were vnreproueable. And albeit they that withstood S. Stephen, had nothing to answere, yet left they not to resist the holy Ghost, which spake by him: as the Ministers doo resist the same spirit, which speaketh in the scripture, and by the mouth of the auncient Fathers, concerning myracles done in the body of Iesus Christ aboue nature. Which the Ministers do repugne, by I know not what vaine and friuo∣lous starting holes. S. Ierome speaketh well to this purpose, Haeretici conuinci possunt, non persuaderi. Heretikes may bee conuinced, not perswaded. And Tertullian writeth: Duritia baeretica vincenda est, non suadenda. Hereticall obduration is to be vanquished, not perswaded. And as touching the iniuries which the Ministers in this behalfe do multiply against the Doctors, in that doo they imitate all the aduersaries of truth, and giue testimony of the disquiet which such manner of people endure in theyr mindes, when their errors are shewed them. Of whom the Doctors haue pittie and compassion, & pray God to restore thē to their right sences. For as much as they know, that the conuersion of an heretike, is one of the matters reserued to the omnipotencie of God. In vaine doo the Ministers labour to produce store of Greeke, to shewe that Penetrare Caelos, dooth not signifie to passe the heauens without opening: because the Verbe [Dierchestai] is found, for passing where there is an opening. But the Doctors neuer said, that [Penetrare] or [Dierches∣thai] may not be applied to open places: or that one pear∣ceth in opening of them: for well do they know, that it is met with in all Authors. They haue well said, that the Ministers would inferre a re∣all opening of the heauen, by the rigor and proprietie of the verbe Aperire: So might they also inferre, that the hea∣uens were shut in the ascention of Iesus Christ, by the verbes Dierchesthai, and Penetrare, which strictly do signifie, to pearce or passe through, without that of it selfe it importeth an opening: albeit a man may vse the same where there is an open passage. But by the rigour of theyr signification can they not necessarily inferre an opening, if the ope∣ning bee not shewed from some other place, by some word, or euident condition of the thing pierced: as it is in the texts by the Ministers alledged. Now in the ascention these words [Dierchesthas], and [Penetrare], are put for to pierce: and no word is there added, which importeth a di∣vision of the heauens. The condition of which, nor the state of the glorified body of Iesus Christ, doo not constraine that one necessarily vnderstand an opening to haue beene made, to suffer the body of Iesus Christ to enter. There∣fore did the Doctors wel reason of the rigor of [Penetrare:] as the Ministers did of the rigour of [Aperire:] which more often is found in the scripture without signification of the reall opening of the heauens, then [Penetrare] is found in the scripture to signifie a diuision and actuall cutting of the heauens. For Aperire Caelos, is often found for imaginary and spirituall opening; and hardly is Penetrare Caelos euer found for actuall diuision of the heauens. And therefore had the Doctors better reason to conclude, by the rigour of the verbe Dierchesthai, or Penetrare, (to pierce without actu∣all diuision of the heauens) then the Ministers had to inferre the opening of them by the verbe Aperire. The Ministers in the last article obiect to the Doctors, that they haue passed ouer some places of scripture, by which it appeareth, that faith is the worke of God, whervnto (say the Doctors) that in some one of their writings they haue ex∣presly confessed, that faith, in as much as it is a gift of God, it is a worke of God: but in as much as he that beleeueth worketh together with God, in beleeuing (for Nemo credit, nisivolēs, no man beleeueth vnlesse he be willing) it is a humane work. And it is not repugnāt one self-same work, for diuers causes to be a worke of God, and a worke of man. And where they say, that the auncient Fathers haue said (if not in proper, yet in equiualent termes) that God could not cause one bo∣dy to be in diuers places: that is false. And the Ministers ne∣uer haue, nor can shewe the same: and contradict their last writing. For bringing the reason, why the Fathers haue not expresly said it: It was (said they) because they neuer thought that such an absurditie would euer fall into the braine of man. Which reason ought to haue place, for the say∣ing in termes equiualent, as in expresse termes, sith one selfe-same thing is signified as well by the one, as by the other. As touching the rest, the Ministers neuer answer to the principall point, whereof they haue bene so often admoni∣shed: and they efsoones admonish them, should they a thou∣sand times call this saying a repetition: to wit, that they are required to bring scripture, to proue that it repugneth the order established in the world, the truth, the wisedome, om∣nipotencie, and vnchangeable will of God, that one body may be in two places: which thing they cannot do: but they will answere, as they are accustomed: that is to say, nothing. Wherein appeareth, that their doctrine is not founded vpon Gods word, but vpon their owne opinion, or particular inspi∣ration, which cannot be but of Sathan. For it cannot be of the holy Ghost which is against the common consent of the Church vniuersall. And vpon the same are also founded, the other articles of their religion: albeit they disguise them, and promise Gods word to euery purpose. A short Aduertisement of the Doctors, vpon the Ministers Reso∣lution, touching the omnipotencie of God. THe Doctors are astonied at the fashiō of the Ministers, in their words and writings. For they themselues from the beginning of the Conference, haue neuer had patience to prosecute & conclude one onely point, without mingling other things therewithall, impertinent to the matter in que∣stion: as shal appeare by the reading of the acts. And before their resolution made of the omnipotencie of God, they haue heaped vp all the articles which they could remember, and throwne one vpon an other without cause or reason. Al∣though the Doctors at their request, had proposed the Ar∣ticles of the Supper: And after dispute of the omnipoten∣cie of God (to make present the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the holy Sacrament) to come orderly to shewe and proue, that the will of God hath bene such, and that there it is. But the Doctors well vnderstand the good custome of all them of the pretended reformed religion: which is, to spet in the eyes of Christians, all the articles of the Religion, and theyr inuented filthinesse, all on one threed: to the end, that nought bee determined, that all abide in confusion, and that the Serpent glide awaye, hauing cast his ve∣nome. Moreouer, by obseruation of the Ministers answeres, it shall bee seene and knowne, that they neuer stay vpon any certaine and the same answere, but rather of an act al∣ledged out of the scripture: where of euery question, they haue giuen therevnto diuers impertinent, and some∣times vnsufferable answeres. Of which the Doctors do ad∣monish them that can read these Conferences, and pray them to haue regard to the same, and thereof referre them to their iudgement. Furthermore, the Doctors admonish the Ministers, that they may, or ought to knowe, that all Sects of our times doo cast before the eyes of those whom they will abuse, the same beadroll of Articles, which the Ministers in theyr Re∣solution haue gathered together, to get audience against the Church Catholique, and to bring in theyr heresies and errors, vnder the name of the glorie of GOD. Whereof they boaste to bee defenders as well as the Mi∣nisters. And therefore are they not so acceptable in theyr opinions and conclusions, that the Ministers can pretend any right, to exalt the power and glorie of God, by such mingling and confounding of all matters toge∣ther. Moreouer the Doctors shewe, that they may with better reason retort against the Ministers, the conclusiō which they pretend to inferre, of the subtiltie and craft of Sathan: which is (as they write) that Sathan vnder faire shewe of pietie, glideth like a Serpent into the Church of GOD, to put therein disorder and confusion: and in the end to assaile God himselfe. The Doctors do pray each one to consider in himselfe, whether the Ministers purpose be not such by their deductions, and generally by the principall points of theyr doctrine. For vnder faire pretext to roote out some abuses and errors against the word of the Lord, which they falsly studie to perswade the world to bee in the Church Catho∣lique: And vnder the shadow to preach, that they seeke the aduancement of the name of the same Lord, they goe about to spoile God of all his proprieties and perfection, albeit they no more declare it, then Sathan told his meaning to the first man. Furthermore, the Ministers abase the merit and effica∣cie of the bloud of Iesus Christ, and open a doore by their doctrine to all vices and sinnes. Be it so, the Doctors will not repeate what the Ministers haue held, concerning the omnipotencie of God: because they shall fill their writings therewithall. But so it is, that in their goodly resolution (al∣though they suite it with seemely words) that God cannot (after them) but so much as they please to receiue of his wis∣dome and will: which they disguise after their owne sence, when it is found declared in the scripture. Against the goodnesse of God they hold that he is the author and wor∣ker of euill, and of sinne. Against his mercie they teach, that he neuer pardoneth, nor will pardon a man which shall maliciously oppose himselfe to the knowledge of the truth: or which shall resist the same. Against the merit of the bloud of Iesus Christ, and passion of the Crosse, in proper termes haue they written, that had Iesus Christ onely dyed by the sorrowes of corporall death, and by the sheading of his whole bloud, he had nought done, nor profited for our redemption: if beeing on the Crosse hee had not endured in his soule, the paines of the damned before his death: and other horrible blasphemies contained in the atticle of the discent into hell. The Ministers do also instruct their adhe∣rents, that murther, adultery, robbery, theft, and euery crime whatsoeuer, is but a veniall sinne to one predestinate, who is neuer (say they) out of the fauour of God, what thing soeuer he commit: and do assure their faithfull, and those of theyr Church to beleeue firmly, that they are in grace, and prede∣stinate, which is in plaine termes (albeit the Ministers will otherwise excuse thē) to giue leaue and license to commit all wickednesse, and other articles which the Doctors will veri∣fie, where the matter shall require the same. If the Ministers denie these points to be in their writings, and published in their Sect, the places of Caluins bookes which the Doctors noted in the Margin, wil testifie the same. To be briefe, behold the glory of God, and of his sonne Ie∣sus Christ, wherevnto tend the Ministers, by the rooting out of the pretended impieties, mentioned in many articles of their last resolution. For briefe answere wherevnto, the Doctors doo say, that some things by slaunder of the Mini∣sters, are falsly imputed to the Catholique Church: that o∣thers are expressed in the holy scripture: and others drawne from the same, and confirmed by the traditions of the Apo∣stles, and the vniuersall consent of the first Christian church: the deceits excepted which the Ministers adde in euery ar∣ticle. And so shall it bee shewed and proued at the least in time and place, if the Ministers haue patience to handle in it ranke euery difficultiie: but if to make their doctrine con∣fused, they persist to mingle all together, the Doctors do protest to mocke therat without answere. Moreouer, the Ministers in generall, doo rightly attribute to the power of God: and say well, that the certaine knowledge thereof, is to be taken by the scriptures, which hath bene alwaies auou∣ched to them by the Doctors. Very well say they also, that it is infinite and incomprehen∣sible. But when they come to particularities, and to shew wherein the omnipotencie lieth and consisteth, then forget they holy scriptures, and without them do measure the same, according to the wisdome and eternall wil of God: & accor∣ding to the order established in the world: and as though they remembred no more that such power were infinit, they tie it to the conditiō, proprietie, & natural order of creatures: As though to make something against, or aboue the order, condition, & natural proprietie of the creatures, were a thing repugnant to the wisedome, nature, and wil of God. Behold the short resolutiō which the Doctors can gather of the Mi∣nisters opinion, touching the omnipotencie of God: which shall appeare by their writings and answeres giuen to the said Doctors. And as touching S. Augustine, which they produce for them, he hath bene answered heretofore. The Doctors refer them to their writings, cōcerning that which the Ministers do falsly tax thē to hold, as a sufficient argument (to infer some matter to be done of God) to shewe that he hath power to do it. The resolutions and obiections of the Doctors do plainly containe the contrarie. The Doctors are also falsly accused by the Ministers, as if they had affirmed the faith wholly contrary to nature. Who haue onely said, that the contradiction ordinarily made to faith, founded vpon the word, commeth from the considera∣tion of naturall things, against the power of God. Concerning Abrahā, the scripture in Genesis alwaies pro∣poseth, that he & his wife made some difficultie touching the promise of God. And cōsidered Corpus suū emortuū, & mor∣tuā vuluā Sarae. His owne dead body, & the dead wombe of Sarah: vntil he heard the assurance of the omnipotēcie. And S. Paul sufficiently declareth the speech of Abraham, from his first vocation, vntil after such assurance, without putting di∣stinction in the Historie, of that which was before, or after such assurance: as is that which the Apostle saith, that he cō∣sidered not Corpus suū emortuū, his owne dead body, but re∣sted vpon the assurance of the almightinesse, & of the pro∣mise made vnto him. The Doctors say: they haue better concluded accor∣ding to the faith, we ought to haue of the power of God (to make one bodie in diuers places) then the Ministers haue done: which haue not any word of God to settle theyr faith vpō, & to beleeue that God could not do it, or that it repug∣neth the wisedome, prouidence, and eternall vertue, or the humanitie of Iesus Christ, yea the nature of a simple bodie only. But concerning all that, the Ministers do trust in their owne presumption, and particular reuelation, without one onely passage of scripture, wherevpon they might stay theyr opinion. Contrariwise, haue the Doctors founded their faith (not on the power of God onely, to make one body in di∣uers places, but to beleeue the deed, and that God hath so willed) on the holy scripture: as in theyr Resolution is con∣tained: with the passages of auncient Fathers, which they to this end haue alledged. Which are so plaine, that the Mini∣sters cannot iustly but affirme the same. And their starting holes shall be cōuinced by the simple reading of the bookes. For all the rest of the Ministers resolution (where are mightie iniuries, Impostures, and slanders against the Doc∣tors) they answere nothing: hauing regard to the Ministers manner of dealing. And the Doctors also do well vnder∣stand, that it should be lost labour to teach the Ministers: who more esteem their owne particular reuelation, for their whole instruction, then all the doctrine and remonstrance of the Church vniuersall, and all Christians together. And freely do the Doctors pardon all the iniuries they haue done them, as people voyd of sound sence, and without iudge∣ment: which thing they declare, by theyr maner of dealing. An obiection of the Supper by the Doctors, against the answere of the Ministers. WHy the Doctors in the beginning of the conferen∣ces haue not touched the Article of the Supper, it sufficiently appeareth by the first dayes Acts. And a deceit it is, which the Ministers haue done, in taxing them to haue recoyled from entering into that matter. For it shall be proued, as well by the offers which the Doctors haue of∣ten made, to confer by word for quicker dispatch of the said matter: and then at more leisure to put it in writing (which the Ministers haue refused): as also by the first obiections, which the Doctors proposed touching the article of Gods omnipotencie: wherby they touched the foundations, vpon which are builded the errors of the pretended reformed reli∣gion against the reall presence of the body and bloud of Ie∣sus Christ in the holy Sacrament. And shall moreouer be ve∣rified, in that the Doctors haue obiected to the Ministers some arguments against their Supper, to make them enter into the same. Vnto which they haue nothing answered: or so impertinently (at the least) as one may iudge by the rea∣ding of their answere, that they fled the Lists: as yet also they do, by their last writing: hiding as much as they possibly can, what they thinke of the Supper: albeit they haue bene admonished to answere therevnto plainely and to purpose. Whether the Doctors or the Ministers retyre, shall bee seene by effect: For albeit the Ministers will not answer, the Doctors will not leaue to aduise them thereof, and to ma∣nifest to all the world, the intollerable errors which bee in the Supper, and in all the doctrine of the Ministers: Who beeing demaunded, dare not confesse and auouch by wri∣ting, what hath beene written by the inuenters of theyr Supper. Now to begin to speake thereof, the Ministrrs do main∣taine it to be celebrated according to the ordinances of Ie∣sus Christ, and after the fashion which the Apostles vsed, and all the Primitiue Church whiles it flourished, and a∣bode in it puritie. Wherevpon the Doctors demaund, how long the Ministers esteeme the doctrine of the Sup∣per to abide in it puritie? And whether the Church were not then as pure in the doctrine of all the other articles, as of this? Furthermore, whether since that time, there is not some place in the world, where the true doctrine of the Supper, and of other Articles, haue beene retained and conserued: and whether such doctrine hath euer con∣tinued without interruption? and in what place? and by whom hath it bene preached and set forth, and from age to age? The Doctors desire the Ministers to make declaration thereof, for that it much importeth. For as much as before Caluin put forth his Catechisme, there was no memorie, that such doctrine as he taught, had bene held in any Regi∣on; and the Supper was not celebrated after the fashion and maner as it is celebrated in the Church, called Reformed. The Doctors would willingly cheare vp the Ministers, who are much disquieted in their writing, because the Doc∣tors haue said, that their Supper differeth not from a com∣mon banquet, except in that it is worse: as being prophane and polluted. To meete wherwithall, the Ministers haue made a great narration of the whole action of their Supper: and by faire shewes, which haue a forme of all godlinesse, they ende∣uour to make it very commendable, and to couer a new no∣thing betweene two platters. And contrariwise, that they may tread vnder foote and abase the thrise▪precious sacri∣fice of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the Masse, by renting in peeces some shewe of him: as if they were vsed without reason or signification, which the Ministers vnder∣stand not, or make semblance not to vnderstand. But things ought not to be prised and esteemed by their shewes, but ac∣cording to their value, nature, and truth. Moreouer, the Ministers should foresee, that all the Sects which bee now in the world against the Church Ca∣tholique, for the act of the holy Sacrament, doo vse at the least, as faire shewe as they. And were they thereof asked, there is not any which would not enforce himselfe, to proue, that it approacheth nearer to Iesus Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitiue Church, then the pretended reformed Religion dooth. Concerning all which, the Doctors re∣ferre them to the writings of the Lutherans, Zuinglianists, Anabaptists, Trinitaries, Maister Alasco, and such like. For vnreasonable it is by such faire deceits, to preferre the Supper of the Ministers, to other Sects: & to iudge it good, holy, vnpolluted, and according to the word of God: but to repute it rather polluted, and defiled with impietie: for as much as it cloaketh a lye in stead of truth, and giueth the shewe of pietie, to impietie and falshood. Also the Doctors haue not dispraised the Supper of the Ministers, for the praises therein giuen to God, or for the confession they there make of their sinnes: or the preaching (if it contained the truth), or for other preparation. But therefore did they say it was detestable, because, against the ordinance of Iesus Christ, it contained not, but common bread and wine: and yet that they attributed vnto it some spirituall effect, and other faire pretext of godlinesse. The which is an abhominable thing, and inuentiō of Sathan, who endeuoureth by such maner of Supper, to abolish and extin∣guish the true Supper, according to the institution of Iesus Christ, and to depriue the faithfull of the fruite, and veritie of the same Supper: in causing them to giue common bread onely, instead of the body and blood of our sauiour Iesus Christ. The Doctors could as well recyte the euill shewes, as the Ministers do recyte the good, which be in their Sup∣per: as the secrets, the new enterprises practised vnder co∣lour and shadow of assemblies made in their said Supper. But to the ende the Ministers reproach not the Doctors, that Priests spake of armes, of contributions, &c. they passe it o∣uer with silence, and referre them to the thing it self: and wil content themselues to declare some causes, whereby they maintaine, that there is no truth in the same Supper, accor∣ding to the institution of Iesus Christ: which are such as fol∣low. That in the Supper of the Ministers, and theyr like, no consecration can be made of the matter of bread & wine which are there proposed. And that for this cause, there is not in the same matter any change made, be it before, or in, or af∣ter the vse. And by consequence that the bread and wine in such a Supper, cannot be but common. That no consideratiō is made in their Supper: hereby appeareth, first, that it be∣longeth not to all persons, to consecrate bread and wine in the Supper: but onely to those that by imposition of the Pastors and Bishops hands, are lawfully ordained according to the succession from the Apostles time, euen vnto vs. Now certaine it is, that the most part of the Ministers of the Church, called Reformed, be not ordained by the laying on of the Pastors hands, who haue the power by succession frō one to an other since the Apostles. Whereof we must con∣clude, that such Ministers vsurping the office which pertai∣neth not to them, cannot make any consecration, and giue not by consequence but common bread and wine. Which article shall be spoken of, when we shall entreat of the sacri∣fice and Priesthood. Secondly, to make consecration of the bread and wine, it sufficeth not that the person be fit to con∣secrate the matter: but also it is necessary, that the lawfull Minister by a certaine meane, do make the consecration: to wit, by blessing, and pronouncing of certaine words ouer the matter proposed; euen as Iesus Christ hath first obserued it. And because the Ministers (albeit they were lawfully ordained, and that they had authoritie and power to conse∣crate) vse not the blessing and pronuntiation of certaine words ouer the bread and wine, (withstanding that which Iesus Christ first did, and then ordained to his Apostles and their successors so to doo) they cannot take any consecra∣tion of the bread and wine, and that in them any chaunge happeneth. Whereof it followeth, that they differ not from common bread and wine, and that such a feast and banquet is but common. And that it is blasphemy to attri∣bute vnto it, the name of Christs Supper. Behold, why partly the Doctors haue said, that the Supper of the Mini∣sters is a prophane and polluted banquet. The Doctors admonish the Ministers to answere to pur∣pose and plainely, to the demaunds by them proposed, which they haue not done: which is the cause that the Doc∣tors, least they should trauell in vaine, haue not yet willed to impugne their answere: summoning them eftsoones to answere what is proposed to them, without drawing backe from the Conference, which (they say) they affect so great∣ly. The first demaunde was generall for all the Sacra∣ments: to wit, whether the Ministers did beleeue, that two things were essentiall and necessary, to the confec∣tion of the Sacrament: namely, the matter, or element, and the word. The Ministers answere, that the Sacrament in it per∣fection considered, consisteth in three things, &c. They speake indeterminately: so that one cannot iudge, whe∣ther they vnderstand theyr saying of the Sacrament, which they call the Supper onely: or generally of all, as they were demaunded. Although because they alledge Ire∣neus, one may coniecture, that they meant but of the Sa∣ment of the Supper. Moreouer it behoueth to note, that which they adde (in it perfection considered): to haue alwaies a starting hole, when speech shall be made of the essence of the Sacrament. The Doctors require that the Ministers answere to the question proposed generally of all the Sacraments. For there is lyke reason as touching the essence of the Sacra∣ments in generall. And that they openly declare what things be essentiall, and necessary to a Sacrament, to be made a Sacrament: without speaking for the present of the perfection of a Sacrament, containing the essence and spirituall fruites, which be not of the essence of the Sacra∣crament. To the second demaund, the Ministers answere no more pertinently then to the first. And namely where the Doc∣tors haue demaunded, whether it behooued to vse certaine words for the confection of a Sacrament: and what word was necessary for the Sacrament of the Supper. The Mi∣nisters haue sayd, that the lowe and secret speaking of cer∣taine words, addressed to the elements, was not the word necessary to the confection of a Sacrament. But they de∣maunded not, whether it behooued to pronounce that word, with a lowe, or high voyce: but the Interroga∣tory was, whether there be any words necessary to make the Sacrament, that one ought to pronounce ouer the matter, or in administring the matter: and that they might be such words for the Supper. And it is not sufficient to say, that the word, by which the ordinance of Iesus Christ is de∣clared, is the word of the Sacrament: but it behoueth to an∣swere, in what words consisteth that word, and when it must be pronounced. As touching the sixt and principall demaund, the Mi∣nisters answere not clearly, and to purpose: but make a capti∣ous answere: by which one may conceiue what is their opini∣on of the presence & participatiō of the body of Iesus Christ in the Supper. And so temper they their saying, that there is no Zuinglian, nor Almanists, which confesseth not thereof as much, or more then they: To wit, that they are conioyned to our Lord Iesus Christ, & that they possesse him in the po∣wer of their faith, and by the operation of his holy spirite, to be made flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, &c. But this is farre off from the demaund: to wit, whether the faith∣full in the Supper receiue into theyr soules, besides all the graces spirituall (among which is the communication with our Lord Iesus Christ) his true bodie and blood, really, tru∣ly, and substantially? And whether the Ministers in the Supper make not distinction of the substance contained and perceiued in the Sacrament, with the fruites thereof proceeding? And for more breuitie, the Doctors de∣maund, whether the Ministers do receiue, and approoue, that which Caluin hath written of the Supper, and of that they receiue thereof in his Catechisme, Institution, and other bookes. As touching the seauenth demaund, the Ministers haue not vnderstood what hath beene proposed to them, touching the Concomitance: For they haue taken it, as if one demaunded, whether it were lawfull to receiue the Sacrament vnder one onely kinde or no. Whiche was not as then put in question. But suche a difficultie was proposed to them: namely, whether in theyr Supper, when one hath receiued the bread, before hee receiue the wine, he do participate of the true body of Iesus Christ, with∣out hee be partaker of his bloud, vntill hee haue taken the wine: or hauing eaten the bread, whether he hath receiued the body and bloud, before he take the Cup? To which de∣maunds, to auoyd vaine blotting of paper, the Doctors ad∣monish the Ministers to answere, without wandering, and to render open confession of their faith. And that the Doc∣tors may knowe, what doctrine they ought to impugne or approue. As touching the articles of the Masse, the Doctors re∣serue them to their proper place: which is of the sacrifice of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ. After it shalbe knowne and proued that they be present in the Supper and holy Sa∣crament. The fourth of August, the yeare aboue said. The Ministers answere to the writing of the Doctors, sent vnto them by my Lord the Duke de Niuernois, the morning, being 7. of August. 1566. T He Ministers leauing aside whatsoeuer is superfluous, and from the purpose in the writing of the Doctors, as be theyr repetitions and rehea salls: dissembling also their iniuries and accustomed scof∣fings, (by which they much more proue the hate they beare to the truth, and the Ministers, then the questions by them propounded) will onely stay on the points which seeme to require some answere. The Ministers first say, that they taxed not the Doctors to haue restrained the Church in a certaine place, but to a certaine company, and to the traditions giuen, followed, and by the same approued. And they magnifie God, that the Doctors doo now acknowledge the Catholique Church to stretch through the world: and that it is not inclosed in the boundes and limits of the authoritie, and traditions of the Romane Church: which the Ministers confesse to haue beene then much esteemed of the auncient Fathers, when errours, abuses, and vices, did not as yet there abounde, as since they doo. But now that all things almost are there corrupted, as well in manners, as in doctrine: and that no∣thing is there more odious, then the word, the light, the trueth, and the power of God. The Ministers do say: that as the state of the same Church hath beene chaunged, so ought to bee also the esteeme and reputation in which it hath beene: adding therevnto, that in whatsoeuer degree of honor she hath bene formerly lifted, she hath not neuer∣thelesse beene esteemed by the Fathers for the vniuersall Church, nor her Bishop for vniuersall Bishop: As by that which Saint Ierome wrote thereof to Euagrius: and by that which concerning the same, was determined in one of the Cone. 3. C. 26. Councells of Carthage, appeareth. And as touching the reformed Church in France, the Mi∣nisters doo not say, that it is the vniuersall and Catholique Church, but only a member of the same: And that it hath it foundation, not vpon the opiniō or authoritie of men: but vpon the doctrine & writings of the Prophets & Apostles. Moreouer, as touching the protestations of Charitie and zeale, whereby the Doctors feare to bee forced vnto In∣uectiues and pursuites which they make against the Mini∣sters, and other the faithfull, by the example (as they say) of Saint Augustine, and other Bishops, which in time past solicited the Magistrates against the Donatists: theyr pro∣ceedings and fashion which they haue, and still doo vse to∣wards the sayd Ministers, and faithfull, do euidently de∣clare, that with false tokens they shrowd themselues by these examples. For as much as the Catholiques, whome they alledge, exhorted the Magistrate to vse all moderation and mildn sse towards the Donatists and other heretiques; and to assay all meanes to reduce them, before they came to the rygor of paines and iudgement. And further, they ende∣uoured to containe and represse the fury of the people, and to hinder theyr open violence vpon them. Whereas they contrariwise, doo stirre vp against the Ministers, the peo∣ple and Magistrates, by slaunder and false imputations▪ and by all other fashions & meanes they can inuent for this purpose. Touching the Omnipotencie of God, and the definition thereof, which the Ministers haue proposed, drawne and ex∣tracted out of the bookes of Saint Augustine: the Doctors in theyr last writing, produce no new thing, to cause them leaue the ame. For that they alledge of the Angels, which can do whatsoeuer they will, and by that meanes should be almightie as well as God (if the abouesayd definition of his Omnipotencie had place) is an example from the pur∣pose, and which cannot prooue that there is in the Angels any such power, as in God. For certaine it is, that theyr will and power dependeth elsewhere, and that God ruleth ouer them, to chaunge, suspend and hinder them as he plea∣seth, and as he can do in all other creatures. Which none can say of God, without blasphemy. Howsoeuer it be, If the Doctors will reproue the definition of Gods Omnipotency proposed by the Ministers, they deale not with them, but with S. Augustine: For as much as the said definitiō was word for word copied out of his writings. The Ministers do maruell, that after they had so am∣ply declared to the Doctors, what they thought of Gods Omnipotencie, and shewed, that it stretched not indiffe∣rently to all things which men in theyr foolish phantasies, may conceiue or imagine: the Doctors will eftsoones harpe on that string, alledging that God can do wisely, what fooles do foolishly imagine. For manifest it is, that fooles can ima∣gine many things which are impossible to God. As for ex∣ample, that there is no God. Psal. 14. and 53. That hee is corporeall, as thought the Anthropomorphites. That the world is eternall: as thought the Peripatetiques. That there was two beginnings: as taught the Manichees. All which thinges, can no way without blasphemie be attributed to the Omnipotencie of God. But that which more conten∣teth the Ministers, is, that our Maisters, after so long and sharpe combat in this Article, and so of en crying blas∣phemie, when the sayd Ministers proposed the truth there∣of, are constrayned in the end to accord with them, and fol∣low the interpretation and restraint which the Ministers themselues had giuen touching the Omnipotency of God: as it appeareth by a sentence of theyr last writing, whereof the words are such. The Doctors say: That all things ima∣ginable to man, are possible to be done with God, without any exception: but of those things which imply contradic∣tion, to be, and not to be. What reason then is there, that for the things (whereof the Ministers and Doctors agree, that they ought to be excepted out of Gods omnipotency) the Ministers in excepting them, be held for blasphemers, & not the Doctors, which say & confesse the selfe-same thing? Now this proposition that a naturall body (yea that of Iesus Christ) is in diuers places at one selfe-same instant, is in the ranke of things which imply contradictiō: as it hath bin already suffi∣ciently proued. Therfore the Ministers cōclude, that the om∣nipotency of God cannot be referred & extended thervnto. The Doctors doo afterwards charge the Ministers with foure horrible blasphemies (as they say) grounding them∣selues vpon that which the Ministers in defending that one body could not be diuers places at one instant) haue said, that it repugned the truth, wisdome, and omnipotency of God. Which thing, the said Doctors finde so straunge, and farre from reason, that they would not vouchsafe to staie to re∣fute it: thinking it was vnworthie of answere, and that it suf∣ficed to haue recyted the same. Wherevnto the Ministers answere▪ that it is a very easie and readie meane, to rid them speedily of all the difficulties wherein they finde themselues wrapped, to say, that it is a blasphemy, and vnworthie of an∣swere. The Doctors yet make instance to the Ministers, and say: that it behooueth them to shewe by the word of God, that one bodie cannot be in diuers places at one instant. Wherevnto the Ministers ef soones answer; that it is for the Doctors to proue the contrary by one text of scripture: to wit, that one body may be in diuers places at one selfe-same instant: seeing that they are proponents in this Confe∣rence, & the Ministers respondents: and that neuerthelesse, they haue heretofore shewed them by liuely reasons, drawne from the scripture, and the essentiall proprieties of God, frō. the nature of bodies, and the authorities of Fathers: that the thing in question was wholly impossible. And touching the argument which they thus make, God can change the order which he hath established in na∣ture. Therfore can he also cause that one body at one instant be in many places. The Ministers denie the consequence, and yeeld reason therof: for as much as such a matter should not onely change the order, but should wrap vp also a con∣tradiction: the which, by the confessiō of the Doctors them∣selues, is excepted out the omnipotencie of God. The Doc∣tors in the article following, do but reproach the Ministers, for they confound and obscure what had bene clearly pro∣posed by the Ministers, in their last writing. By means wher∣of, let them make (if they will) more large an answer, and ex∣pound themselues better. Where the Doctors accuse the Ministers to haue maliciously concealed the word [place] in the matter of circumscription of a measured body: the Mini∣sters say, that it was not needfull to adde that word expresly there. For as much as there is no man so ignorant, who (ha∣uing vnderstood that a body is circumscript) but doth pre∣sently inferre, that then it is comprised in a place certaine. As touching the Camell, if they be not contented with that alreadie said thereof, then let them reade what Saint Ierome hath thereof written, in his first booke against the Pelagians: who expounding the words of Iesus Christ, saith as followeth. In this hath the Lord not said, that it may be done: but hath compared one impossibilitie with an other. For as a Camell cannot enter through the eye of a needle: so the rich shall not enter into the King∣dome of heauen. Now if thou canst shewe that the rich man there entereth, it will also follow, that the Camell may passe through the eye of a needle. And alledge not vnto me Abraham, and the others, which we read in the old Testa∣ment to haue bene rich, and which being such, were entered into the kingdome of heauen, because they (well vsing their riches, and imploying them to good workes) haue by that meane ceased to be rich. Behold what S. Ierome writeth. Thē, as it is necessary (after the saying of S. Ierome) that for the saluation of the rich man, there be a mutation and changing in his heart; yea and that hee cease to be rich, to the end hee may enter into the kingdome of heauen: so also it behoueth, that there be a chaunge in the Camell, and that hee cease to be such: that he may be made to passe through the eye of a needle. As touching the article following, the Ministers say, that by the grace of God, they may discerne the light from dark∣nesse, and falshood from truth. Which is the cause, that they cannot approue, neither the arguments, nor conclusions of the Doctors, touching the being of one body in many pla∣ces at one instant: being well assured by good and certaine testimonies of the scripture, that all whatsoeuer the Doctors will proue, not else-where proceedeth, then from the spirit of error and falshood. Which wil retaine by that meane, the impietie and Idolatrie, which hee hath formerly established in the world, to the ruine almost of all Christendome. As touching the verbe [Dierchesthai] the Doctors finde themselues much hindred to saue their penetration: which they can no way found vpon the proper signification of that word: as hath bene shewed them by the passages produced vnto them, not vpon any authoritie of the scripture. To that which the Doctors alledge (to proue that faith commeth in part of our selues, & not wholy of God) that Ne∣mo credit nisivolēs, (to wit, that none beleeueth but willingly) the Ministers answer: that (vnder our Maisters correction) it is nought to the purpose: for as much as this will and consent is of God: who worketh in the faithfull, both the will and the deed. Which thing S. Augustine in one of his Epistles, verie well teacheth, where he saith: That when God calleth men to saluation, he findeth not in them any good will at all: but that he worketh and createth it in their hearts, if he wil finde it there. And that of S. Paul which the Doctors alledge, that we are coworkers with God, serueth nothing for their pur∣pose: For the Apostle speaketh not there but of the Mini∣stery. And meant no other thing, then what hee writeth therof more clearly in the 2. to the Corinths, in these words: 2. Cor. 5. We are Embassadors for Christ: as if God exhorted by vs. And touching that which they adde, that none of all the auncient Doctors euer taught, that one body could not be in diuers places at one selfe-same time: The Ministers say yea. As they haue shewed in their former writings, where the passages of S. Augustine, Ad Dardanum: and in the 30. tract vpon S. Iohn, and others haue bene alledged. The Ministers answere not but to two points onely, of all that the Doctors haue touched in theyr aduertisement. The first is, that theyr Sermons, theyr writings, theyr disci∣pline obserued in theyr Churches, the censures which they passe for scandalous offences therein committed, the care which they, and the Superintendents haue, to discouer, re∣prooue and correct them: the paine which they take to re∣forme whatsoeuer is disordered, and the publique prayers, which in all places they make to these endes: defend them with all good people: and iustifie them against the slanders of the Doctors. The second is, that the Doctors in theyr sayd aduertisement are deceiued, in that they haue said, that Abraham doubted of the promise. Which is wholy contrary to that which the Apostle in the 4. of the Romanes thereof writeth. Where, in these proper termes he saith: And he nothign doubted of the promise of God through vnbe∣liefe, but was strengthened in the faith, and gaue glorie vnto God. For answere to the Doctors last Obiection, made (as they say) agaynst the answere giuen by the Ministers to theyr former Question, vppon the matter of the Sup∣per▪ Although the sayd Doctors, do faigne not any way to affect delaie in the Conference and Dispute of the Sup∣per, and of the Masse: yet can they not perswade any per∣son of any iudgement, that they haue not hetherto rety∣red, and doo yet drawe backe from entering thereinto. For notwithstanding some requests presented by Madame de Buillon and the Ministers, some declaration which my Lorde the Duke of Niuernois hath made therevppon, of his will and desire to bring them therevnto: yet by all the meanes aboue-sayd, hath it not beene possible to obtaine of them, that (all other thinges set apart) they would in good earnest, conferre with the Ministers of the two points aforesaid. Which thing the Ministers perceiuing, and not desi∣ring to depart from them, without conference first had ther∣of: haue often protested to dispute no more with them, till these two Articles were first decyded and resolued. And to this ende proposed certaine Theses by order and good me∣thode, as well of the one as of the other: to the ende they should well aduise what in the sayd Theses, they would gain∣say and withstand. The Doctors hauing dissembled the same, in stead of pursuing of them, doo propose other friuolous and vnpro∣fitable questions, taken and drawne from theyr Schoole di∣uinitie. And although the Ministers had iust occasion to grieue, that theyr Theses were omitted by the Doctors: neuerthe∣lesse, to the ende they should haue no more shadowe nor colour of delaie, the Ministers haue also answered to their last questions. But now in stead of following theyr An∣sweres, and impugning of them, if any way they could: they propose againe newe questions, no lesse absurd and friuolous then the former. Whereby each one may eui∣dently knowe theyr hypocrisie and dissimulation. And that pretending a willingnesse to conferre of the two foresaide pointes, they doo in the meane time, what in them possiblie lyeth, to drawe them from the Conference thereof: to the ende, it may breake off, before that this matter be cleared. By meanes whereof, the Ministers for conclusion, and resolution of all the Conference, determine by Gods grace, to couch briefly by writing, and in the clea∣rest manner they can, all what God hath taught them con∣cerning the same; and what they haue learned thereof by his word: as well to satisfie the debt and bond which they haue to God, and his honour, to obey my Lord of Neuers, and Madame de Buillon: as lastly, for the contentment and edi∣fication of the whole Church. The Conclusion and resolution of the points, as well of the Sup∣per, as of the Masse, containing a declaration of that which the Ministers beleeue concerning the same: and teache thereof in their Church by the word of God. T He end and chiefe felicitie of men, is to Psal. 37. 28. be conioyned with God, and to abide in him: For as much as it is the only meane by which all their desires can be conten∣ted and satisfied: and by the which al∣so, their mindes and hearts can be plain∣ly freed and deliuered, from the hard and cruel bondage of sinne, and of all the passions, greedie desires, feares & distrusts, which do assaile 1. Cor. 13▪ them. Which was the cause, why S. Paul placeth perfect beatitude, and entire repose of the blessed in this: that God 2. Cor. 6. is all in all in them. But for as much as men be naturally cor∣rupt and wicked, and contrariwise God in all perfection, is pure and holy: the difficultie is to knowe and choose the meane, by which they may approach vnto him. Seeing that there is no societie betweene light and darknesse, nor any communion betweene righteousnesse and vnrighte∣ousnesse. In them cannot this meane bee found: by rea∣son, that of themselues they are wholly vnable, and vn∣caple to relieue themselues from the miserie and curse, into which they be cast headlong. So that, beeing blinde of vnderstanding, they cannot know their owne good: nor seeke it, being rebels and heart∣hardened: and therefore of necessitie must they goe out of themselues, and seeke the aboue said meane in Iesus Christ: who was giuen them of the Father, to bee their righteous∣nesse, 1. Cor. 1. Iohn. 14. Ephes. 3. wisedome, sanctification, redemption, way, life, and truth. Then resteth it now to knowe, how they may bee vnited and conioyned with him. The Apostle dooth teach vs, that the same is done by faith, by which Ie∣sus Christ dwelleth in our hearts, and abideth in vs: so Iohn. 17. that hee and wee are made one, and hee and his Father are one. Now, there are two principall causes of this faith, the one outward, and the other inward. The inward is the holy Ghost, who is called the spirit of faith: for as much as he is 2. Cor. 4. 13. the Author thereof, and createth and bringeth it forth in the harts of men: mollifying and disposing them to receiue with all obedience, the word and promise of God, which is preached vnto them by the faithfull stewards, and Ministers of the same. Rom. 10. Which word, is the outward cause of faith. And as the same faith groweth, and riseth by degrees, euen so doth the vnion which we haue with Iesus Christ, and by his meanes with God: vntill (as saith S. Paul) wee all meete together in Ephes. 4. the vnitie of faith, and knowledge of the sonne of God, vn∣to a perfect man, and vnto the measure of the age of the ful∣nesse of Christ. The increase of faith is wrought by the working and power of the holy spirite, who was the first beginning and author thereof: and afterwards, by the continuance of the word purely preached and denounced: and finally by the lawfull vse of the Sacraments, ordained as seales for the cer∣taintie and confirmation of faith, and assurance wee haue of the foresaid coniunction with God through Iesus Christ, and of the participation of all the good things, grauntes, gifts, graces, and blessings, which by his fauour are purcha∣sed and gotten for vs. As of the remission of sinne, of our regeneration, of the mortification of the flesh, and the lusts thereof. To signifie which things, and more amply assure vs of the exhibition and enioying of the same, Baptisme was ordained of God: to the end, that in the water which is powred vpon our bodies, and in the promise of God which is therevnto added, we may behold (as it were with our eies) the inuisible grace which God vouchsafeth vs, to wash and cleanse vs from our spirituall filthinesse, and to fanctifie vs, and make vs new creatures: As also to further assure vs al∣wayes of life eternall, and make vs growe in the hope wee haue thereof, by the participation of the flesh of Iesus Christ, crucified for our redemption, and of his bloud, shead for remission of our sinnes: the bread and the wine are distributed vnto vs in the Supper, by the ordinance of Iesus Christ. But as the Ministers acknowledge, that there is a vni∣on, and sacramentall coniunction betweene the outward signe, and thing thereby signified: so (say they) on the other side, that betweene them two, there is such a distincti∣on, that the one ought neuer to be confounded with the o∣ther: nor the spirituall thing in such sort fastened to the cor∣porall, (which representeth the same) that the one without the other, cannot be receiued: or that the two by necessi∣tie bee alwayes inseperably conioyned together. Where∣of it followeth, that they erre, which will haue the bread in the Supper to bee chaunged into the substance of the bodie of Christ Iesus: And they likewise which will haue him to be conioyned, and corporally vnited therevnto. So that whosoeuer receiueth and taketh the signes, (bee hee faith∣full, or vnfaithfull) taketh and receiueth forthwith the thing by them signified. Which error, with the most part of others happening in this matter, proceedeth of not well comprehending nor conceiuing what it is to eate the bo∣dy, and drinke the bloud of Iesus Christ. Which thing ought not to bee vnderstood, in sort as corporall meates are taken and eaten, but after a spirituall manner onely: as is declared in the sixt of Saint Iohn: which in this consisteth; that Iesus Christ dwelleth in vs, and we in him: and is done by the faith we haue in him: as teacheth S. Au∣gustine in the 25. tract vpon S. Iohn, saying: Why preparest thou the belly, and the tooth? beleeue, and thou hast eaten. And in the third booke and 16. Chapter de Doctrina Christiana: where he saith as followeth: When Iesus Christ saith: except yee eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, ye haue no life in you. It seemeth that hee commaundeth to commit some great offence. It is therefore a figure, wherby we ought to vnderstand no other thing, but that it behoueth to com∣municate with the passion of the Lord: and to retaine in our memorie, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for vs. The eating then of the flesh and body of Iesus Christ, is no other thing, then a straight coniunction and vnion wee haue with him: which is made by the faith wee adde to his promises. Euen as by the mutuall promises made and re∣ceiued betweene man and woman, the marriage is conclu∣ded, and setled betweene them. And although being so con∣ioyned, they be sometimes by some occasion seperated, and remoued the one from the other, as touching their bodies, yet for all that, do they not leaue to be one flesh, and one body, by meanes of the societie and matrimoniall familiari∣tie which is betweene them. In like case, albeit that Iesus Christ (with whom wee are conioyned and vnited by the faith and trust which wee haue in him, and his promises) bee as touching his bodie, resident in heauen, wee yet abiding vppon the earth; and that by meanes thereof, there is great distance and space betweene him and vs, as touching his bodie: that neuerthelesse hindereth vs not, to bee flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones: that hee is not our head, and wee his members: that hee is not our husband, and wee his spowse: that wee bee not of one selfe same body: that wee bee not engrafted in∣to him, that wee be not cloathed with him: that wee abide not in him, as the boughes and buddes in the Vine. And there is neither distance of times, nor places whatsoeuer it be: there is no difference of times, which can hinder such a coniunction, and that the faithfull eate truly his flesh, and his bloud. For as the auncient Fathers, albeit they were two or three thousand yeares before Iesus Christ dyed, yet left they not to communicate in his flesh crucified, and to eate the same spirituall meate which we eate, and to drinke the same spirituall drinke which wee drinke. The faithfull also which are come twelue or fifteene hundred yeares after, leaue not, what place soeuer they be in, to participate (as did the Fathers) in the same meate, and in the same drinke, which they haue done. And no other difference there is betweene the eating of the Fathers which were before the comming of Iesus Christ, and of them that haue followed him, but the reason of more or lesse: that is to say, that there is in the one, more ample and expresse declaration of the good will of God towards vs, then in the other. Whence must be concluded, that from the beginning of the world vnto the end, there neuer was, nor shall be other coniuncti∣on betweene our Lord Iesus Christ and his Church, then spirituall: that is to fay, wrought by the spirit of God. For euen as there is but one faith in the Fathers and in vs, which respecteth alwayes on the one part and the other, our Lord Iesus Christ: so are we not also otherwise conioyned with him, then they haue bene. As then it is so, that the Fa∣thers haue had no other societie nor communion then spi∣rituall: It followeth thereof, that we also are not, nor can be otherwise, then spiritually cōioyned with him. Neuerthe∣lesse it is not said, that wee and the Fathers are not flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones: and that all together, doo not partake as well in his humanitie, as in his diuinitie. But that which wee say is: that all this participation which wee haue in him, is by the operation & vertue of the holy Ghost: which thing, Christ Iesus in S. Iohn, speaking of the meane of this coniunction, teacheth clearly, when he saith: The Ioh. 6. 1. Cor. 10. things which I speake vnto you, are spirit and life. And S. Paul also, when hee saith: Our fathers did eate the same spirituall meate, and dranke the same spirituall drinke. Now when wee speake of this spirituall eating, common to vs, and to the Fathers: it must not therfore be thought, that we reiect the holy Supper of the Lord, or any way thinke that the same vse of bread and wine is superfluous: no more then the vse of the water in Baptisme. For our Lord knowing the bloc∣kishnesse of our vnderstandings, and the infirmitie and weakenesse of our hearts, and through the pittie he hath of vs, willing to helpe and remedie the same: hath not conten∣ted to haue left vs the ministerie of his word, to assure vs of the participation which we haue in his flesh, & in his bloud, and in all the good things thereon depending: but hath al∣so willed to adde therevnto, the signes of bread and wine, which he hath as seales to his word, to seale in our hearts, by the vse of the same, the faith we haue of the foresaid coniunc∣tion by his word. So that it sufficed him not to haue contrac∣ted a couenant with Abraham, by the word and promise which he made vnto him: but added moreouer therevnto the signe of Circumcision, as a seale, for more ample confir∣mation and assurance of the said couenant. To the end then, that each one may vnderstand what is the Supper of the Lord, and what the Ministers do there∣of beleeue and teach: it is meete to consider and acknow∣ledge in the same, three things. First the ordinance of the Lord contained in his word, and declared by his Ministerie, according to his commaundement: by which this holy ce∣rimony hath bene ordained and established in the Church, for the edification and entertaining of the members there∣of: which thing must bee diligently obserued, to haue it in that honour and reuerence as appertaineth; and not to place it in the ranke of other cerimonies, which haue no founda∣tion nor reason to authorise them, but the onely will and tra∣dition of men. Neuerthelesse heed must be taken, that by the institution, and ordinance, whereof we make mention, we vnderstand not, a certaine pronuntiation of words, or any vertue which is hidden in the same: as do the Priests of the Romane Church: who by ignorance and superstitious opi∣nion which they haue, thinke to haue consecrated, and tran∣substantiated the bread and wine in the Masse, by the vertue of fiue words: Hoc est enim Corpus meum. For this is my body, breathed and pronounced ouer the Elements. Where∣in they are greatly deceiued and abused: for as much as the word which is the formall cause of the Sacrament, is not a word simply said and vttered, but a declaration of the in∣stitution and ordinance of God, made by the Minister, ac∣cording to his commaundement: and a preaching of the death of Iesus Christ, and of the fruite thereof: by which, the hearts of the hearers are lifted vp vnto the contempla∣tion, and meditation of his benefite, and their faith stirred vp and inflamed in his loue: and where the same shall not thus be done, it must not be thought, that the Elements be Sacraments. As S. Augustine in the 80. Tract vpon Saint Iohn, in these termes teacheth: Whence commeth this ver∣tue to the water, that in touching the body, it washeth the heart, sauing that it is done by the word: not because it is pronounced, but because it is beleeued? This word is the word of the faith which wee preach. Rom. 10. 9. This (saith the Apostle) to wit: If we confesse with our mouth, that Iesus is the Lord, and beleeue in our heart, that God raised him from the dead, wee shall be saued. And continuing his speech, hee addeth in the end these proper words: to wit, This word of faith which wee preach, is that (doubtlesse) by which baptisme is consecrated, to the ende it might wash vs. Of this, as before, do the Ministers inferre two things. The one is, that the word of consecration is not (as is said) a simple pronuntiation, but a publike and manifest decla∣ration of the institution and ordinance, and of the whole mysterie of the death of Iesus Christ. The other, that the signes and Elements consecrated, are not chaunged as tou∣ching their nature and substance: but onely as touching the vse and signification: and that onely, during the action wherein they doo serue. For to consecrate the signes (as the water in Baptisme, and the bread and wine in the Supper) is no other thing, then to depute and make them serue to an holy and sacred vse, by the publike declaration of the ordinance of God, made to this ende: and not to chaunge them as touching theyr nature and substance. The which (vanishing away, and beeing abolished) there should remaine no more of the signe, nor (consequently) of the Sa∣crament. Euen so then, as the water in baptisme, after con∣secration, abideth water, without that the nature or sub∣stance thereof in ought chaungeth or altereth: So also the bread and wine in the Supper, remaine as touching theyr substance, such after consecration, as they were before: else should there not bee Analogie, nor mutuall agreement betweene the signe, and the thing signified. For what com∣parison or conformitie is there betweene the accidents of bread, and the truth of the body of Iesus Christ? Seeing that the accidents of bread, as the whitenesse and round∣nesse, destitute of theyr substance, (as the Sophisters doo falsly imagine) could not nourish, nor sustaine the bodie: and by that meane, should not be proper to signifie, that the flesh and bloud of Iesus Christ doo nourish and sustaine our soules. This then must bee holden for a thing resolued, that the bread and the wine abide in their substance: which thing is clearely prooued by that which Iesus Christ (speaking of that hee giuen his Disciples to drinke in the Sup∣per) calleth it, namely: fruite of the Vine. Which can∣not Math. 26. bee applyed to accidents, but ought necessarily to bee vnderstood of wine in it proper substance. Also 1. Cor. 21. by that which Saint Paul saith: calling the Elements of the Supper three seuerall times bread and wine: yea af∣ter they haue beene consecrated. Also by that which hee sayeth else-where: Wee which are many, are one bread 1. Cor. 10. and one body: for as much as wee are all partakers of one selfe-same bread. For there hee will teach vs by the compari∣son of bread and wine, hee proposeth vnto vs, that as it is composed of many graines, so pasted and mingled to∣gether, that one cannot distinguish nor seperate one from an other: So also ought all the faithfull in the Church to be so conioyned and vnited together in one selfe-same body, that it seemeth and appeareth, they are mem∣bers one of an other. Now very foolish and from the pur∣pose should this comparison be, if the bread which we eate in the Supper, and vpon which this comparison is founded, were not true bread. Also by that which Gelacius Bishop of Rome, writing against Eutiches saith: The Sacraments (saith he) which we take, is a thing diuine: and neuerthelesse doth it not cease to bee substance and nature of bread and wine. Also by that which writeth Theodoret in his first Dialogue, and in these proper termes: The Lord hath honoured with the name of his body and of his bloud, the visible signes which doo re∣present them: neuerthelesse without changing the nature of them, but onely adding grace to nature. The same Author in the se∣cond Dialogue, speaking likewise of the bread and wine, which are distributed in the Supper, saith as followeth: After sanctification these misticall signes depart not from their nature: for they abide in their proper substance, forme, and figure. By meanes whereof, one seeth and handleth them after consecration, nor more nor lesse then he did before. Also by that which saith S. Iohn Chrisostome, writing to the Monke Cesarius, whose words are such. In the Supper we call that which is presented bread, before it be sanctified: and after sanctification thereof, by the diuine grace, and meane of the Minister, it hath no more the name bread, but of the body of the Lord: neuerthelesse, the na∣ture of the bread is there still remaining. By the passages aforesaid, as well of the holy scripture, as of the auntient Doctors, and others, which might be yet alledged for this purpose, it appeareth, that the bread and wine in the Supper abide alwayes (as hath bene said) in their proper nature and substance, as well after consecration, as be∣fore. And it must not be doubted, that the faith of the aun∣cient Church hath not euer bene such: and that transub∣stantiation was not setled nor holden in the Romane Church for an Article of faith, vntill the time of Innocent the third. To gainesay and reiect whatsoeuer hath bene said tou∣ching the nature and substance of signes, which remaine af∣ter consecration, the aduersaries of this doctrine do ordinari∣ly alledge, that which Iesus Christ saith, speaking of the bread in the institution of the Supper: Take eate, this is my body: And resting vpon the naturall, and proper significati∣on of the words, they obstinately defend, that the substance of bread vanisheth in the consecratiō: and that there remai∣neth no other substance, but that of the body of Iesus Christ. The reason thereof is, because they obserue not the figures and maner of speaking; which be ordinarie and vsuall in the holy scripture, alwayes, and as often as the matter of the Sa∣ments is questionable. For then the name of the things sig∣nified, is ordinarily attributed to the signes, which do signifie and represent them: as the name of a couenant is attributed Gen. 17. Exod. 12. to Circumcision: because it was deputed to signifie and con∣firme the same. Tit. 3. The Lambe, for like reason, is called the Passeouer: and Baptisme, the washing of regeneration: not because they bee like and semblable things, as the signes and mysteries signified by them: but for the conformitie that is betweene them, the signes (as saith Saint Augustine) take oftentimes Epist. 23. the name of the things which they represent. The error then commeth, because they take and vnderstand the fashi∣ons and maners of figuratiue speeches, as if they were proper and naturall. Now that this kinde of speaking: Take yee, and eate yee, This is my body, is figuratiue, it appeareth by that which our Lord Iesus Christ addeth after the Cup, saying: This Cup is the new Testament in my bloud, which is shead for you. Where he calleth the Cup, Testament, and new Couenant in his bloud. Wherein it behoueth necessarily to confesse, that there is a figure, and that without the same, they cannot well vnder∣stand, nor fitly interpret the said passages: For it is a thing manifest, that a couenant (which is a contract and bargaine betweene parties, made and conceiued vnder a certaine promise and word) is not wine. And neuerthelesse it is so called by figure: for as much as the wine which is distri∣buted in the Supper, and as the seale, by which the said coue∣nant is sealed, and the faith thereof confirmed. By such, and like manner, this sentence [This is my body] which is as much to say, as this is the new Testament in my body, which is giuen for you, must bevnderstood and expounded. For as by the effusion of his bloud, the new Testament was confir∣med: so was it also by the death of his body. And a better Interpreter of the words of Iesus Christ, then Iesus Christ himselfe, must not bee sought for. For certaine it is, that what he hath said of the Cup, is as it were a glasse, & cleare and familiar exposition of that he had more briefly and ob∣scurely said of the bread. This also is proued by that which S. 1. Cor. 10. Paul saith: The bread which we breake, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? which is a manner of figuratiue speech. For as much as (to speake and vnderstand properly) the bread, which is a corporeall and materiall thing, is not the Com∣munion which we haue in the body of Iesus Christ, which is a spirituall and inuisible thing. And neuerthelesse it is so cal∣led, because it is the signe thereof, to represent it vnto vs, and to assure vs of the same. As commonly we cal the signed and sealed Letter, which containeth the declaration of the last will of a man, his Testament: although it be not his Testa∣ment, but is properly the declaration, which he hath verbal∣ly made of his said will. But it is so called, because it is the in∣strument and testimonie thereof. Now, as the scripture and auncient Fathers, as well to re∣commend and aduance the dignitie of the signes, and to hin∣der therby the contempt of them: as for the agreement and likenesse which is betweene the signes, & the thing signified, haue sometimes attributed the name of the same things sig∣nified, to the signes which represent them: and speaking of signes, haue vsed figuratiue speeches. At some other times also haue they spoken of them properly, to take away all oc∣casion of abuse thereof, and to hinder that in taking the signes without any distinction, for the things by them signi∣fied, men should attribute to them the effects, which ap∣pertaine not but to the things onely which they signifie. Of these two diuers reasons, & maners of speaking, examples there are, as well in the scriptures, as in the auncient Fathers. Of the first, we haue an example in Circumcision, when it is called by figure a Couenant. Gen. 17. 13. And of the secōd, is there likewise an example in the 11. verse of the same Chapter: where Circumcision is properly called a signe of the Couenant. Another example there is, of the first maner of speaking which is figuratiue, in Exodus 12. 11. where the Lambe is called the Passeo-uer of the Lord. And of th se∣cond maner of speaking which is proper, the example i in the same Chapter & 3. verse, where the blood of the lambe is named a signe. In like manner and sort, when in the scrip∣ture mention is made of the Supper, sometimes is it there spoken of bread by figure. As when it is called the bodie of Iesus Christ: or the Communion of the bodie, as before hath bene sayd: and sometimes is it also taken properly, as 1. Cor. 11. when it sayd: Whosoeuer shall eate of this bread. Also, Let euery man then prooue himselfe, and so eate of this bread. The like diuersitie in two manners of speaking, is oftentimes founde among the auncient Fathers, in the matter of the Supper: For sometimes they speake of bread by figure, cal∣ling it the bodie of Iesus Christ. As Saint Ciprian, when Sermon: de Caen dom. Epist. ad Rustic. Hom. 6. ad pop. An∣tioch. Hom. 45. in Iohn. Hom. 27. in 1. Cor. Hom. de Encaenijs. 5 Hom. 26. hee saith: that the bodie of the Lorde is taken with filthie hands, and his blood drunke with a prophane and polluted mouth. And when hee saith elsewhere that we sucke his blood, and fasten our tongues in the woundes of our Re∣deemer. And S. Ierome, when he saith: that Euxuperius Bi∣shop of Tholoze, bare the bodie of our Lord in a little Ozi∣ar Pannyer, and his blood in a Glasse. Saint Chrisostome also, when he writeth: that Iesus Christ doth not only suf∣fer himselfe to be seene, but also to be touched and eaten: and that the toothe be fastened in his fleshe, and touched with the tongue. And Saint Augustine: With what care take we heede, when the body of Iesus Christ is administred vnto vs, that nothing thereof fall from our hands to the earth. All which, with theyr semblable Sentences, are figu∣ratiue: and there is no doubt, but to well and fitly interpret them, they that read them ought to bee taught, that in the same, the name of the thing signified, is applyed to the signes which doo signifie the same: which thing may easi∣ly bee gathered out of other sentences, and passages of the said Auncients: where speaking properly of the bread and wine, distributed in the Supper: they call them signes Lib. 4. Cont. Marcion. Lib. 2. Epist. 3. and figures. As Tertullian: Iesus Christ (saith hee) tooke bread, gaue it to his Disciples▪ and made his body: when hee saith: This is my body: that is to say, a figure of my body. And Ciprian: by the wine, is shewed the bloud of Christ. Also in the Sermon which hee made of the Supper of the Lord: As often as we do this, wee whet not the teeth to byte, but wee breake and distribute the holy bread in true faith: By the which wee distinguish the diuine and humane matter. Also in the Sermon hee made de Chrismate; The Lord hath giuen with his owne hands bread and wine vpon the table, on which hee made his last meale with his Disciples: but vpon the Crosse, hee gaue vnto the souldiers, his body to be wounded, to the ende hee might so much the more deepely imprint the truth in his Disciples: and that they should expound to the people, how the bread and wine were his body and bloud: and how the Sacrament agree∣eth with the thing, for the which it was instituted. And also how a Sacrament is made of two things, and there∣fore is named with two names, and one selfe-same name is giuen to that which signifieth, and to that which is signi∣fied. In liturg su Psa. 3. & cont Adamant. ca. 20. And Saint Basile: Wee propose the figures and pat∣ternes of the sacred body and bloud of Iesus Christ. And Saint Augustine: The Lord feared not to say: This is my body: when hee gaue the signe of his body. Also the Lord receiued Iudas to his Supper, wherein hee commen∣ded and gaue to his Disciples the figure of his bodie. And Chap. 26. in Math. Saint Ierome: After hee had eaten the Pascall Lambe with his Disciples, he tooke bread, which strengtheneth the heart of man, and passed to the true Sacrament of the Passe∣ouer. To the ende that as Melchisedecke had done before in his figure, he should also represent there his true body. S. Am∣brose: Lib. 4. de sacram. Chap. 5. in Psa. 22. This Sacrament is a figure of the true body and bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ. Chrisostome: He hath pre∣pared this table, to the ende he might shewe vs daily the bread and wine in mysterie and similitude of the bodie and bloud of Christ. And sometimes it happeneth, that one Doctor in this matter expoundeth an other. As one may perceiue it in the conference of two passages: the one of S. Augustine alreadie alledged: and the other of Tertullian, in the booke De Corona militis: where hee saith: Wee very hardly suffer any thing of our bread and wine to fall vpon the ground. And in stead of that which S. Augustine saith to the same purpose, he saith: (as hath before bene recyted) we carefully regard, that nothing of the body of our Lord, fall vpon the ground. Now as in diuers passages the auncient Fathers (as hath bin declared) haue vsed the two foresaid maners, speaking of the Supper, now by figure, now simply and properly: so it is sometimes found, that in one selfe-same place these two manners of speaking haue beene vsurped in their writings. As in a Canon of the Councell of Niece, where it is said: It was thus concluded of the table of the Lord, and of the mysterie which is therevpon: that is to say, of the worthy body and bloud of Iesus Christ. At the table of the Lord, we ought not to abide tyed here below to the bread and wine, which bee there proposed: but to lift vp our hearts on high by faith, and meditate, that on this holy table, is proposed vnto vs, the Lambe of God, which taketh vpon him the sinnes of the world; which is sacrificed of the Priests, and not slaine. And in communicating truly with his precious body and bloud, we ought to beleeue that these things be signes of our resurrection. Whence we may see, how the Fathers in one selfe-same place, haue spoken properly, calling bread and wine, the signes and Elements, which be presented in the Supper: and also by figure, naming the same signes, the Lambe of God, which taketh vppon him the sinnes of the world. By that which is said, touching the said two manners of speaking, they which read the scripture, and auncient Au∣thors, ought to be admonished, carefully to regard, that for default of well distinguishing the places, where the said spee∣ches are vsurped, they do not confound them: taking that which ought to be vnderstood by figure, as if it were spoken properly: and that which is said properly, as if it were vn∣derstood by figure. And it behoueth them alwayes to re∣member in the reading, as well of the scripture, as of the aun∣cient Fathers, what S. Augustine hath written in his booke De doctrina Christiana. We must beware (saith hee) that we take not a figuratiue speech, according to the letter: For herevnto must that bee referred which the Apostle saieth: The letter killeth: and the spirit giueth life. So that to vnder∣stand that which is spoken by figure, as if it were spoken pro∣perly, is fleshly wisedome. And in the end of the Chapter he hath one memorable sentence: namely, that it is a miserable bondage of the soule, to take the signes, for the things signi∣fied: and not to be able to lift vp the eye of the spirit aboue the corporall creature, to draw eternall life. To come to the third part of the Supper, which is the spirituall and heauenly thing, represented & proposed there vnto vs, as well in the Elements, as in the whole action: the Ministers say, that it is Iesus Christ crucified, and offered on the Crosse to God his Father, for the whole and perfect ex∣piation, and satisfaction of all the sinnes of the world. And that to make vs enioy the fruite of this sacrifice, and to apply vnto our selues the righteousnesse, forgiuenesse of sinnes, life, the grace of God, and all other fauours and blessings, which by the same sacrifice, haue bene purchased and ob∣tained for vs: the word and Sacraments haue bene left and ordained for vs, chiefly that of the Supper: wherein, as in a picture, we behold Iesus Christ suffering for vs, the paines and sorrowes of death, paying our debts, cancelling and ad∣nulling the hand-writing which was contrarie to vs: bearing vpon him our malediction, to free vs from the same: and by his obedience reconciling vs to God his Father, and appea∣sing his wrath towards vs. All which things are represented and assured vnto vs in the Supper: when with a true faith we present our selues there, to celebrate the same. The Supper then was not ordained to be a propitiato∣rie sacrifice (as the Doctors do teach, and as they falsly be∣leeue in the Romane Church) but to be a Sacrament, to the ende to renue and alwayes conserue the memorie which wee ought constantly to retaine of the death and sacrifice of Iesus Christe. Now, betweene a sacrifice, and a Sa∣crament, there is great difference. For as much as in a sa∣crifice, we present our oblations vnto God: and in a Sacra∣ment, God contrariwise offereth and communicateth vnto vs, his graces and gifts. Also in a sacrifice for sinne, there is the death and effusion of the bloud of the Host and sa∣crifice, and not in a Sacrament: but the onely percepti∣on and applycation of the fruite and effects of the sacri∣fice. In the Supper then, Iesus Christe is not againe sacrificed: but the fruites of his obedience, and merite of his sacrifice are there distributed and receiued by the faithfull. Of the reasons aforesaid, do the Ministers conclude, that it is blasphemy and sacriledge, to call the bread of the Masse, of a Romish Priest, a wholsome host. And if for proofe ther∣of, they wold alledge the Fathers, in whose writings is found, that they call sometimes the Supper an oblation and sacrifice: The Ministers answere, that first it nought appertaineth to the Masse of the Priests: between which & the Supper, there is no agreement. And afterwards, that what the Fathers haue said, they neuer vnderstood it of the propitiatory sacrifice: by which remission of sinnes is gotten and obtained. And they haue neuer beleeued nor thought, that there was any other sacrifice to appease the wrath of God, and obtaine reconci∣liation and agreement betweene him and men, then the one∣ly sacrifice of Iesus Christ, made by him alone, one onely time vpon the Crosse. Three things then in briefe, doo the Ministers say: first, that there neither is, nor can be other sa∣crificer of the new Testament, then Christ Iesus. The reasons are, because there is none but he, of whom it hath bene said: Thou art a Priest for euer, after the order of Melchisedeck. Also there is none but he, to whom may agree, and be fitly applyed the conditions and essentiall qualities of a sacrificer, and the sacrifice: Which are, that the Priest be holy, innocent, without spot, seperated from sinners, and made higher then the heauens: which needed not to offer daily sacrifices, first for his owne sinnes, and then for the sinnes of the people. Also there is none but he, which is, nor could bee Mediator betweene God and men: which could satisfie the diuine iustice: which is capable to beare and su∣staine the wrath of God: which could tame and conquer death: which by his death, and proper bloud, could worke the confirmation of the new Testament: and which (to bee briefe) could in fauour and contemplation of his merits and dignitie, obtaine of God remission of sinnes, and the other graces needfull for them which trust in him, and instantly desire him. Secondly the Ministers say, that there is no other sacri∣fice for sinne, but that of Iesus Christ: That he is the one∣ly Lambe which beareth the sinnes of the world: that there is nothing but his bloud, whereby our filthinesse is washed: To bee short, that God taketh pleasure in no other sacri∣fice nor oblation: and that hee requireth no other burnt sacrifice nor offering for sinne. And that therefore Ie∣sus Christe (as it is written of him in the rolle of the lawe) is come, to doo and accomplish the will of God his Father. Thirdly, they say of the sacrifice of Iesus Christ, that it was one onely, and once offered by himselfe: without that it was euer needfull afterwardes to repeate and reiterate the same, considering the perfection and vertue thereof, by which sinne is abolished, and absolute and eternall sanctifi∣cation obtained to all the elect: as it appeareth in the 9. and 10. of the Hebrewes. By meanes whereof, no lesse blas∣phemy it is, nor a thing lesse contrarie to the doctrine and meaning of the Apostle, to approue the repetition and reite∣ration of the sacrifice of Iesus Christ, then the pluralitie of sacrifices for sinne. And if the Doctors would (as they won∣tedly haue) to disguise and colour such an abuse, shewe forth their distinction betweene the propitiatory and applicatory sacrifice, saying▪ that the Priests pretend not in their Masses to sacrifice Iesus Christ for other end, then to apply the me∣rite of his death to those, for whom they celebrate the same. The Ministers answere, that in so dooing, they should at∣tribute vnto Iesus Christ, more then they do: because all the fruite of his sacrifice commeth vnto vs, by the application thereof. As healing commeth not so much by the confecti∣on and preparation of the medicine, as by the application of the same. Furthermore, the Ministers would willingly demaund of our Maisters, by what meane the benefite of the death of Iesus Christ, was applied to the Fathers before his comming, seeing that as then they did sing no Masses? Well seeth eue∣rie man of any spirite or iudgement, that such distinctions are friuolous, and onely inuented to obscure the truth, and dazell the eyes of the simple and ignorant. For Iesus Christ who hath offered the sacrifice, is hee himselfe, which apply∣eth the same vnto vs, by his spirite, his word, and his Sacra∣ments. To returne then to their former speech, and declare why the Fathers haue called the Supper, and all the action thereof a sacrifice. It behoueth to note, that there are many sorts of sacrifices in the Supper: As the sacrifice of a con∣trite Ps. 51. heart, offered by publike confession of sinnes which there is made. After the sacrifice of our body, there offe∣red Rom. 12. by publike prayer, which followeth the said confession. Thirdly, the sacrifice of praise there offered, when they sing Psalmes after the confession and prayer. After com∣meth the preaching of the Gospell, (which is called a sa∣crifice, Rom. 15.): then the confession and prayers en∣ded, the Minister presenteth himselfe to the people, to preach vnto them the word of God. The Almes (which Phil. 4. Heb. 13. is an other kinde of sacrifice) was heretofore brought forth in the Supper by the faithfull: which would therby te∣stifie, not only their remembrance of the graces & benefites of God: but also their loue & desire they had to relieue the necessities of their poore neighbors. Besides all these Sacrifi∣ces, there are yet in the Supper two particular sacrifices, wher∣of mention is made in the writings of the Fathers. The bread and the wine which were chosen and taken of the Almes, brought thither for the poore, and were consecrated: that is to say, deputed and appointed to the holy and sacred vse of the Supper. The other is the memorie of the death and sacrifice of Iesus Christ, celebrated and repeated in all the action of the Supper. The which, for this reason is called a Chap. 10. Sacrifice by S. Iohn Chrisostome, vpon the Epistle to the He∣brewes, when he saith: We make not euery day other Sacrifice, then that of Iesus Christ. But rather (saith he correcting him∣selfe) we make the memorie of that Sacrifice. S. Ambrose calleth it the memorie of our redemption: To the end, that we remembring our Redeemer, may obtaine of him increase of his graces in vs. S. Augustine yet proposeth it more clear∣ly, vnder a comparison which he bringeth of the dayes of the passion, and resurrection of Iesus Christ: which he thus Epist 23. applieth: when the Feast of Easter approacheth, we vse oft times this maner of speech: To morrow, or within two daies, we haue the passion or resurrection of Iesus Christ. That cannot properly be vnderstood of the day wherein Iesus Christ suffered death (which is long since passed): but onely of the memorie of his death, which is solempnized and ce∣lebrated, as this day, euery yeare. A little after, to appro∣priate his comparison, he addeth: Iesus Christ, hath not he bene one only time offered in himselfe? And neuerthelesse in the Sacrament of the Supper, not only on Easter day, but euery day also, is hee offered to the people. Also else∣where: Contra Faust lib. 20. cap. 21. The flesh and blood of this Sacrifice, were before the comming of Iesus Christ, promised by the figures of Sacrifices. In the passion of Iesus Christ, they were giuen and offered in trueth: And after the Ascenti∣on of Iesus Christ into Heauen, they are celebrated by the Sacrament of remembrance. Of these and many o∣ther like passages, one may deduct, that the Fathers haue often called the Supper a Sacrifice: by reason that in the same, the memory of the Sacrifice of Iesus Christ is renu∣ed and celebrated. The name of Sacrifice, is by the Auncients often al∣so applied to the Almes, which the faithfull brought forth in the Supper. As by Iustin Martyr in the second Apologie: by S. Augustin in the 20. chap. of the 20. book Cotra Faust: by S. Ciprian in the booke de Elimosina: by S. Iohn Chry∣sostome, Hom. 46. vpon S. Mathew. Which thing may also be verified by the Canō of the Masse it selfe, where it is said: We offer to thy maiestie part of thy gifts & bene∣fits: which ought to be referred to the Almes of the faith∣full, which the Minister in the name of the whole Church offered to God. They haue sometimes also called the prai∣ers there made, Sacrifices. As S. Ciprian vpon the Lords Prayer. And Eusebius in the 7. of the Ecclesiasticall Hi∣story. Tertullian in the 3. booke against Marcion: where, alledging that written in Malachy, [of the cleane offe∣ring], which ought to be made vnto God, from the ry∣sing of the Sunne, to the going downe of the same, saith: that ought to be vnderstood of the Hymnes and praises of God. Which S. Ierome (expounding the passage aforesaid) doth also confirme. For conclusion of this matter, the Ministers say: that all the passages of the bookes of the Fathers: wherin mention is made of Sacrifice, in the speech of the Supper, ought to be referred to one of these kinds aforesaid. And that it shal neuer be found, that they haue said or written, or yet euer haue thought, that there was any other sacrifice Iesus Christ the onely sa∣crifice propi∣ciatory of the new Testa∣ment. The Sacramēt improperly termed a Sa∣crifice; y rea∣son of the cō∣currence of these 5. Chri∣stiā Sacrifices therin: name∣ly: Contrit ō, Mortification, Praises, Almes & celebration of the memo∣ry of Christ. Euery mem∣ber of Christs Church a Priest. propi∣ciatory, then that alone, which Iesus Christ in his owne body once offered vpō the Crosse for our redemptiō. And that by means therof, it is certain, that in the Christiā church, he ought to be acknowledged, the priest of the new Testa∣ment. And as touching the other sacrifices, namely: of a Contrite heart: of the Mortification of the fleshe: of Praises and Almes: and of the shewing forth, and memo∣rie of the death of Iesus Christ: they say, that it general∣ly belongeth to all the Church to offer them: And that there is no faithfull, nor any member in the whole bodie of the Church, which in this respect, is not a Priest. As saith S. Peter in the 2. Chapter of his first Epistle. And S. Iohn in the first Chapter of the Apocalips. And that we ought for this cause, to offer in the Supper such Sacrifices vnto God: As appeareth by the same Cannon of theyr Masse, by them euilly vnderstood, and applied to the Sa∣crifice, which they pretend to make of the body & blood of Iesus Christ; where it is said: For the which, we offer vnto thee: or who offer vnto thee, &c. Our saying of the Sacrifice, that it is common to all the Church, to offer vnto God, Sacrifice of praise: ought not to be slaunderously interpreted: as if we would con∣found the Ecclesiasticall Ministery, with the sayd Priest∣hood; and by that meanes, ouerthrow and disturbe the order of the Church: attributing to each one, authoritie and power to gouerne the same. For we know well, that the callings be different among the people of God: And that it is needfull, there be in the Church, Pastors, and Doctors, and other Ministers (as Deacons and Elders) to well guide and edifie the same: as well by the daily prea∣ching of the word, as by the carefull and diligent execu∣tion of other things which concerne their charges. But it behooueth notwithstanding, to distinguish such callings which be particular, from the Priesthood aforesaid: which ought to be generall, and common (as is said) to the whole Church. It shall now be easie for all them, which will diligent∣ly obserue the things here before discouered, and shewed The Masse is a corruption and ruine of Christs insti∣tution in his Supper. forth by the word of God, to vnderstand and iudge, that the Masse, such as is now celebrated in the Romane Church, is a whole corruption and ouerthrowing of the institution of the Supper, which Iesus Christ made, and left in his Church. So that it should be now impossible to acknowledge therein, one onely trace or marke of it first ordinance. For of a Sacrament which Iesus Christ left in his The ende of Christs insti∣tution in the Sacrament, abolished by the Masse. Church, to edifie and entertaine the same in a present me∣morie of his death, haue they made a sacrifice; whereby the remembrance of that of Iesus Christ, hath bin wholly buried and interred. And herein is there a maruellous thing, and worthy to be well marked. That is to say, that that which appertaineth not but to the sonne of God The Priest in the Masse most impious∣ly vsurpeth the proper of∣fices of Christ himselfe. onely, and was impossible for any other but him to do: as to sacrifice for sin, to reconcile men vnto God, to appease his wrath towards them, and to make intercession, to ob∣taine for them his fauour and aide; the Priests do attribute to themselues. And that which to them was lawfull, and commaunded, and also possible and easie to do: that is to say, to solemnize the memorie of Iesus Christ, & in taking and breaking, distributing and eating of the bread, and drinking the wine, to shewe forth his death: they haue wholly cast aside. So that one may say, that the Priests do What Christ in celebration of his Supper hath cōman∣ded, that the Popish Priests in their Masse neglect: and what Christ hath not com∣maunded, and is impossible for any but himself to do, dare they at∣tempt to do. nothing of all that which Iesus Christ did, and commaun∣ded to be done in the Supper. And that which he did vpon the Crosse, and that he neuer commaunded man to do, the Priests dare enterprise, and will do the same. The errors and abuse, as well of Transubstantiation, as of the Priesthood, and expiatorie sacrifice, and of the repe∣tition, of the same, which be the principall parts, and as it were the foundations of the Masse, haue bene heretofore confuted, and sufficiently conuinced by the word of God: and by the reasons which haue bene alledged in the decla∣ration of the parts of the Supper. And nothing more re∣maineth to cast downe this Idoll, but to shewe, that that which is in the Masse, (besides the abuses aforesaid) is not better, nor better founded vpon the word of God. For the adoration which there is made of the bread and wine, is an Idolatrie, condemned and accursed of God. And it is not like, that Iesus Christ (instituting the Supper) would not haue ordained it, that S. Paul (recyting this institution, as he had receiued it of the Lord) would not haue taught it: and that the auncient Church would haue omitted the same, had it bene a thing wherein God had bene any way honoured. Afterward, the seperation of the Priest from the people, is directly contrary to the Article of the faith, of the Communion of the Church: and to the ende, for which the Supper was ordained, which is to confirme and entertaine due societie among the faithfull, and to binde them alwayes more straightly one to an other. And none can say, but that it is an intollerable presump∣tion, and a manifest contempt and disdaine of the residue of Gods people. And a plaine mockery is that which the Doctos alledge to excuse and couer such a sacriledge: to wit, that the Masse of the Priests ceaseth not to bee good, when those that are there present will not comuni∣cate. For first it is forbidden them to eate alone in the Supper. And a Supper it is not, where there is not a Communion: as Saint Paul teacheth, reproouing the Corinthians, because they departed one from an other in 1. Cor. 11. 20. 21. the celebration of their Supper. When (sayth he) yee come together therefore into one place, this is not to eate the Supper of the Lord: For euery man, when they should eate, taketh his owne supper afore. And teaching in the ende of the Chap∣ter, the forme which they ought to hold, hee sayth vnto them: Wherefore my bretheren, when yee come toge∣ther to eate, tarry one for another. Furthermore, oft times it happeneth, that there are not in their Masse, but the Priest and the little Clarke, which answereth him: whom they will not receiue to communicate with them. Al∣so, how can they excuse the Masses which are sung in Monasteries: where the people are forbidden to com∣municate with the Monkes, which celebrate the same▪ Moreouer, it is ordinarily seene in great Parishes of this Cittie of Paris, and else-where, euen vppon the dayes that the people Communicate; that they are se∣perated from the Priests, who do their businesse apart, and wil not vouchsafe to feed & communicate with them vpon one table. Also, what communion is there betweene the Priests and the people, seeing that in stead of breaking in the assembly, one selfe-same bread, (to the end that all the partakers thereof, should bee by that meane conioyned and more straightly closed in one body) each one hath his owne particular: the Priest, one more great, and the people, one lesse? Seeing also that the Cup is not any way distribu∣ted to them? Furthermore, what dutie do the Priests, to in∣uite and exhort the people, to communicate with them? yea the Bishops themselues? who would at this day repute it great shame to communicate with crafts-men, and other in∣ferior people. To conclude, had the Doctors well noted the custome of the Fathers, which caused the Cathecumenians, & others there (not prepared to communicate) to depart the place where the Communion was celebrated: and that likewise which S. Iohn Chrisostome saith thereof: they would shame to de∣fend such an abuse & impietie, as is that of their Masse. And that the people may not bee ignorant of that, which these In Epist. ad Ephes. Serm. 3. holy Doctors therof saith, we will translate the same, word for word. It is in vaine that the daily sacrifice is made: It is in vaine that we abide at the Aultar; there is no person which there communicateth. I say not this to the end that yee communicate in any sort soeuer; but that ye yeeld your selues worthy thereof: Art thou not worthy to communicate? so art thou not worthy to pray. Also a litle after: If some one were called to a banquet, should wash his hands, and sitting at the table, should not eate, nor taste ought of the meates which should there be serued: should he not dishonour and wrong him that inuited him? had it not bin bet∣ter he had not come there? Euen so it is with thee. Thou art come, thou hast sung the Psalme with the rest of the people: thou hast confessed that thou wast of the number of the worthy, in not de∣parting with them which are vnworthy. How then abidest thou, and doost not perticipate of the table of the Lord? Thou sayest I am vnworthy. I answere thee, that thou art so: whereby also vn∣worthy of the Communion of prayers. Thirdly the gobbets and offalls of Gospels and Epistles, the Symbole, praier, & other peeces of the scripture, brought all confused, and not hanging together, said and proposed to the people in an vnknowne language (against the expresse commaundement of God, and without any edification of the congregation) is no other thing, then a vaine vsurpation of the name of God, against the expresse prohibition which he hath made thereof. And such robes are too straight and short, to couer the shame and filthinesse of the Masse. Fourthly, what an execrable abuse is it to say, that the Masse serueth to obtaine remission of sinnes; not onely for the quicke, but also for the dead? And that the Priests (pas∣sing yet further, not to forget, or leaue any blasphemy be∣hind) do diuide their hoste into three parts: faigning one part to be for them in heauen: an other for them which are on earth: and the third for them in Purgatorie. For the Sacrament which is not ordained but for confirmation of the faith of the word: extendeth not further then the Mini∣sterie, nor the Ministerie further then this life. As then it is so, that they which are in heauen, and they likewise whom they faine to be in Purgatorie, are dead and departed from An excel∣lent note to proue the Masse a shif∣ting forgery this world: we must necessarily conclude, that as the word cannot be preached to them, so also the Sacraments cannot be administred to them. And if they be not administred to them, that they can profit them nothing. The end of the Resolution. Answeres to the last obiections proposed by the Doctors, touching the Supper. THe Ministers say, that many things there are in the said obiections, impertinent to the matter in question: as that they demaund, how long the doctrine abode in it puritie, touching the Supper, and the other articles of Religion. Wherevnto they answere, that from the time of the Apostles themsemselues, there were heretikes and An∣tichrists: as Ebion, Cerinthus, Simon Magus, the Samaritanes, and others: who by their errors▪ and heresies, went then a∣bout to peruert the Aposto lique Churches, and corrupt the pure doctrine which was therein. Wherevntothe Apostles, by all possible wayes, did manfully oppose themselues: re∣uoking and euer reducing all things to their first institution, and foundation of the pure word of God: as we see, did S. Paul towards the C rinthians, and Galathians: whose Churches, although he had well planted and watered, were neuerthelesse corrupred in his life time, as well in manners, as in doctrine. And to that which the Doctors demaund, how long after the decease of the Apostles, continued the puritie of the doctrine and Religion in the Church of God, as well in the Article of the Supper, as in others: the Ministers answere, that so long time it there continued, as the word of God was followed and preached. To that which the Doctors say afterwards, (traducing the Supper celebrated in the reformed Church) that the Mini∣sters abuse those that are there present, nought else giuing them, but nothing betweene two dishes: the Ministers an∣swere: that this blason much better fitteth the Doctors, then them, because they present not to them whom they haue summoned to their Masses, but accidēts of indiuisible waues, and the sight onely of the formes of bread and wine to feed them withall. A litle after do they call their sacrifice of the Masse most precious: whervpon the Ministers grant that they haue rea∣son so to exault it: & to attribute thervnto, so precious and magnificall a tytle, for the great reuenewes and riches, which this precious sacrifice hath brought vnto them: wherof may well be said, that it hath bene vnto them a fleece, and golden Myne, more abundant then euer was that of Iason; or all the Mynes of the East. In as much as they haue made the world beleeue (and chiefly the founders of Abbayes, Prio∣ries, and other benifices) that their sacrifices, were vaileable to them for the redemption, remedie, and health of theyr soules. Afterwards, without all shame do the Doctors call the Supper of the Lord detestable, because there is nought therein offred (say they) but common bread & wine. Wher∣vnto the Ministers answere, that in their Supper is truly pre∣sented bread and wine to the people; which after consecra∣tion, abide in their substance, as before: but they denie that therfore the said bread and wine be common: by reason (as heretofore hath bene amply declared to the Doctors) that by the preaching of the Gospell, and recytall of the ordi∣nance of God, both the one and the other is changed (as is said) touching the vse, but not touching the nature. To that wherein the Doctors do charge the Ministers, to make insurrections, conuenticles, coniurations, conspira∣cies, and secret practises against the state of their Prince, vn∣der colour & pretext of their Supper; the Ministers answer, that the same was not to impugne their doctrine, but rather shamelesly to despight and slaunder them. And that the fi∣delitie of those of the reformed religion, hath bene knowne and proued, to the expense of their bloud, and losse of their liues. So that the King and his Councell, by his Edict, hath declared them to haue bene very faithfull and well affected subiects to his Maiestie. And wee must not maruell if the Doctors thus slaunder the reformed Churches; for as much as the Christians in all times haue bin accused of like crimes, by the enemies of the truth. As it appeareth by the Apolo∣gie of Tertullian, & the booke of S. Augustine, de Ci itate Dei: by the Tract of Saint Ciprian against Demetrius: and by the booke of Arnobius, which he wrote against the Gentiles. But the Ministers much maruell, how the Doctors are so ill aduised, to alledge the suppers celebrated in the reformed Churches, to verifie their accusations; seeing that the same at this day, being throughout publikely done, in the eyes and presence of them that will behold them: there is no∣thing therein hidden, and whereof each one (if he will) may not easily be informed. But this is the zeale and great chari∣tie of my Lords our maisters (whereof they haue heretofore protested, & that by inuocatiō of Gods name) which so trans∣porteth them to slaunder, without shame or shewe, those whose iustice in that matter, shall answere for them before God and men. Touching that which the Doctors erwards say, that in the Supper of the Ministers, no consecration is made, of the matter of bread & wine, which be there proposed. The Mi∣nisters do confesse, that the bread and wine which be truly in their Supper, are not consecrated in sort as the Doctors pretend to consecrate them in their Masse: For so they ap∣proue not such a consecration. But yet do they maintaine, that there is in their Supper, consecration of the matters a∣foresaid, in sort, as they in their articles, and resolution haue heretofore very largely declared. The Doctors for proofe and confirmation of that afore∣said, do adde, that it belongeth not to all persons indifferent∣ly to consecrate the matter of the Sacraments; but to them onely, which are ordained by the laying on of hands of the Romane Bishops: wherevnto the Ministers for answer, say, that the first point, they confesse: and also (as else-where they haue said) that calling is necessarie to such a purpose. But they denie vnto the Doctors notwithstanding, that this calling is the imposition which they pretend: and the Mini∣sters assure themselues, that their calling is more lawful, and better founded, then is that of the Doctors. Whereas the Doctors propose in the article following▪ that the Ministers haue not answered them clearly enough to their liking, touching the parts of the Sacrament, and of the word required for the consecration of the matter, which therein is. The Ministers answere, that there is no doubt∣fulnesse, obscuritie, nor any inuolution in their writings, sa∣uing that which the Doctors will finde therein: the iudge∣ment whereof, the Ministers referre to the vpright readers. And yet they hold it not more straunge that the Doctors finde their writings obscure, then did Saint Paul, that his Gospell was hidden and couert, to them which perished. And in whome the God of this world had blinded the mindes. To that of the presence of the body of Iesus Christ in the Supper, for which the Doctors require of the Ministers, a more large declaration, then that they haue giuen in theyr former answere. The Ministers say, that they haue the evnto clearly answe∣red, albeit the Doctor bee not satisfied with their whereat they nothing wonder, knowing well it is not theyr custome to be contented if one yeeld not to them what they demaund, and desire. Which the Ministers haue not deter∣mined to do, much lesse to exceed in their answer the limits and bounds of the scripture▪ be it in this article of the Supper, or in others: but rather to follow, as neare as possibly they can, the phrase and maner of speaking of the same. By means whereof, for full answere, the Ministers acknowledge no o∣ther eating of the flesh and bloud of Iesus Christ, bee it in the Supper, or out of the Supper, sauing that which Iesus Christ himselfe declareth in the sixt Chapter of Saint Iohn. Whosoeuer eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, hath eternall life. Also, He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, dwe ∣leth in me, and I in him. Also: As the liuing Father hath sent me so liue I by the Father▪ And he that eateth me, euen he shall liue by me. To the last Article, which is of Concomitance, the Mini∣sters answere, that the demaund of the Doctors was not so hard but that they had well conceiued it. But they dissem∣bled the same, because they would not loose time to speake and write of such dreames. And they well thought that the Doctors were subtill inough, to vnderstand that in their de∣nying Transubstantiation, it was not to pro e their Concomi∣tance. Now for their satisfaction, they adde, that they will know no more then that which Iesus Christ himselfe hath taught in his word. That is to say, that in the Supper to par∣ticipate in his flesh crucified, and bloud shead for the remissi∣on of sinnes, it behoueth to take and eate the bread, & drinke the wine which be administred, without any way diuiding or seperating the same. Which thing is also forbidden by the Canons, De Consecr. Dist. 2. C. Cū omne Crimen. Finished on Wednesday the 14. of August, in the yeare aforesaid. This writing being sent, the Ministers went shortly af∣ter towards my Lord of Neuers, to shew vnto him, that they for theyr part, had largely treated of this matter: but they well perceiued, that the Doctors by theyr friuolous and im∣pertinent questions, hitherto sought not, but to passe away the time, without ought doing in the decyding of the Sup∣per, and of the Masse. And albeit they fayned▪ that such de∣maunds did serue for a preparatiue to this dispute: yet was it to no other end, but not to enter thereinto at all: and to hold things in suspence, vntill length of time should begin to be troublesome: and by that meane, all should break off. That his lyking might be to make the Doctors vnderstand, that without turning this or that way, they should come to end the difference: refuting that which the Ministers had maintained of the Supper, and supporting that which they had condemned in theyr Masse. Which thing he promised them to do. Of which promise, began the Ministers to hope thence forward for some profitable matter, and seruing to the edification of the Readers, and rooting out of the grea∣test abuse and error that is in the Romane Church. Neuer∣thelesse, shortly after was it bruted through the Citie, that Doctor Ʋigor was fallen into a very daungerous disease, and wherof was no hope he should hast ly recouer: which made the Ministers feare, that they were frustrate of theyr hope. And yet more did they feare, when they vnderstood, that the Doctor de Sainctes, was the same time departed from Pa∣ris, and gone towards Monsieur the Cardinal of Lorraine. For they could not otherwise presume, but that they shuld make a long and vnprofitable aboad at Paris: not hauing where∣withall to imploy theyr time. Considering▪ they were not there but by accident: to wit, that de Spina was come thi∣ther, to passe further, and make a voyage into Aniou and the other, who was Minister of the Church of Orleance, was late∣ly come forth of prison, where he had beene brought, in the Moneth of Iune next precedent, vpon a false accusation, suborned against him by the enemies of Gods Church, which charged him to be author of a pernicious and wicked booke, written against the obedience, due to Kings and Princes. Therefore was it very hurtfull for him to so ourn so long a time, in a Citie, whither hee came against his ly∣king. For these causes, they purposed to returne towards my Lord of Neuers, to shew vnto him, the things aforesaid: and tell him, that De Sainctes (who might haue stayed and ioy∣ned some other with him in the stead of Vigor) was depar∣ted thence, without making it knowne when his returne would be: that it was not reason, they should stay there, be∣ing incertaine of that which they had to doo: and conside∣ring that their Churches had need of them, to execute ther∣in their charges: and that they desired the same. Notwith∣standing, in the end they found it better to suffer an incon∣uenience, and to abide there, vntill my Lord of Neuers de∣parted from Paris: as in the end of the Moneth of August he should goe to his owne land called Co lomiers. For seeing the Doctors were then absent, (the Lord of Neuers being departed) the Ministers could doo nothing: not hauing whom to write vnto, nor with whom to conferre. These remonstances being liked by the said Lord, hee gaue them leaue to depart by writing, signed, Lodouico de Gonzague: and below, Varin: Secretarie. Dated 26. of Au∣gust: wherein were declared the occasions, here before tou∣ched, and remōstrance of the Ministers▪ with promise made by the said Lord, to cause the answeres which the Doctors would make, to be brought vnto them. And that by the meane of Monsieur de Buci, S. George, who was charged with this businesse. Also, the Ministers promised to be readie, were it to returne to Paris: or else to answere from the place where they should be, as often as the Doctors should write. These things thus done and passed, the Ministers retur∣ned presently after; supposing to haue some speedie newes from the Doctors. But they haue attended, and yet do at∣tend, without that there hath bene any appearance thereof. And they vnderstood nothing of that matter, sauing that many seuerall writings were afterwardes cryed and solde through the Citie of Paris. In the tytles whereof, some found meane to enterlace the word [Conference], to make shewe vnto the world, that it was something, touching the former disputations. And such a subtiltie indeed was not without great profit to the Printers. So great desire had men to know the truth of the thing. For contentation of whom, we haue thought meet, to bring to light what was done concerning the same: reseruing to another time, to publish what the Doctors (when they shall do it) shall write against it: and what the Ministers also will there vnto answere, if they can recouer the same. In the meane time shall each one be admonished to make profit of that which is here contained. And to pray the Father of lights, to shead more & more the brightnesse of his spirit vpon his Church, to the true vnderstanding of his holy word: for the restauration, and aduancement of the spirituall kingdome of Iesus Christ his sonne, our Lord. So be it, the 8. of No∣uember, 1566. FINIS. A briefe Table of the titles of the Acts of the Disputation. THe Preface containing the occasions of the Dispute fol∣lowing. The first day of the Disputation, which was Tuesday the 9. of Iu∣ly, 1566. touching the assurance one ought to haue of the word of God: and of the meane to knowe what is the word of God: and to discerne betweene the bookes of the Bible: to call the one Canonicall, and the other Apocripha. The second day, being Wednesday, the 10. of Iuly, touching the same matter: with the resolution of the Doctors, concluding, that it is by the authoritie of the Church, that the holy scrip∣ture is knowne to be the word of God: And the resolution of the Ministers to the contrary: That it is the spirite of God which sealeth and imprinteth the assurance thereof in the harts of the elect. The third day, being Thursday, the 11. of Iuly, containing the demaunds and answeres vpon the Creede of the Apostles: and why it is so called. The fourth day, being Friday, the 12. of Iuly: comprehending the resolution of the Doctors: concluding, that it is by the tradition of the Church▪ that one is assured of the Creed of the Apostles: And that of the Ministers, tending to this: that it is knowne by the conformitie which it hath with the holy scriptures. The fift day, being M nday, the 15. of Iuly: where is the begin∣ning of the disputation of Gods Omnipotencie: vnder the co∣uert whereof the Doctors do ground foure points, contained in the 63. Page. On this Omnipotencie, and the points aboue said, the disputes following: as well by word as by writing, were con∣tinued. The sixt day of the Dispute, Tuesday the 16. of Iuly. The Ministers answere to the obiections of the Doctors, Tuesday the 16. of Iuly. The reply or obiection of the Doctors, against the answere of the Ministers, touching the article of Gods omnipotencie, on Sat∣terday the 20. of Iuly. The answere of the Ministers to the writing of the Doctors, sent to them, by my Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 22. of Iuly, about fiue of the clocke in the euening▪ the yeare, 1566. The reply of the Doctors to the writing of the Ministers, sent to them by my Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 25. day of Iuly, a∣bout 8 of the clocke in the euening, the yeare, 1566. The Resolution of the Doctors, touching the article of the Al∣mightinesse of God: in respect of the foure questions proposed by them to the Ministers. Which serue to the vnderstanding of the reall presence of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ in the holy Sacrament. The articles proposed by the Doctors for the next, and other con∣ferences following, according to the order of the said articles. The answere of the Ministers, to the writing of the Doctors, sent to them by my Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 28. of Iuly, about seuen of the clocke in the euening, the yeare, 1566. A briefe resolution of all the answeres and discourses which the Ministers haue made vpon the matter of Gods omnipotencie, in the conference which they haue had with the Doctors. The answeres to the preface of the Doctors questions. The answeres to the questions proposed by the Doctors, touching the Supper. A briefe reply of the Doctors against the last answere of the Mi∣nisters, sent to them by my Lord the Duke of Niuernois, the first of August, at 7. of the clocke in the euening. Anno. 1566. A briefe aduertisement of the Doctors, vpon the resolution of the Ministers, touching the omnipotencie of God. The obiection of the Supper by the Doctors, against the answeres of the Ministers. The answere of the Ministers, to the writing of the Doctors, and to them sent by my Lord of Niuernois, Wednesday morning, the 7. of August. Anno. 1566. The conclusion and resolution of the points, as well of the Supper, as of the Masse, containing the declaration of that which the Ministers beleeue, and teach in their Churches, by the word of God, concerning the same. Answeres to the last obiections, proposed by the Doctors, tou∣ching the Supper. FINIS. Errata. Page a▪ line 20. For some others, reade any other▪ Pa. 6. li 1. next after prayers, read therof. Pa. 26. lin. 7. for therfore, there. Pa. 35. li. vlt. for a it appeareth, as it appeareth Pa. 39. li. 20▪ for O d, God. Pa. 48. lin. 31. Or whether there any, Or whether there be any. Pa. 70. li. 13. After it may be, put in [only] Pa. 71 li. 11. but those, then those. P. 73. li. 2. put out not. Pa. 74 li. 3. Angelius, Angelus, Pa. 74 li 29 Hypostali, Hypostasy, pa. 78. li. 33. antecent, antecedent, pa. 80 li 37 without place, with place. pa. 83. li. 29. diuers vertues, a diuers vertue. pa. 84. l. 30▪ within, [with him] p. 85. li. 36. Pamachiuns, Pamachius. p. 86. li. 27. Cirell, Cyril. pa. 87. in margine, Sect 39. Sect. 29. pa. 88. li 17. read in the margin. Hebr. 4. 14. pa. 89. li 22. put out is. pa. 91. li. 29. spiritualtie, spiritualitie▪ pa. 92. li. 16. Theodoret, Theodor. pa. 92. li. 21. things better cleared, and things better cleared. pa. 94. li. 2. summoning, ytation, li. 5. these words [they said to be done] should be in the margine, and not in the text. pa. 103. Lin. 25. the terme piercing, the terme of piercing, pa. 105. Li. 16. these, those, pa. 110. Li. 11. that God made one, that if God made one, pa. 111. Li. 15. Aerilem, ste∣rilem. pa 114. Lin. 33. speaketh, speake. Ead. Lin. 36. p ace, place. pa. 115. Lin. 33, dimensions and of bodies, dimentions of bodies pa. 116 Lin. 12. Cod, God, pa. 119 Lin 28, the contradiction, the like contradiction, pa. 120 Lin 10 clausa, clausae. pa. 121 Lin 24. Imagined, Imagine, pa. 122. Li. 10. octijs, ostijs, pa. 126 Li. 22. into, in, pa. 127 Lin, 11, Fantasmatiques▪ Fantastiques, Lin 1 wicith, with, pa. 129, Lin 7, that heauens, that the heauens, pa. 136 L. 34, inequitie, iniquitie. pa. 139. L. 1, of, for, pa. 140. Lin 33. number & different, number & fashion different, pa 151. Line 7 withstansteth, withstandeth, pa. 155. lin 7. placle, place, pa. 156. Line 24, Cod, God, pa. 16 . Line 4, depriuation, deprauation, pa. 173, Line 34, scriture, scripture, pa. 180, Lin 34, words, workes, pa. 183, Lin 34, but they, but he, pa. 191, Lin 23, pure care, due care, pa. 195, Lin 7, fanets, fa∣nels, Lin 2 , imperfection, in it perfection, pa. 196, Lin 25, reception, re∣ceiuing, pa, 200, Line 6, Artice, Article, pa, 202, Line 34, vincentin, vin∣centium, pa. 207, Line 31, vpon solid reason, vpon any solid reason, pa. 209, Line 33, Albeit, if, pa, 219, Line 22. they, read it, pa, 220, Line 26, spake, speake, pa, 2 2, Marg: Psal, 37, 3, Marg. 1 Cor: 13, 1 Cor: 15, pa. 233 Line 10, and he, as he, pa▪ 237 Line 12, hath as seales, hath put as seales, pa. 240 Line 24 for the name bread, reade the name of bread. Pa. 250. Margin, right vnder Cap. 10. reade Hom. 17.