A true declaration of the estate of the colonie in Virginia vvith a confutation of such scandalous reports as haue tended to the disgrace of so worthy an enterprise. Published by aduise and direction of the Councell of Virginia. Counseil for Virginia (England and Wales) A true declaration of the estate of the colonie in Virginia vvith a confutation of such scandalous reports as haue tended to the disgrace of so worthy an enterprise. Published by aduise and direction of the Councell of Virginia. Counseil for Virginia (England and Wales) A true declaration of the estate in VIRGINIA. T HERE is a great distance, betwixt the vulgar opinion of men, and the iudicious apprehension of wise men. Opinion is as blind Oedipus, who could see nothing, but would heare all things, Hinc aucupari verba ru∣moris vagi, to hawke after the winged report of a vagabond rumor. But iudgement, is as Salo∣mon in his throne, able by the spirit of wise∣dome, to discerne betwixt contesting truth, and falshood: neither depending on the popular breath of fame, which is euer partiall, nor vpon the euent of good designes, which are euer ca∣suall. These two commanders of our affecti∣ons, haue diuided the vniuersall spirits of our land, whilst (in the honorable enterprise for plantation in Virginia) some, are caried away with the tide of vulgar opinion, and others, are encouraged, by the principles of religion, and reason. But because, it is for hawkes and not for men, to build their nests in aires, and because the honor and prosperity of this so noble an action, is eclipsed by the interposition of clamorous & tragicall narrations: the com∣piler of this relation endeuoureth to wash away those spots, which foule mouths (to iusti∣fie their owne disloialty) haue cast vpon so fruitfull, so fertile, and so excellent a country. Wherein he professeth, that he will relate no∣thing (concerning Virginia) but what he hath from the secrets of the iudiciall councell of Virginia, from the letters of the Lord La Ware, from the mouth of Sir Thomas Gates, whose wisedomes (he conceiueth) are not so shallow, as easily to be deceiued of others, nor conscien∣ces so wretched, as by pretences to deceiue others. But when a matter of such consequence, is not to be shufled ouer with supine negli∣gence, and when no man raiseth a faire buil∣ding, that laith not a firme foundation, it will not be impertinent, to dig a little deeper, that we may build a great deale higher: and from the vniuersall policie of all ciuill states (in re∣plenishing the world with colonies of dome∣sticall subiects) to deriue this wisedome to our populous state and country. Colonies. That which Origen said of Christs actions in vertues morall, holdeth proportion with Gods actions in gouernment politicall, Dei fa∣cta, sunt nostra praecepta, Gods actions, are our in∣structions: who (in the eleuenth of Genesis) turned the greatest cursing, into the greatest blessing, and by confusion of tongues, kept them from confusion of states; scattering those clouen people, into as many colonies ouer the face of the earth, as there are diuersities of lan∣guages in the earth. Now if Tertullians rule be true, Omne genus ab origine censendum that euery action is most beutifull in the originall. Can there be a better beginning then from God, whose wisedome is not questioned, and whose footsteps in all succeeding ages haue beene followed. Search the records of diuine truth, and humane monuments of state, you shall find, Salmanasar transporting the Babilo∣nians, and other Gentiles, to Samaria: and re∣plenishing with the captiues of Israell, the dis∣peopled confines of Media. You shall find that 140. yeeres after the de∣struction of Troy the Ionian colony, was carried from Greece, to Asia: by which that famous Ci∣ty of Ephesus was first builded, and inhabited. You shall find the Egiptians, planted Babilon, Argos, and Athens. The Phenicians first inhabi∣ting Carthage, Vtica, and Thebes. That Timolcon and the city of Corinth, at one time repeopled Sicilie, with 10000. soules. That the Romans deduced 53. colonies out of the City of Rome into the wombe of Italy. That Bremius an En∣glishman by birth, but sonne in law to the King of France, with an equall third part of the kingdome, entred into the hart of Italy, gaue the prime sacke to the City of Rome, and di∣uerted from thence to Gallograecia, whose of∣spring possesse that land vnto this day. That the Admirall of France, among all the feares and discouragements of ciuill wars, neuer gaue ouer the proiect of plantation in Florida. Which heroicall actions, haue not beene vndertaken by so mighty states and Prin∣ces, vpon triuiall and vulgar motiues, when by these courses that first blessing (of crescite and multiplicamini, increase and multiplie) hath beene sanctified: the mea∣ner sorte haue beene prouided: the mat∣ter of plagues, famine and sedition, hath beene exhausted: the fennes of a state politique were drained: the enemies of their peace were bridled: the reuenues of their treasury were augmented: and the limites of their dominions were enlar∣ged. Which diuine, humane, externall, and domesticall, examples, doe shine before vs, as a Pharaoes towre, that wee should not make shipwracke of our intentions, concerning Virginia. Blacke enuie, and pale feare, being not able to produce any arguments, why that should bee lawfull for France, which is (in vs) vnlawfull: that which to Rome was possible, (to vs) is impossible: that which to others is honourable, and pro∣fitable, (in vs) should bee traduced, as in∣commodious, base, and contemptible: Three Heads. Lawfull, Possible, Profitable. wherefore vnder these three heads of law∣fulnesse, possibility, and commoditie, will I marshall all those reasons, which may resolue the religious, encourage the per∣sonall, confirme the noble, and satisfie the timorous aduenturer. First, if it bee vnlawfull: it must be so, either in respect of the law of God, or in regard of the lawe of man. If in respect of Gods lawe, (considering our primarie end is to plant religion, our secondarie and subalternate ends are for the honour and profit of our nation) I demand a re∣solution of this plaine question: whe∣ther it bee not a determinated truth, that the Gospell should bee preached, to all the world, before the end of the world? If, it must bee preached, (as heauen and earth must passe awaie, but Gods word shall not passe awaie) then must it bee preached, one of these three waies: Ei∣ther meerly Apostolically, without the helpe of man, (without so much as a staffe (or meerely imperiallie, when a Prince, hath conquered their bodies, that the Preachers may feede their soules; Or mixtly, by discouerie, and trade of mar∣chants; where all temporall meanes are vsed for defence, and security, but none for offence, or crueltie. For the first (to preach Apostolicallie) it is simplie impos∣sible: except wee had the gift of tongues, that euerie nation might heare the word of God in their owne language; or the guift of miracles, that it might be confir∣med, with wonders from heauen; which two beeing ceased, questionlesse the iden∣ticall commission of the Apostles is ex∣pired: Or if yet the matter bee vrged, that God by fishers did conuert Empe∣rors and therefore that wee must aduen∣ture our liues without humane helpe; yet must it bee remembred, that there is no Apostolicall preaching, but where wee may expect eitheir their conuersion, or our martyrdome. But we can expect nei∣ther, not their conuersion who cannot vnderstand vs, nor our martyrdome, when the people of Florida, did deuoure the Preachers of the word, without speak∣ing any word. Non quia Christiani, sed quia homines, not because they were christian men, but because they were men, wee cannot be said to be martyrs, when wee are not killed because wee are christians. And therefore the Iesuite Acosta confes∣seth (notwithstanding Bellarmines relati∣on of Indian miracles) that they haue no tongues, they haue no signes from hea∣uen, and they can haue no martyrdome, and by consequent there is no meanes left of Apostolicall preaching. For the second, to preach the Gospell to a nation conquered, and to set their soules at liberty, when we haue brought their bodies to slauerie; It may be a mat∣ter sacred in the Preachers, but I know not how iustifiable in the rulers. Who for their meere ambition, doe set vpon it, the glosse of religion. Let the diuines of Sala∣manca, discusse that question, how the pos∣sessor of the west Indies, first destroied, and then instructed. The third, belongs to vs, who by way of marchandizing and trade, doe buy of them the pearles of earth, and sell to them the pearles of heauen; which action, if it be vnlawfull, it must proceede from one of these three grounds, either because we come to them, or trade with them, or tarrie and dwell and possesse part of their country amongst them. Is it vnlawfull because wee come to them? why is it not a dutie of christiani∣tie, to behold the imprinted footsteps of Gods glorie, in euery region vnder hea∣uen? Is it not against the lawe of nations, to violate a peaceable stranger, or to denie him harbour. The Ethiopians, Egyp∣tians, and men of China, are branded with a foule marke of sanguinarie and barba∣rous inhumanity, for blessing their Idols, with the bloud of strangers. It is not vn∣lawfull to trade with them, except Salomon shall bee condemned for sending for gold to Ophir, Abraham for making a league with Abimelech, and all christendome shall bee traduced, for hauing comerce with Turks and miscreants. Finallie, it is not vnlawfull, that wee possesse part of their land, and dwell with them, and defend our selues from them. Partlie because there is no other, mode∣rate, and mixt course, to bring them to conuersion, but by dailie conuersation, where they may see the life, and learne the language each of other. Partlie, because there is no trust to the fidelitie of humane beasts, except a man will make a league, with Lions, Beares, and Crocodiles. Partlie because there is roome suffici∣ent in the land (as Sichem sometime said) for them, and vs: the extent of an hundred miles, being scarce peopled with 2000. inhabitants. Partlie, because they haue violated the lawe of nations, and vsed our Ambassa∣dors as Ammon did the seruants of Dauid: If in him it were a iust cause to warre against the Ammonites, it is lawfull, in vs, to secure our selues, against the in∣fidels. But chieflie because Paspehay, one of their Kings, sold vnto vs for copper, land to inherit and inhabite. Powhatan, their chiefe King, receiued voluntarilie a crowne and a scepter, with a full acknow∣ledgement of dutie and submission. Principallie when Captaine Newport was with Powhatan at Warow a comaco hee desired him to come from Iames towne as a place vnholesome, and to take posses∣sion of an other whole kingdome which he gaue vnto him. If any man alleadge, that this was done in subtlety, not that they euer meant we should possesse them, but that they might first gaine by vs, and then destroy vs. This makes our cause, much the iuster, when God turned their subtletie, to our vtilitie: giuing vnto vs a lawfull possession, (as Pharaoe gaue Goshen to Israell; or Ephron sold his caue to Abra∣ham) and freeing vs, from all impious and sinister construction. If anie man al∣leadge, that yet wee can possesse no far∣ther limits, than was allotted by compo∣sition, and that fortitudo sine iustitia, est ini∣quitatis Materia, fortitude without iustice, is but the firebrand of iniquitie. Let him know that Plato defineth it, to bee no in∣iustice, to take a sword out of the hand of a mad man; That Austen hath allow∣ed it, for a lawfull offensiue warre, quod vlciscitur iniurias that reuengeth bloudie iniuries. So that if iust offences fhall arise, it can bee no more iniustice to warre against infidells, than it is when vpon iust occasions wee warre against Christians. And therefore I cannot see, but that these truths, will fanne away all those chaffie imputations, which anie Romish boa∣sters (that challenge a monopolie of all conuersions) will cast vpon it, or any scru∣pulous conscience can impute vnto it. Certainlie the Church of Geneua in the yeere 1555. determined in a Synode, whereof (Caluine) was president, to send Peter Richier, and William Quadrigarius, vn∣der a French Captaine to Brasilia, who although they were supplanted, by the comming of the Cardinall of Loraine, and the trecherie of their double hear∣ted leader, yet would not the Church of Geneua, (after a Synodicall consultation) haue sent their ministers to such an ad∣uenture, had not all scruples, (in their iudgement) beene cleared by the light of Scripture. When therefore, it is a sweete smel∣ling sacrifice, to propagate the name of Iesus Christ, when the Babylonish In∣chantresse (if her owne Calenders, are to bee credited) hath compassed sea, and land, to make, sixe, eight, or ten millions, of Romish proselites. When there is no other, mixt, moderate, course, to transport the Virginian soules to heauen. When there hath beene a reall concessi∣on from their rurall Emperour, that hath licensed vs to negotiate among them, and to possesse their countrie with them. When there is more vnpeopled continent of earth, than wee and they (before the dissolution of the pillars of heauen) can ouerburden with multitude. When we neuer intend to play the Reho∣boams, and to scourge them with scorpi∣ons. It is not good, to create more sinnes, then God euer censured: nor to brand that action with impietie, which God hath begun for promulgating of his glo∣rie Nunquid ideo deforme est, quia figura men∣titur? is the action therefore deformed, because a false glasse doth slaunder it? Concerning the other braunch of this discourse, wherein some slie whisperers would seeme to cast an aspersion of in∣iustice vpon the action, supposing some forraine Prince to haue a former inte∣rest. Certainlie hee is but a rotten subiect that quarells the actions of his countrie, descrying a serpentine stinge vnder the faire leaues of pietie. And though it bee not for a theoreticall Schollar, to circum∣scribe the dominions of Princes, yet a few proofes from antiquitie, shall suffice to controwle ignorant or presumptuous follie. In the yeere 1170. Madocke the sonne of Owen Guyneth Prince of North∣wales (leauing the land in contention be∣twixt his two brethren Howell and Da∣uid) sailed into the West Indies, and after a second, and a third returne, and sup∣plie, setled himselfe in those domini∣ons. In the yeere 1495. Iohn Cabot a Vene∣tian, but the indenized subiect of King Henrie the seauenth discouered the North parts of America, to Meta incognita, and so it was annexed to the Crowne of En∣gland. As for the donation of Alexander the sixt; it is but a reciprocall clawing, when Emperors create their seruants Bishops vniuersall, and shauelings create their Lords, Emperors generall. If the donation of Constantine were not more vertuall for Saint Peters pa∣trimonie, wee should haue neede of more purgatories, to maintaine fuell in the Popes kitchen: for if the king∣dome of Christ was not on earth, what a transubstantiated power, doth the pretended Vicar of Christ claime, to dispose all the kingdomes of the earth. Petrarch recordeth a memorable histo∣rie, of Sautius brother to the King of Spaine, who was elected generall against the Saracens of Egypt, and comming to Rome for that purpose, the Bishop of Rome, made it to bee proclaimed in the Consistorie that hee bestowed the king∣dome of Egypt vpon Sautius. Sautius vn∣derstanding this fauour, (by his inter∣preter) commanded to proclaime the Pope, great Caleph of Baldacho: perfuming the sonne of pride, with his owne smoke. The Pope hauing no more power, to make Sautius a King, then Sautius had power to make the Pope a Caleph. Let such retailers of Crownes remember, who it was that sometime saide, all these will I giue thee if thou wilt fall downe, and worship me, And yet with this item that the diuell pretended to giue no more than he saw. These points beeing thus defined, I come to the possibility. Against which three maine impediments are obiected. First the daungerous passage by sea, se∣condlie the barrennesse of the coun∣trie, thirdly the vnholesomnesse of the climate: the storme that seperated the admirall from the fleete proouing the first, the famine amongst our men im∣porting the second, the sicknesse of our men arguing the third. All which dis∣couragements doe astonish our men with feare, as though our expences were vnprofitable, when our ends are im∣possible. But before I shall enter into this dis∣course I must craue leaue to make a ne∣cessarie digression, and to iustifie his reputation whose worth is of speciall regard in this plantation. Sir Thomas Gates supposeth himselfe accused publiquelie and in print of a treeble defect. First that hee ranne so farre Souther∣lie and into the Tropique, that the heat caused the infection in the ships. Secondlie that hee gaue a sealed di∣rection, that if they were seperated by anie storme, that they should make for the Baruada in the West Indies, which direction himselfe following, it caused his shipwracke, but the other shippes, (vpon better iudgement) declining these instructions, ariued safelie in Vir∣ginia. Thirdlie that hee caried in one bot∣tome all the principall Commissioners who should successiuelie haue gouer∣ned the Colonie. Against all which imputations, hee maketh this iust Apo∣logie. First hee confesseth that a little be∣fore they came vnto the Canaries, that hee entred into consultation with Sir George Summers, Captaine Newport, and the other of chiefe regarde in the fleete, wherein it was resolued by an vniformitie of consent, to runne Sou∣therlie into the Tropique, which they did, till they came to the height of foure and twentie, but hee denieth that this course was anie cause of infection. For in the Faulcon, the Blessing, the Lyon, (and in the Admirall wherein were one hundred and fiftie soules) there was not one sicke of the pestilence nor other disease; In the other two ships the in∣fection was somewhat hote, but they shipped the same from London; To the second hee affirmeth, that hee first gaue them sealed instructions (not to bee opened till a time of storme) which directed them to the Baruada, But after when they came to the height of foure and twentie, hee countermaun∣ded those directions by word of mouth, and assigned them, (that if they were scattered) that they should make with all speede for Virginia. Which him∣selfe (esteeming the price of time vn∣ualuable) woulde haue executed, had not the violent leake of the shippe hindred him, So that the other ships safe ariuall in Virginia, proceeded ori∣ginallie from his aduise and autho∣ritie. To the third, he briefly signifieth, that no other Commissioners were in his Ship, but such, (as for especiall reasons) were pre∣cisely and peremptorily appointed, by the Councell of Virginia. And thus you see, that Tacitus wisely obserued two great ene∣mies of great actions, Ignorantiam veri, & Inuidiam, the ignorance of Truth, and the emulation of Vertue. To returne therefore vnto the maine channell of this discourse, and to dispell the clouds of feare, that threaten ship∣wracks, and sea-dangers: For we are not to extenuate the seas tempestuous vio∣lence, nor yet therefore to dispaire of Gods assisting prouidence. For true it is, that when Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Sum∣mers, and Captaine Newport, were in the height of 27. and the 24. of Iuly 1609. there arose such a storme, as if Ionas had been flying vnto Tarshish: the heauens were obscured, and made an Egyptian night of three daies perpetuall horror; the women lamented; the hearts of the passen∣gers failed; the experience of the sea Cap∣taines was amased: the skill of the marri∣ners was confounded: the Ship most vio∣lently leaked, and though two thousand tunne of water by pumping from Tues∣day noone till Fryday noone was dischar∣ged, notwithstanding the Ship was halfe filled with water, and those which labou∣red to keepe others from drowning were halfe drowned themselues in labouring. But God that heard Ionas crying out of the belly of hell, he pittied the distresses of his seruants: For behold, in the last period of necessitie, Sir George Summers descryed land, which was by so much the more ioy∣full, by how much their danger was des∣pairefull. The Islands on which they ell were the Bermudos, a place hardly accessa∣ble, through the inuironing rocks and dan∣gers: notwithstanding they were forced to runne their Ship on shoare, which through Gods prouidence fell betwixt two rockes, that caused her to stand firme and not im∣mediately to be broken, God continuing his mercie vnto them, that with their long Boats they transported to land before night, all their company, men, women, and children, to the number of one hun∣dred and fiftie, they carryed to shoare all the prouision of vnspent and vnspoyled victuals, all their furniture and tackling of the Ship, leauing nothing but bared ribs, as a pray vnto the Ocean. These Islands of the Bermudos, haue euer beene accounted as an inchaunted pile of rockes, and a desert inhabitation for Diuels; but all the Fairies of the rocks were but flocks of birds, and all the Di∣uels that haunted the woods, were but heards of swine. Yea and when Acosta in his first booke of the hystories of the In∣dies, auerreth, that though in the continent there were diuerse beasts, and cattell, yet in the Islands of Hispaniola, Iamaica, Margua∣rita, and Dominica, there was not one hoofe, it increaseth the wonder, how our people in the Bermudos found such abundance of Hogs, that for nine moneths space they plentifully sufficed: and yet the number see∣med not much diminished. Again, as in the great famine of Israell, God commanded Elias to flie to the brooke Cedron, and there fed him by Rauens; so God prouided for our disconsolate people in the midst of the Sea by foules: but with an admirable dif∣ference: vnto Elias the Rauens brought meat, vnto our men the foules brought (themselues) for meate: for when they whisteled, or made any strange noyse, the foules would come and sit on their shoul∣ders, they would suffer themselues to be ta∣ken and weighed by our men, who would make choise of the fattest and fairest, and let flie the leane and lightest. An accident, I take it, that cannot be paralleld by any Hystorie, except when God sent abun∣dance of Quayles to feed his Israel in the barren wildernesse. Lastly they found the berries of Cedar, the Palmeto tree, the prickle peare, sufficient fish, plentie of Tor∣toises, and diuers others kinds, which suffi∣ced to sustaine nature. They found diuer∣sity of woods, which ministred materials for the building of two Pinaces, according to the direction of the three prouident Gouernours. Consider all these things together. At the instant of neede, they descryed land, halfe an hower more, had buried their me∣morial in the Sea. If they had fel by night, what expectation of light, from an vninha∣bited desart? They fell betwixt a laberinth of rockes, which they conceiue are moul∣dred into the Sea, by thunder and light∣ning. This was not Ariadnes threed, but the direct line of Gods prouidence. If it had not beene so neere land, their companie or prouision had perished by water: if they had not found Hogs, and foule, and fish, they had perished by famine: if there had not beene fuell, they had perished by want of fire: if there had not beene timber they could not haue transported them∣selues to Virginia, but must haue beene for∣gotten foreuer. Nimium timet qui Deo non credit, he is too impiously fearefull, that will not trust in God so powerfull. What is there in all this tragicall Comae∣die that should discourage vs with impos∣sibilitie of the enterprise? when of all the Fleete, one onely Ship, by a secret leake was indangered, and yet in the gulfe of despaire, was so graciously preserued. Quae videtur poena, est medicina, that which we accompt a punishment of euill, is but a medicine against euill. After nine Moneths aboade in these Islands, on the tenth of May 1610. they im∣barqued themselues in their two new built Pinaces, and after some eleuen daies saile, they arriued neere point Comfort vpon the coast of Virginia: where they had in∣telligence of so wofull miserie, as if God had onely preserued them, to communi∣cate in an new extremitie. From which calamitie, the other argu∣ments of impossibilitie are framed; For if the Countrie bee barren, or the scituation contagious; as famine, and sicknesse, de∣stroy our Nation: wee striue against the streame of reason, and make our selues the subiects of scorne and derision. Therefore in this maine point of consequence, I will propound this plaine and simple Me∣thode; First to demonstrate that there is, and may be in Virginia a sufficient meanes (in all abundance) to sustaine the life of man; Next that the Climate is wholesome and temperate, agreeing with the consti∣tutions of our men; Thirdly, that those ex∣tremities proceeded from accidentall and not inherent euils. Lastly, I will delineate the state of the the Colony, as Sir Thomas Gates left it vnder the gouernment of the honorable L. Laware: whereby it shall ap∣peare, that all difficulties are amended, and that the State of that Countrie is sufficiently mannaged. To begin, with the staffe of bread. It is auowed vnto mee, in writing, in the words of the Author, that hath been there, as followeth. They vse to put their wheat into Corne. the ground, fiue cornes in one spit of earth, and two beanes with them: which wheat cornes multiplying into diuers stalks, grow vp twelue, or fourteene foote high: yeelding some foure, fiue, or six eares, on euery stalke; and in euery eare, some fiue hundred, some six hundred, some seauen hundred cornes: the two beanes, runne vpon the stalkes of the wheat, as our garden pease vpon stickes, which multiplie to a wonde∣rous increase. I cannot let slip a great secret, (saith the Author) whereof I will auouch no more, then with my hands and eyes I haue handled and seene, and whereof to my great comfort, J haue often tasted: The wheat bee∣ing sowen thicke, some stalkes beare eares of corne, and some (like siences in trees) beare none: but in those barren stalkes, there is as much iuice as in some sugar cane, of so delicate a tast, as no fruit in England, is comparable to it; out of which Sir Raph Lane conceiued, that wee may extract sugar, in great quantity. But Sir Thomas Gates affirmeth that our men doe make cordiall drinke thereof, to their great comfort. Pease. Besides, the naturall Pease of the Coun∣trie Fruits. returne an increase innumerable, our Hearbs. garden fruits, both roots, hearbes, and flowers, doe spring vp speedily, all things committed to the earth, do multiply with an incredible vsurie. Beasts. The Beasts of the Countrie, as Deere, red, and fallow, do answere in multitude (people for people considered) to our proportion of Oxen, which appeareth by these experiences. First the people of the Countrie are apparelled in the skinnes of these beasts; Next, hard by the fort, two hundred in one heard haue been vsually obserued: Further, our men haue seene 4000. of these skins pyled vp in one ward∣roabe of Powhaton; Lastly, infinite store haue been presented to Captaine Newport vpon sundry occurrents: such a plentie of Cattell, as all the Spaniards found not in the whole kingdome of Mexico, when all their presents were but hennes, and giny∣cocks, and the bread of Maize, and Cently. There are Arocouns, and Apossouns, in shape like to pigges, shrowded in hollow roots of trees; There are Hares and Co∣nies, and other beasts proper to the Coun∣trie in plentifull manner. Our transported Cattell, as Horses, Kine, Hogs, and Goats, do thriue most happily: which is confirmed by a double experiment; one, of Sir Raph Lane, who brought Kine from the West Indian Is∣land; the other of our Colony, who need take no other care of them, but least they should straie too farre, or be stolne from them. The Turkyes of that Countrie are great, and fat, and exceeding in plentie. The riuers from August, or September, till February, are couered with flocks of Wlidfoule Wildfoule: as swannes, geese, ducke, mal∣lard, teal, wigeons, hearons, bitters, cur∣lewes, godwights, plouers, snights, dot∣trels, cormerants, (to vse the words of Sir Thomas Gates) in such abundance, as are not in all the world to be equalled. Fruits. The Fruits: as apples, running on the ground, in bignesse and shape of a small lemmon, in colour and tast like to a pre∣serued Apricock: grapes and walnuts in∣numerable; the vines being as common as brambles, the walnut trees as the elmes in England. What should I speake of cu∣cumbers, muske melons, pompions, po∣tatoes, parsneps, carrets, turnups, which our gardens yeelded with little art and la∣bour. God in this place is euer concur∣ring with his gracious influence, if man strangle not his blessings, with carelesse negligence. It shall suffice to conclude in the words and phrase of that noble Gouer∣nour, the Lo. Laware, as it is warranted to mee by the copie of his Letters sent to the Virginian Councell. Howsoeuer, men haue belyed both it and themselues, heretofore, yet let no rumor of the Countrie (as if in the wombe thereof lay not these elementall seedes of plenty and in∣crease) waue any mans faire purposes, or wrest them to a declyning and falling off from the businesse. Tempera∣ture. For the healthinesse and temperatenesse of the Clymate, agreeing to our consti∣tutions, much neede not be related, since in all the former written Treatises, it is ex∣presly obserued. No man ought to judge of any Coun∣trie by the fennes and marshes (such as is the place where James towne standeth) except we will condemne all England, for the Wilds and Hundreds of Kent and Essex. In our particular, wee haue an in∣fallible proofe of the temper of the Coun∣trie: for of an hundred and odd, which were seated at the Falles, vnder the go∣uernment of Captaine Francis West, and of an hundred to the Sea-ward on the South side of the riuer, (in the Countrie of the Nansamunds) vnder the charge of Captaine Iohn Martin; of all these two hun∣dred, there did not so much as one man miscarrie: when in Iames Towne, at the same time, and in the same moneths, 100. sickned, and halfe the number died. The like experiment was long since in the regiment of Sir Raph Lane, where, in the space of one whole yeare, not two of one hundred perished. Adde vnto this the discourse of philosophie, when in that Countrie flesh will receiue salt, and con∣tinue vnputrified (which it will not in the West Indies) when the most delicate of all flowers, grow there as familiarly, as in the fields of Portingale, where the woods are replenished with more sweet barks, and odors, then they are in the plesantest places of Florida. How is it possible that such a virgin and temperat aire, should work such contrarie effects, but because our fort (that lyeth as a semy-Iland) is most part inuiro∣ned with an ebbing and flowing salt water, the owze of which sendeth forth an vn∣wholsome & contagious vapour? To close vp this part with Sir Thomas Gates his ex∣periment: he professeth, that in a fortnights space he recouered the health of most of them by moderat labour, whose sicknesse was bred in them by intemperate idlenes. If any man shall accuse these reports of partiall falshood, supposing them to be but Vtopian, and legendarie fables, because he cannot conceiue, that plentie and famine, a temperate climate, and distempered bodies, felicities, and miseries can be reconciled to∣gether, let him now reade with judgement, but let him not judge before he hath read. The ground of all those miseries, was the permissiue prouidence of God, who, in the fore-mentioned violent storme, seperated the head from the bodie, all the vitall po∣wers of regiment being exiled with Sir Tho∣mas Gates in those infortunate (yet fortu∣nate) Ilands. The broken remainder of those supplies made a greater shipwrack in the continent of Virginia, by the tempest of dissention: euery man ouervaluing his own worth, would be a Commander: euery man vnderprising an others value, denied to be commanded. The emulation of Caesar and Pompey, watered the plains of Pharsaly with bloud, and distracted the sinewes of the Romane Monarchy. The dissentions of the three besieged Captains betraied the Citie of Hierusalem to Vespasian. how much more easily might ambitious discord teare in pee∣ces an infant Colony, where no eminent and respected magistrats had authoritie to punish presumptuous disobedience. Taci∣tus hath obserued, that when Nero sent his old trained souldiers to Tarantum and Au∣tium, (but without their Captains and Cen∣turians) that they rather made a number, then a Colony: euery souldier secretly gli∣ded into some neighbour Prouince, and forsooke their appointed places: which hat∣ched this consequent mischiefe; the Cities were vninhabited, and the emperour was frustrated: when therfore licence, sedition, and furie, are the fruits of a headie, daring, and vnruly multitude, it is no wonder that so many in our colony perished: it is a wonder, that all were not deuoured. Omnis inordinatus animus sibi ipsi fit poena, euery in∣ordinate soule becomes his owne punish∣ment. The next fountaine of woes was secure negligence, and improuidence, when euery man sharked for his present bootie but was altogether carelesse of succeeding penurie. Now, I demand whether Sicilia, or Sardinia, (sometimes the barnes of Rome) could hope for increase without manuring? A Colony is therefore denominated, because they should be Coloni, the tillers of the earth, and stewards of fertilitie: our mutinous loiterers would not sow with prouidence, and there∣fore they reaped the fruits of too deare∣bought repentance. An incredible example of their idlenes, is the report of Sir Thomas Gates, who affirmeth, that after his first com∣ming thither, he hath seen some of them eat their fish raw, rather than they would go a stones cast to fetch wood and dresse it. Dij laboribus omnia vendunt, God sels vs all things for our labour, when Adam himselfe might not liue in paradice without dres∣sing the garden. Vnto idlenesse, you may ioyne treasons, wrought by those vnhallowed creatures that forsooke the Colony, and exposed their desolate brethren to extreame miserie. You shall know that 28. or 30. of the companie, were appointed (in the Ship called the Swallow) to truck for Corne with the Indi∣ans, and hauing obtained a great quantitie by trading, the most seditious of them, con∣spired together, persuaded some, & enfor∣ced others, to this barbarous proiect. They stole away the Ship, they made a league a∣mongst themselues to be professed pirates, with dreames of mountaines of gold, and happy robberies: thus at one instant, they wronged the hopes, and subuerted the cares of the Colony, who depending vpon their returne, fore-slowed to looke out for further prouision: they created the Indians our implacable enemies by some violence they had offered: they carried away the best Ship (which should haue been a refuge, in extremities:) they weakned our forces, by substraction of their armes, and succours. These are that scum of men that fayling in their piracy, that beeing pinched with fa∣mine and penurie, after their wilde rouing vpon the Sea, when all their lawlesse hopes failed, some remained with other pirates, they men vpon the Sea, the others resol∣ued to returne for England, bound them∣selues by mutuall oath, to agree all in one report, to discredit the land, to deplore the famyne, and to protest that this their comming awaie, proceeded from despe∣rate necessitie: These are they, that roared out the tragicall historie of the man eating of his dead wife in Virginia; when the ma∣ster of this Ship willingly confessed before 40 witnesses, that at their comming awaie, they left three moneths victuals, and all the cattell liuing in the Fort: sometimes they reported that they saw this horrible action, sometimes that Captaine Dauies sayd so, sometimes that one Beadle the Lieutenant of Captaine Dauies did relate it, varying this report into diuersitie of false colours, which hold no likenesse and proportion: But to cleare all doubts, Sir Thomas Gates thus relateth the tragedie. There was one of the companie who mor∣tally hated his wife, and therefore secretly kil∣led her, then cut her in pieces and hid her in di∣uers parts of his house: when the woman was missing, the man suspected, his house searched, and parts of her mangled body were discoue∣red, to excuse himselfe he said that his wife died, that hee hid her to satisfie his hunger, and that he fed daily vpon her. Vpon this, his house was againe searched, where they found a good quantitie of meale, oatemeale, beanes and pease. Hee thereupon was araigned, con∣fessed the murder, and was burned for his hor∣rible villany. Now shall the scandalous reports of a viperous generation, preponderate the te∣stimonies of so worthie leaders? shall their venemous tongues, blast the reputation of an auncient & worthy Peere, who vpon the ocular certainty of future blessings, hath protested in his Letters, that he will sa∣crifice himselfe for his Countrie in this seruice, if he may be seconded; and if the company doe giue it ouer he will yet lay all his fortunes vpon the prosecution of the plantation? shall sworne lyes, and combi∣ned oathes, so far priuiledge trechery, and piracy as to rob vs of our hopes, & to quell our noble resolutions? God forbid: Qui in mendacio confidit, cito diffidit, a lyers confi∣dence, is but a blazing diffidence. Vnto Treasons, you may ioyne coue∣tousnesse in the Mariners, who for their priuate lucre partly imbezeled the proui∣sions, partly preuented our trade with the Indians, making the matches in the night, and forestalling our market in the day: whereby the Virginians were glutted with our trifles, and inhaunced the prices of their Corne and Victuall. That Copper which before would haue prouided a bu∣shell, would not now obtaine so much as a pottle: Non habet euentus sordida praeda bonos, the consequent of sordid gaine is vntimely wretchednesse. Ioyne vnto these an other euill: there is great store of Fish in the riuer, especi∣ally of Sturgeon; but our men prouided no more of them, then for present necessi∣tie, not barrelling vp any store against that season the Sturgeon returned to the sea. And not to dissemble their folly, they suffered fourteene nets (which was all they had) to rot and spoile, which by orderly drying and mending might haue been pre∣serued: but being lost, all help of fishing perished. Quanto maiora timentur dispen∣dia, tanto promptior debet esse cautela, fun∣damentall losses that cannot be repealed, ought with the greatest caution to be pre∣uented. The state of the Colony, by these acci∣dents began to find a sensible declyning: which Powhatan (as a greedy Vulture) ob∣seruing, and boyling with desire of re∣uenge, he inuited Captaine Ratclife, and about thirty others to trade for Corne, and vnder the colour of fairest friendship, he brought them within the compasse of his ambush, whereby they were cruelly mur∣thered, and massacred. For vpon confi∣dence of his fidelitie, they went one and one into seuerall houses, which caused their seuerall destructions, when if but any sixe had remained together, they would haue been a bulwarke for the generall preserua∣tion. After this, Powhatan in the night cut off some of our boats, he draue away all the Deere into the farther part of the Coun∣trie, hee and his people destroyed our Hogs, (to the number of about sixe hun∣dred) he sent none of his Indians to trade with vs, but laied secret ambushes in the woods, that if one or two dropped out of the fort alone, they were indaun∣gered. Cast vp this reckoning together: want of gouernment, store of idlenesse, their expectations frustrated by the Traitors, their market spoyled by the Mariners, our nets broken, the deere chased, our boats lost, our hogs killed, our trade with the Indians forbidden, some of our men fled, some murthered, and most by drin∣king of the brackish water of Iames fort weakened, and indaungered, famyne and sicknesse by all these meanes increased, here at home the monies came in so slowly, that the Lo. Laware could not be dispatched, till the Colony was worne and spent with difficulties: Aboue all, hauing neither Ru∣ler, nor Preacher, they neither feared God nor man, which prouoked the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and pulled downe his iudgements vpon them. Discite iustitiam moniti. Now, (whether it were that God in mercie to vs would weede out these ranke hemlockes; or whether in iudge∣ment to them he would scourge their im∣pieties; or whether in wisedome he would trie our patience, Vt magna magnè deside∣remus, that wee may beg great blessings earnestly) our hope is that our Sunne shall not set in a cloude, since this violent storme is dispersed, since all necessarie things are prouided, an absolute and po∣werfull gouernment is setled, as by this in∣suing relation shall be described. When Sir Thomas Gates arriued in Vir∣ginia, the strange and vnexpected condi∣tion wherein he found the Colony, gaue him to vnderstand, how neuer was there more neede of all the powers of judge∣ment, then at this present; it being now his charge, both to saue such as he found so forlorne and wretched, as to redeeme himselfe and his from fal ing into the like calamities. All which considered, he en∣tred into consultation with Sir George Summers, and Captaine Newport, and the Gentlemen and councell of the former gouernment. They examined first their store, which after two cakes a day to a man, would hold out but sixteene dayes, (it being fiue moneths betwixt the steal∣ing away of the Swallow, and his lan∣ding) the Corne of the Indians but newly sowed, not an eye of Sturgeon, as yet ap∣peared in the riuer: And therefore at the same consultation it was concluded by a generall approbation, That they should abandon the Countrie, and in the foure Pinaces (which remained in the riuer) they should make for the New found land, where (it beeing fishing time) they might meete with many English Ships, into which they hoped to disperse the most of the Company. This conclusion taking effect, vpon the seuenth of Iune Sir Thomas Gates (ha∣uing appointed euery ship her comple∣ment and number, and deliuered like∣wise to each a proportionable weight of prouision) caused euery man to repaire aboord; his company (and of his com∣pany himselfe) remained last on shore, to keepe the towne from being burned, which some of our owne company mali∣ciously threatned. About noone they fell downe with the tyde to the Iland of Hogges, and the next morning to the Mulbury Iland: at what time, they dis∣couered the long Boate of the Lord La∣ware, which his Lordship (hearing of this resolution by the Captaine of the Fort, which standeth at the mouth of the riuer) suddenly dispatched with letters to Sir Thomas Gates, which informed him of his Lordships arriuall. Vpon receite of these letters, Sir Thomas Gates bore vp the Helme, and that night with a fauou∣rable winde relanded all our men at the Fort. Before which, the tenth of Iune (being Sunday) his Lordship came with all his Fleete, went ashore in the after∣noone, heard a Sermon, read his Com∣mission, and entred into consultation for the good of the Colony. In which secret counsell, I will a little leaue his Lordship, that wee may duly obserue the reuealed counsell of God. He that shal but turne vp his eye, and be∣hold the spangled Canopie of heauen, shall but cast down his eye, and consider the imbroidered Carpet of the earth, and withall shall marke, how the heauens heare the earth, the earth heare the corne and oyle, and they relieue the necessities of man, that man wil acknowledge Gods infinite prouidence. But hee that shall further obserue, how God inclineth all casuall euents, to worke the necessary helpe of his Saints, must needs adore the Lords infinite goodnesse. Neuer had a∣ny people more iust cause to cast them∣selues at the foot-stoole of God, and to reuerence his mercy, then our distressed Colony: for if God had not sent Sir Thomas Gates from the Bermudos with∣in foure daies, they had all beene famish∣ed: if God had not directed the heart of that worthy Knight, to saue the Fort from fire at their shipping, they had been destitute of a present harbor, and succor; if they had abandoned the Fort any lon∣ger time, and had not so soone returned, questionlesse the Indians would haue de∣stroied the Fort, which had beene the meanes of our safety among them, and a terrour vnto them. If they had set Saile sooner, and had lanched into the vast O∣cean, who could haue promised, that they should haue encountred the Fleet of the Lo. La-ware? especially when they made for the New-found land, a course con∣trary to our Nauies approaching. If the Lord La-ware had not brought with him a yeares prouision, what comfort could those soules haue receiued, to haue beene relanded to a second destruction? Brachi∣um Domini, this was thearme of the Lord of Hosts, who would haue his people to passe the redde Sea and Wildernesse, and then to possesse the land of Canaan: It was diuinely spoken of heathen Socra∣tes, Si Deus sit solicitus prote, cur tu tibi sis so∣licitus? if God for man be carefull, why should man be ouer distrustfull? The noble Lord gouernor, after ma∣ture deliberation, deliuered some few words to the company, laying iust blame vpon them for their haughty vanities, and sluggish idlenesse; earnestly entrea∣ting them to amend those desperate fol∣lies, lest he should be compelled to draw the sword of Iustice, and to cut off such delinquents, which he had rather draw (euen to the shedding of his vital blood) to protect them from iniuries; heartning them with relation of that store hee had brought with him; constituting officers of all conditions to rule ouer them, alot∣ting euery man his particular place to watch vigilantly and worke painefully. This Oration and direction being recei∣ued with a generall applause, you might shortly behold the idle and restie disea∣ses of a diuided multitude, by the vnity and authority of this gouernment, to be substantially cured. Those that knew not the way to goodnes before, but che∣rished singularity and faction, can now chalke out the path of all respectiue due∣tie and seruice: euery man endeuouring to out-strip each other in diligence: the French preparing to plant the Vines, the English labouring in the woods and groundes; euery man knoweth his charge, and dischargeth the same with a∣lacrity. Neither let any man be discou∣raged, by the relation of their daily la∣bor, (as though the sappe of their bodies should be spent for other mens profite) the setled times of working (to effect all themselues, or the Aduenturers neede de∣sire) requiring no more pains then from sixe of clocke in the morning vntill ten, and from two of the clocke in the after∣noone till foure: at both which times they are prouided of spiritual and corpo∣rall relie e. First, they enter into the Church, and make their prayers vnto God; next, they returne to their houses, and receiue their proportion of foode. Nor should it be conceiued, that this bu∣sines excludeth Gentlemen, whose bree∣ding neuer knew what a daies labour meant; for though they cannot digge, vse the square, nor practise the axe and chizell; yet may the stayde spirits of any condition finde how to employ the force of knowledge, the exercise of coun∣sell, the operation and power of their best breeding and qualities. The houses which are built are as warme and defen∣sible against winde and weather, as if they were tiled and slated; being couered aboue with strong boordes, and matted round within, according to the fashion of the Indians. Our forces are now such as are able to tame the fury and treachery of the Sauages: our Forts assure the Inha∣bitants, and frustrate all assailants. And to leaue no discouragement in the heart of any, who personally shall enter into this great action, I will communicate a double comfort: first, Sir George Summers (that worthy Admiral) hath vndertaken a dangerous aduenture, for the good of the Colony. Vpon the fifteenth of Iune (accompa∣nied with Captaine Samuel Argoll) he re∣turned in two Pinaces vnto the Bermu∣dos; promising (if by any meanes God will open a way to that Iland of Rockes) that he would soone returne with sixe moneths prouision of flesh, and with liue Hogges to store againe Virginia. It is but eleuen daies saile, and we hope that God will send a pillar of fire to direct his iourney. The other comfort is, that the Lord gouernour hath built two new Forts (the one called Fort Henry, and the other Fort Charles, in honor of our most noble Prince and his hopefull brother) vpon a pleasant hill, and neere a little ri∣uelet, which we call South▪hampton ri∣uer. They stand in a wholsome ayre, ha∣uing plenty of springs of sweete water; they command a great circuit of ground, containing wood, pasture and meadow; with apt places for vines, corne and gar∣dens. In which Forts it is resolued, that all those that come out of England shall be at their first landing quartered; that the wearisomnes of the sea may bee re∣freshed in this pleasing part of the coun∣trey. The fertility of the soile, the tempe∣rature of the climate, the form of gouern∣ment, the condition of our people, their daily inuocating of the name of God, be∣ing thus expressed; Why should the suc∣cesse (by the rules of mortall iudgement) be despaired? Why should not the rich haruest of our hopes be seasonably expe∣cted? I dare say, that the resolution of Caesar in Fraunce, the designes of Alexan∣der in Greece, the discoueries of Hernando Cortes in the West, and of Emanuel, King of Portugale in the East, were not incou∣raged vpon so firme grounds of state and possibility. All which I could demon∣strate out of their owne Records, were I not preuented with hast, to satisfie their longings, who with an open care, hear∣ken after the commodities of the coun∣trey: whose appetites I will no longer frustrate, then their eyes can runne ouer this succinct Narration. I called it a succinct Narration, because the commodities in former Treatises haue beene largely described, which I will only here epitomise, lest any man should change his resolution, when the same grounds remaine, which were the cause of his former aduenture. The Councell of Virginia (finding the smalnesse of that returne, which they hoped should haue defraied the charge of a new supply) entred into a deepe consul∣tation, and propounded amongst them∣selues, whether it were fit to enter into a new contribution, or in time to send for home the Lord La-ware, and to abandon the action. They resolued to send for sir Thomas Gates, who being come, they ad∣iured him to deale plainely with them, and to make a true relation of those things which were presently to be had, or hereafter to be hoped for in Virginia▪ Sir Thomas Gates with a solemne and sacred oath replied, that all things before repor∣ted were true: that the country yeeldeth abundance of wood, as Oake, Wainscot, Walnut tres, Bay trees, Ashe, Sarsafrase, liue Oake, greene all the yeare, Cedar and Firre; which are the materials, of foape ashes, and pot ashes, of oyles of walnuts, and bayes, of pitch and tarre, of Clap boards, Pipe▪staues, Masts and ex∣cellent boardes of forty, fifty and sixtie length, and three foote bredth, when one Firre tree is able to make the maine Mast of the greatest ship in England. He a∣uouched, that there are incredible variety of sweet woods, especially of the Balsa∣mum tree, which distilleth a pretious gum; that there are innumerable white Mulberry trees, which in so warme a cli∣mate may cherish and feede millions of silke wormes, and returne vs in a very short time, as great a plenty of silke as is vented into the whole world from al the parts of Italy: that there are diuers sorts of Minerals, especially of Iron oare, lying vpon the ground for ten miles circuite; of which we haue made triall at home, that it maketh as good Iron as any is in Europe:) that a kinde of hempe or flax, and silke grasse doe grow there naturally, which will affoord stuffe for all manner of excellent Cordage: that the riuer swarmeth with Sturgeon; the land a∣boundeth with Vines, the woodes doe harbor exceeding store of Beauers, Foxes and Squirrils, the waters doe nourish a great encrease of Otters; all which are couered with pretious furres: that there are in present discouered dyes and drugs of sundry qualities; that the Orenges which haue beene planted, did prosper in the winter, which is an infallible ar∣gument, that Lymmons, sugar Canes, Almonds, Rice, Anniseede, and all other commodities which we haue from the Staights, may be supplied to vs in our owne countrey, and by our owne indu∣stry: that the corne yeeldeth a trebble en∣crease more then ours; and lastly, that it is one of the goodliest countries vnder the sunne; enterueined with fiue maine Riuers, and promising as rich entrals as any Kingdome of the earth, to whom the sunne is no neerer a neighbour. VVhat these things will yeelde, the Merchant best knoweth, who findeth by experience, that many hundreth of thou∣sands of pounds are yearly spent in Chri∣stendome in these commodities. The Merchant knoweth, that Caueare and Traine which come from Russia, can be brought hither but once in the yeare, in regard of the Ice: and that Sturgeon which is brought from the East coun∣tries, can come but twice a yeare; and that not before the end of Aprill, or the beginning of May; which many times in regard of the heat of those moneths, is tainted in the transportation: when from Virginia they may be brought to vs in foure and twenty daies, and in al the colde seasons of the yeare. The Mer∣chants know, that the commodity of sope and pot ashes are very scant in Prussia; that they are brought three hun∣dred miles by land, and three hundred miles by riuers, before they come to the Sea; that they pay a custome there, and another in Denmarke, which enhanceth the prices exceedingly: But in Virginia they may haue them without carriage by land or custom (because fiue Nauigable Riuers doe lead vp fiue seuerall waies into the bowels of the whole countrey.) As therefore the like Riuers, are the cause of the riches of Holland, so will these be to vs a wondrous cause of sauing of ex∣pences. The merchant knoweth, that through the troubles in Poland & Mus∣couy, (whose eternall warres are like the Antipathy of the Dragon & Elephants) all their traffique for Mastes, Deales, Pitch, Tarre, Flaxe, Hempe, and Cor∣dage, are euery day more and more in∣dangered, and the woods of those coun∣tries are almost exhausted. All which are to be had in Virginia with farre lesse charge, and farre more safety. Lastly, the Merchant knoweth, that for our com∣modities in the Staights, as sweet wines, orenges, lemmonds, anniseeds, &c. that we stand at the deuotion of politique Princes and States, who for their proper vtility, deuise all courses to grinde our merchants, all pretences to confiscate their goods, and to draw from vs al mar∣row of gaine by their inquisitiue inuen∣tions: when in Virginia, a few yeares labour by planting and husbandry, will furnish all our defects, with honour and security; especially since the Frenchmen (who are with the Lord Gouernour) do confidently promise, that within two yeares we may expect a plentifull Vin∣tage. VVhen therfore this noble enterprise, by the rules of Religion is expresly iusti∣fied; when the passages by Sea are all o∣pen and discouered; when the climate is so fruitfully tempered; when the natu∣rall riches of the soile are so powerfully confirmed: will any man so much be∣tray his owne inconsiderate ignorance, and bewray his rashnesse; that when the same Sunne shineth, he should not haue the same eies to beholde it; when the same hope remaines, he should not haue the same heart to apprehend it? At the voyage of Sir Thomas Gates, what swarmes of people desired to be transpor∣ted? what alacrity and cheerefulnesse in the Aduenturers by free wil offerings, to build vp this new Tabernacle? Shall we now be deiected? Shall we cast downe our heads like Bull rushes? because one storme at sea hath deferred our ioyes and comforts! VVe are too effeminate in our longings, and too impatient of delaies. Gods al-disposing prouidence, is not compellable by mans violence. Let any wisedome giue a solide reason, why his purpose should be changed, when those grounds which gaue life to his first pur∣pose, are not changed. It is but a golden slumber, that dreameth of any humane felicity, which is not sauced with some contingent miserie. Dolor & voluptas, inui∣cem cedunt, Griefe and pleasure are the crosse sailes of the worlds euer-turning-windmill. Let no man therefore be o∣uer wise, to cast beyond the moone and to multiply needlesse doubts and questi∣ons. Hannibal by too much wisedome, lost opportunity to haue sacked Rome Charles the eighth of Fraunce, by tempo∣rising, lost the Kingdome of Naples, and the gouernement of Florence: Henry the seuenth by too much ouer-warines, lost the riches of the golden Indies. Occasi∣on is pretious, but when it is occasion. Some of our neighbours would ioine in the action, if they might be ioynt inheri∣tors in the Plantation; which is an eui∣dent proose, that Virginia shall no sooner be quitted by vs, then it will be reinhabi∣ted by them. A dishonor of that nature, that will eternally blemish our Nation; as though we were like the furious Pyr∣rhus, or impetuous Swissers, who in a brunt can conquer any thing, but with wisedome can maintaine nothing. It is time to wipe away such an imputation of Barbarisme, especially since the conse∣quence is so pregnant, that without this or the like, the state cannot subsist with∣out some dangerous and imminent mu∣tation. He is ouer blinde that doth not see▪ what an inundation of people doth ouerslow this little Iland: Shall we vent this deluge, by indirect and vnchristian policies? shal we imitate the bloody and heathenish counsell of the Romanes, to leane a Catthage standing, that may ex∣haust our people by forraine warre? or shall we nourish domesticall faction, that as in the dayes of Vitellius and Vespa∣sian, the sonne may imbrew his hands in the blood of the father? Or shall we fol∣low the barbarous foot-steps of the state of China, to imprison our people in a lit∣tle circle of the earth, and consume them by pestilence? Or shall we like the beast of Babylon, denie to any sort the honou∣rable estate of mariage, and allow abho∣minable stewes, that our people may not ouer increase in multitude? Or shall we take an inhumane example from the Muscouite, in a time of famine to put tenne thousand of the poore vnder the yce as the Mice and Rats of a state poli∣tique? If all these be diabolicall and hel∣lish proiects, what other means remaines to vs, but by setling so excellent a Planta∣tion, to disimbarke some millions of people vpon a land that floweth with all manner of plenty? To wade a little further, who euer sa∣luted the monuments of antiquity, and doth not finde, that Carthage aspired to be Empresse of the world, by her oppor∣tunity of hauens and multitude of ship∣ping? What hindereth the great Mahu∣metane Prince, from seazing vpon al the territories of Europe, but onely the want of skilfull marriners? What created the rich and free states of Holland, but their winged Nauy? It was a fit embleme that painted death standing vpon the shoares of Fraunce, Germany and Spaine, and looking ouer into England: intymating vnto vs, that so long as we are Lords of the narrow seas, death stands on the o∣ther shoares, and onely can looke vpon vs: but if our wooden wals were ruina∣ted, death would soone make a bridge to come ouer, and deuoure our Nation. When therefore our mils of Iron, and ex∣cesse of building, haue already turned our greatest woods into pasture and cham∣pion, within these few years; neither the scattered Forrests of England, nor the di∣minished Groues of Ireland, will supply the defect of our Nauy. When in Virgi∣nia there is nothing wanting, but onely mens labours, to furnish both Prince, State and merchant, without charge or difficulty. Againe, whither shall wee transport our cloth, and how shall we sustaine our Artisans? Shall we send it in∣to Turkey? Some priuate and deceitfull auarice hath discredited our merchan∣dize. Into Spaine? it aboundeth with sheepe and wooll. Into Poland and Mus∣couy? the daunger doth ouer-ballance the gaine in times of contention. Into Fraunce and Germany? they are for the most part supplied by their owne peace. VVhen if our Colony were peopled in Virginia, mutabit vellera merces, we shall exchange our store of cloth for other merchandize. Let any man resolue why the Councell of Virginia, doe now most earnestly continue their aduentures? why those that were (eye witnesses) of the former supposed miseries, do voluntarily returne with ioy and comfort? why those noble and worthy personages, doe offer to make the action good vpon the hazard of their liues & fortunes? And why Sir Thomas Gates longeth and hasteneth to go thither again, and the Lord La-ware de∣sireth so earnestly to stay there? Are not all these things as deere to them as to any o∣ther of the Aduenturers? Haue not their hopes the same wings? their feares the same fetters? their estates the same rockes? their liues and soules greater gulfes of perill and despair? And yet neither the imbracements of their wiues, nor indulgence to their babes, nor the neglect of their domesticke fortunes, nor banishment from their na∣tine soile, nor any experimented dangers haue broken their noble resolution. And therefore, he that desireth to pur∣chase inf llible hope of priuate vtility; hee that aimeth at the honor & wealth of his natiue country; he that esteemeth his owne repute as deere as his owne eies; he that en∣de uo reth to enlarge the dom nions of his Prince, and the Kingdome of his God: let him remember what hee hath already spent, which is all buried; let him consi∣der the consequences of state, which are all vanished into smoake; let him conceiue what a scorne we shall be made to the ma∣ligners of our state abroad, and our il affe∣cted at home; let him meditate, the external riches of other Kingdoms, able to buy and sell the monarch of the west; let him heare the triumphant boasting of the beast of Rome, as though God would not suffer our schismaticall and hereticall Religion, to be infused into a new conuerted Region: O all ye worthies, follow the euer-sounding trumpet of a blessed honour; let Religion be the first aim of your hopes, & caetera adij∣cientur, and other things shall be cast vnto you: your names shall be registred to po∣sterity with a glorious title; These are the men, whom God raised to augment the State of their countrey, and to propagate the Gospell of Iesus Christ. Neyther ought any man to liue vnder Augustus, as if he liued vnder Domiti∣an, quibus inertia est pro sapientia; to whom sluggishnes & priuacy is imputed for wise∣dome and pollicy. The same God that hath ioyned three Kingdomes vnder one Caesar, wil not be wanting to adde a fourth, if wee would dissolue that frosty Ioinesse which chilleth our zeale, and maketh vs so cold in the action. But it is a meere Idaea, speculation and fancy, to sow sparingly, and yet expect for to reape plentifully; when a penurious supply is like the casting on of a little water vpon a great fire, that quencheth not the heat, but augments it: when procrastinating delayes, and lingring counsels, doe lose the oportunity of flying time; whereby we rather bewray our Co∣lony then releeue them: let no man adore his golde as his God, nor his Mammon as his Maker. If God haue scattered his bles∣sings vpon you as snow, will you returne no tributary acknowledgement of his goodnesse? If you will, can you select a more excellent subiect, then to cast downe the altars of Diuels, that you may raise vp the Altar of Christ: to forbid the sacrifice of men, that they may offer vp the sacrifice of contrite spirites; to reduce Barbarisme and infidelity, to ciuill gouernement and Christianity? Sifrigido loquor, nihil loquor; If I speake to a man void of piety, I speake but the words of winde and vanity; other∣wise how doth that man groane vnder the worlds corruption, that doth not actually or vocally hasten the worldes conuersion? Doubtye not but God hath determined, and demonstrated (by the wondrous pre∣seruation of those principal persons which fell vpon the Bermudos) that he will raise our state, and build his Church in that ex∣cellent climate, if the action be se∣conded with resolution and Religion. Nil disperandum Christo Duce, & Auspice Christo. FINIS.