The English pharise, or religious ape Being the weekes worke of a poore vnlearned professor of the gospell of Christ, zealously and truely checking the counterfeit professor, but open persecutor of Christs true doctrine and disicpline. By Iohn Walker, dwelling at Leeds in Yorkshire. Walker, John, dwelling at Leeds in Yorkshire. The English pharise, or religious ape Being the weekes worke of a poore vnlearned professor of the gospell of Christ, zealously and truely checking the counterfeit professor, but open persecutor of Christs true doctrine and disicpline. By Iohn Walker, dwelling at Leeds in Yorkshire. Walker, John, dwelling at Leeds in Yorkshire. TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. G ENTLE or vngentle Reader, I am to tell thee no strange thing, onely to tell thee of that which hath been from the beginning, which is now at this present, and which shall be vnto the worlds end; how that as Esau hated his brother Iacob in the beginning of the world, how that the Israel of God is ha∣ted still, and that the members of Christ shall be hated, so long as the Sunne and Moone in∣dureth. Faithfull Chri∣stian, I was enbolde∣ned by the Spirit of G O D, to write this little Booke for thy good, it was intended chiefly for thy profit, and so many as l ve the peace of Sion. And whereas by Gods good∣nesse, wee are liuing in the very latter ende of the world, and left here by Gods prouidence, as a very few Sheepe a∣mongst many Woolues, I haue onely, by the helpe of Gods Spi it, set down vnto thy view, not only what great danger thou art in, but likewise let thee see, how that thou mayest escape the same. And although our ene∣mies are many in num∣ber, and at the first sight not easily discer∣ned, because they goe in sheepes clothing; there∣fore I haue set downe in plaine and few wordes, the difference of the Spirit of truth from the spirit of error, whereby thou ma st truly per∣ceiue the tree by his fruite: for he that hath a true and liuely faith in Christ, is alwaies rea∣dy to manifest the same by loue and charitie vn∣to the Brethren. Now for him that saith, hee hath faith, & yet wan∣teth this duty of loue and charity, his faith is but a dead faith, and as Saint Iames saith, shall preuaile nothing, Iam. 5. 14. and there∣fore hee that doth not practise this second les∣son of charitie, let him bee what hee will, and flatter himselfe neuer so much, hee is no better then a breaker of that vnion and fellowship, which ought to bee a∣mongst the true mem∣bers of Christ; and ther∣fore as S. Iohn saith, such is gone from vs, 1. Iohn 2. 19. being, as S. Iude saith, separa∣ted, Iude 9. verse. Pro∣mising, as S. Peter saith, libertie vnto thēselues, 2. Pet. 2. 19. Hauing, as Saint Paul saith, but a shew of godlinesse, denying the power thereof, 2. Tim. 3. 5. Therfore, saith he, turne away from such. And there∣fore faithfull Christian, whose number is but small, let mee intreate thee, as thou tenderest thy owne soule, to be ve∣ry carefull and circum∣spect, to keepe in this candle of loue, especially vnto thy brethren, then shalt thou haue peace of conscience in this world, and euerlasting peace in the world to come: but deferre no time, for our time is but very short, and if thou profit any thing herein, giue God praise, and thou hast gi∣uen me good satisfacti∣on: and thus vnto all those that truly loue the Gospell, the Lord pro∣tect and guide with his grace. A∣men. Thine in Christ, I. W. THE ENGLISH PHARISE, OR RELIGIOVS APE. PROTESTANT. G OOD morrow, brother. Puritane. Good morrow. PRO. Well met, good brother, but mee thinke thou speakest as taking some thing offensiuely. Puri. No truely, thou art but mistaken: it is our manner to returne an an∣swere in few words, or none at all. Pro. I did propound no question, and therefore did expect no answere, onely such salutation as thou receiuest, I expected no lesse backe againe. Puri. The same which I receiued thou hadst a∣gaine, onely the word a∣wanting I owe vnto none, but to such as are of the same opinion that Iam. PRO. To know what opinion thou art of, I would gladly haue some conference, for I doe per∣swade my selfe that thy religion is groūded more vpon a singular conceit, then approoued by the Word of God. Puri. That is not so, for wee are readie to ap∣prooue our Religion on∣ly by the Word of God. PRO. Why dost thou then denie me to bee thy brother, seeing that wee are brethren not onely of one Nation, but likewise brethren in Christ. Pu. We may be brethren of one Nation as we are, & both confesse Christ, & yet for all this not both true members of Christ. PRO. Yet being brethren of one nation, & as it were twins of one womb, born and dwelling together, and that by one and the same profession, both ac∣knowledge Christ; it shewes great want of charitie in the denying me to be thy brother. Puri. I doe not abso∣lutely denie thee to bee my brother in Christ, be∣cause thou onely belec∣uest in him for saluation, but seeing thy life is not strict, and being too fami∣liar in frequenting com∣panie, I doc not take thee to be my brother. PRO. Thou dost con∣fesse that I am thy bro∣ther in Christ, because I hope oncly in him for sal∣uation, but thou findest fault with me, being too familiar in frequenting companie: I would glad∣ly knowe thy reason wherein thou art offen∣ded, seeing that my ordi∣narie companie is with such as do professe Christ as we both doe. Puri. Although thy ordinarie companie is with such as doe professe Christ as wee both doe: yet sometimes I can es∣pie thee conuersing with a Papist, the which I ha e with a deadly hate. PRO. Why, dost thou not hold it lawfull to con∣uerse with an aduersarie? Puri. I am so far from conuersing, that, as I said before, I hate and vtter∣ly detest their companie. PRO. I pray thee let me aske thee a question, whe∣ther doest thou thinke, that onely those of thy profession and life shal be sau d? Puri. Thou hast made a verie idle question, for I thinke no lesse. PRO. I will then de∣mand of thee another question, how is it possi∣ble that such as are not of thy profession, should come to bee conuerted, seeing that thou refusest to conuerse? Puri. I perceiue that thou beginnest to cauill about questions: if thou wouldeft haue my com∣panie, thou must giue them ouer. PRO. I would be sor∣rie to become offensiue in the least degree, therfore I pray thee let vs haue some further conference, & seeing that thou canst not abide to cōuerse with a Papist: yet because thou and I doe agree in this word onely in Christ, I pray thee let vs examine this faith by the word of God, because Saint Iohn saith, Beleeue not euerie spi∣rit, but trie the spirits whe∣ther they be of God or not, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Puri. Although I am contented that our doc∣trine shall bee approued by the Word of God: yet because I doe per∣swade my selfe that thou art a fauourer of the Pa∣pists, therefore I make neither barrel better hea∣ring, and therefore I hate thee likewise as a mēber thereof. PRO. Me think, brother, I find thee greatly out of charitie; for although the Papist bee foorth of the way, as I know he is, yet if my cōferring be but to bring him into the way againe: I see no reason, why thou shouldest be∣come thus offended; it too plainly appeares that thou art much too blame. Puri. Thou mistakes me, for my meaning is not that I altogether hate the persons of men; I onely dislike your com∣pany, and hate your con∣ditions. PRO. Brother, thou saiest that I mistake thee, but it will appeare that thou mistakest thy selfe: for suppose that thou art in the right way to hea∣uen, and I my selfe in the wrong: thou saiest thou louest my person, and ha∣test my conditions. Now whether art thou bound in loue to my person, to bring mee into the right way againe, or rather bound to let mee alone, hating my conditions? Puri. I must of necessi∣tie let thee alone, for I know that there is no hope in thee. PRO. Brother, here ap∣peares but small charitie, thy answer is too perem∣ptorie: thou mightst haue done much better, first, to haue done the part of a friend in some Christian reproof, thē seem thus to disgrace me, as being void of hope, thou hast accu∣sed me without a cause; & therfore thy error, in my iudgement, is very great. Puri. I passe not for thy iudgement, therefore keepe thy selfe satisfied, for I am no chāgeling, as thou supposest, for what I haue spoken thou kno∣west, but what else, thou shalt not, therefore rest thy selfe contented. PRO. I am contented with any thing that is reasonable, but because thou doest wrongfully charge me to fauour any religion, but that onely which I professe; I must tell thee, brother, before we part, seeing that thou art neither conformable vnto the Law of God nor man, I say, thou art no better then a flouri∣shing tree without fruit. Puri. Wherein canst thou prooue me a flouri∣shing tree without fruit, seeing that I preach the Word of God very zea∣lously, and lead my life very strictly? PRO. I am able by the Spirit of God to reproue thee both in thy life and doctrine. Puri. As how? PRO. In thy doctrine concerning thy rashe iudgements against the members of Christ, and in thy disobedience a∣gainst man, being the principal member there∣of. In a word, I am ready to reprehend thee for thy disobedience against both God and man, ac∣cording to our Sauiour Christs owne words, Hee that despiseth you, despiseth mee, and hee that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me, Luk. 10. 16. Puri. I perceiue that thou beginnest to bee an∣grie, but if I had better remembred my selfe, I would haue giuen thee no aduantage of my words. PRO. I looke for no ad∣uantage in thy words: for denying in thy pra∣ctice a thing lawfully commanded, it matters not whether thou hold thy peace, or seeme to excuse it with thy tongue. Puri. Wherein canst thou disprooue mee, for any thing lawfully com∣manded? PRO. I can iustly re∣prooue thee in many things, but two or three shal be sufficient to proue thee but a flourishing tree and a wandring star: first, thy disobedience vnto eccle siasticall gouerne∣ment, which the Church of his Land hath com∣manded. Secondly, thy want of charitie, hauing seuered thy selfe from Christ, in pronouncing rash and accusing iudge∣ments against his mem∣bers. Thirdly, thy con∣tradiction against Christ, in the length of thy prai∣ers, with the manner, and likewise of thy behauiour therein. Puri. I had thought we might haue conferred after another manner, but I perceiue now, that I haue kept thee cōpany but too long. Thou hast promised to goe forward, therein thou maist please thy selfe: for I am pleased to turne my backe. PRO. Brother, thou hast not deceiued mee, for as Salomon saith, Ine∣uer tooke thee for any o∣ther, but for such a one as scornes reproofe, Prou. 9. 8. But seeing that thou hast so scornfully turned thy backe, and separated thy selfe without iust cause, denying to haue any more conference, wherein thou deseruest iustly to bee reproued; I will not faile, by Gods assistāce, to let the world see, that thou art no bet∣ter, as Saint Iude saith, Then a whithered tree twice dead, and fit to bee plucked vp by the rootes, Iude 13. v. Now, because thou shalt take no exception wherein I may offer thee the least wrong; I am ready to reprehend both thy life and doctrine, one∣ly by example in the Scripture: and therefore let mee intreate thy pati∣ence, if thou haue any, for the thing that I ayme at, is thy conuersion, and not thy destruction. And as wee are taught in the Word of God, to reproue either friend or foe, with the words of meekenesse: euen so, my elder brother, I am willing and ready to reprehend thee onely with the words of meek∣nesse and loue, and al∣though thou doest not thinke thy selfe vnwor∣thy of reprehension, be∣cause thou carriest thy of∣fences behinde thee, yet seeing that others doe see that in thee which thou canst not perceiue thy selfe, I haue presumed to lay open vnto the view of the whole world, that a publike offence de∣serues an open rebuke. LOuing and faithfull Christian, I must tell thee before I goe any fur∣ther, that whereas I was determined to goe for∣ward after a dialogue ma∣ner, thou seest here how that my elder brother hath already preuented mee; and therefore am constrained to take ano∣ther course, intending, by God permission, to goe forward wherein I haue promised. The Spirit of God saith, I haue chosen the foolisb things of this world, to confound the wise, and weak things to confound the mightie. Louing Christi∣an beeing no Scholler, thou must not expect that at my hand , which I haue not, onely my good will, wherein the Lord hath enabled me by his holy Spirit, that specially by his especiall grace, I will freely offer thee: but being not fit to iscourse of things at large, I will only point at some heads, wherin thou maist plain∣ly perceiue the Spirit of truth from the spirit of error; and for this purpose thou must vnderstand, that there are in this land two sorts of teachers a∣mongst vs, the one sort is reformed, and the o∣ther sort much defor∣med; the one sort doth teach in Christs Schole with the words of meek∣nesse, the other seemeth to teach therein with the words of accusing Iudge∣ments; the one is guided with the spirit of humili∣tie, the other with the spirit of iniquitie; the one with the spirit of obedi∣ence, the other with the spirit of disobedience; the one teacheth, and resteth himselfe in the schole of Christ, the other maketh but a proud flourish therein, resting himself in hi owne conceite; in a word, the one hath the Spirit of truth, and the o∣ther but the spirit of er∣ror. And first, against the spirit of errour, our bles∣sed Sauiour himself, Saint Paul, Saint Peter, Saint Iohn, and Saint Iude, with others, hauing prophesi∣ed of these very last times, wherein we liue, doth tel vs in plaine words the qualities and conditions of such false prophets as are now resident amongst vs. And now to our elder brother, to whom I must tell thee before I pro∣ceede, that seeing it is a thing subiect to flesh and bloud, not onely to passe ouer offences vnto others from themselues, but likewise imputeth many faul s only to one, whi h somtimes appertaine vn∣to diuers, herein doth shew it self great indis∣cretion of iudgement, as appeareth sometimes in quotation of our English Bibles: for example S. Pe∣ter saith in the e words, and chiefly th m which walk after the flesh in the l st of vncleann sse, and d spise gouernmen , which are bold, and stand in their owne con∣ceit, not fearing to speake e∣uill of dignities, 2. Pet. 2▪ 10 Herein I know, that the Church of Rome, iustly and worthily deserues this imputation. Now, who is so blind, and seeth not, how that thou like∣wise art not onely fleshly minded, and despisest domi∣nion, as S. Iude saith, but likewise agreeable vnto Saint Pauls words, resist∣est the ordinance ordained of God, Rom. 13. 2. And to proue this further, be∣c use thou art ready to take exception without cause, S. Peter speaking of the Ministery, doth seeme to teach thee thy dutie both to superiour and in∣feriour Magistrates: his words are these: Submit your selues vnto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2. 13. And in the verse going before, he giues a reason why the words are these, That they which speake euill of you, as of euill doers, may by your o∣bedience, which they shall see, glorifie God in the day of visitation: therefore, saith hee, submit your selues, 1. Pet. 2. 12. This word ordinance, is quoted in some Bibles onely of ciuill gouerne∣ment: but I appeale vnto the iudicial censure of the learned, whether that Caesar hath his whole right herein or not: I hope there is not any that hath the Spirit of God, but they wil confesse that our gracious King is as well supreme Head and Gouernor ouer all causes Ecclesiasticall, as Ciuill. Now this word ordi∣nance being guarded with these two words, all man∣ner, I see no reason, in my iudgement, of any lesse importance then both spi∣rituall and temporall: and I thinke I haue also the spi∣rit of God. But now to the point: our gracious King hauing comman∣ded many things to bee obserued in this Church of England; and yet, as Saint Paul saith, nothing but that which is agreea∣ble vnto the Word of God, being both decent and comely, I would ve∣ry gladly know thy rea∣son why thou shouldest shew thy selfe thus diso∣bedient. Salomon saith, A diuine sentence shall be in the lippes of the King: his mouth shall not transgresse in iudgement, Prou. 16. 10. Brother, heere thou stan∣dest in thy owne conceit, and thinkest, that no King in the world is so wise as thy selfe: Er∣go, thou wilt refuse go∣uernment, which doth inferre, that thou despi∣sest the Gouernour. Wilt thou see a samiliar exam∣ple by a plaine cōparison, how contrary thou art to Christs command, who saith, Giue vnto Caesar, that which is Caesars, Mat. 22. 21 Amongst the temporall Lawes of this Land, it is commanded, that the poore therein shall bee k pt & maintained with∣in their seuerall Parishes. Now som sturdy beggers there be, which will not submit themselues vnto this command, but being guided by their own con∣ceit, wander abroad, ma∣king themselues no bet∣ter then Rogues by the Statute: of which sort, Saint Paul saith, If they will not worke, they must not eate, 2. Thes. 3. 10. Brother, what sayst thou of this disobedient beg∣ger? or how likest thou of Saint Pauls prescription of this sturdy Rogues di∣et? or what dost thou thinke of this example by thy s lfe? Thou canst not deny how disobe∣dient thou art vnto the Lawes and ordinances, which our gracious King hath command d thee; & therfore as this sturdie begger is become a rogue by the statute of this land, so thou being a conceited obstinate, hast made thy selfe by the statute of God, no better, as S. Iude saith, then a wandering starre, whose dyet, with∣out repentance, S. Paul hath likewise set downe in the 13. to the Rom. and 2. verse. If thou bee put to si∣lence, as to be feared thou art not, then thou begin∣n st to cry out, as the con∣ceited Iewes did, The Tem∣ple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Ier. 7. 4. Thou criest, the Lords anointed, Anointed of the Lord. Now this is such a crie, as may become a wonder vnto the world, who seeth thee in the very height of disobedience: shall a fa∣ther command his childe that thing which he may very easily doe without any danger at all? and shal this childe refuse his fa∣thers command, & pleade not worthie correction, because hee is his childe? this thou wilt confesse is very absurd: how canst thou then excuse thy selfe? dost thou think that thy disobedience vnto our gracious King being contrary vnto CHRIST himself, & his command, to pleade the Lords a∣nointed, because thou preachest Christ; therfore worthy no correction nor punishment? why this is too absurd: nay Brother, flatter not thy selfe, for before we part, I feare me that thou wilt proou no better a Preacher, then, as Saint Paul saith, of enuie and strife, Phi. 1. 15. Ther∣fore bee aduised by the Prophet Ieremy, Amend your waies and your workes: and no doubt, as he saith there, ye may dwel in this place, Ier. 7. 3. Otherwise what may bee expected, but a casting away of your selues, as of the whole seede of Ephraim, Ier. 7. 15? If our gracious King had denied vs any funda∣mentall point of Religi∣on, (the which thou wilt confesse he doth not) or decr d any thing, which as the Prophet Esay saith, had been grieuous, in kee∣ping backe the poore from iudgement, or any such like things which wicked Kings doe, Esai. 10 1, 2. then mightest thou haue had iust cause to com∣plaine, and we al cause to lament. But seeing hee is so merciful, and so louing vnto all his subiects, com∣māding nothing but that which is agreeable vnto the word of God: who art thou, and what a con∣tradicted spirit art thou of, that in stead of loyall dutie and loue, art be∣come thus disobedient vnto so louing and graci∣ous a King? But alas, what hast thou done? Hast thou not with all those disobedient spi∣rits in the old Testament, transgressed most feare∣fully against both God and good men? nay fur∣ther, thou hast swerued from the cōmandement of Christ: Matth. 22. 21. and as Saint Paul saith, re∣sisted the ordinance ordai∣ned of God▪ Rom. 13. 2. striuing against principali∣ties and powers, Titus 3. 1. speaking, as S. Peter saith, against dignities, 2. Peter 2. 10. despising dominion, lude the 8. verse: boasting thy selfe, as Salomon saith, before the King, Pro. 25. 6. in a word thou hast in the very height of pride, transcended thy selfe a∣boue all power, exalting thy selte aboue measure. And now what may be expected, thinkest thou, without a speedie and so∣dain repentance, but such a most fearefull fall for this thy disobedience; as Saint Iude hath alreadie prescribed, euen blacknesse and darknesse for euer: Iude the 13. verse ? Brother, I will shew thee such an ensample of obedience, that if there be but one spark of grace in thee, thou wilt neuer deny to follow him: For behold our blessed Saui∣our himselfe, although a free-man frō all Subsidies or Taxes, or what else which was due vnto Cae∣sar, by strangers, yet, ra∣ther then he would seeme to disturbe a common peace, or become an ex∣ample of offence in the least degree, he comman∣ded Peter to cast his angle into the water, and the first Fish, saith hee, thou takest, open his mouth, wherein thou shalt finde a piece of Siluer of twenty pence, take it, and pay for mee and thee, Mat. 17. 25, 26. verses. Thou seest heere how willing and ready our blessed Sauiour was in O∣bedience in his owne per∣son; thou seest him pay tribute vnto Caesar, al∣though a free-man; nay, further, rather then hee would becom an ensāple of the least offence, thou maist perceiue him yeel∣ding vnto a base Publi∣can. Now if our Sauiour Christ did not think that ciuill policie was taken a∣way by the Gospell: what may the whole world thinke of thee, in denving obedience, refu∣sing but rites and cere∣monies, which are seem∣ly in the Church, beeing lawfully commanded. I am sory to see thee moūt thy selfe into this verie height of pride: thou art become little inferiour vnto those disobedient spirits, that for their pride 2. Pet. 2. 4. fell from Heauen to Hel. Thou hast, as the Pro∣phet D uid saith, banded and io ned thy selfe with the wicked of this world, against the Lord, and his Anointed, Psal. 2. 2. Nay, thou hast done much more then I haue yet spoken of: For thou hast (with Iannes 2. Tim. 3. 8. and Iambres, not onely withstood Mos s in resist∣ing the truet thy selfe. But lik w se by thy in∣chantments, hast & dost draw dayly infinite of multitudes vnto thi thy wilfull disobedi nce, in so much, that thou hast iust∣ly caused our gracious King, not onely to cry out with the Prophet Da∣ id; Lord, how are they in∣creased that t ouble me! ma∣ny are they that rise against mee, Psal. 3. 1. But like∣wise as iustly caused him with the same Prophet to say: Woe is mee, that I Psal. 120. verse 5. am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to haue my ha∣bitation in the Tents of Ke∣dar. And thus thou hast, by thy disobedient in∣chantments, caused such a contention in this Land, that thou hast iustly de∣serued with Mesech and Kedar, those Israelites, (which did degenerate from their godly Fathers, beeing hatefull and con∣temning the faithfull) that most fearefull Iron rodde of Gods wrath, to bruise thee in pieces so∣dainely. I must tell thee, Bro∣ther (and I am sorry that thou hast giuen mee such iust cause to tell thee so) that if it were not for one crying sinne which that bloody and wandering Cain is branded in the fore-head withal, I meane that most monsterous Beast of Babylon, who denyeth the Offices of our Redeemer: I say, and speake it from the Spirit of God, that thou art be∣come so little inferiour in persecuting and murder∣ing the soules of Christs members; that thou hast not onely pledged the Pope of ROME a full health of the dregges of your conceited inuenti∣ons, and false imaginati∣ons, but as thou hast pledged him herein. I feare me it will proue be∣fore wee part, that thou hast begun another halfe pot to him againe. And although thou doest not runne on with him in de∣niall of some fundamen∣tall points of Religion, yet I dare vndertake, that thou resting thy selfe in thy owne conceit, deny∣ing but the circumstan∣ces & shaddowes therof, whose substances cannot bee without, dost more hurt by thy disobedience amongst vs herein, then he doth, or can doe, being so publikely knowne as hee is. And here as our Sauior Christ saith, Thou art but a blind guide, which straines out a gnat, and swal∣lows a Camell, Mat. 23. 24. Thus, Brother, thou carriest this offence of dis∣obedience vpon thy back, and therefore thou canst not perceiue it thy selfe. Now I haue made bold, comming behinde thee, to take it off, & haue layed the same) as thou now seest) before thy face: For which, if thou wouldst so keepe there, and cast it no more be∣hinde thee, I shall be glad that it was my chance to remoue the same. But if thou rest thy selfe in thy owne conceit, cast∣ing obedience from thee, and so become a carrier still of thy offences be∣hind thee, then wilt thou enforce mee, to say with Salomon: That there is more hope in a very naturall foole, then of him that is conceited, Pro. 26. 12. ver. And this shall serue for a taste of thy disobedience, and to let the world see, That as Saint Iude saith; Hauing separated thy selfe from the true members of Christ, thou art be∣come no better then a wandring Starre, whose portion without repen∣tance, is blacknesse of dark∣nesse for euer, Iude 13. vers. And therfore, Brother, let mee aduise thee to learne a lesson of that Starre which guided the Wise men from the East Countrie, vnto Bethlem, where our blessed Sauior Mat. 2. 9. CHRIST was, & as that Star did stand still, when it came iust ouer where the Babe was, and so left them there: so thou who doest rest thy selfe but in thy owne conceit, deny∣ing obedience vnto su∣preme power, let it now be sufficient, & too much, that thou hast settled thy affections, in that East countrie of thy owne i∣maginations, where no∣thing can bee found but Inchanters and Sorce∣rers. And heere I must leaue thee, and turne my self vnto those, of whom, as Saint Paul saith, I per∣swade my self better things, Heb 6 9. And thus, faith∣full Christian, thou seest what great danger the children of disobedience haue broughtthemselues into. Thou seest that our elder brother, for his dis∣obedience, is counted no better in the iudgement of Saint Iude, then a wan∣dring Starre. Thou seest what such haue prescri∣bed in the Scriptures for their diet, after this life: S. Paul saith, condemnation, Rom. 13. 2. Saint Peter, and Saint Iude saith, black∣nesse of darknesse for euer. 2. Pet. 2. 17. Iude the thir∣teenth Verse. Thou seest these blessed Apostles so speaking against these dis∣obedient spirits, as wor∣thy of these fearefull iudgements. And in briefe, thou seest how truely these holy Apo∣stles hath prophesied of these disobedient spi∣rits, in these very last times. And againe, thou seest how opposite these spirits are vnto the obe∣dience of our blessed Sa∣uiour Christ himselfe, who paied Tribute vnto Caesar in his owne person: who rather then hee would bee an ensample of the least offence, al∣though a freeman, yeel∣ded himselfe vnto a base Publican. And thus may all men see, the King of all Kings, an ensample of obedience vnto the whole world. And yet behold, heere thou seest a disobedient spirit so full of contradi∣ction, that hee will tran∣scend aboue principali∣ties and powers. But faithful Christian, let this fearefull example be such a speciall warning vnto thee, that thou keepe thy selfe in all loyall obedi∣ence vnto Princes espe∣cially: and likewise let this example bee a war∣ning vnto all sorts of people, that they yeeld obedience vnto whom so∣euer it is due. As Children to Parents, and Parents to their Children: Wiues to their Husbands, and Hus∣bands to their Wiues: Ser∣uants to their Masters, and Masters to their Seruants, Col. 3. 18, 19, 20. And in a word, al in general to our most gracious King. Now that we may the better performe these du∣ties, let vs take counsell of that blessed Apostle St. Paul, who speaking a∣gainst such disobedient spirits, saith, Turne away from such, 2. Tim. 3. 5. And thus, faithful bro∣ther, thou seest what dan∣ger our elder brother hath brought himselfe vnto, in despising gouern∣ment. It resteth now in the second place, to let thee see his disobedience in his doctrine, and as in briefe thou seest his diso∣bedience against man, thou shalt likewise, by Gods assistance, see his disobediē e against both God and man, who per∣seeuteth Christ in his members: both thou and I haue felt the smart: but faithfull brother, I must leaue thee for a while. And now, brother, by Gods assistance, accor∣ding to my promise, I am readie to encounter with thee this second time. And wheras I haue already reproued thee for thy disobedience a∣gainst man, not finding thee in this Combate to yeeld; beeing prouoked further, I am readie to manifest vnto the whole world, how contrarie thou art to Christ and all good men, by thy disobe∣dience in thy Doctrine. Likewise shewing the dif∣ference betwixt the Spi∣rit of truth and the spirit of error. But before I proceede, I am to meete with an obiection, which the whole world, who being against the truth, may propound, and that is where the true Church of Christ is, and there∣fore to giue satisfaction herein, the world shall vnderstand that both the true Church and the false is in this little Iland, called England: and as there are many false Churches in the world, and but onely one true: The world may likewise perceiue, that as the true Church of GOD is al∣waies accompanied, as Saint Paul saith, with some heresies for the better tri∣all thereof, 1. Cor. 11. 19. So now especially is it at this present time, for there are three sorts of Teachers amongst vs, whereof one of these is the true Church of Christ, and the other two with all the rest, doe but oppose themselues. Now of these two latter being both false, the one of them doth teach in pri∣uate, the other doth preach in publike. Now for this priuate teacher, it is needelesse to speake any thing of him, seeing that the Church of God doth know him suffici∣ently, how that he degra∣ding Christ of his Offi∣ces, challengeth such prerogatiues vnto him∣selfe, as are onely pe∣culiar vnto Christ, and therefore no true mem∣ber thereof. And as this priuate teacher is a knowne ene∣mie vnto Iesus Christ: so likewise, I am readie to prooue by the Word of God, that thou, who restest in thy owne con∣ceit, hauing separated thy selfe from thy bre∣thren, being become a rash accusing iudger of them, that thou art so farre off from being ei∣ther a teacher, or a scho∣ler, in the Schoole of Christ, that thou art an enemie thereunto, teach∣ing onely in the vanitie of thy owne imaginati∣on. And that this is true, our blessed Sauiour, see∣ming to teach the whole world the way vnto the Kingdome of heauen, hath erected vnto the view of the whole world, a large free Schoole, wherein he teacheth that whosoeuer would bee a teacher, or a scholler therein, must learne this lesson of meekenesse and lowlinesse, Matth. 11. 29. And lest his children should swerue or goe a∣stray from this his milde Commandement: hee giues a speciall warning in the sixth Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospell, and thirtie seuenth verse, in these words: Iudge not, that yee bee not iudged: condemne not, and yee shall not be condemned: forgiue, and yee shall be forgiuen, Luk. 6. 37. Now there are diuers and sundrie sorts of peo∣ple, which doe perswade themselues, that they are true teachers in this schoole of Christ, which indeed are not: and ther∣fore to resolue a doubt which may either arise in th gnorant, or in such w ich do mis , a the Papi and diu rs doe. I will therefore make plaine one place of S ripture, that the ignorant may not onely be better satis∣fied, but likewise, that their vnderstādings may be more apt to conceiue of things afterwards. And for this purpose, Saint Iohn saith, Trie the Spirits, whether they bee of God, or not, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. and in the next verse he saith, Heereby shall yee know the Spirit of God: Euery spirit which confesseth, that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, 1. Ioh. 4. 2. Now heere thou must take heede, how thou vn∣derstandest these words: if thou take them litteral∣ly, as the Papists doe in the sixt Chapter of Saint Iohns Gospell, concer∣ning the Sacrament, then thou art in an errour: for thē not only the Papists, but specially the Puritan, with diuers other sects, should receiue benefit by Christs death; which being rightly vnderstood, thou maist plainly per∣ceiue, that they haue no right nor interest therein. For they that degrade Christ of his offices, as the Papists doe, or seeme to to seuer that vnion be∣twixt Christs members, as the Puritan doth▪ doe separate themselues, both from Iesus Christ and h s members. And therfore to cleare this point, be∣fore I proceede, the Pro∣phet Esay saith: This peo∣ple come neere me with their mouth, and honour me with their lippes, but their heart is farre from me, Esa. 29. 13 And our blessed Sauiour saith) Not euery one that saith vnto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heauē: but he that doth the will of my father which is in heauen, Mat. 7. 21. And to make this more plaine, our Sauiour Christ saith further, Many will say vn∣to mee in that day, that is, the day of Doome, Haue wee not prophesied by thy name, and by thy name cast out deuils, and by thy name done many great workes? yet for all these outward actions, wanting loue and charitie vnto the mem∣bers of Christ, thy answer shall be, Depart from me, thou worker of iniquitie, I know thee not, Mat. 7. 2 3. So that wee see by these proofes, that it is not an outward profession only, which God requireth, but likewise an answerable conuersation. But now to the purpose. And whereas thou per∣swadest thy selfe to bee a Teacher in the Schole of Christ, the world shall plainly see, that thou dost but flatter thy self in thy owne imagination, being quite contrarie minded to the true teachers ther∣in. And that this is true, I will first set down a true disciple, and a follower of Christ, who according to our blessed Sauiours commaund, approouing himselfe both in his life and doctrine, teacheth with the spirit of humili∣tie and patience, as appea∣reth by that blessed Apo∣stle Saint Paul, who spea∣king of himselfe, and all true Teachers in this Schole of Christ, saith in these words: Wee giue no occasion of offence, that our Ministerie should not be re∣preh nded, 2. Cor. 6. 3. but in all things wee approue our selues, as the Ministers of Christ, in much patience, 2. Cor. 6. 4. And lest others should mistake thēselues, who are to deale some∣times with such an aduer∣sarie, as doth oppose him∣selfe against the truth, he likewise aduiseth Timo∣thie; To instruct such with the words of meekenes: and hee hath set downe a rea∣son why; for per aduenture God may give them repen∣tance, 2. Tim. 2. 25. Now Brother, whe∣ther thou art a Teacher after this manner, or but a Teacher after thine owne conceit, I appeale vnto such words as flow from thy fierie spirit of accusing Iudgements, and likewise from such fruit as doth appeare by thy general doctrines: for powring forth the Wine of Gods iustice in such fearefull manner, against the wounded members of Christ as thou doest, reseruing the oyle of Gods mercies, without due consideration vnto thy selfe: what is this, but to feede thy own idle and most absurd conceit, ma∣king beames in thy bro∣thers eyes, and but motes in thy owne? Heerein thou makest thy selfe no better then a plaine hypocrite, as ap∣peareth by our Sauiour Christ, saying in these words; Hypocrite, first cas out that beame which is in thine owne eye, and then shalt thou see more clearely to cast out the mote that is in thy brothers eie, Matth. 7. 5. Here mayst thou see how opposit thou art to Christ and his followers, but that, as Saint Iohn saith, darkenesse hath blinded thy eyes, 1. Iohn 2. 11. Againe, our bl ssed Sauiour saith, Iudge not, that yee bee not iudged, Mat. 7. 1. and Saint Paul as a true disciple of Christ, doth giue a suffici∣ent reason wh we should not iudge of others: For, saith hee, thou that iudgest others, thou condemnest thy selfe, Rom. 2. 1. Now how contrary thou art to Ic∣sus Christ, and to his fol∣lowers, doth appeare by the fruits of thy doctrin, who by thy accusing and condemning iudgemēts, hast not only caused ma∣ny to fall from Christ vn∣to desperation, which is most fearefull, but like∣wise for all the rest which take liking to the same, which are infinite in mul∣titudes, & are becom such deadly haters of their Brethren, euen vnto that height of sinne, that they blush not to make good their hateful minds by the Scripture, the place they alleage, where Dauid by a Psal. 139. most prophetical spirit a∣gainst the enemies of God being bloud-thirsty men, desired God not only to slay those wicked people, but h e goeth on further in the sincerity of his hart as (prophesying of them, what should become of such, saying) Do not I hate Psal 139. 21, 2. them, O God, that hate thee? yes, O Lord, I hate them with n unfa ed hatred. This exposition of this place of scripture, which both thy self and those thy follow∣ers doe thus interpret, is hatcht and fetcht frō the deuill, and thy deuillish conceit: for seeing thou canst neuer proue thy self to be of that Spirit which D uid had, nor likewise canst neuer proue vs thy Brethren, to deserue such imputation, which those manslaiers the of God did; how impudent and cruell art thou aboue measure, to censure and iudge thus vncharitably against the members of Iesus Christ? Again, many of thy followers goe fur∣ther, and say, that of their owne Parents, being Pro∣testants, that they are al∣ready damned, and that this is too true by wofull experience, many places of this Land, with the place where Idwell, doe manifest the same. That blessed Apostle S. Paul saith, Let your patient mind be knowne vnto all men, the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4. 5. But thou by a contrarie spirit, sayst vnto thy fol∣lowers, Let your hatred and malice bee knowne vnto all men; and there∣fore thou hast iust cause to thinke that the Deuill is at hand. This thy ha∣tred hath so spred it selfe throughout the whole land, that it cannot bee denied without a brazen face: and that this is true, I can shew thee an in∣stance of experience offe∣red against my selfe: for taking occasion, being moued by the Spirit of God, as now to write this little booke, I writ my let∣ter vnto a principall man of thy sect, and although reproouing him after a friendly manner, his rage was so kindled thereat, that his answere was, that if he liued, hee would re∣uenge it: but if hee died, let GOD reuenge it. A∣gaine, another of thy Sect standing by, did giue mee such cruell and disgracefull wordes, that nothing did appeare but hatred and malice. And amongst the rest of his speeches, for wri∣ting that Letter, hee iud∣ged mee worthy to die some sodaine death. I haue noted these words, that the world may see what spirits the Diuell doth hatch in these very last times: and likewise to let all men see how con∣trarie thou and thy Sect are vnto Iesus Christ and his followers, who from the spirit of humilitie doth teach with patiēce, beeing so farre off from reuenge, that they are al∣waies ready to forgiue their enemies. Saint Iude speaking a∣gainst disobedient spirits of authoritie, saith, That their rage is such, that they fome out their owne shame, Iude the thirteenth verse. And that this is true of thy Sect, one of thy Bro∣thers hath alreadie spo∣ken his malice against one of the chiefest pillars of this Land: and I will tell thee how, taking excepti∣on against a poore man, but for a supposed fault, got him bound ouer vnto the Sessions, where his proofe failed: but being not satisfied, the poore man was troubled fur∣ther, where thy brothers proofe failing the second time, to satisfie his re∣uenge further, another Iustice warrant was sent for. Now the poore man being in the fire twice be∣fore, beeing driuen in∣to great distresse, he be∣thought him of a friend at London: therefore he went trudging vnto him, & made his case knowne: and beeing truely percei∣ued, appearing more ma∣lice thē matter, his friend procured a Supersed as for him, vpon bayle gi∣uen for his good beha∣uiour, as the vsuall man∣ner is: so that hee tooke his leaue, and came trud∣ging home againe: and he no sooner approched, but intelligence was giuen, and needelesse to bid thy brother prosecute; this warrant must presently be serued. But the Constable per∣ceiuing & seeing a Super∣sedeas, made it knowne. Wherupon thy brothers rage beeing kindled, to please the pride of his humour, writ his Letter vnto the Iustices Clarke after this manner. Friend, whereas a war∣rant was directed from your Master, against such a one, it wil take no place, for hee hath gotten a Su∣ ersedeas: I thinke hee hath beene at the Pope, and gotten a Pardon for his sinnes past, and to come: And that this is true, there is sufficient te∣stimonie to proue the same. I haue noted this. First, to discharge my consci∣ence, who ought not to keepe such words secret. Secondly, that the world may perceiue, how that pride & vaine-glory with an inuetered malice, doth so raigne in the children of disobedience, thatthey are ready likewise to burst forth into cursed speeches against Princi∣palities and Powers. O wick d generation aboue measure! what may bee expected at thy hands, if thou shouldst be suffred, and mightst but haue thy owne will, that from thy disloyall disobedience, and rash accusing Iudge∣ments, such fruits as these doe spring? there doth no∣thing appeare in thee but disobedience, rash accu∣sing Iudgements, hatred and malice, and cruell re∣uenge, and all against the poore members of Iesus Christ, whose number by thy inchanted doctrine thou hast so diminished, that those of thy hatefull sect are growne infinite in multitudes. Thou hin∣derest the fruits of the Gospel: Thou causest the Ministerie to be euill spoken of, thou resistest the truth, by setting vp an Idol of thy owne imagi∣nation, thou art so deepe∣ly plunged in the depth of thy owne conceit, that as Salomon saith, There is more hope in a foole then in him that is conceited. Prou. 26. 12. Thouhast giuen vs great cause to com∣plaine, as Saint Paul did of Alexander the Copper-Smith, Thou hast done vs much hurt. But as he said, I trust the Lord will reward thee thereafter. 2. Tim. 4. 14. And yet for al this, al∣though thou hast caused Gods Name greatly to be dishonoured, and loue and charitie smothered, notwithstanding all this, thou art still readie with those conceited Iewes, who cryed, The Temple of the Lord, to excuse thy selfe and say, The Lords Anointed, the Lords An∣ointed. Now if it were not, that the god of this world had bewitcht thy thoughts, thou wouldst blnsh for shame to make such a cry amongst them, which know thee better then thou knowst thy selfe. Suppose thou couldst speak, as S. Paul saith, with the tong of men & Angels, & haue not loue, thou art no better then sounding brasse or a tinckling Cimbal, 1. Cor. 13. 1. Thou saiest thou preachest Christ, it is true: And as Saint Paul saith, I reioyce thereat. But what of this, seeing that thou hast not onely separated thy selfe, from the body of the Church, but like∣wise wantest humilitie, patience, and charitie, thou doest no better then the same Apostle saith, Then preach Christ of enuie and contention, Phil. 1. 15. If thou wouldst giue vs cause to reioyce with S. Paul, how that thou preachest Christ as thou doest: thou must get thy selfe to Virginia, or some other place where Christ was neuer heard before, where (no doubt) their good workes far exceede thine: then would be iust cause of reioycing, where Gods Name would be∣come greatly more ho∣noured, and they, and we both, more comforted. But to stay heere like an vnskilfull Physicion a∣mongst the wounded members of Christ, pow∣ring in the wine of Gods Iudgements, reseruing the oyle of Gods mer∣cies vnto thy selfe, I will vndertake, whereas thou curest one soule, thou kil∣lest a thousand, so that in stead of reioycing, there is nothing to be expected from thee, but iust cause of great sorrow: & there∣fore, as Saint Paul saith, We haue good cause to refuse thy company, 2. Tim. 3. 5. Saint Iohn saith, If wee walke in the light, as hee is in the light, wee haue fellow∣ship one with another, and the blood of Iesus Christ his Sonne, clenseth us from all sinne, I. Ioh. 1. 7. Brother, thou belee∣uest that the bloud of Ie∣sus Christ the Sonne of God, doth clense vs from all sinne. And thou canst not deny, but that I be∣leeue the same. Now a question may arise, wher∣in are wee separated, and whether of vs haue sepa∣rated our selues? I haue alreadie shewed the diffe∣rence herein sufficiently. For the tree is known by his fruit. But I will tell thee, Brother, if that thou hadst looked as seri∣ously, and stayed thy self in the beginning of this verse, as thou hast done in the latter end, thou mightst better haue per∣ceiued, not onely who it is, that goeth about to breake this vnion which is betwixt Christ and his Church, butlikewise who it is that doth separate themselues herein. This Verse is sufficient to confute and confound both the Pope of Rome, and thy selfe, the latter end is sufficient to con∣fute him, & the fore-end sufficient to confound thee: he hath cut off him∣selfe in denying that the blood of Christ doth clense vs from all sinne: and thou hast cut off thy selfe, beeing separated from the fellowship of thy brethren, according to Saint Iohns words, Hee that hateth his brother, is in d rkenesse, and walketh in da kenesse, and knoweth not whither hee goeth, because that drakenesse hath blin∣ded his eies, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. . I haue sufficiently shewed how that thou hast not onely separated thy selfe from vs, but likewise prooued by the fruit of thy accusing Iudgements, how that both thou and thy fol∣lowers are become dead∣ly haters of thy bre∣thren: and thus the world may plainely see, how that by hating ofvs, thou art become, as Saint Paul saith, Onely a louer of thy selfe, 2. Tim. 3. 2. Our blessed Sauiour saith, Blessed are the meeke, far they shall inherit the earth, Ma th. 5. 5. Vpon these words I gather, that thou art but an intruder in thy calling, and liuest by the sweate of other mens browes: that as the wandring and sturdy begger doth eate the bread of others: so thou beeing but a wandring Starre, and impatient, doest eate the bread of thy brothers. Thou preachest long Sermons, and often: therein I blame thee not: it is the manner only that marres all: for in steade of that fierie Spirit of zeale and sinceritie of the heart to preach Christ in loue and humility: thou preachest Christ in accusing and condemning iudgements with the fiery spirit of ini∣quitie. And heere thou makest the verie powers of heauen to shake, Matth. 24. 29. But Saint Paul being of a contrary spirit, saith, To the weake I become as weake, that I may win the weake: I am made all things to all men, that I might win some, 1. Cor. 9. 22. Saint Paul heere, to winne men vnto Christ, did not re∣spect these outward things of indifferencie, but is content to obserue all times, and to eate and drinke with all sorts of people, to winne some vnto God. And for this ende, our Sauiour Christ was content to debase himselfe, To conuerse, and to eate and drinke with Publicans and sinners, Luk. 5. 29. But thou, who scornest all company but those of thy owne sect, Bindest heauie burdens, and layest them on mens shoul∣ders, but as for thy selfe, thou wilt not mooue them with one of thy fingers, Matth. 23. 4. Thou, like the proud Pharise, prea∣chest the Law very strict∣ly: and thou seemest in outward shew to goe be∣fore vs; and if wee doe not make an outward ap∣pearance as thou doest, then presently thou en∣trest into vncharitable iudgement of condem∣nation; and yet who see∣eth not, how fleshly-minded thou art, both in thy wordes and deedes? and how thou temptest God to lay a yoke on the Di∣sciples neckes, which neither our Fathers, nor wee, are a∣ble to beare, Acts 15. 10. Beeing contrarie to Christs words, who saith, My yoke is easie, and my burden light, Matth. 11. 30. Saint Paul saith, Who art thou that iudgest thy brother? or why doest thou set thy brother at nought? we must all appeare before the Iudgement seat o Christ, Rom. 14. 10. Herein thou hast caused vs with Saint Paul, to bring thy name in question, and to say, Who art thou? as though wee knew thee not: but the truth is, wee know thee but too well, for we finde thee altogether, as Saint Paul saith, Without naturall affection, 2. Tim. 3. 3. But alas, what hast thou done in iudging thus vncharitably? Thou hast done no lesse then ioyned thy selfe with the Pope of Rome, who is rea∣dy to iudge all, but will be iudged of none; and therefore making thy selfe hayle fellow well met with him, thou hast with him and all the rest of the whole world, which doe op∣pose themselues against the LORD and his Anointed, yeelded your selues so farre vnto the vanitie of your owne i∣maginations, that yee wilfully haue drowned your selues in the redde sea of Iudgements. And thus I haue let thee see, first, thy diso∣bedience: secondly, thy impatient and accusing iudgements, wherein the world may plainely per∣ceiue, how that nothing doth proceed, nor can be gathered from them, but contention, enuie, hatred, and such inuetered ma∣lice, that thereby thou hast caused the Sunne to be darkened, the Moone to lose her light, and the very powers of heauen to shake. In a word, thou hast iustly caused Gods most sacred name so greatly dishonored, that without a very speedy and suddaine repentance, thou shalt haue for thy better satisfaction, as Saint Paul saith, such a recompence of reward, as is prescribed in these two wordes, Indignation and wrath, Rom. 2. 8 Now Brother, con∣cerning these thy most cruell iudgements against the members of Iesus Christ, which are now li∣uing, thou hast not con∣tayned nor contented thy self h rein. For one of thy Sect, taking occasion in a publike Sermon, to speake of the yong man in the Gospell, who came to our blessed Sauiour Christ, to know what hee might doe to inherit eternal life, Mark. 10. 2 . Hee affirmed before the com∣pany of many hundred persons, that this yong man is a damned soule in Hell. I know there was Hypocrisie found in him: and who can say, hee is free heerein? But seeing that our blessed Sauiour, who answering an obie∣ction of his Disciples, said, Although with, men it seeme vnpossible, yet with God no hing is im∣possible: and againe, for those many good parts the which Iesus Christ said, that hee loued him for; I gather that hee is in a farre more happie case, in my iudgement, then thou, whosoeuer thou art that iudgest thus vncharitably of him. Againe, in the same Sermon, the partie being a meere stanger, it was d ∣manded by a Church∣warden for his Licence; but what angrie answer was returned, I haue o∣mitted to set it downe: onely, to satisfie his own m licious humour, and to disgrace the Officer, hee said, in a publike speech, being in the Pulpit, that hee was a Cadauerous Knaue: implying, that a Tinker, or a Pedler, might find more fauour, and haue no such questi∣ons put vpon them; and for want of matter, hee said, that God made all, but the Deuill would haue all: but heerein hee equiuocated; for he ment all but those of his sect, and being too bold, and too impudent for such a place, he said in a verie peremptorie passion, that if hee had spoken any thing which might seeme preiudiciall, the Law was open, his name was knowne, and likewise where hee dwelt: and in conclusion of all, without exception, hee said, that hee cared for the face of no man. Againe, thy follow∣ers vsing their exercises after thy Sermons, in the Church, some one of them stands vp, to speake, and expostulate of things that haue beene spoken before, and to the num∣ber of an hundred, or more, or lesse, doe at∣tend him. Now, after thy Sermons, whatsoe∣uer is spoken, all are well pleased: but if it chance, that a reformed Mini∣ster; nay, let it bee the Bi∣shop himselfe, then the leafe must bee turned o∣uer, to see, whether that Lots wife looked back on∣ly in her head, or in her heart, or in both; and heere they are at odds, and cannot agree. These followers of thine are the silly ones of this age: they are Buckes of the first head, they haue very pregnant wits of indiscre∣tion, they thinke that none can bee saued but such as vse these their outward obseruations. We know them when we meet them, for they haue no good morrow for vs: but wee know them bet∣ter, when wee bargaine with them; for then their sound horse prooues lame. This feminine kind are very silly and louing creatures, seeming very deuout, although very ignorant: for after thy af∣ter-noone Sermon, some Gentlewoman or other must in treat a Sermon af∣ter supper. Now thou, who cāst preach without studie, hauing no power to deny, this deuout com∣pany, with thy sel e, must meete, when all honest men in the Towne are in bed; & whatsoeuer thou or this company doe, al∣though a crime very grie∣uous, yet in thy owne eie it seemes good, and tolerable: but if thy bro∣ther Protestant chance to get a fall of infirmity, this in thy sight proues a pre∣sent beame; and therfore thou saist damnable. But whatsoeuer thou doest, in thy own sight it seemes good: but whatsoeuer I doe, in thy sight it is naught. Now the reason is, as Saint Iohn saith, be∣cause darkenesse hath blin∣ded thy eies, 1. Ioh. 2. 11. These are children of thy owne begetting; here is like Priest like people. But wilt thou heare what comes of thy darke ser∣mons? I would not omit to tell it, although I take no pleasure therein. A Gentlewoman, who see∣ming very deuout, being one of the chiefest fol∣lowers of that sexe, and whom no occasion might hinder to follow thee tenne miles or more to heare thee speake, thou couldest not quote the Scripture so fast, but shee was ready to looke there∣on; thus farre was verie commendable. But behold what hap∣pened, this seeming de∣uout Gentlewomā chanst to prooue with child: and when the time of her houre drew neere, she ac∣quainted some of her kinswomen with it, who being readie to attend her, demanded whose the child was; but shee being not willing to returne an answer, staied her tongue so long, in so much that her Kinswomen making an offer to depart, and leaue the duty of woman∣hood; she presently con∣sest, that it was her eldest brothers; for which I am very sorry to heare it, and I could wish, that it had neuer been. Brother, I haue not noted this in way of any disgrace; for such clewes will wind themselues to their open shame: and al∣though this sin bee grie∣uous, be it farre from mee to enter into Iudgement in the least degree. I leaue it vnto Iesus Christ, who must iudge both quicke and dead; and therefore without a speedy repen∣tance, thou, who hast most violently pulled this heauy rod of Gods iudgements foorth of his owne hands, which is on∣ly peculiar to himselfe, shalt one day heare this heauie sentence of, Goe ye cursedinto euerlasting iudg∣ments. And thus may all men see, what fruits doe come from thy darke do∣ctrine, and likewise from thy night-Sermons, and how that thou shewest thy selfe vnto the whole world, as Saint Paul saith, To bee but a creeper into mens houses, leading silly women captiue, which are laden with diuers sinnes, and many lusts, 2. Ti. 3. 6. Thou wouldest make all men beleeue, by a little s e∣ming strict and outward obseruation, that thou art an innocent, and a harmelesse man: but who is he that hath but halfe an eie, and seeth not, how that thy puritie is with∣out charitie, and thy de∣murity but impurity? nay who is so blind, and seeth not the still Sow eating all the draffe? Therefore as Saint Paul saith, He that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption: Gal. 6. 8. I could speake much more by experience: but seeing that it is accom∣plished alreadie, which Saint Paul hath prophe∣sied long before, how that thy madnesse is euidently known vnto all men, 2. Tim. 3. 9. I will therefore giue ouer, where I might here∣in reprehend thee fur∣ther, and turne my selfe vnto those of whom Saint Paul s ith, I per swade my selfe better things, He. 6. 9. and after some friendly exhortation with them, I purpose to encounter with thee once again, but farewell for a while. And now, faithful bro∣ther in Christ, according to my promise, and that little measure of know∣ledge which God hath lent me, I haue first shew∣ed thee the difference of the spirit of errour from the Spirit of truth, by the child of disobedience. Se∣condly, I haue likewise shewed thee the diffe∣rence of the spirit of er∣rour from the Spirit of truth by his doctrine, and such fruites s come thereof, how that he be∣ing so deepely conceited in his own imaginations, that he is no Teacher nor Scholer at all in the schole of Christ: for pow∣ring in the wine of God iustice into the wounded members of Christ, reseruing the oyle of Gods mercies vnto himselfe, he is so far from a cunning Phisicion, that in stead of curing, he doth no lesse then kil the soule. Againe, thou seest him so highly conceited in him∣selfe, that as Saint Iohn saith, He is gone from vs, hauing lost the fellow∣ship of the Brethren, be∣ing, as S. Iude saith, so se∣parated, that as Saint Paul affirmeth, Hee is onely be∣come a louer of himselfe, 2. Ti. 3. 2. So that it plain∣ly appeares, that from his doctrine and life doth no∣thing proceede, but enuie and strife, Phil. 1. 15. Thou seest likewise, how that these his fol∣lowers do rest themselues so much in their outward obseruations, that forget∣ting wherein they are trulyiustified, do run into vncharitable iudgements with all others that doe not follow their exerci∣ses: for which I doe not condemne them for their outward appearances, on∣ly in the manner thereof they marre all. And yet mistake me not: for who is so ignorant, that know∣eth not, that the mee∣tings of these multitudes to become publike spea∣kers in the Church, are a∣gainst the prescript rule and Canon both of God and man? Now hee that vseth these and much more, & either affi th with his tongue, or thin∣keth in his heart, respect∣ing more the outward action it selfe, then those inward graces, which might proceede there∣from, he is no better then a plaine hypocrite; and therefore according to our Sauiour Christs own words, Poore despised Pub∣licans and sinners shall goe before him into the king∣dome of heauen: for he that exalteth himselfe, shall bee brought low, and hee that humbleth himselfe, shall bee exalted, Luke 18. 14. For our Sauiour Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: Luke 5. 32. Againe, thou seest them by their outward behauiour, as though there were no deceit to be found in them: and yet thou knowest as well as I can tell thee, that their puritie is such, that it will not permit them to speak when they meete vs: and thou likewise knowest, that vnder a colour and shew of fine words in their bargaines, no sect vnder the cope of heauen so readie to deceiue, as they are: in a word, they are so opposite from the example of Christ, and all holy m n of God, that there is nothing to bee found in th m, nor with∣out them, but an inward Idoll-god of their owne imagination, with an out∣ward shew of holinesse in their life and conuersati∣on. And thus thou seest the very bottome and height of these conceited ones, how ready they are to iudge oth rs, and iu∣stifie thēselues. And here louing brother, wee may learne a good lesson, that seeing that fl sh & bloud is so apt and ready to re∣ceiue and entertaine these inward Idoll-imaginati∣ons, let it bee our speciall care, to auoide and pre∣uent, wherein soeuer wee may be withdrawn from Iesus Christ; and that we may the better preuent these, and performe such duties which God requi∣reth at our hands, let vs specially be careful of this generall point, that wee neuerset our affections on this world, nor on any thing that is therein, but only in the death and pas∣sion of our Redeemer Ie∣sus Christ, wherein onely true loue consisteth. And as Saint Paul saith, to count all things but losse and drosse to be found in him, Phil. 3. 8 let him who hath bought vs at so deare a price, ne∣uer bee forgotten, let vs loue him chiefely in the first place, and in the se∣cond, l t our loue, as Saint Paul saith, appeare vnto al men, but especially vnto the true members of le∣sus Christ: then shall this Iesus, euē his bloud, clense vs from all sinne. Louing brother, when I writ these words, remembring the small number of faithfull Christians, I could not refrain to shead teares for thee. Now vp∣on the reading th reof, if it please God to grant thee his grace in such measure, that thou canst shead teares for thy sins, then shall my sorrowes be lessened, and my com∣forts greatly increased; then shalt thou be happy heere, and ten thousand times more happie in the world to come, in which world I trust to meete thee, where wee shall praise God more fully. And heere I must leaue thee for a while: for I haue something more to say to our elder brother. Farewell in Christ. Brother, comming be∣hinde thee, it was my chance to spy two motes vpon thy Cloake, and be∣cause thou couldst not see them thy selfe, I tooke occasion with a sufficient rubber to rub them off: but finding thy cloake to be of Linsey & Wolsey, then I knew that I had spent my labor in vaine: for more paines I tooke, more rough became thy garment: yet expecting some gratuitie, I followed thee into thy house, where we were no sooner entred, but presently thou wentst vp into thy chamber: & wheras I ho∣ped for something, thou stayedst so long, that my hopes were almost past: but now thou art come, what hast thou for mee? Puri. Truely, I haue nothing for thee, onely this, if that my prayers will doe thee any good, thou art welcome: For as S Iames saith; The prayer of the faithfull auaileth much, Iam. 5. 16. Pro. Brother, thou sayest well: but me think thy prayers are too long for my weake stomake: For when thou wast in thy chamber, I could haue wished thy prayers shorter. For beeing both hungry and thirstie, yet no body offered mee so much as a drinke: and to tell thee truely, I finde my weake stomacke by thy long prayer, not a whit better satisfied. Pur. What doest thou finde fault with mee for my long prayers? Pro. Brother, thou har∣pest all vpon one string: if thou couldst play vpon that other string, named charitie, as well as thou doest vpon that long string of prayer, I could better indure the length thereof. But seeing that charitie is so cold in thee, it is a question, whether thy long prayer can pre∣uaile with God, either to doe thy selfe or mee any good, being not accompa∣nied with charitie. Puri. I haue talked with thee but too long: for thou art so full of cha∣ritie, & so little respectiue vnto my prayer, that I am no more company for thee. Pro. Stay, Brother, it is not I that is so much a∣gainst thee; it is he, whose shoo-latchet, as Saint Iohn saith, wee are not wor∣thy to vnloose, Ioh. 1. 27. It is he whom thou hast opposed thy selfe against, both in thy disobedience to man, and likewise in thy rash iudgements a∣gainst both God & Man. And as I haue in loue re∣prehended thy errours in these two: so likewise I am ready by Gods assi∣stance to reproue thee in thy prayer, wherin thou deseruest. And first for the length of thy prayer. Se∣cōdly, thy behauior whē thou prayest with a touch likewise of thy behauior at the receit of the Sacra∣ment. And for this pur∣pose, our blessed Sauiour, lest his Disciples should imitate the Heathen in their idle repetitions: he giues them a prescription & forme of prayer, giuing them a special warning to direct and frame all their prayers after the manner of the prayer, Mat. 8. 9. And hereupon I gather, that all long prayers are absolutely for bidden. For seeing that al things con∣cerning both body & soul, are contained within this short compasse of these sixe petitions, I conclude that all our prayers must of necessitie, if we wil fol∣low Christs direction, be made both pythic and short. And how soeuer I am not able to reason the case with a Scholler, be∣cause I am no Scholler my selfe: yet the Spirit of God telleth me against the greatest schollers in the world, that hee is out of Christs schoole, who∣soeuer hee bee that doth reason to the contrarie; of which sort, how soeuer they may seeme to please themselues, it is a suffici∣ent argument, that such neither loue Christ, nor his prayer. And to make my reso∣lution good, I am readie to approue it by such two sufficient witnesses, that if thy eyes bee not darkened still, thou wilt confesse the same. My first proofe is Christ himselfe, who draweth a reason from Gods omni∣potencie, in these words: For your Father knoweth whereof ye haue need, before ye aske of him, Math. 6. 8. My second proofe is Sa∣lomon in these words: Bee not rash with thy mouth, nor let thy heart be hastie to vt∣ter a thing before God: for God is in the bea ens, and thou art on the earth, there∣fore let thy words bee few: Eccles. 5. 1. These two examples, who for wise∣dome was neuer any comparable, these iumpe both in one reason, being drawne from Gods om∣nipotencie. Now the que∣stion is, whether that thou wilt rest thy self still in thy owne conceit, as thou hast done, or thou wilt yeeld thy selfe vnto these 2. examples: I dare vndertake that for any prayer thou makest be∣fore thy Sermons, deuide the same into 4. parts, and as much and more may be contained in one part, as is in all the rest. Againe, for thy follow∣ers likewise: al their pray∣ers with their families in priuate, & all their pray∣ers at their meetings in publike, with their thāks before and after meate, (though these taste very Heathenish) yet rather, then eyther thou or they will direct your prayers after the Lords Prayer, or seeme to taste thereof; you are so farre from any loue, or liking therunto: that your con∣ceited noses beeing so glued vnto that Indian and most stinking weede of your owne imaginati∣ons, that ye haue vtterly refused to taste of that most sweet flowre which growes in the garden of God. If one should aske thee this question, why thou doest not knit vp thy prayer before thy Ser∣mons, with the Lords Prayer: It may truely be answered, by the words going before, that it is, be∣cause thou neither louest Christ, nor his Prayer: nd yet if it chance, that thou doe repeate the same, as seldome thou doest, all that heare thee, may ve∣ry well perceiue, that the sweetnesse thereof hath no good rellish, in thy owne conceite: for run∣ning it so fast ouer, as though thou wert count∣ing to twenty, doth argue that thou neither takest loue or liking thereunto: and therefore marke well what I say, thou, who re∣fusest the counsell of Ie∣sus Christ, and wilt not be aduised by his followers, resisting the Spirit of grace offered thee, shalt one day, without a speedy repentance, so taste and drinke of that poysoned cup of thy owne conceit, that very deseruedly, and most worthy therof, thou shalt bee excluded both from Iesus Christ, and his members for euermore. Now because that the world shall better per∣ceiue, how contrarie thy thoughts and conceited imaginations are, vnto the true meaning of the Lords Prayer, I will, ac∣cording to that little measure of knowledge, explaine the same, in as briefe a manner as I can: And first what is meant by hallowed be thy Name: that is, to desire with the inward affection of the heart, that God alone may haue all honour and glory vnto himselfe: but thou, who restest in thy own conceit, attributest honour vnto thy selfe: herein thou art a thiefe, in robbing God of his glory. Againe, Thy Kingdome come: that is, to desire with the inward affection of the heart, that God would so rule and raigne, both in our inward affe∣ctions, and outward acti∣ons, as that neither Sa∣than, nor our owne cor∣ruptions, may rule or do∣mineere against vs, desi∣ring further, that hee would hasten his com∣ming to Iudgement, be∣cau e his Name is so greatly dishonored. Now seeing that thou refusest to desire this in thy hart, which God greatly re∣quireth, or vsing to passe it ouer sometimes so slightly as thou doest: it is no maruell, that thou art inchanted by Sathan, to follow the vaine ima∣ginations of thy owne heart. Therefore thou canst not say, & say truly, Hasten thy Kingdome. Againe, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heauen: That is, to desire that our wils and affections may bee framed according to Gods will: and as the An∣gels in heauen are al∣waies ready in a heauen∣ly obedience, to do Gods wil, both readily, willing∣ly, and gladly: Euen so should we alwaies be rea∣die in obedience, where∣vnto God doth com∣mand vs, imitating the Angels, willingly, gladly, & readily. Now how far off thou art from submit∣ting thy wil and affection vnto Gods will, doth ap∣peare in thy disobedience against Principalities and Powers. And againe, how sarre thou art off from the example of the bles∣sed Angels, appeareth by the fruits both of thy life and doctrine, so that thy will and affections are so contrarie vnto Gods will, that they are only linked vnto the imagination of thy owne heart. Againe, Giue vs this day our daily bread: that is, to desire all things conueni∣ent, both for body and soule. Heerein thou hast made thy selfe vnworthy to partake of the least of Gods benefits, yet al∣though the wicked flou∣rish for a time, and that the dearest of Gods chil∣dren many times doe want these outward bles∣sings, yet it pleaseth God so to enrich them with his inward graces, that outward wāts neuer trou∣ble their mindes at all. Now thou, who art so disobedient both vnto God and man, being but an intruder in thy cal∣ling, hast tyed thy selfe in a double bond, as vn∣worthy to partake of these outward blessings, and resting thy selfe in thine own imaginations, thou hast depriued thy self of the inward graces. And forgiue vs our tres∣passes, as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs. Whereas wee desire here to haue our offences forgiuen vs with a condi∣tion: who knoweth not that all those, who are ac∣companied with a patient Spirit of adoption, that they are so farre off from the least shaddow of re∣uenge, that they are al∣waies readie, and willing to forgiue their vtter ene∣mies? But how contrarie. minded thou art herein, I might appeale vnto thy owne conscience, if thou haddest any: but seeing thou hast none, the world may iudge what spirit thou art of, as appeareth before, concerning a Let∣ter written vnto one of the chiefe of thy sect. For which how greatly I was troubled, and likewise what it cost my purse, I omit to set downe, be∣cause I expect no better requitall at any of your hands, vntill such time, as the wisest in your own conceit can prooue, that grapes may growe vpon thornes, and figgs vpon thistles. Againe, And leade vs not into temptation, but de∣liuer vs from all euill. Here wee desire that God would not suffer Satan and our naturall corrup∣tions, to tempt vs aboue our strength: and because out greatest strength is too weake to resist, wee desire in the second place so to assist vs, that by his speciall power he would deliuer vs from all euill. Now whereas thou hast refused to pray vnto God in Christ, in this most perfect prayer, it is no maruaile that God in his iust iudgement hath giuen thee ouer vn∣to Satan, and thy owne corruptions, letting thee swimme in that sinfull sea of thy owne imaginati∣ons. And thus may the world see how contrarie thou art to Iesus Christ, and his prayer, refusing the God of light, beta∣king thy selfe to an Idol god of darknesse. Our blessed Sauiour Christ saith, And when thou prayest, be not like the Hypocrite, for they loue to stand and pray in the Syna∣gogues, Matth. 6. 5. and Saint Paul saith, praving for the Ephesians, I bow my knees vnto the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, Eph. 3. 14. Now, as thou hast shewed thy selfe a con∣tradicted spirit against both God and good men: so now especially, lest the world should not take more full notice of thy folly, thou hast got∣ten thy selfe into the ve∣rie height of shame: and as thy deformed conditi∣ons of disobedience haue burst out of thy in ward parts: so now at last thou shewest likewise what a deformed creature thou art, in thy outward parts; for, whē other are at their praiers, vpon their knees, thou and thy followers stand vp like May-poles amongst vs, as though ye had no knees at all. Now, how true this is, it cannot bee denied, for both thy selfe, and infinit multitudes of thy fol∣lowers, in all places of this Land, doe manifest the same. And as this is true in thy publike pray∣ers in the Church where specially it is forbidden: so likewise at the recei∣uing of the Sacrament: & although Iesus Christ be as truly there, by the eie of faith, after a spiritu∣all manner, as though we did beholde him, and touch him as Saint Tho∣mas did: yet thou, who neither fearest God, nor reuerencest man, as thou hast shewed thy selfe a deformed fellow from the beginning, doest not blush to stand, in recei∣uing this holy Sacra∣ment, when others are vpon their knees. Now if the Officers of the Church come to reproue these thy followers, be∣cause they are an offence vnto their brethren, then must their vsurping guide say, Sirra, let them alone: and thus are almost al the places of this Land abu∣sed with this disobedi∣ent Sect; and that this is true, wofull experience doth manifest the same. If I should aske thee this question, why thou wilt not pray kneeling? thou wilt answer me, It is not because thou thin∣kest it vnlawfull: but thy reason is, that thou canst pray with as good a de∣uotion standing, as I can doe kneeling. I doe not deny, but that one may pray standing, going, ri∣ding, sitting, or lying. But whereas our Sauiour Christ cōmands, that we should not stand praying in the Synagogues or Churches: Why wilt thou, hauing conuenient roome, not yeelde thy selfe vnto Christs com∣mand? I did once make answere for thee before, and because thou hast no good reason for thy selfe, I will second an answere for thee once againe. Because thou wouldest make the world beleeue, that thou art better then thy neighbours in shew of thy outward actions, therefore thou hast sepa∣rated thy selfe from o∣thers, and rather then the world should not take no∣tice, that thou art singular (as Salomon saith of such) in thy owne eyes still, Prou. 16. 2. Thou now standest streight vp, when others are kneeling, that all men may now behold, that thou art but a plaine Hy∣pocrite. Againe, for thy beha∣uiour both at thy first sit∣ting down in the Church, and likewise at thy ap∣pearance in the Pulpit, thou art so far frō submit∣ting thy selfe vnto God, that without either pri∣uate prayer, or seeming to sing with vs; there thou standest looking a∣bout th e, as though thou wert come from that Indian Countrie, whose prai rs thou imi∣tat st. Now seeing thou doest but intrude thy self, prefuming too bold∣ly into that place of san∣ctitìe, if thou wilt neither pray nor sing with vs, co∣uer thy face, or come there no more, and be∣waile these sinfull times wherein we liue, as being the principall instrument for Satan thereof, and be sure of this one thing, that ifthou dost not feele a touch for thy sinnes, vpon the sight heereof, thou maiest perswade thy selfe, that thou art in a most fearefull and la∣mentable case: and be ad∣uised how thou presumest into that holy place any more: for assure thy sel e, that Christ, whom thou hast so grieuously of∣fended in his members, will one day, and that ve∣rie shortly, without pre∣sent repentance, require their blood at thy hands, and will auenge their cause in that place, where all Hypocrites shall haue their portion, which bur∣neth with fire and brim∣stone for euer. One thing more I re∣member, which I would not willingly haue omit∣ted: how that a reformed Minister submitting him∣selfe at his approch into the Pulpit, as his maner is, one of thy chiefest fol∣lowers, being a Ring-lea∣der of this crue, most shamefully burst forth in∣to a scornefull laughter, This is one of thy brood, that being hatcht vnder such a Cockatrice, no bet∣ter fruit can come therof. Now, seeing that all thy outward actions are but flourisht like painted sepulchres, and that from all thy actions both in∣ward and outward, no∣thing doth proceede but enuy and strife, pride, and vaine-glory, hatred and malice, and most cruel re∣uenge: why dost thou not begin to tremble & quake for feare, seeing that the axe is alreadie laid to the roote of the tree, and that e∣uery tree which bringeth not soorth good fruite, must be hewne downe, and cast in∣to the fire, Mat. 7. 19? Our blessed Sauiour saith, Hee that is not with me, is against me, Ma. 12. 30 Now who is he that seeth not, how that thou opposest thy selfe against Christ; and therefore as Saint Iohn saith, an Anti∣christ, of whom it is said, That there are many gone out into the world, whereby wee know, that it is the last time, I. Iohn 2. 18. Againe, who knoweth not, that thou art a starre fallen from heauen, who by thy accusing iudge∣ments, in condemning both the quicke and the dead, seeming to pull that peculiar rod foorth of Gods owne hands, who therewith hauing con∣demned the members of Iesus Christ, maketh the very powers of heauen to shake, Mat. 24. 29? And againe, who seeth not, that by the frui s of thy life & doctrine, thou hast caused the Sunne to be darkened, and the Moone to lose her light, the Mini∣stery of the Gospell to be bee e ill spoken of, and loue and charitie to bee smo∣thered? And who is hee that doth but looke a∣bout▪ and seeth not how that thou with the Pope of Rome, are those two speciall false prophets which goe in sheepes clothing, but inwardly are rauening wolues, Mat. 7. 15. Whose qualities and conditions, Saint Paul hath plainely described in the 2. Epistle of Timothy, and 3. Chap∣ter; from the first verse vnto the 9. verse: of whom our Sauiour Christ hath Matth. 7. 10 taught vs, that, by these fruites we know thee. And thus the whole World may plainly see, how thou hast separated thy selfe from the body of the Church; and therefore hast brought thy selfe in∣to a most fearefull and la∣mentable case: and yet to aduise thee to turne vnto repentance, I feare me it is in vaine, because Salo∣mon faith, There is more hope in a foole, then of him that is conceited, Pr. 26. 12. And therefore it matters not to tell thee, how thou hast offended God, in de∣nying obedience vnto su∣preme power, contrary to the Word of God, Mat. 22. 21. Rom. 13. 1. 2. Peter 2. 10. Titus. 3. 1. Iude 8. vers. It matters not to tell thee how thou hast offen∣ded God in thy accusing and condemning iudge∣ments, Mat. 7. 1. Luk. 6. 37 contrary to the Word of God, Ro. 2. 1. Rom. 14 10. 1. Cor. 4. 3. It matters not to tell thee, how contrary thou art to Christ in making al thy prayers, and likevvise how wilfully thou refu∣sest the Lords prayer, Matth. 6. 7. Mat. 6. 9. It matters not to tell thee, how contrary thou art to Christs command, in receiuing the Sacra∣ment, and likewise to pray in the Church stan∣ding, Mat. 6. 5. Ephes. 3. 14. It matters not to tell thee, how that with Esau, thou deadly hatest vs, Genes. 27. 41. And likewise to tell thee, how that like Esau, thou hast sold thy birth∣right for meere vanitie, Genes. 25. 34 It matters not to tell thee, how thou hast sepa∣rated thy selfe from vs, 1. Iohn 2. 19. Iude, vers. 19. It matters not to tell thee, how thou art be∣come a false prophet, in iudging the young man in the Gospel, Mar. 10. 17 It matters not to tell thee, that thou art be∣come a false Christ, and a false prophet, in oppo∣sing thy self, both against Christ and his Word, Mat. 24. 24. Mark. 13. 22. 1. Iohn 2. 18. 1. Peter 2. 1. Iude, vers. 4. Reuel. 22. 19. It matters not to tell thee, how contrary thou art to the Word of God in auenging thy self, Mat. 5. 39. Luke 6. 29. Ro. 12. 19. 1. Cor. 6. 7. For thou wilt not on∣ly denie, wherein I haue in euery particular iustly charged thee: but thou wilt with Pilate, take wa∣ter, and wash thy hands, and pleade innocency vn∣to the whole world, and yet this plea will no more preuaile with thee, then it did with him. For as he pronounced sentence of iudgement against Iesus Christ, the head of the Church, deliuering him vp vnto the hie Priest to be crucified: so hast thou brought his members vn∣to the barre of Gods iu∣stice, & hauing pronoun∣ced sentence of iudge∣ment already against them, it sheweth how willing thou art to offer vs vnto that high Priest, the Pope of Rome, to murder vs: and here may the whole world per∣ceiue Iesus Christ in his members, hanging be∣ wixt two theeues. And now at last, who is he that liueth in these daies, and doth not lament to be∣hold, how that Religion, euen in those which doe professe Christ, is now become nothing else but a plaine cloke, or a couer for sinne? for is it not too manifest, that some one of the chiefest of thy sect, meeting a Countriman in his trauell by meere chance, took occasion for some by-respect, to haue some conference with him: but his name being demanded, hee did not only peremptorily deny himselfe, but likewise al∣tered his name, in so∣much that some other countrimen, being of good note and fashion, who know him better, then he knowes himselfe, being sorrie to heare a man of his coate, & their Countriman so shame∣fully to denie himself, de∣māded further where he dwelt? but his answer be∣ing friuolous as before, said, Euery where, where our King hath any land. Now if this, to deny a mans owne selfe, and his country, and to alter his name, bee not such equi∣uocation, as all of your sect do hold damnable in a Papist, I referre my selfe vnto your owne iudge∣ments in your seuerall doctrines. Nay, I would know what sinne there is which the chiefest of thy sect will not commit, if so be that hee can but get so much as one figge tree leafe to couer his shame. I will not say, how wor∣thily any of thy sect doe deserue that woe, the which the Prophet Mi∣cah saith they shall haue; Who by violence do keep and maintaine the inheritance from the right owners ther∣of. I rather wish from the bottom of my heart as a friend, that if any such be guiltie in this kinde, that not onely present restitu∣tion bee made, but like∣wise to get them forth of that place, who so vncon∣scionably remaine there∣in. For assure himselfe, whatsoeuer he bee, and howsoeuer by quillits and trickes, great boastes may be made thereof; yet certainely, without all doubt, at that tribunall seat of Christ, such vncer∣tainties shall beare no plea at all: for better things, then these shall be of that hye court of conscience; and therefore let mee aduise thee, whosoeuer thou art, to make thy selfe such friends heere, as Iesus Christ may become thy friend elsewhere: for ac∣cording to our blessed Sauiours sp eches, With Mark. 4. 24. what measure soeuer wee measure heere, the like shall bee measured to vs againe. Doth any man truly mea∣sure a thing but by a line, except it bee such which stand in their owne con∣ceit, as most of thy Sect doe? Saint Paul saith, in the person of all Gods children, that we ot number or compare our selues, with such who praise themselues, 2. Cor. 10. 12. For (saith hee) to praise a mans owne selfe, the chil∣dren of God, not going with∣out the line of Gods Word, reioyce in no such things. 2. Cor. 10. 13. Therefore seeing that most of thy Sect are so ready to boast and compare your selues before others, it may bee required, and very neces∣sarie for thee to shew, what Townes or Coun∣tries ye haue wonne vn∣to the Lord. But for thy answere herein, it is need∣lesse. For being too appa∣rant, that such Trees can∣not possibly bring forth any good fruit, what can it preuaile thee to haue an Angels tongue, and a Deuils heart? thou art no better then a post in the crosse-way, that rots it selfe to direct others. To speake well, and doeill, is to build vp heauen with the voice, and hell with the conuersation: and therefore seeing that thy words and thy deeds doe not agree together, I may truely compare thee vn∣to such a Souldier, which at the table could make fine talke of warres: who when hee came into the field to fight, was neither valiant nor expert: and therefore seeing that all thy actions both inward and outward, being not guided by the line of Gods Word, but by thy own conceit: no maruell that they proue, as Saint Iude saith, but spots in your feasts of charitie, which be∣ing without all feare, feede but your selues, being clouds without water, carried about with windes, corrupt trees without fruit, twice dead and plucked vp by the roo s, Iude 12. verse. Euen of whom Saint Paul saith, For these things whose mindes & cogitations being vnsanctified, the wrath of God is fallen vpon you, be∣ing the children of disobedi∣ence, Col. 3. 6. And there∣fore to giue thee a Title of an English Pharise, or but an imitator of Reli∣gion, all such which true∣ly perceiue any thing, may plainely see, that I haue done thee no wrōg at al. And now at last, be∣cause thou art conceited in thy selfe; Of such Sa∣lomon saith, there is no hope, hauing ioyned thy selfe with the Pope of Rome, in your false ima∣ginations, wherein yee thinke that yee doe God good seruice: I must of necessitie, seeing that the god of this world hath thus darkened your vn∣derstandings, leaue you at your study of vanities, to ponder vpon these places of Scripture vnder-writ∣ten. Iude 12. verse latter end. 2. Pet. 17. latter end. Rom. 13. 2. latter end, Luk. 13. 27. latter end. Mat. 7. 2. Rom. 2. 1. 1. Cor. 4. 5. For I must turne my selfe vnto such, of whom as Saint Paul saith, I per∣swade my self better things, Heb. 6. 9 And who haue not thus learned Christ, Ephes. 4. 20. which beeing taught by him, walke as the truth is in Iesus, Ephes. 4. 21. being renewed in the Spirit of their mindes, Ephes. 4. 23. walke so as they haue Ie∣sus Christ for an exam∣ple, who hauing put off that old man of sinne, are now become so sanctifi∣ed in their liues and con∣uersations, that beeing clothed with that glori∣ous garment and robes of righteousnes, do walk worthy of their calling in true holinesse of life. And now, faithfull Bre∣thren in Christ, of whom I wish as to my owne soule, seeing that this our elder brother doth so rest himselfe in this word, on∣ly in Christ, that neglect∣ing such duties required at his hands, runnes into all manner of sinne: Let it be your speciall care, and such a warning vnto you, that you neuer cherish or har bour any one sinne at all, and that not any one sinne may seeme pleasing in your eyes: striue and endeuour against all sin. For without holinesse no man shall see the Lord. And againe, seeing that Christ doth command vs, not onely to beleeue in him: but to loue one another, 1. Ioh. 3. 23. Let it not be, as Saint Iohn saith, in word and in tongue onely, but in deede and in truth, 1. Iohn 3. 18. For hee that hath this worlds goods, and seeth his brother haue need, and shut∣teth vp his compassion from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him, 1. Ioh. 3. 17. Therefore I humbly in∣treat you, in the bowels and compassion of Iesus Christ, as you tender your owne soules, that ye walk worthy of your vocation whereunto ye are called, with all humblenesse of minde, in meekenes, with long suffering, suppor∣ting one another through loue, alwaies endeuoring to keepe the vnitie of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, hauing your lamps, with those fiue wise Vir∣gins, so furnished with the oyle of Gods graces, that our blessed Sauiour, at his generall appea∣rance, may haue iust cause to say: Come yee blessed of my Father, possesse the Kingdome prepared for you, before the founda∣tions of the world, Mat. 25. 34. For when I was an hun∣gred, ye gaue mee meate; I thirsted, and yee gaue mee drinke; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I was naked, and yee clothed mee; I was sicke, and yee visited mee; I was in prison, and yee came vnto mee, Mat. 25. 35, 36. Now enter into your masters ioy, vnto the so∣ciety of that blessed com∣pany of Angels, & Arch∣angels, and all holy men and women, and chil∣dren departed, there to remaine in euerlast∣ing comforts, for euer∣more. And here, my faithfull Brethren, I trust in Christ Iesus, that we shall meete there very shortly, to sing with that holy company, euerlasting praise to the whole Trinitie, to God the Father, who hath created vs, to God the Sonne, who hath re∣deemed vs, and to God the holy Ghost our com∣forter, who hath, & doth sanctifie vs, to whom bee endlesse praise for euer and euer. And now at last, that this glorious Kingdome may bee in∣creased, let mee intreat you once againe to ioine with me in our continu∣all prayers, in often re∣membrance vnto this ho∣ly Trinitie, that this little number, which being the signe of the Son of man, may be so aduanced now hard before hiscomming, that these thicke cloudes of iniquitie being disper∣sed, it may appeare more cleare vnto the view of the whole world. And that this may be the better and sooner ef∣fected, I most humbly de∣sire the Lord of Hosts, from the very bottom of my heart, with heartie teares of humilitie, vpon my bended knees, that it would please him of his infinite mercy, so to grace our most gracious and re∣uerend Bishops of this Land, that they all in ge∣nerall, both in word and deede, may bee so rea∣die to stop the passage of these mystie cloudes of darknesse, that the Gos∣pell of Iesus Christ being the true light, may shew it selfe like the bright morning Starre, now at his last cōming to iudge∣ment. And againe, grant, deare Father, for thy ho∣nour and blessed names sake, vnto our most graci∣ous and reuerend Bishops of this Land, with all re∣formed Ministers of the same, such a powerfull spirit of humilitie, that they being able to beate downe these transcen∣dēt spirits of iniquity, thy glorie shining more cleer∣ly, the power of sinne and Satan may bee darkened speedily, and that these most sinfull times may haue a speedie ende, I humbly desire with thy seruant Iohn in the Reue∣lation; Come Lord, come Lord Iesus, come quickly. Amen. To the Puritane. THy disobedience it doth reach in height aboue the skies: Thy hie conceit doth please thee well, and therein thou art wise. Disdaine within thy heart doth dwel, fraught with reuenge an dire: Thy words burst out in iudgements as hot as any fire. (deepe, With singular eie thou do'st espy: great beames in others sight, And therin do'st thy self much boast, with rayling words of might. Leaue off for shame, thou hast disgrast thy selfe in open view: The Scripture doth reueale thee plain, and therefore is most true. Thy prayers long doe please thee wel, against the Word of Christ: In him thou wilt not rest alone, by Satan thou art tiste. Thou wilt stand vp in thy conceite, in begging for thy neede: Without remēbrance where thou art, in full hope for to speede. But hee that doth behold thy face, whose face thou do'st not feare, Will send thee away to thy disgrace, where want shall be thy cheare. Where t ou must stay, and then sub∣thy selfe in thra'l to dwell: (mit Where nothing is, but fearefullcries, in that deepe pit of hell. Thus hauing climde in thy conceite, in height aboue thy reach: And with misconstring of the same, the Scriptures for to search, Thy height of pride hath brought thee for want of penitent speed: (low, Wherein thou hast thy selfe disgrast, thy humours for to feede. To all. A word, or two, in generall, to whom these verses heere. Doe not forget, but keepe in minde, alwaies God to feare: Let not cōceit withdraw your minds, from that pure Word of God: For if ye doe, ye shall sure taste of his most heauie rodde. To all true Christians. And now at last, a word or two, vnto my brethren deare, Who honour God, and loue his Word, his holy name to feare. Goe on with speed and courage great, your time it is but short, And shew your selues in loue and each others to exhort. (peace, Then he that bought vs deare, will and meet vs in the cloudes, (come, With Angels bright, full cleare in to call vs forth of mouldes. (sight, Then will Christ say, Come blessed and stay on my right hand; (mine, Yee lou'd me well, ye sed the poore, and here now ye shall stand. Where wee shall raigne for euermore, his glorie for to see, Who hath redeem'd vs from our sins, and now hath set vs free: To him be praise: let vs giue thankes, in honour of his name: Then happy we, but cursed he, that doth refuse the same. A Prayer before meate. MOst louing Father, grant vs, wee humbly beseech thee, such patient spirits of humilitie, that our bodies and soules beeing truely sanctified and fed by thy heauenly graces, may be so freed, f om that erroneous spirit of dis∣obedience, and false accusations, that liuing heere in thy feare, wee may hereafter depart in thy fauor, and that for thy Sonne Christ Iesus sake. Amen. A Thanks-giuing after meate. MOst mercifull Father, wee yeeld thee hartie thanks, for feeding our mortall bodies, with these thy good creatures: Lord, continue thy blessings vnto vs still, and so free our hearts from that high conceite of vaine glorie, that our bodies and soules being continually sanctified by thy powerfull spirit of humilitie, may still liue in thy fauour, and heere∣after depart in thy fauour, for thy blessed names sake. Amen. LOrd protect our most graci∣ous King and Queene, and that hopefull progenie, from the cruell rage of Satan, and all his wicked instruments, and grant, wee most humbly beseech thee, that his Highnes, and his, conti∣nuing in a godly feare, may liue to praise thy most holy name, vn∣till the comming againe of Iesus Christ, and that for his owne names sake, Amen. To know a Puritane from a true Christian. IF any desire to know, what a Puritane is, looke in the se∣cond Epistle of Saint Paul to Timo∣thie, the third Chapter, from the first verse vnto the ninth verse, and there yee may plainly per∣ceiue the qualities and conditions both of him and the Pope of Rome, with all others of those An∣tichrists, the which haue banded themselues against the Lord and his Anointed: and although that they haue gotten themselues painted names: yet Saint Paul tels vs, and wee must beleeue him, That they are mad men out of their wits, whose madnesse (saith hee) is now euident vnto all men, 9. verse. Heere may the whole world perceiue all such, which haue and doe persecute Christ Iesus in his members; especially, those two monstrous heads, the which doe so cunningly labour in sheepes clothing, the Pope and the Puritane. Now, if any desire to see Iesus Christ in his members, which is the true Church of God, looke from the ninth verse, vnto the end of the Chapter, and there ye may behold the true signe of the Sonne of Man, where ye may perceiue, all the elect faces of Gods children in that spirituall glasse of immortalitie: especially, his Euangelicall face, of whom it may truely be said, That he hath knowne the Scriptures of a child, I meane, our most gracious King, whom the Lord of his in∣finite mercy for his honour, and the good of his Church, doth by his vnsearchable prouidence, now protect amongst vs; therfore most blessed hee, and his, who shall dwell in euerlasting peace, and ne∣uer die. Farewell vnto the whole world. FINIS.