



AN EXPLICATION OF THE MORALL LAW. The first Booke, containing sundrie Questions for the understanding of the first Table of the Morall Law.

EXERCITAT. I. Of the excellencie of the Morall Law, above other Lawes.

Iam. 2.8. If ye fulfill the royall Law yet doe well.

THe Morall Law hath not beene unfitly compared to the Eclipticke line; for as the Sunne keepeth still his course in the Eclipticke line; and other planets,Simile, some of them are now in this side of the line, and now in that side of the line; and when they come within the Eclipticke line, then they come nearer to the Sunne. So man, when hee walketh in holinesse and righteousnesse, then hee is within his Eclipticke line; but when hee walketh in sinne and
 unrighteousnesse, then hee is without his line. Iob. 23.17. His wayes have I kept and have not declined from them.
A comparison betwixt the Law Morall and Iudiciall.To shew the excellencie of the Morall Law, above all other Lawes; let us compare, first, Gods Morall Law, with his judiciall Law which hee gave also himselfe. Gods morall Law exceedeth his judiciall Law in this, that his judiciall Law obliged the Iewes, and that onely in Iudea.The Iudiciall law did binde the Iewes onely in Iudea. As other positive Lawes binde, not men out of their owne Countrie; so the judiciall Law of Moses, obliged not the Iewes; but onely in Iudea. Example, no Levite might have a possession in Iudea particularly by himselfe; yet their Law did not binde the Iewes out of Iudea;The Morall Law bindeth all persons in all places. for a Levite of Cyprus sold his possession, and laid the mony downe at the Apostles feete. Act. 4.36. but Gods morall Law bindeth all persons, in all places an therefore it is called the royall Law, or the Kings Law, Iames, 2.8. For that which the King commandeth to be common, is common to all; as the Kings high way, Num. 21.2. So the Kings weight. 2. Sam. 14.26. He weighed the haire of his head at two hundred sicles after the Kings weight; That is, the weight wherewith all men weighed. So the Kings Law, that is, the Law which all are bound to walke in. Contrary to this, is pervertere vias domini, to pervert the wayes of the Lord. Act. 10.13. It was a great blindenesse then of those, who said Act. 16.21. that Paul and Silas taught customes which were not lawfull for them to receive, neither to observe being Romans. But Gods morall Law bindeth all people a like.
The Morall law bindeth the inner man, but the Iudiciall Law bindeth him not.Secondly, the morall Law bindeth the inner man, but the judiciall Law of Moses obliged not the inner man. Example, Tooth for tooth, and eye for eye, Deut. 16.21. When one had paid tooth for tooth, or eye for eye, hee had satisfied the judiciall Law; for that Law required no more of him. but the morall Law required
 more of him, that hee should bee free of the rancour of his heart.
Thirdly, The iudiciall Law was fitted for them, as they were a people of a hard heart; as the law of divorce,The Iudiciall Law for the estate of the Iewes. of Ielousie, and of the revenger of the blood; which were Lawes made according to the hardnesse of the hearts of that people; and as the shoomaker maketh a shooe according to the crooked foote: so the Lord made these iudiciall Lawes, and fitted them to the estate of that people. Solon being asked, whether he had given the best Lawes to the Athenians or not? Answered: the best that they could suffer. So the Lord fitted these Lawes to the nature of that people: but the morall Law of God, is not fitted that way to the estate of men; but all men must fit themselves to it.
Fourthly, some of the Iudiciall Lawes exempted some men, from performing some duties;The Iudiciall Law exempted some men from some duties, but the morall Law bindeth all alike. as Deut. 24, 5. A mad should not goe to the warres, nor bee charged with any businesse, the first yeare that hee is married. But the morall Law prescribeth alike obedience to all, Ioel. 2, 16. Let the bridegroome goe forth of his chamber and the bride out of her closet.
Secondly, let us compare Gods morall Law,A comparison betwixt the morall Law and the ceremoniall. and his ceremoniall Law together. Some of the ceremoniall Lawes obliged all the Iewes in all places: therefore Daniel in Babylon might not eate of any of the uncleane meates of the King of Babel, Dan. 1, 8. Some of the ceremonies obliged but some of the Iewes in all places;Ceremonies which had relati n to the Temple, were not kept in the Wildernesse, or in the captivity. as no Nazaret might drinke wine. And thirdly some of the ceremonies, obliged all the Iewes at sometimes; as no Iew might eat leaven at the Pascha. But the morall Law obliged all people, at all times, and in all places. These ceremonies which had relation to the Temple, they kept them neither in the wildernesse, nor in the captivitie: as they paid nothing to the Priests who served
 in the Temple. But the morall Law did bind them, both in the wildernesse and in the captivitie; and therefore he who brake the Sabbath in the wildernesse, was stoned to death, Levit. 24.
Againe, the ceremoniall Law was accommodated and fitted to them, as they were infants in the Church; and it was fitted to their capacity and non-age: but the morall Law bindeth all estates and conditions of men alike.
The ceremoniall Law shew what was sinne ex accidente indirectly, but the morall per se and directly.Thirdly, the ceremoniall Law, made them understand sinne, ex accidente; for it was appointed in expiationem peccati, for the expiation of sinne: as the judiciall Law was appointed in paenam peccati, for the punishment of sinne. But the morall Law shewed them directly what was sinne.
Fourthly, these ceremoniall Lawes are called, praecepta non bona, Ezekiel. 20.25. I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judgements whereby they shall not live.
Pracepta
malanon bonabona.There are three sorts of precepts. First mala, as the statutes of Omri. Micah. 6.16. Secondly, non bona, as the ceremoniall Law. Thirdly bona, as the morall Law. The Lord calleth these ceremoniall precepts, non bona: because they could bring nothing to perfection, Heb. 10.1. And he that kept them could not live by them; they were given but as hedges to keepe in the people,The ceremoniall statutes were called, not good, because they brought nothing to perfection. after they set up the Golden Calfe, that they should not commit Idolatrie any more: and they were but shadowes to them, of good things to come, Heb. 10.1. They commanded neither vertue nor vice in themselves; therefore he calleth them praecepta non bona. But the morall Precepts are just and holy, and the man that doth them, shall live in them, Gal. 3.12.
A comparison betwixt the morall Law, and the Lawes of men.Thirdly, let us compare Gods morall Law and the Lawes of men, they say that ratio legis est anima legis, the wisdome of God was anima huius legis, and as farre as the wisedome of God, differed from the wisedome of man; so farre differeth the Law of God, from the civill Lawes of men.
Secondly, the civill Law saith,The morall Law of God forbiddeth the motions of the heart without consent, but the Law of man doth not so. de minutis non curat lex, that is, the Law looketh not to every small transgression. But Gods morall Law, observeth and condemneth, both the great and the least sinnes; it forbiddeth Gnats, as well as Camels, Mat. 23. The Nazaret was forbidden as well to eat the kernell of the Raisin, as to eate the huske, or drinke the Wine. Num. 6.4. So the Lord forbiddeth in his Law, as well the first motions of the heart without consent, as he doth the act it selfe; but mans Law looketh not to these:Simile. and as the Sunne when it shineth brightly, sheweth us atomes, the very little motes, which are the least things we can perceive: so the bright Law of God, sheweth us these first motions of the heart to be sinne, which the naturall man would thinke to be as small as the motes in the Sunne.
Thirdly, the civill Law saith, Cogitationis paenam in nostro for^ nemo luat; but the morall Law first taketh order with the cogitations of the heart, then it commeth to the countenance, Why is thy countenance fallen, Gen. 4.6. then to the gnashing of teeth, Act. 7.54. (...),(...). they gnashed with their teeth, as if they had beene cutting with a Saw: then to the foaming of the mouth; therefore the Hebrwes marke, that Ceseph signifieth both foaming at the mouth, and anger, Esth. 1.18.(...)
iraspuma. These the Greekes call (...), Who are angry till they foame at the mouth againe. So the morall Law taketh order with the angrie words as to call our brother Raca or foole: then see how the morall Law pursueth the act it selfe; as first, the Pharisees revenge, tooth for tooth and eye for eye: then Cains revenge, seaven for one. Then Lamanes revenge, seventy for one, Gen. 24. Then Hamans
 revenge,The morall Law forbiddeth all sort of unlawfull revenge, or to remember an injury. to have all the Iewes killed; and as the morall Law taketh order with the fact it selfe: so with the dregs after the injurie is pardoned. Thou shalt not avenge nor remember Levit. 19, 18. A man is strucken with a dagger, when he throweth away the dagger then he pardoneth the revenge; but yet if he keepe still the sheath, the dregge remaineth; and he remembereth the wrong done to him.
The Civill Law doth not respect vertues in themselves, but as they concerne the Commonwealth.Fourthly, the civill Law, Whatsoever it commandeth concerning vertues, it commandeth it onely in respect of humane society, and as they are acts of justice; so that if it prescribe any thing of morall vertues, as of temperance and sobriety; it respecteth them no other wayes,Arist. lib. 5. Ethic. cap. 1 but as they are good for the commonwealth; but not as they are directly vertues in themselves. Example, When it comandeth temperance, it commandeth it not as a vertue necessarie for this or that particular man, but because this intemperance doth hurt the commonwealth. So when it forbiddeth Adultery, it forbiddeth not, as a sinne hurtfull to the man, who committeth it; but as a sinne contrarie to an act of justice: but the Law of God commandeth these vertues, as vertues directly; both intellectunall and moral.
Fiftly, mans Law permitteth many things, which the Law of God altogether disaloweth; mans Law permitted the Husband, if he tooke his wife in the act of Adultery to kill her; as the Athenians made a Law of it; and Draco and Solon approved it. The Law of the twelue tables saith Moechum in adulteri^ deprehensum necato:Plutarchus in vita solomis, and lex 12 tabul. but this Law was moderated lege Iulia, it was onely permitted for the husband to kill the Adulterer, if hee had beene a vile and a base fellow; and afterward, it was permitted to the Father onely, to kill his Daughter if she were taken in adultery; but not to her Husband: yet these were never allowed by the Law of God, and although
 before men those were not punished, yet they were guilty before the Lord.
Fourthly,A comparison betwixt the morall Law, and Law of a mans conscience. let us compare the morall Law with the Law of mans conscience, and wee shall see how perfect the morall Law is. We are obliged to follow our conscience if it be rightly informed, because it is the Deputy of the Lord: if it be an erroneous conscience, we are bound to doe nothing against it; because it is the Lords Deputie we should thus farre respect it, although we follow it not. A Tyrant because he is Gods Deputie, his subjects may not rise against him; yet they must not obey his unlawfull Commandements: but wee are still bound to follow the Law of God.
Lastly,A comparison betwixt the Law of God and the Law of sinne. let us compare the morall Law and the Law of sinne together. Paul Rom. 7, 21. calleth sin a Law, because it commandeth a man, even as the Law doth. Gods Law is a streight Law, the streightest Line in the Mathematickes, is the shortest Line, and if we would goe the straight way to happinesse, let us keepe this Law of God; but enter not in the way of sinne; for it is a crooked Line, and it will bee long ere we come to our journeyes end, if we walke out of this plaine way: the Law of sinne is easie in the beginning and narrow in the end; but the Law of God is contrarie: the Law of sinne is lato-angusta, but the Law of God is angusto-lata.
The conclusion of this is. From the generalitie of the  Law that all men are bound to walke in it, therefore all men shall be judged by it; but with this difference, the Heathen and Pagans shall be judged, onely by it, as it is the Law of nature. The Iewes shal be judged by it, as it is the Law of Moses; by whom the Lord wrot these great things of his Law, Hos. 8, 12. There is one that accuseth you, even Moses in whom ye trust, Ioh. 5, 45. Thirdly, Christians shal be judged by the evangelicall law. Rom. 2, 16. God shal judge the secrets of men, by Iesus Christ, according to my Gospel.

 Secondly, from the brightnesse and puritie of the Law; let us learne to walke as the Children of light: for the bright Law is set up to discover sinne to us, that we may shunne it. A man that hath a neate and a cleane house; he hath a looking glasse set up in it, that men may decerne the spots in their faces, to the end, they may doe them away; the Law of the Lord is that glasse set up in his Church that it may shew us our spots, and that we may doe them away. But if any man be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his naturall face in a glasse; for he beholdeth himselfe and goeth away, and streight way forgeteth what manner of man hee was, Iam. 1.23. So it is, if we forget our spirituall face when we looke in the Law.
From this that the Law is spirituall and searcheth the  secrets of the heart, the conclusion is. That mens Lawes bind not the conscience directly, Aquinas sayeth out of Seneca; Servitus in totum hominem cujuscunque, sortis per omnia non descendit: but we may convert this speech, Servitus in totum hominem cujuscunque sortis per omnia descendit: no Law of man can bind the conscience of any, no not of the poorest Slave that is, Slaves in the Revelation are called,(...). bodies, Rev. 18.13. She sold bodies, that is, slaves; why are slaves called (...) bodies? because as Epiphanius observeth, their Masters commandements reach onely to their bodies; therefore the Apostle calleth them, their Masters according to the flesh.(...) Vaginae, ^haldaice corpus Eph. 6.5. the body is but nedena the sheath of the soule. Dan. 7.15. I Daniel was greived in my spirit in the midst of my Sheath. But the moral law of God bindeth both soule and bodie: and this is that which Iames saith, there is one Lawgiver who can both save and destroy. Iam. 4.12. meaning God who can destroy both soule ^nd body.
 From the excellencie and perfection of the morall Law, we may draw this conclusion. That no man should
 speake evill of his brother Iam. 4.17. for then he judgeth the Law, because the Law forbidderh a man to speake evill of his brother, and as the stroakes which are given upon the left side, are felt upon the right: so when wee speake evill of our brother, wee wrong the Law in not submitting our selves to it; and Iudge that, which should be our Iudge; and then wee wrong God himselfe who gave this Law, and we say as the house of Israel said, the way of the Lord is not equall. Ezek. 18.25.


EXERCITAT. II. The manner how the Lord gave the Law.

Exod. 19.16. And it came to passe, one the third day in the morning that there were thundrings and lightnings and a thicke Cloud upon the mount, etc.

FIrst consider, where the Lord gave this Law? upon Mount Sinai, and in the Tabernacle. Secondly, how he gave it? with thundering and lightning.why Sinai was called the mountaine of God.
The Lord gave his Law upon Mount Sinai: it is called the mountaine of God; not for the height of it, as tall Cedars are called the Cedars of God: but it is so called because oftentimes the Lord appeared there and gave his Law there: and from this the Heathen called their Gods, the Gods of the Mountaines 1 King. 20.13. And therefore they sacrificed in the high places.
The Apostle,A comparison betwixt Sinai and Sion. Gal. 4.25. maketh a comparison betweene Sinai and Sion; that is, betwixt the Law and the Gospell, and he compareth Sinai and the Law to Hagar the bondwoman, who brought forth bond Children;
 and Sinai to Sara the free woman, who brought forth free Children, and he maketh Sinai, Hagar and her Children (...), so he maketh Sion, Sara and her Children (...): which agree together or are in the same ranke: then he maketh Sion, and Sara (...), so hee maketh Hagar and Sara; and the bondwomans Children and the free. Let us studie then to flye from Sinai, that burneth with fire and is a Mountaine of blacknesse and darkenesse and Tempest, where there is nothing but feare and terror, and which bringeth forth Children of bondage: and let us come unto Sion and to the City of the living God, the heavenly Ierusalem, which bringeth forth free Children, Heb. 12.18.22.
Sinai and Sion like Ebal and Gerazim.Sinai is like Mount Ebal, where the Tribes stood who cursed: and Sion is like mout Gerazim, where the Tribes stood to blesse. If we would be blessed, let us draw neere to Sion and Gerazim, and shunne Sinai and Ebal.
The Law was given in Sinai and in the Tabernacle: some part of this Law concerned onely the Iewes,The morall Law was given upon Mount Sinai, but the ceremoniall Law in the Tabernacle. and some part of it concerned all the world. That which concerned all the world was given upon the top of the Mount. The ceremoniall Law which was given to the Iewes, was given to Moses in the Tabernacle, Levit. 1. and when the Tabernacle was destroyed then the ceremonies were abolished: but the morall Law which was given upon mount Sinai indureth for ever, and shall remaine as long as the Mountaines shall stand.
The second thing to be considered, is the manner how the Lord gave his Law.
The Lord gave his Law with thunder and lightning, there is a great similitude betweene naturall Thunder and spirituall Thunder;The thunder is called Gods voice. naturall Thunder is called the voice of God, and so is spirituall Thunder: but the difference is this, the naturall Thunder is the voice of God, but it is not a distinct voice, it sheweth us that there is
 a God, but not distinctly that there is a God: and as there is a difference, betwixt the speech which a man maketh with his fingers, Pro. 6.13. when he maketh signes with his fingers he is said to speake with them; and betwixt that which he speaketh with his tongue: so there is a greater difference betwixt this naturall voice of God, his Thunder, and his spirituall voice in the Word; the one is vox in Aere, the other is vox in Sanctuario, Psal. 29.9. But in the Temple every one speaketh of his glorie,
Secondly,The naturall thunder resembleth the spirituall thunder, the word. this naturall Thunder resembleth the spirituall thunder in subtilitie, for this naturall Thunder will breake the bones and not the flesh, and it will pierce verie subtilly: yet the spirituall Thunder farre surpasseth it; it will devide betwixt the marrow and the bones, Heb. 3.12. and it discerneth the very cogitations of the heart.
Lastly, this naturall Thunder maketh Hindes to calve; it renteth the rockes, and it breaketh the hardest things which withstand it, but not the softest:(...) so doth this spiritual Thunder, the Word of the Lord resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble Iam. 4.6. Psal. 81.7. I answered thee in the secret place of thunder. Besether ragnas, Symmachus, (...) in loco abscondito majestatis: and the reason of the speech was this,(...) vox. when hee was to reveale his will unto his people, hee revealed himselfe and spake in the thunder,(...) filia voces, and the Grecizing Iewes call thunder (...) a voyce. as Exod. 19.16. and therefore kol is called a voyce, and when Bath is joyned with it, it is taken for a kind of Prophesie among the Hebrews: and with the thunder, hee usually fortold them of somethings to come. Ioh. 42.29. when the Father said to his Sonne I have glorified it, and will glorifie it againe. Some of those that stood by sayd it thundred, others said it was an Angel that spake to him;Gods revelations made to the people were usually with thunder. the reason was because these Revelations were usually in
 thunder, as if ye should say, some say it was Kol, others say it was bath kol; and they say an Angel speaketh to him, speaking after the manner of the Chaldeans, who ascribe the workes of God, to his Ministers the Angels or contra.The Chaldes ascribe the workes of God to his Angels. See Eccles. 5.6. say not before the Angell the, Seventy hath it, say not before God so the Chaldies call mortem repentinam, angelum mortis. And wee may observe further, that Iohn, in al the Revelations made to him, ioyneth thunder with the Revelation. as cap. 4.5. and out of the Throne proceeded Lightening and Thundrings, and voices. So cap. 6.1. I heard as it were the noise of thunder, one of the foure beasts saying come and see. So cap. 10.3. and when he had cryed, seaven thunders uttered their voices: thus we see how the two thunders goe together: and therefore the Hebrews call them Tomim,(...) gemelli. The Christian Iewes,gemelli. who observe, that prophesie and thunder went usually together: when they heare it thunder so often, they aske of them who remaine Iewes still. What is the cause that they heare no voyce, nor Angell speaking unto them of their Messias to come? and these miscreants when it thundreth doe light candles, hoping to heare that comfortable voice of their Messias; whom they expected so long.
The people when they heard the thunder, and the Lord speaking, to them out of the cloud, were exceedingly affrayd, Exod. 20.19. and they said unto Moses, speake thou with us, and we will heare. The Lord behoved to qualifie this voyce to them, and Moses himselfe feared and quaked, Heb. 12.21
Moyses and the people were affrayd at the giving of the Law.When the Lord appeared to Elias, there came a strong wind and rent the Mountaines, and the Rocks, and the Lord was not there: and after the wind, an Earthquake; and the Lord was not there: and after the Earthquake, a Fire; and the Lord was not there: and after the Fire, a still small voyce, and the Lord was there.
 1 King. 19.17.18, the Lord hath qualified these thunderings of the Law; and of Kol, a thundering voyce, he hath made, bath Kol, vox in silentio, a small voyce; and now Bonarges, the sonnes of thunder, doe qualifie their threatnings, and temper them; that they become the sonnes of consolation; and as after thundring there commeth Raine: so after their threatnings, with pitty and teares of compassion; they end in comfort.


EXERCITAT. III. That the Law was written in Tables of Stone.

Exod. 34.1, And the Lord said unto Moses, hew the two Tables of Stone, like unto the first.

LEt us consider first who wrote the Law? secondly why it was written upon stone? thirdly why upon hewen stone? forthly, why upon two Tables? lastly, why and wherefore they were so written, that this writting took up the whole Tables; so that there was no blanke left?
First the Lord wrote the Law:To write accordtng to the phr^se of Scripture, to give Lawes. to write according to the phrase of the Scripture, is usually, to give Lawes, as Esay 10.1. Woe to them that write grievous things which they have prescribed. So Dan. 6.8. Now O King, write the decree, that is, give out the Law.
Whether were the second Tables written by God,  or by Moyses?
They were written by God as the first were,  for Deut. 10.2. it is said I will write in the Tables, the words that werein the first Tables.
But it may be said,  Exod. 34.28. that Moses was with
 the Lord fortie dayes and fortie nights, hee did neither eate bread nor drinke water: and hee wrote upon the Tables, the words of the covenant, the ten Commandements.
God wrote the second Tables as he did the first.The words should be read this wayes, and he did neither eate nor drinke, to wit Moses, here is a rest distinguished by the point Atnach. and he wrote upon Tables, to wit God.
How God, Moyses, and the King, are said to write the Law.Observe, that God wrote the Law upon stone with his owne finger, and Moses wrote the Law, and the King is commanded to write out the Law. The Lord wrote the Law,(...) that is, the ten Commandements: and Moses wrote the Law, that is, Hhamusha, the whole five bookes of Moses:(...) and the King wrote the Law Deut. 17:18. This is called Mishne torah, the repetition of the Law, or the copie of the Law, Iohn 8, 32. And the reason why the King wrote out Deuteronomie,The King wrote out Deuteronomie onely. rather then any other part of Moses Law, was this; because it is a compend of the whole Law, and all these things commanded to them concerning the King, are set downe in it: in the other bookes, there are many histories and things, which concerne the Priests, and belong not to the King: therefore he wrote them not out.
The Lord wrote the ten Commandements, and gave them by the ministerie of the Angells to Moses, Gal. 3.19.How the Law is sayd to be given by the Angels. It was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, that is, Moses and the Angells were Mediators in the giving of this Law. So Act. 7.53. They received the Law by the disposition of Angels. Moses himselfe againe wrote the Iudiciall, and ceremoniall Law, but grace was given by Christ. The first was given by God himselfe as common principles to all; and these which Moses gave, were more particular determinations, and cases depending upon this Law; but Iesus Christ gave grace.
 What was the reason, why Christ wrote none of the
 New Testament with his owne hand, as the Lord wrote the ten Commandements with his owne hand?
The reason seemeth to be this;  Why Christ wrote none of the new Testament with his owne hand. if Christ had written any of the Gospell with his owne hand, then superstitious people would have preferred it, to that which was written by the Apostles: for, if men make an Idoll of the crosse, upon which they hold, that Christ was crucified; and of the nailes that nailed him to the Crosse: farre more would they have made an Idoll of that which Christ wrote with his owne hand: and this seemeth to be the reason, why Christ Baptized none with his owne hand.
But by this reason it should seeme,  that God should not have written the ten Commandements with his owne hand, for feare of Idolatry also.
There was no such danger of Idolatry here;  because the Tables were kept within the Arke, where the people saw them not.
The Lord wrote the commandements upon stone. We find in the Scripture, that they did write of old in Lead, Iob. 19.24. so in stone. Thirdly in the Saphire and other pretious stones; as the names of the twelve Tribes were written upon two Onix stones. Exod. 28.10.the Iewes wrote in Lead and stone, etc And upon the pretious stones in the Brestplate. ver. 12. Fourthly, upon Tables which are called ceraetae, or levigatae tabulae, set over with wax; and they were called Pugillares tabulae, quod stylo pingerentur, So Luc. 1.36. Zacharie called for writting Tables. Fiftly, they wrote in parchment, So Iere. 36. Iehoiachim cut the rowle of Ieremies prophesie with a knife. So they wrote in brasse, as that covenant wch was made betwixt the Romans, and the Iewes, was written in brasse, 1 Mac. 8.22. and cap. 15.13.
Most of the Iewes hold, that the Law was written by God in a Saphire. And Epiphanius is of this mind in his treatise of the twelve pretious stones. So Rabbi Ioseph
 in his Paraphrase upon Cant. 1. Suidas in Mosen and Abulensis upon Exod. 24.16.The Law was not writt^n upon a Saphire but upon some other stone. and for this they alleage that place Deut. 33.2. The Lord did shine from Paran, and there came a fierie Law from his right hand: they say the glorious beames which came from the Lord shined upon the Saphire, and made a reflexe backe againe, casting glistring beames like the fire; but this is a mistaking of the place: the meaneing of the place is onely, that the Lord taketh a comparison from the sunne here, which in the morning showeth a light before it, then afterward it ariseth, and enlighteneth the earth: so by degrees God shew his power amongst the Israelites wheresoever they went, even from Aegypt whence they came, untill they came to the Land of Edom, which was neere to the promised Land. Then it was not a Saphir upon which he wrote; but another stone.
He wrote upon stone, to signifie the hardnesse of our hearts.He wrote upon stone, to signifie the hardnesse of our hearts: there is no stone so hard, as the heart of a gracelesse man is: therefore, Zach. 7.12. They made their hearts like the Adamant stone. This Adamant is such a sort of stone, that no Iron can cut it, it will breake any mattell saith Hierome, but it cannot be broken it selfe: therefore the Greekes called it (...) ab (...) et (...) because it cannot be broken: and Plinie writing of it saith, Durities ejus est inenarrabilis, et simul ignium victrix natura, et nunquam incalescens, and then hee addeth, illa invicta vis,The heart of man like the Adamant. et duarum violentissimarum naturae rerum contemptrix, hircino tamen rumpitur sanguine fadissimo animalium. That is, this Adament which wil neither be broken by Iron, or will bee made hot by the fire; yet the blood of the stinking Goat will make it soft, this most fitly representeth the hard heart of man: because the base commodities, and the threatnings of men; will make his heart to yeeld; but it is hard like the Adamant to resist the Law of God, Iere. 5.13. They have
 made their faces harder than the rocks. The heart of a wicked man is like the Smythes anvill, the moe stroakes that it getteth, the harder it is, this is a fearefull thing, 2 Chron. 28.20.21.22. When the Lords hand was against Achaz, the more that he afflicted him, the more he hardened his heart; therefore the Lord saith of him; This is that Achaz. And Kinchi marketh upon Psal. 115. that the Article Hu, is set-before some notable transgressors, as Gen. 36.43.(...) The Hebrewes call this milleth hat^gnam, dictio quae auget significationem. This is Esau the Father of the Edomites So Numb. 26.9. this is that Dathan and Abiram. So Gen. 10.9. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord. So 2 Chron. 28 This is that Achaz that hardned his heart.
He wrote the Law upon stone,The Law was wrieten upon stone, to signifie the perpetutey of it. to signifie the perpetuitie of it. The Lord commanded his Prophets to write their P^ophesies upon Tables, Esay ^0.8. But the Seventie hath it, ^cribe super Buxe, write them on the bush tree, which consumeth not. Iob. 13.28. to signifie the indurance of the troubles that were upon him, expresseth it by writting, saying Thou writest bitter things against me. To correct is actio transiens, to write is actio permanens.
The Lord wrote the Law upon hewen stone, to teach us, that he must prepare our hearts and smooth them, before they can receive the Law: this is called in the Scriptures, Breaking up of the fallow ground Hose. 10.12. For as the Husbandman in the Summer breaketh up the ground, and pulleth out the Thornes; that the Land may be fitte to receive seede: So the Lord breaketh up the fallow ground of our hearts,God prepareth the heart before he sow the seede of grace. and pulleth out the Thornes, that he may sow in the seed of grace; and he maketh smooth the heart with his preventing grace, that it may bee fit to receive his Heavenly characters; he will not write his Law in a rough and unsmooth heart.
He wrote the Law upon two Tables, and Salomon
 alludeth to this. Prov. 3.3. Write mercie and truth upon the Table of thy heart. The Lord doth not care that thou have the Law written upon the posts of thy doore, and the fringes of thy garment; but he will have it written in the heart. Psal. 40.7. In the volume of thy booke it is written of me, I delight to doe thy will, O my God: yea thy Law is in the midst of my heart. Where the holy Ghost alludeth to the forme which was under the Law, they wrote upon parchment and rowled it up upon a peece of wood, or upon a reede Luc. 4.2. (...) He rowled up the booke;Hence came this phrase amongst the Latines. Ducere ad umbilicum. as if he would say, thy Law O Lord is not written upon the rowle and wrapped up that way, but it is written in the midst of my heart.
(...) Hinc and hinc.Whether were these two Tables written one both the sides, or were they written upon one side onely; because, the Text saith they were written mize umize, one both the sides, one the one side, and on the other, Exod. 22.15. The Seventy reade it, Hinc et hinc erant scriptae.
The Law was not written on both sides of the Tables, but upon one side.They were written on both the sides; that is, they were written in both the Tables; but they were not written, as the rowles were written, both within and without; Zach. 5.3. The curse of the Theefe upon the one side, and the curse of the Swearer upon the other side; mize umize it was written in both the sides, that they might reade it both before and behind.
(...)They had two sorts of writings, first, that which the Hebrews call Gnalpanim in facie; the other in tergo. The Greekes had (...) rowles, which were written upon the one side onely, and (...) rowles which were written both within and without. The Tables were (...) written upon the one side,Scripta
(...).(...). but the rowle of Gods judgement Ezek. 2.10. was (...) and it had written in it Lamentations and mourning and woe. So the flying, rowle of the curse of God Zach. 5.3 had the
 curses written both within and without, and the Lord wrote this way onely to the wicked;When the Lord is said to write, he writeth upon both sides to the wicked, but upon the one side to the godly. but the Law was given not as a curse but as a direction to Gods Children, and therefore it was written but upon the one side of the Tables:
Lastly, this writting tooke up the whole Tables,No blanke left for man to adde any thing to the Law. to signifie, that there was no blanke left for man to adde any thing to this Law. Deut. 4.2. Ye shall not adde to the word which I commande you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. this Law was written upon Tables of stone and they were broken, to signifie, that we breake this first Covenant: but in the New covenant when he giveth us hearts of flesh Ier. 31.33. and shal betroth us to himselfe for ever in judgement righteousnesse and in loving kindnesse, Hos. 2.19. Then we shall not fall away from the covenant againe.


EXERCITAT. IIII. The Preface of the Law.

Exod. 2.20. I am the Lord thy God, etc.

THe Lord, Exod. 34.28. wrote upon the Tables the Words of the Covenant, the ten Commandements.Some erre in dividing the Commandements. Here it is expressly sayd, that there are ten Commandements; but men have erred sundry wayes in dividing these Commandements: for some of the Iewes make the first and second but one Commandement; yet to make up the number of ten, they made this the first Commandement, I am the Lord thy God etc. and they say, this must
 of necessity be presupposed, To beleeve that there is a God who commandeth; and they hold, that in this Commandement the Lord bindeth them To beleeve in him. They cleare the matter by this comparison. If a King should come to a people whom they know not, and hee were to give them Lawes, it were necessarie first that they should know him to be a King; and what right hee had over them to give them Lawes: So when God sayeth I am the Lord your God, it is as much as if hee should say,The Israelites beleeved in God before they received the Law. receive me for your King and submit you to my Lawes. But this should not induce us to thinke, that these words are a command: for the Israelites before they came to receive the Law, they beleeved in him, Exod. 4.31. and Exod. 14.31. after that they had passed the red sea, They beleeved in God and in Moses. They believed in God already, and therefore they needed not a new precept to be given them that they should believe, but that was presupposed: for if they had not first beleeved, he should not have given them these Lawes: and they promised that when hee was about to give them the Law, that all things the Lord would bid them doe, that they would do Exod. 19.8. In these words then, I am the Lord thy God,The Lord made an intimation to them in these words. there is nothing commanded, but onely an intimation made to them who it is that speaketh to them, to wit, the Lord God.
All the Commandements are set downe by way of precept. Thou shalt not commit Adultery, and, Thou shalt not steale.The right exposition of the words. These words Exod. 34.28. God wrote in Tables the ten words of the Covenant, should not bee translated here, He wrote ten Sentences. as Mat. 21.24. I will aske you one word; that is, one Sentence, or one Question: but it is taken here, Prosententia precipiente, for a commanding Sentence, as Esth. 1.10. The Queene refused to come at the word of the King,These words are not a Commandement, but a Preface. that is, at the commandement of the King. So De calogus is called (...) by the Apostle, a command: ten
 words, that is, ten commands. These words then are not a command, but a preface to the commands; because they are not set downe by way of precept as the rest of the Commandements.
In this preface we have to consider what is craved of us? secondly who craveth it of us? First, what is craved; obedience, that they should hearken: for obedience beginneth at the eare, Speake Lord, for thy Servant heareth 1 Sam. 3.10. Secondly who craveth this attention? it is Iehova, the great and mighty God.
There are foure things to be marked in this name Iehova; first, that God revealed not himselfe to any,Foure things to be marked in the name Iehova. by his name Iehova untill Moses time, Exod. 6.3. I was knowne before to be shaddai, and I manifested my selfe to the Patriarches by Adonai, and Elohim; but I manifested not my selfe, by my name Iehova, which signifieth my essence, untill I revealed my selfe unto thee, Moses.
But this name Iehova was knowne before Moses time,  Gen. 4.26. incaptum est nomen Iehova invocari, So Gen. 15.8.
The Fathers who lived before Moses time,  The Lord revealed not himselfe by his name Iehova, untill he reveal^d himselfe to Moses. (...) called him not Iehova, but Elohim or Adonai; but Moses, who wrote the historie of Genesis, after that this name was revealed unto him, he used this word, Iehova, in the historie of Genesis. Moses doth not set downe here the words of the Patriarches, but the sense of their words: they called him Elohim and Adonai, but Moses called him Iehova. This name was Peli before, a hid name, admirable, or secret. Peloni almoni, is a name in the Scriptures, which is not expressed but understood; as Ruth. 4.1. So in the Gospell, Ye shall goe unto what shall I call him his house.(...) Mat. 26.18. and of Peloni almoni, is made Palmoni, Dan. 8.13. which the Seventy translate (...) for it is a hid name of reverence, which is communicated to none.(...)
 When Manoah asked the Angell what his name was, he answered my name is Peli, admirable or secret Iudg. 13.18.The Heathen had some darke footesteps of the name Iehova, The Heathen had some darke footsteps of this admirable and secret name; for upon the gate of the Temple of Minerva which was called Sai, they had this inscription written: Ego sum omne quod extitit, est, et erit, meumque peplum nemo adhuc mortalium detexit. And they prayed that their God would unvaile himselfe unto them, that they might understand something of his great majesty. It was not for the benefit of the Church to know the Angels name; and therefore he concealed it.
Sundry causes which make men conceale their names.There are many causes wherefore men conceall their names; sometimes feare, sometimes shame, sometimes deceit, sometimes wisedome, sometimes charitie and humility makes them to conceall their names. When Paul wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews; wisedome made him to conceall his name: for he becomming now of a Iew, a Christian; his Epistle would have had the lesse credit with the Iewes: and therefore hee concealeth his name.Why the Lord kept up his name Iehova from the Patriarchs so long. The reason, why the Lord kept up his name Iehova from the Patriarchs so long, was his wisedome: but now when the promises were to bee accomplished which hee had made before; hee expresseth his name Iehova.
The second thing to be considered in this name is, that he is called Eheie, Ero qui ero, Exod. 3.14. that is, whose eternitie endureth for ever: and hee is called Eheie, who was, is, and is to come: for, the future tense with the Hebrews comprehendeth all the three times, past, present, and to come. Iohn saith of the beast, Reve. 17.11. the beast which was, and is not: the thing that is past, is not: and Ezekiel. 26.19. thou shalt be no more:God is opposite to man by way of contradiction. when a man is dead he was, and is no more. God is onely immortalitie, he is Alpha and Omega, and he is opposite to man by way of contradiction, which is the greatest contrarietie that is.
 deus est, homo non est, Iohn expressing this name Eheie, expresseth it thus (...), Revel. 1.8. setting them downe as nounes; and he would rather commit a soloecisme in the Greeke tongue, then not to expresse the name Iehova by them: for by nature they are participles, they should not bee taken materially here (...), but as participles, and they should be declined (...): but to expresse Eheie and Iehova, he calleth them (...) etc.
The third thing to bee observed in this name is,The letter Iod added to some words for the whole name Iehova. that some times the letter Iod and no more of the name Iehova, is added to words: example Ionas. 1.9. I am an Hebrew and I feare the Lord God; it is in the original Gnibhri anochi, as if he should say,(...) I am an Hebrew of Iehova or belonging to him, the letter Iod is not Affixum here, and the sentence would be perfect without it Gnebher anochi: but this Iod added to it, carrieth this sense,(...) I am an Hebrew belonging to Iehova.
The fourth thing to bee observed in the name Iehova,The name Iehova is given to no creature, as the rest of Gods attributes are. is this, that his other attributes, Adonai, and Elohim, are given to creatures, as to Angels and to men; but this name Iehova is never given to any creature.
The last thing to be observed in this name, is this,The name Iehova is never pronounced with it owne vowels. that it is never pronounced, nor written with the owne vowels of it; but either with the vowels of Elohim, or Adonai, and the Seventie translate it alwayes (...),Of this see more Commandement. 3. and the Iewes call it (...) ineffabile, (...), indicibile, and (...) ineloquibile.
I am the Lord thy God.The preface includeth in it remission of sinnes, the resurrection and life everlasting. To bee their God includeth three speciall blessings in it. First, remission of sinnes. Secondly, the resurrection of the body. and thirdly, life everlasting.
First it includeth in it remission of sinnes, and it is concluded thus.
They who are blessed, have God to be their God.

They who have their sinnes remitted, are blessed.
Therefore, they who have their sinnes remitted, have God to be their God.
Secondly, the resurrection of the body is contained within this preface I am the Lord thy God; as Christ proveth against the Sadduces. I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaack, and the God of Iacob, God is not the God of the dead; but of the living, that is, of those who live to God, although their bodies bee in the grave. To prove the resurrection out of this place, some frame the argument after this manner.
They who live in their soules after their bodies are dead, must rise againe in their bodies;
But Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, live in their soules, although their bodies be dead;
Therefore, their bodyes must rise againe.
But this argument, although it hold well enough against those who hold the immortality of the soule, yet it proveth not against the Sadduces who deny the Immortalitie of the soule: but to fit the argument against the Sadduces, and those who deny the Immortality of the soule; it must be framed thus.
An argument to convince the Sadduc^s, who denied all the Scriptures except the five bookes of Moses.They who have God, to bee their God; must live againe,
But Abraham Isaack and Iacob, have God, to be their God:
Therefore, they must live againe.
This argument will hold against the Sadduces who admitted the five bookes of Moses, and granted that God made a covenant with Abraham Isaack and Iacob.
 But the Sadduces might have said, that God might have beene their God while they were living, and now ceased to be their God when they were dead.
 The covenant is pronounced in the present time, (...)
 (...) I am their God, and not, I was their God: for although the word Sum be not expressed in the covenant, yet it is to bee understood after Ani according to the manner of the Hebrewes.(...)
He might have beene the God of their soules,  although not of their bodies.
The Sadduces could not frame this answere,  who denied the immortalitie of the soule. Secondly, the Text saith, I am the God of Abraham, that is, of whole Abraham. For when any thing is attributed or astricted to a part, the Whole is presupposed first. Example, the black Moore is white in his teeth,When any thing is attributed to the part, the whole is first understood. then the Moore must first exist who hath the white teeth. So if the Whole exist not, In potentia at least, then this limitation cannot bee made to the soule, that he might bee the God of Abrahams soule; as though the body never were to rise againe: and if their bodies were not to rise againe, how could he be called the God of their bodies? or why commanded hee their bodies to bee circumcised and made them Temples of the holy Ghost, if hee had not beene minded to raise them againe? To live then, must be understood here first of the soule, living actually, and of the body, living potentially, which by the power of God shall be raised againe; and it is said in this sense,The Churchyard is called the house of the Living. Mark. 5.39. She is not dead but alive. How was she living? by the power of God who was able to raise her againe: and therefore the Hebrewes call the Church yard, Domus viventium, The house of the Living because the bodies lived to God all this time. The Iewes themselves believe the resurrection Esay 26.19.(...) Nebhelathi jekumun, Cadaver meum resurgent that is, I beleeve that my body shall rise againe and others with me, so. Ioh. 11.24. I know that he shall rise againe in the resurrection at the Last day.
Thirdly, this preface containeth in it life eterall. Heb.
 11.16. God is not ashamed to be called their God and he hath prepared for them a City to come,Heb. 11.16. it is concluded thus.
If their God had not prepared for them a City to come he might have beene ashamed;
But their God cannot be ashamed:
Therefore their God hath prepared for them a Citty to come.
I am the Lord thy God; here he teacheth them the, application of all the promises of Salvation to themselves. Heb. 11.13. the faithfull embraced the promises and kissed them,The comforts in divinity standeth in these possessive promises mine, thine, ours. this was their parrticular application of the promises. The Schoolemen say well, that all the comfort in divinitie lieth in these possessive pronounes mine, thine, and our's,(...) tu mihi. a Saviour is borne to you, Luc. 2.11. So Paul who hath given himselfe for us Tit. 2.14. And the comfortable promises of the Gospell,Thou art mine, this is the summe of the whole covenant. is Esay 43.1. Li atta, tu mihi, which is (...), a short sentence, but comprehending all the promises of Salvation in it: when God saith thou art mine, and our hearts can answere him againe we are thine. This is a happy meeting: the Iewes used to write these two short words Li atta, the summe of the whole covenant, as a motto upon their rings, and above their gates: Mine and thine are words of love. 2 King 20.32. Achab said to Benhadad he is my brother, then the text saith the men did diligently observe whether any thing would come from him (meaning from Achab) and they did hastily catch this word, when he said is my Brother: So when the Lord utterreth this word to us, I am your God, we should hastily catch it, and lay hold upon it; and make particular application to our selves of the promise: but hypocrites cannot make this particular application to themselves of these promises of salvation;Hypocrites cannot make perticular application of God, nor his promises to themselves. when the Lord offered a signe to Achaz, Esay. 7. the Prophet said to him aske a signe of the Lord thy God, but how answered
 the hypocrite? I will not tempt the Lord, but he durst not say, I will not tempt the Lord my God: but Esay can applie that to himselfe, will ye tempt the Lord my God Esay 7.13. Pharao sayd Exod 10.17. Pray to your God for me, that he may take away this plague from me: and so Darius Dan. 6.20. calleth him Daniels God, and not my God, and see how strangely the Iewes spake of Christ; There is one Christ who is dead and risen againe, Act. 25.19. and the Devils say, Iesus thou sonne of the most high God, what have wee to doe with thee, Mark. 5.7.
How cometh it,  that Balaam that wizard maketh particular application to himselfe, calling God his God Num. 22.18. I cannot goe beyond the word of the Lord my God.
Balaam called God his God,  after the manner of the Hetruscians,How Balaam called God his God. taking him to be that Hetruscian God who had informed his mind, and enlightened it at that time.
How commeth it that Ezekias saith to Esay. 2 King 19.4. it may be the Lord will heare all the words of Rabshakeh,  and will reprove the words which the Lord thy God hath heard?
He calleth him Esayes God, and not his God,  not out of distrust as Pharaoh and Nebuchad-nezzer did, but onely because Esay was their mouth to the Lord at that time, who brought the answeres to them from God.
The last thing which is contained in this preface, is, the reason why they should obey him? because hee brought them out of the Land of Aegypt.
The conclusion of this is, Psal. 119.130.Conclusion. the entrance to thy words giveth light, and giveth understanding to the simple.




EXERCITAT. V. Commandement 1.

Exod. 20.3. Thou shalt have no other Gods before me.

The first and second Commandement, are two distinct Commandements.THe first and the second Commandement are two distinct Commandements, and not one, as the Church of Rome would make them: for if they were not two distinct Commandements, then whatsoever religious duties are required, and offences forbidden in Gods Word elsewhere, could not bee contained here under one of these Commandements: but all religious duties required besides in any other Scripture; can, and must bee contained in some distinct Commandement of the first Table, and there are many religious actions commanded, which we must referre to some generall head, and some distinct Commandement in the first table, which cannot be referred to the first or third Commandement, or to the fourth, and therefore of necessitie they are to bee referred to the second Commandement.To bow before God belongeth both to the first and second Commandement in diverse respects.
Thou shalt not bow downe to them nor worship them. These words belong both to the first and second Commandement in diverse considerations; To bow the body, is an exercise of religious worship due to God, and wee must not performe it to any other creature There are two sorts of bowing of the bodie, the first is an absolute bowing or terminatiua adoratio, as they call it, and stayed in the thing, to which it is given; and this is performed when the thing it selfe is the principall cause why the worship is given unto it.Adoratio
terminativarelativa. This sort of worship is due onely to God himselfe and it belongeth to the first
 Commandement, although it be an externall action of the bodie, 1 Tim. 2.8.Adoratio terminativa, quid. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. This externall action of the body, To lift up the hands, belongeth to the first Commandement. The second sort of bowing or of bodily worship is that, which we call Relatiua, quando non terminator in creatura,Adoratio relativa, quid. when it endeth not in the creature, Sed transit in aliud, it passeth to another; and this sort of worship is forbidden in the second Commandement: such was the worship which Cornelius would have given to Peter Act. 10.25. and which Iohn would have given to the Angell Revela. 19.10.
Secondly, others distinguish the first and the second Commandement this way:Neither all, nor onely inward worship, is commanded in the first Table. that all inward worship is commanded in the first Commandement, and all outward worship, in the second but neither all, nor onely, inward worship is commanded in the first Commandement: as to bow the knee before God terminative et absolute, is judged a part of the worshipe of God in the first Commandement: so both the outward and inward relative worship are condemned in the second Commandement. When a man carrieth any religious and reverent respect to worship before the creature, this is condemned in the second Commandement, as when the Philistims would not tread upon the threshold where Dagon broake his necke 2 Sam. 5.5.
Thirdly when false worship is given to the false God, they make that a breach of the second Commandement; and when true worship is given to the true God, they say this is commanded in the first Commandment: but this distinction holdeth not, for when a man worshipeth a false God, by false meanes; as when a Covetous man maketh a God of his mony, it is a breach of the first Commandement, and not of the second: but when
 he goeth about to worship: any creature for Gods cause outwardly in act, this relative worship is condemned in the second Commandement.
Ye shall have no other Gods before me: these words are not rightly translated, ye shall not make Peregrinos deos, strange Gods: he forbideth not onely deos gentium, which are dij peregrinj, but thou shalt make to thy selfe no Gods,(...) alienus. although thou never learne of another people to make them. And this word Achar in other places of the Scripture, is expounded by these two words, Necar and Zar, so that he forbiddeth to have any God but himselfe.
It is great Idolatrie to worship the Gods of other people, being deceived by them; as the heart of Salomon was drawne to worshipe strange Gods by the example of his Wives. It is greater Idolatrie when they make choise to worship them, not being compelled for feare,To worship Gods whom their Fathers knew not, a great sinne. as they would have driven David to doe, 1 Sam. 26.19. thus did Amaziah willingly worship the Gods of the Edomites after that he had overcome them, 2 Chron. 25.14. but a higher sort of Idolatrie, is to worship Gods whom their Fathers knew not. Deut. 32.17. this was a greater sin than to worship the Gods of their Fathers.
(...)Before me, in the Hebrew it is, Gnal Panai which may be expounded in my place; as Deut. 21.16. he may not make the sonne of the beloved first borne, gnal Panai, in place of the sonne of the hated woman. Or, gnal panai, id est e regione mei yee shall not bring in the Harlot in my sight.
Before me, God is a jealous God. Who will not suffer Idolum Zelotypiae, the Image of Ielousie to be set up before him.The great hatred of God against Idolatrie. Ezek. 8.3, hee who should not suffer a stranger to enter into the Temple, how can hee suffer an Image to be set up before him? he who would not suffer the
 Arke, and Dagon to stand together in the Temple of the Philistims; how can he suffer an Idoll to be set up beside himselfe in his owne Temple? What boldnesse was it in the Iewes, to set up the Idoll in mount Olevit,(...) Mons unctionis a (...) unctus fuit. (...) Mons corruptionis a (...) corrumpere. even in the sight of the Lord, for hee never looked out of the Sanctuarie, but hee saw that vile hill of abhominations: therefore hee calleth it not, Har hamishha, Mons unctionis, but Har hammashhith, Mons corruptionis, The Hill of corruption, 2 King 23.13. And they came neerer with their Idols to set them up before the Lord Ezek. 8.5. Northward at the gate of the Altar, this Image of Ielousie in the entrie was set up. This was the outmost gate in the court of the Gentiles. And yet neerer, in Gazophylacijs, in the Chambers that were next the Temple. When the Prophet digged a hole through the wall he saw them worshipping creeping things and abhominable beasts vers. 10. And yet neerer, even to the North gate of the Lords house at the entrie of the Court of the Priests, there they set up the filthy God Tammuz.The Idols in Ezekiel's dayes, were brought neerer and neerer, untill at last they were brought within the Temple. And yet they come neerer which was a greater abhomination, At the doore of the Temple of the Lord, betwixt the Porch and the Altar, were five and twentie men with their backes towards the Lord, and their faces towards the East, and they were worshipping the Sunne. When they came to worship before the Lord they turned their faces towards the Arke:When the people of God worshipped, they turned their faces toward the Arke. which was in the West end of the Temple, and when they came out of the Temple, they returned not that way, by which they entred in: as when they came in at the East gate, they went out at the North or North-eastgate,They went not out of the Temple by the doore at which they entered in. but they went not out at the East gate because then they should have turned their backes upon the Lord. If they might notturne their backes upon him; farre lesse might they turne their hearts from him. See Esay. 1.4.
Ye shall have no other Gods. Acherim, Strange Gods,(...) so it
 is called strange fire. Nom. 3.3. and strange incense Exod. 30.9. and Levit. 10.1. So alienare se retrorsum, is to goe Backward from the true God, Esay. 1.4. In worship, if wee respect either the object,To have another God is to have a strange God. or the manner of the worship; to have another God, is to have a false God. so Gal. 18.9. Another Gospell, is a contrarie Gospell, and Disparata sunt contraria in cultu divino, ubi est alius et alius non est vnus cultus; therefore a strange God, is put here for a false God.
We may take up this Commandement in these propositions. First, ye shall have a God. Secondly, yee shall have me for your God. Thirdly, ye shall have mee onely for your God.
Many have not God to be their God.First, ye shall have a God. The most people of the World have not God for their God; there were and are three religions in the world, first Iudaisme, secondly Christianitie, and thirdly Paganisme.
(...)Iudaisme is considered in a threefold estate, first when they were Gnammi, My people, secondly when they were Lo gnammi,(...) The estate of the Iewes when they were the people of God. Not my people, and thirdly when they shall be Rubhama, to be pitied Hose. 1.
In the first estate, when they were gnammi, My people, then they worshipped the true God, they waited for salvation in Christ to come, and they were distinguished from other people by the badge of circumcision; then the Proselyte of the Gentiles was numbered with them, and he was called Goi gnikkari,(...) Gentilis fundamentalis, when he had embraced the Articles of the faith. Those who were opposite to the people of God in this estate, were either those who mixed their religion with heathenish Idolatrie,The Samaritans religion contrary to the Iewes in their first estate. (...) such were the Samaritans: of these Chrysostome said, (...) to mixe these things that should not bee mixed, the true worship with the false; and the Iewes stigmatized (as it were) the Samaritans with these two letters, Gnaijn zain because they
 used strange worship. Or, those who fell away quite to gentilisme, such as was Rabshake whom the Iewes hold generally to have beene an apostate Iew;(...) and such a one is called Copher begnikkar, Negans fundamentum.
In their second estate they are Lo gnammi, Not my people. And they despised me Esay. 1,The great ingratitude of the Iewes in casting off the Lord, who had done such great things for them. They whom I begot and brought up, they upon whom I bestowed so great priviledges, they to whom I gave so many benefits with out their desert, they whom I caried upon Eagles wings, Deut. 7.6. (for the Eagle doth not carie her young ones in her tallones as other ravenous fowles doe, but upon her wings) I was betwixt them and all danger, I covered them in Aegypt with my winges, I carried them through the Desert; and yet they have cast me off, whom they ought to have worshiped: they have despised me in my Precepts, in my Counsels, and in my Ceremonies, in my Patriarches and in my Prophets, in my Iudges and in my Kings, and lastly they have despised mee in my welbeloved Sonne, whom I sent to them, Saying, perhaps they will reverence my Sonne Mat. 21.37. They regarded not the rocke of their Salvation, but judged him Plagued and smitten of God, Esay. 53.4. They rejected mee, whom I accounted onely for my children, and I accounted all other people but dogges in respect of them, Matthew 15.26. But they turning into Dogs have rent mee, Psal. 22. Philip. 2.3. And now the Turke and the Iew are alike,(...) desiderabilis. a (...) desiderare. he in his Desideratus Messias, his wordly King; and the Turke in his Muhhamad, his desiderabilis Mahomet, both circumcise; the Iewes the eight day, the Turkes the eight yeare.
In their third estate, when they shall be Ruhhama, they and the Christians shal be one,The Iewes in their third estate shall be all one with the Christians. then there shall be one sheepheard and one sheepfold, Ioh. 10.26. And the seale of the Covenant shall be baptisme, as it is to us now.
The second religion Professed in the World is
 Christianitie,How they were called Christians at the first, those have God for their God, first they were called Nozerim, nazaraei and afterward their name was changed at Antioch,(...) and they were called Mesichijm Act. 11.26. And the seale of the covenant to them is baptisme. Opposite to these are Apostats who fall away from Christianity; such a one is called Hemir dath, Mutans fidem.
Some fall totally from Christianity.These who fall from Christianity: doe fall away either totallie, or in part. If they fall totallie, either they fall to Iudaisme, Turcisme, or Gentilisme.
(...) a radi^e, (...) en^ere.First, if they fal to Iudaisme, then they are called Copharim, redempti pretio, bought with a pryce.
Secondly, if they fall to Turcisme, if the Turkes buy the Children of the Christians, then they are called Mamlukin, and they circumcise them when they are eight yeare old: and if they take them alive when they are men of age, then they must renounce their Christianitie,(...) a radice (...) pax. and they must say; Non est Deus, nisi Deus et Mahumet, then they are circumcised, and called Musulmanin, servati, a salem Pax.
The third sort are these who fall totallie to Gentilisme, as Iulian the Apostate.
Heretickes and Schismaticks fall from Christianity in part.They who fall a way in part from Christianity, are either Heretickes or Schismatickes. Haeretici in veritatem; et Schismatici, in charitatem, peccant.
(...)The third religion is Paganisme, it is called Gajaroth, and in the Syrian language the Paganes are called Aramaei. Galat. 3.28. The reason why they are so called: is because the first Idolaters, mentioned of, in the Scriptures came from Aram, or Syria: as Abrahams Father was a Syrian, Laban was a Syrian, Naaman was a Syrian, and Balaam was a Syrian Deut. 23.4. And they put an Aramite for an Idolater, as an Arabian for a Theefe, Iere. 3.2. and a Chaldean for a Genethliacke Dan. 2.2.
Brerwood in his inquiries.If all the world were divided into thirtie one parts,
 there will be found ninetene parts to bee possessed by Idolaters, seven by Mahumetans and Iewes, and but five parts by the Christians.
Nineteene parts are possessed by Idolaters, first some of Europe and the sixt part of Africa, the most part of Asia, as India, Calecut, Cathay, and Tartarie, all America, except a few drawne to Poperie, be the Spaniards.
The Mahumetans possesse sixe parts of the World, as Arabia, Persia, and a part of Asia, as the Tartares, and the fourteenth part of Europe.
Christians possesse but five parts of the World, and there are thirteene sects amongst them. Papists, Grecians, Melchites or Syrians, Indians or Christians of Saint Thomas, East Indians, Georgians, Muscevits and Russians, Nestorians, Iacobits, Ophits in Aegypt, Armenians, Abissaeni and Maronits.
Now take the true professores, and separate them from these corrupt worshipers: then separate hypocrites from these true professors; and so wee shall see how few there are, who have God for their God.Conclusion.
The conclusion of this is: seeing that there are so few, that have the true God, to bee their God: let us studie to be of the number of that little flocke, to make the Lord to be our God; and then we shall be his people.



EXERCITAT. VI. God is to be loved with all the heart. Commandement. 1,

Deut. 5.6. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.

THis Commandement craveth of us that wee should have God to bee our God. First, that wee should love him. Secondly onely love him. Thirdly, with our heart, and with all our heart. Fourthly to put our trust in him,Reasons why we should love God. and hope in him. Lastly, to feare him.
 First we must love him, nothing can fill, the heart of man but God. Prov. 30.15. There are three things which are not satisfied,Nothing can fill the heart but God. yea foure that say they have not enough: the graue and barren wombe, the earth that is not filled with water, and the fire that saith not, it is enough. So nothing can fill the heart of man, there is such an Immensitie, and emptinesse in it, that nothing can satisfie it but God himselfe: Cast three Worlds into it, yet it will never say, it is enough, Et nullum datur vacuum, it must bee filled and nothing can fill it but God: Therefore hee speaketh to the heart, and when it is emptie hee must fill it with graces. Satan is said to fill the heart, Act. 5.3. But he cannot come in directly to the heart, to fill it, but onely to the sense and phantasie, this is proper to God onely, both to fill the heart and to give it contentment.
 The second reason why wee should love God, is, because there is nothing that can give rest to the soule,Nothing can give rest to the soule but God. but God: the heart of man is like the needle of the Compasse, that trembleth still, untill it come to the Pole. 1 Sam. 25.29. The soule of a wicked man is in a sling; that which
 is in a sling is violently tossed about: So is the soule when it is not upon the proper object, God. David said Psal. 30.10. Libbi sehharchar, My heart was troubled; Sohher is called a Merchant going too and fro selling his wares:(...) mercator a (...) circumare. so is the heart of man troubled about sundrie things; and the letters are doubled here, to signifie the great care and trouble, that David had, when he sought after these things, as the Merchant seeketh for his gaine. When the rich man said in the Gospell, Soule take thy, rest, for now thou hast much goods laid up for many yeares Luc. 12.19. He put the soule from the right object. But when David said, Returne my soule to thy rest, Psal. 116.7. then he set his Soule upon the right object.
Secondly, we must onely love him, Nihil praeter, supra aut contra.
Whether is God to bee loved for his benefites or not? 
God is to bee loved for himselfe,  Although hee should kill me, yet will I trust in him. Iob. 13.15.Medium quatale and perse nullam boni appetibilis rationem possidet, tota quippe ratio amandi medium, est convenientia cum fine. God is vltimus finis (as Thomas saith) and wee may not serue him for another end, for then we should make ultimum finem but medium. An^igonus Sochaeus saith, Ne estote servis similes, qui dominis serviunt mercedis ergo.In Pirke Abhoth. There is great reward in keeping Gods Commandements Psal. 19.11. The reward is the end of our service, but it is not the end of that which we love; we expect our reward, but we enjoy not our reward. These benefits in respect of our infirmitie may be motives to stirre us up to love him, and they may be ordine Prima, but never quoad dignitatem Pracipua. Ioh. 6.26. Ye seeke me because ye eate the bread and were filled. Iob. 21.15. What shall it profit us, if we pray unto him? They measure all their religion by profit, and will doe nothing but for gaine. So Mal. 3.14. It is a vaine thing to serve the Lord,Hypocrites serve God for gaine. and what profit
 is it that we have keepe his ordinances?Hypocrites serve God for gaine. To those men gaine is Godlinesse. 1 Tim. 6. And they are like little Children that will not say their Prayers, unlesse we promise them their breakfast.
God is to be loved with the whole heart.The manner how we should love him; wee should love him with our heart, the heart is the first thing that God looketh unto. Prov. 23.26. Sonne give mee thine heart.God looketh first upon the heart. When the beast was cut up for a sacrifice the first thing that the Priest lookt upon, was the heart, and if the heart was naught,Simile. the sacrifice was rejected: God looketh first upon the heart of his Children, and then upon their Sacrifices; as he looked upon Abel and upon his sacrifice.God looketh upon the intention without the act. Gen. 4.4. Secondly, hee looketh upon the intention of the heart without the act, as upon Davids purpose to build the Temple; and here hee accepteth more of the qualitie then of the quantitie. Thirdly, he liketh sometime the action of an unregenerat man, but not as it proceedeth from him. 2 Chron. 25.2. Amaziah did that which was good in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.The Lord liketh the action of an unregerate man, but not as it proceedeth from. The things which hee did were good in themselves, but not as they proceeded from him.
Seeing the heart is that, which the Lord looketh first upon; then every man should studie to purge his heart especially from Hypocrisie, which defileth all our actions,Hypocrisie defileth all the actions of a man. and maketh the doung of our sacrifices to be cast in our faces. We have a notable example how this Hypocrisie divideth the heart Hos. 10.2. And hindereth it that it cannot love God. 1 Sam. 21.7. There was a certaine man of the servants of Saul there (Doeg) detained before the Lord.(...) Doeg was a great Hypocrite. But this doth not expresse the force of the words in the originall, Ninghzar liphni Iehova, it carieth this sense with it, Incluserat se ante Tabernaculum ut studio legis occuparetur. Hee went of purpose to studie the Law of God there, and to understand his will, who
 would have thought, but that this hypocrite came with an upright heart to serve the Lord? and yet because the heart of him was not perfect, he became a most fearefull persecuter, and murtherer of the Priests of God.
So when the Seventie went up to meet the Lord, Exod. 24.1. Nadab and Abihu went with them, and yet because those rebels had not a good heart to love the Lord: therefore they brought in strange fire to the Altar of the Lord. David said Psal. 18.44. That many of my servants mendaciter se subjiciunt mihi, Many counterfitly submited themselves to me: So many counterfitely submit themselves to the Lord, whose hearts are not upright with him. The prophet showeth this Hypocrisie. Iere. 17.8. The heart of man is deceitfull above all things, in the originall it is, Gnakobh, A Supplanter.
Thou shalt love the Lord with all thine heart,(...) and it is enlarged, Deut. 6.5. Thou shalt love the Lord with all thine heart, soule, and might. And Marc. 10.30. with all thy soule, mind, and strength. In the Hebrew it is ex toto valde tuo. The Chaldee Pharaphrast paraphraseth it, Ex tota substantia tua, which is not the meaning of the Law. Wee are not curiously here to seeke the difference of these, minde, Soule, strength, and heart;(...) but onely to consider, what God craveth of us, that wee should love him unfainedly; and with an upright heart.
And that we may take up this the better,Repetition of words in the Scripture sometimes doth intend the affection, sometimes the signification, sometimes both the affection and signification, and sometimes neither of them. we must understand that repetitions in the Scripture, somtimes neither intend the affection, nor signification; but diminish, them; example Iob. 19.21. Have pity, have pity upon me my friends. Here the doubling of the word neither intendeth the signification, nor affection, but dimisheth it rather.
Sometimes againe, when the same words are repeated, they intend both the affection and signification.
 Psal. 126. Venientes veniebant cum exultatione. Here it intendeth both the signification and the affection, they came home as cheerefully from the captavitie, as these who bring home their corne with joy and gladnes. Exam. 2. Ge. 25.30. and Esau said to Iacob, feed me I pray thee with that red with that red pottage. Here the doubling of the same words intendeth both the affection of Esau, and the signification of the words: that is, With that excellent red pottage. But when the repetition is in diverse words, it intendeth the affection, but not the signification of the words. Example, Exod. 32.6. The people sat downe to eate and drinke, and rose up to play* heare the words to Eate, Drinke, and Play, intend not the signification, but onely the affection of the people; they expresse how earnest the people were in this their Idolatrie. It is true, ye shall find when diverse words are set downe to expresse one thing, they sometimes intend the signification, as well as the affection; but that is in the joyning of the words, and not in the words themselves. Example Luc. 17.17. They did eate, they dranke; they married wives, they were given in marriage. Here although their securitie be set downe by diverse wordes, yet the repetition of them intendeth the signification, as well as the affection; they are set downe here without any conjunction,The Hebrewes to expresse the earnestnesse of things, set downe the words (...), without a conjunction. after the manner of the Hebrewes: for the Hebrewes when they would expresse their earnest desire about a businesse, they set downe their words without a conjunction: but when diverse words are set downe with a conjunction, then they intend not the signification, but onely the affection; as here, Thou shalt love the Lord with all thy s^ule etc. Here the words intend the affection, but not the signification: and therefore wee are not here curiously to seeke how these words differ, but to understand, that we should love the Lord, not onely comparatively, or appretiatively; but both intensively
 and extensively, as farre as we can: and as the sunne beames gathered together and united in a Cristall glasse,Deus amendus est intensive and extensive. burne the hoter: So all the affections gathered together and united, mak the love the more fervent, Tunc omnes fontes mei laudabunt te Psal. 103.
Contrarie to this love is lukewarmenesse in the service of God. Such was the Church of Laodicea,God cannot abide lukewarme people. because they were lukewarme, therefore the Lord saith; I will spue them out of my mouth. Rev. 3.16. For cold and hot things contract the stomacke and make it to keepe the nourishment: but lukewarmenesse dilateth the stomacke and maketh it spue out the nourishment:Non datur hic medium. So the Lord cannot a bid those lukewarme people, but spueth them out. Lukewarmenesse is not a midst betweene cold and heate, as in naturall things; but it is more opposite to heat than cold is.
And that we may conceive this the better, let us marke these foure sorts of people.


Continens and temperans, bonus.


Incontinens and temperans, malus.


Incontinens and intemperans, pejor.


Continens and intemperans, pessimus.


The best sort of these foure,Foure sorts of professors compared together and who are worst. are they who are both continent and temperate, subduing their passions, and serving God in sincerity both in heart and deed; as Zacharie and Elizabeth were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandements and ordinances of the Lord blamelesse. Luc. 1.6.
Secondly, the Incontinent and Temperate are not the worst, as those who are over ruled by their passions but burst not forth in act, as David when hee was about to kill Nabal; here hee was incontinent: but by the wise councell of Abigail he was restrained from murther, and was temperate in his action.
Thirdly some are both incontinent and intemperat
 and yet these are not the worst, who being overcome with their Passions burst forth in act, as David when he committed adulterie, and as hee who killed in sudden passion: neither are those most opposite to them who are both continent and temperat.
Fourthly, some are continent and intemperat, and they are worst of all, and most opposite to the first sort. For such doe not things through passion, but under colour and pretence of religion, as the Hypocrites: these the Lord doth abhorre most of all, even as he who in cold blood killeth a man, is more detestable than he who killeth in sudden passion: for this sinne commeth neerest to the sinne of the Divell, who is not subject to passion. And as these who commit adulterie not so much through lust, but out of the bad habit of their mind, because it is contrarie to the Law; are more hardly reclaimed than others who are misled by lust (for here the reasonable facultie is corrupted, and in the other the sensual facultie) so a man who through infirmity and weaknes, falleth in the neglect of the service of his God; is not so corrupted, as he who through a bad habit is corrupted, so that at no time he can love the Lord. And the child of God may be compared to a man who falleth into an Epilepsie, but those lukewarme people are like those that have the Hydropsie who thirst continually: and therefore of al sinnes we must abhorre and detest this lukewarmenesse most,  as most opposite to God and his worship.
Whether is the hatred of God, or the ignorance of God the greater sinne?
 In diverse considerations the hatred of God may bee a greater sinne than ignorance, and ignorance may bee a greater sinne than hatred. First, for the hatred of God. That is the greatest sinne which is most opposite to the greatest good:In genere moris Odium Dei est deterius ignorantia, Sed in penere entis Ignorantia est deterior Odi^. therefore the hatred of God opposite to the love of God, must bee the greater sinne. But if ye
 will consider ignorance as opposite to the vision of God, (wherein consisteh our blessednesse) then the ignorance of God is a greater sinne than the hatred of God: for to see God is a more excellent thing, than to love him.
And to love God the better we should hate our selves Luc. 21.26:
Man is considered in a fourefold estate.Man considered in a threefold estatr. First in his innocent estate. Secondly in his corrupt estate. Thirdly in his regenerate estate, and Fourthly, in his glorified estate.
In his innocent estate, to love God and to love himselfe were Idem:The love of a mans e-selfe in his innocent state was but a reflex of the love of God. for as the Echo est individuum cum suo sono, it is but the reflexe of the same sound backe againe: so when man loved God in his innocent estate, and then loved himselfe; it was but a reflexe of the love of God and but one love with it.
In the second estate, to love God and to love himselfe are contrarie, Rom. 1.30. Haters of God. 2 Tim. 3.2. Men shall be lovers of their owne selves.
In the third estate to love God and to hate our selves are not directly contrarie, but subcontrarie: for by this hatred is understood onely lesse love, and hatred is not properly taken here, this maketh the subcontrarietie: and the Schoolemen say well, Deus non extinguit,God taketh not away the love of a mans selfe but moderateth it. sed ordinat affectiones, He taketh not away the love of a mans selfe, but onely moderateth it; that hee hate himselfe, that is, love himselfe lesse than God; and in this sense it is said, Gen. 29.31. That he hated Leah, that is, he lesse loued her than Rachel. In the fourth estate they shall be one againe.

In statu primo, Amore deum et amare se, sunt idem.
In statu secundo, Amare deum et amare se, sunt contraria.
In statu tertio, Amare deum et edisse se, sunt subcontraria.
In statu quarto, Amare deum et amare se, sunt idem.


We cannot reach to the full measure of this love in this life,Our knowledge of God in this life is not perfect. Simile. the knowledge which we have of God, is but secundum modum recipientis, et non recepti, that is, It is according to the measure of our knowledge, and not according to the dignitie of him that is knowne. Thou seest in a looking glasse the Image of a face represented before it, the glasse representeth the face here, not according to the perfection of the face, but onely according to the perfection of the glasse; which representeth the Image of things to us, and not the essence of things. So we see the Image of the fire in the eye, not according to the nature of the fire (for then it should burne and consume the eye) but onely the colour and the figure of the fire;Our love to God in the this life is, as our knowledge of him is. and the eye although it bee but little, yet it taketh up the whole figure of the Hemisphere: so the knowledge which we have of God, it is but a finite knowledge, we know him not as hee is infinite in himselfe, and our love is as our knowledge is. In the life to come our knowledge shall bee but a finite knowledge, but then we shall love both Intensive et extensive to the full, that is all, that the Law requireth of us.
The Children of God love the Lord, vel secundum actum, alwayes; as the glorified in heaven: vel secundum studium:Diligitur Deus vel secundu^. actum.studium.habitum, for their care and indevour is to love the Lord: this is the greatest perfection of love, that the Children of God can attaine unto, in this life: vel secundum habitum; as many of the Children of God, when they fall into some great sinne, yet they lose not the habite of the love of God.
Papists hold that God requireth not this love literally.Most of the Schoolemen, and Papists hold, that this Commandement craveth not this literally here; but onely they teach that this is Medium, a midst to lead us to the end, when we shall love him fully in the life to come: and they adde further, that Secundum sensum anagogicum, the Law requireth this exact and full love; but it
 craveth it not of us literally here in this life; and they say there is a double perfection: First, Quando pervenitur ad finem. Secondly, Quando non receditur a sine, When we attaine to the end; Or when we goe not from the end.Simile. And they give this example: A Captaine saith to his Souldiers, fight and obtaine the victorie; some of them doe fight and obtaine the victorie; some of them againe doe their best, and yet obtaine not the victorie; yet they fight also, and doe fulfill the Captaines Commandement: So in this life they say, that God requireth no more of us, but that we goe not from the end, and in the life to come that we attaine unto the end. But these Souldiers who fight and obtaine not the victorie, if the Captaine should deall with them, In foro stricti juris, According to the rigour of the Law, they should get no reward of him; but it pleaseth the Captaine to accept of the good indevours of his Souldiers: and so dealleth God with his Servants,God accepteth of the endevou^s of his children in the Court of new obedience he accepteth of his Saints in the Court of new obedience, although they come farre short of that obedience, which is required of them.
But under the New Testament hee promiseth that his Children should keepe his Lawes.  Ezek. 36.27.
They shall begin this new obedience in this life,  Our new obedience begun here, but perfect in the life to come. and that more cherefully than under the Law: but that shall be perfected in the life to come, which is required in the Law.
This one Commandement, to love the Lord with all our heart, is the Commandement which we must study first: for all the rest are implied and contained in it, as the conclusions are contained in the premisses and this Love is the fulfilling of the Law Rom. 13.10.Amor Dei ^^p et Legem
Reductive.Effective.Formaliter.
This love of God, is the fulfilling of the Law three wayes. First, Reductive, because we fulfill all the Comments
 for the love of God. Secondly Effective, hee who loveth the Lord is readie to obey him. And thirdly formaliter, quia finis in moralibus habet rationem forma: for all our actions should bee referred to his glorie.
To put our trust in God, is commanded in the first Commandement.As this Commandement craveth of us to love God, so it Commandeth us to put our whole trust in him, to hope in him, and to feare him. First, to put our trust in him, He that trusteth in the Lord shall stand as Mount Zion, that cannot he removed. Psal. 125.1. But the wicked who put their trust in any other thing, their hope shall bee cut off and their trust shall be a spiders house, Iob. 8.14. marke the comparison, the spider spinneth a web out of her owne bowels, and shee weaveth it most curiously, then she incloseth herselfe within the midst of her web, as it were a house: but how easily is she swept away? So man when he spinneth out of his owne heart, his owne imaginations and trusteth in them;The trust of the wicked, like the Spiders web. they are but like the Spiders house unto him. These weave the Spiders web, but their webs shall not become garments to them, neither shall they cover themselves with their workes, Esay. 59.5.6.
The goodnesse of God is the object of our hope.So we should hope in him. The reason wherefore we beleeve him, is the authoritie of the speaker; although we have no evidence of that which we beleeve: So the reason wherefore we hope in God, is his power and goodnesse, that he is able and willing to performe that which wee hope for. Fides respicit primario veritatem, spes vero primario bonitatem.
So we should feare him. The Lord is called The feare of Isaac. Gen. 31.42. (as he is called Expectatio et Patientia Israel,God is called The feare of Isaac. Iere. 14.8.) that is, he whom Isaac feareth, Esay 8.13. Sanctifie the Lord and let him be your feare. It is the manner of the Scriptures, to put the habit or the passion
 for the object. So Gal. 2.23.Actus potentia pro objecto ponuntur. Faith is put for Christ the object of faith, and Rom. 8. We are saved by hope, that is, by Christ hoped for. So the feare of Isaac, that is, the Lord whom Isaac should feare.
The Chaldees call God Dehil,(...) terror or feare Dan. 2.31. Iacob comming from Syrian and being to sweare to a Syrian, sweareth to him according to the Syrian or Chalde Phrase, by the feare of his Father Isaac, that is, as Onkelos paraphraseth it, by the God that Isaac feared.
This feare of God is a fence for the keeping of all the Commandements. Deut. 4.10. I will cause them to heare my words that they may learne to feare me. So Levit. 25.17. Ye shall not therefore oppresse one another, but yee shall feare the Lord. So vers. 36. Take no usurie of him or encrease, but feare thy God. So vers. 43. Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour, but shalt feare thy God. So Levit. 19.32. Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and feare thy God. The beginning of wisedome is the feare of the Lord, and the end of all is to feare him. Eccles. 12, 13.
The Conclusion of this is, Seing no flesh can bee justified by keeping this Law, to love the Lord with all our heart, strength and might, wee must pray with David, enter not into judgement with thy Servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified Psal. 143.2. And that he would accept of us in the Court of new obedience, and not bring us into the Court of justice.



EXERCITAT. VII. Of the highest degree of mans love to God. Commandement I.

Rom. 9.3. For I could wish that my selfe were accursed from Christ for my brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh.

WE are bound to love God above all things, because he is the fountaine of all goodnesse, and next unto him wee should love our owne Salvation.Our temporary life to be preferred to the life of our equall.
We are bound to love our temporarie life better then out neighbours, provided that he be our equall: but if he be our superior in the highest degree, as our King, or the Commonwealth,The temporary life of our superiour to be preferred to our owne. then we are bound to give our temporarie life, for their saftie: Davids subjects said to him, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Sam. 18. But for our Spirituall life,Our owne salvation to be preferred to the salvation of all men. wee are more bound to wish our owne salvation, than the salvation of any other whatsoever, yea than the salvation of the whole Church. Mat. 25.9. The wise Virgins sayd, not so, lest there bee not enough for us and for you.
We are bound to quit our temporarie estate for the peace of the Church:Gregorius Presbyter de vita Nazianzen. Gregorie Nazianzen giveth us a good proofe of this: for when there arose a great contention in the Councell of Constantinople about him, because hee was placed there, their suffrages not being asked: Nazianzen left his place willingly, and said to the rest after this manner; I beseech you by the holy Trinitie, that ye would live peaceably together, and if I be any cause of the dissention, I am no more worthy then the Prophet Ionas was, cast mee into the Sea, that
 this storme may cease; and I will most willingly suffer whatsoever ye will doe unto me (although I bee innocent) for your peace sake; cast me out of my place and banish me, onely keepe unitie and peace amongst your selves. Farewell holy Pastors, and remember my labours continually.
Secondly the good Pastor is bound to give his life for his sheepe, Ioh. 10.17. and Paul said he was readie to die at Ierusalem for the name of the Lord Iesus, Act. 21.10.
Thirdly,We may desire the deferring of our glory for the good of the Church. wee may desire sometimes the deferring of our glorie to come, for the good of the Church. Philip. 1.23. For I am in a straite betweene two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is farre better; neverthelesse to abide in the flesh is more needfull for you, but we must never desire, for the good of the Church, to be deprived of eternall life.
But Paul wished to bee deprived of eternall glory,  for the good of the Iewes and their eternall Salvation.
This was but a conditionall wish,  like unto that of our Saviours, let this cup passe etc. And charitas exuberans optat etiam Impossibilia, saith Luther. When Paul wished that he might be a curse for his brethren, it was voluntas conditionata, but when Christ wished that this cup might passe, it was voluntas sub conditione;Voluntas Conditionatasub conditione. the matter may be cleared by this Example, a man hath two servants, both their wils are subordinat to their Masters will, but hee injoyneth to one of them a harder taske then to the other; this man refuseth not to doe his Masters will, but saith unto him, if it be thy wil, I will doe this, although it be a hard taske, here his will is sub conditione, as before it was voluntas conditionata, a will readie to doe his masters will: but this is a further degree, that he will undergoe this likewise, if his Master will bid
 him,The difference betwixt Pauls wish and Christs wish. and this is the lowest degree of subjection. Pauls wish was voluntas conditionata onely, but Christs wish was not onely conditionata, but likewise sub conditione.
We are joyned to God Similitudine naturae, vel communione faelicitatis.Againe we must observe that we are joyned to God, either similitudine, natarae, or communione faelicitatis. The first is broken off by the evill of sinne, and the second by the evill of punishment. Now if Paul should have wished to have beene removed from Christ, ratione similitudinis naturae, that had beene a sinne in him; but hee wished onely to be separated from him communione faelicitatis. Bernard said, it was better to bee in hell and love God, than to be in Heaven and sinne. None that loveth God can be in hell, nor none that sinneth can bee in heaven:We may will the greatest punishment rather than the diminution of Gods glory. for the midst and the end cannot be separat; yet this should bee our disposition, when wee give a proofe of our love to God, that wee could wish in sincerity the greatest punishment, rather then that Gods glorie should be diminished.Simile. The Philosopher saith, that naturall things have two motions, the one ad sui conservationem, the other ad conservationem universi; as water tendeth downeward by the proper motion of it, yet ad vitandum vacuum, to eschew emptinesse, which is repugnant to the nature of the whole, it will ascend: So the Godly have the like inclination, one for their owne particular good, and the other for the good of the whole,The good of the Church to be preferred to our temporary estate. which is the glory of God; if we can redeeme the good of the whole Church with our greatest temporarie misery, we are obliged to it.
 But how could he wish this, seeing it importeth a diminution of the love of God, this is not Malum paenae but Malum Culpae:Malum CulpaePaenae: for if he had beene in that estate, he had beene excluded from Heaven, and he had been viator still, but if he had beene in heaven hee had beene Comprehensor;Ma^ in this li^e is V^a^or, in heaven he shall be Comprehensor. and they who are from home, travelling to their journies end, can never love God so perfectly;
 as they who have attained to the marke alreadie.
If ye will consider this petition by it selfe,  it was neither sinne nor dimunition of this love: but if ye will consider the consequents of this wish,Pauls wish considered simply in it selfe was no sinne. if indeed hee had beene excluded from the Kingdome of heaven, then it had beene a sinne for him to have wished it. One may wish a thing simplie without sinne,Simile. yet to wish it vestitum omnibus circumstantijs it may be sinne. Example, a woman hath her husband to be executed for some capitall offence, the woman wished her husband to live, as her husband, and a Father to her Children to provide for them; but if she should desire her husband to live as an Enemie to the Commonwealth contrarie to the Law, then her wish were a sinfull wish: So for Paul to wish this to testifie his earnest love to the Church, it was no sinne;Pauls wish vestitum circumstantije was a sinne. but if he had wished it vestitum ominibus circumstantijs, with a diminution of the love of God, and want of eternall happines; then his wish had beene sinne.
Againe we wish a thing antecedente voluntate vel consequente voluntate, with an antecedent or consequent will. Example, a Iudge by his antecedent will,Voluntas antecedenssubsequens. wisheth that all the subjects may live; but by his consequent will, he wisheth the malefactor to die. So Paul wished this by his antecedent will, but not considering it with all the consequents that might follow upon it.
Fourthly, Paul wished not this absolutely,Pauls wish was not absolute but in comparison. but in comparison: as the naturall Mother who pleaded before Salomon chose rather, that the Child should be given to her who was not the Mother of it, than that the Child should be cut in two, 1 King 3.26. If ye consider Pauls wish here, it was onely in comparison; rather then they should die, he wisheth this to himselfe.
But how wisheth hee to be accursed of God,  and to
 be rased out of the booke of life, seeing it was a thing impossible?
 If ye consider this wish of Paul formally, he cannot be rased out of the booke of life;Pauls wish considered materially and formally. but if ye will consider it materially, looking to Pauls affection at this time, then hee might have beene rased out of the booke of life. Consider Christs Petition, let this cup passe. In Gods eternall decree it was impossible that it should passe, but consider againe Christs infirmitie as he was a man, these two might stand together, not to passe, and that it should passe: So consider Gods eternall decree, Paul cannot bee accursed, nor his name rased out of the Booke of Life: but consider againe his love and affection towards his brethren, hee wished to bee rased out of the booke of Life. Love is like unto the Ivie, which if if it cleave to a stone or an old Wall, it will rather die than forsake it: So Paul being sicke of love for the Churches cause, hee would rather suffer the most extreme punishments, then that the Church of the Iewes should perish.
A man cannot simply wish to be accursed for others.A man may wish that which tendeth to his perfection, as to give his life for his Countrie; this is a way to happinesse, if hee doe it in faith, but if hee should seeke simply to be accursed for others, this were to seeke his owne destruction; and this he cannot doe.Pauls wish was not an ordinary meanes of the Iewes salvation.
Pauls wish was not an ordinary meane here for the saving of the Iewes, but his earnest desire comming from his great love testified this, how earnestly hee desired their Salvation.
 First, this wish of Paul teacheth us, how much wee should account of the salvation of the sonnes of men.
 Secondly, this wish teacheth us that love seeketh not her owne, 1 Cor. 13.5.

Thirdly, it teacheth us, that love is stronger then death  Cant. 8.6.
Fourthly, it teacheth us, how much wee are indebted  to Christ, who did really undergoe this curse for us.
The conclusion of this is,  hee that loveth not the Church unfainedly, he can never love God intirely: for he that loveth not his Mother who bare him, will never love his Father who begot him.


EXERCITAT. VIII. Commandement, 1.

Luc. 16.13. Ye cannot love God and Mammon.

WHen we love any thing more than God, and set our affections upon it, then wee make a god of it.Three sort^ of men who have not God for their God.
There are three sorts of people especially who have another god for their god. The first are (...) lovers of honour. The second are (...) lovers of mony, and of third are (...), lovers of Pleasures.
The first are (...) lovers of honour; man naturally seeketh himselfe and his owne honour, and he forgetteth to give honour to God. Iohn 7.18. He that speaketh of himselfe seeketh his owne glorie, but hee that seeketh his glorie that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousnesse is in him.
The highest degree of this Idolatrie is when they affect that honour which belongeth onely to God;A great ambition to affect the honour that is due to God. the ground of this affectation, is that poison which Sathan
 dropped into the eares of our first Parents in Paradise, when he said, Ye shall bee as Gods, Gen. 3.5. Therefore man affecteth the honour, that is due to God. Such was that ambition of Herod, Act. 12.22. When he was delighted with that cry of the people,The great ambition of Tyr^s. The voyce of God and not of man. Such was the ambition of Nabuchadnezzer, Esay. ^4.14. I will ascend above the height of the cloudes, I will be like the most high. Such was the ambition of the King of Tornes, Ezekiel. 28. First in wisedome, hee thought himselfe wiser than Daniel. vers. 3. Then hee thought himselfe to be the summe and perfection of all wisedome. Thirdly, he thought that he exceeded the High Priest in all his ornaments, vers. 13. Fourthly he thought himselfe to be above Adam when he was in Eden the Garden of God vers. 13. Fiftly above the Cherubims or Angels vers. 14. A^d last he said, he was God himselfe, and sat in the seat of God. An^ such is the ambition of the Pope that exalteth himselfe above all that is called God. 2 Thess. 1.4.
 How can creatures desire to be like God: for they cannot desire that there should be two Infinits?
 There are two sorts of desires, voluntas absoluta et efficax,Voluntas
absoluta and efficax.conditionata and inefficax. et conditionata et inefficax: by the first they cannot desire to be like God; but by the second they may desire to bee like God. The will of man cannot absolutely wish to be like God in all things,A creature cannot wish to be like God in all things. but it wisheth to be like God in somethings, as Adam and Eve desired to bee like him in knowledge. Nabuchadnezzer desired to bee like him in greatnesse. Esay. 14.14. Simon Magus desired to be like him in power, in working of miracles, therefore they called him the great power of God, Act. 8.10. and Herod desir^d to bee worshiped like God Act. 12.22. But absolutely no creature can desire to bee like God.
The second sort, are (...), lovers of money, covetousnesse is Idolatry, Ephes. 5.5.

There is a great resemblance betwixt the Idolatrie of the first Commandement,Great affinity betwixt Idolatry of the first Commandement and Idolatry of the second Commandement. and the Idolatry of the second Commandement; betwixt a covetous wretch setting his heart upon his mony, and an Idolater, bowing before his Image. The Lord shewed to Ezekiel in a vision. Cap. 8. the vile abhominations that were committed within the Temple, and what they were doing in the Chambers of their Imagerie. Some were worshipping creeping things; Some with their Censers in their hands making the smoake to goe up before their Images, and some weeping before the filthy Idoll Tammuz. So if the Lord would lead us in the Spirit, and let us see (as hee did Ezekiel) what our severall affections were doing within us; we should see a thousand times greater Idolatrie, than ever Ezekiel saw in the Temple. Here wee should see some sacrificeing to their owne net,Greater Idolatry now than in the dayes of Ezekiel. Habak. 1.16. ascribing all things to their owne wit and policie. We shall see others sacrificing to Tammuz or Ball Peor, to their filthy lust, and as, Iere. 7.18. The Children gathered the Wood, the Fathers kindled the fire, and the Women kneaded their dough to make Cakes to the Queene of Heaven; so when wee looke into our hearts wee shall see our affections busie to give some sort of service to this Idoll or that, and to none more readily, then to Baal-mammon.
When Nabuchadnezzar set up a golden Image to bee worshiped, all the People fell downe and worshiped it, but the three children who refused to worship it were cast into the firie furnace, yet the Angell of the Lord was with them in the midst of the firie furnace, and they found the most comfortable presence of God with them, because they would not fall downe before that Idoll: So saith Chrysostome,Chrysost. Hom. 18. in Cap. 5. ad Ephes. covetous and avaritious wretches fall downe before their mony, but the children of God refuse with the three Children to fall downe before that
 god of thicke clay which is Gold,(...) Aurum est densum lutum. gnabh tit, densum lutum, Habak. 2.7. And therefore God is with them in all their necessities, and provideth for them. And as the Idolater hath a sacrifice which hee offereth to his Idoll: So,The sacrifice of the covetous man to his Idoll. saith Chrysostome, hath the avaritious man his sacrifice which hee offereth to his Idoll, but what sacrifice hath he, Even those whom he defraudeth, and maketh a sacrifice of them to his Idoll: againe, he maketh a sacrifice of the poore to whom hee denyeth maintenance. And last, the wretch offereth himselfe, because hee defraudeth his owne soule of the use of his riches. And as the Idolater devoutly beholdeth his Idoll, and dare scarcely touch it: so the covetous wretch dare scarcely be bold to touch his mony, and his heart is oftener with his mony,The covetous man is maried to his gold. then the Idolaters heart is with his Idoll. Iob purged himselfe of this Idolatrie. If I have made Gold mine hope, or fine Gold my Confidence, Iob. 31.34. The Seventy reade it, si posui aurum in conjugium meum, and it signifieth the great love which the covetous man hath to his riches.
The third sort, are, (...) lovers of pleasures. Iohn reduceth all these sorts of pleasures to three, either the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes or the pride of life, 1 Ioh. 2.16. first the lust of the flesh, by this is meant all internall pleasures wherein the flesh delighteth, as drunkennesse gluttony, whoredome, such make a god of their belly: the very panch, which is the basest part in man, is made a god by them, they sacrifice not to the wit their more excellent part,The belly is a base god. but all their care is for the belly. Clemens Alexandrinus writeth of a fish which hee calleth (...) which hath not a heart distinguished from the belly, as other fishes have, but it hath the heart in the belly: So these gluttons which make a god of their belly, have their heart in their belly.

The second sort of pleasures, is the lust of the eyes.The lust of the eyes what. Eccles. 2.10. Whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not myne heart from any Ioy. He studied to satisfie all his senses,Salomen satisfied all his senses with pleasures. his eare with musicke. I got me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sonnes of men, as musicall instruments, and that of all sorts, vers. 8. His eye with great buildings, gardens and Orchards vers. 4.5. His tast, I sought in mine heart to give my selfe unto Wine, vers. 3. this is, to live in pleasure, and such are dead while they live. 1 Tim. 5.6. such were Tyrus and Sydon, and those of Phoenicia, they were called Phoenicians from the Syriacke word Phinnek delicatus, and (...) delicait,(...) delicate educavit. because they spent their time in pleasure. Christ pronounceth a woe against such, Woe bee to you that laugh, Luc. 6.25. That is, that spend your time in mirth and pleasure.
The third sort of pleasure, is the Pride of life, which puffeth up men that they know not themselves. David saith of these, that Pride compasseth them about as a chaine: and violence covereth them as a garment. Psal. 73.6.
The Conclusion of this is; The Lord in the Creation made a threefold subordination, first that man should bee subordinat and subject to God, to honour and reverence him. Secondly, that the sensuall appetite should be subordinat to the reasonable facultie. Thirdly, that things below here should bee subject both to the reasonable facultie and sensuall appetite, but when a man loveth any thing better than God, then all these three subordinations are broken: for when hee affecteth divine honour, making a god of himselfe; then the first subordination is broken* when hee setteth his heart on his pleasures, and maketh a God of them, as the rich glutton who had his pleasures and
 good things in things in this life, L^^. 16. Then the second subordination is broken. And thirdly, when hee setteth his heart on his mony, to make a God of it, and to serve it. As the rich man in the Gospell, Luc. 12.13. Then the third subordination is broken. Whereas it should serve him he, becommeth a slave to it: the heathen could say, mihi res, non me rebus submittere conor.




Commandement II.

EXERCITAT. I. Of Idolatry in generall.

Exod. 20.5. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any graven Image etc.

THere are two things forbidden in this Commandement: first to make an Image for a religious worship, and secondly to worship it.
Some condemne the act of painting and carving, as the Iewes doe,The lawfull use of painting. who will not suffer a painter to dwell amongst them. But this gift of it selfe, is the gift of God, as may be seene in Aholiab and Bezaliel whom the Lord indued with this skill. Exod. 31.3. Secondly some will not allow the historicall use of them in houses, or upon the Princes Coine for distinctions sake, but this is lawfull, and Christ himselfe alloweth it. Mat. 22.20. But some goe further and allow them,What use of painting unlawfull. not onely for ornaments in privat houses, but also in Churches, as the Lutherans doe. Fourthly, some allow them for excitation, to move them to worship: and lastly, some allow them for adoration. These are not Lawfull.
Thou shalt not make to thy selfe etc. There is a difference
 betwixt him that maketh the I^^^, and him that prayeth to it when it is made; the one is the materiall Idolater, the other is the formall Idolater. The artificer maketh onely the Image, but hee who prayeth before it and adoreth it, maketh a god of it. The Children of Israel cryed unto Aaron, make us gods to goe before us, Exod. 32.1. It was Aaron that made the Calfe, but the people made the Calfe a god. If a man had come into the shop of Demetrius the silver smith, and had asked him, what hee was doing? and he should have answered, I am making gods; hee should not have answered rightly here: for it was hee that bowed before the Idoll, and prayed before it, that made a god of it, Psal. 115.8. They that make them are like unto them: so are all they that put their trust in them. This is the speciall sort of making of gods, when men trust in them and adore them: The Poet Martiall saith,
Qui fingit sacros, auro vel marmore vultus,Non facit ille Deos; qui rogat, iste facit.
Thou shalt not bow downe to them etc. There are two things forbidden here, Nihil dandum idolo, nec accipiendum ab Idolo: Nothing must bee given to the Idoll, nor nothing taken from the Idoll. Wee must give nothing to the Idoll, as reverence or maintenance.No worship to be given to an Idoll.
First wee must doe no homage or reverence to the Idoll.(...) genuaflexit. (...) dimissio capitis cum superiore corpore. (...) verticen^ inclinare. (...) totum corpus prosternere. The Hebrews have foure words, to note the foure severall gestures of the bodie, the first is Barach, The bowing of the knee, 2 Chr. 6.13. The second is Carang, which signifieth the bowing of the head, with the bulke of the body, Psal. 95.6. The third is Kadad, the bowing of the head, the fourth is Hishtahhavah, The prostrating of the whole body upon the ground. So he
 forbiddeth to lift ^^e eyes to an Idol, Ier. 18.6. So to kisse the Idoll, 1 King 19.18. I have reserved ten thousand whose mouth have not kissed Baal. Cicero maketh mention of the Image of Hercules,(...) quando absolute ponitur significat osculari. cujus mentum osculis adorantium attritum fuit. And when they could not reach to the Idoll to kisse it, they kissed their hand in token of homage which they did to their Idoll. Contrarie to this sort of worship is the kissing of the Sonne Iesus Christ, Psal. 2.12. This osculum homagij, is due onely to Christ.
Secondly,Nothing to be given to the maintenance of an Idoll. wee must give nothing to an Idoll for the maintenance of the service of it, as the Israelites tooke their eare-rings and Iewels to make the golden calfe. So we must not plant groves to it, Deut. 16.22. Psal. 137.2. We hanged our harpes upon the willowes, when they desired us to play to their gods; wee hung up our harpes upon the Willowes, that is, upon the groves consecrat to Belus or Bel, and we said, it were better that our tongues should cleave to the roofe of our mouth, than that wee should forget the worship of the true God at Ierusalem; so to erect any title or inscription in honour of them, Levit. 26.1.
So to institute a Priesthood to serve these Idols,Nuplere manum quid Hebreyes. Iud. 17.12. As Micah consecrated a Levite, in the originall it is Implevit Micah manum Levitae, where this Idolater imitated the forme of consecration of the Lords Priests, Exod. 29.31. 2 Chro. 13.3. Omnis veniens ad implendam manum suam, that is, to bee ordained: When the Priest was consecrat to the Lord, the Ramme which was to be offered, was called Aries impletionis Exod. 29.31. Because the hand of the Priest was filled with it when he was ordained. These Idolatrous Priests, 2 King. 23. are called Kemarim, as ye would say, blacke,(...) denigrare. because they were smoked with the smoke of the sacrifices.

The Priests stood barefoot before the Lord when they served.So to stand barefooted before the Idoll which the heathen called Nudipedalia, they borrowed this custome from the Preists of the Lord, who stood barefooted before the Lord when they served,
All these sorts of externall worship given to Idols the Iewes called Gnabhuda Zara, and it consisted in foure things,(...) Cultus alienus (...) altare (...) fuffitus (...) incurvatio (...) libatio How adoration differeth from prayer. first Altare, secondly Suffitus, thirdly, Incurvatio, and fourthly Libatio.
Adoration consisteth in the inward adoration of the heart, and outward gesture of the body; and it differeth from Prayer, which may bee performed by the inward act of the mind sometimes, without any outward gesture of the body.Adoration is an act of religious worship.
This Adoration is an act of religion, properly to bee performed to God onely, as the object of it; for it ariseth of an apprehension of the excellence of God above all things created, and it is Idolatrie when this worship is given to any creature either directly or indirectly.
Spirituall and civill worship are distinguished by the end and intention of the worshipper.Spirituall Adoration and civill adoration are distinguished by the end, and the intention of the worshipper onely distinguisheth them. There is no outward worship which is done to God but it may be done to men, except onely sacrifice which is due to God onely, Exod. 22. Otherwayes the intention of these who worship, and the end wherefore they worship, distinguisheth them. When the mother of the sonnes of Zebedeus came to Christ and bowed to him, Mat. 20.20. desiring that one of her sonnes might sit at his right hand, and the other at his left hand, this was but civill adoration which she gave to him; because it was but a civill thing which she required of him, taking him to bee a temporall King: but when a Catholicke cometh and boweth before the Pope, he giveth him more then civill honour, he giveth him divine honour; why? because he
 taketh him to bee one that cannot erre in his calling, and who is Christs vicar upon earth here: So hee giveth him in effect that which is due to Christ, and that he hath that same power to forgive sinnes which Christ hath.
There is Totum potestativum and Totum contractum;Totum
Potestat^vum.Contractum. Totum potestativum is the power of ruling and governing in a King; Totum contractum is the same power contracted in an inferiour magistrat; as in a Major or Provest, Christ hath Totum potestativum, absolute power to remit sinnes, but his ministers have not Totum contractum, as inferior magistrates have the power of the King,Ministers haue not totum contractum but they are as heraulds to pronounce remission of sinnes. they are onely but Heralds to make intimation of the remission of sinnes: the inferiour magistrat may urge obedience to himselfe, because he hath. Totum potestativum contractum in himselfe; but no man hath Totum potestativum contractum within himselfe to remit sinnes. When they bow before the Pope, they hold that he hath not onely potestatem contractam to remit sinnes, but potestatem excellentiae, and that it differeth onely in degree from Christs power, whereas the Minister in remission of sinnes, hath not this power (...) sed tantum (...), and he doth nothing in absolution but disposeth onely the penitent,potestas
(...).(...). and by the word and probable signes absolueth him: this absolution is not a proper act of forgivenesse of sinne, as if it had a direct, necessarie and physicall influence in forgivenesse of sinne: but he is onely Causa moralis, seu concilians, whereupon God is moved to pardon the penitent when he seeth him humbled. But they ascribe to the pope the same power which is in Christ to forgive sinnes, although not in the same degree: therefore when they bow before the pope it is idolatrous worship, and as the people called Simon Magus the great power of God. Act. 8.10. so do they the pope.

The intention of the worshiper maketh not that civill worship which was first instituted to be spirituall.The intention of the worshiper maketh not that civill worship which was first instituted to be spirituall worship. Example, If a man should stand before an idoll, and faine himselfe to bow before it, for the loosing of the lachet of his shoe, this were idolatrie; why? because bowing before an idoll was instituted for the honour of the idoll: and here we must distinguish inter finem operis,Finis
Oteris.Operantis. and finem operantis, and the action is to be judged a fine operis and non operantis.
 The conclusion of this is, No bodily gesture distinguisheth spirituall worship from civill; therefore God counteth nothing of the outward bodily worship, where the inward worship of the heart is wanting. To bow downe the head like a bull-rush and to spread sackcloath and ashes under them. Esay 58.5. this did not please the Lord: and when the Lord willeth us to keepe our foote when wee goe into the house of God, Eccles. 5.1. It is meant of the affections, and not of the foote of the bodie.
 Secondly, it is finis operis, and not operantis which distinguisheth the action, therefore these turne-coats, and time servers, who have a knee readie for every idolatrous service, their intentions will not excuse them from idolatrie, because the chiefe thing which is intended there is idolatrie.



EXERCITAT. II. No spirituall worship is due to any creature invisible. Commandement II.

Exod. 20.4. Or any likenesse of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.

GOd knowing the wandring heart of man how prone it is to idolatrie, and to goe a whoring after other Gods, first he forbiddeth them to worship any thing in heaven, secondly in the earth, thirdly in water under the earth. He forbiddeth them to worship these visible creatures; but there is more comprehended here: God said, in the creation, that he created heaven and earth. Gen. 1.1. But the Apostle expresseth it more largely. Coloss. 1.16. For by him were created all things that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible. So should this be resolved here more largely, as to things invisible now in the heavens, and to the devills who are cast out of the heavens, and appeare to men in visible shapes.
Things in heaven which are not to be worshiped: as first, the humanity of Christ; Christ God and man is the object of our worship, but not Christ in his manhead.Iohn 5.23. Christ God and man is the object of our worship. He that honoureth not the sonne, honoureth not the father. Ro. 14.11. All knees shall bow to me. Iohn 20.28. Thomas said, My Lord, and my God; yet the man Christ was to be worshipped when he was lying in the grave: because the hypostaticall union was not separated by death; but the humanity by it self is not to be worshiped* for Christ
 as man he worshiped. Ioh. 4.22. We know what we worship.The humani^y of Christ by it selfe is not to worshiped. Nicen. epist. 7. ad Constant. Secondly, Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man. Ier. 17.5. But the humane nature of Christ considered by it selfe, is a man, and therefore not to be worshiped. And the councell of Nice accursed Nestorius, and condemned him as an idolater, because he did hold that Christ the sonne of God was but a mere man, and yet was to be worshiped; Cyrill calleth this (...): it is true, we worship Christs manhood with his Godhead associative, but we worship not his Godhead and his ma^hood copulative; we worship the king with his crown associative, but we worship not the king and the crowne copulative;Adorati^
Associativa.Copulat^va. and we worship not the humanitie of Christ for it selfe, but because it is hypostatically united to the Godhead, and so it is worshipped (...). If we should worship the humanity of Christ with civil honour,To worship the godhead of Christ with civill honour is blasphemie. as it is hypostatically united to the Godhead, then we should worship the Godhead but with civill honour, which were blasphemie; for spirituall honour is onely due to the Godhead, and the worship which is due to one of the persons in the hypostaticall union, is due also to the other: therefore it is not civill honour which is given to the humanitie of Christ, as it is united hypostatically with the Godhead; and seeing adoration respecteth totum suppositum,Adoration looketh t^ the greatest excellencie in the person. the whole person; it looketh alwayes to the greatest excellencie in the person, for otherwise if we should worship a person, and not looke to his chiefest excellencie, it were no lesse then to professe that there were no greater excellencie in him. Example,Simile. If a King were both a Duke, a Marquesse, and an Earle, and if one should giue him the honour onely which is due to an Earle, this were in effect to degrade him of his kingly honour: so to consider Christ as God and man, and yet to giue him onely but civill honour, this were to degrade him of his greatest honour:
 To conclude this with Athanasius, Nec Verbum sine Carne, nec Caro sine Verbo adorari potest;Neither the Godhead of Christ without the manhood, nor the manhood without the Godhead are to be worshiped. Ob. but so that the reason and cause of the adoration is still in the deitie; and the humanitie is adored because it is hypostatically joyned to the deitie.
A distinct excellencie stirreth up a distinct affection and motion in the minde, but the excellencie of the humanitie is a distinct excellencie: therefore it should stirre up a distinct adoration.
A distinct excellencie in distinct persons should have a distinct adoration;  A distinct excellence in diverse persons stirreth up a distinct reverence and affection: as a King should be otherwise worshiped then a Baron: but when they concurre in one person, then there should not be a distinct adoration: here we give one sort of adoration to the whole, to both the natures of Christ in one person.
Angels who are in heaven are not to be worshipped.Angels not to be worshiped. Coloss. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward involuntary humility and worshiping of angels, intruding himselfe in those things which he hath not seen, vainely puffed up in his fleshly minde, and not holding the head. Where the Apostle reasoneth this wayes, every one who is subject and subordinate, as the members are to the head, should not have that honour which is due to the head. But the angels are subject to the head; therefore they should not have that which is due to Christ the head: Let us pray to our father, and he can send legions of angels to defend us. Matt. 26.23.
There are two sorts of worship, cultus religionis,Cultu^ ReligionisSocietatis. and cultus societatis; cultus societatis belongeth to all those who are of one society, the angels are our fellow servants. Revel. 22.9. Therefore this worship which is done to them, is done to them as our fellow servants.
This civill worship which is performed by men, is either as they are politici in civitate mundi, or ecclesiastici in ecclesia D^i; that is, as they are civill men dwelling upon
 the earth, and gathered within the church and made members of her; as they are members of the church againe, either they are members of the Church triumphant, or militant: the angels now are of the Church triumphant, conciues triumphantes: therefore they haue not of us cultum societatis now, and when they appeared of old to the Patriarchs they were worshipped onely with civill worship,  and so if they should appeare now.
Whether is it a diverse sort of worship which is given to an angell and to a king? it might seem to be a diverse kinde of worship, because the excellencie is diverse, the king being civill, and the angell spirituall.
 There is no midst betwixt religious worship and civill adoration: the adoration given to an angell and to a king,Adoration given to an angell and to a king differ in degree onely. non differunt specie, but gradu: for to make it civill worship, it is sufficient that it be a creature to whom it is given; but if we will respect the degree, there may be greater or lesser worship given; greater to the angels, and lesser to the king.
The soules departed are not to be worshiped.In heaven there are also the soules of the blessed departed, and them we may not worship: for they understand not what we are doing upon the earth. When Elias was to be taken up to heaven,The Iewes say of the dead, gnalau hashalem, which they contract thus (...) on him is peace, and not on him be peace. hee said to Elisha, aske of me what I shall doe for thee before I goe hence. 2. Kings 2.9. whereby hee implyed that there was no place to aske him after he was gone. And if the Saints on earth refused this spirituall worship offered to them, as Paul and Barnabas Act. 14.15. much more will they refuse it in heaven,Psal. 115.1. Revel. 5.13. they will say, not unto us, not unto us, they cast downe their crownes before him that sitteth upon the throne, and give him all the honour.
Of old there were Idolaters called Collyridani, of whom Epiphanius maketh mention, who baked cakes,The Church of Rome make an idoll of the virgin Mary. and offered them to the virgin Mary, this was idolatrous worship offered to her. So when the Church
 of Rome take the fine flowre and the incense of prayer, and offer to the virgin Mary, they commit idolatrie and make an idoll of her.
The conclusion of this is, commandements, promises and practises are our warrant to worship the Lord onely, and to call upon him in our necessity. Psal. 50.15. call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie mee.


EXERCITAT. III. No visible things in the heavens, or in the earth to be worshiped. Commandement II.

Exod. 20.4. Or the likenesse of any thing that is in heaven above, or etc.

AS before the Lord discharged things invisible in the heavens to be worshiped; so now he dischargeth all things visible, seene with the eye, whether devills appearing in a visible forme, or the sunne, moone and starres, or any creature in the earth, or in the water under the earth.
First, he forbiddeth to worship the infernall spirits, the devills, (...); when the devill appeareth in any visible shape to call upon him, or to sacrifice to him; such was the worship which they gave him in the Teraphim.The Teraphim what? Elias in tishbi sheweth how they made this Teraphim, they tooke a child who was the first borne, wrung off his neck, and embalmed his head with spices;How the Teraphim gave the answers. and they wrote in a plate of gold, the name of the spirit whom they called upon, and they put it under this
 head, and then the spirit gaue the answers. Laban called this Teraphim,(...) his God; therefore he saith, nehhashti, auguratus sum, I divined by my God that the Lord hath blessed mee for thy sake. Gen. 30.27.
(...)They had their Teraphim likewise in the likenesse of a whole man. 1. Sam. 19.13.
Secondly, they worshipped the devill in the forme of a goate, They shall no more offer their sacrifice to the hairie ones,(...) leshegnirim, that is, to the devils who appeared in the forme of satyres and goats. Levit. 17.7.
Thirdly they worshiped him in the forme of a flie. Baalzebub was the God of the Ekronites, and Ahazia sent to get a response of him, whether he should live or not. 2. Kings 1.2.
In all idolatrie the dedivill is worshiped:There is no sort of idolatrie in which the devill is not worshiped. Psal. 106.37. Yea they sacrificed their sonnes and daughters to devils. so 1. Cor. 10. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God; and I would not that you should have any fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drinke the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils. Those idolaters made not a direct covenant with the devill as the former did, nor they consulted not with him directly as they did.
The Sun is not to be worshiped.Now let us come to visible things, which they were forbidden to worship, and first the sunne, the moone and the starres, and things in the heavens.
How they came to worship the planets.Men studied first the course of the starres, and that bred astronomie; then they observed the influence of the planets, and that bred physick; then they foretold things by the starres, and that bred judiciall astrologie: and last they worshiped the planets, and that bred idolatrie. Of all the planets, they chiefly worshiped the sunne.The Amonites worshiped the sun. The Ammonites called the sunne moloch, and their God Moloch, and they burnt their children to this God, a most unnaturall sinne; they spared the Canaanites
 whom God commanded them to destroy,Diverse nations had the sun for their god. and spared not their children, the fruit of their owne loynes: the Lord commanded to offer the first borne to him, and they offered their first borne to Moloch.
They had horses for the sunne, and chariots for it,Subdiales Statua. which carried about the image of the sunne 2. Kings 13.11. and some worshiped the fire, symbolum solis; as the Chaldeans: and the Sydonians called the sunne Heliogabalus, deus fingens, vel formans;(...) Deut omnia fingens. (...) Omnia videns. because the sunne fashioneth all things; and the Israelites worshiped this god.
The Tyrians called the sunne Hercules; haar col, omnia videns; and Hercules twelve labours in their Mythologie, signify the sunne passing through the twelve, signes in the Zodiack.
So the Egyptians worshiped the sunne, and they called him Iupiter Hammon, omnia califaciens, so they called the sun Adon, dominus, they saluted the Sun (...),The Iewes learned from the heathen to worship the sun. and from Adon they made Adonis, and they tooke their fable of loosing and finding of Adonis, from the setting and rising of the sun, and the Iewes learned from these nations, to worship the sunne, the moone and hoast of heauen.
Seing the sunne is the chiefe of all the planets;  what is the reason why the idolaters call the sunne the queen of heaven? Ier. 7.8. and 44.19. When we burnt incense to the queene of heaven.
It should not be translated,  What is meant by the queene of heaven. When we burnt incense to the queene of heaven; the seventie translate it better, (...), the hoast of heaven* the difference of the interpretation arose of this, because the hebrew word malcah written with He, signifieth a queen, and with aleph it signifieth a worke. Againe, amongst the Latines Luna is in the feminine gender,(...) Regina (...) opus. and Sol is in the masculine gender: but with the Hebrewes shemesh the sunne is in the feminine gender, and jareah the moone is in the masculine gender: therefore according to their genders,
 it maybe said Deus lunus, and Sol regina.
Many become foolish in their worship. Simile.It is strange to se, how people have been so foolish, to forget the creator, and to give all praise to the creature; they are not unfitly compared to countrie people, who have never been at the court: when they come first to court, the first men that they see cloathed in fine apparell, they take him to be the King, and they fall downe and worship him: so the heathen when they saw some beautie in the sunne, they gave it that honour which was due to God.(...) Sol a (...) Ministrare shemesh the sunne, commeth from the word shamash ministrare, because it is appointed to serve men; why then should man fall downe and serve it?
They worsh^ped the moone as a goddesse.Secondly, they worshiped the moone in the heaven, and Iob purgeth himselfe of this idolatrie, Iob. 31.27. or my mouth had kissed mine hand, when I beheld the sunne when it shined, or the moone walking in her brightnes: the idolaters when they could not reach to the moone to kisse her, they kissed their hands in token of homage,Some wor^^iped the starres and planets. and this was called adorare, quasi applicare manum ad os.
Thirdly they worshiped the starres or mazoloth the planets, 2. King. 23.5. And he put downe also them that burnt incense vnto Baal, to the sunne, to the moone and Lemazaloth, to the planets. Gen. 30.11. and Leah said, a troupe commeth,(...) Lea and Rachel kept somer ^^u^s of their fathers idolatrie. and she called his name Gad. Bagad read in two words signifieth bonam fortunam: Gad was the host of heaven to which they sacrificed, and gave divine honour, Esay. 65.11. and they called it Masal tobh, bona fortuna; Leah ascribed this good fortune to the influence of the starres: neither of Iacobs wives were purged from their fathers idolatrie, Rachel stole her fathers Teraphim, and Leah ascribed all to good fortune, and the influence of the starres.
In earth they worshiped beasts, the Israelites worship^d the golden calfe in the wildernesse, this calfe
 they set up as a representation of God,Why the Israelites set up the golden calfe. who fed them in the wildernesse, and provided for them; the oxe was alwayes holden a signe of plentie,The oxe was a signe of plentie. therefore Salomon saith, where the oxe is wanting the crib is emptie* Prov. 14.4. and Ioseph because he provided for the people of God in their necessitie, he is called bos dei, Deut. 33.17. and the Romans set up a golden oxe to Minutius; because he provided for them in the famine. So they dedicated this calfe to the Lord, because he provided for them in the wildernesse.
The Lord forbiddeth them to make the likenesse of male or female to worship it, Deut. 4.16. for they worshiped both bul calves, and cow calves, they had both gneglim and gnegloth Hosea 10.15.(...) The apostle in disdaine putteth Baal in the feminine gender. and the Apostle Rom. 17.4. putteth the name Baal in the feminine gender, (...), and (...) should be understood. Tobit. 1.5. all the tribes made defection sacrificing (...) to the cow Baal, (...) should not be understood here, for what strength is there in an idoll to helpe?
God made man lord over all his creatures, as neate and sheepe, and all beasts of the field, Psal. 8.7. and yet man forgetteth this, and worshipeth the very basest of them.
Lastly, in the water under the earth. The Egyptians worshiped Nilus as a god, and the fishes in it. So the Philistims worshiped Dagon,The heathen worshiped the water as a god. which was halfe a fish and halfe a man in shape, therefore the Lord forbideth the people to learne at these heathen nations to worship things in the water under the earth.
The conclusion of this is, let us say with David, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon the earth that I desire besides thee. Psal. 73.25.



EXERCITAT. IV. No image can be made to represent God. Commandement II.

Esay. 40.25. To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equall, saith the holy One?

THe Church of Rome say, for representation the image of God cannot be painted to expresse lively and fully the nature of God: and in this sense they say, that God forbideth any image of him to be made, seing he hath no forme whereby he can be expressed. Esay 40.18. To whom will ye liken God, or what likenesse will ye compare unto him? But to expresse him by some bodily shape as he appeared here, that is no idolatrie, as he appeared to Daniel in the likenesse of an old man, and the holy ghost appeared in the likenesse of a done. Matt. 3.16. When he is painted to teache the histories of the scripture, that so by sensible figures our mindes may ascend to take up the invisible God; to paint him this way is not a sinne; angels themselves are immateriall spirits, yet they were painted under the law, and represented by cherubins; why then may not God be represented by an image? There is a great difference betwixt the angels and God.No proportion betwixt God and an image. First they are finite, and therefore there may be some proportion betwixt them and an image; but God is infinite, and an image finite; therefore no proportion betwixt them.
Imago
Personae.Representationis officii.Secondly, there is imago personae, and imago representationis officij, the cherubins were no representation of the persons of the angels; for they being immateriall,
 cannot be expressed by any materiall things, and if we should conceive an angell to have any quantitie by an image, then the image should teach us a lie:An image may represent the office of angels but not their persons. the cherubins then are onely representations of the office of the angels, that they were ministring spirits attending the elect; and they were painted this way, that the Iewes might read (as it were) in a historie, what the angels did to them who wait upon the Church continually.
But members are attributed to God in the scripture:  if they be attributed to God for this end, that wee may take him up, why may he not be painted to the laicks, that by the eye as wel as the eare, they may take him up?
Members are attribute to God metaphorice,  Members attributed to God metaphorically not typically. but not typice, metaphora est in verbis, typus in rebus, the scripture setteth him downe with eares, hands, and feet by words borrowed from men, but it never setteth him downe by any bodily shape painted before us, but alwayes forbiddeth us to represent him by any bodily shape; and there is no danger to the people by idolatrie, when he is represented to the eare by metaphoricall words, but great danger to them when he is represented to the eye by visible shapes.
How shall we conceive of God then,  that we take him not up as an idoll?
We must conceive him to be a spirit, most just,  How we must conceive God. most holy, and infinite; but because the infinite Godhead is but finitely comprehended by us; therefore we should set the eyes of our faith upon the manhood of Christ;Simile. for hee that seeth the sonne seeth the father. When a man looketh into a chrystall glasse, it casteth no reflexe to him; but put steele upon the backe of it, it will cast a reflexe: so when we looke upon the Godhead it selfe, it casteth no comfortable reflexe unto us, but put the humanitie, as it were a backe of steele to that glasse, then it casteth a reflexe to us.

Now let us speake of the worship it selfe. The Church of Rome being charged with idolatrie, and worshiping of idols, they wipe their mouth with the whore, and say they did it not, Prov. 30.20. And they goe about by sundrie shifts to cleare themselves of this idolatrie.
Adoratio
Absoluta.Respectiva.There is a double sort of worship, the first is called adoratio respectiva, the second is called adoratio absoluta. Absolute adoration is this, when the worship is termed in the creature, as objectum quod adorationis, and the worship is limitated to the creature. Respective adoration is this, when worship is given to dead and senselesse creatures for the examplars sake,Obiectum
Quod.Quo. then the exemplar is obiectum quo, and the dead and senselesse thing is obiectum quod; that is, wee reverence and adore the dead and senselesse thing for the examplars sake.Simile. Example, when wee attend the coffin, the corps being buried alreadie, the coffin is obiectum quod which we attend, and the corps are obiectum quo which moveth us to attend the coffin: so when we doe homage to the Viceroy for the King; the Viceroy here is obiectum quod, and the King is obiectum quo. The more modest of the papists of old made but the image obiectum quod adorationis, and God himselfe obiectum quo.
Adoratio
Respectiva.Coniuncta.Againe they say, that there is adoratio coniuncta, or coadoratio, and there is adoratio respectiva: coadoratio or coniuncta adoratio, they make to be this; when both the exemplar, and the thing represented by the exemplar are worshiped coniunctim, as obiectum quod adaequatum, this sort of worship they gaue not to the image at the first, but onely respectivam adorationem.
Imago consideratur.
Secundum rem naturae.Formaliter.Thirdly, they say that an image is considered secundum rem naturae, and so it is not worshiped. Secondly formaliter and in actu exerci^^^, as it holdeth forth the exemplar to us, and so it is ^^rminus formalis adorationis, and
 then the cause of the adoration is in the exemplar, which both moveth the adoration and determineth it; and the image is but a condition of the adoration, and the adoration is not given to it, but to him who is the cause of the adoration, as Caietan saith.Many papists now hold they are not only accidentally to be worshiped but properly. But now they goe farther and maintaine that images are not onely to be worshiped accidentally or improperly; but also by themselues, and properly, so that they end and terminate the worship, as they are considered in themselves; and not onely as they are portraitures of the exemplar represented: and some of them say yet more plainely, that it is the self same worship, that is due to God, and to the image; and that it is coadoratio or coniuncta adoratio,Gregorius de Valentia disput. 6. quest. 11. punct. 6. and eodem officio, and honoris genere, eodem animi motu, and eade^ voluntate excitandi opinione^ excellentiae, ille cultus ad prototypon spectat secundum se, ad imaginem vero coram ipsa, and in ipsa tanquam vicaria; they clearely confesse, that it is the same worship that is due to God and to the image: and as the Echo est individuum cum suo sono; so it is one sort of worship which is given both to the image and to God: and Vasques implieth,Vasq. lib. 3. de ador. disput. 1. cap. 5. that in some case the devill may be worshiped appearing in some visible shape. When Darius mother Sysigambis came before Alexander the great, (mistaking Ephestion for Alexander) she fell downe before Ephestion, but knowing that she was mistaken, she began to blush: But Alexander said vnto her, be not ashamed, non errasti mater, nam Ephestion est etiam Alexander. If a papist falling downe before his image and mistaking the image for Christ, and if Christ should say to him be not ashamed, thou art not mistaken, for this image is also Christ: then he needed not to blush nor be ashamed: but Christ is more jealous of his honour than so, and will not give it to any creature.
The conclusion of this is, 1. Ioh. 5.2. little children,Conclusione. beware of idols, Micha's idoll bewitched the whole tribe of Dan. Iudg. 18.36.



EXERCITAT. V. That idolatrie is most opposite to God. Commandement II.

2. Cor. 6.14. What communion hath light with darknesse? 16. and what agreement hath the temple of God with idols?

IDolatrie is a sinne that is first most opposite to God himselfe, and secondly it is opposite to his mariage with his Church.
(...) Qui habet vitam in se and a se.First, it is most opposite to God himselfe, God is ens entium, and therefore he is vnus, verus, and bonus.
First, God is ens entium, who hath his being of himselfe, and hereby ye shall know that Chai, the living Lord is amongst you. Iosh. 3.10. this title distinguisheth him from dead idols which haue neither life in themselves, nor can give life to others. Psal. 106.26. And they joyned to Baal-phegor, and eat the sacrifices of the dead, that is, the gods who are dead; they are called dumb idols, Haback. 2.18.(...) So Psal. 115. they haue mouthes but they speake not,(...) the idols are called elilim, nihilitates. Esay. 2.8. Ezek. 30.13. and Tohu,The idols are called dead gods. emptinesse. 1. Sam. 12.21. things are true as long as they agree with the patterne which is in the minde of God, but when they goe from that once, they are reckoned for shadowes of things onely. Prov. 20.6. Who shall finde a faithfull man? as if he shoud say, it is easie to finde shadowes of men, but it is a hard thing to finde a man indeed who is answerable to the minde of God. Idolaters, because they goe from this patterne,People following other gods become no people. they are called non gens. Hos. 10.9. and
 non populus, not a people. 1. Pet. 2.10. and the apostle saith, an idoll is nothing. 1. Cor. 8.4. it is not nihil negativum, but nihil privativum,Nihil
negativum.privativum.effectivum. there is no relation betwixt God and it, or it is nihil affectivum.
The first attribute of God who is Ens entium,Omne ens est unum numero and specie, sed Deus unum eminenter. is unit as and therefore the scripture by way of excellence calleth him vnus, Iob. 31.15.(...) Vnus. Did not one fashion us in the wombe, that is, God, so Zach. 14.9. In that day there shall be one Lord, and his name vnus, this name Ehhad,(...) afterward the heathen called it Adad, corruptlie, Deut. 6.4.(...) Hearken Israel, the Lord thy God is one, and it is written with a great Daleth which letter signifieth foure, as the Hebrews marke, to signifie the foure corners of the earth, and that he should be worshiped in them, and none else but hee; although there be many that are called gods, yet to us there is but one God. 1. Cor. 8.6.
The gods of the heathen were many; they had thirtie thousand gods, as Hes^^d witnesseth. And Augustine observeth well in his booke de civitate dei,The heathen multiplied their gods according to the periods of their life. that they multiplied their gods because they durst not concredit all to one God: as they had one god for the mountaines, another for the vallies, one for the sea, and another for the land; so they had a god for every period of mans life: when the child was borne, they co^mitted him deae Lucinae: when he weeped they committed him to vaticana or vagitana: when they lifted up the child from the ground, they committed him to Dea Levana: and when he was in the cradle to Dea Cunina, and so thorow the rest of the periods of his life. But David acknowledged God to be his God from his mothers wombe. Psal. 22.10. So they had a god or a goddesse for every severall part of the bodie, Iupiter the eldest brother got the head, Neptune the second brother got the breast, and foreparts,They had gods for every part of the body. and Pluto the third brother got the hinder parts, the middle part or cinctum they gaue to Mars,
 the eyes to Cupid, they gaue the kidnies to Venus, and the knees to the Goddesse Misericordia, and the feet to Thaleia: these parts they committed to severall Gods and Goddesses, because they distrusted them, and would not concredite all to one God, but David saith, Psal 34.20. That God keepeth all our bones. And Christ saith, that the very haires of our head are numbred. Matth. 10.30. so that they cannot fall to the ground without Gods providence. They had like wayes Deos tutelares which they carried about with them, as Rachel stole her fathers Gods. Gen. 31.19. and they had Penates, their houshold Gods, Esay. 46.7. They beare him upon the shoulder, they carie him and set him in his place, and hee standeth: yea from his place shall he not remove.
The second attribute of God who is Ens entium is verum, but the idoll teacheth lies, Habakuk 2.18. how teacheth the idoll lies? Non per inexistentiam, sed per assistentiam. Non per inexistentia^, that is, the divill spake not out of the idoll,How the idoll speaketh lies. but per assistentia, that is, the priest lying beside the idoll, the divill inspired the Priest to speake these lies. When the Priest slept vpon the skin of the beast that was sacrificed, then the divell inspired him; this sleeping the Greekes call it (...),(...) pellis. the idoll was but the pledge of the devils presence to the Priest: so now when the Priests stand in defence of their idols and idolatrie, and teach that they are to be worshiped, then the devill speaketh by the idoll, and the idoll is the pledge of the devils presence to the Priest, and that which is offered to the idoll is said to be offered to the devill. Psal. 106.37. 1. Cor. 10.20.
The third attribute of God as he is Ens entium, is Bonum, goodnesse, there is none good but God onely, that is, having his goodnesse of himselfe: but idols by way of appropriation are called sinne. Lament. 1.8. My people haue committed a sinne,Idolatrie by way of appropriation is called sin. that is idolatrie. So Exod. 32.
 22. This people is prone to sinne, that is, to idolatrie. So Num. 23.21. He saw no iniquitie in Iacob, that is, idolatrie, and in this sense is that place of Syracides to be vnderstood, Syracid. 49.5. All the kings of Israel were sinners except David, Iosias and Ezekias, that is, they were idolaters.
Secondly,Idol^trie breaketh the wedlocke betwixt Christ and his Church. this sinne of idolatrie breaketh that holy wedlock which is betwixt Christ and his church, he being a iealous God, hee cannot suffer his spouse to goe a whooring after other gods, but would haue her a chast virgin presented unto him; this was typed vnder the law by the turtle doves and young pigeons, which the Lord commanded to be offered to him: the young pigeon was commanded to be sacrificed vnto him, because it had never a mate; and the turtle dove, because it had but one mate: so God will haue of his church her first loue, and onely loue: this abstinence from idolatrie is called virginitie.God will have of his Church her first love, and onely love. Revelat. 14.4. and idolaters are called adulterers, Iam. 4.4. when the Iewes denied Ioh. 8.41. that they were the children of fornication, they meant, they were not idolaters, who say to the stocke thou art my father, and to the stone, thou hast brought me forth, Ier. 2.27. they say, they haue God for their father, and they called the Samaritans bastards,(...) ingluvies vel vesicula in avibus quae sordium receptaculum est a (...) stercus. (...). because they worshiped strange gods. When the church is corrupted and defiled with idolatrie, then she is called Moreah, Zeph. 3.1. the Seventy translate it, (...), when one is exposed to some great shame for their filthinesse, and in this sense it is said, that Ioseph would not make Mary a publike example for her suspected incontinencie. Mat. 1.19.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. idola^rie being a sinne so opposite to God himselfe; it was a great blindnes in Micha when he set up an idoll in his house, to say then. That the Lord would doe him good, Iudg. 17.13. their sorrowes shall be multiplied who hasten after other Gods, Psalm. ^6.7.



EXERCITAT. VI. Commandement 2. How base idols are in the sight of God.

Ier. 11.12. Ye haue set vp altars to that shamefull thing even altars to burne incense to Baal.

THis idolatrie is most detestable in the eyes of the Lord, therefore when the scripture speaketh of idols it calleth them abominationes, as the abomination of the Moabites, and Ammonites: When the Romans set vp the spread-eagle in the temple of Ierusalem, it was called the abomination of desolation,(...) ab illicitis idolorum cultibus. Quare addunt haebraei epithetum perpetuum. Mat. 24.15. so they are called (...), pollutiones, Act. 15.20.
The apostle willeth us to abstaine from abominable idolatrie, 1. Pet. 4.3. this epithete is not put for distinction sake here, as though there were some sort of idolatrie lawfull; but it is Epithetum perpetuum, as the Hebrewes call it, as Psal. 86.13. Thou hast delivered my soule from the lowest hell, we cannot inferre hence that there are two hells, the epithete here is not put for distinctions sake, but to signifie the deepenesse of hell: so the epithete is added here to signifie the vilenesse of idolatrie.
Now if wee would vnderstand how detestable these idols are in the sight of God, let us goe thorow all the causes of them.
How base and senselesse makers of idols are.First the efficient cause; they that make them, are like vnto them, Psal. 115.8. What a senselesse thing is this to make an idoll, and then to bee affraid of it? these are like little children, who blacke their neighbours faces,
 and then are affraid of them.
Secondly the matter, how basely hee thinketh of it; when the people began to worship the brasen serpent,Hebraei exprimunt diminutiva per (...) cum @ in fine sic (...). Exod. 32.15. The little righteous ones he called it Nechusbtan. 2. King. 18.4. as you would say, a little peece of brasse in contempt; for it is the manner of the Hebrewes to expresse their diminutives by adding Nunto them. So he calleth them Gelilim, stercoreos deos. 2. King. 23.10. he defiled topheth, that is, he appointed it for base and vncleane vses, as to cast out their doung there, and their filth; because gods of doung were worshiped there.
The Lord commanded the Iewes when they were about to ease nature to goe without the campe,Ainsworth c. 7.8 of the communion of saints. Deut. 23.12.13. and to haue a paddle that they might digge and cover the excreme^ts. All the ceremoniall laws are to be reduced to some of the morall lawes; our divines reduce this place properly to the second commandement, that we should cover these loathsome excrements of idolatrie, as they were to cover their naturall excrements.The Lord detesteth the forme of the idols.
Thirdly the lord detested the forme of them; he detested not onely (...) which is abiecti animalis forma; but also to bee represented by man, who of all visible creatures is the most excellent. Psal. 115.5. They haue eyes and see not, cares and heare not, and a mouth that speaks not, these were made to the similitude of man; and likewise the Teraphim were images made to the likenesse of man. 1. Sam. 13.19. yet he detested all these images.
Lastly, from the effects,The base names which the holy Ghost giveth to idols. (...) the holy ghost calleth the idols Miphlezeth, terriculamenta. 1. King. 15.13. They that worship them shall get no rest neither day nor night. Revel. 14.11.(...)
So they are called Gnatzabbim, dolores, so they are called Tzirim, tormina vel cruciatus,(...) because they put a man to as great paine as the woman is when she is in her childbirth,Psal. 135.15.
 Esay. 45.16. and 21.3. They are called Bush, pudor. Ier. 11.12. the same word is given to a mans privie parts:(...) Deut. 25.11. Ye haue set vp altars to the shamefull thing:The heathen gave sundry names to their idols. that is, to idols, and so Gideon is called Ierubesheth, 1. Sam. 11.21. because he put Bush or that shamefull idoll Baal to shame.
A man is ashamed when his nakednes is seene, this idolatrie maketh the people naked. Exod. 35.25. The heathen called their god (...) the God of thunder, but God in derision called him Baal-Peor, or (...) the god of a crack, they called their god Baalzebub, the god who did driue away flies, but Christ in disdain called him (...) the god of doung: the Iewes in contempt call the god of Eckron the god of flies, because their temple was free from flies; for there was never a flie seen in the temple of Ierusalem for all the flesh that was sacrificed in it: but the Ekronites called him Baalzebub, because hee kept them from hornets and flies; this name afterward was given to the devill himselfe, he is called Baalzebub, because he is the father of all this idolatrie.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, all offences are against the the kings lawes, but pettie treason is a greater offence then common transgressions: but when rebels begin to disclaime their king and set up another in his place, that is the highest offence of all: sinnes of the second table offend God, but swearing and taking the name of God in vaine is pettie treason against him, as when one falsifieth the kings coine; but to set up a rebell in his place, an idoll, that is the highest treason: let us detest that sinne most, which turneth us away farthest from God.



EXERCITAT. VII. What force idols have to allure those who worship them, and to draw men after them.

1. Cor. 12.2. Yee know that yee were Gentiles carried away unto these dumbe idols, even as ye were led.

THe loadstone hath not so great vertue to draw the iron to it, as the idoll hath to draw the worshiper after it. And as the whirlewinde carrieth a man violently: so do the idols draw men violently after them.
The scripture maketh mention of sundry swift beasts,(...) Dromas. Ier. 2.23. as the mule, Camelo-pardalis, the wild asse, and the dromedary. As the wild asse snuffeth up the winde at her pleasure, and none can turne her away: and as the dromedary is most swift transversing her wayes. Ier. 2.23.24. So are the idolaters swift in following their idols.
There are two things that a man is bound to care for specially, his naturall life, and his spirituall life.
His naturall life consisteth in his health, wealth, and ease, but see how the idolaters to serve their idols, despise and neglect the care of these three.
First, their health, they neglect their bodies,Idolaters neglect their health to serve their id^ls. and think their religion consisteth in abstinence Coloss. 2.23. they disfigure their faces and looketh with a sad countenance. Matt. 6.16. And which is more, the priests of Baal cut themselves with knives and lancers untill the blood gushed out upon them. 1. Kings 18.28. so doe Fratres flagellantes, who whip themselves untill the blood run downe: and sometimes they have given their bodies to be burnt for their idols.
Secondly, a man is bound to have a care of his
 wealth and riches, but how prodigally have the idolaters bestowed their riches upon their idols?Idolaters spare no cost for their idols. Exod. 32.3. And all the people brake off the golden eare-rings which were in their eares, and brought them to Aaron. So Hos. 8.4. of their silver and their gold have they made themselves idols. So Ezek. 16.33. Others give gifts to whores, but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them. So Psal. 16.4. deum alienum dotant, that is, they give a dowrie to their idols, and bestow their goods upon them, and stand not for cost.
Thirdly their ease, they care not for their ease, so they may satisfie their idols. Exod. 32.6. And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings. So Baals priests cryed from morning untill evening. 1. Kings 18.29.The heathen gave diverse attributes to their idols, and to every attribute they made a prayer. They were not weary to use many idle repetitions and long prayers to their idols. They gave sundry attributes to their idols, and to every attribute they used to say a prayer, and so with much vain babling they spent the time: So do many now spend their canonical houres, and this Christ forbideth: Matt. 6.7. But when ye pray, use not vaine repetitions, as the heathen doe, for they thinke they shall be heard for their much babling.
And their greatest love should be to their children who should succeed them; but the unnatutall idolater will not stand to offer his children to Moloch, and to sacrifice them to him. There is but one rare example in all the scriptures of Abraham, who at the commandement of God tooke his onely sonne Isaack (...), the sonne of his age, and would have offered him to the Lord, but it was usuall to these idolaters to sacrifice their children to devils. Psal. 106.37.
Secondly, for the spirituall and eternall life; they preferred their idols to it. Hos. 2.2. They carried their adulteries betwixt their breasts: that is, the signes of their idolatrie, to testifie that the idoll had their heart,
 whereas they should have carried the Lord as a bundle of mirrhe betwixt their breasts: Cant. 1.13.
So they walked, behhukkoth, in their statutes, Levit. 20.23. Whereas they should have walked in his statutes;(...) they gave all honour and reverence unto them; they cryed, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Act. 19.28. They kept their gods and changed them not. Ier. 2.11. hath a nation changed their gods which are yet no gods?
May we not conclude then, Ier. 10.8. They are altogether brutish and foolish,Conclusion. the stock is a doctrine of vanities They who worship stocks and stones and dumbe idols, are more brutish then beasts.


EXERCITAT. VIII. The many evils which the people have got out of idolatrous Aegypt.

Deut. 17.16. Ye shall not cause the people to returne to Aegypt.

AEgypt was the matrix of all idolatrie, therefore the Lord forbad them to goe backe to Aegypt:The evill which the people of God got in Aegypt. they got much mischiefe out of Aegypt, there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their virginitie: Ezek. 23.3.They lost their spirituall virginitie there. There they learned the grounds of their idolatrie, hence it is, that the most of the ceremoniall lawes are opposite to idolatrous worship in Aegypt.
Secondly, turba miscellanea,The mixed multitude came from thence. the mixed multitude came out of Aegypt: Exod. 12.38. Who learned them to murmure and to crie; Would to God we were back again at the flesh pots of Aegypt. Exod, 16.2.

Thirdly, they got their leprosie out of Aegypt, for that sort of leprosie called Elephantiasis,The leprosie from Aegypt. when the skin groweth hard like the Elephants skin was bred onely about Nilus in Aegypt. Deut. 28.17. The Lord will smite the with the boiles of Aegypt.They forgot their circumcision there.
Forthly, they forgot their circumcision in Aegypt, therefore it is called opprobrium Aegypti, Iosh. 5.9. This day have I rolled away the reproach of Aegypt from you.
The blasphemer came out of it.Fifthly, the blasphemer who blasphemed the name of the Lord, Levit. 24.10. was the sonne of an Aegyptian.
The golden calves.Sixthly, Ieroboam brought the golden calves out of Aegypt: therefore they were commanded never to goe backe againe to Aegypt. Because Aegypt was such a vile land the Psalmist calleth it the land of Ham Psal. 105.23.27.Aegypt why called Ham. and 106.22. Ham was cursed by his father Noah, so the Egyptians his posteritie were an accursed people. Aegypt was a proud people,Aegypt called Rahab. therefore it is called Rahab, Psal. 87.4 and Esay 51.9. And now what hast thou to doe in Aegypt to drinke the waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to doe in the way of Assyria, to drinke the waters of the river?Sichor is put for Aegypt. Ier. 2.18. Sihor is Nilus, which signifieth blacknesse, for the troubled waters of Nilus differed much fro^ the clea^e running waters of Siloh, why then should they goe to drinke of them?So the city, for Ierulem, and Behemoth beasts, for an elephant. and hee calleth Euphrates the River here Antonomastice, for the greatnesse of it. Gen. 15.18. It is called the great river; these two were the borders of Canaan, from the river of Egypt to Euphrates. Exod. 23.31.
What great blessing was this then, when five cities in the land of Egypt should speake the languages of Canaan,(...) ^^str^ctio. (...) that is, should worship the Lord in truth, And one of them shall bee called the city of the Sunne, Esay. 19.18. that is, they shall bee converted to professe the truth, and one of them shall be the most excellent citie, that is Alexandria, the city where Marke taught the Gospell first.

If Egypt was so abhorred and detested by the Lord, what must spirituall Egypt be? Revelat. 11.8. and these Who take the marke of the beast upon them. Revelat. 16.2. And as they were never to returne backe to Egypt again; so neither must the people of God returne now to spirituall Egypt.
Observe how Iohn doth parallel the judgements of old Egypt, and spirituall Egypt together.Old Aegypt and spirituall Aegypt paralleled together in their plagues. Old Egypt was plagued with sores and botches:In sores. so are they of spirituall Egypt. Revelat. 16.2.
Secondly in old Egypt the waters were turned into bloud: So in spirituall Egypt.In blood. The waters of the sea became as the bloud of a dead man, and every living soule died in the sea. Vers. 3.
Thirdly in old Egypt there was great darkenesse:In darknesse. So in spirituall Egypt there is great darknes. Vers. 10.
Fourthly, frogs molested the Kings chamber in Egypt,In the frogges. So frogges came out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, working miracles to deceive the world and the Kings of the earth. Vers. 13. Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses in Egypt. 2. Tim. 3.8. And when hee wrought his miracles they said, hee carried straw to Aphra, as the proverbe is in the Talmud,In their magitians. they meant that there was Magick enough in Egypt already, therefore hee needed not to come to Egypt, to play his trickes of Magick there; thus they withstood the man of God, and hardened the heart of Pharaoh: So in spirituall Egypt, doe these frogges and deceivers set themselves against Moses, saying, that hee hath not his calling of God.
Lastly, there was thundering and lightning in Egypt;In thundering and lightning. so in spirituall Egypt Vers. 18.
The conclusion of this is; Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Revelat. 18.4.



EXERCITAT. IX. A comparison betwixt the golden calves set vp in the wildernesse, the golden calves in Dan and Bethel, and the popish Idols. Commandement II.

Psal. 106.19. They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshiped the molten image; they changed their glory into the similitude of an oxe that eateth grasse.

THe idolatrie of Ieroboam, compared with the idolatrie of the Israelites in the wildernesse,The idolatrie of the Israelites under Ieroboam compared with their idolatrie in the time of Aaron. setting up the golden calfe, will be found a farre lesse sinne, if we looke nearely unto it.
First, they had lately tasted of the great benefits of God, in delivering them out of Egypt by a mighty hand, and bringing them through the red sea: Yet they soone forgot his workes; they waited not for his counsell. Psal. 106.13.In benefit^. They forgot God their Saviour which had done great thin^s in Egypt, wonderfull workes in the land of Ham, and terrible things in the red sea. Vers. 21.22.
In outward pledges of his favour.Secondly they had many moe pledges of the favour of God, then the ten Tribes had, they had the cloud by day,(...) pa^^^ ^^^ustissimorum. and the pillar of fire by night, hee fed them with the bread of the strong ones, Psal. 78.25. They had the tabernacle, and the arke the testimonie of God presence amongst them, which Ieroboam and the ten tribes had not; therefore their sinne was greater then theirs.
In their prophets.Thirdy for prophets, they had Moses the man of God, who was faithfull in all his house. Heb. 3.2. the ten tribes had Ahijah the Shilonite, but what was hee to
 Moses? they had an old prophet in Bethel, but a greate deceiver, and they had a young prophet, but was easily deceived. 1. King. 13. and what were they to Moses?
Fourthly, the ten tribes had priests but of the meanest and the basest of the people. 1. King. 13.33.In their priests. Hee made of the lowest of the people priests for the high places, whosoever would, hee consecrated him, and be became one of the priests of the high places: but they had Aaron the Lords high priest, who was consecrated and ordained by God himselfe, and called to this honour. Heb. 5.4.Aarons sinne in making the golden calfe a greater sinne than the sinne of Demetrius or Ieroboam. he that had holinesse to the Lord ingraven in a plate of gold upon his forehead, for him to sit downe and fashion an image with a graving toole; like another Demetrius the silver-smith, he making silver shrines to Diana, and he making golden calves to Iehova, what a great change was this? Againe he to represent the Lord by an oxe that eateth grasse. Ps. 106.20. This was a great abomination it was great idolatrie when the men of Lycaonia would have worshiped God in the likenesse of men, Act. 14.11. but greater idolatrie to worship the lord in the likenesse of an oxe: Ieroboam made a feast day according to his owne heart, in honour of his idoll. 1. King. 12.13. so said Aaron, to morrow is a feast to Iehova, this was a greater sinne than that of Ieroboam.
Now let us compare the idolaters in our times with those who worshiped the golden calfe in the wildernes, and yee shall see greater abomination in this idolatrie than in the idolatrie of former times. The Israelites gave the glorie of Christ who dwelt in a cloud and pillar unto a calfe; but these idolaters give the glory of Christ when hee is dwelling in our flesh,Sacrae ceremoniae Eccles. Rom. lib. 7. cap. de consecratione agni dei. and glorified to a creature whom they worship as God indeed, giving it to their crucifixes and Agnus Dei.
When Christ was in the flesh here, there were many who gave themselves out for false Christs; but Christ
 forbiddeth to beleeve such. Mat. 24.23. so these counterfet christs should not be beleeved.
The Lord, Ezek. 23.4. maketh a comparison betwixt two sisters,(...) Aholah and Aholibah. Aholah is tentorium, Abolibah is tentorium meum in ea. Hee calleth the ten tribes tentorium a tent, because they were separated from the temple of God now, and he calleth the kingdome of Iuda, tentorium meum in ea, my tabernacle in her, because as yet they professed the true worship of God. Aholah played the harlot. Vers. 5. But yet her sister Aholibah was more corrupted then she,A comparison betwixt the idolatrie of Israel and Iuda. Vers. 11. So compare Aholah the Iewish church with Aholibah (who glorieth that shee is the true church) and shee shall be found the greater harlot of the two. And the lord comparing Samaria with Ierusalem, Ezek. 16.51. saith, that Samaria had not committed halfe of the sinnes which Iuda had committed,Quomodo Hebraei exprimunt comparativum gradum. but that Iuda had justified her sister in all her abominations; amplificasti abominationes tuas prae ipsis. Samaria was not simply justified, but onely in comparison with Iuda. So Luke. 18.14. The publican went downe to his house, justus prae illo, justified rather than the Pharisee. So Mat. 12.41.Surgere and stare in iudice^ quid apud hebraci. The queene of the South shall rise in judgement against this generation, that is; shall stand in judgement and not fall, compared with this generation: So if we will compare the Iewish idolatrie and the idolatrie of this generation,A comparison betwixt the idolatrie of the Iewes, a^d the idolatrie in our times. they shall stand in judgement when this generation shall fall; and there shall bee a more easie sentence pronounced against them, then against this generation.
The Iewes who were so much addicted to idolatrie before the Lord Iesus Christs comming in the flesh, quite renounced their idols, and they say now, that there is no punishment which befalleth them, but there is a drachme weight of the golden calfe in it; and when they see any church in which there are idols, they
 call it Beth Hatturpha, domus turpitudini^.(...) So wee may hope that, before the Lords second comming, they who stand most in defence of these idols: shall renounce them as a filthie thing, and acknowledge that there was a drachme weight of their idolatrie in all their former punishments.


EXERCITAT. X. Of the increase of idolatrie, and how it increased and spread through the world. Commandement II.

Ier. 16.11. Your fathers have forsaken mee, saith the Lord, and have walked after other gods, and served them, and worshiped them, and ye have done worse then your fathers.

IDolatrie is a worke of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. And there is no worke of the flesh that man is so prone unto as to idolatrie:The first period, of Idolatry. The first period of idolatrie began not long after the creation. Gen. 4.24. Then began men to prophane the name of the Lord. Psal. 49.12. Man being in honour abideth not, he is like the beasts that perish.Idolatrie maketh a man brutish. Idolatry maketh a man brutish. Ier. 10.14. Every man is brutish in his knowledge, every founder is confounded by his gra^en image.
There were three notable men, from the creation to the floud, who kept the truth in sinceritie and puritie in their families; Adam, Methusalem, and Noah, and then the Lord drowned the world for wickednesse.
After the floud,The second period of idolatry. as people increased they began to
 build a towre to get themselves a name, and the Lord scattered them, and they who went to the east worshiped idols, and this was called (...), the Persians called the Scythians with whom they were conversant, Sakas, a Sach vel Sacksah, which signifieth a multitude, because they were gathered together in multitudes; So the Arabians had their names from Gnarabh,(...) miscelanea turba a (...) miscuit* miscere, turba miscellanea, a confused multitude. Gen. 14.1. Tidall King of nations, Symmachus translateth it King of the Scythians; and these worshiped their conquerours and captaines as gods. The church all this time remained with Heber and his posteritie, Melchizedeck and some few others who dwelt in Canaan.The Churh in the third period remained with the posteritie of of Hebe^ and with some few others. Those of Hebers posterity who went to Syria fell to idolatrie, and therefore an Aramite is put for an idolater in the scriptures; Terah Abrahams father an idolater, Abraham himselfe was an idolater, Laban the Syrian an idolater, Naaman the Syrian an idolater, and Balaam the Syrian an idolater.
There were some others who were not of the posteritie of Heber who kept the truth amongst them. Gen. 20.4. Lord wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?
Third period of idolatrie.The third period after the floud when idolatrie increased, was, when they set up a molten calfe which Moses caused bray to powder; and made them drinke it in detestation of that idoll which they had worshiped.
After Moses death, Satan laboured to make an idoll of the body of Moses,Satan laboured to make an idoll of Moses body. and that which he could not doe by him when he was living, he goeth about to effect it by his body when he was dead; but Michael withstood him. Iud. 9. and buried his body where no man knew; and here we may see that the reliques of the Saints are made idolls.
The fourth period of idolatrie.The fourth period of idolatrie was under the Iudges, and here we shall marke foure things. First that none of the Iudges themselves were idolaters, as most of the
 King of Iuda and all the Kings of Israel were, and that was the cause why idolatrie got not such footing in the time of the Iudges, as it did afterwards.None of the Iudges were idolaters.
Secondly, when they fell to idolatrie, the Lord scourged them by the Philistims, Ammonites, Madianites, and then they cried unto the Lord, and hee helped them,
Thirdly,Dan an idolatrous tribe. of all the tribes the tribe of Dan was most given to idolatrie; therefore they tooke away the Ephod Teraphim, and the graven image out of the house of Micah, and set it up in Dan, this was the idolatrie of the whole tribe, Is it better for thee to be a Priest for the house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel? Iud. 18.20.
Fourthly, Ionathan the sonne of Gershon, the sonne of Manasseth was the priest to this idoll. Ionathan was the sonne of Gershon, and Gershon was the sonne of Moses,(...) cum @ suspenso pro (...) and the Iewes observe that they will not have him called the grandchilde of Moses, but of Manasseth, who by anticipation was called Manasseth, because he followed him in his idolatrie; yet to shew that hee was the grandchild of Moses, the word is so set downe that it may be read either Manasse or Mose.The judgements of God upon Dan for their idolatrie.
Because the tribe of Dan was most infected with idolatrie, therefore the golden calves were afterward erected in Dan, as a punishment of their former idolatry, and for this cause it was that they were the first of the tribes, who were carried away in the west side of Iordan. Ier. 8.16. The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan, and Iohn, Rev. 12. When he reckoned up the tribes which were sealed, he passeth by the tribe of Dan.
The fift period of idolatrie was under the Kings,The fift period of idolatrie. the Kings of Israel were idolaters, or tolerated idols, All the Kings of Israel were sinners except David, Ezekiah and Iosias, Ecclus. 49.5. That is, they were idolaters. In this period idolatrie waxed by degrees, first
 it waxed much in Salomons time, he who excelled all the sonnes of the East for his knowledg,Idolatrie in the fift period increased by degrees. he whose heart the Lord had enlarged, he who was a prophet of God and a pen man of the Holy Ghost, hee who for his devotion offered to God so many thousand sacrifices, his prayers, his great care he had to build the Temple, who fell not away untill his old dayes, who would have thought that the dragon with his taile would have pulled downe this great starre? and although the Lord threatned that the kingdome should be rent from him. 1. King. 11.11. Yet he was nothing moved with it; and if we will compare his foolish sonne Rehoboam with his wise father, he may seeme to be more obedient then hee; for when hee had gathered an armie to fight against Ieroboam and the ten tribes, yet when the prophet Shemaiah came to him, 1. King. 12.24. He harkened unto the word of the Lord and went backe againe, but Salemon went on in his sinnes and idolatrie.
Idolatry came to a greater high in the dayes of Ieroboam.Secondly, it waxed more when the ten tribes were rent from the house of David and Salomon; then Ieroboam set up the calves in Dan and Bethel, then the ten tribes were Aholah, and yet Aholibah exceeded them in whoredomes. Ezek. 23.
Thirdly, it came to the height in the dayes of Manasseth, and so it continued with the rest of the Kings, like a leprosie, untill the captivitie. Then idolatrie died in the captivitie, for there they were purged and fined, and they brought it not backe, neither went a whoring after other gods.
The last period was when idolatrie began in the christian church, the beast which was dead was quickned againe: Revelat. 17.11. And then the idolatrie of the Gentiles was brought in in the christian church.



EXERCITAT. XI. Whether Gideon made the Ephod an idoll or not. Commandement II.

Iudg. 8.26. And Gideon made an Ephod thereof, and put it in his citie in Ophra; and all Israel went thither a whoring after it.

WHen Gideon made an Ephod of the gold and eare-rings which they had taken of the spoile, wee need not to take it so strictly that it was onely made of gold, but of those things which were taken in the spoile, whether gold, silke, linnen, etc.
But it may seeme, Vers. 27. That statuit in Ophra,  hee set it up in Ophra, that it was of pure gold, which might stand up, an image made of gold.
In the Hebrew it is posuit onely, he put it, and not,  he set it up, the priests Ephod was of linnen, and the high priests Ephod was partly of linnen, and partly of silke, and partly of gold.
This word Ephod in the scripture is applied onely to holy uses,Ephod twofold. but if wee will consider the persons who put on the Ephod, then it may bee said to be partly ecclesiasticall, and partly politicke.
Ecclesiasticall is three fold, first the Ephod of the high priest: Exod. 28.6. Secondly of the priests:Ephod ecclesiasticall threefold. 1. Sam. 22.18. And thirdly of the Levites: 1. Sam. 2.18.
Politicke againe is that which David wore when hee danced before the Arke: 2. Sam. 6.18.David did not put on the Priests ephod. When David said to Abiather the high priest Ahimelechs son, I pray thee bring me hither the Ephod. 1. Sam. 30.7. And Abiather
 brought hither the Ephod, el David, to David, that is, Davidis causa,(...) id est, Davidis causa. the priest tooke on this Ephod to aske counsell for David what he should doe, David wore not the priestly Ephod himselfe; for by Ephod here is meant the whole ornaments of the priest: So Hos 3.4.
 Now the question is, whether Gideon intended here to set up an idoll in Ophra? those who hold the affirmative bring this reason for them: because he instituted that for which he had not warrant out of the word of God.
 The word of God setteth downe all the priests ornaments: therefore he did not this without a warrant altogether. He made not a new Ephod.
 Secondly, some hold that Gideon did not directly set up an idoll, nor did he intend to doe it; but because hee withstood not the people when they committed idolatrie, therefore he sinned.
 It is evident that they did not commit idolatrie till after his death, therefore Vers. 27. it is not rightly translated, Fornicatus est omnis Israel post cum, as though they followed Gideons example in their idolatrie;The Israelites went not a whoring after the Ephod till after the death of Gideon. Obj. Iunius translateth it better, post eum scilicet Ephodem, or in eo scilicet Ephode.
Thirdly, some hold that Gideon sinned, offering sacrifice with this Ephod upon him.
 The Lord who spared not Vzziah when hee went to offer incense at the altar, but stroke him with leprosie: 2. Cron. 26.17. and spared not Core, Dathan, and Abiram with their complices. Num. 16. Would hee have spared Gideon if hee had attempted such a thing? and is it probable that he who refused the government when it was offered to him by all their consent, that hee would affect the priesthood?
 Fourthly, it may seeme that hee sinned, in making these holy vestures to have some use out of the tabernacle, which alwayes should have served for the tabernacle.

When Ieshuah set up an altar, Iosh. 22.29,30.  Gideon set up the Ephod in memorie of thanksgiving. Hee set it not up that they might sacrifice there, but only he set it up as a memoriall of thanksgiving. So Gideon made this Ephod onely in a memoriall of thanksgiving, and for no other use.
But these who hold the negative that he committed not idolatrie in making the Ephod, bring these reasons.Reasons proving that Gideon committed not idolatry in making the Ephod.
First Iude 8.32. It is said, Gideon died in a good old age, which comprehends in it foure things. First, fulnesse of dayes; secondly, tranquillitie of minde; thirdly, a good name, and fourthly, to die in the favour of God, and this phrase is never spoken but of those who died well, as Abraham died in bona cani^ie, in a good old age. Gen. 25.15. So David, 1. Chron. 29.28. and so Gideon here.
Secondly, the Israelites are challenged for this,  that they shewed not kindnesse towards Ierubbaal, or Gideon, according to the goodnes which he had shown to them, Vers. 35. Now if hee had set up this idoll to make the people to commit idolatrie, they should have had no cause to have shewne kindenesse to him, but rather should have hated him.
But it may be said that the Ephod became a snare to him and to his house: Vers. 27.  
Although Gideon himselfe sinned not in setting up the Ephod, yet it tended to his ruine, that is,  to the ruine of his sons, and the rest of his house, that is, his friends, it was the ruine of his house in the dayes of Abimelech, when this Ephod was set up in the house of Baal-bereth in Sichem. Iudg. 9.33.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. that we are to construe the acts of the Saints in the best part where wee see no evident proofe to the contrarie: farre lesse are wee to condemne them, where the holy spirit commends them.



EXERCITAT. XII. Whether Naaman might bow in the house Rimmon or not? Commandement II.

2. King. 5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and hee leaneth on my hand, and I bow my selfe in the house of Rimmon.

THere is a question moved, whether or not may a man dissemble his religion, and bee present at the worship of idols? and some alledge this place for it.
For clearing of this, Cajetan observeth, first what is meant by this word Lehishtahhavath;(...) secondly, what it is that Naaman craveth; and thirdly, what the prophets answere inferreth.
First, hee observeth that this word Lehishtahhavoth bowing, (the greekes translate it (...)) was used by the easterne people both in civill and religious worship,Cajetan goeth about to cleare Naaman of idolatry in bowing in the house of Rimmon. and it is translated adorare (saith hee) but improperly onely, si adoravero in templo Rimmon: but se in what Naaman desireth to be dispensed with; he craveth onely a pardon and dispensation here, for the bowing of his body, as hee was wont to doe to the king; hee acknowledgeth here the true God, that hee would serve none but him, and that he would have an Altar built for him that he might sacrifice only to him. And whe^he returned to his country, no doubt but he worshiped the true God?
Genuflexio imitatiua.obsequij.And Caietan observeth farther, that there is a double bowing of the knee; the first is called Genuflexio imitativa, the second is called Genuflexio obsequij: and hee saith,
 that genuflexio imitativa; counterfeiting the kings bowing, Est eiusdem speciei cum regio, it is of the same kinde with the kings bowing of the knee, and this is flat idolatrie; Naaman meant not of such kinde of bowing of the knee.
The question then is onely de genuflexione obsequii, this he saith, was lawfull in it selfe, and he bowed with the king, not having respect to idolatrie, but onely to his bowing simplie. For the king to bow, it is not an unlawfull action; but when he boweth before an idoll with an idolatrous minde to worship the idoll, then it is idolatrie, but his servant bowing with him, and doing that civill honour to him which he used to performe to him at other times, is not partaker of his idolatrie; the one is adoratio absoluta, and the other is relativa: and hee goeth about to cleare the matter by this comparison,Adoratio
absoluta.relativa. If a great man should goe unto a whoore, and his servants should accompany him, they goe not with him as he is going unto a whoore, but simply as hee is going, and they accompany him now as at other times; but if they should commend him for such a fact and flatter him in it,Simile. then they should bee guilty of his whooredome: So when Naaman went into the house of Rimmon with the king and bowed there, this bowing was onely a civill bowing, such as he performed to the king at other times before.
But when it is objected,  that this had a shew of evill to bow in such a place, and at such a time with the king.
He answereth,  if Naaman had not made a protestation to the contrary that he would worship none but the true God, it had beene a scandall, but Naaman protested the contrarie both in word and deed, and so was free from scandall.
But the matter is not cleare yet,Naamans fact contrary to his protestation. hee maketh a protestations here, but it may seeme that his fact is contrarie
 to his protestation, when he goeth in and boweth there. And Caietans comparison which he useth, seemes not to be so pertinent; for if the servants should go in with their master in the bawdy house and see him commit that villany, could they justifie themselves by their civill homage which they owe to their lord;Naaman was not simply free of sin in bowing in the house of Rimmon. we cannot say then that Naaman was simply free of sinne in this; and therefore he craveth pardon.
Some answere, that the prophet fitteth his answere here to the weake and infirme conscience. Rom. 15.1. Ye that are strong ought to beare with the infirmities of the weake:The Prophet fitted his answer to the weake conscience of Naaman, as some say. and they say his weake conscience appeared in this, because he was not resolved as yet fully what to doe in this case: This is the note of a weake conscience, Rom. 14.15. to be troubled and grieued at a thing, and doubt whether it may doe it, or not doe it; and yet inclineth to doe it, this is an infirme conscience: the prophet having to doe here with his weake brother, biddeth him goe in peace,Naaman asketh two things. and not to trouble him about this matter: but this cannot be the meaning of the prophets answere, that goe in peace should be an affirmative justifying him in this fact, Naaman hath two demands, first that hee might have so much earth, as to build an altar that he might sacrifice to the Lord upon it: now if wee shall fit the prophets answere to this demaund, would the prophet justifie a thing that was contrarie to the Law, and bid him goe sacrifice there? for they were to sacrifice onely in the place which the Lord their God should appoint. So goe in peace, the meaning is not that the prophet alloweth this fact of his. Non est factum approbantis, sed dimittentis and promittentis se oraturum pro salute eius; that is, hee approved not this that Naaman asked, but when he said goe in peace, it was onely a dismissing of him, and sending him away, promising that he would pray for him, that the Lord would strengthen
 and confirme him, who as yet was weake in faith, if this fact had beene allowed or approved by the Prophet, what is the cause that so many martyrs of God have suffered such great torments and troubles,The Prophet did not approve this demand of Naaman. rather then that they would communicate with idolaters in the least shew of idolatrie?
There was a stately fountaine of water, and the image of Bacchus set up there with a vinetree spreading it selfe round about the court, and overshadowing it; when Licinius came for recreation to the court, Auxentius and many others following him, seeing a branch of the vine tree loaded with clusters, hee bad Auxentius cut it off, and he suspecting nothing, did it; Then Licinius said unto him, set that branch at the feet of Bacchus.Suidas in Auxentio. But Auxentius answered, God forbid, o Emperour, that I doe it, for I am a Christian; But Licinius said unto him, either get thee from my service, or doe this;The martyrs would communicate with idolaters in nothing. at nihil cunctatus zonam soluit and recessit: The martyrs of God would not cast one graine of frankincense into the fire to the idols; they would communicate with them in nothing: therefore the Prophet would never justifie this, that he should goe into the house of Rimmon upon any pretence to worship:The Prophet would not justifie Naamans going into the house of Rimmon. When the Emperor went unto the Masse, the Count Palatine who was his swordbearer, carried his sword before him to the church doore, but would never goe into the Masse with him; and he learned not, that this distinction of genuflexio imitativa and genuflexio obsequij, would have saved him from idolatrie.
The conclusion of this is, that those who are zealous for the glorie of God will neither directly nor indirectly communicate with idolaters, neither will they eate swines flesh, nor drinke of the broth. Esay. 65.4.



EXERCITAT. XIII. Of mixtures of Religion. Commandement II.

1. King. 18.21. And Elijah came unto all the people and said, how long halt yee betweene two opinions? If the Lord be God, then follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.

TO worship two gods is a sinne against the first commandement; but to mixe the meanes of Gods worship, is a sinne against the second commandement.
When things are mixed they are not kept in puritie as when Vintners mixe water with wine, or when silver and lead are mixed together, and they make up a third, different from the two; God will not have his religion mixed this wayes.
The Lord commanded, Exod. 30.29. to make the holy oyntment of pure myrrhe, in the originall it is mar derer, mirrha libertatis, that is, which is free from all mixture,(...) so thou shalt make oleum de olivis purissimum. Levit. 24.2. the incense that was offered was the most transparent and pure incense, Lebhonah Zaccah: Exod. 30.34.(...) So the flowre which was offered to God was simila pura,The wine, o^ntment, the oyle, the flowre which was offered to the Lord wer^ pure without mixture. and the Apostle forbiddeth (...), to mixe the word: 2. Cor. 2.17. As Vintners mixe water and wine together. Prov. 9.3. Wisdome sent forth her maids, why are they called her maides? but to teach preachers to keepe the word in sincerity, as virgins labour to keepe their virginity uncorrupted; and therefore the prophet Esay putteth the prophets and evangelists
 in the feminine gender, Mebhashereth.Prophets and Euangelists put in the feminine gender. (...) The people of God are not called from Abraham.
The Iewes observe, that the people of God are never called in the scriptures Abrahamites from Abraham, neither Isaac from Isaac, but once Amos 7.9. But they are called Israelites from Iacob, and Iewes from Iuda, and they gave this to be the reason; because there came those of Abraham who professed diverse religions, and so of Isaac; but these who came of Israel and of Iuda professed but one religion.
The Lord would have his people a people dwelling by themselves,The Iewes a people dwelling by themselves. that they should have no medling with the heathen. Num. 23.9. Loe the people shall dwell alone,Why he would not have them to dwell neare the sea. and shall not be reckoned among the nations. He would not have them lye neare the sea coast (for the Philistims lay betwixt them and the sea,) lest they having too great commerce by sea with the heathen, they should have waxed prouder and learned their fashions, as Tyrus waxed prouder by trading with many nations by sea. Ezek. 27.28. and this wayes they should have endangered their religion; Salomon of all the Kings sent his ships farre abroad to other nations, but Iehosaphat and Ahaziah attempted this in vaine.The kings of the Ilands who. 2. Chron. 20.35. and where it is said, Psal. 72 10. The Kings of the Ilands shall bring presents to thee, what Ilands are meant here? not the farre Ilands, but the Ilands which lay within the Mediterranean sea.
First, it was not lawfull to mixe Gods religion and the devills,Gods religion and the devils mixed together. such was that religion in the house of Micah. Iud. 17.5. Who had an Ephod and Teraphim, an Ephod for the true worship of God, and the Teraphim for the worship of the devill.
Again it was not lawfull to mixe Iudaisme and Gentilisme together. Levit. 19.27. Yee shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou marre the corners of thy beard,Iudaisme and gentilisme. yee shall not make any cutting in your flesh for
 the dead, nor print any marke upon you. These were the ceremonies of the heathen; therefore the Lord discharges his people to use them. Such was the mixture of the Samaritan religion, who worshiped both the Lord and the idols of the land; and such was the religion of the Gergasites who learned many things of the heathen,Ioseph. lib. 2. de bello Iudaico. cap. 20. as to eate swines flesh, and not to circumcise; and of the Ebionites who observe both the Iewish and christian sabbath.
Christianitie and Iudaisme cannot be mixed.Thirdly, it is not lawfull to mixe christianitie and judaisme; such were the Galatians, who would keepe the ceremonies of the law and the gospell.
 After the death of Christ, when the apostles observed the ceremonies of the law with the gospell, whether mixed they judaisme with christianitie, or not?
Why the Apostles kept the ceremonies after the death of Christ.They kept these ceremonies but for a while, for the winning of the weake Iewes. When Christ came in the flesh, the ceremonies and grace were mixed together like the new wine and the dregges; then the lees began to settle downe, and the wine to bee somewhat more cleare: so at the first, the wine of grace and the ceremonies which were the lees, were mingled together, and afterwards they began to be separated;Simile. and as the Vintner, if hee draw the wine too soone from the lees, it will become sowre; for the dregges keepe the wine from corruption, therefore hee who mindeth to keepe his wine, letteth it stand upon the dregges awhile to preserve it: So the Apostles would not draw the wine of grace too soone from the lees of the ceremonies, but lest this wine standing too long upon the lees should corrupt, as Moab did. Ier. 48.11. therefore they drew the gospell altogether from the ceremonies.
When judaisme and gentilisme were mixed together, here the oxe and the asse were yoked together, the cleane and the uncleane beast; when the apostles
 used the ceremonies after the death of Christ, they used them ad aliud, and non per se,The ceremonies after the death of Christ, were not kept for themselves but for another end. for the winning of their brethren, and not for any thing that was in the ceremonies themselves, but when the Galatians used them under the gospell, this was to ioyne a dead man and a living man together, for they were dead after Christ said, consummatum est, and had no use in the church afterwards but by accident; for as hee who buildeth a vault letteth the centrels stand untill he put in the key stone, and then hee pulleth them away: so when the corner stone Iesus Christ was come, it was time that these centrels, the ceremonies should be removed.
Fourthly, it is not lawfull to mixe christianitie and gentilisme, such was the doctrine of the Nicolaitans: Revelat. 2.15. and some in Corinth who professed that there was not a resurrection: Such is the religion of those in Russia and Muscovia, they have some christian profession of the Greeke church, and mixed with many heathenish ceremonies.
Whether is it a greater sinne to mixe judaisme and christianity together,  or to mixe christianity and gentilisme together.
It is a greater sinne to mixe judaisme and christianity together,  for the Iewes ceremonies belonged once to the church; and therefore for them to rise up againe to molest the Church, is a greater sinne, then when the ceremonies of the gentiles trouble the Church.
Fiftly, when a religion is made up of judaisme, gentilisme, and christianity,Brerewood in his inquiries. such is the religion of the Marduites a people in Syria, who keepe the christian sabbath with the Christians, and the Iewish sabbath with the Iewes, and they worship the sunne and the moone with the Pagans.
Some idolatrous worship is made up of judaisme, gentilisme, and Arrianisme, as Turcisme. Some is made
 of iudaisme, gentilisme, and christianity.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, the pure worship of God is like the glassie sea. Revel. 4.6. which is transparent and shineth, and not darke and covered with ceremonies: we must not borrow the painting of that wrinkled whore to paint the Church with it, but wee must keepe her in her owne beauty.


EXERCITAT. XIV. Of the motives which mooved the heathen to worship idols. Commandement 2.

Rom. 1.21. Because when they knew God they glorified him not, they became vaine in their imaginations.

IDolatrie amongst the heathen arose especially from three grounds, the first ground was the desire which they had to continue the name of their predecessours, benefactors, and their nobles; the second ground, was the desire of some bodily pledge of Gods presence to bee amongst them; and the third ground which drew them to idolatrie, was their boldnes to represent God mystically and hieroglyphically by sundry images.
The heathen set up an image to continue the name of their predecessours, and their posteritie worshipped it as a God.The first ground was their desire to continue their name to the posterity, and therefore they set up images onely at the first for representation in remembrances; but the posterity following, turned this representation into adoration, and they made gods of those whom they knew to have beene but men; therefore they set up in their temples, Harpocrates holding his finger upon his
 mouth, to teach them silence, that no man should bee bold to say, that these were men once,Augustin. de civitate Dei lib. 8. whom they worship now as gods.
The second ground which moved them to commit idolatrie,The people desired much a visible signe of the presence of their God. was the desire they had of some visible pledge of the presence of a godhead amongst them; and even as the souldiers desire to see their captaine visibly in the field before them: So desired they to have some visible signe of a godhead amongst them; and having these pledges, they thought that their gods would not leave them, and wanting these, they thought the gods would leave them.
When Alexander the great besieged Tyrus, one of their Diviners told them, that it was revealed to him in a dreame, that their god Apollo was to depart from them shortly; what doe they to detaine Apollo still amongst them? they take the image of Apollo their god,They tyed the image of Apollo to a post. and bind it with a chaine of gold to a post, thinking thereby to detaine Apollo; they held that this image was a pledge of his presence amongst them,Diodorus Sic. lib. 1. cap. 1. and they thought so long as they kept the image of Apollo that he would not leave them.
The third ground which led them to this idolatrie, was their boldnesse to represent god mystically by their hieroglyphicks, representing him as they pleased.Plutarch. de Iside and Osiri. In Thebe a towne of Egypt (as Plutarch maketh mention) they worshiped a god whom they acknowledged to be immortall, but how painted they him? in the likenesse of a man blowing an egge out of his mouth,How they painted God in Thebe* Varro de re rustica lib. 2. cap. 1.11. whereby they signified, that it was the Lord that made the round world by his word, and they dedicated a sheepe to him; because of old, milke was their food for the most part.
So in the towne of Sai where Minerva was worshiped, before the gates of the Temple they had this hiroglyphick
 painted an infant, an old man, a sparhawke, a fish,Plutarch. de Iside and Osiri. and Hippopotamos whereby they signified, O qui nascimini and denascimini, Deus odit impudentiam. By the young child they signified our birth, and by the old man our death, and by the sparhawke they meant God, who was most sharpe in sight to see all things, and swift to revenge; and by the fish which liveth in the sea, a thing hated by the Egyptians, they meant hatred, and by Hippopotamos the sea horse, who killeth his father and covereth his damme, they meant impudencie.
The Egyptians represented God by a serpent.So the Egyptians represented God by the serpent Aspis who casteth the skin every yeare and renueth the age of it, whereby they signified Gods immortalitie, and thus boldly They changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birdes, and foure footed beasts and creeping things. Rom. 1.23.



EXERCITAT. XV. Whether things idolatrous may be converted to any use, either in the service of God, or may we convert them to our owne use? Commandement II.

Deut. 7.25. The graven images of their gods shall yee burne with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is upon them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein, for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.

AS we must give nothing to the idoll, so wee must take nothing from it.
There were three sorts of Cherem,(...) Res devota Anathema. Three sorts of execrable things under the law. or things execrable under the law, first when both men and beasts were to be destroyed, and then nothing came either to Gods use or to the peoples; such were the goods of the apostate Iewes who fell away from the true God. Deut. 13.15. and in this sense the Amalekites and their goods were execrable.
Secondly, they were execrable, when the men and their beasts and their stuffe were burnt, but the gold, silver, brasse, and iron were reserved for the use of the sanctuarie, and these of Iericho were execrable in this sort: Iosh. 6.24.
The third sort were these, when the men alone were killed, but the beasts and all other things which belonged to them were converted to the use of the souldiers; such was the towne of Hai. Iosh. 8.27.
Things consecrate to idols were execrable when they were idolatrous in state.

Things belonging to idolaters are of three sotts.Things belonging to Idolaters were of three sorts, first such as pertained to Idolaters but were not idolatrous, as David tooke the sword of Goliah, and hung it up in the house of God;What idolatrous things we may use. secondly things that were idolatrous, but were not idolatrous in state, as the fountaines out of which the heathen drew water for the service of their idols, yet the Christians might have converted these fountaines to a spirituall or a civill use; so Gideon tooke the bullock which was appointed for Baal, and the grove, and offered the bullock with the wood in a sacrifice to the Lord. Iudg. 6.26. So the Bethshemites tooke the Philistims cart, and the kine, and offered them to the Lord in a sacrifice. 1. Sam. 6.15. because they were not idolatrous in state; for even as the cloathes of the leper being washed, were made cleane, Lev. 21.8. So those things which belonged to the Idolater, and were not idolatrous in state, might be cleansed and converted to other uses.
But when a thing was idolatrous in state, and carried the marke and badge of the idoll still upon it; as their images of gold and silver, and their ornaments. Deut. 7.25. they were to be cast away, and not to be converted to any other use. Esay. 30.22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and shall say unto it, get thee hence.
Achan stole a Babylonish garment, and two hundreth shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold. Iosh. 7.21. in the Hebrew it is,(...) Lingua auri. Lashon zahabh, a tongue of gold, this tongue some hold to have beene the sword which hung by the idols side;Vi^^lspand de ponderibus and mensuris. The Scythians worshiped asword. and some worshiped Acinacis, the sword it selfe, as the Scythians. Of old, a sword was called lingua, as Fannius an ancient writer testifieth, and the Babylonish garment they hold to bee the cloak which covered the idoll, and the two hundred shekels to be the money
 which was dedicated to the idoll; now because Achan tooke this which was idolatrous in state, and which might not bee converted to his use, therefore the Lord will have him and all his to be rooted out.
That which had an immediate dependance still upon the idoll, and had relation to it,Cassiodorus and tripartita Rufins. keeping still both the matter and the forme; that cannot bee offered to the Lord. Example,What Idolatrous things might not be used. Constantine the great tooke out of the temple of Serapis their sacred elne Fathom, whereby they measured yearely how much the river Nilus would overflow; which the heathen thought to have a certaine divinitie in it; this elne Constantine should not have caused to be put in the temple of Alexandria, because this elne both in matter and forme was kept here, as it was in the idolatrous use before.
That which is idolatrous in state and hath an immediate dependance upon the idoll,Nothing that hath an immediate dependence on the Idoll can be converted to any use. should neither be converted to a spirituall or a civill use; therefore that which the Iewes say, is false, that David tooke the crowne from Milcom the god of the Ammonites, and set it upon his owne head. 2. Sam. 12.30. If this crowne was the crowne of the god of the Ammonites, then it was idolatrous in state,(...) nomen Idoli. (...) Rex eorum. David tooke not the Crowne from Mil om the Idol, but from the King of Ammon. Obj. and David could not have set it upon his owne head. Wherefore hee tooke this crowne from Malcam the king of the Ammonites, and set it upon his owne head.
But how could the king weare such a crowne upon his owne head? a talent in weight is fortie sixe pounds and fourteene ounces, which being reduced to the value of our money will extend to 2250. pounds; the king of Ammon could not weare such a crowne of so great weight upon his head; therefore it may seeme that it was taken from the head of the idoll, and not from the head of the king.
Most thinke that Talent here is taken according to 
 the Syrian weight,Some thinke that the crowne was 2250. pound according to the Syrian weight. which was not aboue the quarter of an Hebrew talent, and which weigheth of our weight eleven pound and foure ounces, and they thinke this the rather; because Rabba in the countrey of the children of Ammon, lay in the countrey of Syria; therefore it seemeth that they followed their weight.
Secondly, some answere that this crowne was valued  according to the worth and not the weight of it,Some thinke that the crowne was valued according to the worth and not the weight. in regard it was set with pretious stones and jewels, it weighed so much, that is, it was worth so much. Zach. 11.13. they weighed for my wages as much as I was valued at, that is, thirtie peeces of silver.
 Thirdly, he both changed the forme of it, and diminished the weight of it.
Things which have beene the immediate instruments of Idolatrie, may be used.Againe these things which have beene the mediate instruments in the worshiping of idols, these may bee used; a church may bee used although before idolatrie hath beene committed there: There was no mountaine more defiled with idolatrie then the mount of Olives was,The Idoll it selfe may not be used. and therefore it was called mons corruptionis, 2. King. 23.13. and yet no place where Christ prayed so often as there.
The idoll it selfe may not bee used, because it hath beene the immediate instrument of idolatrie; when souldiers doe besiege a towne and take it, they pull downe the trophees and colours of the enemies, but not the towne it selfe, the idols are the trophees, ensignes and colours of idolatrie, and therefore to be pulled downe.
Deut. 12.2, 3. Yee shall verily destroy all the places wherein the nations, which ye shall possesse, serve their Gods. Then it may seeme that the places where idols have bin worshiped should be destroyed.
Moses judiciall lawes do not binde us as they did the Israelites.This was a temporarie ordinance, and a part of Moses policie which is now abrogat, for howsoever the equity of this law remaineth, teaching us to detest idolatrie,
 yet it bindeth us not in such a manner to detest idolatrie as they did. Example, God commanded here to destroy idolatrous places, hee commanded to burne the cattell, spoyle, and goods of the apostates; the equitie of this commandement teacheth us to detest and abhorre idolatrie, but we are not bound to follow it in the same manner.
The Lord commanded to consume the rest of the holy things, when the religious use of them ceased, as to burne that which was left of the Pascha. Exod. 12.10. So that which was left of the ram of consecration. Exod. 29.34. and so of the flesh of the peace offering. Levit. 7.15.The equitie of the judiciall law bindeth us now. the equitie of this ordinance continueth for ever, teaching us how to regard holy things with an higher estimation than common things, but we are not bound according to the letter of the law to follow this; for the bread and the wine remaining after the Sacrament should not be burnt; in these lawes wee must looke to the equitie and substance, but not to the letter; and many things were urged in Moses policie, which wee are freed of now. Example, the Iewes were forbidden expressely to marie with the heathen, and if they had married such heathen wives, and had begotten children upon them; yet they were commanded to put them away againe. Ezra. 10.11.Greater libertie to Christians under the Gospell, then to the Iewes under the Law. But now a Christian hath greater liberty. 2. Corinth. 12.13, 14. An idolatrous wife was not sanctified by her husband under Moses law, as she may be under the gospell; God hath changed the rigour of this law. Deut. 17.25. Not to take so much as any thing belonging to idolatrie, and turne it to a civill use. Iosh. 7.1. It is now changed, and the abomination is taken away, we may eate now of the idolothites, when they are not in the temple of the idols, which they might not doe under Moses law.
If the brasen serpent was abolished, why should not
 the place likewise where idols have beene worshiped, be abolished as well as images.
 A place is a necessary circumstance in the worship of God, but this Serpent was not, neither are crucifixes now.
Things are idolatrous in state when they are in the act of idolatrie,When a thing is idolatrous in state. but out of that act and place, and carrying no representation of the idoll, they cease to bee idolatrous, and may be used. Example, no man might eate of the flesh of the sacrifice when it was in idoleio in the place where the idoll was worshiped; yet the rest of the flesh, when it was sold in the shambles they might eate of it:The superstitious Iewes would drinke no wine of the Gentiles. for relata extra usum non sunt relata, the relation here ceaseth betwixt the flesh and the idoll. Iulian the apostate caused consecrate the whole flesh in the shambles to the idols, thinking that none of the Christians would eate of it; but the flesh in the shambles was extra usum, it but was idolatrous in the temple of the idols, but not in the shambles.
Conclusion.The Lord forbad the Iewes libamina gentium, Deut. 32.37. but the Iewes added that they should drinke none of the wine of the gentiles, that is, any meate or drinke dressed by them; and therefore at this day they will neither eate of the christians meate, nor drinke of their drinke, but they will give of their meate to the christians; it was onely libamen, the idolatrous drinke of the gentiles which the Lord forbad them, but he forbad them not simply their meat and drinke.
The conclusion of this is, as he who is chast despiseth not onely the harlot, but also the favour of the harlot: so if we would eschew idolatrie, we must not onely eschew idols, but also things dedicated to idols.



EXERCITAT. XVI. The reason why the Lord will not suffer idolatrie. Commandement II.

Exod. 20.5. For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God.

AS these words, I am the Lord,The Lord to shew his authoritie to command, setteth his name to every one of the commandements. are prefixed to the first commandement; so they are annexed to the rest: they are prefixed to the first by way of preface; I am thy Lord thy God. Exod. 20.2. So they are annexed to the second; as here, and Levit. 19.4. Turne yee not unto idols, nor make to your selves molten gods: I am the Lord your God. To the third, Levit. 19.12. Ye shall not sweare by my name falsly, neither shalt thou prophane the name of thy God: I am the Lord. To the fourth, Vers. 30. Ye shall keepe my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuarie: I am the Lord. To the fift; Vers. 3. Ye shall feare every man his mother, and his father, and keepe my sabbaths. I am the Lord your God, and Vers. 32. Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and feare thy God; I am the Lord. To the sixt, Vers. 16. Neither shalt thou stand against the bloud of thy neighbour: I am the Lord. To the seaventh, Levit. 18.6. None of you shall approach to any that is neare of kin to you, to uncover their nakednesse: I am the Lord. To the eight, Vers. 19. Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, etc. I am the Lord. So to the ninth, Vers. 16. Thou shalt not goe up and downe as a talebearer among the people, I am the Lord. And generally to all the Commandements. Levit. 18.5. Ye shall therefore keepe my statutes and my judgements, which if yee doe ye shall live in them. I am the Lord. He hath set his name
 to every one of them, to shew that hee hath power to command.
Deus Deus tuus, he is God of all creatures, but hee is Deus tuus of his Church.
God both lendeth and borroweth from man.I am a jealous God, the Lord whose delights were with the sonnes of men, Prov. 8.31. will interchange with man, he will both lend some things to him, and borrow some things from him.
Some things are spoken properly, which arise either from his understanding or from his will.Things arising from the understanding and will of God, are first spoken properly of himselfe. From the understanding, as his knowledge, and providence, these are first spoken properly of God; and then attributed to man. So these which arise from his will, as his goodnesse, mercie, and grace, hee communicateth himselfe by creation to all his creatures; and therefore hee is called the father of them.Father properly is given to God. Iob. 38.28. Pater pluviae, the father of raine. This word father is properly attributed to him.(...). Ephes. 3.15. Of whom all fatherhoods in heaven and earth are named, and it is borrowed from him and given to creatures; either when men beget a sonne, or when they make a thing, they are called the father of it. Gen. 4.20. borrowed from him who is the father by eternall generation of his sonne; or father by creation of all the creatures.
Somethings first proper to the creatures, and then attributed to God.There are other things which are first proper to the creatures, and then attributed to God by way of metaphor, such as are spoken of God (...) as when we attribute hands, feet, and eyes to him. Secondly such things as are spoken of him, (...), when the scripture bringeth in God angry after the manner of man,Things proper to the creatures attributed to God three wayes. Psal. 18.8. There went up a smoake out of his nostrils. Thirdly these things that are spoken of him (...), when passions are attributed to God after the manner of men; and they are either simple or compounded passions: Simple, as anger, hatred; compounded
 as jealousie, which is made up of love and hatred.
This word Kinne signifieth either to be jealous or zealous,(...) Zelotypus fuit, zela, affectus, cum p^^p. @ constructu^ in (...) sumitur, Cum @ vel (...) fere in m^^^ n, ut not^t A^. Es^. and it is taken either in a good sense or an evill sense: In a good sense when it is construed with Lamed, as Num. 25.13. Kinne le lohan, he was zealous for his God. But when it is construed with Beth or Eth, then it is taken in an evill sense. Num. 5.14. Vekinne eth ishto,(...) and he be jealous of his wife.
Iealousie is a mixed affection of love and hatred,(...) therefore it is called the fire of his jealousie. Zeph. 1.18. God, because he hath married the Church to himselfe,Iealousie what. he is jealous of her,God is jealous of his Church here. left she should goe a whooring from him after other gods. In heaven hee onely loveth the triumphant Church, he is not jealous of her; in earth he is jealous often times of his militant Church, but hee hateth her not; but he hateth the children of this world altogether.
A loving husband first beginneth to suspect his wife,How jealousie is bred, and how it proceedeth. then he becommeth jealous of her, and last he cometh to hate her and cast her off: but before hee come to cast her off, hatred saith, I will cast her off, because she hath played the harlot; but love saith, I am loath to cast her off, because she hath beene the wife of my youth. Shee is the mother of my children, and so love prevaileth for a while, but at last when shee continueth in her adulteries, then hee turneth her away, and giveth her the bill of divorcement, and hateth her more than ever hee loved her: so doth God deale with his Church before he cast her off.
This iealousie is a strong passion. Cant. 8.6.Iealousie is a strong and rooted passion. Iealousie is cruell as the grave: The grave spareth no man, and there is no redemption from the grave: So the iealous husband, nothing will satisfie him: and as it is a dangerous thing to meet a beare robbed of her whelpes. Prov. 17.12. and the revenger of bloud in his heat. Deut. 19.6. So
 it is to meet a iealous man in his rage.Why the offering of the adulterous woman is called the offering of memoriall. Prov. 6.34. Iealousie is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengance. He will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content though thou givest many gifts.
So this passion is a rooted passion: under the Law the sacrifice which was offered for the woman suspected of adultery, is called oblatio recordationis, the offering of memoriall. Num. 5.18. in all other sacrifices iniquitie was purged and forgotten, but in this sacrifice the wrong is remembred, and they say, there are three things which can hardly be cured, iealousie, frensie, and heresie.
The Lord setteth this attribute of jealousie before the Church here, to warne her to abstaine from idolatrie, and spirituall adulterie.Why the Lord setteth this word jealousie to this commandement. If the wife would remember the rage of her husband, it would terrifie her; and if she would remember his love, this would keepe her in obedience: the adulterous woman when shee enticed the young man to adulterie. Prov. 7.19. She saith, The man is not at home, hee is gone a farre iourney, hee hath taken a bagge of money with him, and will come home at the day appointed. She saith, the good man will come home, but not my jealous husband will come; neither thinketh she thus with her selfe, what if he come home and take me in the act of adulterie?A difference betwixt God the husband of his Church, and other jealous husbands.
God is a jealous husband, marke a difference betwixt him and other jealous husbands. Ier. 3.1. They say if a man put away his wife, and shee goe from him, and become another mans wife, shall hee returne unto her againe? shall not the land bee greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers, yet returne againe to me, saith the Lord; and if shee will returne to him as to a father and guide of her youth, hee promiseth to accept of her. Vers. 4. Whereas no other husband may accept of his wife backe againe, after hee hath put her away being married to another.

When the Church committeth adulterie whether ceaseth she to be the spouse of Christ or not? 
She ceaseth to bee his spouse upon her part,  The Church may cease to be a spouse upon her part, but not upon Gods part. because she hath committed adultery; but so long as hee giveth her not the bill of divorcement, he accounteth of her as his spouse: therefore the Lord saith of Iuda, Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement? Esay. 50.1.(...) aversatrix. (...) prevari^^trix. as if he would say, I never gave her a bill of divorcement, but she went willingly from me of her owne accord, when I would have kept her still. Iuda and Israel are compared by the Prophet. Ier. 3.11. he called Israel Meshubha, the backsliding Israel, and he calleth Iuda Bagodah, treacherous Iuda, when Israel fell away hee gave the bill of divorcement to the ten tribes, but he did not repudiate treacherous Iuda for all her adulteries.
First he was the guide of her youth,When the Lord gave Israell the bill of divorce. and he loved her because he remembred still the kindenes of her youth, and the love of her espousals. Ier. 2.2. that is, when he remembred the love of the Patriarchs, and their sinceritie in worshiping of him. Then they committed adulterie and fell away from him; yet they repented, therefore he cast them not off; But after that they had crucified the Lord of glory, then Paul said, hee would goe to the Gentiles. There was a little remnant of the Iewes who beleeved in Christ, they were to bee gathered in, and to these Peter went to Babylon. 1. Pet. 5.13.When he gave Iuda the bill of devorce. And a few in the West scattered abroad in Pentus, Asia, and Bithynia, and to these Peter wrote. 1. Pet. 1.1. and about the time of the destruction of Ierusalem the Lord gave them absolutely the bill of divorcement, and then hee counted them not a people.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. jealousie is onely joyned to the second commandement, he is angry for the breach of any commandement, but he is iealous when his worship is corrupted, and his glory given to creatures, wherefore this must be a high transgression.



EXERCITAT. XVI. The punishment for the breach of the second Commandement.

Exod. 20.5. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children.

IN this threatning wee have to consider what it is to visite here; secondly what sinnes of the fathers the Lord visiteth upon the children; thirdly who are meant by our fathers here; fourthly how the children are punished for their fathers sinnes.
What the word Visit signifieth.To visite here is a speech borrowed from a Iudge who useth to punish the evill doers, and to reward those who doe well; so the Lord the great Iudge of the world hee punisheth idolaters and their posterity, and he rewardeth the true worshipers who keepe his commandements, he visiteth in judgement, as he visited the Egyptians,God visiteth sometimes in mercie and sometimes in judgement. and hee visiteth in mercie, as hee visited the Israelites. Exod. 3.16. visitando visitavi, I have surely visited you, that is, in mercie. So Gen. 21.1. The Lord visited Sara, as hee had said, that is, hee visited her in mercy.
Children have sin from their parents by propagation, or imitation.He visiteh the sinnes. Sinne is either the sinne which the children have from their parents by propagation, or by imitation; by propagation, as originall sinne; by imitation, as their other personall sinnes. Here wee must put a difference betwixt that accident which is common to the nature of all men, which is called accidens naturae;Accidens
naturae.personae. And a personall accident which is incident to some: The accident which is common to the whole nature of man is alwayes transmitted from the father to
 the child, and shall continue to all the posterity of Adam, to the end. The most filthie leprosie that is, and which runneth long in a bloud, yet in time will weare away in the posterity;Originall sinne is alike in all the sonnes of men both just and unjust, but this originall and hereditarie sinne never weareth out, but it continues with all the children of men, and is alike in them all; the sonnes of the just, and the sonnes of the unjust are both alike in this originall sinne.
But these which are personall accidents are not propagated from the father to the son,Personall accidents are not propagated from the fathers to the children. especially the gifts of the minde; it may bee, that a strong father begets a a strong child, and the leprous father begets a leprous sonne, but neither the defects nor the vertues of the mind are transmitted from the fathers to the children, as the father who is a musitian begetteth not his sonne a musitian; and the father who is wise, begetteth not alwayes a wise child; as Salomon the wisest man that ever was, had but a foole to his sonne, Rehoboam; therefore he saith, Eccles. 2.19. Who knoweth whether his son shall be a wise man or a foole.
Seeing Adam transmitted originall sinne to his posterity,  what is the reason why hee transmitteth not his righteousnesse to them after his sinne was pardoned?
Hee got grace in his second estate, as a personall gift,  Adam did not transmit his righteousnesse to his posteritie, because it was not naturall, but personall to him. and therefore hee could not transmit it to his posterity; but if hee had stood in integrity, hee should have transmitted righteousnesse to his posterity, because then it was naturall to him, as when he fell he transmitted sin to his posterity. And hee begot a sonne in his owne likenesse after his image. Gen. 5.3.
This originall sinne the Lord may punish the children for it, if hee would deale in judgement with them, because it is found in all children transmitted from their parents.
By sinne here especially is meant idolatrie, which by
 way of appropriation is called sinne,By sinne here is chiefly meant Idolatrie.See Command. 2. Exer. 5. pag. 80.By fathers are meant fathers naturall, and by example. as is shewn before, God visiteth other sinnes also besides idolatrie, As all the bloud shed from Abel to Zachary. Mat. 23.35.
By fathers here are meant not onely naturall fathers, but those who are fathers by example, as Cain was a father, Core was a father, and Balaam was a father. Iude 11. Woe unto them, for they have gone into the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the errour of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core: and in this sense the devill is called a father. Ioh. 8.44. Yee are of your father the devill.
Children by nature and imitation.There are two sorts of children; children by nature, and children by imitation: children by imitation are these of whom it is chiefly meant here, and they are rather called their children whom they imitate,Children by imitation are chiefly meant of here. than their children who begot them. Example, Iudg. 18.30. Ionathan the sonne of Gershon, the sonne of Manasseh; this Ionathan was Moses naturall grandchild by generation, yet hee is called the grandchild of Manasseh, because in wickednesse hee followed Manasseh, and the Iewes say,(...) See Exercitat. 10. Pag. 95. they would not write his name, the sonne of Gershon, the sone of Moses, for that had beene a disgrace to Moses, but they wrote him to bee the sonne of Manasseth, by lifting up a letter. And the Hebrewes give another example like unto this.Achaz King of Iuda called king of Israel, and why. 2. Chron. 28.19. And the Lord brought Iuda low, because of Achaz king of Israel. Why is Achaz called king of Israel, here, seeing hee was king of Iuda? they say, because he imitated the wicked kings of Israel in their wickednesse.

He visiteth the sinnes of the fathers upon the children.

 How doth it stand with the justice of God to punish the children for their fathers sinnes, seeing the Lord forbiddeth to punish the children for the fathers offences. Deut. 24.16. The fathers shall not bee put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for their fathers.

The Lord restraineth here the power of the magistrate that he may not put the children to death for their fathers offences, as wee see. 2. King. 14.16.  The Magistrate may not put the child to death for his fathers sin. And they slew his servants who had slaine the king his father, but the children of the murtherer hee slew not, according to that which was written in the Law, the children shall not be put to death for their fathers offences.
The magistrate may not put the children to death for their fathers offences,See Iunis Analyses in Levit. 20.20. although he may punish them other wayes; then it seemeth to be a strange collection. Levit. 20.20. If a woman be begotten incestuously with child, then she shall be burnt, non expectato partu, that is, before she be delivered of the child.
But they shall die childlesse,  this cannot be understood of barrennesse, for that were no punishment to them, therefore it may seeme to be taken in this sense, she and the child shall bee taken away together by the magistrate.
This cannot bee the meaning of the place,  The mother cannot be killed, the child being quick in her belly. that the mother and quicke child shall bee killed together; for the children may not be put to death for the offence of their father or mother; but this seemeth rather to be the meaning of the place, when the magistrate understandeth once that a man had lyen with his uncles wife, then hee shall presently cut them off, before the woman conceive, and so they shall die without seede.
The Lord who is author of life and death,God may punish the children with temporall punishments for their fathers sinne. he may punish the children for their fathers offences with temporall punishments, but hee never punisheth the children for their fathers offences with eternall punishments, unlesse they imitate their fathers sinnes.
It may bee said that children are punished not onely with temporall judgements,  but also with spirituall judgements, and that before they can imitate their fathers sinnes. Gen. 17.14. And the uncircumcised man-child
 whose fl^sh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soule shall be cut off from his people. Here the child may seeme to be cut off for his fathers fault, because his father neglected to circumcise him; and, to bee cut off here, is a spirituall judgement, to be cut off in the wrath of God.
 In the originall it is thus, praeputiatus masculus que non circumciderit caruem praeputij sui,(...) qui non circumciderit, est sut. Kal, a (...) but the Vulgar Latine translation maketh it to be fut. Niphal a (...) qui non circumcisus fuerit. but the vulgar Latine reads it; if he be not circumcised, he shall be cut off; but the right reading is, he who circumciseth not the foreskin of his flesh, he shall be cut off, for the text addeth, he hath broken my covenant, which cannot be said of young infants, but of children when they are come to age and understanding, and when they become (as the Iewes say) filii praecepti, then if they despise the covenant, they are to bee cut off.
When children imitate their fathers sinnes, then the Lord punisheth them:Children imitate their fathers sins two wayes. Children imitate their fathers sins two wayes, either affirmatively, or negatively; affirmatively, when they begin to imitate their fathers sinnes in their infancie and young yeares. Ier. 7.8. The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women kneade the dough to make cakes to the queene of heaven; here they were initiated in their fathers idolatry. So when the Israelites married with the wives of Ashdod, the children spake the language of Ashdod, imitating their fathers. Nehem. 13.24 Secondly, when they come to a greater maturitie of age, and then they fill up the measures of their fathers: Mat. 23.32.
Children are guiltie of their fathers sins when they are not humbled for them.Secondly they imitate their fathers sins negatively, that is, when they dissent not from their fathers sinnes, and when they are not humbled for them; for if such children had the occasions and temptations which their fathers had, they would doe as they did; and therefore justly their fathers sinnes may bee laid to their charge. Dan. 5.22. And thou his sonne, O Balshazzer, hast not
 humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this, meaning the sinnes of Nebuchadnezzar, and the punishment of them; this should teach us to take notice of the corruption of our nature, and how ready wee are to follow others in wickednesse, and especially the sinnes of our parents; the blinde Iewes said, if wee had beene in the dayes of our fathers, we would not have beene partakers with them in the bloud of the prophets. Mat. 23.30.
Ye will say then,  that children are punished for their owne sinnes, why then are they called their fathers sinnes?
They are their fathers sinnes occasionaliter, but they are their owne sinnes causaliter:  they are their fathers sinnes occasionaliter,The sinnes of the fathers are the childrens causaliter, but the fathers occasionaliter. for God may take occasion by the fathers sinnes, to withdraw the grace from his children, and then they are prone and ready to follow all the sinnes of their fathers; when God punisheth the children for their fathers sinnes, hee would never punish them if they were not sinners themselves; but he respecteth more the sinnes of the fathers in punishing of them. Ioh. 9.3. Christ saith of the blinde man,God would not punish children for their fathers sinne if they were not sinners themselves. that it was neither for his owne sinnes nor his fathers sinnes that hee was borne blinde, but that the workes of God might appeare; if this man had not beene a sinner, hee had not beene borne blinde; for blindenesse is a punishment of sinne: but yet when hee made him blinde, hee respected not here his sinne, nor the sinnes of his fathers; but that the glory of God might appeare: So when God visiteth the sinnes of the fathers upon the children, hee would not punish them unlesse they were sinners; but he respecteth more the sins of their parents, than their owne sinnes, when he punisheth them; and the Lord punisheth the fathers sinnes in their children:God in punishing the children looketh more to their fathers sinnes than to their owne. the Lawyers say, if the father and the sonne bee suspected of one crime, it is fit that the sonne bee put first to the torture,
 and they held that it will make the father to confesse sooner then if he were put to the torture himselfe. See how David tooke on for Absalon, would to God O my sonne Absalon that I had died for thee. 2. Sam 18.33. When the Lord punisheth the children for their fathers sinnes, their greatest punishment is their fathers.
When the fathers sinnes and the childrens sinnes meet together, then there is a double punishment. Esay. 40.2. Shee hath received from the Lords hand, Ciphlaijm, double for all her sinnes.(...) Duplicia pro omnibas peccati^, id est, pro suis peccat^^. and pa^entum.
The Iewes had a proverbe in their mouthes, The fathers have eaten sowre grapes and the childrens teeth are set on edge. Ezek. 18.2. Iere. 31.29. the Lord saith, they shall no more use this proverbe,What is meant by the Iewes proverbe, that the father eat sowre grapes etc. but the soule that sinneth shall die. They meant that they were carried away in captivity for the sinnes of Manasseh. Ier. 15.4. which he did in Ierusalem: the Lord promised that they should have no more cause to say so, For the soule that sinneth shall die. To die, here, is taken for a temporall punishment, as exile, famine and such, and not for spirituall death, for the Iewes complained only for their bodily chastisements and not for spirituall; and the Lord answered that hee would punish them no more so. God may iustly set the childrens teeth on edge for their fathers offences, as he did before; and the punishment of the Iewes sinnes lieth upon their posteritie unto this day; but the Lord promises, that their teeth should never be set on edge againe, that is, punished in the captivity of Babel.
B^as useth a profane compo^^on.God visiteth the sinnes of the fathers upon the children: It was a prophane comparison of Bias the philosopher, who said, If the Gods should punish the children for their fathers offences, this were all one, as if a Doctor should give the child physicke when the father is troubled with the colicke or stone: but this is a foolish comparison;
 let us then make the comparison this wayes; the father is a leper and hee begetteth his sonne a leper, now if the Doctor should prescribe physicke to the sonne for his fathers leprosie, hee should doe well; because it is both his fathers leprosie and his own leprosie.
When the children follow not the fathers in their sinnes, then the father is said to die in his owne sinne.What it is to die in his owne sinne. Num. 27.3. Our father died in the wildernesse, and hee was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together against the Lord in the company of Korah, but died in his owne sinne. that is, in the common sin of murmuring with the rest of the people; and it is called his owne sinne, because his children followed him not in his rebellion. Num, 26.11. The children of Core died not. But when the children follow the footsteps of their father, then they die in a common sinne.
The fathers sinnes are imputed to their children,Fathers should be ware to bring punishments upon their children. this should be a meanes to restraine fathers from sinne, and it were but for their childrens cause, to keepe them from punishment: many parents are carefull to leave inheritance to their children, but oftentimes they leave their sinnes to them.The legacie of Ioab. It was a fearefull legacie that Ioab left to his children, that some of them should leane upon a staffe, some of them should die of a bloody flixe, and some of them of a leprosie, and some of them should begge their bread. 2. Sam. 3.29. When a man dieth and hath nothing to leave unto his children but his sinnes, as to one his blood, to another his swearing, and to another his adulterie, is not this a pitifull latter will and testament? Some leave lands to their children, but withall they leave their fearefull sinnes to them; and it were better for them to want their lands, then to bee heires to their sinnes: Gehazi left a talent of silver behinde him to his posterity; but he left the leprosie with it. 2. King. 5.27.

Children should confesse their fathers sinnes.The fathers sinnes are imputed to the children, therefore the children should confesse the sinnes of their fathers. Levit. 26.41. If they confesse their iniquitie, and the iniquitie of their fathers. So Nehem. 1.6. Both I and my fathers house have sinned; and this they are bound to doe, as farre as they can come to the knowledge of their fathers sinnes: such sinnes of their fathers they should confesse, which they in their owne proper persons have committed by the example of their forefathers, for these sinnes they ought to crave pardon. Psal. 79.8. Remember not against us former iniquities,(...) iniquitates Praecedentium that is, the sinnes which wee have committed before by imitating our fathers sinnes: but we must take heed here, that we crave not pardon for our fathers who are dead; for there is no remission, but that which is gotten in this life.
Lastly the Lord not onely visiteth the sinnes of the fathers upon the children, but also the sinnes of the mother.God visiteth not onely the sinnes of the fathers, but also the sinnes of the mothers upon the children. Psal. 109.14. Let not the sinnes of his mother be blotted out, but when the father is an Amorite, and the mother a Hittite. Ezek. 16.3. that is worst of all for the children: for if any of the parents be holy, then the child is holy. 1. Cor. 7.14.
 The conclusion of this is, God visiteth the iniquities of the fathers upon the children; therefore fathers should be loth to commit sinne, lest they transmit the curse to their posterity.
 God visiteth their sinnes upon the children; therefore children should beware to follow their fathers footsteps in their sinnes, lest they bee partakers of their punishments.



EXERCITAT. XVIII. Of the extent of Gods iustice and his mercie to those who breake and keepe his Commandements. Commandement II.

Exod. 20.5. Visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keepe my Commandements.

THe Lord visiteth the iniquitie of the fathers unto the third and fourth generation, in the originall it is, in tertianos and quartanos. So, 2. King. 10.30. Filij quartani sedebunt super solio: Thy children of the fourth generation shall fit on thy throne, that is, Iehoachaz, Iehoash, Ieroboam, and Zachariah; the father is the first, the son is the second, the grandchild is the third, and the great grandchild is the fourth; and he setteth downe the third and fourth generation,Why the Lord punisheth unto the third and fourth generation. because men may live to see so many generations come of them. Gen. 50.23. And Ioseph saw Ephraims children to the third generation, that is, he saw Ephraim, and his sonnes, and his sonnes sonnes.
It pleaseth God in mercy to breake off the course of sinne, and to interrupt it for the Churches cause;God breaketh off the course of sinne sometimes, his Churches cause. Korah was a bad man, yet his sonnes were men fearing God, who wrote some of the Psalmes.
Where the course of sinne is broken off,Where sinne is broken off the punishment will be broken off. there the punishment is not inflicted; the grandfather is a wicked man, his sonne followeth not his footsteps, the grandchild againe followeth the footsteps of his grandfather, here the sinne which was broken off beginneth againe
 and continueth still with the grandchild. Manasseh had his sinne pardoned, but his sonne Ammon walking in the former wayes of his father, became heire of his fathers wickednes; therefore God deferred not the punishment, for within two yeares after he was king, he was miserably killed: Then Iosias succeeded who brake off the course of his fathers sinne; and therefore the punishment was deferred for the space of thirty one yeares. Then his younger brother Ioahaz succeeded to him, and the punishment was continued in him, and likewise in his eldest sonne Eliacim.
In lib. de sera vindicta Numin^s.Plutarch sheweth why the Gods deferre punishment for a time; because the sinne is not found in the childe, which was found in the father; and when the same sinne buddeth fo^^h againe in the grandchild, then the gods doe punish: and he useth this comparison, for even, saith he, as the grandfather had a mole upon his face, which is not seene in his sonne,Simile. but yet it is seene in the grandchild; passing by his sonne, it commeth to the grandchild: So may sinne passe by the sonne and come to the grandchild: and hee telleth of a woman who brought forth a blackmore, when as neither of the parents were blackmores, and being condemned to die as an adulteresse, an old man testified there, that the great grandfather of that childe was a blackemore, and that his blacknes had passed by two generations,Sinne may passe by two generations and come to the third. and come to the third: so sinne may passe from one or two generations, and light upon the third; and where sinne is continued there the punishment lighteth.
Sometimes sinne continueth in a blood.Sometimes ye shall see sinne continued, going on in a bloud without any interruption. Rebekah thought that Esau would have forgotten that which Iacob did to him. Gen. 27.45. but he never forgot it, and that hatred continued in his posterity the Edomites without interruption, and they cried; Psal. 137.7. Downe with
 them, downe with them.
Hee visiteth to the third and fourth generation for idolatrie,God sometime continueth punishment longer than to the third and fourth generation. but he continueth the punishment some times longer than to the third and fourth generation. Ezek. 4.5. I have laid upon thee the yeares of their iniquitie, according to the number of the dayes, three hundreth and ninety dayes, so shalt thou beare the iniquitie of the house of Israel: three hundreth and ninety propheticall dayes are taken here for yeares; and he speaketh here of the idolatrie which began in Salo^^ns old age, and continued untill the ninth yeare of (...) captivity, just three hundreth and ninety yeares in all; and as all the bloud from Abel to Zachary might bee required at the hands of the Iewes in Christs time: So may the Lord lay upon the idolaters now, all the idolatrie from the first idolaters to this time, if hee would deale in justice with them; and hence it followeth, that the idolaters who lived three hundred yeares since, were not in so miserable a case as the idolaters are in now;Idolaters in our times are in a worse case then they of old. because they had not so many sinnes to be laid to their charge.

Of them that hate me:

How can God be hated,  seeing no good thing can be hated?
The idolaters doe not hate God simply as he is good,  but because he punisheth them for their idolatrie;How a man is said to hate God. so Ahab hated Micaiah because he told him the truth, and Paul said, am I become your enemy, because I told you the truth. Gal. 4.16.
To hate God and to love idols, are directly contrary; but for a man to hate himselfe,To hate God and love our selves are directly contrary. to the end hee may love God, are subcontrary; when a man loveth himselfe lesse, that he may love the Lord, this is but improperly called hatred, and so Iacob hated Leah, that is,To hate our selves, and love God are subcontraries. hee lesse loved her than Rachel; but when a man loveth God lesse then his idoll, that is properly called hatred.

Now to keepe our selves that wee fall not into this hatred of God by loving idols,Idolaters looke not streight upon God. wee must lift up our eyes and looke streight from the creatures to God, and from God to the creatures; and then we shall not fall to idolatrie. Quando linea currit aequaliter inter duo extrema, and wee looke straight by the line to the two extreames, then wee see them perfectly; but when wee looke not equally upon them, but a squint; then wee have not a perfect view. Idolaters never looke aright upon God and his creatures, and therefore they give the honour to the creature which is due to the creator, but if they would compare God with the poore creatures, they would never give his glory unto them.

And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keepe my commandements.

God enclineth more to mercie then justice.Gods justice reacheth unto the third and fourth generation, but his mercy to the thousand generation; and hence we may gather, that God inclineth more to mercy than to justice, and therefore when hee punisheth he is said,Facere opus non suum, quid. facere opus non suum. Esay. 28.21. That hee may doe his strange worke, that is, to punish.
 Mercy and justice being Gods two armes, how is it that one of them is longer than the other?
 The one of them is not longer than the other, but hee maketh his Church to feele more his mercy than his justice.
The blessing of the fathers are conveyed to good children.Shewing mercy unto thousands, this blessing of God is conveyed by good parents to the children, for the moe good predecessors that a man hath, hee may looke for a greater blessing. We have an example of this. Gen. 49.26. The blessings of thy fathers are strong with the blessings of my progenitours, all the blessings of the good predecessours concurring together, are effectuall meanes to continue the blessing to the posterity.
To thousands, the Lord will not forget thee, although
 thou be many generations after thy good predecessors,God forgetteth not the children of good parents to many generations. David made inquirie for Ionathans posterity that hee might doe good unto them. 2. Sam. 9.1. Is there any left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindenesse, for Ionathans sake. The Lord blessed the posterity of Ionadab, the Rehabits, for their godfathers cause.
Of them that love mee and keepe my commandements.Our best workes have need of mercie. Hence wee may learne, if mens best workes have need of mercy, then no man can bee justified by his workes, for mercy secludeth merit. Hos. 10.12. Sowe to your selves in righteousnesse, and reape in mercy; the Church must looke for mercy when she is reaping her reward. So, 2. Tim. 1.16. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onisephorus, for he hath oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chaines.
Shewing mercy. Exod. 23.19.God sheweth mercie without merit. (...) Supplicationes eloquitur pauper. I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, that is, I will have mercy without any merit. Prov. 18.23. The poore useth intreaties. Tahhannunim, that is, they begge only of favour, but nothing of merit. So when we have done all things that we can do, let us count our selves unprofitable servants. Luc. 17.10.
And keepe my commandements,God sheweth mercy and then we keepe his Commandements. the Lord must first shew mercy before wee can keepe his commandements; wee keepe not his commandements first, and then he sheweth mercy, all the good of the Church depends upon Christ, and if he shew not mercy, then shee is not a Church. The Church hath beene fitly compared to Heliotropion, or the marigold, so long as the sunne shineth upon it, so long it spreadeth the leaves of it; but when the sunne withdrawes it selfe, then it contracteth the leaves and spreadeth no more. So doth the Church flourish when the Lords mercy shineth upon her; but when he withdrawes his presence from her, she loseth her beauty.
And keepe my commandements. The children of God
 keepe the commandements because the Lord freeth them of the straight obedience of the law, non (...), it lieth not upon them, nor urgeth them, as it doth upon the wicked, Iustis non est lex posita, the law is not made for the righteous man.God enableth his children to keepe his Commandements. 1. Tim. 1.9. It lieth not like a burthen upon them, God accepteth of their endeavours, although they come short in many things.
Secondly, in keeping the law the spirit of God both jubet and juvat, he commandeth his children, and giveth them the spirit of obedience to doe those things, which he commandeth, willingly.
God taketh away the irritation of the Law from his children.Thirdly, he taketh away the irritation of the law; for the law to a naturall man is a provocation to sin. Rom. 7. and so the law becommeth easie to them, and thus they are said to keepe the commandements.Conclusion.
The conclusion of this is, Miserable is the case of idolaters, who must both answer for their owne sinnes, and likewise for the idolatrie of their predecessors.




Commandement III.

Exod. 20.7. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine, for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine.

FIrst the commandement is set downe here, and secondly the reason of the commandement. The commandement, Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine; the reason of the commandement, for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine.What it is to take Gods name in vaine.
Thou shalt not take, that is, thou having no calling, thou shalt not take his name in thy mouth to sweare by it; and so Christ saith to Peter, all they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. Mat. 26.52. that is, they who have no calling to take the sword, if they take the sword they shall die by it; so he that taketh Gods name in his mouth to sweare by it, and is not called to sweare, he taketh the name of God in vaine; and the Hebrewes observe, that Nisbang signifieth to be sworne,(...) potius passive hic sumitur quam active rather then to sweare; which implieth that a man should not sweare but when an oath is laid upon him.
Secondly thou shalt not take,(...) proprie Onus tollere. Nasha is to lift or take up a thing of weight, as tollere parabolam, To take up a proverbe. Esay. 14.4. to take up a lamentation, Ezek. 26.17.

In vaine, Leshave, and Levit. 19.12. it is, Ye shall not sweare by my name,(...) Leshakar, falsely.
The negative part of this commandement forbiddeth first the superstitious abusing of the name of God. Secondly, it forbiddeth the deceitfull and superstitious abuse of the name of God. Thirdly, imprecations and cursings. Fourthly, perjurie. Fiftly, blasphemie.
The affirmative part commandeth to use Gods titles and names reverently, in an oath to observe verity, righteousnesse and judgement. So to vow, etc.

EXERCITAT. I. How the Iewes superstitiously abused the name of God Iehova. Commandement III.

Levit. 24.11. And the Israelitish womans sonne blasphemed the name of the Lord.

THe Iewes had this name Iehova at the first in (...), secondly in (...) first they reverenced this name, and then superstitiously abused it.
First they had a more religious and reverent respect to this name, because it was Zecer, memoriale ejus, his memoriall.(...) Memoriale. (...) Nomen separatum. (...) Nomen gloriosum. (...) Nomen benedictum. Exod. 3.14. This is my name for ever, and this is my memoriall unto all generations: Secondly, because this name Iehova was the name of Gods essence, they did the more sparingly expresse it, and they called it Shem hamphorash, nomen separatum, a separate name, because it was incommunicable to any other creature, so they called it Shem hammichbad, nomen gloriosum, and Shem ijthbarek, nomen benedictum.
Secondly they expresse this name but seldome, because
 they could not tell how to pronounce it, for it is not pointed with the owne vowels of it in the scripture, but onely with the vowels of Adonai, or Elohim, the Greeks have no letter to pronounce it aright, and therefore it is called (...); for these respects at the first it was but seldome pronounced, and the first who pronounced Iehova,Who pronounced the name Iehova amongst the Christians first. amo^gst the Christians was Petrus Galatinus following the pronunciation of the Syriacks and the Greekes, but if ye would pronounce it according to the owne letters, it should be Iahvo, as (...)
Afterwards the Iewes fell in (...), superstitiously abusing this name; and first they say; that the Israelitish womans sonne was stoned to death, because he blasphemed the name of God, that is, because he pronounced the name Iehova: Onkelos paraphraseth it, quod expresserit nomen Iehova, and the Seventy, Quod (...) hee named the name, to with, Iehova.(...)
Then they sell into greater superstition, they say,The superstitious abuse of the name of Iehova. the high Priest pronounced this name Iehova ten times in the day of expiation; thrice in his first confession. Levit. 16.6. which was private; thrice in his second confession, which was publique. Levit. 16:24. and thrice upon the skape-gate. Levit. 16.21. and once in casting of lots. Levit. 16.9. So they say, the Priest who blessed the people, if he was out of the temple and blessed the people, then his blessing was pronounced as three blessings, and the people answered, amen, at every blessing, but when he pronounced it in the temple, hee pronounced it as one blessing: When he blessed out of the temple, they say, that hee expressed the blessing by the name Adonai; but in the temple, by the name Iehova: when they blessed out of the temple, they lifted but their hands to their shoulders, but when they blessed
 in the temple, they lifted their hands above their heads, except onely the high priest; when hee blessed, they say of him, that he lifted not his hands to his head, because the name Iehova was written in a plate of gold upon his forehead; therefore in reverence to this name hee would not lift his hands to his head.
Againe they say, when the witnesses testified against the blasphemer, that hee had pronounced the name Iehova, the Iudges enquired not of them, whether heard ye this man sweare by the name Iehova, but by the name Iose; and the witnesse said, percussit Iose Iosem, the blasphemer pierced God, naming him by his owne name:(...) Perfodiens a (...) perforare. and this they called properly Nakabh, perforare, the piercing of the side of God, but when the people were dismissed, they keept still the witnesses; they enquired not then of the witnesses, whether the blasphemer had blasphemed the name of Iose or not; but the judges said unto them, tell us what ye heard; and the witnesses said, we heard him distinctly pronounce the name Iehova; then the judges rent their clothes, and so afterwards the man was stoned to death; and thus superstitiously they abused this name.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, two extremities would be shunned in taking Gods name in our mouthes, first that wee prophanely abuse not this name by cursing, and next that we superstitiously abuse it not.



EXERCITAT. II. Of the Iewes superstitious and deceitfull oathes. Commandement III.

Mat. 23.16. Whosoever shall sweare by the temple it is nothing but whosoever shall sweare by the gold of the temple is a debter.

THere is no people that abuseth the name of God more than the Iewes doe, applying these titles and speeches which belong onely to God, unto men;The Iewes abuse the names and attributes of God. for when they write their familiar epistles to their friends, commending their friends epistle or letter which they have received, they say, Eloquia Domini, eloquia pura, giving that commendation to their epistles, which is due onely to the law of the Lord. Againe, when they flatter their friendes, desiring that they may bee intire with them, then they abuse the scripture; pateat accessus ad adytum sanctitatis tuae, they crave accesse to his holinesse, which is proper onely to God. Thirdly, when they would testifie themselves thankefull,The Iewes abuse the Scriptures. they say, Nomini tuo psallam, I will sing O Lord unto thy name. Fourthly, when they complaine that their friends have forsaken them, and are not kinde unto them, then they say, Cum exercitibus nostris non egrederis Domine, Lord thou goest not out with our armies. Fiftly, when they bid their friends unto a wedding or a banquet, they say, In te speravi Domine, non confundar, I have trusted in thee, O Lord, let me not bee confounded. Thus wee see how these blinde wretches abuse the scriptures, and take the name of God in vaine, and we see how Christ
 blameth them. Mat. 5. for swearing by the creatures.
The Iewes thought it lawfull to sweare by the heavens.To prove that it was lawfull to sweare by the heavens, they abused these scriptures. Amos 4.2. The Lord did sweare by his holinesse, that is, by the heavens (say they) whereas the Prophet meant that he swore by himselfe. So, Amos 8.7. The Lord hath sworne by the excellency of Iacob: the Iewes tooke it for his temple and not for himselfe, whereas he swore by himselfe, because he had no greater to sweare by. Heb. 6.13. So they used to sweare deceitfully,How they did sophisticate their oathes. and to sophisticate their oathes. Mat. 23.16. When they swore by the temple, they said, it was nothing; but to sweare by the gold of the temple, then he was a debter. So if he swore by the altar, it was nothing; but to sweare by the gift upon the altar, then he was a debter, but Christ sheweth them, that to sweare by the temple,The Iewes swore by the Temple. was greater than to sweare by the gold of the temple; for the temple sanctified the gold, therefore it is greater than the gold: so the altar sanctified the gift upon the altar, and therefore it was a greater sinne to sweare by the altar, than by the gift upon the altar.
The Prophet Haggai propounded a question to the Priests. Hagg. 2.12. If one beare holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt doth touch bread or pottage, or wine, or oyle, or any meat, shall it be holy? and the Priests answered and said, no? Then said Haggai, if one that is uncleane by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be uncleane? and the Priests answered and said, it shall be uncleane. If a holy thing touch that which is common, will it make it holy? No: if an uncleane thing touch a cleane thing, will it make it uncleane? Yes: but here when the altar touched the gift, it sanctified it more, and made it holy. And here is the difference betwixt legall sanctification and Christs blood purging us; for Christs blood when it toucheth us, it maketh us holy, but it becometh not uncleane, whereas these things which were holy under the
 law, might be polluted by uncleane things.
The forme of the oath amongst the Iewes at this day, is this,How the Iewes sweare, and the manner of their oath. when he sweareth he holdeth the booke of the law in his hand, and he sweareth in the holy tongue after this manner. I Abraham sweare by the God of Israel, and by him who is long suffering and mercifull, that I owe nothing to this man N. and the Iudges say unto him againe, Wee attest thee by the great Lord, whether there bee any thing in thy hand which belongeth to that man. And when the curse of the law is pronounced, he answereth, Amen, Amen.
They have learned this tricke at this day,They will keepe no oath unlesse they sweare upon their own Torah. they hold that no oath bindeth them, but when they lay their hand upon their owne Torah, that is, the booke which is read in their owne Synagogues; but if they lay their hand upon any other bible before a Christian Magistrate; they will readily forsweare themselves, therefore sundry townes in Germany understanding this,How Christians make the Iewes to sweare. the Magistrates will not take an oath of them, untill the Torah, their bible bee brought out of their Synagogues, and then they make them lay their hand upon it and sweare. Moreover in the day of their expiation, their Rabbi do absolve them from their perjuries, and all their deceits which they have used against the Christians; and they say, Optimus qui inter gentes est, dignus est cui caput conteratur tanquam serpenti, the best of the Christians is worthy to be trode upon, as the head of the serpent.
They will give their oath willingly in no other language but in the Hebrew tongue;The Iewes will not sweare willingly but in the Hebrew tongue. and they alledge that place of Esay for them. Esay. 19.18. In that day shall five cities speake the language of Canaan, and sweare to the Lord of hostes. And they say if the Egyptians must sweare in the language of Canaan, then all people should sweare in that language, and they account all other languages but the language of Ashdod. Neh. 13.24. and especially the
 Latine tongue, which they hate above all other; but our Lord sanctified the Latine tongue as well as the rest, upon the crosse.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, Those who know not Iesus Christ the angell of the covenant, in whom the Lord hath put his name, Exod. 23.21. will never sanctifie him in his attributes.


EXERCITAT III. What great sinne it is to curse God. Commandement III.

Hebrai^e, Blesse God and die.Iob. 2.9. Then said his wife unto him, dost thou still retaine thine integritie? Curse God and die.

WE may learne from the example of God himselfe not to use imprecations and curses; for when the holy Ghost useth an oath, he concealeth the imprecation and expresseth it by Im Lo,(...) Si non Si non, as Psal. 89.35. Once have I sworne by my holinesse, if I lie unto David, that is, I have sworne that I will not lie unto David.God when he sweareth expresseth not the curse. So Psal. 95.11. Vnto whom I sware in my wrath, if they enter into my rest, that is, I have sworne that they shall never enter into my rest. When the Lord pronounced this oath negatively, then it is to bee understood as an affirmation, as Esay. 14.24. The Lord of hostes hath sworne, if not, so it shall come to passe, that is, it shall certainely come to passe: but when hee setteth it downe affirmatively, then it is to bee understood negatively, as Psal. 95.11. If they shall enter into my rest,
 that is, they shall never enter into my rest.
When God sweareth by himselfe this wayes cum reticentia, he holdeth backe the curse;Why God keepeth up the execration when he sweareth. because no execration or curse can fall upon him, and therefore it cannot be expressed which never falleth out, neither should this sort of speech bee supplied, as some doe prophanely, non ero Deus, or such.
Whether are these words, Psal. 110.1.  The Lord said unto my Lord, an oath or a simple asseveration?
Although the word seeme to bee set downe simply;  (...) includit juramentum. yet in effect, it is the Lords oath here, and verba nefasta, or the execration are concealed.
So when men use these imprecations, they conceale the curse, as Gen. 14.23. If I take from a thread, to a shoe latchet; in the blessings we should expresse them. Iam. 4.15. Ye ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and doe this or that. And not onely religious Abraham suppresseth the curse, but even wicked and prophane Iezabel, when she swore by her idoll she concealed the curse, So let the gods doe to me, and more also, if I make not thy life,The devill a cursed creature, yet dares not be bold to expresse the curse. as the life of one of these by to morrow. 1. King. 19.2. And not only idolaters, but the devill himselfe suppresseth it. Iob. 1.11. If he curse thee not to thy face.
They expresse not the curse to come upon themselves but upon others,Pharaoh expressed the curse which hee wished to light upon the Israelites. as Pharaoh in effect expressed the curse when he said, Exod. 10.10. Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you goe, that is, I pray God that the Lord be no more with you, than I shall let you goe, this was an imprecation or curse which hee wished to come upon them; because he purposed not to let them goe.  
Psal. 131. The people in the captivity seeme to have expressed the curse: If I doe not remember thee, O Ierusalem, then let my tongue cleave to the roofe of my mouth.
This imprecation was not expressed when they were scoffingly urged by the Babylonians to sing,  but afterwards,
 when the psalme was penned in remembrance of their mockery;The Iewes did not expresse this as a curse, but as a memoriall of mockery of the heathen. as if they should say, the Babylonians desired of us songs of mirth when we were in sadnesse; but we had rather that our right hand had dried up, and our tongue had cleaved to the roofe of our mouth, than that we had pleased them in singing.
Psal. 7.4. If I have done this, then let my enemy pursue my life, it might seeme here that David expresseth the curse.
David expressed not the curse here, but defended his innocency, and desired to bee freed of his enemies, as if hee should say,David expresseth not the curse, but defendeth his innocencie. If I have done these things, then they might have had just cause to pursue me, but seeing I am not guiltie of any such thing, but rather I may say I have deserved well of their hands; therefore I desire thee O Lord that thou wouldst free me from them.
The Scripture expresseth cursing by blessing, in reverence of God.When the scripture speaketh any thing which might seeme to impare the holy name of God, it expresseth it by the contrary, as Naboth hath blessed God for cursed God. 1. King. 22.13. So Iob. 2.9. So Psal. 10. avarus benedicit; Targum, blasphemat.
 Whether is this word to blesse here, to be taken ironice, per Antiphrasim, or per Euphemismum.
How to know when a word is spoken nonice or by way of mocking. (...) Meretrix a (...) sanctificareThat which is spoken ironice, we know the contrarie is meant ex gestu loquentis, and forma sermonis; as when Christ said to his disciples, sleepe henceforth; but that which is spoken per antiphrasin, is not knowne by the gesture of the speaker, but by the words themselves; as the whoore is called Kedeshah from Kadash sanctificare, because she is not holy: So Deut. 22.9. Thou shalt not sowe thy vinyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit of thy seed which thou hast sowne, and the fruit of thy vinyard be sanctified, that is, defiled. So auri sacra fames, id est, detestanda, so St Antonies fire is called sacer ignis.
Euphemismus quid.But Euphemismus is, when wee expresse things that
 are odious by good and holy words; and as the scripture expresseth filthy things by holy words, so it expresseth odious things by holy words, and this the scripture doth, both for the honour of God, and to shew the puritie and holinesse that is in the scriptures themselves, as here, blesse God and die, for curse God, So 1. Sam. 14.41. Therefore Saul said unto the Lord God of Israel, shew who is innocent, that is, who is guilty, so the Latines call Scelus, piaculum.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. let us learne to sanctifie God in our hearts, and speake reverently of him with our tongues; mans tongue is called Cabhod, his glory, Gen. 49.6. and Psal. 16.9. because it should bee the instrument to praise God, and set forth his glory; but oftentimes it becometh a weapon of unrighteousnesse, and a member which dishonoureth God most, and whereas it should be their glory, it becomes their shame. Philip. 3.19.


EXERCITAT. IIII. That men should not curse the creatures of God. Commandement III.

2. Sam. 1.21. Yet mountaines Gilboa, let there bee no dew, neither let there bee any raine upon you, nor fields of offerings.

GOd who created his creatures hath onely power to curse them, for ejus est ligare cujus est solvere;God hath onely power to curse the creatures. God curseth the reasonable creature for his sinne, and the unreasonable and senselesse creatures, for the sin of man,
 Psal. 107.33. Hee turneth rivers into a wildernesse, and the water springs into drie ground:Creatures are cursed for mans sinne. a fruitfull land into barrennesse for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein, and God cursed the figge tree, that it might be an exemplar to the Iewes. David cursed the mountaines of Gilboa to bee barren, because of the blood that was shed there: when a man was killed under the law, and they knew not who killed him, the elders of the next citie were commanded to take a heifer, and bring it into a rough valley,How the place was barren where the uncertain murther was commited. which is neither eared nor sowne. Deut. 21.4. that is, which should become rough afterwards, and should not be eared nor sowne; for the innocent blood that was shed there procured this barrennesse: So did it upon the mountaines of Gilboa.
We must neither curse the reasonable, nor unreasonable creatures, for then a man desireth the Lord but to execute his sinfull passion, and hee maketh himselfe both judge and party here.
We may not curse the reasonable creatures.We must not curse the reasonable creatures, nor use imprecations against them; because it is a fearefull sin. We have an example of this.(...) Per me jurant, id est, faciunt de nomine meo juramenti, and execrationis formulam, sic Num. 5.27. and Esay 65:15.Psal. 102.8. Bi Nishbagnu, jurant in me, that is, they wish all evill to befall me, that I may become an execration. It was the manner of the Iewes when they wished any good thing to a man, they made choice of some notable good person, and they desired that the person to whom they wished well might be like such a man, or such a woman. As Ruth 4.11. The Lord make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel.
The people of the Iewes tooke a good or vile person to be a patterne of their blessing or cursing.So when they cursed, they made choice of some vile man to make him a patterne, as it were, of the curse. Ier. 29.22. The Lord make the like Zedekiah, and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon rosted in the fire. So the woman that was guilty of adultery was a curse
 amongst the people. Num. 5.27. And here they use cursing against David, that he might become so miserable, as to be a patterne or example of miserie, so that all men might say when they cursed; The Lord make thee like David.
So we may not curse the unreasonable or senselesse creatures,We may not curse the senselesse creatures. because this curse redoundeth to the Lord himselfe; and as he who mocketh the poore, reproacheth his maker. Prov. 17.5. so he that curseth the creatures, in effect, he curseth the creator who made them.
So to curse the creatures as they have relation to man,Not to curse the creatures as they have relation to man. is a great sinne, hee that wisheth evill to the creatures, wisheth evill to the man himselfe; the Lord forbiddeth in his law to curse the deafe or the blinde. Levit. 14.19. the unreasonable and senselesse creatures are deafe, and therefore wee should not curse them; and if the Lord would open the mouth of these creatures, and make them to speake as he did Balaams Asse; they would say, am not I thy horse or asse, why dost thou curse me?
Contrary to this cursing,The manner how the people of God blessed others when they did meete. is that custome which was used amongst the people of God (...) Let not this befall thee. Luc. 20.16. So David blessed Abigail. 1. Sam. 25.32. Blessed be the Lord who hath sent thee to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou. So to blesse men in their lawfull callings. Psal. 129.8. The blessing of the Lord be upon you. So Ruth 2.4. Beaz came from Bethleem and said unto the reapers, the Lord bee with you; and they answered him; The Lord blesse thee.
The Prophets and Apostles had a singular warrant to curse both the reasonable and unreasonable creatures,The Prophets and Apostles had a warrant to curse. as Peter said to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee. Act, 8.20.
First, they when they cursed,The Prophets and Apostles had the spirit of discerning when they cursed. had the gift of discerning of spirits, and they knew who were reprobates, and against these they used most fearefull imprecations of
 eternall damnation, as against Doeg, Achitophel, and Iudas, that Psal. 109. from Vers. 6. to the end is a terrible imprecation, which David used against Doeg, because he caused the Priests to be slaine;The fearefull curse which David pronounced against Doeg. first against Doeg himselfe, Vers. 6, 7. then against his familie, Vers. 8, 9. then against his name, honour and goods: Vers. 11, 12, 13. and against his eternall salvation. 14, 15. Set thou a wicked man over him, and let Satan stand at his right hand. Set thou the wicked man over him, the Caldee Paraphrast paraphraseth it, Set thou the devill over him, who is the father of wickednesse, and Satan he taketh not for an adversary, but properly for Satan, as Zach. 3.1. And because these were castawayes and reprobates: Iudas went to his owne place. Act. 1.25. therefore the Lord by the mouth of his Prophets, denounced these terrible imprecations against them.
 But you will say, that the Apostles themselves wished fire to come downe from heaven upon the Samaritans. Luc. 9.54. they spake here in sinfull passion; how did the Prophets then, and Apostles curse without sin?
 The holy Ghost as yet was not come downe upon the Apostles, and they were not directed as yet immediately by the holy spirit; and therefore Christ reproved them. Ieremiah, as a Prophet denounced many threatnings against the wicked enemies of the Church; yet through passion and perturbation, not as a Prophet, he useth many sinfull imprecations. Ier. 20. The children of God glory in their tribulations.Ieremiah cursed in passion. Rom. 5.3. but Ieremie fretted in his tribulations: Christ saith, when a man chid is borne into the world there is joy; but Ieremie cursed the day of his nativity, which was the creature of God, and hee cursed the man likewise that brought the newes; whereas hee that bringeth good newes should be blessed, wherefore he spake these things in passion, and not as a Prophet of God.

The Prophets of God when they cursed,When the Prophets cursed, they had an eye to the glory of God, and good of his Church. they had an eye still to the glory of God, that his justice might appeare in the punishment of wicked men, and the Church might bee edified by their punishments. Psal. 59.11. Slay them not, left my people forget, scatter them and bring them downe, O Lord our shield.
Thirdly, the Prophets used these imprecations that they might vindicate their ministrie. If I bee a man of God, then let fire come downe from heaven, and consume thee and thy fiftie. 2. King. 1.10.
Fourthly, they used these imprecations that the Church might be kept in purity; Moses was the meekest man in the earth, yet he saith, Smite through the loines of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not against him. Deut. 33.11.The Prophets curses are to be taken for predictions for the most part.
Lastly, many of their curses are to be taken rather as predictions than curses, as Davids cursing of Ioabs posterity, and it was but for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord. 1. Cor. 5.5. So Paul delivered Hymeneus and Alexander unto Satan, that they might not learne to blaspheme. 1. Tim. 1.20.
What use should the Church make now of these imprecations? 
They may apply them against the enemies of the Church in generall, but not in particular.  
Seeing particular men may not curse,  Particular men may not curse now.  why are the people commanded to curse Meroz. Iudg. 5.23.
This cursing was but an approbation of the curse which was already denounced against Meroz.
The conclusion of this is, let us blesse and not curse.How the people cursed Meroz. Rom. 12.14. Let us remember what tribes stood upon mount Ebal to curse the people, they were the children of the bond woman, for the most part; but those who are borne of the free woman stood upon the mount Gerazim to blesse; they who curse are but the children of
 the bond woman, and shall bee cast out of the inheritance, and shall not inherit with the free womans children.


EXERCITAT. V. Of perjury. Commandement. III.

Ezek. 17.16. As I live, saith the Lord God, surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake; even with him in the midst of Babylon shall he die.

THe Lord threatned here a judgement upon Zedekiah, because he breake his oath to Nabuchadnezzar who made him king, and because he brake the Lords owne oath, and the Lords covenant. Ezek. 17.19. therefore he should die in the midst of Babylon.
Perjurie a great sinne.This perjurie is a high degree of taking of the name of God in vaine; for when a man promiseth by an oath, hee layeth both Gods verity and justice to pledge; and God, as it were, layeth his credit in pledge for him. David desired the Lord to be surety for him. Psal. 119.122.(...) Sponde pro servo suo in bonum. Be surety for thy servant for good. In a promissory oath the Lord is surety for a man, and giveth his word for him; now if hee breake his oath, then he breaketh to the Lord, and maketh his name to bee evill spoken of.
Secondly, when man sweareth, hee bindeth himselfe to bring forth all that which he knoweth, and to performe that which hee promised; and therefore the
 oath is called vinculum animae, the bond of the soule.An oath is the bond of the soule. (...) Num. 30.2. If a man sweare to binde his soule with a band. Now when hee hath no care to performe his oath, it is evident that there is neither truth nor verity in the minde.(...) Obligatione oblagando animam suam.
Thirdly, these three goe alwayes together, verity in an assertory oath, fidelity in a promissory oath, and an execration, if it be not performed.
In a promissory oath there is double verity, first when a man maketh an oath and is minded to performe it, and secondly when hee performeth it;A double veritie in a promissorie oath. if a man promise a great thing or a little, and is minded to performe neither of them, hee is a lyar equally in both, as it is an assertory oath; for all lyes, considered in themselves,All lies considered in themselves are alike. are equall, and none of them is greater than another: the lyars of Pambiditha said, that they could make a camell goe through a needles eye; if another lyar should say, that he could make a mouse goe through a needles eye, the one is not a greater lye than the other: so if one should sweare to give an hundred pound, and another should sweare to give ten pound, but yet neither of them are minded to performe this; both these lyes are alike, as they are assertory, one of them is not greater than the other; but if ye will respect the performing of these two, the performing or not performing of them are not alike; for if a man withhold an hundreth pound which hee promiseth to give to a poore man, and hee doth not performe it; his sinne is greater than the sinne of him who promiseth ten pounds, and withholds it.Iustice and judgement how they are taken.
This oath must bee in truth, justice, and judgement. Ezek. 4.3. When justice and judgement are joyned together in the scriptures, then justice is commonly understood of civill affaires, and judgement of criminall. Psal. 89.14. Iustice and judgement are the habitation of thy throne, they are verba forensia. 2. Sam. 8.15. And
 David reigned over all Israel, and David executed judgement and justice unto all his people. So Iam. 2.13. He shall have iudgement without mercy, who sheweth no mercy, here it is taken for the execution of iudgement; Now when the Lord commandeth that we should sweare in truth, in iustice and iudgement. Ier. 4.3. it is meant that we should testifie the truth both in civill and criminall causes. When Zedekiah had given his hand to Nebuchadnezzar. Ezek. 17.18. and sworne obedience to him, and brake his oath, then he failed in iustice.
 Whether is a man alwayes bound to performe his promissory oath or not?
 He is not alwayes bound in a promissory oath; there is a mutuall promise betwixt a man and a woman that they shall marrie together,When a man is bound to performe his promissory oath. the woman breaketh to the man, here the man is free of his promissory oath; but if there bee not reciprocatio, a mutuall dealing in the same case, then the bond is not loosed. Example, Iohn sw^reth by an oath to give Thomas so much mony, Thomas againe sweareth to him that hee will give him so many oxen, but not for the money, Iohn breaketh to Thomas, and giveth him not the money; the question is whether Thomas bee free of his oath in promising him the oxen? the answere is, hee is not; but hee is bound to give the oxen, nam specie ad speciem non admittur compensatio hic, that is, Iohn did not promise Thomas the money for the oxen, but in another respect.
 Whether was Peter bound to keep this oath or not? Thou shalt never wash my feet. Iohn 13.8.
 All oathes are to bee ratified by the superior, but Christ his superior allowed not this oath.An oath not ratified by the superiour, or when it is a hinderance to a greater good, is not to be kept. Secondly, all oathes have this tacite condition annexed to them, providing that they hinder not a greater good; Peters oath would have hindered a greater good here; forthen Christ could not have shewed them a patterne of great
 humility to wash their feet.
Whether may an oath made by the inferior, with the consent and knowledge of the superior,  bee loosed againe by the superior.
Not, the Canonists give an example of this,  a scholler is sworn not to depart from the schoole beyond the bounds agreed on betwixt him and his creditor, before he make payment at the appointed day; his father in the meane time commandeth him to returne home; if he had contracted this debt for his study, hee had a tacite consent of his father, when he put him to schoole,The superiour may not loose the oath of the inferiour which hee hath once ratified. for all necessaries to entertaine him at schoole, and the father by his owne consent is spoiled of his authority; but much more when he giveth his expresse consent.
But Abraham might free his servant of the oath which he had made him to sweare. Gen. 24.8.  If the woman will not bee willing to follow thee, then thou shalt bee free of this mine oath.
Abraham freeth him of an impossibility,  but there is no impossibility here betwixt the superior and the inferior, when the superior looseth the oath of the inferior in that which he may performe.
When an oath is exacted of a multitude,  whether bindeth it every one in the common wealth, although every one had not sworne the oath.
The oath representative bindeth all the posterity,  as we see in the Gibonites;An oath representative bindeth the posteritie. therefore after many yeares the seven sonnes of Saul were hanged for the breach of this representative oath. 2. Sam. 21.6. Although particularly every one of them had not sworne the oath. When Saul tooke an oath of the people that they should eate none till night; Ionathan was not present when the oath was made. 1. Sam. 14.27. yet the oath did binde them all; so the Iewes tooke upon them and their seede to keepe the dayes of Purim. Esth. 9.27. So the Israelites were
 bound to carry away Iosephs bones out of Egypt, which their father did sweare. Gen. 37.29. Exod. 13.19. So in a representative oath the children are bound to keep that in forma specifica, which their fathers did sweare.
 When a society or incorporation are sworne to keep the lawes in the citty wherein they live, whether are they periured if they breake any of them or not?
 The statutes of the common wealth whereunto men are sworne are of two sorts, first some of them are propounded with the condition of perjury expressed. Secondly, some of them are but conditionally propounded,The statutes of a commonwealth, how they binde. having the punishment annexed if they breake them: he who breaketh the first sort, where there is an expresse condition of perjury added, this man is perjured; But if hee breake the statutes of the latter sort propounded conditionally under such a punishment, hee is free of perjurie, if hee undergoe the punishment, because such an oath obliged to obedience or punishment, and the law bindeth either to obedience or punishment; and if hee refuse to undergoe the punishment, then hee is perjured.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, to sweare rashly and without a cause, is from that evill one, Mat. 5.37. but perjurie is a higher degree from the evill one, and the booke of Gods curse especially lighteth upon his house. Zach. 5. as we see in Zedekiah here.



EXERCITAT. VI. Of blasphemy. Commandement III.

1. King. 21.10. And she set two sonnes of Belial before him to beare witnesse against him, saying, thou didst blaspheme God and the King.

IN blasphemie let us consider these things. First, wherfore it is called blasphemie. Secondly, wherefore the Iewes condemned Christ as a blasphemer. Thirdly, what ceremonies they used when they heard one blaspheme. Fourthly, the judgements which have be fallen those who have blasphemed.
First, wherefore is it called blasphemie, it commeth from the Greeke word (...) ladere famam.(...).
Sundry people doe expresse one and the selfesame thing diversely. Example, 1. King. 2.10.Sundry people expresse one phrase diversely. Hee blasphemed God and the King. The Greekes commonly expresse this phrase this wayes (...), as Ioh. 19.12. Whosoever maketh himselfe a king, speaketh against Caesar. But the Hebrewes when they expresse this phrase, they say,(...). hee hath blessed the king; and the Seventy, following the Hebrewes say (...) hee hath blessed the king,(...). and the Atticks amongst the Hebrewes expresse it otherwayes, (...) hee hath spoken well of the king; that is, hee hath cursed the king, and this (...) signified (...) to blaspheme,(...). which word is appropriated now to God, when his holy name is blasphemed, and this is done sundry wayes.It is blasphemie to give God names which befit him not.
First when men give to God that which no wayes befitteth him, as when they called Christ a drinker of wine. Mat. 11.19.

They blaspheme when they speake disdainfully of God.Secondly the name of the Lord is blasphemed, when they malitiously and in disdain speake against the Lord, as Pharoah said; Who is the Lord that I should know him? Exod. 5.2. such was the blasphemie of the sonne of the Israelitish woman. Levit. 24.11. He blasphemed the name of the Lord, in the originall it is, he pierced the name of the Lord; such was the blasphemie of the Iewes who said,(...) Perforavit nomen. that Christ did cast out devils through Belzebub the chiefe of the devils. Luc. 11.15. This blasphemie is properly called the sinne against the holy Ghost; and they sinne toti, in tote, and totaliter. Toti, that is, having their mindes enlightned, and their affections malitiously set, they reject the whole knowne truth; In toto, that is, they sinne against the whole law, and cast the law behinde them: And totaliter, they fall away finally from the truth; To blaspheme this wayes is a most terrible sinne, for it pierceth the side of God: And as the stroakes which are given to the vitall parts are deadly; so to blaspheme God, of whom we hold out life, that is a most fearefull sinne.
How they condemned Christ as a blasphemer.Secondly, why they condemned Christ as a blasphemer. Iob. 19.7. Wee have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himselfe the son of God. The law is set down; Exod. 22. Lev. 19. Deut. 18. that the blasphemer shall die the death; and the practise of it, Lev. 24. But the Iewes did mis-interpret this law, for first, they generally hold that the sonne of the Israelitish woman was put to death, because when he cursed, he expressed the name Iehova,(...) and so Onkelos the Paraphrast paraphraseth it, Parash eth shema, he expressed the name Iehova; the Seventy (...), hee named the name Iehova. In this sense they said not, that Christ blasphemed, but they say, hee shall die because he made himselfe the sonne of God. But the law faith, he that blasphemeth the name of God, shall die the death: Now to apply this to
 him who was the sonne of God and gave the law, was the wresting of the law, therfore they say, We have a law; it was their law, but not the law of God.
Thirdly,The ceremonies which they used when they heard blasphemie. consider the ceremonies which they used when they heard any blaspheme; they were two especially: first, they put their fingers in their cares that they might not heare the blasphemie; Act. 7.57. and secondly, they rent their cloathes.
How could they rent their cloathes,  seeing the Lord biddeth them rent the heart and not the clothes. Ioel 2.13.
Hee doth not forbid them simply to rent their cloaths, but rather to rent their heart than their cloaths.  So Thou shalt be called Israel and not Iacob. Gen. 22.38. that is, thou shalt be called rather Israel than Iacob. So buy wisdome and not gold. Prov. 8.10. that is, rather, wisdome than gold. When ye make a great feast, bid not your brethren, but the poore. Luc. 14.12, 13. that is, rather the poore than your brethren. So, he sent me not to baptize, but to preach. 1. Cor. 1.17. that is, rather to preach than to baptize.
They rent their cloathes when the king died,When, and for whom they rent their cloathes. as David and his men rent their cloathes for the death of Saul and Ionathan. 2. Sam. 1.11, 12. and for burning of the booke of the law. Ier. 36.23, 24. and when the temple was destroyed, Ier. 41.5. and so when they heard the name of God blasphemed. 2. King. 19.1.
They rent not their cloathes but when they heard an Israelite blaspheme, and therefore they gather that Rabsakeh was an apostate Iew, because they rent their cloathes when they heard him blaspheme. 2. King. 19.1.
They rent their cloathes when one died who was neare unto them in bloud. Gen. 37.34. Le. 13.45. and 21.10. the Priest is forbidden to rent his cloathes; therefore they gather that others might rent their cloathes for the death of their friends or kinsmen, they rent
 the forepart of their cloathes,How they rent their cloathes. but not behinde, or the sides, or beneath, save the high Priest, hee rent his cloathes beneath; and the measure of the renting was an hand bredth, and this was onely the upper garment.
 What is the reason that men rent not their cloathes now for griefe, seeing it was commanded to the Iewes.
Something nationall, ceremoniall, and morall commanded to the Iewes.Some things were commanded to them as nationall, and some things as types, and some things as morall; these things which were nationall doe not bind us now, as to put dust upon the head in the day of humiliation, to goe in sackcloth, to anoynt the face and such; those which are typicall doe not binde us; but onely morall precepts doe binde us, as to rent the heart, etc.
The judgement of God upon blasphemers.Fourthly, see the judgements of God that have come upon blaspemers; as upon Iulian the Apostate, who dyed casting up his bloud against the heaven. Vpon Arrius, who died scouring out his guts; upon Olympus an Arrian Bishop, who denying the trinitie, was stricken with three thunderbolts from the heaven, and killed in a bath.
Conclusion.Ecclus. 23.12. There is a word that is cloathed about with death, God grant that it be not found in the heritage of Iacob; here the blasphemer is brought in, as carried to the place of execution in his mourning apparell; blasphemie is cloathed with death; therefore all Christians as they would shunne eternall death and be cloathed in white, let them shunne this blasphemie.



EXERCITAT. VII. To give God his right titles and attributes. Commandement III.

2. King. 2.14. And he tooke the mantle of Elijah that fell, from him, and smote the waters, and said; Where is the Lord God of Elijah Aphhu.

WE have spoken of the negative part of this commandement, that wee should not take the name of God in vaine.When the Lord called his Prophets he confirmed them in their calling by sundry signes. Now wee come to the affirmative, to use the name of God reverently in prayer, in swearing, and vowing.
The Lord, when hee appointed his Prophets, used sundry signes to confirme them; he touched Esaiahs lips with a cole from the altar. Esay. 6.6. so he touched the mouth of Ieremiah. Cap. 1.9. Then the Lord put forth his hand and touched my mouth. So he biddeth Ezekiel, eate the booke, Ezek. 3.2. so hee appointed Elisha by casting the mantle of Elijah about him. 1. King. 19.19. and to this Christ alludeth: Luc. 24.49.Allusion. But tarry ye in the citie of Ierusalem untill ye be cloathed with power from on high.
Now when Elisha was cloathed with this mantle of Elijah he stroke the waters with his mantle, as he saw his master doe before; and the waters not being divided, as hee saw Elijah divide them before with the same mantle, hee cryeth out, where is the Lord God of Elijah Aphhu.
The question is, whether this word Aphhu should bee joyned to the words going before, or to the words following: Some joyne it to the words following, and
 reade it this waies,(...) Sic legitur. Vbi est Iehova Deus Elijae Aph-hu? and percussit aquas. he himself smote the waters, that is, Elijah himselfe, but the words should be joyned with the words going before, Where is the Lord God of Elijah Aphhu. For they are distinguished from the words following by the point Pesik, and Aph-hu, are joyned together by the Euphonick accent Maccaph, which sheweth them to bee but one word; the words they are to bee read as a prayer, Elisha calling upon the God of Elijah by his title and attribute Aph-hu.
Reasons proving that Aph-hu is a proper name of God.Now that this is one of Gods attributes, first it is proved; because the Seventy never do translate it.
Secondly, because Aquila and Symmachus translate it here (...) which signifieth the hid name of God, and Hu is often times joyned to the proper name of God Iehova: Lament. 1.18. So to the name Peli, hu peli Dan. 8. So to the Messias. Zach. 9.9.
Thirdly, the Chaldee paraphrast doth not translate it, but paraphraseth it this wayes; Suscipe petitionem meam Domine Deus Elijah Aph-hu.
Fourthly, the Iewes at this day in the beginning of their prayers, they begin their invocations thus, Aph-hu, qui es ante orbe^ conditu^, and Aph-hu a quo conditus est orbis.
Lastly, the ancient Iew Abrabaniel commenting upon this place, putteth Iehova for Aph-hu: by these reasons wee may perceive, that all those take it for a proper name of God.
A speciall part of Gods worship to know his names and attributes.It is a speciall part of Gods worship to use his names, titles and attributes reverently, now if this his name should be passed by and neglected, were not this a taking of the name of God in vaine?
So we should studie to know his other names which are revealed to us, as Shem, and Iehova and Shecina. Exod. 29.45. and (...), power: Luc. 22.63. at the right hand of the power, and many such.
But where the names are altogether hid, as Hu Peloni
 Almani contracted Palmoni. Daniel 8. these we should not search.


EXERCITAT. VIII. Of a lawfull oath. Commandement III.

Ier. 4.3. Thou shalt sweare, The Lord liveth in truth, judgement, and righteousnesse.

FIrst wee must sweare by the Lord, it is a principall part of his worship. Esay. 45. Deut. 13.(...) and it is expressed some times this wayes, qui iurant Laihova, to the Lord, that is, by the Lord, Esay. 29.18. 2. Chron. 15. Zeph. 1.5.
We must not sweare by the creatures,We may not sweare by the creatures. for they cannot beare witnesse of the truth and falshood of the heart.
But the children of God seeme to have sworne by the creatures. 1. Sam. 25.26. As the Lord liveth,  and as thy soule liveth.
The first part of these words is an oath,  When wee sweare directly by God, the creatures may be named. but the latter part containeth an asseveration or obtestation onely conjoyned with the oath; for although wee may not sweare by the creatures, yet when wee sweare directly by God, in the forme of the oath we may name the creatures, and present them before God, that he would take vengeance of us, if we lie and sweare falsly. Ier. 38.16. So the king sware to Ieremiah, saying, as the Lord liveth who made us this soule, I will not put thee to death; and it is to be observed, that these two are distinguished
 in the Hebrew phrase which cannot be so distinguished in another language;(...) Vivat Iehova (...) Vivat anima tua (...) in forma piel, significat vitam habere in se vela se. (...) in forma paul, passive significat vitam habere ab alio, and non a se. when God is named in the oath, it is Chai Iehova, but when the creature is named, it is but Che; the first signifieth him that hath life in himselfe, and giveth life to others; and therefore we should sweare onely by him, the second signifieth, that which hath life of another, and therefore we should not sweare by it.
When the Prophets speake of idols they say both Chai and Che; they say Chai, because the idolaters thought their gods to be living gods,(...) Vivat Deus tuus o Dan, and vivat mos Beer-sheba. and Che; because, according to the truth it selfe, they had no life in them, as Amos 4 14. Chai cloecha dan, veche derech beer-shabhang.
If the name of the Lord be not called on either expresly,  or understood, it is not an oath.
When one saith, the Lord knoweth I speake the truth, whether is this an oath or not?
When a speech is pronounced by way of enunciation it is not an oath, but when is is pronounced by way of invocation it becometh an oath.These words may bee considered two wayes, either enunciative, or invocative, when one purposeth to call God for a witnesse, as Gal. 1.20. Before God I lye not. So when Peter said, thou knowest that I love thee, Ioh. 21.15. here it is the forme of an oath; because they call God for a witnesse that they speake the truth in his presence: but if it be spoken onely by way of enunciation, shewing that they speake the truth, then it is not an oath.
 If a man sweareth by the creatures, whether is hee bound to keepe such an oath or not?
 Hee is bound to keepe the oath, else he should commit a double sinne; first to sweare by those who are not gods, and secondly because he keepeth not his oath; hee is bound to keepe the oath to the Lord,Whether a man be bound to keepe the oath which he hath sworne by the creatures. whose majesty and glory shineth in these creatures, but if hee should sweare so by the devill, that oath obliged him not, because he is an enemie opposite to God altogether; and
 the goodnesse of God is not seene in him, as in other creatures.
If it be said that he who sweareth by the creatures amisse forsweareth himselfe;  then hee who sweareth the truth by the creatures, hee sweareth by God: hee dishonoureth God when hee sweareth by the creatures falsely, therefore hee honoureth God when hee sweareth by the creatures truely.
This will not follow,  for many things will redound to the honour of God by the creatures,Albeit the swearing by the creatures falsely dishonour God, yet it doth not honour him to sweare by them truly. and yet they are not to be honoured with that honour which is due to God. Example, if a man bee drunke with wine, the abuse of the creatures redoundeth to the dishonour of God, but when wee use the creatures moderately, wee honour God, but yet wee give not divine worship to the creature, and multa sufficiunt ad contumeliam Dei quae non sufficiunt ad cultum Dei, many things doe dishonour God which are not fit meanes to worship him.
He that sweareth must sweare by the Lord,We must not sweare by idols. we must not sweare then by the name of idols. Exod. 23.13. I will not remember their gods, so Psal. 16. I will not take the name of their gods in my mouth. They that sweare by the sinne of Samaria and say, thy God O Dan liveth, and the manner of Bersheba liveth. Amos 8.14. the manner of Beersheba, that is,The manner of Beersheba what. the formes and rites of the worshiping in Beersheba, as the Chaldee Paraphrast paraphraseth it.
One may take an oath of an idolater as Iacob tooke an oath of Laban when hee swore by his false gods. Gen. 31.53.
But a man may seeme this way to be guilty of idolatry,  for now hee giveth the idolater occasion to sweare by his idols, and if it be not lawfull to sell an idoll to an idolater, for then thou strengthenest him in his idolatry, how then is it lawfull to take an oath of an idolater?
If a Christian should compell an idolater to sweare by
 his idoll, then he were guilty of his idolatry. Iosh. 23.7. Neither make mention of the name of their idols,How a man is not guiltie of idolatry, albeit he make the ido^ater sweare by his idoll. nor cause them to sweare by them. Hee who selleth an idoll to an idolater, is guiltie of his idolatrie, as he who putteth a sword in a mad mans hand is the cause why hee murdereth; but hee who accidentally onely is an occasion to another mans sinne, the sinne is not his, but the persons who committeth it; wee may use the sinne of another man lawfully to our good, when that which we aske of him, if he please, he may doe it without sin; it is sin then to him, because hee doth it not rightly; but it is no sinne to thee,When we may use another mans sinne for our good. because thou askest of him a thing lawfull; and therefore thou dost not communicate with him in his sinne. Example, a man commeth to borrow money of an Vsurer, the Vsurer if he please might lend the money freely without vsury; therefore the borrower may safely borrow money, albeit hee seeke so much for the loane of his money: So a Christian may take an oath of an idolater, why? because the idolater if hee pleased might sweare to him by the true God; now when the idolater sweareth to him by a false god, the Christian partaketh not with him in his idolatrie, but seeketh onely to secure himselfe,Why a Chrishian maketh the idolater sweare by his idoll. and this hee seeketh by swearing, but not by swearing by the false god: but if a man should come to seeke helpe of a witch, this were altogether unlawfull; for a witch cannot bee in a covenant with the devill, but she must sinne; therefore a man cannot seeke helpe of her.
 Whether is the idolater more bound when he sweareth by his false god, then when hee promiseth by his simple promise?
How the oath which an idolater hath made by his idoll doth binde him.The oath in it selfe is no more then a simple promise, for it cannot bee an oath, nisi prima veritas adducatur in testem, who is God himselfe: but yet if yee will respect the evill enformed conscience, who taketh this idoll to
 be a true God, then the idolater is more bound by his oath then by his simple promise; because all Divines agree in this, that an erring conscience bindeth a man that he shall doe nothing against it. Rom. 14.14. If he judge a thing to be uncleane to him, it is uncleane, and if he judge a thing to bee holy to him, it is holy; the erroneous conscience of the idolater doth not change the nature of the thing, but onely to himselfe who thinketh so of his idoll; but not to him who thinketh otherwayes of the idoll.
Whether is it a greater sinne to sweare by the true God falsely, or to sweare by the false god truely? 
It is a greater sinne to sweare by the true God falsely,  for then he sinneth against the first commandement; but when he sweareth by a false god truly,A greater sin to sweare by the true God falsely, then by a false god truly. he sinneth against the third commandement; when hee sweareth by the true God falsely, it directly overthrowes all internall confidence and worship of God; but when hee sweareth by a false god truely, hee overthroweth the externall meanes of Gods worship, to wit, swearing by him.
The conditions of an oath are these: first,The first condition of an oath. it must bee in veritie, all men naturally are lyars. Rom. 3.4. Therefore God hath found out an oath to secure men the better. Heb. 6.17. God sweareth himselfe, to secure men, for God willing to shew unto the heires of promise more abundantly the immutabilitie of his counsell, confirmeth it by an oath, that is, by two immutable things,Why the Lord himselfe sweareth. by which it was impossible for God to lye, we might have a strong consolation. It is unpossible that God can lye, yet to helpe our infidelity he addeth an oath; men trust more to an oath then to a simple promise: for many men will lie, but will be loath to forsweare the^selves; and an act of religion bindeth more than a simple promise; and when God sweareth, he layeth two bands upon himselfe, first that he lye not, seco^dly, that he forsweare not: the Apostle calleth Gods
 promise,Why God will have man to sweare to his neighbour. and his oath, two immutable things. Heb. 6.18. men are naturally lyars, therefore as God sweareth, to secure man, so hee will have man to sweare to man to secure his neighbour; and man knowing that God is both the witnesse, and the Iudge, this secureth him.
The oath must bee in veritie; there is an agreement betwixt the minde and the matter, and this is metaphysica veritas;Veritas
Metaphysica.Logica.Theologica. the second is ad^quatio lingua and rei, and this is logica veritas; and the third is, when there is adaquatio rei, lingua and conceptus, when the matter, the the tongue, and the minde agree, and that is, theologica veritas.
When there is an agreement betwixt the tongue and the matter, this is a materiall truth; when there is an agreement betwixt the minde and the tongue,A threefold veritie. this is a formall truth; when there is an agreement betwixt the minde, the matter, and the tongue, this is both a materiall and formall truth:A threefold falsehood. So when there is a disagreement betwixt the matter and the tongue, this is a materiall false oath. Secondly when there is a disagreement betwixt the minde and the tongue, this is a formall false oath; but when the minde the matter and the tongue differ, then it is both a materiall and formall false oath. Esay. 59.13. Conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falshood.
In an assertorie oath, it is most requisite that the verity of the mind and the matter goe together; but in a promissory oath, it is most necessary that the heart and the tongue goe together.An oath must be in judgement.
The second condition of an oath is that it be in judgement, that it bee not a rash oath. Levit. 5.1. and this is actus prudentia non justitiae, it is an act of prudencie and not of justice. It is not enough to know, that it is a truth which he sweareth, and that it be a matter of weight, but also whether he may be beleived without an oath.An oath is not simply required of a man as theologicall vertues are.
An oath is not simply required of a man, as humility,
 and prayer, and such; but onely necessary as repentance is after a mans fall: if man had stood in innocency, there had beene no use of these oathes, they are onely then necessary as letting of bloud is necessary to the body, which should be advisedly and sparingly done, to use it ordinarily is dangerous.
When a man sweareth rashly,Whether a man may keepe the oath that is made rashly. here judgement is required to know whether hee should keepe such an oath or not. David swore rashly that hee would kill Nabal, yet hee was better advised, and with judgement retreated his oath. 2. Sam. 25. The rest of the tribes swore that they would give none of their daughters to the tribe of Benjamin, yet they gave them the daughters of the men of Iabesh Gilead afterwards, being better advised; and because the daughters of the men of Iabesh Gilead were too few for them,The tribes repented them of the rash oath made concerning Benjamin. they bad them goe to the feast of Shiloh where the maides came forth to dance in the vineyards, and there to take them wives. Iudg. 21.21.
The third property of an oath is, that it be in justice,The third condition of an oath. that is to say, when hee is called upon in necessity to sweare: it is not enough that hee sweare the truth, and that he sweare advisedly with judgement; but also hee must bee called to sweare, and it must be laid upon him by a Iudge: Christ saith, when the Comforter will come,How the holy Ghost convinceth the world of sinne, justice, and judgement. Iudicium
Libertatis.Potestatis. he will reprove the world of sinne, and of justice, and of judgement. Ioh. 16.8. Of sinne, that is, of infidelity opposite to verity. Of judgement, that is, of rash judgement concerning others, when they take upon them judicium libertatis and have not judicium potestatis, that is, when they judge having no calling to judge: Thirdly hee will reprove the world of justice; because man is an unequall judge, taking that to himselfe which is onely due to God; now when the Comforter came, he reduced sinne into verity, rash judgement into true judgement, and this unequall justice to right justice, answerable to these
 three which are required in an oath, and when an oath wanteth any of these three, then it is (...), from the evill one. Mat. 5.27.

Of the word AMEN, whether it bee an asseveration or an oath.
IT is commonly taken for an asseveration, but it is not a simple asseveration, but an oath; for Christ calleth verity into witnesse, who is God himselfe, who is Amen.(...) Revel. 3.14. and Elohe Amen. Esay. 56.16. These two are equivalent in the old testament, as I live, saith the Lord; and in the new testament, (...). Ioh. 1.51. Therefore when the Lord saith, I live, and saith, Amen, it is all one. The Chaldees say, Kim Ana,(...) constans and firmus ego, for Gods truth is his life, and his life is his truth; and it is all one when he affirmeth a thing by himselfe, and by his Amen.
Amen, Amen, I say unto you; the Chaldees would translate it,How the Chaldee interpret amen. I sweare, I sweare unto you: wee read never that any of the Prophets or Apostles used this word Amen in an oath, but onely God, or his sonne Iesus Christ: because they cannot sweare by themselves, having the Lord to sweare by, who is greater than themselves.
Why the Church useth amen at the end of her prayers.And the Church useth this word in the end of her prayers, (...) fiat: because all the promises in God are yea and amen in Christ. 2. Cor. 1.20. therefore she is perswaded that the Lord will grant her petitions; and it is better translated, so it is, than, so let it be; it is not only a wish or a desire of a thing to be so, but also an assurance that the thing is granted.
Three sorts of amen in the Talmud.The Iewes in the Talmud made three sorts of unlawfull Amen; the first was Iethomah, pupillum, when one saith Amen;(...) and understandeth not to what, as children;
 the second is ^atuphah, raptum,(...) when one saith Amen before prayer be ended; and the third is, Ketuphah, soctum, that is, when one by turnes divideth his thoughts betwixt God and the world, now hee prayeth, now his minde runneth after his worldly businesse; then he prayeth againe, and so his minde runneth after the world againe.


De juramento coacto.
IF a man bee taken by theeves;  and they make him to sweare to doe such and such things, whether is hee bound to keepe this oath or not?
He is bound to keepe this oath, if it be in malis poena,  onely, Psal. 15.4. although it be to his owne hurt; but if it be sinne in it selfe, he is not bound to keepe it.
But hee is enforced to this oath,Ob. Answ. The will of man cannot be compelled. therefore he is not bound to keepe it.
The will of man cannot simply bee compelled, for when a man doth a thing for feare of greater evill, he is not judged to doe it unwillingly; for although at the first, it would seeme to be against his will, yet the feare of greater evill maketh him to bee willing; and in this action of redeeming himselfe from theeves, three things are to be considered: first, the action of him that sweareth; secondly, he who compelleth him to sweare; thirdly, the matter which he sweareth.
First we consider the action of him who sweareth,Whether a man is bound to performe his oath made to theeves. the action is good, because redimit vexationem suam, and nature teacheth a man to redeeme his liberty; and if it bee an action of mercy to redeeme another from the hands of theeves; much more is it an action of mercy for a man to redeeme himselfe: but if wee consider the oath upon the theeves part, who maketh the captive to sweare, then it is altogether unlawfull. Thirdly, the
 matter must be considered which they make him to sweare, if the matter be onely losse of his goods, then he is to keepe his oath. Psal. 15.4. but if the matter of the oath be sinne in it selfe; then he is not to keepe it.
A man is obliged to (...) performe his oath to the theeves: in the court of conscience albeit not in the courts of men,Againe wee must distinguish betwixt the court of conscience and the courts of men; the oath made to theeves is not valide in the courts of men, because hee was enforced to it. If a man to supply his necessity borrow money from an usurer, here is a necessitie; but no externall necessitie compelling him by force: therefore he is bound here in the courts of men to keepe his promise; but when the thiefe compelleth him, this necessitie bindeth him not in the courts of men, quia est vis major, but in the court of conscience hee is bound to keepe his oath, although there bee no externall compulsion.


De juramento incauto.
A Man taketh an oath of another ignorantly, and the swearer sweareth deceitfully unto him; yet if the Lord who is the principall contracter allow or command the thing which he sweareth,Whether a man is bound to keepe the oath which he hath sworne, being deceived through ignorance. the oath is not null, although hee that is the second contracter be deceived, as we see in the example of the Gibeonites; Ioshua was deceived by them when they made an oath to him deceitfully; yet the oath abode firme and sure, and obliged the posterity, because the Lord God himselfe was the principall contracter.
Maimon. Tom. a. tract. de Regib. cap. 7 sect. 10.The Lord commanded when they came neare any citie to fight against it, first, that they should receive the seaven precepts of Noah;The conditions of peace that was offered to the nations. secondly, that they should become tributaries; and thirdly, that they should become servants to the Iewes: but the Lord excepted still the Moabites, and Ammonites, that no peace should be offered
 to them; and notwithstanding that Ioshua had offered peace to the seaven nations, yet they contemned the peace, because the Lord had hardened their hearts and was to destroy them.
And the Hebrewes say,Three things given them in choise. when the messenger did offer peace to them, they had three things in commission to them. First, fugiat qui vult; secondly, dedat se qui vult; and thirdly, pugnet qui vult: and they say, that the Gergafites of all the seaven nations accepted of the conditions of peace, therefore they are not reckoned amongst the rest. Deut. 20.27. Iosh. 9.1. the Gibeonites who were of the Hivites, at the first refused the conditions of peace with the rest; but seeing the rest miserablie put to the sword, by deceit they entred in conditions of peace with Ioshua: here the oath which Ioshua made with them, did binde him; because it was according to the intention of the lawgiver, and error persona non irritat contractum.
The conclusion of this is.Conclusion. Seeing God is both the judge and the witnesse in an oath, wee should not call him to witnesse in an untruth; neither sweare falsely, Lest the booke of Gods curse light upon the house of the swearer. Zach. 5.




EXERCITAT. IX. Of the gestures which they used in swearing. Commandement III.

Exod. 17.16. And Moses built an altar, and called it Iehova Nissi, for hee saith, because the Lord hath sworne that hee will have warre with Ameleck from generation to generation.

Diverse readings of this place. Exod. 17.16.THis place is diversly read, some read it thus, Hee set up a trophee of victory, and called the name thereof Iehova Nissi, or the Lord is my banner; and he said, because the hand of the Lord was against Amaleck, in abscondito lana, that is, when the moone is in the conjunction with the sunne, which is the last day of the moneth; so Prov. 7.20.(...) Here they make that to bee one word, which should be two, Cesiah, for Ces jah.
(...)Others read it thus, And hee said; because the hand of Amaleck was against the throne of the Lord; therefore there should be warre from generation to generation.
The best reading of it.But the best reading is, And he said, because the hand was upon the throne of the Lord, the battell of the Lord shall be against Amaleck from generation to generation, that is, the Lord laying his hand upon his throne, hath sworne that there shall be a perpetuall warre with Amaleck.When they swore they laid their hands upon some solemne thing. Here is an allusion to the forme which they used in swearing, to lay on their hand upon some solemne thing when they swore; as Abrahams servant put his hand under his masters thigh. So they used to sweare at the altar. 1. King. 8.31. If the oath come before thine altar in this house. So they used to lay their hands upon the altar,
 hence came that phrase tangere aras: now the Lord speaking after the manner of men here, is said to lay his hand upon his throne, that is, to sweare by himselfe, for hee hath no greater to sweare by. Heb. 6.
This ceremony in swearing is expressed some times by laying on the hand,Ceremonies used in swearing. and some times by lifting up the hand; when the hand is holden up to the heaven,Vibrare manum, and levare manum quid. it is a signe of swearing. Gen. 14.24. so Esay. 3.7. To lift up is taken for swearing; but vibrare manum, est habitus percutientis. Ezek. 36.7. to shake the hand to and fro. Psal. 106. Esay. 11.15. and sometimes to lift up the hand is a signe of helpe, and favour, as men put the hand to helpe them that are weake. Psal. 10.33. and sometimes it is the gesture of him that prayeth. Esay. 49.22.
Marke the goodnesse of God who beareth so much with mans infirmity; first he promiseth unto him,God sweareth to us bearing with our infirmities. then hee affirmeth unto him, then hee sweareth to him, and then hee expresseth the oath by the gestures, and manners of men, for a mans greater assurance; and last he setteth his seale to confirme all in the sacrament; and here we have great cause to bee humbled for our infidelitie, and to magnifie the mercy of God who condescendeth so farre unto us, to the end, we should not be faithlesse but faithfull. He that beleeveth not God maketh him a lyar, because he beleeveth not the record that God gave of his sonne. 1. Ioh. 5.10. He that beleeves not Gods record maketh him a lyar, but much more doth he make him a lyar who beleeveth not his oath, and his sealed promise.
The Lord sweareth laying his hand upon his throne,Lawfull to sweare laying the hand upon the Scriptures. therefore to lay their hand upon the holy scriptures when they sweare, is a thing lawfull: for they doe not sweare by the scriptures, but they use that signe to affect them more in their oath. So Abrahams servant laid his hand under his masters thigh, and they swore beside
 the altar, or laying their hand upon the altar.
The accomplishment of this oath against Amalecke.The accomplishment of this oath against Amaleck is perpetuall warre, for the rooting out of the Amalekites: we read how angry the Lord was with Saul for sparing of them. 1. Sam. 15.11. and how the Hagagites, as Haman and his posterity were rooted out. Esth. 9. which was the effect of this curse: and many of them fled to Macedonia, and changed their names; (therefore the Seventy in Esther translate an Hagagite, a Macedonian) so their name was rooted out under heaven.
Some good people of other nations but none good came of Amalecke.The curse was so upon the Amalekites, that none proved good of them; but yee shall finde some good men and women of the posterity of other cursed nations, as of the posterity of Ham, Ebedmelech the black more. Ier. 38.7. of Esau, Iob: of the Cananites, Rahab: of the Hittites, Vrijah: of the Iebusites, Arauna: of the Moabites, Ruth. of the Philistims, the Cherethites, the Pelethites, and the Gittites; and of the Hivites came the Gibionites or Nethinims: but none came of the cursed posterity of the Amalekites, because the Lord commanded them to be made cherem execrable.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, as wee should reverently sweare when we take the name of God in our mouthes; so we should use reverent gestures in swearing.



EXERCITAT. X. Of Vowes. Commandement. III.

Psal. 76.11. Vow and pay unto the Lord your God, etc.

A Vow is a promise deliberately made to God,What a vow is. of some good things to be performed, if it be not disannulled by the superior. Deut. 23.23. Exitum labiorum servabis, that is, thou shalt performe thy vowes.
In this promise a desire is not sufficient to make a vow,What is sufficient to make a vow. neither is the purpose or intention sufficient to make it, unlesse hee who voweth have a minde to oblige himselfe; it sufficeth to make a vow, if hee hath resolved in his minde although hee hath neither spoken it by word or writ.
Secondly, it is said, deliberately made; for a promise in a sudden passion, without due consideration, maketh not a vow; how great this deliberation should be,In canon: mulier: qua habet similem. 26. the Glosse saith, Iudicium quod sufficit ad obligandum diabolo, sufficit ad obligandum Deo, but this is a false ground, for any sudden or hasty motion bindeth a man to the devill, but there must bee a full resolution or a full consent to binde a man by his vow.
Thirdly, it is said, of some good thing;A man must not vow that which is sinne in it selfe. to exclude things that are evill in themselves; for a man may not vow that which is sinne in it selfe, as those who vowed that they would neither eate nor drinke untill they had killed Paul. Act. 23.12.
There are some vowes de malo and ad malum;Three sorts of vowes. some de bono male, and some de bono bene: that which is de malo
 and ad malum, should not be kept; Secondly, that which is de bono male, as if a man should vow to give almes, that he may be seene of men; hee should give his almes, but leave the end: a man keepeth a concubine, hee voweth that that day that she beareth him a sonne, hee will give so much to the Church; hee should give that which hee voweth, to the Church, but leave his concubine. And thirdly, de bono bene, and these vowes hee is bound to performe.
What things wee may not vow.A man may not vow that which hindreth a greater good; Peter vowed that Christ should never wash his feet,Things that hinder a greater good. this vow would have hindred a greater good, and therefore it should not be kept.
Things that are not in our power.So he may not vow that which is not in his power: Example, a man that is married may not vow abstinence from his wife,Things absolutely necessarie. nor the woman from her husband; the reason is, because the man hath not power over his body, but the wife; neither hath the woman power over her owne body,Wee may not vowe trifles. but the husband: 1. Cor. 7.4. but yet the man may things without the consent of the wife, because hee is vow other her head, so hee may not vow that which is absolutely necessarie, as to vow he will die: so he may not vow a trifle, as to lift a straw.
Vowes must have the consent of the superiour.If it be not disanulled by the consent of the superiour. Superiors are God in the highest degree; husbands to their wives, parents to their children, masters to their servants,Who are our superiours. etc. in the lower degree. If the consent of the superior be not to the vow, then it is null. A man voweth things which are free or indifferent to him; to marry or not to marry is a thing in it selfe indifferent, yet it is not simplie free to thee; and if thou vow such a vow and have not the Lords consent in it, who is thy superior; then thy vow is null: thou hast his consent when he giveth thee the gift of continencie,When wee have the Lords consent in our vowes. that thou canst liue without marriage; but to all he giveth not this gift. Mat. 19.12.

Whether may a man vow that which hee is bound to performe by the law. 
He may vow that which hee is already bound to performe;  Thom. tom. 4. dist. 38. q. 1. art. 2. quest. 11. neither doth this derogate any thing from the law of God, as though his vow were more then Gods law by which he is obliged already; hee doth onely this to helpe his owne infirmity and weakenesse:How a man may vow that which he is bound to doe already. there are some things which are not commanded in the law to us, and they are both materially and formally left free to us, and such things we may vow: there are other things which are commanded by the law, which are not altogether voluntary, and left free to us; if a man make a vow of such a thing, it is a materiall vow onely,Votum
Materiale.Formale. but not a formall vow. Example, 1. Sam: 1.11. When Hanna vowed that shee would dedicate her sonne to the Lord, this was the materiall part of her vow, shee was bound to this, because hee was a Levites sonne. Num. 1.3, 4.The materiall part of the vow is commanded by the Lord, but the formall part is voluntarie to us. but besides this, she vowed him to be a Nazaret unto the Lord; this was the voluntarie and formall part of the vow. So Iacob was bound by the law of the Lord to have God for his God, yet he voweth, if the Lord would bring him backe againe from Mesopotamia safely, then the Lord should be his God. Gen. 28.21. this was the formall part of his vow. So David, Psal. 119.106.Why we should vowe that which wee are bound to performe. I have sworne and will performe it, that I will keepe thy righteous judgements: David was bound to keepe the Lords judgements, yet because hee was so ready to fall, hee addeth this oath to strengthen himselfe, and to enable him for the keeping of the commandements.
Levit. 27.26.  No man might vow that which was the first borne; for that was the Lords already; therefore it may seeme that a man may not vow to binde himselfe anew againe, because he hath bound himselfe already in baptisme.
The first borne of the beasts were so the Lords,  that
 they could not bee dedicated or vowed over againe: a beast when it is given to God,The difference betwixt the dedication of the first borne of beasts and man. it is not liberum agens, to fall from the dedication againe, it is mere passive in the dedication: but man after that he is dedicate to God in baptisme, he is a creature that worketh freely, and sinneth often: therefore hee may vow anew againe to strengthen himselfe that he fall no more.
The difference betwixt the vowes under the Lawe and under the Gospell.Wee must put a difference betwixt the Iewish vowes under the old testament, and our vowes under the gospell: under the law, vowes were a part of Gods worship; but now they are not a part of Gods worship: they are not pars cultus now, sed ad cultum; the Church of Rome take them still to bee a part of Gods worship.
 The Prophet Esay saith, that wee shall vow under the gospell. Esay. 19.21. Yea they shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and performe it. Then it may seeme that our vowes are a part of Gods worship now under the gospell, as they were under the law.
The holy Ghost expresseth the estate of the Church under the new Testament by legall termes oftentimes.When the holy ghost speaketh in the old testament of the estate of the Church under the new, hee often times useth legall termes as Malachi 3.3.4. He shall purifie the sonnes of Levi that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousnesse, then shall the offering of Iuda and Ierusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the dayes of old, and as in the former yeares. And so by vowes, the Prophet Esay meant, the spirituall worship which wee shall performe to the Lord under the gospell.
 Whether may a man vow now under the gospell or not?
What things a man may vow under the Gospell.He may vow those things, quasunt necessaria propter aliud, sed libera in se. Example, a man is overtaken with wine, and hee is drunke; hee voweth abstinence from wine, this vow may bee a lawfull vow: First, if hee restraine it not to one certaine day:The conditions of a vowe under the Gospell. Secondly, that he put no part of holinesse in it; for the kingdome of God standeth
 not in meat and drinke. Rom. 14.17. Thirdly, that hee place no merit in it: Fourthly, that it take not away his Christian liberty, but onely restraine the use of this liberty; this way when he useth his vow, hee maketh it a fence to the commandements of God.
A vow is a straight obligation to binde us to God, marke the phrase of the holy ghost. Psal. 56.12. My vowes are upon me, that is, I am bound to doe this: the Hebrewes use this proposition, Gual, super,(...) Super me stint vota tuae o Deus. (...) hic notat of ficium, id est, teneor persolvere votatua. Quest. for the duties which we are to performe to any. Super nos est tradere eum in manum regis. 1. Sam. 23.20. this dutie lieth upon us, or wee are bound to doe it, so Nehem. 6.10. they are said detineri voto, to be holden with their vow.
Whether doth a vow binde us more strictly than an oath?
If it be a solemne vow, and an oath be interposed,  Whether an oath or a vowe doth binde more strictly. which is the bond of the soule. Num. 30.3.4. Then the vow bindeth more then the oath; but if it bee a simple vow, then it bindeth not so strictly as an oath: necessity looseth a simple vow, but necessity breaketh not a mans oath; therefore a mans oath bindeth him more straightly, then his simple vow.
Necessitie looseth a simple vow,Necessitie breaketh a simple vow, but not an oath. the Rechabites vowed that they should never lodge in houses, but in tents; but necessity compelled them to breake this vow, when Nebuchadnezzar came to besiege Ierusalem. Ier. 35.
Whether is a thing better done with a vow,  or without a vow?
Those things which God hath commanded in the scriptures to be done,  What things are better done with a vowe, and what not. when a vow is added to them they are better done then with a vow: But those things which God hath left free to man, and hee hath not a certaine calling to doe them; it is better to doe them without a vow: when thou addest a vow to the thing which God commanded thee to doe, then thou doest offer both
 the tree and the fruit to the Lord; but when thou vowest these things for which thou hast no certaine calling, thou doest not offer the tree to the Lord, and the fruit he will not accept.
(...) Sacrificium retributionis a (...) retribuere, vel (...) pax.When the vow is vowed, we must study to performe it. Shillem is called sacrificium retributionis; because when they were in danger, they vowed, and when they were freed they performed it: this word cometh first from Shallam retribuere, and then from Shalum pax: because when a man payeth his vowes to the Lord, then he getteth peace in his minde.
It is added, if it be not disanulled by the superior; for it is in the superiours power to disanull or approve the vowe the superiours are, the husband to the wife, the master to the servants, and tutor to the pupils.
The husband may approve or disanull the vowe of his wife.The husband when he heard the vow of his wife, and approved it, then it was called his vow. Hanna made a vow; 1. Sam. 1.11. but when her husband Elkana allowed it, it is called his vow. 1. Sam. 1.12. He went up to pay his vow.The vowes of the wives are called their husbands vowes. So when the husbands stood by and ratified the vowes of their idolatrous wives, they are called their vowes. Ier. 44.25. Num. 30.14. It was in the husbands power to disallow the vow of his wife, vir ejus stabiliet illud, vel irritum faciet: the husband by his tacite consent alloweth the vow of his wife, and shee might safely performe it; but if after that hee had holden his peace from day to day, and then afterward disallow her vowed, then he shall beare her iniquity. Num. 30.15. Gnavonah, the affixe is in the feminine gender, because his wife would have performed her lawfull vow,(...) iniquitas ejus, scilicet uxoris. but he taking upon him by his authoritie to disanull her vow, then he beareth her iniquitie.
Drusius ex Phesicta. 41.61.4.The parents might disallow the vowes of their children; the Iewes say, they might disanull the vow of the males, untill they were thirteene yeares of age and a
 day past, and of the maid untill shee was ten yeares of age and a day past; but the civill law saith, they may disallow the vow of the male untill he was fourteene, and the maid untill she was thirteen. There are two sorts of vowes, reall vowes, and personall vowes,Votum
Reale.Personale. reall vowes are such as belong to the establishing of the house or familie,What the reall vowes are and what the personall. and personall vowes are such as belong to their person; reall vowes the parent may disanull untill the children bee twenty five yeares, they give an example of this. If a childe should vow to give so much land to a holy use, his father may disanull this vow untill he be twenty five yeares of age; but if it be onely a personall vow to abstaine from such and such things, then the parent may but disanull this vow of his sonne, untill he be fourteene yeares of age.
Whether may a preacher disanull the vowes of any of his congregation or not? 
If it bee a superstitious vow,  hee may tell his hearer that hee is not bound to keepe it,The preacher may not directly disanull the vow of his hearer. but hee must not take upon him directly to disanull such a vow; for this were to usurpe the priviledge of a husband, master, father, or tutor; a man hath vowed that he will drinke no wine, hee abstaineth from wine along time, and falleth in a great sicknesse, the physitian cometh to him,Simile. and telleth him that there is no health for him, unlesse hee drinke wine: The physitian doth nothing in this case, but sheweth the man in what case he is, if hee drinke no wine; and so it is necessity here that looseth the vow, and not the physitian: So the preacher may shew the necessity and expediencie of the loosing of the vow, but hee may not loose the vow; for this is not a part of the keyes of the kingdome of God committed to his charge.
The Pope taketh upon him to dispense with vowes,The Pope how he dispenseth with vowes. or to change vowes: Some vowes hee permitteth the
 Bishops in their diocesses to dispence with, and some he reserveth to himselfe to dispense with them; and he permitteth the Priest onely to absolve them from excommunication at the houre of death, and thus hee abuseth the keyes of the kingdome of God, applying them to those things which are not spirituall.
 The conclusion of this is; Vowes under the gospell are no part of the worship of God: they erre then who thinke that they are as much bound by these vowes, as by the law of God; and the common people are as much mistaken, who are more unwilling to breake one of these vowes, then to breake the commandements of God.


EXERCITAT. XI. Of Jephthes vow. Commandement III.

Iudg. 11.30. And Iephthe vowed a vow.

Three things to be considered in Iephthes vow.THere are three things to be considered in Iephthes vow, first, what moved Iephthe to vow this vow, and whether this vow was the cause of the victory or not? Secondly, how this vow is to be read? and thirdly, whether he sacrificed his daughter or not?
First, what moved him to vow this vow, some separating the 29. and 30. verses say,The opinion of Caietan concerning this vow. that the spirit of the Lord came upon Iephthe, and he passed over Gilead over to the children of Ammon, the spirit of the Lord came then upon him to goe against the children of Ammon, and here they make a rest, And Iephthe vowed a vow, this
 beginneth a new sentence, he vowed a vow of his owne head, (say they) but the spirit of the Lord was upon him to direct him to goe against the children of Ammon.
But the same spirit that moved him to goe against the children of Ammon, moved him to make his vow;Caietans opinion not likely. and this vow was the cause of the victory, for the text sath, If thou deliver mine enemies into mine hand; then it subjoyneth, the Lord delivered them into his hands, and if the Lord had not granted this victorie for the vow,Iephthes vow was conditionall. Iephthe had not beene bound to performe this vow; because he vowed this vow with a condition, if thou grant me this victorie, and then Verse 36. it is added, Doe to me according as it hath proceeded out of thy mouth, for as much as the Lord hath taken vengance of thine enemies:God granted the victory not onely for the prayer of the people, but also for Iephthes vow. he heard the prayers of the people and saw their afflictions, and granted the victory for their prayers, but hee granted it also for Iephthes vow, although there were many defects in it.
The second thing to be considered, here,How the words are to to be read disiunctive vel copulative. is how the words of the vow are to be read; some reade the words with a copulative and not disjunctive conjunction; and they say, a disjunctive hath place onely where two things are opposite under the same gender, but wee speake not so of those where the one is comprehended under the other. Example, of the first, hee who curseth his father or his mother, here are two distinct persons opposite under the next gender. Exod. 21.17. Mat. 15.4. So he who toucheth this man or his wife. Gen. 26.11. But we say not this way; this is a living creature, or a man; because the one comprehendeth the other, for every living creature is a man. So it shall surely bee the Lords, [and] I will offer it in a burnt offering, and not; [Or] I will offer it: for whatsoever was offered in a burnt offering, was the Lords; therefore it must be read (say they) it shall surely bee the Lords, and I will offer it for a burnt offering.

Piscator.Others make the difference betwixt these two members after this manner, that he promised to consecrate to the Lord whatsoever met him first, whether it were dogge or asse, for such he might have redeemed by the law. Levit. 27.11. and the latter part of the vow, I shall offer it in a burnt offering: had this condition annexed to it; If it be a creature fit for sacrifice.
 Those who alledge that hee sacrificed her, say that there was no example at this time of vowing virginity, for it was holden a curse in Israel to want children, therefore Elizabeth said, the Lord hath taken away my reproach. Luc. 1.25. and Psal. 78.63. Their virgins were not praised,  that is, they were not married.
There was no command^ment to sacrifice their children.As they had no example to vow virginitie in those times, farre lesse had they any example or command to sacrifice their children: Iephthes vow was a rash vow, and much ignorance in it of the law of God, for Levit. 27.11. The Lord commandeth that if a man vow a female,Much ignorance of the law in Iephthes vow. that her estimation shall bee thirtie shekles, and that he may redeeme the female for so much, and as he is to be blamed for his ignorance; so for his rashnesse in vowing this,I^phthe intended chiefly that his daughter should live a solitarie life, and accidently onely to live a virgin. in that he neither advised with Priest nor Levite for the space of two moneths: and it may be said farther, that virginitie was not the chiefe thing that hee intended here in his vow, but onely a solitary life, that shee should bee separated from the societie of others, which of necessitie must inferre virginity: if hee had vowed a sonne to the Lord, hee might have beene the Lords, and have beene married also: as Samuel was consecrated to the Lord, and yet he was married; and a woman consecrated to the Lord must follow her husband; but Iephthes daughter not being married, hee consecrateth her to the Lord to live in a solitarie place: So that he intended a solitarie life for her principally, and virginity but accidentally.

The third and chiefe thing to be considered here,Whether Iephthe sacrificed his daughter. is this, whether did Iephthe offer his daughter or not? the whole question dependeth upon the translation of this word. Vers. 40.(...) The daughters of Israel went out yearly to lament her, the Seventy readeth it (...) and the Chaldee Lealaab, ad lugendum: but they might lament her yearely, she being alive; because she lived such a solitarie life. The reason why they translate it, To lament her,(...) a (...) Draco. (...) pro (...) non est gerundium ex duplicantibus sed ex quie scentibus Lamed He, est igitur gerundium Piel ut (...), thema est (...) confabulari. was, because they derived Letannoth from Tanan, and hence cometh Tanim draco, because the dragon maketh a pitifull mourning when she cryeth. Micah 1.8. I shall lament like a dragon. So Iob. 30.25. I was a brother to the dragons, Letannim pro letanninim: but Letannoth here is derived from Tanah narrare. So Iudg. 5.11. Ietannu, narrabunt justitias Domini, it should be translated then, ad colloquendum, and Pagninus, and Arias Montanus translate it so to comfort her; the Hebrew glosse hath it ad loquendum ad cor ejus, ad consolandam eam;(...) Ad confabulandum cum ea. and Kimchi in his commentary, Lehashihhah, ad confabulandum cum ea, which Iunius followeth, and the Tigurin, to talke with her, or wee may read it, ut narrant res laetas, to tell her good newes, or glad tidings.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. the Lord accepteth of Iephthes vow; although there were many infirmities in it, yet by faith he pleased God. Heb. 11.32.



EXERCITAT. XII. Of Davids vow. Commandement III.

Psal. 132.2. He sware unto the Lord and vowed unto the mighty God of Iacob; surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house: nor goe up into my bed. I will not give sleep to mine eyes, etc.

DAvid seeing the arke of God ambulatorie, and having no resting place, but now in this place and now in that,The cause which moved David to vow. when he himselfe had gotten rest from all his enemies, hee intendeth to build a temple for the Lord; and hee maketh a vow, neither to come into his new house, nor ascend up into his bed, nor to give sleepe unto his eyes; nor slumber to his eye lids, untill he finde out a place for the Lord to dwell in.
When David wrote this psalme.This psalme was written by David when the arke was carried from the house of Obed-edom. 1. Chron. 15. We heard of it at Ephrata,What is meant by Ephrata. that is, in the citie of Ephraim. Vers. 6. where the Prophet maketh an allusion betwixt Ephraim and Ephrata; and he said, we heard it in Ephrata, that is Shiloh, where the arke remained a long time; and therefore it is called the house of God. Iudg. 20.18. And we found it in the fields of the wood, that is, in Kiriath-Iearim: before he heard of it in Shiloh, but now he found it in Kiriath-jearim in the house of Aminadah, and so hee carried it to Ierusalem, and purposed there to build an house for it; because it had dwelt long in tents which were not firme but moveable: but after that hee was forbidden by the Prophet to build the temple, and
 that his sonne Salomon was to build the temple,David dedicateth this psalme to be sung at the bringing of the arke into the temple. David dedicateth this psalme to bee sung when the temple should be built; and therefore he calleth it a psalme of degrees, for it was the psalme which they sung upon the thirtenth degree as they ascended into the temple;Why called psalmes of degrees, for there are twelve psalmes of degrees going before: and David who had the whole forme of the temple revealed unto him, saw these degrees as well as the rest of the temple.
How could David vow that he would never give sleepe to his eyes, untill he had built the temple? 
The scripture speaketh after the common manner,  The scripture speaketh after the manner of men. not that hee should not sleepe at all; but that scarce hee should take a nappe, or that he should not sleepe soundly, or take his rest kindly untill hee had built the temple. So it speaketh after this manner. Iob. 7.13. They sate downe with him upon the ground seaven dayes and seaven nights; not that they sate all this time, but the most part of this time they sate upon the ground.
But how performed hee this vow,  seeing he was forbidden to build the temple?
The Lord who appeared to Nathan that same night released his vow,  How David performed this vow. and shewed him the patterne how the temple should bee built; David gathered materials for the building of the temple; but the particular place was not revealed unto him where it should bee built* hee fought many battels with the Philistims, he committed adultery, and numbered the people; then the angell of the Lord killed so many thousand of them, and where the angell stood, and held his hand over the floore of Arauna the Iebusite, there Gad the Prophet shewed him the particular place where the temple should be built.
David is rewarded two manner of wayes for this vow.David is richly rewarded for this vow. First, a sonne is promised to him, as if the Lord should say to him; Thou promisedst to build an house to mee;
 therefore I shall build thee an house, that is, I will give thee a posterity to succeed unto thee in thy throne: So Exod. 1.17. The Lord built them houses, that is, he gave them children. So hee that will not build his brothers house.What it is to build the house. Deut. 25.19. that is, raise up seed to him.
The second part of the promise is this, that the sonne which was to come out of his loynes should build the temple, and that Iesus Christ who was also to come of him should build the spirituall temple; and this vow of David was so acceptable to God,God promiseth a protection to the temple for Davids cause. that hee promised a protection to the temple and to Ierusalem; not onely for Salomons sake who built the temple, but also for Davids sake. 2. King. 19 34. I will defend this cittie, and save it for thine owne sake, and for thy servant Davids sake.
 The conclusion of this is, superiours and parents should be carefull to continue the meanes of Gods worship to their posterity, as David did to Salomon.
 Secondly, the vowes of the inferiours are null when they want the approbation of the superior: so was Davids vow here, he was not bound to keepe it, because the Lord did not approve it.
 Thirdly, children are bound to performe the reall vowes of their fathers; as here Salomon was bound to build the temple which David had vowed.
 Lastly, the Lord respecteth in a vow as much the intention of the heart, as he doth the vow it selfe.



EXERCITAT. XII. Of the punishment for the breach of this Commandement. Commandement. III.

Exod. 20.7. For the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine.

HE will not hold him guiltlesse, the Hebrewes speake lesse and understand more, Prov. 17.21.The Hebrewes expresse the lesse and understand the more. The father of the foolish rejoyceth not: that is, hee is very sad. So Prov. 24.23. It is not good to accept persons in judgement: that is, it is very evill. So Exod. 20.7. Hee will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine: that is, he will cerly punish him.
He will not hold him guiltlesse.Guilt is the obligation to the punishment. Sinne is the transgression of the law, and guilt is the obligation to the punishment for the transgression of the law; and it is expressed; by fearefull names in the Scripture, as by blood, by debt. By blood, Thy blood be upon thine owne head. 2.Guilt expressed by sundry fearefull names. Sam. 1.10. for as it is a fearefull thing for a man that is challenged for shedding of blood, if the blood be found upon him, as it was upon Ioabs girdle, and his shoes, when hee killed Abner and Hasael. 1. King. 2.5. to come in before a Iudge: so it is for a sinner to come in before the Lord, and the guilt upon him.
So the Scripture expresseth this guilt this wayes.Simile. Let his iniquitie returne upon his owne head, Psal. 7.16.How iniquity returnes upon the head of the wicked. Vnder the law, when a man confessed his sinnes, all the guilt was laid over upon the beast, and it was killed for the man, but hee that was an obstinate sinner, and continued
 in his disobedience; the guilt was not laid vpon the beast, but returned upon his owne head, and hee died for it.Guilt expressed by debt. So this guilt is expressed by debt, and not by little debt, but by talents, and that many talents, Matt. 18.24. and Matt. 6.2. (...), Hee is in danger, or indebted to the Councell. And contrary to this is, Not to impute sin. Rom. 5.13. To cover sinne, Psal. 32.1. and To blot out sinne, Psal. 51.1.
Sinne, guilt and punishment goe together.Sinne the transgression of the law, and guilt the obligation to the punishment for the transgression, and the punishment goe together: but many are affraid of the punishment, who neither are afraid of the sinne, or of the guilt of it:How sinne findeth out a man. but where the guilt is, there the punishment will finde them out. Num. 32.23. Your sinne will finde you out. Sinne leaveth such a sent behinde it, that even as the dogge findeth out the hare by the sent; so doth the punishment finde out the guilty man by the guilt. The sinne passeth away, but the guilt remaineth, Iosh. 22.17. Wee are not cleansed from the iniquity of Baal-peor unto this day.
Sometimes againe the guilt is pardoned, although the sinne remaine;Sometimes the guilt is pardoned although the sinne remaine. as the guilt of the sinnes in the children of God is taken away, yet concupiscence remaineth in them. There is Materiale in peccato, and formale; the formall which is the obligation to the punishment is taken away from the children of God, although the materiall part remaine still, Ier. 50.20. In those dayes, and in that time,What the materiall, and what the formall part in sinne. saith the Lord, the iniquitie of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sinnes of Iudah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve. and Rom. 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. There is sinne worthy of condemnation, but the Lord pardoneth it. When a Magistrate giveth over his place, here formale respectivum desinit,Simile. men respect him no more as a Magistrate,
 but yet hee remaineth still a man: so this (...), or concupiscence remaining after baptisme in the child of God, is sinne; but the relation, the guilt, which is the obligation to the punishment, is taken away; manet vitium, sed tollitur judicium. Cessat (...), sed restat (...). That irregularity or breach of the law remaineth still in the child of God, although the Lord punish him not for it.
Againe there is an actuall guilt,Reatus
Actualis.Potentialis. and a potentiall guilt in sin; the actuall guilt is taken away from the sins of the justified; but the potentiall guilt is still in them: the matter may be cleared by this example,The actuall guilt taken away from the sinne of the godly but the potentiall remaineth. there were serpents in the wildernesse which stung the Israelites to death: there was a viper upon Pauls hand which hurt him not, and there was the brasen serpent in the wildernesse lift up on a pole. The sinnes of the wicked are like the serpents that stung the Israelites to death; the sinnes of the children of God are like a viper upon Pauls hand,Simile. although it had a sting in it, yet it was restrained by the power of God, that it could not hurt him: so the guilt is taken from the sinnes of the children of God, that they have no power to sting them: as the viper had no power to sting Pauls hand: but in heaven there shall be no sting at all, neither potentiall, nor actuall to hurt the children of God, as there was neither actuall power, nor potentiall in the brasen serpent to hurt.
Sinne when it is not imputed must be transferred upon another,Where the guilt is, there the punishment will follow. and it is punished upon that person upon whom it is transferred and where the guilt is, there the punishment followeth.
If it be said,  that equitie requireth that the guilty be punished who hath transgressed, how can the guilt then be transferred vpon another.
This is the naturall part of the law,  that sinne be punished; but this is not the naturall part of the law that
 sinne be punished this way:What essentiall and what accidentall to justice. for as this is essentiall to the nature of man, that he be a living soule; but this is onely accommodatum natura, or fit for the nature of man, that hee have the use of his right hand; but it followeth not alwayes that he hath the use of his right hand: so this is essentiall to justice, that sinne be punished; but this a thing fitting only, but not essentiall, that it be punished this or that way.
The supreme Iudge in punishing, remitting or transferring sinne upon another doth not contrary to the law.The supreme Iudge, when hee useth the mitigation of the law; when hee changeth the offenders heart, and breaketh off the course of sinne in him, and when hee punisheth another for him, who doth willingly undergoe the punishment, and when hee exacteth the rigour of the law in those who continue in their sinnes; in none of these he doth contrary to the law.
Foure wayes of proceeding in judgement.And that wee may understand this the better, let us observe that a Iudge proceedeth foure wayes in judgeing. First, hee proceedeth sometimes (...), according to the strict rigour of the law, that hee will punish the person in whom the sinne is found. Secondly, hee proceedeth sometimes (...), according to the mitigation or favourable interpretation of the law. Thirdly, hee proceedeth sometimes (...), above the law. And lastly, (...), against the law. Example, Zaleucus made a law, that the adulter should lose both his eyes; his sonne committeth adultery,The strict rigour of the law. if Zalencus should have pulled out both the eyes of his sonne, that had beene (...), according to the strict rigour of the law. Secondly, if hee had spared both his eyes,Against the law. that had beene (...), against the law. Fourthy, when hee spareth one of his eyes,The mitigation of the law. that was (...), according to the mitigation of the law. Thirdly when hee found out this remedie,Above the law. that one of his owne eyes should be pulled out, and one of his sonnes eyes, this was (...), above
 the law. The law would never have dreamed of this midst, but it came of the clemencie of the king to spare one of his sonnes eyes; but that justice might have place, and the law satisfied, hee will have two eyes pulled out.
But if wee will looke more nearely unto this,It was not an act of perfect mercy or justice in Zaleucus in sparing one of his sonnes eyes, and pulling out one of his owne. it was neither justice nor mercy properly; for if it had beene perfect mercy, both his sonnes eyes should have beene spared; and if it had beene perfect justice, both his eyes should have beene pulled out.
Now to apply this to the matter in hand, the soule that is guilty shall die, now if all who are guilty were condemned, this were according to the rigour of the law. Secondly, if hee should absolve and quit all, this were contrary to the law. Thirdly, when hee concluded that he would save some, this is a mitigation of the law. Fourthly, when hee findeth out this remedy to pardon some, and to satisfie the law by his sonne who was willing to undergoe the guilt for them;Why God punisheth some and spareth others. this is above the law: there is a pardon granted here, and yet the punishment not remitted, the pardon is granted to some that they may studie the more to keepe the law, and the sinne is punished in others, that Gods justice may be fully satisfied.
When the guilt is taken from the sinne, it is transferred upon Christ; and hee must undergoe the punishment to satisfie the law; because he hath given his word for us.
All sinne hath guilt with it naturally,The sinne of swearing hath a fearefull guilt with it. but especially this sinne of swearing; for if a man shall answer for every idle word at the day of judgement, Matt. 12.36. much more shall hee give account of his idle and blasphemous oathes. In that vision of Ezekiel cap. 2.10. Hee saw a rowle which had written in it lamentations, mourning and woe. And in that vision of Zachariah. cap. 5.
 The roule was twenty cubits in length,Swearing bringeth the curse and judgement of God upon men. and ten inbreadth, which would containe a great number of lamentations, mourning and woes, all these light upon the house of the swearer and blasphemer.
The conclusion of this: Ecclus 23.9. accustome not thy selfe to swearing, neither use thy selfe to the naming of the holy one, for a man that useth swearing, shall be filled with iniquitie, and the plague shall not depart from his house. The sinne of swearing bringeth the judgement and the curse of God upon a mans selfe and his familie, and likewise upon the whole land, Ier. 23.10. So because of swearing the land moarneth, and the pleasant places of the wildernesse are dryed up.




Commandement IV.

EXERCITAT. I. Of the word Sabbath, how it is taken in the Scriptures.

Exod. 20.8. Remember the Sabbath day to keepe it holy.

THe word Sabbath is not translated,The word Sabbath is not translated in any language. but kept in the originall, and passeth in all languages, as the word Cherubim, Pascha, and such.
But when it signifieth a whole weeke, then it is translated; as Levit. 23.15.The Sabbath signifieth a whole weeke. And you shall count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheafe of the waue offering: seven weekes shall be complete. In the Hebrew it is, seven Sabbaths shall be complete. So in the Gospell, Ifast twice in the weeke. Luc. 18.12.
It is distinguished from other Sabbaths by (He) demonstrative, Hasabbath,@ Demonstrativum. (...) Sabbathum sabbathorum. and it is called Sabbath Sabbathon, a Sabbath of Sabbaths, Exod. 31.15. that is, an excellent Sabbath. Matthew retaineth the first, calling it Sabbath, and the Apostle, Heb. 4.9. translateth Sabbathon (...), it is not a diminitive here, as some
 would make it, because nun is added to it, as though it signified (...), or a preparation to the Sabbath; but it is doubled here to signifie an excellent Sabbath above other Sabbaths. The Hebrews expresse the superlative diversely,(...) sometimes they adde the name of God (El) to it, when they would expresse a great or excellent thing as el gabbish, great hailestones. Ezek. 13.11 so ariel a strong lyon, 2. Sam. 20.
Secondly, they expresse the superlative by putting two synonima or words that are equivalent in signification together,(...) e coeno luti. as Psal. 40.2. He brought me out, Mittit hajaven, e coeno luti, the mirie clay. And thirdly, by doubling the same word, as Gen. 14.10. putei, putei, to signifie many and deepe pits:(...) putei putei. and so here, Sabbath Sabbathon to signifie that great Sabbath. The Iewes comparing this Sabbath with other Sabbaths they call it the Queene, and their other Sabbaths as Pascha pentecost, and feast of Tabernacles, they compare them but to concubines, and the dayes betwixt the first day of the feast, and the last great day of it, they compare them but to handmaids.
This Sabbath exceeds all other Sabbaths.
 Why then is that called a high Sabbath, Ioh. 19.31. (For that Sabbath day was an high day) when the Iewes transferred their pascha to it, was the sabbath day more holy, because of this translation of the pascha to it?
Why the Sabbath was called a high Sabbath.It is called a high day here onely in estimation of the Iewes, for the Scriptures speake of things sometimes s men conceive of them; as Ioh. 18.28. And they themselves went not into the Iudgement hall, lest they should be defiled:The Scripture Speaketh of things as men conceive of them. that is, as they thought or conceived, they should be defiled.
And from this word Sabbath sundry languages doe forme and derive their word signifying the Sabbath.
 as the Syriack calleth it Sabba,Diverse derivations of the word Sabbath. and the Greekes following the Syriack, call it (...), and in the plurall number (...) having the accent in the penult syllable: but when it is derived from the Hebrew word Sabbath, then the Greeke termination is (...) having the accent in antepenultima, and the Apostle following Hellenismum, or the Grecizing Iewes teacheth us to put the accent in penultima, therefore they who derive it from the Hebrew word Sabbath are mistaken.
All the rest of the feasts take their denomination from it, as the feast of expiation. Levit. 16.21.The rest of the feasts take their denomination from the Sabbath. So the seaventh yeares rest, and the Iubile the fiftieth yeares rest are all called Sabbaths; and the whole weeke is called the Sabbath. Levit. 23.15. Luc. 18.12.
The heathen who lived out of the Church,The prophane derivation of the Sabbath according to the heathen. as Plutarch, made a profane derivation of this word Sabbath, deriving it from (...) Bacchus, and when they saw the Iewes keepe it, they said, they kept orgya Bacchi, the feasts of Bacchus.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. all the feasts tooke their denomination from the Sabbath, and were called Sabbaths from it; therefore they were but vassals to the Sabbath, and like servants called after their masters name, and were to bee abolished, whereas the Sabbath should indure.



EXERCITAT. II. When the Sabbath day beginneth. Commandement IV.

Gen. 1.8. And the evening and the morning were the first day.

FOr the understanding of this, when the Sabbath beginneth, we must know first, what is a naturall day, and what is an artificiall day:The naturall day what. A naturall day is the space of twenty foure houres, measured by the presence and absence of the sunne; the presence of the sunne is called the day, and the absence of it is called the night.
An artificiall day what.An artificiall day is from the sunne rising to the sunne setting, as Exod. 18.14. Why sittest thou thy selfe alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even, and so Ioh. 11.9. Are there not twelve houres in the day.
When the naturall day began.The naturall day began in the morning, because the light was the first thing that was created; this light measured the three first dayes when it shined; and it made the night when it withdrew it selfe: but from the fourth day after the creation, the sunne measured the day, and the moone the night.
The darkenesse which was upon the face of the depth was not the first night.That darkenesse which was upon the face of the earth made not the first night, it was no part of time, but punctum temporis; for time is the measure of motion, and it began with the light, and shall end with it. Rev. 10.6. Then there shall be no more time.
Secondly, the night is the privation of light, and the habit goeth alwayes before the privation; therefore
 the day was before the night.
Psal. 104.19. Hee appointed the moone for seasons,  the sunne knoweth her going downe. Hee appointed the moone for seasons, here the moone is reckoned first, because the night was before the day, and the sunne waiteth upon her and knoweth her seasons.
The sunne knoweth Mebhoo, occasum suum,  his owne going downe, and not her going downe;(...) Sol novit occasum suum, et non ejus, scilicet Lunae. for Shemesh is in the common gender: and the sunne waiteth not upon the moone, but she waiteth upon the sunne; because she hath all her light from the sunne. Secondly, David keepeth not the order of time here,The order of time not alwayes kept in the scriptures. Object. no more then hee doth in reckoning up of the plagues of Egypt. Psal. 106.
But the evening and the morning were the first day, therefore the evening hath beene before the morning.
The evening is the ending of the light here,  (...) vespera finis diei a (...) miscere, sic dicta, quod tunc lux tenebris commisceri inciptat* and the morning is the ending of the night; the evening is called Gnerebh from Gnarabh miscere, because it is partly day, and partly night; and it is called crepusculum, from the old Latine word crepera, which signifieth dubius, as when wee doubt whether it bee day or night, and it is amidst betwixt day and night.
There is a twofold midst, medietas aequidistantiae,Medietas
Interpositionis.AEquidistantiae. and medietas interpositionis; as the sunne in the dayes of Ioshua is said to stand upon Gibeon, and the moone in the valley of Ajalon. Iosh. 10.13. The sunne stood South-west from the campe of Ioshua where it pitched at that time, in Makkedah as ye goe to Bethoron. Vers. 10. which lay betwixt Gibeon and Ajalon. The sunne in the South-west maketh three after noone, and yet the sunne is said to stand in the midst of heaven. Vers. 15. although it was three houres past the meridionall, this was medietas interpositionis.
The second is, medietas aequidistantiae, as when a thing participateth equally of both the extreames; now when
 Gnerebh is called the evening,Gnerebh the evening belongeth to the day, and not to the night, what sort of midst is it? it is not medium aequidistantiae here, but medium interpositionis; and therefore it belongeth to the day, and not to the night.
When Christ is said to lye three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth:How Christ lay three dayes and three nights in the grave. Christ was crucified betwixt two evenings at that time when the Pascall Lamb was killed; the evening here is reckoned for the first day; and the next foure and twenty houres are reckoned for the second day; and he rose upon the third morning, that was the third day; the morning here Synecdochice is taken for the whole day, and the night following.
 But it was said before, that the morning belonged to the night going before, how then beginneth it a new day when Christ is said to rise the third day?
Varro de lingua latina.There is a threefold morning, First, when there is more darknesse than light. Secondly, when there is a like darknesse and light.A three fold morning. Thirdly, when there is more light than darknesse. The first morning belongeth to the night going before; the second standeth as a midst betwixt both the day and the night; and the third morning belongeth to the day following: this is cleare out of the scripture;The Evangelists reconciled concerning the time when Christ rose. for Mathew Cap. 28.1. saith, (...) that is, Serum Sabbathi, the Iewes Sabbath being ended, it began to dawne to the first day of the weeke; the first part of those words have relation to the first morning, in which there is more darknesse than light, and the latter part hath relation to the third morning, in which there is more light than darknesse. The first morning Marke calleth it (...), the Iewes Sabbath being ended, Luke calleth it (...), upon the first day of the weeke when there was great darknesse as yet. Marke calleth the third morning (...), earely in the morning the first
 day of the weeke, when there was more light then darknesse, and Iohn explaineth this, (...), while as yet there was some darknesse; when the women rose to goe to the sepulchre, it was the first morning being very darke:The time when the women came to the sepulchre. when they were going to it it was betwixt light and darknesse, this was the second morning; but when they were at the sepulchre, Christ was risen, that was the third morning. Now when it is said the evening and the morning was the first day; by the morning here is understood the first part of the morning ending the night,Gnerebh the even is the ending of the day, and not the begining of the night. rather than beginning the day, as by the first part of Gnereb is understood, the ending of the day, and not the beginning of the night.
Ezek. 24.26.27.  The Lord sheweth the Prophet in a vision that Ierusalem should bee destroyed, and hee commanded him to hold his peace and not to speake of the destruction of it to the people; and the Lord giveth him a signe, that his mouth should bee opened in that day that the citie should be destroyed, and that in that day he would send one to tell him; hee was dumbe all this while, and the accomplishment of this prophecy we see. Ezek, 33.22. Where the Prophets mouth was opened unto him in the evening, and the messenger came to him in the morning: therefore the morning is a part of the night preceeding, and the day beginneth at the night.
Ezekiel setteth downe expressely the yeare,  the moneth, and the day when he saw this vision. Ezek. 24.1. And he opened not his mouth concerning this matter; from the nineth yeare to the twelfth, at which time Ierusalem was destroyed. Cap. 33.22. Then the hand of the Lord was upon him, and opened his mouth, and hee spake the selfe same night that the citie was destroyed, and in the morning of that day the messenger came to him; but this morning could not be a part of that day in
 which the citie was destroyed, and in which his mouth was opened; because there was three dayes journey betwixt Ierusalem and Babylon, where Ezekiel was in the captivitie for the present: therefore this testimonie will not serue the turne to prove that the morning was a part of that day in which his mouth was opened.
 If it be said that all this was done in vision; therefore hee that escaped that night came to Ezekiel that morning.
 Was Ierusalem destroyed onely in vision? did Ezekiel hold his peace all this time onely in vision? and saw the Prophet this day of the destruction of Ierusalem only in a vision?All these things concerning the destruction of the temple, were really done and not in vision. this cannot stand; wherefore all these were really done, and he told him of the destruction of the citie; which hee could not doe in one night being such a destance betwixt Ierusalem and Babylon. This text then will afford no more but this, in that day that the man escapeth hee shall come to thee, and tell thee of the distruction of the citie; and not this, that hee shall come the selfe same day that he escapeth.
Gen. 29.23. Leah was brought to Iacob in the evening, that is, in the night; otherwise Iacob would have discerned her: therefore the evening belonged to the night, and not to the day.
 The evening hath sundry periods in the scripture, before it bee called night properly,The evening hath sundry periods. as the morning hath. First, when the sunne is declining, secondly, when the sunne is setting, the time betwixt these two was called inter duas vesperas, betwixt two evenings. Exod. 12.6. These two evenings belong properly to the day; then there is a third part of the evening, when it is darke night, and this belongeth to the night* and it was in this evening that Laban brought Leah to Iacob.
Now because the day beginneth at the morning and not at the evening, it followeth, that the Sabbath must
 begin at the same period, at which the day began at the creation.
This fixed period at which the Sabbath beginneth must be after midnight,The time when the Sabbath doth begin is after midnight. when it is dawning towards the day, that is, when the day is ascending upward, therefore Matthew saith, Cap. 28.1. When it began to dawne towards the first day of the weeke: in the originall it is (...) from (...) which signifieth to waxe towards the light, although it bee not light;(...) Candela separationis. it signifieth not Habhdil the candle of separation, with which the Iewes used to make a distinction betwixt the Sabbath and the day following; neither doth it signifie the light of the starres, as some would have it; neither the rising of the morning starre; but that time onely when the Sabbath beginneth to be kept, and dawneth towards it.
If this bee the true beginning of the day after midnight,Ludovicus de Dieu inannotat. in Matth. then the nations who keepe a diverse period of the beginning of their day from this, decline from the first institution; as the Vmbrians at midnight, the Astronomers at mid-day, the Babylonians at the sunne rising, the Athenians at the sunne setting.
Midnight can not be properly the beginning of the day,The inconveniences that would follow if the Sabba^h began at any other time than after midnight. because it partly partaketh of the day going before and partly of the day following; for the beginning of the day must be after midnight, and it is de media nocte, and not media nox when it beginneth.
It cannot begin at the mid-day, for this is contrary to the first institution; for here there is neither morning nor evening.
Thirdly,Why the Sabbath cannot begin at the light. it cannot begin at the light with the Babylonians; for here there would follow a great absurditie: because they who dwell farre North from the equinoctiall line, or farre South from it; they have the sunne in summer the whole foure and twenty houres, and in winter they want the light of the sunne the whole day:
 therefore if the Sabbath began here with the light, then their Sabbath should bee twice as long in the summer, and none in the winter: therefore there must be another period at which the day beginneth, than the light, or the rising of the sunne.
Why it cannot begin at the sunne setting.Lastly, the setting of the sunne cannot be the beginning of the naturall day, for this is contrary to the order of creation, as is said before: therefore no man ought to invert the order of nature for the beginning of the day, except God come in by his divine institution and change it, as when hee brought the children of Israel out of Egypt in the evening, and instituted the Passover as a memoriall of that deliverance, he began that day at the evening, which observation they kept from that night in which they came out of Egypt, untill that morning when Christ rose againe from the dead.
The Evangelists speake of the division of the day, according to the Romans computation.The Evangelists when they speake of the morning when Christ rose, they speake according to the reckoning of the Romans, and not according to the reckoning of the Iewes. The Iewes at this time had many customes of the Romans amongst them, because they were subject to them; the Iewes divided their night in three watches, the first they called caput vigiliarum, Lament. 2.19. then they had the middle watch. Iud. 7.19. and the morning watch. Exod. 14.14. But after the manner of the Romans they divided their night into foure watches, And hee came to them in the fourth watch. Marc. 6.48. So they dated their yeares according to the reigne of the Princes, who reigned over them, as Luc. 3.1. In the fifteenth yeare of the reigne of Tiberius Caesar. So the Prophets often times doe reckon by the heathen Kings. So when Alexander came to Ierusalem, they reckoned their times from his comming, and they called it Aera Alexandri, and so, Aera Seleucidarum Alexandri: and so here they followed the Romans
 in counting of their day. The Romans divided their day and night into sixtene parts,The Romans divided their day and night into sixtene parts. the first part was called Diluculum, 2 Ortus solis, 3 Ascensio diei, 4 Antimedium diei, 5 Meredies, 6 Pomeridianum tempus, 7 Declinatio diei, 8 Occasus solis, 9 Crepusculum, 10 Conticinium,Vide Rosini antiquitates. 11 Ascensio noctis, 12 ante medium noctis, 13 Intempestiva nox, 14 De media nocte, 15 Declinatio noctis, 16 Gallicinium: all this time De media nocte, untill the rising of the sunne is called the morning.


A Demonstration to show at what time the day began in the creation.
Thy Sunne shall no more goe downe, neyther thy Moone withdraw it selfe: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light and the dayes of thy mourning shall be ended. Esay. 60.20.
god who comanded light to shine out of darknes hath shyned in our harts to giue ye light of his glorie in christ 2 cor. 4.6.





EXERCITAT. III. Of the Morall, Judiciall, and Ceremoniall part of the Sabbath day. Commandement IV.

Nehem. 9.14. And madest knowne unto them thy holy Sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes and lawes by the hand of Moses thy servant.

SOme of Moses lawes are both morall, judiciall and ceremoniall.That the first borne should have a double portion was both morall, judiciall, and ceremoniall. Example, to give a double portion to the eldest, there is something naturall in this law, to give a double portion to the eldest, because he was his fathers strength and first begotten: there was something judiciall in this law, he must have a double portion; because hee was to maintaine the prerogative of the first borne in Israel: and there was something ceremoniall in this law, as he got a double portion; because hee was a type of Christ, Who was the first borne amongst many. Rom. 8.29.
The judiciall part of the law ceaseth now, because the commonwealth of Israel standeth not now. The ceremoniall part of the law is taken away, because the eldest now is not a type of Christ the first borne: but the morall part of the law remaineth, that the eldest should have a double portion, because hee is his fathers strength.
Posi ivum
Morale.Divinum.So in the law of the Sabbath there is something morale positivum, the morall positive part of the law; and secondly, something positivum divinum, the divine positive part of the law, and both those remaine still.
 Thirdly, there are somethings judiciall in this law, and somethings ceremoniall, and those two are abrogated.
The morall positive part of this law,What is morale positivum in the Sabbath. and the divine positive part doe remaine: the School-men say well, Cultus est a natura, modus a lege, and virtus a gratia. Cultus est a natura, nature it selfe teacheth us that there must be a time given to the service of God, and this is morale positivum, the morall positive part of the law, Remember that thou keepe the rest. But to keepe the seventh day,What divinum positivum. Modus est a lege, this was the divine positive part: but the spirit of God teacheth us to sanctifie the Sabbath, and this is a gratia, from his grace.
This is the morall positive part of the law,All people have apointed a certaine time for the worship of God. to have a time for the worship of God; therefore all people have appointed a certaine time for his worship, the Mahumetans keepe the sixt day of the weeke; the Iewes the seventh; the Christians the first day; and the Indians the fourth day.
The divine positive part of the law is to keepe it within seven dayes, this is the limitation of God himselfe, for nature would not teach us to keepe one of seven, more then one of eight.
How can this law bind us more than any other of Moses judiciall lawes;  seeing it is not the morall positive part of the law?
This divine positive part bindeth all men,  This divine positive law bindeth us strictly, because it was given to Adam before his fall. because it was given to Adam before his fall, and hee represented all mankinde; therefore this divine positive law hath a greater force to binde us, then other of Moses positive lawes which did binde onely the Iewes in Iudea.
It may be said that ceremonies are changable:  but this keeping of the Sabbath is a ceremony; therefore etc.
Ceremonies of order appointed by the Church may 
 be changed,Ceremonies of order may be changed by the Church. but this cannot be changed; for although it be not the naturall part of the law, yet it hath the properties of the naturall part; for that which is the morall and divine naturall part of the law, cannot be revoked without a staine of the Lords holinesse, as that adulterie should be no sinne;The morall divine naturall part of the law cannot bee revoked without a staine of Gods holinesse. but this circumscription of the day might be altered to the fourth or fifth day without any staine of Gods holinesse; yet because it is the divine positive part which God himselfe hath set downe, and gave to Adam before his fall, therefore it cannot be altered or changed.
The judiciall part of the Sabbath is the ease of man and beast.The judiciall part of this law is the ease of man and beast. So in the seventh yeare the land was to rest for the ease of man and beast. Levit. 25.6. for the stranger and for thy servant etc. The Lord had a speciall respect to his people as he was their governour, law-giver, and captaine, Iudg. 8.23. And they were Feudarij his fewers who in a speciall manner held their land of him, and in this respect especially, hee gave them their judiciall lawes.
The ceremoniall part of this law of the Sabbath.The ceremoniall part of this law consisted in the manner how they kept their sabbath, they had a double sacrifice for it, they might kindle no fire on it, Exod. 35.3. They might dresse no meat that day, they were limited to a Sabbath dayes journey, their Sabbath began in the evening and ended in the evening, and it was a type to them of all the benefits which they were to receive in Christ to come.
Not to kindle fire on the Sabbath was a ceremoniall law.They might kindle no fire this day, this was a ceremoniall part of their service; and it seemeth but to have continued as long as they were in the wildernesse. When Christ went to eate bread in the house of one of the chiefe Pharisees upon the Sabbath day, Luc. 14.1. is it probable that there was no fire that day to dresse the meat? Their Sabbath was a day of joy unto
 them, and they laid aside their sackcloth that day, and they had a feast that day,The Iewes Sabbath was a day of joy to them. which was a part of their ceremoniall worship, Iudith. 10.3.
Whether are wee as strictly bound to keepe the Sabbath, as the Iewes were under the law? 
Wee are not so strictly bound to the letter,  as they were in the wildernesse; for wee may kindle fire upon the Sabbath, and dresse meate, providing that it be done soberly, and without any hinderance to the divine worship; if we consider afterwards againe, how the Sabbath to them was a feast, wee have not such a liberty as that:The Sabbath a part of the Iewes pedagogie. for it was a part of their pedagogie under the law. When they made a feast that day, it was a remembrance to them of the benefits which they were to get in Christ to come,The Sabbath was a type to the Iewes of all the benefits which they were to receive in Christ. and therefore that occasion ceasing, we are not bound to it; wee may fast upon the Sabbath, and humble our selves when occasion serveth: but wee are more bound to the morall rest than they were; the Lord saith, Ioel 2.19. Rent your hearts and not your garments:Wee are more bound to the morall rest of the Sabbath than the Iewes were. the morall part of this law bindeth us more then it did binde the Iewes, in respect of the greater measure of knowledge which wee have now; but the literall part of the law did binde the Iewes, but it doth not binde us; for they were to rent their cloathes as well as their hearts in the day of humiliation.What a Sabbath dayes journey was.
They might go no further that day than a Sabbath dayes journey; they measured their iourney two wayes;(...) diaeta terrae. the first was their common measure, and that was called Cibhrath haaretz, diaeta terrae, Gen. 35.16. that is, as much ground as a man might goe from morning to breakfast, or from breakfast to dinner; the Seventy translate it (...), that is, as much ground as a horse will runne in a carrear or a spurt: so farre was it betwixt Bethlehem and Rama. The second measure of their iourney, was the measure for the Sabbath,
 which was as farre distant as betwixt the uttermost tent and the tabernacle,(...) Terminus Sabbaths. which was two thousand cubits, Iosh. 3.4. And this they called Tehhum Sabbath, terminus Sabbathi;(...) miliare. and so they call it mil miliare, that is, an Italian mile: The Syriack hath it, almost seaven furlongs: but when they came to Canaan, they might goe as farre upon the Sabbath as the space betwixt their houses and their Synagogues, every mans house was not so nere the Synagogue as mount Olivet was to Ierusalem;How farre the Iewes might goe upon the Sabbath in Canaan. thus much ground of two thousand cubits kept still the name of a Sabbath dayes journie, although they might go further upon the Sabbath then two thousand cubits. Some doe hold that a Sabbath dayes journey after that they came to Canaan was as much ground, as they might goe after the evening sacrifice was ended, but this would be a very uncertaine measure of ground; for then it might be longer or shorter, according to the length or shortnesse of the day.
This was a part of the ceremoniall Sabbath to begin at the evening, and end at the evening, Nehem. 13.19.This was ceremoniall in the Sabbath to begin at the evening. And it came to passe, that when the gates of Ierusalem began to be darke, before the Sabbath, I commanded the gates to be shut.
Lastly, their Sabbath was a pledge to them of all the benefits which they were to receive in Christ to come; in the allegoricall signification, their Sabbath signified to them Christ resting in the grave;What the Sabbath signified allegorically, tropologically and anagogically. in the tropologicall signification, it signified to them their rest from their servile works, and works of the flesh: and in the anagogicall signification, it signified to them their eternall rest.
 But is not our Sabbath a type to us of our eternall rest?
 It is an arbitrary type, but not a destinate, type for all types are ceased now to us; wee may say, as wee rest
 this day for our labours;Typus
Destinatus.Arbitrarius. so we shall rest one day in the heavens from our sinnes, but this is onely an arbitrarie type. So the head and the body are but arbitrarie types of Christ and his Church: so the seaven golden candlesticks. Revelat. 1.13. are but arbitrarie types to the seaven Churches in Asia, and comparisons are borrowed from those.
How shall wee discerne those things which are forbidden by a morall law,  from these things which are forbidden by a ceremoniall law?
That which is forbidden by a ceremoniall law is forbidden at one time, and not at another. Example,  To know what things are forbidden by a ceremoniall, and what by a morall law. to kindle fire upon the Sabbath is a ceremoniall law, because it was forbidden to them only upon the Sabbath; they might kindle fire at the Pascha and the Pentecost. So abstinence from leaven, was but a ceremoniall law, because it was forbidden only at the Pascha, and not at the rest of the feasts; but to buy and sell is forbidden in all their three feasts: therefore it is a morall precept, they might buy nothing upon the day of the Passover, therefore they bought all necessaries the day before. Ioh. 13.27. So that which is forbidden to some persons and not to all is a ceremoniall thing. Example, no Nazaret might drinke wine, and the Priest might not drinke wine when he entred into the Congregation, but other persons might drinke wine, therefore it is but a ceremoniall law. So for the place, no man might carry a vessell through the temple. Mark. 11.16. but out of that place, any man might carry a vessell, therefore it was but a ceremoniall law.
The conclusion of this is, this law of the Sabbath hath something morall, judiciall, and something ceremoniall, therefore wee must study to distinguish those three, that wee may know what part of the commandement bindeth us perpetually in this precept.



EXERCITAT IIII. Of the difference betwixt the Sabbath and other feast dayes. Commandement IIII.

Exod. 31.15. The seaventh day is a Sabbath of Sabbaths unto the Lord.

(...) dies bonus.FIrst, the Sabbath day differed from Iom Tobh, a good day; Secondly, it differed from Gnazeroch, dies interdicti; Thirdly, from Mognadim their three great feasts.
Dies bonus, a good day what.First, it differed from dies bonus, a good day. 1. Sam. 25.8. a good day, was a day wherein they met onely to be merry, but they kept no religious exercise that day:
The Chaldee paraphrast upon this saith, we are commanded to keepe the Sabbath and good dayes, that is, the feasts; and not to goe above two thousand cubits, but good dayes are not so taken in the scriptures as applied to their feasts: but to a day for banqueting onely. And it was festum fori,Fastum
Fori.Chori. non chori, as the schoolemen speake; such a feast was that commemoration of Pur, it was commanded by Mordechai to bee kept in remembrance of the rest fro^ their enemies;Pur was a politicke cessation onely. it is not called Mogned, as the rest of their feasts are, but Tzemim tempus, it is not called a Sabbath; it is said there that they rested from their enemies,(...) tempus. (...) cessare. the word is Nuah, but not Shabbath to rest, but not to rest as on the Sabbath or on their feasts. The dayes of Pur were but a politicke cessation, and they were good dayes,(...) quiescere. but not holy dayes.
 But the Iewes have a liturgie appointed for this day, therefore it may seeme to be a holy day; upon this day
 they read the booke of Esther, as may be seene in their Calendar.
The liturgie was not appointed by Mordechai,  The Iewes liturgie upon the dayes of Pur was not appointed by Mordecha^. but by the Iewes afterward; the Iewes at this day upon the foureteenth and fifteenth of Adar read the history of Esther, and as often as mention is made of Haman, they knocke upon the table of the Synagogue,Vide Schinlerum in voce Pur. (...) dies interdicti as though they would beat out his braines, and they cry, cursed be Haman, but blessed be Mordechai; cursed be Zeresh, but blessed be Esther.
Secondly, the Sabbath differed from Gnazereth,The Sabbath differed from Gnazereth, or dies inter dicti. Ioel. 1.13. they are called Gnazereth, or dies interdicti, because the hands of men were shut up at these times from worke; and these were kept when some great and heavy judgement of God was upon the Church.Gnazereth or dies interdicti were appointed to be kept for some great judgement. Such was the fast of the fourth moneth when Ierusalem was taken. Ier. 29.6. So the fast of the fift moneth, the seaventh day, for the burning of the temple, this fast, Ier. 51.12. is said to be kept the ninth day, it seemeth then that this fast was kept both the dayes, for the great desolation that was then; their third fast was kept in the seventh moneth Tishri, and this was for the slaughter of Gedaliah. 2. King. 25.25. Their fourth fast was in their tenth moneth Tebbeth, when Nebuchadnezzar burnt Ierusalem: these Gnazereth were but occasionall, and not perpetuall as the Sabbath was, therefore Zach. 8.19. The Lord promised to turne these fasts into joy and gladnesse, and into cheerefull feasts.
Thirdly,The Sabbath differed from their great feasts. the Sabbath differed from the festivall daies called Mognadim.
The first difference betwixt those feasts and the Sabbath was this;The feasts had no preparation as the Sabbath had. those feasts had no (...) or preparation going before them, but the Sabbath had still a preparation going before it, and it was called (...) or pervigilium Sabbathi.

 It may be said, Ioh. 19.14. It was the preparation to the Passover; therefore the Passover had a preparation as well as the Sabbath.
 It is called the preparation to the Passouer, because the Sabbath and the Passover fell both together, and then they transferred the Pascha to the Sabbath, and that is called a great Sabbath. Ioh. 19.31. And the preparation was then in respect of the Sabbath, and not in respect of the festivall day; their other feasts besides the Sabbath needed no preparation.
The festivall dayes were transferred to the Sabbath, and why?Secondly, the Sabbath and their festivall dayes differed in this, they used to transferre their festivall dayes to the Sabbath, but the Sabbath stood immoveable, and could never be removed to any of their feasts: they used, as the Iewes say, to transferre their other holy daies to the Sabbath, propter olera and mortuos, that is, because their meates and dead bodies could not bee kept from corruption two dayes together, and especially in Tisri answering to our Autumne: therefore they made the feast day a common day, and upon it they prepared their meat and buried their dead, and they transferred the religious exercises of that day to the Sabbath.
All the sacrifices of their feasts gave way to the Sabbath. Talmud in tract. de paschate. cap. 5.So the sacrifices of all their feasts gave way to the Sabbath; their dayly evening sacrifice was killed at eight of the clocke and an halfe, according to the Iewes counting of their houres, that is, halfe an houre before three, and offered at the ninth houre and an halfe, that is, halfe an houre after our three: but in the evening of the Passover it was killed halfe an houre before seaven, and offered halfe an houre before eight, that is, according to our calculation, it was killed halfe an houre after one, and offered halfe an houre after two of the clock; and this they did that they might rest the evening of the Sabbath.
Fourthly, the Sabbath had a double sacrifice appointed
 for it,The Sabbath had a double sacrifice. whereas their feasts had their owne particular sacrifices.
Fiftly,The Sabbath was kept in the wildernesse. the Sabbath was kept in the wildernesse and in the captivity, and he that brake the Sabbath in the wildernesse, was stoned to death, but those feasts were not kept in the captivity, and the Passover but once kept in the wildernesse. Num. 9.5.
Lastly,The whole weeke took denomination from the Sabbath. the Sabbath and other festivall dayes differ in this, the whole weeke tooke the denomination from the Sabbath. Luc. 18.12. I fast twice in the Sabbath, that is, in the weeke. So Act. 13.42. The Gentiles besought that these words might be preached unto them, (...), that is, in the middle of the weeke.
The difference betwixt the Sabbath and the weeke dayes was this,The difference betwixt the Sabbath and weeke dayes. every Sabbath day they came to heare the scriptures, read and expounded. Marc. 1.21. Luc. 4.31. So Act. 14.15. and 15.21. but on the weeke dayes they met but occasionally, as Act. 17.10. Esay. 58.2. They seeke mee dayly to know my wayes: they sought the Lord dayly, but the Sabbath day was the appointed time to seeke.
The conclusion of this is,Conclusion. the Iewes had many Sabbaths, and now wee have but one, and therefore wee should be more carefull in observing of it; nam vis unita fortior. For as a river divided into many streames runneth the more slowly, and united into one runneth the more strongly, so the affections set upon moe objects are not so intended, as when they are set upon one.



EXERCITAT. V. Of the sanctification of the Sabbath. Commandement IIII.

Esay. 58.13. If thou turne away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable, and shall honour him, etc. Then I will cause thee ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Iacob.

God who made the creature, hath onely power to separate it for a holy use.GOD sanctifieth his Sabbath, and man sanctifieth it, God sanctifieth the Sabbath because he made it; he that made the creature hath power to sanctifie it, and to separate it for a holy use: he that made the bread and the wine may set a new stampe upon these creatures, and appoint them for his sacrament. So he that made the dayes may separate a day for his owne use and service,Sanctificat^
Constitutiva.Invocativae. and this is constitutiva sanctificatio; but when man is said to sanctifie the Sabbath, it is but invocativa sanctificatio, that is, he desires of God that grace, that he may sanctifie it, and keepe it holy.
How the Lord is said to sanctifie the Sabbath.Againe God is said to sanctifie it. Ezek. 20.12. I gave them my Sabbath to bee a signe betwixt me and them, that they may know that I am the Lord who sanctifieth them; the Lord sanctifieth this day when hee sanctifieth man to keepe it holy. A man is said to doe a thing when he indeavours to doe it, although he doe it not, but the Lord giveth a man grace and sanctifies him.
Time is called holy improperly.The Lord is said to sanctifie the Sabbath, because he separateth it from a prophane use to a religious use; time in it selfe is not sanctified, it is but numerus motus; and it is called holy improperly onely, because it is the measure of holy actions: so the Angell said to Sara, I will returne to thee at the time of life. Gen. 18.14. Time in it selfe doth not live, it is onely the measure of living things:The Sabbath is the measure of holy actions. so the Sabbath is sanctified when it is made the measure of holy actions. Workes to be done that day, are the workes for the soule especially, all the weeke long a mans travell is for his mouth. Eccles. 6.7. and the Sabbath is for the soule, a noble day in respect of the weeke dayes; and he that exerciseth himselfe that day as he ought, is the Lords freeman.
There are sundry sorts of people who sanctifie not the Sabbath, some mocke the Sabbath and scorne it.Some are mockers of the Sabbath. Lament. 1.7. The adversaries saw her, and did mocke at her Sabbaths. Augustine saith of Seneca, that he mocked the Iewes because they spent the seaventh part of their life in idlenesse, and the heathen called the Iewes Sabbatarij, in derision.
There is another sort of people who thinke the Sabbath a burden to them. Amos. 8.6.Some are weary of the Sabbath. When will the new moone be gone, that wee may sell corne; and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat?
There are some who make the Sabbath their delight.To some the Sabbath is a delight. Esay. 58.13. Some kept the Sabbath of the golden calfe; Aaron said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord. Exod. 32.5.Three sorts of men who doe not sanctifie the Sabbath. and how kept they this feast? They sate downe to eat and to drinke, and rose to play. Vers. 6. Others keepe it as the ox keepeth the Sabbath, they rest from labour, but they serve not the Lord that day, but they know not that Sabbath a Sud, that internall and secret rest. There is a third sort who begin the Sabbath,(...) arcanum secretum. but continue not in the worship of God, they thinke that a part of it is sufficient for God, and they make it diem intercisum, a halfe holy day, and some will abstaine from labour that day, but not from pastime; but the sanctification of the Sabbath
 requireth both abstinence from labour and pastime, and that for these reasons.
Reasons proving abstinence from labour and pastime on the Sabbath.The first is taken from the institution of the Sabbath, the Sabbath was instituted in innocency, when man  might have wrought without tediousnes or sweat of his browes,The Sabbath given to Adam, in which hee might meditate upon Gods worke. the Lord appointed not this rest for any wearisomenesse or want of recreation; but the Sabbath was instituted, that hee might have a day to meditate upon Gods workes freely;The end of the Sabbath is not rest chiefly. in the weeke dayes he was dressing the garden which would have brought some distraction to the minde; therefore the Lord would have a day set a part for himselfe, that man might meditate upon him and his workes: Now if Adam who had no sinne within him, or evill example without him, notwithstanding of his well disposed heart to Gods service had need of a day; what need have wee then of a day who are sinners? This argument serveth against those who thinke that the end of the Sabbath is, that men may refresh themselves, this could not befall Adam because he was not weary; rest I grant is commanded here, but it is ad aliud, for holinesse, and not for gaming.
 The second reason is taken from the end of the institution,The Sabbath not appointed for pastime. the negation of labour is the position of holynesse and sanctification, the one is taken away that the other may bee placed; but pastime and gaming after publique service are a let to the rest of this day, for it is all alike holy. The Romans made a law ne quis lanam Tarento eveheret, that none should carrie wooll out of Tarentum, but some who carried sheepe out of Tarentum were punished as transgressors of the law; because they who carried out sheep carried out wooll: and quod una via prohibetur, ad id alia via perveniri non potest, that which is forbidden one way, we cannot come to it by another way; to prophane the Sabbath by workes is forbidden, therefore it is forbidden also to prophane it by pastime.

No time hath any inherent holinesse in it,Reasonable creatures are the subject of holinesse. for reasonable  creatures are onely the subject of holinesse; altars, garments and vessels had a typicall holinesse; this was relative onely to the things signified by them, and not in the things themselves; time then must bee called holy improperly, because it is the measure of holy actions, but pastimes and gaming cannot be called holy actions. 
That which is most large and most permanent, is the principall and essentiall part of the commandement. But albeit David could not have accesse to the house of the Lord,Men are bound to keepe the Sabbath by private exercises if they cannot keepe it publikely. as the swallowes and the sparrowes had to the altar, yet hee was bound to keepe the Sabbath, and in the captivitie they were bound to keepe this day holy, as a man in prison is bound to keepe it holy by private exercises; therefore Christ biddeth his Disciples pray that their flight be not on the Sabbath. Mat. 24. This argument maketh against those who thinke that wee are bound to thinke upon divine service no longer then we are in the Church.
Small workes are forbidden that day;Small workes are forbidden on the Sabbath. was it not a  small thing to goe out at their doores in the morning and to stoope downe and gather a little Manna betwixt five and sixe of the clocke, yet the Lord said, how long will ye breake my commandements? and Mary Magdalene would buy nothing for the annoynting of Christ untill the Sabbath was past. Seeing then the Lord forbiddeth such small things, we cannot say that the Sabbath was instituted for refreshing of our wearied bodies onley.
They say that the ^^nne shineth in some places almost twenty and foure houres,  shall a man keepe all this time holy? it is impossible.
Put the case that we dwell under the pole where the sunne shineth halfe a yeare,  the Sabbath day is not to be measured here by light and darkenesse, but by the
 revolution of the sunne to the same point,Where the sunne shineth long, the Sabbath is to be measured by the revolution of it to the same point. Conclusion. in a part of which time a man may sleepe and take his rest, as hee that hath a night in that time.
The conclusion of this is, God giveth us sixe whole dayes to our owne use, therefore we should give him a whole for his Sabbath, or else wee have two measures in our bagge, a little to meet out with, and a great to receive in, which is abomination to the Lord.


EXERCITAT. VI. That man is commanded to labour sixe dayes. Commandement IV.

Exod. 20.9. Sixe dayes shalt thou labour and doe all that thou hast to doe.

Whether is this a precept or permission.SIxe dayes shalt thou labour; the Lord commandeth his people to labour sixe dayes, this is not a permission but a precept, it is not left arbitrarie to them, as if hee should say, Ye may labour, but it is commanded, Ye shall labour sixe dayes. So Act. 1.22. One shall be a witnesse with us of his resurrection, that is, I command him to bee a witnesse, and not this way, it is free for him to be a witnesse, or he may be a witnesse.
 Then it may bee said that a man may not recreate himselfe upon the weeke dayes.
 The schoolemen say well, that affirmative precepts doe not so straitly binde as negatives doe: Affirmativa ligant semper, sed non ad semper, negativa ligant semper and ad semper: the affirmatives binde not simply without intermission, but the negative precepts binde without intermission.

They had their morning sacrifice when they entred to their worke, and their evening sacrifice when they ended their worke: they gave God the first part of the day and the last, although they were dayes appointed for worke. And Iob. 23.12. I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food. They would not omit this dutie for their meate, farre lesse for their labour: and they divided the day in three parts, the first ad tephilla, orationem: the second ad torah, legem;The Iewes gave a part of the worke dayes to the Lord. and the third ad malacha, opus: although they were dayes appointed for worke, yet they gave the Lord his part of them every day.
Sixe dayes shalt thou labour. God hath given man sixe dayes, therefore it is good reason that hee give the Lord one:Great reason that God have one day seing hee giveth sixe to man. hee gave Adam leave to eate of the fruit of all the trees in paradise, except one; therefore hee should have reserved that one, for God. If the Lord had given but one day to man, and taken fixe to himselfe, yet he was to obey; but now when hee hath given him fixe, and taken but one to himselfe, how can any man refuse to give him this day? what if the Lord had commanded thee some great thing wouldest not thou have done it? 2. King. 5.13.
Sixe dayes shalt thou, labour that thou mayst rest the seventh, a man should alwayes remember Gods service, and make it his last and principall end. 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore yee eate or drinke, or whatsoever yee doe, doe all to the glory of God. He should be diligent in his calling upon the weeke dayes, that hee may rest upon the Sabbath from the workes of his calling. Hee that is not faithfull in his calling,To be diligent in their calling, and to keepe the Sabbath goe together. will never care to keepe the Sabbath; and he that keepeth the Sabbath will be diligent in his calling: those two are like the two cherubins whose faces looked one towards another.
There is a speciall note of remembrance set before
 the Sabbath as a phylactery to cause men to remember it; and this is a part of the phylactery, Doe all that thou hast to doe: doe the worke of thy calling upon the weeke dayes, that thou mayst keepe the Sabbath.
 Whether may a man separate a weeke day for the service of God or not?
Levit. 19.23. When a man planted a vineyard, the Lord commanded that hee should not eate of the fruit of it for three yeares, and all that time the trees should be uncircumcised; but the fourth yeare the fruit of it should be holy unto the Lord, and in the fift yeare they are bidden profane their vineyards, that is, to turne them to common uses; there was no man might use the fruit of the fourth yeare,A man cannot separate a day to make it holy. but it was dedicated to God, and in the fift yeare they were commanded to make it common: so no man may profane the Sabbath appointed for Gods service, so neither may they separate any of the rest of the dayes of the weeke, to make them holy for Gods service as the Sabbath. When a man separateth a particular day for the worship of God, it maketh it not holy, as the Sabbath is. Seir the Casuist saith, Ecclesia potest abolere dies festos, determinatio diei est a jure humano,Seirus lib. 7. cap. 13. and consuetudo plurimum potest in jure humano, sanctificatio est a lege divina, the Church may abolish holy dayes, for the determination of them is but from man, and custone prevaileth much in the lawes of men; but the sanctification of a day is from God: God onely may sanctifie a Sabbath for himselfe, tempus non est inter privata bona: but it is numbered among such things as a^e common to all, as the aire and water: and quod divini juris est, nullius in bonis est; therefore man cannot separate time as God doth for his service, and their separation is but occasionall and alterable.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, God hath given man sixe dayes to labour and doe his owne worke, that hee may
 keepe the Sabbath, and have Gods blessing upon his travels; he must seeke a blessing upon the Sabbath to all his travels in the weeke dayes. For Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vaine that build it, except the Lord keepe the city, the watchman watcheth but in vaine. Psal. 127. So they labour in vaine who worke all the weeke, except the Lord blesse their travels; and the Sabbath is the day in which hee blesseth the works of his children, He openeth his hand every day and satisfieth the desire of every living thing, Psal. 144.16. But hee hath another storehouse which he openeth to his children upon the Sabbath.


EXERCITAT. VII. No worke to be done upon the Sabbath. Commandement. IV.

Exod. 20.10. In it thou shalt not doe any worke, thou nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, thy cattell, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates.

THe interdiction is here set downe, not to breake the Sabbath, first the father is forbidden, the sonne and the daughter, the manservant and the maidservant who should religiously observe it, and the stranger is forbidden that he should not give offence to others, and thirdly the beast that he should not give an occasion to worke that day.
First,Reformation must begin at the head. the father of the family is forbidden to doe any worke. Reformation must begin at the head first, as in a
 kingdome, at the king. Psal. 101. this is his gate. So in a Magistrate, as in Ioshua cap. 24. I and my house will serve the Lord; this is his gate. So the master of a private family. Moses before hee was a magistrate should have circumcised his sonne. When reformation beginneth at the head, then the Scripture saith, Salvation is come to thee and to thine house, Luc. 19.9. because they are the meanes to instruct and informe their household: and even as the balme laid upon Aarons head ran downe to the hem of his garment, Psal. 133.2. So when the father of a familie is religious, then religion descendeth from him to his children, to his manservant, and to his maidservant.
Nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, thy manservant nor thy maidservant. Observe that in matters of religion there is no difference betwixt bond and free,In matters of religion no difference betwixt male and female, bound or free. male and female, Galat. 3.28. betwixt bond and free; therefore the servant payed the halfe shekell as well as the master did, Exod. 30.15. betwixt male and female; therefore the daughters in Canaan might succeed to their fathers inheritance as well as the males, Num. 36.
Necessitas obedientia non excusat servum, sed necessitas coactionis excusat servum.Thy manservant, nor thy maidservant. Some hold that servants may worke upon the Sabbath day at their masters commandement, and that the commandement is onely given to the master,Seitus lib. 7. cap. 28. en casibus. and that the sinne lyeth upon him if he cause his servant to worke, and not upon his servant: but the Lords commandement forbiddeth all equally, whether they be masters or servants, the meanest servant is within the covenant as well as their master who commandeth. Nehemiah did contest with his servants for breaking of the Sabbath, He saw some treading winepresses upon the Sabbath day, and bringing in sheaves, and loading asses, and also wine, grapes and figges, and all manner of burdens which they brought in Ierusalem upon the Sabbath, Neh. 13.15. the most part of these were
 servants: and why did Nehemiah contest with them, if servants were not bound to keepe the Sabbath as well as their masters?
And the stranger that is within thy gates.Advena
Iustitia.Porta. There were two sorts of strangers amongst them, the first was advena justitia, and the second advena portae. Advena justitiae was he that was a proselyte and converted, and he was either Toshebh, inhabitans,(...) Inhabitans. (...) Externus (...). who was converted and had dwelt long amongst them; the seventy translate it (...), a parishoner: Or Ger who was newly converted, the Seventy translate him (...) a proselite. Such proselytes were Arauna the Iebusite, Vriah the Hittite, Ebed-melech, Iethro and such. David maketh mention of these strangers, Psal. 135.19. Blesse the Lord o house of Israel: Blesse the Lord o house of Aaron: Blesse the Lord o house of Levi: yee that feare the Lord blesse the Lord: yee that feare the Lord, that is, all strangers converted, and proselytes who were joyned to Israel and Aaron. Esay 65.3. Let not the stranger say, the Lord hath separated mee. They might eate the passover with the rest of the Israelites, Exod. 13.48. and of these strangers it is not meant here, for the charge is directly given to them as to the Israelites, that they should do no manner of worke; but it is meant of that stranger that was advena porta,Strangers that were not converted are meant here. such strangers as dwelt amongst them occasionally, but were not converted, or become Proselytes, those were bound to rest from their labours upon the Sabbath, that they should not give offence to the people of God; Such were that mixed multitude that came out of Egypt, Exod. 12.38. Num. 11.4. And an hundred and fifty three thousand and sixe hundreth in Salomons time, 2. Chron. 2.17. And those strangers, if they continued any while amongst the Iewes, they were to learne the seven precepts of Noah; and this way they were to be brought peece and peece to the trueth, untill they came to be proselytes.

Now the beast is commanded to rest upon the Sabbath,The beast is not the proper subject of this law. the beast here is not the proper subject of this law. The Schoolemen say well, quando finis praecepti particularis alius est a re precepta in genere, tunc non cadit sub praeceptum: When the end of the particular precept is different from the generall precept, then it falleth not under the generall precept. The end of the law is, that God should be worshiped upon the Sabbath; the reason why the beast should not worke, is, because if the beast should worke, the man must worke with the beast: the Lord saith, Thou shalt not muzze the mouth of the oxe etc. hath God regard of oxen?Why the beast should not work. 1. Cor. 9.6. The Lord gave this law, not for the oxe cause, but for mans cause: so here when hee biddeth the beasts rest upon the Sabbath, it is not for the beasts sake, but for mans sake; the beasts because they have laboured for man all the weeke long, they should rest; but this is a duty required in the sixt Commandement, The mercifull man hath pitty upon his beast, Prov. 12.10. Piety is the subject of the first table, and mercy of the second.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is, that all must be within the covenant from the highest, to the lowest none is excepted. Deut. 29.10. You stand this day all of you before the Lord your God: your captaines of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the men of Israel, your little ones, your wives, and the stranger that is in thy campe, from the hewer of the wood unto the drawer of the water, that thou shouldest enter in covenant with the Lord thy God this day.



EXERCITAT. VIII. Whether the Sabbath was from the beginning or not. Commandement IV.

Exod. 20.11. For in sixe dayes the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day.

WE have shewne who should rest upon the Sabbath, the next thing to be considered, is, the reason why wee should rest upon the Sabbath, because God rested from all his workes; the reason why the Iewes did keepe the Sabbath upon the seventh day from the creation, was,The reason why wee keepe the first day of the weeke. because God rested that day from all his workes: which reason bindeth not us Christians now directly, because God rested not from all his workes upon our Sabbath; but because Christ rested from all his workes upon our Sabbath; triumphed over death and hell; therefore wee should keepe it.Why the seventy translate it, God rested the sixt day.
The seventy translate these words thus, God rested from his workes the sixt day; and they give the reason why they translate it the sixt day, and not the seventh, lest king Ptolomie should have asked them; did God worke any thing upon the seventh day before hee rested? but it should not be translated,God rested from creating of new kindes that are perfect. he rested from all his workes quae fecit, sed quae fecerat, that is, hee rested from all his workes the seventh day which he had made the sixt day, and where it is said, he rested from all his workes, it is to be understood (as the Schoolemen say) hee ceased a no vis speciebus perfectis creandis, sed non ab imperfectis:
 when he createth daily, soules of men, these are not perfectae species, for the body is begotten by generation, and the soule is only created of nothing. Ps. 102.18. The people that shall be created etc. this is meant of their soules, and not of their bodies:(...) Nutrix ab (...) fid^lem esse. for their bodies are begotten by generation. When the beasts are begotten it is a worke of generation, but not of creation: and the Lord ceased not from ruling and preserving those creatures which he had made:God rested not from the workes of his providence and preservation. therefore Prov. 8.30. it is said, I was as a nurse with him: and even as great men commit their children to nurses; so the Lord after that he created the world, committed the care of it to his providence, as to a nurse.
God rested from all his workes; therefore hee would have us to rest from our workes.
Foure sorts of rest.There are foure sorts of rest, the first is a naturall rest, as when Christ sat downe at the well to rest him. Ioh. 4.6. Secondly, a rest from sinne; thirdly, a typicall rest, Heb. 4.9. fourthly, that eternall rest in heaven, Esay 66.23. Sinne is our most proper labour, and most wearisome labour, to worke in bricke and clay in Egypt was not like it,Sinne is the most wearisome labour. it is called (...), labor, and it is like quicksilver, Habet principium motus in se, sed non quietis, still trembling, but never at rest. Wee must rest also from the workes of our callings, in our callings There is much vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.14.
Rest is the habit, and moving a privation; when a man resteth that he may labour againe, that is not a perfect rest; when a man is carried contrary to nature, then the motion is violent, and the rest is comfortable: the motion of sinne is contrary to nature, therefore the rest from sinne must be comfortable;The motion of sinne is contrary to nature. they who rest not from sinne here, shall not rest in the life to come, Revel. 14.11. They that worship the beast shall never rest, neither day nor night.
God sets downe his example for imitation.The Lord setteth downe his example for imitation
 to us because he rested that day,  and so wee may learne that the institution of the Sabbath was from the beginning, which is contrary to those who hold that the Sabbath was not ordained to be kept, till after the Lord had rained down, Manna. Exod. 16. And they say that these words (The Lord rested from all his workes the seventh day) were a reason added to Moses Sabbath, when the law was given, but not to Adams Sabbath before the fall.
But we answere,  in the reason of the commands there is some thing naturall from the beginning, and some thing added by Moses:Something in the Sabbath naturall from the beginning, and something added by Moses. in the reason of the fift commandement; this was juris naturae, given to Adam and all his posterity before the fall, Honour thy father and thy mother that thy dayes may be long, that is, that thou mayst live a long time happily here, and then to be translated to another life: but this was juris Mosaici; That thy dayes may bee long in the land whither thou art to goe. So this was juris naturae in the reason added to the Sabbath, thou shalt rest from all thy workes, because God rested from his workes, but this is onely juris Mosaici, that the Sabbath should be a signe betwixt God and them; and belongeth not to Adams Sabbath. Ezek. 20.10. I brought them out of Egypt and gave them my Sabbaths, that they might be a signe betwixt me and them:To rest upon the Sabbath was naturall to it from the beginning; but that it should be a signe betwixt God and the people was accessorie to it in Moses time. The Sabbath was a particular signe to them of their bringing out of Egypt, and they should alwayes remember to keep it; because the Lord brought them out of Egypt; the Sabbath was from the beginning, but it was accessory to the Iewish Church that it was made a signe, as the rainebow was from the beginning; (the reflexe of the sunne in a cloud) but it was not a signe to the world untill after the deluge.
But they say,  wee read nothing in the whole history of Genesis of the Sabbath, or that any of the Patriarches kept it.

We read nothing that the adulterous or incestuous persons were put to death before Iudahs time, did the Patriarches suffer this sinne to bee unpunished all this time?The Patriarches had an appointed time for Gods worship. and is it probable that the holy men of God who sacrificed to the Lord and worshiped him, had not a certaine time for his worship determinate to them? the Lord sanctified his Sabbath as soone as he rested from his workes, and he set up the sunne and the moone Lemognadim,(...) In statuta tempora. (which is the word used afterwards in the law for their holy conventions) ad statua tempora. What appointed times were then for his worship, if not the Sabbath? for as yet they had none of their anniversary feasts.
 Againe they say, that the words set downe in the law; that thou maist rest, and thy servant may rest, belonged not to Adams Sabbath, for Adam before the fail was not wearied, and there should have beene no servile subjection before the fall; therefore these words belong onely to Moses Sabbath.
 Although Adam should not have beene wearied in dressing of the garden,Albeit man had stood in innocency, yet there should have beene distinctions of superiority, degrees and sexes. yet hee behoved to rest, that hee might exercise himselfe onely in the worship of God; and although servile subjection came in after sinne, yet if man had not fallen, there should have beene degrees of superiority and inferiority, and there should have beene a distinction of ages, sexes, and dignities.
Ioh. 7.22. Christ maketh an opposition betwixt two lawes, one of circumcision, and another of the Sabbath; and he saith that circumcision is kept, not because Moses instituted circumcision, but because it was from the fathers: and because Moses law of the Sabbath was given after the law of circumcision; therefore it is that infants are circumcised upon the Sabbath, and yet the Sabbath is not broken.
 The Sabbath was given after circumcision with the
 rest of the ceremonies belonging to it, which Christ especially meaneth of here; but the morall part was given to Adam before his fall;Christ maketh an opposition betwixt the ceremony of the Sabbath and the ceremony of circumcision. he maketh but opposition here betwixt the ceremonie of circumcision, and the ceremonie of the Sabbath; the lesse necessarie ceremonie gave place to the greater, and the Iewes say, when a child was to bee circumcised upon the Sabbath, yet the morning sacrifice behoved to be offered first before the child was circumcised; and then all the rest of the ceremoniall worship in the Sabbath gave place to circumcision
And where they urge us,  that there is no example of the Patriarches who kept the Sabbath before the Manna was sent downe.  It may seeme out of Iob that they kept the Sabbath in his time (which was before the law was given.) It is said that Iob had seaven sonnes, and they went and feasted in their houses every one his day;Iobs children kept the Sabbath. and then it is subjoyned, Iob. 1.6. That there was a day when the sonnes of God came to present themselves before the Lord.Pineda in Iobum. Now who were the sonnes of God here? but Iobs children who assembled themselves to worship God upon the seaventh day?
They say that these words, God rested the seaventh day and sanctified the Sabbath, are set downe (...),The sanctification of the Sabbath was not set downe by way of anticipation. by way of anticipation; because God promised to sanctifie that day afterward: this carrieth no probabilitie with it, that God is said sanctifie it, because he was purposed to sanctifie it afterwards; for then he might be said to sanctifie the mount Moriah when he created it, because afterwards hee was to build the temple there, and to sanctifie the Pascha and the Pentecost, because afterwards he was to appoint them for holy uses.
The conclusion of this is, wee live not by examples,Conclusion. but by rules, but Gods example was a rule to the Iewes, and Christs example should bee an example to us to
 keep the Sabbath: God rested from the beginning upon that day, and the law hath first respect to Adams Sabbath, and not to Moses Sabbath.


EXERCITAT. IX. Of the change of the Sabbath to the first day of the weeke. Commandement. IV.

Revelat. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day.

CHrist when he rose he changed the Iewish Sabbath into his day, and called it the Lords day. Christ is set downe as an example of imitation to us,Christ teacheth both by word and deed. and hee teacheth us two wayes, by his doing and by his teaching. Act. 1.1. Of all that Iesus began both to doe and to teach. The Apostles followed him because hee rose that day, and kept that day: therefore they called it his day, Iohn was ravished in the spirit,The Sabbath is called the Lords day emphatically. (...), he setteth the article (...) before it, as if he would say, that Lords day; all dayes are the Lords dayes, but this day is emphatically called the Lords day; because hee, as Lord of the Sabbath, changed it: and Beatus Renanus commenting upon Tertullian observeth well, that it was the manner in the Apostles dayes, to call things rather the Lords than Christs,Things called the Lords rather then Christs. as the Lords supper, the Lords table, so the Lords day; because he instituted all these.
Secondly, Christ hath ceased from his owne workes, as God did from his. Heb. 4.10. Here foure things are to be considered. First, God had a rest, and Christ had a rest; God rested after the creation, and Christ rested after
 the redemption;Gods rest upon the Sabbath, and Christs rest upon his Sabbath compared together. God rested when hee had made the world, and Christ rested when he made the new world. 2. Cor. 15.17. Old things are past away, behold all things are become new. Secondly, God is set for an example to the Iewes in the creation, and by like consequence Christ rested that day from all his labours. So should Christians rest upon this Sabbath from all their labours. And this example of Christ bindeth Christians as forcibly to keepe this Sabbath, as the example of God did binde the Iewes to keepe their Sabbath.
Thirdly, the Apostle 1. Cor. 16.2.The Apostles kept this first day of the weeke. commanded that upon the first day of the weeke a collection be made for the Saints, and he speaketh of this day not as a new day, but as a day well knowne among the Christians; for this epistle to the Corinthians was written in the fiftieth and seaventh yeare of Christ, that is, twenty three yeares after his death.
The Lord changed the Priest-hood from the first borne to the Leviticall priesthood. So when the people of Israel came out of Egypt, hee changed their account; whereas before they reckoned from Tishri, now hee commanded them to reckon from Nisan, because of the great benefit of their deliverance out of Egypt: So now he will have the Sabbath to be reckoned from his resurrection, and not as the Iewes reckoned.
Vpon this day the Lord created the heaven and the earth; this day the Angels were created,Many notable things done this day. this day the Lord gave Manna to the Israelites, this day the Spirit came downe upon the Apostles, and upon this day circumcision was instituted; as Chrysostome observeth; because Christ who rose this day was to circumcise the heart.
When the Lord changed the Sabbath day,  what sort of change was this?
There are foure sorts of changes in religion: First, 
 when the essence and substance of religion is changed.Foure sorts of changes in religion. Secondly, when the state of religion is changed: Thirdly, when the essence is changed in part; Fourthly, when the rites in religion are changed.The change of the essence.
The first change is when the essence of religion is changed, as when a Turke becommeth a Christian, this is as when a man is raised from death to life.
The change of the state of a thing.The second change is, when the state is changed, as when Christ changed the Sabbath into the Lords day; this is as when a boy becommeth a man.
The change of the esscence in part.The third change is, when the essence is changed in part, as when one professeth the truth, but in some point he is hereticall; hee is converted in this point, here the essence is changed in part; this is, as when a man who is sicke becommeth whole.
The change of the rites.The fourth change is, when the rites are changed, this is like the change of a mans cloathes: the change here of the Sabbath into the Lords day, was but a change in the state and in the rites, but not in the essence; neither in the whole nor part.
Conclusion.The conclusion of this is; Christ who is Lord of the Sabbath. Mat. 12.8. hath power to change the Sabbath. There are foure memorable changes which Christ made,Foure memorable changes which Christ made. the first is his miraculous change, as when hee changed water into wine; the second was the changing of the ordinances, he changed the ceremonies of the law into the gospell; and the Sabbath from the seaventh day to the first day of the weeke; the third is when he changeth man from nature to grace; and the fourth is when hee changeth men from grace to glory, and in all these hee goeth from the more imperfect to the more perfect.



EXERCITAT. X. That workes of necessity doe not violate or profane the Sabbath. Commandement IIII.

Mat. 12.11. What man shall there be amongst you that shall have one sheepe, and if it fall into a pit upon the Sabbath day, will not lay hold on it and lift it out?

ALthough the Lord hath discharged servile workes to be done upon the Sabbath,God alloweth such servile workes as belong to his worship to bee done upon the Sabbath. yet he alloweth such workes to bee done upon it which serve for his owne worship. To circumcise was a servile worke, yet because it served for his worship; therefore he allowed it. So the killing of beasts was a servile worke, yet because it served for his worship the Lord approved it.
Secondly,Workes of charity may be done upon the Sabbath. workes of charity are the workes of the Sabbath, as to cloath the naked and to feed the hungry, yet all workes of charity are not to bee done that day, especially such, quae sola intentione operantis ad misericordiam diriguntur. Example, a man upon the Sabbath buildeth a bridge, this worke he proposeth to himselfe as a worke of charity, yet this is a servile worke and may not be done that day, but in case of great necessity.
Workes of necessity may be done that day; there is a double necessity, inevitable necessity, and contracted necessity: Inevitable necessity is such that wee can no wayes eschew it, see it, nor helpe it;Necessitas
InevitabilisContracta. as when fire upon a suddaine cometh upon a house on the Sabbath day; this inevitable necessity breaketh not the Sabbath.Inevitable necessity profaneth not the Sabbath. The second sort of necessity is a contracted necessity, when
 men doe not dispose of their affaires all the weeke long, they draw upon themselves a necessity to breake the Sabbath.
Necessitas
Imminens.Prasens.Againe, wee must distinguish betwixt danger imminent, and danger present; if the danger be not imminent, that sort of necessity profaneth the Sabbath. Example, the weather is like to bee stormy, therefore a man may cut downe his corne, or lead it home upon the Sabbath; this sort of necessity breaketh the Sabbath,Present necessity profaneth not the Sabbath. but if the danger bee present, that sort of necessity breaketh not the Sabbath. Example, if a floud should carry away the corne, in that case a man may goe and save the corne, and that necessity doth not violate the Sabbath, and in this case wee profane the Sabbath unlesse wee profane it.
 What if a poore tradesman cannot earne as much all the weeke as will intertaine his wife and family, whether may he worke upon the Sabbath day to intertaine them, or not?
 There is a twofold necessity, first, a pinching necessity,Necessitas non habet legem sed sibi legem facit. secondly, an extreme necessity: if hee and his family be onely pinched, for that sort of necessity hee must not breake the Sabbath;Non licet sumere lucrum hoc die, nisi mera necessitas cogat, si principaliter ob lucrum fiat tunc est opu^ servile. but if his necessity be an extreame necessity, then albeit he worke upon the Sabbath, he profaneth it not; but the Lord alloweth it.
As workes of necessity profane not the Sabbath, so the commandement of the superior profaneth it not.Extreme necessity profaneth not the Sabbath. God commanded the Iewes to doe no servile worke upon the Sabbath, yet hee commandeth them to compasse the walls of Iericho seaven dayes;The commandement of God the superior, breaketh not the Sabbath. here the Iewes might safely breake the Sabbath at the commandement of their superior.
The casuists grant too much liberty to the peo^le in doing servile workes.Servile workes are forbidden that day, but the Romish Casuists grant too much liberty to the people in teaching them what are servile workes, and what are
 not. Example, they say that windemills, and water mills may grind that day, because they require no great worke, nor toile or labour; but they say, if a man should grinde at a man-mill, that were a servile worke: So they hold that fishes coming but once in the yeare,Vide Azpilaetam de violatione sesiorum. as hering, that it is lawfull for the fishers to fish that day: likewise they hold that men may make merchandise that day, providing that it be of things on which a certaine price is set downe. So they held that workes of the minde are not servile workes, and that they may be done on the Sabbath, if they be not bodily workes; as a lawyer may informe his client: so such workes as are common to the master with the servant; as to write, they hold them no servile workes.
The Iewes were profane violaters of the Sabbath,Seyrus de festis. as we may see in the dayes of Esay, and Ieremie, and so continued on till the dayes of Nehemiah; but afterward they fell into another extremitie in the dayes of the Macchabes,The superstition of the Iewes in keeping of the Sabbath. and then they became superstitious observers of the Sabbath, 1. Macch. 2.36. They fled into a city upon the Sabbath, neither threw they ston^s at them who pursued them; but said let us all dye in our innocencie; heaven and earth shall testifie for us,They would not fight to de^^^d them upon the Sabbath. that yee put us to death wrongfully. So they rose up against them upon the Sabbath, and slew them with their wives and children, to the number of a thousand people. but Matthias verse 41. made this decree, If it fall out upon the Sabbath that our enemies invade us, we will defendour selves, that there may be a people left upon the Sabbath to keepe the Sabbath.
Philo in his second booke of the life of Moses, saith, Sabbatum quietem adferre, non tantum mancipijs, sed etiam arboribus and stirpibus. Therefore Matt. 12. and Luc. 6. When the Disciples pulled the eares of corne upon the Sabbath; they said, that the Disciples did that which was not lawfull upon the Sabbath. They would bury no body
 upon the Sabbath, therefore the body of Christ was taken downe from the crosse before the sunne set.The Pharisees extent in superstitious observing of the Sabbath. The Lord commanded, Ier. 17. that they should carrie no burdens upon the Sabbath, but the Pharisies extended it thus farre,The precept. The Pharisees extent. that it was not lawfull for the sick man to take up his bed upon the Sabbath.The precept. Ioh. 5. They might make no journey upon the Sabbath,The Pharisees extent. but the Pharisies extended it thus farre (as Origen testifieth of those who were called Dosithaei) that they would not stirre out of the place where they sat upon the Sabbath;Cynesius apud Euoptium. and Cynesius reporteth of a Iew, who was at the helme of the ship before the Sabbath, but so soone as the sunne set, hee left the helme of the ship and cast himselfe along in the ship, and read all that night, and the day following upon the booke of the law: and although they threatened him with death, yet hee would not take the helme in his hand to guide the ship again: yet Christ and his Disciples went through the corn upon the Sabbath.
Workes of necessity may be done that day, but the Iewes hold,The precept. The Pharisees extent. that they might not bury the dead that day; this is a worke of piety, and oftentimes of necessity, therefore it might be performed that day. A physitian may goe to visit his patient that day, and the midwife may goe to helpe a woman in childbirth that day, and a smith may shoe a post-horse that day, providing that hee be about the businesse that concerneth the estate.
The superstitious Iewes will suffer their beasts to carry no more upon them then their haltar or bridle;The Pharisees extent. they will not saddle their horse that day; whereas the Shunamitish woman desired one of the asses to be made ready, and a servant to be sent, that shee might goe to the man of God; her husband said, Wherefore wilt thou goe to him to day, it is neither new moone nor Sabbath. 2. King. 4.22.23. It was their custome to doe so on the
 Sabbath and new moones. In the dayes of Christ they would have pulled out their sheepe or oxe out of a pit upon the Sabbath, Matt. 12.13.The precept. but afterward they would let the beast lye still untill the morrow;The Pharisees extent. but if it was a marish place or deepe ditch wherein the beast was in present danger, then they used to hire some poore Christian for a trifle to pull out the beast for them. They hold that it is not lawfull for the blinde to leane upon a staffe that day, but for the lame it is lawfull:Schichardus de Sabbatho ex Tal. because the blinde may want the staffe, but not the lame. They teach, that if a man be wounded a day before the Sabbath, and the plaster be laid to his wound,The Pharisees extent. hee may suffer the plaster that day to lye still at the wound, but if he take it away, he may not lay to a new plaster that day.The Pharisees extent. They hold that if a flea bite a man that day, hee may take it, but not kill it; and if a thorn pricke him in the foote that day, he may not pull it out. And last, they hold that a Tailor may not carry a needle, farre lesse a sword.
Men runne into extremities in religion,Men oftentimes run into extremities in religion. Peter will not have Christ to wash his feete at the first, but then he falleth into the other extremitie, Not my feete onely but also my hands and my head. Ioh. 13.9. So here they were profane breakers of the Sabbath, and then they became superstitious observers of it: but we should keepe the golden mediocritie, and turne neither to the right hand nor to the left. Deut. 5.32.
The conclusion of this is, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath, and therefore in necessity  man is Lord of the Sabbath (albeit not the supreme Lord) and may breake it, but hee must take heed that he draw not on this necessitie; for then hee shall be answerable to him who is the great and supreme Lord of the Sabbath, and shall be holden guilty as transgressor of his law.
Secondly, if wee sanctifie the Lord in this life,Conclusion. wee
 shall keepe that eternall sabbath with him in the heavens; the sanctification of the Sabbath in this life is but the first fruits, and the full harvest shall be in the life to come. When the foundation of the second temple was laid, all the people shouted for joy, Ezra 3.11. In hope that the temple should be finished: so if we lay the foundation of the sanctifying of the Sabbath in this life, wee may rejoice, because it shall be finished in the life to come.
 It is said of all the rest of the dayes, The evening and the morning were the first day, the second day; the third day etc. but it is not said, that the evening and the morning were the seventh day; to put us in remembrance that our Sabbath shall be an eternall Sabbath, and never have an end.

Of the punishment for the breach of the Sabbath.
Those who brake the Sabbath under the law were to be put to death Exod. 21.Why they were put to death under the law who brake the Sabbath. and Levit. 24. the reason of this was, because their Sabbath was a pledge to them of all the benefits which they were to receive in Christ to come. So the priests daughter was to be burnt quick if she defiled her selfe by committing whoredome, the reason was because her father was a type of Christ to come:Why the Priests daughter was burnt quicke. if a preachers daughter now should commit whoredome, shee should not be burnt quicke for it, because her father is not a type now of Christ to come; I grant she should be more severely punished in respect of her offence, than any other woman, the breach of the Sabbath now is to be punished with death: but otherwayes at the magistrates arbitrement.
 Why did they put him in prison who gathered sticks upon the Sabbath, doubting whether he should be put to death or not, seeing it expressely commands, Exod.
 21. that he who breaketh the Sabbath should be put to death.
They knew not that this which seemed but a small fault to them, should be punished with death.  Secondly, they knew not what sort of death hee should be put to; and therefore they put him in prison to know the minde of the Lord.
Domine Deus, quaecunque dixi de tuo, agnoscant and tui: si qua de meo,Augustinus lib. 15. de Trin. cap. ult. and tu ignosce and tui.




