





IACOBS VVELL.


IOHN 4. 6.
And there was IACOBS WELL.


LET it not seeme absurd that I reade this short Chorography, and briefe description, of a matter, in appearance, so small, before this most Illustrious Audience. Rich treasure may bee hidden in a roome vnlikely, and such a narrow well as this, may affoord much comfortable. water. There was no pinne in the Temple
 of God, but was seruiceable to some holy vse: neither is there any iot or tittle in the scripture of truth, but is profitable for some instruction. At this fountaine, once the King of heauen (vailed in the flesh of our infirmitie) refreshed himselfe, when he was hungry, wcarie, and thirstie, although rich in himselfe, aboue all: And let my Soueraigne Lord, so great a King vpon the earth, in his dcuotions thirsting after the water of Life, at the beginning of his happie progresse, vouchsafe his first repose, out of this well, by the draught of his vnworthy seruant, although his own precious heart, be (like Solomons) 1. King. 4. 29. large as the sands, and deepe as the waters of the Sea. In this well here spoken off, the Patriarch lacob left a memoriall of his Charity and care for succeeding ages: and at this well, the God of Iacob left a
 mirrour of his thirst, for the conuersion and comforting of soules. Now to preserue the remembrance of both, did the Euangelist set downe this particular note, in his holy Mappe. Out of which, let me be bold, according to the number of the words, to obserue three especiall Occurrences: First of the place, There: Secondly, of a Monument in the place, a Well: Thirdly, of the Author and founder of it, Iacob: Iacobs Well. A place of note for many circumstances, and this especially, of our blessed Sauiours presence. A monument, not great, but of good vse and benefit, in those drie countries, A well, A founder of much reuerence for his faith, for his workes of pietie, and charitie, as also for his great Antiquitie, Iacob. There was Iacobs Welll.
The first of these occurrences (whereof I purpose to speak least)
 is the site and Landship of the place, modelled, or rather folded vp in this briefe locall demonstratiue, There: but explicated more at large for Historie and Geographie, before and after, by former circumstances of Iacob, and later of Christ. For first the place is bounded out, as beeing interiacent between Iudaea and Galile, in the midway betweene them both. Secondly, the name of the Region, Samaria, and of the Citie, Sychar, (so called Maldonat. for Sychem) is expressed, which was a chiefe Citie, seated at Mount Josephus. Garrizim, where Iacobs sonnes once made their furious Massacre. Thirdly, the bordering vicinitie is laid down, as being neere to the possession, Gen. 34 that Iacob gaue to his sonne Ioseph, which hee Gen. 33. purchased of Hemor, Shechems father. And lastly is described the departure of our sweet Sauiour from his own countrimen
 and brethren, this way passing along as his iourney ledde him, and heere as it were De torrente in via bibens. Psal, 1 10. drinking of the brooke by the way for his refection. In whom wee may behold that prophesie of Iacob made to his sonne Ioseph more liuely verified, then in Ioseph himselfe Ramus faecunaus iuxta fontem. Gen. 45 22. He shall bee as a fruitfull branch by the Well side: for neuer did Ioseph take personall possession in this place, but Heb. 11. 22. by faith, or by the translation of his bones, and in his posteritie: and they, Alas! how often interrupted, and at the last exterminated quite. Insomuch as this place, euen this Citie and Country may be pointed at for a Theater (I will not say of Fortune) but of Gods iustice in the conuersion of State, and alteration of Religion. For notwithstanding that this was Iacobs purchase, Iosephs inheritance, by promise, by legacie, by prophecie
 confirmed to the faithfull; Yet beside the former sacking of this Citie by Iacobs sonnes, and the abandoning of the same by Iacob himselfe, It was first Iudg. 9. fired by that Ambitious bramble Abimelech, then the whole Region peruerted by the Caluish Religion of 1. Kin. 13. Ieroboam, in whose defection this Citie was 1. King. 12. 25 suddenly built, and as suddenly left. Then Samaria it selfe 2. Kin. 6. besieged and famished; and at length all harrosed, dispcopled, desolated; and being 2. Kin. 17. replanted with Idolatrous inhabitants fearing not GOD, they were wearied with Lyons: When being better taught, yet at their best, as they did feare God, so they still worshipped their Idols, continuing in a confused Meslin of Religion. And this race of sirangers, Mongrels, and Neuters remained heere till this approch of our Sauiour, who now
 as a Cant2. 2. Lillie amongst the thornes, and as the Churches dearest spouse: heere fedde, and Cant. 1. 6. rested himselfe at noone, thirsting in bodie, but more in soule for the saluation of mankinde, August. in hunc locum. petens and promittens bibere, praying and yet promising drinke: being Egens tanquam accepturus, and affl^ens, tanquam satiaturus. vbi supr 1. in want as one that would receiue, and flowing ouer as one that would replenish others. But I wrap vp this description of place againe, with these three briefe notes vpon it. First, that there is no certaintie of continuall prosperitie in the most setled estates of the world, whereof let Sichem and Samaria be pregnant witnesses. Secondly, that sinne priuiledged, and corruption of Religion authorised, although but in policie, as it was by Ieroboam (who knew better) yet is the bane, and ruine of the most flourishing commonwealths and churches. Lastly, that neither
 the Church of God visibly, nor the spirit illuminating that Church infallibly, is bound to any place, citie or sea, there to reside in the succession of persons: for Iosephs possession was inhabited by Idolaters, Osc 4. 15. Bethel became Bethauen, Turkes and dogges haue surprised the holie land, Antichrist sitteth in the 2 Thessal. 2. 4. Temple of God: where was light, there is darkenesse, where it was day, now it is night, the faithfull Isai 1. 21. Citie is turned harlot, Nequie blandiatur sibi dc loco: Barn: Least any should flatter themselues in the inherent holinesse of the place. And thus wee leaue wandring at large about the place, and settle our selues in view of a little Monument in the place, where our blessed Sauiour did vouchsafe to sit.
Secondly, In this place there was a well, or a spring: for euerie well is a spring, although cuery spring be not a well. A Spring or a fountaine
 may be in Augustin. superficie, easie to come by: A well is in profundo, deepe to be drawne at, and so was this. A seasonable Commoditie of publike vse, and long Continuance, seruing for Iacobs children, and their Cattle, although now for strangers. Water in a thirsty Lord must needs bee a benefit of great Conuenieucy, vnknowne to them that haue enough. No greater care had the Petriarchs in temporall things, then to furnish themselues and their people with water. Wherefore the Genes. 26. 25. Philistins could not shew their spight in any thing so much to Isaac, as to stoppe vp his wels. Neither (that wee may speake of later times) did the Romish Philistin in any thing so deepely discouer his malice, as when hee sent paisoners to intoxicate and corrupt the fountaines and waters of the Protestant Countries in Germanie,
 whereof, we may reade, Sleidan: Comlib. 18. how the Princes and Noble men did much complaine. A well therefore, and in such a place, was surely a benefit much graced by the Concurrency of those foure Circumstances, whereof the Senec. de. benef. Necessaria Vtilia Iucunda Mansura, learned speake: for it was necessarie, profitable, pleasant, and permanent. What more necessary then water? No, not a friend, for all the prouerbe. Who can liue without it? What, more profitable then such a well, in a drie scorched Countrie, for them that liue, or dwell, or trauell there? And so pleasant is water, that Prou. 23. 25. Salomon likeneth good newes out of a farre Countrie vnto coole waters comforting a thirstie soule. The first and greatest cause that made the Israelites to quarrell and mutin with Moses, was for want, or for bitternesse of their water, as Exod. 15. 24 Marah, Exod. 17. 7. Massah, and Meribath can witnesse. One
 and the same word, (as the Learned obserue,) in the sacred fountainetongue is set for an eye, and a spring, which may not vnfitly teach vs, th^t as the eyes are necessary and beautifull springs, to grace the little world of our bodies: so fountaines of water, are as eyes to beautifie and solace the greater world of the earth. Our sweet Sauiour, who at this well asked temporall water, and offered spirituall water of life, hath promised a reward to a Cuppe of cold water, giuen in season, for his sake. And what is a Mat. 10. 42. Cuppe of colde water, to a well of water? Yet a well of water is no great thing, neither in it selfe, but that as Nazianzen speaketh: (...). Nazian: Monastic. That little, is not little, when it produceth much. But aboue all, that which addeth an Improuement to the necessity, profit, and pleasure of this well, is the Continuance and perennitie of it,
 holding out, euen till the time of our Sauiour, out-lasting so many changes, generations, and monarchies: and yet still there was Iacobs well. Monumentum aere perennius: Hor. A monument more durable then brasse.
But this is not all: wee are yet too shallow: And our deare Sauiour hath taught vs to draw deeper, and fetch our hence more then Ordinarie, and vulgar water: For by this well he tooke a fit occasion to proffer and giue a tast of that spirituall water of life, whereof he himselfe is the euer-lasting, and vnexhausted fountaine. Wherefore I cannot seeme to bring water out of mine owne braine vnto this text, nor from the words thereof to wring out blood, by fotcing them, if following the example of the greatest Doctor, Christ himselfe, I take occasion from this well,
 and this water to speake of all the Commodities and Emoluments of mans life, which the Beneficence of worthie men, founders and Benefactours, hath bountifully streamed out for the publike vse and Benefit of many.
In the Suruey of which Commodities; as we passe along, because Monuments are so called, as Monentia Augustin: Moncns mentem. mentem, monitors of the mind. let me behold by them, monere and mentem and memorem, to aduertise the minde and the mindefull, how that first some Monuments, on the left hand, are vaine and superfluous; Secondly, some, in a degree further, Impious and superstitious; Thirdly, some, on the right hand of Contrary nature, Charitable and Religious. And first vaine Monuments on the left hand I call them not according to the vanitie, wherewith Salomon hath
 branded all worldly things, for so the best ofsprings of mans Industry are vaine: But vaine, I meane Idle, without any intended benefit or profit for the wealth of the people, or the seruice of God, onely showing forth mens pride or follie, the superfluity of their riches, and their securitie. Of this sort was Genes. 11. Nimrods Babel, 2 Sam. 18. 18 Absolons pillar, the Theaters and Pyramides of Aegypt, being but Regum pecuniae otiosa and stulta oslentatio: Plin an Idle and foolish Ostentation of the wast money of great Princes. But not to triflle about those meerely vaine and Prodigious follies, I come to a more necessary Suruey: namely, what vaine profusion of money and labour hath beene Imploied, first in houses and mansions for the liuing, secondly in tombes for the dead, Thirdly in superfluities about the houses of prayer, fourthly in Monuments of writing.
 And first touching mansions and Vaine Monuments. dwelling houses for the liuing, no doubt they must and may be built for Arles necessity, for pleasure, for defence, for state and splendour. But the venime of the spider makes a webb of little worth, and the corruption of the builder taints his worke with a touch of vanity. May you bee pleased to see how? First when he layes the foundation in a Presumptuous confidence of perpetuitie, supposing his house and habitation shall Psal. 49. continue for euer, and therefore calleth it by his owne name. Secondly when he situates his house, and inlargeth his prospect vpon grounds depopulated and incroched vpon, so that 1 King. 21. 2. Achabs pleasureable garden, swalloweth vp Naboths heritable vineyard. Thirdly, when the morter is tempered with the sweate of poore mens browes, and the timber
 wrought without wages: so that the Abacuk. 2. 11 stone in the wall crieth, and the timber ecchoeth out a woe to the builder. Fourthly, when all the care and expences run out in Temporall buildings, and priuate garnishments, and there is no respect of the Agge. 1. 4. house of God lying wast, or of the state of Religion either standing or falling. Lastly when those great houses, which should be wels and fountaines of Rehefe, and conduicts of comfort to the hungrie and needie, serue onely as onely Beacons on a hill to bee leene a farre off, where there is cold standing and much waiting, but seldome any fire or smoke, except vpon some rare and strange occasions.
From the mansions of the liuing, I hasten to the Tombes of the dead: wherein wee may behold how expensiue and Ambitious vanitie, hath also shewed her selfe. Not,
 but that there ought to be a godly care, euen in such Monuments: because they are not onely, solatia, Comforts, but also, Monita viuentium, Aduertisements to the liuing. The man of God had his Tombe with the inscription preserued by King Iosias; 2 King. 23. 18 Let him alone, (said the King) let none remoue his bones. The Acts 2. 29. sepulchre of King Dauid remained til St. Peters daies, for all the rage and Crueltie of Gods Enemies. Such respect there was in the making and keeping of the Memorials of worthie men. Wherefore precious for euer in life and death be the memorie of our blessed Iosias, who hath not suffered the title, and (as I may say by Imitation) the Manes of our deceased Deborah, and late Mother of Israel, to be defaced, but hath reuiued and preserued them, as in other lasting Monuments of
 high wisdome and deepe learning, so in a Tombe answerable to the Princely worthinesse of Queene Elizabeth. But the vanitie is when men in their life, conceaue an Immortality of their renowne and fame, not in any substance of vertue, but in such after shadowes planting their heauen; as the Aegyptians rearing their Pyramides, called them Pol: virg: ex Diodor^. Sempitcrnas domos, houses cuerlasting. Or els when great Personages like Isai. 22. 16. Shobnah, (or perhaps Wolsey) false to God and their Countrie, yet hewe out their Tombes in excelso, aloft in the rocke, making falshood and Confederacie with forreine Princes their Refuge, although a scourge should passe thorough the land. But the Lord euermore bandie and role such as bals out of their Countrie, and turne their conceited glorie into deserued shame. Besides when men exceede
 in the garnishment of the Tombes of the Dead, either madly aduancing the Names and Memorials of Traitours, and the vnworthie, as Becket, and such like: or ouersumptuously building vp the Tombes of godly mon and Martyres, as the Pharises did the sepulchres of the Prophets, and the superstitious world, did this of St. Alban, our worthy M. Cambden: Fox. Stephen and protomartyr of England, not regarding the faith or Imitating the Religion of Saints and Martyrs, but superstitiously adorning, nay adoring them, and offering to their shrynes as to Idols, wearing out the stones with their knees, and gracing them with forged miracles. Forged miracles I may well speake of in Fox: 705. this place, for here it was, that thu Noble Protector Humphrey Duke of Glocester discouered a fiction of one that fained himselfe borne
 blinde, and suddenly recouered of his sight by the helpe of St Alban, whereat, there was great Triumph, and ringing of Bels: But the good Duke not so credulous as the vulgar, questioning this miracle, made triall of the vanitie of it by propounding the difference of colours, which when the partie, that neuer saw any thing before (as he said) could name and distinguish, the Duke found him out for a Counterfeit, and commanded his due punishment. Pittie but this worthie Protector, lying interred in this Church, for this and many other good deeds, should haue his Tombe preserued, and a better Inscription or Epitaph, then there is vpon it, for had there been many such Duke Humpbreds, a briefe Register might haue saued the turne for popish miracles.
Thirdly, because euer since the
 first Christian Martyrs were slaine by their persecutors, or buried and remembred by the faithfull Confessors, there hath beene a kinde of Confinitie betweene the Tombes of Martyrs, and holy men deceased, and the places of praier: I next obserue how vanitie creeping into those most necessarie monuments, and houses of praier and Gods seruice, hath beene, B^r^a^d: ^d Gui^: Abb: Apolog. non vanior quam insanior, not so much vaine, as plaine madde, in building and guilding the materiall wals and temples, neglecting the true Temples of God, and the liuing members of Christ. I must not stand to fetch in the manifold Testimonies of the Fathers, onely let vs a little heare St. Bernard, who liued when such things wereswolne biggest, and growne to the greatest ruffe. I omit (saith he, and yet hee taxeth them) Vbisupra. the huge Altitudes of
 the steeples or spires, the Immoderate longitude of the Church-bodies; the superfluous latitudes of the Iles, the sumptuous garnishments, and curious paintings, resembling after a sort the ancient rite of the Iewes. Yet those things hee passeth by the more lightlie, because perhaps they might serue (in some sort) to the honour of God: But the In sacroquid faci^ aurum? ex. Persio. gold and other corporall ornaments, and bodily oblectations, hee soundly reproueth, questioning with himselfe what fruit these vanities might bring, whether stultorum admirationem, or simplicium oblectationem: the wonderment of fooles, or the delight of Idiots; or whether Christistians had perhaps learned of the heathens to serue Idols: But at last he resolues, that all that prodigall cost and wast, was but an Tali quadam. arte spargitur as vt multiplieetur: expenditur vt augeatur: and effus^^ copiam paril. ibid. art, and a lure to get lucre, and a baite cast out to angle for more aboundance. So
 whereas Churches should haue beene wels of heauenly comfort and Saluation, they were turned into gulphes and pits, swallowing vp the fruit, and fat of the Land, being like Exchaunges and Burses of Marchandise, dennes of theeues and lurchers, money-chaungers, doue-sellers, masse-mongers, waxchafferers, worthilie driuen out at last by Christian Magistrates. But let mee now bee sparing in this point, seeing these Monuments haue beene so purged of their peccant humors, that they are growne weake in their vitall parts. They haue so beene let blood for their temporall superfluities, that from a pleurisie, they are falne to a Cachexie, from a swelling to a d shriueling and a shrinking in the sinewes. e Dumque nimis iam putrida membra recidit, Excessit Medicina modum: Lucan. lib. 2. They had indeed heretofore bodies ful-fed and pampered, now behold they are pined, vix ossibus
 haerent, scarce doe the stones hang together: neither euer were they so foggie, but they are now as gant; not euer so surfetted, but they are now as hungrie and thirstie, hauing sustained long penance, in nakednesse and want for all their former excesse, and hauing indeed regorged, and made restitution of more then all. And what hope of tolerable recouery can there be? seeing those wels and fountaines of Bountie, that had wont to ouerflow in temporall lands and goods toward the Church for superstition; are now in the neape tide, at a verie low ebb, and running from the Church, when they should further the mainteinance of true Religion. Wherefore I may cease to speake of vaine and superfluous excesse in these Monuments of Gods seruice, and rather pleade for supplie of their most necessary
 supportance and continuance.
 Fourthlie I must not forget the last, and not the least in consequence of vaine monuments, which are bookes; excellent monuments, if they be good, most pernicious, if bad: Idle and vaine, if they be like those volumes either in quantitie or qualitie, whereof Hist: ceelesia lib. 7. ca. 27. Socrates maketh mention, quae neque doctis neque indoct is prodessent, which neuer were profitable to the learned nor vnlearned; and yet the Author had intituled them with the name of a Christian historie, diuided them into some thirtie sixe bookes, euerie booke hauing many Tomes, neere a Thousand in all, and the Argument of cuerie Tome, almost equalling the Tome it selfe. Of such books, surely, there was neither end of good purpose, or profit, nor almost of stynt or measure, and therefore most vaine and Idle: with which perhaps
 I might raunge the Bookes of many, that haue stuffed the Christian world, with maculature and wast paper: onely (as Father Maximus once said) S. p. Max: pr^l. ad Elpidi um. adlectorum defatigationem, to the tiring and wearying of readers. But in hast I conclude this point, with this compl^int onely, that it is shame and pittie, that the Penne and Print, which should be as wels and fountaines of Comfort, Torcularia diui^nitus monstrala: ^ibliander de ras: Ling. wine-presses to distill the sweer licour of wisdome and Religion, should be made to vent out the froth and foame of idle wordes, and misseimploied braines (that I say nothing yet of that poyson and mischiefe, which often is dispersed by vngodly bookes.) And thus much for vaine monuments.
But vaine and superfluous is a degree 2 Impious Monuments. short of Impious and superstitious, or Idolatrous. And yet such Impious
 Monuments they are, originally naught in the egge and in the birde, in the intent and effect, being inuented as sinkeholes, and trappes of the Diuell, wherein God himselfe had no destinated part. For what els were those nurceries of vice, the houses of the Sodomites, Topheth, and Hinnon, the horses of the Sunne, the mount of Corruption, the Idols of Indignation, the groues, altars, and houses of Abhomination deuoted to false Gods and goddesses, or indeed to the Diuell, vnder the titles of Baal, Astaroth, Chemoz, Milchom, Iupiter, i 2 King. 23. Diana, and infinite such gulphes of sinne, and prouocations to Idolatrie? I might here insert, the Agrippa. stewes of Pope Sixtus; (Veneris monumenta nefandae,) together with the filthy bookes written to such purpose, as Incitements of lust. I might adde all monuments of writing of Atheisme, or heresies, the golden legends
 of loud lies, the Turkish Alchoran, Vlpians seauen bookes, de torquendis Christianis, of torturing christians, the discourses of Kingkilling, being as Tutors to murthers and treasons, the treatises iustifying Equiuocation, and the hellish and diuellish bookes of sorcerie and curious Arts, such as the Acts 19. 19 beleeuers burnt at their first conuersion: But I passe them ouer with contempt and silence, because in those things, the Diuel seemed to haue vnmaskt himselfe and show'd his hornes tothe very affrightment, and execration both of the Christian and Ciuill World.
But I must be bolder to insist vpon those Monuments, which Religion, and Reuerend Antiquitie hath destinated either in the particular, or in the generall vnto holy vses, and yet superstition and Idolatrie hath abused and disguised:
 wherein the Diuell hath indeuored like an hypocrite to sitvpon the skirts of Christs roate, and to plant his Chappell so neere, that it might incroch vpon the house of God, and his seruice. So subtill is the Diuell, that as Arles de Mundo: siue Theoph: Phydias, the excellent Caruer did cunningly inchase his owne countenance in the shield of Minerua, so that it could not be razed out, but the shield it selfe must be spoiled and disfigured: euen so more or lesse in the Churches and houses of God, in the wels of saluation, in wals, windowes, tombes, monasteries, yea in common wels and fountaines he hath left an infectious leprofie, and deepe impression of Idolattie and superstition, being the resemblance of himselfe, such as hardely can be pulled away or purged, but with great discretion and wisdome, least all be defaced. No such
 workemen hath the Diuell had in this businesse, as the Romish painters, Caruers, writers and Enginers. For by their false fingers, and deceirfull braines hee hath fraught the Hospiniax: de orig: templorum. Temples of God, with heathenish rites, and Iewish Ceremonies in their dedications; and in their vse, with tempting and seducing Images, with Reliques, Masses, Altars, holie waters distilled out of their owne Inuentions. They haue Ierem. 2. 13. forsaken God the fountaine of liuing waters, and Christ Iesus the Zech. 13. 1. spring opened in the house of Dauid; for sinne and for uncleannesse, and they haue digged pits vnto themselues, which wil hold no water of saluation, or true soule-comfort, in selfe-merits, saints-merits, in supererogations, satisfactions, pardons, indulgences. The pure fountaines of the sacred scriptures they haue indeuoured to slaunder with imperfections
 and obscurity, and to stoppe them vp with traditions, glosses, froathie legends, lying fictions, and miracles. The sacramentall water of Baptisme, being the fountaine of our new birth, they haue puddled with salt, oyle, and spittle. The Sacramentall fountaine of Christs body and blood, they haue stuffed with a masse of abuses, Idolatries, Adorations, Eleuations, reseruations; driuing the laypeople, as uncleane beasts, from the mysticall streame of his blood in the Cup. To be short, what sacred Order or Ordinance is there, which they haue not stained and defiled more or lesse, with the dung and filth, of their owne inuentions, superstitions, or Idolatries? But praise be to God that these Monuments of greatest Pietie, those wels, and fountaines, of true Religion, so mudled, and stopped
 by those Philistins, are cleansed and restored to their puritie by the Religious Authoritic of our princely Patriarchs, and faith defenders. In regard whereof, I may bid auaunt, all vaine, and all superstitious Corruptions of Idolatrie abolished, that we may with comfort behold the Monuments of Charitie, and true Religion, graced and protected by the highest president of pietie and bountie (vnder God) the Princely Iacob.
Behold then how prouident 3 Monuments of Charitie and Religion. and Ingenious charitie hath beene in all prouisions seruing for the benefit, and reliefe of the people. Shee like the good huswife wrought by day; (by the light of the Gospel) neither did her Prou. 31. 18. Candle goe out by night, no not in the night and darknesse of Religion, for still shee was doing, when her sight was dimme, and saw not the right end of hir
 businesse: By a kind of custome and habit the hands wrought according to the fashion of the first Christians, although the eyes were out. It was the Lord, who worketh his pleasure Posidon: de vita Augustin^^ per scientes and nescientes, whether men know or not know what they doe, for Augustin: de vera relig. c. 17. Minima species boni a Dco bonoest: The least show of good issueth originally from God, that is all good. Walke then thorough the Circuit of charitie, and ye shall find plasters for euery soarc; here Hospitals for the sicke and the lame, there Almeshouses for the poore and Impotent: here schooles for her Children; there Refectories for her old folkes: here workehouses for the able, there places of Correction for the Idle: here trades for the vnskilfull, there lawes and orders for the vnrulie: here Entertainement for strangers, there high waies passable for
 Trauailers: here prouision for poore Maids mariages, there Reliefe and Comfort for prisoners. Neither am I afraid to say, that euen Charitie in her best Intendements, had prouided Nibil aliud ^lim ^rant Monachorum Monasteria quam Collegia in quibus alebantur studiesi: Hier: Zanch: in 4 precept: Monasteries by their first Institution for Casaubon: ad cp. Card: per. 37. schooles of sciences, and Pseudomartyr. shops of manufactures and laborious trades; howsoeuer abused since. And sundry such Wels of Comfort, hath the Charitie of laeobs sonnes inuented and left behind them, teaching vs not to be idle in the day and light of true Religion.
And yet further behold, how Religion vniting faith and Charitie together, hath not onely prouided for the supplie of Temporall necessities, but hath been prouident and exuberant in wels and fountaines to further her children, and disperse and propagate her selfe. Behold her vniuersities and schooles,
 her Colledges, libraries, bookes and lectures for the sonnes of her Prophets, whereby they replenishing themselues, may water others. See her Churches and Oratories consecrated to God, and his seruice, by the primitiue intent of Religious Princes, howsoeuer prophaned sometimes by iniurie of time, or by default of people, yet repurged againe by the fauour of God and the highest Authoritie, from their corruptions. But aboue all, behold the pure fountaines of sacred scriptures, streamed out by writing and printing, Religiously preserued, faithfully translated, being as wels for the deepe sence, and fountaines for the easie precepts, wherein not onely the Eras. in psal. 22. Elephant may swimme, but the sheepe may wade: whence not only the learned may satisfie their deep desires, but euen the wild Asses may quench their
 thirst, the Ignorant Prou. 1. 4. increase their knowledge. For thereunto serue so many gracefull, and laborious Expositions, Commentaries, Harmonies, precepts of tongues and arts, and exercises of an established Ministrie, as Buckets prouided to draw vp water out of those wels of saluation. Besides I may adde hereunto the wholsome lawes enacted for the furtherance of Religion, as also those wels of maintenance by tithes or otherwise, ordained for such as minister in holy things, howsoeuer vnluckily diuerted in a great part by the popish Philistins, Pilkinton: exposit. of Agg: Reinald: serm: on Obad. who robbed parishes to feede Idle Monks. But euen in this case, we haue experience of a zealous desire in our princely Iacob, and other truly Religious Christians, to restore those prouisions to their pristinate vse, if the Iniquitie of time did not make so strong and
 difficult obstruction. But these, and many like these, are the Monuments of Charitie and Religion, digged in this world as in the wildernesse 2 Ps. 84. 6. and vale of Bacah, by worthy Benefactors, and replenished by the blessing of God for his seruice, and the benefit of his people; in the founding or furthering, the repairing or restoring whereof, they are happie that like Iacob haue had hearts to affect, or hands and meanes to effect any good. And thus from the well, we are come to the Authour, from the Monument to the founder, Iacob: It was I acobs well.
The name of the Patriarch Iacob 3 The founder. was reuerenly rehearsed by the Samaritans in this well, although they were strangers to him, and to his faith, making onelie a benefit of this temporall Commoditie, but none of his example in the
 better things. But (which is a greater grace) the holie Ghost by the Euangelist hath registred him, (as else where for Heb. 11. his faith,) so heere for this benefit, bearing his name: Iacobs well. So that in this little Monument of Charitie, liues Iacob, as in a Reuerend Record, when many great Mountaines of pray, and treasures of vanitie, together with their Polyd. Verg. founders name, are vanished, and lie in the dust, or if they remaine, they doe but stinke in Prou. 10. 7 rottennesse and Corruption. Such honour doe men Religious and charitable attaine vnto: according to the Psalme, Ps. 112. 6. They are had in euerlasting remembrance: Prou. 10. 7. their memoriall is blessed, as saith Salomon. Workes of mercie and pietie leaue a long and a sweet sauour behind them, euen when the workes themselues sometimes doe cease, yet Iustitia manet in aeternum, the righteousnes
 of the Authour is written in heauen, and preserued in the earth. Contrariwise, the builder of Genes. 11. ^ Babel liues in perpetuall dishonour; he that reedified Iericho, was marked with a Ioshua 6. 26. Curse; and the like shame and curse is vpon those that goe about to build vp the Romish Babilon, to aduance Idolatrie, or set vp false Religion. Ieroboam is branded for ever with this note, that he 1 King. 16. 26 made Israel to sinne. Iudas beareth the indelible badge of a traitour to his Master. And indeed the plots and exploits of mischief are like monstruosi partus, mishapen birthes of Monsters, imperfect, vnpleasing, like Rob. Winters dreame in Littletons house. crooked steeples, and disfigured faces in the dreame of a traitor, full of horror to the Authors while they liue, and of Infamie when they are dead. So, ingloriously, and in detestation liues Gowrie, and the powdered
 Traitors, not as founders, but as professed Confounders, who like beathnish Cannibals, had vowed this day of the weeke, the Tuesday, to Dies Martis bloody Mars, (or rather to him that was a murtherer from the beginning;) which day notwithstanding in memorie and thankes to God, for their frustrated Imaginations, is our duplex festum, doublic consecrated, to the honour of the Almightie, the sauiour of his Annointed. It was not a well of water to comfort their Countrie, which they went about to digge, but a Hell of fire, to consume vs all, and make vs like Sodom and Ghomorra. Neither did the Traitors sing as Israel, Nom. 21. 17 Rise vp Well, sing ye unto it; but rather, they thus whispered in their damned spels; Rise vp Hell, that Englands Capitol, the Parlament house, where so many wholsome lawes haue beene concluded,
 might make a Feu de foy: my L^f Northhampto^s speech to Gamet. bone-fire, of Ioy and triumph for Traitors and Rebels to sport themselues withall. But farre is it from the sonnes of Iacob to digge such pits of mischiefe, to seeke for glorie in shame, merit in murder and villany, or heauen in hell. These were bloody Edomites, that cried of Ierusalem, Ps. 137. 7. downe with it; but they are the blessed race of Israel, that consult how to Amos 7. 2, 5. raise vp Iacob when he is little or low: and that doe Ps. 122. 7. pray for, and procure the peace of Ierusalem and the prosperitie of her wals and palaces.
And within this kalender of Iacobs sonnes, I doe not onely inrole the most magnificent founders, but also the Conditores, legislatores, liberatores, benefactores: Sr Fr. Eacons Essaies. makers of lawes, defenders of the faith; m-inteiners of vertue, and benefactors by any good meanes, to any good worke: nay euen fathers of children well
 disciplined; for as the wise man saith; Eccles. 40. 19. Children and the building of a citie, make a perpetuall Name: and indeed they are streames much gracing the fountaines whence, and comforting the city where they flow, if they be kept cleare and vncorrupted. Nor must I leaue out the most laborious Authors, and Collectors of the Solaque non norunt haec monumenta mori: Martial. lib. 10, longest lasting Monuments in bookes and necessary writings, then which, the world cannot shew morefruitfull benefits for all posteritie. But doe I speake onely of those that doe build and plant, alteri seculo; for the age to come? Doe I not also giue them their due honour, and the title of Benefactors, who are ready to helpe, and relieue the present wants of people in distresse, making themselues hands to the helpelesse, Iob 29. 15. eyes to the blinde; feete to the lame? or doe I thinke
 it onely charity to build Hospitals, or Religion to raise Temples? nay rather when necessitie requireth, it is charitie to cloth the naked liuing stones, to prouide for the true temples of God, to redeeme poore captiues, euen with the Ambros: de offic. Socrat. bist. eccl: lib. 7. c. 27. treasures of the Church. And further, I doe adde to this wel-deseruing number, not onely those that giue, but also those that take away; Such as Idem. lib. 5. c. 18. Theodosius, who partim dando, partim auferendo, partly by giuing benenefits, partly by Abridging many Abuses and Corruptions, was a benefactor to the Citie. To conclude I proclaime all those happie, that by their aboundance haue had opportunity and will to doe much good, or by their mediocritie haue had power to doe lesse good, yet some; or if some of their bare necessitie and extreme pouerty haue striued to doe much good, although
 it hath falne to little, yet I exempt them not. And here might I haue done with this obseruation of the founder, but that I perceaue some rubbes interrupting the passage of my speech and the charitie of the wel-disposed fit to bee remoued. The first is a doubt, that when men haue established any good thing for posteritie, to leaue behind them, least as Iacobs well, is now in the hands of wicked Samaritans, to whom he neuer intended it, so their benefits may serue in time for bad people, or els be Interuerted, misse-imploied, and wasted, contrarie to the meaning of the Donors. Indeed this disquieted Salomon, Eccles. 2. 19. that he should leaue his trauailes to the man that should be after him, not knowing whether he would bee a wise man or a foole; verse 21. nay homini otioso quaesita dimittit: a man leaues his
 gettings to a sluggard sometimes, to a foole, that hath nothing in his hand. But if this be vanitie to perplexe a mans selfe in his priuate substance for feare to leaue it to an vngracious heyre; how much more is it a folly in publike commodities to be ouercurious, in forethinking, who may in time inherit his fauours, or abuse them? It is such a thing, as Iacob could not preuent, nor Salomon with all his wisdome; nay the Lord himself, that foreseeth all changes, yet made the world, where wicked men and degenerates should dwel, and continueth his benefits of the Math. 5. sunne shining, and raineraining, vpon the righteous and vnrighteous. It is his perfection to bee good to all, both good and bad, to be rich and bountifull to them that misspend his fauors, as well as to others that vse them well. Let vs learne this perfection,
 and not be Gal. 6. 9. 10 wearie of well doing: for in due season we shall reape, if we faint not: while wee haue time let vs doe good to all men, but especially to them that are of the houshold of faith. whatsoeuer become of the gift, or the worke, the fruit shall remaine to further our Reckoning, if it be done with a godly purpose and for the glory of God.
But another doubt there is, that 2 Doubt. when such as the Samaritans, bad and superstitious people, haue beene once possessors of such wels and monuments, prouided by faithfull Patriarchs, like Iacob: how men Religious may vse them againe, seeing they were heathens, who vsually dedicated their wels to Gods and Goddesses. Howsoeuer this Well had bin abused, our blessed Sauiour (wee behold) sitteth by it, and asketh water at it. Now let mee bee bold before this high presence, (passing
 by the free vse of ciuill things graunted euen with Idolaters,) to goe further and suppose our Churches, Chappels, the tithes and maintenance of Religion, and the seruice of God, to be wels and fountaines, that were sometimes in the hands of Idolaters, polluted and defiled by their Corruptions. Is it not lawfull for vs to vse them in the seruice of God, vpon the Recouerie? Can we doubt this; seeing we vse the Augustin. ep. 154. same fountaines, the same aire, that hath beene polluted, with I dolatrous sacrifices, and Incense offered to Diuels. Yea seeing the Temples and other Commodities, ib. that haue beene prophaned by Idolatrie, may we imploy, not indeed to priuate vses, for couetousnesse, but unto a publike benefit, for ib. the honour of God euen as men, when they are conuerted from being sacrilegious and impious persons to the true
 Religion, are to imploie themselues and their members to serue the Lord: I ibid. speake out of Saint Austen. Saint Paule did eate and drinke and conuerse ibid. in Athens a Citie consecrated to Quia Ciuitas erat Minerua eiusih numini consecrata. Acts 17. 5. Minerua an heathnish Goddesse, and hee sailed in a Acts 28. 11. shippe hauing the badge of Castor and Pollux.
Our sauiour vouchsafed to frequent the Temple, after it had been prophaned, and that Temple which Herod had Iosepbus lib. 15. reedified for populer vaine glory; nether did he (that did al things well) forbeare to imploie the Iohn 2. 7. water pots of the Iewish and superstitious purification, in the work of his gracious miracle. This am I bould to speake, for their sakes, that are in no liking with aunciently built Churches, and make a maine point of their Religion, either not to enter into them, or not to call them by the former names of saints, Saint Peter, Saint
 Paul, Saint Alban; that first for distinction, the scripture vseth the names of Ac^s 28. 11. Castor and Poilux, false Gods without scruple: and the Churches of all ages, haue beene content in the translation of the words of the Lord in Iob. 38. Amos 5. 8. Giegor. Mag: in Job. 58. Iob, and in the Prophet Amos, to vse the heathenish appellations of the starres, Pleiades, Orion, Acturus, notwithstanding they had fabulous and poeticall Originals. So that, if the names were worse, then those of Saints and Martyrs, a well reformed Conscience, might vtter them for distinction sake without offence. But now seeing they are the Names of Saints and Martyrs, to whom although as to protectors and tutelar Gods, wee dedicate no Churches, nor offer supplication or seruice, yet for their vertues and victorious sufferings, we may loue them, rehearse their
 names with Reuerence, and imitate their faithfulnesse. It is not with vs as the Papists Bellar: de eccles. triumph. obiect, that with D. Reinald: de Ro: eccl. ldol: lib. 1. c. 8. @. 2. 3. Eustathius we detest all temples, and especially those that carrie the names of Martyrs, and like onely Conuenticles in priuate? or that with the Eunomians, we refuse to goe into the Churches intitled with the names of Apostles and Martyrs? This may be the fanaticall whispering of some wandring house-creeper, and the conceipt of some seduced separatist, but Wee, that is, Dauid our King, our preists and people, frequent those howses of praier, call them by their former names, enter into them willingly, hauing antiquity, and all reformed Churches for our precedents to do the like. For who knowes not that the Citie, and Vniuersitie of Geneua haue their cheif Church retaining the name of
 Saint Peter, one intituled Saint Magdalen, another Saint Geruase Vbispra. the Martyr, whither they vsually resort to Zanch: in 4. praec: to this purpose. holy exercises. Neither is it altogether vaine, that the holy Euangelist here in this place, calleth that same Iacobs well, which the Samaritans so named and termed before him, making no question but that Iacob had digged it, although the tradition came from the Samaritans. Nay our blessed Sauiour is not scrupulous to rest himselfe at this Well, or to graunt it for Iacobs, howsoeuer (which is for our example) he will not be drawne, by the Names and titles of Iacob, to Iohn 4. 22. approue of a counterfcit Religion, wherefore let vs leaue curiositie in such small matters, and conclude this point, first, with praise to the Lord that these wels, these Monuments and other benefits for the furtherance of
 Religion, sometimes in possession of Samaritans, and the superstitious, and by them corrupted and made vnholsome, are againe so cured and restored, that now we may draw and drinke our fill in them, euen of the pure Riuers of the waters of life. Secondly, if it should be proued, that any of these Monuments were founded and erected by the superstitious, yet then wee must acknowledge our selues, much bound to God, that wee may drinke of the Dent. 6. 11. wels wee digged not, dwel in houses that wee builded not, inioy these Churches, which wee prepared not, as Ludolph: Noah had the benefit of that Arke, which was framed by prophane shipwrights, and Sampson was refreshed with sweet hony out of the dead Lion, that liuing would haue killed him; So that we may say with Samson, Iudg. 14. 14. Out of the strong came sweet, and out of the
 deuowrer came meat.  But here mee thinks the Romish Samaritans interrupt vs, and first obiect, that our faith buildes no Churches, digges no such wels: but their Religion, their Pater noster (as they call it) founded all.  Secondly, they lay claime to our Churches, nay bragge that themselues are the Catholike Church, because of the Monuments and names of godly men, that were sometimes pillars of the Church.  To the first, whereas they say, we build no Churches, doe no such workes, but they haue beene all the doers, and are so still: I answere briefly that the Apostles and first Martyrs, who planted the Church, did build no materiall temples, and yet they are worthily stiled Au^entinus Religiosis simi mortales, most Religious men, none being comparable to them since. They as the former planters of the Gospell, edified
 and built vp the people of God, Ephes. 2. 20. as temples for the holy ghost to dwell in, vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Iesus being the head corner stone, and wanted peace, wealth, opportunitie, and the fauour of Princes to erect any Churches and houses of praier, either publike or costly.  Secondlie, more largely I answere, that when the Lord vouchsafed, to call Kings and Princes to the knowledge of the truth, then by their Authoritie, and out of their Aboundance, they in the profession of our Religion, of Aedes sacras, (sacred houses) erected Basilicas, Kinglike palaces, thereby the more to honour God with their substance, and prouide for the more conueniencie of holie Assemblies. Now these first honorable founders, were not of the Romish Religion, for they did not vse such Iewish
 and heathnish Ceremonies in their Euseb. hist. eccl. lib. 10. c. 3 Church-dedications, nor such Inuocation or adoration of Saints or Images, as the Romane Church hath since brought in. This plainly appeareth by the example of Constantine and by the best Antiquitie, who, with Saint Austen, speake thus like Protestants: Augustin: de Ciuit dei lib. 8 c. vlt. We ordaine no Churches, no Priesthoods, no rites nor sacrifices vnto Martyrs, we do not crie at the altars, O Peter, O Paul, O Cyprian, wee offer vnto thee our oblation: but at their Memorials we offer to God, who made them men, and Martyrs, giuing thanks for their victories, and incouraging our selues by calling vpon God, to the like Crownes of Martyrdome. And his is our Religion iust; for although we are content to preserue the memorie of Saints, where they haue suffered and are buried, yet it is not to call vpon them, but to remember
 their constancy to the praise of God, and imitate their vertues, as occasion is offered. In which sence wee are bold to preserue the Reuerent Remembrance in this place, of our prime-martyr Saint Alban, by the losse of whose life, the Gospell first made entrie into this lande: insomuch as I may call this place, the Ose: 2. 15. vallie of Achor, the doore of hope, and the first-fruits of England in suffering for the faith.
 Thirdlie wee answer that although wee did build no Churches now, (which is vntrue) yet is it no lesse honorable to bee restorers, then founders. Deucalion was thought to haue done as great an act, as Prometheus: Noah is as much reuowned as Adam; and it pleased the second Adam, to be a restorer of mankind, which is a greater title, then to bee the first Author, as Adam
 was. I am sure that the worke of our Redemption, excelleth our Creation, and therefore it is true, that we Plus debe^ pro me refecto quam facto: Barn: ^ract: de dilig deo. owe to the Lord more for our selues reformed, then first formed. losias was blessed for purging the Temple: Zorobabel for reedifying the same, as well as Salomon, who builded it. Other former Princes, and great Men, haue brought forth, as first Parents, these and such like Monuments, which in processe of time had more feeding then teaching, and therefore grew out of fashion: But it is the honor of our Religious Kings and Princes, as principally they are nurcing fathers and mothers of the Gospell, so to draw their breasts, and suckle these and such like Orphan-Churches, that by their Princely bounty, they may be necessary and accessorie helpes to Gods seruice. In naturall children the chiefe care is,
 or ought to be, of the soule, the next of the body: first nurture is to be respected, then Nature: and so in these Monuments, chiefly Religion is to be regarded, then the building: first must a Church be beautified in Barn: moribus, then in marruoribus, in manners, then in the marble, and other Ornaments. And this is the course of our Religious Princes, first to cleanse these houses of prayer, from Corruption, and then to raise them from their Ruines. I may speake sensiblie, and if it please God effectually, in respect of this place, this auncient, and now drooping Church, vnder whose roofe we notwithstanding are happily present before the Lord, and his annointed Iacob. Neuer did poore Orphan-Church, standing in such need of a royall nurcing father, more seasonably inioy the hopefull presence of so great a Monarch.
 And aboue all, this benefit shee doth with other her sister Churches alreadie enioy, and must euer, with all thankefulnesse acknowledge, that by her royall Iacobs meanes (next vnder God,) her children may dayly drinke of the water of life, sucke at the breasts of our sweet Sauiour here offered, and receaue the comforts of publike praier, of the Ministerie and Sacraments, being the most essentiall parts of a Church, and benefits, as much exceeding the most excellent building of lime and stone, as the pure spring water exceeds the workemanshippe about the well: and such as our forefathers would haue reioiced to enioy, in fields, in woods, m Cottages. But yet seeing this Monument, this building is now the place, the pallace, the temple, Genes 36. 22 Rehoboth, a large well of receipt, and roome enough, where
 where the seruants of God doe assemble for water of comfort, it pittieth them to see the worke of it so ruinous, the brinke so dangerous, the steening falne in, and a Monument, thus venerable, vpon the wast, so that all that passe by are ready to spoile her, both the Rich couetous, and the poore irreligious, both in desire sacrilegious: In regard whereof, sometimes her sonnes doe wish that shee were rather a Augustin. Zacheus, with a sound bodie, then Goliah, with this crazie, hectique Consumption: because her paralyticque members (as a great body vnsound) rather burthen, then beautifie; and yet the resection and cutting off, of an Integrall part, euen in the greatest body, is a maime and disfiguring, neither euer vsed, but as vltimum refugium, in diseases desperate. It is a spectacle of much remorse, to behold
 a noble personage, high-borne, so in distresle, that for want of friends and meanes to support her, shee is ready to fall, and lie on the ground, as subiect to beggerie, scorne and shame. Euen 2 King 9. 34. King Iehu, had commiseration in extremis vpon Iesabel, quia filia Regis, because shee was the daughter to a King, although a 1 King. 16. 31 daughter: to E^^^aal K. of the Zidomans. wicked daughter of a heathnish King. And may not I cal this Church, a Kings daughter, and in that respect looke for pittie, to whom M. Cambden: Off a a King Christian, gaue the first being, and other Egfrid: Elbelred. Henric. 1. manuscr. Regist. Kings after him, this co^spicuous Amplitude? Shee hath already met with Iehu, who hauing seuerely punished her for all the fornications and witchcraftes; the Idolatries and delusions of Monks and Fryars, wrought in her, could not chuse, but now, if he beheld it, remorse her humble estate, the rather, because
 shee is filia regis, and Basilica, a Kings daughter. But Iehu tooke pittie when it was too late, and when Iesabel was almost deuoured of the dogges: This Church is yet more happie, who though shee hath had many blowes, yet hauing not receaued her deathes wound, shee stands capable of the mercie and fauour of a peaceable Salomon, a blessed Iosias, a Kingly Iacob, to giue her life and health againe. And it is no ordinary helpe, nor vulgar hand, that can heale her sore, because, as shee was the daughter, and is the nurce-child of a King, so her disease is the Kings euill, and requires the speedie assistance of a most Catholike and Imperiall Phisition, to cure her wounds, or els his sacred Authority (if her estate bee found desperate) to cut of her mortified limmes, and binde vp the sounder parts for Gods seruice. Yet
 it is indeed the Recouerie of her pristinate health and soundnesse, that her sonnes on their knees desire: (which if it may not bee obtained) their last Refuge and next Petition must be (that which gracious Princes doe not loue to heare) Isai. 3. 5. Ruina haec sub manu tua: Let her fall be vnder the hand of highest Authoritie: being the mournefull note of people when they had no Respondebit dicens non sum medicus ib. King to helpe them.
But who am I, that I should enter into particulars, before my Lord the King? I confesse with St. Barnard, De consideras: lib. 2. Non est meae humilitatis dictare sic autsic faciendum: It stands not with the meanenesse of my place to prescribe this, or that to be done. Yet this let me be bold to speake, that the sunne giues comfort and lustre, where it shines: fountaines make barren grounds fruitfull, where they passe along: Our
 sweet Sauiour, both the Sunne of Righteousnesse, and the fountaine of truth, ment some good to the place and persons, when hee went thorough Samaria, and sate at Iacobs well: and who knowes, what our most Royall and Religious Iacob may intend for vs, seeing God hath giuen 1. King. 5. 4. rest on euerie side (as to Salomon when he built the Temple,) and there is neither aduersarie, nor euill to resist.
 But againe, me thinkes, I heare the Samaritans, (who like Sanballat and his Confedcrates despise our building,) mock at our hopes, as Idle and frustiate, because these are no daies, to build or repaire Churches, or doe such like works, as they say. In further answere to these deceitfull workers and talkers, let me be bold a little to boast our faith in this point, which hath not beene so Lame nor idle and vnfruitfull
 in the workes of Charitie and pietie, as they reproch vs. Let our chiefe Citie London speake to the praise of God, and the Iustifying of our faith by such workes: Nay let her onely showe, what M. D. Willet. three Hospitals of incomparable foundation and prouision for 1. Christs hospitall. friendlesse children, 2 St. Thomas hospitall. Impotent people, and 3 Bridewell. inor dinate walkers, shee enioieth by the happie Raigne of that truely vertuous King Ed: the sixt, of blessed memori^: besides many other prouisions daily increasing towards the comfort of prisoners, mainteinance of the poore, and ministerie. Let those two. glorious Eyes of our English body, the two fountains of Learning and Religion, Oxford and Cambridge, vtter their knowledge, what the light of the Gospell hath done for them, within the compasse of not many yeares. Our Mother
 Oxford might claime for the Gospell, the foundations, or the finishing or establishment of her See Crowly. Try and then trust. Christ-Church, her Trinity Colledge, and St. Iohns, as shee doth for her Iesus Colledge: But shee cannot but speake her Ioy for her Copious and excellent Librarie, her Diuinitie schoole so adorned, so augmented, her Waddam Colledge, newlie founded, richly prouided for, many faire Enlargements in the most Colledges, in buildings, Exhibitions, and domesticall Libraries, for the furtherance of the sonnes of the Prophets. Neither may I forget, the new life, which Oriall Colledge, when shee was almost at the last gaspe, and on the hazard, receaued by the royall Charter and Confirmation of our euer-blessed Iacob, at his first enterance. This and much more may Oxford speake to Gods glorie; and the other sister Cambridge
 speaketh as much in many points. Shee hath brought forth her Twinnes, her Emanuel and her Sidney Colledges. Shee may demonstrate to the honor of the Trinitie, many Cels conuerted into one glorious house of Learning and Religion, so beautified, and replenished, that it seemes to bee the Via lactea of that Vniuersitie, where there is a Concurrency of many starres, shining together as in the firmament. Neither may shee bee silent of her Saint Iohns, which daielie groweth from a fountaine to a flood, the head whereof not willing to bee knowne to the world, but the Aboundance is from God thorough the fruit of the Gospell, to the onely glorie of his name. But it is both hard, and beside my purpose to make an exact Catalogue of all those worthy Monuments, of the late foundations,
 increasings and Enlargements within those sacred Nurceries. And who can reckon vp the Almeshouses, hospitals, freeschooles, and other beneficiall and Charitable Prouisions for the people of God, and his seruice, through the whole Land, euen vnder the Gospell? I should forget my selfe, if I remembred not, that this place is not without a freeschoole, as a little spring, where youth may drinke in, the first licour of wholsomlearning, flowing from the bounty of a gracious Princesse, now with God, by the Mediation of that worthie Lord Keeper, Bacon; so much honored for wisdome and Religion. If I should be silent, the late Statute ann 7o Iacobi Re gis. statutes would tell you of that royall Iacobs Colledge, newly founded, and dailie increasing, for the furtherance of sacred studies, and deepeest learning. And the Christian world
 proclaimeth those worthy Monuments, partly written by an Apolog. pro Iuram: fidel. praesat. monitor. Imperiall hand, partly by Bishop Iewel. Winchester. Elie. D. Keinald: D. Whitac. D. Fulke. D. Abbot. D. Field. D. Moorton. D. Hacwill. my L. Cooke: many others. learned subiects, for the mainteinance of true Religion against falshood and Rebellion: I need not speak of them. The Northern borderes praise God for that Kingly worke, the Erection of their Church in Arthuret: The Church of Bath, which long stood naked and bare, is richlie cloathed by the bounty of a right L. B. of Bath and Wels. Reuerend and Religious Prelate. The Irish and Virginian Plantations can witnesse how willing our royall Iacob is to propagate the Gospell together with ciuilitie and trades: And daily beholding a gracious King so forward, and so many worthy subiects, stirred vp by his example; Quid non speremus? What good thing is there, but wee may expect? Wherefore our aduersaries cannot say, that
 our faith is altogether Idle, in rearing or repairing Monuments of this Nature.
 But yet againe let me be bold to retire, for some weakelings sake, who deeming the former founders and Erectors of Churches, so farre peerlesse, crie out with the Disciples of our Saviour, when they behold such Monuments as this: Behold what Marke 13. 1. goodly buildings of old! Be pleased therefore to take notice, what wee can say for this, not in enuie to our Auncients, but in loue to the truth. Our forefathers, Princes, and People, were long in gathering stones together, and now at one instant the Romish fauourites shewe vs great heapes piled vp, without mentioning with what leasure and distance of time they were gathered together: as though Rome had beene builded all in a day. This Church may
 seeme Eclesia mirandi operis. Beda. a wonderfull peece of worke to the beholders: yet when it shall be vnderstood, that it had many Kings, successiuely founders, many rich Contributors, manie Eldred, Eadmer, Poulus, Ricard. Ioannes de Cetta, Willm. Hugo, Michael, Thomas, Abbots. fat Abbots and Priors, Benefactors for manie yeeres, beside the ransacking of the olde Citie Veru^am, to aduance it, and that it was at the least fourescore yeeres before it was perfected, and then but of a rude bricke neither, and after againe the bricke about to be turned into marble, and Ioannes Stilbnach, prior. Manuscript. M^ Cox. so neuer finished neither (for pendent opera interrupta, the workemanship remaineth but abruptly still, as the pillars witnesse:) then is the wonder not so great, and we well perceaue, that superstition in the greatest heate had Sub Will. Ab. 22. siontale huius eccl. tediosam moram traxerat. tardiora molimina, slower progresses; longer trauaile, and not so quicke deliuerie as they would make vs belieue. But Date crescendi copiam: Let the
 Lord giue leaue, and peace to the Gospell, and prosperitie to our religious Princes, and then after such distance of time, let the Aduersaries call vs to a reckoning, what fruits our faith hath produced. Now be pleased to reme^ber then in briefe, and lay altogether: first that the primitiue Christians fou^ded no Churches, for want of meanes and opportunity, yet they did buiid vp the Church of God with their doctrine, with their liues, and blood, and so did our Religious Forefathers vnder persecution. Secondly that the first founders, who beganne to erect Churches, were of our faith, and not of the moderne Romish profession. Thirdly that it is as honorable, and often more necessary to repaire those Monuments, then to build them at the first. Fourthlie, that our faith obtaining freedome vnder religious Princes hath been Actiue and Aboundant in good works for necessarie purposes.
 Lastly, that those great Monuments which our Aduersaries boast of, had a longer time to their accomplishment, then they would haue vs imagine: And in regard of these premisses, those worke-vaunters haue no such great aduantage ouer our faith in founding and building, as they would make the world beleeue.
One thing more I obserued, which 2. Ob. is, that as the Romanists lay claim to our Churches, so they intitle themselues to the Catholike Church it selfe, pretending that they are vndoubted heires and successors of all Ancient founders. And as the Samaritans pleaded, that they were the true worshippers, and Iacobs children, because they had Iacobs Well, whereof he dranke; the mount where hee worshipped: so they haue the names of Peter and Paul, and the places, where perhaps they preached and sufered; they talke of the Apostles and
 Martyrs, of the Fathers and Councels, they ingrosse to the^selues the name Church and Catholike, yea they haue the Scriptures, as the Iewes had, in their bookes; or as the Iudges 16. Philistins had Samson, in captiuitie, fettered, shaued and blinded. But shall we beleeue that they are the only Catholikes and Children of the Apostles, for these probabilities and presumptions? Or that they are the onely spouse of Christ, because they shew the Mr. White, out of Jsidor: pref. sheathes, and Caskets where the Ornaments and Iewels of the husband once lay? Or because like the madde-man in Athenaeus, they take an Inuentory of all goods in the Church for their own; as he did in all ships that arriued there, are they the right owners? It is not sheepes clothing that transformes the wolfe, nor the Lions skinne that alters the Asses Nature. They are not therfore right Christians and good Catholikes, that boast of names and titles, Places and Remnants:
 no more then Dion. Nicaeus. Vibius Rufus was a good Orator for hauing Ciceroes wife: or a great Emperour for hauing Caesars saddle: or that foolish smatterer a Lucian. good Philosopher, who studied by Epictetus his Candlesticke: or Fox contra: Osor. Neanthus the Iangler, a good Musician, for carrying the harp of Orpheus. Nay the Samaritans seemed on a better grou^d in some things then the Romanists; for they indeed had Iacobs Well: but these obtrude vnto vs, Reliques of Christ, of the Apostles and Martyrs, which are but meere Impostures and for geries. Their vsurping Prelate must be Christs Vicar, Saint Peters successor, when he succeeds him, but as Mr. D. K. ex Nazianz: night doth the day, a tempest a calme, sickenes health: Yet his D. R. Conference. prerogatiue must be Peters, his dignity Peters, his patrimonie Peters, his robes and royalties Peters, his Ring Peters, his sea Peters, his keyes Peters, his pence Peters. And as the Samaritans said, Iacob gaue vs this
 Well: so they say, Christ or Peter or the Emperor gaue vs these wels, this honor, these crowns, these promotio^s. So poore Peter hath rich heyres: And this is the Gorgons head, which astonished the world a long time; 2. Tim. 3. 9. sed vltra a no^ proficient: They shal preuail nolo^ger, for their madnes shal be made manifest to all men.
But we leaue these seducing and seduced Romanists, to see their errors, if it please the Lord, and with the Samaritans to bee conuerted to the sound knowledge of Christ our Saviour. And I returne to our selues, to whom the Lord hath giuen now the possession of I acobs Wel, the vse of many temporal and spirituall benefits to further vs in his seruice, if we take our opportunitie. For first our God hath reuealed vnto vs that rocke and fountaine of our saluation Christ I esus, wherein are all our Ps. 87. 7 fresh springs of hope and Comfort, the knowledg of whom by the scriptures translated read, and preached, as
 by streams and Conduits, do continually Ps. 46. 4. glad and refresh the Citie of God. And to perpetuate these blessings, the Lord hath fauoted vs with a gracious King, whose hart is a Wel-spring of wisdome, Counsell and Iustice: And so blessed him while hee drinks the Water of his owne louely Cisterne, that thence issueth a happy Riuer of Royal Apparent succession, as from a blessed fountaine, which the Lord grant, may run on, in grace and glory, for the comfort of all true Christian hearts, to the end of the world. In regard of which inestimable fauours, let me be bold, without offe^ce to the royal patience of my Lord and King, to speake a few words, to al the worthy children and subiects of our Princely I acob, here assembled; and so I wil conclude. Seeing the Lord hath granted vs to reap the fruit of many fauours, sowed by former Benefactors of al sorts, and Isa. 66. 12. hath extended peace ouer vs as a flood, and the
 Gospell as a flowing streame: Seeing the true faith co^meth vnto vs not solitary and alone, but accompained with infinite blessings; so that we haue example and encouragement from the highest Authority to do good, and many opportunities to effect the same: let vs be ready to shew forth the inward fountaine of our faith, by the outward streams of our Loue. Especially do Yee, the most eminent in note, indeuor to do most good, whose priuate wels are answerable to your wils, and substance to your desire; Let some water of co^fort flow from you, to the Putei dum bauriuntur speciosiores suns. Basil. publike benefit of the Church and Commonwealth. They that would haue their wels to be wholsome, do draw them ofte^: and ye that would haue your riches blessed, must distribute them often. Thinke what Oceans of wealth run ouer the back-in weeds and shreds, and thorough the throat in puddle, and pamper; how much is wasted by many, in vaine
 pleasures, priuate buildings, fruitlesse exercises; by others in superstitious and Idolatrous Aduancements: and turne some of the streames of your fountaines at last, into the barren fields of the poore, and to the watering of the Sanctuarie. Passe not thorough the world as arrowes through the aire, and ships thorough the sea, leauing no mark nor trace behind you; vnlade the weight of your burdens, that your reckoning may be the lighter: Heere and euerie where are hauens, to ease your Iourney, and speed your arriuall towards heaue^. Let not Leah reproch Rachel for barrennesse, nor blinde superstition reprooue our Religion for lamenesse. Let vs trie it out with our Aduersaries by action, as well as by profession; Spectemur agendo. They wrought for their own sakes, in confidence of merit; Let vs worke for Gods sake in regard of duty. Can ye not build Churches? yet repaire the^.
 Can yee not preach the Gospell? yet further the Gospel. Can you not build Hospitals? Yet refresh the poore me^bers of Christ: when like their Master, they sit hungry, weary, and thirsty by your Wels. Trifle not as the woman of Samaria did, when Christ asked water; pretending Religion to saue you purses, as the Samaritan did to saue her Paines. In a word let vs be ready to doe good, to distribute without murmuring and reasonings and Lay up store and a good foundation for the time to come, that we may be the sons of lacob, Disciples of Christ Iesus, the fountaine of life, the giuer of liuing water; who with his aboundance vouchsafe to make our soules, like a well watered garde^, like a spring, whose waters faile not: and blesse our princely Iacob, going out and comming in, from this time forth for cuermore.
FINIS.


