


THE Flaming Bush.

EXOD. 3. VER. 2.
And the Angell of the Lord appeared vnto him in a ^lame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire and the bush was not consumed.

MOngst all the Volumes of the booke of God there is none repleate with matter of more admiration, exhortation, imitation of wonders,
 precepts, vertues, then the Pentateuch, or, 5. bookes of Moses. AsPsal. Dauid, my song shall be of mercy, and iudgement: heere mercy and iudgement are met together, truth and righteousnesse haue kissed each other. Iudgement, Adam sinnes, Adam sweates: Eue sins, Eue smarts: Serpent sinnes, Serpent creepes: Cain sins, Cain runnes: Noah sinnes, Noah shames: the world sinnes, the world swimmes: Sodom sinnes, Sodom burnes: Pharaoh sinnes, Pharaoh drownes: Chorah sinnes, Chorah sinkes: Semper certa venit vindicta, si sint dilecta nostra delicta. Mercy: The great Monarch of this great All, daigning to become all in all: a Taylour to Adam, a Saylour to Noah: a Pilot to Heber, a Car^uan to Abraham, a co^uoy to Isacke, a ladder to Iacob, a chariot to Ioseph, a mid-wife ^o Moses, a leaderPsal. to Israel: (oh thou that leadest Israel as a sheepe) she was the sheepe, hee the sheepheard that Israel mightPsal. sing with the singer of Israel.


My Sheepheard is the liuing Lord, Nothing therefore I need:
In pastures fayre with waters calme, He sets me for to feede.

Led them from Canaan where bread was wanting: Fed them in Egypt where food was abounding^ bred them in Goshen to numbers exceeding: till another King arose that knew nor Ioseph: that knew not the indulgence they had by Ioseph, but knew to increase the afflictions of Ioseph: it is rare to finde posterity heire of his fathers charity. Dolor and voluptasSeneca. inuicem cedunt; br^u^or voluptas: their Halcyon dayes are now at an end: mirth had presented the former Scene, now sorrow (...) in to act her part. Iealous was Pharaoh ofExod. 1. 10 their multiplying powers, therefore makes policy his pyouer to vndermine their strength. Come let vs worke wisely; as if Machia^^lismeExod. ^. 11. should be christened by the name of wisedome. Taske-masters are appointed
 ouer Israel.
They should not bee Israel in this their perigration, did they not wrestle with God in many an affliction. Pharaoh supposed, that continuall working would coole their desire, and power of begetting; as if, Sine Cerere, and Baccho frigat venus:Dum moritur viuit. Naz' ligabantur inclu debantur cedebantur torquebantur and multiplicantur. Aug. de ciu. dei. l. 22. Exod. 1. 15. but Gods vine is euer more fruitfull with bleeding palme, and Cammomill more fertile with treading. Then Shiprah, and Puah must be bloody Lucinas, to murther their males as soone as they are borne: but though Misraim be flesht in Cain-like cruelty, their feminine hearts are suppled with mercy.
Now the people must drowne whom the midwiues had spared,Exod. 1. 22. like bloody executors of their masters will; while the streames of Nilus are the infants Sepulchers. Nilus was made white with bodies, bare bodyes of Innocents drowned: Nilus was made to swell with teares, salt teares of mothers that mourned: Nilus was filled full of cryes
 of Fathers that lamented: Fathers, mothers, brothers, kinsfolks, sorrowing for their babes, and would not be comforted, and would not be comforted because they were not. In this persecution Moses was born;Exod 2. 2. the mother reioyces when a manchild is borne, but quickly this ioy was Eclipsed with mone: hee cannot abide in Egypt with safety, nor reside in Iochebeds arms with security, but must bee exposed to Neptunes mercy: where euery gust is like to ouerwhelme him, and euery billow like to swallow him. A cradle of bulrushes is the babi^boat, a bark ofExod. 2. 3. reedes the little ones ship, but God was the Pilot, Christ the mast, faith the anchor, loue the sayles, hope the tackling, confidence the decke, therfore hee could not but arriue at a happy port. Pharaohs daughter cameExod 2. 5. (...). foorth to wash her in the coole streames of Nilus to bath her, heard a cry, saw no creature, at last she beheld the precious casket, where beauty pleaded, and begd reliefe,
 whilst his mourneful Oratory pierc't her heart. Her heart was struck with gentle compassion, yet her toung could say t'is an Hebrews child: yet this Hebrewes childe must bee her sonne: he the sonne, shee the mother: onely there wanted a milkie nurse, and who so fit a nurse to suckle him, as she that felt such throwes to beare him? (when we doe seeme most deiected, the prouidence of God is most declared.) No doubt, but oft the Lady did visite him, as much reioycing when shee beheld him, nor Orphan-like did shee nourish him, but what court, or schoole could put into him, was duely administred. But who can wash the Ethiops skin? or who can hide the Leopards spots? or make him forget hee was an Hebrew? though nurture often alienate nature, as Lycurgus intimates in his Lacedemonian whelpes, here partus sequitur ventrem, insomuch as all the honours in Egypt could not weane Moses from calling his nurse mother:
 or winne him from willingly suffering with Israel. A good soule cannot but grieue with others, and haue a feeling Sympathie with its fellow members. He walkes forth and beholds their miseries, and as he well can; reuenges their iniuries. An Hebrew, and a Gypsye are at contention, hee rescues the Hebrew,Exod. 2. 12, 13. slayes the Egyptian. An Hebrew, and an Hebrew striue together, (domesticall broyles are fullest of dangers:) his courteous Rhetoricke can nothing win, behold an Egyptian in an Hebrewes skinne: a full vessell must needs vent, a great heart must needs speake, a turbulent stomacke cannot stay: wilt thou kill me as thou didst the Egyptian the other day? oh with what impatient passion14. doth a galled heart receiue admonition? Then did Moses flye into Midian:15: Caelum mutat, non mutat animum, change of soyle doth not change the soule, but a man that is good, in euery place will bee doing good: Quis enim celauerit ignem? If
 he cannot yet free the Israelites from Pharaoh, he will ayde the wrongedExod. 2. 17. daughters of Iethro: they attend their sheepe and come to water them, the ruder shepheards keepe the water from them: a currish mind and churlish disposition, hath no respect of sex or condition. Moses perceiues them the weaker vessells, therefore thrusts himselfe betwixt them and dangers, and by his vndaunted valour, and magnanimity, assures, and secures them from the Shepheards inhumanity. Their olde Father is quickly told it, and with hospitall welcome entertaines him for it: and being a great and wealthy peere admitsExod. 2. 21. him his seruant, adopts, makes him his sonne in law, and sends him abroad to follow his sheepe. Now he that in Egypt followed his book, in Midian betakes himselfe to his hooke. Moses his hooke, as Peters net, Pauls tent, and Iosephs rule may minister to vs this short instruction, that neither greatnesse norNote. goodnesse neede to bee ashamed of
 an honest vocation. Forty yeares in Egypt a Courtier, and forty yeares in Midian a Shepheard; a solitary life, yet he likes it, a melancholy calling, yet he continues it. He was not ignorant of Court-cares, that A^lae culmen sublime lubricum, hee that climbes the highest, falles the soonest, therefore a priuate, and retyred life in a higher degree doth more contentNote. him. Hee that hath true worth in himselfe, and outward, or inward familiarity with God, findes more pleasure in a Midian wildernes, then others delight in Princely Pallaces.
While innocent Moses followes, and tends his innocent lambs, God doth graciously appeare to him visibly; idle persons are not graced with visions: Idlenesse is a cushionNote. whereon Satan sits, where hee appeares, or rather suggests manifolde temptations. God had beene euer present with Moses, yet he had neuer seene him till now. When AdamGen 3. 8. did ill, hee would haue hid him in a Bush: when Moses did well, God
 is seene in a Bush. A great wonder, in a small matter: that a tender bush should burne with fire, was nothing marueilous, but that the fire should not burne the bush, was truely miraculous.
A true Embleme of the true Church, and of euery true member of the Church.

1 Tis like a Bush.
2 A burning bush.
3 Yet it is no combustible bush.

The Church of God is resembled to a Bush.

1. In stature. quantity.
2. In nature. quality.


The Bush is low: the Church is so


in others eyes.1 Stature In other eyes.
in it owne eyes.



The worldling brandes it with markes of basenesse: the Papist scornes it because of the smallnesse. In the worldlings eye, the Church is a bush: the bush is low; low, andWo^dling. contemptible: the Church is base,
 base and despicable. Tune credis Christo? credis crucifixo? Was the common quaere in Augustines time. What tu? Mecaenas atanis edite regibus? Thou hast beene of great report? thou who hast borne a goodly port? wilt thou be stigmarized with the name of Christ? the shame of(...) vita (...). (...). Christ? a new and wicked superstition. A Carpenters sonne, a carpenter himselfe, and ver dolorum, a man of sorrowes; that had not so much as a house to be borne in, but borrowed a stable: not a bed to be layd in but borrowed a manger: nor a pot to drink in, but borrowed a pitcher: nor an horse to ride on, but borrowed an Asse: nor a roome to eate in, but borrowed a parlour: nor a graue to be buryed in, but borrowed a Sepulcher: thy Gods debasement, will be thy disparagement: being an offence to the Iewes, madnesse to the Graecians, dotage vnto worldlings: a seditiousSerres pag. 652. Aug. Cos. lib. 11. vermine (saide the Duke of Guise) but (seditious Duke) good words we pray: Al^ud est ridere* aliud
 est videre, the naturall man sees not the things of God, and no maruell, for he sees naturally when the things of God must bee discerned spiritually. Therefore with HilaryHil* de T^^n. 5. we may say with hilaritie: Oh stulta mundi sapientia, Christi opprobrium, non sentiens esse Dei virtutem, and mundi stultitiam, non intelligens esse d^i sapientiam: oh vnwise wisedome of the worldly wise, not vnderstanding the opprobrie of the son to be the glory of the Father: nor that which is esteemd folly with men to be the inuincible prudence of God. Then let rides be changed to vides, then let vides be chang'd to fides, and faith will refell this preiudicate opinion, faith will repell this supercilious traduction, for faith will tell though Foras nigra, yet intus formosa: though foule without, yet faire within, a faire soule, though a foule skinne: the Kings daughter is allPsal. 45. glorious within, behold thou art faire my loue, behold thou art faire, Formosi pecoris custos, formosior ipse.Cant. ^. 1.


Christ is the Shepheard, and the Church his Flocke,
Most faire the Shepheard is, and fair^ the Flocke.

In the Papists eies, the sound Church^ Papi^^. is a bush, the bush is smal, and of no repute: our Church is vile, and of no esteeme. Theirs is a Ceder, ours a shrub* theirs a vine, and a pi^e, ours doth pine, and they repine. They haue antiquity, pleade visibilitie, vniuersalitie: wee are a company of few, obscure, contemptible people, lurking from time to time in shades and corners, knowne to few or none. Theirs hath had, and yet hath a fa^eFarther p^rs. 2. par^ of 3. (...)uey. Dr. Hill. ^ ^as. ^. B^^^^wood inq^i^y, cap. 14. greater sway in the world then any other euer had, or hath, how truely spoken let Brerewood iudge: the Christian part of the world (all professions and sects of that name put together) is as fiue: the M^^umetanes as sixe: the Idolaters as nineteene, beside that Heathenish tract of Terra incognita, so farre is that from
 truth which this our Islands naturall sonne, bragd in behalfe of his Romish spirituall mother.
But let them bragge: we know who bragges of the greatest number: Antichrist. I confesse indeedeR^u. 19. the number of ^he faithfull, is lesse far then the number of the faithlesse: there is more chaffe th^n corne in the Lords barne: more ^ares then wheat in the Lords field: for one No^h and his family (beeing but eight) the whole world drownd for their wickednesse: for one Lot and his houshold being but foure, all the cities of the plaine burnd for their vngodlinesse: for one thankefull Samaritan, nine vngratefull leapers: for oneIer. 3. 14. Reu. 3. 4. Elias 450. Pseudoprophets: but one of a city, and two of a ^ribe: a few names in Sardis. Christs sheepe are not many (Pauci, pauperes, pusilli,) for quanti^y; but more then all the rest for quality: hee esteemes more one of his mysticall members, then all the worlds vnhallowed members: yet is it not Gods family so
 small as to be measured by humane Geography: for it is no^ tyed to the seed^ of Iacob, as the Iewes would haue it, no^ to the s^yle of Aff^^^ as the Donatists would haue it, nor to the Sea of Rome, as Popelings would haue it: but God hath chosen for the children of Abraham all that haue the faith of Abraham, and for the tribes of Iacob all that worshipIoh. 4. 23* the God of Iacob in spirit and truth. Then doe not preoccupate the Lords seat, take not vpon thee to iudg thy brethren, neither doe thou despaire of thy selfe, but leaue iudgement to God, and looke for mercy of the Lord: his foundation is sure, and hath this seale, Dominus2 T^^* ^. 1^ nouit qui sunt sui, the Lord knoweth who are his: and we know that we are his, our Church is his. Though they boast of their numbers, des^ising our handfulls: saying, all the world is theirs, scarce any corner ours, and who can choose but suspectD* (...) a few? we dare, and can share equally with them, with our reformed
 Churches opposed to them, and if we could not, this rule of theirs will but teach vs to aduance Turcisme aboue Christianity, and Paganisme aboue Mahumetry, the Word aboue the Church, and Hell aboue Heauen: if any proofe can be drawne from altitude, you know all, the Ceder is vnfruitfullest: if any proofe can bee drawne from multitude, hee that knowes all sayes, the best are fewest. Thus our Church is a bush, low in2 in it own eyes. others eyes, so is it a bush, low in it owne eyes.
I am dust and ashes; I am a worme and no man: vermis sum, non v^r, I am of no estimation, reputation: I am a man of polluted lips: I am not worthie of the least of thy mercies; I am not worthy vnder whose roofe thou shouldst enter; I am not worthy to vnty the latchet of his shooe; I am not worthy to be called thy sonne; I am not worthy the name of an Apostle: humble, lowly, bushy-confessions, sifting themselues to a course braine, farre from that humerous, tumerous,
 Thrasonicall, Pharisaicall, Pyrgopolynice^icall Braggadochio.Aug. hmo. 30 de verb. dom secun. Luk. that shows not vulnera, but munera, not his wounds, but his worth; not his misery, but his brauery. I thanke God, I am not like other men, whileLuk. 18. 11 the silly bush, the poore Publican stands a farre off, as not daring to approach the Mount of Gods glory, casts downe his eyes, as acknowledging himselfe guilty, knocks vpon his brest, the closet of his impiety, and with a looke deiected, soule perplexed, voyce submitted, cryes out Domine miserere mei, Lord be mercifull to me, to me, I say not thy sonne, I13 haue so offended thee; to me, I say not thy seruant, I haue so displeased thee; to me, I say not thy friend, I haue so abused thee; to me, I say not thy creature, I haue so rebelled against thee, but Domine miserere mei peccat^ris! Oh Lord be mercifull to me a sinner: so good a follower of the Son of God, is the child of God:Ma^. 11. Aug. de te. Learne of me to be meeke* and humble, Cum humilitatis doctor^ non ^r^t superbia
 tua: Pride and peace cannot dwell together, but learne of me to be meeke and humble, and you shallMat. 11. 2^ finde rest to your Soules. Humility is the mother of tranquility: and quanto quis humilior, ta^to Christo similior: The more humble thou art, the more like ^hy Maister thou art: but Pride like Colloquintida will imbi^ter a whole pot-full of pottage.

Si tibi sit copi^ aut sapientia formaque d^tur,
Sola superbia, destr^et omnia, and comitetur.

Though beauty, wealth, and wisdome, all thou hast,
Pride will them all demollish quite at last.
Oh be not ignorant of what thou art, Dumus, Rubus, a Bush, a Shrub, nequam, nequicquam, nought, nor ought: Thy Body is (...), as much to say, as (...), thy Soules Sepulcher. Thy Soule is anima, as much to say as (...), a winde that passeth speedily, and that passeth the winde in
 vanity: Thou wast Corpus, a Body, but Cor is gone, thy heart lost, onelyPsal. pus remaines putrifaction, so vaine a thing is man: Then esto quodes, bee what thou art: Thou art low, bee lowly: As holinesse, so lowlinesse becomes the Saints.
Thus for stature, now for nature:2. Nature. Our Church is a Bush. Naturally and for the most part to a Bush belongs these parts, R^di^, Ramus. Cortex, folia, fructus. A Bush hath naturally a Roote: secondly a Body: thirdly Barke: fourthly Branches: fiftly Leaues: sixtly and fruit, so hathScaliger de Subtil. ex^. ^ 40. P. 2. the Church, onely heer's the difference, they haue their branches vpwards, wee our branches (legges and armes) downwards: wee inclosed in a skinne, they in a barke; they haue their mouth in the earth, wee ours towards Heauen, etc. Christ is the Root, the Root of Iesse, the RootRoote, Rom. 15. 12. Esa. 11. 1. Reu. 5. 5. Esa. 53. 2. Esa. 11. 10. of Dauid, called a Root in his Conception: a Root in his Passion: a Root in his Ascention: a Root in the generall Iudgments discussion. Now
 is the Axe layd to the roote of theMat. 7. tree: thou bear'st not the root but the roote thee: As the roote is to the Bush, so is Christ to the Church.

1. Fundamentum. Being a prop and stay to vphold it.
2. Alimentum. Bringing of sap and iuyee to nourish it.1 Founda.

No other foundation can any man lay than Iesus Christ, which is already layd: angular stone, immoueable rock, elect, and precious: There is none other named in heauen or earth, by whom to bee saued: though some think that Philosophers may be saued without him. But other rootes hathRome. Rome; thus they say: thus they pray, Papa Domine mei miserere; O Lord Pope in thee is my hope, haue mercy vpon mee: and qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nostri; as the Sicilians to Pope Martin the 4: thou that takestSerres Inuentory. away the sins of the world haue mercy vpon vs. To the Virgin:

Oh foelix Puerpera,
Nostrapians scelera;

Iure matris imperaDr. Hall.
Redemptori:
Oh happy mother of that sonne
That hath all our sinnes fordonne;
By a mothers right wee pray thee,
Bid our Redeemer to obey thee.

Further:Guili. Nenbrigens. ^ l. 2. cap. 16

Tuper Thomae sanguinem, quem pro Christo fudit;
Fac vt ego ascenderem vbi Christus sedit:
By the blood of St. Thomas which was shed on the ground;
Let me ascend thither where Thomas sits crownd. And,


Aqua benedicta,
Dele delicta:
By this water blest,
Bee thy sinnes releast; bee it life and health vnto thee.


Remission cold
Nere knowne of old.

The Guilt of sin put from thee: and infinite other: Rotren rootes, Egyptian
 reedes, waterlesse welles: of noe life, force, strength. Sunt infirma quaedam refugia, ad quae cum quis fugeritAug. in Ps. 45. magis infirmatur, quam confirmatur: they that trust to them are not onely deceaud in them, but weakned by them. But Christ is the roote of our saluation.

Pendimus a te
Tendimus ad te
Credimus in te:
non nisi per te optimeBoys. domine.


Wee depend on thee,
Wee belong to thee,
Wee beleeue in thee:
Lets bee saud by thee,
oh sweete Iesu.

Other Rootes hath the CarnallCarnal. men, and women; taking, making; staues, and staies; broken staues, rotten stayes: meere Quagmires to themselues. As the Courtier that builds his houses on the fauour of1. Courtier Princes, whose breath is, (and shalbe shortly) in their nosthrils: Trust them not, non est Salus in e^s; their is no health in them, no help in them: the Salue of their tongue like the Saliua
 thereof hath some venome in it.Psa. 146. Psa. 82. 6 Dixi Dii, I haue sayd you are Gods; but you shall all die, and die like men: for what are they, but as thou thy thy selfe? (...) soule and soyle, the one nothing but a puffe of wind; the other nothing but a pile of dust:Greg. Naz. Esa. 2. 22* Gen. 2. 7. both shall passe away, euen as the wind scatters the dust. And who would trust dust? it wil slip out of thy hand and deceaue thee; and more than so flie in thine eies and blind thee: viri magni sunt montes naufragosi, quo Nauem quisque cum impulerit soluitur:Aug. in Iohan. Tract. mightie men are mightie rocks, thy ship splits if thou launch towards them. The Lawyer: the root of whose tree is a mercenary Fee. Woe bee2 Lawyer. vnto you Scribes and Lawyers Tenures, Offices, Sutes, and Pleaes, Wars and Iarres; procure your ease: and how could you feed so fat without them? But, Nouerint vniuersi per presentes: bee it known vnto all men by these presents, that such siluer-Causidicists money-Spermologists, shall once plead hard at the barr of Gods iudgment,
 and shall not be hard: their Case shall bee ill like a Chancery-bill, pittifully complaining, not mercy obtayning, whilst Bribery is raigning.
The Vsurer: who growes on a3 Vsurer. Ba^ke; his mind is on his Mine, thats his Roote, and there hee rootes. But (...)* loue of money. 1. Tim. 6. 10 (...): Philargury is the roote of villany: Couetuousnes, fo^ntaine of wickednes. He sels the ayre, takes mony for time, contracts with Satan, giues his soul for surety, when hee puts out his mony, puts his hand to the bill, when he receaues the vse. But the Condition of this Obligacion is such, that ifLuk. 19. 8. hee doe not Zacchize (restore) presently (and heele bee hangd first) he, and his heires shal bee quite extinct.

De male quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres.
Three heires successiuely doe scarce inioy,
Ill wealth successiuely without annoy.Minister.

The Minister: whose Roote is in
 the Chancel not the Church: Tythes and glebes, commendams and qualifications; are that h^e growes vpon: Hara domestica, his owne Stie; not Arae Dominica, Gods house: not caring to, 1 Feed 2 feed 3 feed; either by his 1 teaching, 2 liuing, 3 releiuing: but Carking wholly to feed himselfe, shall I say wjth Ezechiell with a Barley-loafe? noe, with the Panada of finest Manchet, while the Temple of god remaines vnbuilt. O Prophet couet not profit; tis time, if euer, now to awake least like Ionas his Gourde, thy meanes slake, andIonah 4. 7. thy Superintendency another take.
Epicure, de grege porcus. That is a4 Epicure. louer of pleasure more than of God therefore pleasure, not god is his root,(...) he grows in the Celler vnder the tap, or else in some corner in a wantons lap: either carousing the three Outs; 1 wit out of the pate, 2 drinke out of the pot, 3 coyne out of the purse: or hazarding all at the three Innes, 1 ciuilitie in Bedlam, chastitie in a Bawdy-house,
 3 reuenues in the compter. Are not most of our Despots turnd Tospots? musicke for the eare: beautie for the eie: Pomanders for the nose: Banquets for the tooth: healths for the throte: (noe health for the body) Hell for the Soul. But
Oh bone Iesu, fons indificiens,Tu humana corda reficiens;Ad te curro te solum sitiens,Tu mihi domine solus suffici^ns:Oh sweete sauiour thou art our stayWhen these mundane props shall vanish away,Thou art that Roote that shall neuer decay.
As Christ is the fundament; so he2 Nourishment. giues aliment, iuyce, and nutriment, moysture and nourishment to the Bush, his Church. Radix est os ^t stomachus arboris; the roote is the mouth and stomacke of the tree: mouth to feed it, stomach to nourish it: giues sustentation, which breedes vegetation, and fructification; nor would it haue verdure, or greenish
 tincture, without this sappie moysture; but would bee leaueles, liueles, and fruitles. Euen so Christus est os et stomachus fidelis; Christ is the mouth and stomach of his Church; mouth for instruction, stomach for refection: manna of the soul to feed mans soul: bread of life to breed mans life, sowen in heauen; reapt in earth; in'd by Mary; thresht by the Pharisies; ground on the crosse, betweene two stones, beetweene two theeues; baked in the Sepulcher; distributed, in the Sacrament, where god doth impart to euery faithful branch its part: Sumit vnus sumunt mille, quantum isti tantum ille: whoeuer feedes on this refection, eates and drinkes his owne1 Cor. 11. saluation* my flesh is meat, my blood is drink; flesh and blood, meate and drink; meate indeed, drinke indeed:Psa. therefore as the Hart thirsteth for the riuers of water; so doth my hart thirst for this heauenly moysture.

Cuius guttulis abluuntur animae
Cuius riuulis dispelluntur maculae
Quem qui effugiunt moriu^tur viui

Quem qu^ sequ^^tur viu^nt ^orituri:

The Bush hath a bole, trunke, or2 Bodie. Rom. 12. Eph. 4. 4. body; so hath the Church: we are many members, yet but one body glued, and serued, and cemented together; with the morter of Vnitie plaster of Amitie, asphaltum of Vnanimitie; where the King is the head, Councell the eies, Iudges the eares, Lawes the teeth* Pastours the toung* good Houskeepers the stomache, Husbandmen the feet, Souldiors the hands; the Pope was the haire, the haire of the head aboue the crowne; till Harry the eight did shaue him downe. God grant his trentals still to bee excrements.
We are all baptized into one body.1 Cor. 12. Why doth then the Guelph and Gibbelin, why doth the red and whitros^ faction, or Papist, Hugonet, or Precisian, harrow and til the soyl of dissention? Vnum corpus, vnus a^^mus; one Bole, one Soul: but of this succinctly,1 Cor. 10^ 3 Barke. cause by others sufficiently.
The Bush hath a Barke, so the
 Church.
The Bark to the Bush is a beauty or ornament: 2 a couer or tegument: A good conuersation is such to the christian: this doth Corpus tegere, Cor protegere; deck the soul, protect the body and moues god to respect both. A fa^re Rinde argues a good mind; good Conuersation a signe of sanctification; as virtuous manners are precious treasures, commodious to vs and also to others, to vs ad iustificandum though not effectiuely: so we are iustified by Christ, not apprehensiuely, so wee are iustified by faith yet declaratiuely by iust and holy virtuous workes. So our Sauiour of himselfe, the workes that I haue d^^ beare witnesse what I am: to others ad aedificandum that others seeing our workes on earth, may glorifie our father which is in heuen. V^^^tur exemplis, man is led by practice, more than instruction, like pliable wax for anyS^neca Epist. lib. 1 Epist. 1. impression. But if you bee either male agentes doing wickedly, or nihil agentes lying idly, or aliud agentes vnbeseemingly,
 your Couer is gone, your honour's none, you are barkles Bushes, naked Forresters. Moreouer the Bush hath not onely a barke without, but also a little Filme within: so haue god^ Darlings, as faire outward parts, so good inward hearts, corporall vrbanity, and cordiall sinceritie, as knowing that, Sermo interpres cordis apud v^rum, cor interpres sermonis apud Deum; men iudge of our harts byPhilo-Iud. the outward countenance, but god of our works by the inward conscience: therefore as they hang out a bush, so they haue also Wine, lodginge for Christ as well as a signe.
As pargetted walles, so garnished chambers, and furnished closets, swept and washt, rubd and pared from dust, cobwebs, filth and rubbish; ab offensis le^ioribus smaler offences, and suauioribus sweeter concupiscences, and grau^oribus grosser vices: know you not that you are temples of the Holy Ghost? but the holy-ghost will not dwell in those temples, where En^y
 stands at the doore, Wrath leanes in the porch, drunkennes lyes on the ^^^ore, Gluttony sits at the table, Lechery keepes the bed, and Pride lookes out at the window.
Let vs now with Zacche get vp to4 Branches. the branches, that we may eie and espie our beloued Iesus. The bush hath aboundance of twigges, redundance of sprigges, sprouts, and shuts, boughes, and armes: so hath our slender tender Church: whereof some are temporall, some spirituall: the issue of the wombe, the issue of the word: nor without the former can wee haue the later: for no filij soeculi, no filij coeli, no generation, no regeneration: barrennesse was a curse among the Iewes, wee thinke it a crosse among vs Gentiles. Children are the first, the best blessing. Thus could* Iuno preach to Ae^lus.

Sunt mihi bis septemprestanti corpor^ nimphae:
Quarum, quae forma pulcherrima, D^^op^ian
Con^^bio iungam stabili, propriamque
 dicabo.
(Aeole) qua faciet pulchra te prole beatum.
Twice seauen beautious nimphes I haue in store,
Whereof the fairest I will giue to thee:
Instable wedlock which shall blesse thee more
With children, than great ^oue hath blessed mee,Psa. 128.

And thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. His wife shalbee like a fruitfull vine by the house sides: his children like Oliue branches round about his table: vt Angeli in circuitu throni dei, like a garland of angels round about gods throne: vt stellae in circuitu Poli Arctici, as a garland of stars round about the North-Pole. Alcibiades asked Socrates how hee could indure the chiding of his wife; Socrates ask'd Alcibiades how hee could indure the cackling of his hens, sayes the one pariunt pullos my hens hatch me chickens; but the other parit filios, my wife bearesPsal.
 me children. Happy he that hath hisPsal. quiuer full of them, he shall not be ashamed to speake with his enemie in the gate: they preserue our Species, and after a sort make vs immortall, by deriuing life from the roote to the branches, from the Father to the Son, from the Sonne to the sonnes sonne in longinquum, as Dauid speakes for many generations. But because many of these are not milde but wild, not fertile but stertile, not streight, but crooked branches, some like Cain butchering their brothers, some like Nero, murthering their mothers, some like Ammon defiling their sisters, and others like Ham, reuiling their Fathers, let vs cast our eyes a ventre ad verbum, from the issue of the wombe to the issue of the word. As many as are begotten by the word of God, are branches of the bush, members of the Church of God. God husbandeth, the Sacrament watereth, the Spirit refresheth, repentance moysteneth, the minister planteth, the word seedeth, and feedeth,
 and breedeth, then the Branch springeth.Ioh. 15 35.
O powerful Sperm able to make Foelix quake, the iaylor shake, of stony harts to rayse vp children to Abraha^, and metamorphize the most obdurate: Lyons into lambs, beares into kids, the couetous, as mercifull as Iob, and liberall as Zache: the timerous, as bold as Laurence, and couragious as the Martyrs: the luxurious, as chast as Ioseph, and continent as Iudeth, the blood-thirsty as tender-hearted as Zippora, and detesting blood as Iacob: finally, the vicious as penitent as Peter, and louing Christ as Mary: modo pateant aures, and sitiant sapientiam pectus: These are the branches of the true vine, (Ioh. 15.) King AbibeibaLanct. lib. 3. inst. 26. Pet Mart. Dec. lib. 3. had his pallace in a tree: I am sure Iehoua dwells in these Branches: for though the world be his consistory, and the Scripture his dying room, yet is euer the soule of the righteousHeb. 3. 6. Psal. 132. his Bedde-chamber. Wee are his house.


Where he sets his rest,
And builds his nest,
And thinkes it best, to tarry
If we to sinne
Our soule within
Doe not begin to marry.

But why doe I throstle so long in these branches? I must leaue themLeaues. and come to the leaues. The Bush hath them, the Church doth not want them. The leaues are part of that blessing which God doth impart, to such as are best, to such as are blest: He shall bee like a Iuniper, a Bush, a Palme, a Date, a tree, Datetree,Psal. 1. Palm-tree, planted by the water side: (his regeneration) which shall bring forth fruite in due season (his sanctification) whose leaues shall not fall (his continuation) he beginsTrem. in Psal. 1. well, goes on well, ends well, so all is well, Quid per folium nisi fidem and amorem? What other are these, not falling leaues, not falsing leaues, not fayling leaues, not fainting leaues, but faith and loue? Faith and loue are the louely leaues of this liuely
 Bush. Faith in the great little DiocesseFayth. of the soule (though loue be the Chancelour, memory the Register, conscience the Paritour, prayse the Choristour) is the Arch-bishop, Metropolitan, superintendent of all other graces. Fides est prima quae subiugat animam deo. Faith is that which (beingAug. animam deo. Faith is that which (being first, or best) tyes the soule first, and fast, to the first, and last, Alpha, and Omega, the Vne and Trine, Trine and Vne blessed God. Loue is the kernell in the Nut, the pearle in the Oyster, Dyamond in the ring, luster of the Sunne, chast Diana among her maydes: humility is her handmayde, charity her kitchin-mayde, chastity her chamber-mayde, and gracious sobrietie a mayd of honour. Oh you vestall nymphes; let not hautinesse wooe you, nor couetousnesse winne you, nor concupiscence wed you, nor surfetting beuomit you: Be wise virgins that your lampe may be loue, and oyle faith. If you haue faith, you cannot want loue, for one of these leaues buds from the other,
 loue from faith, righteousnesse from holinesse. Faith is fire; fire is operatiue: where there is fire, there will be heat, the greater fire, the greater heat, the lesser fire, the lesser heat: no fire, no heat, no heat, no fire: FidesLuther. Gal 5. 6. debet pinguescere operibus: Our fayth must worke by loue: if wee haue no loue, our fire is extinct, our candleIentile^^ out. Let it neuer bee sayd of vs (as one sometime of the Monkes of his time that their fasts were fat, and ptayers leane) our faith hot, our loue cold. Oh shame that the child of heauen should resemble hell: Hell hath fire, (Qui non credent, sentient) but that fire hath no light.
I doubt wee haue too many such fire-brands of hell, that haue a flashing fire of faith in their toung, but the fire of their faith, makes not their loue boyle, their light doth not shine out before men, leauelesse trees, empty clouds, waterlesse wells (like theMat. 5. 16. sumptuous Sumpter-mules of that vaine-glorious Cardinall) seeming without wondrous rich, but nothing
 within saue old shooes and bootes, stones and rubbish. Gods child is Gods Priest, therefore must beare on his breast not onely Vrim (Science) but Thummim too (conscience), cursed be those that like Adonibezecke want these thumbs: and in his skirts, not onely Bells (a sounding profession) but Pomegranates too (a sound deuotion) faith must haue a nature, as well as a name, otherwise it is fides nuda, fides nulla, a bare faith, a no faith, and wants leaues to couer it nakednesse. Once more! these leaues are physicall of condition: greene of complexion.
Phisical leaues: the leaues shal be forPhysicall. Ezech. 47. 12, 13. Reu. 2. 22. medcine: the leaues shall bee for the healing of nations: Faith, and loue the leaues of our Bush, heale, and helpe, cure, and recouer the Vertigo of drunkennesse, hecticke of lasciuiousnes, lethergie of idlenesse, wolfe of vsury, consumption of enuy, quotidian of blasphemie, with other the like spirituall diseases. Doe but plucke these leaues with the hand of deuotion,
 mixe them with the Syrrup of discretion, bruise them in the morter of a good conscience, and boyle them on the fire of true repentance, apply them to thy soule both ful and fasting, morning, noone, and euening, and thou shalt see a miracle; a dead man restored to life. Greene leaues: her leauesGreene. le^. 17. 8. Psal. 1. 5. shall be green both summer and winter (i. e.) in the tempe of prosperitie, and tempest of aduersitie: alwayes greene, the leaues shall not wither, the frost shall not nip them, nor the ayre blast them, nor the wind scatter them: Faith and loue on the altar ofIoh. 5. 24. the heart, are like fire on the altar, not to goe out, or depart like the stone in Plinie, which being once made not, could neuer be cold.
I confesse indeed, they may sometime bee seene in the Orient in their full heat, and feruor, somtime in the occident in the declining of their luster, but men, Angels, diuells, can neuer extinguish them: for hee that beleeueth is passed already from death to life: and he that loueth, neuer faileth,1. Cor. 13. 8.
 or falleth from God, but is so hotte, much water cannot quench it, Nec immergent nubes, neither can theCant. 8. 7. cloudes drowne it. The Cardinall otherwise: that a man may make shipwrackeBel. de iust. lib. 3. 14. both of faith and loue, but I haue neither faith to beleeue him, nor loue to like him, nor enuy him his red hat with this label, this bable: for whom God loueth, hee euer loueth; neither can any one snatch them out of the hand of Christ.
He that is elect, and whose faith worketh by loue, eyther neuer falleth,Aug. de Cor and Gra. c. 8. or if he fall, is raysed and reuiued before this life be ended.
If your leaues be true, they can neuer wither, if wither away, they were neuer true: then let your faith, and loue haue a continuall spring, that you may bud now, and flourish alwayes: bee not Gods prentises a while, and the diuels iourney-men after, God will scorne the blew bottome, if Satan sup the creame. Forget not Ephesus, remember you forsake
 not your first faith, first loue: hold on, hold out, Vsque ad extremum vitae terminum, to the December of your dayes, till your spirits ascend to heauen, to him that gaue them, your bodies descend to the earth whereof he made them, your carkasses transcend on foure mens shoulders to Golgotha the place of dead-mens skulls.
Thus, and this for the Root, Body,Fruites. Barke, Branch, and leaues: while I shake the fruites, prepare the basket of attention to gather them: the mouth of meditation to chew them: and the stomacke of obedience to digest them. The myrtle is a little bush,In Elide* but it hath many berries: Pausanius makes it an Embleme of one of the graces. The Church is this myrtle, fruitfull, and fertile, and like Theophrastus his tree, euery child of God is fructiferous: he is that true tree ofReu. 22. 2. life which bare twelue manner of fruits, and yeelds her fruite euery moneth: These twelue fruites are twelue good workes, sixe for the body,
 and sixe for the soule: you may wedde them together in that old^ distich.

Visito, poto, cibo, recoligo, vestio, condo.
Instrue, castiga, remitte, solare, fer, ora.

To visite the sicke, is a wholesome1. Visito. fruite, Religio munda non mundi: it is pure religion and vndefiled to visiteIam. 1. vlt. the fatherlesse and widdowes in their affliction. Bee not slow to visite theEccl. 7. 35. sicke, for this shall make thee beloued. Christ takes this office as done to himselfe, When I was sicke, and inMat. 25. prison ye visited me: therefore let euery one visit: The King his Subiects, the realme is sicke, almost sicke to death: from the shoulders to the sole, many infirmities.
1. The shoulders (the Nobles) in many places are sicke of phlegmons, and tumours: either attending in Court (but what sayes the Prouerbe? Exeat Aula qui vult esse pius) or ruffling in citty, while their Emissaries (Bayliues) are rifling the Countrey:
 visiting not the whole, the sicke, but the sicke the whole to make them sicke.
There was once but one racke, and that in the Towre for Traytors, circumcelions, and malefactors: now wee haue in euery hamlet too many for honest Tenants, husbandmen, and farmers: enhaunsing their fines finem facere, to vndoe them, improouing their rents, to rent their estates, and impouerish them, or inclosing their Commons, that their Oues and Boues, and caetera peccora campi, cannot peepe out of doores for feare of a trespasse, so hedging God out, and fencing the diuell in (here a bush, and there a thiefe) that God might iustly send some hunting Nimrod to trample downe their quicksets. The feet (the Commonaltie) are sore pained with botches, and vlcers, as Informers that eate vp Gods people, as if they were bread: Forestallers, that scarce suffer Gods people to haue any bread, vnlesse they will buy it at their price, or can doe as the diuell
 counceld Christ, turne stones into bread: Scriueners that hale men to the Counter with parchment halters: Brokers that deale with old garments as the most with voyd offices. Who will giue most? without a pawne, a man shall sooner borrow their conscience, then their money: Breakers that gallop they care not in whose debt, then play at most in hiddles till they trot out on the backe of a protection, or skip vp into the saddle of a reference: while the poore of the land are bridled, and sadled, and ridden, and spurred, expecting the supreame power to visit them.
The Iudge his Circuit: Iustice (like2 that traueller twixt Iericho and Ierusalem) is falne amongst theeues. Couetousnesse that old theefe hath put out her eyes, mercenary Lawyers haue deflowred her, Bribery hath cut out her tong, countenance in Court hath deaft her, Partialitie hath robd her of her sword, willfull conniuence hath broken her ballance, and a swarme of perfidious bayliues
 are ready to cut her throat: helpe sage Senators, and visit this desolate widow, doe right, be expedite whilePsal. 82. 3. you haue light: be not Iudices, quasi ius dicentes, nor legis-latores quasi legis latrones, but doers, rather then speakers, treaders, rather then pleaders of the law.
Why should great theeues hang vp little ones? or Saul spare Agag for pretexts? or Vlisses swarue from Telemachus in the furrow? take heed, perhaps some seuere Cambyses shall make cushions of your skinnes for your successors: Let not poore supplyants both pay, and pray, and stay, and in the end goe empty away. Euery vniust Demurr anagramatized is murder.
The Bp. his Diocesse: the plague3 of Egypt is lightamongst vs; and many, too many are sicke of the scab. Religion though not deceased is sore diseased, while truth keepes her chamber with a scratched face.
Atheists would stifle her: while walking Nebuchadnezzar-like vpon
 the turrets of nature, and battlements of reason, they breath forth blasphemie against God, and infamy against man: is not this great Babel, which I haue built? Is not that which weeD^n. 4. 27. doe, done by natures power? haue not we wit? haue not we will? haue not wee reason? haue not we skill? thinking to be good, when indeede they are ill: disarming themselues while they make flesh their arme, reiecting, neglecting the power of God: but when his name is mentioned Adder-like, they clap one eare to the ground, while with their tayle they stop the other: wolfe-like they barke against the resplendent moone: Owle-like they fly the light at noon: Asse-like they bray against the thunder, and Viper-like gnaw out the bowels of their mother, saying with thePsal. 14. 1. foole there is no God: yet science in the most, conscience in the rest, notions in the soule, motions of the heauens, ptoclaime to his face that his toung is a lyer.
Papists would smoother her: loading
 the Church with such a multitude of traditions, that groaning vnder the burthen, shee is fal^e into sweat.
Pope Zachary excommunicated one Virgill a Bishop for confessing the Antipodes: and Popery would exterminate our Virgin truth for suppressing their ceremonies (the want whereof is the best company: ceremonia a care^do) O Lord send this curst cow but short hornes, else truth had need to looke to her essence, for shee will bee in danger to loose her existence. If Father Sweet be her Physitian, he will teach her speake Spanish, while the purchase of Christ shall bee fed with a halfe Sacrament, a wafer-cake, and now and then, a draught of the whores holy-waterbottle: Transubstantiation of the bread, iustification by workes, inuocation of Saints, adoration of Images, peregrinations to Loretto, Tridentall decrees, Remish glosses, Romish asses, knauish Seminaries, and a myriad of other their Babylonish
 opinions.
Seperatists would strangle her, whilst with the sheeres of shamelesse dissention, they so cut and diuide the coat of Christ Iesus, that Gath and Askalon may iustly laugh at vs; wandring as much on the right hand, as Antichrists disciples on the left: for whereas they would ouerpresse vs with too many, these will not admit vs any ceremonies, but like the naked Adamites would haue a bare Church without the apparrell of all order.
Alphonsus the tenth of Spayne, sayd blasphemously, Si in principio mundi ipse deo adfuisset, multa melius, ordinatiusque condenda fuisse, that ifLipsig. God in the beginning had chosen him for a Councellour, many things should haue been ordered better, and with lesse confusion; and if these men had as much power in their hands, as slander in their tongues, and faction in their breasts, many things in our Church gouernment should bee otherwise then they are, for* Quod volumus sanctum est, is as truely conceited
 by them, as it was by the Donatists: Bishops? Downe with them, down with them euen to the ground, best let euery priuate minister bee a superintendent: the surplice as the whores smocke torne in pieces: the ring put in the beares s^out: and for the cap, what should they doe with any, but a cap of maintenance: stinted prayers (saith one of them) are stinking prayers: and God (saith an other) is like a man that loues pottagePow. Brow. well, but as man may bee glutted with one broath often vsed, so will God with one prayer often said: yet these are the men, that make the silly Plebeians beleeue they know more (like Marcian and Montanus) then euer Christ or his Apostles; when like the Lesbian Masons, they rather frame the square of the Scriptures to their braine-sicke positions, then bow their positions to the noterring Scriptures. Therefore it is no wonder, if in stead of the trees dauncing, the dogges fall a barking, while such vnskilfull Neanth^, handle Orpheus
 his harpe. Helpe soueraigne iudge. Bp. visite these distressed, oppressed may dens, charity, iustice, truth, else God will visite for these things. But who am I that Phormi^-like I should presume to read any lectures of Chiualry to Hannibal.
Let each man visit his neighbour, brother, sister, friend, enimy, in sicknes, and in prison, in distresse and misery: The day-starre from on high hath visited vs, and wee must visite one another: not as Henry the fifth did his father to snatch away his crowne, nor as many amongst vs to catch at the sicke mans crownes (preferring one Testament of a rich man, before both the Testaments of God) but as the virgin (blessed for euer) did visit hercozen Elizabeth, she carryed Christ in her wombe, wee must carry Christ, as in our hearts, so in our tongues to minister (as what worldly thing soeuer is wanting) so some words of comfort to diseased Patients, that their hearts like Iohn Baptist may leape and spring within
 them.

Tis pure religion vndefilde,
To visit Gods distressed child.

To quench the thirsty is a moystPoto. 2. Psal. fruite: the thirsty ground cries for water, the thirsty stomacke cals for moysture: God giues the one, giueRom. 12. 2* we the other. Tis the Apostles mandat, if thy enemy thirst giue him drinke (how much more thy friend?) he that requires it will one day requite it: thus sayth the Lord, he that giues not a gallon, but a cruse, not a pottle, but a pot, not a but, but a cup, but a sup, not of Nectar, but of water, be it cold water, to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Non perdet mercedem, shall not loose his reward. But least I loose my selfe in this buttery, or teach you to wring at a wrong spigget, learn in briefe whose thirst to quench. Who is drier then the drunkard? Tis the ^ap-house catch; Drinke will make a man drunke, and drunke will make a man dry: Quo plus sunt pot^, plus sitiuntur aquae, the more drinke they haue, the more drinke they craue: though with
 Maximine they drinke an Amphora a day (almost sixe gallons) yet by noIul. capit. Herod. meanes they will leaue their reckning pot, but euer they cry one tooth is dry. Shall we quench this thirst? No, vnlesse we will quench it in them, as the Indians did in the Spaniards: they with boyling gold (eate gold Christian)Oliu. de Noort. Benz. lib. 1. cap. 23. Luk. 16. 25. scalding broth were too coole for these hot throats.
Be as inexorable to them, as Abraham was to Diues, and wet not1. the tippe of thy finger to coole their2. tong, much lesse to augment or prouoke3. their thirst, least of all to make thy selfe merry. Woe vnto him that giues his neighbour drinke, that puts his bottle vnto him, and makes him drunk, he may drinke too, but shamefullAbbacu. 2. 15, 16. spewing shall bee on his glory: But broach thy beere to such as indigence inforceth to aske. Dapotum ouibus, water these sheepe, bee it atGen. 29 7. the well-head, and at the bleating of such cattle let the rock of your heart gush out streames of pitty.


Let not your fosset once be dry
To such as want compells to cry.

To feede the hungry is a full fruit,3. Cib^. and full of this fruit must bee eueryRom. 12. 20 Deut 11. 17 Luk. 19. 8. Ioh. 12. 3. 1. Sam 25. 18. Eccl. 11. 1. branch. If thy enemy hunger, feede him: shut not thy hand from thy poore brother: but make a diuident of thy goods with Zache, an vnguent of thy oyle with Mary, a banquet of thy bread with Abiga^l. Cast thy bread on the face of the waters, to those whose face is wet with teares, moyst with waters. The Hebrew is Lachem, which is all sort of fruite as well as bread: were it bread alone, then bread is Panis and P^nis is P^n, and Pan is all, meat, and drinke, and welcome withall, else it is as good not to giue at all. The Scripture dothWay. giue certaine cautions to direct our giuing. Est modus in dando, quid our,Quid. cui, quomod^, quando. What must we giue? that which is ours; honour thePro. 3 9. Lord with thy owne substance, and feede not the poore at anothers dore? for why shouldest thou be free on an others trencher. The diuell would
 giue all the world to our Sauior, (a liberall almes but out of Gods Exchequour) and Alexander the sixt America^n. domin. 1493. to Spaine, (a bountious Larges, but of the Indians freehold) and many a gentleman keepes a good house, when worse then a Iew hee crucifies his tenants: for feeding at his wicket some poore that hunger, other poore are inforced to furnish his dresser: say (gentle prouerbe) whether this bee not to rob Peter to pay Paul.
Why must wee giue? good reason: for as 1. God commands it, loueCur. the stranger: the poore are strangers,Leu. 19. 34. vsed strangely, but then beloued, when releeued: and 2. Christ demands it, Date Eleemosynam: he thatL^k. 11. 41. giues you all requires your Almes: and 3. the spirit commends it: thePhil. 4. 17. poore to be fed, relieued, and eased, is an holy sacrifice wherewith God is pleased: so 4. this the means to make you rich, the RR. say, tith and be rich, God sayth, giue, and be rich; a speciall argument, for shew mee that man that would not be rich, Et eris mihi
 magnus Apollo, hath not the noyse of earthly profit drowned the voyce of the heauently Prophet? each man almost imitates Ahab, lyes on his1 Kin. 21. 4. bed, turnes away his head, and will eate no bread.

Ne^ther can sleepie Morpheus close his eyes,
Least Naboth fall, that hee, or his may rise.

Yee Vineyard-mongers, come, and behold the ladder, Iacobs ladder, heauenly stayres, stayres to heauen, charity! now in time, get vp and climbe if you would bee wealthy: for he that giues to the poore, shall neuer be poore, hee that giues to the poore shall haue greater store, like that cruse of Oyle shall be more and more. Date and dabitur, and caput coronabitur, giue a crosse, get a crowne,Pro. 19. 17. a purse here, a kingdome after, Qui miseretur, proximo foe^eratur domino: if you pitty the indigent, you lend to the omnipotent, and he becomes, as the poores surety, so your paymaster: Non ad triplas, imo adce^tuplas vsures.

To whom must wee giue? feedeCui. not the Spaniel, I meane the fawning Sycophant, that (as one told QueeneS. W. R. Eliz.) will neuer cease begging, while any continues giuing: nor the grayhound, the ryotous Prodigall, who will be so much the duller, by how much the fuller: nor the maistiue, the gullet-theefe, who at the end of the tearm will be ready to recatechise thy purse for an other booty: nor the Curr^, the bawling slanderer, the hooke for him is the fitest morsell: nor any other of the Diuells whelps, that are sick of that Canina appetentia, the greedy worme, Epicure, gluttons, belly-gods, whose onely study is to reade Apicius his lectures of the art of Munchery: no, no, giue not the childrens bread to these dogges: but when thou makest a feast, let the poore be thy guest: yet not Popish pouerty that is willfullLuk. 14. 13. iniquity: nor diuelish pouerty growing from the diuells bones, and books, dice, and cards, wine, and women, and such like husbandry: but inuite
 to thy table such as are Gods poore, whom the hand of the Lord hath brought to necessity, onely must these bee the obiect of our almes, while godly discretion is steward of our kitchin. Tribue illis diuitias tuas non qui phasidem auem, sed siliginis panem comedunt, qui famem expellant non qui luxuriam augeant,
How must we giue? let the Apostle4. Quomodo. 2. Cor. 9. 7. direct. The Lord loueth a cheerfull giuer, (viz,) a giuer with a cheerfull eye, no supercilious lowerer: 2. a cheerefull tongue, no sesquipedalious brawler: 3. a cheerefull hand, no obnoxious retarder: to this end the oyle of our charity must bee compounded rightly. Shall I play the Druggist? God commanded Moses to put into the holy oyle certaine spices: our almes must admit ofExod. 30. 23, 24. the like mixture. Myrrhe, a precious liquor, that distills from the tree without cutting or incision: so must charity from vs without constraint or compulsion. Gods Almoner must not bee drawne like a Bare to the
 stake, a free-will offering, (be it but of some offall) is very pleasing. 2. Cinamon: which is hot in the mouth and stomacke too, so must we neyther be stone-cold with Na^al, nor luke-warme with Laodicea, but boiling hotte with Iohn Baptist of Constantinople, whose dayly practise was to feede, and releeue the poore himselfe. 3. Cassia, as sweete as the other, but a low shrub: the true Embleme of humility: giue therefore, but not vaine-gloriously. Let not one hand know what the other handMat. 6. 3. doth doe: and giue not to men, to be seene of men, to be praysed of men, for why shouldest thou trumpet out thine owne fame: if thou loue ostentation, God will vse detestation, and thy soule finde desolation. 4. Callamus: an odoriferous powder, but of a fragill reede: weake man, silly man, sinfull man, no way meritorious. Then giue vpon earth, but think not thereby to purchase heauen, for when you haue giuen, when you haue done all that you haue, all that you can,
 you cannot but confesse you are vnprofitable seruants. Therefore Saint Bernard, Periculosa domus eorum quiBer. in Psal. qui habitat Se^. 1. meritis suis sperant: dangerous is their house that thinke to merit saluation by keeping of house, dangerous because ruinous. But least I seeme tedious, let vs consider the time.
When must we giue? To day if you will heare his voyce, harden not yourQuando. 5. Psal. hearts, haue not hard hearts, be not hard-hearted. While you are aliue, see you relieue and looke that you giue while you liue, while wee haue time let vs doe good vnto all. OurGal. 6. Sauiours action, must be our imitation, I must worke the workes of him that sent me while it is called to day,Ioh. 9. 4. for the night commeth (death commeth) when no man can worke. The posthume-workes of many (making legacies of their wealth when they cannot keep it, and feeding the poore with a mould-meat at their doore) though it may profit the liuing, yet cannot helpe the dead; then benefiteEccl. 14. 13 thy friend before thine end, and carry
 not the candle, behind thy backe.

With what, and why, whom, how, and when,
Learne you to feede the sonnes of men.

To harbour the stranger, is a Lot-like-fruite:4. Re^olligo. two, or three Angels may beare him witnesse. All Sodome beside could not shew such an Apple, no not before it was watred with brimstone, much lesse since beeing mare amarum and mare mortuum, aIoseph. deb. Iud. l. 5. c. 5. Corn. ^aci^us, hist. li. 5. S^rab. li. 16. Plin. l. 5. c. 16. Iob 31. 32. bitter sea, a dead sea, neyther giuing harbour to a bird, nor house-roome to a fish, nor welcome to any thing else that hath life: inhospitable churle, no such churle Iob; the stranger did not lodge in the streetes, but I opened my doore to the traueller: an open heart hath an open doore, and an open mouth too, to language foorth a courteous inuitation, as come in thou blessed of the Lord, why standest thou without. The fruite of thisGen. 24. 33 fruit is sweet, and odoriferous, for hereby as 1. man is eased: what better ease to a deuious traueller, then a
 bountious host, or a knight hospitalar? Thus was the Thisbite, eased by2 Kin. 4* 10 the Shunamite; so God, 2. is pleased: he that sheets a bed for the members, layes a pillow for the head, and he that lodgeth a Christian, entertaineth Christ: thus Christ. He that receiueth you (so pleasing is hospitality that) he receiueth an Angell? yeaHeb. 13. 2. Aug. contra 5. hereses. me. Discite Christiani, non indiscrete exhibere hospitia, ne forte cui domum clauseritis, ips^ sit Christus: open the doore oh man with discretion, least thou exclude Christ, while thou excludest a Christian. 3. Wealth increased.Pro. 11. 24. ^ Kin. 17. 14 There is that scattereth, and more increaseth: see the Sareptans barrell, the more is taken out, the more is put in. Poore Baucis inricht for harbouring Iupiter: Delos made firme land for entertaining Lato^a: and Obed*2 Sam. 6. 11 Edome blessed for his guest the arke: Societ^te hospitis benefit hospiti,Gen. 39. 3. as Iosephs presence prospered P^tiphars substance: and hee that receiu^th a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall be rewarded with profit:
 4. Heauen possessed: when I was a stranger, you receiued mee: what followes? therefore come you blessedMat. 25. of my Father, inherite the kingdome prepared for you. Saint Augustine saith as much of Lot, TemporaleCont. 5. h^r ^uasit incend^um, aeternum consequutus est praemium: the Angels were welcome to his house, therefore (beside temporall fauour) was hee welcome to Gods house. But how are our Hospitalar knights chased from Rhodes? exil^d their aboades by that Ottoman horse? The diuell that great Turke hath so lockt vp the gates of gracious Hospitality, that Mahometan-like wee preferre dogges beforeM^nster. ^os* lib. 4. Pinner. re. camb. men: and Cambaian-like haue hospitalls for hawkes, when the feete of Christ must lodge in a barne, perhaps not so warme: if our face be toward Ierusalem, wee may trauell through Samaria, and no man inuite vs, nor shall we drinke at Iacobs well, vnlesse some woman, some weaker vessell of the poorer ranke, (for they that worst may must carry the
 candle, and they that haue most, will giue least) doe happe to giue it vs: though Peter bids vs bee harberous1 Pet. 4. 8. one to another without grudging.

Porter set open euery gate,
That Christ may enter in thereat.

To cloath the naked, is a warme5. V^stio. fruite. Begin at the beginning; itGen. 3. 21. grew in Paradise: in the third of Gen. God had his wardrope, whence Adam and Eue bare Adam and Eue, had all their accoutrement, skinnes of beasts, (for their figge-leaues were not worth a figge) to couer their nakednesse.
And as he our Progenitors, so we our naked neighbours. Tis the precept of Christ, he that hath two coats, let him giue vnto him that hath none, giue him one. The Communion of Saints, fruit of our faith, part of our Creede. The practise of Iob, if I haueIob 31. 19, 20. 22. seene any perish for want of clothing, or any poore without couering, if his loynes haue not blessed me, and if he were not warnd with the fleece of my sheepe, then let mine arme fall from
 my shoulder-blade. Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oues, Iob's sheepe* cloathed him, and he cloathed Gods sheepe.
But now are our Cloathiers like our inclosers all for themselues, alwayes contending who shall bee finest, I say not in a woollen liuery (vnlesse some Iason array them in a golden fleece) but in the Argonautstuffe of D'dutramer brauery. I haue read of a Rabbin that aduiseth husbands to cloath themselues beneath their ability, their children according to their ability, and their wiues aboue their ability: this last is good Doctrine much in request (for somewhere the wiues backe pincheth the husbands belly) but we take not his counsell in that which is first, in that which is best for euery mushroome (that is ingendered ex putredine, and crept but the last day out of the dunghill) will imitate Cal^gula in his change of suites, neuer wearing one twice.
A new fashioned blocke, a Virginian
 locke, an Indian eare, a SpanishLoue-lock taught the V^rg^nians by the Diuell. Ear hangd full of pearles. b^ard^, a short wast (that no body now is a right Gallant) ruffe vpon ruffe, set vpon set, lace vpon lace, till the apparrell it selfe be also apparreld: Poccadillio's little sinnes are layd aside, and every man almost turned Ruffin (specially if Mr^s. Yellow be an hyred Laundresse) while Dauids messengers, and our Saviours members, haue not a jag, haue not a rag, nor an Harrington in a bagge to hide their posteriors. Tabitha Cumi, oh for some Dorcas to condemne these Ammons, and with the contrary vertue to shame these shauers.

Such garments as you haue in store
Make gard-ments for the naked poore.

To bury the dead is a liuing fruit,6 Condo. a fruite which the liuing must giue to the dead: when I am dead bury1 Kin. 13. 31 me. If Bull's flesh lye aboue groundLemnius. and putrifie, it will ingender Bees, if Horsflesh, Hornets, if Mansflesh, Serpents: if so, necessity bids bury it, least S^rpents sting vs, and wee
 haue no Brazen Serpent to cure vs, if no, yet piety bids bury it, know you not that your bodies are members of Christ? 'Twas piety in Ioseph to bury the head, no lesse in vs to interre the members: Custome bids bury it. Though the old GraeciansHerod. l. 3. porchacci funer. Anli. Elian. var. ^ist. Solinus. burned their dead corps (as the Romans had their vrne for their dust adust) some Scythians hanged them vpon Trees: The Berb^ccae in tombed them in their bellies: the Bactrians cast them to their dogges: Alexander the sixt baked his Cardinalls: DiogenesSerres. wished to bee devoured of Fishes: and dissolute Mec^nas cared for no Funerall, carelessely singing, Non tumulum curo.

No graue for me when death cuts off mine age,
The bird being flowne what matter for the cage?

Yet haue the Hebrews vsed to put earth in earth, that Cumulus cineris might bee tumul^s corporis, aGen. 25. 9 Ios. 24. 30. heape of mould, a heape of mould, As Abraham in Machpelah, Iosuah
 in Tem^athsera, skuls in Golgotha,Mat. 27. 33 Mat. 27. 7 and strangers in Ace^dama: sayth Iehu of Iesabel, a wicked King of a Queene more wicked, visite yonder2 Kin. 9. 34 cursed woman and bury her* cursed, yet buried. And what is the practise of the God-spels professors, our stately Sepulchers with mournefull Elegies may bee vocall Expositors: Spice to imbalme it, sheete to enwrap it, Beere to support it, porters to beare it, mourners to condole it, Bels to bewaile it, tombe to ingraue it, till the second appearing of Christ shall reuiue it. Therefore Saint Paul cals the place of buriall S^minatio in an assured hope of the resuscitation:(...) A sleeping place. The Greekes Caemeterion, in a presuasiue confidence of a ioyfull resurrection, and the Germans Gods-akre, as if it were hallowed for Gods habitation: though Iulian scoffe it as a campe of cottages. Indeede I confesse that pompous exequies profit but little deceased Carkasses, NecSen* ep. 92* magis ad defunctum pertinent hominem, quam secundae ad editum infantem.
 They see not our teares, heare not our cries, take no notice of our colours, whether they be blacke as inM. Sandys. Europe, or white as in Asia, neither do our Bells skarre away the worms: Tamen inuenta est sepultura vt visuSen. de remed. fort. corpora, and odore faeda amouerentur: Yet is the graue that which doth saue, not them from putrifaction, but vs from infection: So, it profits the living, hurts not the dead, therefore by the living must be giving to the dead. Nor haue we any that oppose this order but (that wandring Planet that will keepe no order, and therefore deserues to be deprived of his orders) that curious, furious, injurious innovatorer, that being sicke of Stoicisme will not shed a teare, sicke of Schisme wil not read a prayer, nor meete the Corpes, nor bring it into the Church, nor say ought at the Graue, but like a Dogge or an Asse tumble the defunct into a squalled Ditch, as if it were Decorum to bury the dead Sepultura asinorum, or as the Nabathaeans did their Kings in
 a Dunghill: Martin dye, and I will be thy Poet:A^. Marc.

Passenger, stay, read, heere lyeth.
A Comet blazing with a glow-worme zeale,
Pull'd downe from Heauen, with the Dragons tayle:
Who when aliue did search with ni^ble feete
The stews of Amsterdam, now in a sheete,
Doth naked pae^ance: gentle friends forbeare
To wet his Tombe with any humid teare,
Nor Funerall rite vnto his Carkasse giue,
That gaue no Funerall rite whilst he did liue:
But let him haue when vitall breath doth passe*

The buriall of (Iehoiakim) an Asse.
Thus for the body, shall we feedeIere. 22. 19 the soule? our Bush is not barren of Spirituall fruite: Cadit asina et est qui subleuet; perit anima* non est qui recogitet: If a Beast but fall, we striue to
 helpe it, when the soule is hungry, who would not feede it?
To instruct the ignorant is a witty^ Instrue. Fruite, the taste of which Fruit must sharpen our wit, else our best plea will be ignoramus: Alexanders image will not shine bright, vnlesse Phyd^as oyle it, nor the soule (Gods image) vnderstand aright except some spiritual paedagogue instruct it. Can the knife cut without the whetstone? The great M^gor tooke 30.Relat. reg. mogor. Ioh. or. children, kept them secretly, guarded them closely, nursed them silently, intending to serue what god they would serue: but neither couldAuth. grat. exem. they euer speake any word, neither would he euer serue any god.Mich. Dray Bar* war. cant. 4.

* Thus great wits forged into curious tooles
Proue great wits oft to be the greatest fooles.

Surely nature is an Owle, and were her nest at Athens, had need of spectacles. We cannot come to Christ if the Father drawe vs not, nor do
 any thing of our selues, if Christ helpe vs not: Faemina monetam non moneta faeminam, the woman foundSolinus. the silver, not the siluer the woman: But as the Beare's Whelpe, is fashioned by licking: So is our soule new formed by schooling. Therefore a Word of the Maister, Scholler, School, Lesson: 1. Let the Mr. be judicious, and able to teach:

How can he write that's destitute of* inke?
Or speake a right that nothing right doth thinke?

Si Sacerdos est sciat legem Domini, siHier. super Agg. cap. 2.ignoret legem D^mini ipse se arguit non esse Sacerdotem Domini: Art thou a Teacher in Israel, and knowest not these things? He that would haue a Teacher to bee a Knower, would not haue a Tutor to bee anIohn 3. 10. Vnvnderstander, least the Blind, leading the Blind both be ditch'd* Pregnities precedit lactationem* the mother must conceiue before she suckle, and they that will teach must bee, Doctorum Discipuli, before they be
 Imperitorum Magistri, for how should he teach the Accidens, thatHier. ad Demetri. hath not learned the A B C? 2. Industrious, and willing to practise, asGreg. in Eze. hom. 1 lampas a Torch to lighten others: so carbo also a Coale to burne to himselfe, least while the lippes relate knowledge, the hands bewray ignorance, no doubt but action is a feeling instruction.

Segnius ^rritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus.
A word in th^eare is suddenly forgot,
When th'obiect of the eye evadeth not.

For this cause would Augustus haue the Senators Children present in Court.
Therefore thou that teachest others see thou teach thy selfe, and cast not this item away, least after all thy teaching thy selfe be a Cast-away: why shouldst thou bee like a Bell summoning others to the service of God, and doing thy selfe no scruice
 to God? or like that Bestia Pharmacopolae that Iulian twitted Austin with; a Beast pretended of great vertue ouer night, that ere morning was come, had devoured herselfe: great bruite, small fruite. But Christ taught as much by worke, as by word: and example speakes after the Sermon is ended, euen after the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ. Let the Scholler be first, credulous to beleeu:Scholler. selfe-conceite may as well play the Tr^want as go to Schoole, hee that distrusts the Doctrine, shall want grace to proceede Doctor. Israell beleeued the Lord, and Moses: andExod. 14. the Disciples heard, and beleeued the Messias: All thy hearing will do thee no good without beleeuing: a man may heare, and read, yet be a non proficient with-out a ^reed, for can any one profit by that hee will not credit? Therefore let both people, and puple leaue vs, if they will not beleeue vs: for why should our Oratory aggravate their misery in that day when the word which they haue
 heard (but not beleeued) shall iudge them? Yet we are no Rabbins, theySal. Iarch. in Deut. c. 17. 0. 12. are peremptory, and thinke to be beleeued though they say (as one sayd) that the right hand is the left; or do as Hillel did, that one day taught hisSalm. ^rac. de Sab. Ignat. Lyolae epist. de obedient. ad Frat. in Lusitan. scholler, Aleph, Beth, Gimel, and the next day* Gimel, Beth, Aleph: nor are we Iesuites to binde our audience to a blind obedience: me thinkes, this implicite faith, is explicite folly, onely we say with Saint Bernard. Propositorum mandata non esse a subditis iudicanda, vbi nihil iubere deprehendunturBern. Ep 7. diuinis contrarium institutes, etc. beleeue vs, onely so farre as Scripture doth second vs, no further.
Ingenious to conceiue, Quid absurdius2. qua^ surdo canere? 'tis labor in vain to school the deafe, and as vain labor to teach the dolt. A foolelike Nabal, hath a heart like Nabal, a head like Nabal, a heart like a stone, a head like a stone: the stone is not sensible, nor he intelligible.Suidas^ Like the foole Amphistides that knew not whether his father or mother brought him forth: or thatPerera.
 simple Turke that could say no more for his Religion then this, Mahomet was a Moore, my Father was a Moore, and I am a Moore: so that we may say of him (as Aristippus of one like him) when he comes vnto vs, or sits before vs, (...), one stone sits vpon another.apud Laer. l^b. 2.
Therfore pray vnto him who must bore thine eare, that hee will also bore thine heart, be an Augustine in this, Da mihi domine ^d quod iubes, tun^ iube Domine quicquid voles. Lord make mee conceiue what thouA^g. Sol. 1. Lord make mee conceiue what thou commandest, then Lord command me to doe what thou pleasest. Studious to thriue: Non progred^ens, regrediens: hee goes backward, that3. goes not forward. The Souldier in the campe must not alwayes rest, there is a time when he must be trayned: Isa^c must not alwayes hang on the breast: there is a time when hee must be weaned. So the child of God (be hee but a petty) must striue to thriue, that he may take out. It was Peters iniunction, (and if hee be Peter,
 build vpon this) as new borne babes desire the sincere milke of the1 Pet. 2. 2. word that you may grow thereby.Ber* de confid. lib. 2. If thou want growth, thou hast no truth: for quomodo profic^s, si tib^^am sufficis? he hath nothing learnd, that thinks him so learnd, he hath nothingPli^. nat. hist. l. 8. c. 25 to learne. The Crocodile is growing as long as breathing, bee thou learning as long as liuing.
So Bookish was Socrates, that the Ecue of his death he would be taught musicke, because as hee loued learning, and therefore liued learning, so he would dye learning: vita schola.Schoole. This life is a Seminary, this world a phrontistery, vniuerse an vniuersitie: into which we are admitted (being in the womb matriculated) like Gymnosophists naked: naked as of outward habiliments, (and so worse then a beast, not hauing so much as sitis, and fames, and fr^gora poscunt) of so inward ornaments herein as ^ad as a beast, our sole eye, the eye of our soule being put out by ignorance, a worse disease then poxe or pestilence.
 But saith Dauid, Come hither,Psal* and I will teach thee the feare of the Lord: This world is a field whereon we must now, if euer, sow: this lifeMat. 13. a schoole wherein wee must now, if euer, know; ^u^c erudi^io* postha^ repetitio, therefore let vs conne our booke here, for statutum est, I assure you wee must repeate our weekesworke hereafter.

Quod sibi q^^sque serit presentis tempore vitae,
Hoc sibi m^ssis ^rit cum dicitur, it^ venite.
That which is plowed, and sow^d by a^, and some,
Shall be the crop when it is sayd, goe come.

But we must goe and come fromLesson. the schoole to the lesson. Lesse then one we cannot haue, and we need no more, if we learne this one @: Christcrosse, God be my speed, and well we shall speed if scripture be lecture. Consil^orum guber^aculum lex diuina:Cyprian. holy writ, must be the Adelantado of holy Church.

Else the Armado of all our Cou^sels* is likely to haue a feelie hauen, Silla's haue^: you erre saith Christ, not knowing the Scripture: ignorance of Scripture is the mother of error: but verbum Dominicum mare p^cificum heauenly Sayes are placable seas: oh Lord be my Pilot, and I feare no wracke: Dei doctrina v^^i medicina* the speechesCrys in ep. ad Col. c. 3. v. 16. of God are the lessons of men, anim^ pharmaca, the medicines of men: then speake Lord, for thy seruant heareth, thy scholler learneth.Aug de bap cont. Dona. l. 6. c. 1. Secular learning may bee an afternoones lesson, in arundine sterili sole^* vua pendere. A grape may hang on a fruitlesse tw^gge, and truth (in truth) is truth in Menander, as well as in Paul: But first of all, (saith the Son of God) seeke the kingdome of God: the kingdome of God is the word of God* a sauing lesson, a Lesson which will make vs wise to saluation. Fathers, Philosophers, Poets, Orators, may like the Al^ptae amend our complexions; but mors in olla, mors in olla, death in the pot, death in the pot, if
 Ezechiels salt doe not season their broth, or Moses his wood relish the marah of gentle learning. Hierome by an Angell was buffe^ed sore, for studying too much in heathen lore: but Ioh^ by an Angell was forced to eate the book which he brought him to be his meat.
To correct the delinquent is a (...),Castig^* 8. a bitter-sweet: ^. Bitter in eating, for molestus est medicus fure^t^ phrenetico,Aug. ad Bonif. de correct. Do^at. pater and molestus indisciplin^to filio, ille ligando, iste caedendo: the Chirurgion bindes, and the patient is teasty, the father corrects, and the son is angry: and who but selfe-flashing Papists (that thinke the blood of calfes equiualent to the blood of Christ) is in loue with lashing? Verily natures constitution cannot away with correction: are wee not all averse to reproofe? it is a choak-peare, Monitores acerbi, they that tell vs of our faults are bitter to vs, MonitoribusI^v^nal. asperi, we that are faulty are no better to them, Gradere, fuge in terramAmos ^. 1^ Iudae, and open no more thy
 mouth in Bethel. Bethel must onely eate placentia, Bethel must onely bee fed with pleasings: but placentia fallentia, pleasings are leasings, as placentiae are cakes, and cakes (...), such spiced meate is nought for the soules stomacke. They that in a cup of gold drinke the poyson of flattery, shall quaffe the gall of bitternesse in the Celler of misery. But albeit reproofe be bitter in tasting, wee haue learned by proofe, 'tis sweete in digesting. And Dulcia non meruit qui non gustavit amara.

He meriteth for euer to be ill,
That doth refuse to tast a bitter pill.

Patient! a while be patient, and in fine, thou shalt finde it is the finest Physicke. David (sicke of sinne) was content to take it, willing to tast it, could well digest it: let the Righteous (sayth* he) reprooue me, not the Balmes of Gilead, much lesse the Balmes of the wicked are halfe so precious. Therefore let euery one haue his Dosis, a word, or a blow, or a word, and a blow. If wording will
 serue, let not sinners want it, thus the Lord, thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour. Tis as great an offence not to reprooue thy brotherLeu. 19. 18. when he falls into a trespasse, as it is (saith Rabanus) not to pardon him,Rab. in Mat. 18. ^ when he askes forgiuenesse.
But to sacrifice with hony in stead of salt, and to sooth, and smooth when thou shouldest bite and smite, is offerre coccum sed non bis tinctum, non duplicatum, to offer red, but not scarlet,Orig. in Exod. ^ the Die of thy words goes not deepe ynough, and if men dye for want of words, thine shall bee smart ynough. Cry, cry aloud, cry aloud and spare, lift vp thy words like a trumpet, etc. But if words will not do, adde blows thereto. Grauissimus nodus in ligno,Esa. 58. non potest expelli nisi grauissimo oppressorio. An hatd knot, requires an hard knocke, a desperate sore, a desperateAmbr. cure: Phineas his zeale, must vse Phineas speare, when sinne is shamelesse and cannot blush. But Fides suadendaBer. in can. serm. 66. non imponenda, and saith another, impetranda, non imperanda: faith
 must be wrought rather by persuasio^ then by coaction. True! therefore we pronounce, peace, before wee denounce warre: Tamberlanes banners, white before red: many beeing like that Indian Lama, a sheepish beast, that will doe more by intreaty, thenHuld. Sch. midel. c. 44. by stripes twenty: therefore first intreate; if that will not serue, thou mayest profitably beate. Speake to the eare, if the eare be deafe, speake to the purse, if that auaile not, speake to the body, that the eare may say, I am instructed, purse may say, I am impouerished, body may say, I am a^flicted, that eare, and purse, and body may say I am compeld, that the will of the Lord may be fulfilled, that the house of the Lord may bee also filled. These tart corrections did amend, and reformd the Circumcelians,Aug. ad Vincent. which when they did suffer, they began to consider, whether they were scourged for matters of pietie, or rather corrected for tenents of obstinacie.
The bridle (saith Salomon) belongs
 to the horse, a whip to the asse,Pro. 26. 3. and a rod for the foole. Correct a wise man with a nod, a foole with a rod,Pro. 17. 10. yea with a club. If nodding will not serue nor breaking serue, it must bee a club, a hatchet, or a halter. Binde him fast that hath a phrensie, pricke him vp that hath a lethargie, least our Salt--Peter--Rebells, keepe gunpowder Reuels.

Where Mercury cannot persuade,
Let Mars bee there the Marshall made.

Suspende verbera, produce vbera:Solare. 9. hang vp your rods, hang out your dugges. To comfort the sorrowfull, is a pleasant fruite. The forbidden fruit was a fruit most pleasant, though ignorance forbids me to descry, or describe it. The Cabalists thinke this fruit was grapes, so RicciusRic^: de Talm. do^t. Ara caeli. l^. 5. c. 4. tells vs. Moses Barcepha, not grapes, but wheat, so Boskier informs vs.
But Drusius is confident, it was a figge; take his word for a payment:
 Sane ficum fuisse illam arb^rem, cuius fructu illis vesci non licebat, non malumDrus. de Tetrag. cap. 4. Gen. 3. vt vulgus opinatur pia credidit antiquitas. Whatsoeuer it was Eue esteemed it pleasant to the eye, but this as more Cordiall, is pleasant to the heart. The spirit of God is called a Comforter, (...) quasi (...), moouing in all, going through all,Ioh. 14. 26. therefore he is spirituall that ministers comfort, and somewhat a kinne to the Holy Ghost.

Powr good Samarit an
Th' Oylo of compassion into my wound:
Mirth ecchos pleasautly
Where sorrowes mightily late did abound.

Si paupertas angit, Si luctus maestificat, si dolor cordis inquietat, si vlla calamitas conturbat nos, assint bon^ amici,Aug. in Iob.qui non solum gaudere cum gaudentibus, sed etiam flere cum flentibus didicerunt: tunc aspera leniuntur, ad^ersa superantur, and grauia releuantur, etc. When pouerty pincheth me, or sorrow deiecteth me, or heartsgriefe
 afflicteth me, or ought thats ill troubleth me: oh for some friende, that singing when I am merry, and mourning when I am forrie, knowes how to bring sweetely my pangs to an end. Giue wine to the sorrowfull, comfort to the mournefull. Comfort my people: comfort Ierusalem: Comfort one another. He that is in misery hath neede of an Electuary:Pro. 13. 1. Esa. 40. 2. 1. Thes. 4. 18 Iob. 6. 14 he that is afflicted, should be pitied: whosoeuer he be that is in the pit of oppression, let him drinke with thee of the cup of consolation. Sorrow is dry, and wants a comfortable health.Ier. 16. 7. 2. Cor. 1. 3, 4 Hath not the Lord comforted vs, that we might be able to comfort others, with the same comfort wherewith we are comforted our selues?
Now comfort is duple, as the obiect is double. Vnus duo, one man is two, body and soule: there is comfort outward, and comfort inward. For that which is outward turne the leafe, and looke backward: we haue toucht it before, onely a word more. The imbroydred Lazar comes to
 thy gate, craues thereat not all but some, a pittance or crum, the froth or scum: giue him comfort.
See thy selfe in him, and Christ in thy selfe. Behold I stand at the dore and knocke, Oh send not away thy Christ with a mocke: do thou behold him, and hold it not from him.
Christus petit (magna penuria) Christus non accipit (magna iniustitia)Aug.vt habeas vnde luxurietur filius, charitate careas vnde egeat Deus. Christ in the poore man asketh it of thee (great indigence) the poore man for Christs sake gets it not from thee (great negligence) that thou by thy wealth should make thy son a wanton; while Gods Sonne in his members is suffered to want it. But spirituall2. comfort is the speciall comfort: let not the soule want this Antidote, a quo recessit anima plangis corpus, curAug. non and animam a qua recessit^ Deus? thou mourn'st for the body when the soule is banished, why not rather for the soule whence God is departed? Haeccine viscera compassionis? are these
 the bowells of Christian compassion? for the passion of Christ, quench not the smoaking flaxe, breake not the bruised reede, but binde vp the broken heart, preach the Gospell to the poore, that the children that sit in darkenesse may receiue light. LetEsa. 9. 2. this, or the like be thy Dialect. Poore soule! though thy sinnes bee many, and therefore thy sorrowes mighty, yet feare not the Lords fury, despaire not of Gods mercy. Iudas his desperation was worse then his treason. Thou canst not commit more then God can remit: his mercy transcends his workes, therefore thy works. His promise is indefinite to all. Come vnto me All, Whoores, Theeues, Murderers,Mat. 11. Vsurers, Purse-cutters, Persecutors, Sodomites, Gomorrhaeans, Idolotars.
Christ in his life raysed three to life: the Rulers daughter, the WiddowesLuk. 8. 55. 7. 11. Ioh. 11. 44. sonne, and stinking Lazarus: one dead an houre, the second a day, the third foure: resembling three sorts of sinners, (all sorts of sinners:)
 1: in intention. 2. action. 3. dilectation.Aug. de ver dom. ser. 44. Therefore thy sinnes are not so deadly, but Christ can restore thee. At what time (what time soeuer) a sinner (what sinner soeuer) repenteth of his wickednes (what wickednesse soeuer) the Lord will forgetGlos. in Ioel. 2. any more to remember it, (being gracious, and mercifull, Benignus affectu, misericors effectu) but willEsa. 40. 1. remember for euer to forget it: and comfort ye, comfort ye: Oh how beautifull are the feete of those that bring these glad tydings.

Sound vp the Dulcimer with glee,
That drouping soules may merry be

To pardon the offender, is a mellow fruit, and falls from the tree without plucking. Happy are they that eate it: happier they that beare it. Our blessed Bush is ful of it: S^iunt perfecti viri in^uriam diss^mulare qua^doque obliuis^i penitus and donare, et siRemitte 10. Sen. in Pro. necesse sit in patientia supportare.
A righteous man can dissemble an iniury: sometimes forgiue, and forget it wholly: and if need be, indure it patiently.

There be many stalkes on which this fruit growes.

1. Gods precept.
2. Christs practise.
3. Want of merit.
4. Assurance of profit.

Must, for the King: the King of heauen tells vs we must, if euer flourish in anno gloriae beare this fruit in anno gratiae: thou shalt not reuenge thy selfe on the children of thy people, (my people) for vengeance isLeu. 19. 18. Rom. 12. 19 mine, and I will repay it (who dare preoccupate Gods prerogatiue?) ItExo. 21. 24. was once saide an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: but Was is past, andMat, 5. 35. the Canon is inuerted: a cheeke for a cheeke, a cloake for a stroake, a suite of apparrell for a sute or a quarrell, a44 kisse for a stabbe, a chalize for a challenge. Loue your enemies, we loue not aright if we pardon not iniuries: forgiue one another. The mandate ofCol. 3. 13. the Almighty implies necessity. The sonnes of Rechab would drinke noIer. 35. 6. wine, because their father forbad it; nor we wrath, because our heauenly
 Father hath interdicted vs.
The example of Christ inuites vs2 to it. Si sequi nequis pr^cipientem, sequere tamen antecedentem: if thou canst not follow him that commands, follow him that obeyes: he was despised, reiected, wounded, bruised, oppressed, afflicted: They spit vpon him, that restored the blinde by hisEsa. 53. 3. 5. 7. spittle.

His front with thornes, they sharply crowne,
Which (though they prickt it) would not frowne.

Strip him, whip him, All haile him*Psal. 69. 22 Mat. 27* 48. Pseud. Sib. nayle him. This gall was his meate, his drinke was vineger.

(...),
But course his welcome wee may thinke:
When bread so sowre, so sharpe his drinke.

For all this hee opened not his mouth, I meane against them, but he opened it for them. Father forgiue them, they wot not what is done by them. All his reuenge was a prayer
 against vengeance, writing in grasse, what others in brasse: wrongs. Are you wronged? Let not that minde be in you which is in Lions and L^opards: but let the same mind bee in you which was in Christ Iesus, who being reuiled, did not reuile, being smitten, did not resmite, etc. Non quiPhil. 2. 5. percutit, sed qui reper ^ut it bellum facit. Not he that sends, but hee that accepts the challenge, makes the Duell.
Gods child is sensible of his own3. blemishes. There is that in me which was not in Christ Iesus. Sinn. I am conscious of mine owne infirmities, deformities, I haue wrongd God, I haue wrongd my neighbour. My watch hath not beene well kept, for I haue mispent my talent of time: my chimney hath not beene well swept, for the pot of my charity hath seldome boylde: my linnen hath not beene well washt, for I haue not arayed the naked mendicant: my soule hath not beene well scowrd, for I haue hated my brother in my heart:
 my hands haue not beene well purged, for I haue iniured others: and it is lex talionis, if others doe so by me, Shall I seeke reuenge if God punish me? no* my wrongs to him haue deserued it. Shall I bee witnesse, Iudge, and hangman in mine owne cause, if another vexe me? No, hee is but Gods hammer, why should I be like a dogge to bite at the stone, and not looke to the thrower? my wrongs to God ot him, to God and him doe merit it.Grego. mor. 30.
Is patienter tollerat iniuriam, and erubescit peccatis non parcere, qui apud Deum and proximum multa quibus pati necesse est se recol^t comminisse: he cannot choose but take patiently, and forgiue freely (he must needes blush that doth contrary) such offences as are offered him: that doth consider how he hath offended his God aboue him, and his neighbours with him.
Our sinnes deserue a mittimus,4 paines without end, are our sinnes stipend, it is Gods mercy that wee were not in the goale long since: but
 if we will grant a Demittimus, and pardon others, God will pronounce a Remittimus and forgiue vs. Demittite, and Demittemin^, it is his owne language; forgiue, and you shall beeLuk 6. 36. forgiuen. If you will forgiue men their trespasses, your heauenly fatherMat 6. 14. will forgiue you. Here is gaine, and great gaine indeed: Quare quis non fratri demittat parum, vt dignetur andAug. de re^^i^^d. Cath. conuersat. dominus demittere totum? who would not forgiue a penny to be forgiuen a pound? thy brothers sinne to thee is as a penny, thy sinne to God as a pound; his feathers, thy lead, but this milne to smelt it.
These with others are the stalkes of this fruit: let them make thee, and me forbearing long suffering. Be not Aristotles Disciple to thinke it magnanimity to retaliat an iniury. Let not Scylla's Epitaph be ingrauen on thy graue.

Nemo m^ inimicus inferenda i^uria superauit.
Here vnderneath this ragged sto^e,
Doth lye the corps of such an one:

As neuer any could out goe,
In taking vengeance on a foe.

Be not like that wild Irish, who would not haue the right arme of his child put in the font, least being regeneratedM. Speede. by water, hee should not be able to execute his rancour: a true kerne, a true Carib: rather imitate that gentle Caesar, that said to Metellus, Nunquam efficies vt iram Caesaris merearis, thou shalt neuer cause Caesar to bee angry with thee: rather imitate Marcus Cato, who sayd to one that wrongd him, and cryed peccaus, non memini me percussum, I doe not remember that I was smitten: rather imitate blessed Dauid, who concerning Shimes that reuild him, said let him alone, the Lord had bidden him.
In the games of Olympus hee wan the prize that gaue the most blowes to his aduersary: but in the lists of Christ Iesus hee gets the prayse that puts vp most wrongs by an enemy. for God is his Agonotheta who will reward his iniury.


Ecce quam bonum,
Et quam ^ucundum
Est habitare
Fratres in vnum.
Good in it selfe,
Fayre to the eye,
Brethren to dwell
In vnity,

(i. e) Supportare onerosum, to assistOffer. the helplesse, haplesse, and hopelesse, burdned, ouerburdned, with griefe and care cumbred, is a feeling fruit: feele the pulse of a Christian, his veines, are not vaine, but beare with compassion. Compassio, a compatior, therefore alter alterius onera portare, beare you the burdens one of another:Gal 6. and if an other greeue, diuidatur ^qualiter, say halfe mine.

Altera prostratum corpus in ponte ita collocat vt altera insistere prostrato
Plinius.
corpori, and transire per illam possit.


Vpon a bridge two goates did meet
So narrow that the ^r Satyre feet,
could not haue roome to tread,

One coucht him on his belly flat,
That th'other might (admire therat) quite ore him be conuayd.

Here you heare of a Goate couchant: Moses tells you of an Asse couchant, Isachar couching between two burthens, not onely vndergoing his owne patiently, but bearing the burden of others feelingly. Good reason. Wee are members one of another, and must therefore yeeld subuention one to another.

The outward members did complaine,
That they (forsooth) tooke all the paine,
The idle belly to sustaine with Dyet:


Quoth one my friends I thinke it best,
That neyther hand aboue the brest,
Once mooued be, if we will rest in quiet.

This sayd, and done, the body pynd,
Seeing the members so vnkind,
As to refuse to feed and finde each other,
Learne mortall man by what is said,
Thy loue be not confinde, and stayd,
Vnto thy selfe, but helpe, and ayde thy brother.

Thou standest in as much need of2 him, as he of thee, and if so, 'tis but one good turne for another.

A blind man once did sue to wed,
A woman that was lame:
Saying their loue was firmely bred,
Where wants were like or same.
I cannot see she cannot rise,
I lend her feet, and she me eyes.

But if thou hast both eyes,3 and feete, profit, and comfort now, thou knowst not what weather 'twill be to morrow.

Tu quo que fac timeas, and quae tibi.
Ouid de pont.
laeta videntar dum loqueris fieri tristitia posse putes.

Therefore, feare while thou speakest, least thy sweet to sowre be turned.

Saint Paul doth counsell it, consider thy selfe (saith hee) least thou also be tempted. Saint Bernard doth affirme it, speaking of a brother that fell vnder the burden of some vice. Ille bodie, and ego cras: he to day, andBer. de resur. dom. Ser. 2. I not vnlikely to fall to morrow.

When griefe doth seaze anothers heart,
Be thou content to beare a part.

Faithfull Orison is a fruit most soueraigne,Oratio. 12. Orapronobis, sayes the daughter: Oraprovobis, sayes the mother: Daughter the soule, mother the Church, mother-Church, Quae si nil habeat dare, vult taemen or are, who should she be poore, and had nothing to giue vs, yet is she too pure to cease praying for vs: absit a me hoc peccatam,1. Sam. 12. Iam. 5. 16. let this sinne (saith Samuel) be farre from me: hence the Apostle, pray one for another. When our blessed Sauiour had made his will, and bequeathed his mother to Iohn, his kingdome to a theefe, his coat to a souldiour, his body to the crosse, his soule to hell for the redemption
 of mankinde, he prayed Pater ignosce, forgiue them father: Frater dignosce, learne this brother: Tu non frater si non orator, Thou art no brother, If thou pray not for another: for albeit faith saith, not Our Father, but my Father, as Thomas my God, and my Lord, since another mans faith cannot bee the Vicar of my conscience: yet prayer saith not onely, my Father, but our Father (euery man for himselfe, and God for vs all deserues to be cursed and anathematized of all) when you pray, thus say,Mat. 6. Paeter noster.
When Dauid played, the Diuell1. Samuell. would not dance, belike he liked not his musicke: Saul was well rid of him, better was his roome then his company: when Moses prayd, Israel conquered the Amalakites, as GedeonsIudges. broken pitchers (broken hearts) and sounding Trumpets (ecchoingCh^^s. in Heb. hom. 27. 1 Samu^ll. lippes) chased away, and ouercame the Midianites. Certemagna sunt arma oratio, ipsa bella (...). D^uout prayers, are strong speares. Hereby
 the Patriarke preuayled with Iehouah.Gen. 12. 4.
 But perhaps you aske what others they are that must be prayed for?
 I answer negatiuely: droppe not a bead, let no prayer bee sayde for such as are dead: they may be in thy Creed (for thou mayest hope well, that they are well) but take heede they come not into thy Pater noster.
Dirges, Masses, Tretalls, Requiems, are to begge a pardon when the theefe is hanged, and after the faire, to vnpacke our ware. Medicus postquamChrys. in Mat. Hom. 75. aegrotus obijt nequicquam prodesse potest, in vaine is the potion after dissolution. If they be in heauen, they need not to vs: if in hell, there is (...), a great gulph twixt vs, and them, our prayer cannot goe ouer for want of a bridge: Tertium penitus ignoramus, imo nec esse in scripturisAug. cont. pelag. Hyp. lib. 5. sanctis inueniemus. There is no meane betweene these extreames: Purgatory is but imaginary: a Poeticall Chimaera: a paper prison, like the other Limbos, whereof Virgil (I
 thinke) the heathen was one of the first builders: but Lord remember me now thou art in thy kingdome, and say to my Soule, it shall bee with thee in Paradise.
Doe not supplicate, for any Apostate:2 There is a sinne vnto death (to1 Ioh. 5. 16. pray for it is as to pray for the dead) I doe not say you shall pray for it: the Prophet saith, You shall not prayI^^. 7. 16. for it, to attempt it, is to tempt God: therefore Iudas gai^^ faire by his pension, when he lost the benefite of each good mans petition: bad husbandry, for halfe a crowne to exchange a crowne, for thirty pence of siluer, many talents of golden treasure: hee may well hang whom no man speaks for, no man prayes for.
But (now affirmatiuely) except2 before excepted, we are commanded1 Tim. 2. 1 1 Tim. ^2 2 all to pray for all. Magistrates: blesse,1 (blessed God) our gracious King1 Iames by thy grace, etc. that as hee doth raigne by thee, so he may raigne for thee, that hee may raigne, and remaine perpetually with thee: Our
 hopefull Prince Charles, that no Hittite2 or Amorite may sleepe in his bosome, but a true Israelite, that he may bee greater then great Charlemaigne on earth, and reside, and abide aboue Charles-waine in heauen: The Count of Reyne his spouse and progenie, that3 againe they may raigne of account in Germany. And our Albion-Senators,4 oh let them bee neither trans-nor Cis-Alpine-pensioners: and sic de caeteris.
Ministers: we pray for you, pray2 you for vs: Paul doth bid it: prayEphe. 6. 19 Act. 12. 5. for me: the Church did it, for shee prayed for Peter.
But how is the world become a glutton? instead of praying for vs, prcying on vs? of 9284 English Parishes,Ca^b. ^rit. edit. vlt. 3845 are become impropriations. But quorsum ^^c? our Bellygod-patrons-latrons haue no eares for vs, nor prayers for vs.
Wee must all finally pray for all generally, for Iewes and Pagans, Turkes, and Papists, though some Lincolne-shiere ministers say such a
 petition implies a contradiction to particular election, that it would please thee to haue mercy vpon all men: yet in this also we beseech thee to heare vs good Lord.
Indeede such charity is not to bee found in Popery: for when one Turner a Martyr did at the stake desireAct and Men the peoples prayers, Browne a Papist (oh pittifull Papist) sayd hee would pray no more for him, then he would for a dogge. They haue Bell, Booke and Candle for vs, we a Communion Collect for them, that hauing but one shepheard, wee might all be collected into one fold: The Syrophenician prayed for her daughter possessed with a diuell, and wee for our brother be he neuer so euill.
But how can any pray for others, that seldome or neuer pray for themselues.

Oh Lord thou knowest I neuer prayed before,
But heare me now, Ile trouble thee no more.


Quoth that sea-faring passenger, when the storme beate with anger, or how for others, and themselues, that are full of vice, and fraught with sinnes? If I regard wickednesse inPsal. 66. 18 my heart, the Lord will not heare me, Silete ne vos hac illi nauigare sentiant.

Keepe silence ye, least God doe see,
You passe this way that sinners be.

Then purge thy heart that God may heare thee, and pray for thy selfe, that others may be prayd for by thee.
But happily it will be sayd, I haue often prayd, yet finde no ayde: I and my brother periclitamur, are still in danger. Foolish man, though thou be Popilius, God is not Antiochus: Popilius to Antiochus being sent on a message, drew a circle about his seat, adiuring him, ere he stird to answer his Embassage: but faith tarryes the Lords leasure, and though the Lord tarry, it waytes his pleasure. Is qui
 credit non prefestinabit, he that beleeueth maketh not hast, when as he that beleeueth not maketh hast, and hee that maketh hast, maketh wast: hast, and wast, are mother, and daughter, too hastfull, and wastfull, was Chone Hammigal, a Iewish Rabbi, who when the weather was droughty, put himselfe in a Pye made fit for his body, saying, Lord of the world, thy childrens eyes are fixt on me, as one whom they thinke familiar with thee, I sweare by thy name I will not out my Pie till thou grant them raine, here was flesh in a Pie, but no salt, no wit.

Omniasal sapit, insipidum caput est tibi Rabbi,
Adde salem vt sapidum sit tibi Chone caput.
In fine. Mutuall prayer procureth grace,
When brinish teares bedew the face.

I am peruenimus vsque ad vmbelicas.Martiall. Let vs gather the fragments, the banquet is ended, and a rare one it
 were, were it well disht: howeuer by such as it is, you plainly see our Bush is abounding with excellent fruite. Goe thou and doe likewise: Bring foorth (saith the Baptist) not flowers or flourishes, blossomes or semblances, buds or appearances, but fruits: not the fruite of the world, that's folly, nor the fruite of the flesh, that is frailty, nor the fruit of the eyes, that is fancy, but meete fruites, meete for contrition of heart, reformation of life, sanctification of Soule.
Euen such as are vicious, are very fructiferous, producing, and bearing, as greene fruits of imperfectnesse: so red fruits of blood-thirstines, yellow fruit of gall and bitternesse, flamecollourd fruit of drunkennesse, earthcolourd fruit of couetousnes, pale-colord fruit of lasciuiousnes: whose root is concupiscence, Bole consent, branches, bad desires, buds, lewd words, flowers, vile actions, fruits, naughty customes; which the diuell doth plant, suggestion doth water, continuance increase, necessity ripen, iudgment
 gather, and hell burne. Oh let not the children of this world, the brats of night, be wiser and fruitfuller then the children of light. Let euery one labour to bee like our Bush, whose fruit is good, good and much.
Be not an Oliue bush (when the goates doe licke it fruitfulnesse, doth leaue it) when others prayse thee, let them not pride thee: bee not a vine bush, (the more boughes, the fewer grapes) but if thou receiue more blessings from God, looke thou returne more fruit to God. Be not a Clouebush, (so hot by nature, and greedy of water, that it robbes it neighbours plants of moysture) if thou hast much be thankfull for it, if little, be content with it, and see thou doe not coue^ an other mans profit. Why shouldest thou be like that Greene-land fowle (called an Allen) that (being of greater power) beats the lesser birds till they vomit vp their prey for him to deuoure, then dismissing them with few feathers on their backes) lesse meate in their bellies. I feare we haue
 in England too much of this fo^^, but be not thou so foule.
In a word: if euer thy branches begin to wither, vse Aristotles receipt to make them prosper: (viz.) Cut the roote, put a stone in the cut, that the pure ayre may goe in, and grosse humour flow out. Cutte the root, namely thy heart by repentance, and true compunction: put in a stone, the remembrance of thy graue-stone, death, and dissolution: that the grosse humour, thy sinnes by confession may leaue thee, and the ayre of Gods Spirit, by deuotion fulfill thee, thus shall much and good fruit grow on thee: which gracious blessing that it may happen vnto thee, I powre foorth my prayers continually to the Almighty. To whom be prayer now, and prayse for euer.
FINIS.


