Good nevves from Virginia Sent to the Counsell and Company of Virginia, resident in England. From Alexander Whitaker, the minister of Henrico in Virginia. Wherein also is a narration of the present state of that countrey, and our colonies there. Perused and published by direction from that Counsell. And a preface prefixed of some matters touching that plantation, very requisite to be made knowne. Whitaker, Alexander, 1585-1617. Good nevves from Virginia Sent to the Counsell and Company of Virginia, resident in England. From Alexander Whitaker, the minister of Henrico in Virginia. Wherein also is a narration of the present state of that countrey, and our colonies there. Perused and published by direction from that Counsell. And a preface prefixed of some matters touching that plantation, very requisite to be made knowne. Whitaker, Alexander, 1585-1617. Crashaw, William, 1572-1626. Virginia Company of London. Counseil for Virginia (England and Wales) GOOD NEWES FROM VIRGINIA. ECCLESIASTES 11.1. Cast thy bread vpon the waters: for after many daies thou shalt finde it. Aude hospes contemnere opes & te quo{que} dignum Finge Deo— B E bould my Hearers to con∣temne riches, and frame your selues to walke worthie of God; for none other be wor∣thie of God, but those that lightly esteeme of riches. Na∣kednesse is the riches of na∣ture; vertue is the only thing that makes vs rich and honourable in the eyes of wise men. Pouertie is a thing which most men feare, and couetous men cannot endure to be∣hold: yet pouertie with a contented mind is great riches: hee truely is the onely poore man, not that hath little, but which continually de∣sireth more. Riches (as they are esteemed) haue no limits, but still crie, plus vltra, still more. Neither is any man absolutely rich, but in comparison of a poorer man, of one (I meane) that hath lesse then he: for if he make diligent enquirie, he may finde diuers richer then himselfe: if riches of gold and the like, had bin such as the world doth esteeme them, it is not likely that Iesus Christ would haue taken so poore a state vpon him: when we esteeme them at the best, they are but an heauy burthen to some, an Idoll to others, and profitable to few. Wherefore, Salomon hauing before explained the maruellous vanitie of riches, and how they are wont to be abused, as well of couetous, as of prodi∣gall men: in the first six verses of this Chapter tea∣cheth vs how we may vse them well, and God may make the vse of them blessed vnto vs. In the second Chapter, he hath said, I haue gathered vnto me siluer and gold, and the chiefe treasures of Kings & Prouinces: And I was great, and encreased aboue all that were before me in Ierusalem: Then I looked, and behold all is vanity, and vexation of the spirit. In the Fifth Chapter, Hee that loueth siluer, shall not be satisfied with siluer; and he that loueth riches, shall be without the fruit of it. And what good commeth to the owners thereof, but the behol∣ding thereof with their eyes. And he addeth, The sa∣tietie of the rich will not suffer him to sleepe. Againe, There is an euill sicknes that I haue seene vnder the Sun, Riches reserued to the owners therof, for their euill. Now in the beginning of this chapter, he hath set downe a remedie to both these euils, whereby our riches may be made constant vnto vs: we may take plea∣sure and profit by them, and our posterity through many descents may enioy thē after vs. Cast thy bread (saith he) vpon the waters : why? for after many daies thou shalt find it. The sentence is Rhetoricall, full of figures, and needs some explaining. Bread in Scripture is vsual∣ly taken for all kind of meat and drinke, as may ap∣peare, Gen. 18.5. and in diuers other places: but here (I take it) it is more generally put for all kind of Almes, of what nature soeuer: not onely for meate and drinke, money, apparell, or the like, but also for any kind of thing, whereby we may releeue the necessitie of our neighbour. Waters also are heere metaphorically put for all those men, who stand in need of the almes of our liberalitie, whether they be such as cannot, but gladly would requite vs, or else such as being able, forget to be thankefull. So that the plaine meaning of the words is this. Giue liberally thine almes to all sorts of men, that may stand in need of thy helpe: hide not thine eies at the miserable state of the afflicted; neither stop thine eares at the crie of the poore, though they be not able to recompence thy wel-doing: reproach not thine enemie, when he is punished, but rather ouercome his euill deeds with thy goodnesse; nei∣ther suffer any to returne empty handed from thee, whom God shall offer to thy liberality. For though thou canst not presently expect a plentifull reward of thy well-doing, though the persons, to whom thou hast cast thine almes, bee not able to requite thee, or forgetfull of good turnes, yet be assured of it, that God beholdeth thy charitie, and will at his appointed time requite thee, euen in this world, if it be good for thee, thou shalt taste of his bountie; but in the world to come hee hath reserued for thee a most glorious crowne of blessed immortalitie. This is the soule and substance of this short sentence. The words naturally diuide themselues into two principall parts. A Commandement to be Liberall and Charitable : and a promise of reward, which hereafter we shall find. The Commandement also containeth in it fiue points, touching the doctrine of Liberalitie. 1 The dutie to be performed, Cast thy bread : be liberall to all. 2 The manner of bestowing our almes, by ca∣sting it away. 3 What is to be giuen, Bread ; all things needfull, yea, and of the best kind. 4 Who may be liberall: euen those that haue it: Thy bread, it must be thine owne. 5 To whom we must be liberall; to all, yea, to the VVaters. First, we wil briefly speake of these fiue points of this Commandement as they lie in order; and then directly come vnto the promise more particularly. The enioyned dutie is Liberalitie, which sometimes is termed Almes : sometimes more largely is vsed for all kind of good workes, and very often is signi∣fied by the names of Charitie and Brotherly loue: all which being in sense and signification one, shall in the naming of them, be vsed all as one. Liberality is the true practise of Christian Humanity and Brother∣ly courtesie, one towards another. A vertue comman∣ded by God, and commended by the examples of the best; which makes vs accepted of God, and de∣sired of men. Faith giues comfort to my soule, and ministers peace to my conscience: Hope teacheth me not to be hastie, but to waite patiently the appoin∣ted time of God; but the practise of Loue maintaines my Hope, and assures me that my faith is effectuall; and moreouer is beneficiall vnto others, yea, profi∣table to all. 1. Cor. 13. Now abideth Faith, Hope and Loue, euen these three ; but the greatest of these is Loue. Where∣fore hath God made men great, and filled their cof∣fers with his treasures, but that they should as faith∣full stewards of Gods store, liberally prouide for the necessitie of his Saints? The richest man in the world, hath no right by nature to the things hee doth possesse; for naked hee came into the world, and he must returne naked out of the same againe. Why then hath God made thee rich, and commen∣ded that to thy liberalitie which was not thine owne; but that thou shouldest bee bountifull to those whom he hath made poore? What goodnesse or excellencie did God see in thee, more then in the poorest reasonable creature, before thou yet wast, that hee should make thee rich, and him poore? doth it not befall to thee, as to the foole? yea verily, the condition of men in this case, Eccles. 3.19. and the condition of beasts is all one: As one dieth, so dieth the other; all go to one place, and all was of the dust; and all shall returne to the dust. But that which Nature hath not distinguished, the wisedome and bountie of God hath by a property of calling alte∣red, and lending his treasures to the rich men of the world, hath shewed to them an example of his Li∣beralitie, to this end, that they might be open-han∣ded to others, distributing as faithfull stewards of his gifts, according to the necessitie of the Saints. Wherefore our Sauiour Christ proclaimeth, Matth. 24.45. Who is a faithfull seruant and wise, whom his master hath made ruler ouer his houshold, to giue them meat in season. Bles∣sed is that seruant, whom his master when hee commeth shall finde so doing. Galath. 6. Saint Paul exhorteth vs to doe good to all, but specially to the houshold of faith: and writeth to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.17. to charge them that be rich in this world, that they do good, and be rich in good workes, ready to distribute and communicate. Titus 2. He sheweth Titus also, that the end of our Redemption is, that we might be zealous of good workes: and therefore willeth him to affirme, Titus 3. That they which haue beleeued in God, might be carefull to shew forth good workes, &c. But alas, the practise of this age is farre otherwise. For those that haue wealth, either abuse them to the satisfying of their prodigall lusts, in Whoring, Dicing, or Drinking, till all or the most be spent; or else (as others) vse them only to looke vpon them, or that it might be said they haue them: few or none there be, that vse them aright to the glory of God, and reliefe of his children. God gaue commande∣ment that there should not be a begger in Israel: but how many idle persons haue we in the streetes of our Cities, in the High-wayes, and corners of our pathes, which day and night call vpon the passers by, and yet remaine vnprouided for? How many hungry, naked, fatherlesse, widowes, poore men and oppressed, perish for want of that which God hath lent to these rich theeues? (for no better then theeues are they, keeping vp that which God gaue them to disperse to holy and good vses). But what saith Salomon, Prou. 28.27. Hee that hideth his eyes from the poore, shall haue many curses. What shall we iudge then of those men, who be∣ing rich in substance, and poore in good workes? if Paul may bee heard, Titus 3. they haue not yet beleeued Christ died for them. 1. Iohn 3 17. If Saint Iohn may iudge, they haue no loue of God in them, For whosoeuer (saith he) hath this worlds goods, and seeth his brother haue need, and shutteth vp his compassion from him, how dwel∣leth the loue of God in him? Surely, Christ that shall iudge euery man according to his workes, when he shall call them to render an account of their Ste∣wardship, will pronounce a heauie sentence against them: Mat h. 25 30 Cast those vnprofitable seruants into vtter darke¦nesse, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Go too now, Iames 5.1. you rich miserable men, weepe and howle for the miseries that shall come vpon you. Remember the churlishnesse of Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. and forget not the tormented tongue of Diues. Make haste ei∣ther to repent betime, Luke 16. or make account to heare the dreadfull sentence of the great Iudge, Matth . 25. Goe yee cursed, &c. for ye haue been vncharitable. But you (my bre∣thren) in whose hearts the loue of God abideth, shew the bowels of your compassion to your fel∣low seruants, as need requireth. Remember the af∣flictions of Ioseph, Prou. 1 . and bee assured of this; that hee that hath mercie vpon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord, &c. You will helpe your friend, because hee loues you, and is the companion of your estate. Nature teacheth vs to commiserate the distresses of our brethren, because we are of the same flesh, and haue our parents common. How can we then withhold the hands of our reliefe from those that stand in need of our helpe? Wee are all fellow-seruants of one Lord and Master, Iesus Christ. Wee haue all one common Father, God the maker of heauen and earth. We are all members of one mysticall bodie, most vnseparably vnited to our head Iesus Christ, by the power of the Holy Spirit. How then can we see our fellow-seruants, our deare brethren, yea, the members of our owne bodie to passe by vs, hun∣gry and naked, vnfed, vnclothed? Take heed (I be∣seech you) that Lazarus starue not at your doores, nor Dauids messengers returne emptie. 1 King. 17. If Elijah come to soiorne with you, thrust him not out of doores, thou knowest not how soone God may al∣ter the times, and restore thine estate. The Church of Macedonia is commended, 2. Cor. 8. because, though they were in want themselues, yet they supplied the ex∣treame want of other Churches, 1. Cor. 16.1. yea, if the Saints at Ierusalem want, or the Churches a farre off, lay vp the first day of euery weeke somewhat to send to their reliefe. And so you doing, may gather com∣fort to your selues, that you shall heare that comfor∣table sentence, Venite benedicti patris quoniam fuistis liberales: Come you blessed of my Father, receiue the king∣dome prepared for you; for you haue been liberall, &c. I might say much more in the commendation of Liberalitie: but the time requiring lesse, I come now with haste vnto the second point of the Comman∣dement. The second manner how. Cast thy bread, &c. What? hath God giuen vs goods to cast them away? Eccles. 3.6. yea verily, for Salomon saith, There is a time to seeke, and a time to lose; a time to keepe, and a time to cast away. Which time of losing and casting away the Scripture, heere noteth. But by this word of casting away, is meant no violent reiecting, or negligent losing of some things that we hate or doe not greatly esteeme: but a liberall giuing away of such things as we do possesse: which may appeare by these reasons. First by the nature of the originall word which most vsually signifieth to send out, Mittere & emit∣tere : and so it is vsed by Moses, Gen. 7.7. where hee saith, that Noah sent out the Rauen, and afterward the Doue twice, hee vseth this word continually, & emisit: and so hath both Pagninus and M r∣cerus expounded it. Secondly, it may appeare by the agreement of the Text, with the verses follow∣ing: for the Doctrine handled is touching Libera∣litie, allegorically compared to the seede of bread (for so bread may be heere vnderstood) which hus∣bandmen cast not away, but sow as well in moist, as in drier grounds: and so Tremelius doth interpret them. Now as husbandmen do not cast away their seede, which they fling into the ground, for hatred or neglect, but vnder hope of Gods blessing: euen so liberall men exercising the workes of charitie, doe not cast away their almes, as one that casteth a bone to a dogge, or flingeth dead flowers from him, &c. but freely bestow the almes of God without pride, vaine-glory, or disdaine, yea, without hope of any restitution, or any other recompence, besides the acceptance of God, and the reward which God shall giue vnto him in this life, but especially in the great day of his haruest. And with this doth agree that saying of Salomon, There is that scattereth and is more increased. Prou. 17.24. So that the spirit of God teacheth vs by this word of casting, how we may scatter our good deeds and bestow our almes, as that they may be accepted of God and profitable vnto vs. As, ma∣ny aske and receiue not, Iames. 4. because they aske amisse: so the most that cast away finde not, because they bee illiberall in their liberalitie, or because they giue a∣misse. Let vs then learne from hence to cast away our bread freely: freely we haue receiued our goods from God, let vs freely giue: so shall wee become follo∣wers of God and our liberalitie draw toward the perfection required of vs. The commandement of Christ is, Matth. 5.48. that we should be perfect as our heauenly fa∣ther is perfect. Now then Gods liberalitie being per∣fect, let vs also be perfect in our good deeds: this is a poynt very needfull for vs all to consider; for God requireth liberalitie from vs all ; and very few among the diuers multitudes of giuers giue aright, it shall bee counted a high point of wisdome in vs: first, to informe our selues thoroughly, by what meanes our charitie may become perfect and ac∣ceptable in the sight of God, before we reach out our hands to giue. Our great Master Christ, the mouth of God to man, handling the doctrine of li∣beralitie in his Sermon on the mount, Matth. 6.1. hath taught vs many rules touching the right manner of giuing almes, which wee may referre to these fiue poynts. First, that we giue in faith, for without faith it is vnpossible to please God; Heb▪ 1.6. therfore without faith our almes cannot please God: the summe of which faith is this: first, that God will accept of vs and our almes for his sonne Iesus Christs sake; for no worke of any man can please God, before the man him∣selfe bee approued of him, and then all our good deeds shall be accepted of him. Secondly, that wee be not hastie in expecting a present recompence of reward, but to waite patiently vpon God by faith for the good successe of our almes. Iames 5 7. So husband∣men that cast their seed into the ground, stay vntill the time of haruest, depending vpon God for the fruitfull increase of their labors. 1. Cor. 3. So Paul doth plant and Apollos doth water, but euen both these doe waite vpon God for the blessing of their Ministery: This is the cause why heretofore much of our almes bestowed vpon the affaires of Virginia haue been so cast away, that they could neuer be found againe hitherto: for many of vs haue not been re∣conciled to God, nor approued of him. Some of our Aduenturers in London haue been most mise∣rable couetous men, sold ouer to Vsurie, Extortion and Oppression. Many of the men sent hither haue bin Murtherers, Theeues, Adulterers, idle persons, and what not besides, all which persons God ha∣teth euen from his very soule: how then could their almes or any thing else which they doe, be pleasing vnto God? Such mens prayers are abominable in the sight of God, how much more their Almes? The second rule in giuing is, that wee giue in Loue, which whosoeuer lacketh cannot giue a∣right, and saith Saint Paul, 1. Though I feede the poore with all my goods and haue not loue, it profiteth me no∣thing. The sum of which loue is, that out of mere pittie, compassion and fellow-feeling of our neigh∣bours wants, we cast our bread to him ; not for con∣straint of law, and custome of parishioners, neither for any sinister respect of praise or vaine-glorie. Wherefore the same Paul saith, Rom 12.8. He that distributeth, let him doe it with simplicitie: and our Sauiour Christ commandeth, Matth. 6.3. that when thou d est thine almes, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth. Thirdly, we must giue our almes bountifully and with a cheerefull minde: 1. Cor. . . but as euery one wisheth in his heart, so let him giue, not grudging or of necessitie, for God loueth a cheerefull giuer: He that soweth sparing∣ly shall reape also sparingly; and he that soweth liberally shall reape also liberally. Yet notwithstanding this boūtifulnes hath two proper limits, beyond which it is not to passe. First, wee must bee bountifull onely according to abilitie ; for if we giue all at one time, we may leaue our selues naked, and be disin∣abled for giuing any more hereafter: Deut. 15.4. therefore those Papists that giue away all and turne begging Friers are to bee blamed, Luk. 3.11. for God that hath said, there shall bee poore alwaies with you, forbiddeth in the same place, that there should be any begger in Israell; and the rule of Iohn Baptist is, that he that hath two coats should not giue away both of them, whereby he might be left naked, but he must giue one away, and reserue the other for himselfe. The second limite of our bountie is, that we giue more or lesse according to the necessitie of the Saints, and this Saint Paul teacheth, Rom. 12.18. The fourth rule of right giuing, ariseth from hence, which is, that we giue our almes with discre∣tion. First, that we communicate such things as the neede of our neighbour requireth; the thirstie man must haue drinke, the hungrie and naked, meate and apparrell, the imprisoned for debt, mo∣ney and the like. Secondly, we must not defer the time of our reliefe, lest that wee giue too late, when the case of our neighbour is past helpe: Bis dat qui cito dat: The Physition comes too late when the patient is dead. Prou. 25.11. But a word spoken in season is like apples of gold and pictures of siluer: whilest thou may, then doe good, thou knowest not then what may befall afterward. Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sowe thy seede, and in the after noone let not thy hand rest, for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, this or that. Surely if there were euer any opportunitie gi∣uen of setting forward this Plantation, the season is now most fit. Strike then whilest the iron is hot, do this good worke whilest you may, before it bee too late. Thirdly, we must chuse such a place as may be void of vaine-glorie and hipocrisie. Our left hand may not know what our right hand doth: Matth. 6. Honores palam dandi sunt, elcemosinae clam: Honors may bee openly giuen for the incouragement of others; but almes deeds must bee giuen in secret: then thy Father that seeth in secret shall reward thee o∣penly. The last rule of giuing is, that we giue in Iustice; which is, that we cut not large thongs out of ano∣ther mans lether; that wee giue not other mens goods, but such as bee our owne, and those truely gotten, the text saith, that the bread must be thine, euen thine owne, Isa. 58.7. not another mans. The true fea∣sting is to breake thine owne bread to the hungrie, to bring the poore that wander into thine house. Thirdly, what is to be giuen. The next point to be handled is, wherein we are to bee liberall, what wee are to giue: Salomon hath shut vp all vnder the name of Bread, whereby (as I said before) is meant all things wherein we may re∣leeue the necessities of our neighbours: for if a man shall cast his drinke, apparell, golde, and the like vp∣on the waters, he shall after many daies find them: but Salomon included al these almes vnder the name of bread, because hee would enforce this doctrine vnder one Allegorie of sowing, and therefore doth suite his phrase with words of most significancie. Againe, bread is the staffe of good nourishment, and the most vsuall kinde of almes which we giue. This article then of this Commandement is, that if our neighbours doe stand in need of our helpe in any thing wherein we may helpe them; we are not to with-hold our hand from them, but to cast our almes liberally vnto them. And this must needs be the meaning of the ho∣ly Ghost, Rom. 12.13. for Paul teacheth vs to distribute according to the necessitie of the Saints: but the Saints neede ma∣ny things very often beside bread, yea besides food and rayment, wherefore our almes must needes bee cast out, according to the seueral necessities of those that want. The wants of men bee diuers; some are of the mind, some of the bodie, and some be of the out∣ward goods: and thus haue the Diuines deuided them. The distresses of the mind are most grieuous and needs the best reliefe; but of them all, ignorance of spirituall matters is most common, most dangerous. The bread that must relieue this, Prou. 10 is the mouth of wisdome, which is liberall in instruction, which is as finest siluer, which shall be fruitfull in vnderstan∣ding, which doth know what is acceptable, which is a tree of life and which feedeth many. This was the almes which Paul went to cast away in Mace∣don, and liberally distributed in Mars his streete in Athens. And this is the almes which may bee most profitable vnto this barbarous Countrey of Virgi∣nia, where the name of God hath beene yet scarce heard of. The wants of the bodie be many, but not so dangerous: and those bee principally hunger, thirst, sicknesse, and wounds: according to which cases our almes must be bestowed. The sentence of the great Iudge shall bee according to the tenor of this: Matth. 25. When I was an hungry you fed mee, when I was a thirst you gaue mee drinke, when I was sicke you visited mee. As for the helping of wounded men, our Sauiour Christ hath giuen vs a notable in∣stance and incouragement to bee mercifull toward them, in the case of the wounded Iew, whom when neither the Priest nor the Leuite that passed by would relieue, Luk. 10.30 a Samaritan most liberally prouided for; euen so let vs doe. The wants of our neigh∣bours outward state are most and euery where common. First, wee must freely giue to the poore, as clothes to the naked, liberall gleanings to the stranger, fatherlesse and widow; Iustice in Iudge∣ment to the oppressed, &c. Secondly, we must freely lend whereby we may be oftentimes as beneficiall to our neighbour as by giuing. Mat. 5.41. Concerning which our Sauiour Christ saith, From him that would borrow of thee, turne not a∣way thy face. And the commandement of God is, Thou shalt open thy hands to thy poore brother, and lend him suffiicient for his neede which he hath. Deut. 15.8. Thirdlie, we must freelie forgiue and remit the due debt which our neighbour doth owe vnto vs, if it so fall out that God bring him into decay and extreame pouertie. Exod. 22.26. So the pledge or pawne which our neighbour leaueth with vs, if it belong to his necessarie vse, as his raiment or the like, wee are to restore it to him againe, before the Sun goe downe. And this is the exhortation of Nehemiah to the hard harted rulers of the Iewes, Nehem. 5.11. that oppressed their bre∣thren with Vsurie and the like. And thus manie waies may we cast away our bread, and for all these kinds of Almes, bread is heere to be taken. Wherefore seeing there bee so manie waies to exercise our liberalitie, let vs not think it sufficient to be bountifull in one kinde of good workes, and hard hearted in others, but that our liberalitie may be profitable to vs, let vs giue in all, as the present need requireth. Some men will giue almes at their gate, of the scraps of their table, but will not part with one pennie of monie to anie charitable deed. Others will bee ready to spend their voice in the instruction and reproofe of their neighbour: or it may bee to speake a good word for him, but will part with none of their owne goods to helpe them. And some men will be onely liberall in building of Churches, Hospitalls and the like, which indeede be good works, yet are they neither meritorious, nor the most principall, for manie times the gift of a peece of bread, or a cup of colde water is more needfull, Salomon putteth bread the cheefest almes, and Christ at the day of iudgement, will not con∣demne men for want of buildings, but of other more needfull almes, and lesse chargeable. But if the Church of Rome will maintaine the merit of their Abbies, Matth. 25. Nunneries, Temples, let them heare a great schoole man of their owne, Thomas Aquinas who reckoned vp the seuerall works of charity be∣longing to the body, Aquinas 2.2. quae. 32. ar. 2. hath either forgotten or neg∣lected such buildings: hee hath shut them vp all in this one verse visito, poto, cibo, redimo, go, colligo, condo, the meaning whereof is that true liberality consisteth in visiting the sicke, giuing drinke to the thirsty, meat to the hungry, in redeeming the cap∣tiue and imprisoned, in couering the naked, in ga∣thering or calling home poore trauelling strangers to his house, and in buriall of the dead, but in all these he hath made no mention of those buildings. Wherefore let vs learne not onely to spend Gods almes, but to be such prouident Stewards or pro∣uiders for the seruants of God, as that wee may bee liberall in all kinde to giue them meat, drinke and other of Gods goods in necessity according to the seuerall necessities of them. The fourth point in order to bee considered is, Who. who may properlie giue almes which may easilie be determined, if we consider the diuers kinds of good works which wee haue now lately rehearsed. For hee that is not able to bee liberall in one kinde, may bee fit for another, which may be noted in the almes of Peter and Iohn entring into the Temple, Acts 3.1. when they restored the lame cripple to his health, to whom they said in this manner, Siluer and Gould haue I none, but such as I haue, that giue I thee. Whence wee may conclude that Euery one may bee a giuer of almes. For he that hath not the riches of wealth and cannot giue much, let him giue a little according to the measure of his abilitie. Wherefore our Sa∣uiour Christ commendeth the liberality of the poor widdow, Mark. 12.41. which cast into the treasury but two mites, which was all that she had. Those also that haue not money and goods to helpe their neighbour, let them lend the helpe of their bodily labour, of their callings, or the vertues of their soule and body vnto them, and this was Pe∣ters Almes. And these whom pouerty, age or subiection (vn∣to the hard gouernment of others) hath made vn∣fit for these two: let them exercise their Liberality, in praying for the reliefe of those that want, which is the proper calling of Almes-men, and Hospitall chil∣dren ; yea it is the dutie of vs all. This is the doctrine, and I beseech God to stirre vp your minds to the practise of liberalitie in all things towards all men. And remember the poore estate of the ignorant inhabitants of Virginia. Cast forth your almes (my brethren of England) and extend your liberality on these charitable workes, which God hath called you to performe. Let not the seruants of superstition, that thinke to merit by their good works (as they terme them) goe be∣yond vs in well doing; neither let them be able to open their mouths against vs, and to condemne the religion of our Protestation, for want of cha∣ritable deeds. It may bee some men will say the worke is great, I am not able to relieue it, I answer the work is such and such order is now taken, that those that cannot giue much, may be liberal in a little. Those that can∣not helpe in monies by reason of their pouerty, may venture their persons hither, & heere not only serue God, but helpe also these poore Indians, and build a sure foundation for themselues, but if you can do neither of these, then send your earnest prayers to God for the prosperity of this worke. The first point in order, & last Article of this cō∣mandement remaineth now to be handled: which is concerning the persons to whom we are to bee li∣berall, To whom that is to all men in generall, who stand in need of our releefe and helpe. For if corne be cast vpon the waters, or very watry grounds, it cannot prosper or bring forth increase: So if good works be bestowed on vnthankfull or vnable persons; wee are not to expect a recompence of reward frō them. From whence wee may gather an argument from the lesse to the greater: that if wee are to be liberall to such as cannot or will not requite vs, or to such as will not deserue our kindnesse, how much more to them, that may deserue our good will, or will make conscience (if they can) to be thankfull vnto vs in the best manner? So then if we must be liberal both to good men and bad; to thankfull and vn∣thankfull, to our enemies and friends, it followeth that we must be Charitable to all men. Galath. 6.10. And this is the rule of S. Paul, do good to all, but specially to the houshold of Faith. Though the chil∣dren of God bee chiefely to be respected: yet are we not to withhold our almes from any one, if they need our helpe. The rule of Christ is answerable: Giue him that asketh, Matth. 5.52. and from him that would borrow of thee turne not away. Doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you. And so Paul expoundeth this rule of Christ: If thine ene∣mie hunger, Rom. 12.20. feed him, if hee thirst, giue him drinke. If then we must feed and cloath our enemies and per∣secutors, how much more our friends and helpers; it remaineth then that we must do good to all. From hence we may take iust occasion to blame the vncharitable disposition of hard hearted rich men, and wealthy Parishes, which suffer multitudes of poore men and women to perish in their quar∣ters for want of their reliefe. The commandement of God is, that there should be no beggers in Israel. But looke into the streets of our Cities, and passe from them into all the quarters of England, and you shall find neither Court nor Countrey, Citie, or Village, without the importunate crauings of those that crie Giue, Giue. From hence it is that so many base theeues, and pettie robbers, lurke in eue∣ry corner, vntill the common trees of execution hang them vp. From hence it is that so many poore mens children, wanting the charitie of others, to see them brought vp in learning and some honest vo∣cation, were better if they had neuer been borne, then to liue in such misorder, as most of them doe. Repent therefore betimes, you able misers, lest the woe of Saint Iames fall vpon you, Iames 5.1. lest God heare the cries and curses of the poore, and heape miseries, without measure, vpon such miserable men. And now let me turne your eyes, my brethren of Eng∣land, to behold the waters of Virginia : where you may behold a fit subiect for the exercise of your Li∣beralitie, persons enough on whom you may cast a∣way your Bread, and yet not without hope, after many daies to finde it. Yea, I will not feare to af∣firme vnto you, that those men whom God hath made able any way to be helpefull to this Plantati∣on, and made knowne vnto them the necessities of our wants, are bound in conscience by vertue of this precept, to lay their helping hands to it, either with their purse, persons, or prayers, so farre forth as God hath made them fit for it. For it is euident that our wise God hath bestowed no gift vpon any man, for their priuate vse, but for the good of other men, whom God shall offer to their Liberalitie. Wherefore, since God hath opened the doore of Virginia, to our countrey of England, wee are to thinke that God hath, as it were, by word of mouth called vs in, to bestow our seuerall Charity on them. And that this may the better appeare, we haue ma∣ny reasons to encourage vs to bee Liberall minded and open-handed toward them. First, if we consider the almost miraculous be∣ginning, and continuance of this plantation, we must needs confesse that God hath opened this pas∣sage vnto vs, and led vs by the hand vnto this work. For the Marriners that were sent hither first to dis∣couer this Bay of Chaesapeac, found it onely by the meere directions of Gods prouidence: for I heard one of them confesse, that euen then, when they were entred within the mouth of the Bay, they dee∣med the place they sought for to haue beene many degrees further. The finding was not so strange, but the continuance and vpholding of it hath bin most wonderfull. I may fitly compare it to the growth of an Infant, which hath been afflicted from his birth with some grieuous sicknes, that many times no hope of life hath remained, and yet it liueth still. Againe, if there were nothing else to encourage vs, yet this one thing may stirre vs vp to go on cheare∣fully with it: that the Diuell is a capitall enemy a∣gainst it, and continually seeketh which way to hin∣der the prosperitie and good proceedings of it. Yea, hath heretofore so farre preuailed, by his Instru∣ments, the couetous hearts of many back sliding Aduenturers at home, and also by his seruants here: some striuing for superioritie, others by murmu∣rings, mutinies, & plaine treasons; & others by for∣nication, prophanenes, idlenes, and such monstrous sinnes; that he had almost thrust vs out of this king∣dome, and had indeed quitted this Land of vs, if God had not then (as one awaked out of sleepe) stood vp and sent vs meanes of great helpe, when we needed most, and expected least reliefe. The sa∣uing of those two honorable Knights, Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Somers, with Captaine Newport and the rest of the Aduenturers in the Sea Venture, as also their happy deliuerance out of those vnhabi∣ted and vnfrequented (because feared) Ilands of the Barmudaes, could proceed from none other, but the singular prouidence of God. If this worthie Go∣uernour, Sir Thomas Gates, had bin hindred but one weeke longer, it might be feared that the famine, which had by that time deuoured the most of our countrimen heere, would haue consumed the rest. And when hee considering that his weake meanes was not able to restore, or sustaine the burthen of such wofull distresses, had shipped the few remai∣ning for England, and had forsaken with Hannibals sighes, the first builded Iames -Towne: vpon the sud∣den newes met him, of the comming in of that Ho∣norable Lord La war, with a fresh supplie. Where∣upon he presently returned to the Towne he had so lately forsaken. Since, when this English Colony hath taken better root; and as a spreading herbe, whose top hath bin often cropped off, renewes her growth, and spreads her selfe more gloriously, then before. So this Plantation, which the diuell hath so often troden downe, is by the miraculous blessing of God reuiued, and daily groweth to more happy and more hopefull successe. I haue shut vp many things in few words, and haue alleadged this onely to proue vnto vs, that the finger of God hath been the onely true worker heere; that God first shewed vs the place, God first called vs hither, and here God by his speciall prouidence hath maintained vs. Wherefore, by him let vs be encouraged to lay our helping hands to this good work, (yea Gods work) with all the strength of our abilitie. Secondly, let the miserable condition of these naked slaues of the diuell moue you to compassion toward them. They acknowledge that there is a great good God, but know him not, hauing the eyes of their vnderstanding as yet blinded: wherefore they serue the diuell for feare, after a most base manner, sacrificing sometimes (as I haue heere heard) their owne Children to him. I haue sent one Image of their god to the Counsell in England, which is painted vpon one side of a toad-stoole, much like vnto a deformed monster. Their Priests (whom the call Quiokosoughs ) are no other but such as our English Witches are. They liue na∣ked in bodie, as if their shame of their sinne de∣serued no couering: Their names are as naked as their bodie: they esteeme it a vertue to lie, deceiue and steale as their master the diuell teacheth them. Much more might be said of their miserable con∣dition, but I refer the particular narration of these things to some other season. If this bee their life, what thinke you shall become of them after death? but to be partakers with the diuell and his angels in hell for euermore. Wherefore my brethren, put on the bowels of compassion, and let the lamentable estate of these miserable people enter in your consi∣deration: One God created vs, they haue reasona∣ble soules and intellectuall faculties as well as wee; we all haue Adam for our common parent: yea, by nature the condition of vs both is all one, the seruants of sinne and slaues of the diuell. Oh re∣member (I beseech you) what was the state of England before the Gospell was preached in our Countrey? How much better were we then, and concerning our soules health, then these now are? Let the word of the Lord sound out that it may be heard in these parts; and let your faith which is to∣ward God spread it selfe abroad, and shew forth the charitable fruits of it in these barren parts of the world: And let him know that he which hath conuer∣ted a sinner from going a stray out of his way, shall saue a soule from death, and hide a multitude of sinnes. But if any of vs should misdoubt that this bar∣barous people is vncapable of such heauenly my∣steries, let such men know that they are farre mista∣ken in the nature of these men, for besides the pro∣mise of God, which is without respect of persons, made as well to vnwise men after the flesh, as to the wise, &c. let vs not thinke that these men are so sim∣ple as some haue supposed them: for they are of bodie lustie, strong, and very nimble: they are a ve∣ry vnderstanding generation, quicke of apprehen∣sion, suddaine in their dispatches, subtile in their dealings, exquisite in their inuentions, and industri∣ous in their labour. I suppose the world hath no better marke-men with their bow and arrowes then they be; they will kill birds flying, fishes swim∣ming, and beasts running: they shoote also with meruailous strength, they shot one of our men be∣ing vnarmed quite through the bodie, and nailed both his armes to his bodie with one arrow: one of their Children also, about the age of 12. or 13. yeares, killed a bird with his arrow in my sight. The seruice of their God is answerable to their life, be∣ing performed with great feare and attention, and many strange dumb shewes vsed in the same, stret∣ching forth their limbes and straining their bodie, much like to the counterfeit women in England who faine themselues bewitched, or possessed of some euill spirit. They stand in great awe of their Quiokosoughs or Priests, which are a generation of vipers euen of Sathans owne brood. The manner of their life is much like to the popish Hermits of our age; for they liue alone in the woods, in houses sequestred from the common course of men, neither may any man bee suffered to come into their house or to speake with them, but when this Priest doth call him. He taketh no care for his victuals, for all such kinde of things both bread and water, &c. are brought vnto a place neere vnto his cottage and there are left, which hee fetcheth for his proper neede. If they would haue raine, or haue lost any thing, they haue their recourse to him, who coniu∣reth for them, and many times preuaileth. If they be sicke, he is their Physition, if they bee wounded he sucketh them. At his command they make warre and peace, neither doe they any thing of moment without him. I will not bee teadious in these strange Narrations, when I haue more perfectly en∣tered into their secrets, you shall know all. Finally, there is a ciuill gouernement amongst them which they strictly obserue, and shew thereby that the law of Nature dwelleth in them: for they haue a rude kinde of Common-wealth, and rough gouerne∣ment, wherein they both honour and obey their Kings, Parents, and Gouernours, both greater and lesse, they obserue the limits of their owne possessions, and incroach not vpon their neigh∣bours dwellings. Murther is a capitall crime scarce heard of among them: adultery is most seuere∣ly punished, and so are their other offences. These vnnurtured grounds of reason in them, may serue to incourage vs: to instruct them in the know∣ledge of the true God, the rewarder of all righte∣ousnesse, not doubting but that he that was power∣full to saue vs by his word, when we were nothing, wil be mercifull also to these sonnes of Adam in his appointed time, in whom there bee remaining so many footsteps of Gods image. Wherefore you wealthy men of this world, whose bellies God hath filled with his hidden Treasure: trust not in vncer∣taine riches, neither cast your eyes vpon them; for riches taketh her to her wings as an Eagle, and fli∣eth into Heauen. Prov . 3. But bee rich in good works ready to distribute or communicate. 1. Tim. . How shamefully doe the most of you either miserably detaine, or wickedlie mispend Gods goods, whereof hee made you his stewards? The Couetous person seekes to hide his talent from the good of others and himselfe, ho∣nouring it as his God, which should be his seruant. The Prodigall men of our land make hast to fling a∣way Gods treasures, as a greeuous burthen which they desire to be eased of. Some make no scruple at it, to spend yearely an hundred pounds, two, three, fiue hundred, and much more about dogs, haukes and hounds and such sports; which will not giue fiue hundred pence to the releefe of Gods poore members. Others will not care to lose two or three thousand pound in a night, at Cards and Dice, and yet suffer poore Lazarus to perish in their streets for want of their Charitable Almes. Yea diuers will hyer gardens at great rents, and build stately houses for their whoores, which haue no compassion on the Fatherlesse and widdowes. How much better were it for these men to remember the afflictions of Io∣seph, to extend the bowels of their compassion to the poore, the fatherles, afflicted and the like, then to mispend that which they must giue a straite ac∣count of at the day of iudgement? Are not these miserable people heere better then hawks, hounds, whores and the like? O you that spend so much on them, thinke it no dishonour to your persons, no impouerishing to your state, to bestow somewhat to the raising vp of Christs kingdome, and mainte∣nance of so holy and heauenly an action as this is, God of his goodnesse that hath giuen you abilitie to performe it, make you willing to help it forward with the best of your power. For after many daies thou shalt find it. Hitherto haue we spoken of the commandement and the seuerall branches of the same: Now follows the reason of this Commandement which the Holy Ghost v∣seth heere to stir vs vp vnto liberality, which is ta∣ken from the reward which wee shall haue of our well-doing, for after many daies thou shalt find it, the some of which reason is, that though God doe not presently reward our well doing, but doe defer the requitall of it for many daies, yet thy good works shall not perish, but God at the appointed time, shall abundantly recompence thy liberality. Out of this reason wee may gather two notable conclusi∣ons touching the reward of liberality. First wee may conclude from hence, that God doth not al∣waies giue a present reward to the good works; he doth for the most part defer his rewards manie daies, sometimes many yeares, yea sometimes e∣uen till death it selfe, when hee will neuer cease to reward vs according to our works, with vnspeakea∣ble ioyes of blessed immortality. And the wisdome of God doth thus defer his rewards for most singu∣lar reasons. For if God should presently reward good works, who then would not be a prodigall gi∣uer, who then would bee a faithfull giuer? For when a man is certaine of present gaine he will not spare to giue abundantly, because he seeth an ex∣ceeding profit ready to be put into his hands for so doing: and this would stirre vp the most couetous wretch in the world to be liberall, gaping out of meere couetousnesse, after an ouer-plus of reward. Wherefore God hath made the time and conditi∣on of his rewards doubtfull, that we might not bee couetous of the benefit: but that he might exercise our faith, and teach vs with patience of hope to expect the appointed time of his reward. The prin∣cipall point of perfect charity is, that wee giue in faith, whose true nature is to depend vpon God for the good successe of our almes, Heb. 11.1. for Faith is the ground of things that are hoped for, & the euidence of things that are not seene: now if we should haue the reward of good works in the view of our eies, and ready as it were to be put into our hands, what place would then be left for practise of faith whose obiect is vn∣seene, whose hopes bee of afterwards? Wherefore S. Paul aduiseth Timothy to charge them that bee rich in this world to be rich in good works, 1. Tim. 6. not for any present reward which they were to haue, but onely for the benefits to come, laying vp (saith he) in store for themselues a good foundation, against the time to come, that they may obtaine eternall life. The message which God sent to Cornelius by his Angell is worthy to be noted of vs. Acts 10.4. Thy prayers (saith the Angell to him) and thine almes are come vp into re∣membrance before God. Cornelius was a man that had giuen much almes to the poore, which God did not presently reward, for hee did seeme rather to haue forgotten his liberality, wherefore now hee saith that his almes are come vp into remem∣brance, the meaning whereof must needs bee, that though God did seeme to neglect his liberality, yet he had not forgotten his almes, but now meant to reward them. 2. Kings. 4.10. The Shunamite woman that Pro∣uided a chamber, table, stoole, and candlesticke for Elisha. Acts. 9.36. And Tabitha, which is Dorcas, that was so full of good works and almes▪ deeds which she did, were both at the first view rather punished for their good works, then presently rewarded: for the first lost her onely sonne, the second fell sicke, and vn∣timely died. But marke the ende, God forgat not to requite them, euen in this world, for the Shuna∣mite had her sonne restored to her aliue by the prayer of Elisha ▪ and Dorcas by the ministery of S. Peter was raised againe to life. By this that hath bin said, it may easily appeare, that God dooth out of his infinit wisdome defer the time, & prolong (ma∣ny daies for the most part) the reward of our almes and liberality; from whence we may learne, that it is the propertie of true charity to neglect the pre∣sent reward. 1. Cor. 13. For Loue the mother of liberality is not couetous, but is bountifull, it beleeueth all things, it hopeth all things: and Faith the grounde and first pedegree of right giuing, doth not make hast, Isa. 28.16. but reposeth it selfe vpon the expectation of hope. Wherefore in communicating our goods, and distributing our almes, let vs haue no couetous eye, ayming at the present profit: but let vs depend with faith vpon the future blessing which shall come in due season. For if wee would thoroughly consider the thing as it is, wee shall finde that all the reward of our well doing comes not from any me∣rit or desert of ours, but onely from the meere mer∣cy of God. What man can say that the goods which he possesseth be his owne? Or what haue wee that we haue not receiued? When wee haue made the most and best of our selues, we are but the stewards of Gods goods, and the Almners of his purse. Why then should wee looke to be payed extraordinarily for the giuing of that which is not our owne, but which wee are commaunded by our Master to be∣stow? We haue more need to pray with Dauid, Psal. 130. . O Lord if thou bee extreame to marke what is done amisse, who may abide it? And to confesse, that when wee haue done all that we can, we are but vnprofitable seruants. Luke 17.20 It follows then that all the good which we doe receiue, comes not from our deserts, but onely from the riches of Gods bountie, which rewardeth vs according to our works done, without any de∣sert of ours whatsoeuer. Wherefore the eyes of li∣berality do not looke after the reward of the worke, but they search how to do the worke, how to giue the almes, so as that they may bee pleasing to God, and of him accepted, and by him (if hee see it good) rewarded. Let then your liberall minds (you honorable and charitable Aduenturers of Virginia ) be stirred vp to cast your almes on the waters of Virginia, with∣out hope of present profit. The base affections of the Vsurer will not looke for the ouerplus of en∣crease, vntill the couenanted time of his loane be expired. The husbandman casting his seed into the earth, waiteth vpon God vntil Haruest for a fruitful crop: verily he that beleeueth doth not make haste. Be not ouer hastie with God: God will not yet re∣ward you, that he may make you more famous in the world, that the world may see your zeale, and beare witnesse to the patience of your faith, not to greedie haste of couetous desires. The worke is ho∣nourable, and now more then euer, sustained by most honorable men. O let vs not then be weary of well-doing: fortie yeares were expired, before Is∣rael could plant in Canaan, and yet God had called them by the word of his mouth, had led them him∣selfe by an high hand. Yet may you boldly looke for a shorter time of reward. The returnes which you haue from the East Indies, though they be ex∣ceeding rich, yet is the aduenture doubtfull, the ex∣pence chargeable, and the expectation of returne, of three yeares continuance. Let me aduise you to be as liberall in aduenture hither, and I dare affirme, that by Gods assistance, your profitable returnes shall be of more certainty, and much shorter expectation. Remember, I be∣seech you, how many liues were lost, how many yeares were spent, what discouragements, what great losses the Aduenturers of Spaine and Portu∣gale suffered and vnder-went, before they could be setled in the West Indies, or receiue any profitable returne from thence: and now behold what rich loads, what profitable returnes are yearely shipped from thence. Shall our Nation, hitherto famous for noble attempts, and the honorable finishing of what they haue vndertaken, be now taxed for in∣constancie, and blamed by the enemies of our pro∣testation, for vncharitablenesse? Yea, shall we be a scorne among Princes, and a laughing stocke a∣mong our neighbour Nations, for basely leauing what we honorably began; yea, for beginning a Discouerie, whose riches other men shall gather, so soone as wee haue forsaken it? Awake you true hearted English men, you seruants of Iesus Christ, remember that the Plantation is Gods, and the re∣ward your Countries. Wherefore, aime not at your present priuat gaine, but let the glory of God, whose Kingdome you now plant, & good of your Coun∣trey, whose wealth you seeke, so farre preuaile with you▪ that you respect not a present returne of gaine for this yeare or two: but that you would more li∣berally supplie for a little space, this your Christian worke, which you so charitably began. As for those spirits of slander, whom the Diuell hath stirred vp to speak euill of this good Land, and to weaken the hands of our brethren, lest they should go forward, and pull Satan out of his Dominions▪ Let them take heed, lest the punishment of Shammua and his nine companions, the faithlesse searchers of the Land of Canaan, do befall them: and that they ne∣uer liue to taste of the commodities of this good Land. But lest I may seeme to exhort you to an vnpro∣fitable Liberalitie, or to argue God of forgetfulnes to those that serue him faithfully: heare now what a comfortable promise of reward God hath made vnto vs in these words: which is, That after many dayes we shall find. If God should haue commanded vs to cast away without finding, some discourage∣ment there might haue been to our weake nature; but since God hath assuredly promised vs, that we shall find in the end, who will not obey the com∣mand? who will not be Liberall. God hath been al∣wayes found true in his word, most faithfull in his promises. Genes. 12. If God do promise Abraham that his seed shall inherit the Land of Canaan: Abrahams poste∣ritie shall after many daies in the appointed time be planted peaceably in the land of Canaan If God promise Salomon wisdome and riches: . King. 1. Salomon shall be wiser and richer then any Prince of the earth. If God promiseth that he will giue his onely Sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him shall not perish, but haue life euerlasting: Iohn 3. his Sonne Iesus Christ shal be borne into the world at the appointed time, and vndergoe the weight of Gods wrath for re∣demption of beleeuers. Shall God then faithfully performe all his promises in so great matters, and be vnfaithfull in lesser matters: oh let no such base con∣ceit of the Almightie enter into our minds, as to thinke that he that spared not his owne Sonne, Rom. 8.32. to performe his promises to vs, will be so vnmindfull of vs in so small a thing. The promises of God are many, Prou. 10.24. and most bountifull. There is that scattereth (saith Salomon ) and is more encreased: and in the next verse hee addeth: The liberall person shall haue plentie, or (as the Hebrew text is) The soule of blessing shall be made fat, and hee that watereth, shall also haue raine. Most comfortable is the promise of Liberali∣tis, set downe by Isaiah, Chap. 58.8. And if thou be liberall, thy light shall breake forth as the morning, and thy health shall grow speedily: thy righteousnesse shall goe before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. What can be said more to encourage vs? Prou. 19.1 Yet Salo∣mon addeth: He that hath mercie on the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord; and the Lord will recompence him what he hath giuen. Wherefore, what is with Liberality gi∣uen, is not cast away, but lent vnto the Lord, vnto him that is able to repay vs, Psalm for both the heauen and the earth are his; and who is also willing to recom∣pence it, for he hath promised so to do, and confir∣med his word and promises by the Sacraments, his seales. We do willingly lend to a good Creditor, especially if we haue his bond, with his hand and seale to pay vs. What, shall we trust man, and distrust God? O far be it from vs, my brethren, let no such distrust possesse our vncharitable minds. If we de∣sire any more promises, let vs obserue what coun∣sell Christ gaue vnto the Pharisies: Luke . Giue almes of those things which you haue, and behold all things shall bee cleane vnto you : which is as much, as if he should say, giue almes, be liberall; for in so doing, your goods shall be sanctified vnto you, and you shall attaine to an holy and pure vse of your goods. The Scripture is plaine in this point. I will now come therefore to giue you a view in briefe, of those commodities and rewards that we shall find heere, after not many, but a few dayes. First, our Liberalitie grounded on faith, and pra∣ctised in loue, will be a meanes to helpe our soules forward in their passage to heauen; for they are the high-way and trodden path, wherein wee must walke to euerlasting life. Therefore, the more any man abounds in good workes, the more comforta∣ble shall be his passage. Secondly, they are such necessarie fruits of faith, that faith cannot goe without them: for where no good workes are, there is no faith; and where true sauing saith is, there will be shewed good workes; yea, we cannot hold true faith from doing good: reade for the proofe of this, the Epistle of Saint Iames, and the first Epistle of Saint Iohn, besides the places which we haue heretofore alleaged. Thirdly, Liberalitie is a notable meanes against couetousnesse: for where true Charitie dwels, there is no roome left for Couetousnesse to harbour in: two contraries cannot be both at once in one sub∣iect; God and the Diuell will not dwell together, neither can Couetousnes and Liberalitie be linked together in one breast. Thus shall the Lord abundantly reward our soules for our liberalitie, and many waies more be∣sides if we bee truly charitable. But the bountie of God would haue vs to tast of some temporall bles∣sings besides, and after a few daies, if we be cheere∣full giuers, returne a plentifull reward home vnto vs. Wherefore that I might content the longing minds of euery man, I thought it fit in the last place to recite a few commodities which in short time we may finde here in Virginia, for the charitie be∣stowed in this Plantation. The whole Continent of Virginia situate within the degrees of 34. and 47. is a place beautified by God, with all the orna∣ments of nature, and enriched with his earthly trea∣sures: that part of it, which we already possesse, be∣ginning at the Bay of Chaesapheac, and stretching it selfe in Northerly latitude to the degrees of 39. and 40. is interlined with seuen most goodly Ri∣uers, the least whereof is equall to our Riuer of Thames: and all these Riuers are so neerely ioy∣ned, As 14. or 16. miles. as that there is not very much distance of drie ground betweene either of them, and those seuerall maine lands are euery where watered with many veines or creekes of water, which sundrie waies doe ouerthwart the land, and make it almost nauigable from one Riuer to the other. The commoditie whereof to those that shall inhabite this land is infi∣nite in respect of the speedie and easie transpor∣tance of goods from one Riuer to the other. I can∣not better manifest it vnto you, but in aduising you to consider whither the water or land hath beene more beneficiall to the Low-Countries: but here we shall haue the commoditie both of water and land more readie with lesse charge and labour then hath been bestowed by them in turning land into water. The Riuer which wee inhabit (commonly called Powhatans Riuer) ebbeth and floweth 140. miles into the maine; at the mouth whereof are the two Forts of Henrico and Charles: 42. miles vpward is the fi st and mother Christian towne seated, called Iames-Towne, and 70. miles beyond that vpward, is the new towne of Henrico built, and so named in the memorie of the Noble Prince Henry of lasting and blessed memorie: tenne miles-beyond this Towne is a place called the Fals, because the Riuer hath there a great descent falling downe betweene many minerall Rocks which bee there: twelue miles farther beyond this place is there a Christall Rocke wherewith the Indians doe head many of their arrowes: three dayes iourney from thence is there a rocke or stonie hill found, which is in the top couered all ouer with a perfect and most rich siluer oare. Our men that went to discouer those parts had but two iron pickaxes with them, and those so ill tempered that the points of them turned againe and bowed at euery stroake, so that wee could not search the entrailes of y t place, yet some triall was made of that oare with good successe, and argument of much horpe. Sixe daies iourney beyond this Mine a great ridge of high hils doe runne along the maine land, not farre from whom the Indians report a great Sea doth runne, which we commonly call a South Sea, but in respect of our habitation is a West Sea, for there the Sunne setteth from vs. The higher ground is much like vnto the molde of France, clay and sand being proportio∣nably mixed together at the top; but if we digge any depth (as wee haue done for our bricks) wee finde it to bee redde clay, full of glistering spangles. There bee many rockie places in all quarters; and more then probable likeliehoods of rich Mines of all sorts: though I knew all, yet it were not conue∣nient at this time that I should vtter all, neither haue we had meanes to search for any thing as wee ought, thorough present want of men, and former wants of prouision for the belly. As for Iron, Steele, Antimonium, and Terra sigillata, they haue rather offered themselues to our eyes and hands, then bin sought for of vs. The aire of the Countrey (espe∣cially about Henrico and vpward) is very temperate and agreeth well with our bodies. The extremitie of Sommer is not so hoat as Spaine, nor the colde of Winter so sharpe as the frosts of England. The Spring and Haruest are the two longest seasons and most pleasant, the Summer and Winter are both but short: The Winter is for the most part drie and faire, but the Summer watered often with many great and suddaine shewers of raine; where∣by the cold of Winter is warmed, and the heate of Summer cooled. Many haue died with vs hereto∣fore thorough their owne filthinesse and want of bodilie comforts for sicke men; but now very few are sicke among vs: not aboue three persons a∣mongst all the inhabitants of H nrico ; I would to God our soules were no sicker then our bodies, and that other of Gods blessings were as generall and common as the bodilie health. I haue seene it by experience, and dare boldly affirme it, that sicknesse doth more rage in England quarterly, then heere yearely. I doubt that hereafter when our Hospitall or Guest-house is built vp, you heare of many more cut off by the sword of Iustice (vnlesse the better people be sent ouer) then perished by the diseases of the Countrey. The naturall people of the Land are generallie such as you heard of before. A people to be feared of those that come vpon them without defensiue Armour, but otherwise faint-hearted (if they see their Arrowes cannot pearce) and easie to bee sub∣dued. Shirts of Male, or quilted cotten coates are the best defence against them. There is but one or two of their pettie Kings, that for feare of vs haue desired our friendship; and those keepe good quar∣ter with vs being very pleasant amongst vs, and (if occasion be) seruiceable vnto vs. Our eldest friends bee Pipsco and Choapoke, who are our ouertwhart neighbours at Iames-Towne, and haue been friendly to vs in our great want. The other is the Werewance of Chescheak, who but lately traded with vs peaceab∣ly. If we were once the masters of their Countrey, and they stoode in feare of vs (which might with few hands imployed about nothing else, be in short time brought to passe) it were an easie matter to make them willingly to forsake the diuell, to em∣brace the faith of Iesus Christ, and to be baptized. Besides, you cannot easilie iudge how much they would be auaileable to vs in our discoueries of the Countrey, in our buildings and plantings, and quiet prouision for our selues, when wee may peaceably passe from place to place without neede of armes or guarde. The meanes for our people to liue and subsist here of themselues are many and most certaine both for Beasts, Birds, Fish, and Hearbes. The beasts of the Countrey are for the most part wilde: as Lions, Beares, Wolues and Deare: Foxes blacke and read, Rakowns, Beuers, Possowns, Squerrels, Wilde-Cats, whose skinnes are of great price, and Muske-Rats which yeelde Muske as the Muske-Cats doe. There be two kindes of beasts amongst these most strange: one of them is the female Pos∣sown, which will let forth her young out of her bellie, and take them vp into her bellie againe at her pleasure without hurt to her selfe, neither think this to be a Trauellers tale, but the very truth; for nature hath framed her fit for that seruice, my eyes haue been witnes vnto it, and we haue sent of them and their young ones into England. The other strange conditioned creature is the flying Squirrell, which thorough the helpe of certaine broad flaps of skin growing on each side of her forelegs, will flie from tree to tree 20. or 30. paces at one flight and more, if she haue the benefit of a small breath of winde. Besides these, since our comming hither, wee haue brought both Kine, Goates, and Hogges, which prosper well, and would multiplie exceedingly if they might bee prouided for. This Countrey be∣sides is replenished with birds of al sorts which haue bin the best sustenance of flesh, which our men haue had since they came; also Eagels and Haukes of all sorts, amongst whom are Ausprech, fishing Hauke, and the Cormorant. The woods be euery whereful of wilde Turkies which abound, and will runne as swift as a Grey-hound. In winter our fields be full of Cranes, Herons, Pigeons, Partridges and Black∣birds: the riuers and creekes bee ouer spread euery where with water foule of the greatest and least sort, as Swans, flocks of Geese & Brants, Duck and Mal∣lard, Sheldrakes, Dyuers, &c. besides many other kinds of rare and delectable birds, whose names and natures I cannot yet recite, but we want the means to take them. The Riuers abound with Fish both small and great: the sea fish come into our Riuers in March, and continue vntill the end of September: great sculles of Herings come in first: Shads of a great bignesse, and Rock-fish follow them. Trouts, Base, Flounders, and other daintie fish come in be∣fore the other bee gone: then come multitudes of great Sturgeons, wherof we catch many, and should do more, but that we want good nets answerable to the breadth and deapth of our Riuers: besides our channels are so foule in the bottome with great logs and trees, that we often break our nets vpon them: I cannot reckon nor giue proper names to the di∣u rs kinds of fresh fish in our riuers; I haue caught with mine angle, Pike, Carpe, Eele, Perches of sixe seuerall kindes, Crea-fish and the Torope or little Turtle, besides many smaller kinds. Wherfore, since God hath filled the elements of earth, aire, and wa∣ters with his creatures, good for our food and nou∣rishment, let not the feare of staruing hereafter, or of any great want, dishearten your valiant minds from comming to a place of so great plentie: if the Countrey were ours, and meanes for the taking of them (which shortly I hope shall bee brought to passe,) then all these should be ours: we haue them now, but we are fain to fight for them, then should we haue them without that trouble. Feare not then to want food, but onely prouide meanes to get it here. We haue store of wild-foule in England, but what are they better for them that cannot come by them, wanting meanes to catch them, euen such is and hath been our case heretofore. But these are not all the commodities which we may finde heere: for the earth will yeelde much more fruite to our industrious labours, as hath been proued by the Corne and other things which wee haue planted this last yeare. I haue made proofe of it with the helpe of three more, being a stranger to that business and hauing not a bodie inured to such labour, and set so much corne, horis succisiuis vnius septimanae, in the idle howres of one weeke, as will suffice me for bread one quarter of a yeare: and one commoditie is besides in this corne, that from the time of setting, vnto the time of gathering, fiue moneths will abundantly suffice: for we set corne from the beginning of March, vntil the end of May, and reape or gather in Iulie, August & September. Our English seeds thriue very well heere, as Pease, Onions, Turnips, Cabbages, Coleflowers, Carrets, Time, Parseley, Hysop, Marioram, and many other whereof I haue tasted and eaten. What should I name vnto you the diuers sorts of Trees, sweete woods and Physicall plants: the di∣uers kinds of Oakes and Walnut-trees. The Pines, Pitch-trees, Soape-ashes trees, Sassafras, Cedar, Ash, Maple, Cyprus, and many more which I dailie see, and admire at the beautie and riches which God hath bestowed vpon this people, that yet know not how to vse them. Wherefore you (right wise and noble Aduen∣turers of Virginia ) whose hearts God hath stirred vp to build him a Temple, to make him an house, to conquer a Kingdome for him here: be not discou∣raged with those many lamentable assaults that the diuell hath made against vs: he now rageth most, because he knoweth his kingdome is to haue a short end. Goe forward boldly, and remember that you fight vnder the banner of Iesus Christ, that you plant his Kingdome, who hath already broken the Serpents head: God may deferre his temporall re∣ward for a season, but be assured that in the end you shall find riches and honour in this world, and bles∣sed immortality in the world to come. And you my brethren my fellow labourers, send vp your earnest prayers to God for his Church in Virginia, that since his haruest heere is great, but the labourers few, hee would thrust forth labourers into his har∣uest; and pray also for mee that the ministration of his Go pell may be powrefull and effectuall by me to the saluation of many, and aduancement of the kingdome of Iesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, bee all ho∣nour and glorie for euer∣more, Amen.