The Song of Songs, which was Salomons metaphrased in English heroiks by way of dialogue. With certayne of the brides ornaments, viz. poeticall essayes vpon a diuine subiect. Whereunto is added a funerall elegie, consecrate to the memorie of that euer honoured Lord, Iohn, late Bishop of London. By R.A. Aylett, Robert, 1583-1655? The Song of Songs, which was Salomons metaphrased in English heroiks by way of dialogue. With certayne of the brides ornaments, viz. poeticall essayes vpon a diuine subiect. Whereunto is added a funerall elegie, consecrate to the memorie of that euer honoured Lord, Iohn, late Bishop of London. By R.A. Aylett, Robert, 1583-1655? The Pastor to the Authour. I Out of Pulpit oft haue beene thy Teacher; Now in this Booke thou art to me a Preacher, God grant what's there and here deliuered, May daily in our liues be practised. Io. Whyte. To The Authour. THis Worke diuine to paint with commendation, Were sure a worke of supererogation In mee, yet in plaine english I say this, The Booke 's the theorie, the practice His. B. L. WHen I at home thy Practice doe behold, Me thinks it goes beyond all contemplation, But soone this Booke hath that conceit control'd, And rays'd my soule to heau'nly admiration, Thy skill so here thy Practice doth transcend, I see there's none so good but may amend. W. B. Affinis-domesticus. OF making many Bookes there is no end, And too much reading wearieth the flesh, But more that I to reading these intend, They more my Soule and Spirit doe refresh. I. A. YOu carelesse Church-men, that your time mis-spend In idlenesse, or worldly cogitation, Learne of the Learned in the Lawes, to spend Your idle time in holy Meditation. Denout Ciuilians of our English Nation, Besides their true discharge of publique place, Giue faire example, worthy imitation, By learned Pen, to season soules with grace. Hayward, in Prose; our Authour here in Verse, Both Doctors of another facultie, Doe sacred heau'nly Mysteries reherse, As if they did professe Diuinitie. Goe on (braue Spirits) while your deuouter Lines Shame them that falsly call themselues Diuines. A. Magirus. Pag. 10. Stan. 1. Lin. 6. for shine, r ade shone. pag. 11. stan. 2. li . 7. for amidst, r. amisse. pag. 23. stan. 2. lin▪ 6. for confesse, r. confessed. p. 31. stan. 2. lin. 2. for will, r. nill. p. 67. stan. 3. lin. 1. for fellowes, r. followes. p. 75. stan. 1. l▪ 2. for heau'n. r. hau'n. p. 111. stan. 1. lin. 1. for assay'd, r. as ail'd. p. . sta. 2. l. 1. for within, r. which in. p. 123. stan. 1. lin. 5. for abye, r. abyes. pag. 135. stan. 3 lin. 7. for religious, r. Religions. p. 139. stan. 3. lin. 9. for imperfecti∣ons, r. impe fection's. p 140. stan. 1. lin. 3. for fand, r. fend. p. 145. stan. 4. lin. 8. reade so mis-spend. p. 152. stan. 1. l. 5. for ioynes, r. ioynts. pag. 187. stan. 3. lin. 7. for will dread, r. wildred. THE SONG OF SONGS, WHICH WAS SALOMONS. The Argument. MY Muse, that whilome, swaid by lust of youth, Did spend her strength in idle wanton toyes, Now viewes her vanity, with mickle ruth, And as awak'd doth seeke for solid ioyes, Such as pure soules to blessednesse conuoyes: This is the cause why shee so much doth long, Act. 2. 3. His grace implor'd who in a mighty noyse Appear'd in clouen tongues, to teach my tongue To sing these sacred mysteries, this SALOMONS song. CHAP. I. The Churches loue to Christ shee doth defend, And cleere her selfe from all indignitie: She cals her Spouse, who shewes her how to wend, They bothdelight in sweet communitie. W Ith kisses of thy mouth doe thou me kisse: Church. Thy loue is better vnto me then wine, Thine oyntments sauour good and pleasant is, A sweet perfume is that blest Name of thine, Therefore the Maydes all in thy loue combine. Oh draw me, and we after thee will run, If to thy treasures thou our hearts incline, We will reioyce, and in that ioy begun, We will recount thy loues, with all that errours shun. Scorne me not (Sions Nymphes) though I seeme browne For I am faire and comely, as a Rose, I (till Sunnes scorching beames on me did frowne,) Was like those that in Salomons tents repose: My Mothers sonnes my beauty did expose To the Sunnes heate, and raging, me abiected, So did they me a baser way dispose To keepe strange Vineyards not to be respected, Whil'st mine (ay me) lay vnmanur'd quite neglected. Oh tell me where, thou whom my soule doth loue, Thou feed'st thy Sheepe, and rests them at noone day: For why alas should I a strag'er proue, And feede my flocks with them that goe astray? Fairest of mayds, Christ. since thou know'st not the way Tread not in steps that into errours moue; But leade thou forth thy Kids to leape and play Vpon the hills, the Shepheards tents aboue, To Pharaoh's Hoste and Charrets I compare my loue, Thy comely cheekes are deckt with orient stones, Thine iu'ry neck with spangles all is graced, Yet will we make thee farre more precious ones Of gold and siluer ioyntly enterlaced. When as my King is at the table placed, Church. He sends forth smells most odoriferous: By night he like a bunch of Myrrhe embraced My loue is like a Cypresse berry'd bush, Which in the gardens of Engaddi men doe crush. Faire is my loue, Christ. behold my loue is faire, Thine eyes are like the eyes of turtle doue, And my beloued is most debonaire, Church. Pleasant and fruitfull flourishing in loue: Our house with Cedars all is seel'd aboue, And all our walkes are planted like a Cypresse groue, CHAP. II. Their mutuall commendation, and their feast: His fainting Spouse with loue Christ doth refresh; He calls her forth to Gardens neately drest: The Church doth Faith and Hope in him professe. I Am the field Rose, Church. and the Lilly white. Eu'n as a Lilly which the thornes doe throng, Christ. So is my loue amongst the daughters dight: And as an Apple tree the woods among, Church. So's my belou'd mongst men. Oh how I long Vnder his pleasing shadow to abide! His fruit delightfull is vnto my tongue, He sets me at the banquet by his side, And with sweete loue as with a Banner doth me guide. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with smells Of frag ant Apples; I am sicke of loue, His right arme with embracements me compells; About my necke he doth his left hand moue. O Daughters of Hierusalem aboue I charge you, by the Roes, and champaine hind, You stirre not to displease, or wake my loue: I heare his voice, behold he comes behind, And leapes and skips o're hils and mountaynes like the wind. Like a young Roe, and like a youthfull Hart, Is my belou'd: he stands behind the wall, And from the window beames of loue doth dart: See through the lattice he to me doth call Oh come my loue (the fairest aboue all) The winter's past, Christ. the summer is at hand, The Birds doe chirpe, the rayne doth cease to fall, The earth embellisht all with flowers doth stand, And eke the turtles voyce is sounded in our land; The Fig-tree putteth forth her blossomes greene, The tender blooming Vines doe sweetely smell, Arise my loue, the fayrest to be seene, My Doue, that in the cliffes of Rockes dost dwell, Come from the secret corners of thy Cell, Oh, thy sweete counten nce to me vnfold, And let me heare thy voyce, that sounds so well. Thy voyce is pleasanter then can be told, And eke thy countenance most comely to behold. The Foxes take, the little Foxes take That spoyle the Vines, that tender Grapes doe beare, My well belou'd is mine, Church. I am his Make; Alone amongst the Lillies feedes my deere, Vntill the shadow's flye and day appeare. Turne my belou'd, and be thou like the Roe, And Hart, that on the Mountaynes here and there, Like the young Harts that in Mount Bether goe, And like the Hinds and Roes that there make goodly show. CHAP. III. The Church her Spouse in bed doth seeke, not find: Shee doth arise, and seekes him in broad wayes; The watchmen askes: At length, with ioy of mind, Shee finds him out, and glories in his praise. BY silent night as in my bed I lay, Church. I sought to find him, whom my soule doth loue: I sought indeede, but could not finde that way: I said then, I will rise now, and goe proue, If I can finde him, whom my soule doth loue, About the Citie, streetes, and broade wayes round: But all in vaine my labour lost I proue, The Watchmen that doe walke the streetes me found, I ask't, saw you not him whose loue my soule doth wound? It was but little, that I from them past, But I did find him, whom so long I sought: I would not let him goe, but held him fast, Vntill him to my Mothers house I wrought, And to her Chamber, that conceiu'd me, brought. Daughters of Salomons Citie, Christ. Prince of Peace, I charge you driue out your faire Flocks so soft, Your Harts and Hindes, that they doe not disease, Nor my belou'd awake vntill her selfe doth please. Behold, who's shee that fro the Wildernes (Like cloudy pillars of sweet smoke) ascends, Perfum'd with Incense, Myrrhe, and Aloes, And all the spices which the Merchants lends? See Salomon his bed, Church. which to defend, Full sixty valiant men, by night at hand, Most valiant men that Israel can send, Each with his sword girt on his thigh, doth stand, All expert men, as euer were in any land. Salomon made a Throne of Libane wood, Whose Pillars siluer, and whose seate was gold, The couering purple; floore, whereon they stood, All pau'd with choisest loues, and stories old, Which Daughters of Hierusalem had told, With cunning needles; Sions Nymphs, I say, Come forth, and your King Salomon behold, Crown'd with the Crowne, which for his marriage day His Mother made, a day of ioy, of sport, and play. CHAP. IIII. Christ here the graces of his Church commends; His rauisht heart with loue to her doth sh w: Into his Garden he inuites his friends, Where in abundance all delights doe flow. HOw fayre art thou my oue! Christ. behold, how faire! Within thy locks, thy Doues eyes shine most cleere: Like to a flocke of Goates is thy fine Haire, That from the Mount of Gilead appeare: Thy Teeth be like a flocke of sheepe, that are Eu'n shorne, which from their washing vp doe come; And e'ry one amongst them twinnes doe beare, Amongst them barren (loe) there is not one, Thy Lips, like scarlet Ribband, round about them shone. Thy speech is comely, and thy Temples are Within thy locks, like a Pomegranate side: Thy Necke is like the Tow'r that Dauid reare, On which a thousand shields doe hang beside, (All shields of mightie men in armes well tride:) Thy Brests ate like two twinling Roes, close by Feeding on Lillyes neere the Ri er side: Vntill the day appeares and shadowes flie In hills of Myrrhe and Mounts of Incense let me lie. Thou art all faire (my loue) in thee's no spot: Christ. Then come with me (my deare) from Lebanon: My Spouse, from Lebanon why cam'st thou not? And from the top of Amana looke on The top of Shenir, and the hill Hermon From Lyons dens, and from the Leopards hill, Thou rauish't hast mine heart, my louely one, One looke from thee with ioy my heart doth fill, Thy necke in golden chaines cu'n through my hart doth thrill. My Spouse, Christ. my Sister, how faire is my Loue! Oh, how much better are thy brests than wine! The sauour of thine oyntments is aboue All Spice; and from thy Lips drops hony fine, Hony and Milke vnder thy tongue doe line, And all thy garments smell like Lebanon, A fenced Garden is my Spouse, a Vine, A Spring shut vp, a Well seal'd with a stone, Her plants are Spikenards, Saffron, Camphire, Cynamon. All pleasant fruits, Spikenard, and Calamus, There trees of incense, Myrrhe, and Aloes dwell, With all the spice most odoriferous. My Loue's a Spring of Gardens and a Well Of liuing Waters, that from Lebanon fell. Awake, Church. thou North winde; come, thou South, and blow Vpon my Garden, and her plants compell In plenty to my best belou'd to flow, When he to eate his precious fruits doth thither goe. Into my Garden now, Christ. beh ld, I come, My deerest Spouse, my Sister, and my Loue, I eate mine Hony, with mine hony-combe, My Myrrhe, and Spice, I vp together goue: I drinke most pleasant wine, as sweet as loue, Mingled with Milke; Oh Milke and Hony deere! My fr ends, of all my Wine, Fruit, Spices, proue: Oh, eate and drinke, I say, and make good cheere, Yea, drinke aboundantly, Oh, my belou'd, my deere. CHAP. V. Christ doth his Church out of her slumber wake: Her slouth doth turne her heart to mickle woe: Shee suffers persecution for his sake: And to her Maides describes from top to toe. BY night I slept, Church. but ah, mine heart did wake, When (loe) I heard the voyce of Him I loue; He knockt, Christ. and call'd; Open to me, my Make, My loue, my vndefiled, and my Doue: My head is moyst with dew from Heau'n aboue; The night, with droppings, all my locks doth fill, My coate is off; Church. how should I on it proue? My feete are wash'd; how should I them defile? Yet seeing's hand within the doore, mine heart did smile. To open then to my belou'd I rose, And (loe) the Myrrhe did downe mine hands distill, Sweet smelling Myrrhe, which from his hand did wooze, And all the handles of the locke did fill; I open'd then to my belou'd at will, But my beloued had himselfe withdrawne, My loue was gone, my heart grew faint and ill, I sought him, but alas, I sought in vaine; I call'd him; but no answere gaue he me againe. The Watchmen, that about the Citie went, Found me, and smote me, and they wounded mee, The keepers of the Walls my vaile off rent. O Daughters of Hierusalem that bee, I charge you, if you my beloued see, To tell him how that I am sicke of loue. What's thy belou'd? Daugh. fairest of Maides, what's hee, For whom such questions thou to vs dost moue? Tell vs, what's thy belou'd other belou'ds aboue? Ruddy and white is my beloued one, The chiefest of ten thousand: Church. of fine gold His head is; and his locks are bushy growne, Blacke as a Rau'n; his eyes (if you behold) Are like Doues eyes, which by the Brookes doe fold: Their feathers washt in milke, and fitted neate; His cheekes, spice beds, sweet as the Marigold; His lips, like Lillies moist, with Myrrhe all wet: His hands are like gold rings, with stones of Berill set. His belly is bright Iuory, in-laid With Saphires blew; and his faire legs, whereon He stands, like marble pillars, vpright staid By golden sockets, and like Lebanon, His face: and faire as Cedars thereupon. His mouth (behold) most comely is and sweet; He is the loueliest one that can be showne. Thus my belou'd is knowne, if you him meete, O Daughters of Hierusalem, him fairely greete. CHAP. VI. The Church her hope doth to her Maidens cleere: Her Spouse is rauisht with her glorious sight; Before the Queenes and all doth her prefer, And likens her vnto two Armies bright. FAirest of women, Daugh. whither is he gone? Where did he turne? that we may seeke with thee. Into his Garden, Church. my belou'd alone Descended is, to's beds of spicerie; In his delightfull Gardens feedeth hee, And gathereth Lillies beautifull and yong. I my beloueds am, and hee to mee Beloued onely is; for him I long; Behold, I see him f ede the Lillies faire among. My Loue, Christ. thou art, as Tirza, beautifull; And as Hierusalem, comely and gay; And, as an Host with banners, terrible; Thine eyes haue ouercome me: Turne away; Thine haire is like a flocke of Goates, that stray Vpon Mount Gilead; and thy teeth doe shine Like to a flocke of Ewes, which make their way Vp from their washing place; by euery one Are twinnes, and, loe, amongst them barren there ar none. Thy comely cheekes within thy locks appeare Ruddie and white, like a Pomegranate side: Queenes sixtie, fourescore Concubines there were, And Virgins without number, which did ride About my Loue, my vndefil'd, my Bride: Yet her, the Mothers onely happinesse, The choice of all her Mother bare beside, When as the Daughters saw, they praise and blesse; And all the Queenes and Concubines could doe no lesse. Who is't that lookes like Morne? faire as the Moone? Cleare as the Sunne? as banners terrible? When I to view my pruned Gardens come, The Valleys, Fruits, and budding Vines fruitfull, The Pomegranate, that beareth faire and full, My soule vnwares me on the Chariot pight, Of people vnto me most dutifull: Returne, returne, lets see the Shulamite; Returne, what will you see? shee's like two Armies bright. CHAP: VII. The Churches comely graces are descride: Shee doth professe her Faith, Loue, and desire; And shewes how to the marriage of the Bride, All things that are in heau'n and earth conspire. HOw comely are thy feete within thy shooes! Christ. (O Princes Daughter) junctures of thy thigh Like jewels are, which cunning hands did close: Thy nauell, like a goblet round, replyes, I want no liquor: and thy belly lyes Like to a heape of wheate with lillies dight: Thy brests (Roe twinnes) like tow'r of Iuory's Thy necke; thine eyes, like pooles in Hesbon bright; Thy nose, like Lebanons tow'r, that towards Damascus light. Thine head's like Carmel; with thy purple haire, Eu'n Kings within their galleries are bound: How pleasant art thou! for delights how faire! Thy stature's like a Palme tree, straight from ground: Thy brests of grapes are like to clusters round. I said, I would into the Palme tree climbe, And prune the boughs which there amidst I found: Thy brests are like the clusters of the Vine: The odor of thy nose, Apples. is like sweet sops in wine. Thy palate is like wines of sweetest smell, Which downe the throat goe pleasantly and sweet, Causing the lips, that drinke thereof, to tell Tales in their sleepe. Church. I my belou'd doe greet, And his free loue with true affection meet. Let's to the fields, and lodge in countrey cell, And earely in the Vine-yards dew our feet, And see if that the Vines doe prosper well, And how the Grapes doe bud, and Pomegranates doe swell. There plentie of my brests I will thee giue: Behold the Mandrake sweetly smelling ay: Looke, at our gates all ple sant fruits doe liue, Both new and old, which I for thee vp lay, For thee ( my belou'd) against our marriage day. CHAP. VIII. Her vndefiled loue the Church makes knowne, And doth describe the force of iealousie: The Gentiles call'd, by Sisters wooing, showne: Shee hastes her Christ to come in Maiestie. OH, that thou wert eu'n as my brother deere, That suckt my mothers brests: when I without Thee found, I would thee kisse: and none should heere Despise mee: then I would thee leade about Eu'n to my mothers house, that first mee taught. I would thee cause to drinke of spiced wine, And iuyce, that from the Pomegranate runnes out: Thy left arme vnderneath my head should line; Thy right arme with embracements should my loue intwine. Oh, Sions daughters, I you charge no lesse, Stirre not to wake my loue, vntill he please. Who is't that comes vp from the wildernesse, Christ. Leaning on her beloued at her ease? From vnder th' Apple trees I thee did raise, Whereas thy mother did thee first conceaue, Whereas thy mother first began thy dayes. Oh, Church. let thine heart me as a Seale receaue, And as a Signet on thine arme doe thou me cleaue. For Loue is strong as death, and Iealousie Cruell as graue; her coles be brands of fire, Whose raging flames consume most violently: No water can asswage her direfull ire, Nor any floods can drowne her hot desire: No, though a man all that he hath would sell, And let himselfe for wages out to hire, Yet house and substance all shee would refell, Yea eu'n c ntemne: No worldly thing can Loue compell. Wee haue a little Sister, and no moe, Whose brests as yet lye in a narrow rome: Tell vs, What snall wee for our Sister doe, When as the time of wooing her, is come? When as the time of wedding her, Christ. is come, A siluer Palace, with a doore most sound Of Cedar boords, wee'le make for her alone. I am a wall; Church. my brests are towers round: So am I in his eyes as one that fauour found. A fruitfull Vineyard had King Salomon; Christ. In a most fertile place this Vineyard lay: To Dressers he it farm'd, that euery one, For fruits thereof receiu'd, should yearely pay A thousand siluer peeces at their day: My Vine before me I doe dresse alone. If they to thee a thousand must defray, A thousand siluer peeces, Salomon, They for their paynes must haue two hundred euery one. O, thou that in the Gardens sweet dost dwell, My name to thy Companions forth sound; Oh, cause me heare thy voyce, that sounds so well, And make it from the Hills and Rocks rebound. Make haste then (my beloued) to confound Thine enemies: Church. Be like vnto the Roe And youthfull Hart, that on the mountaynes bound, The mountaynes whereon Myrrhe and Spices grow, Make haste, ô my belou'd, thy glorie here to show. FINIS. WHen Da id his Ambassadours did send, Wise Abigal vnto his 1. Sam. 2 . 39. & 40. wife to take, The Lady lowly to the ground did bend, Offring to wash their feete for her Lords sake: Learne here what high account we ought to make, Of messengers that vs glad tidings bring, Which trauell great and labour vndertake, For to espouse vs to our Lord and King, To be 1. Sam. 18. 18. allyde vnto a Prince is no small thing. They that Mark. 1. 3. to desert hearts send forth their voyce, And make his paths streight, and his wayes prepare, Shall as the Bridegroomes Iohn 3. 29. friends with him reioyce, And be Matth. 22. 9. inuited to his heau'nly cheare. Oh, how my soule is rauished, to heare Herselfe inuited as a welcome ghest, By come Can. 2. 14. & 3. 7. my Spouse, my Loue, my Doue, my Deare, Behold, our marriage bed is richly drest, And all things are Ca . 5. 1▪ 2. prepared readie for the feast. Selected Vessell, blessed Paul, who 2. Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. rapt Aboue the triple heau'n, such things didst eye, As here the soules of men in darknesse wrapt, Cannot conceiue, What didst thou there espie? Matth. 22. 2, 3, 4. The Bridegroome cloth'd in loue and majestie, Hasting vnto his marriage consummation, Whose louely'st Bride the Wise man doth Ca . 7. 1, 2, &c. descrie, With all the marriage solemne preparation, The Luk. 2. 32. Gentiles light, and glorie of the Iewish nation. Then let no Luk. 14. 17, 18, &c. yokes of Oxen, Farme, or Wife, Hinder thy comming to this marriage feast. Where Apoc. 22. 1, 2. Water thou shalt taste, and bread of Life; The King will bid thee Can. 5. 1. welcome as his ghest, And thee inuite to Can. 4. 12. & 6. 2. Gardens neatlier drest, Than that of Eden, planted by Gods hand; There is true happinesse and Apoc. 21. 4. endlesse rest, There Apoc. 5. 11. glorious Angels doe by millions stand, All readie at the Bridegroomes and the Brides command. THE BRIDES ORNAMENTS. The first Booke. THE CONTENTS. The Porter of Loues Gate, Humilitie: Her Treasurer, Knowledge; Fortitude, Generall; Mercy, her Chancellor; Truth, Secretarie: Iustice, chiefe Iudge; Prudence directeth all. Temp'rance, Comptroller; Repentance, Marshall. Bountie, the Almoner; Faith, Hope, Patrons are; Patience, Obedience, Meeknesse, Maides I call, Attending Loue: Ioy, priuy Seale doth beare; Gods word▪ sword-bearer is; Zeale, Prayer, chaplens there. THE PROEME. 1 T Hose sublime Wits, that in high Court of Fame Doe seeke to ranke themselues by Poesie, Eternizing the glorie of their name By prayse of Honour, and of Cheualrie, To some great Princes Court their youth apply, Knights honourable actions to behold; Chaste Ladies loues, and Nobles courtesie. Of such haue Homer, Virgil, Spencer told, And haue thereby their names in Fames faire Court enrold. 2 But had they waited on the glorious Court Of Heauenly Loue, by some call'd Charitie, And seene the order there, and gracious Port Of this great Queene and her faire Companie, Her gentle Gouernement and Maiestie, This sure their most Heroicke Muse might raise, As farre aboue their moderne pitch to flie, As candle-light's surmounted by Sunnes rayes, Or as the Creatures boasting is by Makers praise. 3 Nor had their stately Muse beene rais'd more high, By this employment in Loues Meditation, Than their owne soules, which vp to auen would flie By this delightfull heau'nly Contemplation, Where they might view th'eternall Habitation, Prepared for the faithfull Friends of Loue, That by her Lawes frame life and conuersation, As Members of one glorious Head aboue, Which here vpon the Earth by it doe liue, be, moue. 4 Long time I sought Loues Court most carefully, And on her noble Actions set my mind, That, in her praise, my Muse might soare on high, I sought in vaine, but could no entrance find, Vntill a courteous Lady then assign'd To keepe the Court Gate, hight Humilitie, Well knowing what I sought, lowly declin'd, Assuring me I neuer could descrie, Loues honourable Court, but by Humilitie. 5 Shee was a louely Lady cloth'd in gray, Of russet wooll, which her owne hands did spin, Nor would expend her state in garments gay, Her care was to be glorious within; Yet had this Lady goodly commings in, Which for Loues sake shee dealt amongst the Poore, To fill their bellies shee look'd leane and thin, Would stoupe to heale the meanest Lazars sore, Yet when shee had done all, grieu'd shee could doe no more. 6 Shee soone in me espies a dangerous sore, Most dangerous, because it was least seene, But inwardly did fester more and more; It was Ambition, which eu'n from my Spleene Vnto mine heart had sent her poysonous teene; To cure which sore, shee med'cine streight applyes, Before I came in presence of her Queene. Who gaynes, saith shee, grace in my Soueraignes eyes, By meekenesse, not ambition, seekes, as I, to rise. 7 Many good med'cines did this Maid deuise, Whereby shee might recure my dangerous sore, As good examples, words eke of the wise, But none of these did yeeld me profit more, Than mine owne wretchednesse; which shee before Me laid; that I might humbled be thereby, And though my flesh first spurn'd against this lore, Yet shee so gently did this salue apply, That my proud heart it made stoupe to Humilitie. 8 Thus humbled, I was to Repentance brought, Who was the Marshall, wondrous graue and sage, Ah! shee, at first, me ickle sorrow wrought, And shew'd how I vnworthy was to wage, Or be admitted to Loues equipage. Shee then my conscience forthwith did demand, To bring my Sinnes and Follies on the stage; Who, streight-wayes, did obey her great command; And, loe! my sinnes appear'd in number like the Sand. 9 Sinnes done in secret, and long since forgot, Shee there exhibited plaine to bee seene, And straight me to the Barre of Iustice got, Accusing of high treason to her Queene: Iustice was chiefe Iudge, in the Law well seene, Yet limited by bounds of her Commission; Law was her rule, not what shee did esteeme, To extend Mercy shee had no permission: They that haue sinn'd must be condemn'd without remission. 10 But Faith and Hope, two Patrons neare at hand To all distressed soules that craue their aide, Aduis'd me not on mine owne workes to stand, But on His merits that had fully paid The ransome of my sinnes; and further said, From Iustice I to Mercy might appeale. This done, the Court most willingly conuaid Me to the Throne of Mercy, which should heale, And all by Iustice done against me, would repeale. 11 Mercy a Princesse was of high degree, And neare vnto the Queene of Loue allide; Most pleasant was her countenance to see: Knowledge the Treasurer sate by her side; But Prudence most of all her Grace did guide. The Secretarie Truth her Acts did write, Shee Mercy yet with Iustice did diuide, To all those Suitors that did craue their right; And were, by Faith and Hope, taught how to plead aright. 12 I had good audience at my first appearing, But when Faith, Hope, began my suite to moue, Repentance crau'd another day of hearing, And shee would all my sinnes before them proue; I answer'd, that this let I would remoue, For I confesse all against me laid, And streight by Faith and Hope did plainely proue, My Sauiours merits, all my debts had paid; Then all the Court gan cry, I need not be afraid. 13 Yet Mercy with her counsell would aduise, Before that shee to sentence did proceed, And first with Knowledge, Prudence, Truth deuise, The same which was long time before decreed▪ And though damnation be thy sinnes iust meed, Yet seeing thou so rightly dost apply Christs merits, thou, from guilt of them art freed: Wherefore by Faith, Hope, and Humilitie, In Loues Court to abide, thou hast free libertie. 14 I thus absolu'd, by Mercies gracious dome Was brought to Meekenesse and Obedience, That they might me instruct, ere I should come Into the Chamber of their Queenes presence: And by the way I met with Patience; These three sweet Ladies many precepts giue, With charge the same t' obserue with diligence, And all my wrongs past and to come forgiue, If in this Court of Loue, with honour, I would liue. 1 Then Fortitude, this Queenes great Generall, Taught me'gainst all afflictions to stand fast, For he that loueth well endureth all; And Temperance enioyned me to fast, And all immoderate lusts from me to cast; This Temperance, Comptroller of the Hall, Of slender dyet is and body chast; Bountie the Alm'ner next to me did call, To doe good, and distribute to poore Saints 'boue all. 16 Then Lady Laetice, that staid all this while, Longing and wishing me this good successe, On me began most graciously to smile, And comfort after my great heauinesse: Shee is of high trust and great noblenesse, And keepes the priuy Signet of her Queene, Which on the hearts of all shee doth impresse, Absolu'd by Mercy from Lawes direfull teene: Shee is call'd Inward Ioy, more to be felt then seene. 17 There met I Zeale without vaine superstition, Who neuer, without Knowledge, durst come there, So hot and fiery was her disposition, As shee in peeces could stone tables teare; Shee in graue comely habit did appeare, As of the Tribe of Aaron shee were borne; Gods Name dishonoured shee could not beare, Her haire was all discheuelled and torne, Which she had rent to hear wretches her queenes loue scorne. 18 Shee was most earnest and patheticall, And like Ioy, did enflame mine inward parts: Then Courtesie a Lady faire and tall, Instructed me in her most pleasing Arts, How first I should my lookes suite to mine heart, And next according to mine heart should looke, Vnfeignedly the head and euery part, To loue, who for loue my sinnes on him tooke; This Ladies louing heart, you might reade in her looke. 19 Then came Gods Word, of all the rest, the Guide, From whose Mouth went a sharpe two edged sword, Which did from me all sinne and lust diuide, And in my bleeding wounds sweet hony powr'd: Last, Prayer needes this fauour would afford, My suite vnto Loues Highnesse to present. Then falling on my knees, shee did record My words, and eu'n my secret hearts intent, And them, by Mediation, to Loues presence sent. 20 Thus was I to Loues glorious presence brought, Which was beyond imagination great, Who gently me enquired what I sought: Madame, said I, This now I doe intreat, Your Grace will giue me licence to repeat The goodly glorie I doe here behold: Shee granted me I should of her entreat, And all her Courtiers, whereof I haue told, Which by Gods grace I meane in order to vnfold. 21 And that I may an order due obserue, The first that comes forth is the Queene her Grace, Then follow on such Ladies as her serue, In their due order, ranke, and proper place. Humilitie first leades the Vertues trace: Loe, next Repentance, Faith, and Hope haue rome: These three are Ladies which doe guide our race, Till we into the armes of Loue doe come; But, loe, they leaue vs there; for then their charge is done. MEDITAT. I. Of Heauenly Loue. 1 T Hose learned spirits that spend their youthful prime In writing Volumes large of wanton Loue, Find, in the end, they lose most precious time, And all their labour, and, though late, oft proue, That had their soules beene mounted vp aboue, Whence they were sent to this fra le house of clay, They there had found the obiect of true Loue, God, true, eternall, which ne're fades away, But when Loue there begins it doth endure for ay. 2 Whom as we loue 'boue all things by him wrought, So all his glorious Workes in him we loue, And eu'n that Word, whereby to passe he brought This all, in whom eu'n all doe liue, bee, moue; The same is Authour, Finisher of Loue, The Sea from which all streames of Loue doe flow, Which here refresh the tender plants, and proue Most soueraigne medicine to the Saints below, Whereby in goodnesse, loue, and vertue, they may grow. 3 And as the Brookes their tribute-streames doe send Vnto the boundlesse Ocean, whence they moue; So though on Saints and Poore we freely spend What we receiue; yet to this Sea of Loue We must tend alwayes, as the steele doth moue With Load-stone touched, to the Arctique Pole; All other motions violent doe proue, This is the obiect of true Loue: this s le The Center is of Loue, on which all Loue doth roll. 4 Authour and Finisher, Thou Word of power, Center and Load-stone, Obiect, Sea of Loue, Sweet drops of Grace vpon mine heart downe shower, Attract my steely thoughts tow'rds heau'n to moue; Teach me, the complement of man, true Loue, O helpe me to expresse, what I conceaue Of thine affection, which thee from aboue Made to descend, and all thy Glorie leaue, And to the cursed Crosse for loue of man to cleaue. 5 Of that dread loue by which the Trinitie, Ineffably doth in it selfe delight, Of Persons three making one Vnitie; I dare not vndertake so high to write: My Muse here onely labours to indite, Of that free Loue, which doth from thence descend, That Loue which from the head on members light, And that which from them ought againe ascend; Lastly, that Christian loue we each on other spend. 6 But as th'eternall Godhead is but one, Quaere. Yet is by Persons three distinguished, The Sonne is of the Father all alone, The Spirit from Sonne and Father doth proceede; So though a threefold kind of Loue we reade, Yet is this true and heau'nly Loue but one, For, with that Loue from Father doth proceede, Christ loueth those he chooseth for his owne, And we the selfe-same loue to Head and Members showne. 7 Thou that did'st in thy Fathers bosome wun, Eternally begotten, vncreate, Let me begin where first thy Loue begun To be vnto vs manifest: when Hate And Pride, the Dam of mischiefe and debate, Had caused those celestiall Lamps of light, The Angels that kept not their first estate, To be deiected from thy Palace bright, Reseru'd in euerlasting chaines of darkest night. 8 Then first thy free Loue did to Man appeare, Whom after thine owne Image thou didst frame, And blessedst him to multiply and reare Much fruit on Earth: and gau'st him power to tame Thy handie workes, to which he gaue a name, Which they receiu'd as Vassalls of their Lord; Adam then Lord of all thy workes became, Each herbe, fruit, seede, thou gau'st him for his board, Thus Lord of all; Hee's onely subiect to thy Word. 9 God saw that all he made was very good, Yet 'twas not good that Man should be alone, (I dare not thinke Man could alone haue stood In his integritie) thou gau'st him one To be his helpe, of his owne flesh and bone, For whom he should Father and Mother leaue; Behold! now Adam with his Paragon, Walke in the Garden, where they haue good leaue, The fruit of euery tree there growing to receaue. 10 Hadst thou him set in Gardens, ready planted With all v etie of rich delight, And for his care to keepe them had but granted, He might take pleasure onely in their sight, And foode from one to feede his appetite, Nature had beene content with competence: Thou gau'st him leaue of all the trees to bite, Thou onely one tree from his lips didst fence, To shew thy Lordship, and proue his obedience. 11 But, loe, that pride which mischiefe did conceaue, First in the Court of Heau'n, brings forth below; And in disdaine such exc'llent Spirits must leaue, Their glorious Mansions vnto one they know, Was fram'd of slimy earth: Behold! they grow To tempt the weaker by a false pretence, You shall not die, saith he, for God doth know What day you eate, you shall be gods from thence, Loe, thus was all mankind made guiltie of offence. 12 Adam, where art? What art? Hid, naked, vile; Now thou hast eate of the forbidden Tree, My Wife did me, a Serpent her beguile, Cannot excuse thee nor thy Progenie: Curst is the Serpeat for his subtiltie, The Ground is curst and all that on it goes, Serpents and Womans seede at enmitie, The earth, from whence thou cam'st, thee vp must close, Thy Garden's lost, thy Subiects now become thy F es. 13 O miserable Man, in losse, in paine, Looke but from whence, and whither thou dost fall: Who now hath power to raise thee vp againe? Breach of one Law, thee guiltie makes of all, Hell is thy Guerdon, miserable thrall, Driu'n from the presence sweet of God aboue, Which thee to such a height of blisse did call, The Serpents speech, thou now too true dost proue, And to thy cost know'st Good and Euill, Hate and Loue. 14 God is most mercifull, yet True and Iust, His Mercy shined in thy first Creation, His Law is broken, now he punish must; Here Loue, behold, beyond all expectation, Will draw them both to reconciliation; God becomes Man, Iustice to satisfie; His Death shall pay the price of our damnation, No height of Verse this great Loue can des ry, This Sunne is too resplendent for my Muses eye. 15 Most glorious God, Wise, Happy, Vncreate, Absolute, Perfect, Pure, Omnipotent, Here humbly to conuerse in meane estate, And as a Malefactor to be rent, To saue eu'n those that sought him to torment, Captiuitie thus Captiue for to l ade, And giue such gifts to Men, and Hell preuent, Thy workes of power, Lord! can Creature reade, But this of Loue and Mercy doth them all exceede. 16 Three sorts of Loue wise Sages haue obseru'd, Loue of true Friends, of Kindred, Coniugall; Of which amongst them friendship hath deseru'd To be first rank'd, this Loue surmounts them all: These Starres doe rise, these Starres againe doe fall, But when this Sunne of heau'nly Loue doth shine Once in our hearts, it is perpetuall, And when it lowest seemes and to decline, It then is highest rays'd, and nearest to Diuine. 17 This Loue's an vndiuided Vnitie, A concord that diuision will admit, Diuided yet to all abundantly, And doth this all into one body knit; The Head that eu'n aboue in heau'n doth sit, It ioyneth to the Members on the ground, And all those Members in one Body knit, Loue like her selfe the same is euer found, Though in one Member more than other shee abound. 18 As Soule of Man doth from the Head to Heart, And all the Members life and motion send, Being l in all, and all in eu'ry part, Eu'n so doth Loue her Power diuine extend On eu'ry part that on the Head depend, And as the Members soone rot and decay, To which the Soule her vertue doth not lend; Eu'n so the Man whose loue doth fall away, Doth straight in errour, darknesse, and delusions stray. 19 Those that by reasons force, and strength of wit, Draw true Conclusiont by firme Argument, First striue the Causes, with th' Effects to fit, Else they will hardly grant the Consequent. To say, I loue, is not sufficient, Except I shew the reason why I loue; I know, ô Lord! thou art Omniscient, But know no cause to loue mee should thee moue, Onely I daily feele that which I cannot proue. 20 God is Loues very Authour; Life and Spring, Yea, God himselfe is also stiled Loue; From him all Streames of Loue are issuing, As from the Sea all other Waters moue: He first fills all with Loue in Heau'n aboue; Which Water plenteously the Vales below. So God loues first before we doe him loue, Loe, what exceeding great loue he doth show: God loues his Enemies first, before they doe him know. 21 The cause of all this Loue proceeds from thee; Thou didst vs loue yet being Enemies, Bond-slaues to Sinne and Satan: but now ree, And made thy Friends by Grace; our loue doth rise From thee as from the Spring, and multiplyes, Growing from strength to strength, till by thy Grace, We workes of Loue in thee doe exercise; Thy Members here for thee wee doe embrace, Eu'n as ou owne, till we behold thy glorious Face. 22 Into one Body we by Loue doe grow: Into one Building we are all combin'd, Loue that doth from the Head to Members flow▪ And all the stones hath in this building ioyn'd; Where eu'ry Members office is assign'd; And eu'ry stone an others weight doth beare; All liuely Stones the choisest of mankind, All liuing Members of one Head which here By Loue in one close cemented and ioynted are. 23 My lowly Muse, dares not presume to prie Into Gods holy happy Habitation, Where Loue three Persons ioynes in Vnitie, And makes one Godhead, to mans admiration; I leaue the Mysterie of th'Incarnation, Where Loue doth make both God and Man in one, And eke the power of Spirits regeneration, Where Loue makes Man eu'n of Gods flesh and bone, Thus Loue all things in Heaue and Earth vnites in one. 24 Such as Loues cause is, such are Loues effects, Holy, Transcendent, Supernaturall, Which publique good, not priuate most respects. The weakest member seruice doth to all, And the most Honourable doth not call The meaner base, as he did him despise, They all agree in one, and one in all, Vnto one glorious Head by loue to rise, And in him workes of Loue and Grace to exercise. 25 This Loue's long suffering, gentle, not enuies, Not striuing, boasting, shamelesse for her owne, Bitter, ill-minded, ioying in iniuries, But most glad to doe right when Truth is knowne; Endures, beleeues, hopes, suffers all alone, Though tongues doe cease, and prophecyings faile, And knowledge vanish, yet Loue holds her owne; We know and prophecie in part, as fraile, But when the perfect comes, th'imperfect nought auailes. 26 Had I the tongues of Men and Angels, and Could prophecie, and knew all mysteries; Had Faith to remoue Mountaynes, t'vnderstand All knowledge, and should all my goods out size Amongst the Poore, my body should deuise Eu'n to be burn'd; yet if I want this Loue, It profits not, this Loue which doth arise From a pure heart; oh thou then, that dost proue And tr e the hearts of Men, season mine heart with Loue. 27 And euer let the Obiect of my Loue Be the true indiuiduall Trinitie, The Saints on earth, and Angels all aboue, That still persist in their integritie; I mention here the happy memorie Of thy deceased Saints and Martyrs all, Which here their Loue to thee did testifie, Whom thou by Loue didst first vnto thee call, And dost in heau'n reward with blisse perpetuall. 28 But 'tis the heart from which this Loue must flow, There Loue her Court keepes, there's her Royall seate; 'Tis not enough with wordes this Loue to show, Or fayned lookes; God doth the heart intreate; That must b clens'd from sinne, made sweet and neate For him that standeth knocking at the dore, Then open; he will enter in and eate, And bring with him of heau'nly foode such store, As thou shalt neuer thirst nor hunger any more. 29 Clense my deceitfull heart defil'd with sinne, Make it a Temple for thy Spirit of Loue, Fit for the King of Glorie to come in, That all my words, thoughts, actions, pure may proue, As Riuers which from purest Fountaynes moue, Oh, since thou wert so bountifull to spend Thy precious Blood for vs thy Foes, still loue And cherish vs, and 'gainst all harme defend. Who will die for his Foes, cannot denie his Friend. 30 In all that Nature hath indued with life, We find desire with like to companie: Againe wee see di tions, jarres, and strife, 'Mongst those that are of different qualitie; We oft -inclinations may descrie, By company they either keepe or shunne, They haue of manners such a sympathie, I therefore shew what heau'nly Graces wonne With royall Loue, which sweetly link't together runne. 31 These Vertues are Loues deare Concomitants, Repentance, Knowledge, Faith, Humilitie, Fortitude, Iustice, Prudence, Temperance, Meeknesse, Obedience, Truth, Hope, Curtesie, These a most sacred Societie, Doe on the Court of royall Loue attend, These Hate expell, and her base progenie, Wrath, Aua , Pride, , and contend Gainst Glutto e, which on Hate depend. 32 These Impes which of this hellish Hagge are bred, Begot of her by Lucifer in Hell, In wayes of errour and of darknesse leade, Where damned spirits in torments euer dwell; And though on earth they beare away the bell, Of all one day there will a reckning bee, Then shall appeare who hath done ill, who well; The louely Bride shall ioy her Loue to see, But they which follow Hate, with her shall damned bee. 33 Such doe ill iudge of Loue that cannot loue, Nor in their hearts feele heate of liuely flame, Loue is the gift of God from heau'n aboue, Sent downe mans proud rebellious heart to tame, And yeeld obedience to his holy Name, Though scorn'd by those, whose hearts are made so blind With this worlds god, they cannot see the same, This World they loue, and on Lusts set their mind, And neuer seeke this true and heau'nly Loue to find. 34 The reason is, they doe not seeke to know Gods Wisedome, Mercy, Bountie, Goodnesse, Loue, And these though Preachers daily to them show, And their slow vnbeleeuing hearts reproue, Their hearts of flint to loue they cannot moue; Ah! How can they loue God they haue not seene, When as their brethren here they cannot loue? To loue the Head, and yet to beare a spleene Vnto the Members, is a thing vnknowne, vnseene. 35 Should they with Paul behold the glorious sight Of th' Head, whose Members they doe cause to rue, They would fall downe amazed with such light, And humbly prostrate with submission due, Crie, Lord, Who art? and with affection new, That Head and Members would intirely loue, Which lately with such spite they did pursue: Then would they set their hearts on things aboue, And all base worldly cares out of their mind remoue, 36 Or be as , Iohn, and Iames affected, When on the Mount their Lords Transfiguration They saw, and thenceforth worldly cares reiected, Desiring there to make their Habitation: Or could they see the Bridegroomes preparation, When clothed all in Maiestie and Loue, He hastens to his marriage consummation, How would they all their former thoughts reproue, And striue to be ioyn'd to their Head by Faith and Loue! 37 When Loue like Moses holds vp both her hands, We, gainst our spirituall Amal c preuaile; And, lest shee faints, like H r and Aaron stands, Both Faith and Hope to stay them, lest they faile; These three transcendent Vertues, loe, can quaile All that our passage to the holy Land Oppose by force, or else by flight assaile; Loe, two of them, ten thousand can withstand, The third triumphs o're Sinne and all the Deuils band. 38 If when good saw Goliah slaine, His loue to valiant Dauid was so great, That they did as one soule from thence remayne; How should we loue our Lord that did defeat Our spirituall Goliah? How intreat Our Ionath that doth his Fathers ire Appease, and though he drops of blood doth sweat, Will vindicate vs from eternall fire, And make Coheires with him? Angels this Loue admire. 39 And father Iaco thought it much, to send His dearest Benia to Egypt land, Hauing ten sonnes vpon him to attend, To loose their brother Simeon then in band: How doth Gods loue it selfe to vs expand, Who hauing but one onely Sonne, him gaue Vs to redeeme from Satans cruell hand, And vs his enemies as his Sonnes to saue, In whom, and by whom, he will grant vs all we craue? 40 And as the Child that sucks his Mothers brest, Is in all dutie to her euer bound, For bearing him with paine and losse of rest, With many troubles shee in nursing found: So should our Loue vnto our Lord abound, By whose Crosse we are new borne from aboue, And nurs'd with Blood that floweth from his Wound, His Flesh we eate, his Blood we drinke, and proue Flesh of his Flesh, Bone of his Bone, by Faith and Loue. 41 Behold, here is a Sea of Mysterie, Where Lambs may wade, and Elephants may swim, And both be drown'd, except sweet Loue stand by; By Faith we onely wade about the brim Of this deepe Sea, by Loue vp to the chin. It is a mysterie, which to vnfold, No speech is able, 'tis the heart within, To which this mysterie is plainely told: This secret, Babes and Sucklings doe through Loue behold. 42 Loue's like to Oile, that, in Zarepta's Cruse, By spending on the Prophet, did increase; Like Sunne, which light doth into all infuse, Yet doth thereby his light no whit decrease, Like boundlesse Waters of the bounteous Seas, Which faile not, though on all the Flouds they spend; Like Leaches skill, by vse which gaynes increase, Like feruent Prayer, which the Cloudes transcend, Yet by her daily vse in strength and growth doth mend. 43 Loue's like pure liuing Streames in Pipes, which flow From some faire Conduit built vpon a Hill, Which though they moisten all the Vales below, And many Offices with Water fill; Yet to as high a pitch remounten still, As is the Fountayne from whence first they fall, Eu'n so Loues streames, which from our head distill Vpon the lowest Member here of all, Mount vp, from whence they came, with source perpetuall. 44 But why seeke I by simile's t' expresse, The heau'nly Nature of this glorious Queene, Since Men and Angels greatest noblenesse, But eu'n as shadowes to the substance beene, If with her most celestiall splendour seene: Let dust and ashes dare then be so bold, His Maker to compare with Loues great Queene, So I her heau'nly graces may vnfold, And you the plainlier may her glorie great behold. 45 God's vncreate, eternall, infinite, Loue's boundlesse, sans beginning, without end: And as Gods Throne aboue in Heau'n is pight, Yet's Pr dence doth on meanest Worme attend; So th gh Loues habitation doth transcend; Shee dwells with meanest Creature here below, And n them her most gracious Beames doth send; G d eu'n the secrets of mans heart doth know▪ And Loue the secret things of God to Man doth show. 46 The King of Heau'n, for Man, did on him take A Seruants forme, eu'n so this heau'nly Peere, Her selfe a Seruant vnto Man doth make. The whole Law God for vs fulfilled heere, And Loue vs from the guilt thereof doth cleare; If you will grant similitudes may proue, By thousands I can make it plaine appeare, Loue's like in all to God in heau'n aboue, Yea, Loue is God himselfe: for God is called Loue. 47 As in the Frame and Microcosme of Man, The Soules great power all other motions sway, And the whole Frame which of the Chaos came, To the prime Mouer alwayes doth obay; So doe all spirituall heau'nly Vertues ay, Depend vpon this gracious Queene of Loue, And eu'n as Man and the whole World decay, When Soule departs and Spheres doe cease to moue, Eu'n so all Vertues die not quickened by Loue. 48 Two things obserue in Loue, longing, delight; Longing to get; Delight, when we obtayne: Loe, Loue with longing doth our hearts inuite Vnto the feast, where Christ shall entertayne▪ Virgins that in their Lamps sweet Oile maintayne; Those that are in the wedding Garment drest, Where they with him shall euermore remayne, In solemnizing of this marriage feast, Where they enioy true happinesse and endlesse rest. 49 As is Loues Obiect, so indeed is Loue, Constant, delightfull, happy, permanent, If we affection set on things aboue, And treade in his steps that before vs went, Delight shall euer last with true content: If for this pearle of Loue, we all doe pay, And let no Wife, Farme, Oxen vs preuent From comming to the marriage at the Day, Then like Loues Obiect, so delight shall last for ay. 50 Th' examples of this Loue are manifold, In holy Men, when yet the Law had place, As Abram, Moses, Iob, and Dauid bold, But they haue shined more now vnder Grace Amongst those that haue seene our Sauiours face, But most since he the Comforter hath sent, Stones, Fagots, Swords, Sawes, Crosses they embrace, As if they did their Sauiour represent, Shewing by losse of their deare Blood their true intent. 51 In eu'ry Age, examples doe abound Of Gods loue t'vs, and ours to God againe; Yea, when most en'mies seeke Loue to confound, Shee doth her owne most valiantly maintayne, No horror, death, cold, hunger, losse, or paine, Saints, from their Loue to Christ, can separate, Their Martyrdome's their Crowne; their losse, their gaine; Their Captaynes death Souldiers doth not amate, They know this is the way in at the narrow Gate. 52 Oh! let this one example serue for all, For Loue, a Seruants forme, God on him takes, To raise vp Man, eu'n God receiues a fall, Himselfe a Suiter poore to vs he makes, Enduring paine and hunger for our sakes, Going from house to house: in eu'ry place Doing of good, our sinnes vpon him takes, Opes wide his Armes, his Church for to embrace, And humbly vs intreating to accept of grace. 53 It hath beene knowne, that sometimes for a Friend A man would die; some shorten'd haue their life With griefe for losse of Children, or their kind: Some, for their Minions losse, haue dyde with knife: Iacob would serue eu'n seu'n yeares for a Wife, Our Sauiour for his Foes his Bloud doth spend; Vs Children to adopt, layes downe his Life; To saue his Spouse doth on the Crosse depend, Seru'd for her fiue seu'n yeares: His Loue doth neuer end. 54 Behold! by all these Names, he doth inuite Vs to embrace his mutuall heau'nly Loue, And calls vs Friend, Child, Sister, Spouse, Delight; His Seruants sends vs curteously to moue, To royall Banquets and sweet beds of Loue, By grace adopting vs, to be Coheires Eu'n with himselfe, of glorie great aboue, No cost or paines, not his owne Blood, he spares, But like a Father, Husband, Friend, for vs he cares. 55 I here had ended, had not holy Steuen, The first of Martyrs, that did testifie His Masters Resurrection: of the seuen The chiefest Deacon: Had he not falsely Beene next accus'd of wicked blasphemie, Whose witnesses their cloth's at Sauls feete lay, And then him stone with stones, whil'st he doth crie, Iesu receiue my Spirit: And Loue doth pray Aloud, Lord to their charge this sinne doe thou not lay. 56 Why seeke I out? let vs within abound, Towards the Saints in loue and charitie, Which doth to Gods high glorious grace redound, When by releeuing them in poue tie, They for our bountie Gods Name glorifie: He that vnto the Sower giueth seede, Bread to the hungrie, he will multiply Vs with increase, if to poore Saints in neede We giue with cheerfulnesse: such gifts God likes indeede. 57 Who sparingly doth sow, reapes sparingly: His Righteousnesse for euer shall remayne That doth disperse and giue abundantly: What doe we saue if we the world should gayne, And lose our Crowne which vp in Heau'n is layne? Who hauing this worlds good, and doth behold His brother want, yet doth his hand retayne, How can it be but Loue in him is cold? For whereas Loue doth dwell, her fruits are manifold. 58 Oh! come all yee then, that forget the Lord; Behold his loue to Man with admiration! Oh, let our loue such fruits to Saints afford, They may blesse God for such refocillation. Mount vp my soule by heau'nly contemplation, Behold him in his Maiestie aboue! Behold him in his wonderfull creation! In's Wisedome and his Prouidence, and proue If all these counterpoise his Bountie, Mercy, Loue. 59 And if his loue's so great and wonderfull, Most precious sure's the Obiect of his loue, Out of this Worlds great treasurie to cull One, whom he would eternally aboue Make happy with his presence: and to proue So kind a Father, Him Coheire to take To his owne deare beloued Sonne: to loue Him as his owne, for his owne Sonnes deare sake. Learne here what high account we of our soules should make. 60 Why dost, my Soule, then grouell on the ground, Since in respect of thee this World is base? No thing created in the World is found, Which God vouchsafed hath so much to grace. His free Loue doth aduance thee to this place, Requiring of thee this one complement, Thou him and his againe with loue embrace, For Loue fulfilleth the Commandement, Command Lord what thou wilt, Loue makes obedient. 61 But ah my Soule! Where is thy Loue? thy feare? How doth the World bewitch thee? How possesse? How are thy thoughts tane vp with worldly care? Breeding of heau'nly Loue a sensel snesse: Dost thou misdoubt Gods gracious promises? Farre be such Atheisme and impietie; Oh, neuer let such dismall heauinesse Cleaue on my Soule, through vnbeliefe to die, For which Christ offred vp himselfe so louingly. 62 Hast thou not, oh my Soule! most plainely seene, That all things in this World are vanitie, No true content to mortall e're hath beene, But that which doth endure eternally? As Primum mobile Loue doth employ All other Graces in their proper motion, And as all Spheres are mou'd perpetually By the prime Mouer, so Loues purest Notion, Swayes all the other Vertues in their due deuotion, 63 Wilt then despise his friendship, kindnesse, loue, Wherewith thy Lord inuites thee vnto Grace? And as a Father, Husband, Friend thee moue, His Loue with like relation to embrace? And all thy minde on things aboue to place, Abandoning vaine wealth and worlds delight, The World and all things in it are but base, To ransome one poore Soule all is too light, In this Gods Loue doth more then all his Power and Might. 64 Oh! that I could despise Worlds vaine promotion, And follow heau'nly things with all my might, My whole life consecrating to deuotion; Oh, that I might liue euer in thy sight! Where fulnesse is of ioy and pure delight, Oh, that mine heart were on thy Law so set! To meditate thereon both day and night, Thy Statutes then I neuer should forget, Nor at the wickeds vaine and false preferments fret. 65 Oh, that my dearest Husband, Father, Friend, His heau'nly Loue into mine heart would shower! That my Loue may againe to him ascend, And that I may with all my might and power, Loue and defend his Members from each stower; His Saints which in this wandring wildernesse In danger of the Wolues are eu'ry hower, Visit the Widdowes and the Fatherlesse, And walke vnspotted here in Truth and Holinesse. 66 But though, alas, this heau'nly Loue I feele Abundant grace vpon mine heart to shower, Loue of this World my soules eyes vp so seele, To loue the things aboue, I haue no power: And though I feele sweet flashes euery hower Of heau'nly Loue: I cannot loue againe The Head nor Members, which in earthly Bower Most deare and precious in his sight remayne, But hardly can from Enuie, Hatred, Pride refrayne. 67 I doe confesse my debt of Loue so great, I neuer able am my score to pay, For if I should Gods kindnesses repeate, And all his fauours in one summe conuay, I might begin them earely before day, But could not cast the number vp by night. Accept my will and readinesse for pay, Accept my sorrowfull heart and humble sprite, Which made the Widdowes poore, an acceptable mite. 68 Let me thy loue so liuely apprehend, That I may ready be with cheerefulnesse To die for thee, who thy deare Blood didst spend, To vindicate my soule from wretchednesse; And raise me to such height of happinesse, That I may gladly wish my dissolution; And cast from me all wretched world inesse, Prepared with a holy resolution, To stand vndanted at the Worlds great deuolution. 69 Frame in me such an habit of thy Loue, As I for loue may seeke thee to obay, More than for feare I should thine anger moue, Whereby thou should'st my sinnes with vengeance pay; And grant that all the good I doe, I may Performe it well, with good and due respect Vnto thy gracious Loue, which me alway In eu'ry good and perfect thing direct: And not for pleasure, gayne, vaine glorie, worlds respect. 70 Set my delight on hallowing thy great Name, And longing for the comming of our King, Thy Will on Earth to doe, eu'n as the same Thine Angels doe in Heau'n: such nourishing As we haue need of, daily to vs bring. Forgiue our faults as we by loue forgiue Them that offend vs; From the entising Of Sinne and Satan and the Flesh releeue; From euill set vs free, in Ioy and Loue to liue. 71 O Lord! I doe but aske, what thou to giue More readie art, than I am to receaue; Thy Life thou laidst downe, that my soule might liue, Didst cleaue to flesh that I to thee might cleaue; My Soule thou wilt not now in darknesse leaue, Which to redeeme thou suffredst many a wound, And Hell and Satans malice to deceaue, Suffredst thy Body three dayes in the ground; But rais'd vp now to Heau'n, thy Loue doth more abound. 72 For there thou mak'st continuall intercession For vs, thy Seruants which doe wander here In this vaine World, subiect to base oppression Of Satan, World, Flesh, which about we beare: Thou send'st thy Comforter our hearts to cheare, That sayes, Thy Grace is all-sufficient, Esteeming nothing for thine Owne too deare, For them which to thee bee obedient, And loue and serue thee with a faithfull true intent. 73 Then, oh my Soule! be bold and confident, Though of this Loue thou haue the smallest taste, He gaue it, that will daily it augment, Cherish it carefully, let it not waste: D st thou desire to loue? loe, loue thou hast; He surely shall fulfill thy whole desire, Looke all the Ages that are gone and past, God neuer yet was found like Man, a lyer, But what he promiseth, we boldly may require. 74 Should I with Iob be throwne downe in the dust; With Ionas drown'd in belly of a Whale; With Ieremie into a Dungeon thrust; Should I with Dauid walke, eu'n in the vale Of cruell death, with Ioseph set to sale, And without cause in prison spend my dayes, Should damned ghosts stand readie for to hale My Soule to Hell: all this me not dismayes: I know whom I haue trusted, he my soule will raise. 75 Should my sinnes be in number as the Sand, And my forefathers sinnes, my sinnes exceed In weight and number: yet I firme would stand, What though eternall fire be sinnes iust meed? Much is forgiu'n, where is much loue indeed; Wherefore mine Heart and Soule shall euer praise My Maker, that in me such loue doth breed, That doth my Soule from hellish horror raise Aboue the Heau'ns, to liue the life of Loue alwayes. 76 As alwayes for thy loue, so at this time I praise thee for this holy Meditation Of heau'nly Loue: of all the Graces prime, Which by thy grace doe worke out our saluation; And pay the score and price of our damnation: I alwayes will acknowledge and confesse Thy Power and Bountie in our first Creation; But now mine heart vnable to expresse Thy Loue in our Redemption, here with ioy doth cease. 77 And pray's that whilst I Loue to others preach, My selfe may not become a reprobate, Like as I oft haue seene a skilfull Leach, Carelesse of his owne health and fraile estate; But grant that as this Song I doe relate Of heau'nly Loue, it may my Soule here moue To be as true as Turtle to her Mate: That neuer worldly cares my heart remoue From this most precious Pearle: this true and heau'nly Loue. 78 Had I not told, you wonder might, how I So meane a wretch, in presence came of Loue; But, as I said, Madame Humilitie Me first directed to her Court to moue; And from mine heart Ambition did remoue; For, from my youth, I had a great desire, To view th' estate and blisse of glorious Loue, But, oft in vaine, I did thereto aspire, Till Humblenesse me taught: of whom I next enquire. MEDITAT. II. Of Humiliti . 1 M Y boundlesse thoughts, that in a restlesse mind, Depriue my body oft of naturall rest, And vrge my soule true happinesse to find, And that once found therein to set my rest, Doe often to my purer Soule suggest, To seeke for pleasures, honour, wealth, promotion; But more of them I gayne, the more opprest I am with worldly cares, and mindes commotion, So that to nothing in this World I haue deuotion. 2 And yet I see, all Things that being haue, Vnto their Bene esse doe intend, Their Summum bonum 'tis that all doe craue, First sought for, though they last it apprehend: Loue is that good I seeke to apprehend, As all Things being to their end doe moue; But none but by Humilitie can wend Into Loues Court, without her none can proue What is the end and finishing of all true Loue. 3 Therefore I sing next of Humilitie, The lowly Porter of high Loues Court gate, Who brought me first Loues glorious Court to see, And all her Courtiers, as I told of late: Humilitie the poorest beggars Mate, Yet equall to the highest Peere of Loue, And by her vs'd in all affaires of State, Humilitie which doth so gracious proue To all good Men on earth, and Angels pure aboue. 4 God! second Person in the Trinitie, Whose being is immortall, vncreate, Who in the dayes of thy Humilitie, Didst here conuerse with Men in meane estate, That we thy lowlinesse might imitate, Direct my Muse most liuely to expresse Humilitie, that opens wide Loues gate To those, that doe confesse their wretchednesse, But shuts close 'gainst all proud and vaine ambitious ghests. 5 Humilitie that vertue is, whereby We vile and lowly seeme in our owne eyes; Despising our owne worth and dignitie, Since of our selues we nothing haue to prise: The first and certayne step whereby we rise, And climbe the Hill of Ioy and Happinesse; Stranger to fooles companion of the wise. Of Folly, Pride; of Grace comes humblenesse; One head-long leades to Hell, the other vnto Blesse. 6 This modest Lady, Humblenesse of Spirit, Her selfe vnwise and ignorant doth deeme, And neuer thinkes shee able is to merit, In Loues high Court to be in such esteeme, Shee farre inferiour to her selfe doth seeme, And neuer thinkes shee Knowledge can attayne, Disgrace or losse shee sweetly doth redeeme With Humblenesse, and holds it greatest gayne, Her Peace, not Place; true Loue, not Glorie to maintayne. 7 Most fruitfull Lady like the fertile Vine, Which euermore when shee most fruit doth beare, Her goodliest branches lowliest doth decline, And as the fairest clusters doe appeare, Hid vnder leaues; eu'n so this gracious Pee e Couers all Vertues vnder lowlinesse: Of Fortunes stormes shee neuer stands in feare, Nor troubled is with want or with distresse, For shee hath learn'd to be content in paine or ease. 8 Inward and outward's this Humilitie, In words and actions, lookes, thoughts, and attire, The inward by the outward we descrie. It is hypocrisie for to desire Lowly to seeme, and secretly aspire Vnto a Crowne, by legs, with Absal m: Such complement let Pagan Courts admire, Neuer such basenesse yet had any roome In Court of heau'nly Loue, where heart and looke is one. 9 For true Humilitie is vndiuided, Shee alwayes lookes, speakes, does, seemes, thinks the same, And though shee bee by scorners oft derided, Shee's alwayes humble like vnto her name: Nor doth shee vertuous deeds to purchase fame, But for themselues, and for her Lords deare sake, Who with her suffred much reproch and shame, When he a Seruants forme did on him take, And Lord of all, himselfe of none account did make. 10 The Sonne of God from all eternitie, Most holy, happy, wise, whose glorious Station Being pight in Heau'n, thought it no robberie To be with God of equall estimation; Himselfe to make here of no reputation, His glorie great in highest Heau'ns to leaue, And liue here in the meanest seruants fashion, And when the Heau'ns did him againe receaue, Her here vnto his Spouse for an ensample leaue. 11 Oh! could we but this wondrous Grace conceaue, And honour Loue hath done Humilitie, Would it not cause vs vnto her to cleaue, And her embrace with all integritie, Keeping her in our hearts most carefully, That from our humbled hearts, as from a Well, There might flow forth vnfayn'd humilitie, That when we are hence summon'd by the bell, We in Loues Court with ioy eternally may dwell? 12 This is the finall cause of Humblenesse, To gaine true Blisse, and Gods eternall Loue: The formall is vnfayned Lowlinesse, In and without, which God and Man approue; The knowledge of our selues vs well may moue As the efficient cause, her to embrace: Thoughts, manners, lookes, words, tires materiall proue; For by the words, eye, act, attire and face, A wise man may discerne what in the heart hath place. 13 But now if we vnto th'effects proceede, What gaynes a man by all his lowlinesse? Wee see what mickle sorrow it did breede Vnto our Captayne, when in great distresse Hee's humbled to the Crosse: and we no lesse By his ensample looke to vnder-goe His scoffes and scornes, his gall and bitternesse: If this be all Humilitie can doe, Of all they are most wretched that are humbled so. 14 But loe! our Leader that did her embrace With such affection, God doth him regard As his deare Sonne: behold, he doth him grace Aboue the Angels; and he hath prepar'd Such ioyes for him as cannot be compar'd: With glorie and with honour hath him crown'd, And though a while on earth he meanely far'd, All now vnto his honour doth redound, At naming of his Name all knees must kisse the ground. 15 And vs that in our Captaynes steps doe treade, And follow him in true Humilitie, He will to endlesse blisse and glorie leade, And honour here with true nobilitie: And as he captiue led captiuitie, And did from lowest earth to heau'n ascend, So from the dust and graue shall we on high Be rais'd, where we in glorie shall transcend The Angels: which on Head and Members must attend. 16 But soft, my Muse, thou now dost farre transcend The subiect of thy song, Humilitie, Now homeward to thy selfe thy thoughts intend, And view the subiect where shee doth aby. The heart's the seate of true Humilitie, And in thy body seated is thine heart, Both made of basest Clay: thy soule from high, The highest by thy nostrils did impart, Which is there all in all, and all in eu'ry part. 17 The bodi's base; the soule it doth transcend, And were't not here immur'd in house of clay, Against her nature shee would re-ascend To him that gaue her: Then, my Soule, I say, Into her Makers presence would away, And be accepted by his mediation, Who humbled to the Crosse, for her did pay His dearest blood for reconciliation. For after humblenesse doth follow exaltation. 18 Nay eu'n our flesh, though humbled in the dust, By vertue of our Sauiours Resurrection, Againe shall be vnited: and the iust Which haue beene humbled here by his direction, Shall be deliuer'd from worlds base subiection, Into the libertie and glorious light Of Gods owne Sonnes, vnder whose safe protection, They euer shall enioy the happy sight Of God and's Saints, which here haue humbled beene aright. 19 But Humblenesse is not the onely way To bring vs to this glorious exaltation, End of our hopes: but first doth vs conuay To wholesome true Repentance to saluation; Which is from filthy sinne the best purgation: Mercy the meeke and humble man doth saue, Though Iustice vs condemne to dire damnation, If Faith and Hope for vs we Patrons haue, Whilst Bountie grants vs all things needfull we doe craue. 20 The Treasurer Knowledge, who hath alwayes vow'd Her selfe true seruant to Humilitie, Hath her with precious and rare gifts endow'd, Yet still more meane and lowly shee will bee: For well shee wots, in whom the Treasuree Of Wisedome and of Knowledge all did dwell, Became a seruant meane of low degree, Truth often vnto her (what shee knowes well) That shee hath nought but what shee hath receau'd, doth tell. 21 Thus Meeknesse, Patience, true Obedience, Ioy, Doe alwayes with Humilitie abide, Shee is most kind and curteous, neuer coy Vnto the vertuous; and shee opens wide Loues gate vnto the Humble; but doth hide From th'enuious, vaine, and the ambitious wight, Truth, Prudence, Knowledge, which should be their guide; Thus Humblenesse guides all to Truth and light, But Pride, Ambition, leade to darknesse, errour, night. 22 This Monster, foule Ambition, cursed Pride, Who, enuying Man, eu'n in his first creation, Did like a subtile Serpent smoothly slide In t' Edens Garden, Mans sweet habitation, Where by malicious, subtile, false perswasion, He then perswaded simple E e to trie Forbidden fruits, and by false application Assur'd her shee should knowledge get thereby, Such knowledge gayne they that eq iuocate and lie. 23 Oh! had Humilitie true Knowledge brought To Eue, before shee did commit this sinne! Shee ne're had entertayn'd so base a thought, Nor we of Pride and Satan bond-slaues bin; See here the end of all, that doe begin In pride and in ambition: they must fall, Pride first betray'd vs to the Fowlers gin, But Humblenesse deliuers them from thrall, That doe vnfeignedly with her for mercy call. 24 What? Be as gods? For to be proud and poore, Is a base sinne, hated of God and Man, Behold, eu'n as Humility's the doore, That leades to Happinesse, eu'n so began At Pride the miserie and smart of Man: Which still in him remaynes a dangerous sore. For honour here a Worldling what you can, His greedie thoughts will neuer count it store, Ambition, like to Hell and Graue, still gapes for more. 25 Thus Poets tell of an ambitious Snaile, That golden weather-cocke on steeple high Espying, from sweet Garden, would assaile, And for vaine glorie life would ieopardie: He by fast hold and winding subtiltie, Mounts slily vp the steeples highest spire, Whence he the poore Bird throwes downe cruelly, And doth to his place vaine-gloriously aspire, Till Boreas brasen wings him throwes downe in the mire. 26 Thus vaine fond youth left his sage Fathers lore, And by his borrowed wings did soare so high, (Loe here their end that seeke so high to soare) The Sunne beames heate his waxen wings did frie. Proud Bryar that safe and secure did lie Vnder stout Oakes most safe protecting armes, Supplanted him by treason cunningly, Then to Sunnes heate expos'd and Winters stormes, He's trod downe by wild beasts, and eaten vp of wormes. 27 Once had the feete the noble Head defide, Grieuing to beare his burthen any more, And Brawny armes their helping hands denide, To feede the belly with conuenient store: But hands and armes forthwith grew weake and poore For want of stomacks strength'ning nourishment, And now the legs that able were before, To beare both Head and Bodies wonderment, Became wrang, stumbling, lame for want of gouernment. 28 When Ioth ms trees went out t'annoint a King▪ I dg. 9. 8. They first besought the Oliue tree to raigne, But he, his fatnesse highly valewing, Refus'd to leaue it for a Kingdomes gaine: Next Fig-tree sweet to rule they would constraine, Who nould his sweetnesse leaue for Kingdomes glee: Last to the fertile Vine they doe complaine, Who fruitfulnesse loues more than Sou'raigntee, But Bryar base will raigne and the anointed bee. 29 Like as on Mountaynes which doe breake the clouds, Sand, grauell, and vnfruitfull earth doe lye, But in the fruitfull Valleyes lowly shrowds Fruit good for meate, and to delight the eye: And as the brackish Waues doe mount on high, Whilst fresher Waters silent slide away; Eu'n so it fares with sweet Humilitie, Which like the fruitfull Meadow's fruitfull ay, And like fresh Brookes, whose sweetnesse neuer doth decay▪ 30 And as tall ships which beare too high a saile, Are soone o'returned by a boystrous wind, Whilst smaller Vessels 'gainst the Waues preuaile, Arriuing safely at the Port assign'd: So they, that to ambition are enclin'd, And Phaeton -like to guide the Sunne aspire, All things consume that vnder them they find, Till from their Coach they tumble in the mire. Till fewell failes, Ambition neuer slakes her fire. 31 And as mans eye, the higher he doth stand, The things which are beneath doth lesser deeme, So he that doth Gods greatnesse vnderstand, In his owne eyes, doth vile and nothing seeme, An humble man's a gemme of high esteeme, Which ignorant men doe trample in the mire, Vntill the skilfull Ieweller redeeme It from the dust, and clense it in the fire, Then those that trod on it before, doe it admire. 32 Those that in Princes seruice purchase fame, And thereby would raise their posteritie, Seeke great allyance to confirme the same, And of the Heralds get a Pedigree: But they that would gaine true nobilitie, To doe Christ's heau'nly Fathers will must seeke, For such his Mother, Brother, Sister bee, No honour or allyance can be like To this: yet sure such are the humble and the meeke. 33 Humilitie's the Basis and foundation Of Vertues all into one building brought, Which for to raise on high by contemplation, Must deepe and low within the ground be wrought: If one desire to mount his house aloft, And workes his vnder-pinning slight below, He builds vpon the sands: all comes to nought, For if the floods doe come or wind doe blow, Affliction, Persecution, all doth ouerthrow. 34 The thing which God or Nature doth decree In secret: Man, oft b' innate augurie Vnwittingly foretells, which shewes to bee Betweene our soules and heau'n a sympathie; Hence is it, that this Dame * Humilitie Hath her denomination from the ground: For though, as shee is spirituall, shee can flie Aboue the highest heau'ns, yet shee is found The lowliest wight on earth, though highly to be crown'd. 35 The ancient Latines Homo, Man did name, By deriuation from Humilitie, To teach him that he should become the same In Truth, as in names Etymologie; And let a man looke through Antiquitie, Loe! all the Men, whose vertues are commended For paternes good vnto posteritie, In humblenesse they haue begun and ended, When Pride, as basest sinne, is alwayes reprehended. 36 Abel and Cain, firstlings of humane eede, Ambitious Cain, but Abel meeke and mild, His offring was accepted, which did breede Such wrath in Cain, that he the ground defil'd With his owne brothers blood, which he hath spoil'd▪ Moses is call'd the meekest man aliue, Abram himselfe but dust and ashes styl'd, When he besought his Maker, for twice iue Iust men there found, to saue the Sodomites aliue. 37 Iacob fed Labans sheepe, the Patriarchs all Like trade of husbandrie did exercise; The Iudges with the Prophets great and small, And all good Kings were low in their owne eyes. Iohn Baptist the Messias-ship denyes, And humbly doth himselfe vnworthy deeme To be him, that stoopes and his shooe vntyes, Christ did it no disparagement esteeme, To wash their feete, whom with his blood he would redeeme. 38 Ah what an humble mind did Mary beare, When with salt teares that flowed from her eyes, Shee wash'd Christ's feet, and wip'd them with her haire, Great Volumes I suppose would not comprise Names of all humble Saints: let it suffice, Their names are written in the Booke of Life, They here vaine worldly glorie did despise, Free from Ambition, Malice, Enuie, Strife, And now by Faith and Hope in Loues Court leade their life. 39 Oh! could we but this Vertue truely taste, And as w'are dust and ashes apprehend, How he that in the highest heau'n is plac't, And did of nothing to vs Being lend, And one condition vnto all men send, Vouchsafes spirituall communication, Calls vs his Spou e, his Children, Host, and Friend, We n'ould despise the honest conuersation Of meanest brother, that's Coheire of like saluation. 40 Dares dust and ashes thus expostulate? Shall not the Lord of all the World doe right? And yet dares dust and ashes in his state, Denie his brother poore to come in s ght? Shall dogs licke Lazar's sores? whilst thou no bite Or crummes which vnderneath thy table fall, Wilt to him giue? Behold, he shall be site In Abrams bosome: thou the Deuills thrall, For thus the Humble rise, and thus the Proud must fall. 41 No better obiect of magnificence, Can there be found here, than an humble heart, Who still ascribes all to beneficence, That he receiues, not to his owne desart: Vnto thy humble brother then impart Part of thy substance: with true courtesie Intreat the least: The lowlier that thou art, God will thee higher raise: Humilitie Mounts vp to heau'n, whilst Pride in hell doth burning lie. 42 But ah! Ambition still cryes for a name, Like Giants proud that Babels Tower would raise, Whence followes sure confusion, losse and shame: Alas! how few there be now in our dayes, That seeke by humblenesse anothers praise, Humilitie, no entertainment finds, But poorely 'bout Court, Citie, Countrey strayes, And in her roome faign'd complement her winds, Who ne're minds as shee sayes, nor e're sayes as shee minds. 43 Base Complement! hatcht of Pride and Ambition, Faire Dame Humilitie to emulate, Whose onely pietie is superstition, And▪ by pretence of friendship, couers hate; Cain by her did worke his brothe s fate, Ioab slue Abner in the time of peace, In Court shee styled is a trick of State, In Church and Citie shee doth so increase, For Catholique and Vniuersall shee doth prease. 44 Nay, goe vnto the meanest beggars cell, And there as proud a heart you often find, As those that vnder Cedar roofes doe dwell, And did his purse but answere to his mind, He would despise the proudest of mankind. Where shall you see more Enuie, Malice, Strife, Than is betweene the Seruant and the Hind? Where more dissembling than twixt Man and Wife? The Sword is not more keene, than is the bloody Knife. 45 Ambition! How dost thou possesse the mind Of restlesse Man, whilst, in an idle vaine, (Which thou call'st Honour) thou dost nothing find But vanitie and vexation for thy paine? Know'st thou not Godlinesse is greatest gaine? And that the Merchant was pronounc'd most wise, That sold all that he had this Pearle t'obtaine, Oh, would'st thou seeke to buy this merchandize, Humilitie is shee can helpe thee to such prize. 46 Then, ô my Soule, couet Humilitie: Dost thou seeke Knowledge, Pleasure, Wealth, Promotion? All these shee will thee bring assuredly, Shee's like the Master-spring, that first giues notion To eu'ry wheele, that in the Clocke hath motion, Like Salt that sauours eu'ry dish we eate, Shee's Sugar sweetning eu'ry bitter Potion, Promotion, Knowledge, Pleasure, Wealth, Drinke, Meat, Humility's all these, and yet shee is not great. 47 Oh, neuer let me seeke to emulate, Except in Goodnesse, and with more desire To follow, than in hope to adequate, And like a Tree low planted neare the Mire, Bring forth much Fruit, not Fewell for the fire: With little let me euer be content, Patient of miseries; for my sinnes require, Than I haue had, farre greater punishment, And farre thy smallest fauours my deserts out went. 48 For, I confesse, that too ambitiously I hunt for worlds entisements base and vaine, Which clogge my Soule so, that shee cannot flie Aloft, where sound ioyes euermore remaine: And though I basely thinke of gold and gaine, Yet Honours glitt'ring shewes so daze mine eyes, That still I'm tainted with ambitious staine, And wish I might to worldly honour rise, But this in me the Flesh, not Spirit doth deuise. 49 For shee hath learn'd, that not from East or West Promotion comes, The higher one is plac't The greater cares and troubles him infest, And as thou more or greater Talents hast, The more thou art to count for at the last. Thou art a Steward here: 'Tis not thine owne, But as thee 'boue thy fellowes God hath grac't, So must thy Faith and care 'boue theirs be showne, We doe expect best Crops whereas best Seede is sowne. 50 These things, ô God! I aske, doe not denie, Let me depend vpon thy Prouidence In paine and ease, losse and prosperitie, My selfe submit with all obedience Vnto thy Will: performe with diligence Charge publique, priuate: Let Humilitie Be vnto me a Rocke of sure defence, Against Mens malice, and Worlds iniurie, And where my weaknesse failes, let thy good Grace supply. 51 Oh thou, that Lazarus from Diues gate, Didst into Abrams blessed bosome raise, There to enioy eternall happy state, That here, on earth, was humbled all his dayes; Direct mine humble heart in all thy wayes, The meeke, in iudgement, thou delight'st to guide, Turne all I doe vnto thy glorious praise, Preserue me from Ambition, Enuie, Pride, And though with Lazar's sores, in thy Loue let me bide. 52 Thou hast, ô Lord! proclaymed Blessednesse To all the meeke in Heart and poore in Spirit: Blest are the Meeke, they shall the earth possesse, The Poore eu'n now Gods Kingdome doe inherit. Lord! I acknowledge freely my demerit, It is thy Grace whereby I am, liue, moue, Thy humbling to the Crosse, for me, did merit, That I should be exalted to thy Loue, And liue with thee in blisse eternally aboue. 53 I aske that which thy blessed Martyrs had, Which here haue witness'd their Humilitie, And of that cup of gall to taste were glad, Which first their Master swallow'd willingly, Thy Grace, ô Lord! which thou wilt not denie, For they haue found it all-sufficient, Humble me how thou wilt: Abilitie Yet grant in sorrow to be patient, And strength with Paul, in paine or ease, to be content, 54 Grant me thy Grace, but to conceaue the end And certayne fruits of my humiliation, Then shall I plainely see and apprehend, That it prepares me fit for exaltation; And to make sure with feare mine owne saluation, Whereby I may stand firme and confident 'Gainst wicked Men, Hell, Deuils, and damnation, Who neuer shall be able to preuent Thy loue in Christ, which thou on humble men hast bent. 55 Now for that thing which worldlings doe deplore, I yeeld to thee most heartie laud and praise, That thou art pleas'd to humble me therefore, On earth, that thou againe to heau'n might'st raise, Oh teach me, Lord, to number so my dayes, That I my life may labour to amend, Oh, teach me lowlinesse in all my wayes, To thinke of my beginning and mine end. Prince, Beggar, borne alike, and to their graue descend. 56 And since that sweet Humilities condition I haue so learned by this Meditation, That now I hate Pride, Enuie, and Ambition, With complements base subtile machination: Grant me to follow Christs humiliation, Who from the Crosse to Glorie did ascend, Whose suffrings make a reconciliation For those, that by true Faith him apprehend, And after him in lowlinesse and meeknesse wend. 57 You may remember how I earst you told, That when Humilitie had clear'd the score, Whereby t'ambitious Pride my heart was sold, Shee led me to Repentance: who before The chiefe Iudge Iustice brought, and my foule sore Discouer'd to my more humiliation, Till Faith and Hope at Mercies seate therefore Did pleade Christs Blood my reconciliation. But this I leaue vnto another Meditation. MEDITAT. III. Of Repentance. 1 T He Highest that created first of nought A Chaos vast, and out thereof did take The Earth, whereof he noblest Creature wrought, Eu'n Man, and made all Creatures for his sake, Him first pure, iust, and righteous did make, But since, their owne inuentions they obay, And in a right path set, their way mistake, And as blind; fooles and slaues haue gone astray, Nor can, without the true Light, find againe the way. 2 For whilst they doe yet in their sinnes remaine, Their Soules in errour and in darknesse bide, They know not how they should be borne againe, For Sinne this mysterie from them doth hide; And till Humilitie their trustie Guide, Shall them to wholesome true Repentance leade, They misse their ayme, and striuing stray more wide; Repentance quickneth men in sinne cleane dead, And teacheth new-borne Babes in path of Life to tread. 3 Shee is the Mid-wife, that with keenest knife Our Nauell cuts, whereby we cleaue to sinne, Who though shee cruell seeme, yet giues sweet life, When first to liue in Spirit we begin; Shee, vs polluted and defil'd within, Doth clense in Fountayne of Regeneration; Vs new-borne Babes, shee teacheth to let in The milke sincere to sure Iustification; Till stronger meate make strong our Faith to sure Saluation. 4 And though in chaine of Gods most f me Decree, First sauing linke is his Predestination, Election next, then Calling, yet wee see No certayne pledges here of our Saluation, Till true Repentance workes Humiliation: Loe! then we doe, by right degrees, proceede Vnto the highest linke, Glorification; So that Repentance first to vs doth reede, What is eternally in Heau'n by God decreed. 5 Thou, that dost Hearts with true Repentance season, Making them view their owne vile wretchednesse, That cast downe with Apostasie and Treason, We may of thee seeke endlesse Happinesse; First grant me true Repentance: next to expresse What sou'raine Vertues I in her haue found. And though at first my soule with bitternesse Were ouerwhelm'd; yet Grace did cure that wound: So where most sinne there is, Mercy doth most abound. 6 Repentance is a holy worke of Grace, From godly Sorrow: by which Man from sin Is turn'd: Gods promises in Christ t'embrace, And Fruits fit for Repentance to begin: Repentance is Gods holy worke within, To worke our Righteousnesse, and Sinne deface, And no Man can be exercis'd therein, But he that standeth in the state of Grace; For no Man turnes to God, till God him first embrace. 7 Grace and Repentance are in time conioyn'd, As Fire and Heate: but as Heate first appeares To vs, when Fire in Embers is confin'd, Eu'n so when sparkes of Grace our Heart first cheares, Repentance manifests her selfe by teares. Grace is the sap in heau'nly vegetation, Repentance is the prime bud, which it beares, The first sure signe of true Regeneration, Then follow leaues, flow'rs, fruits, as certayne demonstration. 8 This godly Sorrow differs from the care And griefe a worldling in his heart receaues, By sense of Gods iust wrath or great Mens feare, Or ought that their good names or goods bereaues. This godly Sorrow griefe of mind conceaues, That he hath sinn'd, and that he did displease So good and kind a God; which so close cleaues To's heart, that though no feare did him disease, Of Iudge, Hell, Deuill, yet nought but Grace can him appease. 9 Man was most faire, in Gods owne Image built, Had with him sweet communion at's Creation, Whereby in God, and God eke in him dwelt, But sinne hath since enforc'd a separation, And made vs sonnes of wrath by alienation; Now we like prodigall and lost sheepe stray, Till Grace and true Repentance restauration Doth make of all, sinne doth in vs decay, Then we returne, and our Creators hests obay. 10 But true Repentance doth repent of all, And not of many or one onely sinne: Herod conuerted thus at Baptists call, Him gladly heard, and hearing did begin For to doe many things: but would not lin The sinne of incest with his brothers Loue; Some, like th'Adulterer, doe turne from sinne, When they want strength: from bad to worse some moue, As when the prodigall a couetous man doth proue. 11 Shee hath two hands, with one, loe! shee beginnes To presse vs downe to true mortification, Whereby we may returne from all our sinnes; Vs th'other rayseth by Regeneration To a new life, and to Sanctification. One from all actuall sinnes makes vs abstayne, Suppresseth, weakens, natures deprauation; Makes the Mind purpose, and the Will full fayne, And all our whole indeauours from sinne to refrayne. 12 The other hand Mans purged mind doth raise Vnto a serious firme deliberation, To yeeld sincere obedience to Gods Sayes, And worketh in the will an inclination Him to obey, as at our first creation. This doth Mans life and best indeauours frame, To walke here in a holy conuersation, Though all, we doe, vnperfect is and lame, Yet if the Heart be right, God will accept the same. 13 And as shee hath a double energie, Men head-long to th'infernall Pit to throw, And them againe by Faith to viuifie: So though of this great worke, one cause we know, Gods Spirit, that whereas it list doth blow; Yet vseth it a twofold instrument, The Law, which Death to vs for sinne doth show: The Gospell, that doth preach attonement; Thus both the Law and Gospell teach vs to repent. 14 The Law first pierceth eu'n the very heart, And doth by little and degrees proceede; Till Knowledge foure things needfull doth impart, Gods Law; the guilt of Sinne; and Sinnes iust meede, Which is eternall Fire by God decreed: Then we these rightly to our selues apply, Which doth in vs a feare and horrour breed, Except on Gospels comfort we rely; For without that we die in hell eternally. 15 Then doth the Gospell make vs comprehend Gods mercy, for it seriously enquire, And by the gifts of Knowledge to contend, That though I iustly haue deseru'd Gods ire, If I my selfe denie yet, and desire My trust in Christs sole merits to repose, I shall thereby escape eternall Fire: Thus doth Repentance griefe and ioy impose, Griefe for my sinnes: but Ioy, God doth me from them loose. 16 Thus godly Sorrow in our heart being wrought, Which brings Repentance with true change of mind, We are resolu'd neuer in word, deed, thought, So to offend God in our wonted kind, But a new life to leade; loe, then we find Within our selues a wondrous alteration, Not that it changeth substance of our mind, Or body, in the matter or the fashion, But doth reforme their powers as in their first creation. 17 Shee worldly griefe to godly sorrow turnes, Our Wrath and Anger into temp'rate Zeale, Presumption into Faith, their heart that burnes In wanton loue, to heau'nly Loue appeale: Mad laughter shee with Christian ioy doth seale, Mildnesse of nature turnes to spirits meeknesse, Soules faculties doth all repaire and heale, And brings them vnto their first perfectnesse: Thus shee makes crocked streight, and what's wrong doth re∣dresse. 18 Then bring we forth fruits worthy amendment Of life; the truth whereof we doe expresse, When, by good workes, we shew how we repent, Repenting soules be Trees of Righteousnesse, Planted by God which Riuers doe refresh, Eu'n flouds that from the Sanctuarie flow, Whose boughes doe lowly stoope with fruitfulnesse: There fruits for meate; leaues good for medicine grow, Else to the roote the Axe is laid them downe to throw. 19 Repentance Subiect is a grieued heart, A conscience wounded with the sight of Sinne, Which nought but hell and horrour doth impart, When to lay open conscience doth beginne Our sinnes without, and wicked thoughts within: And 'lesse shee to vs hope in Christ reueale, We may with Iudas hang vp by the chin, But like a skilfull Surgeon shee doth deale, First corrasiue the sore, and then it gently heale. 20 Shee hath a double Obiect, guilt of sinne, And sinnes iust meede, eternall condemnation, Which terror breedes without, horror within; The second is our Sauiours blessed Passion, Made eu'n our owne by a right application: This brings true inward ioy and sound delight, And doth deface th'hand-writing of damnation, This brings vs out of darknesse into light, This Sunne of Righteousnesse doth chase away our night. 21 As Pharaoh with his Butler and his Baker, So deales shee with the wicked and the iust, They both alike offended haue their Maker, And both alike into one Dungeon thrust: But, loe, shee lifts to place of highest trust The Butler, but the Baker doth forsake, And leaues him to the meede of the vniust: Thus, with her left hand, shee vs drownes in Lake, But with her right vs into endlesse ioy doth take. 22 Neare to her fellowes, gracious Restitution, A Lady of a conscience wondrous tender; That of all benefits makes retribution, And for a wrong done, double mends will render; Sorrow, Teares, Kindnesse, Bountie, doe attend her, Sighs, Prayer, true Deuotion on her wait, If shee wants these Associates, God amend her, Shee's but Hypocrisie, the Deuils bait, To catch poore soules with false pretences and deceit. 23 For, loe, two Hags of hell would like her seeme: One outward is and ceremoniall, Which like proud Pharisee her selfe doth deeme Aboue the Publican: And shee will fall To prayer on her knees amongst them all: The other eu'n my pen trembles to write, Mine heart to thinke of: her, Despaire we call, Oh! shee our Sauiours suffrings doth despite, Counting His satisfaction, for her sinnes, too light. 24 Many there be that will repent of , When they are scourged by th'Almighties hand, But when to spare his rod he doth beginne, They stay repenting, and themselues doe band Against the Righteous: And though God command, They will resist him like proud Egypts King, Which notwithstanding ten Plagues did withstand His Makers will, his Heart still hardening, Till on himselfe and people he confusion bring. 25 A cursed sinne's finall impenitence, When as a man himselfe so iust doth take, As he needs not repent for his offence: This like a lethargie our soule doth make Vnsensible of sinne, till we awake: And as 'tis a disease most dangerous, Which vs insensible thereof doth make, So of all States it is most perilous, To be dead-sicke of sinne, yet thinke we are righteous. 26 Foure things obserue in this great worke of wonder, Grace, horror, sorrow, comfortable peace, Which I resemble to tempestuous thunder, Lightning shewes first, next cracks, then shower increase, But all in comfortable Sunne-shine cease: So in this worke of our Regeneration, The Spirit first lights; Hell doth like thunder prease, Then sorrowes, clouds, teares, showers make inundation: Lastly, like Sunne shines ioy, which seales vp our saluation. 27 And as in course of humane generation, Conception, trauell, lastly birth wee see; So in this worke of our regeneration, The Spirit, Soules-horror, inward ioy agree: The Spirit first giueth life and power to bee, The Soule then trau ileth in griefe and paine, Then followeth our glad natiuitie, Which recompenceth all our losse with gaine: Thus as at first the Flesh, the Spirit begets againe. 28 And as some women, though they doe conceaue, And quickning ioy doe feele within their wombe, Yet by disorder oft a hurt receaue, And so miscarry ere to birth they come, So that their wombe become the infants tombe: So in vs oft a quickning Spirit doth moue, As if Repentance were in vs begun, Yet in the end it doth abortiue proue, This is when we resist the holy Spirit of Loue. 29 Some, as I say, conceaue an embrion, But lose their fruit eu'n in the vegetation, Some in due time to trauell haue begon, But wanted strength eu n in the procreation, And in this weaknesse falne to desperation, Like Iudas they haue strangled their owne brood, Before it had in new life respiration, Who did deplore's betraying innocent blood, Well he began, but ended in a desperate mood. 30 But if our trauell doth to birth proceede, And that there is a liuing Child forth brought, Oh then what ioy and comfort it doth breede, Then we employ our care, and eu'ry thought How we may nurse and feede it as we ought; We therefore pap and milke to it first giue, And after stronger meates for it are sought, Till it vnto a perfect man doth thriue, Loe then he can beget, that earst began to liue. 31 Eu'n so a new borne Babe in Christ proceedes, There's wondrous ioy at's first regeneration, On Gospels Milke he young and tender feedes, Till he grow strong: Then from Predestination He can discourse eu'n to Glorification, Thus doth he to a height and fulnesse grow Of age and strength by Spirits Illumination, Till he all Mysteries in Christ doth know, Then is he able vnto others them to show. 32 Men are like Horses wild, who sure had bin, As at the first, to Man obedient, Had they not beene corrupted by mans sin, And would haue beene seruants most diligent, Now they grow Rebels, disobedient, Till we with bit, yoke, bridle doe them tame: So Man growes'gainst his Maker insolent, Till by Repentance he doth him reclame; Then he becomes as at the first God did him frame. 33 Mans heart is like the ground, which for mans sinne Is cursed, Thornes and Thistles for to reare, Which first the skilfull Plow-man doth beginne, With a strong Teame of Oxen vp to teare; Fallowes and Harrowes it for to prepare, It sweet and cleane for to receaue his seede: Loe then, in stead of Thornes it Wheat will beare, Repentance thus ploughs Hearts to kill Sinnes weede, And Tils it, fit and sweet for Grace to sow Faiths seede. 34 If a man sowes and doth not Till his ground, Or if one Till his ground and doe not sow, On first kind, Thornes and Thistles doe abound, Which choke the seede so that it cannot grow; And from the vnsowne tilled ground, we mow Nothing but stinking weedes fit for the fire: Eu'n so, except with sorrow we doe plow Our hearts, and Word to sow therein desire; Sinne chokes all grace, & weeds therein grow ranke & higher. 35 Repentance like an Axe is, that hath praid On all the Cedars that on Lebanon stand; And eu'ry one downe on the earth hath laid, The sound shee hewes and squares with her right hand, Making them posts and pillars fit to stand In Gods owne house: But eu'ry hollow crust Shee teares and cleaues for fire with her left hand: Thus doth Repentance trim and square the iust; Despaire th'vngodly rends, and into Hell doth thrust. 36 Behold! we thus with trembling and with feare, In paine and griefe worke out our owne saluation, But some when as Repentance draweth neare, And calls their conscience to examination, Like Ahab, fall into this bitter passion, What, hast thou found me? Oh! mine enemie? Despising godly Prophets reformation, And rather vnregenerate chuse to die, Than pangs and bitter throwes of a new birth to trie. 37 Latines and Greekes giue her a diuers name, Which haue in them a twofold true notation, And yet in her they both employ the same; Latines from P nitentia. Paine doe make their deriuation. Next is a . new mind by interpretation; Both these describe her nature wondrous right, In paine and sorrow is her inchoation, When shee with Flesh and powers of Hell doth fight, Then followes change of mind which bringeth sweet delight. 38 For shee is bred in paine, brought forth in gladnesse, Sorrow is ouer-night, but in the morne Comes soundest ioy, to chase away nights sadnesse, And when we thinke that we are left forlorne, Then comfort's nigh to lift on high our horne, And though a while the Worldlings vs doe deeme The off-scumme of the people, and the scorne Of wicked men: yet God doth vs esteeme, And by this change, most precious in his eyes we se me. 39 Thus haue all holy men in former ages, By griefe and change of mind obtayn'd Gods grace. This eke is shadowed in those grand Sages, That tooke great paynes and care to find the place, Where Christ was borne, that they might see his face; Who after, in a dreame, forwarned were Not to returne againe in their first trace: Thus after trauell long, great paines and care, With ioy and change of mind another way they fare. 40 Of all the Eu'n from that its in her T one, To low Humilitie, that keepes her , Our blessed Sauiour hath vs paternes showne, Onely because no sinne was euer knowne To be in him, He cannot well be said For to repent of sinnes that be his owne; But sure for ours a ransome deare he paid, And felt the wrath of God which on vs should be laid. 41 His Soule was heauie eu'n vnto the death, He fear'd to drinke this cup of bitternesse, God did on him such wrath and vengeance breath, That he sweat drops of blood in his distresse: Such horror, by Gods curse, did him depresse, That he cry'd out as if he were forsaken, Such horror doth repenting oules oppresse, But not in so great measure are they shaken, For Christ the edge of Gods displeasure off hath taken. 42 This was his way to heau'n; This must be ours, Before we be to true Repentance brought. Consider now with are the bitter stowers, Whereby our Fathers haue Repentance sought, Let Abram tell, from natiue Countrey brought Into an vnknowne Land, to be a stranger, Where he indured hunger, cold, and drought, Whom Cana famine made an Egypt , Where of the losse of Wife and Life he was in danger. 43 Afflicted Iob, modell of true Repentance, How was he plagu'd without? frighted within? Who though he seem'd most happy in his entrance, Yet his last dayes were best: Dauid did sin Most desp'rately: but after did begin Sadly to crie, when he Gods anger found, Purge me without, and make me cleane within. When Solomon felt his sinnes accursed wound, He a whole of true Repentance did compound. 44 Good chattered like a Swallow, Or like a Crane, and mourned like a Doue, And though his sonne Man sses long did wallow In much foule sinne, yet bondage did him moue To true Repentance: Peter more did loue His Master a ter vnaduis'd denyall: Thus all Gods seruants better Saints doe proue, After they haue endur'd the fiery tryall. Experience of Gods loue makes holy men more loyall. 45 I should seeme partiall, if I onely tell Of men, who in this worke haue happy beene, Since Women for this beare away the bell; Witnesse her eyes which like two Fountaynes dre ne To wash her Sauiours feete: And Ri as teene, When vnder sackcloth shee her life did lead, Till the wish't raine from heau'n to fall was seene, So long shee did defend the bodies dead, That for the Gibeonites were hang'd vp by the head. 46 But why seeke I for witnesses without? Looke in thine heart if there thou hast not found This smart of horror, thou maist iustly doubt, Thy soule's not yet vp in Lifes bundle bound: Therefore vnto thy selfe with speede propound, To view Gods wrath and thine owne wretchednesse, Then griefe of heart and sorrow will abound, Which thee vnto the brinke of hell will presse, Till Faith thee raise by inward ioy to happinesse. 47 Thou shalt not find her like fruit, which to th'eye Was wondrous faire, and pleasant to the taste, Which poyson'd Adam and his Progenie; Shee bitter is at first, sweet at the last: And when the cloud of sorrow's ouer-past, Shee brings of ioy and comfort so great store That all become new: loe, old things are past, Shee is the Antido e, that doth restore What Adam lost, when he forsooke his Makers lore. 48 No, th'Antid is Christs most precious Blood, Repentance is but the preparatiue, To make our soules taste this most heau'nly food, Than which no other can keepe vs al e: And till Repentance out of vs doth driue In-bred corruption, and all actuall sin, This Balme of Gilead will not make vs thriue, Oh then Repentance! purge me cleane within, And make my stomach fit this Manna to let in. 49 The Spirit's willing, but the Flesh is weake, Oh a most bitter pill is this temptation, None but they that haue felt it, right can sp ake What pangs it breedes in our regeneration: Well, let men-pleasers onely sing saluation, Let not vaine fruitlesse hopes thine heart deceaue, We must first taste the curse of our damnation, Before saluation truely we conceaue; As head, so must the members that to it doe cleaue. 50 We here must taste it, or then, when w'appeare At Christs Tribunall: From which none can hide Himselfe; but all stand forth themselues to cleare; When Bookes are brought forth, and are open'd wide, In sight of God, Christ, Angels, and the Bride, When Satan and thy conscience thee accuse, And no gold can an Aduocate prouide: Oh, who thinks of this day and can refuse To taste here of Christs Cup, and scape the Deuils Cruse? 51 Wherefore against thy selfe an Action bring, And thus accuse, examine, iudge, and trie, Lest thou beest iudged of the righteous King: First before Christs. Gods Tribunall prostrate lie, And if he then beheld thee with his eye, Confesse thy in-bred sinnes, knowne, and vnseene, Against thy selfe pronounce vnfeignedly Damnation, hell, and horror: when we seeme Most vile in our owne eyes, God doth vs best esteeme. 52 Death, to all men, the wages is of sin, But vnto those, the Heau'n of happinesse, That thus on earth condemne themselues within, And after bring forth fruits of Righteousnesse; But to those that goe on in wickednesse, Death is the Port and entrance into Hell. Lord giue me here this pill of bitternesse, Which may corruption from mine heart expell: No wound can be so deepe, but thou by grace canst heale. 53 And though shee seemes like fiery two-edg'd sword, That keepes from Man the way to Tree of Life, Because her fiery triall is abhord, And Cowards heart doth faint to see her knife; Swouning away at Flesh's and Spirits strife: Oh neuer yet let feare my courage quaile, To hinder me from that sweet Tree of Life, Better Repentance thresh me with her flaile On earth; than hellish Dragon breake me with his taile. 54 But, I confesse, I tremble at her rod, As Moses did at his when he it cast On ground, by the commandement of God, And it became a Serpent, that in haste He fled from it: but all his feare was past, When God him bid to take it by the taile; Then it became a Staffe to stay him fast, And wonders worke: So though our hearts shee quaile At first, we yet at last by Faith 'gainst her preuaile. 55 We are as Satan hop'd Iob to haue found, When as he said, Doth Iob serue God for nought? Whilst God doth hedge vs in on each side round, And prospers all that by our hands are wrought, Whilst by our flocks are multitudes forth brought, So long we seeme his bountie to embrace; But take away our goods and leaue vs nought, Behold, I say, we curse him to his face, Except, as vnto Iob, he grant preuenting grace. 56 This is of wicked men the punishment, That all their life Repentance haue despised, Eu'n at their end they thinke not to repent, This trade must in thy youth be exercised, As Abel of his Firstlings sacrificed. They that from sinne abstaine not till their last, And to Worlds pleasures haue their Strength. Youth deuised; Are like those, that being sicke, professe to fast, When as alas! they haue no appetite or taste. 57 Such late Repentance seldome is or neuer, We one example in the Scripture reade Not to despaire, repent what time so euer, But onely one example, lest it breede Presumption: 'Tis meate and drinke indeede To Satan, for to see youth doe his will, And on the other side great ioy doth breede To th'Angels, for to see young men fulfill Gods Statutes in their Strength. Youth, and eke obay his Will. 58 Oh! then embrace her whilst 'tis call'd Today: For most vncertayne is our life and fraile, The longer I the lusts of sinne obay, Against them I the hardlier shall preuaile; Late med'cines of their cures doe most what faile, Which would yeeld remedie in season taken; The Serpent in the head, not in the taile Is quickly kill'd: young twigs are easily shaken, But grow hard to remoue when they deepe roote haue taken. 59 If in due time thou seekest to repent By godly sorrow, which ne're comes too late, And thou hells pangs dost feele; Be confident, Thou art by Faith in Christ regenerate, Assure thy selfe, most happy is thy state; If thou least drop of Mercy dost obtaine: The danger's past; sinnes stinging will abate, The Spirit of thy mind's renew'd againe, And from least shew of sinne hereafter now refraine. 60 Though, like seruant, first thou Nought but Hostilitie, thee to confound, If that thine eyes with his once open'd bee To looke vp to the Mountayne: There abound Horses and Charets fiery about thee round, Crie but alas! Master, What shall we doe? Loe, more for thee, than there for them are found: Thy light with blindnesse so confounds thy Foe, Thou mayst them captiue leade, and vnto others show. 61 Thy Groat is found, which thou before hadst lost; Thy Sheepe's brought home, that earst hath gone astray; Thy dead sonne hath againe receau'd his ghost; The prodigall's come home that ranne away: Vashti's deposed from the Scepters sway, And humble Hester now hath got her place, The workes of darknesse now are chac't away, And in their roome are workes of Light and Grace, Faith by Repentance shewes vs now Loues smiling face. 62 Ioy after Sorrow, after labour rest, And after shipwrack the desired Port, All men loue safety: they discerne it best That lately haue escap'd some eminent hurt. Loe! light is pleasing vnto eu'ry sort, To them most that in darkest Dungeon bee, To passe from death to life, doubles the sport Of : But all the ioyes I see, Is when om wounded conscience, Grac doth set . 63 And now, o Lord, vnab to presse Thy wondrous bountie in first creation; And much more here vnworthy to confesse Thy Loue and Grace in our regeneration, Begun here first in vs by renouation, And true Repentance: Lord, now cure my wound, The sting of conscience by sweet application Of Faith: the fruits whereof may still abound, And to the riches of thy glorious Grace redound. 64 You may be pleas'd with me to call to mind, How when the humble Lady first me brought To Dame Repentance, harsh I her did find, And shee most strongly on my conscience wrought, Yea, though with teares, I oft her Grace besought, That I might iudged be at Mercies seate, Shee mee, by force, before Dame Iustice brought, Where all my sinnes and faults shee did repeate, But Faith me iustifide, of whom I next entreate. MEDITAT. IIII. Of Faith. 1 O Ne Beeing that from all eternitee Most happy is, Wise, Iust, Omnipotent, And from eternitie all things did see, As present, though long after they were meant, Of nought created Aire, Fire, Firmament, With all the Spirits and Powers that are aboue, Made and replenished Earths Continent, The Sea, and all that in them both doe moue, All these he made for Man; Man him to serue and loue. 2 Man sure a Creature was most excellent, Being of all created things the end, To whom that Being onely being lent, That he to's Makers seruice might intend, And in his ioyfull Presence his life spend; Wherefore He him in goodliest Garden plac't, And one Fruit onely did from him defend, Of which Fruit onely he presum'd to taste, Wherefore God him for eu'r out of the Garden cast. 3 But as the glorious riches of his grace, Was the sole-mouing cause Man first to make; So gracelesse Man he leaues not in this case, But to repaire his losse, will vndertake A new worke likewise for his mercies sake: To free him from sinnes guilt, and Satans wile. God will Mans flesh and guilt vpon him take, And purge him from the sinne doth him defile, Thus Satan is beguil'd, that sought Man to beguile. 4 As Can 'd Man from earthly Eden to be cast; So true Beliefe and Obedience, Cause : And as on paine of death he was to fast From one fruit onely; so this gracious King Commands vs now, one onely fruit to taste, Life to restore, and for to kill Death's sting: This fruit is Faith in Christ, whereof I next doe sing. 5 Thou, that when Man most blessed was created, But by sinne falne from his high happinesse, Thine owne Sonne sent, that he regenerated Might be; and winne againe more perfect blesse. Who here eu'n humbled'st God in humane flesh, That thou by Faith might'st Man to thee vnite, And safe deliuer from all wretchednesse, Direct my Muse of Faith to sing aright, And grant me first Faith, before of Faith I write. 6 Faith is a wondrous gift of God, a Grace, Whereby th'Elect apply particularly Christ right, and all his benefits embrace: By her our hope subsi ts most certainely; Shee shewes vs things vnseene, most euidently: Faith of the Gospell is a firme beliefe, Whereby, Christs benefits offred, we apply, And rightly doe receiue: So Faith in briefe Is a right application, and a sound beliefe. 7 Faith is the Bucket which hangs on Hopes string, Whereby the most deepe liuing Well we sound, Which if the Rope hold out, vs vp will bring Such liuing Water, as doth there abound, When Christ his sauing Graces doth propound. Faith is the Hand whereby we them receaue; Faith healeth vp the clensed purged wound, Beginneth where Repentance doth vs leaue, Who without her seekes Faith, doth himselfe deceaue. 8 Faith as it's t ne for credit or beliefe, Is when we credit giue to God or Man, Thus he with men most Faith hath that is chiefe, And in his coffer hide most money can: But when to God it reference hath, we than It ordinary or extr'ord'nary call. By this we miracles and wonders can. Ordinarie Faith is hight historicall, Or iustifying Faith, in some but temporall. 9 But this most precious Faith, whereof I write, And which I formerly aright define, The Faith of Gods Elect is truely hight, Which when one hath doth wholly ne're decline▪ This iustifying, sauing Faith doth ioyne Vs to our Head, and is the instrument And meanes, whereby Gods Spirit doth refine And purge our hearts from sinfull excrement: This Faith doth make Gods Children bold and confident. 10 This Faith, though not diuided, hath degrees, Beginning, first, encrease, and consummation; A little Faith to greater doth encrease, Till built and rooted on a sure foundation: Yet neuer had this Faith so sure a station, Which conscience and hels terrours haue not shaken: Remember Christ our Head his bitter passion, How he cry'd out as God had him forsaken, When he the guilt and curse of sinne had on him taken. 11 Such as the Head, the Members must endure, Thus in their soules they totter, faint, and reele, Though the foundation of the Lord stand sure And firme, and hath vpon it set this seale, The Lord knowes who are his: yet he doth deale With vs, as doth the Finer with his gold, Which he doth seu'n times in the furnace neale, Thus tries he those, whose names he hath enrold, But will heape comforts in their bosomes manifold. 12 In Men and Plants, and , three soules wee see Of Reason Growing, and the , So in this Christian soule, Faith, there bee Three qualities alike cooperatiue: And as in Man all three into one , So in th'Elect, both Faith historicall, Temporall, and the true Faith are aliue, And but one sauing Faith together all: This Soule, Mans forme, this Faith Christians life we call. 13 As vegetation sheweth most in Plants, So in the worldlings Faith historicall, Faith temporall in false Professors hants, True Faith vpon th'Elect doth onely fall: And as no Plant or Beast, be it great or small, The things that are in Man right apprehends, Yet Man, what is in Beasts and Plants knowes all, So those two Faiths (which serue to other ends) Know t true Faith, yet shee both comprehends. 14 God Authour is, and Cause efficient Of eu'ry good and perfect gift and grace, His good Will moues him first: But his Intent And chiefe end is the glorie of his Grace, And our saluation in the second place, But when He in our soules doth Faith beget, Whereby Christ and his Merits we embrace, A double meanes he here on worke doth set, Inward and outward, whereby sauing Faith we get. 15 The outward is his Word and Sacrament: One workes, the other strengthens what is wrought▪ The inward is Gods Spirit into vs sent, Our hearts to quicken, sanctifie, make soft, Wherein the Word may sowne be as it ought, The Gospell, whereupon stands Faith's foundation, Though we, by Law, to see our sinnes are brought, As the Schoole Mistris to regeneration; Yet 'tis the Gospell vs wise vnto saluation. 16 The , most what worketh by the Word, Not, but without, 'tis all sufficient, But this instruction it doth vs afford, That we in hearing should be diligent: The Word, without the Spirits enlightenment, Is as good Seede sowne on vntilled ground, That neuer brings forth fruit that's excellent, For without Grace, Faith temporary's found, And neuer doth in good and holy workes abound. 17 Prayer is not the meanes Faith to obtaine, But it preserues and strengthens Faith to pray: For without Faith our Prayers are in vaine, Yet after Faith is wrought in vs, we may Pray that Faith failes vs not: wherefore, I say, We must giue Prayer her due commendation, For by her we discourse with God alway, And haue with him familiar conuersation, Though none can pray aright before regeneration. 18 Faith's like the Hand, and Prayer like the Key Which doth th' Almighties Coffers open wide, Wherein his richest Treasures lockt vp lye. The Key vnprofitably hangs beside, Except that Faith it take in hand to guide: Likewise the Hand doth vse her strength in vaine, The Barre without the Key gainst Wards to slide: Both ioyn'd, the Locke to open doe constrayne, And vs most glorious view of heau'nly Treasures gayne. 19 'Twere infinite of all Faiths fruits to tell, All duties towards God, all charitee Towards our Neighbours, done aright and well From her proceede: A holy mother's shee Of Graces all, that sanctifying bee: Therefore 'tis plaine they want her, that doe striue To make good workes Faiths mother, and doe flee Vnto Saints merits; For were Faith aliue In them, all Pietie and Charitie would thriue. 20 They from Rome: For then a quiet conscience and a cleare, (A faithfull euidence) to them would come, Then with true inward ioy would soone appeare Holy Securitie, to cast our care Vpon the Lord: for if Faith iustifie, We are at peace with God: Loe, then our feare Is turned into sweet Securitie, And inward ioy doth by afflictions multiplie. 21 But if this peace and ioy doe not appeare, But rather terror, stormes, and di idence, Let's labour yet our conscience may stand cleare, Which is to doe Gods Will, and shun offence: Here God beholds our will, not impotence, And if we doe indeauour to approue Our selues to God; Faith workes in vs a sence Of heau'nly Loue: whereby we plainly proue That God loues first, whereby we doe begin to loue. 22 Behold! thus eu'n a fruit of Faith is Loue, For many one whose Faith is weake and faint, And cannot in themselues Spirits earnest proue, Nor their hearts with true inward ioy acquaint, So as in true beliefe they seeme to faint; Yet find within their brests this Spirit of Loue, Which is to them from sinning a restraint, And 'tis an euidence doth surely proue, Faith's seede is sowne within, when as we truely loue. 23 And as Faith growes, eu'n so doth Loue encrease, Loe! first we them that are in want releeue, With spirituall comfort troubled soules appease, Loue makes vs (if we constantly beleeue) That for our brethren we our liues will leaue. By this indeed we know God's charitie, That did himselfe of life for vs bereaue, We therefore for our brethren ought to die. This great Loue in vs comes from Faiths plerophorie. 24 The Subiect of true Faith is a pure heart, Her Obiects are Christs sufferings, sanctitie Fulfilling of the Law in eu'ry part. If these three by true Faith we can apply: They are against all ill the remedie, These are the Balme a wounded soule can heale, And not the Churches store, Romes trumperie, These onely can to vs our Pardon seale, Merits Mens fancies are, these Scripture doth reueale. 25 Eu'n as three ills, inherent be in sin, Originall vice, Sinne actuall, condemnation; So Faith three parallel benefits lets in, Whereby effected is Iustification, Christ's sufferings pay the price of our damnation, His perfectest Obedience satisfies For actuall sinnes; th'exquisite Sanctification Of's humane Nature in vs all destroies Originall sinne: This threefold way, Faith iustifies. 26 He that is able out of stones to raise Vp children vnto Abram: He, I say, Can onely make our hearts melt at the rayes Of his Sunne beames: He to a heart of clay Can turne a stony heart: And though this may Seeme very hard and strange to flesh and blood, Yet he that feeles his heart melt with the ray Of spirituall Grace, Faith there doth proue this good: By those whose hearts world blinds, th s is not vnderstood. 27 Three qualities true Faith accompany, Which shee doth vse in eu'ry worke well wrought. First shee doth good, not for to please Mans eye, But for his sake, whose blood her dearely bought▪ Next by Gods Law, each action, word, and thought Shee squareth: For shee knowes Obedience, Then Sacrifice is better by her wrought: All to Gods glorie last hath reference, To these we guided are by Spirit, not by Sense. 28 Shee's swift to heare: The holy Sacrament Of Baptisme once: The Eucharist oft receaues, Releeues the Poore, in Prayer diligent, In which shee still persists and neuer leaues; Lastly, shee to some lawfull Calling cleaues, To be fore God and Man without offence, If these faile in her, shee herselfe deceaues; Shee's temporary, and a false pretence, To walke licentiously without Obedience. 29 Other Companions are of Faith likewise: As grieuous, manifold, and great tentation, With these sound Faith herselfe must exercise, These part not from her till soules separation. For Satan prosecutes with infestation, His hatred to our head continually, Vpon his Members to their great vexation, Besides Tentations, true Faith purge and trie, Preparing hearts for Grace by sweet Humilitie. 30 These often come of diffident distrust, When sight of sinne makes vs faint, stagger, reele, Or when by our vnworthinesse and lust, We of this precious Faith a coldnesse feele; These for a while our spirituall eyes vp seele, So as true inward comfort, life, and loue As in times past in him we cannot feele, Who is our Head, and hereby doth vs proue, And make vs when we feele his want, the more to loue. 31 Behold, two other Deepes on either hand, On right, Presumption proud; on left, Despaire; Which like two red-Sea walls of waues doe stand, And for the Faithfull a faire way prepare, That through the Deepe they may eu'n drie-shod fare▪ But loe! the miscreant and presumptuous Wight, They drowne in ouer-weening and much care, Here God against th' Egyptians seemes to fight, Out of the fiery Pillar that to Faith giues light. 32 These two are like the Cities of the Plaine, Gomorrha proud, and Sodom base in lust, On which God fire and brimstone downe did raine. The first is Pharisaicall, ouer-iust: The other doth Gods promises distrust. But Faith, like little Zoar Lot doth saue, Though vnbeliefe doe turne his Wife to dust, These three be they that seeke Faith to depraue, These three so hinder Faith, shee nothing right can craue. 33 Presumption proud on her owne merits stands, Despaire lookes downe on her vile wretchednesse, But neuer Gods great goodnesse vnderstands, Nor his great power, free grace, and willingnesse To ease all those whose sinnes doe them oppresse: But Infidelitie seekes to entise To Atheisme, and all vngodlinesse, And make Faith folly seeme to worldly wise, Who nought beleeue, but Sense and Reason must deuise. 34 Despaire to great Goliah I resemble, But Faith doth like to little Dauid fare, At whom though Saul and all his Host doe tremble, Yet all his threats bold Dauid cannot scare. He that hath giu'n the Presump∣tion. Lion and the Infidelitie. Beare Into his hands, he surely doth beleeue, This Despaire. rayling Philistim will neuer spare, But will him vnto like destruction leaue, Thus off with his owne sword Dauid his head doth cleaue. 35 Oft haue I seene some grieued patient Languishing of some desp'rate disease, Not fe ling it till Natures helps were spent, Then thinks his graue onely can's griefe appease, Yet if he hopes of skilfull Leech some ease, He him intreates to vse his vtmost skill, To cure his maladie and sore disease, Himselfe referring wholly to his will, Till he such Balme apply that cures him of that ill. 36 All men are of the disease of sinne, Which till 'tis past mans cure, they not perceaue. But when of helpe they to despaire beginne, If by true Faith they vnto Christ can cleaue, Their soules Physician: and vnto him leaue The cure alone: of his most precious Blood, A plaister they to cure their sore receaue; This onely is the Balme can doe them good▪ And not Saints m nts, Pardons, Dirges, woodden Rood. 37 Faith to the blind man may be well compar'd That feeles the heate, but cannot see the flame Of fire, which in the winter is prepar'd, The tyra nizing cold thereof to tame: Faith, Hope, are like two Men, one blind, one lame, Blind Hope, weake Faith on shoulders doth sustaine, Faith, Hope directs her steps aright to frame, Both labour top of Zions mount to gaine, And both by mutuall aide their wished end attaine. 38 Our hearts are like vnto the parched Land, That three yeares drought endur'd in Ahabs dayes, Faith like the Cloud is little as mans hand, That in the end great stormes and wind doth raise, And many showers abundantly displayes; Loe then the Land that earst was drie and waste, Abundantly her fruit and grasse repayes, So Faith though small at first, yet at her last Growes wondrous great, & poures down heau'nly showres ful fast. 39 Faith is like to a graine of Mustard seede, Which of all graines at sowing time is least, But growes so high that Birds therein may breede, Yea Fowles of th'aire therein doe make their nest; Shee's like an O en plant that winds infest, Which more 'tis shak'd rootes faster in the ground, So more tentations haue true Faith opprest, Shee stands more resolute, secure, and sound; And as her rootes hold fast, her leaues and fruit abound, 40 We are on earth like Wind-mills all, whose grist Are workes of Pietie and Charitie, Our Faith like Sailes, which if the wind be whist, And aire calme, doe stand vnprofitably, But when tentations rise, shee instantly Swayes all the inward powers by her commotion, To all the workes of Loue and Pietie, Loue to our Neighbours, to our God deuotion; But if Faiths sailes doe faile, all faile in their true motion. 41 Faith is our spirituall Sunne in Firmament, Which Clouds may darken, not put out her light: Shee is swe t Oile, that giueth nutriment Vnto our Lamps, vs to direct aright: Shee is our strong Shield, vnder which we fight Safe and secure'gainst all the powers of Hell; Which though our brest-plate oft by force or slight, They pierce of Righteousnesse: Faiths shield doth quell Yet all Hells fiery darts, and Satans force expell. 42 Shee Morter is, vs liuing Stones to ioyne, In that great Building to the corner Stone, The Pins and Ioynts which euery peece combine Into one goodly Frame: By Faith alone Members on Earth and Head in heau'n is one, Shee doth espouse the Bridegroome to the Bride, Shee vs the earnest of his Spirit hath showne, Shee sets vs at the Banquet by his side, Then Loue vs to embrace, her Armes doth open wide. 43 Faith like is to the holy Martyr Steuen, Who when before the Councell he did stand, Look'd vp and saw Gods glorie great in heau'n, And Iesus standing by on his right hand; Shee's like Tobi Angell, at command For to direct vs in our iourney right, And free from danger both by Sea and Land, Shee doth endue vs with such heau'nly light, That we to Friends and Parents may restore their sight. 44 Like Aduocate, who not for priuate gayne Pleades for all sinners to Repentance brought, Whom neither feare nor fauour can restrayne From pleading, till our Pardon shee hath wrought: Shee neuer leaues vs till shee hath vs brought To the most glorious happy Court of Loue, Into his armes, whose Blood vs dearely bought, For Faith and Hope cease further there to moue, Our state there is immutable without remoue. 45 Faith, like to Moses, out of Egypt leades All Israelites that vnder bondage grone, Baptiseth them that in her foote-steps treades, As in red Sea: Faith cleaues a Heart. Rocke of stone, From which gush liuing Waters: Faith alone The hidden Manna makes from heau'n descend, Which who by Faith eate, Bone become of Bone, Flesh of his Flesh: Faith doth before vs wend Through this worlds wildernesse: but there she makes an end. 46 Yet Faith, like Moses, doth from Mount behold, And view from farre the blessed promis'd Land; But leaues vs there vnto our Iesus. Iosuah bold, T'expell the Amorite with mightie hand, And giue vs seisin of that blessed Land, Loe then, Faith to sure Knowledge is return'd, Then we in state vnchangeable doe stand, Not that Faith, Hope as needlesse off are turn'd, What Faith beleeu'd, and Hope did waite for, is confirm'd. 47 Like when some friend doth promise thee to giue, After his death, a faire Inheritance, Thou must beleeue and hope whilst he doth liue: But when his change thy fortunes doth aduance, And thou possessest this Inheritance, Loe then thy first beliefe, and hope d crease, Thou hold'st it now by good assurance: So when we Hea n possesse, Faith, Hope, doe cease, It is our owne for euer, not a Farme by lea e. 48 Faith is as much as when we credit say, Which is as sure as money in our hand, If we trust one that able is to pay, And to what he hath promised will stand: If rightly then Gods power we vnderstand And Truth, which fast like him hath euer stood, We haue most firme assurance of heau'ns Land, Yet least weake Faith make doubt of this as good, Loe, his last Testament sealed with his owne Blood. 49 If with th'incredulous these cannot preuaile, Who will beleeue no more than they can proue By Sense and Reason: None of these shall faile Thee to a true and liuely Faith to moue: Behold, the Father vs hath shew'd such loue, That we the Sonnes of God should called bee. By reason. If Sonnes, we be Coheires of heau'n aboue; By sense. If we beleeue but what we taste and see; To Sense in Sacraments exhibited is hee. 50 With these authorities why should I sort Saints Monuments, which in Worlds wildernesse, By Faith obtayning here a good report, Are now arriu'd at th' Hau'n of blessednesse: Millions which haue and constantly professe, And for this Faith, land, honours, life doe leaue, Accounting it their greatest happinesse They are worthy found, not onely to beleeue In Christ, but for his sake their liues, goods, friends, to leaue. 51 See Abraham, in whose most holy Seede All Nations of the earth most happy are, How Faith did arme him to performe a deede Against the promise God vnto him sware: His sonne, his onely sonne, not Isaack spare? See Iacob, with his Maker hand to hand Wrestling to get a blessing, nor doth care To lose his limbs, so firme his Faith may stand, Loe, Faith brings Iosephs bones from Nile to holy Land. 52 Moses by Faith the red Sea doth diuide, So stroke the Rocke that Waters g shed out, Calls food from Heau'n with God on Mount doth bide Full fortie dayes: Loe, Iosuah bold and stout Commands the Sunne to stand still, while he fought Gods Battailes: Loe, Kings, Iudges, Prophets all, By Faith inuincible did neuer doubt Blessings, Raine, Haile, and Foode from heau'n to call, With fire and vengeance on Gods enemies heads to fall. 53 Loe, Christ himselfe, when he on earth did preach, And mightie miracles to passe forth brought, What thing did he more here vnto vs teach Than Faith? By which great miracles he wrought, He that had Faith neede not despaire of ought. Lepers by Faith are cleans'd, issues are stayd. Blind see, Lame walke, the Deuils are cast out, Her Faith so great's growne that for crummes earst pravd, That, Be it as thou wilt, to her by Christ is said. 54 Yea, after that our Sauiour did ascend, And had the promis'd Comforter downe sent, His Church by Faith wrought wonders that transcend: Loe, Peters shaddow heal'd eu'n as he went. Partlets and Napkins from Paules body sent, Expell'd ill spirits; did Blind and Lame restore: Cur'd all diseases of the patient: So that th' Apostles by true Faith did more, And greater miracles, than Christ had done before. 53 I doe beleeue the World could not contayne The Bookes, if one all Monuments should write Of Saints, which Clouds of witnesses remayne Of Faith's great power, her glorie, grace, and might: Which though they laid their liues downe in this fight; Their glorie euer doth in Heau'n remayne, Where Victors they triumph in the Lambs sight, And for their losse of life and mortall payne, True immortalitie and endlesse pleasure gayne. 56 And though in these last times and dayes, Her force and vertue seeme for to decline; Yet he that feeles the comfortable rayes Of her Sunne-beames vpon his heart to shine, Infallibly perceaues some power Diuine In him, that World of wonder hath effected, Which is both God and Man in one to ioyne: For this they know and feele that are elected, But Satan blinds the eyes of those that are reiected. 57 Oh! What great wonders worketh Faith within, When first shee rayseth by regeneration, And quickneth soules that lay long dead in sin, Vnto the life of Grace sanctification: This second farre exceedes our first Creation, To passe from darknesse to the glorious light, And libertie of Heires of true saluation, When loos'd from Satans bands we walke aright, And with this shield of Faith 'gainst all our enemies fight. 58 My ioynts doe tremble, and mine heart doth quake, When I Faiths wondrous workes begin to write; Shee from the sleepe of sinne doth me awake, Into sweet libertie and glorious light: My Members that in sinne did earst delight, And worldly lusts shee maketh to obay, Defacing in me th'old Mans image quite, Sinnes fogs and mists of errour driues away, And turnes my night of griefe to ioyfull Sunne-shine day. 59 Like Enoch, now me thinkes with God I walke, And haue with Angels happy conuersation, Like Abram I with God doe friendly talke, And wrestle by diuinest Meditation: Loe, rapt to the third heau'n by contemplation, I there such ioy and glorie bright behold, As Peter did at's Lords Transfiguration: Such glorie bright and ioy cannot be told, Faith this to true Beleeuers onely doth vnfold. 60 And now with , Iohn, Peter, I could say, Vpon the Mount, 'Tis good Lord to be here: And wish our Mansions there may last for ay, Where such delight and happinesse appeare, Where I like St 'n behold most plaine and cleare Heau'n open, and Christ sit at Gods right hand; The glorious Bridegroome longing for his Deare, Hierusalem the glorie of the Land, The head, whose members are in number like the Sand. 61 But ah, we all, like fond, desire To Righteous later end for to attayne, But neuer for to liue like them enquire; But seeke for Balaaks honours, gifts, and gayne: But they that will with Christ in glorie raigne, Must looke with him on earth to beare his Crosse. The Coward neuer Honour doth obtaine, Who from his Captayne runnes for life or losse, All in comparison of Christ is dung and drosse. 62 Yet I alas! doe oft like F lix fare, Tremble to heare of Iustice and damnation, Or thinke Paul mad: And if it doth pr pare Mine heart fit for good tidings of saluation, I am withdrawne by Worlds negotiation, To put it off vnto another day, I oft like Peter make great protestation To die for Christ, but come I to the fray, I deeply him forsweare, or else I runne away. 63 Yea oft when I some inward flashings feele, As if Faith now were to some measure growne, I straight waxe cold, faint, totter, stagger, reele, As if Faith's seedes were scarcely in me sowne; Or I true inward comfort ne're had knowne, Nor tasted spirituall Grace: yet I beleeue, Lord helpe my vnbeliefe! Thy power's showne Most in my weaknesse: Lord then me releeue, And from Sinnes baits and Satans malice me reprieue. 64 Nor would I onely wish for to obtaine The faithfuls glorie, and her Garland weare, But if neede be, would beare my share in paine, Not that I able thinke my selfe to beare Those grieuous orments as thy Martyrs were; But let me measure like of Faith receaue, My body cut, broile, scal'd, hang, saw, sterue, seare, 'Tis Gods great grace, we in him may beleeue, But greater, for Christs sake, vnto his Crosse to cleaue. 65 Why then should I wish Honour, Wealth, Promotion? Which in this World are transitorie, vaine, And in mine heart no roome leaue for deuotion▪ Or godlinesse, which is the greatest game? He that to all things needfull would attaine, Must seeke Gods Kingdome first and Righteousnesse, Loe, then all other things doe come amaine, But ah! it is my fault, I must confesse, To looke on present shewes, and not on good successe. 66 So that when of the grand Mogull I reade, Great Lord of misse-beleeuing India, Whose wealth and Empire farre out-strip indeede All Kings of Europe and of Africa, Great China's King; Ch of Tartaria, The least of which the grand Mogull exceede; That potent Prince Sophie of Persia, Great Turke, Virginia's Po hatan, these breede In me such doubting oft, I stumble at my Creede. 67 Th' whole World to God compar'd, than point is lesse, Earth to the World, to the Earth Christendome: And but a Point of these Christ right professe, Of these Professors but a Point become Beleeuers true: So that the little summe Of all Christs flocke, as Point is to compare With those that headlong to the Deuill runne: What then? All these huge troupes in errour are, And thus Point onely in the true and right way fare. 68 Why then doe Fooles of Vniuers ll , As note infallible of sound beliefe, Seeing the Deuill hath the worst and most, And few, alas! acknowledge Christ as chiefe? But soft, my Muse, thou merit'st iust repriefe, To draw in matters here of disputation: Thy taske of Faith is to discourse in briefe, And to erect thy thoughts by meditation: Disputes are fit for Schooles, not Muses recreation. 69 Lord make me one of this thy little Flocke, Of that small number that beleeue aright, That fall not downe before a stone or sto ke, But being by Faith endude with heau'nly light, Know they are alwayes in their Makers sight: That wheresoe're we lift pure hands to pray To thee, or whensoeuer, by day or night, To thee alike are both the night and day, True Faith in Christ to God our prayers prese teth ay. 70 Grant that by Faith I may a heart obtaine, Chams, Moguls, China's glorie to despise With all Worlds pompe, wealth, honour, lustre vaine. By Faith so clearely open thou mine eyes, To see thy Sunne of Righteousnesse arise, That glorious Sunne whose beames doe neuer fall Vpon the proud, ambitious, worldly-wise, But on the meeke, obedient, that with Paul Doe not consult with flesh and blood, when thou dost call. 71 Lord, thou hast promised, thou wilt not quench The smoking flaxe, nor breake the bruised Reede, Thou mak'st a weake Faith grow from strength to strength, Vnto her fulnesse and ripe age indeede: Thou plant'st and watrest so this little seede, That it doth grow to infini e increase, Like the fiue Lo ues that did fiue thousand feede; Yet did into twelue baskets-full encrease: By vsing, grace and vertue grow, and not decrease. 72 Who then soe're he be that doth beleeue, Perish shall not, but haue eternall Life: The calling and the gifts which God doth giue, Without Repentance are: The Bridegroomes Wife Is lou'd for euer: Neuer any strife Can separate Christs loue: He that can free Vs from the fiery Furnace, Saue our life From Lyons hungrie iawes, We know that he Is wise, and better knowes, what's good for vs than we. 73 And now by Faith I dare my Maker call Father, Christ brother, Heau'n my Inheritance; The Angels mine attendants, lest I fall: Behold, I dare my shield of Faith aduance Against Despaire, the Deuils keenest lance. Death, Angels, Life, Powers, Principalities, Things present, Things hereafter for to chance, Height, depth, no Creature's able to deuise, To turne from me Gods loue which doth in Christ arise. 74 What shall we say? if God be on our side, Who can against vs be? If he not spare His owne Sonne for vs: What can be denyde? Who dares condemne, who by him saued are? For whom his Death and Rising doth prepare Eternall blisse: Shall anguish, tribulation, Nakednesse, famine, perill, sword or feare, Vs sep'rate from the Horne of our saluation? In these Faith makes vs conquer by Christs mediation. 75 My prayer, gracious Lord, shall euer bee, Increase my Faith: And as now, in some wise, Thou her faire Lineaments hast made mee see, For which I praise thee: Open so mine eyes, That seeing I her worth may truely prise, And for her sake most willing be to loose My life, and all this wicked world despise; And rather bondage here with Faith to choose, Than liue in Egypts Court with vaine deceitfull showes. 76 Now as a valiant Souldier, strong and wise, That would in open field defeate his Foe, Suffers no sleepe to come within his eyes, But keepes continuall watch: For he doth know, His En'mie, Lyon-like, about doth goe, By force or sleight his life for to surprize: Eu'n so, good Lord, grant thou me grace to doe, That though sleepe often close my bodies eyes, My Soule may still keepe watch 'gainst Satans subtilties. 77 Hope was the Patron that with Faith did ioyne, When to my triall me Repentance brought, Who all their might and forces did combine, Vntill my absolution they had wrought: These not their owne good, but their Clients sought, And pleaded not for friendship, fees, or gayne; Loues fauour was their vtmost ayme and thought, They shew'd no Law their Causes to maintayne: But Pardons wrote in's Blood that for our sinnes was slayne. MEDITAT. V. Of Hope. 1 R Epentance, Faith, and Hope be graces three, Which no where but in Israel are knowne: Of other Vertues some resemblance wee Do find amongst the Heathen: which are showne To them by Natures light, and first were sowne Most pure, till they corrupted were with sin, But now they most vnlike themselues are growne, For till Faith, Hope them to restore begin, They glorious seeme without, but foule and vile within. 2 For though of Knowledge, Loue, Truth, Patience, Right, Mercy, Fortitude, Humilitie, Prudence, Zeale, Temp'rance, Bountie, Obedience, There doe in them remayne some memorie; Yet wanting Faith and Hope, like either eye, Their blinded soules for to direct aright, In all their actions they doe moue awry, For Faith and Hope like Sunne and Moones cleare light, Direct repenting Soules which wander else in night. 3 And though by reading in Dame Natures booke The Heau'n and Earth's most wonderfull creation, They vpwards to their Maker oft did looke, And saw his Power and Wisedomes manifestation, And their owne wretchednesse: Yet Humiliation For sinne, in them no true Repentance wrought: For missing these chiefe Agents of saluation, The worke could not be to perfection brought; For without Faith and Hope, Repentance profits nought. 4 Thou that the Finisher and Authour art Of eu'ry good and perfect Gift and Grace, Who look'st not on the worke, but on the heart, Where eu'ry Vertue holds her seate and place, Who lately hast me guided in the trace Of Faith the Mother: now direct aright My Muse, to follow on the Vertues chase, And first of Hope Faiths daughter next in sight: And make my Hope stand stedfast whilst of Hope I write. 5 Hope is of things to come an expectation, Which God hath promis'd, and Faith doth beleeue, For when th'Elect of their Iustification By Faith, stand sure: Then Hope doth them releeue With Patience, to expect till God doth giue All the good things which he hath promised, So that no crosse affliction can them grieue, For by this Hope they stand assured, The day will come their Hope shall be accomplished. 6 Some, Faith Hopes Mother, some her Sister call, Howsoe're, betwixt them is so neare relation, That if one faile, the other needes must fall; Faith brings forth Hope, the Anchor of saluation, But Faith is nourished by expectation, A thankfull Daughter to a blessed Dame, Who nonrisheth her Mother in this fashion, And oft when Faith growes cold, blind, faint, and lame; Hopes brests, Assurance, Patience, her restore againe. 7 A blessed paire, like Na mi and Ruth, Faith doth direct, and Hope goes forth to gleane, Faith searcheth first, beleeues, and finds the Truth, Then Hope at Booz feete expects the meane: And though at first a small reward shee gayne, Yet being content Gods leisure for to stay, Shee in the end doth to her Hope attayne; Ruth nto Booz married is that day, And now may Naomi in her lap Obed lay. 8 Hope is so like Faith, and so neare of Kin, As hardly we discerne a difference; Faith is the ground whereon Hope doth begin; Both haue alike assurance, Patience: From the same Spirit both haue their influence, Both sauing Graces purge and purifie The heart, and season with obedience: Both last alike: By both we'our selues denie; Both make our conscience sound: By both for Christ we die. 9 But Faith is first, for loe, shee is Hopes ground, Hope onely future sees, but Faith things past: Faith seales our euidence and makes it sound, Hope waites till shee possession take at last: Hope is the Helmet that on th'Head is plac't, But Faith the Shield doth all the body hide, And though our Faith oft faint, our Hope stands fast, From off the Shield full many a blow may slide On Helmet: but there farther entrance is deni'de. 10 Thus haue I shew'd how they are different. The cause now: As of Words immortall seede The Spirit begets Faith, to giue firme assent Vnto Gods Promises: Eu'n, so indeede, That Spirit out of those Promises doth breede A liuely Hope: whose end is our saluation, And that we shall haue all things which we neede; In the meane time, we haue our conuersation By Faith and Hope with Christ, in heau'nly habitation. 11 Similitudes make plaine and illustrate Things, that are else mysterious, darke, obscure: As when th'immortall Workman did create At first, Man without helpe, alone and pure, He made him then a deepe sleepe to endure, And tooke stuffe from him ere he did awake, Of which he made for him a helpe most sure. So the same Spirit that Faith at first did make, To make now Hope, Faiths help, doth matter from Faith take. 12 As Body, Spirit, Faith, Lord and Baptisme's one, So but one true and liuing Hope we find: But as her Obiects infinite become, We may distinguish her in different kind. If heau'nly Obiects be to her assign'd, Shee like the Obiect is, Celestiall, If shee on worldly Obiects set her mind, As doth the Obiect, shee doth rise or fall, Loe then, the Obiect of our Hope is all in all. 13 We hope for that for vs in Heau'n's vp laid, We hope to see Christs glorious Exaltation, We hope for all things, that Christ for vs praid, We hope in Gospell that brings vs saluation, We hope of all in Christ a restauration; We hope Soules, Bodies, shall immortall liue: We hope to reape what's sowne in expectation, The faithfull Pastor hopes his Flocke shall thriue, Faith Author is of Hope, but Hope keepes Faith aliue. 14 When Faith beleeues, Hope hopes gainst Sense and Reason. Gods Promise is her soundest Argument, His leisure to attend, is her best season, Though Faith beleeue 'boue Hope yet shee's content To hope: Present to her are things absent: Shee neuer faints, but holds out to the end, Shee to encrease and grow is diligent, Shee's pure and cleane: No shame doth her attend, By Patience and Experience shee doth daily mend. 15 Faith's like Elias that by God was sent, Elisha to anoint him to succeede: Hope, like Elisha, waits most diligent, And leaues her not, till fiery Charets leade Faith vp to Heau'n: Then Hope stayes in her stead; Loe then, Faiths Spirit on Hope is doubled found, And though by Faith our Soules on Heau'n now feede, Hope still sustaynes our Bodies on the ground, And waits till all that Faith beleeues, shee true haue found. 16 Yea after that our bodies turne to dust, It seemes that Hope still with our soules remaine: What else doth meane the Reuel. 6. 10. 11. crying of the Iust, Which for Gods Word lie vnder th'Altar slaine, How long wilt thou (Lord) to auenge refraine Our blood, on those, that on the earth it spilled? To whom this answere is return'd againe, They should rest, till the number was fulfilled Of those which for the Word, as they were, should be killed. 17 Hope's subiect is each heart, that Christ hath knowne, And where in glorie he vouchsafes to dwell, Shee best by Obiects is conceau'd and showne, For as they doe transcend, Hope doth excell: All Gods good Promises which one can tell, Her Obiects are, which if one right would reade, He must begin with that when Adam fell, Gods Promise to the Woman, that her seede, Though Serpent bruis'd his heele, should breake the Serpents head. 18 Like this, was that promise to Abraham, All Nations should be blessed in his seede: And him that King of Israel became God promis'd, one should ne're want of his breede, To sway great Iuda's Scepter in his stead, Till Shilo came, who was his Lord and Sonne: Sonne, as his flesh did from his Loynes proceede, Lord as the God-head in the flesh did won, Thus he was Dauids Christ, Sonne, Lord, and yet but one. 19 Loe, God perform'd all his good Promises In Christ his sufferings, birth, and exaltation, All tending to bring wretched Man to blisse; But now, behold, new tidings of saluation, The Gospell shewes, our reconciliation Is finished: as after shall be showne, When all in Heau'n and Earth haue restauration: What we beleeue and hope, shall then be knowne, Hope then shall reape in ioy, what shee in teares hath sowne. 20 For as the promises that God had sw re, In Christs first comming were accomplished: Eu'n so all those that in the Gospell are, In's second comming shall be finished: And since that Good to Adam promised, Was full foure thousand yeares ere consummation; Why then should Hope that's thus experienced, Faint in lesse then two thousands expectation? Nearer, than when we first beleeu'd, is our saluation. 21 Oh! had I here Hopes wondrous memorie, Then should I able be soone to make knowne, All's Promises which God cannot denie, Eu'ry of which Hope doth account her owne. Behold, in briefe, them all vnto thee showne, All Faith beleeues, (And what doth he distrust? In whom this little seede of Faith is sowne) All these, I say, Hope doth together thrust, And in them puts assured confidence and trust. 22 Therefore these Vertues alwayes her attend, Assurance, Confidence, and Patience, With Perseuerance alwayes to the end, And of Gods faithfulnesse Experience: These, and the like, are her most sure defence 'Gainst troubles, s ffes, her weaknesse, long delay Of many Promises, which made long since Are not accomplished vnto this day; And when shee's like to faint, these her refresh alway. 23 They that would make faithlesse vncertaintie, So necessary to attend Hopes trayne, And on coniect'rall probabilitie Lay Hopes foundation: They demonstrate playne, True Faith and Hope did ne're in them remayne: And though like Faith, Hope sometimes wa er may, (As who can to a perfectnesse attayne) Yet, Hope encreasing, Doubting doth decay, Vncertaintie and Hope together cannot stay. 24 No more than in the Water cold and heate, For as the heate all coldnesse doth expell, So Hope all doubting out of vs doth beate. I grant, that as in luke-warme Water dwell Both heate and cold, so in the hollow Cell Of vnsound, luke-warme Libertines false mind, Vncertaintie and wau'ring Hope doe dwell: But this no true and stedfast Hope we find, Else true and feigned Hope would differ in their kind. 25 Though Hope hath many an open Enemie, None wrong her more than her familiar Friends, As Merits, Doubtings, false Securitie In ciuill honest dealing: who depends On these quick-sands, more danger him attends Than if he split on Rocke of fierce Despaire, Or to distrust Gods promises intends, Because so long a finishing they are▪ Ciuill Defection hazards more than open Warre. 26 Oh! who can point out all the subtilties Satan doth vse this Lady to depose; How he all worldly Obiects doth deuise, That shee may in them confidence repose; And thereby may her heau'nly Obiect lose? Who are more miserable, Satan sayes, Than those on things to come their Hopes repose? And who liue longer and more ioyfull dayes, Than they whose Hope on wealth and Princes fauours stayes? 27 As Iewes two Theeues did hang on either hand, When as they crucifi'd the Lord of Life, So two extremes on either side Hope stands, And both of them haue each with other strife: On left hand stands Despaire with bloody knife, On right Presumption bold doth ouer-weene. Hope, oftentimes may saue Despaires life: Presumption railes, and thinketh in her spleene, If Hope could others saue, shee ould endure such teene. 28 Hope is like Iacob that went out but poore, But free from danger vnto Land; But when he doth returne with Wi es and store, Laban pursues behind: Esau with band Of full foure hundred doth before him stand: But Angels as Companions him attend, And eu'n with God he wrestles hand to hand, Who doth from churlish Laban him defend, Nor suffers cruell Esau Iacob to offend. 29 So when our Hope, alas, is faint and poore, It forward walkes most free from all tentation: But when it gets some strength, Despaire before, Behind, Presumption seekes our supplantation, Loe then Gods promises of our saluation, Like Angels are to comfort vs at hand, We wrestle with the Spirit by supplication, Whereby we are inabled to withstand Despaire, Presumption proud, and all the Deuils band. 30 Men in this World, are like to ships at Sea, Which stormes haue beaten and t e waues haue tost, That, when they come to harbour in the Lea, Cast Anchre out: where if they find the coast Consist of Mens me∣rits. quick-sands, all their labour's lost: Loe! then Hopes Anchre there can get no hold, So they with stormes and waues againe are tost: But if they find firme Land, they then grow bold, No wind, stormes, waues, can beate them from their Anchre-hold. 31 Faith as the Sunne, and Hope is as the Moone In Heau'n both glorious Lamps this World to light, So in mans soule Faith, Hope, like two lights shone, Their little world towards blisse to guide aright. As Moone doth borrow from Sunnes glorious light, So Hope from Faith: And as when Sunne to shine On Moone forbeares, shee's scarce discern'd by sight; So when Hope wants Faiths glorious light Diuine, Shee wanes like Moone, and all her beautie doth dec'line. 32 Hope signifies a constant expectation Of some good thing to come, from such a one Of whose Loue, Pow're, and Truth a firme perswasion We haue that all we wait for shall be done: Loe, first Hope onely is of things to come, It is no Hope to hope for things we see: Next in her selfe Hope confidence hath none, Last, all our hope and refuge is to flee Vnto Gods grace, pow're, wisdome, Truth, which certaine bee. 33 Here in examples may my Muse transcend: For whatsoeuer things are writ of old, Are for our learning and instruction pend, That we, through Patience, comfort may behold In Scriptures: And haue Hope for to lay hold On all Gods Promises and Dealing kind, By him shew'd to our forefathers of old, And those which to our owne times are assign'd, Last of all, those which we within our selues doe find. 34 These three may breede in vs experience, Experience Hope, Hope maketh not asham'd; Loe first th'examples all haue reference To Hope, which I in Faiths discourse haue nam'd, Kings, Prophets, Iudges, Martyrs all enflam'd With Loue, in Hope and Faith most firme doe stand; Without the one, the other may be blam'd, Both able are Hels malice to withstand, For if one faints, the other lends her helping hand. 35 This generall briefe narration shall serue, For all Hopes noble famous acts of old. Now if you will be pleased to obserue, Whilst I th'examples of our times vnfold, And those which our forefathers haue vs told; God neuer hath so de lt with any Nation, In giuing temporall blessings manifold, In our deliuerances 'boue expectation, Lastly, in yeelding vs such meanes for our saluation. 36 He sets vs in a blessed Land, where flow Hony and Milke, and all good things abound, The Plough-man reapes the Crop which he doth sow: Here Peace and Plentie eu'ry where are found; Here dreadfull trump of warre doth neuer sound, No leading here into captiuitie, Here no complayning in our streets is found, Here's health of body with prosperitie, And all these lasted haue beyond mans memorie. 37 I hope here is for vs sufficient ground, To trust in God for all things temporall; How many plots hath Hell and Rome out found, Vs to betray to bondage spirituall? Yet God hath vs deliuer'd out of all, Besides that secret cruell trayt'rous broode, Priests, that themselues Catholique Champions call, Shee hath prouok'd to make her quarrell good, Great Kings to open warre and shedding innocent blood. 38 Witnesse th'Armada huge of Eightie eight, Which b eathed nought but cruell desolation, And was inuincible in Mans conceit, Whom nought could satisfie but th'extirpation Of Protestants, and all the English Nation: Home-treason, forraine warre vs to betray To Popish, cursed, hellish machination: Nought could this Phara hs crueltie allay, Till Death, Hell, and Destruction swept them all away. 39 This quail'd the spite of Egypt: but of Rome, Though pow'r grow weake, her spite growes yet more strong; When force and open warre doe vaine become, Shee seekes by treason to maintayne her wrong: Loe, Iesuites and Seminaries throng In Court, Church, Citie, and in euery Place; To sow seedes of Sedition vs among, To bring Prince, Counsell, Prelate in disgrace: To credit Superstition, and the Truth out-face. 40 How many were their plots of cursed Treason Deuis'd against our late dread Soueraigne Queene? Impatient to expect the time and season, When shee should hence goe and no more be seene: That time they look'd to wreake their spitefull teene, On opposites of Popes Supremacy, Oh! this a bloody day had surely beene, Had not the Lord vs succour'd from on high, And whence we hop'd for least, did vs most helpe supply. 41 Loe, whilst shee liu'd shee seem'd a weake defence, A Woman to defend so great a Nation From secret treasons, open violence, Fill'd all the World with ioy and admiration: But when by her most happy commutation, Shee leaues this Earth: Behold, that prouidence, Which made this weake Sexe strong for our saluation; Brings in a stronger and more sure defence, With Gladnesse, Plentie, Peace, without all violence. 42 Oh! that my Muse were able here to flie, The high pitch of my Soueraignes commendation, Who Solomon -like in all his Royaltie, Brought Peace and Plentie to this happy Nation: At whose most blessed, glad Inauguration, No Shimei barkes, nor Sheba lifts his hand, But all him meete with ioyfull salutation, God saue King IAMES, sole Monarch of our Land, And set thy seate as fast as our late Queenes did stand. 43 This was a gracious worke of Prouidence, A thing vnparallel'd, before not seene. But can this stop the Dragons virulence? No it encreaseth more his spite and teene; For the same cause he hated our late Queene, He doth Faith's great Defender now infest, But against Loue, Faith, Hope is all his spleene, And all that will not fall downe to the Beast; With those that Antichristian supremacy detest. 44 Many a cursed plot and cruell treason Hath beene attempted 'gainst our gracious King, Before and since the happy time and season, God him in peace to rule this Land did bring; But neuer yet was hammer'd such a thing, By Pope, Turke, Iesuite, or in Hell below, As was the powder plots fierce lightening, Which in one instant all should ouerthrow, King, Counsell, Nobles, Citie, Commons, Priests vp blow. 45 Oh barbarous wretches! cruell instruments Of Death and Ruine to their natiue Nation! What heart of steele or flint that not relents To apprehend the dreadfull desolation, (Besides of men) of that faire habitation, Those seates of Iustice, Houses for deuotion, Great Brittaines glorie, Strangers admiration? Shame is reward, Gods wrath the bitter potion, Of all that had their heads in this most hellish motion. 46 But leaue them to their punishment and shame. Behold a worke no older than the yeare, Wherein Gods Loue to vs (blest be his Name) No lesse than in the former doth appeare: I meane our Soueraignes sicknesse, who was neere To the last act of all mortalitie, But when all physicke fayl'd, God did him cheere, His health restoring with prosperitie, And adding length of dayes to him that look'd to die. 47 Nor onely doth this Antichristian Bore, Seeke to roote vp the Vine of Gods right Hand; But there be Foxes, little Foxes store, Which 'gainst her bloming Grapes in ambush stand; Those that against Church gouernement doe band, Separatists. Churches illit'rate Vermine, who disclose Their enuie to the Prelates of our Land, When against their Succession they oppose, Tithes, Prayers, Order, Titles, Ceremonies, Clothes. 48 These humorous Nouellists haue oft assay'd, From her youth vp, our Church vnto this day: But neuer hath their subtiltie preuayl'd Church discipline to alter, though I say, Martin their spite and malice did bewray, When he in scoffes and rayling spent his wit, Not sauouring of the Spirit, which should pray For Kings and those that at the Sterne doe sit; And not ranke Martinisme in Rulers faces spit. 49 These first, as Theudas -like, some great Man rose; To whom great multitudes themselues combine, And Iudas -like Church tribute did oppose, But they are perisht: And our fruitfull Vine Yet prospers still and yeelds abundant Wine: Which proues it planted is by Gods owne Hand, For were 't Mans policy, not power Diuine, Shee neuer could such furious Beasts withstand; But long since had destroyed beene out of this Land. 50 Was e're in Israel knowne or Iuda's coast, So long peace and such plentie temporall? Can any of the Nations like vs boast, Deliuerances from bondage spirituall? Our God, who did vs out of bondage call, Protects our Leaders by his power diuine, 'Gainst Hell, Pope, Iesuites, Sep'ratists and all: And lest our Faith and Hope faile or decline, Loe, in Prince Charles new hope, and all that Princely Line. 51 But some may say, What's this to spirituall Hope? These were deliuerances temporall: But who knowes not, by these Hell and the Pope, Sought the destrnction of the Spirit and all? Loe, Faith and Hope now banisht from the stall Of Romes foule Beast, for aide flyes to our Land, Where Prince, Priests, People ioyne together all, In the defence of Faith and Hope to stand, And in their quarrell spend their liues, their goods and land. 52 Here both haue dwelt safe neare a hundred yeare, Since they from Rome were banisht to this Land; Where many Saints haue lost their bloods most deare, Whilst constantly in their defence they stand, And though, for neare sixe yeares, Romes cruell hand Did in this Land true Faith and Hope assaile; Yet since Elizabeth did all command, The Champions of true Faith did neuer faile, But 'gainst close treason and force open did preuaile. 53 And though we lately lost the likeliest Prince That euer liu'd, Faith and Hope to defend, Yet loe, our Hope is more encreased since, By Royall Charles, whom God doth seeme to send, Like Charlemaine his Church secure to shend 'Gainst Antichrist, Hell, Schisme, and Saraceen: And all from vs that would Hopes Anchre rend. But here my Muse in order should begin▪ To melt away in teares for losse of Anne our Queene. 54 Most peerelesse Lady! Nobles surest friend, The Peoples safetie; Clergies firme defence, Who constantly did Faith and Hope defend 'Gainst subtile Schisme and Papists virulence: Church Patronesse 'gainst the violence Of couetous Sacrilege and griping hands, Who spoile Church-liuings vnder false pretence, It 'gainst the thrift of true Deuotion stands; That Churchmen should haue large possessions, goods, & lands. 55 But as when Death from Sonne and Father rent A carefull Mother, and a faithfull Wife, Isaac Rebecka brought to Sara's Tent, To comfort both the Sonnes and Fathers life, So we doe hope, our Prince will take a Wife Into his Mothers Tent, who shall begin Like her to comfort Sonne and Fathers life. But soft, my Muse, this thread too long doth spin, Now will I sing of Hope that ought to be within. 56 These presidents of Gods Grace, Faith, Truth, Loue, Power, Wisedome, Prouidence, and dealing kind With those that trust in him, vs well may moue Vnto a stedfast Hope; which if we find Within the secret Closet of our mind, It is the earnest that to vs doth proue, Here all things needfull shall be vs assign'd, And we shall haue Hopes end, eu'n Heau'n aboue, Where Faith and Hope shall leaue vs in the armes of Loue▪ 57 But Faith and Hope implicite generall, Brings not to vs this blessed Habitation: It must be inward, liuely, spirituall, With true particular right application Of all Christs merits, wrought for our saluation; Else, with vntemper'd morter stones we lay, And build vpon vnsound and weake foundation; Fie on the Clerkes that so abuse the Lay, (They vnderstand not what they hope, beleeue, or pray.) 58 Which thus would seale vp all in ignorance, That they might seale their Pardons vnto all; Thus they their state doe mightily aduance, By binding or by loosing them that fall: Mortall offences and sinnes veniall, Differ not in their nature but their pay: As sinnes abound, their Markets rise and fall, So wide to Heau'n they open now the way, That, loe, the richest men with most ease enter may. 59 The rellish and true taste of Faith and Hope, They turne to ignorance and superstition: Gods written Word that wont to be their scope, Must now giue place to humane vaine Tradition: Their inward Hope is honour, wealth, ambition, And how they may all earthly Kingdomes sway, Emp'rours and Kings to them must yeeld submission, Else they their Subiects licence them to slay, Thus Peters keyes, like swords, cut all out of their way. 60 How doe these foule flagitious crying sinnes Transport my Muse from holy Meditation, Which erst in Hope aboue the Seraphins, Tooke sweet delight in heau'nly Contemplation! (Hath shee too long staid in this deuaition?) Loe, now shee doth to Hope returne againe, To heau'nly Hope, and glorious expectation, Which firme and stedfast euer shall remayne, Till her in Loues high Court her Sauiour entertayne. 61 See here, how graciously our God doth deale With his, in sending them such enemies; Else would Worlds vaine entising pleasures steale Away our hearts to all impieties: Such trialls doe the Vertues exercise, Of all that set on God their confidence, The greater ills that wicked men deuise, The faster we doe cleaue to our defence: So Hope becomes most firme by such experience. 62 And therefore I might better here complayne Of too much Ease, Peace and Securitie, Luke-warmenesse, hollow Dealing: these doe trayne More soules to Hell, than Popes hostilitie. Loe Satan not by force, but subtiltie, Made our first Parents guiltie of transgression, Whom Priests and Iesuites follow cunningly, In plotting by auricular Confession, Against States, Treason, and against poore Saints oppression 63 O let me wish here more than I can hope, All Enuie, Malice, Au'rice laid aside, We would make Heau'n the Obiect of our Hope, And Faith and Truth may euer be our Guide: Thus from Gods Statutes we shall neuer slide, Thus We, Pope, Sep'ratist shall meete in one: Whom Truth doth ioyne, no Power can diuide, Oh! why should Flesh of Flesh, and Bone of Bone Differ? where God and Christ, Faith, Baptisme, Hope is one. 64 Would our owne willing be, but to confesse Their errour, and returne vnto the right, Aband'ning wilfull, peeuish, singlenesse, And censuring things whereof they haue no light, Oh, would they striue with all their force and might. To hold Spirits Vnitie in bond of Peace, And not thus with indifferent things to fight; Touch, taste not, handle not, which doe encrease Schismes and Diuisions, which are Enemies to Peace. 65 So long and hot hath beene this feruent strife For Apples, things of order, decencie, That we, alas! neglect religious Life, Faith, Hope, Repentance, Ioy and Charitie: Of things indifferent iudge indifferently, The smaller things, the greater consequence There is, we should with all Humilitie Yeeld vnto them vnfeign'd obedience: Not we the Law: The Law must rule our Conscience. 66 Now could I, with Compassion, Prayers, Teares, Beseech you all as to a common flame, To lend your Hands, your Heads, your Hearts, your Eares, And all your aide and helpe to quench the same: 'Tis to our Church a foule reproch and shame, Christs Coate that is without Seame to diuide, When we in substance all doe hold the same: Lets humbly in one Hope, Faith, Loue abide, And not fall out for shells, to make whose peace Christ di'de. 67 But they say Ceremonies now are dead, Why should we them againe then viuifie? I grant all were in Christ accomplished, Which his last Sacrifice did typifie: But those of Order and of Decencie, Doe for our imitation still remayne, As Ephods, Offrings, Tithes, Prayers, Prophecie, Kneeling: such as Deuotion true maintayne, The first we doe forbeare: The last we doe retayne. 68 But now I stray from Hope, b t not from Peace, Which is the thing I hope for and desire, What shall our strife for Ornaments encrease? Whilst Aduersaries in our gates conspire To burne our Townes, and blow vs vp with fire, Now by our Hope that vp in heau'n is laid, I instantly you pray, beseech, require, To lend your publique and your priuate aid, That Rulers not for feare, but conscience be obaid. 69 Hope still pricks on my Muse in this discourse, In hope hereby Peace to our Church to gayne. But method here doth stop her farther course; Who preacheth Order, Order must maintayne, Hope must not passe her Mother Faith in trayne, Lest I doe hope for more than I beleeue, For which if I doe pray, I pray in vaine; God without Faith no prayers doth receaue, Hope, Prayer, without Faith, doe oft poore soules deceaue. 70 Thou then that art of Faith and Hope the Spring, I lesse thy Name for this sweet Meditation, This light of Hope which thou to me dost bring, Oh let true Faith direct my Supplication Vnto my Hope thy holy Habitation, That Port of blisse, purchas'd by thine owne Blood, Spent on the Crosse to finish our saluation: This is my Hope, This is my heau'nly Food, On this faire Hope to rest, I hold my chiefest good. 71 And here, I hope, I may haue leaue to rest, And stop my Muse a while from following The Vertues praises, late so readie prest, In Loues high Court, for my true welcomming: Yet, by Gods grace, I promise here to sing Of all their praises, in their ranke and place; If this mine entrance and first hanselling, Shall but obtayne amongst those Readers grace, Who, by these Vertues aide, hope to behold Loues face. FINIS. MEDITAT. I. Of Iustice and Righteousnesse. 1 WHen first Gods mouing Spirit forth had brought Beasts, Fowle, Fish, creeping things after their kind: Loe, then He Man in his owne Image wrought, And him a Ruler ouer all assign'd, Writing within the Tablet of his Mind His Law, which should eternally endure, And all the Creatures in Obedience bind To Man their King, and knit his heart as sure To King of Kings. This Law was naturall and pure. 2 Here first the right of Soueraigntie began, All subiect to the Monarchy of one, For euery Creature subiect is to Man, While he is subiect vnto God alone. This Monarch now is seated in his Throne, And the whole World doth with his Scepter sway: Here's the first president that e're was knowne Of gouernment. From hence, loe, Princes may Learne rightly how to rule, and Subiects to obay. 3 Thus Man of this great World the little King, To shew his Soueraigntie, gaue all a name, And they their Lord as Subiects reu'rencing, True Vassals to this little King became: Yet Man in honour could not hold the same, But did become rude, disobedient: Breaking that Law, he merits hell, death, shame, When he offends that hath the Regiment, His double sinne deserues a double punishment. 4 In all his workes before, the Lord had showne, His Loue, Power, Wisedome, Truth and Prouidence: But now Mans sinne his Iustice must make knowne, Though most notorious was the Mans offence, God will not iudge till he makes his defence; Man cited then, appeares vile, naked, lame, There needes no witnesse but his conscience, And though on others he would lay the blame, The more his cause is heard, the more appeares his shame. 5 Besides th' eternall Law within the heart Of Adam God had wrote with his owne Hand, He did one Precept vnto him impart, Which was indifferent, till God did command Of all the Trees that in the Garden stand, From one, on paine of death, he must refrayne. Lawes made we may not question or withstand: Who breakes them, beares the forfeit of the payne▪ When Rulers cease to punish Vice, they sinne maintayne. 6 Thou that the hearts of all Men dost dispose, Of Kings to rule, and Subiects to obay, From whom all Power proceedes to bind and lose, Who humble Men in iudgement guidest ay; Thou Iudge of all the World, direct, I pray, Thy humble Seruant, to discerne aright Of Iustice, that I her delineate may In her true shape vnto the Peoples sight, That teaching I may learne and practise to doe right. 7 Shee is a constant and perpetuall Will, That giues to euery Man what is his right; First free from passion, shee continues still Constant in her disposing things aright. In action next shee taketh most delight, And not alone in idle speculation, There's no respect of persons in her sight, The same to all without vaine alteration, For Law's the Rule and Square of her administration. 8 Iustice the Vertue, Law's the Rule and Square, Whereby we truely Iustice exercise: Wherefore if in the abstract you declare Lawes Nature, shee's perpetuall, constant, wise, And so with God in heau'n for ay abye: But if you view her in the concrete Would, Shee varies as the Subiect her employs, Then blame not Lawes when wrong we doe behould, It comes from Man that's made of corruptible mould. 9 As when pure Wine in putrid Vessell put, Becomes vnwholesome, ranke, vnsauory, The fault's not in the Wine, but in the Butt, Which doth the sweetnesse of the Wine destroy: Eu'n so it fares with Law and Equitie, In their owne nature they are perfect, pure, But if in Subiects of Iniquitie They are contayn'd, they cannot so endure, But like the Subiect they become corrupt, impure. 10 Three kinds of Lawes from God I doe obserue; Morall, Iudiciall, Ceremoniall: Which three the Iewes did constantly preserue, As bound in conscience to obay them all. The Ceremoniall, and Iudiciall, Cease, but remayne paternes for imitation: The Morall is the same perpetuall, That most pure Law, which from Mans first creation, Continues still to vs without least alteration. 11 And though the Rule of Right, now doth not tie To the Iudiciall Lawes strict obseruation, Yet it doth bind vs to the equitie Thereof (as fittest for our imitation:) Though Blasphemie, Theft, Murder, Fornication, Haue not amongst vs now the punishment Which Iewes inflicted by Gods ordination; Yet 'tis a Rule in all good gouernement, The paine vnto the sinne must be equiualent. 12 As Lawes right to maintayne, and wrong redresse, Should be conform'd to the Iudiciall, So rules of order and of comelinesse, Should imitate Lawes Ceremoniall: The Morall Law (by some call'd Naturall) Is Gods eternall Law, by which aboue He things in Heau'n and Earth disposeth all. These God ingrau'd in Stone, the Iewes to proue, But in our hearts they all now written are by loue. 13 Mistake me not, that I maintayne hereby Grosse Iudaisme, or out-worne rudiment, Which Christs last Sacrifice did typifie, (Such Ceremonies long agoe are spent) But those whereby we should our selues present In publique Preaching, Sacraments, Deuotions, It well becomes vs all with one consent, To imitate without strife or commotions, 'Tis sinne to disobay Lawes in indifferent motions. 14 I know fnll well there is a Law beside This Morall Law, which some call Naturall, Which vnder God by Nature is impli'de To rule Heau'ns Spheres and Motions, which they call The Law of Nature; By which rise and fall Sunne, Moone, and Starres, in Motion necessarie, But from the Law of Reason, whereby all That Reason haue are Agents voluntarie, By some call'd Reasons Law, my Muse now will not varie. 15 From hence, as from a Nurserie, doe come All Lawes, which by good Christian Politie And lawfull Power, to vs as bonds become, To keepe vs in the bands of Charitie, And vs preserue from wrong and iniurie, And not by others losse to raise our gayne, But leade our liues in Truth and Honestie, As not enough from euill to restrayne, Except we good performe, and others right maintayne. 16 Eu'n as we see things wanting life and sense, (But Agents naturall) striue to maintayne The preseruation of the common Ens, And 'gainst their naturall course themselues constrayne, Eu'n Motions against Nature doe darraigne, As heauie stones will vp from Center flie, Rather than all a Vacuum entertayne, So reasonable men should rather die, Then suffer any harme to Vniuersitie. 17 And hence come Lawes of Nations, which maintayne Leagues betwixt Princes, Freedome, Seruitude: Next ciuill Law, whose equitie did gayne Command of all Romes Empires amplitude. The Canon Law, whose wi edome did conclude All other Lawes, till Pride and Superstition Amongst those sacred Sanctions did intrude, So Antichristianizing by ambition, That holy Writ must now giue place to their Tradition. 18 Thus Statutes of each Countrey, Citie, Land, Which they themselues doe call Municipall, All Lawes which now in force with vs doe stand, The Common, Ciuill, Ecclesiasticall, All these doe come from the pure Naturall, And tend true Right and Iustice to maintayne, Respecting Gods true worship aboue all, Next Magistrates, peace publique, common gayne, And last that each man may in peace his owne retayne. 19 But as from Fountayne seated on a Hill, Pure siluer streames in sundrie Channels flow, First cleare like Spring from which their waters rill, But passing farther thicke and miry grow, (Defiled by their Channels soile below) Eu'n so, all Lawes which from th' Eternall come, First like the paterne are, as pure as snow, But doe in time corrupt and base become, By Mans corrupted heart, through which Lawes streames doe run. 20 Base Dust and Ashes dares not be so bold, As to define of Righteousnesse Diuine, That Iustice pure which Flesh cannot behold, But as some rayes here seeme below to shine, As farre aboue the reach of humane eyne, As infinite Loue, Truth, and Maiestie, Transcends the measure of a finite Line: Yet Man at first was fram'd thus righteous by The Righteous God, from whom comes none iniquitie. 21 For nothing that's vnrighteous or vniust, Hath e're or shall be in his Presence seene; Wherefore renouncing all our rags, we must In Christs pure Righteousnesse all clothed beene. It is a wicked fond conceit to weene Mans righteousnesse, once able is to stand Before the Righteous Iudge, where our most cleane And perfect acts, as vile, vnpure, are scand: Oh wretched Man whom thus Presumption holds in band. 22 My feeble Spirits and Soule amaz'd become, When I contemplate of the Righteousnesse, That with the most Iust God doth euer wonne, My Muse vnable farre is to expresse His Iustice, which is Truth and Holinesse: Therefore I backe now will retire againe To Iustice, that brings Man to Happinesse, And here on Earth doth Peace and Loue maintayne, And first her Nature by her Causes will explayne. 23 Out of bad causes good effects to draw, Peculiar is to Prouidence Diuine, From whence it comes that many a wholsome Law From euill manners seemes to draw her Line; But they no causes are; For power Diuine Is the first Cause of Iustice and of Right, Eu'n as the Sunne, which giueth powre to shine To all the glorious Lamps wee see by night, Though darknes seeme the cause of their pure twinkling light. 24 Yet as the Sunne, the Fountayne of all Light, Doth of his beames to all those Planets send, Which in the absence of the Sunne by night, Direct all Trauailers aright to wend: So righteous God such Righteousnesse doth lend To Kings, and Rulers all, that iudge below, That they may Right and Iustice true extend, And in Gods stead both Light and Guidance show To Men, which else to all obliquitie would grow. 25 At first when Kings and Princes gan to sway, And that no Lawes as yet were on record, All did their Princes will and mind obay, And the whole Law came from the Princes word: Law therefore Kings this Title doth afford, And stiles them liuing Lawes by grace Diuine, Sent vnto Men to be their Liege and Lord, With power to make new Lawes and old define, The Head, which Members all in politique Body ioyne. 26 Thus God first giues Kings power Lawes to ordayne, Which power Kings to the Iudges delegate; By their Lawes, Right and Iustice to maintayne: All Power from God doth first begin her date, And therefore all ought him to imitate, And thereby to doe right, and wrong redresse; Not onely to encrease their owne estate, And liue in Plentie, Pride, and Wantonnesse, For so we make God cause of our vnrighteousnesse. 27 So we abuse the Power God doth giue, To Pleasures, Pride, Vnrighteousnesse, and Wrong, As if we onely to our selues did liue, When Iudgement onely doth to God belong, Who eu'n the Kings and Iudges sits among, To doe the Orphane and the Widdow right, To breake delayes that Clients suites prolong, Nor suffering Right to be borne downe by Might, But truely first discerne and then proceede aright. 28 These true effects of righteous Causes are Like God, first cause of Iustice to proceed, Who pulleth downe the Mightie from his chaire, And sets the Meeke and Humble in his stead. Loe, Iustice hath a sword to make sinne bleede, As well as Scepter for to rule in Peace; Besides our sowing we must also weede, If we expect a plentifull encrease, So long as Vice growes strong, the sword must neuer cease. 29 Sixe seuerall Serieants wa on Iustice Throne, Which shee in seuerall duties doth employ; By first, shee doth command things to be done: By second, punisheth what's done awry: The third forbids: the fourth giues leaue to trie: The fift exhorts: last doth the right aduise: All these respect haue to lifes honestie, And that no hurt gainst others we deuise, Lastly, things that are due to euery man to size. 30 But not men onely in authoritie, May Subiects be of doing wrong or right, But eu'n weake men in want and pouertie, As when a poore man doth his Neighbour smite, Or workes to man or beast the least despite▪ To wish the least hurt, is vnrighteousnesse: And who workes ought by open force or slight 'Gainst Neighbours goods or credit, doth no lesse Offend against the perfect Rule of Righteousnesse. 31 Yea Subiects sinne against the Rule of Right, When double honour, vnto Rulers due, They doe not tender in the peoples sight; Rulers are Ministers, set in Gods lieu, For good of those that euill doe eschew; Who seekes Authoritie for to out-face, Deserue sharpe punishment in open view, Though, as a Man, I can beare all disgrace, Yet should I not endure dishonour to my place. 32 Loe, here I could by subiects fiue expresse Fiue seuerall degrees, which Meditation Suggests to me of this pure Righteousnesse. First is of God, from which by deriuation The other foure haue life and sustentation; Of Angels, Kings, and Iudges all, which ee Authorised by Princes delegation; Lastly, of Subiects. But the latter three, Corrupted often are by Mans impuritie. 33 As plants, which haue sole power vegetatiue, Iudge not of Beasts which motion haue and sense, Nor Beasts of Men, that doe in reason thriue, Nor Men of Angels pure diuine Essence, Nor Angels infinite Omnipotence: So Subiects iudge not Iudges vprightnesse; Nor Iudges, Kings; Nor Kings, the excellence Of Angels Iustice; And Angels no lesse Vnable are to iudge of Gods pure Righteousnesse. 34 Thus euery Soule by right we subiect see To higher Powers, for conscience, not for feare: The Powers that are, by God ordayned bee, And, but by God himselfe, no Powers are. Who then resists the Power, doth not spare Eu'n Gods owne Ordinances to resist, Which is for good to those that right doe fare, But for their punishment that doe persist In wickednesse, nor from wrong doing doe desist. 35 Wherefore we must giue eu'ry Man his due, To whom Tithe, Custome, Honour, Feare, belong: We ought to render them most iust and true, Or else thereby Gods Ministers we wrong: We must owe nought, but Loue to old or yong, For he that loues fulfils the whole Lawes will, Abstaynes from Murder, Lust, Detraction, Wrong. In briefe, commanded good (forsaking ill.) By louing Neighbours as our selues, we all fulfill. 36 Of all the that attend this Shee most of all in Truth take delight, Who is alli'd in Righteousnesse so neere, And link'd in Loue, that from each others sight They neuer part, but eu'n with all their might Ioyne their seruice to their Queene t' approue. Obedience, Knowledge, Prudence, wait on Right, Braue Fortitude and Zeale resolued proue, To maintayne all Right doth for their great Queene of Loue. 37 Thus all the Vertues that on Loue attend, Companio are of Iustice and of Right, All single and in one their forces bend, Her to assist against vnlawfull might. Great Enemies with her doe daily fight; Ambition, Wrong▪ Seeking by force and secret ight, To weaken hers, and make their owne part strong: Yet shee the pro dest of them all oft layes along. 38 As many as are Enemies to Peace, Publique or , are her Enemies: For whereas Discord, Warres, and Strife encrease, There follow Wrong, Reuenge, and Iniuries: And though ouer-vainely d e aduise Braue Spirits to bloodie warres to purchase Fame, Yet who so vndertakes such enterprise, Vnlesse it be for Peace in Iustice name, By shedding guiltlesse blood deserues eternall blame. 39 Therefore the Pirate iustly did retort Reproch of Thiefe to Grecian Monarchs shame, Who the whole World sought to subdue by tort, To purchase proud vaine glorie to his name, Assuring him he was as much to blame, To rob by Land, as he on Sea to pill, The Monarch wronged all for idle Fame; The Pirate for his gayne did rob and kill; Each 'gainst the of Right by force maintayn'd his will. 40 Some great glorie like to ikes in Pond, All other vnder Fishes to deuour, That they alone inherit may the Lord, And all the World subdue vnto their power, As neuer thinking of their latest hower. When, as they came, they must returne againe, Why should the Highest on the Lowest lower? The greatest Prince the meanest Slaue disdayne? Both borne a ke, breath, die, and in their graue remayne. 41 Besides, Vice oft in Vertues shape appeares: Iniustice vnder Mercies name doth goe: Therefore must Iudges not be mou'd with teares Of Sinners in calamitie and woe: Rulers in Discipline may Mercy show, And Meeknesse, so they leaue not loosely light The raynes vnto Offenders, ill to doe Whom Feare, not Loue, from doing hurt doth fright. For hope of pardon doth lewd minds to sinne inuite. 42 The Iudges then that such Offenders free, To Iniurie betray the Innocent. Three kinds of doing Almes, some say, there bee; First to releeue the poore and impotent; Next to remit all wrong vnto vs meant; The last is, Malefactors to represse. Who so deferres deserued punishment Vpon Offenders 'gainst Gods Righteousnesse, To anger doe prouoke his patient gen lenesse. 43 Therefore let Iudges Grace and show, In pardoning their priuate iniuries: But for offences publique let them know, They there eu'n Gods owne Iudgement exercise. The ancient Romanes wisely did deuise To punish facile Iudges with that payne, Which Law against Offenders did deuise, Thus wisely foolish pitty to restrayne, For that seuere vprightnesse Peace did best maintayne. 44 For surely Then fayned Mercy, Pity, Conscience, Grace, Who all their wrong entitle Iust and Right, And the right of Law deface, Whereby each Man ought to direct his p ce: From which to stray is foule iniquitie. I grant that Conscience may rule in some case, But not against the Law, whose equitie (If not against Gods Word) hath good authoritie. 45 For as in eu ry Towne and common Mart, There is of Weights and Measures but one s ze, And Standard, which true right to all doth part, And Weight and Measure iustly doth comprise; Eu'n so in this Worlds Market men deuise One Law to mete out eu'ry Man his due, And by that Law the Iudges ought assise All their Decrees and Iudgements iust and trew, And not in stead of Lawes to roach Opinions new. 46 But as in Man we soule and body find, So Lawes consist of Letter and true Sense: And as the body place giues to the mind, So the Lawes Letter with Obedience, To the true Sense and Soule of Law consents. Who Letter of the Law seeke to maintayne, And leaue her mind and meanings excellence, Are like them that their bodies good to gayne, Both Soule and Body hazard to eternall payne. 47 Some Painters Iustice without eyes describe, That shee might know no Man in doing right; Some without hands, that shee may take no Bribe; Some without pockets, that may gifts inuite▪ For gifts of wisest men doe blind the sight, And words eu'n of the Righteous doe peruert, Making them wrest the Law, and take delight In base rewards, which doe corrupt the Heart, Which being once amisse doth all the rest diuert. 48 But vaine it is to thinke by likelinesse Of earthly things, to type out things Diuine, Since none her heau'nly Nature can expresse, But who the God-head can aright define. O let the Sunne of Righteousnesse then shine Vpon my blinded heart with his bright rayes, Which may direct my Muse aright to line, And leuell out this heau'nly Ladies wayes, That searching, I may learne and follow Right all wayes. 49 No earthly subiect now my Muse contaynes, Behold, of Righteousnesse Diuine I sing, That Righteous Iudge that searcheth Heart and Reynes, Most gracious God, and yet most righteous King: Who on his owne deare righteous Sonne did bring The bitter cup of wrath and indignation, Due to Mankind for their dire trespassing; Thus satisfying Iustice by his Passion, And shewing wondrous Loue in working Mans saluation. 50 This Righteousnesse in vs may be defin'd A sanctifying holy Qualitie, By Gods owne Spirit vpon our Hearts consign'd, To shew to Gods Law true conformitie, And square our words and actions all thereby. Loe, thus we giue to euery one their due, To God and Man, for by Gods Law we trie And vnderstand what to them both is due. So that conformitie thereto is Iustice true. 51 To this most perfect Iustice can attayne None, but our Head, surnamed, THAT IVST ON . Indeed, God made Man righteous, and againe In Heau'n we iust and perfect shall become: But amongst Men so righteous there are none. Yet reade we of a two-fold Vprightnesse; One Legall, which the Law to vs hath showne: The other, which the Gospell doth expresse, Where Grace ac epts our will by Faith for Righteousnesse. 52 The Law requires perfect Obedience, Eu'n in that Man that seekes to liue thereby: The Gospell, Faith, and a good Conscience; By Faith Christs Righteousnesse especially Imputed is, which rightly we apply. That, of the Conscience doth the whole Man frame, Willing in all things to liue honestly; This, of Gods Spirit a powerfull worke I name, And none but the regenerate obtayne the same. 53 For Righteousnesse that thus from Faith doth runne, Let me referre you to that Meditation, Which I of Faith haue formerly begunne, Whereas Christs Merits (ours by Imputation) Stand before God for our Iustification. And thus Christ is of the whole Law the end: For what the Law exacts for our Saluation, Christ hath fulfilled for vs as a Friend, And by the Gospell to Beleeuers doth extend. 54 The Righteousnesse of a good Conscience, In two things doth consist especially; First, to abstayne from ill with diligence; Next, to doe good willing and constantly: To doe good and auoid iniquitie, Are two essentiall parts of Righteousnesse: Except they both concurre, they both doe die. Loe, thus old Za hary and Elizabesse, Were righteous before God, and walkt with men blamelesse. 55 We Righteousnesse of Faith from Christ receaue: That of the Conscience, is a worke of Grace: The Righteousnesse of Faith will not there cleaue, Where Righteousnesse of Conscience hath not place: This right of Conscience rightly we embrace, When true Repentance working change of mind, Doth the old Man of sinne in vs deface, With resolute purpose in a holy kind, Henceforth to frame our liues as Gods Law hath assign'd. 56 If thus the mind be truely altered, And change of resolution throughly wrought, Then the whole Man is fitly furnished, To put Faiths Righteousnesse on as he ought. Without true change of mind we soone are brought Like Dogge vnto his vomit to retire; By sinne corrupted Nature's easily caught Againe like Sow to wallow in the mire. High God doth first this inward Righteousnesse require. 57 Thus by true Faith and a good Conscience, With true Repentance we our selues doe presse, And arme to proofe for sure and firme defence, With brest-plate spirituall of Righteousnesse, Which gards vs from all mortall sinfulnesse. For as the brest-plate hides each vitall part, So that no mortall wound can them oppresse, Eu'n so this Righteousnesse defends the Heart And Conscience, that no mortall sinne can thorough dart. 58 Thus strongly arm'd, we most assured stand Of our effectuall calling and saluation: For as we God most righteous vnderstand, So know we that the righteous Generation, Are borne of him which brings true exultation, Cladding our Names with happy memorie, Makes much for true religious confirmation, Doth it with Infidels much dignifie, Who seeing our good workes our Maker glorifie. 59 As are the windings of slie Errours trayne, So are the y-paths of Iniquitie; Yet in two Heads we may them all contayne, To Neighbours wrong, to God impietie; Here I some ouer-iust Ones passe not by, (Such as must haue all Bowes by their owne bent) Who by pretence of Christian libertie, Allow nought but what their owne braines inuent, Correctors curious of things indifferent. 60 Two other Gulfes here I will onely sound; One is of Pharisaicall Righteousnesse; The other with false Libertines is found, Who doe abuse Gods grace to wantonnesse: The last, Faith onely with their tongue professe, But let their conscience wind at libertie. The other make great boast of Vprightnesse And Merits, trusting to be sau'd thereby: Both put asunder those God doth together tie. 61 (Thus Hymeneus did and Alexander, Who first did put away good Conscience: And then in Schismes and Heresies did wander, Till they made shipwracke of Faiths firme defence. Thus some giu'n ouer to a reprobate sense, Doe fall to senselesse base Idolatrie, Putting in stocks and stones their confidence: And in the mysterie of Iniquitie; Who boasts himselfe to haue of Heau'n and Hell the Key.) 62 Not but Christ's immense Coate of Righteousnesse, Sufficient is to cloath all that beleeue: But we our Faith by good workes must expresse, If of his Fulnesse we hope to receaue: Yet let Presumption no Man so deceaue, The rags of his inherent Righteousnesse With Christs, in our Redemption for to weaue. By ours we must not hope to come to blisse, Nor euer without ours attayne true Happinesse. 63 Our Righteousnesse no cause is, but the way, Whereby we to our Heau'nly Citie come: He that doth misse this path, doth walke astray, And head-long with Iniquitie doth run. As in some narrow passage to a Towne, He that will thither passe, one way must treade, Which if he misse, he wanders vp and downe, No path but one the right way him can leade: Yet we the path no cause of comming thither reade. 64 This path's like Iacobs Ladder, which did reach Eu'n vp to Heau'n, yet stood vpon the ground; From top whereof Christ out his Arme doth stretch, To helpe vp all that in good workes abound. A streight long way and many steps are found, Before we scale the top of Righteousnesse: Gods gracious Spirit doth first this way propound, And guides our feete to moue aright to blesse, But onely Christ aboue doth vs thereof possesse. 65 In this way Enoch's said to walke with God, And Men began then holy inuocation Next Noah in his Makers grace abode, A iust and perfect Man in's generation. Thus Iob, Lot, Abram, haue their commendation For Iustice, Iudgement, Faith, and Righteousnesse, Walking with Men in vpright conuersation, And towards God in Truth and Holinesse, Thus shewing by her fruits the Faith which they professe. 66 Thus Patriarchs, Prophets, Iudges, Priests, and Kings, That did beleeue Gods future promises, First fear'd and honour'd him aboue all things, Next walk'd on earth in Truth and Righteousnesse, Labouring in Life and Doctrine to expresse Their firme beliefe of Christ that was to come, Who since is manifested in the Flesh, And doth the end of Righteousnesse become, Which cannot be obtayn'd, vnlesse on earth begun. 67 Loe, Moses had an eye to this reward, When he left Egypts pleasures, wealth, promotion, The three chiefe baits which Worldlings most regard, Three greatest Enemies to true Deuotion: Ioseph for this despis'd his Mistris motion, And rather chose that stocks his limbs should lame, Than he would taste of Lusts vnrighteous potion. Loe, Christ a wretch for Righteousnesse became, And for the Iusts reward endur'd the Crosses shame. 68 If I should count all the Authorities, Which of this Vertue in Gods Word abound, One Volume to hold all would not suffice, In eu'ry Booke, Verse, Chapter, to be found: But most of all, the holy Psalmes propound Abundant matter for this Meditation; The which my Reader I doe leaue to sound, That willing is to make right application, And follow Righteousnesse in life and conuersation. 69 But though I tremble whilst I heare Paul reason Of Temp'rance, Iudgement, Truth and Righteousnesse, Yet carelesse take a more conuenient season, Like Foelix, in my life it to expresse, And grope for Bribes the wronged to redresse; I cannot tell how soone of this my rome, My Maker will a iuster Man possesse, And then to strict account I needs must come, And be rewarded as to others I haue done. 70 Were mortall eyes but able to behold, The glorious splendour and the light Diuine, The Crownes, Ioyes, Honours, Pleasures manifold Prepar'd for them that liue by righteous Line, And how the Righteous like the Sunne shall shine With Sonne and Father in eternall blesse, We nould at Crosse, reproch, or shame repine, Which though they seeme some burthen to the flesh, More free our soules hereby conuerse in Holinesse. 71 But ah, Sinne on our Nature hangs so fast, And pricks with honour, pleasure, wealth, and ease, That Coward-like our Armour off we cast, And for promotion flatter, fawne, and please. Then Satan takes aduantage vs to seise As Captiues, being naked and vnarm'd, Whom though before perhaps he might disease, Yet neuer could vs mortally haue harm'd, If with brest-plate of Righteousnesse we had beene arm'd. 72 Oh, but 'tis too great burthen to the flesh, To keepe this Armour on continually, And to our nature breeds great wearinesse, To so great watchfulnesse our soules to tye: But since it doth assure vs victorie, Who would not beare this burthen for a while? Besides, the burthen of Iniquitie Is heauier, and doth our soules defile, Though for a time with pleasures false it vs beguile. 73 Oh, let this brest-plate then of Righteousnesse Be on my Soule and Body alwayes prest: The more this burthen doth my Body presse, My Soule is sure to find more ease and rest: No paine, shame, or reproch, that vs molest, Are worthy of the Crowne most glorious, Which God the Righteous Iudge hath readie drest, For to bestow vpon the Righteous, Made so by God his acceptation gracious. 74 For I confesse it is thy acceptation Which makes our Righteousnesse (though dung and losse, Compared to the Lawes strict obseruation) Most perfect: Thou hast nayled to Christs Crosse All our offences: By him all our drosse Is turn'd to purest Gold in fire tried. Where God accepts, no power of Hell can crosse, If by true Faith our hearts be purified, Our imperfections by Christs perfectnesse supplied. 75 Oh then, most perfect Sunne of Righteousnesse, Vouchsafe that now thy Spirit of Grace may shine Vpon mine Heart, by Truth and Holinesse, Temp'rance, Faith, Hope, Obedience, Loue Diuine, That all my words, thoughts, actions, I may line, And leuell out by thy pure Rule of Right; All errour, lying, iniurie decline, And hauing of thy Lawes a most cleare sight, I may to walke therein place all my hearts delight. 76 Make me conceiue the profit, vse, and end Of righteousnesse, and the necessitie I of this brest-plate haue, my Soule to fand Against the furie of mine enemie: And grant, my conscience good may testifie The armes whereby I may stand fast and sure, And not those fain'd ones of Hypocrisie, Which neuer can hold out me to secure, Or any of the fierie darts of Hell endure. 77 But it is not in him, that wils or runneth, For to attaine the Crowne of righteousnesse, From whom each perfect gift and good grace commeth, His grace it is that guides to happinesse: We find amongst those gracious promises, And grants, which in thy holy Word we reade, That who seekes first thy Kingdomes righteousnesse, Shall haue, all things whereof he stands in neede Doe thou, Oh Lord me forth then in this right way leade. 78 Thou the whole Scripture gau'st by inspiration, Apt to instruct, improue, correct, represse, To make the man of God wise to saluation, And perfectly instruct in righteousnesse: And when the wicked turne from wickednesse, Thou promisest their Soules aliue to saue: So many are thy gracious promises, To grant all good things that the righteous craue, That I this righteousnesse doe begge and hope to haue. 79 Then, as a Lyon, shall I be most bold, My righteous way shall shine eu'n as the light, The eyes then of the Lord shall me behold And he will grant me eu'n my hearts delight. In all his Statutes I shall walke aright, And all his iudgements iust and true obserue, My death shall be most precious in his sight, My righteous memorie he will reserue, Yea eu'n the righteous seede he will on earth preserue. 80 To praise God for the blessings manifold His Word assures vnto this righteous Nation, Would in discourse my Muse for euer hold, And be too long for this one Meditation. Oh, hold me then to more strict obseruation Of Time to come, than I haue had of past, That I may make a daily examination Of my whole life and all my sinnes vp cast, As mindfull of th'account I am to giue at last. 81 And teach me, that this Grace of Righteousnesse Is as a Chaine of many links close ioyn'd, By which we would ascend from hence to blesse, Whereof if but the least linke doth vnbind, Loe, the whole Chaine is to the earth declin'd: Eu'n so in this strong Chaine of Law and Right, Though most of all our acts be rightly lin'd; If one Iniquitie our Hearts delight, This one makes all the rest vnrighteous in Gods sight. 82 But I vniustly my discourse extend: Now I beseech the Authour of this Grace, I all my force to practise it may bend, And first doe Right and Iustice in my place, Respecting not the Person but the Case, In my Commerce with all Men dealing right. Last, that I may true Righteousnesse embrace, That with true Faith and a good Conscience dight, I in these spirituall Armes vnto the end may ight. 83 Thus hauing chalked out the Rule of Right, I should by my first Method next proceede To sing of Mercy: but Truth doth inuite My Muse first her great power to areede, Who doth in time eu'n Righteousnesse preceede. Besides, none can approch dread Mercies Throne, But those whom Truth and Iustice thither leade, And sure their Nature links them so in one, As one without the other neuer goes alone. MEDITAT. II. Of Truth. 1 S Vch is the nature and sweet inclination Of heau'nly Graces all, whereof I sing, That with most kind and mutuall relation, They all seeme ioyn'd together in a ring, So close each one another following, That who gets one doth all the rest obtayne. For, from one Fountayne all of them doe spring, All link'd together in so strong a chayne, As where one Vertue dwels, there all the rest remayne. 2 'Tis vaine to thinke that single Graces can Make vp complete the Man spirituall, More than diuided Members of a Man Can grow, or thriue, not ioyn'd together all. Hence Poet the three Graces twins doe call, Ioues Daughters, and them in one ring doe ioyne; And hence they make the Virgins musicall All but one consort, which are Sisters nine: Thus by their fables shadowing things Diuine. 3 For they discern'd by Natures dimmed light, One Authour sole of eu'ry goodly Grace, Whom Father they and King of all doe hight, And him Lord ouer all their gods doe place. Loe, thus as in a mist they Truth did trace, But missing the true path of Righteousnesse, In stead of Truth they Errour did embrace, For neuer was Dame Iustice Errours guesse, Nor euer Truth did dwell with false Vnrighteousnesse. 4 For seeming Truth, without the of Right, Like Summum is greatest iniurie: And Righteousnesse not guided by Truths light, Is Curiousnesse or false Hypocrisie, Faith that brings forth fruits of Iniquitie, Is base Presumption; Loue, Diffimulation; That worketh not in vs by Charitie, All from one Head haue life and sustentation, And therefore all together make their habitation. 5 But none more like are, or of Kin more neare, Than this faire paire of Truth and Righteousnesse; The blessed Mother and her Daughter deare; For Truth the Mother is of Vprightnesse: And surely, Truth and honest Simplenesse To eu'ry Vertue doth so needfull grow, That all faire shewes not done in Singlenesse, And Truth of Heart, are but a false vaine show, A splendid sinne corrupted by Mans heart below. 6 Thou, in whose Lips was neuer found least guile, Whose Heart hates lying and iniquitie, Whose Hands did neuer God or Man beguile, Whose Hand, Heart, Word, and Thought, is Veritie, Whose blessed Spirit of Truth doth testifie Vnto our Spirits true way of Righteousnesse, By which we come to liue eternally, Direct my Muse Truths nature to expresse, That Truth may guide my steps to endlesse Happinesse. 7 My bounded Muse here dareth not define Of boundlesse Truth from all Eternitie, Which as impossible's to mete by Line, As Persons three, which in the Trinitie Make but one Truth and perfect Vnitie. But as one God consists of Persons three, And each participates of Deitie; So we one Truth communicated see To Persons three, which but one in the God-head bee. 8 Of Father, , and Spirit of Truth we reade But as one God, so but one Truth alone; Into which Truth the Spirit of Truth doth leade, Who sent is from the Father and the Sonne. The Word of Truth that gloriously did won With Spirit and Father from eternitie: Flesh here tooke of our flesh, bone of our bone, To free vs from errours captiuitie, And chalk't vs out a way to walke in Veritie. 9 This is the Truth whereof I meane to write, Which ought to be of our whole Life the square, To leuell out our words, thoughts, acts aright, And eke our Iudgements to Gods Word to square: For of this Truth foure parts there onely are, Of Iudgement, Action, Speech, and of the Heart, The want of one, the rest doth all impaire; Wrong iudgement, words, and actions doth diuert, But a false heart doth iudgement, action, speech peruert. 10 And that I right and plainely may proceede, I will all foure thus singled out define; And first the Truth of Iudgement I doe reade, Truth of Iudgement. A power inlightning of Gods Spirit Diuine, Which doth Mans vnderstanding part refine, And settles in the Doctrine of his Word: Behold, when Truth doth in our iudgement shine, All Heresie and Schismes by vs abhord, This Truth of Iudgement sacred Knowledge doth afford. 11 Truth of the Heart is a sweet singlenesse And sincere meaning, Truth of Heart. whereby Man constraynes His Heart to approue it selfe in Holinesse, To him that searcheth both the Heart and Raynes. This in the inward Man the Truth contaynes, And is to God most acceptable treasure: This Truth from all Hypocrisie refraynes: Here doth the Deuill soonest take his seasure, For, loe, the Heart of man's deceitfull aboue measure. 12 The Truth of Speech is when our hearts agree Vnto the matter and vnto our mind: Truth of Speech. For if it from our Heart doe disagree, Or from the thing whereto it is design'd, The first to be plaine lying is defin'd. The second, falshood at the best we name: One doth abuse the Conscience and the Mind; The other brings the Authour vnto shame; Both falsifie the Truth and are alike to blame. 13 The Truth of Actions, Truth of Action. honest dealing, plaine, Faithfull in all without dissimulation: With God and Man whether we lose or gaine, When we doe not deceiue by simulation, And feigning things without determination; Or else dissembling whereabouts we goe: These are from Truth a wicked declination, And when we God or Man deceauen so, What we would vnto vs, to others we not doe. 14 But as a naturall body doth consist Of quarters foure, to make a man complete, And if but one of all those foure be mist, The other three lose all their life and heate: Eu'n so it is with Truth, whereof I treate, If of these foure substantiall parts want one, The other three are vainenesse or deceat; For Truth of Iudgement, Heart, Speech, Action, Make but one Truth without dissimulation. 15 But Truth of Iudgement ground is and foundation Of all the rest: For be our Hearts sincere, Our words and deeds without dissimulation, If Errour in our Iudgements doth appeare, With Paul we may eu'n persecute the deare And holy Seruants of the Sonne of Truth, And thinke we doe to God good seruice here. Fie then on Fooles that misse-spend their youth, They neuer seeke to know or learne the way of Truth. 16 But be our Iudgements eu'n as right and sound, As Christs Disciples by their Master taught; Yet if within vs Iudas hearts be found, On vs the greater iudgement shall be wrought. Who knowes his Masters will and doth it nought, Oh, what doth he by this his knowledge gayne, But eu'n the sting of his owne conscience brought To desperation and infernall payne, And to put out this sting puts on an hempen chayne? 17 What shall we say of those that doe professe Truth of Religion, and a Heart sincere? Yet in their dealings nothing lesse expresse, But for their gayne deceaue, lie, and forsweare: Surely, these men a double heart doe beare: For were the Heart, which is a liuely Spring, Whence flow our words and deeds, oh were that cleare, Then all the streames from thence forth issuing, Would be pure like the fountain, from whence they do spring. 18 But things we best of all by causes know: God is the Cause of each good gift and grace, But here more mediate Causes I may show, Whereby he in the Truth doth guide our pace. By's Word we Truth of Iudgement doe embrace, Which is to wandring Soules a guide and light, His Spirit vpon our Hearts doth Truth enchase, Then Truth of Iudgement makes vs speake aright, And Truth of Heart makes all our actions true and right. 19 Thus (as Effects) true Speech and Actions flow From Truth of Iudgement, and the Truth of Heart, As all Mankind from Eue and Adam grow: But if the subtill Serpent can peruert Our Hearts or Iudgements, as he did diuert Our two first Parents, then as all their seede Defiled is with their corrupted part, So from our Heart and Iudgement will proceede Corrupted words and actions which such fountaynes breede. 20 Therefore to set our Iudgement true and right, We to the ground and pillar ought to come Of Truth, which is the Church of God, so hight, Because the treasures of all Truth there won, Of all Gods Oracles which there haue rome. From which all Truth of Iudgement we deriue, The Church a carefull Keeper doth become: There's Truth that able is to saue aliue, And away Errour, Darknesse, Superstition driue. 21 O blessed Truth, that holy Church preserues From Satans malice, and the Moth of time, O glorious Church, whose soundnesse pure reserues Truth of Religion, which doth make thee shine In Righteousnesse, Faith, Hope, and Loue Diuine, More then Pompe, Wealth, Vniuersalitie: For Truth doth decke Christs Spouse more trim and fine Then Time, Consent, Succession, Vnitie, Now foild with Superstition and Idolatrie. 22 With these false Ornaments the Church of Rome, Like painted Harlot, shuns the open Light: Nor will vnto the Ground and Pillar come Of Truth, to trie if shee bee wrong or right. Therefore, poore Laiks neuer must haue sight Of holy Writ, to frame their Iudgement by: Traditions and false Miracles them light, And on the Churches word they must relie: Thus Ignorance the Mother is of Poperie. 23 But as sound Truth abhorres such Ignorance, Eu'n so presumptuous curiositie Shee doth decline, nor euer doth aduance Her purest thoughts to things that be too high: Her subiect is no higher Mysterie, Than Spirit of Truth is pleased to reueale: Into Gods secret Counsell for to prie, Is like the Thiefe that fire from Heau'n did steale, To whom eu'n Heathen iudgements endlesse torments seale. 24 So vniuersall is Truths glorious Fame, That all things that the Heau'n and Earth contaynes, Delight to be adorned by her Name: Yea, God himselfe Truths title not disdaynes: Loe, He Lord God of Truth for ay remaynes. The Word of Truth, the Spirit of Truth, likewise Wayes, iudgements, works cōmandements Truth retaynes In this, Saints, Angels, with God sympathize: But Satan and his broode delight in contraries. 25 Thus as shee is adorn'd by Titles high, So with her Glorie shee doth all adorne: Nothing vnto perfection commeth nigh, Except by them the badge of Truth be borne. And though some Worldlings doe her Liuerie scorne, As things against their pleasure, ease, and gayne, For that plaine dealing is a Iewell worne, But he that weares it, beggerie shall gayne; Yet Truth her credit still doth with the best retayne. 26 Yea Truth amongst the Writers of all times, Hath beene in such great honour and account, As without Truth yet neuer Prose or Rimes To any Praise or Honour vp did mount. The holy Writ, wherein Truth doth surmount, Shee safely doth'gainst all her Foes defend. How oft doth Dauids muse Gods Truth recount, Whereby her glorie lasts to the Worlds end? Ah, my poore Muse, see thou alwayes on Truth attend. 27 There's not one Vertue that with Loue doth dwell, But honours Truth, and seekes her company: Begin eu'n at Humilities low Cell, And mount to Mercy that doth sit on high, All seeke the companie of Veritie. Eu'n Loue must be without dissimulation, And Righteousnesse without Hypocrisie, Vnfaigned Faith, true constant Expectation. No Vertue without Truth comes neare Loues habitation. 28 Faire glosing shewes without Dame Veritie, Are but as falsely feigned Holinesse, Which surely doubles the iniquitie, And neuer leades the way to Happinesse. My Muse is farre vnable to expresse The prayses all of Peeres that Truth attends, Whom shee adornes with wondrous Noblenesse: But Righteousnesse vpon her most depends, And Mercy now and Truth haue met & growne great friends. 29 But surely Truth hath not so many Friends, But shee doth find as many Enemies: For Satan all his malice 'gainst her bends, Supplanting Her by force or subtilties. He father is of errours and of lyes, And seekes herewith Truths glorie to distaine, And therefore they maliciously deuise Interpretations false, and glosses vaine, Traditions, mens inuentions, 'gainst her to maintaine. 30 As Purgatorie first they did deuise, Purses for Pardon of mens sinnes to gleane: So Limbo's they for Writers haue likewise Wherein to purge and make their Writings clean , (Index expurgatorius I meane) In which if any Writer disagree From their Traditions, whereupon they leane, They in this Limbo Patrum purg'd must bee, Or falsely else condemned to burne for Heresie. 31 Thus moderne Writs, sacred Antiquitie, The Fathers, Schoole-men, Doctors, Histories, They all of them in Purgatorie frie, And sore against the Truth doe tyrannize. The ancient Fathers, Truths antiquities, That like Iohn Baptist beare to her record, They doe behead, or else them circumcise, None scapes their Index but Gods holy Word, And that must be translated with their Church t'accord. 32 But Errour striueth not more to deface Our Truth of Iudgement, than Iniquitie, And proud prophanenesse seeketh to disgrace True Dealing, Speech, and Hearts sinceritie: Them branding with foule Follies infamie, As none could liue but those that can dissemble, Reproching them for Truth and Puritie, That seeke hereby their pure Head to resemble, When eu'n in Gods pure sight the purest Angels tremble. 33 Not that I goe about here to defend Those feigned pure Ones, that most wickedly Much Truth and Puritie in words pretend, But in their Actions deale dishonestly; Nor those, that like the boasting Pharisie, Call to their brother farther off to stand, Which soone discerne a Mote in Brothers eye, But eu'n Beames in their owne not vnderstand; These for some false pretended Spots leaue Church and Land. 34 Such rau'ning Wolues oft in long clothing goe, And therefore hard by outward shewes to find▪ We best them by their fruits may learne and know, 'Tis dangerous to censure in this kind▪ For those that haue a true pure Heart and Mind, Make shew thereof as they that doe dissemble, Therefore till all their Actions false I find, To iudge them Hypocrites mine heart doth tremble, Lest to the Wicked I the Righteous should resemble. 35 For dealing true's like Touch-stone, which doth trie The baser Mettall from the purest Gold: Discernes a true Heart from Hypocrisie, And fayned Puritie doth soone vnfold. And as by Touch-stones touch is easily told What is pure Gold, from what is gilt for show; Although the Gilt's more glorious to behold; So Truth of Heart by Truth of Words we know, And by the Actions which from them doe daily flow. 36 Truth's like the Treasure wh ch the Hu bandman, As he was digging in the Field, did sound, Which he keepes close, and sells all that he can, And with the Money goes and buyes the Ground. Shee's like the precious Pearle the Merchant found, And then sold all, this Gemme for to obtayne. The wise Man heau'nly Counsell doth propound, That wills vs vse all meanes her to obtayne, And buy the Truth with losse of honour, pleasure, gayne. 37 Truth is like Salt that seasons eu'ry thing, And makes it sauoury to God and Man; Preserues our Soules from Breath putrifying Of busie Flies, that labour what they can To breede corruption in the inward Man. Shee leauens all the whole Lumps preparation, The Soule and Body, Flower and the Bran, Affection, Reason, Will, Communication, Heart, Mind, Opinion, Iudgement, Life, and Conuersation. 38 As precious Ointment powr'd on Aarons head, Ran downe vpon his Beard and did not stay, Till all the Skirts it of his clothing spread: So sacred Truth her vigour doth display From head, whereas our Iudgement makes her stay Vnto the Beard and Tongue, where speech haue place, Then to the Heart and Hands shee holds her way, From whence our Actions all haue life and grace; Thus to the Skirts of our long clothing Truth doth trace. 39 Gods Truth compares her to a Belt or Zone, Which Souldiers vse for strength and ornament, Whose golden Studs most gloriously shone, And ioyne the Armour in faire complement Loe, whilst this Girdle is about vs pent, Christians whole Armour hangs on fast and sure: But if this Girdle from our Loynes be rent, Off falls our Armes, and Satan or Worlds lure Then wounds vs desperately, or makes vs sleepe secure. 40 Diuinest , thou didst shadow well In Legend of true Loue and Chastitie: By girdle faire of fairest Florimell, This sacred Belt of Truth and Veritie, Which none on looser Ladies loynes could tie, Yet their faire Limbs that had li 'd true and chaste, It did adorne most rich and gloriously, And was most fitting for their slender waste, But they, Vngirt vnblest were that had beene vnchaste. 41 For as the girdle doth inclose around Mans body, where our soules high powers doe dwell: Wherein, as good or euill doe abound, Eu'n all our actions flow thence ill or well: So Truth about our soules keepes Centinell, And eu'ry act we doe, shee doth make knowne To that iust Iudge, from whom we can conceale Not eu'n the secret thoughts that in vs growne: For nought so close or secret is to Truth vnknowne. 42 Thus Touch-stone, Treasure, Pearle, Salt, Leauen, Zone, Doe all fall short with faire Truth to compare: For Truth in all's compar'd to God alone, And none but God her glorie can declare: Who for Truths sake his owne Sonne did not spare, But offerd him, false man to reconcile, That Truth and Mercy might meete and prepare Strict Iustice on poore wretched Man to smile, Whom Satan with false lyes and errour did beguile. 43 What doth the Word of Truth to vs commend, More than this inward Truth and Singlenesse? Abram for this is styl'd by God a Friend, And Iob of Truth and Perfectnesse. If I should here the Readers patience presse With all examples therein to be found, Surely, my Verses should be numberlesse: Wherefore a few I for the Truth propound, That you like men of Ber a may the Scripture found. 44 Where you shall fi d of Truth examples store, Eu'n Christ himselfe for Truth was crucifide, Baptist beheaded, Paul endured more For Truth, than the Apostles all beside. When Peter had the Lord of Truth denide, He went out and did weepe more bitterly, Than when his Master to him signifide By girding him, what death he ought to die, Whereby he should the Truth of God much glorifie. 45 And this hath made the Martyrs of all Ages (Till death, their Truth of Iudgement to maintayne;) Sealing with blood the Truth of sacred pages, And whilst they here endur'd most cruell payne, They ioyfull were in hope of glorious gayne, Yea many haue embraced losse and shame, In singlenesse of heart Truth to maintayne. But what though here they doe endure some blame? The true in heart shall gayne an euerlasting name. 46 Dauid a man call'd after Gods owne heart, For inward Truth and Singlenesse within. No beautie, eloquence, or outward part Can so commend a man: For Truth doth winne The loue of God and Man: But that foule sinne Of lying Lips and a deceitfull Heart, Is an abomination vnto him. In eu'ry triall Truth maintaynes her part, But all dissemblers (Adam -like) aside doe start. 47 Loe, many Daughters haue done vertuously, But glorious Truth doth farre surmount them all. Yet if I onely sing of Veritie, And labour not to practise it at all, But from my Loynes her Girdle loosen shall, It had beene better I had neuer knowne The way of Truth, than afterwards to fall And leaue the Light, that vnto me was showne, Choking those seeds of Grace the Spirit of Truth had sowne. 48 But ah, the Deuill and his Instruments Continually doe seeke our Truth to spoile: And by feare, force, and Worlds allurements, Our Soules of this rich Iewell to beguile. Loe, Romanists adulterate and defile Eu'n Truths pure Fountaynes and sweet liuely Spring: And Worldlings true sinceritie doe soile With odious name of false dissembling, And eu'n with basest termes Gods Priests dishonouring. 49 Ah, now we with the fashion all doe run; As Buildings, Wares, Apparell, are for show, So is Religion and Deuotion; Where is most pompe and glorie, thither flow The greatest multitude; From whence doth grow To such a height the name of Poperie; Yea, many of vs seeke for praise to know; But leaue true practise in sinceritie, When not to know, but doe Gods will is charitie. 50 Fashion and Custome now so tyrannize, As comely honest Truth they doe out-face: If it the Fashion be vs to disguise, It as a comely Custome we embrace; That which Paul thought a Womans foule disgrace, Like Man to haue her head vncouer'd, shorne, Amongst our Women holds a goodly grace, Like vnto mens their garments now be worne, As they in Truth the frailtie of their Sexe did scorne. 51 But I could wish with all our power and might, As in Gods presence pure we all did stand, We would goe, thinke, know, speake, and practise right In Truth of Iudgement, with Tongue, Heart, and Hand; This God did vnto Abraham command, To walke before him and to be vpright: Walking before God makes vs vpright stand; Vprightnesse shewes we walke as in Gods sight: Who thinks God him beholds, how dares he doe vnright? 52 Let me here tell you, how a holy Man A Harlot did diuert from filthy quest; Who by her comely feature many wan To leaue their owne, and foile her filthy nest. Himselfe in habit of a Gallant drest, Agreed and paid, desir'd a secret rome, Shee him vnto a Chamber streight addrest, So close that therein not the least light shone, But ah (said he) Gods eye vs here may see alone. 53 Alas (said shee) no place can be so close, That can vs hide from Gods all-seeing Eye: Dost thou beleeue (saith he) God sees thy grosse, Thy beastly foule sinne of adulterie, And fear'st not lest his furie should destroy, Eu'n whilst in this presumptuous sinne thou art, And thee condemne to Hell eternally? My Authour saith, hereby he did conuert Her wicked life to Truth and Singlenesse of Heart. 54 Though many imperfections we doe feele, And our corruptions downe so sore vs presse, That Vice into our Hearts doth often steale, And vnawares deceaue with sinfulnesse; Yet if by sorrow true and humblenesse We purge our Hearts of what is entred in, And after seeke by carefull watchfulnesse, Them to preserue hereafter from like sinne, We may grow to some perfectnesse of Truth within. 55 But I confesse, that though with all my might I labour for true puritie of mind, And would doe nothing but as in the sight Of God and Angels, and of all Mankind; Yet often my deceitfull heart I find Tempting me secretly such things to doe, Which I should not dare venture in that kind, If some Man present were the same to know: Yet Truth the closest of them all to God doth show. 56 What, shall man presence make me true and iust? And shall not Gods, that ees my secret thought, To whom for all one day account I must, And be rewarded as I here haue wrought? Shall not his presence me deterre from ought, That may offend his sacred Maiestie? The Sonne of Truth whose blood me dearely bought, And grieue the holy Spirit of Truth, whereby Seal'd and redeem'd I am from Hels captiuitie. 57 Oh thou that Truth requir'st in inward parts, Vs secretly mak'st Wisedome vnderstand, Renewing Spirits aright and clensing Hearts, By whom in Truth and Righteousnesse we stand, My way direct right to the holy Land, Through Deserts wide of this Worlds wildernesse; Feede me with heau'nly Manna from thine Hand, With water from a Rocke my soule refresh, And thorough Iordanes flood conduct to endlesse blesse. 58 The humble thou hast promised to guide, And to direct his path aright for ay. Who seeke vnfeignedly in Truth t'abide, Thou neuer sufferest to goe astray; Oh then direct my goings in thy way, My iudgement, heart, hand, tongue, in Veritie; Thou readier art to heare then I to pray: Then grant me Loue, Faith, Hope, Humilitie, And season eu'ry Grace with Hearts sinceritie. 59 God is my Shepheard, How then can I stray? He is my Light, Truth, and my righteous Guide, His rod and staffe my slipperie feete doth stay, Lest they at any time doe slip aside: His Truth and Mercy euermore abide; Though Wine and Women and the King are strong, I nothing feare if Truth be on my side; Thy Truth and Mercy shall my dayes prolong: Of thy great Truth and Mercy euer be my song. 60 Oh, let thy Word of Truth my Iudgement sway, Thy Spirit of Truth mine inward Man inlight, Incline mine Heart to learne, will, to obay, And on thy Truth set thou my whole delight, On it to meditate both day and night: That whether I eate, sleepe, walke, watch, or pray, I may remember I am in thy sight, So shall I conscience make of euery way, And be most carefull what I aske, doe, thinke, or say. 61 But, ah, dread Mercy, I too long forbeare To tune my Dittie to thy sacred praise, Who wert so gracious vnto me whileare, When I appeal'd from Iustice stricter Sayes, Vnto thy Throne of Grace where though my wayes Were all discouer'd, by thy gracious dome I was absolu'd. But next I will thee praise, Now I with Truth and Righteousnesse haue done: For none without these two to Mercies grace can come. MEDITAT. III. Of Mercy. 1 I F any mightie Monarch chance enquire, Why I sweet Mercies seate doe place so high, Since shee the lowliest Cell doth most desire, Her selfe delighting sole in miserie, The onely Object of her pitying eye: He hence for greatnesse may this lesson gaine, That as he growes in Pow'r and Maiestie, To Poore he ought the greater Mercy daine, Thus imitating him by whom eu'n Princes raigne. 2 For though this Dame be of such wondrous grace, So neare in fauour to the Queene of Loue, That next to her s ee gaynes the soueraigne place, Both here below, and in the Heau'n aboue; Yea though to heau'nly Loue so like shee proue, That scarse the one from th'other can be knowne, (Though to be mercifull, and truely Loue Doe differ much, as after shall be showne) Yet her great bounty's not to meanest wretch vnknowne. 3 For as the Sunne, from highest firmament Vouchsafes on good and bad alike to shine, And clouds of Heau'n doe raine indifferent On fertile Land, and on the barren Mine; So vnto all shee offers Grace Diuine: But as the Cause is not in Sunne nor Raine, But in the Soile, why it doth fruitlesse line, So sinne's the cause some cannot Grace retaine, Which shines and waters bad and barren hearts in vaine. 4 A depth all bottomlesse I now doe sound, A height which higher than the Heau'ns doth reach, So wide as nothing it can compasse round, For Mercy ouer all Gods workes doth stretch; So farre beyond mans limited fraile reach, As to conceaue of Gods Eternitie, Or how he all doth out of nothing fetch, Darknesse from Light, Ioy out of Miserie, From Warre true Peace; high Honour from Humilitie. 5 Thou, God of Mercy! blessed Trinitie! Who first in thine owne Image didst create Man pure and good: But when Hels subtiltie Had him deiected from so happy state, Abandoning to endlesse Bale and Hate, That riches of thy Mercy might appeare, Didst for thy Mercies sake regenerate, And all his score by thy Bloods price didst cleare, Grant I may rightly sing and practise Mercy here. 6 Which is a certayne pitifull regard, Which we of others miserie conceaue, Whereby our hearts are moued and prepar'd, Them, what we can, to succour and relieue: That Passion and Affection which doth grieue Mans heart, to see anothers miserie, Doth not vnto th'Almighties Mercy cleaue, No more than Anger, Hate, and Iealousie, As they distempers are, be in the Trinitie. 7 No words indeed can properly expresse Gods Mercy, Anger, Hate, or Iealousie, But as wee see their fruits wee them confesse, To be in God by Anthropopathy: Gods punishment of foule iniquitie, We call reuenge: But when he Grace doth show To those which are in woe and miserie, We call that Mercy: Not but we well know, No passion or distemper in Gods Nature grow. 8 That Mercy may the plainelyer be descri'de, And we her diuerse Nature better know, I her into two Currents doe diuide; The Mercy God on Creatures doth bestow, And that which he requires of vs below: For as God is by Nature pittifull, So he delights in them that Mercy shew; For he by Nature is most Mercifull, And therefore vnto all in Fruits most plentifull. 9 Gods Nature is Eternall, Infinite, So is his Mercy stretched out to all, Eu'n as the Sunne to Man and Beast giues light, And Raine on bad and good alike doe fall: But this we call Gods Mercy generall, Which lasts but for a time. But on the Iust He shewes his Mercy more especiall, Which euerlasting is: wherein we trust, And whereby He to Blisse will rayse vs from the Dust. 10 But here we must haue an especiall Care, Lest diff'rence of Gods Mercy we confound, Not speciall euerlasting Grace to share, Where he but common, generall, doth propound: This is a firme Position, true and sound, That God in Vnbeliefe hath shut vp all, That his great Mercy might to all abound; Vnto the Wicked, common, generall, Eternall vnto them, that on him rightly call. 11 God grant to Me this Mercy speciall, That of Mans Mercy I may right enquire, That teaching, I may practise it withall, The Mercy that God doth of vs require, Of which, a two-fold kind make one entire; First towards Sinners, that doe goe astray, The next to Poore, and those that Helpe desire; First pitties Soules, and leads them in right way, The last supplyes their Wants, that Need haue eu'ry Day. 12 For as Mans soule is his most noble part, Whereon his sole eternall Blisse depends, So he the greatest Mercy doth impart, Who to poore wandring Soules his Mercy sends: He that giues to the Poore, he surely lends To God, that will foure-fold his gift repay; But who to saue poore Soules his Mercy spends, Shall sure obtayne those Crownes at that great Day, Which God doth vp in store for such Soule-sauers lay. 13 In men we diuers outward causes see, Which them to Mercy and Compassion moue; Some by remembrance of like miserie, Which in themselues they formerly did proue; Some Kindred, Youth, Acquaintance, friendly Loue, Learning, Nobilitie, to Pitie leade: But none of these cause Mercy from aboue, But it from Gods sole goodnesse doth proceede, And not from any thing that in our Natures breede. 14 Therefore as God doth on vs Mercy show For the great riches onely of his Grace, So we no other cause of Mercy know, Whereby our Fellow members we embrace, But his sole Grace: whose Mercy did deface Eu'n Works hand-writing once against vs brought, No works of Mercy can in heau'n haue place, In Faith and Charitie that are not wrought: Then Mercies works for shew, or Merit come to nought. 15 None can to Mercies perfectnesse attayne But onely God, whose Mercy's ouer all; No number can our miseries contayne, Yet God in store hath Mercy for them all: Onely in words, Gods Mercy doth not fall, But most in fruits and comforts doth abound, As Mercy hath no measure, so withall, Her fruits and works all numbers doe confound, Mans life a daily exercise thereof is found. 16 'Tis not a heauie Heart or grieued Mind, Compassionate of others miseries, Whereby afflicted Soules no profit find, But as our Heart, so our Abilities Must minister to Saints necessities; They that the Heart and Hand in this disioyne, Faith aud good Workes to sunder doe deuise. If first our Hearts to Mercy true encline, Good Words & Works from thence as true Effects will shine. 17 For in the heart of Man is Mercies Throne, The Subiect, where true Mercy doth abide, All streames of Mercy that from thence doe flowne, Are as the Fountaynes pure from which they slide, Then like Gods Mercy they doe spread out wide, First, feeding Soules that pine for heau'nly Food, Next for the Poore and Hungrie they prouide, For all in Neede that of our helpe haue stood, And like to Widdowes Oile encrease by doing good. 18 Then we them truely workes of Mercy call, When from vnfayned Mercy they proceede: For sure it is the Heart that seasons all, Which maketh mercifull in word and deede. Thus we releeue the Poore that are in neede, And Widdowes, Orphanes, Strangers, entertayne; We clothe the Naked, and the Hungrie feede, Visit the Sicke, the Captiues that remayne In bonds, we loose: And comfort those that mourne in payne. 19 Though all the Vertues of Loues Royall Court Delight to keepe sweet Mercy companie, As Patience, Iustice, Faith, Hope, good Report, Repentance, Meeknesse, Truth, Ioy, Chastitie; Yet shee delights most in Humilitie, Vnseparable Adjunct of this Peere, With whom shee workes all deeds of Charitie, Those which our Hearts from Sinne doe purge and cleere, And those whereby the Needie we doe succour heere. 20 By her is daily great prouision made For Blind, Old, Lame, all People that are poore, Not those that doe of begging make a Trade, And loosely idle walke from dore to dore, A worke of Mercy shee it deemes to gore Such Vagabonds: their Passe with blood to seale, Vnfruitfull Vermine that consume our store, The Catterpillers of our Common-weale, Which to maintayne base ease, and lust, begge, lie, and steale. 21 But shee, directed by Humilitie, Into deepe stinking Dungeons will descend, To visit captiu'd thralls in miserie, And them instruct in wayes of Truth to wend, Exhorting them their bad liues to amend; If any for well-doing bound doe lie, Shee for His ransome her estate will spend, All Malefactors wants Shee doth supply, For well shee knowes Christ did for Malefactors die. 22 Shee next like Lot and Abram entertaynes Strangers all Day, at Noone, and eke at Night: Not that shee hopes from them least gold or gaynes, Or that with double mends they will requite: But those which harbour want shee doth inuite Humbly to Meate, and Drinke, and Lodging meete, Where shee to wait vpon them takes delight, And brings faire water for to wash their Feete, And them for her sweet Sauiours sake doth fairely greete. 23 Then shee the hungrie Bodies of the Poore With her faire Hand of plentie full doth feede, And drinke vnto the thirstie powreth store, Shee feares not once her selfe to stand in neede. Who to the Sower ministreth his seede, And bread vnto the humble, will prouide For those which of her Body shee doth breede, Shee with no future want is terrifide, For others oft to feede, shee hunger doth abide. 24 Oh, should you see th'abundance eu'ry day Of clothes, shee for the naked doth prouide, To keepe them from the cold, and to aray Gods Images which here in Clay abide, And if that any naked shee espide, After shee all her clothes diuided had, Shee would her owne coate cut out, and diuide To those that want; most chearefully and glad That shee had such a shift, poore naked Soules to clad. 25 With those that mourne in Sion shee will mourne, And beare a part with them in miserie, Whether they weepe, by friends as left forlorne, Or grone with weight of their iniquitie, Shee wondrous salues of comfort doth apply, And when they weepe, shee mourning not forbeares, And oft in Psalmes and Hymnes makes melodie, Sweet Psalmes and Hymnes that drie vp all our teares, And like to pleasant Wine, make vs forget our cares. 26 But, most of all, sicke persons shee doth tend, And comfort them in point of death that lay, For there most needed comfort sweet to lend, When Sinne, Hell, Death and Conscience doe dismay The Soule that now departing is away: First spirituall comfort shee to them doth deale, How on Christs merits they should onely stay, Balme that applide aright, their sores should heale; And prayes the Spirit within the Truth hereof may seale. 27 'Twere infinite to tell the wondrous store Of heau'nly comforts Mercy can apply, For Mercy hath a salue for eu'ry sore: Soules burthened with their iniquitie Shee handeleth most soft and tenderly; The smoking flaxe, nor yet the bruised reede Shee will not quench or breake vnwarily; Such heau'nly comforts can thus Peere areede, That shee makes Soules when Bodies are halfe dead. 28 Best skill to cure the Body shee doth vse, And to his former health againe restore: No Office meane or base shee doth refuse, That may the payne asswage, or heale his sore, All miseries lie open her before, That shee may lend to all her helpe and aid, She physicke sends, and meate vnto the poore, With beds of downe, whereon he may be laid, And though her med'cines faile, her prayer's neuer staid. 29 But if their Soules from Bodies once depart, In seemely sort shee cares them to engraue, Last worke of Mercy that we can impart Vnto their corps when God their soule doth saue, Which though now dust, yet most sure hope we haue, God will the same a glorious Body rayse, And decke it for her Spouse most fine and braue, The Deads memoriall shee doth often prayse, The Liuing to prouoke to walke in righteous wayes. 30 Thus when shee hath in Graue him seemely laid, With much lamenting, and with many teares, To tender Orphanes and to Widdowes aid, Shee doth employ the vtmost of her cares, In whose defence no great Mans frownes shee feares, But stands in iudgement for their firme defence, And if both Parents die, as oft it fares, Their tender Babes shee soone remoueth thence, And feedes, and puts to Schole eu'n at her owne expence. 31 Therefore shee large Almes-houses hath erected, Faire Colledges for Muses habitation, And Churches, by prophaner sort neglected, Adornes and decks in honourable fashion: Shee holds it much against her reputation, In goodly seeled Houses to abide, And see Gods Temples ruinous prophanation. If in her any sparing be descride, 'Tis that shee works of Mercy may dispread more wide. 32 But ah! no pen is able The fruits of Mercy by Humilitie, But in one worke I all the vp doe count, To succour those that are in miserie: As there is infinite varietie Of miseries in Soule and Body found, So without number shee doth helpes supply, But for her end Soules health shee doth propound, And in such heau'nly comforts shee doth most abound. 33 Rebuke, admonish, suffer, and chastise, Her very stripes are corra es to heale, And when in most distresse the Body lies, Most comfort then to Soule shee doth reueale. Thus Christ did vnto her a paterne seale, With mortall foode he thousand Bodies fed, But those to whom he Bread of Life did deale, Like huge Sea sands cannot be numbered, Whereby their Soules now liue, though yet their Bodies dead. 34 But though this Peere is mercifull to all, Yet almost all become her Enemies, Ambition, Pride, Hate, En e, Malice, Gall, All that delight in wrong and iniuries, From whence oft come most horrid cruelties: But amongst all they doe her greatest wrong, Who vnder shew of pitying miseries, Punish not those that doe in Vice grow strong: The Iudge that spares the wicked, doth the godly wrong. 35 Iustice and Mercy both doe well accord, And in one Subiect may contayned bee, For iust and mercifull is God our Lord, Iust as a Iudge, but as a Father, hee Is pitifull and tender: So ought wee In our owne cause, as Fathers, Mercy show, And our deare Brethren of all wrongs to free, But when we sit in iudgement, we must know, We are Gods Ministers to punish sinne below. 36 Eu'n as a Iudge in his owne Familie Vnto a gracelesse sonne may pardon giue, Though he his Coffers rifle priuily, And doe conspire of life him to depriue; But if as Traytor to his Prince he liue, And one before his Father him arraigne; The Iudge there cannot his owne Sonne forgiue, But must condemne to his deserued paine, For Magistrates ought not to beare the sword in vaine. 37 I Mercy here and Iustice may compare Vnto a Gardners spade and pruning knife, The knife luxurious branches off doth pare, That for vaine shew grow fruitlesse, ranke, and rife; The Spade vnto Vines roote, giues heate and life, By dunging, opening it to Sunne and Raine: Ne yet betwixt them discord is or strife, One prunes the boughes, the other doth maintayne The Roote. Both haue one end the Bodies good and gayne. 38 In this Worlds Schoole we all like Scholers are, Fitted below for Fellowships aboue, Mercy, our Patronesse, doth vs prepare Foode, Rayment, Bookes, all things that needfull proue, We all haue but one Lesson here: to Lou : Which none can better teach than this sweet Peere, Yet our vntowardnesse doth oft her moue, To suffer Iustice to correct vs here: Which sure doth vs more good than all her daintie cheere. 39 So as Correction truely may be said To be a worke of Mercy: For as hee That most affects his Sonne, is not afraid To scourge him oft for his impietie, Eu'n so our gracious God, to whom wee bee Than Sonne vnto his Father farre more deare, Doth oft chastise to purge and purifie Vs from sinnes guilt, whereby we may appeare Before him perfect, pure, and liue more holy here. 40 For Mercy doth like skilfull Surgeon deale, That hath for eu'ry sore a remedy: If gentle drawing Plaster cannot heale The wound, because it festreth inwardly, He sharper corra iues must then apply, And as he oft cuts off some member dead, Or rotten, lest the rest should putrifie, So Mercy wicked Members off doth shred, Lest they should noysome proue to body and the head. 41 Mercy is like the glorious Cherubins, Which in the holiest place their wings extend, And vnder their broad spreading golden ins, Arke, Mercy eate, Rod, Manna comprehend; So glorious Mercy doth her Grace forth send. By ruling, workes of Mercy, poores defence, The Arke, Gods Statutes doth to vs commend; The Rod, his Pow'r: Manna, his Prouidence: Mercy them all contaynes in wings circumference. 42 Eu'n as one totall summe it selfe extends To all the Credits in the Merchants Bill; So Mercy doth all Vertues comprehend, And Men of Mercy with all Graces fill: And as from foule corrupt depraued will, All wickednesse abundantly doth flow, So from a Heart of Mercy doth distill, All Graces that in Loues faire Garden grow; Mercy's the summe of all I doe, or wish to know. 43 But all in vaine I seeke by Simi e To shew the nature of this Grace Diuine; Since earthly things, to Her, all shadowes be. Thy Mercy, Lord, no where so cleare doth shine, As sending of that blessed Sonne of thine: Vnspotted Lambe, slaine from Eternitie, To saue all that their hearts to him incline, From Hell, Death, Bale, and endlesse Miserie: This Mercy is without all like or paritie. 44 Here will I striue to cleare the difference That I of Loue and Mercy doe conceiue. To other each haue so neare reference, That we one for another oft receiue: Gods Loue vpon th'Elect doth onely cleaue, Mercy on them in Miserie that lie. Till Satan our first Parents did deceiue, God them embrac'd in Loue and Charitie; No Mercy needed them that felt no Miserie. 45 Gods Loue doth most in our Creation shine, In our Election, and Predestination: But his great Mercy seemes to draw her line From our Redemption and Iustification: Not that I hence exclude Loues operation, For Loue is as the Prince and Soueraigne, Of all the Graces needfull to saluation; And Mercy is the chiefest of her traine, And seemes in Mans Redemption like her Queene to raigne. 46 As that great Peere that in his Princes grace, For Vertue and for Learning high doth stand, And next to him obtaynes the second place, And chiefest gouernement of all the Land, In Court of Mercy doth eu'n counter-mand Acts that are sped in Iustice highest Plee: So Mercy here, who is Queene Loues right l nd, Doth vs from sentence of damnation free, Which Iustice doth pronounce: A hard, but ust Decree. 47 But as this Peere deriues authoritie From Prince, by whom all Regiment doth moue; So speciall sauing Mercy doth relie, And first proceed from Gods eternall Loue. O deepe rich wisedome of our God aboue, Vnsearchable thy Iudgements, and thy Wayes Past finding out! more hard the more we proue, Most glorious Sunne of Loue which wide displayes, Thy beames of Mercy bright like Phoebus golden rayes. 48 But ah! such knowledge soareth arre aboue The reach of my weake Muses waxen wing, I now Mans Mercy and his heau'nly Loue Seeke to compare for their discouering Where heau'nly Loue sends her sweet lightening, Shee doth of thing belou'd like Loue require: But when we Mercy shew to any thing: We seldome Mercy of that thing desire, Mercy stil downward goes, Loue most what mounteth higher. 49 Mercy doth most in Miserie consist: Loue reacheth Heau'n with her high mounting wing, And Head and Members all in one doth twist, But downe againe I my discourse must bring To Mercy; which from Heart hath life and pring, Whence shee receiueth her denomination: For Misericordia, whereof now I sing, Is one with Mercy, and is by translation A miserable Heart, or piteous inclination. 50 And though indeed no Miserie can fall Vpon th' eternall Being, blest for ay, Yet he that bare the Miserie of all, And hath before vs lin'd out Mercies way, His part in Miserie for vs did play, When as he saw or heard of Miseries, He to compassion moued was streight-way, And to them ministred best remedies, And oft with teares bewayled our infirmities. 51 Hierusalem! Oh poore Hierusalem! (His Heart full sad, his Eyes eu'n flowing teares) How oft would I you gather as a Hen, Her Chickens vnder her warme wings vpreares? Not inward grones and weeping he forbeares, When Iewes and Mary Lazarus bemone, Vpon the Crosse all Miseries he beares, And cryes out for our woes, not for his owne, Such cryes were neuer heard: Such Mercy neuer knowne. 52 As our high Priest, all our in rmities (Excepting sinne) he in his Body bare, Whereby he learn'd to know our Miseries, And to releeue them that in anguish fare: He now his Blood and Body doth not spare, But deales it out in blessed Sacrament, For Meate and Drinke to those that grafted are Into his Body by sweet couplement. Sound Meate and Drinke for Soules and Bodies nourishment 53 As Ointment sweet that powr'd on Aarons head, Ran downe and did perfume his garments all, So this sweet Oile of Mercy doth dispread, From Christ our Head and on his Members fall: If I should here to your remembrance call The Names of all, whose Mercies did abound; I might as well here make memoriall Of all Saints Names that Bookes of Life propound, Who shew'd true Mercy here, in Heau'n haue Mercy found. 54 Noe, Abram , Lot, Iob, Isaac, Israel, With all the righteous Men before the Flood, Good Ioseph, Moses, Iosua , Samuel, All Kings, Priests, Prophets, Iudges, that were good: Behold it was sweet Israels Singers food To chant Gods Mercy earely and at night. Apostles, Martyrs, that for Truth haue stood, In workes of Mercy set their whole delight, In preaching Faith, Hope, Loue, in Almes, and doing right. 55 No Father on his Child more pitie takes, Then doth our heau'nly Father shew compassion On vs, and loues our Children for our sakes, Which lasteth to the thousand Generation. Oh! had he not it showne on this our Nation, We had long since consumed beene with fire, And brought like Sodom vnto desolation, These wicked dang'rous times when sinnes conspire, To draw on vs Gods vengeance and eternall ire. 56 But why seeke I outward A thorities? If we stand right, we in our hearts shall find Of heau'nly Mercy such testimonies, That all Soules, Bodies, Powers will be inclin'd To magnifie Gods Mercies wondrous kind, That like his Truth for euer doe endure, Which hath all outward needfull things assign'd, And giu'n vs earnest, which doth vs secure, That Mercy re began, shall stand for euer sure. 57 And that we may the eas'lier apprehend, And taste Gods Mercy; He it maketh knowne To vs familiarly: And doth commend It to vs by examples of our owne. As Father hath to Child his Mercy showne, As Mother of her owne wombe doth loue, As Birds their young-ones feede till they be flowne: So mercifull the Lord to vs will proue; And though all these should faile, God will not faile aboue. 58 This also serueth for our imitation, That like our God we Mercy here should show, And as he tenders vs with sweet compassion, We should his Members here in Mercy know: It equall is we pitifull should grow, And Mercy shew, where Mercy we receaue: He is to Mercy swift, to Anger slow, Most mercifull to them that to him clea e, And kind, where Ignorance, not Malice doth deceaue. 59 But ah! so carelesly we Mercy show, And succour those that are in miserie, That we by all meanes doe auoid to know Their wants, that are in woe and pouertie, When as indeed to see calamitie Of others, doth Mans heart to pitie moue. We swimme in Plentie and Prosperitie, Regarding not what hardnesse others proue, And farre the sight or thought of wretchednesse remoue. 60 Our Captayne did not thus that went before, But in much anguish, paine, and tribulation Conuerted Soules, heal'd Sicke, releeu'd the Poore, Himselfe without a house for habitation, In workes of Mercy was his conuersation, What Member suff'red, and he did not grone? Where saw he want and shewed not compassion? What? did our Head this by himselfe alone? No, His Apostles all with him in this haue gone. 61 Oh, that we would in this Him imitate, And Mercy eu'n with open Armes embrace With our whole heart, strength, substance and estate, Aide and releeue the Poore in wretched case; 'Tis not a pitious heart that makes men base: For they that are most valiant, noble, wise, Most readie are Mercy to shew and Grace, When Cruelty's the badge of Cowardize: Good Kings rule all by loue; Vsurpers tyran ze. 62 In stead of Mercies bowels, kindnesse, loue, We put on Worldlinesse, Securitie, And off from vs the euill day remoue, Liuing in pleasure, ease, and vanitie: Banishing farre the Poores calamitie, As Enemies to profit, thrift, and rest, And when we smitten are we will not crie: As if no griefe or pitie ought in e t, Or harbour in a hardie, valiant, noble brest. 63 Yet the most Mightie that doth it on high, Of Valour and Nobilitie the Spring, Delights to see and helpe our miserie, That we might take delight in pi ying; Thus God by his example would vs bring To Mercy, and considering the Poore, He Mercy before Iudgement here doth sing, Wherein than Sacrifice he ioyeth more, That as we doe receiue, we might againe restore. 64 And since 'tis not in outward workes alone, But inward Bowels that God doth delight, (Though by the one the other is best knowne) We often should desire to haue a sight, Of poore Mens wretchednesse and pitious plight, Which our hard Hearts might to compassion moue, And yeeld them remedie with all our might. What neede hath God of Mercy or of Loue? But by poore Members here our Mercy he doth proue. 65 For though God's able by his onely Word, To succour all that are in Miserie, And in abundance daily Bread afford, To those that are in want and pouertie; Yet more to show his Liberalitie, And that his wondrous Bountie might appeare, Vs for his Stewards he doth dignifie, And good Dispensers of his bounteous cheere: Happy is he whose Lord him findeth faithfull heere. 66 Lord, of those faithfull Stewards make me one, Yet for no hope of Merit or Desert, But for the Glorie of thy Grace alone, And riches of thy Loue, who Authour art Of eu'ry Grace that commeth from the Heart: With temporall afflictions exercise Me, that I may escape eternall smart, And learne by griefes and mine infirmities To succour all that are in woe and miseries. 67 Though Mercy God againe doe not desire Towards himselfe, as he doth Loue for Loue; Yet to his Members all he doth require, We should most bountifull and gracious proue: That our Affections inward should vs moue Like heau'nly Father mercifull to bee, Our Brothers garment pawn'd we must remoue From vs, before the Sunne be set, lest hee Doe crie to God that pities all in miserie. 68 No Man so poore but he may Mercy show, And succour those that are in miserie: For though his worldly substance ebbe so low, He seemes to liue in want and penurie; Yet may he lend Diuine sweet remedie To those that doe in Hell and Darknesse sit, And heau'nly comforts to their Soule apply, Whom Conscience throwes into th' infernall Pit. More Mercy from Hels jawes, than earthly cords to quit. 69 Doe but conceiue what Mercy may be found With mercifullest Man that ere did liue, And we may know farre greater doth abound With God, who's not more willing to releeue Than able, all things needfull vs to giue, Besides, in Mercy he doth take delight, Most readie their Offences to forgiue That doe relie vpon his Truth and Might, And on his gracious Prouidence doe rest aright. 70 And therefore thou this life appointest here For Mercy; but in Life that is to come Thou as an vpright Iudge wilt then appeare, And render eu'ry Man as he hath done: Oh should'st thou here with Iudgement haue begun, We all had beene the Vessels of damnation, And but for Mercy we had long agone Beene swallowed vp of Hell and Desperation, Thy Mercy that begun, must finish our Saluation. 71 So eu'n the Iust no cause to boast shall find, By Mercy all must be deliuered, Thy Iudgements iust, for thy forbearance kind, By Reprobates shall be acknowledged, How can his Grace sufficiently be read; Who good by Nature, Iust, Eternall, Wise, Thus sinfull, mortall, base, flesh honoured, And to such height of Glorie makes to rise, As Angels wonder to behold such Mysteries. 72 What Pen of Praise is able to commend The wondrous gracious Force and Energie Of Mercy, which eu'n God made to descend From his great Glorie, Ioy, Felicitie? The God of Wisedome, Power, and Maiestie, To shew such Grace on Wretches vile below, To haue compassion on Mans miserie, Base corruptible Dust, which here doth grow, Swift to reuenge and wrath, but to compassion slow. 73 Nothing but thine owne goodnesse could thee moue On Man to shew such Mercy and Compassion, Thou art most glorious, he most base doth proue, Thou iust, he sinfull by his deprauation; Thou Lord of blisse, he He re of dire damnation, Oh Lord! as thy sole goodnesse thee did moue, To pay our price of Reconciliation, And vs exalt from Earth to Heau'n aboue; So let thy goodnesse cause thee alwayes vs to loue. 74 How should my Muse of Mercy make an end, Which like thy Truth and Loue endures for ay; And most abundant comforts here doth send To all, but most to those that in right way Sincerely walke, and doe thy Hests obay? Lord grant that as I of sweet Mercy sing, Her in my heart, deed, word, I practise may, Not for vaine praise or any outward thing, But for thy Mercy sake, my good and gracious King. 75 Next Loues great Generall, braue Fortitude Should enter Lists: to shew her wondrous might, But Rashnesse 'tis, not Valour, to include A Christian Souldier in such dang'rous fight, Till all his Armour be about him dight; His vpper parts I armed haue elsewhere With Girdle, Brest-plate, Shield and Helmet bright, But Feete and Legs I naked left and bare; Now Patience them shall arme, as you shall after heare. MEDITAT. IIII. Of Patience. 1 W Ell hath our valiant Guide Mans life compar'd Vnto a warfare, where we alwayes stand In complete Armour, readie and prepar'd The force of cruell Foe-men to withstand, Where Satan, World, and Flesh together band, By open force and treason to subdue, And leade vs captiue by their mightie hand, And all vnarm'd, or out of order due They fetter'd dragge to Hell with cursed damned crue. 2 Which to auoid, he wills vs to be strong In God, and in the Power of his Might; And the whole Armour that doth here belong To Christian Souldiers, on our Soules to dight: For here with Flesh and Blood we doe not fight, But Empires, Powers, Principalities, The worldly Gouernours of darkest night, Sublime spirituall subtile Enemies; Which to resist, he ghostly Armour doth deuise. 3 The Belt of Truth, Brest-plate of Righteousnesse, Faiths Shield, and Hope the Helmet of saluation, Sword of the Spirit, Prayers feruentnesse, Feete shod in Peaces Gospels preparation: These be the Weapons of our Militation. Of Helmet, Brest-plate, Shield, and Girdle, wee Alreadie haue conceau'd a Meditation: These foure the vpper parts arme to the knee, But Patience, Legs, wh reon the rest supported bee. 4 For so the Learned seeme to giue the Sense, This preparation of the Gospels Peace, To be the brasen Bootes of Patience, Which doth defend from Thornes and Stones disease Our Legs and Feete: And where the Belt doth cease, These Bootes of Patience Armour doe supply, By which in complete Armour we doe prease, And stand vndanted 'gainst our Enemie; This Vertue is the next my Muse seekes to descrie. 5 Which well is call'd the Gospels preparation; For neuer any Patience true and sound Can be, but by the Gospels mediation. The Heathen built not on this certayne ground, And therefore this true Patience neuer found, Which but by Peace of Conscience none attayne: This Peace the Gospell onely doth propound By reconcilement of the Lambe (Christ) s aine; Without this Peace of Conscience Patience all is vaine. 6 Thou glorious God of Peace and Patience, (Who sent'st thine onely Sonne our sinnes to beare, And by his Suffring and Obedience Vpon the Crosse from guilt of sinne to cleare All those to whom his Crosse is sweet and deare) Direct my Muse this Grace aright to reade, That knowing, I may neuer once forbeare To practise Patience in thought, word, deede, But to the end my Life in Peace and Patience leade. 7 Which is a gift of God, whereby weare Inabled willingly and constantly All crosses that God layes on vs, to beare, For Goodnesse, Godlinesse, and Honestie. Impatience 'tis to beare vnwillingly, And but an idle feigned false pretence, To boast of Vertue without Constancie: Her parts be foure; of which some difference May seeme at first, yet all make but one Patience. 8 The first part is, from Anger to abstayne; The second is a constant Expectation; The third is, to the end Right to remayne; The last consists in willing Sustentation Of all afflictions here, and castigation. But Man to these foure parts we onely tie: For the last part, which doth consist in Passion Vnto th' eternall Being comes not nigh, Who's free from all Affliction and Calamitie. 9 Yet is he rightly call'd the Patient God, And doth in first three named parts transcend: First, farre from Anger, when he spares his Rod, He doth expect and wait till we amend: And last, abides the same vnto the end: He fruitfull Times and Seasons of the Yeare Vnto the good and bad alike doth send; Most patiently doth with our Follies beare, And where he 'gins to loue, he neuer doth forbeare. 10 Thus Mercy, Zeale, Repentance, may be said Inexplicably in God to bee; Zealous, yet not offended or dismaid: Most Mercifull, yet griefe did neuer see: Repenting, yet without remorse is hee: Most Patient, yet without least payne or passion. Of Vertues parts, which are of Frailtee And Weaknesse, God hath no participation, Yet want they not in Man their vse and commendation. 11 As is the Cause and End of Patience, So we her true or counterfet esteeme; The Cause and End doe make the difference: If we for Fancy, Glorie, Lust, Wealth, seeme To beare with Patience, Hunger, Payne, Cold, Teene; This suffring, missing her true Cause and End, As falsely feigned, counterfet we deeme: But if for doing well, or to defend The Truth we suffer, this our Patience doth commend. 12 The greedie For Lust, some doe endure basest shame; The Souldier spends his blood for glorie vaine; Th' Ambitious venture all to purchase Fame; Loe, there we carnall Ends and Causes name. True Patience causes, honest are and iust, When for ill-doing we doe suffer blame. Take paine for Glorie, Honour, Gayne, or Lust, Rewards like to the Cause and End expect we must. 13 But true immediate ground of Patience Is the sweet Gospell (as I said) of Peace: For Man, deepe plung'd in sinne and foule offence, No Creature could Gods wr h but Christ appease. In stead of Loue, Gods wrath on Man did seise, Till Christ concludes our Reconciliation, And vs of our offences doth release, Of which the Gospell is th' A unciation: Therefore is Patience call'd the Gospels preparation. 14 And therefore as her Cause and End is Peace, So all her works to inward Peace doe tend, Which in the inward Man doth most increase, When outward Warres seeme most him to off nd, Shee doth o r Soules most valiantly defend, By patient bearing crosses, paine, and shame, Which shee with Patience suffers to the end, Except they crosse the Glorie of Gods Name, Or Neighbours good, which to endure deserueth blame▪ 15 One euill is of Sinne, and one of Payne; That ill of Sinne this Dame cannot abide, But that of Punishment shee counteth gayne. Gods holy Name blasphem'd or Truth deni'd, Or wicked Men Gods holy Saints deride, Is no true Patience patiently to heare: But on our selues when crosses doe betide, Then Patience true doth patiently forbeare, For shee her owne, not others wrongs, delights to beare. 16 If one will take her Co te iniurio ly, Shee suffereth such losse with Patience: But if of Faith, Loue, Truth, or Honestie One would depriue her, that is such offence As cannot stand right with her Conscience. Shee priuate wrongs most willingly doth hide, But faults admitteth vnder no pretence. Shee can endure Men should her selfe deride: But her Profession scorn'd shee no wayes can abide. 17 Compell her to a mile, shee will goe twaine; Strike her on one, shee turnes the other Eare: All wrongs done to her selfe shee can sustaine, But none done to her Neighbours shee can beare: If shee to l ue her selfe commanded were, Shee euill would resist with ill againe; But, loe, her Lord resistance did forbeare, When he was scoffed, scourged, beaten, slaine, And open'd not his Mouth to curse or to complaine. 18 Afflictions are her Obiects, which we find Diuers, as they in diuers Subiects rest, Afflictions of the Body and the Mind, Which Mind and Body dang'rously infest. Against these, Patience is alwayes prest, And them as well-come Friends doth entertaine: More crosses shee endures, more shee is blest, And knowes through anguish, trouble, griefe, and paine, Her ayme, eternall rest, shee in the end shall gaine. 19 Thus Heauinesse and Sorrow proue her Heart, How willingly, how long, shee will abide; How lowly, humbly, shee endureth smart; How void shee is of Ha tinesse and Pride, Anger, Reuenge, selfe Loue, and Enuies gride. If minds afflictions shee could not withstand, How could shee beare such as her Flesh betide, Plagues, Torments, Labours, Paynes, Diseases, and Death, Fastings, Watchings, Prisons, Cold, and Yron band? 20 Most sweet and most welcome Ghest, To eu'ry payre combin'd in Amitie: The chiefe Maintayner of each ioyous feast, Begun in Wedlocke, Friendship, Charitie, Sweet Patronesse of each Societie; Continuing all that Loue begins in Peace: Most sacred Twin with sweet Humilitie, For as one growes the other doth encrease, And to attend on Loue and Mercy neuer cease. 21 What doth the Loue twixt Husband and the Wife, Than Patience, more fast and firme maintayne? Who keepes true Friends from discord, iarre, and strife, And Children in their Parents loue retayne; Shee Masters fauour doth to Seruants gayne, And tells them they a Master haue aboue, Who God most patient doth ay remayne, Though they to wrath him eu'ry day doe moue: Thus Patience preserues all Peace begun by Loue. 22 None can ascend to glorious Court of Loue, But he must clime by Patience, beare with payne; Without this Patience, all the Vertues proue False shewes, which doe no substance true retayne. What Loue, Faith, Hope? What Grace did ere remayn Constant? without this gift of Patience, Therefore shee is the Glorie of Loues trayne, The Vertues all attend her Excellence, And shee againe attends them all with Recompence. 23 Those most Heroike Vertues, Fortitude, Prudence, Ioy, Iustice, Bountie, and the rest, What are they if you Patience exclude, But eu'n so many torments to molest Mans Soule, if with affliction once distrest? Zeale without Patience doth like Furie spurne: Eu'n heau'nly Knowledge doth our minds infest: Repentance, like Hell fire doth Conscience burne: Wer't not for Patience, all would to Confusion turne: 24 As Christ is Authour of true Patience; So of Impatience, Satan and his brood, First shew'd in Garden in Mans innocence; Whilst he in Makers Grace and Fauour stood: For when the Serpents base impatient mood Mans glorie in Gods Image could not beare, He them seduc'd to eate forbidden food, Whereby our Blessings chang'd to Curses were, Till Patience in the Garden vs againe did cleare. 25 Since this these two doe worke by contrarie, By Patience we our Soules possessen here, And we them lose by our Impatiency: One heares sound Doctrine; th' other stops her eare. One suffers all; the other nought will beare. For Loue, Christ, Godlinesse, or Honestie, By Patience more than Conquerors we are: Impatience makes vs cowardly to flie; True Patience, brings all Grace; all Vice, Impatiencie. 26 There's an extreme besides Impatience, (Because by Vertue clok'd) most dangerous, Which is a light R gard and stupid Sense, Not feeling crosses which God layes on vs; Such as doe vant themselues so valourous, That by Gods punishments they set most light, Plague, Famine, Sword, Fire, Wiues and Childrens losse; Nor will be scourged when the Lord doth smite, But scorne his chastenings all, which doth his wrath incite. 27 Such neuer looke at God, who these doth send; Nor on their sinnes, the Cause of all our smart; Nor on the End, that they their liues might mend: But with rebellious will and stubborne heart, Gods Father-like chastisements doe peruert, Whereby they doe themselues the fruit denie Of Gods corrections, which should them conuert: Like Beasts and Blocks they vnder burthens lie, Referring all to Heathen Fate and D stinie. 28 These the Almighties Patience prouoke, (Like Pharaoh ) Iudgements on their heads to send, And turne his scourging stripes to fatall stroke, Bringing a fearefull and a desperate end. Of two extremes from this Lord me defend, Oh, rather let me fainting take a fall, Then as incorrigible thee offend, Which is most wicked dang'rous sinne of all. Into the first thy Saints; the last, the Deuils fall. 29 This Heath'nish, blockish, base impatience, (Which is a froward dull Stupiditie) Doth (like to Opium ) amase the Sense, And makes Men as dead drunke all senselesse lie; Ah, how can he his Armes or Legs emply Like Christian Souldier, valiantly to fight Gods Battailes, whom such Drugs doe stupifie? Or how can he of Christs Cup taste aright, That doth in such dead cursed drunkennesse delight? 30 This World's the Field where all Saints Souldiers are, Assaulted daily by Gods Enemies, Who therefore must by Christian Pa ience beare, Payne, Hunger, Cold, all incommodities, Wayting for Victuall, Ease, and new supplies. They constantly must hold out to the End, One bearing with others infirmities: To faint or flie before the Battaile end, Is worse, than if to fight they neuer did intend. 31 Loue is the Mother, Patience the Nurse Of eu'ry linke and band of Amitie: And though Hate and Impatience ban and curse, Seeking to choke all good Societie; Yet Patience nurseth all in Charitie: Her sincere Milke is patiently to beare, And suffer wrong and harme most willingly. Ah, but for Patience, Malice all would teare Kings, Husbands, Fathers, ould their Subiects, Wiues, Sonnes, spare. 32 Nothing her Nature better can expresse Than her to Bootes and greaues of brasse compare, Which doe the Feete and Legs of Souldiers dresse That in the fore-front of the Battaile are; Thus shod, on Speares, Pricks, Goades, Pikes, treade we dare; Losse, Shame, Crosse, Fire, Griefe, Sword, and Banishment, Which would o'rethrow vs, if our Legs were bare: But Patience armes them with such hardiment, They passe them ouer all with courage and content. 33 As Temples, Arches built by cunning hand Of Artist, skilfull in Geometrie, More weight on them is laid, more firme doe stand▪ So Patience, more opprest most sure doth lie. No Stormes, Wind, Weather, can our House destrie, Erected on such sure and fast foundation: Afflictions doe ioynts more strongly tie, And knit most firme by patient sustentation: For more shee suffers here, more is her consolation. 34 And as the soundnesse of a firme foundation Is best discern'd when most weight on is laid; And Faith vnfeign'd best tryed by temptation, Mercy most seene, when Poore doe want our aid: So Patience is most gloriously displaid By Crosses, Paynes, Disgrace, Indignities, Which without her our Soules would haue dismaid, And Bodies grieu'd with basest iniuries: All Vertues fairest shew, oppos'd by contraries. 35 Her very Name and Etymologie Describes this Ladies Nature wondrous right: For Patience, Sufferance doth signifie, Forbearance, farre from Anger, and to fight Gods Battailes with true courage and delight. Hee's stronger that can ouer-come disgrace, Cr sses and iniuries by patient sp'rit, Than he that walled Cities doth deface, And Monarch-like doth sway the whole World by his Mace. 36 Like as the heau'n abo e is garnished With Sunne, and Moone, and glistering Starres by night, So hath Gods Church beene alwayes furnished With patient Mirrours to direct vs right▪ Yea though we had no Scriptures vs to light, Examples of th' Elect might be our line, To walke in Patience with all our might, So they before to vs, that follow, shine; That number Starres, he may that can their names define. 37 Begin we with our Sunne before the Flood, Our patient Maker; How did he forbeare? Though Enochs prophecying they withstood, Yet God with their iniquities did beare, Vntill the Deluge vp the Arke did reare. Next see his Patience and forbearance kind, To them that vnderneath the Couenants were: But most his suff'rance vnder Grace we finde; As Father most to loue his youngest is inclin'd. 38 Our Sauiour next, whose Life, Death, Suffring, shame To vs, all Patience doth represent: Whereby all Christians ought themselues to frame, Following his foote-steps who before vs went, Who ne're did sinne, nor euer guile inuent: Yet when he suffer'd, threatned not to smite, But dumbe like to a Lambe most innocent, Commits his Cause to him that iudgeth right, Bearing on Crosse our sinnes, that he redeeme vs might. 29 Now follow Starres, which doe receiue their light From that most glorious Sunne of Patience; Meeke Abel, slaine by cruell Cains despite; Noe, Preacher to th' old World of Penitence, Bearing scoffes, scornes, for his Obedience; Abram forsakes his Kindred, House, and Land, And patiently a stranger dwels in Tents: At ninety nine is circumcised, and His deare sonne Isaa offers at his Lords command. 40 See Isaac patient to embrace the Knife: Iacob enduring churlish Lab wrong▪ His Di as Rape, his Sonnes most cruell strife; With Ioseph, who endured prison strong, For doing well; who can expresse his long True Patience, that did Pharaohs pleasures leaue To suffer payne his Brethren among? The meekest Moses did stone Tables cleaue, When Zeale of Gods great Glorie did his sense bereaue. 41 How patiently did holy Dauid beare Sauls persecutions, wayting for his Crowne? When he his skirt cut off, tooke vp his Speare; Yet would not let Abisai smite him downe. But none for Patience like to Iob is knowne: Loe, Christ himselfe the Patience doth commend That Prophets, Priests, and Martyrs haue vs showne, All which in briefe the Truth for to defend, Haue without grudging held out constant to the end. 42 All wrestled in this Field of Patience: Some scornes, stripes, fetters, prisonment sustayne: Some racking, sawing, broyling, banishments; Some scourg'd with rods, with sword some haue bin slayne: In Sheepe skins, Goate skins, some to walke were fayne, Of which the World in no wise worthy were, All will dread on the Mountaynes and the Playne, In earthly Dens and Caues lay hid for feare; These all by Faith in Christ of Patience followers are. 43 I should doe wrong vnto all Women-kind, Should I the praise of Patience them denie: So many for the Truth with constant mind, In flames of fire haue let their body frie: Besides continuall payne and miserie, In bearing, nursing, Children they abide, Whereby they doe maintayne Posteritie. O blessed Maid, what griefe did thee betide, To see thy Sonne on Crosse his Armes to open wide? 44 But I too farre the Readers Patience presse With multitude of Paternes from without; Since onely inward Patience can vs blesse, And make vs like to Lyons bold and stout, Preseruing vs from perill, dread, and doubt, Whilst patiently we here all crosses beare, To th' end with Christian courage holding out, And neuer Mans pride or Hells malice feare, For by this suffring, more than Conquerours we are. 45 We reade that Socrates did Patience gayne By patient bearing his impatient Wife: And we this Grace by suffring may attayne, If in Faith, Hope, and good Workes we be rife. Doubtlesse our paynes here, crosses, griefe, and strife, Are nothing if they rightly be compar'd Vnto the Ioyes, Crownes, and eternall Life, Which God aboue for all those hath prepar'd, That with true Patience of his comming haue regard. 46 But ah, we of farre other spirit are, In our hot blood we cut off Malchus eare; But if our liues be question'd, then we dare The Truth denie, and eu'n our Christ forsweare. Mans mind possest with furie or with feare, Falls from the meane to all extremitie: For want of courage he no crosse can beare, Or for reuenge doth offer iniurie, Both which alike are guiltie of Impatiencie. 47 When I the liues of holy Martyrs read, And what great torments here they suffered, As Members sympathizing with the Head; Saint Lawrence on a gridyron tortured, Who at's Tormenters neuer murmured, But pray'd them onely turne the other side, For one was broyl'd enough and martyred: And Pota iana her that did most paynefull death abide, Whom with hot scalding pitch from top to toe they tride; 48 Should I here wish their Patience or their Payne? No sure, I wish both Payne and Patience: The more I suffer here, the more's my gayne; The greater losse, the greater recompence. Ah, this to flesh and blood is sore offence, And vnto carnall minded, enmitie, That take delight in pleasing of the Sense, Their Nose with smels, their Touch with luxurie; Their Taste, Eyes, Eares, their Heart and all with vanitie. 49 Though thou escape crosse, scourging, sword and fire; Yet surely, if thou liu'st the life of Grace, And walk'st vprightly as Gods Lawes require, Flesh, World, and Deuill thee will seeke to chace, As peeuish, singular, vaine, foolish, base▪ Yea, wicked Men thy Patience to trie; Will thee deride, dishonour, scorne, disgrace: We Patience shew in bearing iniurie For Christ, as well as those that for the Truth doe die. 50 But I confesse I nothing here doe find More pleasing then reuenge, to flesh and blood: Like this, was Iohn and Iames reuengefull mind, When entrance was at Citie Gates withstood, Because their Faces towards Sion stood; Shall we Elias -like from Heau'n fire craue, For to consume this base rebellious brood? To whom Christ said, Know yee what Spirits yee haue I came not hither to destroy and spoile, but saue. 51 Lord grant me Pauls true constant resolution, Not onely for thy Names sake to be bound, But willingly to suffer dissolution. Some scortching flames like beds of downe haue found, In some such inward comfort did abound, When as they suffred for Christs holy Name, For signe of inward ioy and comfort found, Their hands they lift vp to expresse the same, Till they consumed were eu'n by the scortching flame. 52 It was th'Apostles triumph and delight, To be accounted worthy for Christs sake To suffer scourging, prison, shame, despite, Which did them way to Crownes and Glorie make: More happy 'tis to suffer at a stake For Truth, than end our dayes in ease and rest: Paul for a wondrous fauour did it take, That he not onely to beleeue was blest, But that he suffered more for Christ than all the rest. 53 The abiect and off-scowring of the World, A gasing stocke to Angels and to Men, Perill on Land, on Seas, with Tempest whirld, Perill of Beasts, and of false Bretheren, Mock'd, scourg'd, bound, stock'd, cold, hungrie, naked, thin, Last, Satans buffetting spirituall: I here should tyre my Reader and my Pen, If I his crosses all to mind should call, Yet he with constant Patience conquered them all. 54 So they that truely loue, will ought endure For his sake onely they so truely loue. Lord grant me Loue, for then I may be sure, In all afflictions patient to proue: No power of Men or Hell their soules can moue, That build vpon so good and strong foundation, Temptation may vs shake but not remoue From Loue, the ground and pillar of saluation, Loue is the Cause of ours, as of our Sauiours passion. 55 This seasons all afflictions, crosses, payne, Makes Death our Gate to Heau'n; the Graue, our rest. This makes our Patience perfect, and doth gayue Vs Heau'n as sure, as if we were possest. The God of Patience be euer blest, The End and Authour of my Meditation, And grant I constantly may euer rest Vpon his Loue in Christ, my sure foundation, Whose Patience paid my price of Reconciliation. 56 Thus of true Patience hauing laid the ground, I thereon Christian Fortitude will raise: For neuer any valour true and sound Can well abide, but where true Patience stayes. No perill, payne, or shame that soule dismayes, Where these two Vertues doe themselues combine, Both ioyfull make vs walke through dreadfull wayes, And like two Sunnes in Firmament doe shine; Most glorious Fortitude: but Patience most Diuine. MEDITAT. V. Of Fortitude. 1 A L valiant Captaynes of the sacred Hoast Of Loues high Queene; that fight 'gainst Hate and Hell, Christs Souldiers muster vp from eu'ry coast, And them to stand in complete Armes compell, That Satans fiery darts they may repell. But as in worldly Batta les, Armes are vaine, If Cowards hearts doe faint, or courage quell; So in this spirituall Warfare, all are slaine, That with true Fortitude this fight cannot maintayne. 2 I therefore her, Loues valiant Generall, And chiefe Commandresse of her Forces name; For that the most braue Sp'rits heroicall, Haue alwayes beene most honour'd by the same; Amongst the Heathen men, that sought vaine Fame, This Vertue was in such great estimation, Of heau'nly Seede they thought their Heros came, Expecting not from humane propagation Such worth: except the Gods concurr'd in Generation. 3 And therefore those, whose valour did transcend The ordinarie reach of humane Race, By Pedigrees are lin'd out to descend From Ioues, or some great Deities embrace: Thus in a mist they seeme the Truth to trace, For Vertues all (but chiefly Fortitude) Are not begotten, but infus'd by Grace, And in Kings hearts in larger amplitude, As they it more doe neede than common multitude. 4 For as small Waters faire and goodly seeme, When little Channels doe their course maintayne, Yet would a Man them scarsely Waters deeme, If they ran drissing in some Riuer mayne: Eu'n so a Subiects heart, that doth contayne True Fortitude, but in a measure small, Great glorie to himselfe thereby may gayne, But if in Princes heart the same should fall, It scarsely would be counted Fortitude at all. 5 Wherefore, the Hearts of Kings are said to bee Like mightie Riuers in th'Almighties hand, From which as from a little Ocean, hee Disposeth Water ouer all the Land: His Nobles, which, him round, like Brookes doe stand, Refresh and water eu'ry Dale and Plaine, As from their Soueraigne they haue command, But all their Waters haue from Ocean maine, Where all their Tribute must re urne with praise againe. 6 And therefore since I find it all but vaine To seeke for any good and perfect Grace, But from the bountie of my Soueraigne, I here beseech th' Almightie guide my trace, In finding out this Vertues royal Race, That I her wondrous Glorie may expresse So here, as all may striue her to embrace, As th'onely strength of humane happinesse, Till with Loues gracious Trayne shee bring vs vnto blesse. 7 Thus, strong in God, and Power of his might, F rtitude doe truely first explaine To be a strength of mind or valiant Sprite, Whereby couragiously we doe sustaine Hard things, for Vertues sake, and not for gaine: Betwixt B ol nesse and Feare, a moderation, True Fortitude doth from base Feare retaine Meeknesse from murmuring at Gods castigation, And Patience mitigates the know of our passion. 8 Patience is past, and Meeknesse comes behind, I therefore Fortitude here twofold name, One of the Body, th'other of the Mind: This Fortitude of Body is the same We common haue with Beasts both wild and tame, Encreast by feeding, strength, good constitution; In stout sustayning is her greatest fame, Next in on-setting with braue resolution: This helps in Warre, but minds it best in persecution. 9 I twofold likewise call that of the Mind, One true, the other that which men doe fayne, When for false ends we nobly are enclin'd, Or when these Causes following constrayne; Passion, Experience, Ignorance, Art, Gayne, Passion of Feare, of Fu ie, Hope, and Anger: By these we mightie things doe oft darraigne, Experience, Art, make vs to dread no danger, By Ignorance, and for Gayne we boldly Life endanger. 10 For feare of danger, and t'auoid disgrace, The Coward faint will like a Dragon fight; Who can withstand the furie of the Base? Experience, Art preuaile oft against might; And Ignorance of danger doth incite The fearefull, great atchieuements to aduenter, Custome of winning makes vs oft in spite Of Fate and Fortune into Battles enter: By Sea, for hope of gayne, some to the Indies venter. 11 But Fortitude, which doth prepare the Mind For God and Goodnesse chearefully to die, Is that braue Vertue formerly defin'd, Which Death nor Hell it selfe can terrifie: By this we onely on the Lord relie, And strong in God, and Power of his might, Put on our armes to fight most valiantly, Faith, Hope, and Truth, with Patience, Iustice Right, And with the spirituall Sword vndantedly doe fight. 12 Though, of our selues, we no more able are These mightie Armes to weare and w ild aright, Than little Dauid was King Sauls to beare, When he Goliah met in single fight; Yet, if Gods power we consider right, And set by all the worldly strength we haue, Relying on his prouidence and might, As Dauid, we may say, with courage braue, Who me from Beare and Lyon, from all harme shall saue. 13 For from the Lord is all sufficiency, Our Enemies in Christ we nothing feare, But fight Gods Battailes most couragiously, In whom we able to doe all things are: And as he shame endur'd and crosse did beare, So Souldiers of our valiant Generall, We with vndanted resolution dare Oppose the World, Flesh, Sinne, and Deuils all: Whose Faith stands firme in Christ, what dread can him apall? 14 Though spirituall Enemies doe more abound In number, Malice, Strength, and Policy; Yet by these spirituall weapons we confound Them all, triumphing on them valiantly: This spirituall strength growes in vs inwardly, As doth the new and inward Man reuiue, Which stronger growes as our corruptions die, And by the Fleshes weaknesse most doth thriue, And when the Body's dead preserues our Soules aliue. 15 Our Soule, the subiect of true Fortitude, Not giu'n by Nature, but infus'd by Grace, The spirit of Man it is, that doth include This most heroike Vertue: 'Tis not place, Wealth and preferment, or a noble Race, And Breeding, that doth raise so high the Mind, To count all fading Obiects vaine and base, And wholly be to heau'nly things inclin'd, Whereby our strength aboue all earthly things we find. 16 True Fortitude is home eu'n from aboue, And in Loues Court is of such high regard, That none couragious are, but they that loue, And of their valour hope for Loues reward. Loue conquers all: oh! What can be compar'd To mightie Acts of Loue? whose iealous ire Consumes all that her Grace doe not regard, Oh! what is stronger than Loues hot denre? None e're without her did to noble acts aspire. 17 Loue, Fortitude her valiant Generall, In all her spirituall Battels doth employ, On whom these Graces wait, and follow all To fight against our spirituall Enemy, Long-Suffering, Patience, Magnanimitie, Assured Faith, Hope, Constancy and Peace, But most of all, shee loues Humilitie: For as great her glorie more increase, So shee inclines to Meeknesse, and true Lowlinesse. 18 What is't that I haue not receau'd (saith shee?) All help's from God; Mans strength is weake and vaine: If he be for vs, Who can 'gainst vs bee? Oh, who can to true Fortitude attaine, But he that from aboue doth it obtaine? Boldnesse therefore and Intimiditie, Which leaues Gods glorie, seeking priuate gaine, Is to true Fortitude an enemie, As well as Cowardize and Effeminitie. 19 For as all Cowards timorous and faine, Discourage Friends and hearten Enemies, So foolish, rash, vnexpert, vnacquaint With spirituall Battailes, and the policies Of cruell Satan, and his complicees, Doe desp'rately themselues and fellowes traine, Vnarm'd where Satan in close ambush l es, Where some are stung, some poyson'd, and some slaine, All as his capti 'd Slaues in bands hee doth retaine. 20 Thus those that on their owne strength doe relie, And haue within them selues vaine confidence, Proud Boasters oft Goliah -like defie Their Enemies: but take a fall at length. God onely is our Rocke of firme defence. Beastly presumption 'tis for to depend On fleshes arme, in things of consequence: But deuillish madnesse 'tis, for to defend Our spirituall strength, and as our owne it to commend. 21 This spirituall Pride of all most dangerous, As bodily, in them doth harbour most, Who are least valiant and couragious. Thus Braggadochio himselfe doth boast, To be fit Leader of a mightie Hoast; And Merit-mongers out of foolish Pride, Will merit more than their first Father lost, And lay vp store, for many Soules beside, Who for their money may to heau'n haue entrance wide. 22 (No floods of teares are able to disgrace The resolution of braue Fortitude, Which like pure Diamonds adorne her face. And from her all hard-heartednesse seclude: Oh, may mine eyes like Fountaynes bee endude With floods in Warre my panting Soule to coole. 'Tis Satans policie first to exclude From quenching waters the besieged Soule, Then burn the town with fire, when he hath stopt the Pool . 23 When valiant Gideon went out to fight With Midian, God made a Proclamation, Who dreaded or did feare the Enemies might, Returne should to their People and their Nation, And shall we in this spirituall dimication, Hope to withstand our ghostly Enemies, Except our Hearts be strengthned 'gainst tentation, To fight with Powers, Principalities, And by true Fortitude to treade downe iniuries? 24 Wherefore the Sonne of Sirach, doth compare The heart of Fooles to an high plast'red wall, Which stormes of wind and winter cannot beare, But shaking, tottering, at length doth fall; Imaginations vaine his heart apall: But a wise heart, that is established By counsell, to a strong and stately Hall, With Beames and Ligaments so coupeled, As it of Winds and Tempests neuer stands in dread. 25 As Harts huge Hornes him profit not at all, By reason of his faint and fearefull heart; So Christian Armour yeelds defence as small, If diffidence our Fortitude peruert, And as none proudlier march than stately Hart, In Summer faire of his prosperitie, But if he heare a Dogge, or see a Dart, Doth faint for feare and flyeth cowardly, So doth the Man whom God doth Fortitude denie. 26 The heart of man's like Pilot in a ship, Whose cunning in calme weather is vnseene, But if Winds blow, and Waues to Heau'n vp skip, And all in danger great of drowning beene, Then both his skill and courage may bee seene: Then though the Sailes be rent and Ship be torne, He faints not till the wished Port he win: So though our Flesh here's tortur'd and forlorne, Yet by true Fortitude we to our Hau'n are borne. 27 As Branches of the Palme, the more opprest With burthens, nearer Heau'n themselues doe raise; So Fortitude in valiant Christians brest, The more assaulted, merits greater praise: And as those Boughes are stronger found alwayes, That are oppos'd to Boreas boystrous blast, Than those on whom the South and West wind playes, So that Mans mind doth stand most firme and fast, Who hath through greatest torments and tentations past. 28 Three wise men wrot: 3. Esdr. 4. King, Women, Wine, are strong, But aboue all, Truth beares the Victorie: Earth great, Heau'n high, Sunnes course is swift and long, Yet Truth contaynes all in's imensitie. Earth, Heau'n, Sunne, all obey Truth chearefully; To Truth I perfect Fortitude compare, Both one: most perfect in the Deitie, As Iustice, Loue, and other Vertues are, God onely here to vs some sparkes of them doth share. 29 Now onely of this Sparke is my discourse, This Vertue, Manlinesse the Grecians call; For they that ran not valiantly their course, The Heathen scarse accounted men at all: By Latines; Fortitudes originall Comes from a Body strong, and valiant Mind; They therefore count those most heroicall, Who most in warre to valour are inclin'd, Or whom most resolute 'gainst Fortunes stormes they find. 30 With them a Man of warre was seldome found, Able in Peace to conquer Iniurie; The godly in examples doe abound, Of suffering and doing valiantly. Let captiu'd Lot declare how valourously, From mightie Kings him Abram succoured, Which shewes his strength and magnanimitie, But his mind's valour, when he suffered Cold, Famine, Banishment, his owne Sonne slaughtered. 31 Most Princely Iacob with God wresteled, And therefore better might with men preuaile, Yet how was he by Laban iniured? His brother Esan did his life assaile, Yet strong in God his heart did neuer faile, Not, Gen. 32. 33. when at Mahanim he met Gods Hoast; And Esau, with foure hundred, did he quaile. Of Ios ahs valour may all Iudah boast, But of them all herein may Da id glorie most. 32 Apocryphall are Stories, not the Facts, Of machabaeus and his Bretheren; Whose noble Fortitude and valiant Acts, Transcend the courage of all mortall Men. Oh! wondrous prowesse which they shewed then, For to defend their Lawes and Libertie, Their Temples, Cities, Wiues, and Children, From prophanation by Idolatrie, And from the bondage of an Heathen enemie. 33 I might of Moses, Caleb, Gedeon tell, Ieptha, Iob, Samson, Dauids Worthies three, That through an Hoast drew Water from a Well; Eu'n millions of examples you may see Of Saints, which in Gods Booke our paternes bee, As Children three which would endure the flame, Before they would commit Idolatrie; Of all the Apostles onely Paul I name, Whose Fortitude in God deserues eternall fame. 34 What? are the Seruants greater than their Lord? No: all the strength that did in them abound, He of his fulnesse did to them afford, In whom all perfect Fortitude was found: Whom when he did conuerse with Men on ground, No Deuill, Power, terror could dismay: And that he might, at last, Hels powers confound, His Life, on cursed Crosse, eu'n downe did lay: Sad Night! But loe: His rising brings a ioyfull Day. 35 Which to sweet Nectar turnes our Cup of Gall: Loe! This is true braue Fortitude of mind, That as Christ chearefully did suffer all, That God for our Redemption had assign'd; So all our strength and will must be inclin'd, All crosses valiantly to suffer here, But where we them against Gods glorie find: For with such iniuries Christ could not beare; And therefore Merchants did with whips from Temple scare. 36 What? Shall I here all Woman-kind exclude, As Subiects meane for this heroick Grace? No: In the mind is seate of Fortitude, And oft in Female brests obtaynes high place, 'Tis not proud Looks, mens Tire, stout Speech, bold Face, Can Women for true Fortitude commend: No Vertue like to Modestie doth grace That Sexe, and best their Honour doth defend: In this the brauest Women alwayes did transcend. 37 See faire Rebecca couer'd with a vaile; Iudge Debora vnder an Oken tree; Most modest Iudith durst the Head assaile Of Holofernes: H ster next I see Bring Haman vnto shame for Mardochee: Shall I name one that doth surmount them all? Loe, our late Queene Elizabeth was shee, Yet was most modest, shamefac't, Virginall, All Female boldnesse Impudence, not Grace we call. 38 This Woman-Man. Androgune, Masculine-Foeminine, Sometimes of Doubtfull, oft of Common Gender, Who turn'd her face where Womanhood should shine To bold out-facing: And her locks did tender Vnto the Cutter. Scisers: Our Faiths great Defender, Because shee was of Fortitude the scorne, And Ape of Manhood, did so reprehend her, As now all vertuous Ladies haue her lorne, Forgotten, and disgrac'd, as shee were neuer borne. 39 Great Faiths Defender! who dost here defend, As Faith, so Valour and true Fortitude; Oh, were my Muse but able to commend Thy Princely Heart, and Minds braue magnitude, Wherewith th' Almightie hath thy brest indude; Or tell the courage of thy valiant Sonne Our Prince; which stretcheth to such amplitude, That had my Song with his great Praise begun, My Life on Earth had ended ere my Muse had done. 40 But we returne to Fortitude within, By which we fight 'gainst spirituall enemies, World, Deuill, Flesh, and our originall Sinne, Hell, Empires, Powers, Principalities, To our spirituall Peace all enmities: Against these, for our safegard, we embrace All spirituall Graces, as sure remedies; Ah! how dare they looke Satan in the face, That are quite destitute of all true sauing Grace? 41 Alas! What strength haue they then that depend Vpon the Pope and his Supremacie, Or hope his holy Water can defend Them from this strong and subtile enemie: Saints Reliques, Bulls, Beades, and such trumperie, Are now the onely weapons they must weare; Their Agnus Deies doe so terrifie The Deuill, and away ill spirits scare, For other spirituall Armour, now they neede not care. 42 How hope they to be able to withstand The Serpents malice, and the Worlds despite, Who lay by Armes, and loose and idle stand, Not buckeling themselues vnto the fight? As Armes were, like apparell, for delight, Or for sport onely, and a glittering show, These fainting hearts that are afraid to fight, Vaine Fooles that neuer yet Hels strength did know, Which at the first encounter them will ouerthrow. 43 Alas! eu'n too too many now a dayes, Like Gallants of our time, make goodly show In glitt'ring Armes, and bragge great might in Frayes; But come where danger to their life may grow, They then away both Armes and Weapons throw. Thus they abuse the knowledge God doth lend, Vnto their ruine and their ouerthrow, Wanting true valour Truth for to defend, And Christian Fortitude, to hold out to the End. 44 My onely wish is, euer to be strong In God and in the power of his Might, Casting off all things that doe not belong Vnto the Christian Battaile I must fight: Oh! who in warres can serue his Prince aright, That doth himselfe with Worlds affaires entangle? With spirituall Weapons we maintayne this fight, And not with cunning at the Barre to jangle, We here must fight for Life, and not for profit wrangle. 45 I here confesse mine inward strength is vaine, Vnable to withstand such enemies, That I to seeke out of my selfe am faine, For helpe against Hels powr's and policies; So many are my knowne infirmities, I mine owne strength doe vtterly distrust, Hoping thy Grace, that all our wants supplies, Will strengthen me against Hell, Sinne, and Lust, Since in no finite Power, but infinite I trust. 46 Oh, grant me firme on thine Omnipotence, In crosses and afflictions to relie, And wholy to renounce all confidence, Mans strength, or hope in Princes, can supply: Who, vnder shadow of thy Wings doe lie, No forraine Power, nor inward dread need feare, Thy strength is most seene in infirmitie, In thee wee able to doe all things are, By force of thy great Might we all aduenture dare. 47 God is my Refuge, Strength and Fortitude, My Rocke, Shield, Buckler, and in whom I trust, Who hath my Foes all vnto me subdu'd, Making our Enemies to licke the dust. Most firme defence vnto the Meeke and Iust; All superstitious vanities are vaine, Who put in God their confidence and trust, Firme, stable, sure, like Sions Mount remayne, No powres of Hell can snake where this foundation's layne. 50 Great is the Power wherein we doe trust, A mightie Power and exceeding strong, Able to raise our Bodies from the dust, And to Eternitie our life prolong: All pow'r from God, to God all doth belong, Why then should'st thou my Soule distrust or quaile? On him relie, and none can doe thee wrong: Thine Heart and Conscience Satan may assaile, But by Gods helpe, thou shalt against them all preuaile. 51 So by this mightie Power we shall at length Be Victors, though Sinne seeme vs here to foile: Lord, grant me this spirituall Pow'r and Strength, That though my Body suffer here a while, And like a Coward oft doth take the foile; I may with courage so my Soule defend, No Power me of spirituall Armes despoile. Lord, grant I practise may, what I commend, So I, with prayse my Booke and Meditation end. 52 Thus as one of the Bridegromes meanest Friends, I to adorne the Bride doe offer here These Ornaments: The gift no worth commends, But He to whom the Widdowes mite was deare, Because shee all her substance offred there, Will well accept of this poore Offering, That when I shall at that great day appeare Before the Iudge, to giue my reckoning, This time may be allow'd me for Gods honouring. FINIS. The third Booke consisting of fiue MEDITATIONS, viz. 1. Knowledge. 2. Zeale. 3. Temperance. 4. Bountie, and 5. Ioy. And The fourth Booke, of viz. 1. Prudence. 2. Obedie ce. and 3. Meekenesse. 4. Gods Word, and 5. Prayer. Were Likewise intended by the Authour at this time for the Presse. But the euer-lamented losse of his most hono∣red Lord (which hath changed all his Ioyes into Sor∣rowes, and Songs to Lamentations) hath beene the cause of deferring their publishing. A FVNERALL ELEGIE, Consecrated to the memorie of his euer∣honoured Lord, IOHN KING, Late Lord Bishop of London. LEt others call their Muse to helpe them mourne, And books of Tragique Scenes and Stories turne: My Heart abundant matter shall indite, If but the halfe (I of my sorrow) write. Were it a priuate losse of mine alone, I could it smother with a priuate grone: But ah! I ring my Fathers Fathers knell, The Charet and Horsemen of Israel. Happy Elisha, when the fiery Horse And Charets thee did from thy Master force! Whilst he in Whirlewind vp to Heauen ascends, His Spirit doubled downe on thee descends: But ah! I haue no Spirit but to mourne, And wash with teares this sacred Fathers Vrne, His is not left me to diuide Mine Eyes from Teares, as Iordanes floods were dride. Yet had I but his Spirit here to tell, How stoutly he opposed Iezabel, And all her Baalling superstitious crew Of Prophets, and their Idols ouerthrew, How firmely he in his Religion stood, Readie till Death to seale it with his blood, Without least Bastard thought to change that Truth, Which was in him firme, rooted from his youth; I then might ius ly hope my feeble Verse Had done full right vnto thy wronged Herse, For I should muzzell those that wrong thy fame And die them, like their whoare, scarlet in shame, Should force into their face that modest blood, That left them, ere since they left Truth and Good. Yet why should I thinke much that Calumnie, Labours to cloud thy Names bright memorie, Since that Iust One, thy Sauiour, after Death Could not auoid Slanders envenom'd breath? And if thy Lord and Masters fate were such, Let not thy Ashes grieue to beare as much. Oh sacred Spirit enclos'd in frailest mold Of britle Clay! when I did thee behold Praying Elias -like; thou couldst constrayne The Heau'ns to water all the Earth with rayne. And when thy zealous tongue touch'd with the flame Which Seraphin had from the Altar ta ne; Thou like to Paul or Peter didst diuine, Three thousand Soules conuerting at a time. When thou didst sit on Iustice sacred Throne, Thy Prudence shin'd like that of Solomon, And Samuel -like so equall didst diuide, Thou often gau'st content to either side. Like Aristotles thy Schole Disputations, Thy Speeches Tullies eloquent Orations, Thy Lectures all Ideas most diuine, Where Arts like Starres in Firmament doe shine. Did behold thee in thy Familie, Thy House a Temple of the Deitie. Thou Dauid -like didst to th' Almightie sweare, No wicked riotous Person should come there. You worthy Tribe of Leui, when you want And find your shorne allowance all too scant, His which refresht you often, blisse And gaue you Liuengs free as they were his. You Poore lament whom he so often fed, Not with his Doctrine onely, but his Bread. And Strangers when you want; his losse lament Who vnto you such large allowance sent. One and the same Rule in things Temporall, He did obserue as in Spirituall, Who so on Earth doth plentifully sow, May well expect a like increase to mow. Most happy Man, if Vertue, Honour, Right, Or any worldly Blisse make happy wight, Home, and abroad honour'd, belou'd and fear'd, Him Grace and Learning vnto all endear'd. But oh! what Mortall stands so sure and fast, That here may be call'd happy, till his last? To whom the People erst Hosanna cride, When he in triumph doth through Sion ride, Ere many dayes was on the Crosse so shaken, As if he fear'd himselfe of God forsaken: So when this Saint (like Paul the ged) sung To build vp Sions ruines with his Tongue, The rauish'd Hearers with thy message strooke, Sate as they had no powr's, but Eare and Looke, Both which did yeeld thy Worth such loud applause, As if an Angels Trump had lent thee voyce, I thinke their strict attention did fore-see, They neuer more should heare so much from thee. A Swan -like Dittie, for it was his last, For ere the Sunne had round his circuit past, He that for Sions building vp did pray, Did in his owne fraile Temple feele decay! My Soule eu'n trembles but thy groanes to heare: Alas! how couldst thou them with Patience beare Afflictions, which would breake a brasen Wall, And hardest Milstone grin'd to powder small, But Hee in Heau'n that heard thee groane and weepe, And all thy teares did in his Bottle keepe, When it was full, doth take of thee compassion, And freed thee from thy paynes and bitter passion. Eu'n on that Day whereon we celebrate His Passion, whom thou liu'dst to imitate; Loe, God doth millions of his Angels send, Thy sorrowes here with heau'nly Ioyes to end. Shall we bewaile thy happy commutation, Now chang'd from Earth to heau'nly Habitation? Where as thy Ioyes the Angels farre surpast, Which neuer of thy Miseries did taste, For there thou dost that Psalme of comfort ring, Which none but Saints afflicted here can sing; That Ioy which neuer had in Heau'n beene knowne, But by those Saints that vnder crosses groane: That Ioy, which feeles God comfort vs againe, After he hath vs plagu'd on Earth with paine; And for a few yeares of aduersitie, Rewards in Heau'n with Ioyes eternitie; Which giues for Sorrow, Ioy; for Labour, Rest; A Hau'n to vs whom Shipwracke erst distrest: From Danger, Safetie; Light vnto the eye, Long blind in Dungeons obscuritie. Life after Death doth make our liues more sweet, Who here Christs plentifull afflictions meet. Shall haue in him a plenteous consolation: Then let vs all, that wait for like saluation, In Body like this Saint the dying beare Of's dying Lord; and let him neuer feare But his Lords life shall be made manifest In Him, when He our Labour turnes to Rest. But more: my Muse is as vnfit to write As are my sorrowes stupid to endite! Onely, Shee thus the publique losse bemones, And what Shee wants in words, supplyes with grones.