The suruey of Christs sufferings for mans redemption and of his descent to Hades or Hel for our deliuerance: by Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester. The contents whereof may be seene in certaine resolutions before the booke, in the titles ouer the pages, and in a table made to that end. Perused and allowed by publike authoritie. Bilson, Thomas, 1546 or 7-1616. The suruey of Christs sufferings for mans redemption and of his descent to Hades or Hel for our deliuerance: by Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester. The contents whereof may be seene in certaine resolutions before the booke, in the titles ouer the pages, and in a table made to that end. Perused and allowed by publike authoritie. Bilson, Thomas, 1546 or 7-1616. THE CHIEFE RESOLV∣TIONS OF THIS Suruey. THe cleerenes and fulnes of the Scriptures in the worke of our Redemption is exactly to be reuerenced; so as no man ought to teach or beleeue any thing touching our redemp∣tion by Christ, which is not expresly witnessed in the sa∣cred Scriptures: much lesse may we distrust the manifest words of the holy Ghost to be impertinent or vnsufficient in declaring the true price and meane of our redemption. The maine ground of the Gospell, which the Apostles preached, the faith∣full receiued, wherein they continued, and whereby they were saued, was this; That Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures, and was buried, and rose the third day; according to the Scriptures. Since then we are reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, we must acknowledge none o∣ther death of Christ then that which he suffered in the bodie of his flesh, after which he was buried, and from which he rose the third day, which death the Scriptures most apparently describe to be the death of Christs bodie. If we were redeemed by the bloud of Christ, and God proposed him (to be) a Reconciliation through faith in his bloud, which was shed for the remission of sinnes; we may not presume to appoint a new price of our redemp∣tion, or new meane of our reconciliation; since by the bloud of his crosse Christ hath pacified both the things in earth, and things in heauen; and the bloud of Iesus Christ cleanseth vs from all sinne. The Scriptures doe no where teach, nor mention the death of Christs Joule, or the death of the damned, which is the second death, to be needfull for our re∣demption. We must not therefore intrude our selues into Gods seat to ord ne a new course for mans redemption. If the Spirit doe quicken, and the iust liue by faith, and he that abideth in loue, abideth in God, who is life; it was vtterlie impossible, but the soule of Christ in that abundance of Spirit, euidence of Faith, assurance of Hope, and perfection of Loue, which he alwayes retained, should alwayes liue to God. Life and death being opposed as priuatiues, and so not to be found in one and the same subiect at one and the same time; the soule of Christ alwayes liuing, could neuer be dead. Neither could a dead soule be pleasing to God, (who is whole life, and therefore hateth death as contrarie to his nature;) when yet he was alwayes well pleased with Christ. Where some imagine extreame paine in Christs soule may be called the death of his soule; that position is repugnant to the Scriptures: for the greater the paine which the soule feeleth, and endureth with innocencie, confidence, obe∣dience, and patience, (such as were all Christes sufferings) the more the soule liueth and cleaueth to God, for whose glorie it suffereth so much smart; as ap∣peareth in Martyrs, whose soules do most liue in their greatest torments. The late deuice of hell-paines in Christes passion is not only false, but also su∣perfluous: for the true paines of hell neither are, nor can be suffered in this life, where, by Gods ordinance extreame paine driueth the soule from the bodie: much lesse can man or Angell endure them with obedience and patience, as Christ did all his paines. And what need was there of hell-paines in the crosse of Christ, since God can by euery meanes, or without meanes raise more paines in bodie or soule, than any creature can endure. Christs soule could not be strooken with any horrour of Gods displeasure a∣gainst him, since in his greatest anguish he professed God to be his God, and his Father, and by prayer preuailed for his persecutors (as appeared after by their conuersion) and gaue eternall life to the soule of the Thiefe hanging by him, and beleeuing on him. Now to giue life is more than to haue life; and restore others to fauour he can not, that himselfe is in displeasure. Hell-fire, which the damned and diuels do and shall suffer, is a true and eter∣nall fire prepared by the mightie hand of God to punish aswell spirits as bodies; and this errour, That the fire of hell was only an internall or spirituall fire in the soules and consciences of men, was long since condemned in Origen by the Church of Christ. Reiection therefore, desperation, confusion, horrour of damnation, exter∣nall and eternall fire, which are the torments of the damned, and true paines of hell, can not without blasphemie be ascribed to Christ. Christ therefore suffe∣red neither the death of the soule, nor the paines nor horrors os the damned, or of hell. Euery sinne is common to the whole man, who is defiled euen with thoughts that be euill; not only because the bodie is the Seat, wherein, and the instru∣ment, whereby the soule worketh; but also for that the first infection of sinne commeth to the soule by the bodie, and the first information and prouocation to sinne riseth from the senses and affections, which are mooued with corporall spirits; and all the parts and powers of the bodie attend the will with most rea∣die subiection to haue each sinne (which the soule conceiueth) impressed on them, and executed by them. And therefore the suffering for sinne in the per∣son of the Mediatour, must be common both to bodie and soule in such sort, that as in transgressing, our soules are the principall Agents, so in the suffering for sinne, his soule was the principall Patient. Christ would vse no power to assuage the force and violence of his paines, (though he wanted none, as appeareth by his ouerthrowing them with a word, that came to apprehend him;) but submitted himselfe to his Fathers will with greater obedience and patience, than any man liuing could. We may therefore safely beleeue, That the iustice of God condemning sinne in (Christes) flesh, proportioned the paines of his bodie, in which hee bare our sinnes, to the strength of his patience; and so both his paines and his patience farre exceeded all mens. The rather for that Christes sense did not faile him by degrees, as ours doth, when the paines of death are extreamest, which driue our soules from our bodies; but hee did in most perfect sense feele the sting and bitter∣nesse of paine to the last breath; by reason he was of his owne accord, at an in∣stant appointed by his Father, to breathe out his owne soule, and so did, to the great admiration of the Centurion that obserued it; and consequently hee re∣tained firmnesse of voice, and exactnesse of sense, all the while his paines were at sharpest. The soule is punished in this life by her vnderstanding, will, affections, and senses, according as their obiects, directed and strengthened by God, make vio∣lent and vehement impressions; the torment of hell-fire being the iudgement of another world. Neither is God the tormenter of soules in hell with his imme∣diate hand, but by his wisdome and power hath ordained euerlasting fire, as an externall Agent aboue nature, to take vengeance of damned men and diuels according to their deserts. No Scripture doth teach, That God with his immediate hand tormented the soule of his Sonne on the Crosse, or in the Garden; notwithstanding Christes soule was full of feare and sorow in the Garden, and of griefe and paine on the Crosse: all which outward and inward passions ne did, ne could peruert Christs will, nor oppresse his power; but they must all be voluntarie, that they might all be meritorious; and the more Christs power was to admit them, when he would, as he would, and because he would; the more his obedience was to the will and hand of God, who forced nothing on Christ against his will, but by that which was offered and suffered, tried the obedience of his Sonne, and accepted all from him as a most willing Sacrifice. The wrath of God punishing our sinnes in the person of Christ, was neither such as the Damned in hell, nor as the Reprobate in earth doe suffer; but ra∣ther common to the members of Christ, who must drinke of this Cuppe, haue fellowship with his afflictions, and be conformed to his death, though they ne∣uer feele the true paines of hell, nor haue their soules tormented by Gods im∣mediate hand. Neither was it any other wrath, than such as might stand with Gods loue towards his Sonne, (who did not hate him for our sakes, but loued vs for his) and was Fatherly tempered to the strength of Christes manhood, and graciously ouerruled and quenched by the fauour that God bare to the per∣son of his Sonne. And therefore the termes of meere and proper wrath (if they meane proper to the damned) are false and impious in Christes sufferings, which neither in maner, measure, nor purpose, did agree with the torments of the damned. The true and full satisfaction for our sinnes, must not be deriued from the singularitie and infinitie of Christes paines, longer and greater than which the damned and diuels doe euery one suffer; but from the dignitie of the person, who being the only and eternall Sonne of God that made vs, humbled himselfe in our stead, and in our nature to restore vs, and offered recompense for our sinnes, which was his submission and obedience vnto the death of the Crosse, more pleasing to God than our condemnation to hell could haue beene: for in this ballance betweene the wrath of God against our sinnes, and the loue of God towards his Sonne, neither was his iustice neglected, nor his loue ouer sway∣ed; but a sweet and wise temper of both was prouided for the manhood of his Sonne, first to suffer with patience, and then to raigne with glorie; that all the sonnes of God might be the more willing and readie by his example to obey the will, and abide the hand of God, before they did enter into his Kingdome. The Scriptures witnessing, that the Sacrifices of God are a troubled spirit, this might not want in Christes Sacrifice for sinne; but he approching the pre∣sence of God with and for our offences, lawfully might, and exceedingly did feare the greatnesse and iustnesse of Gods anger against our iniquities; and as deeply sorrowed, that Gods holinesse was so carelesly despised, and highly dis∣pleased with our manifolde iniquities. Which inward sacrifices of feare and sorrow for vs, and our sinnes, in the person of the Mediatour, were no lesse ac∣ceptable to God than the simple suffering of paine. Since Gods power is despised, where it is not duely feared, and sinne is iusti∣fied, where the displeasing of God is not thorowly sorrowed; in presenting vs and our cause to God, Christ was to yeeld for vs, and in our behalfe that infi∣nite submission and feare to the power of God prouoked, and contrition and sor∣row to the holinesse of God offended, which we could neuer haue done. And without these to offer to beare the burden of our sinnes, was to make light ac∣count of our sinne against God, and of Gods wrath against our sinne, which was farre from the Sonne of God. There might therefore in Christes sacrifice for sinne not without iust cause appeare exceeding feare and sorrow, yet both religious, and measured by the rules of obedience and humilitie, though passing grieuous to the soule of Christ. Neither were these submissions and afflictions of Christs soule answerable to his perfection, and our transgression, if they did not reach to the highest degree of feare and sorrow, that mans nature in Christ was capable of, without distrust of Gods fauour, or dislike of his iustice. Christ did not pray in the Garden contrarie to his Fathers knowen will, but made an expresse and speciall reseruation thereof euen in the first part of his prayer. Neither was he amazed and confounded in all the powers of his soule and senses of his bodie, as these Presumers teach, but he prayed with faith, and suffered with obedience; both which require perfect vnderstanding, will, and memorie. Manie things might concurre to increase Christes sorrow in the Garden, as the reiection of the Iewes for spilling his bloud, the dispersion of his Church, all flying and forsaking him; the continuall rage of Satan against his weake and fearefull members; Christ now in his temptations and afflictions beholding theirs with great compassion and griefe of heart: which is it that Hilarie saith; Et tristitia de nobis est, & oratio pro nobis est. Christ sorrowed for vs, and De Trinitate li. 10. prayed for vs. An Agonie is properly a vehement contention of minde to preuaile in that we vndertake, rightly weighing and striuing to remoue the difficulties and im∣pediments obiected to hinder the euent. Christes bloudie sweat, if it were naturall, must proceed rather from zeale and intention of minde, than from feare and sorow; which coole the bloud, and quench the spirits; whereas the spirits must be mightilie kindled, and the bloud much heated and thinned, before it can issue forth by sweat. And since by the words of Saint Luke, Christ fell into an Agonie after an Angell appea∣red from heauen, and comforted or strengthened him (with a message from God) it seemeth rather an effect of Christes intentiue prayer which the Scrip∣ture there mentioneth; than a consequent to any other passion or paine. Christes intentiue prayer, after comfort receiued by an Angell from heauen, might proceed from his ardent desire, care, and zeale of our redemption from the wrath of God, and protection from the rage of Satan. And therefore, as the Prophet foreshewed he should not onely beare the sinnes of many, but pray for the Trespassers, Christ might spend all the spirits and powers of bodie and soule in most vehement and feruent prayer, euen vnto a bloudie sweat, to haue all his members pardoned their sinnes, and reconciled to God by the sacrifice of his bo∣die, which he would offer for them; and also to haue Satan cast out from accu∣sing them, and in the end trodden vnder their feet. If Christes bloudie sweat were supernaturall; we must aske no cause there∣of, but leaue it to his sacred will, who could aboue nature doe what he would. That it was no proofe of hell paines, appeareth plainly, because Christ after in greater paines on the Crosse did not sweat bloud; and of all those, whom these men imagine suffered hell paines in the Scriptures, no one can be produced, that euer sweat bloud. The word (forsaking) vsed by Christ in his Complaint on the Crosse, doth not in all the Scriptures inferre the paines of the damned; but in the wicked it noteth reiection, desperation, and feare of damnation; and in the godly it ar∣gueth want of protection, or decrease of consolation in their troubles. In Christ it might shew the time, the cause, the maner, or the griefe of his being so long forsaken, and left to the rage and reproch of his persecutors, without any sensible signe of Gods loue towards him, care for him, helpe in his troubles, or exse in his paines; but it doth not prooue, that Christ thought himselfe forsa∣ken of Gods fauour, grace, or spirit; which feare or doubt could not be in him without a manifest touch of error, and want of faith. Christ neuer feared nor doubted, that he should or could perish vnder the hand of God persuing our sinnes in the bodie of his flesh; but for the ioy set be∣fore him, endured the Crosse, and despised the shame; and as S. Peter sayth of him at the time of his suffering, he alwayes beheld God at his right hand, that he should not be shaken; and therefore his heart reioyced, and his tongue was glad, and his flesh rested in hope, because his soule should not be forsaken in hell, nor his flesh see corruption. Christ was made a curse for vs, in that he suffered the temporall and corpo∣rall curses of the Law threatned vnto sinners, as all sorts of afflictions belong∣ing to this life, and in the end, a painfull and shamefull death, by which he abo∣lished the spirituall and eternall curse of God due to vs for sinne; but he was ne∣uer inwardly, truely, nor eternally accursed of God, since by tasting of our ex∣ternall curse for a time, he made vs partakers of his spirituall and celestiall bles∣sednesse for euer. Christ who knew no sinne, was made sinne for vs, that is, either the punish∣ment of, our sinnes, or the sacrifice for our sinnes: for we were healed by his stripes, and he gaue himselfe for vs a sacrifice of a sweet smell to God. Be∣ing then an holy and acceptable sacrifice to God for sinne, he was neither defiled nor hatefull to God with our sinnes: but suffered, the iust for the vniust; that is, he tooke vpon him the punishment of our sinnes, though he were most inno∣cent; and by the holinesse of his person, submitting himselfe to the death of the crosse, purged our vncleannesse; by his innocencie, couered our guiltinesse; and by his fauour with God, reconciled vs that were enemies. Christ bare the full punishment of our sinnes; that is, not all which we should haue borne; for then he must haue beene euer lastingly reiected, confounded and condemned to hell fire, which are most horrible blasphemies; but he bare so much of the punishments of this life, where he suffered, as in his person by the iust iudgement of God was most sufficient for all our sinnes. TOuching Christs descent to hell, the words are plainly cited by Peter out of Dauid, that Christes soule (after death) should not be left in Hades, which Saint Luke in his Gospell vseth for the place where torments are prepared for the wicked af∣ter this life. And in that sense is the word vsed thorowout the New Testament; as likewise the Greeke Fathers tooke it for the place vnder the earth, whither the soules of all men were condemned for sinne, and where the Diuels detaine and torment the wicked. That Christ likewise descended to the lower parts of the earth, and to the (bottomlesse) deepe after death, is vouched by Saint Paul; whereupon the whole Church of Christ from the beginning hath confessed his descent to hel to be a point of Chri∣stian pietie. Peters Sermon (in the second of the Acts) intended not simply to proue that Christ was risen from the dead, as Lazarus and others were; but affirmed far∣der of him, That God raised him vp, to set him on Dauids Throne; that is, to make him King of Glorie. This he prooueth, In that Christes flesh could not see corruption, nor his soule be forsaken in hell; which was verified in none, no not in Dauid (who were all dead, and saw corruption) but only in the Mes∣sias. It was therefore impossible, that either death or hell should detaine Christ, but he was to rise Lord of death and hell, and the Sauiour of all his from both; as appeared by his ascending to heauen, and sitting at the right hand of God. Neither was this strange to the Iewes, who were taught to expect that to be performed by the Messias, which God promised by his Prophet; O Death, I will be thy death: O Hell, I will be thy destruction. Sheol in the Olde Testament signifieth the Graue, and Hell; that is, the pla∣ces whither the dead bodies of all men went, and whither the soules of the wic∣ked dead in sinne descended after death. And therefore where it is distingui∣shed from the death of the bodie, or referred to the soule after death, as it is in Dauids words applied by Peter to Christ, it apparently signifieth Hell. The ends of Christes descent are likewise deriued from the Scriptures, as the destroying of the Diuels kingdome, and triumphing ouer powers and principa∣lities, and making an open shew of them, spoiling them by deliuering all his E∣lect, dead, liuing, and yet vnborne, from the right, power, and feare of eter∣nall death; taking into his hands the Keyes of Death and Hell, that he might be Lord of all, in Heauen, Earth, and Hell. The Creed is not a Collection of Greeke or Hebrew phrases vnknowen to the people, but a short summe of the Christian faith prouided for the simpler sort of men to learne by heart. And therefore, as nothing is superfluously repeated, so nothing is obscurely couered in it. And though this Article, He descended to hell, wanted for a time in some Churches, euen as some part of Scripture did, yet was it retained by all Christian Writers, as a ground of true religion from the Apostles time; and professed in some Churches very anciently in their Creed, and at last generally receiued in all places. All the Fathers of Christes Church with one consent teach this as a point of the Christian faith, That Christ after death descended to hell; insomuch that Austen resolutely sayth, Who but an Infidell will denie, that Christ was in Epistola. 99. hell? Where Abrahams bosome was, neither was, nor is agreed amongst the learned: only Austen rightly inferreth out of Christes words, That being a place of comfort, and farre off aboue Hades (where the rich man was tormen∣ted) with a great Gulfe setled betwixt those two places, it could be no part, nor Epistola. 99. member of hell. The rest, which are very many, appeare by the seuerall Titles ouer ech Page, or by the Table prouided to finde the same with more facilitie. THE SVRVEY OF CHRISTES SVFFE∣RINGS FOR MANS REDEMPTION. IT may seeme somewhat strange to thee (Christian Reader) as it doth likewise to me, that one and the selfe same cause, being twice now debated and discus∣sed in writing on either side; we should at the last be farther from agreeing on the true state of the contro∣uersie than we were at the first entring into the mat∣ter. If the fault be either in the doubtfulnesse of my words proposing it; or in the diuersnesse of my mind defending it; I refuse no reproch of follie, and incon∣stancie; but if I keeping close to the points which I first propounded, and calling vpon the aduerse part, with as great vehemencie and importunitie as I could, to goe directly to the issue, and no way to digresse from the things in question; the Impugner trusting more to the couert of his words, than to the soundnesse of his proofs, will of purpose shunne the marke prefixed, and roue at pleasure with doubtfull and deceitfull termes, to hide the nakednesse of his side, and to make the Reader beleeue he hath matter of moment, when indeed he doth not so much as vnderstand himselfe, or take any knowledge of the chiefest things which I obiect or alledge; then is he woorthie to beare the blame who best deserueth it, and thou (Christian Reader) mayest soone perceiue, and assoone pronounce both for thine owne ease, and for an end to be had in this strife; (for to thee the Confuter referreth himselfe, and so doe I) whether of vs flieth the touchstone of trueth, and faileth in the due proofe of his doctrine, as neere as God shall giue thee wisdome to discerne light from darknesse, and grace to preferre trueth before falshood. In the Preface of my Sermons published, I much misliked, and openly charged the ouer hastie Discourser, that called himselfe H. I. for Praefat pag. 9. lin. 2. cleane changing the state of the first Question: and to the maine diuision of his Treatise, where he sayth, The whole controuersie hath in it two points; the first, That Christ suffered for vs the wrath of God, &c, I replied in my conclusion, Conclu. pa. 243. l. 5. It was too much boldnesse to outface the world in print, that this was the position which I impugned. There were too many witnesses there, for me to denie, or for him to belie the Question, he knew it well enough, but he could not tell how to proue that which I then reproued, and therefore he shranke from it, and dallied with generall and doubtfull termes. And lest either the patient Reader, or strict Examiner, should be forced farre to seeke for the chiefe points by me denied or affirmed in those Sermons; I purposely and plainly numbred and deliuered them in such sort, as none could mistake them, but he that would wilfully ouerleape them. My words thou wilt pardon me to repeat (good Christian Reader) that thereby thou mayest see whether I alter or new frame my first questions and resolutions, as this Prater pretendeth, by his euery where complaining of my manifolde ambiguities, fallacies, and contr rieties; or he rather dissembleth the weaknesse, and couereth the badnesse of his cause vnder certeine perplexed and confused phrases, as anon thou shalt heare more at large. These are my words in the foresayd Pag. 2. l. 10. Preface. I laboured (in these my Sermons) to prooue these foure points: First, That it was no where recorded in holy Scriptures, nor iustly to be concluded by the Scriptures, that Christ suffered the true paines of Hell. Secondly, That as the Scriptures describe to vs the paines of the Damned and of hell; there are manie terrors and torments, which without euident impietie can not be ascribed to the Sonne of God. Thirdly, That the death and bloud of Christ Iesus were euidently, frequently, constantly set downe in the writings of the Apostles, as the sufficient price of our Redemption, and true meane of our Reconciliation to God, and the verie same proposed in the figures resembled in the sacrifices of the Law, and sealed with the Sacraments of the New testament, as the verie ground-worke of our saluation by Christ; and so haue beene receiued, and beleeued in the Church of God, foureteene hundred yeeres, before any man euer made mention of hell-paines to be suffered in the soule of Christ. Last∣ly, where the Scriptures are plaine and pregnant, That Christ died for our sinnes, and by his death destroyed him that had power of death, euen the diuell, and reconciled vs when we were strangers and enemies in the body of his flesh through death: besides, That the Holie ghost in these places by expresse words nameth the bodily death of Christ, as the meane of our Redemption & Reconciliation to God; no considerate Diuine might affirme or imagine Christ suffered the death of the soule; for somuch as the death of the soule must exclude Christ from the grace, spirit, and life of God, and leaue in him neither faith, hope, nor loue, sanctitie, nor innocencie, which God forbid any Christian man should so much as dreame. And if any man to mainteine his deuice, would inuent a new hell, and another death of the soule, then either Scriptures or Fathers euer heard, or spake of, they should keepe their inuentions to them∣selues: it sufficed me to beleeue what I read, and consequently, not to beleeue what I did not reade in the Word of God, which is and ought to be the foundation of our faith. Whether there be any darkenesse or doubling in my speech, I leaue it to thy censure, good Christian Reader. I affirme touching our redemption and reconciliation to God, what the Scriptures affirme, and as neere as I could in the selfe-same words: I denied the late additions of some men in matters of so great weight, which the Scriptures by their perpetuall silence denie, and by their open and euident consequents disprooue and impugne. If any man thinke my Sermons in these points lesse euident, or perti∣nent to the purpose than my Preface; let him looke to the places where these things are hand ed, and iudge in Gods name, as he findeth cause; remembring that he which withstandeth or neglecteth the trueth, withstandeth and neglecteth his owne saluation. First that no Scripture doth witnesse or warrant Christs suffering the true paines of hell in his soule; see either the Sermons. p. 8. lin. 22. proposing of their opinions that so thinke; or the examining of their Serm. p. 11. l. 24. proofes which are brought for that conceit; or the shutting vp of that part, which sheweth the summe of all aforesayd, which I close in this wise: Serm. pa. 41. l. 14. Then are there in the sacred Scriptures neither any praedictions that Christ should suffer the paines of hell in his soule heere on earth; nor causes why he must suffer them; nor signes that he did suffer them; and consequently, what soeuer is pretended, no proofe, that these suf∣ferings must be added to the Crosse of Christ, before the worke of our saluation can be per∣fect. Secondly, that such paines of hell, as the Scriptures expresse and auouch, may not be applied to Christ, without apparent impietie, reade what I Serm. pa. 48. l. 34. write concerning the particulars, and settle thy iudgement (gentle Reader) as thou likest best. I desire not to preuaile, where I bring not sufficient proofe: emptie words on either side, are slender meanes to quiet thy conscience, or settle thy faith, if thou seeke to be religi∣ous. Thirdly, where the whole course and tenor of the sacred Scriptures do plainly and fully ascribe our Redemption and the remission of our sinnes to the death and bloud of Christ Iesus; I dare not delude the words of the Holy ghost, as if they were euery where improper or imperfect, but by the foure first Serm p. 42. l. 2. effects of Christs crosse, I make it appeare how sufficient our saluation is by the bloud of Christ, without anie supplie of hell paines to be suffered in the soule of Christ. Lastly, since no Christian man may doubt, but we are redeemed and saued by the death of Christ, how Serm. p. 73. li. 13. farre it is from all sense and shew of holy Scripture to subiect Christ to the death of the soule, and how repugnant to the mouthes and mindes of the ancient and catholike fathers, I insert a speciall discourse, and thence obserue, that where & whensoeuer the Holie ghost speaketh of the death of Christ, he meaneth the death of Christs body suffered on the altar of the Crosse, and by no meanes the death of Christs soule. These things being thus sensibly and plainly set downe to the view and reach of all men, were they neuer so simple, if they were Christians; what reason had you, Sir Refuter in your Treatise to slide from all this, and to delude your Reader by telling him that the whole controuersie had in it two points: 1 That Christ suffered for vs the wrath of God: 2 That after his death on the Crosse, he went not into hell in his soule: as if I proposed or proued nothing in the first part of my Sermons, but that Christ did not suffer for vs the wrath of God? did I, or could I make or mooue anie such question, that in preci e words taught the Serm. p. 133. li. 13. wrath of God against our sinnes was verie great in the Crosse of Christ? did I not in plaine termes ascribe to Christ Ibidem. li. 30. a double sense of Gods wrath: the first l. 14. pursuing our suretie being innocent and obedient, and euen his owne and onelie sonne with all maner of corporall and temporall scourges vnto death, before it could be pacified? the next a l. 34. serious contemplation of that eternall and intolerable v ngeance, which the Iustice of God had in store for vs, by reason of our manifolde sinnes, whose danger and destruction touched him as neere, through the tendernesse of his loue and pitie, as if it had beene imminent ouer his owne head? But this you will say is not the wrath which you meane. Sir whatsoeuer your meaning be, which is scant knowen to your selfe, as anon we shal better perceiue, the words of your Treatise setting the very question, to which your Reader must looke, ouerlashed with two palpable vntrueths, vnfit for a man of that care and conscience which you would seeme to haue. For first this could be no question with me, whether Christ suffered for vs the wrath of God, who exactly affirmed that Gods wrath was great in the Crosse of Christ, and admitted in the soule of Christ a sight and sense of Gods temporall wrath inflicted on his bodie, and of Gods eternall wrath prepared for our sinnes. Againe, had I moued that question, which I neuer meant, doth the first part of the controuersie containe no more but Whether Christ suffered the wrath of God or no? are your hell paines so soone vanished into smoake? is the death of Christs soule no question with you? whether the death of Christs bodie, and the shedding of his bloud be the full price of our Redemption, and cause of our reconciliation to God, is it not worth the asking, nor worth the an∣swering? but you ranne from the rest not able to iustifie that which I disproued; and then, as your maner is, you catch a large and licentious word, and currie that till you confound both your selfe and your Reader. For who but you would haue proposed such a question, Whether Christ suffered for vs the wrath of God, knowing that in the Scriptures themselues, according to which we must frame our speech in matters of faith, there are many degrees and differences of Gods wrath, whereof some may be attributed to Christs sufferings without offence; others can not without plaine im∣pietie? and therefore the question which you proposed in your Treatise was but a very stale to make your Reader gaze at, whiles you shifted aside from the matter which I moued. [The one (you will say) is a proofe of the other; for he which suffereth Gods wrath, must needs suffer the paines of hell. ] That was and must be the whole strength of your Treatise, vnlesse you will confesse that you meant to waste your paper, and mocke your Reader with a number of emptie and idle fansies. But how faint and feeble that foundation was to beare so great a building, the fo. 243. conclusion of my Sermons doth sufficiently shew. In which I tolde you, that either your argument must be vitious, if your antecedent were particular; or if to make your argument good, you enlarged your antecedent to be generall, your first proposition would be both iniurious and blasphemous. For though Christ might and did suffer some parts of Gods wrath, as the Scripture vseth that word, which is all that your indefinite proposition will im∣plie; yet it would no way follow that he therefore suffered the paines of hell. And if, to amend your consequent, you did affirme that Christ suffered the whole wrath of God, and euery part thereof, and so by consequent the paines of hell also; the forme of your argument was bettered, but your antecedent, on which the conclusion must depend, was a most false and wicked assertion: for then must Christ haue suffered re∣probation, desperation, eternall damnation, and what not. Whether this exception were sound and good, I leaue to the iudgement of the Reader; verily, I haue either forgotten the first principles of Logicke; or els it was a full and plaine subuersion of your misshaped reason. But you now amend the matter in your last defence, and where your chiefe positi∣on Their foure restraints of hell paines. was before indefinite, Christ suffered for vs the wratb of God; and so did neither good nor harme to the maine question of Christs suffering the paines of hell; vpon better aduice, you make it generall and say; Christ suffered all Gods wrath, but with foure restraints to saue your opinion from apparent falsitie and heresie. For first you adde, Defence p. 7. l. 32. all Gods PROPER wrath; next, if it be a punishment for sinne, and no sinne; third∣ly, as touching the essence and nature thereof; fourthly, so farre as was due generally for all mankinde to suffer. But Sir Defender, this is not to maintaine your first argument, but to confesse, and recant your former follie, when you see your position impugned as friuolous and childish, if it be particular; or as erroneous and impious, if it be gene∣rall; to come in with foure fresh limitations in a new pamphlet before you can saue your generall assertion from sensible impietie and infidelitie. Howbeit take your fourth, to returne to trueth is neuer too late: Let your generall proposition stand fettered & restrained with these foure brakes: I must aske you now, not onely how you proue this generall Collection, Christ suffered for vs all Gods wrath in the same na∣ture and maner that we should haue suffered it, sauing your foure exceptions; but also, what parts of Gods wrath you leaue inclosed in your generall affirmatiue, when all these are excluded. Which two demands I wish thee (good Reader) to haue in speciall remembrance against we come to debate the Defenders question, that thou mayest see both what cause leadeth him so to collect, and what trueth is in the gene∣rall, when these particulars are excepted. That Christ tooke our infimities and bare our sorrowes is confirmed by the Prophet Esaie, and alleaged and expounded as well by Saint Mathew in his Gospell, as by Saint Peter in his first Epistle; in either of which senses we may safely graunt the mea∣ning of the Prophet to be generall, though his words haue no speciall adscription of all, or some. Saint Mathew declaring how Christ cured with his very word such as were possessed by diuels, and healed all that were sicke, affirmeth that to be Math. 8. vers. 17. fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, he tooke our infirmities and bare our sicknesses, meaning he tooke from vs our infirmities and recouered our diseases. And in this sense the generall is most true, that Christ tooke away all our infirmities, and recouered all our sicknesses, were they corporall or spirituall, temporall or eternall, that we should feele the full burden of none of them. Neither did our Sauiour only take our sorrows from vs, but he also tooke them vpon himselfe, which Peter obserueth when he saith (Christ) 1. Pet 2. himselfe bare our sinnes (that is, the burden and punishment of our sinnes) in his body on the tree. And in this sense likewise, it is very true that Christ bare the burden of all our sinnes without exception, but not all, and the selfe same burdens of our sinnes which we should haue borne. For he that so enlargeth Saint Peters words, which this Discourser so much laboureth, extendeth them to reprobation, pollution, desperation, damnation, and to all the punishments prepared for the wicked in this life and the next, which is the depth and height of all impiety. I wish the Defender therefore to get him some better ground to erect his frame vpon, he will else prooue himselfe an euill Disputer, and a woorse beleeuer. Saint Paule hath a third sense ga∣thered out of this place, when he saith, Heb. 4. We haue not an high Priest that can not be tou∣ched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in ALL THINGS (tried or) tempted in like sort, ‖ yet ‖ without sinne. That Christ was tried and pressed with all our infirmities may hence be collected, but with these two additions like to his brethren, and still WITHOVT SINNE. for he must be like (not to the reprobate, much lesse to the damned, but) to his Heb. 2. brethren in all things, that is by partaking as well flesh and blood with them, as sufferings and tentations like them, yet alwaies without sinne. Then as the godly neither doe nor can suffer the true paines of hell in this life, which are the iudgements and torments of the damned in another world; no more did Christ suf∣fer them in this life. And where conscience of sinne, ignorance of Gods counsaile, and weakenesse of faith sometimes draw the godly to doubt of Gods fauour, and af∣fright them with the horror of hell; from these, and all like inward tentations and motions of sinne, Christ must be most free, in whose soule was no lacke of grace, nor touch of sinne; but the fulnesse of Gods spirit, assured knowledge of Gods will, and perfection of all humane integritie and innocencie, besides the personall vnion and communion of his Godhead, which kept him both from doubting of Gods loue to∣wards himselfe, and from fearing damnation as due to him or possible to be laide on him. [Your limitations you will say, serue to exclude those punishments which Christ neither did nor might suffer. For Christ suffered onely in this life, and but for a time, and without sinne; and yet suffered all, and the very same punishments so limited, as you limite them, which the damned doe, and those were the paines of hell.] If you begin (Sir Defender) to limite the words of the holy Ghost to your liking, I thinke it a safer and surer course to heare and receiue S. Peters and S. Pauls limitations annexed to their owne words, and other defence against all your attempts I desire none. Christ himselfe (saith Peter) bare our sinnes in his bodie on the tree. Heere see we not onely the person who, euen the sonne of God; and the place where, and time when; on the tree, not after; but also the part in which he bare the punishment of all our sinnes, to wit, in his body. He must (saith Paul) be like his brethren in all things; that is, infirmities, tentations, and sufferings, but still without sinne. What is this to the paines of hell, which are the destruction of bodie and soule excluded after this life from the ioy and blisse of Gods kingdome, and tormented among diuels with euer∣lasting fire? [ That (you thinke) is my grosse imagination of hell, the fire there is a toyish fable; the greatest paine in hell is the sense of Gods fierie wrath, which he inflicteth with his immediate hand vpon the soule lyable to sinne without any meanes or instruments; the substance where∣of because Christ suffered (as you say) for a time in this life, though not in hell nor for euer, he suffered the verie same paines of hell as touching the essence and nature thereof, which the damned doe; though in circumstances of time and place his sufferings somewhat differed from theirs. ] Your quintessencing and new framing of another hell, which the Scriptures neuer speake of; your quenching hell-fire with a fansie; your appointing God to be the tormentor in hell with his immediate hand; your nice diuiding be∣tweene the substance and circumstance of Gods eternall iudgements; your placing the substance thereof in the apprehension of the soule, and that as well in this life as in the next, with a number of like audacious and desperate deuises to vphold the name or the shade of hell-paines in the sufferings of Christ, wee shall anon discusse, when we come to your opening of the question; in the meane while the Reader must marke, The question is not whether Christ bare the burden of all our sinnes on the tree, or whether he were touched and tempted in all things like to his brethren, yet still without sinne, but whether it can be prooued by the Scriptures that Christ must beare all and the selfe same burdens of our sinnes which wee should haue borne in this life, and the next, and which the damned doe and shall beare. Your distincti∣on of the substance and circumstance of Gods endlesse and mercilesse vengeance of sinne in hell, we shall quickly let the Reader see how vainely you presume it with∣out all warrant of holy Scripture, and how falsely you applie it to the person of Christ against the manifest Scripture, if first we obserue how handsomely you set downe the doctrine which I defend in the next words to your owne hieroglyphicall question, of purpose that if you cannot by trueth ouerbeare it, you may at least by falshood disgrace it. His Defence. p. 7. contrary [ opinion (say you) we conceaue thus, that Christ suffered for our sinnes nothing else, but simply and meerely a bodily death altogether like as the godly doe often suffer at the hands of persecutors, sauing onely that God accepted the death of his sonne, as a ran∣some for sin, but the death of his seruants he doth not. ] Had you not seene and read my sermons printed before you made this late defence, you might haue excused your selfe (Sir defender) by forgetting or mistaking my wordes; but after so often and open repeating them in Print, what cause can be imagined why you should thus ap∣parently peruert my words, and purposely forsake the points which I proposed, saue onely that finding the foile, and doubting a fall, you would gladly slippe your necke out of the collar; and seeing no better meanes, you thinke it more sk ll to stand wrangling about the Question, then to be taken tardie with saying iust nothing in a matter of the greatest weight, and chiefest regard in Christian religion. My words are euery where plaine enough as well in deliuering as debating the question, that Christ suffered no death saue on ly the death of the bodie, by the verdit of holy Scripture; and therefore whatsoeuer the Scripture speaketh of Christs death, it is intended and referred to the death of Christs bodie on the Crosse, and by no meanes to the death of his soule. The words of my preface are these: Pr . p. 3. l. 8. Where the Scriptures are plaine and pregnant, that Christ died for our sinnes, and by his death destroyed him that had power ouer death, euen the Deuill, and reconciled vs when we were strangers, and enemies in the body of his flesh: besides, that the holy Ghost in these places by expresse words nameth the bodily death of Christ, as the meane of our redemption and reconciliation to God: no considerate Diuine may affirme or imagine Christ suffered the death of the soule. When I come in my Ser∣mons to handle that point I thus beginne it. Serm p. 73. l. 13. That Christ did or could suffer the death of the soule, is a position farre from the words, but farther from the groundes of sacred Scrip∣tures. When I shew the Fathers doe ioyne in the same resolution with the Scriptures, I say, Serm. p. 78. l. 32. Rightly therefore doe the Ancient Fat ers teach, that Christ dying for our sinnes suffered ONELY THE DEATH OF THE BODIE, BVT NOT OF THE SOVL . Concluding their testimonies I capitulate in this wise; Serm. p. 83. l. 28. I hope to all men learned or well aduised it will seeme no Iesuiticall phrenzie, but rather Christian and Ca∣tholike doctrine, that the Sonne of God dying for our sinnes suffered NOT THE DEATH OF THE SOVLE, BVT ONELY OF THE BODIE. If you vnderstand not these words (Sir Defender) your Reader will iudge you fitter to learne your abc, then to dispute questions in Diuinitie; if you doe conceaue them, and will peruert them, let him likewise pronounce whether it be sinceritie or impudencie in you, thus to outface the matter against my plaine speach, and to make Proclamation that I de∣fend Christ suffe ed nothing else for our sinnes but simply and meerely a bodyly death altogether like as the godly often doe at the hands of persecutors. Had you said, I maintaine Christ suffered no death, but onely a bodily death, I would haue asked you by what Scriptures you or all your adherents can disproue it; but charg∣ing me as you doe with this opinion, that Christ suffered nothing else but simply and meerely a bodily death altogether like the godly; I must tell you this is one of your trueths, which many men will call a malitious leasing, since my wordes are publikely extant to the contrarie. My first resolution was; Christ Serm. p. 4. l. 4. saw before hand that going to his Crosse he should tast all kindes of calamities, and so it came to passe. For betweene his last Supper and his death, he was betrayed of Iudas, abiu∣red of Peter, forsaken of all his followers; he was wrongfully imprisoned, falsly ac∣cused, uniustly condemned, he was buffe ed, whipped, skorned, reuiled; he en∣dured cold, nakednesse, thirst, wounding, hanging, shame, reproach, and all sorts of deadly paines; besides heauinesse of hart and agonie of mind, which oppressed him in the Garden. All this I affirme Christ suffered before his death, and therefore all this besides his meere bodily death; to which I added Serm. p. 87. l. 23. all those afflictions and passions of the Soule, which naturally and necessarily follow paine and accompany death. You perchance would annex the paines of hell, and the death of the Soule, but those are the very points in question which I then did, and yet doe vtterly ex∣clude from the sufferings of Christ. Where you say, I hold, Christs death was altogether like as the godly doe suffer at the hands of Persecutors, I know not what you meane by your altogether; in some things his death was like theirs, in many things vnlike. A wrongfull and painefull death of the body he suffered at the hands of the Iewes, as the godly doe often at the hands of their persecutors; and a full perswasion he alwaies had of Gods excee∣ding and assured loue and fauour towards him, in the middest of all his anguishes, as the godly haue in theirs, though in farre lesse perfection then his was; but as touching the cause, the manner, the force of his death, I make it altogether vnlike theirs. They inherite both sinne, and death, from their Parents, and so of necessity must die, and putrifie in the graue; he did inherite neither, but being free from both, yeelded himselfe to die, that he might purge and abolish sinne. Death wres∣teth our soules from our bodies, be we neuer so patient, whiles sence doth last; he breathed out his soule powerfully, and willingly, which none could take from him, except he would lay it downe of his owne accord. Our bodies doe rot in the graue, and lye in corruption, which is the dominion of death, till the time, they shall be re∣stored; his body could not be dissolued to ashes, because neither part of his hu∣mane nature might perish, after it was once vnited to his Diuine; but lay in the graue without corruption resisting death, and rose with speede in glory ouerthrow∣ing death, first in him selfe, and after in all his members at their appointed time. So that death is now a necessarie consequent to our sinfull nature, his voluntary death was the satisfaction for our sins, and pacification of Gods wrath, restoring vs againe to Gods fauour, which through sin we had lost. Thus haue you both swarued very far Sir Desender from your owne question, which your selfe put in your first Treatise though wide from our purpose, and wholy misreported the doctrine which I for∣merly auouched by Scriptures, and Fathers; giuing small hope you will deale more sincerely in the rest, that enter so corruptly at the first, but you will now open the whole state of the Question, which we are content to heare. [ The opening of the whole state of the Question. For the better vnderstanding whereof Defenc. p. 8. we must note these principall things. ] What you cal the opening of the Question, I may better call the darkning and obscuring of the Question with many trifling and tedious obseruations, with many new found, farre fet, and ill applyed phrases, with many bold and false assertions powred out of your owne braines, without any shew or so much as pretence of holy Scripture. And if you may be suffered thus to raigne and reuele in matters of Religion at your pleasure; it is an easie way for you to conclude any thing without any great paines or proofes. For you bring vs a world of wordes warranted by no mans authoritie, but by your owne, and out of them you frame false positions fitte for your fancie, and vtter them as vndoubted principles of Christian Religion; which indeede haue in them neither truth, nor sence, when they come to be examined. As is your matter, so is your method, tumb∣ling and tossing too and fro, like the vnsettlednesse of your head, and spending twen∣tie pages in meere confusion and contradiction, for which cause I must be driuen to recall your conceits to some speciall heads, least in pursuing your steps I loose both my selfe and the Reader. The things which you disorderly shuffle, and I shall be forced more largely to handle, concerne either the offender, which is man, or the offence, which is sinne, or the Iudge, which is God; or the punishment which is death, or the ransommer and re∣deemer, which is Christ. I meane to meddle with no more in any of these, but what directly pertaineth to this question, and serueth aptly to exclude your conceits, and truely to establish the collections which I make. First then, 1 touching MAN who consisteth of body and soule, the doubt will be whether the whole man sinned in Adam, that the whole might suffer in Christ; or whether the soule onely sinned, that the soule of Christ onely must suffer. Secondly in 2 SINNE must be remembred how it commeth, and what it bringeth. Sinne is either COMMITTED, as by Adam, or IN∣HERITED, as by vs all; or ASSVMED, as by Christ, who tooke vpon him the pu∣nishment of our sinnes though neither committed nor inherited by him. And of it selfe sinne breedeth in the offendor, where it is not remitted, clensed, and remooued by the blood of Christ; POLLVTION of the whole man, STING of conscience, and REVENGE of Gods wrath in this life and the next. Thirdly, for the 3 IVDGE which is God, we must learne, from what ground, within him the punishments of his elect in this life doe proceede, whether from his Iustice, or from his loue, or from both mixed together, by whom he executeth his iustice in earth and in hell, whether by his immediate hand, or by inferiour ministers and meanes, with what measure he pro∣portioneth it, as well to the faithfull in this life, as to the faithlesse, till the number of their sinnes be full; and lastly, to what purpose he directeth it, either to reuenge sinne, as in the wicked and damned; or to represse sinne as in the godly, or to declare his iustice, as in Infants baptized; or to perfit his graces, as in the best of his Saints here on earth; or to purge and abolish sinne, and to prooue obedience as in the person of Christ Iesus. Fourthly, 4 DEATH which is the wages of sinne, and includeth all the punishments prouided here, and elsewhere for sinners, is either corporall parting the soule from the bodie; or spirituall separating the soule from the life, and grace of God; or eternall, excluding both bodie and soule, from the ioy, and blisse of Gods heauenly king∣dome, and wrapping them both in the darkenesse, fire, and horrour of hell for euer. That all the paynes and griefes of this life, are the seedes of death, and wayes to death, and so come vnder the name of death, which driueth the soule from the bodie, is now presumed, and shall be prooued in place conuenient. Fiftly, concerning the 5 REDEEMER, which is Christ; to whose sufferings all that is aforesaid must in some sort be referred, the question is, in what part, and how farre he suffered, feared, or ap∣prehended the wrath of God against our sinnes: but without question we must know and beleeue that his person was naturally and infinitely beloued of God, (all the elect being imbraced and accepted onely for him, and in him) and that the dignitie of his person and depth of his fauour with God, (when hee submitted himselfe to shew his obedience, and maintaine Gods iustice, by the shame and sharpenesse of the Crosse, receiued in his humaine nature) was the right ground, and true cause of our Redemption and Reconciliation to God; whose patience vnto death was a greater and acceptabler sacrifice to God for sinne, then all the world; yea then all earthly and heauenly creatures were worth. And to increase or strengthen this voluntary sacrifice for sinne, the paines of hell were no way needfull since Christ was to shew his obedi∣ence in this life onely, and after death to rise and raigne with glory, and by that which he suffered on the Crosse, he was to learne the obedience of a Sonne, and not the ven∣geance due to deuils. In all these issues, if I would take the Discoursers trade, to af∣firme what I list, without any further proofe, I could end the whole cause in as fewe wordes as I haue expressed it; but since that will neither content the Reader, nor conclude the gaine-sayer, I must haue leaue in larger maner as occasion serueth, both to repell the Defenders bold presumptions, and to confirme those things which I take to be safer Resolutions in Christian Religion. The principall things which you would haue noted (Sir Discourser) are either de∣fectiue in their diuisions, or coincident in their partes, or repugnant to your purpose. Defence p. 8. l. 6. All suffering of paines in man (you say) is from God, either properly from his Iustice, or from his holy loue; either from himselfe alone, or also from his instruments and inferiour meanes: and that for sinne either inherent, or imputed; either as Correction or as punishment; either immediatly or mediatly as anon we shall further see. Not one of these foure parti∣tions, which you make the fortresse of your cause, is sound and sufficient; and the fift is the selfe-same with the second, it onely varieth in words. In these two diuisi∣ons ( all suffering of paines in man is from Gods Iustice, or from his holy loue; either as correction or as punishment ) you roue obscurely, but absurdly, at the ground, the measure, the purpose of all paines and punishments, as they come from God on all men, be they wicked or godly, Christ himselfe not excepted; either in this world, or the next. For the GROVND of them, you say they proceed from Gods iustice proper∣ly, or from his holy loue. The MEASVRE and PVRPOSE of them you confound in saying either as correction, or as punishment, which you should distinguish. From Gods iustice properly on men infected with sinne commeth nothing but pu∣nishment, that is their due, which the iust Iudge awardeth them. From Gods loue, of it selfe commeth nothing but grace and blisse; for which cause he is the fountaine of Grace, and father of Mercy to such as he loueth. In the reprobate God hateth their sinnes, and so their persons, being the committers or inheriters of sinne still abiding. In the elect, Gods holinesse disliketh their sinnes as much as the others; but their persons he loueth and fauoureth for Christ his sonne, in whom they are chosen. And though the full and due punishment of their sinne, which is spirituall and eternall death, be translated from them, and abolished in Christ; yet when men redeemed and freed from the heauie burden of their sinnes doe not earnestly repent them, or eftsoones frequent them, God for the conseruation of his holinesle, and demonstration of his righteous iudgement to all the world, doth sooner and sharper visit and punish with the corporall and temporall scourges of this life his owne children, neglecting or resuming their sinnes, than his enemies; whom with longer patience he suffereth to heape vp wrath against the day of wrath. A Iames 2. ver. 13. iudgement mercilesse therfore, as S. Iames calleth it, is and shall be to the wicked, whereas in the godly mercy reioyceth against iudgement, but not without iustice. For 1. Pet. 4. iudgement (which in God can neuer be with∣out iustice, since he is the righteous Iudge of the world) must begin at the house of God, 1. Cor. 11. and when we are iudged, we are chastened, (with a mercifull iudgement) that we should not be condemned with the world. And though in the afflictions of the godly, there be many things added of fauour; as the measure, which is tolerable, not ouerwhelming their patience; the purpose which is holy, to recall them from the delight and cu∣stome of sinne, and to perfit the graces of God in them; the comfort which is great, that God loueth their persons, when he pursueth their sinnes; the promise which is sure, that if they suffer with Christ, they shall reigne with Christ, and such like; yet the smart of Gods rod, and sharpnesse of his whip, wherewith he awaketh the negligent, and tameth the vnruly, proceed from his iust iudgement, and commend his holinesse which hateth all sinne in whomsoeuer; and declare his iustice to the whole world, that he wincketh not either at the waiwardnesse, or at the carelesnesse of his owne children. The places in Scripture witnessing thus much are infinite, and easie for euery childe to obserue; and therefore one shall suffice for all. To his Church God sayth by the mouth of Ieremie, Ierem. 30. Though I vtterly destroy all the Nations, where I haue scattred thee, yet will I not vtterly destroy thee; but I will correct thee by iudgement, and not vtterly cut thee off. I haue stricken thee with the wound of an enemie, and with a cruell chastisement for the multitude of thine iniquities, thy sinnes were increased. Thy sorrow is incurable for the number of thine offences, ‖because‖ thy sinnes were increased, I haue done these things vnto thee: ‖But‖ I will restore health to thee, and heale thee of thy wounds. Defen. p. 10. l. 29. [ The godly in this world doe suffer paines for their sinnes; but these whatsoeuer they be, ( yea though death it selfe ) are improperly called punishments, they are chasticements of sinne. ] This new Grammer doth best become your newe doctrine. All paines for sinnes whatsoeuer, suffered by any of the elect in this life, are chasticements, but in no wise you may indure to haue them called punishments, except very improperly. What is a chasticement properly, but a punishment moderated with loue and mercy? And since you be so precise that no paine suffered by any of Gods children may properly be called a punishment; whence I pray you is the word punishment deri∣ued? not from the Latine word punire to punish? and punio from Poena, which our English tongue resembling the Latine, calleth paine? so that paine and punishment are wordes of one deriuation, and so properly of one signification, and by force of the wordes properly, all paine for sinne is punishment for sinne. And therefore in all mens iudgements sauing yours, chasticement is a punishment tempered with fauor, and not a paine excluding all punishment as you make it in your dissolute diuision. Read either the text, or notes of the Geneuian Translation of the Bible, which you would seeme so much to follow; or whose translation you will, and see whether they doe not contradict your childish conceite, that the Chasticement of Gods chil∣dren is no punishment. Psal. 106. Moses was punished for their sakes; and againe, God Lament. 3. doth not punish with the hart; & the Wiseman speaking vnto God, Sapient. 12. with how great circum∣spection (saith he) wilt thou punish thine owne children. And vpon those words of Iere∣mie, Ierem. 10. O Lord correct me, but with iudgement, not in thine anger; they of Geneua note, Ibid. lit. q. He onely prayeth that God would PVNISH THEM with mercie, which Esay calleth in measure ca. 27. for here by iudgement is ment, not onely the PVNISHMENT, but also the MERCIFVLL MODERATION of the same. So that Chastisement no∣teth the measure of the punishment, which God fauourably inflicteth on his children, not according to their sinnes, nor exceding their strength. Psal. 103. He hath not dealt with us (saith Dauid ) after our sinnes, nor rewarded vs according to our iniquities. 1. Cor. 10. There hath no tentation taken you (saith Paul ) but such as belongeth to men; and God is faithfull which will not suffer you to be tempted, aboue that you be able, but will giue the issue with the tentation, that you may be able to beare it. Yea, to his enimies God miti∣gateth the heauinesse of his hand at first, and giueth them time and place to amend before he destroyeth them. Reuelat. 2. I gaue her space to repent (saith Christ ) but she repented not; and therefore when the measure of their sinnes waxeth full, God repaieth them the fulnes of vengeance, which is puuishment proportioned to their sinnes; and this is the due and proper punishments of those that are wilfull, and doe not repent their wickednesse. Defenc. p. 10. l. 29. [ The paines of the godly are partly remembrances to cause repentance, partly Chastice∣ments to humble vs and mortifie sinne in vs; but these whatsoeuer they be (yea though death it selfe) are improperly called punishments. Here you touch after your loose ma∣ner the purpose of God in afflicting his seruants, which you say is to reforme them, but in no wise to punish them. If God had none other meaning in afflicting the faithfull, but to reforme their sins, nor none other meanes to doe that, but by paines, your speech had some truth; but because God hath diuers purposes in so doing, and diuers waies without paines to amend his children, this that here you bring, as the rest else-where, is a blind groping besides the truth, and a bold presuming that you are in the truth. God many times lodeth the best and chiefest of his Saintes with oftner and greater troubles, then he doth the meaner sort; not because their sinnes are more then others, or they neede more amendment then the rest; but to TRIE their faith, as in Heb. 11. Abraham, and Iob. 1. Iob; or to shew the 2. Cor. 12. perfection of his grace, as in Paul; or to prepare them to glory, as in Luk. 16. Lazarus; or to Rom. 8. conforme them to Christ, whose steps they must follow; and often to declare his iustice, as he did in striking Dauids child, when the sinne was both repented and pardoned in the Father. In the 2. Sam 12. sicknesse and death of which child, as of all other infants rege∣nerate by Baptisme, there neither was, nor can be any vse of Repentance, humilia∣tion, or mortification for themselues; and consequently by your owne diuision, since to them it can be NO CORRECTION, it must in them be a punishment of sinne, not actually committed by them, but naturally deriued to them by the guilt and cor∣ruption of their Parents. Yea, the generall paine laid on Adam and all mankinde, as dissolution by death, priuation of originall light and grace, corruption of sinne, in∣fection of soule, which declare vs all to be the children of wrath by nature; were they corrections or punishments of Adams sinne, since after death there is no repen∣tance nor amendment of life, and the rest are neither barres to sinne, nor retraits from sinne, but either parts, effects, or causes of sinne? which sticke so fast, and beare such rule in many euen of the elect, that no gentle or fatherly admonitions, reprehen∣sions, or comminations, will preuaile with them, but they must be ouerruled and wearied with sharp and pearcing scourges, before they will see or forsake the loath∣somnesse of their sinne. Wherein though it be a great fauour of God, rather to persue them with all temporall plagues vnto their conuersion, then to let them run headlong to euerlasting perdition; yet the meanes which he vseth are mixed with iustice and mercie, and are rightly beleeued to be punishments fully deserued by their sinnes, though not fully proportioned to their sinnes, the iust and full wages whereof in sinfull men can be none other but death corporall, spirituall, and eter∣nall. So that your diuision, all paine from God is either correction, or punishment; and your position no paine in the godly is punishment, are not onely friuolous and false, but repugnant each to the other: for so much as paine commeth from God for probation of faith, perfection of grace, assurance of saluation, encouraging of others by example, as well as for correction; and death and correction in Infants, where correction hath no place, must by your owne partition be a punishment of sinne inflicted on the first Man and all his posteritie. The which because we all inherite from our Parents, and had it in vs at our birth, when there was no vse of correction for vs, it was then in vs all, and so still remaineth a punishment of our first Parents sinne; though by the grace, and price of Christs death, we are and shall be freed from it. But come to your purpose, and apply this to Christ, for thither you bend and Christs bodily death, part of the punishment of our sinnes. thereat you shoote; is your diuision true in the sufferings of Christ? then since by your owne assertion Defenc. pa. 11. l. 12. chastisements and remembrances, (which are the branches that you make of Correction) belonged nothing at all to Christ, and indeede there could be no cause to correct any sinfull corruption or affection in him, where no sinne was; it is a plaine confession that the bodily death and paines which Christ suffered on the Crosse, were the punishment of our sinnes in his body; and conse∣quently a part of that curse which was imposed on the first mans sinne; which you so stifly denied in your Treatise, where you said; Treatise. pa. 45. l. 1. Therefore Christs dying simply as the godly die (that is a bodily death) may in no sort be called a curse or cursed. And if to shift of this contradiction, and confession of the truth of my answere to the place of S. Paule, Christ was made a curse for vs, you referre these words ( as the godly doe ) not to the same kinde of death which is bodily in both, but to the same cause of death, which was different, in Christ and his members; Remember good Sir, the words are not mine, but your owne; I put many differences betwixt the death of Christ, and his Saints; as namely the cause, the manner, and force of his death, which I haue touched Supra pa. 7. before; but the kind of death which was bodily, and not Ghostly, is all one in Christ and the godly. For Christ died not the death of the Soule, no more doe the godly, when they depart this life, albeit they may oftentimes whiles here they liue, draw neere to the death of the Soule by sinning, which Christ could not. And if you begin now to be better aduised, I am not displeased with it; it shall suffice that mine answere did, and doth stand true, that Christ in suffering bodyly paines and death for vs, suffered a part of the same punishment and curse which was laid on all mankind for the sinne of Adam. Defen. pa. 9. l. 34. [ We must note especially that to suffer (as the godly doe) Chasticements and correcti∣ons, is not to suffer or feele Gods wrath, nor the punishment of sinne: except it be in a very improper speech. To suffer the true punishment, satisfaction, proper payment and wages of sinne, onely that is to suffer properly and truely the wrath of God: now then seeing the paines which Christ for vs did feele, were indeede properly the punishment, and payment and vengeance for sinne, such as the godly doe in no wise suffer, Christ onely hauing wholy suffe∣red that for vs all: Therefore indeede his sufferings proceded from Gods proper wrath, and were the true effects of Gods meere Iustice, bent to take recompence on him for our offences. ] Thou hast in these words (Christian Reader) the bulwarke of this mans cause, con∣cluding that Christ suffered the MEERE IVSTICE, PROPER VVRATH, and very CVRSE of God for sinne. The frame of his reason, if I vnderstand it, (as who vnderstandeth his mysteries but himselfe?) is this. All paine in man is from God, ei∣ther as correction of sinne or as punishment for sinne. In Christ there was no (‖ cause and so no neede of ‖) correction: his sufferings therefore were the punishments of sinne. They were punishments for sinne; Ergo, they were the true punishment, proper payment, wages and vengeance of sinne, which proceeded from Gods proper wrath, and were the true effects of Gods m ere iustice, bent to take recompence on him for our offences. His termes of TRVE, PROPER, and MEERE, ioyned to the PVNISHMENT, VVRATH and IVSTICE of God, are not warranted by any Scripture, much lesse referred to the sufferings of Christ, nor so much as prooued by any testimony, defined with any certaintie, di∣rected by any part, or expounded by any meanes; but onely proiected as Ridles, and laberinthes to weary the wise, to angle the simple, and to refuge himselfe, when he shall be pressed with the falsitie and impietie of his assertions. Least therefore we wrangle about words in vaine, which is his desire and deuise, that he may seeme to say somewhat, and carry the Reader into a forest of strange and vnknowen phrases, where he shall hardly discerne what either side saith; I th nke it needefull first to de∣clare what the Scriptures meane by the wages of sinne and wrath of God, and so to trie in what sense, and with what truth his termes may be added to them, and ap∣plyed to the sufferings of Christ. Rom. 6. [ The wages of sinne is death, saith S. Paul. God himselfe foretold Adam it should be so. Whensoeuer thou catest (of the forbidden tree) thou shalt Genes 2. die the death. Then how many kinds of death, are by God threatned and inflicted on sinners; so many parts must the wages of sinne containe. Now those are three, the death of the Soule in this life, which I call spirituall; the death of the body leauing this life, which I call corporall; and the death of both in the next world, which I call eternall. For as man had two parts by which he did liue, Soule and body; and two places wherein he might liue if he obeyed God, earth for a time, and heauen for euer; so disobe∣dience depriued either part of man in either place, of the life which he should haue enioyed, and subiected him to the feares, griefes, and paines of death, both here, and in hell for euer. The life of the body is the vnion of the Soule with the body; the effects whereof are sense, and motion, to discerne, obtaine, and performe that which is needfull or healthfull for the body. And as the presence of the Soule bringeth life to the body, so the departing of the Soule taketh life from the body, and leaueth it dead, that is, voide of all action, motion and sense, as to euery mans eyes is apparent in dead bo∣dies. The Soule therefore in the Scriptures is vsually taken for the life of the body, which proceedeth from the Soule, and is maintained by the Soule; And these phrases to Math. 2. Rom. 11. seeke a mans Soule, tolay Ioh. 13. 1. Ioh. 3. downe his owne Soule, or to giue it for another, to powre out his Soule vnto death, with such like, doe properly expresse the death of the body, quickned by the Soule, because men loose or leaue this life, when they loose or leaue their Soules. And where God threatned death to Adam, euen the very same day in which he should transgresse, we must not thinke that God either delayed the punishment longer, or extended it farder, then his words at first im∣ported. When therefore the very same day that they sinned, God said to the woman, Genes. 3. increasing I will increase thy sorrow, and to the man, In sorrow shalt thou eate all the daies of thy life, we must acknowledge, that from that time forward, death began to take hold, and worke on both their bodies, though not by present separation of the Soule from the body, (for Adam liued after that 930. yeeres) yet by mortalitie, mutabilitie, miserie, and namely by sorrow and paine as the instruments and agents of death. 2. Cor. 7. Worldly sorrow causeth death, as Paul witnesseth; and a Prou rb. 17. broken hart (saith Salomon ) drieth the bones; yea, Eccles. 30. sorrow hath slaine maxy. And were it not so written, yet experience and nature teacheth vs, that griefe of mind, and paine of body, where they continue or increase, consume the flesh and hasten death; so that when God. the same day that they sinned, subiected them to sorrow and paine, which before they felt not. He made way for death, that it might continually worke in them, and ken them till they returned to dust. De ci itate Dei. li. 13. cap. 10. The ti e of this life (saith Aust n) is nothing els but a race to death, and truely after a m n begi th to be in this b dy, he is in death. The life of the soule is not her vnderstanding and will, which she can neuer lose, no not in hell; but onely the trueth and gra e of God, by whose spirit she receiueth the light of faith to direct her, and the strength of loue, to stirre and i cite her in t is life to beholde, desire, and embrace the holinesse and goodnesse of Gods blessed will and promise, for her euerlasting happinesse; which with patience and comfort of the Holy ghost, she expecteth till Gods appointed time do come. The lacke or losse of this inward sense, and motion of Gods spirit, which only can quicken the soule, is the death of the soule, depriued of her life, which is God, and left to herselfe in blind∣nesse and hardnesse of heart, and giuen ouer vnto a reproba e minde, and vile affecti∣ons, to worke wickednesse euen with greedinesse; till contempt of Gods will, and desperation of his mercy doe fearefully end her miserable time in this life, and vio∣lently draw her from hence to see, and suffer the terrible iudgements of God proui∣ded for sinne in another world. Life euerlasting, is the perfect and perpetuall vision and fruition of Gods glorious presence in the heauens, where vnspeakable light, and honour, ioy, and bli e, shall compasse, and replenish bodie and soule in the fellowship of Christ, and his elect an∣gels for euer. The exclusion and reiection of the wicked from this heauenly f licity, together with the shame and confusion of sinne wounding and stinging the consci∣ence without ease or rest; and the dreadfull horror of hell, the place of darknesse and diuels, hauing in it continuall flames of intolerable and vnquenchable fire eternallie tormenting the soules and bodies of the damned; the Scriptures call the s cond death, because it is neuer inflicted but after the first death; and likewise wrath to come, for that the state of this present life is not capable of th se extreame torments, which are reserued for another world. And least I should seeme to make degrees and parts of eternall death out of mine owne head; let vs briefly view, whether the word of God do not witnesse the same. Luc. 13. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth (sayth Christ) when you shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and a the Prophets in the kingdome of God, and your selues thrust out at doores. Daniel 12. Many of those that sleepe in the dust of the earth shall awake (sayth Daniel) to perpetuall shame and reproch; Esa. 66. Their worme shall neuer die, sayth Esay. The Lord that willed his good and faithfull seruants to enter into their masters ioy, when he came to the slouthfull and vnprofitable seruant, commanded to be Matth. 25. taken from him euen that he had, and to cast him into vtter darkenesse. The Iudge himselfe forwarneth he will giue this sentence on the wicked in the last day, Ibidem. Depart from e, ye cursed, into euerlasting ire, prepared for the diuell and his angels. They shall be Reuel. 14. tormented in fire and brimstone (sayth Iohn) and the smoke of their torments shall asc nd euermore, and they shall haue no rest night nor day. This is that 2. Thess. 1. euerlasting perdition and Iude ver. 7. vengeance of eternall fire, which the wicked shall suffer in hell, and this is the full and complete punishment and wages of sinne, repaying the reprobate according to their deserts, when their sinnes come once to that ripenesse and fulnesse, that they may no longer be endured by Gods iustice; the two former kinds of deaths in this world being such as are either despised, or desired, by the wicked. For nothing is more acceptable to them, than without all feare, or care of God, to follow their willes, and pursue their lusts; which i the death of the soule; and the death of the bodie which they can not decline, they labour to neg∣lect; and though they murmu at God for it, as if man had beene framed at first mor∣tall, yet finde they no great hurt in it, because they know not the sequel of it; and per∣ceiue it to be common to good and badde, and to leaue no sense of paine behinde it. And indeed the outward punishments of this life are by Gods bountie, and patience so tempered, not only with comfort to the godly, but with moderation to the wicked, that they warne all men to feare and flie the wrath to come, and giue time and place for amendment. Sapien. 12. The old inhabitants of the holy land, thou (Lord) diddest h te (sayth the Wiseman) for they committed abominable works, as sorceries, and wicked sacrifices; neuerthelesse thou sparedst them also, as men, and didst send the forerunners of thine host, euen hornets to root them out; not that thou couldest not destroy them with one rough word, but in punishing them by little and little, thou gauest them space to repent. The Apostle sayth the same, Rom. 2. Despisest thou the riches of Gods bountie, and patience, and long suffe∣ring, not knowing that the bountie of God leadeth thee to repentance? but thou after thine hardnesse, and heart that can not repent, heapest vnto thy selfe wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the iust iudgement of God, who will reward euery man ac∣cording to his works. The wrath of God is also diuersly taken in the Scriptures; sometimes for the in∣ward dislike, and hatred that God in his holinesse hath of all iniquitie; sometimes for his iudgements threatned, or executed against sinne, whether they be tempered with loue or patience, to worke or expect repentance, as in his owne, and in this life; or proporti∣oned to the deserts of wicked and impenitent sinners, for substraction of grace, as to the reprobate in this world, or infliction of vengeance, as to the danmed in hell. Such is the holinesse of God, that he can loue no wickednesse, but by nature and of necessity doth and must hate all vnrighteousnesse in whomsoeuer. Psal. 5. Thou art not a God, that loueth wickednesse (sayth Dauid) neither shall euill dwell with thee. 2. Cor. 6. What fellowship hath righteousnesse with vnrighteousnesse? or what communion hath light and darknesse; What fauour then and allowance should iniquitie finde with God, that is the very fountaine and flaming fire of all holinesse? To declare Gods perfect hatred against all sinne as well of the faithfull as faithlesse, the Scripture witnesseth not only that his soule abhor∣reth the outrages of the wicked, which are an abomination vnto him, but also that he is displeased and grieued with the sinnes euen of his elect. Prouerb. 6. These things the Lord hateth (sayth Salomon) yea his soule abhorreth them. Zacharie 8. All these are the things that I hate saith the Lord, by the Prophet Zacharie. Psal. 5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hatest all them that worke i iquitie, sayth Dauid to God. The Lord will abhorre the cruell and deceitfull man. Yea God is displeased and grieued with his owne, when they sinne a∣gainst him. Deuter. 32. The Lord saw it (sayth Moses) and was stirred to anger, with the prouoca∣tion of his sonnes and his daughters. When Dauid had slaine Vriah, and taken home his wife; the 2. Sam. 11. thing displeased the eies of the Lord, sayth the Scripture. Likewise when he numbred the people, 1. Paral. 21. God was displeased with that deed. Esay remembring the mercies of the Lord towards the house of Israel, sayth; Esa. 63. hee was their Sauiour in all their troubles, he was troubled, and the angell of his presence saned them: but they rebelled and grieued the spirit of his holinesse. The Apostle confirmeth the same: Ephes. 4. Grieue not the Holy spirit, by whom ye are sealed vnto the day of Redemption. Then as the loue of all righteousnesse is a naturall and necessarie consequent to Gods holinesse; so the dis∣like and hatred of all sinne is rightly and properly appertinent to his diuine puritie; neither must the godly take it for an improper kinde of speech, but fully beleeue and plainely confesse, that God is truely and greatly displeased with their sinnes, lest in their hearts they bring him within compasse of liking or allowing their vncleannesse: and when they repent, they must not onely tremble at the prouoking of so righteous and fearefull a Iudge, but chiefly sorrow for the displeasing and offending the holi∣nesse of so gratious and louing a father. This dislike and detestation of disobedience euen in his owne children, which God of his holinesse hath, the Scripture often ex∣presseth by the name of Anger, though no punishment follow. Exod. 4. ver. 14. The Lord was very angrie with Moses (sayth the Scripture) when he so long refused to goe at Gods ap∣pointment to deliuer the children of Israel out of Aegypt. God was likewise Numb. 12. vers. 9. verie angrie with Aaron and Miriam his sister, for speaking against Moses, though Aaron was not punished for it, and Miriam quickely healed of her leprosie. So God him∣selfe professed to Eliphaz the Temanite, saying; Iob. 42. vers. 7. My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends, though he willed them to sacrifice for their offence, and promised to accept Iobs prayer for them. The same may often be obserued in other places of the Scriptures. The wrath of God is likewise taken for the threates, whereby God denounceth what he will inflict on the wickednesse of men; or for the sharpe reproofe, which hee vseth against sinne committed. Psal. 95. I sware in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest, saith God of the disobedient Israelites in the wildernesse. Ezech. 38. In mi e indignation, d in the fire of my wrath haue I spoken it (saith God by Ezechiel) surely at that time there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel. So Dauid, Psal. 2. Then shall ‖ God ‖ speake to them in his wrath, and terrifie them in his sore displeasure. Wherefore Dauid prayeth for himselfe, Psal. 6. O Lord reprooue me not in thine anger; knowing that Gods rebukes and threates ought to be as much regarded and feared of the faithfull, as his plagues. Lastly, all the Iudgements of God, awaking the negligent, scourging the disobedient, obdurating the impenitent in this life, or renenging the Reprobate, here and in hell, are in the Scriptures called the wrath of God; of which speech there can be no question, because the word of God giueth plaine & plentifull euidence in euery of those parts: onely the Discourser auoucheth, that the two first, are no degrees nor effects of Gods proper wrath; though the Scripture call them wrath, but are so termed by a very im∣proper speech. These are his words: Defen. pa. 9. l. 35. To suffer chastisements and corrections as the godly doe, is not to suffer, or feele Gods wrath, except it be in a very improper speech. And this is one of the maine points, on which he putteth theissue of the question. Defen. p. 13. l. 2. I affirme (saith he) Christ suffered Gods proper wrath and vengeance: You thinke, all afflictions what∣soeuer, small or great, and towards whomsoeuer, are the effects of Gods wrath: but that is not so, except in a most improper speech. To the godly their afflictions both small and great, are Gods fatherly and gracious chastisements, and no effects of his properwrath. Thou must not forget (Christian Reader) from what beginning we come to this issue. This Rouer taking vpon him to prooue, that Christ suffered the true paines of hell, and of the damned, made this his foundation, Treatis. pa. 33. That Christ suffered the wrath of God for vs; which he affirmed to be equall to hell it selfe, and all the torments thereof. Mine answere shortly was, I did not see what this proposition, Christ suffered for vs the wrath of God, if it were granted, could helpe his cause, or hinder mine. Conclus. pa. 243. l. 27. For the wrath of God extended to all paines and punishments, aswell corporall as spirituall, in this life and the next, were they temporall or eternall. So that no paine or punishment, small or great, could befall the bodie or soule of Christ, but it must needs proceed from the wrath of God. To this he now replieth, To Defen. p. 9. l. 35. suffer (as the godly do) chastisements and corrections, is not to suffer or feele Gods wrath, nor indeed the punishment of sinne; except it be in a very impro∣per speech. Where first obserue that these words ( as the godly do ) are not conteined in mine answer, but intended by him in his replie. The ground on which I stood, was that all the miseries of mans life what soeuer they be, came first from the wrath of God reuen∣ging the sinne of our first Father; and so are degrees and parts of that wrath wherewith God punished the transgression of Adam. I named no miseries peculiar to the godly, but common to them with the wicked; neither did I touch any speciall ma∣ner of suffering as the godly do suffer; but prooued that the Scriptures, which must teach vs all how to speake in Gods causes, called them wrath euen in the godly. And consequently, since Christ suffered sorrow, paine, and death, which came for sinne, and are common to all, he might and did suffer the wrath of God for vs, and yet not the paines of the damned. [You cast about afresh (Sir Discourser) in your defence, and tell vs the Scriptures Phrases of Gods wrath in Scrip∣ture against the wicked are im∣proper. speake verie improperlie, when they call the miseries of this life the wrath of God; and therefore you bring vs a new phrase of your owne framing, and say the godly in no wise doe suffer Gods proper wrath, that is, properly taken, or properly so called, which Christ did suffer as you affirme.] Is your learning so good (Sir Defender) that you will applie to God wrath, indignation, and furie properly so called, which are the high∣est degrees of Gods anger against the wicked? Haue you forgotten, who tooke vpon you such knowledge in the Hebrue tongue, that the vsuall words whereby the Scrip∣ture expresseth the wrath of God against the wicked, do import the aph. nose, the chemal . heat, the k tseph. boiling, the char n. kindling, the . excesse a d rage of God against the wicked? which words if you referre to God by way of proper speech, you make of euery one of them a barbarous and blasphemous heresie. So that your late coined distinction of Gods wrath by improper speech towards his children, and his wrath properly so called a∣gainst his enemies, is vaine and foolish: the words in Scripture that note Gods wrath against his enemies are most improper, and are translated from the behauiou of an∣grie men to God, of purpose to strike a terrour into the wicked, of that great and grie∣uous iudgement which they shall receiue. But whatsoeuer the words designe in their naturall signification, which the Christian faith forbiddeth vs to attribute properly vnto God, because they expresse humane affections and corporall passions, which are not in God: by the anger which is in God against sinne, the Scripture meaneth nothing els, but his most holy dislike of sinne in whomsoeuer, and his most iust and constant will and decree, in some to reward sinne according to desert, which is venge∣ance in this life, and the next; in others so to temper the punishment of sinne with loue and mercie, that whatsoeuer he inflict on bodie or soule, shall tend to the praise of his iustice and mercie, and end with the consolation and saluation of their soules. And by the anger which proceedeth from God, are in the Scriptures intended either his threats against sinne, or his punishments of sinne, be they corporall or spirituall, temporall or eternall, mixed with mercie, or proportioned only to iustice. If you relinquish your holdfast of improper speech, and rase that vnaduised shift out of your booke; (for God hath in him no wrath properly so called, but his holi∣nesse displeased, and iustice prouoked by sinne, are improperly named his wrath in the Scriptures;) Let vs come to the proprieties of the things themselues, and see whe∣ther chasticements for sinne doe properly proceede from Gods loue onely, or from his iustice tempered with loue and mercy. Of the wicked I shall not neede to speake much, we make no great question of them; howbeit euen their externall punish∣ments in this life are not voide of Gods bountie and patience diuersly blessing them with earthly things, often warning and sparing them, by giuing them time and place to mislike and leaue their sinnes; and length-fully expecting their submission and amendment, which the Apostle calleth Rom. 2. the riches of Gods bountie, patience, and long sufferance, leading (euen the obstinate and hard harted) to repentance: The doubt is of the godly; whether their afflictions which are corrections and chasticements for sinne, rise only from Gods loue, or rather from his iustice mixed with loue. I affirme the Scriptures doe directly and distinctly propose in the chasticements of the elect as well iudgement and wrath, as mercy and loue; and that not by abusing the words, but by reseruing to either their naturall proprieties, and seuerall consequents; the one for the commendation of Gods iustice, the other for the demonstration of his mercy, and consolation of the afflicted. Esay 57. 17. For his wicked couetousnesse I was angry, (saith God) and did smite him, ‖ but ‖ I will heale him, and restore comfort vnto him. He must be more then absurd; that will ima∣gine, God would or could say, for his wicked couetousnesse I loued him; that were to make God the abettour and embracer of wickednesse, which is wholy repugnant to his Diuine sanctitie and glory; the words therefore must stand as they doe without any euasion of improper speech, and Gods anger in this place must plainely differ from his loue, which cannot be added to these words without euident impietie. Since then the cause was sinne which God doth perfectly hate in whomsoeuer, euen in his owne, and the smiting came for sinne and from anger, it is not possible this chasticement should spring onely from loue, but ioyntly both must worke together, I meane Gods anger against sinne, and his loue towards the person, to make the punishment tolerable, and comfortable to the bearer. The like rule God giueth for all that belong to the true seed, and sonne of Dauid, which is Christ. If Psal. 89. 31. 32. his children forsake my law, and walke not in my iudgements; I will visue their transgressions with the Rod, and their iniquitie with s ripes; but my mercy will I not take from him. God threatneth no loue to sinne, he threatneth anger; the stripes here mentioned are not the loue of a father, but mitigated by loue; the mercy here promised, is not adioy∣ned as the onely cause of this correction, which is ascribed to the transgressions and iniquities of the children; but it serueth for a salue, to heale the wound, which Gods iustice prouoked by their sinnes should formerly make. For he is the God that Deut. 32. woundeth and healeth; killeth, and quickneth; 1. Sam. 2. casteth downe to hell, and rayseth vp againe; not working contraries by one and the selfe same loue, but when he hath iustly done the one for our offences, he gratiously doth the other for his mercies sake; in Habacuk. 3. wrath remembring mercy, least we should be consumed. He then despouseth the Church vnto himselfe in Ose. 2. iudgement and mercy, not in iudgement forgetting mer∣cy, nor by mercy excluding iudgement, for 1. Petri. 4. iudgement beginneth at the house of God; but retaining both that the whole Church may Psal. 101. sing mercy and iudgement vnto him as Dauid did; yet with this difference that he doth not Lament. 3. punish with the hart, as the Prophet testifieth, but his Miche. 7. delight is in mercie. Which plainly prooueth the Rod is not all one with loue, as the Apostle noteth, when he opposeth the one against the other; saying, 1. Cor. 4. Shall I come to you with a rodde or in loue? but is guided by loue, lest in displeasure God should Psal. 77. shut vp his mercies. These two therefore in God, iust anger against the sinnes, and tender loue towards the persons of his children, together with their effects, which are iudgement and mercy, may not be confounded the one with the other, but as they haue different causes and proprieties in God, so haue they dif∣ferent effects and consequents in vs; the Scriptures bearing witnesse, that Gods an∣ger riseth for our sinnes, his loue for his owne names sake; his anger he threatneth, his loue he promiseth; he hath no pleasure in punishing, he delighteth in mercie; he repenteth him often of the euill which he denounceth, his gifts and calling are without repentance; when we call vpon him he deliuereth vs out of all our troubles, his mercy will he neuer take from his, nor frustrate his truth. Yea, the godly haue a diffe∣rent feeling of his anger towards them from his loue; they feare, they faint, they grieue, and grone vnder the burden of affliction, they waxe weary of it, they pray against it; they giue him thankes when they are freed from it; none of which affecti∣ons may with any sense of godlinesse agree to his loue. [But these are Defen. p. 13. no effects of Gods proper wrath, (you thinke) Et pa. 10. Christ onely hauing wholy suffered that for vs all. ] What you meane by Gods proper wrath, is knowen onely to your selfe, you neuer expresse nor expound the word, but with more ob∣scure and doubtfull termes then the former. At first, you affirme Gods wrath to∣wards his children was a most improper speech. I haue now shewed, that if you looke to the words vsed in the sacred Scriptures, Gods wrath towards his enemies is as improper a speech as the other. Your second wrench was, that all chastisements for sinne are inflicted on Gods children properly by his loue. I haue prooued, that they proceede properly from Gods iustice tempered with mercie, and not from his onely loue. Your third shift is now, they are no effects of Gods proper wrath, which Christ did wholy suffer for vs all. If you vnderstand by Gods proper wrath that which is on∣ly wrath, and hath no admixture of his loue, fauour or mercie, then is your position ridiculous in your first maine point, and blasphemous in the second. For who euer auouched that God punished his children, and his enemies with the same degrees and effects of wrath? or who euer dreamed that God chastising the sinnes of his elect, in wrath remembred not his mercie? you doe indeede affirme of Christ, that he suffered all Gods proper wrath, which if you now interpret to be without all re∣spect of loue or fauour towards him, you light on a greater blasphemie, then you are ware of. Wherefore looke well to your new found phrases of Gods meere iustice, and proper wrath, with which you thinke to colour your conceits; they will else proue you a weake Scholer, and a worse Christian. The word ( proper ) applyed to Gods wrath may signifie either that which is not figuratiue; or that which is not common to others; or that which hath no mixture of loue, or mercie to mitigate wrath, but is wholy and onely wrath. In God nothing is figuratiue; he is naturally, and wholy truth itselfe. The words applyed to him are often improper and figuratiue, because we can hardly speake, or vnderstand many things that are in him, but by such words as are knowen and familiar to vs. In this sense all that the Scripture intendeth by wrath in God, is most proper, and naturall to God; namely his holinesse abhorring sinne; his iustice proportioning punish∣ment to it, and his power performing whatsoeuer his will and councell decreeth for the repressing, or reuenging of sinne. For which respect Zanchius, a very moderate and considerate writer of our time, and one whom amongst others, the Discourser Defen. p. 26. iudgeth no way inferior to the best of the Auncients, setteth downe this for one of his Resolutions, which he calleth a Thesis: De tribus Elo∣him lib. 4. ca 6. quaest. 1. Ira, eo sensu, quo scripturae dant illam deo, veré, & proprié, ei attribuitur: Anger, in that sense in which the Scriptures giue it to God, is truely and properly ascribed vnto him. And his resolutions ensuing vpon the former are not onely, that God is Ibid. quaest. 2. angry, (he meaneth truely and properly as his first Thesis affirmeth,) with all sinners as well elect, as reprobate; but that, Ibid. quaest. 4. maior & grauior est ira dei aduersus homines etiam electos, propter peccata, quam existimari possit ab ipsis ho∣minibus. The anger of God against his elect for sinne, is greater and greeuouser, then they can conceiue. A second signification of proper may be, that this wrath which the Scriptures attri∣bute to God, is proper to him, and common to no creature els. Men, and deuils haue wrath, but that is tumultuous, or vitious; and hath no communion with Gods wrath, which is righteous and holy. The Saints and Angels in heauen no doubt de∣test all iniquitie, but they are no fit discerners, esteemers, nor rewarders of sinne. The secrets of the heart they know not, whose vncleannesse is open onely to the eies of God. The waight of sinne they cannot truely balance; he onely that is offended, and cannot be deceiued, rightly knoweth how farre euery sinne should displease, and what euery sinne deserueth. As they cannot fully ponder offences, no more can they iustly proportion punishment to the demerits of euery sinner, and least of all or∣daine, and arme meanes temporally to afflict, or eternally to reuenge the bodies and soules of transgressors: he onely that is all-wise, all-holy, all-iust and allmightie, can throughly discerne, perfectly dislike, euenly reward, and powerfully represse sinne by repentance or vengeance, as seemeth best to him; and therefote he onely is the righteous Iudge of the world, and capable of that wrath, which is proper to God. A third meaning of Gods proper wrath may be this, that as euery thing most right∣ly deserueth his name, when it hath in permixtion of the contrary to alter his nature; so Gods proper wrath may be that which is wholy and onely wrath without any temper of mercie or loue, to diminish the heate and hight of wrath. That is most properly light, that hath no darkenesse; trueth, that hath no falshood; good, that hath no euill in it. And since Gods iustice against the wicked admitteth neither loue to their persons, nor mercie to their miseries; that is also Gods proper wrath, which is fully and wholy wrath without any fauour or pitie towards them that are the vessels of wrath appointed to destruction. Of their damnation S. Iohn writeth: The euel. 14. smoke of their torment shall ascend for euer, and they shal haue no rest day nor night. Wher∣by it is euident, their ames. 2. iudgement shall be mercilesse, their Mark. 9. worme neuer dying, and the fire neuer quenching. And how can it be otherwise, since they are both haters and ha∣ted of God. 1. Iacob haue I loued (saith God) and Esau haue I hated. Thou Psal. 5. hatest (saith Dauid to God) all those that worke wickednesse. Yea Rom. 1. the wrath of God (saith Paul) is reuealed from heauen against all vngodlinesse and vnrighteousnesse of men. For as they re∣garded not to know God, so God deliuered them vp into a reprobate minde to doe vnseemely things. Neither is there any greater wrath in this life, then for men to be left to the lustes of their owne hearts, that they may be full of all vnrighteousnesse, wickednesse, ma∣liciousnesse, haters of God, inuenters of euill, voyde of all loue, fidelitie, and mercie, and here receiue in themselues a meete reward of their errour, to prepare them for eternall ven∣geance, with diuels in the world to come. This wrath of God against the wicked, hath in it neither loue, nor mercie, but is wholy wrath proportioned to their desires which are sinnefull, and their deserts which are hatefull before God, and so they feele the iust, and full recompence of their affected ignorance, and wilfull disobedience. Of this wrath the elect doe not taste, they are freed from it in Christ their Redeemer and Sauiour, by whose spirit their mindes are lightned and renued, and their hearts perswaded to the obedience of faith, and by whose death they are wholy deliuered from the wrath to come. Of the two former they often taste, specially when they neglect continuall and serious repentance, to which free remission of sinnes is offered in the blood of Christ Iesus; or when through the rebellion of the flesh against the spirit, they are caried backe to the desires of their former corruption. In which cases the Lord with sundry and sore afflictions letteth them sharpely feele what it is to pro∣uoke the holinesse, or abuse the goodnesse of so gracious a Father, and neuer leaueth scourging them, till they see and acknowledge their vnrulinesse, and lament and leaue their vncleannesse, taking hope and hold through faith of his mercies promised them in Christ Iesus. If it can not be truely sayd of the elect, that in this third sense, which you vrge, they taste of Gods proper wrath, because of the loue which God beareth, and sheweth them in Christ his sonne; how much lesse may it be auouched of Christ himselfe, that he suffered all Gods proper wrath; on whom nothing was layed for our sinnes, but with so great loue, fauour, and honour (considering the cause which he vndertooke) that God in each and all Christs sufferings declared him to be the best pleasing sacrifice, and most sufficient recompense for sinne, that heauen could yeeld, or God would haue. For whether wee looke to the choise of the person, to the measure of his cha∣stisement, or to the reward of his labour, wee shall see the exceeding and admirable loue, and fauour of God towards him, albeit the iustice of God kindled against our sinnes, did not quit him from all paine: yea that very chastisement, by which he yeel∣ded, and learned obedience, did not onely witnesse, but also increase Gods loue to∣wards him. And where you (Sir Discourser) cast your eyes onely vpon Gods seuere and implacable iustice against sinne, when you speake of Christes sufferings, to serue your owne turne, and to tole in hell-paines with some pretence of piety; all the god∣ly may perceiue, and must confesse, that God in satisfaction for sinne had greater re∣gard of his holinesse despised by mans disobedience, and of his glorie defaced by Sa∣tans triumph for our fall, than of the rigor of his iustice prouoked by contempt of his commandement. For had God chiefly respected the execution of his iustice against sinne, his owne sonne was most vnfit to be subiected to that vengeance which was prepared for deuils: but God in the recompense which he required for sinne, chose rather to haue his holinesse contented, and his glory aduanced, than to haue his iu∣stice inflicted to the vttermost. And therefore he selected the person of his owne sonne, that might fully satisfie his holinesse, and maruellously exalt his glorie, but on whom of all others his iustice could take least holde; not that his iustice should be neglected, but that a moderate punishment in his person, for the worthinesse thereof would weigh more euen in the balance of Gods exact iustice, than the depth of Gods wrath executed on all the transgressours. The chastisement of our peace layd vpon him will proue the same. For where the What death Christ died. wages of sinne is death, and death due to sinne is threefold, spirituall, corporall, and eternall, as I haue formerly shewed; such was the person of our Sauiour, that two parts of death due to sinne, could by no rule of Gods iustice fasten on Christes hu∣mane nature. The gifts of Gods spirit and grace could not be quenched nor dimi∣nished in him; he was Iohn 1. full of grace and trueth; he had not the spirit Iohn 3. by measure, as we haue; but Iohn 1. of his fulnesse we all haue receiued. Iohn 8. It is my father (saith he) that honoureth me, whom ye say to be your God; yet haue ye not knowen him, but I know him; and if I should say I know him not, I should be a liar like vnto you: but I know him, and keepe his word, and do alwayes the things that please him. The cleerenesse of trueth knowing Gods will, and fulnesse of grace keeping his word, beeing continually present with the humane soule of Christ; most apparently the death of the soule, which excludeth all inward sense and motion of Gods spirit, could haue no place in him, by reason the death of the soule is the want of all grace, and height of all sinne, from which he was free: much lesse could any part of Christs manhood by Gods iustice be condemned to euerlasting death, or to hell fire; since there could nothing befall the humanitie of Christ, which was vnfit for his Diuinitie, they both being inseparably ioyned toge∣ther; or repugnant to that loue which God so often professed, and proclamed from heauen; or iniurious to the innocencie and obedience, which God so highly accep∣ted, and rewarded; or preiudiciall to mans saluation, which God so long before pur∣posed and promised. No weight of sinne, no heat of wrath, no rigour of iustice could preuaile against the least of these, to cast Christ out of heauen, and combine him with diuels in the second death, which is the Reuel. 21. lake burning with fire and brimstone. There is onely left the third kinde of death, which is corporall, to which Christ yeelded him∣selfe willingly for the conseruation of Gods iustice, who inflicted that paine on all men as the generall punishment of sinne; for the demonstration of his power, who by death ouercame death, together with the cause and consequents thereof, and for the consolation of the godly, that they should not faint vnder the crosse, nor feare what sinne and Satan could do against them. It was loue then in God towards vs, to giue his sonne for vs; Iohn 3. So God loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him should not perish, but haue life euerlasting: but farre greater loue to his sonne, than to vs, though the burden of our sinnes, which we could not beare, were layd vpon him. For since God hath. Ephes. 1. adopted vs through Christ Iesus vnto himselfe, and made vs accepted in his beloued; of force he must be much better beloued, for whose sake we all are beloued. And if to Hebr. 1. make the world by his sonne, were an excellent demonstration of Gods euerlasting and exceeding loue towards his sonne; to Iohn 3. send him into the world, that the world through him might be saued, doth as farre in honour and loue exceed the former, as our Redemption, by which heauen is inherited, doth passe our creation, whereby the earth was first inhabited. Neither was it possible that God should remit the rigor of iustice against sinne, for the loue of any, but onely of his owne sonne; whom because he loued as deerely as himselfe, and had made Hebr. 1. heire of all things; worthily and right∣ly did the wrath of God against man asswage, and yeeld to the loue of God towards his owne sonne; against whom no punishment could proceed, but such as was fa∣therly, and serued rather to witnesse obedience, than to execute vengeance. For though you (Sir Discourser) in the height of your vnlearned skill resolue, that Christ could suffer no chastisement, but Defenc. pa. 11. l. 11. all his sufferings were the true and proper punishment, or iust vengeance of God for sinne; yet the Prophet Esay telleth vs, the chastisment of our peace was vpon him; and the word Musar, which the Prophet there vseth, deriued from Iasar, is the proper word that in the Scripture signifieth the correction of a father to∣wards his sonne; and of God likewise towards his Church. Prouerb. 19. Chastise thy sonne (saith Salomon) while there is hope. Deutr. 8. As a father chasteneth his sonne, ‖ so ‖ the Lord chasteneth thee, sayth Moses to Israel. Prouerb. 3. My Sonne refuse not the chastening of the Lord. Psal. 94. Blessed is the man whom thou Lord doest chasten. The like may be seene by those that will looke, Deutr. 21. vers. 18. Ierem. 2. vers. 30. Ierem. 31. vers. 18. Psal. 118. vers. 18. The Apostle concurreth with the Prophet Esay touching Christes sufferings, and sayth, Hebr. 5. Though he were the sonne, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. He learned obedience, which is the subiection of a sonne to his fathers chastisement, he tasted not vengeance, which is the indignation of an enemie requiting. Yea the very death which Christ suffered in the body of his flesh, was so farre from being an effect of Gods proper wrath, that it was an increase of Gods loue towards him, and as well the price of our Redemption, as the cause of all his honor following. Iohn 10. Therefore the Father loueth me (sayth our Sauiour) because I lay downe my soule (or life) to take it againe. And so much the Prophet foretolde, Esa. 53. Therefore will I giue him (sayth God) a part in many things, and he shall diuide the spoile of (or with) the mightie, because he poured out his soule (or life) vnto death. Which the Apostle sheweth to be thus verified in Christ. Philip. 2. He humbled himselfe, being obedient, vnto the death, euen the death of the Crosse. Wherefore God also highly exalted him, and gaue him a name aboue euery name, that in the name of Iesu euery knee should bow; of things celestiall, terrestrial, and infernall, & euery tongue confesse, that Iesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the father. All power, honour and iudgement, in heauen, earth, and hell, are therefore deliuered ouer to Christ by God, and all things subiected vnder his feet, because he h bled himselfe, and was obedient to his father vnto death, euen the death of the Crosse. Was it then wrath in God without loue, that brought Christ to his death; or rather vnspeak∣able loue in God towards his sonne, which ouerruled his iustice prouoked by our sinnes, and so highly accepted, and plentifully rewarded the death of Christ, that he made him LORD ouer all things and persons in heauen, earth, and hell? to giue grace and peace, mercie and glory to Gods elect by his meanes and merites; and to inflict excecation, destruction, and damnation on the wicked both men and di∣uels by his iudgement and sentence? If it were admirable loue and fauour in God towards Christs humane nature to ioyne mans flesh and spirit into the vnitie and so∣cietie of his Sonnes Diuine maiestie, what inestimable honor and glory was it to put the whole gouernment of Gods kingdome in heauen and earth into Christs hands, which is the reward that God hath allotted to Christs obedience & patience shewed on the Altar of the Crosse? So that the learned may soone perceiue, I worke no Defenc. pa. 19. deceit nor mistaking to the Reader through the ambiguitie of this word, THE VVRATH OF GOD, as you pretend; but you wandring in the desart of your owne deuises, haue fa∣shioned to your selfe a fardle of phrases, as Gods proper, and improper wrath, meere iustice, and such like, and vnder the generalitie and vncertaintie of these words you hide your head; and when you are required to make some proofe, and shew some parts of Gods wrath out of the Scripture, which Christ suffered, besides the death of the Crosse, and paines thereof, you answere; to Defenc. pa. 17. l. 15. particularize or to specifie the parts of Gods wrath, which Christ felt, as I will you to doe, what madnesse were it in men to at∣tempt, and what folly is it in any to require. Indeede it would be madnesse in you to attempt it, for thereby you should plainly disclose that absurditie and impietie which now is cloaked vnder generall and doubtfull termes; but those that be godly will ne∣uer suffer their faith to be framed by your phrases, except you shew warrant of Gods word, both whence you collect them, and what you meane by them; neither of which you doe, nor can doe with any truth in these points now in question. For first by what Scripture proue you that Christ did or must suffer the proper The Scriptures neuer mention that Christ suf∣fered Gods wrath. wrath of God or the punishment and vengeance of sinne? I following the sense and words of the Scriptures, and of Diuines both olde & new, which make shame, sorrow, paine and death in this life the effects of Gods wrath punishing sinne in Adam, and his of-spring at his fall, did by consequent ( a specie ad genus affirmatiue ) gather, and in that respect confesse, that Christ suffering those things on the Crosse, suffered the wrath of God, and due punishment of sinne in this life: but you tell vs now, the Scriptures in that point speake most improperly, you haue found out that Gods wrath signifieth properly the paines of the damned, and those Christ suffered for our sinnes. True it is, and long since by me Serm. pa. 131. conclus. pa. 243. auouched, that Gods wrath against sinne extendeth to all the paines and punishments of Soule and body, as well in hell as on earth; and in comparison of the terrible torments of hell fier, the paines and pu∣nishments of the faithfull in this life may be called, and accounted rather the Serm. p. 133. chas∣tisements of a Father, then the rigour of a Iudge; but since you refuse that sense of Gods wrath, which I collected from the Scriptures as very improper, take no aduantage of my confession, and let Gods wrath stand in your sense either for Gods displeasure against the person offending, or for the vengeance of sinne executed on the wicked and damned; I aske you now by what authoritie of holy Scripture can you prooue, that Christ suffered Gods proper wrath, or his wrath at all? I recall not my former Resolution, which I take to be sober and sound; but you reiecting it as improper and deceitfull, let vs see how you prooue by the Scriptures that Christ suffered Gods wrath, which you so much presume, and make the chiefe pillour of all your proce∣dings. In your late defence with shame enough, you yeeld at last, that this Defenc. pa. 16. l. 12. word HELL is not literally and expresly applyed to Christs sufferings in the Scriptures; you must likewise yeeld, by your leaue, that this speech, the wrath of God, is not literally nor expresly affirmed of Christs sufferings in all the Scriptures. That Esay. 53. he was wounded for our transgressions, and torne (or trodden vnder feete) for our iniquities, and we healed by his stripes; as also that he was afflicted and oppressed, and bare our iniquities, and poured out his soule vnto death, the Prophet Esay witnesseth; that he Math. 20. Ioh 18. dranke of the Cup, which his Father gaue him, the Euangelists mention; and the Apostle saith, he was Rom. 4. deliuered, and 1. Cor. 15. died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures; but none of these expresse or inferre that he suffered the proper wrath of God, or full punishment and vengeance of sinne; which are the phrases placed for the ground∣worke of all your discourse, though no way prooued by any shew of Scripture. The words vsed generally by the holy Ghost to expresse Christs sufferings (besides the former) import that he gaue himselfe for vs to be the Ephes. 5. sacrifice, the 1. Cor. 6. price, and the 1. Timoth 6. ransome of our deliuerance. All which wordes note no wrath conceiued against him, nor vengeance executed on him; but rather the exceeding loue and fauour of God towards him, as the onely Sacrifice that God would accept; the onely price that God did esteeme, the onely ransome that God would receaue for the sinne of the world. This Sacrifice was his body, this price was his bloud, this ransome was his death. Hebr. 10. We are sanctified by the offering of the body of Iesus once ‖made‖. 1. Cor. 6. Ye are bought with a price th Paule, that is, 1. Petri. 1. yee were redcemed with the precious blood of Christ, saith Pe∣ter. For Ephes. 1. we haue redemption in him by his blood; And Hebr. 9. he is the mediatour of the new testament, through death, for the ransome of the transgressions in the former testament, So that by the sacrifice of his bodie, price of his blood, and ransome of his death, he hath made a most full recompence, satisfaction, and redemption for the sinnes of the world: and consequently the punishment which he sustained, 1. Petri 2. when he bare our sinnes in his body on the tree, was the full & perfect Hebr. 1. purgation, and 1. Ioh. 2. propitiation of our sinnes; full not in the degrees and parts of condemnation and vengeance due to sinne, which the damned doe suffer, as you falsely and absurdly insinuate, but full in price and force of Redemption and deliuerance from sinne; for somuch, as Gods holi∣nesse is highly pleased with the obedience, Gods glory greatly aduanced by the hu∣militie, and Gods iustice fully satisfied with the submission and patience of his Sonne on the Crosse. More then this if you will vrge on the person of Christ, as needefull for our Re∣demption, first proue it, and then professe it at your pleasure; otherwise if you boldly and vainely presume it, your addle and idle wordes can not preiudice the setled and vndoubted principles of the Christian faith warranted by the word of God, and fully receaued by the Church of Christ euen from the beginning. To your maimed and ruinous foundation that Christ must suffer all and the very same punishment, wages, and vengeance of sinne, which the damned doe suffer, and we should haue suffered, had we not beene excused by his suffering it for vs; I haue plainly and sadly answered I know not how often, it is a false and lewd imagination; and so impious, that your selfe dare not in your late Defence offer it to vew, without many bridles to holde it from horrible blasphemie. But (Sir discourser) why coyne you conclusi∣ons in christian Religion, that must haue three or foure exceptions to saue them from open impietie? and why see you not that your speciall reseruations ouerthrow the truth of your owne assertion? for where the true and proper punishment, wages and vengeance of sinne in all the wicked is spirituall, corporall, and eternall death; in your limitations at last, which you forgate at first, you except Christ from spirituall death, which is sinne, and from eternall death which is damnation of body and soule to hell fier; & yet you still affirme, that Christ suffered the full & proper punishment, wages, and vengeance of sinne, as though these two, spirituall and eternall death, were no parts of the punishment & vengeance due to sin; or these being excepted as vnfit for Christ to suffer; you could truely say Christ suffered the full and proper punish∣ment, and vengeance of sinne, which consisteth of these three kinds of death. And who but you would send vs such headlesse and senselesse resolutions in Di∣uinitie as these are; I Defenc. pa. 13. l. 22. affirme that Christ suffered all gods proper wrath, and vengeance for sinne, I say all that the very damned do suffer, namely so described and limited as is aboue said. And againe, Defenc. pa. 12. l. 1. He suffered from Gods hand euen as the damned doe; namely in these points which are both possible and reasonable. Were you some new Euangelist, or vpstart A∣postle, it were euen enough for you to referre Christs sufferings to your description and your limitation without any farther authority; but when you take vpon you with your bare word to broch so many nouelties in Christian religion, without one line or letter of holy writ to vpholde your dreames and deuices, who can chuse but deride your follie? You pinne mens faiths for the ground of their saluation to your descrip∣tions and your limitations, to possibilitie and reason measured by your rule without any text or title of Scripture to warrant your words; and then you thinke the maine question is profoundly and fully handled; but your sober and wise Reader will pre∣sently finde the lamenesse or leudnesse of your grand conclusion. For if Christs per∣son not only by your possibilitie and reason, but by the soundnesse of trueth, and sin∣cerenesse of faith must be exempted from sinne which is the death of the soule, and from damnation which is euerlasting death; why write you so boldly that Christ must suffer all Gods proper wrath, euen all that the damned do suffer; whereas apparently those two being excepted, Christ could suffer no kinde of death but only a corporall? And if by your so describing and so limiting the matter, you draw Christ within the staine or guilt of sinne, or within the compasse or danger of damnation; hope you to finde any Christian eares so patient that will endure that monstrous and sacrilegious in∣dignitie? [But you will inuent a new hell for Christ, which shall haue the Defenc. pa. 13. l. 14. substance, but not the circumstance of damnation, and shalbe inflicted Ibid. pa. 12. l. 32. by Gods immediate hand properly, ye a only in the verie soule of Christ, l. 27. God can doe more than he will. which Gods owne infinite wrathfull power and iustice can inflict for satisfaction, where and how it pleaseth him. ] The question (good Sir) is not of Gods power what he can do, but of his will reuealed in his Word, and of his pro∣mise performed in the person of his sonne for our saluation, and testified by the mouthes and pennes of the Prophets and Apostles, that were guided by his holy spi∣rit to speake and write the trueth. I make no doubt, but God can create another hea∣uen, another earth, and another hell, as quickly and as easily as he did these that now are; yet if any man affirme that God will so do, or hath so done, I must holde him for an Infidell, because he gainsayth Gods trueth, and belieth Gods will by pretending Gods power. Talke not therefore what God can doe; shew rather by the word and witnesse of trueth what God hath done; to that must we trust, to that are you bound, and from that are you slipt. You haue not so much as any colour of Scripture, for these desperate nouelties and vanities, I will giue them no woorse words, lest you complaine of my bitternesse; and if any man be but so wise, as to let your proue these things before he beleeue them, he is safe enough for euer admitting them, I may spare my paines in refuting them; yet because destitute of all other helpe, you ap∣peale to possibilitie and reason, to fourbish your new inuention of another hell, let vs see how handsomely you hale it onward. Defenc. pa. 8. l. 12. [ By the law of our creation as we are men, hauing a soule besides our bodie, so our soule hath in it a threefolde facultie of suffering paines. First that which is proper and immediate iustly so called: proper, because it is proper only to reasonable and immortall spirits. Immedi∣ate two wayes; First, because it can and doth receiue an impression of sorrow and paines made from God only by and in it selfe, without any outward bodily meanes thereunto. Secondly, it is also an immediate punishment or els correction of sinne: it commeth not for any other cause at all. So that thus we meane, when we speake of the soules proper and immediate suffering. The soules second facultie of suffering paines, is not proper, but common to vs with beasts: namely, that which is by sympathie and communion with and from the body. A third kinde of painfull suffering the soule hath: namely, her vehement and strong affections are painfull, whether they be good or euill, as zeale, loue, compassion, pitie, care, &c. neither are these im∣mediatly for sinne, whether punishments or corrections: neither are they punishments, or cor∣rections at all properly in themselues: accidentally they may be, when they grow so strong that they paine and grieue the soule. ] If the walles and roofe of your new hell rise no fairer, nor stand no faster then your foundation doth; a weake puffe of winde will blow all away. If a man should shortly answer you, That the soule of man hath but one facultie of suffering, though the meanes be diuers from which and by which she suffereth paines, and that the meanes be farre moe than you number (as namely she may suffer paine from her owne vnder∣standing and will, yea from diuels and from the fire of hell, besides the meanes which you recken, to wit, her sympathie with the bodie, her vehement affections, and the immediate hand of God when and where pleaseth him) your building is at an end; you can go no farder; you haue neither Diuinitie, nor Philosophie, possibilitie, nor reason to support that which you would so faine inferre. But let vs view your speci∣alties. [ The soule (you say) by the law of our creation hath in it a threefold facultie of suffering paine. ] The soule indeed by her creation hath a triple reference to good and euill; to wit, her apprehension and distinction of either; her inclination and motion to ei∣ther; and her impression and passion from both; and for the performance of these she hath sundrie and seuerall parts and faculties. For as man was made to know God, and loue God, and after a time of obedience perfectly to enioy God, who is onely and wholly good; so had he three speciall powers and faculties in his soule answerable to these three purposes of the Creator; and yet capable of the contrarie, which was the want of all good, if he fell rom God. And therefore by the power of his vnderstan∣ding man might discerne good and euill; by the libertie of his will e might elect and embrace either, and by the passibilitie of his soule he might feele and suffer the impression and sequele of both by ioy or paine, which God in his iustice alotted to be the end and wages of liking and doing good or euill. And because for the seruice and safetie of his bodie, and for the dueties and actions of this life, man was to vse earthly things, and also to need outward meanes for hearing the word, and viewing the works of God, there were giuen him senses to perceiue, and sensitiue motions to desire things needfull and delightfull for him, as also to dislike the euill of penurie, paine, and sorrow that should be occurrent to his senses. In which the wisdome of God ordained, that what seemed good to mans imagination should prouoke his de∣sire with loue and delight, and what seemed euill, should offend him with some touch of griese; the superiour and spirituall powers of the soule being giuen as Iudges to censure, restraine and oue rule the sensitiue delights and motions, where they swar∣ued from the true rule of good and euill, which was only Gods will reuealed, or writ∣ten in the heart of man. The respects and diuersities of good and euill offered in generall to the sense and vnderstanding of man, were sanctitie, sufficiencie, and felici∣tie with their contraries, and likewise the generall passions and impressions of good and euill receiued in the soule, were hope and ioy for good approching or posfessed; and feare and paine for the imminence or presence of euill, as also for the departure or losse of good, in whose place euill, which is the priuation of good, necessarily suc∣ceeded. The passions then of euill (for true ioy and hope thereof, are rather perfe∣ctions than passions of the soule) are feare and griefe; and the meanes by which they are wrought in the soule, and brought to the soule, are naturally the senses and affecti∣ons, vnderstanding and will; and supernaturally the hand of God, or such externall meanes as God hath prouided to punish the soule. So that first your making a threefolde facultie in the soule of suffering paines, is an ignorant conceit in you, as if the facultie of suffering paines were multiplied, because the meanes inflicting paines are many. If I should say, The soule hath in it a thre ∣fold facultie of vnderstanding, for that it perceiueth many things by the senses of her bodie; many things by her owne light and remembrance; and many things by the immediate reuelation of Gods spirit; might not wise men instly deride me, knowing the power and facultie of vnderstanding to be but one and the selfe-same in man, though the means be diuers by which that facultie is informed? Likewise the will of man is caried sometimes by the eie, sometimes by the eare at the persuasion of others, sometimes by her owne affections, sometimes by feare, sometimes by reason, some∣times by grace; shall we therefore say the soule hath in it a sixfold facultie of liking and electing that which is offered her? or rather it is one and the same power of will, which is moued and often times ruled by these sixe meanes; partly from the bodie, partly from her selfe, partly from others, and partly from God. Euen so the passibi∣lity of the soule, or the faculty of suffering paine, is but simple and single in the soule, how many soeuer the meanes be, by which she receiueth the impression of paine: otherwise you might as well say, The soule hath contrary faculties of suffering, be∣cause she feeleth contrary impressions of ioy and paine sometimes striuing together, sometimes succeeding ech the other; but the soule as she is furnished with her facul∣ties to discerne, and elect good and euill, so is she framed to receiue the impressions of either which are contrary; and in that respect capable of ioy and paine in this life, howsoeuer in the next life, the soule shall be perpetually fastned to the one or to the other without alteration or change. As you confound the facultie of suffering paine with the causes offering, and the The agents and means by which the soule suffe∣reth paine. meanes bringing the impression of paine to the soule; so doe you neither fully num∣ber the agents from which, nor the meanes by which paine is inflicted on the soule, on which you ground your three kinds of the soules suffering of paines. If the soule were not passible, that is, capable of ioy and paine, she could neither be rewarded for well doing, nor punished for euill. But God hath created her receiuable of both, that as she should doe good or euill in his sight, so she might suffer and feele that which should be good or euill, to wit, ioyous or grieuous euen in her owne sense and iudgement. Of both, (I meane ioy and paine as they are rewards of well and euill doing) God alone is in this life, and the next, the supreame ordainer, appointer, effe∣cter, worker, and distributer, all other agents and meanes whatsoeuer seruing only his will, expressing his power, and obeying his commandement; yet that doth not hin∣der, but in the punishing of his owne heere, or of his enemies in this world and the next, God may and doth vse instruments and meanes, whom and what pleaseth him to performe his will. For example in this life, besides Gods agents to punish, which are Angels, men, diuels, and all other creatures; the meanes which he hath ordained to impresse paine in the soule, are as many as there be intellectiue or sensitiue powers and abilities in the soule to foresee, discerne, or remember whatsoeuer euill past, pre∣sent, or to come, on vs, or on others whom we loue; or to perceiue, or desire any good which is lost, lacking, or likely to be taken from vs, or from others whom we re∣gard. So that not only sympathie with and from the bodie, and vehement and strong affe∣ctions, of zeale, loue, compassion, pitie, and care, which you recken, do paine the soule; but the eyes, and eares, vpon a thousand occasions, when the bodie is not touched, bring feare and griefe to the heart; yea the vnderstanding, remembrance, conscience, and will (which you vtterly forget) doe oftener offend and afflict the soule euen of the gody, than either the bodie, or the affections do. And in the world to come (which you purposely skip to make way for your new hell) besides the losse of glory, sting of con∣science, and shame of sinne, the Scriptures assure vs that vtter darkenesse, ruthfullwailing, horror of diuels, torment of fire, despaire of case shal afflict the bodies and soules of the damned with intolerable and eternall anguish, as when we come to speake thereof, we shall more largely proue. A third errour in you is, that you make your second kinde of the soules suffering paine, which is by sympathie and communion with and from the bodie, not to be proper to man, but Defenc. p. 8. l. 23. common to vs with beasts; wherein you bewray either your vnderstanding not to be great, or your intent to be vilde. For though beasts haue bodies and sen∣ses, as men haue, and the paine of their bodies pierceth and affecteth the sensitiue parts & powers of life in them; yet haue they no soules I trust, which can be affected the paine of their bodies, as men haue. I hope you be not so deepe in your distillati∣on of hell, that you will bestow soules on beasts to make them liable to your new∣found paines of hell; but in men their immortall spirits are and shall be afflicted by their bodies and senses both heere, and in hell, when the full punishment of their sinnes commeth to be layed vpon them. Iob. 19. How long will you vexe my soule, saith Iob. Psal. 105. The on entred into his soule, sayth the Psalmist of Iosephs fetters. Eccles. 1. All is vanitie, and affliction of the spirit, sayth the Preacher. Luc. 2. A sword shall pierce thy soule, sayth Si∣meon to Marie. Then for the soule or spirit of man to be vexed, afflicted, pierced, and pained by and from the bodie, is proper to man, and no way common to vs with beasts, which haue no soules: and that kinde of suffering paine which is without the bodie, is not proper to the soule, by reason it is common to men with diuels, who haue no bodies, and yet suffer paine aswell by their vnderstanding and will, as by ex∣ternall meanes appointed of God to punish the damned both soules and diuels. Wherefore your termes of the soules proper and immediate suffering, which before I called vnsalted and vnsetled, and you say are Defenc. p. 9. l. 6. easie to be vnderstood and necessarily to be vsed in this question, as you now haue declared and deliuered them, are false and ab∣surd. For no kinde of suffering paine is proper to the soule of man, but onely that which is with the bodie, or by the bodie; the other kinde of suffering paine by vn∣derstanding and will, and by hell-fire, being common to men with diuels; which haue no bodies, and are no soules, no more than soules in heauen are Angels. S. Au∣sten truely sayth, August. 're∣tracta. l. 1. cap. 11. Angelos habere animas, nusquam me legisse in diuinis eloquijs canoni∣cis{que} recolo. That Angels haue soules I do not remember I haue any where read in the diuine and canonicall Scriptures. Since then diuels haue neither bodies nor soules, though they be spirits; and beasts though they haue bodies, yet haue they no soules to be pained by their bodies; it is euident that the piercing and afflicting of the spirit and soule of man by the bodie, and from the bodie, is the onely kinde of suffering which is proper to the soule of man; the spirituall affliction of the soule by her vnderstan∣ding and will, and by the torment of perpetuall and eternall fire, being common to men with the reprobate Angels. To the immediate suffering of the soule in hell, which is another of your new∣found Good affections of loue & zeale are not painful. fancies, I will immediatly come, if first I touch an errour or two in your former words; to let the Reader see, that you are vnlike to lay sure grounds in faith, when you know not the plaine rules of Nature. A third kinde of painfull suffering (you say) the soule hath: namely her vehe ent and strong affections are painfull, whether they be good or euill, as zeale, loue, &c. I pray you Sir, how come zeale, and specially loue, when they be good, to be painfull affections in your Calender? S. Iohn sayth, 1. Iohn 4. There is no feare in loue; and giueth this reason; for feare hath painfulnesse, presupposing it for a prin∣ple, that loue hath no paine: which is most true; because we delight in that which we loue; and so loue hauing no paine in it, but delight, it hath consequently no feare, by reason feare hath paine, which loue hath not. But if it be strong (you will say) it pain∣eth the soule. If loue bring delight, the stronger the loue that is good, the greater the delight; and so the strength of loue doth not increase, but exclude all paine. Which is also S. Iohns rule, 1. Iohn 4. Perfect loue casteth out feare, which is the least impres∣sion of paine that may be. And where loue that is good, is strongest and most fer∣uent, as namely in heauen, there is no place for paine; and in earth when we are com∣manded to Luc. 10. loue the Lord ‖ our ‖ God, with all ‖ our ‖ heart, with all ‖ our ‖ soule, with all ‖ our ‖ strength, and ‖ our ‖ neighbour as ‖ our ‖ selues, must we be whollie delighted, or partlie grieued with God, and our neighbour. The like is to be sayd for zeale, which is nothing but the heat or feruencie of loue. Accidentally they may turne vs to paine, when our godly zeale and loue are hindred, or crossed by the wicked. But the thing that grieueth vs in those cases is not our loue, but the leaudnesse of the wicked, despising or wronging that which we zealously loue. And so may all vertues paine vs. What iust man is not displeased with iniustice? What liberall minde is not mo∣ued at auarice? What valiant heart is not grieued with cowardice? The like we shall finde in all other vertues; euen an inward offence at their contraries, and yet no wise man will say that vertues are paines and punishments of the soule. [Of Dèfenc. p. 8. l 33. compassion, and pitie, among the rest you say accidentally they may be punish∣ments when they grow so strong that they grieue the soule. ] As though there could be any compassion or pitie which doth not grieue the soule. What is pity but sorow at the sight of another mans miserie? and what is compassion but a vehement passion or griefe of the heart for his miserie whom we deerely loue? so that there can be neither com∣passion nor pitie, without sorow and griefe of heart; neither are they at any time pu∣nishments if they be good, but rather Christian dueties and vertues. The miseries of those whom we loue, may be punishments vnto vs; and our compassion on them, if they be wicked, may turne to be vicious, and so be a punishment because it is immo∣derate, where it should be temperate; as we reade of Dauids excessiue compassion on Absalon his leud and rebellious sonne. These be errours enow in so few words, but these are nothing to those that follow in fauour of the soules immediate suffering from the hand of God himselfe without any instruments or inferiour meanes. I might resume your former words of the soules immediate suffering from God alone; but because you heape vp a great deale of rubbish to the same purpose much like the other, or rather much worse than the other; I thinke it best to rid all together. Defenc p. 9. l. 9. Thirdly, we must also note, that God himselfe is alwayes and euermore the principall and proper punisher when the soule suffereth paines after the first maner, that is in her proper and What suffering is immediate from God. immediate facultie of suffering. And that is alwayes immediatly for sinne also, not for anie other cause at all. Fourthly, God himselfe therefore was thus the principall, and only proper punisher of Christ, as he sustained the punishment of our sinnes. The diuels and wicked men his persecuters did their parts also indeed for other ends, but yet they were all as instruments onely, and vsed by God vnto his owne end, namely that Christ might pay heereby a iust price and full satisfaction for our sinnes. It was then the Almightie and most iust God himselfe in his seuere wrath against our sinne, that principally and properly inflicted on Christ the paines and punishments, which he as our suretie suffered for the paying of our ransome. As it is writ∣ten, Esa. 53. The Lord LAYD VPON HIM THE PVNISHMENT OF VS ALL. Your phrases be so fresh and new, that your selfe can scant tell what to make of them, or how to expound them. In these words, and those which goe but the next side before, you set vs downe three interpretations of the soules immediate suffering not agreeing the one with the other. Defenc. p. 8. l. 8. All suffering of paine, is (you say) from God, ei∣ther from him alone, or also from his instruments and inferiour meanes. This presently you call immediatly or mediatly; and this commeth neerest to the sense of the word, if it came as neere to the trueth of the matter. For what is immediate, but without all meanes? The soules first maner of suffering paine then (as you say) is immediate, that is Defenc. p. 8. l. 8. from God only; you must implie without all instruments or inferiour meanes whatso∣euer. For that kinde of suffering which hath any meanes or instruments, is mediate, not immediate from God alone. Why then in your second interpretation of imme∣diat, do you not exclude all instruments and meanes, but only outward bodily meanes? For thus you say in the second place, It is iustly called Defenc. p. 8. l. 18. immediate, because it can and doth receiue an impression of sorrow and paine made from God, only by and in it selfe without any outward bodily meanes thereunto. Heere you exclude not all meanes, but outward bodilie meanes. And when Satan led Saul for feare, and Achitophel for anger, and Iudas for sorrow to despaire, and in fine to dispatch themselues; this desperation wrought in them by Satan, was by your doctrine immediate from God, because the diuell was the doer thereof, without any outward bodily meanes. And likewise, when by hatred, rage, feare, and furie Satan afflicteth the children of disobedience, in whom he worketh; this you will call the immedia e hand of God, because he vseth a spirit, and not a bodie for his instrument. And yet doubting how this can be maintained, for that God vseth men aswell as diuels to prooue and punish both his owne and his enemies, you fall to a third sense of immediate, where you make God alone the prin∣cipall; the rest to be only instruments; and so that is immediatly from God, which is principally from God, what meanes or instruments soeuer he vse, bodily, or ghostly, men or diuels. And in this sense all paines and punishments whatsoeuer, wheresoe∣uer, by whomsoeuer, are immediatly, that is, principally from God, and by conse∣quent all three kinds of suffering paine in the soule which you put, and what meanes soeuer els can be named of inflicting and impressing paine in the soule are immediate from God, that is, they come chiefly from him, whose power, will, and iudgement the rest demonstrate or execute. And thus for want of trueth and lacke of vnderstan∣ding, whiles you labour to expound the soules immediate suffering of paine from God, you vtterly subuert and ouerthrow all that you would say. [Againe, God himselfe (you say) is alwayes and euermore the principall and proper pu∣nisher, when the soule suffereth paines after the first maner, that is in her proper and immedi∣ate facultie of suffering. ] Keepe your manifold faculties to procure you more wit; the soule hath but one facultie to suffer and feele paine, how manie soeuer the meanes be from which or by which she may receiue paine; it shall suffice to call it the first ma∣ner of the soules suffering paine. When you say God is the principall and proper punisher, what meane you by punisher? Amongst men the Iudge determineth and pronounceth what shall be done, the hangman executeth the sentence vpon the con∣demned, and both in their kinds are punishers. The like appeareth in Gods iudge∣ments. God alone is the decreer, appointer and commander; though he v e angels, men, diuels, and all other creatures to execute his will for the punishing of sinne; or deliuering of his seruants from the hands of the wicked. This is the difference be∣twixt an earthly & the heauenly Iudge; that men giue to men right, and not strength to execute their iudgements, but God as he gaue to all his creatures all the strength which by nature they haue, when he first made them; so hee vseth their naturall strength which he gaue, and giueth them farther power and force, where need is, ful∣ly to accomplish his will and commandement: yea farther, he vseth the willes and forces of men and diuels for ends and effects to them vnknowen, and in them vn∣righteous, but to him most iust and holy. So that God is the only punisher as a Iudge to decree, appoint, and command what shall befall euerie man for sinne; he is also the onli giuer and supporter of all power and force, when anie punishment is execu∣ted either by the naturall strength of any creature, or by strength and might aboue na∣ture; but that God is alwaies and euermore the executioner, when the soule suffereth otherwise than by her bodie, or by her affections, or that he was the principall and onelie proper executioner of Christ as he suffered for our sinnes; or that in hell (which is your vpshot) God is the immediate executioner and tormentor of soules and diuels, those are rather sicke mens dreames or madde mens fits, than sober and Christian verities. And in plaine reason how agreeth this word principall, either with proper or with immediate, both which are ioyned by you with it? Where God is principall, there vseth he other meanes and instruments besides himselfe, and his owne hand. Princi∣pall hath alwayes accessaries and instruments, and where they intermeddle, they vse not Gods immediate hand, but such meanes as they are able and apt to guide. So that when God is principall punisher, he is neither proper nor immediate punisher, but vseth the seruice and force of his creatures to perfourme his appointment; and when he is either the proper, or immediate executour of his owne will, he neither nee∣deth, nor vseth his creatures. And here the third time you play with the word pro∣per, but very improperly, as you did twice before; first with Gods proper wrath, then with the soules proper facultie of suffering, now with the proper punisher, which can no way be matched with principall and applyed to God without a palpable absurdi∣tie. For referre principall whether you will, to the determination or to the execution of Gods wil and iudgement; to say that God is the principall determiner of his owne will, is a wicked speech. For who is Gods counseller to aduise him, or associate to as∣sist him; that God should be principall and others concurrent with him to promote his will with their consents; or restraine it with their dislikes? God is not only a Iudge of the world, but the sole Iudge thereof; to make him principall and not sole therein, is to impart his right, and glorie vnto others, which he will not endure. Wee shall see, honour, and admire, and with heart and voice magnifie the righteousnesse of Gods Iudgement that shall be giuen by his Sonne; n which sense it is said, 1. Cor. 6. The Saints shall iudge the worlde; yea, we shall iudge the Angels, but that is by submitting our wils to his, and by glorifying his iudgement, as in heauen his Saints alwaies doe, not by clayming voices with him. There is then no Iudge of the soule but onely God, and to say he is principall Iudge thereof, is apparantly to dishonour him. Will you re∣ferre principall to the execution of Gods iudgements? then he must haue some others to conioyne with him in common; and they must vse such meanes as lie in their power; and so God is neither the proper nor immediate punisher of the soule, where he is the principall. And when it pleaseth him to take vpon him the chiefe execution of his owne iudgement, what cause is there he should call assistants vnto him? Doth he lacke wisedome, or power, that his creatures must aide and helpe him? I wish you to weigh your words better, before you wade in things aboue your height. Your words are absurd, your matter is more absurd, and the proofes you bring for it are most absurd of all. To bring Christs soule within the compasse of hell paines, you flash out the fire of hell as a fable, and turne out of seruice the rest of the torments there, namely reiection from the kingdome of heauen, the sting of Conscience, con∣fusion of Sinne, horrour of darkenesse and diuels, despaire of ease and such like, as no paines, or at least as no substantiall paines of hell: you suppose a paine which you imagine commeth from the immediate power of God, vpon the soules of the wicked as well in earth, as in hell, and so not onely you make God the tormentor of soules and diuels in hell with his owne immediate hande, but you so aggrauate the paine thereof, with fierie words, that the reprobate may fully feele it in this world, and yet it neither doth end their liues, nor waste their bodies, which a pange of the stone, or a fit of an Ague will doe. The best proofe you bring for all this, is a bold face, and bigge words, wherewith you bid all the world NOTE it is so. But Sir, if charitie did not stay me, I should NOTE you rather for an idle talker, then for a booke-ma∣ker, which thinke it lawfull for you to allegorize all that the Scripture mentioneth or threatneth of hell; and in the end broach out of the heate of your owne head a Chy∣mysticall hell, as well in this world as in the next; and so little regard either the truth of Gods speech, or the faith of the whole Church, or the consciences of all good men; that without any further trouble or triall WE MVST NOTE, you say so. Such archers, such arrowes; such cheapmen, such chaffe; a man of your pitch will hardly be brought to any other passe. The bottome of your building (for it deserueth not the name of a foundation, it is so weake and rotten) is this, which I wish the Reader to NOTE, it is so notable stuffe; That where there are but three sorts of the soules suffering paine, as you con∣ceiue; the first by the immediate hand of God, the second by sympathie with the bo∣die, and the third by her vehement and strong affections; The affections (you say) are neither Defen. p. 8. l. 29. immediatly for sinne, nor punishments at all properly in themselues: the soules second facultie of suffering by sympathie with the bodie, you affirme, is Defen. pa 8. l. 23. not proper, but common to vs with beasts: the first therefore in your conceit is the Ibid. l. 37. proper and prin∣cipall humane suffering for sinne; which Christ must needs feele being a Ibid. l. 38. man made of God to suffer for all our sinnes. Of this wandring and halting diuision I haue spoken be∣fore. It is euident the soule may suffer paine from and with the bodie; and from and by her owne powers and faculties of vnderstanding, will, sense, and affections, and from the hand of God immediate or mediate, that is vsing other meanes than are be∣forenamed to punish the soule. That the paine of the bodie paineth the soule of man there can be no question, na∣turall euidence and dailie experience sufficientlie confirme it: and this is that which you call sympathie, when both doe suffer paine together, the one from and with the other. Touching the eies and eares how often impressions they make of feare and sorrow for our selues and others, when the bodie is not touched nor pained, euerie woman and childe can giue testimonie. Threats, rebukes, euill reports taken in at the eares; dangers, distresses, and losses foreseene or seene in our selues and others, which must needs trouble and grieue the soule, are no newes in any condition or person. The affections which are both vngodlie and vnrulie, are so manie blasts and stormes tossing the soule to and fro, with anger and feare, with desire and dislike, with pensiue care of earthlie things and foolish pitie, with hope and despaire, with vnlaw∣full loue and hatred, with vaine ioy and vnprofitable sorrow, and with a number like headie and hastie passions, insomuch that they often driue the soule to rage and furie, or end this life with griefe and disdaine. As for the vnderstanding and will; the soule conceiuing Gods iust and heauie displeasure against sinne, and knowing the wages thereof to be finall depriuation of all grace and glorie, and eternall damnation of bo∣die and soule to hell-fire; how can she but quake and tremble at the very cogitation and remembrance of her owne guiltinesse, and of the greatnesse of his power and iustnesse of his anger? And therefore the godlie presently fall vpon the considerati∣on hereof to condemne and detest all their sinnes, and with broken and contrite harts to lament their vnrighteousnesse, and to afflict their spirits with earnest and inward sorrow till by faith and repentance they find comfort in the mercies of God through Christ Iesus. For want of which, the wicked often in this life, and speciallie at the houre of death, sincke vnder the burden of their sinnes; and plunged into the depth of desperation are possessed with an horrible fright, and terror of the torments prepa∣red for them in another world; they feeling here on earth in their soules the remorse of sinne, and sting of conscience, but not able to rise vnto true repentance and hope of saluation by reason of their continuall contempt of grace, whiles it was offered them, which then is taken from them. After this life appeare the terrible iudgements of God against sinne, which the wicked so much feare, and the faithful so much shun: the speciall maner and meanes whereof as farre as the Scriptures deliuer them, I will deferre till I come to the particular handling of them; though I haue often proposed them, and in part proued them; but whether the words of the Scripture expressing them be allegories, that is figuratiue shadowes, or plaine speeches, that question is not yet debated; which I reserue till I haue ended the immediate suffering of the soule, as this Discourser calleth it. Of these sixe meanes, besides the immediate hand of God to inflict paine on the soule for the punishment of sinne; it pleaseth you (Sir Discourser) to skip foure; and the other two in effect to denie. Affections (you say) are neither punishments nor cor∣rections at all properly in themselues; and suffering by sympathie from and with the bo∣die, is common (as you auouch) to vs with beasts, and is no proper humane suffering; because in your iudgement your first kinde of suffering from the immediate hand of God alone is the proper humane suffering, which for that cause your selfe call the soules Defenc. p. 8. l. 22. proper and immediate suffering. But what if in all this you speake not one true word? what if the affections that be euill be properlie punishments of sinne? what if the soules suffering, from and with the bodie, be the true and proper humane suffering? what if God vse not his immediate hand in tormenting soules; but hauing ordained and appointed meanes by his wisedome and power, committeth sinfull soules to be punished by those instruments and meanes which he with his hand hath prepared, and in his word expressed? Do you not shew your selfe a deepe Diuine, that prooue points of faith by open falsities; and heape vp errours by the dozens, binding them with your bare word, and obtruding them to the world as oracles lately slipt from heauen? but go to the parts, and first to the affections, which you affirme are no pu∣nishments, whether they be good or euill. The affections of the soule that be good, as the loue of God, the zeale of his glo∣rie, and hope of his mercie and trueth, are the speciall gifts and graces of Gods spirit, and so farre from paining the soule, that they breed exceeding comfort and ioy in the Holieghost. The affections that are e ill are not onely the rage and reward of sinne, but inflict as great anguish as may be felt in this life. Concupiscence which is the root and nurse of all euill affections in vs, be they sensitiue or intellectiue; what is it, but the inordinate and intemperate desire and loue of our owne willes and pleasures, despising and hating whatsoeuer resisteth or hindereth our deuices or delights, yea though it be the will and hand of God himselfe? this corruption of the soule by sinne, which is now naturall in vs all, whence came it, but from and for the pu∣nishment of the first mans sinne? what is it but the verie poison of sinne? and whe∣ther tendeth it, but to withstand and refuse all grace, that men reiecting God, and reiected of God, may runne headlong to the finall and eternall vengeance of their sinne? It is no small punishment of sinne for men to be left to the Rom. 1. desires of their owne hearts, and to be giuen ouer to vile affections; which the Apostle calleth the re∣ward of their error, and euen the fulnesse of all vnrighteousnesse: which make men the ser∣uants of sinne, whiles they Tit 3. wait on lusts, and diuers pleasures, which 1. Pet. 2. fight against the soule, by Rom. 7. leading it captiue vnto the law of sinne, which is in the members. And if you doubt whether they paine the soule or no, looke but on their names or their effects, and you shall soone be out of doubt. Anger, disdaine, despaire, dislike, detestation, feare, sorrow, rag , furie for earthly things, can these be so much as conceiued or named without euident impression or mention of paine? yea the fairest of our affections, and those which at first flarter vs most, as loue, desire, and pleasure. (I speake still of euill and vnlawfull) do they not quicklie faile, sowerlie leaue, and sharplie vexe with their remembrance and repentance the greatest seekers and owners of them? In all these worldlie desires and delights S. Austens rule is generallie true. August. deci∣uitat. Dei. l. 21. cap. 26. Quod sine illi∣ciente amore non habuit, sine vrente dolore non perdet. He that kept them not without allu∣ring loue, loseth them with afflicting griefe. As for the intellectiue passions of the soule, which are the trembling at Gods wrath, the feare of his power, and despaire of his fa∣uour, besides the shame of sinne, griefe of heart, and horror of hell; what torments they breed in the condemned consciences of the wicked, the godly may partly iudge, by that which they sometimes taste, notwithstanding their present recourse to the mercies and promises of God in Christ. So that euill affections, aswell intellectiue as sensitiue, be punishments of sinne, and painfull to the soule; howsoeuer your co∣gitations (Sir Discourser) be otherwise humored. Concerning the soules suffering from and with the bodie, which you say is com∣mon The soules suf∣fering from and with the bodie is not common to beasts. to vs with beasts: if the soule do not consider for what cause, at whose hand, and to what end she suffereth; as also how she may be freed, and what thanks is due to her deliuerer, she may be well likened to the Horse and Mule in whom is no vnderstan∣ding: but the brutish dulnesse of some earthly minded men, doth not make this kind of suffering not to be properly humane, which God from the beginning did, and doth vse to all his seruants and saints (his owne sonne not excepted); and whereby God worketh in all his children correction, probation, perfection, preparation to glorie, which are things most proper to men, and no way communicable vnto beasts. Heb. 12. God scourgeth euerie sonne whom he receiueth, and yet he vseth him not like a beast. 2. Tim. 3. All that will liue godlie in Christ Iesus shall suffer persecution, not common to them with beasts. Iam. 1. Count it an exceeding ioy (saith Iames) when you fall into diuers tentations, knowing that the triall of your faith bringeth foorth patience. Now to impart any of these things to beasts, were very strange Diuinity. Math. 5. Blessed are they (saith our Sauiour) that suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdome of heauen. Shall men be bles∣sed, and enioy Gods kingdome for suffering as the beasts doe? 1. Pet. 4. If any suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. He that putteth no difference betwixt the sufferings of beasts and Christians, is vnwoorthie to be a Christian. 1. Pet. 5. The same afflictions (saith Peter) are accomplished in your brethren, which are in the world. If you list (Sir Discour∣ser) to take beasts for your brethren, you may make your sufferings like to theirs, or common to them; otherwise they that are men, and speciallie Christian men, must acknowledge that this kinde of paining the soule by the bodie, is proper to men, and common neither to beasts, nor to diuels. 1. Cor. 10. There hath no tentation taken you (saith Paul) but such as is humane. What is humane, but common to all men, and onely to men; and so common neither to beasts, nor to any other creature, but proper to men? Take backe therefore your vaine imagination, and more foolish collection, that the suffering of the soule by her bodie is not properly humane, because it is com∣mon to men with beasts, and learne hereafter that beasts hauing no soule, much lesse anie graces or promises of God in this life or the next, can not communicate with men in that kinde of suffering, which the soule feeleth from her bodie, and whereby she is chastised, prooued, perfected in this life, and prepared for the glorie of the life to come. [At least yet you thinke the soules immediate suffering from the hand of God a∣lone, is the Defenc. p 8. l. 37. proper and principall humane suffering. ] If there be any such suffering of paine, as you imagine, from the immediate hand of God alone, it is the proper and principall suffering of deuils, and not of men. For humane properly it can not be, vnlesse it touch the whole man, that is as well bodie as soule, whereof man consisteth. And therefore the r ll punishment of mans sinne in earth and in hell, conteineth the torments of both parts; without either of which, there is no proper, nor principall humane suffering; though the soule after death be aff icted for a season till the bodie be raysed and punished with he ; which is the true humane suffering for sinne after this life, because it is euerlastingly allotted to the wicked for sinne, by the most righ∣teous iudgement of God. But how proo e you (Sir Discourser) that the soule of man suffereth sensible and absolute paine. I meane not depending on her owne cogi∣tations or actions, from the immediate hand of God? what Scripture, what example haue you for it? It is the maine morter of your new erected hell; but tempered onely with the water of your owne wit; nor Scriptures, nor Fathers doe acknowledge any No proofe that God punish th immediatly. such kind of suffering in hell from the immediat hand of God as you affirme; yea they expressely auouch the contrary. From the hand of God without question is all power, and so all punishment, whe∣ther it be here, or in hell; he alone giueth force to each creature to pierce and pu∣nish; and he alone made the soule capable of paine from her bodie, from her selfe, and from whatsoeuer creature should please him to vse for the punishment of the soule. Of this I make no doubt; the hand of God, which is the power of God, orde∣reth▪ strengtheneth, sharpeneth, continueth, and worketh, all paine and punishment both here and elsewhere, for the time and for euer; but whether he doeth this by meanes likewise ordeined and appointed by the same power, either within or without the soule, or by his immediate hand without all meanes, this is the question; and rea∣ding the Scriptures for this with as good attention as I could, I find no such thing af∣firmed in them, or prooued by you in all your Discourse. Touching hell, I sinde the contrarie confi med and auouched by the manifest and expresse words of the holy Ghost; and in the greatest plagues and punishments of this life, the meanes that God vseth are likewise mentioned in the Scriptures: the immediate hand of God inflicting paine on the soule no where, that I read, or that you prooue, which in so weightie a cause euery wise man will expect at your hands, before he admit your metaphoricall flames of a new found fire, deuised by you for the Soule of Christ, to make it subiect to the paines of hell. That God is the onely giuer of all grace, by the working of his holy Spirit in our hearts, without the assistance of any creature to further that action, may not be doub∣ted of any Christian. Iohn 3. A man can receiue nothing except it be giuen him from heauen; euen from the Father of lights. (whence) Iam. 1. commeth euery good and perfect gift. For which cause the Scriptures call him, the 1. Pet. 5. God of all grace, working all in all; and his Spirit, the Spirit of grace, 1. Cor. 12. distributing to euery man, as pleaseth him; and yet this diuision and o∣peration of grace, which proceedeth most powerfully from God alone, is not alwaies immediate, but dependeth on the hearing of the word, partaking of the Sacraments, and imposing of hands, which God vseth as meanes not to helpe his power, but to direct and guide our weakenesse. Otherwise neither man nor Angel hath, or can haue any power to touch and turne the heart, or to inspire it with grace, but onely God, who made it and can alter and change it at his pleasure. As the giuing, so the taking away of all good gifts pertaining either to the vse of this life, as prudence, courage, magnanimitie, and such like; or to the furtherance of the li e to come, as faith, hope, loue, and other fruits of Gods Spirit; depend wholely on Gods will and worke: and yet that is no let, but when God hath most iustly de∣priued men of his grace, which should preserue them from euill, he may and doeth leaue the neglecters and abusers of his grace to be possessed and ruled by the spirit of 1. Iohn. 4. errour, Zacl. ar. 13. vncleannesse, and Esai. 19. giddinesse, that Ephes. 2. worketh in the children of disobedience, and carieth them headlong into all kind of mischiefe. Not that God performeth any of these things with his immediate hand, which are wicked and impious; but that by his iust iudgement he giueth them ouer, which despise and forsake him, to be a pray to the roaring Lion, that deuoureth them. Neither is Satan to seeke howe to leade men destitute of grace, to all villanie both against themselues and others; since he can 2. Cor. 4. blind the mindes of vnbeleeuers, distract their Marke 5. wits, and inflame their hearts with all sorts of raging lustes, and vntamed affections, as he did in Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Iudas; and dayly doth in all the wicked. In the outward punishments of this life, where God turneth the furie and violence of his creatures to reuenge sinne; and the seruice of men, Angels, and deuils, to pur∣sue the wicked to their destruction, and to chastise his owne to their conuersion; the hand of God doth euery where appeare by the Scriptures, but that is nothing to your immediate suffering of the soule. For first in them God vseth his creatures, as his agents and instruments; and where his immediate hand may happily be conceaued to worke without meanes, there he punisheth the soule by the bodie, which by your owne position is not the proper and immediate suffering of the soule. In the feare, shame, and griefe, which the soule here conceaueth vpon the denoun∣cing, conuicting, or beholding of her owne vncleannesse, and the terrible iudge∣ments of God against sinne; the power, trueth and iustice of God are euident, but not that immediate hand of God, which you imagine. For in this case God punish∣eth the soule by her selfe, that is, by her intellectiue or sensitiue faculties, letting her plainely perceiue, what ioy is lost, and what vengeance is prouided for all the workers of wickednesse. The losse of which blisse, and terrour of which vengeance apprehen∣ded by outward sense, or inward intelligence, cannot but mightily grieue and afflict the soule. And the greater the losse, that is irreuocable; as also the soarer the mischiefe that is ineuitable, the deeper is the wound, that either of them make in the heart of man. But this feare and griefe, whiles here men liue, proceede from the cogitation and perswasion of the minde and conscience, and not from the immediate hand of God. And in the world to come the horrour of hell and rage of fire, which God hath ordained to punish the soule, shall inflict an intollerable torment not rising from the minds and wils of the wicked, as in this world it doth, but impressed by an exter∣nall and violent agent, which is the meanes that God hath prepared to execute ven∣geance on men and deuils. How beit in none of all these appeareth that immediate suffering of the soule from the hand of God alone, which you so much talke of, and to which you would so faine subiect the soule of Christ to make him suffer the substance of that, which the damned (according to your dreame) doe feele in hell. For in your conceit of the soules im∣mediate suffering from the hand of God, the soule must onely be a patient, and no agent; and God must inflict the paine on the soule with his owne hand, and not by any meanes without or within the soule; onely the soule must feele and discerne the present and inherent paine by her passiue power and facultie, by which she is capable of all paine, whence soeuer or howsoeuer it commeth. This kind of suffering you e∣uery where affirme, you no where prooue; and that which is most absurd, you pre∣sume against the cleare words of the holy Ghost continually naming the fire of hell, and threatning the wicked with it, to allegorize the Scriptures at your pleasure, and in stead of fire which God hath ordained and armed as a most dreadfull meanes to take vengeance of sinne, you suppose a certaine paine, which God with his imme∣diate hand will inflict on the soules of the damned, and that you make the substance of hell paines, and fasten it to the soule of Christ for the time, before he could worke our redemption, or suffer the punishment of our sinnes. But sir Discourser this is rather dreaming then debating of matters of faith, to allegorize whatsoeuer standeth in your way, and in stead thereof to imagine what you please without either proofe or pretence out of the word of God; as if your mouth were the rule of Religion, or the trueth of God would vanish by your fantasticall figures and shadowes. Where∣fore leaue your deuising and auouching what best liketh your vnquiet humour in so weightie matters of mans Redemption, and tye your tongue if not your heart, to the wordes of the holy Ghost, that at least you may beare the shew, if not the sense, of a Christian man. For I vtterly denie that God is either the immediate tormentour of soules in hell, which is your idle and absurd imagination; or that with his immediate hand God did torment the soule of his Sonne at any time here on earth, as the soules of the damned are tormented in hell, which is your witlesse and wicked assertion. For proofe you produce the words of say affirming of Christ, that the Lord layed vpon him the punishment of vs all; but in this, as your maner is, you hit neither the words, nor the meaning of the Prophet. The word is HAAVAH to be crooked or to go a rie, and so by translation signifieth the crookednesse o wickednesse of mans life; which the Prophet testifieth was layd vpon Christ in saying, Esa. 53. the Lord layd vpon him the iniquitie of vs all. But grant it may sometimes by the ioyning of other words im∣port anie punishment allotted to wickednesse; doth the Prophet say that God layed all the punishment due to sinne vpon Christ, or that God layed it vpon the soule of Christ; both which you inferre out of the Prophets words, though neither be there expressed, or thence to be concluded? S. Peter will tell you on what part of Christ God layd our sinnes, euen on his bodie. 1. Pet. 2. Himselfe bare our sinnes (saith Peter) in his bodie on the tree. Now where Christ did beare them, there God did lay them. Christ bare them in his bodie, as Peter affirmeth; God therefore layd our sinnes on his bo∣die, that by suffering death on the Crosse, which was the wages of sinne, Christ might make the purgation of our sinnes in his owne person. Againe, the sense which you would sowe to the Prophets words, that God layd vpon him all our punishment, that is as you would haue it, all the punishment which we should haue suffered, is false and wicked. For so Christ must haue suffered, reiection, desperation, and eternall damnation which the damned doe suffer, and we should haue suffered, had we not beene redee∣med. If you meane no more than the Scripture intendeth, that what Christ suffered for vs in the bodie of his flesh on the Crosse, was the full redemption and satisfaction for all our sinnes; then are you wide from concluding out of these words, that Christ suffered the paines of hell or the full vengeance due to our sinne by the immediate hand of God, which is the chiefe point that you aime at. This is all the proofe you offer out of the Scriptures for the immediate suffering of the soule of Christ from the hand of God; and what sturdie stuffe this is, the rudest reader that lighteth on your pamphlet of Defence will soone conceiue. If you keepe this course in the rest of your positions, the world will soone be wearie of your new-found fansies, if you be not of your manifest follies. [But Christ suffered (you say) the substance of hell-paines, though not the circum∣stances of place and time, which the damned do suffer; for they are not of the nature and essence of hell. ] To make God the tormentor of Christs soule heere on earth with his immediate hand, and so of all the damned soules in hell, you brought vs the words of the Prophet Esay, the Lord ayd vpon him the iniquitie of vs all: for this seraphicall se∣questration of the substance from the circumstances of hell, which mysterie of ini∣quitie you begin now to broach, what Prophet or Apostle can you produce? Dare you, Sir Discourser, out of the hazard of your owne head, pull in pieces Gods setled, reuealed, and eternall iudgement against sinne; and with the worme of your owne wit wrest in sunder the substance of hell from the circumstance thereof? What will you not aduenture in earth, that attempt this in hell? or what shall be free from your forge, that offer to make vs a new essence and nature of hell, and heauen? If you can de se or intend to mingle your toyes with Gods truth, and with sillie sleights of So∣phistrie, which you thinke Philosophie, sub ert maine points of Diuinitie, your leasure is great, but your labour is leaud. In the secrets of the next world, none of the godlie euer presumed to debate or determine any thing, speciallie touching hell or heauen, without the manifest precedence or sequence of holie Scripture. You had need therefore (Sir Deuiser) to be well aduised; it is no small presumption and in∣trusion against Gods wisedome, power, and counsell, to eleuate and frustrate the paines which he hath appointed for the wicked in hell, and to co e fresh and new in stead thereof, which God hath not ordained. I professe to all the world, I dare not depart from so often and earnest words of Christ himselfe, nor allegorize the sentence of the Iudge, which shall be pronounced on the reprobate both men and angels, and executed in the sight of all the elect, not by any figures and metaphors, but by the terror of the things themsel es matching the trueth of the words, which Christ shall vtter. And he I assure thee Christian Reader I warue not either from the conti∣nuall tenor of the Scriptures, nor from the full consent of Christs church; howsoeuer this Deuiser flatte himselfe in his new inuention. But let vs trace him in his owne path, and controll him with the le ell of Gods trueth. What can be more substantiall to any iudgement or punishment than the sentence of the Iudge, and specially of such a Iudge, as with his will, word, and power de∣creeth, pronounceth, and setl th all things in heauen, earth, and hell? If then this Iudge in his sentence of condemnation appoint the PLACE and TIME to be parts of the punishmen s inflicted on the damned; tell vs I pray you, why some parts of the sentence be mo e essentiall to the punishment than others? or why all being parts alike, they should not all be equally of the substance of the iudgement? Matth. 25. De∣part from me ye cursed unto euerlasting fire, prepared FOR THE DIVELL AND HIS ANGELS, is the sentence to be pronounced on all the wicked, that shall be damned. Of the continuance there can be no question, but here it is expresly mentioned, that it shalbe EVERLASTING. For the place, it is as plaine by the witnesse of the Scrip∣ture, which maketh no fire euerlasting but onely hell-fire. Our Sauiour Marke 9. vers. 43. 45. twice in one chapter ioyneth the one as an exposition to the other; and thrice almost with one breath affirmeth euerlasting fire to be the fire of hell. vers. 44. 46. 48. It is better to enter into life m imed than hauing two hands (or two feet) to be cast INTO HELI, INTO THE FIRE THAT NEVER SHALL BE QVENCHED; VVHERE their worme neuer dieth, AND THE FIRE NEVER GOETH OVT. No fire is euerlasting, but onely hell∣fire. Christ therefore in his sentence including the one, implieth the other as part of his iudgement against the reprobate, and maketh both time and place essentiall parts in the punishment of the damned. And when he sayth, DEPART from me ye cursed, forsomuch as there shalbe then no places left, but heauen for the blessed, and hell for the cursed, he doth not exclude them from the one, but by appointing them to the other. Besides, that fire which is prepared for the diuell and his angels, is no where but in hell; and therefore adiudging them to that fire, he doth euidentlie ad∣iudge them to hell fire. Since then no man is or shall be damned but only to hell, and that for euer; the place and continuance are expresse, and so essentiall parts of the iudgement; and consequently of the punishment that is and shall be inflicted on all the damned. For the iudgement which then shall be openly pronounced, is immu∣tablie decreed, and alreadie reuealed by the Iudge himselfe; and therefore vn∣changeable to all that a e or shalbe damned, and executed on that part of the wicked which is extant, I meane their soules assoone as they depart this life, though their bo∣dies be yet in the dust, as afterward shalbe shewed. Most vainly then and falsely doe you slide betweene the substance and circumstance of hell-paines; since the name of hell-paines doth necessarilie and naturallie import the place of torment where those paines are, which is hell; and out of which place they are not: els might they be cal∣led aswell aëriall or terrest iall paines, as hell paines, if they were found aswell in the aire or on the earth, as in hell. But the Scripture hath resolued vs there is a place of Luc. 16. torment after this life, which is called hell, and the torments there so farre exceed all the paines of this life, not only for perpetuitie, but also for intolerable acerbitie and grauitie, that they are iustly called hell-paines, as proper to the place where diuels and damned persons shalbe punished with euerlasting fire. And where you would seeme out of the dregs of Philosophie to borrow the dif∣ference of the substance and circumstance of hell-paines, you vnderstand not what you say. For euen by the rules of Philosophie there are no circumstances in things per∣petuall and immutable. Circumstances must often varie, els are they no circumstan∣ces, if they be eternall and necessarie consequents. Since then time and place do not alter in anie of the damned; for all that are damned are cast into hell for euer, though all suffer not like paines; if there be any circumstances in hell, they are rather in the degrees and differences of paine, which you make the substance of hell, than in the place or perpetuitie of the torment, which neuer varie in any of the damned. And since you will needs be medling with Philosophie, I pray you Sir Discourser, if Christ suffered the substance of damnation as you auouch, doth not your doctrine plainlie conclude the Sauiour of the world to be damned? for, which shall truely at∣tribute the name of anie thing to anie person, the substance or the circumstance of the thing? By all the rules of Art and reason, to whom the definition doth agree, the thing defined must likewise agree. Now ech definition importeth the substance, not the circumstance of the thing defined. And so if Christ suffered the substance or dam∣nation, it is euident by your doctrine he was damned; which is a corollar e in Chri∣stian religion fit for such a considerate Colonell as you are; I will say no woorse. Yea such is your deepe insight in these matters, that with turning and winding as a worme doth in wood, to make Ch st suffer the substance of those paines which the damned do suffer; you exclude him, against your owne intention and assertion, from all both substance and ci cumstance of that, which the Iudge pronounceth and inflicteth on the damned. For where the sentence of the Iudge, Depart from me ye cursed into euer∣lasting fire, conteineth in it reiection from Gods kingdome, malediction and tor∣ment of eternall fire, with their necessarie consequents; Reiection and malediction Christ Defen. p. 10. l. 29. neuer tasted by your owne confession. Continuance of time and place are as you say Ibid. p. 12. l. 22. meere circumstances onely, and not agreeable to Christ; there remaineth then the fire of hell; which you allegorize, by no meanes acknowledging any TRVE sire in hell, for that you vtterly denie. Now allegories are by no meanes the substance or essence of an e creature; and so you teach, Christ suffered the substance of all that the damned doe suffer, saue that he suffered as your selfe confesse, no part of that which Christ by his iudiciall sentence inflicteth on the damned; which is the sub∣stance of all that the damned do or shall suffer. Thus what Christ pronounceth on the damned you make circumstantiall and allegoricall; and what is no way comp ised in his sentence of condemnation, you make that only to be substantiall and essentiall in hell-paines; let the Reader now iudge whether this hel be not of your owne framing, and not of Gods ordaining. This is follie sufficient by a vaine distinction of substance and circumstance to ex∣clude all that Christ pronunceth on the damned, from the substance of hell paines; but because it maketh an open gap to Atheisme, to allegorize the greatest torments that God hath ordained for the wicked in hell, and to admit nothing for the sub∣stance thereof, saue that which was common to Christ with the damned; which can be neither reiection, malediction, nor eternall torment of fire, since Christ suffered none of these, and yet (as you affirme) he suffered the substance of all that the damned doe suffer; let vs more largelie consider what paines are essentiall to damnation, and to hell, not that hell which your running head hath latelie hatched, but that which the word and will of God hath for euer established; as also whether there be true fire in hell or no; that we may the more plainly perceiue what vanitie and impietie you haue aduentured to make hell and so heauen to be euerie where as touching their substance; and the chiefest torments of hell to be imaginarie paines deuised and con∣ceiued by your selfe and a few of your sect, without all warrant of holie Scripture, or witnesse of ancient and Christian beleeuers. Wherein when I speake of substance and essence, thou must not thinke (gentle Reader) that I meane precisely matter and forme, as Philosophers do, which bodies only haue; I speake as a Diuine, of rewards and pu∣nishments; in which that is most essentiall and substantiall, which God hath ordained shalbe generall and perpetuall in either kinde. Then that is essentiall to damnation or to the paines of hell reserued for the damned, which God by his word and will re∣uealed, hath prouided and established for all that shalbe damned, excepting or spa∣ring none, but including them all in one and the same iudgement. And if thou finde by the word of God, that the place of hell and perpetuall torment there, be necessa∣rily and generally decreed and appointed for all the reprobate that shall be damned, make sure account that is essentiall to the punishment and paines of hell, which the will and word of God hath ordained and expressed shall ineuitably and eternally pursue and punish the wicked. For Gods will and ordinance is most essentiall and substantiall in all these things; and what he hath determined, and setled generallie and eternallie, without ceasing or changing to take holde on the wicked, that is the substance and essence of their punishment, and of hell-paines, which is their portion. In my Sermons I deliuered manie parts of hell-paines, which by no meanes could with any sense of religion be applied to Christ. The Discourser neither doth nor can denie them, but shifteth them off as either allegoricall or not essentiall to the paines of hell. I shall therefore need but to examine whether they be figuratiue or proper speeches, as also whether they be essentiall or accidentall to the condition and pu∣nishment of the damned; which I am content in order to do. Out of the sentence of the Iudge to be pronounced against all the reprobate, I obserued foure parts of hell∣paines inflicted on all the damned; to wit, Sermons. . 50. Reiection, malediction, vengeance of fire, and continuance therein for euer. Touching reiection and malediction, the Discourser plainly confesseth, that Defenc. p. 11 l 27. in Christ there could vtterly be none of these, as also neither Ibid. desperation, dereliction, nor sting of conscience. This confession I take to be ver e true, though it be neither agreeable to himselfe in other places, nor conformable to his generall positions otherwise. But of that afterward. In the meane while, if reiection from all grace and glorie, and extreame malediction of bodie and soule, be essentiall paines in hell, and punishments for sinnes; and Christ neuer tasted these; then Christ neuer suffered all that the damned doe suffer, as touching the essence and substance thereof. And first of reiection from the kingdome of God, what say you, Sir Deuiser, (for I Reiection from the kingdome of God: essentiall to hell paines. may rightly so call you, that take vpon you to deuise vs a new hell not heard of in the Scriptures) is it either no paine to the damned, or is it no essentiall part of their pu∣nishment, to be thrust out of the kingdome of heauen? The losse of good things, when they be perceiued and desired, doth by nature no lesse grieue and asflict the soule of man, than the presence of euill doth offend him. All earthly creatures, as well as man, affect that which is good for them; and from the desire of good which is naturall to all, it is not possible that man should be exempted: but as by sense and vnderstanding he discerneth higher and better things than the rest, so this affection and inclination after he truely perceiueth or fully beholdeth them, is exceedingly inflamed with them; and when he findeth himselfe disappointed and depriued of them, his griefe increaseth according to the goodnesse of the things, and greatnesse of his desire. The ioy and honour then of the saints in the kingdome of God when the wicked shall presently beholde, and see themselues reiected thence, they shall in∣wardly grieue with vnspeakable sorrow, and outwardly mourne with gnashing their teeth for very anguish of heart, as perceiuing themselues excluded from that inesti∣mable blisse for euer. This collection our Sauiour confirmeth in expresse words: Luc. 13. There shal be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdome of God, and your selues thrust out at doores. Yea where there are two sorts of paines in hell; Losse of heauen, and sense of euill; the learned and ancient Fathers haue professed the former, to be a greater and grieuouser paine than the latter. Ad Theodoru lapsum epist. 5. There are some (saith Chrysostome) of an absurd iudgement, who only de∣sire to escape hell: contra ego, multo durius esse tormentum quoddam assero, quàm gehenna est: hoc est, non assecutum esse tantam gloriam, & illinc elapsum esse. But I on the contrarie a firme there is a farre worse torment than hell it selfe is, to wit, the losse of so great glory, and the falling there-from. Neither doe I thinke that we ought so much to grieue at the euils in hell, as at the losse whereby we fall from heauen, qui nimirum est cruciatus omnium durissi∣mus, which doubtlesse is the bitterest anguish of all the rest. S. Austen in like sort: . ad . cap. 112. To perish from the kingdome of God, to be banished from the citie of God, to want so plentifull a∣bundance of the sweetnesse of God, as he hath layd vp in store for those that feare him, tam grandis est p a, vt ei nulla possint tormenta quae nouimus comparari, is so grieuous a pu∣nishment, or paine, that no torments which we know may be compared vnto it. NAZIAN∣ZENE. De plaga gran inis. Those (that rise to iudgement) this amongst other, or rather ABOVE other punishments shall torment them, that they are reiected of God. And Basil. De regulis fu disputat. interroga 2. The estranging and reiecting from God, is an euill more intolerable, than all that is (feared or) expected in hell. If the griefe shall be so great to be excluded from the kindome of God, and the same be comprised in the sentence of the Iudge, where he saith, Depart from me ye cur∣sed; then is there no doubt but it is an essentiall part of the paines of hell: since it is not only generall and perpetuall to all the damned; but a necessarie precedent to the rest of their torments, which can neither take full hold of them, nor afllict them in the highest degree, till they be wholly depriued of all consolation and expectation of any fauour from God, and vtterly confounded with the griefe and shame of that re∣ ection which they shall suffer at the hands of Christ before men and Angels. Malediction, the second part of the Iudiciall sentence against the wicked, noteth Malediction to pain s. as well the cause of their condemnation to be sinne, for which onely, both men and Angels are accursed; as the sequels of sinne in the condemned, whom this curse ex∣cludeth from all sense and hope of Gods blessings, eternall and temporall for euer; and wrappeth in the fearefull remembring and feeling the number and horrour of their offences, that before flattered, delighted, and encouraged themselues in their wickednesse. For where shame, sorrow, and fe re are by Gods wisedome and trueth appointed as waiting mates on sinne, and offered to the consciences of all men, to stay them from sinne, or leade them to repentance when they haue sinned, if they doe not harden their hearts; the wicked to take their full foorth in their vncleannesse, cast these behind them, and not onely conceale and excuse their sinnes, but quench all re∣uerence and remembrance of God, least any thing should hold or hinder them from their pleasures. And therefore the Iustice of God arising to take finall vengeance of their rebellion against him, causeth extreame and inward shame, remorse and feare, which they so much shunned, when they might haue repented, and desisted from their euill wayes, most dreadfully to inuade them, and as mightie streames to ouer∣whelme them, till they sinke to the bottome of all confusion, compunction and de∣speration. Which is a most iust reward of their dalliance with God, and yet a most painefull torment to the damned, who in their life time wilfully renounced God, to enioy their delights; but there and for euer after shall without remedie or mercie be∣hold the lothsomenesse of their sinnes, and grieue at the follie and furie of their diso∣bedience; God punishing the soule of euery such transgressour with the remembrance and remorse of his madnesse, with the euidence and conscience of his vncleannesse, and with the sight and assurance of his perpetuall wretchednesse. . Quae p na grauior quàm interioris vulnus conscientiae? What paine more grieuous, (sayth Ambrose) then the wound of the conscience within? . Amongst all the afflictions of mans soule, there is none greater, (saith Austen) then the conscience of sinne. . Howe thinkest thou (saith Chrysostome) shall our consciences be bitten? and is not this worse then any torment what soeuer? Basil. in Psal∣mum. 33. The most grieuous torment of all (saith Basil) shall be that re∣proch and eternall shame. Cyprian de Ascens. Do∣mini. Omni tormento atrociùs desperatio condemnatos affliget. Worse then all other torments shall desperation afflict the condemned. Lamentat. 3. Giue them griefe of heart, euen thy curse vpon them, saith Ieremie to God. No doubt then the sting of conscience and shame of sinne, which so extreamely shall grieue the heart, is a part of that eternall curse, which shall light on the wicked; and so painefull and grieuous shall it bee vnto them, that they shall curse the day of their birth, time of their life, and all the workes of their hands, that occasioned or leasured them to come within the compasse of this fearefull and euerlasting curse. Hier . lib. 6. in Esa. cap. 13. Torments and sorrowes shall take holde on them (in the day of iudgement or of death) and they shall be pained as a woman in labour with child. By which it appeareth (saith Ierome) they are tormented with their owne conscience. Pamphil apolog. pro Origene. Tunc & ipsa conscientia proprijs stimulis agitatur atque compungitur. Then the very conscience (of the wicked) is pricked and pierced with her owne goades and stinges. August. in Psal. 53. Magna paena est impiorum conscientia. The conscience of the wicked, is a great paine or punishment vn∣to them. You did well vtterly to exempt the Sauiour of the world from both these, I meane from reiection and malediction; you must otherwise haue depriued him of all grace and glorie; and plunged him into the shame of sinne, and remorse of conscience; nei∣ther of which without open impietie, can be ascribed to the soule of Christ: and yet both these are essentiall paincs to the damned, and not circumstances, as you pretend of time and place. How painefull they are, I leaue the Reader to consider by that which is already said; essentiall they cannot chuse but be to damnation and hell, not onely because they are comprised in the sentence of the Iudge, which is the substance of condemnation, but also for that the rest of hell paines are not inflicted till both these take hold on the soules of men. For so long as men haue any part or hope of heauen, they are not condemned to hell, neither shall the finall iudgement of God proceede against any, till their owne consciences doe first conuict them and con∣demne them. And therefore as in Christs sentence, reiection, and malediction stand before the rest, so in perfourmance they must take place before eternall torment of fire shall follow. Gods iudgement being certainely iust, shall be without all contradicti∣on euen in the consciences of the condemned, who then shal be their owne accusers: and as hell hath no communion with heauen, no more can a man bee adiudged to hell, but he must first be excluded from the possession and expectation of all heauen∣ly ioy and blisse. I speake of the order and coherence of the punishments, not of any long distance of time betweene them; forsomuch as that iudgement shalbe as quick∣ly executed, as pronounced. The torment of fire is the third part of this iudgemen , which I make no question, but you will acknowledge to be an essentiall paine of hell, whatsoeuer you intend by the name of fire. For if this also be accidentall to damnation, I maruaile much what is substantiall. But you are content to admit this for the substance of hell paines, so you may allegorize it, and make thereof what best fitteth your fansie. Then if Christ suffered not the torment of hell fire so much threatned to the wicked in the Scrip∣tures, and inflicted on the damned by Christs sentence; it is very plaine he suffered no part of the substance of hell paines; vnlesse your learning serue you to say, that when Christ commeth to giue Iudgement against all the damned, he shall vtterly for∣get and mistake himselfe, and in stead of the substance of hell paines, pronounce one∣ly the circumstances thereof against the reprobate both men and Angels. Here ther∣fore is the place to examine whether the fire of hell be allegoricall, or no; for that it is essentiall to the paines of hell, can be (no doubt) with any but with Atheists, and Infidels, which know not God, since it is named by Christ as a chiefe punishment, prepared for the diuell and his Angels. Wherein I wish thee (gentle Reader) aduisedly to marke what is said on either side, it is a matter of no small moment both to Chri∣stian religion and true godlinesse, whether it shall be lawfull for euery vnstable wit, at his pleasure to allegorize whatsoeuer liketh not his humour in the sacred Scrip∣tures. For if the small and eternall Iudgement of God against the wicked be allegori∣call; then surely the reward of the faithfull from the same Iudge at the same time must likewise be allegoricall. And if we once bring all that is threatned and promised in the world to come to be figures and allegories, we endanger the power, and iustice of God, which must openly appeare to all the world in the punishment of sinne, (if he be a God: and displeased and offended with sinne ) as also his mercy, bountie and glo∣rie, in crowning his elect, to be nothing but types and figures. The end of all things, which is the time of iudgement must openly and fully performe whatsoeuer God in this life threatneth or promiseth: and if that day doe not plainly distinguish betweene righteousnesse and vnrighteousnesse, the elect and the reprobate, and shewe a most sensible difference betwixt the kingdome of heauen and the torments of hell; to the view of men and Angels without figures or allegories, no time after is, or euer shalbe appointed for that purpose. The first reason which leadeth me to beleeue the fire of hell to to be a true, sub∣stantiall, and externall fire, and no allegorie, is that, which is and must be the ground of all Religion, to wit, the proper signification of the word threatned in the Scriptures to the wicked, and by Christ inflicted on the damned. Otherwise if we hold not fast this rule, not to runne to figures in expounding the Scriptures, except the proper signification of the words in any place be August. de d ct. Christia. lib. 3. cap. 10. against the trueth of faith, or honestie of manners, we shall leaue nothing sound or assured in the word of God. For August. ibid. when the mind is possessed with any errour, whatsoeuer the Scriptures auouch to the contrarie, men thinke it to be figuratiue; as S. Austen rightly obserueth. Your selfe approue this rule, when it maketh any thing for you: your words are: Defenc. pa. 109. l. 8. I like well that no figure is to be admitted in Scripture, where there is no ill or hurtfull sense following litterally. Now that externall and substantiall fire is denounced to the wicked in the Scriptures, and shall accordingly torment the damned in hell, what iniurie is it to the Christian faith, or what repugnance hath it with the rest of the Scriptures? We doe and must beleeue that Christ shall come to iudge the quicke and dead; and with his owne mouth shall openly adiudge the reprobate to Matth. 25. euerlasting fire, prepared for the deuill and his angels. What necessitie then is there to allegorize this fire? It is impossible, you thinke, for soules and deuils, which are spirits, to be punished with externall and corporall fire; and therefore the fire in your conceit must be figuratiue. Shall it be impossible to God, when he speaketh the word, to performe the deede; or is it too hard for you to conceaue the manner how it shall be done? I trust you take not vpon you to restraine the maruailes of Gods workes to the reach of your wits, or to measure the greatnesse of his arme by the weaknesse of your hand. How many thousand things are there in the creation, conseruation, and alteration of the world; in the aire, in the earth, and euery part thereof, which are daily before our eyes, and yet farre passe our vnderstan∣ding? To tie Gods trueth and glorie to your capacitie, were madde deuinitie; to make any thing vnpossible for him, which his mouth hath spoken, were meere infide∣litie. He that created spirits of nothing can as easily make them capable of paine and punishment from fire, or whatsoeuer meane pleaseth him to vse. But fire hee hath threatned vnto men and deuils. By fire therefore shall they be tormented, which his hand that is Almightie, and his mouth that is all true, shall perfourme in the sight of all the world. A second reason is, that Christ shall pronounce these words in Iudgement, where the guiltie must perceiue, what is their doome; the ministers must know, what they shall execute; and the elect must discerne what they are to approoue. Now allego∣ries are exactly knowen onely to the speaker; the hearers, except they can search the heart, can not certainely knowe the meaning of figures and parables till they be ex∣pounded. Christs iudgement therefore shall be plaine and proper, and containe no∣thing in it that any way may hinder the present and euident conception, execution, or approbation of it. The end and vse of parables, which are allegoricall similitudes, ou Sauiour confessed when his disciples asked him, Matth. 13. Why speakest thou to them in parables. Who answered: because it is giuen to you to know the secrets of the kingdome of heauen, but to them it is not giuen. Mark. 4. To them that are without, all things are done in para∣bles, that seeing they may see and not discerne, and hearing they may heare and not vnder∣stand. Then serue parables and allegories, which are both one, to hide the meaning of the speaker; and to darken the vnderstanding of the hearer. But the Iudgement of Christ hath cleane contrarie purposes; and must haue plaine and proper speech, that the whole world may heare it with their eares, vnderstand it with their hearts, and see it executed with their eyes. For how should allegories or metaphores be execu∣ted by Gods Angels, who shall be the ministers in that iudgement? or how shall all the elect concurre with Christ in iudgement, if he vse metaphores and allegories knowen onely to himselfe? It is euident therefore the generall and finall sentence by which the wicked shall be adiudged to euerlasting fire, must haue in it no figures nor allegories, but onely plaine and proper speech, which must be heard and vnderstood of all good and bad, and be presently put in execution by the ministers that attend that Iudgement. A third is, that where parables by reason of their darknesse must be expounded before they can be conceiued; when Christ doth declare the meaning of them, his exposition of necessitie must be in plaine and proper words, lest a darke and doubt∣full exposition breed a further confusion in the mindes of the hearers, than the para∣ble it selfe. The parable of the good seed sowed by the owner of the ground; and of tares sowed by the enemie; as also of the haruest and reapers; when the Disciples of Christ prayed him to declare vnto them; he expounded it in these words: Matth. 13. vers. 37. The so∣wer of the good seed is the sonne of man, the field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdome; the tares are the children of the wicked; the enemie that soweth them, is the diuell; the haruest is the end of the world; and the Reapers be the Angels. As then the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of the world. The Sonne of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdome all offences and the wor∣kers of iniquitie, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shalbe wailing and gnashing of teeth. And vpon occasion of the parable of the draw-net cast into the sea, and gathe∣ring all kinds of men, and after seuering the good from the bad; our Sauiour repeat∣ing the same exposition in the same words (So shall it be in the end of the world; the an∣gels shall go forth, and seuer the bad from among the iust, and shall cast them into a fornace of fire) sayd to his Disciples, Ibid. ver. 51. Vnderstand ye all these things? and they sayd to him, Yea Lord. The parable they vnderstood not, but this they vnderstood. The fire therefore in∣to which the wicked shall be cast, is no parabolicall, but a plaine and proper speech. Againe, Christ expoundeth the parable by it: it is therefore no allegorie, but a true and proper speech by which Christ opened the obscuritie of the parable; and his Disciples presently conceiued his meaning by the proprietie and perspicuitie of his words. Then, that Matth. 13. the Angels of God in the end of the world shall seuer the wicked; and cast them into a furnace of fire, is an euident, plaine, and proper speech, easie to be vn∣derstood of euerie Christian by the verie hearing of the words vttered, without re∣course to you Sir Deuiser to helpe allegorize them; or to bring in stead of them the immediat soules suffering, which you still auouch, but neuer take the paines to proue, or vse the meanes to vnfold. Fourthly, your new conceit hath no coherence with the sense or words of the Ho∣ly ghost; but either he must correct his speech, wheresoeuer he mentioneth the fire of hell, or you must recall your fansie, who suppose an inward paine in the soule from the immediat hand of God to be hell fire. For if that which you call hell fire be only within the soules of the wicked, how can they DEPART, GO, or BE CAST IN∣TO HELL FIRE, which by your imagination is cast into them, & not they into it? And therefore when our Sauiour so often affirmeth, that the wicked shall be cast into hell fire, and iudicially willeth them to depart from him into euerlasting fire; you must set him to schoole, and teach him to speake righter, and according to your opinion, to say, that hell fire shalbe cast into them. But if these be fooleries most vnfit for any Christian man, to controll the sonne of God in his speech, and to condemne him of open and childish ignorance, as not knowing the difference betwixt an externall and internall fire; then learne to reuerence the veritie and grauitie of the word of God, and to confesse that he which seeth and setleth all things in heauen, earth, and hell, cannot so forget himselfe as to mistake the one for the other. For if the fire be a vio∣lent, externall, and locall agent into which the wicked shalbe cast; then are the words of our Sauiour and of the Prophets and Apostles most proper and pertinent to the matter: but if that fire which shall torment the damned, be nothing but an internall paine rising within the soule by the immediat hand of God; then are all the speeches of the Holy ghost, expressing their punishment, wide from the sense, and dissonant from the truth of that which you suppose they would deliuer. Dauid describing the vengeance that God at the last will execute on the wicked, sayth, Psal. 11. Vpon the wicked God will raine snares, fire, and brimstone. This raining vpon them, sheweth that the meanes and matter of their torment shall be without them; and not an anguish onely rising within them, as you imagine of hell fire. Reuel. 20. The diuell that deceiued them, was cast (sayth S. Iohn) into a lake of fire and brimstone; and whosoeuer was not found written in the booke of life, was cast into the lake of fire. The Holy ghost by your direction must haue sayd, the lake of fire was cast into the diuell, and into euery one that was not found written in the booke of life. Mark 9. It is better (sayth our Sauiour) to enter into life maimed, than hauing two hands to goe into hell, into the fire that neuer shall be quenched. Our Sauiour by your doctrine is not well aduised so to speake, when he should haue sayd, It is better to enter into life maymed, than hell fire to goe into you. And when Christ foretelleth that the Angels shall seuer the badde, and cast them into a furnace of fire; he committeth two great ouersights by your new Diuinity: the first in saying, the Angels shall cast the badde into a furnace of fire; where indeed by your deuice the furnace of fire shalbe cast into the badde: the next in that he sayth, the Angels shall cast them into the fire; which hath no trueth in it, if the soules of the wicked inwardly suffer from the imme∣diate hand of God alone, as you teach. For how do the Angels cast the wicked into the fire, when the immediate hand of God inflicteth that, which you call hell fire, on the soule without any instruments or inferiour meanes? These mockeries you must make of the Scriptures, before they will serue your new conceit, that hell fire is an al∣legorie, and importeth nothing but a paine raised within the soule by the immediate hand of God alone; which what agreement it hath with the doctrine and descripti∣ons of the Holy ghost, I leaue the Christian Reader to consider. Fiftly, the word Gehenna, which Christ authorized in the new testament to signifie hell, hath no iust representation of hell, if there be no substantiall and externall fire in hel. For where anciently the children of Iudah Ierem. 7. built the place of Topheth in the valley of the sonne of Hinnom to burne their sonnes & daughters in the fire 2. Reg. 23. vnto Molech; which valley the eighteenth of Iosue placeth Iosue. 18. vers. 16. neere to Iebusi (that was afterward Ierusalem) and calleth Gehinnom: and the chiefe councel of Ierusalem, whiles their power lasted, vsed to punish certaine offences with fire in the same valley lying neere to their citie: Our Lord and Master either taking the word that was vsuall among the people in his time to import hell, and establishing it with his authoritie; or resembling hell to the place of tormenting & burning malefactors with fire so wel knowen to the Iewes, na∣meth it Gihanna in Syriack; which the Hebrues call Gehinnam, the Euangelists , and the Latines Gehenna. In this application of the word, that the one might fitly re∣semble the other, three things were chiefly respected, as Peter Martyr rightly obser∣ueth vpon the second chapter of the second booke of Kings. First that being a Pet. Martyr. in 2. cap. 2. lib. Regum. val∣ley, to wit, a lowe bottome, it resembled hell, which is beleeued to be beneath the earth. Se∣condly, for the fire, wherewith the wicked are tormented (in hell) euen as the children were in that valley burnt with fire. Lastly, the place was vncleane and detestable, whither all vile and lothsome things were cast out of the citie of Ierusalem, euen as defiled and wicked soules are cast out of the kingdome of heauen into hell. And howsoeuer you may quarrell with the first and last respects, because you thinke them not Canonicall, though I finde them grounded on the Scriptures, if that were to this present purpose: the second is without contradiction the maine reason why our Sauiour tooke the word Gehenna to represent hell, and is expressed by himselfe when so often in the Gospell he addeth fire to the word Gehenna, and expoundeth the one by the other, that is, Gehenna by vnquenchable fire. Matth. 5. Whosoeuer shall say foole (to his brother) shalbe worthy of the Ge∣henne of fire, that is, of the vale of fire, or of hell. And againe, Matth. 18. It is better for thee to en∣ter into life with one eye, than hauing two eyes to be cast into the Gehenne of fire, which is the vale or lake of fire, and hell fire. In the Gospel written by S. Marke Christ ioyneth the one as an explication to the other. It Mark. 9. is better to goe halting into life than hauing two feet to be cast into GEHENNA, into the fire that neuer shalbe quenched. So that the re∣semblance of true fire in either place, painfull to the sufferer and dreadfull to the be∣holder, was the chiefe respect, why our Sauiour allowed GEHENNA in the new Te∣stament to signifie hell, and consequently doth assure vs there is true fire in hell. For if hell haue no fi e in it besides an inward and inherent paine of bodie or soule, as we see in all violent and burning diseases, Christ might more fitly haue resembled hell to any sharpe and sore sicknes e, than to an externall and sensible fire, which can haue no reference to hell, if the torments there be only spirituall and internall. These reasons lead me to r solue and beleeue, that the fire of hell so much threat∣ned to he wicked in the Scriptures and inflicted on the damned, shall be a true, vi∣sible, and externall fire; wherein lest thou shouldest thinke, Christian Reader, I rest too much on mine owne opinion, as this D scourser doth in all things on his; I am content to let thee see, that the Ancient and Catholike Fathers of Christes Church haue constantly professed as much before me, and condemned the Discoursers con∣ceit as an open errour repugnant to the Scriptures, and hurtfull to the Christian faith. I haue alreadie produced the testimonies of so many Fathers in the Pag. 342. conclusion of my Sermons touching this point (the writers being of the greatest learning and ac∣count in the Church of Christ) as may satisfie the ober, and stumble the froward; thei iudgement concurring with the manifest words of holy Scripture: yet because this Discou ser lightly regardeth their concents, & vainely shifteth off their proofes, let vs heare and examine his answere to their assertions. The Fathers by me cited, were Austen, Ambrose, Chrysostome, Eusebius, Tertulli∣an, Lact ntius, Cyprian, Minutius, Pacianus, and Gregorie, besides the wordes of Si∣bylla, which many of those Fathe s accept and alleage as proceeding from God to witnesse the trueth and terrour of his generall iudgement to all the world, and agree∣ing with the tenour of holy Scripture. His answere beginneth and endeth in this wise; Defenc. pag. 146. l. 25. You set your s lfe to prooue that in hell there is materiall fire. But it seemeth you are now almost afraid so to call it: yet you call it true fire, which also wee vtterly denie. All your proofes, (such as they ar ) runne to prooue corporall and materiall fire yet eternall, ex∣cept your Scriptures, which vtterly prooue nothing at all. Defenc. pag. 147. l. 8. And me thinkes you should not care for corpor ll fire now in hell, seeing you seeme to beleeue no torments for damned soules, saue on ly at the resurr ction. For thus you reason, as the bodie hath beene the instrument of the soules pleasure in sinne, so it shall be of her paine. But all prouocations and pleasures of sinne, the soule taketh from her bodie, all actes of sinne she committeth by her bodie. There∣fore the iustice of God both temporally and eternally punisheth the soule (ONELY) by the bodie: Or therefore all the soules paine for sinne, both temporally and eternally is by the body. This is your owne reason: which being true, why should you care for corporall fire in hell, be∣fore the last iudgem nt? You begin and end with two notorious vntrueths and falsifications of my words; that at least you may make others beleeue, there is some likelihood in yours, when I dare not stand by mine, but am either afraid of them, or conclude directly against them. Doe I set my selfe to prooue, that in hell there is materiall fire; and yet am I now al∣most afraid so to call it? It is your wont (Sir Discourser) not mine, to take vp termes that may be turned euery way, and to plant your chiefe strength vpon the doubt∣fulnesse of their Signification. Doe I any where apply the word materiall to hell fire? or doe any of the places which I cite, so call it? If they doe, name them; if not, how set I my selfe to prooue materiall fire in hell, without any words or proofes sounding that way? Know you my meaning without my words? or doe you boldly presume of my meaning against my words? If by materiall fire, you meane that which is maintained by wood or by such like matter as nourisheth fire, and without the which fire will quench; (for that is one of your chiefest obiections which you say is vnanswered:) then doe the places which I bring plainely prooue that hell fire is not materiall. For Lactantius sayth of it; Conclus. pa. 346. It burneth of it selfe without any nourishment. And Gregorie; Ibid. pag. 345. It is neither kindled with mans industrie, nor nourished with wood; but contrary to the nature of our fire, it consumeth not what it burneth, but rather repaireth what it eateth, as Tertullian sayth of it. So that neither my positions nor probations gaue you any cause to coniecture I meant your materiall fire. The places produced by me ex∣presse the contrary: and mine owne words are; Ibid. pag. 343. S. Austen long since hath plainly re∣solued, the fire of hell is not only a true fire, which were my words, but a corporall fire, that shall punish both men and diuels. And closing I make it Ibid. pag. 348. a point of Christian doctrine deliuered by the Prophets and Apostles, and receiued by the Fathers of all ages in Christs church, that the fire of hell shall be visible and sensible to the bodies of the wicked, and shall eternally and corporally punish the damned according to their deserts. It was therefore your foolish ob∣iection, that hell fire must be materiall, if it be not allegoricall according as you dreame; it was no resolution of mine, nor so much as mentioned by me. I saw the ambiguity of the word well enough, and for that cause did refraine it from the begin∣ning For though materiall may be that which consisteth of matter and forme, and so all things that are corporall, as the wind, the aire, the heauens are likewise materiall; yet in our vulgar speech and vnderstanding, to which I framed my selfe, that is mate∣riall fire which is nourished with some MATTER apt to burne and consume; and in that sense hell fire is no materiall fire. The end of your answer in this place is farre woorse than your entrance: for there The Defender grosly peruer∣teth my words. you wittingly and wilfully peruert my words by adding ONLY and ALL vnto them, directly against my meaning; yea when I openly admonish the Reader to the contrary. I inferred by occasion of former proofs; therefore the iustice of God both tem∣porally and eternally punisheth the soule by the bodie: which words are most euidentlie true, since in this life without all question the soule is punished by the bodie; and af∣ter iudgement the bodie being cast into hell fire, shall eternally afflict the soule. My words then bearing in them a manifest trueth, you take the paines, by interlacing them, to wrest them to an open falsehood: for you make me say: Therefore the iustice of God both temporally and eternally punisheth the soule ONLY by the bodie. Now this is as false, as the former was true: for God in this life doth often punish the soule by her selfe; and vntill the last day it is as certeine the soules of the wicked departed hence are punished without their bodies; which so long lie dead in the dust of the earth. What conscience this is (for nothing in you must be impudence, though it be neuer so shamelesse) of an euident trueth to make a palpable errour, by adding (ONLY) to my wordes, which I carefully and purposely did auoide, let the Reader iudge. But the proposition inducing this conclusion you will say is generall; to wit, all prouocations and pleasures of sinne the soule taketh from her bodie, all acts of sinne she com∣mitteth by her bodie; the conclusion thereof you thinke should be likewise generall: therefore ALL the soules paines for sinne both temporally and eternally is by the bodie. Your thoughts (Sir Discourser) bewray your owne follie, they must not marshall my reasons; I can expresse mine intent without your helpe. Out of a generall assumpti∣on what Art hindreth me to auouch an indefinite and particular conclusion; especi∣ally when I meddle with Gods matters, whose power and will in iudgement no rules of reason can binde or limit? And if I would needs expresse the forme of a syllogisme (as you vainly imagine I meant to doe in these words) I neuer learned out of a nega∣tiue for the maior, to draw an affirmatiue for the conclusion: but had not your eyes stood in your light, it was easie for you to haue seene both what the conclusion must be by force of the premisses; and how in respect of him that is all-iust and yet all∣mighty, I thought not good to restraine him to my conclusions, but to inferre in sted thereof, that which sufficiently depended on the conclusion, and could haue no que∣stion either in holy writ, or dayly vse. Both the premisses are orderly and plainly set downe in my writing, and not loosely and ignorantly misplaced, as yours are, by put∣ting the cart before the horse, and taking that for the maior which with me is a part or appendix of the conclusion. My words stand thus: Conclus. pa. 254. l. 29. Nothing is more proportionable to Gods iustice, than to ioyne them in paine that were ioyned in sinne; and to retaine the same order in punishing, which they kept in offending. But all prouocations and pleasures of sinne the soule taketh from the bodie, all acts of sinne shee committeth by the bodie. What boy now knowing the first principles of Logicke doth not presently perceiue the conclu∣sion must be; therefore nothing is more proportionable to Gods iustice than both temporal∣ly and eternally to ioyne bodie and soule in paine which were ioyned in sinne; and to make the bodie the instrument of her paine, as it hath beene of her pleasure. This conclusion is an vniuersall negatiue; and yet doth not exclude all paine of the soule without the bo∣die to be vnagreeable to Gods iustice, as you pretend I meane; but auoucheth no paine to be more agreeable, than where bodie and soule are both ioyned in suffering, as they were in offending. And because no punishment is more agreeable to Gods iustice, than where both soule and bodie are coupled in paine, as they were in sinne; though it be no way against Gods iustice to punish the soule for a season without the bodie: Ibidem. Therefore (which is the inference that I vse) the iustice of God both temporally and eternally punisheth the soule by the bodie, that as it hath beene the instrument of her plea∣sure, so it shalbe of her paine. You affirme, not only my meaning, but my reason to be this; that God temporally and eternally punisheth the soule (ONLY) by the bodie. I vtterly denie that I haue any such reason, words, or sense; but that you purposely haue inser∣ted the word (ONLY) of your owne, to make my reason seeme false and foolish; which otherwise is sound and sure. You mistooke (you will say) my meaning; you did it not of malice. Your mista∣kings (Sir Discourser) are indeed very grosse, as shall well appeare, when we come to your fairest forts; but in this (by your leaue) you could not mistake me, except you were bereaued of your wits and senses. I not onely prouided that my words should import no such thing, as you dreame of; but to cleere all cauils, when I had made some proofe out of Cyprian, Ierom, and Tertullian, for the second proposition of my reason, I moued the question my selfe, and answered it, with as plaine and precise a deniall as I could deuise to vtter. These are my words: Conclus. pa. 257. l. 12. Do I then denie that the soule hath any sufferings in this life & the next, which come not by the body? BY NO MEANES. For though those conioyned sufferings be most answerable to sinnes committed; yet the soule hath some proper punishments in this life, as sorrow, and feare, when the bodie hath no hurt: from which Christ was not free, as appeareth by his agonie: and so in the next, the soules of the wicked haue griefe and remorse, besides the paine of fire. These punishments in this world and the next, the soule suffereth, not by her body, nor from her body: how then should I meane that God temporally and eternally punisheth the soule (ONLY) by the bo∣die, or that (ALL) the soules paine for sinne is from the bodie, as you make me to speake, both without and against mine owne words? Whether this dealing sauour of vn∣shamefastnesse, or no, iudge thou Christian Reader, as thou seest cause. The maner of the Discoursers carriage in the entring and ending of his answer, I might not omit. Now to his matter. The midst of his answer is a medley meet for a man of his learning and iudgement; the summe of it is this: Defene. pag. 146. l. 25. All my proofs (out of the Fathers) runne to prooue corporall and materiall fire, except the Scriptures (by me alleaged) which vtterly prooue nothing at all. For his part he seeth no reason to beleeue, that now there is corporall fire in hell (which is only our question or els nothing) whatsoeuer shalbe heereafter, when the bodies shalbe tormented with their soules. Lastly, Austen here doth not proue there shalbe such sire (after the resurrection) be only sheweth the maner how it may be so heereafter, if God will. Now if the power of God only be all our reason, we may as well proue the skie is fallen. All the rest of the Fathers say nothing further, nor indeed, so farre as Austen. Whether ten ancient writers, all Christian and Catholike fathers, relying themselues on the manifest words of holy Scripture, and ioyning in one confession of the trueth, be not more to be trusted and better beleeued than H. I. of Paules Chaine, let the poorest prentise in London iudge. As for the Scriptures; if you Sir Deuiser and such other busie heads may allegorize them, when they contradict your humors, from Genesis to the Apo∣calypsis, they shall vtterly proue nothing at all against you: for what is there in them which you may not peruert with your fansies and figures, if nothing shall be plaine and proper that any way seemeth vnsauourie to your reason? The Fathers haue for that which they affirme, the exact and euident words of holy Scripture, and not so few as Twenty Places of the New Testament witnessing, without any parables or alle∣gories, fire to be threatened and performed to the wicked in the world to come. Whereupon with one consent they haue all resolued and professed it as a setled ground of Christian religion; that hell fire, to which Christ shall adiudge the wicked at the last day, shalbe a true, externall, and sensible fire; I meane seene and felt of all the reprobate in their soules and bodies. To this our new Patriarck of Pater-noster Rew answereth: Defenc. pa. 146. l. 37. Austen doth not proue there shalbe such a fire; he only sheweth the maner how it may be so heereafter, if God will. Now if Gods power onely be all our reason, we may prooue aswell the skie is fallen. Gentle Sir, if so many vouchers from Christes owne mouth and from his Apostles following their masters steps, be no proofe with you, nor sufficient witnesse of Gods will, you haue some aduantage against S. Austen and all the rest of the Fathers for presuming vpon Gods power without the knowledge of his will: but if those proofs be more then pregnant, then looke to your allegories, lest they prooue you to be a proud presumer against the Scriptures, and an arrogant despiser of the Fathers, where they accord with the word and will of God. It is not enough for you (Sir Deuiser) to rowze your selfe, and say YOV SEE NO REA∣SON; you must take the paines to yeeld good reason why you depart from the lite∣rall and proper signification of the words vttered by the sonne of God. And since you can pretend none but want of power in God to performe the words which he hath spoken in their proper sense; all the godly will see great reason to refuse your fansies and figures, as idle shifts to decline the cleerenesse of the sacred Scriptures. The Scriptures you say Defenc pa. 146. shew no more any corporall, or materiall, or true fire to be now in hell, than a corporall worme, materiall brimstone, much wood, and true chaines: which I What is meant by the worme that neuer di∣eth. called a sleeuelesse obiection; but neither I, nor Austen whom I cite against it, doth any where answere it. ] Of the worme mentioned in Christes words (their worme neuer dieth) I shewed you S. Austens iudgement, which might content a farre greater Clerke than you. Neither is he alone in that opinion. Gregorie Nyssene sayth, Nyssenus de resurrectione Christs. I heare the Scrip∣ture affirme, that the damned shalbe punished with a fire, darknesse, and worme; quae omnia compositorum ac materialium corporum, poenae cruciatús{que} sunt; all which are the punish∣ments and torments of materiall and compounded bodies. Basil deliuering what terrours shall be presented to the eyes of the damned in the day of iudgement; amongst other things nameth a Basil in Psal. 33. darkish fire, that hath lost his brightnesse, but kept his burning; , and a venimous kinde of worme feeding on flesh, and raising intolerable torments with his biting. Iosephus a Iew liuing in the Apostles times, and no stranger to the Christian faith, in his oration to the Greeks, (which Dama∣scene doth mention, and Zonaras doth cite) speaking of the finall iudgement of God to be executed by the person of the Messias, sayth, Zonaras na um om. 1. fol. 191. There remaineth for the lo∣uers of wickednesse an vnquenchable and neuer ending fire, , and a firy worme not dy∣ing, nor destroying the bodie, but breaking forth of the bodie with vnceasing anguish. How∣beit, because August. de ciuit. Dei. l. 21. ca. 9. S. Austen leaueth it indifferent for euery man to refer the WORME properly to the bodie, or figuratiuely to the minde, as he liketh best; so that by no meanes he thinke the bodies in hell shall not be touched with the paine of fire; I left it like∣wise free for euery man to make his choise, and saw no need of farther answer. * Tou∣ching brimstone, you may iest at S. Iohn if you list, who saith of the wicked, they shall be Reuel. 14. tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lambe; and likewise of the diuell, that he Reuel. 20. was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone: or if you please, you may oppose God himselfe, and aske whether materiall brimstone were mixed with the fire which hee rained from heauen on Sodom and Gomorre, and why hee powred them both on the heads of those wicked ones, as if fire alone were not suffici∣ent to destroy them, who Iude epist. are set forth for an ensample, (by) suffering the vengeance of e∣ternall fire. But howsoeuer you presume to alter or new frame the iudgements of God after your fansies, when I reade that God hath Genes. 19. rained brimstone and fire out of heauen on Sodom and the cities adioyning, and will Psal. 11. raine fire and brimstone vpon the wicked, as Dauid testifieth; I dare not allegorize either of them, because I reuerence the word of God, which is his will; and by no meanes distrust his power. For if God will haue brimstone mixed with hell fire to make it burne not onely the darker and sharper, but also the lothsommer, and so to grieue the sight, smell and taste of the wic∣ked, which haue heere surfeited with so many vaine pleasures; what haue you or any man liuing to say against it? yea rather, why teach you not men to tremble at the ter∣ror of Gods iudgements, who can and will so fully punish all the powers and parts of bodie and soule, with one and the same fire in hell? Your obiection of true chaines and much wood, I called sleeuelesse; in deed I should Chaines there are in ll though not of iron. haue called it witlesse; for but you, no man that would seeme wise, euer did account it worth the obiecting or answering. Who knoweth not that the names of artificiall things applied to Gods iudgement or gouernement, must not import with him as they doe with vs, things made or prouided with mens handes; but the woonderfull works and powerfull acts of God, tending to the same end, for which these artifici∣all things do serue with vs? As when we read in the Scriptures, of Gods sword, cup, bow, booke, sootestoole, furnace, and such like: Is any man so foolish as to aske after the Cutler, Goldsmith, Fl tcher, Stationer, Carpenter, Mason that made those things for God; and not rather to looke to the vse of these things amongst men, and thence to collect the marueilous and manifest effects of Gods power, iustice, counsell, and prouidence determining and perfourming in this world and the next, what pleaseth him against men and Angels? The chaines wherewith the deuils are bound, Peter calleth the 2. Pet. 2. chaines of darkenesse, not of mettall which man can frame; and they note the ineuitable subiection, and immutable condition of deuils plunged in outwarde and inward darkenesse, malediction, and horror, whereby they are now Pet. Ibid. kept vnto damnation, without any power to resist or decline the iudgement, which shall be pro∣nounced on them. That God hath a Smith to make Iron chaines to bind the deuill, or a fueller to cut and fetch wood for hell fire, lest it should faile; these were such me∣riments to be concluded out of Scripture, that if you find no vanitie nor absurditie in them against the trueth and glorie of God, you may take the Legend or the Alco∣ran into your Creede, without any scruple of conscience: but if these things be more then sottish, then deserue your obiections a worse name then I gaue them. The Scriptures, you say, shew no more any true fire in hell, then true chaines and much wood. To suppose those things to be needefull for hell, which are prepared by the hands of men; is a very wicked and wilfull impietie. For so should hell fire quickly cease, which Christ hath said shall be euerlasting. And that the Scriptures prooue no more the trueth of fire there then they doe of wood, is an open, and arrogant vntruth. For first all the Fathers of Christs Church, and the soberest Diuines of our time, are condemned by this insolent assertion, as ignorant and absurd teachers, who confesse the trueth of hell fire to be established by the Scriptures, which of wood they do not. Secondly, the words of Christ and his Apostles, are chalenged to be false. For they in plaine speech affirme fire to be in hell, which of wood they doe not. Thirdly, the reason, whereupon the Defenders obiection is grounded, ouerthroweth all religion in this life, and all reward in the life to come. For this is and must be the pillar where∣to his obiection leaneth. The Scripture nameth fire, and so it nameth wood; and therefore it sheweth the trueth of the one no more then it doth of the other; but if the wood be figuratiue, so must the fire be. Applie this reason to the Church of Christ on earth, or to the kingdome of heauen, or to Christ himselfe, and see whether it will not vtterly subuert them all, and make all Gods promises and graces here and in hea∣uen to be allegoricall, and not literally true. Of Christ God saith; Esa. 28. Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone. And of himselfe Christ saith, Iohn 15. I am the true Vine. Were it not braue blasphemie to say, the Scriptures shewe Christ to be no more a true God, then a true Stone, or a true Vine, because they affirme of him all three? To his Church God saith, Esai. 54. I will lay thy foundation with Saphires, and will make thy windowes of Emeraudes, and thy gates shining stones. All thy children shall bee taught of God, and much peace shall be to thy children: in righteousnesse shalt thou be esta∣blished. Shall we say that wisedome, peace, and righteousnesse here promised to the Church are figuratiue, because Emeraudes and Saphires mentioned in the very same place must be figuratiuely taken? Christ saith to his disciples; Luc. 22. I appoint you a king∣dome as my Father hath appointed to mee, that you may eate and drinke at my table in my kingdome. Are all the rewards of the faithfull in the kingdome of heauen allegori∣call, because this most apparantly is so? Proude and false therefore is that surly reso∣lution of yours, Sir Discourser, who auouch the Scriptures shewe no more true fire in hell, then much wood, because the Prophet in one place nameth them both; and if your obiections be no better, let the Christian reader iudge whether there be any cause you should so earnestly call for an answere. But let vs view the place whence you fetch your wood to nourish hell fire; and see whether it make no more for the one then for the other. Against Senacherib that proud and blasphemous king of Assyria, the capitall and cruell enemie of Gods peo∣ple and Church, the Prophet denounceth vengeance in this wise. Esa. 30. The Lord shall cause the glorie of his voice to be heard, and shall shew the stroke of his arme with the anger of his countenance, and flame of deuouring fire, with scattering and tempest. For Tophet is prouided of olde, it is euen readie for the King: (God) hath made it deepe and wide, the burning thereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord doth kindle it as a current (or riuer) of brimstone. Tophet was a place built by hand in the valley of Hinnom nere to Ierusalem, made deepe and wide to containe whole Pyles of woode which the Priests of Molech with their deuices and prouisions could readily kindle, and raize to huge and mightie flames, to inclose and consume the children that were pre∣sented to their Idole. To this place and vse the Prophet alludeth, when he threatneth the King of Asshur; and to comfort the Iowes that God had care ouer them, he assu∣reth them, that Gods Tophet was prouided of olde, and readie for the King (of Asshur,) that it was deepe and wide (to receiue him and all his retinue;) and the burning there∣of (as) the fire (of) much wood, the breath of the Lord kindling it as a flood of brimstone. That Tophet was a place in the valley of Hinnom, & a part of Gehinnom Ierem. . ve . 31. BVILT HIE of purpose to burne children in the fire, appeareth by Ieremie. The store of wood heaped there, and the rage of fire kindled there is euident by Esays com∣parison, when he sayth. The burning thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord as a Riuer of brimstone kindling it: fire and much wood is the fire of much wood, to which he compareth the burning of hell, for wood without kindling maketh no fire. And so the Chaldaie paraphrast expresseth it. Chalda a pa∣raphras. in Esa. 30. A flame of sire is there (in hell) kindled LIKE AS in much wood. And to euery man meanely seene in the Hebrew tongue, it is a knowen Rule, that Caph the note of similitude is often vnderstood in the Scriptures; and then specially when it is added to one part of the Periode, for example; Psal. 11. v. 1. Flie to your mountaine a bird, that is LIKE a bird. Miche. 3 v 9. Zion shall be plowed a field that is LIKE a field. Gen. 49. v 9. A Lyons whelpe Iudah from the pray shalt thou ascend; that is LIKE a Lyons whelpe. Esa. 4 . v. 6. All flesh is grasse, and the glory thereof is as the flower of the field that is, all flesh is LIKE grasse. And in this place of Esaie it is so the ra∣ther, because the aduerbe of similitude is expressed in the next member, where it is said, the breath of the Lord, LIKE a streame of brimstone, doth kindle it: which ar∣gueth that the former part must likewise be vnderstood the burning thereof is A s a fire of much wood which in effect is a mightie flame. This then being a comparison, what reason haue you, Sir Discourser, to pronounce, that the Scriptures shew no more true fire in hell then much wood; since fire was the maine respect why hell was likened to Tophet; wood was not, and without fire, hell is no more like to Tophet then it is to a bodkin; which if it be thrust into a mans body will raize paine enough. And therefore these amplifications must either vtterly be voyde, and import nothing knowen to the Iewes, or else there must be fire in hell as there was in Tophet, and that like the fire of much wood, which is violent and raging; and as a torrent of brim∣stone, which flameth all with fire, if it be once kindled. And since Christ called hell Gehinnam for the resemblance it had to the flames of Gehinnom as is before proo∣ued; what maruaile if the Prophet speaking by the same spirite, compared hell to To∣phet, which was the place in Gehinnom where the mightiest fires to burne men were made in his time? Or if we follow not the Chaldaie paraphrase to make wood a comparison, but leane to the later writers who make it a metaphore, and referre it either to the continuance of hell fire, or to the sinnes, soules, and bodies of the wicked feeding and nourishing the fire of hell, as wood doth our common fire; what gaine you by that? If one word in the sentence be figuratiue, will you conclude all the rest to be figuratiue? so may you as well anouch all the Articles of our faith to be allegoricall, because sit∣ting at the right hand of God is a plaine allegorie. And are there no moe places in the Scriptures mentioning hell fire besides this of Esaie? Or if there be, as there be ex∣ceeding many, which haue no similitudes nor metaphores in them, will you alle∣gorize them all, because this place of Esaie hath one similitude or metaphore in it? whether this haue any learning, reason, or sense in it let the Reader iudge. And because I haue mentioned the opinion of the latter writers, making wood a Later Diuines profess true fire to be in hell. metaphore in this place of Esaie, and yet confessing the fire of hell to be a true, sub∣stantiall, aud externall fire; I thinke it not amisse to let the Reader see, what diuerse of them, in true religion and learning not inferior to any of our time, haue profes∣sed touching either of these points. Peter Martyrs iudgement of GEHENNA we heard before, who maketh Pet. Martyr in 2. cap. 2. lib. Reg. Tophet all one with GEHENNA and saith of Tophet: Esaie in his 30. Chapter calleth that place (of Gehenna) Tophet, and fire vnquench∣able, as hauing much wood and brimstone to nourish it. The Prophet also setteth downe the breath wherewith the fire is blowne, that it may flame the more siercely. Munster in his Annotations vpon the 30. of Esaie saith Ma ster. An∣notat. in 30. Esa. Gehenna is here called Tophet. Dicit habi∣taculum illud esse ig eum; That (place or) habitacle the Prophet saith is all fierie, to let thee vnderstand, that the torment there is euerlasting. For the vncleane lustes of the mind, which here are not purged by faith, shall be the nourishment of that eternall flame IN STEEDE of wood and coales. And also the conscience (within) shall afflict the wicked as a kind of fire. Hell is perpetuall because the Spirite and will of the Lord giue euerlasting force of fire to it. Bullinger in his 90. homilie vpon the same Chapter. Bullinger ho∣mil. 90. in Esa. 30. Our Pro∣phet calleth hell Tophet, as our Sauiour called it Gehenna. And indeede Tophet or Gehenna did burne and flame with perpetuall fires deuouring their children, which seduced with a diuelish error, thought they offered them vnto God, when they offered them vnto the diuell. As then in Tophet wretched men were skorched with fire, so in hell all the wicked are tormented with euerlasting fire. Therefore hell is rightly called Tophet and Gehenna whose inside or burning is fire; that is, if thou aske what is in hell, there is fire and burning, or, whatsoeuer is within hell is nothing but fire. God perfourmeth that hell shall flame with perpetuall fire, euen as in many places and hilles of the earth an unwasted store of brim∣stone is found that euen thence we may gather there may be Riuers and lakes of brimstone in hell. All these things the Almightie knoweth how to prepare, that these torments may itte both Soules and bodies, so that we haue no neede to dispute whether this fire and brim∣stone be corporall, and if it be corporall, how it worketh vpon spirituall substances. The Lord as I now said, can fit all these to either part (of man,) that in truth they may be inflicted as well on the bodies, as on the spirits of the damned, which here the Prophet foretelleth. If thou hadst rather dispute against them, and wilt not now beleeue these things, doubtles thou shalt one day trie them by experience. Gualter vpon the same place. Esaie Gualther. ho∣mil. 163. in Esa. 30. teacheth what heil is. The inside thereof is fire; that is how deepe and wide soeuer hell is, it is all fire and burneth euerlastingly. For so he describeth the sharpnes of the punishment, which the wicked shall there suffer. And lest any should aske, what matter can suffice to maintaine such a fire, the Prophet saith, there is great store of wood. He that made hell hath plenti∣fully prouided, that the fire there shall neuer goe out. For filthie lustes and lewd actes not purged by aith, and guiltie mindes yeeld perpetuall matter and maintenance to those flames. Yea and the bodies also of the wicked shall be incorruptible that they may suffer continuall fire and flame, and dure therein. He mentioneth also a streame of brimstone, whereof the Apocalypse speaketh, that we should remember and consider those things which are in nature; For so many ages hath the fire of Aetna continued and still doth, casting vp flames of brimstone. He then that kindleth these things (in nature) without the helpe or assis∣tance of men, he also can kindle and maintaine the fire of hell, that it shall neuer faile. Musculus commenting vpon the 25. of Mathew sayth. Muscul. in Mat. cap. 25. Those who measure all things by the rule of reason, and thinke nothing firme that cannot be comprehended by mans witte, dispute how it is possible, that the body should alwaies burne (in hell) and not con∣sume, which is repugnant to the nature of the body. They likewise dispute how fire can burne not onely bodies, but also wicked spirits which haue no bodies. These curious men thinke that to be against nature, which is done by Gods will, neither doe they consider, the nature of all creatures to haue and be that, which they haue and are by Gods commandement. Others quarrell with the qualitie of the fire, and thinke it no corporall but a metaphoricall fire, which they take or an exceeding paine and sorrow of minde. This they gather out of the 9. of Marke, where Christ saith, their worme dieth not, and the sire quencheth not. Here as by the name of worme no corporall worme is to be vnderstood, but a great and continuall remorse of mind; so they thinke by the word fire no corporall fire, but a metaphoricall must be conceaued. I take it to be rashnes and not the part of a christian man (thus) to dispute of the qualitie of this fire, but rather leauing the certaine knowledge thereof to the Iudge, to prouide that we trie it not one day, what manner of sire it is. Zanchius very soberly and learnedly examining this question resolueth in this sort. Zanchius de operibus dei part. 1. lib. 4. cap. 19. It is certaine the diuels toge∣ther with all the wicked shall be in euerlasting fire, and therein tormented. Christ plainely professeth he will say to the wicked depart into euerlasting fire prepared for the diuell and his Angels. What manner of fire it shall be I dispute not because the Scripture doth not expresse it; but this is without question, that not onely the soules of the wicked, but also their bodies shall suffer torment FROM THIS FIRE, and therefore the fire such as may worke vpon their bodies, and inflict on them a farre greater paine, then our materiall fire doth impresse on vs. What qualitie soeuer it shall be of, it seemeth it shall be altogether a corporall creature, which may worke vpon bodies and torment them. Which being so; IT IS MANIFEST the diuell shall suffer paine and torment from a corporall thing, I meane from this sire, and that euerlastingly; therefore it is called eternall and vnquenchable fire. And asking your question Idem in 1 cap. 2 epist. ad Thes. part. 3. Thesi. 4. How is it possible, that spirituall substances should suffer from corporall, he an∣swereth. We haue an example in our selues in whom the soule suffereth many things from the body by her coniunction with it. Againe, what can resist the power and will of God? Let this doubt therefore depart from the minds of the faithfull. I produce these later writers of great learning and good religion, as I might many moe, to let thee vnderstand gentle Reader, that I neither presse the Scriptures, nor cite the Fathers to any other purpose, but to that, which by all their iudgements is Christian and catholike; and howsoeuer some men otherwise learned, but carried with this new conceite of Christs suffering the essentiall paines of the damned, to colour their deuise, call these things in questi∣on, yet the most aduised and sufficient Diuines of our age haue clearely confes∣sed that which I teach, to accord with the holy Scriptures, and to be held of the godly without contradiction. The ancient Fathers of Christs Church vphold the same doctrine, and teach the fire of hell to be an externall, visible, and true fire, and not a spirituall and internall paine onely, as this Discourser intendeth. Chrysost. ad Theodor. laps. epist. 5. With no speech (sayth Chrysostome) can any man expresse it here, but els where we shal see it most plainely. Set now before thine eyes that horrible way, which shal carrie (thee) headlong to the fire, and the (deuils) readie with torments, and the persons deliuered to such cruel tormentors. These things shalbe in that day. August. li. 50. homiliarum. hom. 16. Let vs alwayes thinke on these things (sayth Austen) lest it repent vs too late, when we come to the sight of eternal fire. For the burning pit of hell shalbe laid open, there shalbe a descent, but no ascent. Basil. in psal. 33. Call to minde (saith Basil) that terrible tribunal of Christ, which no creature may indure; there must euery one of vs be presented to render an account of his life. About those that haue liued wickedly shal stand fearefull and grisly angels beholding the sire and kindling it. Then shall they see a deepe gulfe, and darkenes that no eyes can pierce through, and an obscure fire that with blackenesse hath lost his shining, but kept his burning. Cyril. de exi an. & de se∣cund. aduentu. Alas (saith Cyril) what a place is that where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, which is called hell, which the deuil himselfe abhorreth? Alas what a Gehenne of vnquenched sire is that, which burneth and shineth not? how venemous is that worme, which neuer resteth? how terrible is that deepe and euerduring darkenesse? how cruel in their torments are those mer∣cilesse Angels? woe to the guiltie; when the innocent shalbe rewarded with honour, and they with shame. The innocent shal goe to Paradise, the nocent into fire vnquenchable. The sight of God shal cherish the innocent, the sight of fire shal torment the wicked. If the fire of hell be visible, it must needs be an externall and true fire: for internall and spirituall paines are inuisible. And therefore the Church of Christ hath alwayes confessed the fire of hell to be an externall and violent force of true fire tormenting the wicked; and con∣demned as an error in Origen, the conceit of an inward and spirituall fire in stead of hell fire, which this Defender is so much in loue withall. Ierom directing Auitus what he should beware in the reading of Origens bookcs, sayth, Hiero. ad A∣uitum quid sit cauendum in li∣bris . Scias detestanda tibi in cis esse quàm plurima, & iuxta sermonem Domini, inter scorpiones & colubros incedendum. This know, that there are very many things in them to be detested by thee; and as God speaketh, Thou must walke amongst Scorpions and Serpents. Where repeating diuers errours of Origen, hee layeth this downe for one of those that must be detested. Hiero. ibid. Ignes quoque Gehennae & tormenta quae scriptura sancta pecca∣toribus comminatur, non ponit in supplicijs, sed in conscientia peccatorum, quando Dei vir∣tute & potentia omnis memoria delictorum ante oculos nostros ponitur, ac praeteritas volup∣tates mens intuens conscientiae punitur ardore, & poenitudinis stimulis confoditur. The fire of hell also and the torments, which the sacred Scripture threatneth vnto sinners, (Origen) PLACETH NOT AMONGST (externall) PVNISHMENTS, BVT VVITHIN THE CONSCIENCE of sinners; when as by the vertue and power of God the remem∣brance of all our sinnes is set before our eyes, and the minde beholding her pleasures past, is punished with the fire of conscience, and pierced with the stings of (griefe and) repentance. This error Ierom more plainly expresseth, and sharply taxeth in his larger Commen∣taries vpon the Epistle to the Ephesians; whose words to preuent all cauils I thinke best to set downe in Latine as they lie, though they be large; for that they giue light to the former testimonie. Hier. in 5. cap. epist. ad Ephes. Quia sunt plerique, qui dicunt non futura pro peccatis esse supplicia nec extrinsecus adhibenda tormenta, sed ipsum peccatum & conscientiam delicti esse pro poena, dum vermis in corde non moritur, & in animo ignis accenditur in similitudinem febris, quae non torquet extrinsecus aegrotantem, sed corpus ipsa corripiens punit sine crucia∣tuum forinsecus adhibitione: has it aque persuasiones & decipulas fraudulentas verba inania appellauit & vacua, quae videntur blandiri peccantibus, sed magis eos ferunt ad aeterna sup∣plicia. Because there are many which say that there shall be no (externall) punishments for sinne, nor TORMENTS OVTVVARDLY INFLICTED, but that sinne it selfe, and the conscience thereof is punishment, whiles the worme doth not die in the heart, and a fire is kindled in the soule after the fashion of a feuer, which doth not outwardly torment the sicke, but possessing the bodie ve th t without any forr gne inflicting of paine: these perswasions and deceitfull deuices, the Apostle calleth void and emptie words, which seeme to flatter sin∣ners, but indeed hasten them to eternall punishment. Hell fire by this resolution is a pu∣nishment OVTVVARDLY inflicted on the damned, and not an inward fire or paine kindled in the minde, and possessing the soule or bodie as an ague doth, which is an inward grieuance, but no externall violence; and the contrarie conceit of your spiri∣tuall fire in the minde to be hell fire, is heere condemned in Origen as a deceitfull and detestable error, hastning men to eternall torments. The same confession stil continued, in the Church of Christ, Gregory: Gregor. mo∣ral . lib. 9. cap. 38. Quos flam∣ma Gehennae deuor at, à visione veri luminis coecat, vt for is eos dolor combustionis cruciet, & intus poena caecitatis obscuret, quatenus qui authori suo corde & corpore deliquerunt, simul corde & corpore p iantur. Whom the flame of hell deuoureth, it blindeth from sceing the true light; that paine of burning may outwardly torment them, and punishment of blindnesse inwardly obscure them, that as they sinned against their maker with heart and body, so they may be punished both in soule and body. Isidore: Isidor. de sum∣me . lib. 1. cap. 31. Duplex damnatorum poena est in Ge∣henna, quorum & mentem vrit tristitia, & corpus flamma. There is a double punishment of the damned in hell, whose minds burne with sorow, and their bodies with flame; by a iust rc∣ward, that as they debated with their mindes what they might performe with their bodies, so they should be punished both in soule and bodie. Bede: By the Beda lib. 3. cap. in cap. 9. Marci. worme (Christ) noteth the rottennesse, as by fire the burning of hell; or cls the worme signifieth the ouer-late repentance of sinne, which shall neuer cease to bite the conscience of the damned in their torments; vt ignis sit poena extrinsecus s iens, vermis dolor interi s accusans; that the fire (of hell) should be a torment OVTVVARDLY raging, and the worme a griefe inwardly accusing. Bernard: Bernard de interiori dom cap. 38. Timor co turbabit te, cùm terra aperietur cor am te, & iurues & caedes in stagnum sulfu∣ris ardent is & foetentis. Ignis exteriùs carnem tuam comburet, vermis interiùs conscienti∣am corrodet. Feare shall amaze thee, when the earth shall open before thee, and thou fall and light in the lake of brimstone burning and st king. Fire shall OVTVVARDLY BVRNE thy flesh, and a worme shall inwardly gnaw thy conscience. So Tertullian before them: Tertul. in A∣pologetico. Gehenna est ignis arcani subterraneus ad poenam the saurus. Hell is a treasure of secret fire kept vnder the earth to punish withall. And Iustine the Martyr: The diuels Iustinus Apo∣logia prima pro Christianis shall suffer punishment and vengeance, , inclosed in euerlasting fire. Arno∣bius likewise: (The Gentiles) are Arnobius ad∣uersus gent s. lib. 8. admonished by the books of (their) best learned men, and verses of (their) Poets, of that firie flood and infernall lake of flames often compassing (the place) which being prepared for eternall torments, they deliuered as knowen, both by the demonstration of diuels, and by the oracles of the Prophets. As the flashes of lightning touch mens bodies, but consume them not, and as the fires of Aetna and Vesuuius and of other pla∣ces of the earth doe burne, and not spend; so that flame appointed to punish (the wicked) is not fed with the decayes of those that burne, but nourished with parching their bodies that waste not. And Prosper: To Prospr de vita contem∣platina. lib. 3. cap. 12. heare and reade these things, and to beleeue they shall come to passe; to thinke how great an euill it is to be excluded from the ioy of beholding God; to be banished from heauen, and cast into euerlasting fire with the diuell and his angels; to see no light in that fire, but to feele that it burneth; to suffer the terrible cracks of that flaming fire; to haue their eyes blinded with the bitter smoke of that fuming gulfe; to be drowned in the deepe lake of Gehenna, and to be torne eternally with most greedie wormes; to thinke on these things and many such like, is a sure way to renounce all vice, and refraine all allurements of the flesh. Apparently then the fire of hell by the confession of all these ancient aud Christian writers is locall, as kept vnder the earth; externall, as inclosing the damned both men and diuels; and sensible to the eyes with obscure flames tormenting all the parts of the body with an horrible paine of burning, but not consuming them. And that the fire of hell shalbe an externall and true fire, what proofe can be fairer or fuller than that Scriptures and Fathers with one voice professe that Christ shall come to iudge the world in flaming fire, which shall 2. Pet 3. melt the elements with heat, and dissolue the heauens; and threfore without question must needs be a true, substantiall, & externall fire; and that the same fire, with which he shall come to iudge, shall deuoure his aduersaries. Esa. 66. Behold (sayth Esay) the Lord will come with fire, that he may render his indignation with the flame of fire: for the Lord will iudge with fire. Psal. 96. There shall goe a fire before him, (when he commeth to iudge, sayth Dauid) and burne vp his enemies ro nd about. The Lord Iesus (sayth Paul) 2. Thess. 1. shall shew himselfe from heauen in flaming fire, ren∣dring vengeance to them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel. For (to such) Hebr. 10. remai∣neth no sacrifice for sin, but a fearefull expectation of iudgement, and a violence of fire which shall deuoure the aduersaries. Fire (sayth Arnobius) shall go before Christ comming to iudgement, Arnobius in Psal 96. euen fire which shall performe two offices: with one and the same aspect it shall lighten the friends, and inflame the enemies of God: for the fire which shall burne the sinfull, shalbe made brightnesse to the iust. The end of this present world (saith Iustine Martyr) is the Iust. in resp. ad quaest. 74. iudgement of the wicked by fire as the scriptures of the Prophets & Apostlesdeclare, and likewise th writings of Sibylle: so blessed Clemens (that liued with the Apostles) in his Epistle to the Corinths affirmeth. Christ shall come (sayth Ambrose) Ambros. in 2. Thess. cap. 1. with his heauenly army, and with fire as his minister to giue vengeance. or the sire of iudgement shall serue him to reuenge the reprobate, sayth Gregorie. Paul Theodoret. in 2. Thess. cap. 1. sheweth (sayth Theodoret) that u Gregor. in E∣zech. hom. 2. iudgement shalbe full of terror, noting first the Iudge comming from heauen; then their pow∣er which minister vnto him, who are the angels; lastly, th kinde of punishment: for (the wicked) shall be deliuered to the flame of fire. There are Idem in Psal. 96. two properties in fire; to burne, and to shine: the shining propertie the assembly of Saints shall enioy; by the other shall wicked men be punished. So Basil: Basil. in Psal. 28. There are two forces in fire; one to burne, the other to shine: the sharpnesse of ire which punisheth, is layed vp for those that deserue burning; the light and shining thereof is allotted to the ioy of the blessed. And Athanasius: Athan. in∣terp. parabol. quaest. 79. Fire hath two forces; the one of shining, which shall be giuen to the iust. the other of burning, which shall be diuided to sinners. Ierom likewise: Fire shalbe Hieron. in E∣zech. li. 1. cap. 1. light to the faithfull, and punish the vn∣beleeuers. And Theophylact: (Christs) comming shall be in flaming fire, as Dauid pro∣fesseth (of him): A fire shall goe before him, and shall burne his enemies round about. For Theophylact. in 2. Thess. cap. 1. this fire shall offer burning to sinners, and no shining; but to the iust it shall giue light and shi∣ning and no heat or burning. The fire, I trust, which hath these two properties, to ligh∣ten the iust, and torment the wicked, is an externall and sensible fire; and with that fire Christ shall come to dissolue the heauens, melt the elements, and punish the wic∣ked; neither shall the spirituall and internall paine of the soule, which the Discour∣ser maketh his hell fire, come neere the Saints, or be ioyous and comfortable to any, as the fire of iudgement shalbe to the saints of God. Then all sorts of writers, Prophets, Euangelists. Apostles, and Diuines of all ages: Yea Philosophers, Poets, and Sibyls haue taught, the wicked shall e punished with true fire, and not with metaphores; and the Sonne of God in person hath confirmed the same; and all sectes, Iewes, Pagans, and Christians haue beleeued it; God taking speciall care as well by deeds as words that the truth and terror of his vengeance vp∣on sinne should not be vnknowen to all the world. For which cause he hath not on∣ly made the earth in many places as Aetna, Vesuuis, and else where to burne with perpetuall fire; but hath often destroyed sinfull persons and places with fire from heauen; to let all men see and know that the vengeance decreed. threatned, and ex∣ecuted on the wicked is sensible and true fire from God; which he hath made of all senseles creatures the most violent, potent and fearefull meanes to punish. Therefore did he Genes. 19. raine fire and brimstone vpon Sodome and Gomorre when their sinnes were at full; & punished the people, that murmured at him, with fire; calling the name of the place Number 11 THABHERAH, because the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them; as likewise he sent Number. 21. Firie serpents to bite them, when they spake against him. So Number. 16. Fire came out from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fiftie men of Corahs company, that presumed to offer incence vnto the Lord; as before it had destroyed Leuit 10. Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire before the Lord. And at Eliahs word 2. Kings. 1. Fire came downe from heauen twice and deuoured two Captaines with their two bands of an hun∣dred men. Insomuch that when Satan would haue Iob beleeue, he was punished by Gods owne hand, he gate fire to fall from heauen vpon Iobs sheepe and seruants; the messenger making this report; Iob. 1. The fire of God is fallen from heauen, and hath burnt vp (thy) sheepe and seruants and deuoured them. Which kind of vengeance Luke 9. Iames and Iohn the Disciples of Christ desired, when their master was repelled by the Samari∣tans and denyed lodging, as willing to haue that inhumanitie punished to the exam∣ple of all others, but that they were repressed by him who came to saue, and not to destroy. Thus hath God often by true and sensible fire from heauen, declared and ve∣rified the certaintie of his generall and finall iudgement, when his Sonne shall ap∣peare in flaming fire to render vengeance to all that know not God and obey not the Gospell; and that fire of Iudgement, which shall burne heauen and earth, shall shine to the Saints with ioy and comfort, and punish the wicked by tormenting them for euer. This you thinke is not against you: for you deny that Defenc. pa. 146. l. 35. Now there is corporall fire in hell, whatsoeuer there shall be hereafter, when bodies also shal be there vnited and tormented with the soules, and this only is your question, or nothing. Many shifts you haue sent vs in Whether there be true fire in hell before iudg∣ment is not the question. your late defence, which sauour neither of learning nor religion; but a slenderer then this you haue sent vs none. For first this is not the chiefe doubt, whether there be now in hell any true fire or no; which you say is your ONLY QVESTION or nothing: but what is the substance of damnation due to sinne, and what vengeance for sinne all the wicked must suffer in hell, not for a time but for euer; and we should haue suffered, had we not been redeemed; this is the right & maine point in question. For this is the full waight and burden of our sinnes, which you See the con∣clusion of my sermons fol. 339 say must be laid vpon Christ before we could be freed from it; and this is the proper payment and wages of sinne, which we should haue payed, had we not beene ransommed by the death of Christ; and therefore by your owne conclusions Christ must and did pay the same, which else we should haue payed. That which the damned doe presently suffer in hell, is not the full burden, nor iust vages of their sinnes; else the terror of Iudgement, as well as the taking of their bodies were wholy superfluous; if the true payment and full vengeance of their sinnes were executed on them before Iudgement. But the reprobat as well men as Angels are Epist Iud. vers. 6. Reserued vnder darknes vnto the iudgement of the great day; and 2. Pet. 2. Vnto DAMNATION (which) sleepeth not; though it be not already to the full performed on either. Againe, a great number of the wicked shall neuer trie the torments of the soule seuered from the body, because the day of Christ shall find them liuing, as the Apostle 1. Cor. 15. testifieth, and not part their soules from their bodies, but cast both ioyntly into hell fire, so that the vengeance of sinne before Iudgement which you would so faine fasten on, and make YOVR ONLY QVESTION, commeth too short of all your owne conclusions, and is excluded by the expresse words of your limitations in your late defence. For you subiect Christ to all Gods proper wrath and vengeance, so farre as was due generally for all mankinde to suffer. But the fire of hell before Iudge∣ment, except it be the selfe same that also remaineth after iudgement, belongeth not by Gods iustice to all men in generall, by reason manie shall not suffer it but after iudgement. It is euident therefore that the fire of hell before iudgement is not your maine question, because it neither is the full wages nor vengeance of sinne, nor gene∣rally due to all mankinde; but the right and true question is touching hell fire after iudgement, wherein body and soule shall burne, feeling the torment and violence of euerlasting fire, according to the measure of ech mans sinnes. Howbeit, if we marke well the words of holy Scripture, this which you would so gladly make your question, is no question at all. For by the sentence of the Iudge it manifestly appeareth, that there is but one aud the same fire prouided for all the damned both men and diuels; and that fire not onely is euerlasting without end or change, but prepared and made ready before the day of iudgement, as the words of our Sauiour doe plainly import; who will say to all the wicked without exception: Matth. 25. Depart from me ye cursed, , into (that) euerlasting fire, which is (alreadie) prepared for the diuell and his angels. The article so often repeated suffereth the fire whereinto the wicked shall be cast, to be none other fire but the selfe-same that is euerlasting, and prepared for the di∣uels. The Participle of the Preterperfect tence argueth the time when that fire was prepared for the diuell and his angels, to be perfectly past before iudgement. Of the first there can be no question; August. de ci∣uitate Dei lib. 21. cap. 10. Idem quippe ignis crit supplicio scilicet hominum attri∣butus & Daemonum, dicente Christo, Discedite à me maledicti in ignem aeternum, qui para∣tus est Diabolo & Angelis eius. Vnus quippe ignis vtrisque erit, sicut veritas dixit. The same fire (sayth Austen) shall serue for the punishing of men and Diuels, Christ saying, De∣part from me ye cursed into the fire euerlasting, which is prepared for the Diuell and his An∣gels. One fire shalbe to both, as the trueth hath spoken. The second, that hell fire is pre∣pared before the day of iudgement, and abideth euerlasting from the time of the pre∣paration without any new creating or altering at the day of iudgement, is as euident by the sacred Scriptures. Esay who liued and prophesied more than eight hundred yeeres before our Sauiour reuealed this doctrine, sayth of it, as we heard before: Esa. 30. Tophet is prepared of old (or long since) the burning thereofis (as the) fire (of) much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a riuer of brimstone, doth kindle it. Our Lord and Ma∣ster almost one thousand six hundred yeeres since, made the soule of the rich man in the sixteenth of Luke to say of hell fire, Luke 16. I am tormented in this flame. And S. Iude proposing the destruction of Sodome and Gomorrhe, sayth; They Epist. Iude. vers. 7. are set foorth for an example, , (in or by) suffering the punishment of euerlasting fire. Where we see the fire which God rained from heauen on Sodome and Go∣morrhe, is called euerlasting; and the inhabitants of those cities are affirmed by the Apostle (euen then when he wrate) to suffer euerlasting sire, for an example of the iust iudgement of God. It is therefore one and the same fire of hell that punisheth the wicked before and after iudgement, which was prepared long since, as Esay sayth, and is euerlasting, that is, not ending or changing into another fire, but increasing and kin∣dling with greater fiercenesse at the day of iudgement, that all the wicked both men and angels may receiue a damnation answerable to their deserts, which in part they now feele, but then expect a sharper and sorer torment than yet is executed on them; which is the terrour of iudgement and fulnesse of damnation reserued for them. Then notwithstanding your sleights and shifts, Sir Discourser, that Christ suffered the substance and essence of hell paines, and that happily there shall be corporall fire after Iudgement, yet now there is no true fire in hell: we find it resolued by the Scrip∣tures, and auouched by all the ancient Fathers, and the best learned Diuines of our time; that the fire of hell so much threatned in the Scriptures to the reprobate, is a true, substantiall, and externall fire, and the same that was prepared for the deuils e∣uen from their fall, and doth and shal dure as well before, as after Iudgement for euer; into which the soules are, and at the generall resurrection the bodies of all the wic∣ked shall be cast, there to burne with vnspeakeable and vnceaseable torments. And though I thinke it not fit for any man to take vpon him to deliuer the quality or force of that fire further then the Scriptures haue reuealed it; yet that is no iust cause to doubt the trueth thereof, or to preiudice the power of God, who hath spoken the word, as if he could not, or would not performe it; but rather for certaine to know, and confesse that God can punish the mightiest of his Angels by the weakest of his creatures; and as in sinning they haue exalted themselues by pride farre aboue their degree; so in punishing them for their sinne, God can and will depresse them as farre beneath their originall condition; to teach them that all their strength depended on his will and pleasure. So that we haue no neede to runne to the immediate hande of God alone, to make him the sole tormentor of spirits, (as this Discourser doeth) for extracting a new Quintessence of hell fire: the will and word of God, as it gaue to men and Angels all their power and force, so may it take the same from them swel∣ling against him when he will; and subiect them to the force of any his creatures, which he can endue with might to performe his commandement against all the trans∣gressours and despisers of his righteousnesse and holinesse. In summe we see that Christ suffered no part of that, which the Scriptures make substantiall and essentiall to the paines of hell and damnation of the wicked, I meane of that which is included in the sentence of the Iudge pronounced against them: but this Discourser, as he hath deuised a new kind of redemption neuer mentioned in the Scriptures, nor deriued from the blood of Christ; so hath he framed vs another hell, then the word of God reuealeth; and changed the whole course of the sacred Scrip∣tures with his dreames and deuises, that though the text of holy writ doe no way fa∣uour his sansies, yet by flying to allegories, and heaping vp a number of metaphores, he might entertaine some talke, when his proofes did faile. To vphold that Christ suffered the true paines of hell, before we could be redeemed by his death & blood∣shed; he minced hell paines into substance and accidence, and least this geare should seeme grosse, he shadowed the substance of hell fire with figures and allegories; and sent vs at last to the immediate hand of God, for all punishment of sinne in the life to come; not vpon any iust ground or proofe out of Scripture, but because his Master∣ship knew not otherwise how to carrie his conceites cleanly, he vnloaded them all by tropes and metaphores vpon Gods immediate hand; from which onely (as he saith, though very vntruely) the Soule hath her proper and principall suffering. But exa∣mining the parts, we find no such metaphysicall substance of hell, as he pretendeth; no such metaphoricall fire, as he affirmeth; no such immediate hand of God, vex∣ing Soules and deuils in hell, as he imagineth; we rather find the cleane contrarie; to wit, his circumstances to be of the substance of the Iudgement pronounced vpon the wicked; the fire in hell to be a true and substantiall fire; and by that, as by a peculiar meanes decreed by the will, strengthened by the power and reuealed by the word of God, the damned both soules and diuels to be perpetually punished and tormented, each of them according to their demerits; though the inward powers and faculties of the minde, shall not cease most grieuously also to afflict the damned and despay∣ring spirits. And touching Christs sufferings, to which all this must be referred, and for which all this is discussed, we finde him most free from darkenes , destruction, con∣fusion, remorse of sinne from malediction, dereaction, and desperation with their consequents; and from the torment of hell ire, either in soule or bodie which is the second death; that is in deede from all the parts of damnation noted in the Scriptures to be prouided for the reprobate, which are the true paines o hell; and so this deuisers dreames to bee as farre from trueth, as they are from all testimonies of holy Scripture, which men∣tion no such things suffered by Christ, nor make any of them needefull for Christ to suffer before he might pay the price of our redemption. Defenc. pag. 2 l. 26. We doe not contend to expresse what iust measure of Gods wrath. nor precisely in what manner it was reuealed, and executed on Christ. Onely we knowe that whatsoeuer it were, . Gods very wrath and proper vengeance for sinnes, though outwardly executed on the bodie, yet it could not but sinke in deeper, euen into the depth of the soule a d be discerned by Christ, and conceaued to be such, and so sustained as proceeding from God, and so wound the Soule properly. yea chiefly, though the anguish thereof bruised his bodie ioyntly also. You haue la∣bored (Sir Discourser) in twentie pages of your Defence by many lame distinctions and false positions to shew vs the MANNER & MEASVRE of Christs suffering the paines of hell for the sin of man. The manner you made to be, Christs suffering them properly, yea onely in his very soule, from the immediat hand of God, euen as the damned do. The measure you tooke to be all Gods proper wrath and vengeance for sinne, yea the selfe same paines for their nature which are in hell. and which are extreamest and sharpest in hell. Your twelfth page told vs in plaine words, Defenc. pa. 12. l. 28. These paines then in this very manner in∣flicted Christ felt; indeede not being in the locall hell; yet those being the selfe same paines for their nature which are in hell, yea which are SHARPEST in hell. And he discerned and receaued them properly, yea ONLY in his very soule. You beginne now to tell vs ano∣ther tale, that you doc not contend to expresse what iust measure of Gods wrath, nor pre∣cisely in what manner it was reuealed and executed on Christ. Onely you know that what soe∣uer it was, Gods very wrath and proper vengeance for sinnes, though outwardly executed on the bodie, could not but sinke in deeper, and so wound the soule properly yea chiefly. By a long processe you made vs beleeue the soules proper and immediat suffering must be from the hand of God alone, without inferiour meanes and instruments, and not from the bodie, because that kind of suffering is common to vs with beastes, and Treatis. pa. 18. li. vltima. maketh not properly to our redemption. And so by your refined diuinitie, the stripes, wounds, blood and death of Christ, could not properly pertaine to the price of our redemption, by reason those sufferings which come by the body were common to Christ with beasts. Thus reuerently and religiously, to prooue your selfe a pure Christian, you resolued touching the bloodshed and death of Christ, sustained on the Crosse. Now as almost tyred with that blasphemous toy, and perceiuing how hard it would be to please the learned with this leauen, or to seduce the simple with these vnsauerie shifts, which haue neither foundation nor mention in the sacred Scriptures; you beginne to turne an other leafe, and to tell vs you doe not contend for the iust measure, nor precise ma∣ner of Christs suffering the wrath of God. Only you know that whatsoeuer it were (though you can neither prooue nor expresse what it was) Gods very wrath and proper vengeance for sinne, though outwardly executed on the body, could not but sinke deeper into the Soule, and wound the soule properly yea chiefly, though the anguish thereof bruised the bodie ioynt∣ly also. It is well yet at last that you find your selfe ignorant of some things, and that you will not take vpon you to expresse in what precise manner, or iust measure the wrath of God was reuealed and executed on Christ. For whiles you broched those secrets more boldly then wisely or truely, you ranne your selfe out of breath, and brought neither substance nor shadow of holy Scripture to warrant your vanities, but daunced vp and downe with certaine licentious and ambiguous phrases of GODS PROPER VVRATH, MEERE IVSTICE, VERY VENGEANCE and such like flowers, neither confirmed by the Scriptures, nor so much as expounded by your selfe, but because you checke your owne presumption, I will spare it, and come to that which you professe your selfe so resolutely to know; that Gods very wrath and proper ven∣geance for sinne, though outwardly executed on the body (of Christ) could not but sinke deeper into the soule, and wound the soule properly, yea chiefly, though the anguish thereof bruized his bodie also. Wherein notwithstanding you keepe your accustomed phra∣ses of Gods very wrath and proper vengeance, which you neither doe, nor dare describe by the parts thereof, that we may discerne the trueth of your speech; yet for their sakes that are simple, I am content shortly to examine what wrath from God, Christ suffered, as farre as the Scriptures direct vs, at whose hands he suffered it, and what he did, and must conceaue of those his sufferings. There is no question but power to feele, conceaue, and discerne by sense, reason, What wrath of God Christ suf∣fered. or faith in man belongeth properly yea onely to the soule of man. Life, sense, and motion appeare in the body, and haue their actions perfourmed by the instruments of the body: but euen in them the power and force that quickneth and mooueth the body, and discerneth by the senses of the body, commeth from the soule, and so de∣pendeth on the soule, that the soule departing from the body leaueth it voyd of all motion, sense and life. Then in all Christs sufferings, when any violence lighted on his body, the paine pearced into his soule, and his soule not onely fully felt the an∣guish thereof, but rightly discerned the fountaine whence, the cause why, and the meanes by which it came. Christ likewise knew himselfe to be endewed with such might and strength, that of him selfe he could not onely resist the whole world, if he would; but euen commaund and represse men and diuels. His ouerruling of seas, windes, and wicked spirits, and giuing his Disciples power ouer them is so euident and often in the Scriptures, that no Christian may be ignorant of it. After his agony in the Garden, with the word of his mouth he threw to the Iohn. 18. ground the whole band of men, that came with Iudas to take him; and when by this meanes he had shewed him selfe not destitute of his wonted force and vertue, he voluntarily submitted him selfe, not onely to be bound and brought whether they would, but euen to be whip∣ped, mocked, wounded, hanged, and euery way vsed at their pleasure. Which he did not to satisfie their wicked rage, but to obey the will of his heauenly Father; who when he would punish the sinnes of men in the person of his owne Sonne, Matth. 26. Deliue∣red him into the hands of sinners, from them to suffer Acts. 4. whatsoeuer the hand and counsell (of God) had determined before to be done. For Acts. 3. those things which God before had shewed by the mouthes of all his Prophets that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled, by the malice of some, and ignorance of others, whom Satan incited, with the greatest contume∣ly and crueltie they could deuise, to take Christs life from him. In all which Christ suffered nothing but what the Acts. 2. determinate counsell and foreknowledge of God purposed and appointed should be done. For this was Iohn. 18. the Cup which (his) father gaue (him) to drinke; and this was the Luke 22. houre, and power of darknes, when the Prince of the world came against him, howbeit neither man nor deuill Iohn 19. could haue any power at all against him, but what was giuen (them) from aboue. So that in all those wronges, reproches and paines which were offered and inflicted on him by the rage of Satan and the wic∣ked, he saw the secret counsell and hand of God punishing our sinnes in his bodie, and by that meanes satisfiyng the diuine iustice that was prouoked by our transgres∣sions. But no where doe the Scriptures deliuer that God with his immediate hand tor∣mented The paines of hell were not the cause of agonie. the soule or body of his Sonne, much lesse that he impressed the very paines of hell and of the damned on the soule of Christ; which is your new found Redemp∣tion and satisfaction for the sinnes of men. By his agonie in the garden you boldly and rashly presume it; but by what logick you conclude it, neither doe I conceaue, nor can you declare. Christ was SORROVVFVLL and AFRAID in the garden, and began to be AMAZED; ergo, you thinke, he felt, or foresaw he should suffer the paines of the damned from the immediate hand of God. Well these may be your hastie thoughts, but this hath no ground in Arte, reason, nature, or Scripture. For many other things Christ might feare; and this of all other things he could not feare. How many things are there in God, when we approach his presence; how many things proceede there from God, when we aduisedly marke his counsels and iudge∣ments, which may iustly ouerwhelme the weakenes of mans flesh with admiration and feare euen to astonishment? The brightnes of Gods glory, the greatnes of his power, the deepenes of his counsels, the sound of his voice, the presence of his Angels, the sight of his vengeance prepared, or executed on others how many good and per∣fect men haue these things strooken into feares and mazes? When Saint Iohn in the spirite sawe the shape of the sonne of man and heard his voice, he Reuel. 1. fell downe as dead for feare. When Daniel had seene the vision of the goat and the Ram, he was Daniel. 8. afraid and fell vpon his face, yea he was stricken and sicke certaine daies being astonished at the vision. When the parents of Sampson saw the Angell ascend toward heauen in the flame of the Altar, they Iudic. 13. fell on their faces to the ground; and one of them said, we shall surely die, because we haue seene the Lord. When a light from heauen suddainly shined round about Paul, as he was trauayling to Damascus, he Acts 9. fell to the earth trembling and amazed. When Isaac perceaued that he had ignorantly blessed Iacob in steede of Esau, he was Genes. 27. stricken with an exceeding great (feare and) trembling. When the people saw the Creeple walking, that was dayly layd at the gate of the Temple to aske almes, and knew him to be the same man that before was lame from his mothers wombe, they were Acts 3. amazed and sore astonished at it. Ieremie lamenting the miserie of the Iewes, sayth; I am sore Ierem. 8. vexed for the hurt of the daughter of my people, I am heauie, and asto∣nishment hath taken me. Euen as the Apostle also witnesseth of himselfe; Rom. 9. I speake the trueth in Christ, and lie not; I haue great heauinesse and continuall sorow in mine heart, for my brethren that are my kinsmen according to the flesh. If visions and Angels from God, if the works and iudgements of God executed on others haue driuen the best men to frights and agonies, what maruell then if the humane nature of Christ presenting himselfe in the garden vnto the Maiestie of his Father to be the Ransommer of man∣kinde, and with his owne smart to satisfie the iustice of God for the sinne of the world, and no way ignorant how weighty that burden, and how mighty the hand of God was, to whose will he must and did wholly submit himselfe; what maruell I say if the weak∣nesse of our flesh in Christ beganne to be afrayed and astonished at the iudiciall presence and power of God, at the perill of man if he were deserted, and price to be payd for him before he could be redeemed? not that damnation or destruction were prepared or purposed for him that should saue vs; but for that the hand of God was infinitely able without hell and the paines thereof to presse and ouerpresse the manhood of Christ by whatsoeuer meanes he would. This, you will say, is the paines of hell, and the very same, yea all that which the damned do suffer.] In deed Sir Discourser? doth your skill serue you to make a reli∣gious submission to the Maiesty of God, and an holy confession of his most mighty power euen with feare and trembling, to be all that the damned now suffer, or the selfe same paine which is sharpest in hell? Doe not the godly at all times when they enter into the iust consideration of themselues, presently see their owne infirmity and in∣dignitie, and thereby fall with feare and trembling to confesse all sanctitie, glorie, might, and maiesty to be Gods, and themselues to be not only earth and ashes, but euen sinfull and hatefull vnto God, if he be not gracious and mercifull vnto them? And will you call these faithfull meditations of Gods children giuing vnto God his due, the paines of hell and state of the damned, because the sense of their weaknesse and vnwoorthinesse breedeth in them feare and trembling? Then make heauen as touching the essence thereof all one with hell, and saluation in substance to be the same that damnation is, because the best learned Fathers confesse, that the Angels in heauen doe and shall tremble at the voice and iudgements of God. Hilarius de trinitat. li. 2. Ad uius vocem Archangeli & Angeli tremunt: At whose voice the Angels and Archangels doe tremble; sayth Hilarie speaking of the Godhead in Christ. Which words Leo the Great doth allow and alleage in his Leo epist. 97. ad Leonem August. Epistle to Leo the Emperour; and they grew to be of that credit, that the effect of them was inserted in the Church seruice by Gelasius, as Alcui∣nus doth witnesse. Albinus Flac∣cus de diuinis offi ijs. Maiestatem tuam tremunt potestates: The powers of heauen do trem∣ble at thy Maiesty. Christ Basil. in hex∣amer. homil. 11. comming from the heauens (to iudgement) euery creature shall tremble, saith Basil: the Angels themselues shall not be without feare. for they also shall be present, though they shall giue no account to God. At that day (sayth Chrysostome) Chrysost. ep. 5. ad Theodorum lapsum. all things shall be full of astonishment, horror and feare. A great feare shall then possesse euen the Angels, and not the Angels only, but the Archangels, and Thrones, and powers of heauen, be∣cause their fellow seruants must vndergoe iudgement for their liues led in this world. Will you hence conclude that the Angels and Archangels are or shalbe then in the paines of hell, because they do and shall tremble at the sound of Gods voice, and sight of Gods wrath to be executed on the world? No more may you inferre that Christ did or should suffer the paines of hell and of the damned, for that his manhood began to feare and tremble either at the maiestie of God sitting in iudgement; or at the power of his iustice able to punish by what meanes, and in what measure pleased him; or at the weight of our sinnes, for which he did vndertake; or at the sharpnesse of vengeance layd vp in store aswell for the Iewes as all other vnbeleeuers, that should neglect the saluation then to be purchased by his death and passion; since the person of Christ being God and man was farre more assured and secured from hell and damnation, than either the Saints or Angels of God are, or can be. At least then, you thinke, Christ feared and felt the wrath of God due to our sinnes, though outwardly executed on his bodie.] From Christes Agonie, which might haue diuers causes, and whereof the true cause is not reuealed vnto vs by the Scriptures, as I haue alwayes sayd, so I now repeat it againe; you can conclude no∣thing for your paines of hell to be suffered in the soule of Christ through the imme∣diate hand of God. They are your blind and bold deuises, (I must not say lewd and wicked, because you are so tender, you may not be touched) to bring the true paines of hell, yea the sharpest and extreamest of them into this life; and to make the sub∣stance of hell nothing but a certaine paine inflicted onely on the soule by the imme∣diate hand of God: which you thinke Christ suffered in the garden, where you say, he Defenc. pa. 17. l. 1. felt as extreame sharpnes of paine, as may by any possibilitie be endured yea though in hell it selfe; and yet this Ibidem. pa. 21. l. 7. incomprehensible, vnspeakeable, infinite and intolerable fierie wrath and paines of hell did neither part his soule from his mortall body, nor so much as breake his patience. So terrible you make the torments of hell in words, and so easie in deeds, that the wicked here suffer and endure them without ending their liues, breaking their sleepes, or refusing their foode. But the true paines of hell are of an other manner of force, th n you dreame of. They leaue no place for meate, nor sleepe; the body must be immortall and not able to die, that shall endure them; they passe all patience of m n and Angels. So that howsoeuer you aggrauate your fansie with fierie words, you eleuate in truth the dreadfull iudgements of God against sin, when you make the sha pest and extreamest of them to be tolerated of our Sauiour in this life with patience and si ence, as appeared in his sufferings; and the reprobate in the midst of your hell paines to liue, eate, and sleepe; which in the tr e paines of hell were not possible. Austen saith rightly: August. de ciuita. dei. li. 21. cap. 3. So is the soule conioyned with this body, that to th paines which are exceeding great, it yeeldeth and departeth: because the very frame of the members and vitall parts is so weake, that they are not able to sustaine the force which bringeth great or most sharpe paine. Which Chrysostome also confi meth: Chrysost. ad populum A i∣ochen. hom. 49. Name fi e if thou wilt, the sword, or wilde beasts, and if any thing be more grieuous than these: yet are these scant a shadow to the torments of hell. And these when they grow vehement, are ea∣siest, and soonest dispatch men, the body not sufficing to suffer a sharpe paine any long while. Your hell paines then are not very sharpe, which the wicked may suffer so many yeres in this life, and not forsake either food or sleepe. Yet Christ did feele, you say, Gods very wrath and proper vengeance for sinne, and that only you know, though you c n not expresse the maner or measure of his feeling it. And it was discerned and concei ed by Christ to be such, and so did wound the soule properly, yea chiefly; though it were outwardly executed on his bodic. ] The wrath and vengeance of God due What is Gods wrath due to si ne. to sinne, and generally to all mankinde for sinne, is spirituall corporall, and eternall death with all the seeds and fruits of death; that is, the losse of all earthly and heauenly blessings in this life and the next, and the depth of perpetuall mi ery in body and soule here and in hell. This is the true wages and full payment of sinne; and though God of his bountie and patience do often remit to the wicked in this life, a great part of this in things tempo all, yet when he inflicteth on them the miseries and cala ities of this life, he giueth them their due. And as for spirituall and eternall death now and hereafter, it is so proper and certaine to the reprobate, that not one of them shall e cape e ther. Spirituall death is Ephes 4. blindnesse and hardnesse of heart working all vncle nnesse euen with greedinesse; which sheweth men to be . strangers from the life of God, and , as past all sense and feeling of God. Eternall death the Scrip∣ture calleth WRATH TO COME, because no man suffereth the full force and wa ght thereof in this life, but as it is the Reue . 2 . & 21. second death, so it followeth in men after the first death, which euereth the soule from the bod e. Yee vipers bro d (sayd Iohn Baptist to the Pharises and Saddu s) . who hath taught you (thus) to fl e from the wrath to come? Iesus (sayth Paul) 1. I h ss. 1. deliuereth vs from the wrath to come. In this life the wicked may haue a Heb. 0. fearefull expectation, but no present execution, of this iudgement; there is a Ro . 2. day of rath, euen the reuelation of the st iudgement of God, when euery man shall be rewarded according to his works, and a violent fire shall d uoure the aduersaries. This wrath by the Scriptures is reserued for the vessels of wrath for euer, and shall be exe∣cuted on them with indignation, furie and fire; not onely because the wrath of God against the wicked burneth l ke fire, but for that it shall be powred on them with fla∣ming and euerlasting fire. The effects whereof are reiection, malediction, confusi∣on, desperation and such l ke, which neuer accompanie saluation. To say that Christ suffered this kinde of wrath, which is the true and proper wages of sinne, is horrible and hellish blasphemie, which I hope no Christian man will ad∣uenture. From the spirituall death of the soule, which is the Rom. 1. wrath of God reuealed from heauen against all vngodlinesse and vnrighteousnesse of men, and bringeth with it the losse of all grace and goodnesse in this life, and consequently leaueth the polluti∣on and dominion of sinne in the soule of man, our Lord and master must be as free as from damnation; the one being alwayes a necessary consequent to the other. Dis∣pleasure and wrath against Christes person God neuer had, nor could haue any; Christ being his owne and only sonne, and so deerely beloued, that for his sake Gods most iust and most heauie wrath against the sinnes of all his elect did calme and as∣swage: for Gods inward loue doth not admit contrarieties or changes as mans doth; all Gods counsels, wayes, and wo kes being absolutely perfect and constant, chiefly towards his owne sonne, whom he naturally, infinitly, and euerlastingly loueth in the same degree that he doth himselfe; and therefore no more possible there should be in god any displeasure or dislike conceiued of his sonne for bearing the sinnes of the world, or for what cause soeuer, than of himselfe. And since the humane nature of Christ was by Gods owne wisdome, will, and worke, ioyned into the vnitie of the person of his sonne, and made one and the same Christ with his Godhead; no cause, nor course whatsoeuer could alter or diminish the exceeding loue and fauour of God to∣wards the very manhood of Christ; but as God did inseparably knit it to the person of his sonne, so did he make it fully partaker of that infinite loue wherewith he em∣braced his sonne. To confirme this to all the world: God did often from heauen pronounce with his owne voice, Matth. 3. Matth. 17. This is my beloued sonne in whom I am well pleased; as he forespake by his Prophet, Esa. 42. Beholde m e elect (in whom) my soule delighteth. This vnspeakable loue of God towards the person of his Sonne now being God and man, is the chiefe ground of our election and redemption. For wee were Ephes. 1. adopted through Iesus Christ, and made accepted in (his) beloued; by whom wee haue redemption through his blood, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes, according to the riches of his grace. So that we were neither elected nor redeemed, but by the infinite loue of God towards his sonne; for whose ake we were adopted to be the sonnes of God, and to whose loue the fierce wrath of God prouoked by our sinnes did yeeld and giue place; nei∣ther may he beare the name of a Christian man, that otherwise teacheth or beleeueth of our election and redemption. Now iudge thou Christian Reader, whether it were wrath or loue in God towards his sonne, that pardoned all our sinnes for his ake, and accepted the voluntarie sacrifice of his bodie and blood for the redemption of the world, through who e death we are reconciled to God, and cleansed by his blood from all our sinnes. Then as in God there neither was, nor could be any displeasure against the person Christ did not conceaue that God was in∣wardly displea∣sed with him. of his Sonne; nor against any part thereof for what cause soeuer; nor any chaunge or decrease of the loue which God with his own mouth professed from heauen towards Christ incarnate; so could not Christ without plaine infidelitie conceaue or beleeue that God was inwardly displeased or angrie with im, no not when he presented him elfe to God his Father vnder the burden of all our innes; knowing that neither sin, from which he was ee, being the innocent and mmaculate amb of God; no Gods most holy dislike, or iust pursuite of sinne could diminish Gods fatherly affection and most constant loue to him. For though he were not ignorant, that God in his holi∣nesse did hate and abhorre the vncleanesse of our sinne; and in his iustice would pursue it, to witnesse his v ter dislike and detestation thereof; ye for so much as Christ himselfe was holy and vndefiled euen in his humane nature; and did not thrust himselfe into this action, but was called and annointed by God to this honor, which God would yeelde to none but to his onely Sonne; and this readines of the Sonne to l ke and obey his fathers counsell and decree, and to pitie our miserie by laying our burden on his owne shoulders; was in it selfe so glorious to God, and gratious to∣wards man, that it could not b but most meritorious and acceptable to God, the Author, and accomplisher of mans Redemption by this meanes; what cause could Christ haue to doubt of his fathers loue towards him, or of his fathers approuing and accepting his office and seruice tending wholy to the perfourming of Gods will, and aduauncing of Gods glorie? But God was angrie with our sinnes, though not with his sonne; and that Anger Christ must beare, before we could be freed from it.] The more Angrie God was with our sinnes, the more contented he was with the person of his Sonne and euery part thereof, that submitted himselfe to the purpose and pleasure of God to appease his wrath kindled against our offences. And that Anger Christ did vndertake to quench, by satisfiyng the iustice of God in such sort as seemed best to God himselfe, and not by frustrating or declining it, nor by suffering the substance of the same destructi∣on and damnation which was due to vs. Yea this very point of Christs obedience and patience, enduring and so vpholding Gods iustice according to Gods owne will, (re∣specting who he was that in this wise submitted and emptied him selfe) was farre more contenting and pleasing to God, then if the whole world had beene condemned for sinne to hell fire. For God delighteth not in the destruction of the wicked, but in the obedience of his Sonne he tooke infinite delight; not reuenging him with rage as an enemie, but imposing a fatherly correction on him for our sinnes; which in his per∣son could extend no farder, that is, to none other kinde of death; and in ours would haue beene the eternall destruction of body and soule. Wherefore the wisedome and goodnesse of God chose out the person of his owne Sonne purposely; that neither our sinnes might be remitted as trifles skant prouoking his Anger, nor his Iustice meete with such as no way deserued to be respected or spared; but that the burden of our sinnes might be translated from vs, who were vnworthy of all fauour, and lye vpon the shoulders of his owne Sonne, whom in all iustice he must and did most high∣ly loue and tender; and therefore could award no farder or other punishment against him for our sinnes, then might stand with the moderation and affection of a father, and try the obedience and submission of a sonne. Sharpe was the chasticement of our peace on that part of our Sauiour which was capable of paine and smart, least God should seeme to dally with our sinnes; but not such as either exceeded his strength, or any way chaunged or called in question Gods fauour towards him. And so our Sauiour conceaued and resolued of all his sufferings, that by Gods iustice they must haue in them griefe and anguish very painfull and offensiue to his humane nature, because our sinnes were very lothsome and displeasing to Gods diuine nature: yet so that nothing should be laid on him, which might ouerwhelme or endanger his obe∣dience or patience; and that Gods purpose in so doing was to abolish sinne, and abate his wrath, his iustice being thus satisfied in the person of Christ Iesus: and not to ex∣ecute on his owne Sonne the fulnes of that vengeance which was prepared for sinne in men and Angels. And where the Discourser prateth so much of Gods VERY wrath, and PROPER vengeance for sinne, to be executed on the bodie and soule of Christ; if he meane the very same wrath and vengeance which is prepared for deuils, and shall be executed on all the damned; he openly blasphemeth. For then must the Sonne of God be e∣uerlastingly adiudged to hell fire as they are. If hee flie to the substance and essence thereof; he foolishly cau lleth, or vainely seeketh to shift his hands of open impietie. For if by substance and essence of hell fire prouided for sinne, he meane only a sharpe and extreame paine; then by this childish sophistrie, an headach, or toothach, a fit of an ague, or pang of the stone, if the paine be sharpe, are in substance and essence all one and the very same, which the damned now suffer in hell; since he is no way able to prooue that God is the immediate tormentor of soules in hell. But thus to mocke and delude the dreadfull Iudgements of God against sinne, and to play with the per∣son of Christ in so waightie matters of our saluation, is fitter for Pagans then Christi∣ans; and well this Discourser may multiply the miste of his words, but he shall neuer be able thence to der e any light of trueth. If he meane the very same paine in soule or bodie which the damned suffer; he runneth headlong into that impietie, which he would seeme to shun. For the bodies of the damned suffer hell fire, which Christs did not; and their Soules apprehend that God is their enemie, and not onely hateth them, but hath reiected, accursed, and condemned them for euer; which to imagine of Christs soule, is to charge him with plaine Infidelitie and Apostasie. Christ there∣fo e rightly conceaued of his sufferings; and knew God to be a gracious and lo∣uing father, euen to his manhood; though such was the constant course of Gods iustice, to which Christ submitted himselfe, that the price of our sinnes might not e easie in the person of our Sauiour; to make vs the more warie, how to prouoke Gods iustice hereafter, and to acknowledge our selues the more bound to him, who with his no small smart redeemed vs; and withall to ratifie the fearefull vengeance of God powred on the wicked to be most iust, when as the exchange of our sinnes was so grieuous to the vndefiled and welbeloued manhood of the Sonne of God. Since then God could no way be displeased with the nature, office, or action of Christ in of∣fering himselfe a ransome for man, which God himselfe first decreed before all worlds, promised by his Prophers, published by his Angels, testified by signes and wonders, and confirmed with his owne voyce from heauen; and the sufferings of Christ were tempered with Gods loue, proportioned to Christs strength, supported with oy, accepted with fauour, and reward d with all honor in him and in vs for his sake; what wound could this chastisement make in the depth of Christs soule, when it was executed on his body? or what could the soule of Christ conceaue more, then that God was in de de angrie w th our sinnes, and therefore would not accept our persons being in ourselues vnr ghteous and odious vnto him. And yet in mercy to∣wa ds s, and honor wards his Sonne, God would make him the Redeemer and Sauiour of the world, not neglecting his Iustice, nor forgetting his loue, but so mix∣ing them both together, that his dislike of our sinnes might appeare in the punish∣ment of them, and his relenting from the rigor of his Iustice in fauour of his onely Sonne might magnifi his mercy, satisfie his wrath, and enlarge his glory; and declare in most ample manner the submission, compassion, and pe fection of his Sonne, as only worthy to performe that worke, which procured, and receaue that honor, which followed mans Redemption? Christ then suffered from the hand of God, but mediate, that is, GOD DELIVE∣RED him into the hands of sinners, who were Satans instruments, with all eproach and wr nge to put him to a contumelious and grieuous death: God by his ecret wisdome and iustice dec eeing, appointing, and ordering what he should suffer at thei hands. Our sinnes e bare in his body on the tree, not that his soule was free from feare sorrow, , derision, and temptation, but that the wicked and malitious ewes practised all kind of shamefull violence and cruell tortu es on him by Whipping, Racking, pric∣ ing, and wounding the tenderest parts of his body, whereby his soule elt extreame and intole able paines. In all which he saw the determinate counsell of God, and re∣ceaued in the garden from his father this Iudgement for our sinnes, that he should be d liuered into the hands of sinners. For had he not humbly submitted himselfe to obey his fathe s will, no power in earth could haue preuailed against him; but as he had often fortold his Disciples what the . Priestes, Scribes, and Gentils should doe vnto him so when the hower was come, which was foreappointed of God, to obey his fathers will, he yeelded himselfe into their hands; they persuing him to death, of enuie and malice, but God thus . perfourming euen by their wicked hands what he had oreshewed by his . Prophets, that Christ should suffer. For they not knowing him, or the word of the Prophets, fulfilled them in condemning him; yea they fulfilled all things which were written of him. So that no man shall need to runne to the immediate hand of God, nor to the paines of hell for the punishment of our sinnes in the person of Christ: the Iewes FVLFILLED ALL THINGS that were written of him touching his sufferings, and therewith Gods anger against our sinnes was appeased, and God himselfe reconciled vnto vs. Esay speaking of the violence done by the Iewes to Christ, sayeth, he was wounded for our transgressions and broken for our iniquities, and with his stripes we are healed. (Thus) the Lord layed vpon him the iniquitie of all vs, and he 1. Pet. 2. bare our sinnes in his body on the tree; by those sufferings before and on the Crosse which the Scriptures expresly declare and describe. And as for the immediate hand of God tormenting the soule of Christ with the selfe same paines which the damned now suffer in hell, which is this deuisers maine drift; when he maketh or offereth a∣ny proofe thereof out of the word of God, I shall be ready to receiue it, if I can not refute it: till then I see no cause why euery wandring witte should imagine what mon∣sters please him in mans redemption, and obtrude them to the faithfull without any sentence or syllable of holy Scripture. I haue no doubt but all the godly will be so wise, as to suffer no man to raigne so much ouer their faith with fancies and figures, vnwar∣ranted by the Scriptures, vnknowen to all the learned and ancient councels and Fa∣thers, vnheard of in the Church of Christ till our age, wherein some men applaude more their owne inuentions then all humane or diuine instructions. The feare of bodily sufferings you thinke could not be the cause that there Defenc. pag. 12. l. 35. strai∣ned out from Christ much sweat of clotted blood. ] You straine the text of the Euangelist to draw it to your bent. Saint Luke hath no such words, that there strained out from Christ much sweat of clotted blood: he sayth, Christes Luc. 22. sweat was like drops of blood trick∣ling downe to the ground. Theophylact a Greeke borne, and no way ignorant of his mother tongue, expresseth Christes sweat in the garden by these words, , Christes body or face DISTILLED with plentifull drops of sweat. And albeit sometimes signifie the congealed parts of that which is otherwise liquid, and compacted pieces of that which els is poudered; yet often it noteth that which is thick in comparison with thinner, or eminent in respect of plainer. Now Christes sweat might be thicke by reason it issued from the inmost parts of his bodie, and was permixed with blood, or els it might breake out with great and eminent drops, as comming from him violently and abundantly, and being coloured with blood and congealed with colde, might trickle downe like DROPS or strings of blood vpon the ground. Howsoeuer, the Scripture saith not his sweate was clotted blood, but like to congealed or cooled blood, neither that such clots were strained out from him, but that his sweate being thicked and cooled on his face, fell from him like strings of blood. But grant there could be no reason giuen of Christs bloodie sweat in the garden, no more then there can be of the issuing first of blood, and then of water out of his side when he was dead; which S. Iohn doth exactly note as strange but yet true; will you conclude what please you, because many things in Christ both liuing and dying we e miraculous? I bind no mans conscience to any probabilities for the cause of this sweate, but onely to the expresse wordes and necessarie consequents of holy Scripture, and yet I wish all men either to be sober and leaue that to God which he hath concealed from vs, or if they will needes be gessing at the reason thereof (for certaine knowledge they can haue none) by no meanes to relinquish the plaine words or knowen groundes of holy Scripture, to embrace a fansie of their owne be∣getting. The learned and ancient Fathers haue deliuered diuers opinions of this sweate, which thou mayest see (Christian Reader) in my Sermons, and which we shall haue occasion anon to reexamine: euery one of them being (as I thinke) more probable and more agreeable to Christian pietie, then this Discoursers dreame of hell paines, or Gods immediate hand at that present tormenting of the soule of Christ. And if we looke to the order and sequence of the Gospell, we shall finde that feruent zeale extreamely heating the whole bodie, melting the spirits, thinning the blood, ope∣ning the pores, and so colouring and thicking the sweate of Christ, might in most likelihood be the cause of that bloodie sweate. Which S. Luke seemeth to insinuate when he saith, that after Christ was Luc. 22. comforted by an Angell from heauen, (and so reco∣uered from his former feare, and freed from suffering hell paines, wherein there is no comfort) he prayed more earnestly, (or ardently) and his sweate was (in colour and consistence) like drops (or strings) of blood trickling downe to the ground. So that feruen∣cie in prayer is set downe next before that sweate in the Gospell, as a precedent or cause thereof. Howbeit I onely barre the boldnesse of this deuiser, who presumeth what pleaseth him of Christs bloodie sweate in the garden, because the Scriptures doe not exactly mention the cause; and thinke it no reason to let him build on a blinde coniecture, a false conceit of his owne without any warrant of holy Scripture. But I am repugnant to my selfe, and some where Defenc. pag. 13. l. 27. I hold that Christ suffered no more but meere bodily paines, that is in his soule from and by his bodie. Pag. 14. l. 18. Neuerthelesse contr ∣riwise I seeme somewhere to yeelde wholely so much as you affirme. ] I leaue that grace to you Sir Discourser, to roule to and fro, and when you haue aid a thing after a sense and in a sort, then in another kind to vnsay it againe; and laying the whole foundati∣on of your cause vpon Christes suffering the wrath of God, neither to bring any proofes, or to shew any parts thereof by the word of God; but to play with the termes of very, proper, and meere; and to call that the opening of the whole question. Indeed I euery where defend that Christ suffered no death expressed or mentioned in the Scriptures, saue onely the death of the bodie; from other passions or sufferings of the soule, as feare, sorrow, shame, and such like, I doe not exempt the soule of Christ, when he sustered for our sinnes; though I leaue no place in him for the feare of dam∣nation, sting of conscience, despaire or doubt of Gods fauour, and such other ship∣wrackes of all faith, hope, patience, and pietie. The Crosse, death and blood of Christ when I name, I vse those words as the Scripture doth, to declare the whole maner and order of his passion from the garden to the graue, as it is described in the Euangelists; not excluding either the feare or agonie, which befell him before he was apprehen∣ded, but comprising within his death his obedience and patience in all those as icti∣ons, which he suffered till he died. And this is no wauering in mee, to retaine the words of the holy Ghost in their right sense and vse; but it is rather a childish dalli∣ance in you, Sir Discourser, to suppose that the death of Christ doth import no more but the very act of giuing vp the ghost; or els if I by that worde designe the rest of Christs sufferings endured at the time of his death by the witnesse of holy Scripture, you will also hemme in your hell paines within the list of the same wordes, though the Euangelists name or note no such thing in all the historie of Christs pass on. So likewise in speaking of Gods wrath against the wicked I wrap in no Ridles, nor enuiron the Reader with a windlace of words; but plainely and fairely distinguish it either by the naturall vertues and properties that are in God mis iking and repre sing sinne, or by the effects and punishments proceeding from God to reuenge the works and reward the workers of iniquitie. In the wicked, Gods holinesse hateth the euill deede, and the doer; that is, both the sinne, and the sinner; and by his iustice without all loue or fauour towardes them awardeth a punishment against them according to their deserts; which the power of God doth execute on them, not respecting their strength, but rather inabling them to continue in perpetuall torments of bodie and soule in hell fire for euer: Gods purpose being onely to reuenge sinne in them, and to destroy them for their sinnes; which is most holy and righteous in him, though it be neuer so grieuous and intollerable to them. Gods iust and full iudgement against sinne, where and when it pleaseth him to inflict it, is the depriuing bodie and soule of all outward and inward peace and grace in this life for the time, and the reiecting of both from all blis e and rest in the world to come for euer; which is the los e of God and of all his blessings prouided in this life, and the next for his elect. These causes and parts Gods anger hath against the wicked for their sinnes, and to euery of these the Scripture beareth witnesse. In Christ Gods holinesse infinitely imbraced the humilitie, obedience, and charitie of his Sonne offering himselfe to be the ransommer of man, and perfectly loued the integritie, innocencie, and puritie of his manhood created, called, and anointed of God to this intent and end, that his death and bloodshedding should be the redemption of the world, though God vtterly hated the sinnes of men, which his sonne then assu∣med into the bodie of his flesh to beare the burden of them, when wee could not. Wherefore Gods iustice finding the loue of the Father towards his Sonne, farre to exceede the hatred of the Creator against the vncleannesse of his sinfull, but sedu∣sed creature, did relent from the rigour of that iudgement, which was prouided for sinne in Angels, and with a fatherly regard and respect to the meanest part of the pe son of his sonne, decreed a punishment for our sinnes in the manhood of Christ, which was a corporall death, accompanied with the sharpest paines, that Christ might endure with obedience and pacience: whose voluntarie submission and sacrifice for sinne the iustice of God did accept as a most sufficient price and payment for all our sinnes, which in themselues deserued euerlasting destruction of bodie and soule in hell fire with deuils. This correction though very sharpe yet not ouerpressing the patience of Christs manhood, Gods iustice would not release to his owne Sonne, least he should seeme to make light account of our sinne, (if it were remitted onely for prayer and intreatie) and without iust cause so terribly to punish the sinnes of the re∣probate with all kinds of death, I meane corporall, spirituall, and eternall. And grea∣ter or other death, then the death of the bodie, God by no iustice could impose on the person of his Sonne, since Christ could not be subiected to sinne, which he must cleanse and abolish in vs; much lesse be reiected from euerlasting lisse and ioy, to which hee must bring vs; least of all linked and chained with deuils in perpetuall flames of hell fire, for so much as hee was the true and onely Sonne of God, for whose sake we all were adopted and made heires of eternall saluation. And for this cause the power of God, which is otherwise most dreadfull to men and Angels, and so was then to the manhood of Christ, restrained it selfe, and tempered the smart of Christes paines to the st ength of Christes humane nature, not meaning to o∣uerwhelme his patience, but to trie his obedience to the vttermost. In all which suf erings Gods counsell and purpose was most fauourable and honourable euen to the manhood of Christ, the perfection of whose confidence and patience hee would demonstrate to Angels and men and propose him a paterne to all the Sonnes of God, how to humble thems lues vnder the mightie hand of God; and accept his obedience vnto death as a most prec ous and pleasing satisfaction and sacrifice for the sinnes of his elect; and reward his humilitie with vnspeakeable honour in making him Lord and Iudge of all, both men and Angels, not onely to confound the pride, and supp esse the power of Satan, but to adiudge him to euerlasting torments with all the wicked and accursed. Against the tenor and effect of this Christian confession, which I referre to the iudgements of all that be learned & rightly instructed in the sacred Scriptures, I ne∣uer speake any one word to my knowledge; I cannot in euery sentence repeate euery circumstance, nor of euery page make a paire of Indentures, much lesse may I forsake the forme of holsome words deliuered in the Scriptures. But the maine summe and scope of this doctrine being so fully declared and so often repeated by me, I had no reason to feare the capacity, or doubt the memorie of any heedfull Reader. And howsoeuer some shallow trifler may picke out a word heere and there to carpe at, yet are there so many cleere places to direct all doubts, that no man needeth to stumble, but he that will not or can not stand vpright. For let the Christian Reader looke but to the marke at which I aime in euery place, and remember these two rules; that of three sorts of death, which onely are mentioned in the Scriptures, as the wages of sinne, to wit, corporall, spirituall and eternall death; I alwayes remoue the two last from the person of Christ by describing or naming the first, which was his corporall death? and in that I conteine the whole course and maner of his death, that is, the feares, for∣row s shames, temptations, derisions, smarts, and paines, which the Scriptures record in the history of his death: and all my words will prooue plaine and easie, which this ma thinketh so false in themselues & so contrary to themselues. Examine my words which he hath brought for examples of contradiction and falsity, and see whether his labour be any more than meere nugation and vanitie. A ouching and prouing that Christ could not suffer eternall damnation, which is the full wages of sinne, nor the death of the soule, which by the Scriptures must ex∣clude Christ from the fauour and grace, trueth and spirit of God: and giuing the rea∣sons why sinne could not preuaile vpon his person as it did vpon others, I conclude; What maruell then if sinne, which should haue wrought in vs an eternal destruction both of bo∣die and soule, could not farther preuaile in him (that is, to none other kinde of death) but to the wounding of his flesh and shedding of his blood, for the iust and full satisfaction of all our sinnes, euen in the righteous and sincere iudgement of God? In this I free Christ from eter∣nall destruction or death of bodie and soule, which was the wages of sinne in our persons, but could not take holde on his, as the difference there betwixt him and vs declareth. I exempted him by proofs in the page precedent from the death of the soule, which was the maine scope of that section, and so le t him subiect onely to the third kinde Sermons pa. 15. l. 4. ad marg. of death, which was corporall, and might be suffered not onely without all taint of sinne, losse of grace, and change of Gods fauour, but euen with great manifestation of Gods power and wisdome in his death; and commendation of Christs obedience and pa∣tience vnto death. That third kinde of death I doe not name, but describe by the wounding of Christes flesh and shedding of his blood; Sermons pa. 4. l. 34. the rest (of his paines and griefes) that went b fore, not being excluded as superfluous, but continued and increased by that sharpe and xtreame martyrdome, which he endured on the cross , as my caueat touch∣ing Christs Crosse did plainly admonish. And since the whole maner of Christes d ath and shedding his blood expressed in the Scriptures, is the thing that I alwayes intend, and the word doth import; when I name or touch the death of Christ▪ all that he voluntarily or violently suffered when he yeelded himselfe to be put to death, s comprised in the mention of his death. Besides that Christ by his bloody sweat in the garden beganne of his owne accord in some sort to effuse his blood for our sakes and safeties, and the efore it could haue no iust reason to imagine that my words exclude his agonie and other passions of the soule mentioned in the Scriptures, specially my very next words affirming, that Sermons pa. 17. l. the same part might and did suffer in Christ which sin∣ned in man (to wit) the soule, (though) by no meanes it could receiue the same wages which we should haue receiued. But I professe by the generall title of my Sermons the Defenc. pag. 14 full redemption of mankinde by the death and blood of Christ; and commend the j ce and fruit of his bodily death as most sufficient ] That indeed is very dangerous to your fansie, who hold the ioynt suf∣ferings Redemption by Christes blood most suffici∣ent. of Christes soule from and by his body not properly to pertaine to mans re∣demption, for that they are common to men with beasts, and therefore labour to frustrate all the words of the Holy Ghost deliuered in the Scriptures as improper, and impertinent to our saluation; but to me there can be no danger in the trueth, nor doubt of the fruit or force of those things which the spirit of God so often and eui∣dently commendeth vnto vs in the acred Scriptures as the price of our redemption and meanes of our reconciliation to God. In Christ (sayth Paul) we haue Ephes. 1. redemption by his blood euen the remission of our sinnes. Redemption by Christs blood you will and must g ant; the Holy ghost doth directly auouch it: but whether that redemption be full and most sufficient, which is purchased by the blood of Christ, you doe make some doubt, or els you need not sticke at my words, which import so much. Of that if you doubt, you must beare the name of some other sect, and not of a Christian, for no Christian may doubt whether the redemption which we haue by the blood of Christ be f ll and suff cient or no. To make Christ in part a Sauiour, is to make him in part no Sauiour, contrary to S Peter, who sayth, Acts 4. There is no saluation in any other. If you will de iue our whole redemption from him, but not from his blood shed for vs, then giue you S. Iohn the lie, who sayth, The 1. Iohn 1. blood of Iesus Christ clenseth vs from all sinne. Clensing from all sinne is full and perfect redemption from sinne; and sinne be∣ing fully remitted and purged, there is no cause of breach betweene God and vs, that should hinder our saluation. Christ by his owne Hebr. 9. blood (sayth Paul) entred once into the holy place hauing purchased eternall red mption. Fuller or more sufficient than eternall redemption we neither expect, nor euer shall haue any; since that which is eternall, admitteth no change nor increase. Then that redemption which Christ hath pur∣chased by his blood, is most full and sufficient by the Apostles testimony; and sooner shal you proue your selfe to be no sound Teacher, than that to be no sound dóctrine, which hath so manifest witnesse in holy Scripture. I teach that the Defenc. pa. 14 ioynt sufferings of Christ (the soule feeling what the body suffered) are most auailable for our saluation; and that (besides the sacrifice of Christes body) there is no The ioint suffe∣rings of Christ most available for our salua∣tion. other sacrifice of his soule, which can be neither bodily nor bloody. ] If I alone did teach thus, and not the whole Church of Christ with me; or if the sacred Scriptures which must guide vs all what to affirme and beleeue in the worke of our saluation, did not teach the same; I w re worthy to be challenged: but if I say no more than the Scrip∣tures do warrant me to speake, looke you Sir Discourser to your late created Creed that can not admit nor endure the words of the Holy Ghost. That the true sacrifice for sinne was but ONE and ONCE made, and that it required the BODIE, BLOOD, and DEATH of the Offerer, is not my addition, but the Apostles asser∣tion. Christ Heb. 9. vers. 26. appeared (sayth Paul) in the end of the world once to put away sinne by the sacrifice of himselfe; and by reason he was an high Hebr. 7. vers 17. Priest after the order of Melchisedech, and a Heb. 8. vers. 2. Minister of the true Tabernacle and Sanctuarie, it was of necessitie he should haue somewhat also to offer, Heb. 10. 5. Wherefore when he commeth into the world, he saith (to God) Sa∣crifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a bodie hast thou ordained me. vers. 7. It is written of me that I should doe thy will O God; vers. 10. by the which will we are sanctified (sayth the Apostle) euen by the offering of the body of Iesus Christ once. Who after he had offered (this) vers. 2 one sacrifice for sinne sitteth for euer at the right hand of God. For with (this) vers. 14. one offering hath he (consecrated or) made perfect for euer them that are sanctified. That likewise without Heb. 9. 22. effusion of blood there is no remission, and therefore Christ with his vers. 12. owne blood entred in once vnto the holy place, and obtained eternall redemption; as also that the vers. 16. death of the te∣stator must be, where a testament is; in either of these the Apostle is euident and vehe∣ment. Now if you (Sir Discourser) can conuey these things to the soules proper and immediate suffering the paines of hell from the hand of God, and shew how these re∣solutions of the Apostle perteine properly yea only to the soule of Christ; we shal great∣ly woonder at your wisdome. For thereby shall you prooue, that the soule hath not only a body, but blood also that may be shed, which are miracles, I will not say mon∣sters, both in Scripture and nature. Luk. 24. A spirit (sayth Christ) hath no flesh and bones, as ye see me haue. If you can teach Christ that he neuer knew before, by my consent you shalbe allowed for more than a Creed-maker. Howbeit, you will marre your owne market in so doing. For if the soule consist of bodie and of blood, what shall become of her proper and immediate facultie, of suffering without and besides the bodie, which you so highly aduanced in the beginning, as to make it the proper and principall hu∣mane suffering? If you shrinke from these follies or rather frensies, as I hope you will, then must you grant the ioynt sufferings of Christ, I meane the wounding of his body and shedding of his blood euen vnto death, as the Scriptures describe it, to be the true sacrifice for sinne, and consequently most auaileable for our saluation. If you thinke I exclude the soule of Christ from her part in this bodily and bloody sacri∣fice of Christ; I haue so often said and shewed the contrarie in my former reply that I am weary of iterating one and the same thing, though you be neuer weary of mista∣king it. My former words I repeat againe, that the Reader may see, I haue no cause to recant or controle them. Conclus. pa. 352. l. 19. The true sacrifice for sinne which Christ offered, must haue the body, the blood, and the death of the offerer; none of which agree to the soule of Christ, though the body without a soule could be no reasonable sacrifice; and therefore I exclude not the soule, whose obedience, innocence, and patience concurred to sanctifie this sacrifice, but I note the parts of the sacrifice for sinne by the Apostles doctrine were those, which I named, the blood and death of the Sacrificer, both which must needs be found in his bodie, and not in his soule. These words you quote in the margent, but you take not the paines to refute them, much lesse to establish your vnbloody and vnbodily sacrifice of Christs soule suffering hell paines from the immediate hand of God. Which kind of offering for sinne is as strange to the Scriptures, and to all the learned and auncient fathers as the rest of your vnknowne doctrine. And therefore you doe well to straine still on the same string by censuring what you mislike, and neuer proouing what you affirme, least you should marre your musicke, if you should proceede to the parts or proofes of your new found Redemption by the paines of hell. Yet Defenc. pa. 14 somewhere I seeme to yeeld wholy as much as you affirme; as where I say, the same part indeede might suffer in Christ which sinned in man, I meane the soule. ] Somewhat it is you find so many writers new and old on your side; you here no sooner the suf∣fering Christ might suffer in s le and yet not hell paines. of the soule, or the anger of God against sinne in any man, but you presently count him vnder your coulours. Euen as I make for you, when I write against you, so doe the Auncient fathers, and later Diuines, whose names you abuse. [But if Defenc. pa. 14. l. 21. I meane as I ought, then at least I follow your meaning.] It is a peece of your skill, when I speake directly against your fancies, to make men beleeue I meane as you doe, or at least I ought so to meane. Indeed if you may be vmpeere what I ought to meane, I shall be sure to iump with your meaning; but looke to my words good Sir and mea∣sure my meaning by that which I speake, and not by that which you would haue me speake. I said Christs soule might suffer for sinne: what collect you thence? I did not adde without or with the body, so that all the sufferings of Christ inflicted on his body might be and were impressed in his soule, and you nothing the nearer to your purpose of hell paines suffered in the Soule of Christ. But graunt the soule of Christ did suffer for sinne without concurrence of the body; must it needs follow, he there∣fore suffered the paines of hell? how many griefes and paines of the soule are there, not proceeding from the body, which are nothing like nor neare the paines of hell? For example in harty and true repentance how great is the griefe and paine of euery part and facultie of the soule detesting and abhorring sinne, and fearing and feeling the power of Gods wrath? and yet I trust ech penitent person doth not suffer the paines of hell. Feare, griefe, and sorrow then, the soule of Christ might deepely tast when he suffered for sinne, and yet be farre from the paines of hell. But your collection from my words is more absurd; for where I say, the soule of Christ might suffer for sinne, yet by no meanes could it receiue the same wages (of sinne) which we should haue receiued; you inferre not only without any words of mine, but directlv against my words; ergo I meane, or I ought to meane, that the soule and mind of Christ suffered the paines of hell from the immediate hand of God: and so where I auouch Christ by no meanes could suffer the same wages (of sin) which we should haue suffered; you paraphrase, Imeane, or I ought to meane, Christ suffered the selfe same which we should haue suffered, and of my negatiues you make affirmatiues, and then tell the Reader I contradict my selfe. But in plaine termes I Defenc. pa. 14. l. 27. allow in Christ all those afflictions and passions of the Soule which naturally and necessarily follow paine; and this ALL reacheth vnto moe then meere bodily paines; it includeth the soules proper and immediate paines also. ] Where you lear∣ned to reason I doe not know, but you haue the best grace to disgrace your selfe that euer I saw; and if this be all the learning you haue, you may clout shoes with this Al. Doe the torments of hell naturally and necessarily follow paine? then whosoeuer in any part, or for any cause is payned, suffereth the paines of hell, or at least the soules proper and immediate paines, which you make extreamest and sharpest in hell. Babes and boyes may thus bable; it is a shame for men to talke so much out of square. Let my words stand simplely as you bring them, and allow in Christ all those afflictions and passions of the soule, which naturally and necessarily follow paine, what conclude you out of them? your sight is very sharpe, if you see any absurditie in them. Howbeit you draw my words from their right course and sense, by leauing out what pleaseth you: My words are Sermons pa. 87. When the auncient fathers affirme that Christ dyed for vs the death of the body only, we must not like children imagine, they exclude the vnion, operation, or passion of the soule: but in the death of his body and shedding of his blood, they include all those afflictions and passions of the soule which naturally and necessarily follow paine, and accompany death. Christ suffering for vs a painefull death how could it be otherwise, but such afflictions nd passions of the soule as naturally and necessarily follow paine and accomp ny de th, should be found in the soule of Christ, vnlesse we giue him an in∣sensible flesh or impassiole soule, both which are errors in the nature of Christ? His flesh wa sensible, and his soule passible as ours is, because they both were humane. Pai then and death in my words are plainly referred to the body of Christ, whose lesh could not be wounded and blood shed as his was, but naturally and nec ssari∣ly his le must feele the paine thereof. And yet if my words w e not limited to the paine of Ch sts body, as indeed they are; I see no inconuenienc growing from them, nor helpe for your fansie cōtained in them. Def 14. l. 29 Yet plai er (as fauo g your error) I say, , paine, & griefe of body or mind be it neuer so great, will commend Christs obedie ce & patience; And the punishment of sinne, which proceedeth from the ius ice of God, and that Christ might and did beare. Yea he suffered death, with all painf ut no sinfull or onsequents. How good a sempste you are, doth well appea by your short cu ing and ide hing my words together. The first sentence you take our of a Section of my wherein I purposely shew, that not only the paines of hell, but euen the feare o must e farre from the soule of Christ. The suffering of hell paines in the soule of Christ, I there refuse as not cons t to the Christian , but to the ertaintie, sanct ie of Christs person, : and with God. Immediatly after the words which you bring I say, Christ there could be no apprehension of h ll paines as due to him or determi for him, but e m st are that God would be inconstant or v st, which are more then Yea to these very words which you I oyne this exception in the same but the . sense of damnation or separat n from God, or the feare or doubt thereof in Chr t as they quench faith and abolish grace, so they dissolue the vnion and commu on of ath natures, or else breed a false persuasion and sinfull temptation in the soule of Christ. Who can be so sottish as not to see, that my former words import Smart, and g fe of body and mind which haue in them neither sen e nor seare of hell paines that is of damnation or separation from God; since no man is damned but vnto the p ines and place of hell, and is first separated from God? W th as great discretion you fasten on an other sentence of mine; where though position be not generall but indefinite, and hath two restraints euen from your ; to wit, in this li e, where Christ suffe ed; in like to vs, who a his ; you throw off all, forgetting what your sel e obiected, and whereto I nswere, and suppose that here I fully concurre with your con ites. But your owne obiection, and that will rightly guide my solution. Your reason, which you proudly boasted could not be refu ed by the wi of man, as (as you call from the les e to the more. Thus doe the members of Chri the terrors God and sorrowes of h ll.) therefore of necessitie Christ suffered the lik . P ooue you by this A gument that Christ a ter this life suffered the terrors of God and sorrowes of hell? I doe you wrong to pect it, for it is open impietie so to thinke or say. Then do you more wrong to imagine that I extended my words farther then to refell your reason. As you spake of this life, though you expressed it not; so I replied that the pu shment s nne, which proceedeth from the iustice of God (in this life) and is no sinne, Christ might and did beare; but in no wi e those terrors and feares of consci nce, which pro∣c from sinne, and a gment sinne. Now I pray you what allowance finde you here for your new erected hell, or how force you my words to fit your deuises? Terror of con∣science, and feare of hell could haue no place in Christ, by reason they proceede in from r morle of sinne, weaknesse of faith, and doubt for the time of Gods fauour, which we cannot ascribe to Christ without drawing him into the dregges of our sinne. And therefore when we compare his suffering with ours, we must alwayes except the rootes and branches of our corruption, for that they be taintes of sinne, and wants of g ace neither of which may be admitted in the soule of Christ. Now if I exclude the , and terrour of conscience from the person of Christ in the same sentence, which you quote▪ how should my words sound in your eares, as if I admitted the true paines of hell to be suffered in the soule of Christ, which I haue often said the wicked doe not suffer in this life; muchlesse Christs members, whence you fet your pat e for Christs sufferings; least of all Christ himselfe, on whom that vengeance by no iu∣stice could be inflicted? The mortall bodies of men and their fraile life, are by no meanes capable of those terrible iudgements of God against sinne reserued for ano∣ther world: and howsoeuer your errour leadeth you to aduenture the making of a new hell, my resolution is euery where occurrent in my Sermons, that no iustice of God could award against his owne Sonne the same paines, which the damned in hell doe suffer; if we measure their paines by the Scriptures and not by your fansies: be∣sides that the members of Christ are not subiected in this life to those torments of hell, which the reprobate in an other place doe and shall endure. Rom. 8. There is no con∣demnation to them that are in Christ Iesus. How then should the Lord Iesus himselfe not onely feare, which I there denie, but also suffer the same condemnation to hell paines, which the wicked and accursed doe and shall suffer? Defenc. pa. 15. li. 6. We say not Christ suffered simply all the paines of the damned; he felt not such as are by their very nature sinnes, as well as paines; as indeede desperation is. When God offe∣reth Desperation in hell is no sinne. grace and mercie, as in this world he doth to many; to renounce or refuse is a damnable sinne; but in hell where there is no promise nor possibilitie of either; there to despaire is no sinne: yea rather there to hope, that Gods irreuocable iudgement shal be altered, and his setled counsell changed, were to hope that God will be false of his word, and wauering in his will, which indeede is a mightie sinne. And therefore neither reiection, confusion, destruction, desperation, nor damnation, are sinnes in hell, but the iust and fearefull punishments of sinne, ordained by Gods iustice, and inflicted by Gods power; who there requireth no obedience, but onely executeth vengeance; the suffering whereof is not sinnefull, though it be neuer so painefull to the damned, abiding for euer in the pollution and confusion of their sinnes here com∣mitted. So that if my Lordship as you call it, doe stand to my words, and not clippe them nor renounce them, your Patriark ship gaineth little by them for your purpose. For I by no meanes acknowledge that the true paines of hell are inflicted on any in this life; and by no iustice could the Sonne of God be damned to suffer hell paines, either in substance or in circumstance, as the Scriptures describe them. And there∣fore your vaunting before the victorie. depending onely on the foolish mistaking, or peeuish peruerting of my words is as idieulous, as it is vaine-glorious All you can get is this, that if you can be suffered to wrest my wordes from their coherence and sense, without respecting what goeth in the same Section before them, or what is ioy∣ned in the same sentence with them; and then interlace them with other wordes of your owne, seruing your turne when mine doe not; you can picke out two or three lines in the whole booke, that thus abused and corrupted shall sound somewhat to∣wards the secrets of your phantasticall hell. By which arte of yours you make me say in one section, that the iustice of God both temporally and eternally punisheth the soule (ON∣LY) by the bodie; and in the next section, you say I grant, that Christ did beare punish∣ment of sinne, (AS GREAT AS ANY IS) proceeding from the iustice of God, yet be∣ing no sinne; and so with adding (ONLY) to my wordes in the first place, and as (GREAT AS ANY IS) in the second, you haue made some shew of contradiction in my positions, or at least in your additions. Thus much for the examination and refutation of those maine diuisions and posi∣tions which the Discourser hath laid for the foundation of his cause in his generall o∣pening of the Question; and likewise for the clearing of those contradictions which he falsely supposed to be in my writings. Wherein if I would haue taken the trade which he doth, I could with farre more breuitie and facilitie haue denied all that he affirmeth, and ballanced my no to be euery way as good as his yea: but for their sakes that cannot discusse those things themselues, I haue not refused more largely and fully to expresse and proue the trueth in ech of those points, which he catcheth hold of in defence of his errour, and thereby haue giuen the Reader to vnderstand that this Discoursers new doctrine is as wide from the veritie, as from the authoritie of holy Scripture. There remain the particular challenges such as they are, which this impug∣ner maketh to many parts & points of my Sermons, and of my conclusion annexed to them; as also his defence of those speciall reasons published in his first Treatise, which I refuted as farre as needed in the conclusion afore mentioned. In which I meane to spend no more time then necessitie forceth me, but to referre the Reader to the pla∣ces where the things are purposely handled, except some new matter not fully deba∣ted be offered vnto me, by reason whereof I may sometimes be drawen to make larger proofe of some things, shortly but truely before vttered by me; and ignorantly, if not peruersely mistaken by him. To the Discoursers chalenge that I forced my Text by mistaking the crosse of Christ for Christs personall sufferings on the Crosse, where Paul meaneth the afflictions of Christes members in this world; I made in the conclusion of my Sermons a tripartite answere, 1. That the Crosse of Christ did alwayes in the Scriptures import the per∣sonall sufferings of Christ on the Crosse; and neuer the afflictions of the godly. 2. That the circumstances of the Text conuinced no lesse; which were Pauls earnest renouncing of all ioy saue in the Crosse of Christ, and his vehement opposing himselfe to those that ioyned circumcision to the Crosse of Christ, least they should suffer persecuti∣on for it at the hands of the Iewes. 3 That the best and most ancient Fathers, Ierom, Chrysostome, Austen and others, expounded these words precisely of Christs death on the Crosse. To this what replieth our Controuller? The Defenc. pag. 22. crosse of Christ here signifieth I grant Christ crucified, not in his owne person onely, but also in his members. ] Then first you be slipt from your former resolutio deliuered in your Treatise, which is no strange thing in your writings. There your words were, Treatis. pag. 32. I take it to be cleare, the Apostle HERE SPEAKETH NOT of the personall sufferings of Christ, but of the godly: You there de∣nie that Paul speaketh of Christs personall sufferings, but of the godly. Here you af∣firme hee speaketh of both, and least you should seeme to diuide them, you adde; Paul doth here Defenc. pag. 22. l. 9. ioyntly together vnderstand by Christs crosse, the afflictions of the whole my∣sticall bodie, both head and members. A large and long Crosse of Christ, that conteineth not onely his owne death and passion, and whatsoeuer persecution he suffered in his life time, but ioyntly together all the asflictions of the godly from the beginning of the world to the end. I will not aske you where you find, or how you proue Christs crosse to be so vsed in the Scriptures; you that take vpon you to frame new Redemptions, new hels, and new heauens to your fansie; will not sticke to frame a new Crosse of Christ, without any Scripture: howbeit know this, all wise will beware of such expositions as haue neither example nor ground in the word of God. For though our Sauiour sometimes said, If any will come after me, let him denie himselfe, and take vp his Matth. 6. Marke 8. Luke 9. Crosse and follow me; yet he neuer said, let him take vp my Crosse and follow mee; and Paul who often vseth the word Crosse without addition, & many times the Crosse of Christ, neuer taketh it in all his Epistles for the afflictions of the godly, but onely for the spitefull and shamefull death which Christ in his owne person suffered on the Crosse. So that howsoeuer euery Christian may be said to take or beare his Crosse; the Scrip∣tures no where apply the Crosse of Christ, but only to the force and fruit of Christes death suffered on the Crosse for vs and our saluation: which is the sense that I affirme Saint Paul here intended. But the markes, afflictions, and DYING OF THE LORD IESVS, are vsed in this and other places of the Scripture, to signifie the afflictions of the godly.] Those places haue speciall wordes adioyned, which can not bee referred to the person of Christ, but must of force belong to the speaker or sufferer. As Galat. 6. I beare IN MY BODY the markes of the Lord Iesus, saith Paul: and againe, Coloss. 1. I fulfill the rest of the af∣flictions of Christ IN MY FLESH. And so, 2. Corinth. 4. we beare about IN OUR BODIE the dying of the Lord Iesus. Where these words, in my bodie, and in my flesh are proper to the speaker, and no way deriueable to the person of Christ. Wherefore the markes, afflictions, and dying of the Lord, must either import a resemblance to the personall suffe∣rings of Christ, or demonstrate the cause for which the Apostle suffered, which was for Christs sake: and in this is no difficultie, to suffer affliction, in like manner as Christ did, or to suffer it for Christs cause. But the Crosse of Christ, whereof the Apo∣stle speaketh in my Text was that, at which the Iewes were so greatly offended, for which the true preachers were so sharpely persecuted, to which the false teachers ioy∣ned circumcision for the better attayning of saluation, in which the godly most reioy∣ced, and by which the faithfull were crucified to the world, and the world to them; and all these are proper to the personall death and crosse of Christ as he was the Saui∣our of the world, and not common to the afflictions of the Saints. It was a question of doctrine, not of manners, for which the Apostle so much striued; and the highest point of mans redemption, not of mans perfection, in which he so much gloried. For touching other mens miseries, how should Paul reioyce in them; or how should he by them be crucified to the world; and the world to him? He had good cause to re∣ioyce in the death of Christ though it were neuer so much maligned and pursued by the Iewes, because it was the wisedome and power of God to saue all that beleeued; and in his owne troubles for Christes quarrell hee might reioyce as hauing thereby Philip. 3. fellowship with Christs afflictions and made conformable to his death: but to reioyce at o∣ther mens troubles, that hath no warrant in the word of God. Rom. 12. Reioyce, saith Paul, with them that reioyce, and weepe with them that weepe. Wee may take comfort, and giue God thankes that the faithfull haue grace to endure persecution with patience and courage; but that affliction befalleth them, we may not be glad. For that is to reioyce at other mens harmes, which is repugnant to the rule of charitie. Neither could Paul be crucified to the world, by other mens troubles long before dead, or then vnborne; examples might encourage the weake, but Paul was strong and pro∣posed himselfe as a paterne of patience, suffering persecution. And therefore this haling into the Crosse of Christ the afflictions of all the godly that euer were or shall be, as if the Apostle so highly reioyced in them, and were crucified to the world by them, is wholy against the haire, and hath neither dependence nor coherence with the Apostles words. Besides you doe not, or will not vnderstand the maine point here in question be∣twixt the Apostle and those false teachers of the Iewes, whom he reprooueth and re∣futeth in this Epistle. You say indeede, Defenc. pa. 22. l. 2. It is manifest the Apostle here (Gala. 6. v. 12.) reprooueth the false teachers for mingling the pure doctrine, because they were loth to taste persecution; but you neither tell vs what the Gospell was which they thus mingled with circumcision, nor why they feared persecution, nor from whom; which things if you would haue specified as the Scriptures deliuer them, you should soone haue per∣ceiued how properly the Apostle addeth for the Crosse of Christ, and how rightly I re∣ferred these words to the force and fruite of Christs death, which is the summe and sub∣stance of the Gospell. What the Gospel was which Paul preached, appeareth plain∣ly by his owne words. 1. Corin. 1. vers. 23. We preach (saith he) Christ crucified, vnto the Iewes a scandall (or offence) and vnto the Grecians foolishnesse: 24. but vnto them which are called both of the Iewes and Greekes, Christ the power of God, and wisedome of God, to saue all that be∣leeue. For Christ is 30. made of God to vs righteousnesse, redemption, and sanctification; to the end, 31. That he which reioyceth might reioyce in the Lord. In so much that 1. Cor. 2. vers. 2. I esteemed not to know any thing among you (sayth Paul) saue Iesus Christ, and him cruci∣fied. So that, Christ crucified, the Crosse of Christ, the preaching of the Crosse, and the Go∣spell of Iesu Christ are phrases of like force vsed by Paul for one and the selfe same word of trueth, which is the doctrine of our saluation by the death and blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 1. vers. 17. Christ sent me (saith he) to preach THE GOSPEL not with wisedome of words, least THE CROSSE OF CHRIST should be frustrate. For the 18. PREACHING OF THE CROSSE is to them that perish foolishnesse, but to vs that are saued, it is the power of God. Christ crucified then being the very ground of our saluation, and the Gospel decla∣ring him to be the power of God to saue all that beleeue; euidently the crosse of Christ was the maine doctrine of the Gospell which Paul preached to the Galathians; and which the false Apostles mixed with circumcision and the righteousnesse of the law, as well for the aduancing themselues being Iewes, as for feare of their countrey∣men, who vtterly disdained, and egerly pursued all that taught, a man hanged on a tree as a malefactor, (for so the vnbeleeuing Iewes conceiued of Christ) to be the Sauiour of the world, and complement of all Gods promises made to the seede of Abraham for their euerlasting blisse. The rage of the vnbeleeuing Iewes against Paul for preaching the death and blood of Christ to be the Redemption of all the faithfull is manifest in many Acts 14. 17. 18. 21. places of the Actes and of his owne 2. Cor. 11. 1. Thes. 2. Epistles; which furie whiles the false Apostles sought to decline, and somewhat to please and pacifie the Iewes, they added circumcision and the obseruation of the law vnto the Crosse of Christ as necessary for iustification and saluation, without which the death of Christ could doe vs no good. This error then newly sowen among the Galathians (to whom Paul before had preached Christ crucified as the sole and sufficient meane of their Redemption, and Iustification, through faith in his blood) the Apostle throughout that large Epistle of his written Gal. 6. 11. vnto them with his owne hand, doth purposely and mightily confute; and is so farre from coupling any thing with Christ as requisite for righteousnesse or blessednesse, and chiefly the law, that he opposeth himselfe against men and Angels for the truth of his doctrine; and resolueth cleane contrary to those false teachers and flatterers of the Iewish nation, in most vehement manner; Gal. 5. Behold I Paul say vnto you, that if yee be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Ye are abandoned from Christ, whosoe∣uer are iustified by the law: ye are fallen from grace. His reasons are vrgent and euident. Gal. 2. If righteousnesse (could be) by the law, then Christ died in vaine. Gal. 3. And that no man is iustified by the law in the sight of God, it is plaine; for the iust shall liue by faith; now the law is not of faith. For all haue sinned, and are iustified freely by (Gods) grace through the Redemption that is in Christ Iesus, Rom. 3. whom God hath set foorth, to be a Reconciliation THROVGH FAITH in his blood, to declare his righteousnesse by the forgiuenes of sinnes. Gal. 3. As many (then) as are of the works of the law, are vnder the curse; but Christ hath re∣deemed vs from the curse of the law being made a curse for vs; (as it is written, cursed is euery one that hangeth on a tree) that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentils through Iesus Christ. And that made the Apostle enter this disputation with so sharpe a rebuke to the Galathians, for sliding from this Gospel or glad tidings of their saluati∣on in the Crosse of Christ, to circumcision and the works of the law. Gal. 3. O foolish Gala∣thians, (saith he) who hath bewitched you not to obey the truth; to whom Iesus Christ was before your eyes described crucified among you? And in this confident course he goeth on with plentifull and substantiall proofes; that the Redemption, righteousnesse, blessed∣nesse, adoption, freedome and sanctification of Gods children, proceede from the grace of God and of Christ, who Gal. 1. gaue himselfe for our sinnes that he might Heb. 2. tast death for all, and are receiued by faith in the blood of Christ, which confesseth him to be the Sonne of God and the only Sauiour of the world. What marueile then, if in the close of this example, when Paul had shewed his care to haue the Galathians persist in this truth, in that he wrote so Gal. 6. v. 11. long a letter vnto them with his owne hand, which otherwise he did not vse; he did also traduce the pride and pollicie of the false Apostles, who partly to aduance themselues because they were Iewes, partly to shunne the enuie of their countrimen, frustrated the Crosse of Christ, by adding circumcision and the obseruation of the law vnto it, Vers. 13. not that they themselues kept the law but 12. only because they would not suffer persecution for preaching the Crosse of Christ, which the vnbeleeuing Iewes so egerly resisted and impugned; and withall professed of himselfe, that howsoeuer they Vers. 13. reioyced in the flesh, that is, in the circumcision of the Gentils; yet Vers. 14. God forbid that he should reioyce but in the crosse of Christ, as the most sufficient meane of mans Redemption, by which he was crucified to the world, and the world to him, what persecution soeuer he suffered for it? And the verses following, which you pe uishly pull to patience in persecution, pertaine di∣rectly to establish the truth and force of Christs Crosse. For Vers. 15. in Christ Iesus (saith he, that is, to attaine saluation by Christ crucified) neither circum sion an leth any thing, nor vncircumcision, but a new creature; that is, Regeneration in Christ, when the inward man of the hart is renued by faith through the operation of the spirit. And Vers. 16. as many as walke according to this Rule of doctrine by preaching and beleeuing the crosse of Christ, ( for many Philip. 3. walke (after an other rule) of whom I haue often told you, that they are the enimies of the crosse of Christ) peace be vpon them and mercy, and vpon the Israell of God, that is vpon as many as be Iewes within and not without, and haue the circum∣cision of the hart in the spirit not in the flesh, whose Rom. 2. praise is not of men but of God. And therefore Gal. 6. v 17. from hence forth let no man put me to businesse as if I liked or allowed circum∣cision when and where pleased me. For if I yet Gal. 5. v. 11. preach circumcision, why doe I yet suffer persecution? the sl inder of the Crosse is abolished, and the Iewes haue no cause of offence against me. But 2. Cor. 11. of the Iewes fiue times receiued I fortie lashes, sane one; I was thrise beaten with rods, I was once stoned, I haue beene in stripes aboue measure, in prison fre∣quent, in death often. I Gal. 6. v. 17. beare in my body the markes of the Lord Iesus, that is, the signes of these persecutions suffered for his cause, which prooue that in preaching the crosse of Christ I goe not about to please men but God. For Gal. 1. v. 10. if I would please en, I were not the seruant of Christ. There is no miscoherence with the Text, nor dissidence from the truth in this ex∣position which not my selfe alone but the auncient Fathers and best Diuines both olde and new haue imbraced: yea it fully agreeth with the maine intent of Paul in this Epistle, with the perpetuall vse of his words, and with the cleare light of other places where like persons and cause were vndertaken by the Apostle. You only are found, Sir Discourser, that to shew neither learning nor reading, but a presumptious ouerweening of your owne witte will needs make the Reader beleeue I vnderstand not the Text. But let vs heare your pure conceit, how currantly it carrieth with it the words and circumstances of the Text. They vrge you to be circumcised, onely least they should suffer persecution for the crosse of Christ, saith Paul of those false teachers, which peruerted the truth of the Gospell among the Galathians by teaching cir∣cumcision and the righteousnesse of the Law to be necessarie to saluation. How ex∣pound you these words of the Apostle? Def. pag. 23. li. 36. he may (say you) be vnderstood to say, that he would not suffer persecution for commending the afflictions and shame of good Christians for Christs sake. You should say, THEY would not suffer persecution, vnlesse you put Paul into the number of false teachers, but that might be the scape of your Printer. Come to your owne ouersights. First then Christs personall sufferings are here quite excluded; for Christ I trust shall haue an other title with you then the name of a good Christian among the many; and so the crosse of Christ in this place by your exposi∣tion doth both exclude and include the proper sufferings of Christ. For afore you said, here Paul doth ioyntly together vnderstand by Christs crosse, the afflictions of the whole mysticall body of Christ both head and members. Secondly where euer read you in the Scriptures, that the Iewes raized persecutions against any, for commending the afflicti∣ons of the godly? If it be a truth, name vs the place and the persons; if it be a dreame of yours, keepe it to your selfe: the Scriptures can expound themselues without your ansies. That the Iewes had a furious disdaine and hatred against the person of Christ, and specially against the shame and reproch of his crosse, and for his sake against all that preached or beleeued him to be the Messias so long before promised, and his death to be the Redemption of t e world, the Euangelistes and Apostles euery where in their writings giue full testimony. Paul himselfe first persecuting the Christians vn∣to death, and afterward as sharply pursued by the Iewes for the very same cause, best knew what offence the Iewes tooke at the infamous death of Christ on the crosse, and how egerly they were bent against all that durst professe the name of Christ; and therefore could speake in this case out of his owne experience; that not the commen∣ding of the afflictions of the godly, but the preaching of Christs death on the crosse to be the saluation of the world, was the point that so much irritated the Iewes to lay violent hands on the Christians. Thirdly did circumcision hinder the commending of the afflictions of the godly? the Apostles and first spreaders of the Gospell, as also Paul himselfe were circumcised, and yet the chiefest fauourers and encouragers of the afflicted Christians, so that circumcision was no impediment to like and allow the afl ictions of the godly. But as Paul saw himselfe to be most odious to the Iewes, because they held opinion of him, that he Acts 21. taught all men euery where against the peo∣ple, the Law and the Temple; (and indeed he boldly professed that in Christ Iesus nei∣ther Gal. 5. & 6. circumcision auayled any thing nor vncircumcision, and that they were no longer vnder the Law, since Christ had redeemed both Iew and Gentile from the curse and bondage of the Law) so he could not but discerne the drift of those false teachers, who to flatter the Iewes and to claw fauour with the enimies of Christs crosse taught circumcision and the righteousnesse of the law, to be necessary vnto saluation, as if the death of Christ without them could profit vs nothing. You doe therefore not ex∣pound, but peruert the words of Paul, which I tooke for my text; when as he repro∣uing those false teachers, (whom he before confuted) for adding circumcision and the iustification of the law to the death of Christ, thereby to mitigate the malice of the Iewes conceaued against the crosse of Christ; you turne the Apostles words from doctrine to manners, from preaching to not commending, from the death of Christ to the afflictions of Christians; and so of the highest point of our Redemption, and Saluation by the crosse of Christ, you haue found out a cold kind of scant allowing the troubles of the Saints. But the Fathers (which I brought) ouerthrow not your sense, they rather iustifie it. ] Whether Augustine, Chrysostome, Ierome, and Bede, whom I cited for the sense of this place, do take the word Crosse in this very sentence for the personall suffe ings of Christ on the crosse, which was my assertion; I referre it to the censure of the Reader vpon the sight of their sayings, which he may finde in the Conclu. pa. 229. conclusion of my Ser∣mons. I must confesse mine eyes be not matches, if they speake not directly to that purpose. Howbeit, you haue a speciall gift to make a short returne of all the Fathers with a nihil dicit, when they speake against you. Indeed you are out of your element when you talke of Fathers, for you neither like their credits, nor allow their iudge∣ments, as in processe we shall more fully shew. For the present, to satisfie those that be soberly minded, and to let all men see to your shame, that I tooke my text right, though you fondly seeke by your silly conceits to impeach it; marke I pray thee, Christian Reader, whether both elder and later Diuines doe not concurre with me in that sense of Christes crosse, which I auouched to be in Pauls words. Christ was cru∣cified vnder Pontius Pilate. Aust. de sym∣bolo a Cate∣chum. li. 3. This (sayth Augustine) we beleeue, and we so beleeue it, that we reioyce in it. Be it farre from me (sayth Paul) to reioyce but in the crosse of Christ. Athana. in p ssionem & crucem dom n. Happily some man (sayth Athanasius) beholding the Lord and Sauiour to be condemned of Pilate and crucified of the Iewes, will cast downe his head for shame. But if we learne the cause why the Lord suffered, wee shall cease to blush, and rather reioyce as Paul did in the Lords crosse. Ignatius in his Epistle to those at Tarsus where Paul was borne, sayth, mindfull of Paul; Ignatius epist. 4. ad Tarsenses. Holde it for most certaine, that the Lord Iesus was truely crucified, (for Paul sayth, Be it farre from me to reioyce but in the crosse of our Lord Iesus) and truly suffered and died. Cyril: Cyrill. de recta fide ad Reginas. Be it farre from me to reioyce but in the crosse of the Lord Iesus. Paul sayth, he reioyceth in the death of Christ: he knew Christ therefore to be God, and to haue suffered for vs in the flesh. Theodoret thus expresseth Pauls meaning; Theodoret in galat. ca. 6. Ego au∣tem propter solam salutarem crucem me iacto & mihi placeo. I onely boast my selfe on that crosse (of Christ) which bringeth saluation, and therewith I content my selfe. Theophy∣lact vpon the same words of Paul; Theophylact. in Galat. ca. 6. Illi (inquit) circumcisionem hanc gloriae ducunt, à me vero procul sit caeterarum rerum iactantia. Licet in vna Christi cruce & morte admo∣dum gloriars. They (sayth Paul) count circumcision a glorie, farre be it from me to boast in other things. It is lawfull for me thorowly to reioyce only in the crosse and d ath of Christ Ie∣sus. Some will aske, How or why doest thou reioyce in the Lords crosse? For that he was crucified for my sake, which a no bodie, and loued me so deerely, that he offered himselfe to death (for me.) Oecumenius; O menius in Gala. ca. 6. What is this reioycing (in Christs crosse which Paul speaketh of?) That for vs who were vnworthy (Christ) would be crucified; for that is the cause we haue to glorie. Haymo vpon the same place in the person of Paul sayth; Haym in Gala. ca. 6. I will not reioyce in the riches and dignities of this world, but in the crosse of Christ; that is, I will reioyce in his passion which was celebrated on the crosse, whence is my redemption and sal∣uation. Moe I might easily bring, but these for antiquitie may suffice. The grauest and exactest of the new writers agree with the Fathers. Bullinger: Whereas Bullinger in Gala. ca. 6. Paul might haue vsed a simple kinde of affirmation, ONLY THE DEATH OF CHRIST is sufficient for me to saluation, he chose rather to expresse it by the way of detestation, and to say; Farre be it from me to reioyce, but in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ. Where againe the second time, by the crosse he meaneth the death, sacrifice, and ex∣piation of the Lord Christ and the whole worke of our redemption. Gualter in his 59. ho∣milie vpon that Epistle sayth: Now Gualterus in Epist. ad Gala. homil. 59. Paul opposeth himselfe to those false teachers decla∣ring how he himselfe is affected, and vpon that occasion repeateth the Summe of his doctrine, touching the redemption and saluation of mankind?, in these words; Be it farre from me to reioyce, but in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ. He might haue sayd simply; I reioyce only in Christ crucified, in whose crosse I know there is reposed for me life and saluation. But he vseth such a kind of speech as teacheth vs their insolencie was an abominable and capitall of∣fence. Caluin, a man for his great paines in the Church of God worthy of great praise, where he steppeth not too much aside from the ancient Fathers, expounding these words of Paul, sayth: Caluinus in Gala. ca. 6. To reioyce in Christs crosse, is as much as in Christ crucified, but that it expresseth more: for it signifieth that death of Christs which was full of reproch and shame, and was accursed of God. That death then which men abhorre, and whereof they are ashamed, in that death Paul sayth he reioyceth, because he hath perfect blessednesse therein. Piscator in his Scholies vpon Pauls Epistle to the Galathians, noting what crosse of Christ it was for which the false teachers would not suffer persecution, sayth; Piscator in schol. super Epistolam ad Gala. ca. 6. Ob crucem Christs, id est, ob doctrinam Euangelij de salute part a per solam Christi crucem; they would not suffer persecution for the crosse of Christ, that is, for the doctrine of the Gospell teaching saluation to be purchased by the crosse of Christ only. There is not a new writer of any iudgement or diligence which ioyneth not with these; and howsoeuer some of them withall auouch, that Paul meant to shew by this opposing himselfe to these false teachers, that hee shunned not persecution for the crosse of Christ as they did, but reioyced in the doctrine of the crosse by which the e∣lect are saued, what affliction soeuer befell him therefore; yet they deriue that part of Pauls meaning, not from the confused signification of Christs crosse, as you doe; but either from the EFFICACIE thereof by which Paul was crucified to the world, and the world to him, in neglecting the flattery and enduring the fury of such as oppo∣sed themselues against Christ: or from the CONFORMITIE to it, that as he desi∣red to reigne, so he was willing to suffer with Christ, and therefore reioyced as well in the fellowship as in the force and effects of Christes sufferings on the crosse: or lastly, from the CONTRARIETIE to the false teachers, that though they adulterated the true doctrine of Christes crosse, because they would decline persecution; it was Paul ioy to teach sincerely the power of Christ crucified, whosoeuer pursued him for so doing. This sinceritie and duetie of the Apostle I am farre from denying, but the crosse of Christ I constantly referre to the doctrine of mans redemption and saluati∣on by the crosse of Christ, that is, by his personall sufferings on the crosse, as all those old and new writers do, and not to the troubles and afflictions of the godly, to which if this Discourser dare ascribe the meane or merit of mans redemption or saluation, he falleth from puritie to poperie, and from the Christian faith to open heresie. Thou seest then, gentle Reader, how sure ground and iust reason I had to propose that sense of my text which I did; as also how vntruely, vnwisely, and headily, this fellow ranne first to the challenging of my text, and still vpholdeth his humour with his priuate dreame of Christs crosse conteining ioyntly together all the afflictions of Christ and his members from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof; and maketh the false teachers, as fearing persecution for the commending of his conceit, to ioyne cir∣cumcision to the doctrine of the Gospell, and so by altering and interlacing Pauls words after his owne fansie, hee hath hatched at last an exposition without head or heele, which no man vnderstandeth besides himselfe, and the Diuines of all ages both new and olde do contradict. But I committed another great ouersight in handling my text, which was to Defenc pa. 24. take occasion from the text to speake of any thing, for you count them the faithfullest and wisest handlers of Scripture which conclude euen from their text firmly and first of all what soeuer they afterwards teach thereupon. ] Indeed I thinke your maner be to conclude all that you afterward say, euen from your text without the helpe of any other places of Scrip∣ture. You be so fast in your conceits, and so loose in your conclusions, that you can inferre any thing of euery thing. Euery word you speake, you tie to your text as firm∣ly as flax to fire: but if you would take the paines once to proue that you say, and not only to say that which you should prooue, you would finde great difference betwixt the firmnesse of a fansie in which you be so resolute, and of an argument which for ought I yet see in your writings, you scant make not vnderstand. And where you quarrell with such handling of texts as is vsuall in these dayes, but no good nor commend∣able vse, your reading must be greater and iudgement better, before you take vpon you to controle the Preachers of England for mishandling their texts. Many hun∣dreds there are of whom you may learne both how to diuide and how to pursue your theme; your skill is not such, that you should professe your selfe a Method-master to this Realme. When I tooke occasion from my text to lay downe first the contents, then the effects of Christs crosse, as the Scriptures did deliuer them; that is, what Christ suffered on his crosse for vs, and what he performed by his crosse to vs; say good Sir out of your new found art, what fault you finde either with the matter or with the method. [ Christes crosse, you say, signifieth here no such thing, but the afflictions of Christ and his members. ] That is the vanitie of your errour; that is not the trueth of my text. Christ crucified in his owne person for mans redemption, is the full purport of Christs crosse in my text; as in my Sermons I shortly declared; in my conclusion I more amplie proued; and now I trust I haue therein fully satisfied the Reader. That standing good, I note what Christ suffered; which I call the contents of his crosse; and to what end he suffered, which are the effects of his crosse; both these are aptly and fairely clo∣sed in my text, and by other places of Scripture iustly proued to be comprised in my text. This forsooth your mastership liketh not, but I must make syllogismes out of euery word conteined in my text, or els I make the Scriptures such an instrument as they ought not to be. Silly Sir you vnderstand not what you say: first learne, and after teach, lest you teach that you neuer learned. When it is sayd, Matth. 22. Giue vnto God the things which are Gods, can you out of these words without the aid of other Scriptures, firmely conclude what things are Gods, and how they must be giuen vnto him; or must you proue that by other places of holy Scripture? Euen so when I had shewed what was iustly inclosed within the words of my theme, I made direct & ful proofe thereof by other places of holy writ; which I take to be a sound and sure way of well vsing the Scriptures, to that very purpose they should be applied, notwithstanding your palterie prouisoes, that no man must after speake any thing that can not firmely be concluded by the sole and single words of his text; which is a rule fit for such a Ro∣uer as you are, that neuer soundly proue any thing; but not for him that will fully di∣uide and rightly deliuer, as well the sense as the sound of any sentence of holy Scrip∣ture which he taketh in hand to vnfold. To shew your selfe a firme and fine concluder vpon texts, you exemplifie your skill, and inferre that in three speciall points, I my selfe Defenc. pag. 25. by my very text ouerthrow my selfe, in the first entrance as all men may see: First, in that I expresly grant, the proper sufferings of Christes minde may rightly be in the contents of his crosse, contrary to my maine opinion, that Christs bodily sufferings ALONE were the full price of our redemption. Se∣condly, that Christs soule in a large sense may be sayd to be crucified, if I suppose my text to signifie the whole contents of Christs crosse, which I reproued in you with great con∣tempt. Thirdly, in that I quite ouerthrow my second question: for if it be a detesta∣ble thing to reioyce but in the crosse of Christ, then Christes descent to hell after death must either be a part of the contents of his crosse, and so he must suffer among the di∣uels and damned spirits, or els he did vs no good there, if we may not reioyce in his descending thither. These iarres in my selfe, you say, I must reconcile, els men will thinke, I haue not handled my text indeed very rightly. ] These iarres good Sir, for so much as concerneth me, are soone reconciled. Your first obiection is a plaine falsitie, your se∣cond an open follie, your third a meere mockerie. The contents of Christs crosse I ex∣tended to those griefs, wrongs, and paines, which Christ suffered in his passage to his crosse, as namely his submission in the garden, his apprehension, accusation, illusion, fla∣gellation, condemnation and such like, all which he felt before he was fastened to the tree; and though indeed they were precedents to his crosse, yet because the griefe and smart of them continued and increased with his hanging on the tree, the Scrip∣ture doth not exclude them from the crosse of Christ, which often meaneth by that word, the whole course and maner of Christes death and passion, as well in comming to his crosse, as in hanging on his crosse. As for the proper sufferings of the minde, those be none of my words; yet if you thereby meane care and feare, shame and sorrow, not repugnant to the condition and perfection of Christes person; let them in Gods name come within the contents of Christes crosse as antecedents or consequents to the paines which he suffered. But if vnder the proper sufferings of the soule you conuey the suffering of hell paines, or the death of the soule from the immediate hand of God, which is your dreame; keepe your errours for your owne accounts, my words haue no such matter nor meaning. How then Defen. pa. 25. li. 6. can my maine opinion be true that Christs bodily sufferings ALONE were the full price of our Redemption, which I would also ground on all the Fathers though ve∣ry vntruely? ] How can your obiections be waightie that speake neuer a true word? By Christs bodily sufferings I no where exclude either the sense, consideration, or af∣fection of the Soule, discerning the paines which, and the cause why the body suffered, as you falsely imagine; I only except the death of the Soule and paines of hell in Christs sufferings; and to barre that, I shew by many sufficient testimonies of the auncient Fathers, (which you shall neuer ouerbeare for all your bragges,) that Christ dyed for vs the death of the bodie onely, and not the death of the soule. In this case I vse the word ONLY, as hath beene often told you; otherwise to exclude the vnion, operation, or passion of the soule from Christs sufferings, I neuer vse it. And where I so often and instantly vrge that Christs death, and blood-shedding are specified in the Scrip∣tures as the full price of our Redemption, and true meanes of our reconciliation to God; You foolishly by their fulnesse would turne out all the rest of Christs sufferings as superfluous; but my words throughout my sermons are expresse to the contrarie. Sermons. pa. 63. The crosse, blood, and death of Christ are euery where mentioned in the Scriptures, as the very ground-worke, and pillars of our Redemption. And the things which are named in the Scriptures as they were the last, so are they the chiefest parts of Christs sufferings; the rest being vnderstood as antecedent to them, and not eminent aboue them. So that by the death and blood of Christ I neither did nor doe exclude the rest of his sufferings before he came to his crosse; only I make them Antecedent to that, not eminent aboue that which he suffered on the crosse. For as the end of euery thing presupposeth a beginning and a middle, and the highest staire doth orderly confirme there are lower greeces; so the fulnesse of Christs obedience and our Redemption performed by his death and bloodshed on the crosse, doth not exclude the rest of his antecedent suf∣ferings from the communion of his merits, or cause of our saluation, but onely no∣teth that his obedience, and patience on the crosse euen vnto death as it was the last, and the sharpest, so it was the chiefest and acceptablest part of the sacrifice which he offered for the sinnes of the world. Though then as you haue vsed the matter by adding PROPER (to the) sufferings of the mind, and ONLY to the sufferings of the body, you make some shew of repugnancie in my positions; yet when your miscoloured and misconstrued patches are returned to their owner, my opinions stand sound in themselues and consonant ech to other, and haue that reference to my Text which I first expressed. But Christs soule in a Defenc. pa. 25. large sense may be said to be crucified if we suppose this text to signifie the whole contents of Christs crosse; which I reprooue in you with (such) contempt. ] It is an Idle skill and dangerous trade in you and your assistants, when the necessarie parts of Christs satisfaction, and essentiall points of our Redemption come to be questioned; for you to bring your inuentions, besides the Scriptures and without, if not against the faith, and then to vouch it may be said in a large sense; that is by a me∣taphoricall, hyperbolicall, or metonymicall vnderstanding. In exhortations we per∣mit many things to Diuines, which in positions of faith are vtterly vnlawfull. So long as the words of a perswader may receaue any true construction, be it proper or figuratiue, we beare with his vehement and suddaine affections; but in determinati∣ons of doctrine, and conclusions of faith, all men require plaine and proper speech, that the truth may appeare and not be shadowed and obscured with darke and doubt∣full riddles. If your hell paines in Christs soule and the death of Christs soule, be but phrases of speech first deuised by you, you should not so much striue for them be∣ing no where mentioned, nor applyed to Christ in the sacred Scriptures; but if they be matters of faith, and sufferings requisite by Gods iustice for mans saluation, as you beare the world in hand; why now when you see the falsitie and absurditie of them iustly reprooued, come you in with a large sense, a kind of speach, which in re∣solutions of faith is not tolerable? I haue no doubt but figuratiuely the soule of man and the Sonne of God may be said to be crucisied euery day. For not only the 1 Cor. 2. Lord of glory was once crucified by the Iewes; but there are that Hebr. 6. crucifie againe to themselues the Sonne of God, euen such as willingly fall from the truth. And that the desires and delights of the soule may and must be continually crucified, the word of God is eui∣dent. Gal. 5. They which are Christs, haue crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts; not by fastning their bodies to the tree, but by Coloss. 3. mortifying their earthly members, as inor∣dinate affection, euill concupiscence, couetousnes, and such like which haue their seate prin∣cipally in the soule. Gal. 6. The world is crucified to me, and I to the world, (saith Paul) when he meaneth that his hart despiseth for Christ all the baites and threats of the world. In a large and figuratiue sense therefore, Christs soule may be said to be dead and cruci∣sied, and so may the diuell be said to be God, for the Scripture calleth him the 2. Cor. 4. God of this world; but I hope these may not goe for positions of faith, nor for Articles of Christian Religion, without beleeuing of which we can not be saued. From the word Crosse to crucified is an argument, you thinke à Coniugatis, as from words of the same force and inflection; and therefore if Christs soule were partaker of the crosse, it was also crucified.] From being fastened or nayled to the Crosse vn∣to crucified is indeede a good consequent in the proper signification of the word; for so much doth Crucifigi import, whence Crucifixus commeth: but from the Patients, instruments, or the precedent or consequent circumstances of the Crosse, which yet are in∣closed in the contents of the Crosse, to being crucified, is such an Argument as none but you would make. The disciples flying, Peter forswearing, Pilats wife dreaming, the Mari s sorrowing, the women of Ierusalem weeping, Simon of Cyrene bearing the Crosse, are all within the contents or precedent circumstances of Christs Crosse, and yet it were stra ge Logicke to say they were all dead and crucified. The swordes and staues that were brought to take him, the cordes that bound him, the whippes that were made to scourge him, the thornes that crowned him, the nayles that fastned him, the wood that bare him, the lots cast on his garments, the sponge that was filled with vineger to giue him drinke, the speare that pearced his side, are all within the contents of his Crosse: Shall we thence reason, and say they were also crucified? on∣ly his bodie was fastned to the Crosse, in which respect the whole person is saide to haue bene crucified; and the paines which he suffered before in his bodie & brought with him to the crosse, are properly contayned in his crucifixion, by reason they con∣tinued in his bodie when it was nayled to the Crosse. The rest of the wrongs & paines which he suffered, are figuratiuely comprised in the name of Christs Crosse, because they were antecedents to his Crosse, or els the name of Crosse is largely taken for all maner of affliction, which befell him after his last Supper, when once he yeelded himselfe to be prepared as a sacrifice for the Crosse. But what is this to the death of Christs soule, or how doth it any way prooue that in soule he must suffer the paines of hell before he could redeeme vs? At least yet; I quite ouerthrow my second question, that Christ after this went downe into Hell. For either Christ got vs no purchase in hell, for which we should reioyce; or else I must extend the crosse of Christ, and his bitter sufferings, euen vnto his being in hell, among the deuils and damned spirits, before we may reioyce therein] A conclusion fit for such a Clerke as you are, that can neither distinguish things different from things per∣tinent to the crosse of Christ, nor see the coherence betwixt the cause and effects of Christs sufferings. In that I obserued, the Apostle made it a thing detestable to re∣ioyce in any thing els but in the crosse of Christ; I followed therein, Chrysostome, O cumenius, Theophylact, Bullinger, Gualter and others, whose litle fingers I take had more learning and iudgement then your whole head; neither do I see what you bring against it, but the opening of your owne follie. For first there be things coherent to the crosse of Christ, and things different from it. Hee that reioyceth in the crosse of Christ, doth also reioyce in euery thing that is necessarily by Gods power and ordi∣nance adioyned vnto it. For no man can reioyce in the cause, but he must likewise reioyce in the effects; and where the Antecedent is expressed, the consequent is therewithall intended. Now the crosse of Christ in it selfe without the effects, was and is most odious and scandalous to men, as appeareth by the Iewes and Gentiles ignorant thereof, and offended therewith. So that when the godly professe they reioyce in the crosse of Christ, they meane in the loue of Christ, who willinglie endured the paine and shame of the crosse, to purchase them euerlasting blisse, and therewith procured and established all the meanes and parts of their Redemp∣tion, iustification, and sanctification in this li e, and saluation in the life to come: and, but in respect of Christs loue submitting himselfe to the crosse, and of those effects merited and obtained by the crosse of Christ, they take no pleasure, much lesse ioy in his griefes and torments, as the wicked did that put him to death. Wherefore it was an easie thing for euery childe to see, that when the Apostle reioyced in the death of Christ suffered for vs and for our saluation, he also reioyced in the conse∣quents of Christs death, as his Resurrection, ascension, sitting at the right hand of God, and promised returne to Iudgement, by which as by certaine degrees and steps, our iustification, mortification, sanctification, and saluation, are assured and performed. Now a consequent to Christs death, if not a part or preamble to his Resurrection from the dead, is the destruction of the diuell, and of hell, which is the chiefe place of Satans power as I thinke, and as the Church of Christ before me hath thought, notwith∣standing all that you haue said, or can say to the contrarie. Thus standeth my Text neither forced, nor misapplied, as by your ioynt mysticall imagination of a new crosse you supposed, but rightly both conceiued and referred to the painfull suffe∣rings and powerfull effects of Christ on the crosse; in which the Apostle so reioyced, that he detested all things different from it, or derogatorie to it: and the iarres which so much offended your eares, were but your owne iests and Follies. iefallies not truely repor∣ting, but grosly mistaking the sense and sequels of my positions. Defenc. pag. 25. l. vlt. Proceeding forward, I still shew a badde minde towards you, seeking foorthwith euen in the entrance to draw you without cause into hatred for disdaining the Fathers. What then is your contempt and disdaine of the Fathers, which I so often report in sundry places, and as o∣diously as is possible? Surely you beleeue I can not tell, happily it is because you follow not their authorities in some opinions of religion, nor in diuers expositions of Scripture. ] What need you seeke so busily for that which I so plainly haue exemplified vnto you? you af∣fourd the Fathers when pleaseth you, neither true knowledge of the first principles of their faith, nor the right vnderstanding of words familiar in their natiue tongue, nor so much as reasonable or likely expositions of the Scriptures, but fond and absurd as you terme them; and yet you aske What is your insolent dealing against the Fathers? With one consent they teach that for our redemption Christ died the death of the body only, and by no meanes the death of the soule: You teach that Christ must die the death of the soule before he could redeeme vs, and that his bodily sufferings Treat. pa. 18. l. vltim. properly did not make to our redemption. And though Austen aske, Austen. Epist. 99. Who dare auouch that Christ died in soule, or in his humane spirit? you not only dare and doe it, but you make it the maine ground of our redemption: wherein you condemne him and the rest of the an∣cient and learned Fathers as ignorant of the very way and meane of our redemption. So likewise, that Christ receiued vpon him the punishment, but not the guilt of our sinne; that the second death in the Scriptures is the eternall punishment of bodie and soule; and that the death of the bodie was inflicted on Adam and all his posteritie as a punishment of sinne; in these and many such, which are deliuered as sound conclusions of Christian religion, you oppose your selfe against S. Austen and the rest, and reiect their iudgements as false and erroneous. And for the sense and signification of words vsed in the Scriptures, you lustily controle them in their natiue speech, and leaue them not so much as the true vnderstanding of the Greeke or Latine tongue. This Trea. pa. 95. I affirme, say you, it is only the Fathers abusiue speaking and altering the vsuall and ancient sense of Hades that bredde this error of Christs descending into hell: their vnapt and perillous translating into Latine Inferi. Ibid. pag. 96. And note heere first, it is a thing too rife with the Fathers, yea with some of the ancientest of them, to alter and change the authentike vse of words; whereby consequently it is easie for errours and grosse mistakings to creepe in. ] This challenge of yours against the credits and consciences of so many learned and worthy Fathers as haue vsed the word hades to signifie the place of hell, how insolent it is, I leaue to the wise Reader to iudge, when he shall see that indeed they concurre with the writers of the new Testament, and with the ancient and vulgar vnderstanding of their owne tongue. How you entertaine their expositions of the Scripture, your owne words doe witnesse, when you replie to interpretations alledged out of them; Trea. pa. 66. this sense is most absurd; 67. this is no lesse absurd than the former, there is no reason, nor likelihood for it. 68. This is more fond and absurd than the other. This is the reuerence and louing regard you beare towards their opinions and iudgements for the manifolde graces of God that were otherwise in them; and this you thinke is no contempt, nor disdaine of the Fathers. I call the Fathers iudgements many times AVTHORITIES, that Defenc. pag. 26. the world might conceiue their words to be warrants vnto vs, and good authorities to rest on in matters of Re∣ligion. If I had not this drift in my minde, why giue I them such a title, which to you seemeth somewhat insolent indeed. What difference there is betwixt the authoritie of God and man in matters of religion, I need not to learne, nor you to teach; there is no such thing in question betwixt vs: S. Austen hath long since in Austen. con∣tra Fausi. Ma∣ ich. li. 11. ca. 5. & de Baptis. contra Dona∣tist li. 2. ca. 3. & E ist. 19. & in prooem. 3. li. de Tri∣ tate. sundrie places of his works, humbly, truely, and fully confessed and professed the eminence of the Canonicall Scriptures aboue and against all the writings of others, whosoeuer they be: with him I wholly ioyne in iudgement. This therefore is an idle shift of yours, to guesse what drifts I haue in my minde, and that I goe about to impaire the soueraigntie and cer∣taintie of the Scriptures, by giuing such a title to the expositions and opinions of the Fathers, as to call them Authorities. As though the best learned Diuines both new and olde, did not vse the same word in the same sense and case that I do. Peruse the labours of that learned Father, Bishop Iewel, and see how often in his Replie to Har∣ding, and his Defence of the Apologie, he calleth the testimonies of the ancient Fa∣thers and Councels Authorities. We R plie. pag. 95. rest (sayth he) vpon the Scriptures of God, vpon the Authoritie of the ancient Doctours and Councels. And againe, to Ibid. pag. 149. reckon vp the au∣thorities of ANTIQVITIE it would be infinite. The halfe communion by the authoritie of Gelasuis may well be called open sacriledge. In the conclusion of the same booke, In the answer to Hardings conclusion. I grant you haue alledged authorities sundrie and many such as I knew long before. Verely I neuer denied but you were able to bring vs the names and shadowes of m ny Fathers. You haue defended the open abomination of your stewes by the name and AVTHORITIE of S. Augustine. You haue sought vp a companie of new petite Doctors Authors void of Authori∣tie, full of vanities. In the conclusion of his defence of the Apologie, The conclu to H ding. my Authori∣ties of Doctors and Councels as you haue vsed them, are few enough. What meant you in fauour of open Stewes to shew vs the name and AVTHORITIE of S. Augustine? Peter Martyr against Smithes bookes of the singlenesse of Priests, sayeth. Peter Martyr de votis & c ∣libat. fol. 474. In iudging of things obscure, we must haue two waies or meanes to direct vs; one i ward which is the Spirit, the other outward which is the word of God. Tum si ad haec patrum etiam authori∣tas accesserit, valebit plurimum; to these if the authoritie of Fathers be ioyned, it is of great force. So Chemnitius in his examination of the Tridentine Councell. Chemn. in 1. parte exami. concilij trident. cap. 6. genus tra∣ditionum. Quod de patrum authoritate sentimus, etiam ab ipsis Patribus didicimus. That which we hold touching the authoritie of the Fathers, we learned of the Fathers themselues. Where also he teacheth you this Rule worth the noting for your new found Redemption and the rest of your nouelties. Ibid . Sentimus etiam nullum dogma in ecclesia no m, & cum t ta an∣tiquitate pugnans recipiendum. We also confesse that no point of Doctrine which is new to the Church, and repugnant to all antiquitie, is to be receiued. If the Fathers themselues will better please you, I want not their example for the vse of that word which so much offendeth you. Ierome in his Epistle to Damasus in very earnest manner maketh this petition, Hiero ad Da∣mas. Epist. 57. Vt ihi epistolis tuis siue tacendarum, siue dicendarū hypostase n detur authoritas; That AVTHORITIF may be giuen me, saith he, by your letters to vse or refuse the word hypostases. Vincentius in his book against heresies mooueth this question. Vincentius ad∣uers. Haereses. Here some perchaunce will aske, where as the Canon of the Scrip∣ture is perfect, and abundantly sufficient in it selfe for all things, quid opus est vt ei eccle∣siasticae intelligentiae iungatur authoritas; what neede is there that the authoritie of the ec∣clesiasticall interpretation should be ioyned with it? The effect of his answere (which is good for you to obserue, that claime such libertie for your selfe to expound the Scriptures at your pleasure) is this, least euery man should wrest the Scriptures to his fansie, and sucke thence not the truth, but the patronage of his error. Saint Augu∣stine that is euery where carefull to yeeld the Scriptures their due reuerence, yet gi∣ueth the word Authoritie, to the decrees of Councels and writings of godly Fathers before his time. Speaking of generall Councels he saith, August epist. 118. Quorum est in ecclesia salu∣berrima authoritas, Whose authoritie is most wholsome in the Church. And alleaging the testimonies of Irenaeus, Cyprian, Hilarius, Ambrose, Gregorie, Chrysostome, Basil, and others against Iulian the Pelagian he concludeth; Idem contra Iulianum P ∣lagianum li. 2. cap. 9. Hoc probauimus Catholicorum authoritate sanctorum; this haue we prooued by the authoritie of Godly Catholike men; vt vestra fragilis & quasi argutula nouitas sola authoritate conteratur illorum; that your weake and sleigh noueltie might be ouerwhelmed with their onely authoritie. For your con∣tumacie is first to be repressed by their authoritie. Ibid. cap. 10 With these testimonies and so great au∣thoritie of holy men, thou must either by Gods mercy be healed, or else thou must accuse the egregious and holy Doctors of the Catholike truth; against which miserable madnes I must so answere, that their faith may be defended against thee, euen as the Gospell it selfe is de∣fended against the wicked and professed enimies of Christ. If then this word seeme inso∣lent to you which is so frequent with the best Diuines of former and latter times, let your Reader iudge whether it be ignorance or insolence in you to stumble at so plaine a word, as if the religious and auncient Fathers, and lights of Christs Church were not worthy with you to be counted learned Authors, nor their testimonies to be named Authorities fit to guide and lead others to the knowledge of the truth. Defenc. pa. 27. I trust no aduised Christian will challenge more authoritie to the Fathers then was giuen, (by those of Beraea) to the Apostle, nor deny indeede to any priuate man, much lesse to a Minister to iudge and discerne in themselues not onely the words of men, but euen of the sense and meaning of the Scripture by the Scripture it selfe, which thing the Beraeans did, and are commended by the holy Ghost for it. ] I trust you claime no power to iudge of the Scriptures; you may discerne the truth there written, but with necessitie to beleeue, not with libertie to iudge. And if by your freedome you fasten on falsehood, it is no excuse for you, but a condemnation vnto you. Saint Austen speaking of the bookes of the Prophets and Apostles saith, August contra Cr um gra aticum li. 2. cap. 31. quos omnino indicare non audeamus, which we may not dare at all to iudge. And where you say the Ber ans are commended by the holy Ghost for not beleeuing that Paul spake touching Religion, till they had examined by the Scriptures and seene whether the truth were so as he vttered; You speake not one y vnwisely and vntruely, but if you would haue Christians to follow that course, you shew intolera∣ble pride against the word of God: for the Beraeans were commended (when as yet they neither beleeued in Christ, nor acknowledged Pauls Apostleship) for their rea∣dinesse to heare, and care to search whether Paul spake trueth or no. This if you now assume to your selfe ouer Pauls words or writings, you incurre the crime of flat impi∣etie. Pauls words to vs that beleeue, without further search or other credit, are of e∣quall authoritie with the rest of the Scriptures; and not to beleeue him, till we exa∣mine and see the trueth of his doctrine, is meere infidelitie. Galat. 5. Behold, I paul say vnto you, must suffice all Christians, and if Galat. 1. an Angel from heauen preach otherwise than he preached, we must hold him accursed. For our comfort that beleeue, and to perswade them which as yet beleeue not, we may search and see the consent betwixt the Pro∣phets and Apostles; yea the sonne of God sent men to the writings of Moses and the Prophets, not as wanting soueraigntie and sufficiencie in himselfe aboue all Pro∣phets, but leading them that knew him not, to consider better of those Scriptures which they knew. It is as true of Pauls writings, as of the rest of the Apostles and Prophets, which S. Augustine affirmeth; Aug. epist. 19. De quorum scriptis, quòd omni errore care∣ant, dubitare nefarium est. Of whose writings to doubt whether they be free from all error, is plaine wickednesse. Defenc. pa. 28. Neuerthelesse I well perceiue that all this great shew of cleauing to the Fathers iudge∣ments is but coloured in you. For in other points againe we see when they speake not to yoúr liking, the case is altered. Ibid. pag. 29. The Fathers may be left in some priuate opinions. I see in this booke where you forsake the ancient and learned Fa∣thers, that is, as you speake in my case, you con mne & despise them. The more vniust then and iniurious was your slander, that I went about by the vse of one word, which olde and new Diuines vsed in like sort before me, to make the Fathers of equall authoritie with the Scriptures: since now you can both obserue and obiect, that euen in this booke which you impugne, I say and do the contrarie. And though I be farre from repenting or misliking any thing that I sayd touching the prerogatiue of the sacred Scriptures and their irrefragable authoritie against all the words and wits of men; yet can I not chuse but note your negligence, that marke neither what, nor of whom I speake. Had I brought Fathers in matters of faith against or without the Scriptures, you had some colour to choake me with mine owne words; but taking care as I did, that in cases of faith the Scriptures should be plaine and perspicuous for my purpose before I cited them; and the testimonies of the Fathers euident and concurrent with the Scriptures; how doe I crosse any of those places which you quote out of my wri∣tings touching the authoritie and sufficiencie of the Scriptures in points of faith? or what agreement hath your dissenting from the Scriptures and Fathers in the chiefest keyes of Christian religion, with my leauing them in some expositions and positions not pertinent to the faith nor generally receiued of them all? It is vanitie enough to dreame of contradictions where none are; and as great infirmitie not to see that which lieth before your eyes: but to pronounce, that you know how Defenc. pa. 20. li. 12. wauering and slipperie I am for the most part therein, when you neither consider nor conceiue what I say, that is more than childish temeritie. As I sayd, so I say againe; In Gods causes Gods booke must teach vs what to beleeue, and what to professe; and therefore what I reade in the word of God, that I beleeue; what I reade not, that I doe not beleeue. Yea, I adde thereto S. Basils conclusion: asil. oral. Su 0. ca. 21. If all that is not of faith, be sinne, as the Apostle sayth; and faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; all that is without the Scripture inspi∣red from God, as not being of faith, is sinne. This confession I constantly holde, and as in the first booke which you quote, I directly and expresly defend, that no point of faith should be beleeued without Scripture, so in my Sermons I no where varie from it, how slipperie soeuer your tongue be to tell a tale in stead of a trueth. I doe Defenc. pa. 29. reiect Austens opinion in three speciall points, and diuers Fathers in two other ca∣ses, and some of those things I affirme against all the Fathers, and almost against all the Church; and yet I bitterly reproue you for vsing the like libertie. Doe I any where reiect S. Augustine or all the Fathers in any point of doctrine necessarie to our salua∣tion, as you do in the chiefest grounds of our redemption? And when I let the Rea∣der vnderstand, that the reasons which some Fathers bring to fortifie their priuate o∣pinions, are not sufficient for to force consent to be giuen vnto them, doe I call them fond absurd without reason or likelihood, and paradoxes in nature, as you do? These two things I iustly reproue in you, which I my selfe doe not fall into for all your fitning. In the maine principles of Christian religion and our redemption, you make the best learned Fathers ignorant of their Creed and Catechisme; and when their expositi∣ons of the Scripture crosse your imaginations, you Reuell against their Iudgements as void of sense and reason. This do I not; In the rule of faith I renounce not their maine consent nor vndoubted maximes, least I conclude them or my selfe to erre in faith: In other questions of les e importance wherein they differ sometimes from ech other, sometimes euen from themselues, I let the Reader see their reasons, and leaue him free to follow what he liketh, or to suspend his iudgement, if he find cause there∣fore. This libertie I neuer take from you, nor mislike it in you; but when you pro∣nounce all to be absurd, fond, and foolish, that yeeld not to your fansie: wherein you doe not onely proudly aduance your owne dreames as necessary Doctrines, but re∣prochfully preiudice the freedome of others. This difference is not my deuise: the Vincentius aduersus Hae∣res s. auncient consent of Godly Fathers (saith Vincentius) is with great care to be searched and followed of vs, not in all the questions of the Diuine Law, but onely or chiefly in the Rule of Faith. Whether therefore the bodies of such as arose and came out of their graues after Christs resurrection returned againe to corruption, or still kept the honor of immortalitie, which was bestowed on them; as also when Christ said to the theefe on the Crosse, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, whether Christ ment the presence of his humane soule or of his Diuine glory should be that day in Paradise, and so whether the soules of the faithfull d parting this life, goe straight to heauen, or stay in a place appointed them of God till the day of iudgement: and likewise whether Abrahams bosome were a receptacle for soules within the earth, and neere to hell; or far aboue the earth: and lastly whether the loosing of Adam from hell, by Christs descent thither, which the whole Church almost seemed to hold by tradition, freed onely the person of Adam from the place of hell; or both him and his posteritie from all feare and danger of hell: These be things that may be liked, disliked, or sus∣pended without any manifest breach of faith, and wherein Saint Austen probablely disputeth, but determineth nothing for certaintie to be beleeued; alwaies tempering his words in these cases with August. pist. 99. Ego quidem non video, explicent qui possunt, nondum intel∣ligo, nulla causa occurrit, nondum mu . I see not how, let them declare it that can, as yet I vnderstand it not, I conceaue presently no cause, as yet I find it not cleere. If I then labou∣red with respectiue words, and other places of the same Fathers, to shew wherein they doubted, or dissented; who but a light head and slipper tongue would call this contemning or despising of the Fathers? But you will proceede to the speciall examples wherein I charge you with despising the Fathers; and I will not be long after you. First Defenc. pa. 30. where you say out of certaine Fathers, that Christ in his dying gaue vp his spirit miraculously, no violence of death wresting it from him, as it doth ours, but when he saw his time, he euen at an instant laid it downe of himselfe; Contrarie to this I alleaged the Scrip∣ture, HE VVAS LIKE VS IN ALL THINGS, sinne onely excepted. To answere this you reply, was he like vs in his birth? Can we lie in the graue without corruption as he lay? Or raise our selues from death as he did? Which poore answere I wonder to see comming from you. As well you might shew farder, he was not like vs in that he walked on the water, nor in that he fasted fortie d s, nor in that he knew the secrets of mens harts, nor in that he turned water into wine, and with a word healed all diseases. These things done by his man∣hood, yet were they the proper effects of his Godhead: they were no naturall but spirituall things. ] You may wonder at what you will, and though your proofes and replies be not worth the paper you wast, yet you so powder them with figures and fansies, that you thinke them very pretious. Where I obserued out of Augustine, Ierome, and Bernard, that the manner of Christs death was not like ours, (though his death were the same that ours is, I meane the separation of the soule from the body,) by reason he had perfect sense and strong speech euen to the very instant that of his owne ac∣cord (when he saw his time) he breathed out his soule; whereas both speech, and sense doe faile in vs before we die, and our soules are taken from vs, we can not breath them out when we will; to impeach this obseruation you cast out first reprochfull words, and then vntidy proofes, such as your store could best affourd. Treatis. pa. 53. Here a fine fable is offered vs, say you, a Paradoxe in nature, and contrary to the Scripture which saith, HE VVAS LIKE VS IN ALL THINGS sinne onely excepted. This scorne∣full speech and bare pretence of Scripture misapplied to your peeuish conceite, is all the answere you vouchsafe to those auncient and reuerend Fathers, I meane Saint Austen, and Saint Ierome. To repell this pride of yours, and to make you perceaue the misconstering of the Scriptures, I shortly replyed; Was Christ like vs in his birth? in his graue or in his resurrection? If he were vnlike vs in these, and yet those words must stand true, then might he also be vnlike vs in his death, and no proofe out of those words could be made to the contrarie. At this poore answere you wonder; but you and your adherents lay your wits together, as you haue done your heads, you shal neuer refell this answere, as poore as it is, without confessing the weaknesse of your owne proofe. For if you restraine the text (which you brought) to naturall humane properties, and infirmities, as now you doe, then most apparantly his birth and his graue must in all things be like to ours, for they are in vs naturall humane properties or infirmities. To be borne of a Virgin, not to rotte in graue and to rise from the dead, Defenc. pa. 30. Those Diuine effects (you say) are iustly beleeued to haue beene in Christ because of the expresse Scripture that witnesseth the same. ] But then the text which you vrged, he was like vs in all things, must haue an other meaning then you made shew of. And so it well may, for euen in his birth, in his graue, and in his resurrection, he was like to vs though not in euery circumstance thereof. His body was made of the seede and substance of his mother as ours is, though she a Virgin, and we were begotten by our Fathers. It also lay senselesse and dead in the graue as ours doth, though it could not returne to dust as ours shall. He rose from the dead to a celestiall and immortall life; and so shall we, but not when we will, nor of our owne power, as he did: So that he was like vs in all things▪ that is in euery part of our nature, and in euery kind of humane in∣firmities, but not like vs in euery action, circumstance or consequent of all humane properties and infirmities. For so we should depriue him of that fulnesse of wisdome, grace and power, wherewith his humane soule was indued farre vnlike to ours not on∣ly if we respect naturall properties, and infirmities in vs, which are vtterly voide of these gifts; but if we compare our measure of knowledge, grace, and strength with the abundance of his spirit. Then might he be like vs euen in death also which par∣ted his soule from his body, as it doth ours; though he were vnlike vs in power to dye when he would, which we can not, and retained full force of sense and speech to the very moment of giuing vp his Ghost, which we doe not. Againe the words following in the Text He was like vs in all things, SINNE EX∣CEPTED, are a sufficient exemption of Christ from our manner of death, as well as from our kind of birth, and rotting in the graue. For we are borne in sinne, which he might not be, & therefore was to be borne of a Virgin to auoid all concupiscence, as well of a Father as in his Mother, without whom he could not be made our flesh. So rotte we in the graue by reason of sinne dwelling in our bodies; which must be changed into dust, whence we were taken, in reward of our first fathers sinne, from whose loynes we come with like infection of sinne. This Christs body might by no possibilitie admit, though you in the margin of your booke make a false note to the contrarie. First, for that no part of his person might vtterly be dissolued or corrup∣ted after it was once vnited to his Godhead, but must remaine for euer inseparable from his Diuine nature, and so incorruptible: because God was vnited not to dust or ashes, but to humane flesh which so must still continue. Secondly, for that all Christs sufferings for sinne must haue in them exact and perfect obedience, and so precisely sense and will in euery passion, to submit himselfe to the hand of God: which in death he might doe and did; but in rotting i the graue where sense and will wanted he could not doe. Lastly, the Apostle extendeth Christs obedience in suffering, no farder then to the death of the Crosse; after which could follow no fat∣der humiliation, and so no corruption to dust; but a sure confirmation of his death by lying three daies in the graue, and a plaine pledge of his resurrection, because he could not see corruption. The same words exempt Christ from our manner of death. For where death entred not but by sinne, and the soule of ech man to this day, by a naturall instinct sheweth her secret abhorring of death and open strugling with death before she depart her body, from which she doth not yeeld but by force of death ta∣king from her first speech and sense, and so by degrees the whole possession of hir bo∣die; violently thrusting hir out of her seate; Neither this violence of death, nor this resistance of the soule may be admitted, or were perceaued in the person of Christ. He might suffer nothing but willingly; because the misliking of the hart is disobe∣dience though the fact be endured. Wherefore if we meane with the Apostle to confesse Christ to haue beene obedient to his death, we must leaue in him both sense and will to obey euen to the last gasp, and also power to breath out his soule into his Fathers hand, when the time was come appointed by God for him to depart this life. Againe, what force created could wrest his soule from him being God, and man, but at his liking? His owne words are, none taketh my soule from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe. Whereon Chrysostome rightly groundeth this consequent. Chrysost. de feria 5. passio∣ni sermo 6. Si nemo, vtique nec mors. If none then surely neither death. But you would see Defenc. pa. 30. expresse words in the Text that Christ died, as I say, not naturally, but miraculously, and then you will beleeue it. ] Would you haue so plaine words in the text, that you can not, or that you should not quarrell with? If you delude, as your maner is, the plaine words of the Scripture with kinds of speeches and large senses, I see no words that can hold you, but you may defend after your fashion any kind of fansie or heresie, with Synecdoches, Allegories, and Hyperboles. And though the iudgement of so great and godly fathers ioyning with the very words of the Scripture, carie with it sufficient weight to a sober and religious Reader; yet for your pleasure, that you may see your follie, I am content to cast about againe. What is ponere animam in the Scrip∣ture, Sir, I pray? is it willingly or vnwillingly to lay downe a mans soule or life? You know Peters words to his Master, Iohn. 13. Animam meam pro te ponam. I will lay downe my life for thy sake. And S. Iohns, 1. Iohn 3. Nos debemus profratribus animas ponere. We ought to lay downe our liues for our brethren. And Christes, Iohn. 10. Propter hoc Pater me diligit, quoni∣am ego pono animam meam, vt iterum sumam eam. Therefore the Father loueth me, because I lay downe my soule to take it againe. In all these places ponere animam must needs be to lay downe life or soule willingly; except you be so wise as to thinke that Peter in loue telleth his Master he was vnwilling to die for him; and S. Iohn forwarneth vs, we must not be willing to die for our brethren; yea, and that the Father loued the Sonne because hee was vnwilling to die for his sheepe, which were Diuinitie fit for such a Doctor as you are. Then tollere animam is for another to take our ( life or) soule fromvs, whether we be willing or vnwilling it should be done, as appeareth by Eliahs prayer vnto God, in saying 1. King. 19. take away my soule, when he desired to die. Resort now to the words of our Sauiour, where he sayd, Iohn. 10. None taketh (my soule) from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe, and see whether they inferre a peculiar maner of dying, not common to others. Had he meant to say no more, but I die willingly, as you imagine he in∣tended; pono animam, I lay downe my soule, had been words enow to expresse that mean∣ing: but he maketh an addition, which must needs haue some force; and not be an idle repetition of the same thing; and likewise an opposition, the contrarie whereof must be found in his death. For where other mens soules are taken from them, though they be neuer so willing to die, as appeareth by the witnesse of Scripture, I lay it downe OF MY SELFE, sayth our Sauiour; that is, not onely of mine owne accord, but by mine owne power. To shew that so he doth, he sayth, None taketh (my soule) from me, (which they do from others) I lay it downe of my selfe. And lest any man should doubt as you doe, whether e spake of his willingnesse to die, which is common to o∣thers; or of his power, which was proper to himselfe; in full, expresse, and direct words, to stoppe such cauilling mouthes as yours is, hee addeth as a proofe of his speech, Iohn. 10. I haue power to lay it downe (he meaneth of himselfe, as the former words con∣uince) and haue power to take it againe: this commandement haue I receiued of my Father. That he was willing to lay down his soule I do not denie, the word pono (I lay it down) proueth so much; but he professeth that hee had receiued power and commandement from his Father to lay it downe of himselfe, and to take it againe of himselfe. This com∣maundement was peculiar to his person; no man liuing euer had or shall haue the like; & this power to lay downe his soule of himselfe was as MIRACVLOVS, as his power to raise himselfe from the dead, since they are both compared and ioyned together. These things did those ancient and learned Fathers see, when they made their col∣lections: and so plaine and perspicuous are they euen in the Text it selfe, that none of meane capacitie or any modestie can mistake, or will outface them. As for Defenc. pa. 31. Chrysostom whom you cite hereupon, he hath nothing for this point. ] He that hath once hardned his hart and mouth against the truth, will neuer stay nor sticke at any thing. When you would needs out of those words, He was like vs in all things inferre, therefore Christ must be like vs in the manner of his death; I let you see that Chrysostom auoucheth the contrary. The death of Christ, and his rising from the dead, Chrysost. in Iohan. omil. 59. both these (saith Chrysostom) were strong, and besides the common (that is, the naturall) course of men. And expounding Christs words I haue power to lay downe my soule, that is. (saith Chrysostom) Ibidem. I alone haue this power, which you haue not. In this power which he had and we haue not, I trust he was vnlike vs; and so Chrysostom di∣rectly refelleth your vnskilfull application of the Scripture that Christ was like vs in all things, euen in the manner of his death. But Defenc. pa. 31. If it were new and not ordinarie that Christ should haue power to lay downe his life, yet why may not his manhood dye naturally notwithstanding? ] Forsooth because he vsed that power at the time of his death, as he himselfe witnesseth, which no man euer did, or can doe. As he had power which was aboue nature to lay downe his life when he himselfe would; so his owne mouth testi∣fieth that none tooke his soule from him, but he layed it downe of himselfe, that is, of his owne accord and power, when he saw his time. And so Chrysostom telleth you; C st in I han. omil. 59. Ita mori vires humanas excedit; So to dye (as Christ did) passeth the power (or nature) of man and, solus erat vitam ponendi dominus, Christ alone was the (Ruler or) master of laying downe his life. Howbeit in your mocking vaine you goe on, and say, that I will conclude this better. You must remember what God himselfe saith; O foole this night they shall fetch away thy soule from thee. Whereto you adde. I remember it well, what then? ergo, Christ saying none taketh my life from me, ment he would dye miraculously, and not by the fayling of nature in him? If this be the reason, verely I graunt it is marueylous subtill and past my reach. If you ouer-reach no more then this reason doth, you will come short of all your new conceits. If your memory be not too much moistened, you may call to mind that this place was brought to prooue, Christ was vnlike vs in the laying downe of this soule; and if I be not as grosse as you are gamesome, it proueth it very directly. God by those words expresseth the rich man should that night die, and thereby teacheth vs that when we dye, our soules are taken from vs. So that it is not in our power to keepe our soules in our bodies as long as we will, nor to leaue them when we list: but when God sendeth, will we, nill we, they are taken from vs. This Christ deni∣eth to be verified in him; none tooke his soule from him, but he laid is downe of himselfe, which we cannot doe. Hence if it please you to frame but this reason which is in open sight: All mens soules are taken from them when they dye: Christs soule was not taken from him when he dyed: ergo, Christ dyed not in the same manner that we doe; and so was vn∣like vs in his death, by the manifest wordes of the Scripture; you shall see a plaine truth, not past your reach, though repugnant to your purpose. But I should proue Christ died Defene. pa. 31. miraculously not naturally. That at last after long and sore anguish of mind, & bodily torments his natural strength failed him, & therfore he bowed his head and gaue vp the ghost; what miracle is there in this? ] Men may well maruaile at your folly, who turne & wind euery way rather then you will acknowledge that which the Scriptures expresly witnesse was in Christ aboue mans nature, which they that saw it marueiled at, & which the best Diuines of all ages haue confessed to be miraculous in the death of Christ: To haue perfect sense, speach, and mo on at the very instant of giuing vp the ghost is a thing not possible to our nature. Our speach and sense & lunta motion doe first euidently faile before our soules depart from our bodies: But Christ had all three by the full report of the Euangelists, euen to the very act of breathing out of his soule. Saint Iohn writeth that Iohn. 19. Iesus knowing all things were ful∣filled said, I thirst: and when he had tasted the vineger he said, it is finished: and inclining his head gaue vp the ghost. Hee noteth in Christ exact memorie of all things written in the Scripture touching him, Plaine speach, and voluntarie motion in laying downe his head at the very moment that he yeelded vp the ghost. S. Luke witnesseth that Luke 23. cry∣ing with a lowde voyce (Christ said.) Father into thine hands I will commend (or lay down) my Spirit. . And speaking these words hee breathed out his soule. The lowdnesse of his voyce, and effect of his prayer professing hee would now die, and at the same instant performing it by giuing vp his spirit, conclude that neither sense, memorie, speach, nor prayer failed him to the last breath, as they doe vs when wee draw towards death; and therefore the maner of his death to bee farre distant from ours. Defene. pa. 31. li. 37. Anone after (you say) he might die, and in the meane while both sense and speach faile him before he died.] Your libertie to iudge of the sense of the Scripture doeth lead you, and hold you to this errour. You imagine what please you of the words of the Euangelists, and auerting them from their true coherence by interposing your fansies, you maintaine it as your right to iudge of the meaning of the holy Ghost. But consult your conscience, that you st not with the truth; and compare the Euange∣lists words and purpose together, and you shall soone see the course, and force of them. To what end doe the Euangelists so carefully note in Christ these circumstan∣ces, not vsuall with vs, no possible for vs at the departure of our soules, but onely to shew the trueth of his owne words, that none tooke his soule from him, but hee laied it downe of himselfe, which he had power to doe and accordingly did? and therefore they describe him remembring all things, calling euen for drinke because hee was exceeding drie through paine, warning the people standing about him, with a lowde prayer, that he would (now) lay downe his soule into his Fathers hands. And so bowing his head of his owne accord he forthwith breathed out his soule. Anone after, say you, but nature first de∣caying in him; Presently say I, when there was in him no decay of nature, nor any want of memorie, sense, or speach. In vaine else were all those things, both performed by our Sauiour, and testified by the Euangelists, if this were not the scope thereof, that Christ with actuall and perfect obedience, deuotion, and submission to the will of God, and therefore also with full and perfect memorie, sense, and speach, did aboue the strength and vse of men, willingly and powerfully with one breath render his soule into the hands of his Father; who had decreed hee should die, but gaue him leaue and power to lay downe his soule of his owne accord when hee would, without constraint or stroke of death wresting or taking his soule from him. And that the maner of Christs death was miraculous euen in his owne Person, and draue the stan∣ders by to confesse hee was more then a man, that so could die; if you could but open your partial eares, you should heare the Euangelists cofirme, though you very course∣ly intreate S. Ierom as bending himselfe therein against the plaine text, where indeed he rightly pursueth the words of the holy Ghost, and you would saucily controle one text by an other, and not seeke to reconcile them together. Saint Markes words are these. And Marke 15. Iesus crying with a lowde voyce, gaue vp the ghost, and the Centurion that stoode ouerright him, seeing, , that crying in such sort hee breathed out his soule, said; Surely this man was the Sonne of God. This crying so lowde which Saint Marke speaketh of, was that prayer whereby Christ commended his soule into his Fathers hands, as S. Luke testifieth; for those were the last words hee spake at the time when he gaue vp the ghost. The breathing out of his soule so presently vpon so strong a voyce, and o lowde a prayer was so strange, that it forthwith mooued the Centurion, who stoode ouerright him, and well obserued him, to pronounce that he was the Sonne of God. What now hath Ierom offended, I pray you, in noting that which S. Marke writeth, that the Hieronymus ad Hedibia quaesti . 8. Centurion hearing Christ say to his Father, Into thy hands I commend my spirit, ET STATIM SPONTE, and foorthwith of his owne accord to haue giuen vp the ghost, mooued with the greatnesse of this wonder, said, truely this man was the Sonne of God? I Defenc. pa. 32. vrge Ierom, you say, against the plaine text in an other place: which saith; When the Centurion s w the Earthquake & the things which were done, he said, truly this man was the Sonne of God. ] If Ierom should haue falsified one text, as you haue done, to out-face an other, he were worthy to be blamed; but your libertie to iudge of the Scriptures at your pleasure must excuse you. What hath Ierom said in those words; which Saint Marke, and S. Luke in effect did not before him? That the lowde voyce which Christ vsed presently before his yeelding vp the ghost, was that prayer which Ierom mentio∣neth, S. Luke witnesseth. And speaking those words (saith S. Luke) Christ gaue vp the ghost. That was a very strange, and marueilous thing to the Centurion to heare him so speake, and see him so die. Saint Marke obserueth; The Centurion seeing, that cry∣ing in such sort, Christ gaue vp the ghost, said, Surely this man was the Sonne of God. Could it mooue the Centurion (that had the charge to see Christ executed) to this confessi∣on, and not seeme strange vnto him? Pilate that gaue sentence of death vpon him, Marueiled he was so soone dead; and doe you thinke it much S. Ierom should say it was a wonder? But in S. Matthew it is Defenc. pa. 32. expresly noted that the Earthquake chi ly did mooue the Centurion so to thinke, and speake. ] Saint Marke saith, The Centurion that stoode ouer-right Christ, and beheld him; when hee saw in what sort hee cried, and died, said, Truely this was the Sonne of God. After his death, the Earthquake and other things that followed the death of Christ, caused the Centurion and his Souldiers, as they were keeping Iesus now dead, greatly to feare, and with one voyce now to con∣fesse that surely he was the Sonne of God. Both which reports stand true together; the one not ouerthrowing the other. For the Centurio alone at the hearing of Christs voyce, and sight of his death did first affirme it: Afterward when Christ was dead, as the Centurion and his souldiers kept his body on the Crosse, till Pilates pleasure were knowen, the wonders which followed Christs death, as the shaking of the earth, the cleauing of the rockes, and opening of the graues, made the Centurion and those that were with him watching Iesus greatly to feare, and (with one mind) to say, Truely this was the Sonne of God. So that your words Pag. 32. li. 45. HE SAID, meaning thereby the Centurion, are not in S. Matthew, but the Centurion and those that were with him SEEING (the won∣ders that followed Christs death) greatly feared, saying, Truely this man was the Sonne of God. And had the Centurion seene nothing wonderfull in Christs person before he di∣ed; how should hee and the rest haue gathered certainely, that these things declared Christ and none other, to be the Sonne of God? But Christ suffering all things with si∣lence and patience till the instant of his death, he then shewed himselfe to die with a strange and diuine power aboue mans nature, which the Centurion first marked, and therefore confes ed him to be the Sonne of God; & when the rest of the wonders that followed the death of Christ, were perceiued; they confirmed him and all his souldi∣ers in the same opinion: yea Luk 23. all the people that came to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their brests and returned. Where S. Luke also putteth a manifest difference betwixt the Centurion and the rest of the people. Of the Centurion hee saith, Vers. 47. seeing what was done, in that Christ praying gaue vp the ghost, hee glorified God and said, truely this man was iust. Of the rest Saint Luke saith, , Beholding the sundry things that were done (after Christs death) Vers. 48. they stroke their brests and returned. This miraculous and diuine power, which appeared in the person of our Sauiour breathing out his soule at an instant, when he would and as he would, besides and be∣yond the nature of man, at which the Centurion so much wondered; the best Diuines of all ages haue likewise obserued, and acknowledged. So that you haue small cause to conceiue, you can take Bernard tardie in a tale in such sort as you doe; as if his age were too young, or his wits too weake to encounter your worth. He sayth indeede: to die was a great infirmitie, but so to die, (as Christ did) was a great (or an infinite) power. Where shewing your selfe to be sharpe sighted in toyes, and heauie headed in trueth, you aske, which is this infinite power? Christs tasting the vineger, or his saying it is fini∣shed, or his bowing the head, or his giuing vp the ghost? Had you not tasted so much the vineger of your owne conceits, that you can scant lift vp your head to looke on any thing but lees, you might easily haue seene what Bernard sayth, and that he sayth no more then the best learned Fathers in Christes Church said before him. Bernard seria 4. ebdo. paenos . Solus pote∣statem habuit ponendi animam suam, nemo am abstulit ab eo & inc to capite (factus obediens vsque admortem) tradidit spiritum. Quis tam facile quando vult dormit? magna quidem infirmit as mori, sed planè sic mori virtus immensa. Solus potestatem habuit ponendi, qui solus facultatem aeqne habuit liberam resumendi; imperium habens vitae & mort is. Christ alone had power to lay downe his soule, none tooke it from him. Bowing his head, (being obe∣dient vnto death) he gaue vp the ghost. Who can so easily sleepe, when he will? To dic was a great infirmitie, but so to die was plainely an exceeding power. H e onely had power to lay downe his soule, who onely had like free power to take it againe; hauing the rule of life and death. Long before Bernard S. Austen sayd as much, whose words you say, being Defenc. pag. 33. l. 1. granted, necessarily conclude nothing for my purpose. They shew nothing but Christs voluntarie dying, and that at his death he sh ed great power, which you denie not. ] Were it infirmitie in you that you could not vnderstand S. Austens words, it were the lesse to be misliked; but being an insolent conc of your selfe, that will quarrell with Scriptures and Fa∣thers, least you should be conuinced of a manifest errour, this hath neither trueth nor touch of any Religion. That Christ died VOLVNTARIE, and shewed GREAT POVVER AT HIS DEATH, S. Austen you grant auoucheth; and you because you can wind those wordes at your will, do not denie them: but were you as carefull to take Saint Austens words in their right sense, as you be readie for a shewe to admit them, this matter were ended. S. Austen speaketh indeede of Christs voluntarie, and powerfull dying, but he doth not meane, as you doe, that Christ was onely willing to die, as religious and godly men are, which desire to depart this life; but that he died S rmo. pa. 3. quia voluit, quando voluit, quomodo voluit; because he would, when he would, as hee would. And giuing the reason of his speech out of the Scripture, (though you proud∣ly and falsely say he hath no strength of reason by the Scripture) he learnedly and true∣ly pursueth it in this sort. Austen. de Tri tated. l. 4. cap. 13. Where the spirit is farre better then the bodie, and it is the death of the spirit to be forsaken of God; as it is the death of the bodie to be forsaken of the spirit: and this is the punishment in the death of the bodie, that the spirit because it willingly for∣sooke God, shall vnwillingly leaue the bodie; neither can the spirit leaue the bodie when it will, vnlesse it offer some violent death to the bodie; the (Soule or) Spirit of (Christ) the me∣diatour did plainely prooue that he came to the death of his flesh by no punishment of sinne, in that he forsooke not his flesh by any meanes against his wil, but BECAVSE HE VVOVLD, VVHEN H VVOVLD, AND AS HE VVOVLD. Therefore he said, I haue power to lay downe my soule, and haue power to take it againe. None taketh it from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe. And this those that were present GREATLY MARVAILED AT, as the Gospell obserueth, when after that (loud) voyce he presently gaue vp the ghost. For they that were fastned to the tree were tormented with a long death. Wherefore the (two) theeues had their legs broken, that they might die. But Christ was WONDRED AT, because he was found dead; which thing we read Pilate marueiled at, when Christs bodie was asked of him to be buried. There is more sound Diuinitie in this one Chapter of S. Austens then in both your Pamphlets; though you pretend S. Austens wordes conclude no∣thing, nor against you, nor for me. Where you may learne, (for it is fitter for you to be a scholler then a writer, till you haue learned to leaue your wilfull humours, and to giue are vnto the sage and wise Fathers that were pillars of Christes Church many hundred yeeres before you;) first that for the punishment of sinne, the death of the body was inflicted on all mankinde, in which the soule should depart from her bodie against her will, and not when she would, nor as she would. Secondly that the man∣ner of Christs death was cleane contrary to ours; he gaue vp his spirit of his owne ac∣cord, and power, when he would and as he would. Thirdly his giuing vp the ghost so presently vpon his loude prayer, was wondered at by the standers by, and by Pi∣late himselfe when he heard of it. Whether this conclude my purpose I leaue to the iudgement of the discreete Reader: your no, as it lightly commeth without cause, so with me it goeth as lightly without regard. But Austens words, which I first Se mons pagina. 8. quoted, prooue not so much.] You take vpon you to refute first and last; why skip you then that which is cited in the midst? Grant Austens words to be true, as indeede they are most true, which are alleaged in the first place, and my purpose is fully concluded. The prooue that no man can August. in Iohan. tractat. 119. SO SLEEPE when he will, as Christ died when he would; that no man can so put off his ve∣sture when he will, as Christ put off his flesh, when he would; that no man can so leaue the place where he standeth, at his will, as Christ left his life when he would. And if so great power appeared in him dying, with what power shall we thinke he will come to iudge? Where voluntary dying in Christ doth not onely import that he was con∣tent and willing to die; as Paul was when he desired to be dissolued, but that he left this life by separating his soule from his bodie when he would; hauing at that present when he parted his soule from his bodie; perfect memori , sense, and speech, and brea∣thing out his soule of his owne accord, with more facilitie and celeritie then we can lay off our garments, or change the place in which we stand. And from this admira∣ble power, by which he layd downe his soule, and tooke it againe at his pl asure, Au∣sten draweth a comparison to the exceeding greatne of that power with which he shall come to iudge the world. With Austen ioyne all the Fathers of Christs Church that eaer spake of this mat∣ter, and the best Diuines of latter ages confesse the same. Athanasius. Athana. cont. Ar . orat. 4. . To haue power to lay downe his soule when he would, and to take it againe; this is not the proper∣tie of men, but it is the power of the Sonne of God. For man dieth not by his owne power, but by necessiti of nature and that against his will: but Christ being God ad it in his own power to separate himselfe from his bodie, and to resume the same againe, when he would. Origen. Origenes in Iohan. Euang. 19. An non Dominus singulare quiddam prae omnibus, qui in corpus aduenerint, de seipso dicit? doth not the Lord affirme a thing that was (peculiar or) singular to him aboue all that euer were in the flesh; when he saith, None taketh my soule from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe, and haue power to lay it downe and power to take it againe? Let vs consider what he meaneth, who left his bodie, and departed from it without any way leading to death. This neither Moses, nor any of the Patriarkes, Prophets, or Apostles did say besides Iesus. For if Christ had died as the theeues did that were crucified with him; we could not haue said, that he layd downe his soule of himselfe, but after the maner of such as die. But now Iesus crying with a strong voyce, gaue vp the ghost, and as a King left his bodie. His power greatly appeared in this, that at his owne free power and will leauing his bodie he died. Gregorie Nyssene. Gregor. N s∣senus de resur∣rectione Christi Oratio 1. Memento Dominici dicti, quid de seipso pronunciet is, a quo pendet rerum omnium vis & potentia; quomodo ex plena summáque potestate, ac non ex naturae necessitate animam à cor∣pore seiungit. Remember the Lords words, what he pronounceth of himselfe, of whom de∣pendeth all power; how with full and soueraigne power, and not by necessitie of nature he seue∣red his soule from his bodie; as he sayd, None taketh my soule from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe. I haue power to lay it downe, and power to take it againe. Gregorie Nazianzene maketh the mother of Christ thus to speake vnto him after his death. Nazianzen. in Christo pa∣tiente. Comming I heard thy voice vnto thy father, , and thou suddenly departedst (this life) as leauing it willingly. Ierome: Hierom. 15. cap. Marci. With a faint voice, or rather speechlesse we die, that are of the earth; but he which came from heauen breathed out his soule with a loud voice. Idem ad Hedi∣biam qu . 8. We must say it was a shew of his diuine power to lay downe his soule when he would, and to take it againe. Yea, the Centurio hearing him say to hi Father, Into thine hands I commend my spi∣rit, & statim sponte spiritum dimisisse, and straightway of his own accord to send forth his spi∣rit, mooued with the GREATNES of this WOONDER said, Truly this was the Sonne of God. Chrysostome vpon these words of Matthew, Iesus crying with a loud voice gaue vp the ghost, sayth, Chrysostom in Matth. cap. 27. hom. 89. Idcirco magna voce clamauit, vt ostendat haec sua potestate fieri. Therefore Christ cried with a loud voice, that he might shew this to be done by his owne power. Marke sayth, Pilate maru lled if he were alreadie dead. And the Centurion also THER FORE CHIEFLY beleeued, because he saw Christ die of his owne accord and power. Victor of Antioch vpon the like words of Marke, sayth, Victor Antio∣ in cap. 5. Marci. By so doing the Lord Iesus doth plainly declare, that he had his whole life and death in his owne free power. Wherefore Marke writeth, that Pilate not without admiration asked if Christ were yet dead; addidit item ea potissimum de causa Centurionem credidisse; he added likewise that the Centurion chiefly for that reason beleeued, because he saw Christ giue vp the ghost with a loud crie, and signifi∣cation of great power. Leo noting that Christ died not for lacke of helpe, but of deter∣minat purpose sayth, Leo Serm. 17. de Passione Do∣mini. Quae illic vitae intercessio sentienda est, vbi anima & potestate est emissa & potestate reuocata? What intreatie for life shall we thinke there was, where the soule was both sent out with power, and recalled with power. Fulgentius: Fulgentius ad Trasimundum lib. 3. Cum ergo ho∣mo Christus tantam accep rit potestatem, vt cum vellet animam poneret, & cum vellet de∣nuò resumeret, quantam potuit habere Christi diuinitas potestatem? Ideo autem ille homo potestatem animae habuit, quia cum diuina potestas in vnitatem personae suscepit. Where then the man Christ receiued so much power; that he might lay downe his soule when he would, and take it againe when he would, how great power might the Godhead of Christ haue? and therefore the manhood of Christ had power to lay downe his soule, because the diuine power admitted him into the vinitie of person. Sedul. operis Paschalis lib. 5. cap. 17. Sedulius: Animam protinus suam sancto de cor∣pore volens ipse depos it. Christ himselfe forthwith (vpon his prayer) willingly layd off his sacred soule from his bodie. Nonnius in his Paraphrase vpon S. Iohns Gospell, expres∣seth the saying of Christ, None taketh my soule from me; in these words, Nonnius Pa∣raphras. in Jo∣an. ca. 10. ver. 18. No birth∣law taketh my soule from me, no incroching time that tameth all things; nor Necessitie which is vnchangeable counsell; ; but ruler of my selfe, I of mine owne accord yeeld vp my willing soule. Beda vpon that place of Matthew, And Iesus crying with a loud voice, sent out (or gaue vp) his spirit; writeth thus: Bed in Matt. cap. 27. Quod au∣tem dicit, emisit spiritum, ostendit diuinae potestatis esse emittere spiritum, vt ipse quo{que} dixe∣rat, nemo potest tollere animam; in that the Euangelist saith, Christ sent out his (soule or) spirit, he sheweth it is a point of Diuine power to send out the soule, as Christ himselfe sayd, None can take my soule from me. Ibid. in Marci cap. 15. Nullus enim habet potestatem emittendi spiritum nisi qui animarum conditor est. For none hath power to send out the soule, but he that is Creator of soules. Which Bede buildeth vpon the words of S. Matthew, who saith that Christ crying with a loud voice , dismissed or sent his soule from him. Theophy∣lact: Theophylact. in Matth. cap. 27. Iesus crieth with a loud voice, that we should know it was true which he sayd, I haue power to lay downe my soule: for not constrained but of his own accord he dismissed his soule. And Idem Marci cap. 15. the Centurion seeing that he breathed out his soule so like a Commander of death, WONDERED, and confessed him: Idem Marci cap. 23. for he died not like other men, but as the Master of death. Lyra vpon these words of Mat∣thew, Lyra in Mat∣ cap. 27. Iesus againe crying with a loude voice, sent forth his soule. Whereby it appeareth that voice was not naturall, but MIRACVLOVS, because a man afflicted with great and long torment, and through such affliction neere to death could not so cry by any strength of nature. The latter writers concurre with the older in this obseruation. Erasmus in his Pa∣raphrase vpon Saint Luke. Erasmus pa∣ . in Lu. ca. 23. Iesus when with a mighty cry he had said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, breathed out his soule: to make it manifest to all, that he did not faint as others doe, the strengh of the body by little and little decaying, but straightway vp∣on a strong cry, and words distinctly pronounced, laid downe his life as of his owne accord. And the Idem in Mar∣ci. cap. 15. Centurion who stood ouerright as a Minister and witnesse of his death, and had seene many dye with punishment, when he saw Iesus besides the manner of other men, after a strong cry presently to breath out his soule said; truely this man was the Sonne of God. Musculus, Musculus in Matth. cap. 27. That Christ sent foorth hi soule with aloude voice is a proofe of greater power, then may be found in a man dying. Whereby he shewed that he layed of his soule of his owne accord; answerable to that, I haue power to lay downe my soule and to take it againe. To which end Iohn saith, that bowing his head he gaue vp the Ghost. Others first dye, and then their heads fall; but he first layeth downe his head, and then of his owne accord deliue∣reth his soule vp to his Father. Gualter Gualter in Ioh. hom. 169. But let vs see the manner of Christs death, who as Iohn writeth with bowing downe his head yelded his Spirit. Luke saith, he cryed with a loude voice, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirite. Concurrunt h c non obscura Diuinitatis argumenta; Here find we manifest arguments of his Diuinitie, which the Cen∣turion and others obserued as some of the Euangelists witnesse. First this cry and distinct pronouncing of his last words sheweth a power and vertue MORE THEN HVMANE. For we know that men dying so faint, that the most of them cannot speake be it neuer so softly. Againe, he dyeth when he will himselfe, yea and layeth of his soule with authoritie, to shew himselfe Lord of life and death, which is an euident proofe of his Diuine power. It is pro∣fitable for vs diligently to marke the Diuine power of Christ, which shewed it selfe so plainly in his death. Marlorat vpon the words of Mathew, and Iesus crying againe with a loud voyce sent foorth his spirit, saith; Marlor. in Matth. ca. 27. Declarat hic Christus maiestatem suam, Christ declareth here his Maiestie, that he layeth downe his soule, not when men constraine him, but when he himselfe will. Whereupon Pilat maruailed that Christ was so soone dead. And the Lord himselfe said, None taketh my soule from me but I lay it downe of my selfe. I haue power to lay it downe, and power to take it againe. To which it pertaineth that is written, he bowing downe his head gaue vp his spirit; for other men first dye, and then their heads hang; but Christ first laid downe his head, and then voluntarily rendered his soule to his Father. Many moe might be brought of all ages and places confessing the same; but if these suffice not, what may be enough I doe not know. To decline the Scriptures and Fathers that make against him, the Discourser hath deuised two shifts very like the rest of of his tenents, that is void of all truth and iudge∣ment. Defenc. pa. 32. I deny not, saith he, but Christ might shew some strange vnusuall thing apparantly to the beholders in vttering his last voice, which might very much mooue the beholders and The Defender deuiseth shifts to decline Scrip∣tures and Fa∣thers against im. h arers. Adde hereunto that experience sheweth, (as Phisitians say,) how some diseases in the body bring death presently after most strong and violent crying: Namely in some excessiue torments, as of the stone. ] Things reported and expressed in the Scriptures touching the strange and wonderfull manner of Christs death you deny; and dreame of things there no way mentioned, to coulour your matter and cosin your Reader. That Christ did render his soule into his Fathers hands, when as yet neither speech, sense, memory, nor motion began to faile, is diligently obserued by the Euangelists, and was greatly mar∣ueyled at by the Centurion, which saw the manner of his death: As also that he brea∣thed out his soule of his owne accord when he had spoken those words without any former or other degrees or pangs of death appearing in him, is likewise witnessed by the Scriptures, and constantly auouched by all the Fathers. Saint Luke saith, and speaking these words he breat hed out his soule: Saint Mathew, and crying with a loud voice he dismissed his spirit: Saint Marke, and sending a strong voice from him he blew out his Soule. This did he of his owne accord and power, None taking his soule from him, as in death they doe ours; but declaring himselfe by laying of his soule when he would, and as he would, to be Lord and master of life and death. This is fit for all Christians to confesse, least they dishonor the death of Christ by depriuing his person of that power and glory, which he openly shewed in the eyes & eares of all his persecutors. This you shift of, and instced thereof imagine some strange and VNVSVALI acci∣dent in the manner of Christs death, which neither the Scriptures report, nor you can expresse: wherein you shew your selfe forward to inuent what is not written, and backward to beleeue what is written, which is the trade of such men as meane to make a shipwracke of their faith. That a man may dye crying, as Christ did, you haue found at length if not from Diuines, at least from Phisitians; for I perccaue you haue sought all sorts of helps both farre and neere to vphold your fansies.] P rchaunce Phisitians may tell you, when a painefull disease possesseth the parts which are no fountaines of life or sense, a man may cry, till sense and strength begin to faile, and so hasten his death by the violent spending of his spirits; but that a man may by any course of nature retaine perfect memorie, sense, motion, and speach to the very act of breathing out his soule, I assure my selfe no wise Phisitian will affirme. And if any more humorous then lear∣ned will wade so farre without his Art, he must vnderstand that his word may not ouersway the Rules of Diuinitie and Principles of nature. For what are the powers and faculties whereby the soule is conioyned with the body, but life, sense, and mo∣tion? so long then as they last, the soule by nature neither doth, nor can forsake the body. But when sense and motion first outward and then inward are oppressed and ouerwhelmed, then life also perisheth and the soule may no longer abide in her body; the vnion by which she was fastened vnto it, being wholy dissolued Wherefore death which is the priuation of life, by Gods ordinance for the punishment of sinne by de∣grees surpriseth and in the end quencheth all sense and motion, and so forceth the soule to forsake her seate; which by Gods appointment is violently parted from hir body whether she will or no: but neuer till the effects oflife, which are sense and mo∣tion, be first decayed and abolished. A sowne is the suddainest ouerwhelming of the powers of life, which any natural experience doth teach vs; and yet therewith though outward sense and motion doe faile at an instant, and the inward be very weake and almost insensible, the soule doth not presently depart, but stayeth a time till all sense and motion without and within, (except the partie be recouered) be vtterly extin∣guished. Wherefore in all men by necessitie of nature the powers and parts of life decav in some sooner in some later before they die; and therefore in Christ on the Crosse it was MIRACVLOVS and aboue nature, that hauing full & perfect outward and inward sense speech and motion, he did in a moment, when he would, and as he would, render his soule into the hands of his Father without any farder decayes, or other degrees of death precedent then the very act of breathing out his soule, which left his body presently and perfectly dead. Thou hast gentle Reader the causes and prooses that mooued me to obserue the man r of Christes death to bee different from ours; which whether they be conso∣nant to the Scriptures, and rightly conceiued by those learned and ancient Fathers, which I haue named vnto thee, I leaue to thy discrecte iudgement; assuring thee there is nothing to hinder the maine consent of so many old and new writers in a mat∣ter of so great consequence, but onely the headdinesse of this discourser; who vpon a bare pretence of one peece of Scripture not well vnderstood and worse applied, thin∣keth he may worke wonders; and conclude all these graue and sound Expositours to be so ignorant of the sense of that place, and so vnable to reach to the depth of those words, Christ was LIKE VS IN ALL things; that with one accord they would af∣firme Trea. pag. 53. a sine fable, a Paradoxe in Nature, and contrarie to Scripture. Howbeit it is no newes with this man to defend that Christ was Ibidem. distempered, ouerwhelmed, and all con∣founded both in all the powers of his soule and senses of his body. He boldly auoucheth it was so with Christ before his death in the Garden and on the Crosse, and therefore hee presumeth it might much more befall him at his death. But let him keepe these se∣crets to himselfe. I doubt not Christian Reader but thou wilt be well aduised before thou put the Sauiour of the world and the Sonne of God out of his wits or senses, to make way for such witlesse and senselesse fansies. He Defenc. pa. 33. proceedeth to shew my disdaine to the Fathers for insolent reiecting all their opinions touching the causes of Christs Agonie in the Garden, and of his complaint on the Crosse. For answere, first I desire to know whether you allow of all these causes, or no; you seeme to refuse thē here: for herein you shewed not your own opinion, but the Iudgement of the Fathers. Else∣where your selfe are resolute for some of those causes, and against other some. And yet before; all these interpretations you say are sound, & stand well with the rules of Christian pietie; thus variable you are in that wherin you seeme most resolute. ] When you know what it is to be constant, you shall doe well to talke of inconstancie; till that time your owne doctrine will most disgrace your owne doings. You catch oft at contrarieties in my writings; make good but one, and then prate at your pleasure. Otherwise men will thinke it to be the weaknesse of your witte, or stifnesse of your stomacke, that can not or will not rightly conceiue that which is truely spoken. Touching the cause of Christs Agonie in the Garden; since the Scriptures doe not I did not resolue what was the cause of Christs agonie. expresse it, I said it was curiositie to search it, presumption to determine it, impossible certainely to conclude it: yet for that you made this your chiefe aduantage, that there could be coniectured none other cause of Christes exceeding sorrow in the Garden, besides the present suffering of H ll paines in his soule; I gaue the Reader to vnder∣stand how many there might be besides your de ce, which of all others was least tol∣lerable or probable. Now you would know whether I ALLOVV of ALL these causes, or no. I haue answered you that already, if you had but eares to heare it. I did not ac∣knowledge any of these to be precisely or particula ly mentioned in the Scriptures as the right cause of that Agonie, but if you would needes goe to coniecturing, I said, there might be conceiued so many, and euery one of them more LIKLIE, and godly, then your supposing of Hell paines at that instant in Christs soule. I persist still in the same minde, what change finde you in me? Else where I am Defenc. pa. 33. li. 12. resolute (you say) for some of these causes, and against other some. And yet before I said, all th se interpretations are sound and stand well with the rules of Christian pictie. ] It is more then a penance to be troubled with a trifler, that hath neither eyes to see, nor head to apprehend what is said. When I came to consider of the generall respects in Christ, whence that A∣gonie might arise; as the persons were two, God with whom, and Man for whom Christ delt in that worke of our redemption; so I resolued the cause of Christes Agonie could not proceede, but either from his submission to God, to whose will and hand he must subiect himselfe, if he would ransome man; or from comp ssion of mans miserie, for whom he was willing to lay downe his life. A thi d ground of Christs feare I grant I see none. For that Diuels should torment Christes soule, I leaue that inuention to your deuotion. But doe I determine any particular cause contrarie to my first profes∣sion, when I stand resolute, that from one or both of these fountaines the cause of Christs feare and sorrow must be deriued? If I doe not, then piper-like doe you play with y variablenesse, when you doe not so much as attend that I am resolute in the generall dueties of pietie and charitie, which I ascribe to our Sauiour; though I bee not resolute in any particular cause of his feare at that present, as I at first professed I neither could, nor would be, by reason the Scriptures do not expressely mention any. Againe, what dulnesse is this to say I am resolute against s me of these causes, for that I make two principall heads, whereon the rest depend? Can not your wisedome see, that Christes SVBMISSION to the Maiestie of God sitting in iudgement, and his DEPRICATION of Gods wrath proceede from his religious and humble subiec∣tion to the will and hand of God? As also that his sorrow for the REIECTION of the Iewes, and DISPERSION of his Church, and his LAMENTATION of mans sinne grow from his compassion on mans miserie? And lastly that the VOLVNTA∣RIF DEDICATION of his blood to bee shed for the sinnes of the world, and the SANCTIFICATION OF HIS PERSON to offer the true and eternall sacrifice, partake with both the former respects? Is it a contradiction with you to see many branches on one stemme, many Springs in one well, many members in one bodie? And so childish you are, that you take -meale for egges, and interpretations for ∣ses, and then you crake of my contrarieties, how much I ouer shot my selfe: For where I bring diuers Expositions of Christs words on the Crosse, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee; and say in the end, Serm. pag. 37. li. 33. All these interpretations are so d an stand with the rules of Christian pietie: you in a dreame or drow sinesse (choose which you will) imagine I say, ALL THESE CAVSES of Christes Agonie are sound, an stand well with the rules of Christian pietie; and so contradict my former resolution, as if onely two were sound, and not the rest; where in trueth I neither auo ch the one, nor the other: such conflicts you make with your owne follies, and get the conquest not on my Assertions, but on your owne most foolish ouer-sights. Yet these Defenc. pa. 34. li. 3. & 6. agree not with any circumstance of the Passion, and on of them crosseth and ouerthroweth an other. ] Take first the paines to prooue somewhat, and then challenge your priuiledge to prate at your pleasure; otherwise your word i no warrant for any wise man to depend on. The Scriptures testifie first Christs sorow in the Garden, and then his sweat like blood. His sorow where he saith, Matth. 26. , my s le is euery way (grieued or) afflicted with sorrow euen vnto death. His sweate, after he was comforted by an Angel from heauen, and fell to feruent prayer. So saith Saint Luke; An Angel appeared to him from heauen comforting him. And being in an Agonie he prayed Luk. 22. more earnestly, and his sweate fell on the earth like drops of blood. Now an Agonie doth not properly or necessarily inferre either fainting feare or deadly paine, as you mis∣conceiue; but noteth a contention or intention of bodie or minde whereby wee labour to per∣forme our desire, and striue against the danger which may defeate vs, as in place con∣uenient shall more fully appeare. Where also you shall see that not feare but feruen∣cie in all likelihood was the cause of that bloodie sweate. In the meane time it is plaine that Christ professed he had sundrie causes of his sorrow in the Garden; for hee sayth my soule is on euery side oppressed with sorow. And what vrged him to that a∣gonie or vehemencie of prayer, which S. Luke speaketh of, after he was comforted by an Angell, wherein his sweat ran from him l ke drops of blood, is not yet agreed on, nor any way confirmed by you: But note any of these sixe causes, which I conceiued might induce our Sauiour to this sorrow or sweat; and see whether they haue not di∣rect reference to his passion, and a full coherence ech with other. Howbeit, you re∣ser e that for a fitter place, and so do I. Why then doe I seeme to Defenc. pa. 33. li. 10. refuse them as none of mine, by saying, I shewed not mine owne opinion but the iudgements of the Fathers? ] Nay why seeme you so void of all vn∣derstanding, that you apprehend not so much as vsuall English? Iohn 7. MY doctrine is not MINE (sayth our Sauiour) but his that sent me: will you hence conclude a mani∣fest contradiction in Christ, because he sayth, mine is not mine, but his that sent me. In possessions, that is mine, which is wholly mine and no mans els; and in opinions, that is properly mine, whereof I am the first inuenter and author; howbeit by a larger ex∣tension of the word, that is mine also, wherein I communicate with others, though it be not properly or only mine. Out of this distinction of proper & common, knowen to the very children in Grammar schooles, our Sauiour sayth most truly; My doctrine (that is, the doctrine which I preach, and in that respect is mine) is not mine, is not only mine, nor of my deuising, but his that sent me. This were enough to warrant my words; and yet my speech is somewhat plainer: for I added, not MINE OVVNE opinion, but the iudgements of the Fathers. Now mine owne is that which is properly mine, and wherein no man partaketh with me; and although you might stumble at Mine, yet MINE OVVNE would put you out of doubt. So that here, as elswhere, you bewray the sharpnesse of your quarrelling humor; but if neither you nor your friends could spie any greater faults, than these absurd and ignorant cauils; the Reader will scant trust you hereafter, when you talke of my contrarieties and inconstancies. But how doth this excuse the foulenesse of your mouth in reiecting the Fathers iudgements with irreuerent and disdainfull termes; which was the thing I then reproued in you? If the opinions were onely theirs and not mine, would you the rather reuile them as fond and absurd, because they were wholly theirs, and no way mine? Defenc. pag. 33. l. vlt. The Fathers you say, I call not so. Such I meant and tooke for absurd gatherers, as com∣monly le regard the sound doctrine of the Fathers, but onely admire their faults: whome here I noted by the name of our Contraries. ] Are you so set on shifting and shufling, that you can not forbeare seuen lines but you must needs contradict your selfe, and that so grosly, that euery Carter may controle you? In the seuenteenth line of your three and thirtieth page, you tell me, Pa. 33. li. 17. I am in the best opinion, when I denie these to be mine o∣pinions: and being charged, that insolently you called those iudgements of the Fa∣thers fond and absurd, you answer (that) these your words are Ibid. li. 24. purposely meant of those in these dayes, that delight to vaunt of the Fathers, and chiefly in their errors. Your vnciuill and vnseemely liueries of fond and absurd opinions and senses, must needs belong ei∣ther to the Fathers that vttered them, or to me that cited them. To catch me in a kind of contradiction, as you thought, your selfe acquit me from holding them: For I de∣nie them, you say, and r fuse them as none of mine. On whom then light your fond and absurd speeches, but on the Fathers that first conceiued, and first deliuered those opinions and senses, which you so much d ke and reproch? You meant it not of the Fathers.] You flutter in vaine, to free your selfe from that lime-twig: against your plaine speech no man will admit your secret meaning cleane contrary to your words. You say indeed, Trea. pa. 65. li 25. I know our contraries do fansie other senses of this Text, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me; but the senses of that text alledged out of the Fathers word for word, & the places of the Authors named, when you come after your proud and peremptorie maner to examine and censure; you say, to that which was produced out of Ierome and Chrysostome, Trea. pa. 66. li. 31. which sense is most absurd; and this is too fond to be spoken. To the sense noted out of Athanasius, Austen, and Leo, your answer is; Trea. pa. 67. li. 11. this is no lesse absurd than the former; there is no cause nor likelihood in the world for it. So when the te∣stimonies of Ambrose, Austen, Ierom and Bede were produced, that the reiection of the Iewes might be some cause of Christes sorrow in the Garden; you grosly mistake their words, as if they had expounded Christes complaint on the crosse, and pertly reioyne, Trea pa. 68. li. 3. & 8. this is more fond and absurd than the other; there is no sense nor reason in it. How thinke you Sir? speake you of the men, or of the matter, when you say, this sense is most absurd, this is too fond to be spoken? Could you wrench your words from the mat∣ter to the reporter, which you can not; what gaine you by that? If to alledge these opinions of Fathers, be so fond and absurd, as you say, though I refuse them, as you a∣ ch I did; what was it in the Fathers themselues to profes e and publish those most fond and absurd senses (as you call them) to all ages and Churches, but meere and in∣excusable madnesse? But tie your tongue shorter, lest men thinke you mad, thus to raue at eueriething, be it neuer so learned or aduised, that rangeth not with your er∣roneous fansie. They haue spoken wisely and grauely, and your kicking and win ing at their religious and sober expositions with such scornfull phrases, may discouer your coltish conceits, it can neuer decrea e or craze their credits. I Defenc. pag. 3 . cast a needlesse rebuke vpon you for confounding the causes of the agonie and the com∣plaint together. ] Though all your exceptions to the Fathers expositions of that text, The Defender doth grosly mis∣take the reiecti∣on of the Iewes to be the mea∣ning of Christs complaint on the crosse. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me, be most friuolous and foolish; yet none is more babish than when you mistake the reiection of the Iewes (which I shewed out of Ambrose, Ierom, Austen and Bede might be some cause of Christes sorrow after his last supper) to be the meaning of his complaint on the Crosse: and would needs in a flaunt affirme that ME in those words of Christ (why hast thou forsaken me) doth not signifie my whole Nation; which of my certaine knowledge neuer came into my head, nor euer out of my mouth. For I tooke care to wade no further in expounding them than the Scriptures and Fathers went before me; and howsoeuer his sorrow for them might happily not cease before his death; yet there was no cause why hauing for∣merly prayed his Father to forgiue them, that knew not what they did, he should now call the rest of the perfidious and obstinate Iewes by the name of himselfe. If you stand to vphold this ouersight, you shew your selfe to haue lesse iudgement in main∣teining it, than you had in mistaking it; but you haue stood too long on these irifles, which I thinke to be true: for you trifle indeed, and neither in defence of your selfe, nor disaduantage of me, bring any thing that is materiall. You come therefore to peruse how you haue ignorantly and purposely peruerted my reasons. That the Defenc. pag. 35. true sacrifice for sinne must be indeed BODILY, BLOODY and DEAD, we doubt not; we vnfainedly and heartily embrace it. The Patriarks beleeued it, the Iewes sacrifices of beasts figured it, the New Testament confirmeth it. But what will follow then? ergo Christes bodilie death only and meerely was the whole ransome and price of our sinne? for we must note that this is the very question indeed; this is the point of our controuersie. ] The Defender not able to sup∣port his errours, doth quarrell with the que∣stion. When you can say nothing to support your errours, you beginne to quarrell with the question; as if you had or could prescribe me what I should preach of. What I by warrant of holie Scripture receiued into the contents of Christs crosse, and what I ex∣cluded from the same, is euident by my words; you may not come after and alter the question to your liking. Into the Crosse of Christ I admitted whatsoeuer the Holie ghost witnesseth the Sonne of God suffered either on his crosse, or going to his crosse. My words are plaine, Serm. pag. 8. li. 35. the rest which went b fore, not being excluded as superfluous, but continued and increased by that sharpe and extreme martyrdome which he endured on the crosse. And good reason had I so to doe: for all the paines and griefes of bodie or minde which befell him betweene his last supper and his fastning to the crosse, endu∣red and augmented on the crosse; and so by no meanes might be excluded from his crosse. What things I then excluded from the crosse of Christ, is as manifest by mine owne words; which neither I can hide, nor you may change. These they are: Serm. pag. 8. li. 23. Some men in our dayes stretch (the crosse of Christ) a great deale farther, to the death both of bodie and soule, and vnto the whole paines of the damned in hell: but vpon how iust grounds, when you heare, you m y iudge as you see cause. Then shewing what might be tolerated, if men could therewith be contented, and that I neither refuted those which tooke hell paines hyperbolically for Ibid. li. 29. li 36. great and intolerable paines; nor those that by hell paines vnderstood either Pag 9. li. 1. & 3. a wrestling with the very powers of hell, or trembling at the terrour of Gods vengeance prouoked by our sinnes, so they put no distrust nor doubt in Christes soule of his owne saluation or our redemption, but leaue him firme faith alwayes fixed on God: I repeated againe, what it was I impugned; to wit, that Serm. pag. 9. li. 14. some men in our dayes will no nay, but that Christ on the crosse suffered the selfe same paines in soule, which the damned do in hell, and endured euen the death of the soule. Heere Sir is the question as I first proposed it, I no where alter it, no varie from it: both these, I meane the death of the soule, and the selfe same paines which the damned in hell do suffer, I excluded from the crosse of Christ, and consequently from the worke of our redemption; which I auou∣ched to be perfect and full without either of those additions. To this are all my proofs directed, and from this by your leaue I may not suffer you to wander: Defenc. pa. 35. li. 32. Your meere bodily sufferings without any proper sufferings of the soule take backe to your selfe; I haue no such words, nor make no such doubts; the death of the soule and the selfe same paines which the damned doe suffer, and we should haue suffered, had we not beene re∣deemed, which is the second death or the death of the damned, are the things brought by me in question. Wherefore howsoeuer you will vnderstand my meaning contrarie to my words, because you would shroud your selfe vnder the couert of these wordes MEERE AND PROPER, I must recall all my reasons to those two points to which I first intended them: and whether I speake ambiguously or deceitfully, or change my question, or charge you vniustly that you slip from the question to certaine gene∣rall and doubtfull termes, let the Reader in Gods name iudge. My proofes to my purpose stand sound and good. The true sacrifice for sinne by the Apostles Doctrine hath these three properties in it; it must be BODILY, BLOODY, and DEADLIE; that is, it must haue the bodily and bloody death of the mediator, who must be the Sonne of God. This the Patriarkes belee ed, the Iewish sacrifices prefigured, the new Testament confirmeth. What followeth you aske. Erg Christs bodily death onely and meerely was the whole ransome and price of sinne? Without your termes of proper and meere you are no body. My reason is in sight. The death which the Mediator must dye for the sinnes of the world must be bodily and bloody. The death of the soule, in this life, and the death of the damned after this life (which are the paines of hell) could not be bodily and bloody. Therefore neither of them was the death which the Mediator must or did die for the sinnes of the world. If he dyed neither of those, then he died the death of the body onely, for so much as the Scriptures mention no kinds of death but onely these three, except it be by way of figuratiue speech. Doe you now see what followeth? then what is your answere? Defenc. pa. 35. li. 32. If I meane that the MEERE bodily sufferings of Christ without any proper sufferings of his soule are the intire and whole Ransome for sinne, then you affirme expreslie, there is no peece of reason in these words. ] You are a PROPER and MEERE Gentleman to spott out matters of this importance. I conclude by the Apostles assertion that Christ for the sinnes of the world died nei∣ther the death of the soule, nor the death of the da ed, which is the paines of hell and second death; but ONELY a BODILY death. You reele too and fro, and stum∣ble first at bodily, and then at onely, and in the end say you know not what. If I meane that Christes MEERE BODILY sufferings without any proper su ings of the soule were the whole ransom for sin, then you see no reason in my words.] Thus much reason you may heare in my words, that Christ died neither the death of the Soule, nor the death of the damned, but ONLY a BODILY death, that is the death of the body and none other kind of death. What say you to this? Pag 8. & 14. This is not your Contro∣ ersie, you say; the very question indeede is as you haue set it. ] Haue you a Commis∣sion, when I haue proposed questions which I mind to impugne; to come after me and new set my questions? Acknowledge the death of the soule, and the death of the dam d, which are the true paines of hell, to be no part of Christs sufferings, and we shall soone conclude that Christ died onely a bodily death for the sinnes of the world. But you after your slight and slippery manner, though euen here you deny it very stifly, when you be pressed with reasons or authorities, conuey your selfe pre∣sently to your ambiguous and deceitfull termes of meere bodily sufferings, and the pro∣per sufferings of the soule, and from thence you make your aduantage. But what are meere bodily sufferings? such as haue no communion neither with the sense nor grace of the soule? can a liuing body die a shamefull and cruell death as Christ did and the soule neither like or mislike it, nor so much as feele it? This you inferre vpon the word onely, when I conclude that Christ died a bodily death onely. Defenc. pa. 5. li 36. If the sacrifice (say you) As it is onely bodily and bloudy doe wholy purge sinne ‖ it fol∣loweth that no action or passion of the soule, neither by Sympathie nor any other, I say none at all As being in the soule, was regarded as propitiatorie and meritorious. ] Graunt first Ft pa. 36. l. 2. What is contai∣ned in Christes bodily death. your owne termes to be true, (which are neither my words nor my meaning) that Christs MEERE bodily sufferings without any proper sufferings of the soule were the whole Ransom for sinne; how exclude you the sense, affections, and actions of Christs soule not to be meritorious? Had Christ any sufferings in his body which his soule felt not? and when his soule felt them, did he not patiently, obediently, and willingly en∣dure them for our sakes? Or was not the patience, obedience, and loue of Christ me∣ritorious? How then will it follow, that if Christs sufferings were MEERE BODI∣LY without any proper sufferings of the soule, no affection nor action of Christs soule was meritorious? But you adde f the Sacrifice, As it is onely bodily bloudy and deadly doth wholy purge sinne, th n no action nor passion of the soule was propitiatorie and meritori∣ous. ] If you meane that Christs body as it was onely dead (for that is your word) did without soule or life wholy purge sinne, then indeed your consequent is good, that neither action nor passion of the soule could be propitiatorie, because the soule was not present when the body was dead. But who maketh that blockish Antecedent be∣sides your selfe? Or who euer excluded Christs innocence, obedience, patience, charitie, and digni e from his bodily and bloody sacrifice before you? will you seuer the man∣ner of offering from the thing offered, and call it a perfect and propitiatorie sacrifice? As it was only bodily and bloudy, it had no communion with any action or passion of Christs soule, As being in the soule. ] Why entangle you the Reader with an As and an As of your owne adding, which no where are found in my words? What sense can any wise man pike out of this? The sacrifice, As it is only bodily, excludeth all actions and passions of the soule, As being in the soule. ] Is it so strange a kind of speech to say that Christ died only a bodily death, which so many learned and auncient Fathers haue so frequently v ed before me, that you should bring in your As and your As thus to kicke at it? In death as in death, if thereby you meane the priuation and want of soule and life, there is neither paine, nor sense; and in the body As in the body, if you take the body for a dead corps there is no absolute necessitie of a soule; other∣wise no body could be dead. What then? Had therefore Christs body no soule, nor his death no paine, when he suffered for our sinnes? Or are you of late so souced in Sophistrie, that when you heare of a body you will inferre, there is neither action nor pa sion of the soule in that body, as in a body? or wh n you are told of a man tormen∣ted to death, you will assure vs that in his death, as death, he had neither paine nor sense? All men besides you, conceaue in the sufferings of the body, the soule as the soule must haue the sense and feeling thereof, and is thereby vrged by Gods ordi∣nance to seeke for the cause and ease thereof. Hose. . In their affliction (saith God by his Prophet) they will seeke me. And Dauid, Psal. 82. sill their faces with shame, that the may seeke thy name. And likewise by the suffering of death they vnderstand the paine and sting of death approching, and lastly separating the soule from the body. And therefore Christs sacrifice for sinne though it were only bodily; because no part of Christ died but only the body, yet the soule endured the paine and discerned the cause thereof. And though it were deadly, because it ended in death and was finished by death; yet the actions and affections of Christs soule, as well from her selfe as from his body, at the time of his passion impressed, or stirred, either by the cause, smart, author, or manner of his sufferings were meritorious, and made way for the satisfaction of sinne, which was not accomplished but by that death of Christs body, that God had deter∣mined. Let therefore the Reader iudge how well you impugne my conclusion, that Christ died for our sinnes the death of the body only, and not the death of the soule nor of the damned; and how vainly you vouch, Christs death and sacrifice as they were bodily, had neither paines nor patience, obedience nor charitie, nor any other acti∣on or passion of his soule in them. Defenc. pa. 36. Else-where I see in you manifest contrarietie hereunto; for sundry times you teach that Christ did suffer peculiarly and seuerally some proper punishments, (which I hope were pro∣pitiatorie and meritorious) in his soule, besides his bodily suffering; yea that this was a part of his crosse and an effect of God wrath on his soule, as well as the suffering in his body. I pray thee Christian Reader obserue, that this Discourser plainly and fully here confes eth that I SVNDRY times teach, that Christ BESIDES his bodely sufferings did suffer pe∣culiarly and seuerally some PROPER punishments in his soule; and that this was a part of his Crosse, as well as the sufferings of his bodie. Now iudge whether it be not a meere shift for him to beare thee in hand, that the question betwixt vs is, whether Christs meere bodily sufferings without anie proper sufferings of the soule be all that Christ suffered for our sinnes, and the whole ransom for sinne; or whether that be or can be my mea∣ning as he outfaced thee the next Pag. 35. li. 3 . Page before; the contrary whereof I sundry times teach as he now confesseth. But I crosse my selfe, he thinketh, & write I know not what. Sir Trifler if I contradict my selfe, shew me my words, my writing is extant. If you will be priuie to my meaning against my words, you are a strange if not a sturdie Prophet. But indeede I haue neither meaning nor words sounding that way. I auouch that Christ for our sinnes suffered the death of the body only, and not of the soule; or no death but only the death of the body. Vpon these words, the death of the bodie onlie, if it may be inferred by any reason or learning, ergo, Christs dead bodie depriued of soule and sense was the whole Ransom for our sinnes, for that he meaneth by Christs death: or, ergo no action, nor passion of Christs soule before or on his crosse was meritorious: If I say these conclusions doe necessarily follow out of those words or out of the meaning of them; then I must confes e I am fowly ouershot in my speach. But if these be most ig∣norant and absurd collections from my words, and from theirs that vsed that spe ch before me; then mayest thou see, Christian Reader, what meaning this man hath throughout this booke, purposely to peruert and misconster all that I say, to make thee beleeue I broch some strange and wonderous Doctrine. But shifts l hid but a while, the shame in the end will be his. Defenc. pa. 36. li. 13. How then can that which I sundrie times teach of Christs sufferings in his soule be true if our whole ran om and propitiation be bodily bloudy and deadly, only which is the point here stand on? What contradiction finde you in my words, that Christ might haue and had sufferings in his soule, as feare, sorrow, and affliction of minde and yet died no death, but only a bodilie? Only a bodily death doth not exclude all paines which are not bo∣dily, but all deaths, saue the death of the bodie. Wherefore my conclusion is wh re it was, That the death which the Mediator must suffer for sinne, by the Apostles do∣ctrine must onely be bodily and bloodie; and therefore by no meanes the death of the soule, or of the damned. [ Yet this as not our whole r some you say, nor the whole sacrifice for sinne, the sufferings of his soule must be added vnto it. When I speake of Christes death, I vnderstand that maner and order of his death which the Euangelists describe; for so the Scriptures meane when they speake of Christes death; and from that death I doe not seuer those sufferings of his soule which the Scriptur s mention, because the sharpnesse of that death which his body was to suffer, draue him to the deepe consideration of the cause, why; of the Iudge from whom; and the captiue, for whom he suffered. Christ otherwise had not suffered death as a Redeemer, if he had been ignorant of any of these; or compelled by force to endure the furie of the Iewes: he had power enough to stay their rage, & decline their bloudie hands; yea, to auert or decrease the paines, as he thought good; but because he was to offer himselfe as a willing sacrifice to suffer death to saue vs from the wrath of his Father; he layed aside his owne power, and submitted himselfe wholly to be disposed at his Fathers will, which the Scriptures call his obedience vnto death. When therefore he foresaw and felt how sharpe and painfull that death would be, and was, which he must and did suf∣fer for our sinnes; was it possible he should not fully cast the eyes of his inde vpon the horror of our sinnes, which did so sting him? vpon the fiercenesse of Gods wrath, which did so pursue him though he were his innocent and only sonne? and vpon the terrible vengeance that rested for vs, if he should mislike or ref se to beare the bur∣den of our offences? If any man learned thinke it possible for Christ to suffer the one, and not in spirit most cleerely to see the other, I am content he shall se er the suf∣ferings of Christs soule from the griefe and anguish of his bodily death: but if it be more than absurd so to conceiue; then finde we that the sight and sense of Christes extreame torments in bodie caused and vrged his soule thorowly to beholde these things with feare and sorrow, which in themselues were most fearefull, and could not ch but affect Christes soule deeply and diuersly. As for the whole ransome of our sinne, we shall haue occasion in the next reason more largely to treate of. Defenc. pa. 36. But you haue reasons, you say, to confirme your maine matter; among manie, these two: the first, the Iewish sacrifices shadowing and foreshewing; the second, the sacraments of Chri∣stians testifying and confirming, that the true sacrifice for sinne was bodily and bloudy. Still what trifling is this? doth any in the world denie, that the true sacrifice for sinne was the bo∣die, bloud, and death of the Redeemer? Wherefore the proposition must be, as I did set it in your behalfe: the Iewish sacrifices were shadowes or figures, and our sacraments were signes of our whole and absolute redemption by Christ, I say of the whole and entire propitiatorie sa∣crifice, or els you shrinke and leaue the question. ] When I lacke one to set propositions in my behalfe, I will send to you for helpe: till then spare your paines, except you might reape more thanks. But you must learne to get you plainer termes, or at least more plainly to expound them, if you will needs be a setter of propositions: for what is the WHOLE sacri ice propitiatorie? and what is our WHOLE redemption? By the whole sacrifice meane you the whole person of Christ, that gaue himselfe for vs? or intend you the whole action, whereby he sanctified, submitted, and presented himselfe as a sacrifice of a sweet smell vnto God? or by the whole, vnderstand you all that in Christ was deuoted and deliuered vnto death for the satisfaction of Gods iustice? And so our whole redemption, doe you referre it only to remission of sinnes, as the Apostle doth when he sayth, We haue redemption through Christes bloud, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes? or also to deliuerance from the dominion and infection of sinne, and to the abolishing of all corruption in soule and bodie; which is our whole and absolute redemption? When the powers of heauen shall be shaken, and the Sonne of man come in a cloud with power and great glorie, then Luc. 21. lift vp your heads (sayth Christ) for your redemption draweth neere. Ephes. 4. You are sealed (by the holy Spirit) vnto the day of redemption, sayeth Paul. And Dauid: God shall Psal. 72. redeeme their soules from deceit and violence; that is, he shall deliuer their soul s. The Saints, as the Apo e speaketh, Hebr. 11. were racked, and would admit no redemption to obtaine a better resurrection; where, by redemption he meaneth deliuerance. As Zacharias sayd, God hath Luc. 1. visited and sent redemption to his people; that is, saluation (or deliuerance) from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate vs, to serue him in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life. So that our whole and absolute redemption compriseth all the degrees and steps of our saluation, as iustifica∣tion, sanctification, and glorification; and these though they were merited and ob∣tained for vs by Christes obedience vnto d ath, yet are they performed and accom∣plished by diuers other meanes therewith concurring and thereon depending, as by the grace of his spirit, the working of his power, and glory of his comming. And therefore the words which you haue set in my behalfe, are like their authour; that is, they are ambiguous and quarrellous. The whole propitiatorie sacrifice are words as doubtfull as the other: for since Christ was the Priest, who Heb. 9. by his eternall spirit offered himselfe vnspotted to God, and Eph. 5. gaue him∣selfe for vs to be an offering and sacrifice of a sweet smel vnto God; his innocence and obe∣dience chiefly rested in his soule, & thence sanctified his bodie, which suffered death for the ransome of our sinnes. Though then all things in Christ were holie and ac∣ceptable vnto God, and so sacrifices most meritorious; yet nothing did fully satisfie the iustice of God for sinne, nor make a perfect reconciliation for vs with God, but his obedience vnto death. For that which must satisfie for sinne, must be death; o∣ther ransome for sinne God neither in his wisdome and counsell would, nor in his trueth and iustice could accept, after his will once determined and declared. It was the first wages appointed and denounced by God to sinne: Gene. 2. In the day that thou eat∣est thereof thou shalt die the death; (or certainly thou shalt die;) the doubling of the word noting the inflexibilit e of Gods counsell and iustice. The Apostle witnesseth the same, when he sayth, Rom. 6. The wages of sinne is death. Then as sinne was irreuocab e rewarded with death, so must it necessarily be redeemed by death. Which rule stood so sure, that when the Sonne of God would giue himselfe for vs to redeeme vs, he could not do it (by reason of Gods immutable counsell and decree) but by death. Where∣fore the Apostle calleth him the Hebr. 9. Mediator of the New testament through death for the redemption of transgressions. And where a testament is, there MVST BE (sayth he) the death of the testator. He contenteth not himselfe to say there was, but there must be the death of the testator, before we could be redeemed. A necessitie not simplie binding Gods power, but plainly declaring his counsell to be fixed, and his will reuealed. Since then Christ was to Hebr. 2. taste death for all men, that through death he might destroy him which had power of death, euen the diuell; and deliuer vs who were Rom. 5. reconciled to God by the death of his sonne; the point (which indeed wee both must stand on) is; what death Christ suffered to redeeme vs from sinne, and to reconcile vs vnto God; whether it were the death of the damned, which is the second death; or the death of the soule; or (as I auouch) the death of the bodie only. Other parts of Christes person, and beames of his vertues, and kinds of his sufferings are not to this qu stion, arther than they commended and presented to God Christes death which must ransome our sinnes; but the scope to which all the rest was referred, and the lose which consumma∣ted all the rest, was death; and therefore no sufferings of Christ were parts of the pro∣pitiatorie sacrifice which ransomed sinne, but such as ended in death, or tended to that sorrowfull, shamefull and painfull death of Christ, which by order of Gods iustice was appointed to satisfie for sinne. The fulnesse of which satisfaction consisted in death, and therefore the death and bloud of Christ though they were not the whole sa∣crifice, yet were they the full and perfect ransome and price for sinne; because without them the rest could not preuaile, and to them all the rest was directed. If then you will deale plainly as you pretend, or not forget your duetie to God and his trueth, you must leaue cauilling with the words of the Holy Ghost, and go soberly to consi∣der, not whether any other sufferings, but whether any other death of Christes be mentioned in the Scriptures to ransome our sinnes, besides the death of his bodie. If you finde any other there, professe t in Gods name; if you finde none but only that described or mentioned in the Scriptures, leaue snarling at the depth and bredth of those words which the Spirit of God hath authorized, and learne rather to vnder∣stand them truely, than vainly to oppose against them. In sense and substance there is no difference betwixt these words, the death, bloud, and crosse of Christ; the crosse noting the tree, whereon Christ died a reprochfull and cruell death for vs; and his bloud expressing the maner of his death by sundrie sorts of shedding the same, as by whipping, piercing his head with thornes, boaring his hands and feet to fasten him to the crosse, and hanging him thereon three houres by the sorenesse of his wounds, till his soule departed from his bodie. To make these iarre one with the other, which the holy Ghost had knit together, is the signe of a busie, but not of godly wit; and howsoeuer you and your adherents can flourish with figures of Grammar, you were best take heede that you turne not your eares from the trueth of God. The bodily death which Christ died to ransome our sinnes, the holy Ghost doth note sometimes by his Flesh, sometimes by his Body, sometimes by his Blood and sometimes by his Crosse, and these either ioyned or seuered; and sometimes also by his soule or life laide downe or powred out vnto death for vs. We finde them ioy∣ned, when Paul saith, Coloss 1. It pleased (God) by Christ to reconcile all things to himselfe and to pacifie by the BLOOD of his Crosse through him, both things in earth and things in hea∣uen. And you which in times past were strangers and enemies, hath he now reconciled in the BODY OF HIS FLESH through death. Seuered are they when Peter saith; 1. Pet. 1. You were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ as a Lambe vndefiled; Who Hebr. 9. by his owne blood (saith the Apostle) entered in once into the holyplace, and obtained eternall Redemp∣tion. And so when Iohn saith, 1. Iohn 1. The blood of Iesus Christ clenseth vs from all sinne. As likewife Paul; Ephe. 1. We haue Redemption through his blood, euen the Remission of sinnes. Of his body himselfe saith; Luke 22. This is my body, which is giuen for you; and Iohn 6. my flesh will I giue for the life of the world: so are Hebr. 10. we sanctified by the offering of the body of Iesus Christ once. Likewise of his soule by which the Scripture meaneth his life for that life wholy dependeth vpon the presence of the soule in the body; Iohn 10. My Father loueth me (sayth Christ) because I lay downe my soule (or life.) Matt. 20. The sonne of man came to giue his soule (or life) as a ransome for many. And Esay foreshewed that Christ should diuide the spoyle of (or with) the mightie, Because he Esa. 53. powred out his soule vnto death, which se∣uereth the soule from the body; and so made it an offering for sinne by laying it downe of himselfe, that death might seaze on his body. This then being the maine founda∣tion of the Gospel, which the Apostle receiued, that 1. Co in. 15. Christ died for our sinnes accor∣ding to the Scriptures, the Question still standeth as I first set it, What death Christ died for our sinnes by the witnesse of holy Scriptures, and not what sufferings went before, or what other things ioyned with his death, which is the hole that you would faine hide your selfe in. To that intent, which I set downe, my reasons drawen from the Iewish sacrifices and Christians sacraments did, and doe still stand effectuall. For the olde sacrifices must figure, and the new Sacraments must seale whatsoeuer death in Christ was the full and perfect ransome of our sinnes. But they foreshew and confirme the bodily death of Christ onely; they neither shew not signifie the death of the soule, nor the death of the damned. Therefore the bodily death of Christ onely is the full and perfect ransome of our sinnes: the death of the soule, and the death of the damned, as they serued nothing to our Redemption, so were they not suffered in the soule of Christ. Two cauils you offer against the first part of this reason touching the sacrifices of the fathers before and vnder the law. One that they figured not the whole sacrifice, as neither Christes Deitie, his soule, nor his resurrection: the next that all the sacrifices of the Iewes did not signifie his bodily death, because the Scape goate, which was a sinne offering, was not slaine. Of trifling you talke much, this is more then trifling, it is plaine shifting. Christes deitie could be no part of that sacrifice which suffered for sinne; the diuine Maiestie can not suffer either paine or sorrow. To what ende then come you in with Christes Godhead, when you talke of his suffering for sinne? His soule, you say, was not figured by those sacrifices.] The suffering death in his soule was indeed no way figured by them; but that the mediatour should haue an humane soule to bee separated from his body by death, before hee could make purgation of our sinnes; that was more then figured by those sacrifices. For since not the blood of beasts, but of man, and euen of the Sonne of God made man, was by Gods promise to be shed for our sinnes; It is euident that from life to death he could not come, but by seuering his soule from his body. And consequently he must haue a soule being a man, which must be powred out vnto death, before he could die, euen as the powers of life in bloody sacrifices were parted from their flesh, before they could be offered as sacrifices vnto God. But I Defenc. pa. 36. li. 31. charge you vntruely when I say, you expound your whole and absolute Redempti∣on to be of all the fruites and causes of our Redemption: you haue no such word nor meaning as fruites. ] Your words are our whole and absolute Redemption, and those I say containe the whole course of our saluation euen vnto the last step, which is our glorification, as I haue formerly prooued by Christes owne speech. Againe if the Treati pa. 11. li 30. resurrection of Christ, which is your owne instance, bee a part of that propitiatorie sacrifice, because it was a necessarie consequent, then all the benefites that Christ obtained for vs, or bestowed on vs, must be comprised in that his oblation for sinne. For they are all ne∣cessarie consequents and effects of our Redemption, and depend on these two bran∣ches; his death to free vs from sinne, and his resurrection to raise vs into a new and heauenly life now & for euer. He was Rom. 4. deliuered (to death) for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iustification. From these two heads the Scriptures deriue not onely forgiuenes of sinnes, but newnesse of life on earth, and happinesse of life in heauen. Yet you did not call them fruits. Effects you called them, and what is a ioyfull effect, such as was Christs resurrection, but a fruit? and that as well in Christ as in vs? When the Prophet saith of Christ Esay. 53. he shall see the trauaile of his soule, and be satisfied, what meaneth he but the fruits and effects of Christs labour? when for his obedience to death, God highly exalted him, and gaue him a name aboue euery name, that euery knee should bow vnto him, what is this but a fruite and reward of his humiliation, first, in his owne person, then proportionably in all that be his? Defenc. pa. 37. li. 5. Many of the Iewes sacrifices, yea most of them, did represent and signifie Christs bodily sufferings onely, yet not all. Therefore you may well deny mine assumption, as you did before; and affirme that certaine Iewish Sacrifices set forth the sufferings euen of the soule of Christ, and not of his body only. ] Did I any where say that all the Iewish sacrifices were bloudy? or that all of them did represent Christs death and blood shedding? Could I be ig∣norant, that the Iewes had oblations made onely by fier, as of flower, wine, and incense? and also offerings of the first fruits, and other things dedicated or presented to the Lord for the vse of his tabernacle and Temple? Doth not the Apostle say; Heb. 5. Euery high Priest is ordayned for men to offer GIFTES and SACRIFICES for sinne? Where gifts shew, that things without life were offered as well as liuing beasts and birds which were slaine. As then there was no cause, nor neede I should, so I neuer vsed the word ALL in that case, vnlesse I added liuing or BLOODY Sacrifices. For they by their life lost and blood shed figured the death of Christ Iesus. But this ALL is your adding to my wordes, that you may take occasion to pike some quarrell at them. But you may well deny my assumption, that no sacrifices of the Iewes did figure the suf∣ferings of Christs soule. ] I assumed no such thing, neither did I meddle with the suf∣ferings of Christs soule, vnlesse they were the death of the soule, or the paines of hell, which the Scripture calleth the second death; and I the death of the damned; because none besides the damned die that second death: but you plainly giue me the slip; and conuey your selfe from speaking of the death of the soule or of the death of the dam∣ned, which are the things in Question, to the sufferings of the soule in generall, of which I make no Question. And though your meaning be, vnder the sufferings of the soule to comprise the tormenting of Christs soule by the immediate hand of God with the selfe same paines which the damned do feele in hell; Yet such is your cariage, that eue∣ry where you suppresse your maine intent, and make a faire shew with the sufferings of Christs soule, as if you ment no more, but that Christs soule must needs haue some sufferings proper to it selfe; which you confesse I sundry times teach; and yet you make your Reader beleeue, I euer impugne. You shall doe well to awake out of this slumber and call to minde, that there are no sufferings of Christs soule now in question, but the DEATH of the SOVLE, or of the DAMNED; which you dare not openly auouch, and therefore you plaster them ouer with smoother termes of the sufferings of the soule; to hide your secret mysteries till you meete with itching eares, that will listen more to fansies then to faith. Another peece of skill you shew in this place, to ease your selfe of all proofe, and thinke it enough if you once denie it. For where you affirme that certaine Sacrifices of the Iewes set foorth (those) sufferings of Christs soule, which you meane; and I vtterly denied that any sacrifices of the Iewes did shew the suffering of hell paines in Christs soule, or any other kind of death be∣sides the death of the body only: you take not the paines to make any proofe of that you a rme, but stand in your state, and say you deny my assumption. As if the nega∣tiue being mine, and the affirmatiue yours, you were not by all rules of R ason to prooue your a atiue; and it sufficed me to stand on the negatiue, till you made iust proofe of the contrary. [Here you will say you doe bring proofe for your asser∣tion.] Here indeed you spend three leaues in talking of it as your manner is; how∣beit your word is here, as throughout your writings, the best warrant you offer vs for this cause. But let vs heare your examples and proofes. First, that Defenc. pa. 7 li. 10. sacrifice consisting of two goats, a slaine and a scape-goat. You obiect heere a∣gainst; first, that I abuse the Text. That were a great fault; but let vs view the Text. ] Against your instance of the Scape-goat figuring as you would haue it, the suffe ings My Exceptions to the Defen∣ders instance of the Scape-goat. of Christs soule; I made three exceptions: First, that the Scripture did not call the Scape-goat a Sacrifice for sinne: Secondly, that no proofe was or could be made, that the Scapegoat signified the soule of Christ: Thirdly, that if both those were granted, which were no way proued, the Scape-goat suffering nothing, but being let loose into the wildernesse, did rather inferre that Christes soule was freed from all such sufferings as you would force vpon it. To the last, which is the chiefest, you take the paines to say little; and so giue the Reader to vnderstand, that your bolde as∣sertion is the best foundation of your proofe: for if you can not shew, as you neither doe nor can, that the Scape-goat by the Scriptures suffered any thing; how will you bring it about, that the Scape-goat figured the sufferings of Christes soule? shall no suffering be a figure of suffering? such may your figures be; but the wisdome of God maketh figures for similitude and resemblance to the trueth; and not for contrarie∣tie to it, as you do. The chiefest point then you cleane slide from, and take holde on some words in Moses text, about which you thinke you may wrangle with some more likelihood. The verie expresse w rds of the text, you say, are these: Aaron shall take of the people two goats for a sinne offering. And verie good reason must I bring to frustrate so pl a speech. ] I am farre from bringing any thing to frustrate the Scriptures; but if the Scripture expresse it selfe, I preferre that before your misapplying the words to your will. (Aaron) shal take of the congregation of the children of Israel two goats (for sinne.) So stand the words, if you will needs appeale precisely to the text. Here is a taking (of two goats) and an intent for sinne declared in generall, but the particular maner of v∣sing and ordering either of them according to Gods appointment followeth in di∣stinct and direct w ds. Aaron Leuitic. 16. vers 7. shall take the two goats and make them stand before the Lord at the doore of the Tabernacle. And Aaron shall giue lots vpon both goats, one lot for the Lord and another for the Scape-goat. And Aaron shall make the goat on which the l fell for the Lord to draw neere, and shall make him reddie (or) sacrifice him for sinne. For here is AASA'HV added, which in the Scriptures vsually signifieth to make readie a Sacrifice. And he shall kill the goat that is for sinne, for the people, and bring his bloud with∣in the vai e. In as plaine words as the former be, or any can be, that goat on which the lot fell for the Lord, must be made readie, that is, sacrificed for sinne, of which he spake at first; and that which was the peoples sinne-offering must be slaine, and his blood brought within the vaile. But neither of these agree to the Scape-goat: therefore the Scape∣goat was not the sinne offering for the people, which the Scripture in that place men∣tioneth. Defenc. pa. 37. li. 21. These words (you say) proue not that the Scape-goat was no sinne-offering at all. ] These particular circumstances doe plainly proue, which of the two goats was made the peoples sinne-offering, and so conuince that you inlargc the words of Moses without any iust ground to serue your owne conceit. Two sinne-offerings were not taken from the people, but two goats were taken for sinne, and one of them sacrificed for the people, as was after prescribed and performed; and Aaron commanded for him and his house Leuitic 16. vers. 6. to offer a bullocke for his sinne-offering. So that where the Scrip∣ture mentioneth no moe sinne-offerings for the people but one, neither vseth the word AASA but to one of them; that one was prepared and slaine by Gods com∣mandement as a sinne-offering for the people, where the Scape-goat was preserued aliue, and sent away into the wildernesse, to shew the force of the former sacrifice by carying with it the sinnes of the people. Defenc pag. 37. li. 28. I take a sacrifice and offering in the largest sense, as signifying any consecrated thing gi∣uen to God to appease him for sinne. And such vnbloudie sinne-offerings very manie we shall finde in Moses Law. Wherefore the Scape-goat may be a sinne-offering, though it were not slaine or bloudie. ] That the word Sacrifice may be diuersly taken, and applied to things vnbloudie and ghostly, I haue no doubt: but that one and the same word, in one and the same place, should import both a bloudie and vnbloudie sacrifice for sinne, is a shift of yours without all sense, it hath no shew in the sacred Scriptures. Againe, the sacrifices for sinne, were they bloudie or vnbloudie, which are mentioned in Moses law, and namely in all those places which you quote in your margin; they were all without exception OFFERED to God by FIRE; the things liuing suffered first death by effusion of bloud; the things without life, as flowre, oyle, wine, and such like, were cast into the fire where the bloudie sacrifices were burned; and so without bloud or fire no sacrifice for sinne is appointed in Moses law. Since then the Scape∣goat was neither slaine nor touched with fire, but sent forth aliue into the wildernesse; what do those examples of things vnbloudie, yet offered by fire, helpe you to proue, that the Scape-goat liuing was such a sinne offering as many are found in Moses law? Defenc. pa. 38. li. 13. Can there be any thing in the world more full and strong to prooue that the Scape-goat also was a true sinne-offering, or rather a true part of this whole and entire sinne-offering con∣sisting and being compleat in both these goats, the slaine and the Scape-goat? For as the slaine so the Scape-goat, we see, was CONSECRATED to the Lord, and here OFFERED (to make reconciliation by him) and separated from men, and bar vpon him all the sinnes of the people. ] You be come now from a sinne-offering to a part of a sinne offering; and that you proue, because the Scape-goat was Pag vt supra li. 5. CONSECRATED and OFFERED to make reconciliation by him. All these words are your owne adding to the text; and if you keepe that course, you may proue what you list, if not by the Scriptures, at least by your commentaries vpon the Scriptures. The words of Moses in that verse, which you quote, are those: And the goat (on which the lot fell to be the Scape goa ) shal be Leuitic. 16. vers. 10. brought aliue before the Lord, LECAPPER, to pray ouer him (o to carie away sinne by him) and to send him for the Scape-goat into the desert. You aske whose translation this is. The s that had better skill in the Hebrue tongue than you or I. The ancient translation of the Latine Church hath, vt funda preces super um; to make prayers o∣uer him; which Isychius, Nicolaus de Lyra, and Arias Montanus o follow. Pagnin sayth, ad emundandum per illum, to clense, or cary away sinne by him, which Vatablus in his notes varieth by adrogandum, to pray ouer him. That the Scape-goat was consecra∣ted or offered, there are no such wordes in Moses text; except you meane, that the bringing of the goat before God was the offering of it, and the praying ouer it was the consecrating of it; but these be sillie coniectures to proue the consecration and oblation of a Sacrifice. The Scape-goat therefore was not the halfe sinne-offering of the peo∣ple as you pretend; it was a sensible figure of the acceptance of the former Sacrifice, whose bloud was carried within the vaile, and made a full propitiation for all their sinnes; as much as those Sacrifices could effect. And in token thereof the Priest was willed before their faces by imposing his hands and confessing their iniquities, to let them see, that the Lord remoued all their sinnes out of his sight, as that goat was cari∣ed away from the sight of men into the wildernesse. So that the Scape-goat was no∣thing giuen to God for sinne as you would haue it, but shewed rather a reiection and detestation of sinne by his departure into the desert, and was no sanctified and accep∣ted sacrifice for sinne, as the other was who e bloud did make the purgation of their sinnes, and reconcile them to God by his figuring and their beleeuing in the true and eternall sacrifice for sinne. Was not the Scape-goat then a figure of Christ as well as the slaine goat? ] Though cer∣taine The Scape-goat might in some sort be a figure of Christ. Fathers doe sometimes resemble the Scape-goat to the wicked and reprobate, which is not so wide a wandering from the trueth, as your wresting it to signifie the sufferings of Christes soule; yet neither did I, nor doe I gainsay, but the Scape-goat might in some sort be a figure of Christ, notwithstanding all things in it can not be proportioned to Christ, for so no figure can match him: yet that doth not proue it to be sacrifice for sinne, much lesse to foreshew the sufferings of Christes soule. There were many figures of Christ, yea of Christes death, as the Brasen Serpent, the Rocke in the desert; Sampson, Ionas, and many such, which were no sacirfices; and so might the Scape-goat prefigure either the cause or shame of his death or both, as the slaine goat did the maner and power of his death, and yet be no sinne-offering. Iustine Martyr sayth, The two goats Iustinus in Dial go cum Try one. designed the two commings of Christ; the first when the Elders of the people and Priests laying their hands on him and putting him to death, SENT HIM AVVAY AS THE SCAPEGOAT. The second, when they shall acknowledge him, whom they dishonoured, to be the sacrifice for all repentant sinners. Te ullian is of the same minde: One of the goats Tertul. contra Marcio. li. 3. & aduers. Iudaeos de 2. Christi a uentu. arayed in redde scarlet, aecurfed and spet on, beaten and punched by the people, was cast out of the city into a place of perdition, (thus) marked with ma∣nifest signes of the Lords passion. The other offered for sinne, and giuen for food to the Priests of the Temple, secundae repraesentationis argumenta sign bat, sealed the effects of his second appearing. Theodoret referreth the two goats to the two natures of Christ; the Theodoreti quaesti. in Le∣ it. & si il. Dialogo 3. laine goat to represent the passible nature of his flesh; the Scape-goat to shew the impassible nature of his Diuinitie. Isychius li. 5. in Leuit. 16. Isychius doth the like. Caluine a man of sharpe iudgement, and in some sense a mainteiner of the sufferings of Christes soule, yet doth not applie the Scape-goat as you doe; but either to witnesse the resurrection of Christ, as the slaine goat did dcclare his death; or to shew that Christ was a man deuoted to beare the shame and punishment of sinne for others. There is heere set downe (sayth he) a Caluinus Har∣ o. in 4. li. Mo∣sis in 2 praec pto ex cap. 16 Le∣uitici. doubble way of cleansing sinne. For of the two goats, one was offered for a sacrifice after the maner of the Law, the other was sent forth (aliue) to be vel , as a thing deuoted to destruction for others, or an of-scouring of the people. The truth of either of these figures was exhibited in Christ, because he was the lambe of God, whose slaying abolished the sinnes of the world; and that he might be , (one deuoted or appointed to beare the plague for others;) all beautie was quenched in him, and he reiected of men. There may be brought a more curious speculation, that the sending away of the (Scape-goat) was a figure of Christes resurrection; but I embrace that which is more simple and certaine, that the goat sent away aliue and free was VICE PIACVLI (as a thing deuoted to beare the brunt for others) that by his departure and leading away, the people might be assured their sinnes did vanish, and were caried farre out of sight. So that though the Priest brought one goat aliue for a reconciliation, yet God was not pacified without bloud, quia vis expiationis a sacrificio alterius Hirci pendebat, because the force of cleansing sinne depended on the sacrifice of the other (slaine) goat. Thus haue we manie significations of the Scape-goat referred euen to Christ by old and new writers, and euen by some whom you would seeme most to follow; and yet none of them applieth it to the sufferings of Christes soule. So that your assertion in that behalfe is but your meere imagination, farther from the words of Moses, than their coniectures which you count widest off. But you will proue it by maine might, that shall remoue mountaines before it. It Defenc. pa. 39. li. 4. must needs be then that the (Scape-goate) signified Christ, yea doubtlesse Christ man. For the godhead could be no sinne-offering neither did it make reconciliation for sinne, neither did the Deitie beare our sinnes vpon him properly; all which the Scape-goate did. If it were Christ man, it could not be his body, for his body was slaine bloudily, the Scape-goate was not slaine. It must then be of necessitie (I thinke) the humane MORTALL Soule, which the Scape-goate signified. ] I know not whether you make the Soule of Christ mortall as your words here stand, because he suffered the death of the soule as you imagine, or whether this were the scape of your Printer; but by such demonstrati∣ons as these are, supported with figures and fansies of your owne making, you may prooue what you will. That the Brasen Serpent was a figure of Christs death, Christ himselfe witnesseth. Whence you may inferre after your manner, that Christ had no true flesh nor felt death. For the Brasen Serpent had neither flesh to feele, nor life to loose. So the Lord expresseth, that Matth. 12. Ionas was a figure of his lying in the graue; and yet was Ionas aliue in the Whales belly. May it therefore be concluded that Christ was neuer dead, nor buried, because Ionas indeede was neither? Figures haue a re∣semblance to some things in Christ, not to all; as the brasen Serpent to his fastning on the Crosse, and sauing all that beheld him in faith; Ionas to the time that he lay in his graue, and to the impossibilitie conceaued of his resurrection. So the Scape-goate notwithstanding your must needs be, and could not be, migh signifie the impassible godhead of Christ, as Theodoret, and Isychius affirme, since power to take away sin and to cleanse it, without any suffering for it, is proper to God. It might likewise re∣semble the detestation and hatred the Iewes had of Christ when they cryed, Iohn. 19. away with him, away with him, if the vsage of the people towards the Scape-goate were such as Tertullian describeth; which was to spit at him, punch him, and curse him, as he was caried out of the Citie. And where he went away aliue for all their spites and wrongs, that might declare either his resurrection into life eternall which they could not touch, or else the disposition of his life here not left in the peoples hands, but reserued to his owne power, till he did willingly offer it as a sacrifice vnto God. Am∣brose saith of him. Ambro. de in∣carn dom. Sa∣cramento. ca. 5. Quasi arbiter exuendi suscipiendique corporis, emisit spiritum non amisit. As hauing power in himselfe to lay aside and to take againe his body, he sent foorth his soule, he lost it not. And likewise Eusebius. When Eusebius de∣monst. Euangel. li. 1. ca. 8. no man had power ouer Christs soule he himselfe of his owne accord laid it downe for man. Ibidem li 3. cap. 6. . So (loosed from all force) and resting free, him selfe of him selfe made the departure from his body. This the Scape-goate I say might fi∣gure, as some ancient Fathers auouch, & your reasons to the contrary are but rushes, vnfit to conclude such a cause; considering that no figure agreeth in all things with the truth, for then it should be no figure but the truth, and you collect some small disagreements betweene the figure and the truth.. Againe as you suppose for some petite difference the Scape-goat could not figure the deity, nor body of Christ: so I vpon stronger grounds collect, it could not signi∣fie the proper sufferings of Christs soule, & if your word were of any waight, your selfe auouch that which I entend. Those Trea. pa. 11. li. 24. b asts sacrifices (say you) could not prefigure the immortall and reasonable soule of Christ. ] If that be true which is your owne auerment, how could the Scape-goat which I troe was a beast, as you say a sacrifice, figure the sufferings of Christs soule, which were inward and invisible, as was his soule? Can you so closely conuey contradictions, as in your treatise to tell vs the sacrifices of beasts could not prefigure the immortall soule of Christ, and in your defence to assure vs it must be ofne∣cessitie that the Scape-goat signified the humane soule of Christ? Besides if the Scape∣goat signified Christs soule sent away from his body, for the other goat was first slain; it must of force import Christs death; for without death, his soule was not separated from his body. And so by your vrging that it could not signifie Christs death, you plainly confirme it did signifie Christes death. Thirdly the place whither the Scape∣goat was sent, was the Leuit. 16. vers. 22. Wildernes and a land vnhabitabie. Now the soule of Christ se∣uered from his body, went to heauen as you hold or to Paradise. Is heauen or Para∣dise with you become a wildernes & a land not inhabited? Fourthly the Scape-goat af∣ter he was sent away, did Ibidem. beare vpon him all the sinnes of the people. Dare you say that Christs soule departed from his body did beare or suffer the punishment of the peoples sinnes? Your meaning is but to Defenc. pa 40. li. 2. shew what you thinke to be indeed most probable and likely, knowing that yet some such matter, as you ayme at, they doe signifie without Que∣stion. ] After it must be of necessitie, come you now with probabilitie? and is your doubtles so soone turned into likelihood? The Reader is well holpen vp to rest on your word, and to beleeue SOME SVCH MATTER AS YOV AYME AT. But backe to the matter indeed, and then your Reader shall finde euen by your owne confession, be∣sides my proofes, that you do but ayme at these things vpon the bare surmise of your own braine; and that you can shew no sacrifices of the Iewes which did figure the pro∣per sufferings of Christs foule; much lesse the death of his soule which is the matter that we differ about, howsoeuer you would now loose your necke out of the coller. We Defenc. pa. 38 li. 21. reade of other sacrifices consisting of sacrifices of sundry and diuers sorts. The bloody sacrifice had conioyned together with it, the vnbloody sacrifice of the meate offering, and an What salt, flow∣er, le, & wine, added to the Iewes sacrifices ight signifie. other of the drinke offering. Which may very likely represent vnto vs the sundry and diuers kinds of Christs meritorious sufferings in his life time and at his death. ] You coniecture still so farre from truth, that few men will regard your coniecturall likelihoods. Why Salt, Flower, Oyle and Wine, were added to the carnall sacrifices of the Iewes; much may be ghessed, litle can be prooued. They might well serue to make the sacrifice the sweeter, and the fuller, and so resemble the fragrancie and sufficiencie of Christs death; but what reason you haue to make Christes life to be thought his death; and his merits all one with his sufferings; and things without sense or life to figure the sufferings of his soule, and you know not what besides; I doe not see, but onely that your will is your best weapon, when you be put to the push of any proofe. Yea in the same side where you reiect the iudgement of Cyrill, Ambrose, and Bede, as Pag. 38. wide coniectures and palpable mistakings, you come in with your foolish supposals, and offer them to all the godly as matters of good moment, onely because you fansie them. But mocke not your Reader with may, and must as you thinke; your thoughts must be wiser and neerer the truth before a meane man will regard them. Pag. 38. li. vl. Who but I (you say) would defend these palpable mistakings of the auncients, and not see the Pag. 39. li. 1. expresse text against them? ] Nay who but you would so peremptorily trample vpon the credits of such men, with a proud presumption of the text before you did better examine it? Is it so repugnant to the Scriptures as you pretend, to say the wic∣ked are a Redemption or propitiation for the godly, which in Moses the Scape-goate is said to be for the people? Salomon saith, Pro. 21. v. 1 . COPHER LAZADDIC RASHAA a Redemption for the iust (shall) the wicked (be,) and the transgressour for the righteous. Where not onely the same sense, but the same word is found which Moses vseth, when he saith, the Scape-goate shall be Leuit. 16. presented aliue before the Lord LECAPPE vers. 0. AALAV, to make (Redemption or reconciliation) by him. So God by Esay said, Esa 43. v. 30. I gaue Egypt CAPHRECA to be thy Redemption; that is to be plagued for thee, that thou mightest scape. And so God often layeth the burden on the wicked, that should fall on the righteous, and excuseth the one by the punishment of the other, as he did ty∣pically on the Scape-goate & truely on Christ for all the sinnes of the people. Where∣fore it was no such ouersight in Cyrill, Ambroses and B de to resemble the Scape∣goate to the wicked, when they are punished to spa the godly as you would make it, their coniectures are farre more considerate then yours; the Sauiour of the world was Mark. 15. counted among the wicked, and vsed in shew as the wicked are, when he bare our sinnes in his body, and tooke our burden on him. That which M nster reporteth out of all the Rabines, and especially out of Rabi Salom: Kimchi, and Aben Ezra, that the Scape-goate was Munst. An∣notat. in Leui∣tic. ca. 16. sent to a strong hill in the desert, and there torne in peeces before he could touch the middle of the hill; I leaue to each mans liking, because the Scripture noteth no such thing; Howbeit Tertullian saith, Tertull. contra Marcio. li. 3. extra ciuitatem abijciebatur in per∣ditionem, the Scape-goate was cast out of the Citie into perdition; And Iustine Martyr in his Dialogue with Triphon the Iew, saith, the Priests and Elders sent Christ away as the Scape-goate, laying their hands on him, and doing him to death. The Defenc. pa. 40. li. 8. very like are your three reasons brought to shew that the Holocaust can not signifie the sufferings of whole Christ, and therefore not of his soule any way. ] Whether the Holo∣caust What the Holo∣caust did sig∣nifie. were a figure of Christes sacrifice, or did represent the ioynt sufferings of the whole manhood of Christ, neither of these is in question betwixt vs. You tooke vp∣on you to shew, that the Iewes by their sacrifices were directed to beleeue the suffe∣ring of that which you call hell paines in the soule of Christ, when he offered him∣selfe for our sinnes. That was the point which I denied. The shedding of Christes bloud vnto death, the Apostle in the ninth and tenth Chapters to the Hebrewes, doeth plainely deduce from those bloudie sacrifices of the Iewes; other sufferings of Christ from their sacrifices he doth not deriue. The Holocaust, you replied, was Trea. pa. 13. li. 18. eue∣ry whit chopt in peeces, and altogether put into the fire and burnt. I answered this was done after the death of the sacrifice, whose dead body was wholly consumed to ashes with one and the selfe same sire; and therefore this could not be referred to the proper sufferings of Christs soule; which could not suffer any thing after the death of the body, much lesse be wholly consumed with any sufferings common to the body, since the body of Christ it selfe neither was, nor could be consumed with any corruption or affliction. Besides that you your self in the leafe before made a plaine resolution, that those Trea. pa. 11. li. 24. Sa∣crifices of beasts, could not prefigure the immortall and reasonable soule of Christ. How then could the dead bodies of those beasts cut in peeces and quite consumed with fire, represent the inward and proper sufferings of the soule? Is there Defen. pa. 40. li. 13. any Similitude concurring in all points and circumstances with the thing signi∣fied? ] If it did, it were the trueth it selfe, and not a figure thereof. And therefore all your illations that the Scape-goate, which in some things disagreed from the Deitie and body of Christ, could signifie neither, were vaine and idle. It sufficeth in figures warranted by the word of God, that one principall action or circumstance bee com∣mon to both, in how many things so euer they bee otherwise different. But where is your warrant in the Scriptures, that the burning of sacrifices when they were dead, sig∣nified the sufferings of Christes soule? Shew that, and then wee will soone dispence with the rest of your rules and my reasons also. Figures expressed in the word of God had no doubt their similitude to the trueth, though we perhaps see it not; and if any one point of resemblance be ratified by Gods authoritie, that may and must content vs. But will you of your owne head make figures to fit your fansies, and then claime the same prerogatiue, which God himselfe hath? What if many figures in the Law had as great disparagement as you call it, To the things signified, as the burning of the Holo∣caust to the sufferings of Christes soule? Is that a president for you to deuise and esta∣blish what figures please you, and thence to raise platformes for strange and newe doctrine? The Defenc pa. 40. li. 20. bodies of beastes first sl ine were after caried out of the host. Now these signified Christs going out of Ierusalem to be slaine, but being yet aliue. The burning of the beasts af∣ter they were dead, was a sacrifice of a sweete sauour vnto God, which in trueth is Christs very death, and nothing done by him afterward, whereby Gods anger is fully pacified toward vs. ] In figuratiue and bloudie sacrifices could you distinguish the suffering, which was proper to the liuing creature that was offered, from the offering which was peculiar to the Priest, and from the accepting which belonged onely vnto God, you would not thus iumble them together both in the figures signifying, and in the thing signi∣fied. That the bloud of the carnall sacrifices slaine vnder the Lawe, did foreshew the bloudshedding and death of Christ Iesus for the sinnes of the world, the Apostle to the Hebrewes is very plaine, not onely calling him amongst other things , y Hebr. 10. The shadow of good things to come, and Heb. 9. , a similitude for the time present, but also making diuers comparisons betwixt them and the bloud of Christ, and proouing by the first testament that the second must be ratified with bloud and death. By which as by figures were sufficiently testified, the ioynt sufferings of the whole manhood of Christ euen vnto death. For the powers of ife and sense in those creatures that had their bloud shed vntodeath, naturally fee∣ling and shewing in their kinde the paines and terrour of death, were fi test to witnesse to all the beholders that the violent and bloudie death of the Messias, which hee would vndertake for the ransome of their sinnes, should bee grieuous and painefull euen to his soule. And that being made so manifest to all mens eyes by the death of the liuing sacrifices, what needed the burning of the same after it was dead and sense∣lesse, obscurely to intimate if not falsely, that the fire of affliction as you would haue it, should consume the Messias? God had therefore another meaning, as I take it, in commanding ech sacrifice after it was slaine, to be offered to him by fire. Forwhere of all creatures subiect to mans sight and sense, fire was the fittest for the light, heate, force, and motion thereof to designe vnto the people, the brightnesse of Gods glorie, the zeale of his holinesse the grace of his Spirit, and seate of his habitation in the heauens; God gaue the Iewes fire from heauen to burne perpetually on his Altar; which did teach them with what cleannesse of hands and feruentnesse of heart, the things which hee re∣quired, should bee offered vnto him; and did separate the sacrifices dedicated vnto God from all prophane abuse and humane vse; and made them ascend towardes the place of his glorious presence, that he might accept them with fauour, and be pleased with them. All which significations of heauenly fire were most perfectly accompli∣shed in the sacrifice of Christ Iesus. For neuer man nor Angel offered vnto God any seruice with like puritie and charitie, as the Lord Iesus offered himselfe to his Fathers will; and that his oblation did not onely clense his body from all corruption of mor∣talitie and infirmitie, as appeared by his resurrection; but pearced the heauens with admirable celeritie and efficacie, and preuailed in the presence of God to bee a sweete smelling sauour for all the sonnes of God. Some of these things you seeme to acknowledge, As fire to signifie the Defen. pa. 42. li. 8. Acceptation of Christs death, in that it was a sacrifice of a sweete sauour ascending vp to God. What What fire did signifie in sa∣crifices. reason then haue you that fire should note the wrath of God powred out on Christes soule and body before he died? Shall one and the same fire in one and the same sacri∣fice import both gracious acceptance with God, and terrible vengeance from God? These be contraries in mine eyes, whatsoeuer they be in yours. That fire in sa∣crifices did shew Gods fauour and not his anger, the sacrifices of Iudges 6. Gedeon, 2. Chron. 7. Salomon, and 2. Kings 18. Elias, doe plainly prooue, which God with fire from heauen consumed, not in token of any displeasure against them, or dislike of their offerings, but in signe of ve∣ry fauorable acceptations both of their persons and sacrifices. Euen so at the first of∣ferings of Aaron Leuit. 9. the glory of the Lord appeared to all the people and there came a fire from the Lord, and consumed the burnt offering vpon the Altar; which when all the people saw, they gaue a shout for ioy and fell on their faces. This fire descending from God and con∣suming that sacrifice, God commaunded to keepe Leuit. 6. vers. 12. 13. burning for euer on his Altar, and none might approch to him with any other fire in incense or offering: in so much that when Nadab and Abihu the sonnes of Aaron tooke strange ire to offer before the Lord, and not of that which alwaies burned on the Altar, God Leuit. 10. destroyed them with fire. The fire then which consumed the sacrifices of the Iewes was miraculously deli∣uered them by God, and ioyfully receaued of all the people, and therefore did not argue to them any wrath or vengeance on their sacrifices, but rather the fauour and good liking of God, which the Scripture noteth by the sweete odour of the sacrifice. As when Noah made his Genes. 8. burnt offerings to ascend ( by fire ) the Scripture saith, the Lord smelled a sauour of rest, that is, he shewed himselfe to be appeased, and his anger to rest. So when Aaron and his sonnes were to be consecrated Priests, God said to Moses, Exod 29. Thou shalt make to smell, (by fier) (that is, thou shalt burne) the whole Ram, as a burnt offering; it shall be to the Lord a sauour of rest: that is a pleasing sacrifice. And for that cause God willed the Iewes in their peace offerings, whereby they gaue thanks for their safetie and prosperitie, to vse fire; and saith of it, Leuit. 3. v. 5. ISSHE, this burning by fire, (or this sacrifice made by fire) is a sauour of rest vnto the Lord. And so in incense, which Saint Iohn resembleth to the Reuel. 8. prayers of the Saints, fire was likewise required, to teach them, that their prayers went vp before God as the smoke of sweete odours, and were ac∣cepted of him. Then not affliction or indignation on the Sacrifice was declared by the fire which God commaunded to be vsed in all kinds of sacrifices, but rather an ascending vp to the presence of God, and an accepting thereof in the sight of God, which is farre from your suffering of hell paines in the soule of Christ, for which you bable so much in both your bookes. But the Apostle sayth, as the bodies of beasts were burnt without the campe, so Christ Christs suffe∣ring without the gate of the Citie. suffered without the gate. ] Were it granted, that fire in Sacrifices did signifie probation or affliction, which is no way proued; you are no whit the neerer to your suffering of hell paines in the soule of Christ. For the bodies of beasts, sayth the Apostle, were burnt, which can by no pretense of these wordes be stretched farder than the afflictions of Christes bodie, when he was carried to be crucified without the gate. And the chop∣ping of the holocaust in pieces, that it might the more conueniently be layed on the wood to burne, maketh as slender proofe, that Christes soule suffered the paines of hell, notwithstanding your graue deuice, that Christes soule was chopt in pieces, and not his bodie; which conceits of yours, declare your follie, but helpe not your cause. Those Sacrifices whereof part was burnt by fire, and the rest reserued for the Priest, and sometimes for the owner that brought them to feast before the Lord, had their bloud shed at the doore of the Tabernacle as well as the other, and so resembled the death of Christ no lesse than the other, though God would haue no part of the one to be eaten by the Priests or people, as the other were, but to be wholly consumed by fire, because they were wholly reserued or dedicated vnto him. And this the A∣postle respecteth in that comparison which he maketh of the bodies of beasts burnt without the campe, whereof the Priests that serued in the Tabernacle could not be par∣takers. They were consumed by fire, because the Priests should not eat thereof; to foreshew, as the Apostle noteth, that such as were addicted to the seruice and cere∣monies of the Law and the outward Temple, could not be partakers of the trueth, which is in Christ, except they did leaue those elements of the Law, which seemed so glorious in their eyes; and followed Christ out of the gate, bearing his reproch; whose bloud was most holy and most sufficient to sanctifie the people, though hee were cast out of the citie to suffer as a malefactour and wicked person. Neither were the dead bodies of those beasts consumed by fire out of the campe, to make them sa∣crifices vnto God; for then must they haue beene burnt on the Altar, which was at the doore of the Tabernacle of the Congregation within the citie, as the holocausts were; but after they were slaine before the doore of that Tabernacle, and their bloud brought and sprinckled on the hornes of the Altar of incense, and before the vaile of the Sanctuarie, and their fat burned on the Altar of burnt offerings in the Court; then was the rest caried out of the campe to be consumed with fire, that no man might eat thereof. The place whither, and the purpose why the dead bodies of those beasts were carried forth from the vse of the Priests, are touched by the Apostle in the thir∣teenth to the Hebrues; but the maner of burning them after their bloud was sprinc∣kled, and their fat offered vnto God vpon his Altar by sacred fire, he no way compa∣reth with the sufferings of Christes bodie, much lesse of his soule, neither of which was consumed in Christes passion without the gate as their bodies were by fire with∣out the campe. For the fire of probation and affliction by the witnesse of holy Scrip∣ture, consumeth only the wicked; which are as drosse and Esa. 5. v. 24. Nah. 1. v. 10. 1. Co inth. 3. stubble before it; it con∣sumeth not the godly, but clenseth them, and maketh them pure as Pro. 17. v. 3. Sap. 6. v. 3. Eccles. 2. v. 5. golde tried in the fornace, yea 1. Pet. 1. much more precious than gold tried with fire. So that my first and second exceptions stand good for ought you haue proued to the contrarie. No Scripture doth warrant, that fire in Sacrifices did signifie the tor∣ments of Christs bodie, much lesse the proper sufferings of Christes soule, least of all the paines of the damned; but rather, as I haue shewed, the perfection and puritie of Christs sacrifice before God, and the acceptation thereof with God; which are things farre distant from your deuice. As also that Christes bodie or soule were wholly con∣sumed by any affliction when he suffered for our sinnes; this hath neither ground in the word of God, nor trueth in it selfe. Which reason you cunningly skip, and say, my Def. pag. 41. second exception is also nothing. What mine exceptions were, my words are plaine. Conclus. pa. 236. li 30. Why the burning of the holocaust should signifie Christs affliction on the crosse either in body or in soule, I see no proofe made by this Confuter; and why they should not resemble Christs afflictions before death, these two reasons moue me: First it was burnt after it was dead; next it was wholly consumed by fire: neither of which can accord with Christes sufferings on the crosse. This was, as all men may see, my second exception, and not that which you subiect in place thereof. That indeed sheweth how carelesly you concluded against your selfe. For where you make such a stirre for the PROPER sufferings of the soule of Christ, when you come to exemplifie them but in a figure, you bring the burning of the bodie of the holocaust, which either wholly excludeth the sufferings of the soule, or admitteth none but those that were also common to the bodie of Christ, and so your PROPER sufferings of Christes soule are cleane without your owne exam∣ple. But now you amend the matter, and plainly affirme, that Defenc. pag. 40. li. 37. one and the same tor∣ment afflicted Christes whole manhood by sympathie. ] Looke better to your words, Sir Trifler, another time. If it were common to the bodie, how was it proper to the soule? If it were proper to the soule, how was it common to the bodie? You haue shifts enow to saue all this: for Defenc. pa. 42. li. 1. according to the proportion of the holocaust, so WHOLE Christ, you say, and then his verie soule CHIEFLY was AS IT VVERE chopt into pieces, and AS IT VVERE quite consumed in his firie sorrowes. ] A learned & The Defenders aine shifts. wittie answere very like, as it were, to your selfe. To proue the proper sufferings of the soule, you proportion out the sufferings of the whole man, which are common to bodie and soule; and these because they are chiefly in the soule, you make proper vnto the soule. By that reason all the sufferings of the bodie are proper likewise to the soule; because the sense of them is chiefly, if not onely in the soule. But what will you not say, that speaking both monstrously and falsely in your firie humor, salue it all with as it were? The soule of Christ, you say, was AS IT VVERE chopt in pieces, and as it were quite consumed; and so in effect, when your words, which should be proper and positiue in points of faith, are absurd and senselesse, you imagine they may be as it were like to be true. Did you professe to speake figuratiuely and not properly, as in positi∣ons of Religion you ought to do, many phrases might be borne withall which other∣wise are intolerable: but when your assertions are out of all square and trueth; then to qualifie them with as it were (which is a shift, though verie shamefull, thorowout your booke in the greatest matters in question) and still to defend them as principles of Christian religion; this is fit for no man but for him that maketh a Maygame of p etie to support the madnesse of his fansie. With like learning you cure the contrarietie that you readily ranne into, whiles ouer egerly you pursued your owne purposes forgetting what fell from you in other places. For where in your Treatise for an aduantage you sayd, Trea. pa. 11. those sacrifices (of beasts) could not prefigure the immortall and reasonable soule of Christ; and in your De∣fence you resolutely inferre, Defenc. pa. 39. li. 11. It must then be of necessitie (I thinke) the humane soule of Christ, which the Scape-goat signified, which was a true sinne-offering: This you can FVL EASILY reconcile, and that without trifling. In the former place you meant generally and for the most part, but not alwayes, nor altogether: Againe, the Scape-goat and the holocaust do not, in respect as they are bodily things, represent the soule of Christ or any matter pertain∣ing to it; but the particular vsage and maner of action about them, doth liuely represent the sufferings of Christes soule. ] This indeed is not trifling, but plaine tumbling in the mire. Your words were: those sacrifices (of beasts) could not prefigure the immortall and reasonable soule of Christ. Your new correction is now, you meant they did not AL∣VV AIHS nor ALTOGETHER represent meere bodily sufferings. What is your new addition but a cleere confession, that your former words were false? For if those sacrificcs did not alwayes nor altogether represent Christs bodily sufferings, then some∣times they prefigured the sufferings of his soule. But you sayd, they were Trea. pa. 11. li. 9. & 12. ALTO∣GETHER VNFIT for those inward and inuisible things, NEITHER HAD THEY ANIE RESEMBLANCE TOGETHER. Altogether vnfit, and not altogether vnfit to represent the sufferings of the soules; as also not any resemblance and some resemblance are contradictions in our countrey, whatsoeuer they be in yours. But since you can not alwayes nor altogether hit the trueth, you will now goe to it with respects. The Scape-goat and the holocaust, you say, doe not in that respect as they are bodily things, represent the soule of Christ, or any matter pertaining to it. ] In that re∣spect as they are bodily things without any sacred action or passion, they figure nei∣ther bodie nor soule of Christ, nor are indeed any figures at all. But you speake of sa∣crifices of beasts, which can not beare that name in the Scriptures without some sacred action and passion ordeined by God to praefigure the sacrifice of his Sonne. And where euery thing which was appointed of God to foreshew the comming and dy∣ing of his Sonne, was a figure of him, not in respect of any bodily matter or forme, (for so all things of that kinde should naturally haue beene figures of Christ, and not by gods appointment, which is most absurd and false:) but in regard of some holie, rare, or beneficiall action, passion, or propertie authorized by God to represent the power and vertue of Christ appearing in our flesh; you like a deepe Diuine seuer from those sacrifices all sacred actions and passions ordained by God, to make them both sa∣crifices and figures, and then tell vs that in respect of their earthly and bodily sub∣stance they were no figures of Christes soule. When you sayd Sacrifices, you inclu∣ded those sacred actions and passions, which made them sacrifices and figures of Christes sacrifice; and therefore to exclude them againe with an idle respect, is a silly and emptie refuge. If vnder bodily things you comprise externall and sensible acti∣ons and passions; then is it euident, that by sensible signes in those Sacrifices God did alwayes and altogether declare the ioynt sufferings of Christ for the sinnes of the world, but not the paines of hell nor the death of the soule, from which you alwayes and altogether slide, vnder pretence of my grosse vttering it, though I vtter it in the selfe-same words and parts which the Scripture doth. But how considerate are you, when you vouch, that the Trea. pa. 41. Scape-goat representeth not Christes soule, vnlesse onely in re∣spect of the escaping of it, when the other goat died; & yet not the body of the holocaust, but the vtter consuming by sire of the whole, signifieth the sufferings of whole Christ? What agree∣ment hath ESCAPING with VTTER CONSVMING? and yet you make both these actions to be figures of the sufferings of Christes soule. So that Christes soule by your refined figures did escape free from death, and not escape free from death (for you defend that Christ died the death of the soule) and was vtterly consumed, and could not be consumed; but as it were escaped, and yet escaped not, and was at it were vtterly consumed, and yet could no way be consumed, but escaped free and vntou∣ched as the Scape-goat did. Such is your settlednesse, that yea and no, with you, are as it were all one. That fire did signifie the Defenc. pag. 42. li 9. incorruption of Christes flesh after death, is very hard and farre fetcht. Sacrifices had their respect to Christes death, not to any thing further or after∣wards. ] All things are farre fetcht with you, that come not from the whirlepoole of your owne head. It is the iudgement of S. Austen and other learned Fathers, which you so lightly esteeme. Aug. contra aust. Man . li. 22. ca. 17. The same substance of the bodie shall be changed into an heauenly qualitie; quod ignis in sacrificio significabat, velut absorbens mortem in victoriam; which fire in sacrifice signified, as it were swallowing vp death in victorie. Whom Bede disdaineth not to follow. eda. qu st. super Leuit. cap. 3. Ignis in sacrificio id significabat, velut absorbens mortem in victoriam. Fire in sacrifice did signifie victorie euen swallowing vp death. Cyril is of the same minde. Cyrillin Le∣uit. li. 1. Agreeably (to the sacrifices) did heauenly fire consume all things that were done by our Sauiour in the bodie, and restored them all neerer to the nature of his Diuinitie: for rising from the dead, he ascended to heauen: his passage to which place the nature of fire doth shew. To farder sufferings after Christes death no sacrifice had respect, because there nei∣ther were any, nor needed any; but to the efficacie and glorie consequent to Christes death, the fire in sacrifices had respect, as these Fathers affirme. Against whom though you euery where oppose the worm-eaten warrant of your owne words, I trust you will somewhat relent to the Apostles authoritie; who telleth you, that the Hebr. 9. v. 7. high Priests going int the most holy place with the blood of the sacrifice once euery yeere, signi∣fied Christes Vers. 8. 12. 24. entring the heauens with his owne blood; which I hope was after both his death and his resurrection. As for an Defenc. pag. 42. li. 12. other sense out of Austen, that it should signifie our perfection and burning cha∣ritie, it can not be true: for the holocaust-sacrifice out of question primarily signified the per∣son of Christ, not ours. Also you both here do seeme to double, vnderstanding by the holocaust both incorruption after death, and a perfect burning loue in vs now in this life; which things are farre distant, and can not stand together. ] You are so giddie, that you dislike euerie thing; and so hastie, that you conceiue nothing right. S. Austen sayth indeed that fire in the holocaust may note the feruent esse of charitie, and brightnesse of immorta∣litie, which are all one with perfection and incorruption. What fault finde you with this? The holocaust, you say, signified primarily the person of Christ, not ours. Doth S. Austen denie that? It suff ceth for the trueth of his wordes, that those sacrifices did principally point out Christes sufferings, grace, and glorie; and consequently ours. For as we haue Phil. 3. fellowship with his afflictions, and are conformed vnto his death; so shall we be partakers of his perfection and incorruption, and be Rom. 8. fashioned to (his) image. Rom. 8. ; If we suffer as he did (sayth Paul) that we may be glorified as he was; not presuming an equalitie with him, but promising a conformitie to him. The Sacrifices then which (as you grant) primarily signified the person, passi∣on and perfection of Christ, did secondly note and teach our dying to sinne, our ri∣sing againe in glorie and appearing before him in perfect holinesse; which in this life we endeuour but can not attaine to the full, till by death we be freed from sinne. The bearing of Christs Image is enough to iustifie Saint Austens speech. For he neither saith, that the holocaust did primarily signifie the members of Christ, nor that men could haue perfection of charitie in this life: but when Christ shall present vs righte∣ous and glorious vnto his Father, then shall he offer vs as holocausts vnto God. And yet in the meane while what hindereth Saint Austen to exhort vs, that the Diuine fire of Gods wisedome and grace may wholy inflame vs, and euen consume vs? Who but a moth of your mould would giue Saint Austen the l e twice in two lines for so speaking, and in the third line after charge him with doubling, as if Christs puritie in this life and glorie after this life could not stand together? or the perfection of Gods Saints here (such as it is, which the Scripture so Mat. 5. v. 48. Col 4. v 12. I m. 1. v. 4. calleth) were not coherent with that incorruption, which they shall haue there? The one is not the other, but the one is so consequent to the other, that without holines in earth no man shall euer enioy happinesse in heauen. And to both doth the imitation of Christ, and signification of fire in the holocaust direct vs. Comming to the next reason you Defenc. pag. 42. reprooued me for saying, Sacraments are earthly Elements, they can not set out the spirituall and uisible effects in Christ. ] There was iust cause I should tell you, that this your asse tion did mainly crosse the very nature and definition of a Sacrament. For Sacraments are visible signes of inuisible graces; that is, of the spirituall effects of Christs power and grace abiding in him, and yet working in vs. Wherein did I wrong you? you ment they Defenc. pag. 43. li. 1. vsually represent not spi∣rituall and in sible effects or acts in Christ him selfe, but onely the externall and visible parts of his passion. ] The two Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptisme and the Lords Supper; doe they represent onely the externall and visible parts of Christs passion? Doth Baptisme shew no more in Christ, but that actuall and substantiall water ranne out of his side after he was dead? Is this the whole signification and rep esentation that bap∣tisme offereth vnto vs? Surely you must leaue Catechising and learne to be catechi∣sed; if this be all your skill in Sacraments. The bread and wine on the Lords table, besides the reference which they haue to the body of Christ broken and his blood shed, doe they not plainly shew the flesh of Christ is meate, and his blood drinke nourishing our soules to euerlasting life, as the elements support and maintaine the life of the body? Water in Baptisme doth it not declare the power of Christs death washing our soules, and of his spirit renuing our minds? These you say are Defenc. pag. 42. li. 37. spirituall effects wrought in vs not in Christ. Power to clense, quicken, nourish, and strengthen to eternall life, is that Christs or ours? We indeede are the persons that are clensed, quickened, nourished and strengthened; but the force and grace working these things in vs, is Christs and not ours. We receiue it as flowing from the fountaine, but it na∣turally springeth in him, and from thence is deriued to vs. The Sacraments then teach vs, that the fulnesse of power and grace dwelleth in Christ really and truely; which he is content shall worke in vs, but neuer leaue him. The water washing, the bread nourishing, the wine comforting, note no power in vs to do any of these things; it is euident impietie so to thinke or say; onely they assure vs, that as Christ the true owner of all these things, by his obedience vnto death, was made the onely disposer of them; so he will performe the couenant with vs, which the Sacraments doe seale vnto vs; and that is the couenant of mercie and grace in this life, and of glorie in the next; which the Sacraments could not seale, except they did signifie those gifts and effects to be actiuely and originally in the giuer; as they are passiuely in the Re∣ceiuers. Defenc. pag. 42. li. 38. VSVALLY Sacraments doe not represent spirituall effects or actes in Christ. ] When text and trueth faile you, your fashion is to flie to phrases; and so still to say Sacraments doe constantly and continually sig∣nifie and repre∣sent the same. somewhat, though it want both learning and vnderstanding. For example, Sacra∣ments (you say) doe not VSVALLY represent spirituall effects or acts in Christ. Did you speake of nature, which often faileth; or of men, who change their minds, vsuall and vnusuall might serue for some purpose; but what is this to Sacraments? they con∣stantly and continually keepe the same order in their significations and representati∣ons; so that vsuall and vnusuall in them are all one. The nature of the Element is still the same; the action prescribed may not be varied; the promise annexed neuer faileth on Gods part. So that what any Sacrament once resembleth or signifieth, it alwayes expresseth and obserueth the same. Will you diuert your wordes to diuers Sacra∣ments, and make that vsuall to one, which is vnusuall to another? This which you vsually exclude from Sacraments, is common to both the Sacraments of the New Te∣stament of which we reason; and being common to them both, as I haue shewed, to signifie spirituall effects or acts in Christ himselfe, with what trueth say you now, THEY do it not vsually, speaking of both; whereas both do it apparently and perpetually? It is Defenc. pa. 42. li. 29. your selfe indeede that denieth the very definition of a Sacrament: for your maine assertion is that neither the Iewish sacrifices, nor Christian Sacraments, doe signifie any more then the bodily and blo dy death of Christ, which I hope was a visible, and no uisible thing. ] Your Reader will shortly take you so often tardie with foule-lies, that hee will skant beleeue you, when you speake a trueth. Is it any position of mine that the Iewish sa∣crifices, and Christian Sacraments doe not signifie any more then the bodily and bloudie death of Christ? Indeede I af irmed they signified none other death of Christ, but on∣ly that which was bodily and bloudie, which I g ant was visible; but as for other ef∣fects of Christs power & grace, by which we are Serm. pa. 63. li. 22. grafted into Christ, and quick ed and nourished vnto life euerlasting, Ireferred them to the Sacraments of the new Testament as vnto Seales confirming the couenant of mercie, grace, and glorie made to vs by the death of Christ, in the same words that I now speake it. And so conclude of them, as I doe now; Ibid. li. 23. These propose vnto vs no inuisible paines of hell, but the body of Christ woun∣ded, and his bloud shed for the remitting of our sinnes, and vniting vs vnto Christ. There∣fore your turning no inuisible paines of hell, which are my words, into no more then a bo∣dily death, which are yours; and vnder pretence of those words, excluding from the Sacraments all other significations and representations of Christs inuisible power and grace proposed by them, sheweth your accustomed vain of misconstering and alter∣ing my words, when you cannot otherwise impugne them. You Defenc. pa. 43. li. 3. make me to crosse the institution of the Lords table, because I said the Ceremonie of breaking the bread, cannot properly belong to Christs body. But euen here doe I not expresse∣ly say, that it sheweth forth how Christs body was broken for vs? ] Where by Christs insti∣tution the bread was BROKEN, to note vnto vs the breaking of his body for our sinnes; and Paul expresseth that similitude of the bread broken to Christes body, in saying, s 1. Cor. 10. The bread, which wee breake, is it not the communion of the body of Christ; and to verifie that resemblance, reporteth the words of Christs institution in effect to be these, This is my body which is broken for you: you to make a siely shew that the Sacraments declare t 1. Cor. 11. Christs suffering of Hell paines, auouch that the. Trea pa. 14. li. 12. breaking of the bread cannot properly belong to the body, but to the soule, and to the body by Sympathie with the soule. Wherein you first denie the Similitude betwixt the bread and the body of Christ, to be true in deedes but onely in words; because you doe not acknowledge the violence offered to Christs body by his persecutors, to bee any kind of breaking properly and truely. For howsoeuer with bigge words you talke of the anguish of Christes soule bruising his x Defenc. pa. 21. li. 4. body ioyntly also; yet when you come to expresse your selse plainely, you say, Trea. pa. 5. li. 27. This grieuous passion was in his soule immediatly and properly, seeing then his body was not touched with any smart. And since all sense of paine is in the soule; if by breaking you vnder∣stand not the violence offered to Christes body, in vaine come you in with your Sympathie, which may shew itselfe in the body, but not bee felt of the body, by rea∣son the powers of sense are in the soule; and so you controle the Apostles words as voide of all trueth, whiles you referre them truely and properly to the soule, and not to the body but onely by Sympathie. The grounds, whereon you denie this Analogie betwixt the bread and the body of Christ, are as absurd and false, as the Conclusion, which you build on them; and are in number foure. 1. That Klômenon (in Greeke) is BROKEN TO PEECES pro∣perly. z Defenc. pa. 43. 2. That MEDVCCA in the Prophet (Esay) is also broken to peeces, properly, or crushed and beaten to POVVDER. 3. That Christes body was not properly broken. 4. That the breaking of the bread into many peeces, doeth first and immediatly set out the breaking of his soule. In all which you violently follow your owne fansies, as your ma∣ner is, against all diuine and humane testimonie. For first doth not by his proper signification import that only, which is broken in peeces, as you meane peeces wholly parted the one from the other. Looke backe to your Lexicons, to which you appeale, and namely to that of Budaeus, Tusanus, and Constantinus which Crispine Printed, Anno Domini 1562. or to that which was a fresh Corrected and enlarged by G snerus, Iunius, Xylander, Cellarius, Honygerus and others, and Printed at Basill 1584. and see whether Klân whence Klômenon commeth, bee not there expressed by frango, flecto and luxo, and by ; which are to breake, bow, vnioynt, bruise, or cut. And though Robert Steuen in his Thesaurus, set downe none other signification to the verbe Klân, but frango to breake; yet hee doth not thereby meane onely breaking of bones, or making of peeces as you ful wisely intend; but to breake generally, what∣soeuer or howsoeuer. And so Klân is to breake the straitnesse of any thing by wrying or bowing it, and the coherence of any thing by straining, tearing or cutting it, and the roundnesse or fulnesse of any thing by bruising it. Aristotle in his Problemes sayth, that as we clime vp the hill Arist proble. sectio. 5. nume∣ro. 19. , the knees are bent (or strained) backward; as we goe downe the hill, , the thighes are bent (or strained) forward: as also with Hippocrates is the straining of a ioynt, where he saith; that in holding the hand forth right, Hippocr. li. 1. . , the bowing of the ioynt (at elbowe) is strained. For so doth Galen expound him; . The offer to stretch out the Galenus in undem librum. arme directly straineth the ioynt at elbow, , to the out side. And Lucian describing the iesture of a Tragicall person, sayth; , Bowing and straining himselfe. In all which Klàn doeth not import any breaking of bones nor making of any pe ces, but the straining of the ioynts, by which the body or the parts thereof may be bowed. He ychius saith klân is likewise to cut, expressing it by Hesychij I e∣xicon in . , to cut vines, which Theophrastus calleth Theophrasius de causis lan∣tarun. lib. 3. cap. 19. , the cutting of vines, with whom Suidas, Phauorinus, & the Greek In verbo . Scholiast vpon Aristophanes agree, deriuing the metapho∣ricall signification of , from cutting the tender bran∣ches (of vines, and other trees) which are properly called , because they wil turne and bowe euery way; and the hooke that serueth to cut them, is named . Yea the very breaking of bread in Christes institution, (to which the Apostle resembleth the violence offered to Christes bodie) the Greeke church neuer so vnderstood, that Aristopha. . it was not or might not be done with kniues. For besides that the ancient leiturgie vnder the name of Chrysostome, mentioneth a sacred knife in forme of a lance, where∣with the bread was cut, which is there expressed by Chrysostomi Leirurgia Graecè. , and ; Germanus Bishop of Constantinople reporting the vse of the Greeke Church in his time continued fro former ages, saith, the Lords body Germani hi∣storis Ecclesi∣astica. , is cut with a knife, which they call a launce, out of the bread; and though that be diuided, yet Christ remaineth whole and vnparted , in euery piece of the bread so cut. That klân is also vsed to signifie the tearing or bruising of fleshie parts, where no bones at all are broken, Hippocrates the father of all learned Physicke, speaking in his owne Art most skilfully and truly, doth cleerely witnesse: : Hippocrates . li. 3. ad finem. Lesse dangerous are any of the bones broken, than where the bones are not broken, but the vaines and sinewes adioyning are on euerie side bruized. If the vaines and sinewes of mans bodie are properly sayd , when they are bruized or torne with any vio∣lence; the flesh of man, which is full of vaines and sinew s to bring bloud and sense to euery part of the bodie, can not be bruized with staues, or torne with whippes and thornes as Christes was, but those vaines and sinewes spreading themselues thorow∣out the flesh, must likewise be bruized and broken, which Hippocrates calleth , though the danger be the lesse, because the veines and sinewes seruing to that vse, the more outward they come, the smaller they are. And lest you should still dreame as you doe, that there is no breaking of any thing in mans bodie but of bones, and that when the pieces be wholly seuered one from the other; Galen, a man past excepti∣on in his facultie, telleth you, that in violent hurts of the hands or feet, by leaping, fal∣ling or straming, , the knitting of the bones l Galenus in 2. lib. Hippocra. . rather breaketh than the bones themselues. Where the word is put to signifie the losing and tearing of the ioynts when the bones are not broken, which Ga∣lene auoucheth is the properest word that the Greeke tongue hath for breaking of bones, and vsed almost of euerie man that is acquainted with the Greeke tongue. Of brea∣king Galenu de eth. medendi lib. 6. he likewise saith: Galenus in 2. lib. Hippocra. . a part (may be) bro∣ken, the rest being yet coherent. Euen as Hippocrates sayd before him: Hippocrates in 2 lib. . : when the lower iaw is broken, if it be not cleane forced a sunder, but that the bone is in some part coherent. By which it is euident that as well ioynts as bones may be BROKEN, and that either in part or in whole. Klan then, whence klômenon is deriued, importeth not necessarily the breaking of bones in mans body, as by your new Diuinitie you haue lately deuised, to make way for your hell paines in the soule of Christ; but it signifieth generally to breake, as our English word doth, and frango with the Latines likewise; whether it be by bowing or straining that which is straight; by losing that which is fast; by bruizing that which is sound; or by cutting and seuering in part or in whole that which is coherent. And so much our English word BROKEN expresseth. We say the necke or backe is broken, when neither bone nor skinne is broken, but the fastning of the ioynts is lo∣sed. Likewise the head the face, the shinnes are broken, when the skin or flesh of these parts is by some violence razed or torne. Yea the veynes are broken with a rupture, and children are broken out when their flesh doth exulcerate. And since the diuiding of that which was coherent, (which the Phisitians call Galenus de Methodo me∣dendi li. 6. , the solu∣tion of vnitie or continuitie, ) whether it be strayning, cutting, razing, tearing, or bruizing the bones or flesh of mans body in part or in whole, is contained in the English word breaking, and in the Greeke word Klômenon; the Apostle spake properly enough when he said that Christs body was broken, for so much as all the ioynts of it were losed in sunder, the vaines and sinewes tornc with piercing and grating of Iron spikes, q Psal. 22. vers. 15. the flesh and the skinne cut and rent with thornes, whips, and speare, and bruized with staues; though the bones were not broken, which is your ignorant exception against the Apostles words. But MEDVCCA in the Prophet is broken in peeces properly, or crushed and broken to Defenc. pa. 43 li. 15. powder; as these Scriptures doe vse the word likewise, and all Lexicons doe confirme. ] Your resolutions are so rash, that no man will trust your report for the proper signification of words. DACHA indeede is properly to bruize whether it be with hand or foote, but not to peeces nor to powder, without some other word added to expresse so much. For your Lexicons, to which you so confidently appeale, consult that of Pagnine per∣used and augmented by Mercere, Ceuattere, and Bertrame, and Printed at Lyons in Fraunce Anno 1575. or Forsters Printed at Basile Anno 1564. and see whether they do not plainly reproue your folly. Forsteri Dic∣tionarium H ∣braicum in the∣mate Dacha. 2 8. Forstere expresseth the theme, whence ME∣DVCCA commeth, by oppressione seu depressione contusus est, to be bruized by oppression or depression; neither doth he so much as mention the signification of frangere to breake in all the examples of that theme. Pagnini the∣saurus linguae sanctae. Pagnine declareth the force of that theme by conterere, frangere, contundere, to beate, breake, or bruize, but Mercere addeth as Forstere did, oppressione vel depressione, by oppressing and depressing. And against your beating to powder, Pagnine taketh speciall exception out of the Rabbins in the very same place of Numbers, whence you would inferre it. For vpon the words Numbers 11. verse 8. the people gathered Manna, and BEATE IT in morters, and made cakes Num. 11. v 8. of it. He saith, differt a SHACHAK secundum Hebreorum Doctores, quod SHACHAK Pag . in themate Doc. pag. 457. est minutatim contundere & terere. The word here vsed differreth from SHACHAK according to the opinion of the Hebrew Doctors, because SHACHAK signifieth to beat a thing small or to powder, which cosequently this doth not. And though they had dissembled so much, yet the Scripture it selfe doth conuince, that your obseruation out of that place, as out of all the rest which you quote for that word is starke false. For Manna by the description of Moses, was a small round thing, E od. 16. ve . 4. small as the hore frost on the earth, and Num. 11. vers. 9. fell in the night with the dew, and Exod. 16. vers. 21. melted (away) when the heate of the sonne came. Now Manna being so moist, that it would melt with the heate of the Sunne, was not beaten in morters to bring it to powder, as you boldly suppose, since it would rather cleaue together then come to powder; but by bruizing it betweene two stones, which was their kind of Mill in the Wildernes, or in a morter with some water they did worke it to batter or dough, thereof to make wafers or cakes. But were it so, that Manna would come to powder, which yet the text doth not infe re; will you con∣clude, because beating in a morter bringeth dry things to powder, that therefore bea∣ting doth generally and necessarily signifie beating to powder? And as that place is mistaken by you, which only seemed to make for you; so not one of the rest, which you quote in your ma gin doth conuince either beating to powder, or breaking in peeces properly, to which you so violently wrest the words of say. For where the Prophet saith, the Esa. 19. v. 10. Nettes of Egypt shall be torne, that is farre from beating to powder, except you haue lately deuised the powder of Nettes to make a plaister of. And if we should say they were torne to pieces, what necessitie is there, that either this tearing should be properly breaking, which you admit not but in things that be stiffe and hard as bones and such like; or that those pieces should be diuided from the whole, and not rather be ruptures in the whole, as we see in torne nettes, which are not alwaies rent cleane a sunder? The next and last place which you quote for the proper vse of this word, it as wide from your purpose, as West from East. Deu. 23. v. 1. None wounded (sayth Moses) with any contusion r abscission of his secret parts, shall en∣ter into the congregation of the Lord. Can thos parts of man be properly broken in pie∣ces, or beaten to powder? They may be bruized or wounded, as other fleshy parts may be, but breaking to pieces properly, or beating to powder, were very strange in that case. That bruizing was vsed as well as cutting, to make men Eunuches, appeareth by Paulus Aegineta; where he sayth: Paulus Ae∣gineta. lib. 6. cap. 68. Hu us re modus duplex est, vnus collisione, alter ex∣cisione absoluitur: The way to do this is double, one by bruising, the other by cutting. And since Moses compriseth both these wayes in his words, it is euident that DACCA is a bruize, and consequently the word may be properly applied to Christes bodie, which was sorely bruized as well with the beating of s aues and whips, as with piercing and grating of iron spikes. These are the grounds on which you gather, the Prophet could not by that word meane the wounding and bruizing of Christes bodie; but because powder and pieces, as you dreame, are properly comprised in that theme, therefore it must be referred to the soule of Christ. As if pieces and powder came neerer in soules to the right signifi∣cation of bruizing, than the mangling, tearing, and contusing of Christs body, which he suffered from the violent rage of the Iewes. Your other word of the very same na∣ture, keepe to your selfe. When your proofs faile you in this, you may not be suffered to roue at your pleasure, and to reach after other words, & out of your own vnlearned skill to vouch, they are of the very same nature. Wherefore there is no cause why the coherence of Esaies wordes should be cut in sunder by your vnhandsome deuice of the peeces and powder of soules; but as the first words in that sentence, Esa. 53. v. 5. he was wounded for our transgressions, and the last, with his stripes we are healed, are plainly referred to the punishments of Christes bodie; so the middest, he was bruized for our iniquities, should haue the same relation and intention, especially the Prophet foretelling the people, what they should see in their Messias, and how they should misiudge of him. Ibid. v. 4. We (sayth Esay) did iudge him as plagued and smitt n of God, but he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruized for our iniquities, and with his stripes are we healed. Neither is it any strange thing in the Scriptures to ioyne this very word which you talke so much of with wounding as with a word of the same nature and force. For be∣sides that Moses sayth, Deut. 23. None wounded with any bruizing or utting of his secret parts, shall enter into the Lords congregation; Dauid saith to God, Thou hast bruized Rahab, as one that is wounded. Where wounding & bruizing are more properly lincked together as words of like force and effect, than your breaking of soules into pieces, or beating them to powder. The verie same word is also vsed in the Scriptures, to note the brui∣zing of mans bodie by sicknesse, or of his estate by wrong and oppression. Dauid in a grieuous sicknesse complaining that he felt nothing sound in his flesh, nor any rest in his bones; addeth: Psal. 38. v. 8. I am weakned and bruized very much. Bruize not the poore in the gate, sayth Salomon; that is, oppresse not the poore in iudgement. The children of the foolish shall be Iob. 5. v. 4. bruized (that is, oppressed) in the gate, and none shall deliuer them. And when it is applied to the soule, it may note that to be either wounded with sorrow, oppressed with wrong, or humbled with obedience; but as for powder and pieces, from which you would pull a iust proportion, which nothing can answere but the paines of hell, it is a sicke conceit of your owne braine; it hath no deriuation either from the Prophets or Apostles words. You did not meane, that Defenc. pa. 44. li. 18. & 29. the soule might be properly broken in pieces, but that thus it is neerer and better applied to the soule than to the bodie; which was only pierced and boared thorow. ] Then was your former opposition out of the Scripture very licentious, and your conclusion as friuolous. In that a bone of Christes was not broken, you inferred that Esaies words, He was broken for our sinnes, Trea. pa. 10. li. 16. could not be properly meant of Christes bodie, flesh, and bones: as if there were no breaking of ioynts, veines, sinewes, flesh, or skinne; but only of bones. And yet as if the soule of Christ, which is by nature alto∣gether indiuisible, might properly be broken in pieces, you conclude the breaking of the bread can not properly belong to the bodie of Christ, BVT TO THE SOVLE. Had you denied the breaking of the bread properly to belong to either, your words must haue beene; It can belong properly neither to the bodie, nor to the soule; but you denie the one, and auouch the other; It can not belong properly to the body, but to the soule. Whether those words of yours doe not expresly import, that the breaking of bread doth properly belong to the soule of Christ, as to the trueth wherein they must be verified, I leaue it to the iudgement of the discreet Reader. [Howbeit, you denie not, but Defenc. pa. 44. li. 26. broken applied to the soule (of Christ) is figuratiue. ] And so you grant there was no cause you should take such exceptions as you did to the Apostles wordes, This is my bodie which is broken for you. For since it can not be verified of the soule, but figura∣tiuely as you now confesse; it may so be most iustly verified of Christes bodie, with∣out any sense of hell paines suffered in the soule of Christ. And if the consent of the English, Latine, and Greeke tongues may be trusted for the vse of a word; breaking may properly be affirmed of Christes bodie, which can not be of his soule; for so much as his ioynts, veines, sinewes, flesh and skinne were broken and torne in sunder, Christs body truely broken by the iudge∣ment of new and old wri∣ters. though his bones were not. And but that your fashion is to follow no man farder than your fansie leadeth you, you might haue seene with what reuerence and conscience Master Beza, that other∣wise vpholdeth the sufferings of Christes soule, referreth this word KLOMENON to the tearings and torments of Christes bodie, being hereto led by the Apostles asser∣tion. By the word Beze Annot. in epist. ad Cor. 1. ca. 11. v. 24. broken (in Pauls wordes) is designed the kind of (Christes) death; because, besides that the Lords bodie was torne, bruized, and euen broken with most bitter tor∣ments, though his legges were not broken as the theeues were, Christ breathing out his soule with a most violent death, was as it were rent in two parts according to his humane Nature. This word then hath a MARVELLOVS EXPRESSE SIGNIFICATION, that the figure should fullie agree with the thing it selfe; to wit, that the breaking of the bread should represent to our minds the verie death of Christ. Peter Martyr hauing made your obiection, that a bone of Christ was not broken, resolueth: But Petr. Martyr i 1. epist. ad Corint. ca. 11. heereof I will not greatly contend for somuch as this breaking is by many Fathers referred to the body of Christ. With whom the wordes following doe make, (broken) for you; which indeed leadeth me to consent vnto them, and to acknowledge a double breaking, (one in the bread, another in the Haymo in 1. pist ad Corint. ca. 11. bodie of Christ.) Bullinger sayth, Bulling. in 1. epist. ad Corint. cap. 11. The bread is properlie sayd to be broken, the bodie of man to be slaine; howbeit, in the Hebrue tongue to breake, is to waste, to kill and destroy. And so the visible bread, which in our sight is broken with our hands, doth certeinly set before our eyes that bodie (of Christ) which was broken or done to death by vs or for vs. So Haymo: q Christ himselfe brake the bread, which he deliuered to his Disciples, to shew that the brea∣king and suffering of his bodie came not but of his owne accord. Which wordes he tooke out of Beda vpon the Gospels of Marke and Beda in Marci cap 14. & in Iucae ca. 22. Luke. Before whom, Prosper: De consecra∣tione dist. 2. Et cum ostia. When the host is broken, and the bloud is powred out into the mouthes of the faithfull, what other thing is designed than the doing to death of the Lords bodie on the crosse, and the shedding of the bloud out of his side? And likewise Austen: August. de feria. 4. ca. 6. m. 9. The table of thy spouse (sayth he to the Church) hath bread that is whole, quem fractum & comminutum vidimus in Passione, which wee saw broken and bruized in his Passion. Of this bread the Lord himselfe sayd; The bread which I will giue, is my flesh. And indeed whosoeuer shall duely consider the violence done to euerie part of Christes bodie before and on the crosse, shall find a farre sharper and so er kind of breaking, than if his legges had beene knapt in sunder as the theeues were; and see iust cause why Paul compared the breaking of Christes bodie to the breaking of the bread, though you idlely or falsely say it was ONELIE PIERCED or boared thorow. For if by piercing you meane all kinde of violence, that impressed any paine in the bodie; then is piercing farre larger and grieuouser than your kinde of breaking, which is of bones; and more than such piercing, Christes bo∣die needed not, to answer the similitude of breaking the bread. But if by piercing you meane boaring thorow, as you seeme to expound it; then did Christes bodie suffer ma∣nie violences, as buffeting, striking, whipping, piercing with thornes, and such like, which were no borings thorow. And so there is either no weight or no truth in your words, that Christes bodie was only pierced and boared thorow. Defenc. pa. 43. li. 37. Vainly you charge me, I know not how often, against my expresse words, that I call hell, heauen, and descending, ascending; but here it is no wrong to charge you with such an absur∣ditie Proper opposed to metaphori∣call. indeed, who expresly do make that, which you say is FIGVRATIVE, to be a proper denomination. ] If I charge you falslie, when you come to the place conceale it not; in the meanetime, if there were any inconuenience in this, as there is none, it was the tracing of you in your owne termes. For you argued, that Christes bodie could not be sayd properly to be broken, because no bone of his was broken; and consequent∣lie it is your collection, that if a bone (which is but a part of Christes bodie) had beene broken, the bodie of Christ (which is the whole) might be sayd to haue beene properly broken. Mine answer was, that since Christs bodie had other parts besides his bones, which by his owne words are conteined vnder the name of his flesh, if any parts of his flesh were truelie broken, the whole body might be sayd to be properlie broken, as well in respect of his flesh, as of his bones. What absurditie find you in this, that first proceeded not from your selfe? But, were the words mine owne, when I speake as a Diuine of the proprietie of signification, calling that proper which is not metapho∣ricall; and affirme, that as the sense of the word BROKEN was proper in a part of Christes bodie, so must it likewise be proper and not metaphoricall in the whole, be∣cause the whole, which taketh his denomination from a part, must retaine the same signification of the word, which was verified in that part; what boyes play is it in you to come from metaphors to other kinds of figures, and to trifle with termes of proper and siguratiue (when I opposed proper to metaphoricall) and child shlie to charge me, that I speake contraries with a breath? As if one and the same speech might not be figuratiue in expressing the whole for a part, which is Synecdoche, and yet reteine his proper signification, and be no metaphor. Except therefore your Grammar be so great, that euerie Synecdoche must needs be a metaphor; and your Logicke so little, that you can not distinguish a subiect from a predicate; I see no cause but one and the same speech or proposition may be figuratiue in the subiect, by vnderstanding the whole for a part; and yet proper in the predicate, by reason the sense thereof is not metaphoricall. For these be figurae dictionum, not orationum; figures of words, not of sen∣tences. As in our case whether Christes bodie were properly broken, or no: if the bodie, which is the subiect in that proposition, by Synecdoche be taken for a part; then broken, which is the predicate, must the rather be properlie and not metaphoricallie affirmed of that part, which was truelie broken: how beit, as I thinke, since the proper sense of breaking was verified of all or the most parts of Christes bodie, it must like∣wise be verified of the whole bodie. But omit these Grammaticall and Logicall points, wherewith manie Readers are not acquainted, and come to the verie pitch of my words. I doe not affirme, that the whole for a part is a proper speech, as you conceiue me; but that the whole from a part may properly (and not metaphorically) take his denomination. That a man speak∣eth, writeth, heareth; seeth, tasteth, smelleth, and such like, are they proper or figuratiue speeches in your censure? Proper I thinke; and yet no part in mans bodie is the in∣strument of speech besides the tongue, of writing besides the hand, of hearing be∣sides the care, of seeing besides the eye, of tasting besides the mouth, of smelling be∣sides the nose. Infinite are the actions of the bodie naturallie executed by certaine parts, as eating, drinking, sleeping, spetting, coughing, weeping, and other such, which no man in his right wits will affirme to be figuratiue actions or speeches in man; and yet in them all, a part doth denominate the whole. In the vertues and vices of the mind, as for men to be wise, sober, diligent, patient, liberall, learned, mindfull, watchfull, and such like, or the contrarie; shall we say, that men be figuratiuely and not properly and truely such, because these are gifts of the minde, and not of the bodie? The verie es∣sentiall parts of man, as vnderstanding, will, reason, sense, and appetite; shall they like∣wise make figuratiue speeches in men, because none of them are common to all the parts and powers of bodie and soule, but in euerie of them a part doth denominate the whole? It may be you will not greatlie sticke to turne Porphyries predicables and Aristotles predicaments into Mosellanes tropes, and make figures of them all; what say you then to the branches of Christian faith and trueth? are they also figuratiue and improper speeches? That Christ is the sonne of God, and the sonne of Dauid; that he was borne of a virgine, and circumcised in the eight day; that he fasted, hungred, and was tempted; that he eat and slept, wept, and waxed weary; that he was buffeted, whip∣ped, and crucified; that he died for our sinnes, and rose for our righteousnesse; that he ascended into heauen, and thence shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead; and an infinite number of the like: are all these figuratiue speeches in your conceit? I hope you be not so fastened to figures, that you will make vs a figuratiue faith, and a figu∣ratiue Sauiour; and yet in all these, a part doth denominate the whole. Your eyes therefore were somewhat close, or your wits wandering, when you could not see the difference betwixt taking the whole for a part, and denominating the whole by a part; which is so common and constant both in Diuinitie and Philosophie, that in all naturall and necessarie actions, passions, and proprieties, the whole receiueth his attribute from a part. And so my words rest sound and true, both in humane reason and in holie Scripture, notwithstanding your vaine proclamation of so cleere and ex∣presse an absurditie in them. But you must be borne with, your humor is so sharpe, and your head so shallow, that your left hand knoweth not what your right s ibleth. Your despising the Ecclesiasticall historie as a fable, is a sparke of your pride, from which few ancient writers are free; howbeit the Scriptures are plaine enough for my purpose, to proue that Christs body was truely broken. They witnesse that the Iewes Mark. 14. vers. 16. buffeted him with their sistes, and smote him with their S rieants staues; thar Pilate Ma th. 27. vers. 26. scourged him, that the souldiers 29. platted a crowne of thornes on his head, and then did 3 . beate him on the head with reedes and Ioh. 19. v. 3. roddes; that his crucifiers P al. 22. vers. 16. digged his hands and seete, and pulled Vers. 14. all his bones out of ioynt; and that in this plight the waight of his body hung on the crosse three houres by the wounds of his hands & feete; and when he was dead, his Iohn 19. vers. 34. side was pearced with a speare, besides the mockes, wrongs and taunts that were offered him on euery side: and yet all this you say is Defenc. pa 44. li. 21. not in any sense pro∣portionable to the proprietie of the word KLO'MENON and MEDVCCA. You prate of PROPRIETIES and proportions to no end, but to colour your absurdities and presumptions. What Christian Reader will endure you to say, that the Apostle in applying the word KLO'MENON to the body of Christ, had neither proprietie nor proportion to the right sense of the word? If he did not speake properly in those words, ( which is broken for you ) as I thinke he did, yet at least he must speake meta∣phorically and figuratiuely, and so keepe a resemblance and proportion to the origi∣nall sense of the word; except your wisedome will auouch that the holy Ghost igno∣rantly and vnaduisedly abuseth the word. Which if you confesse of your selfe, I will easily beleeue, because you neither know what you affirme, nor what you deny. For where afore you said in plaine words, Trea. pa. 14. the breaking of the bread CAN NOT PRO∣PERLY BELONG BVT TO THE SOVLE (of Christ,) Now you graunt it pro∣perly belongeth neither to body nor to soule; onely from powder and peeces you take a iust and full proportion in the soule to the proper sense of those words. You haue me in iealousie that Defenc. pa. 44. li. 16. I thinke you to be a senslesse foole; indeed I thinke you to be more conceited then learned, and a great deale more shifting then sound, though in this booke you haue sought the helpe of all your friends to maintaine the most of your matters with as it were; but if you reiect the Apostles words as wanting both pro∣prietie and proportion, except your hell paines be admitted; and make out iust and full proportions from powder and peeces vnto the soule of Christ, I doubt your Reader will thinke these be senslesse and foolish Toyes. If I would play with proportions as you doe, I neede not depart from the words of the holy Ghost to find a fairer resemblance to the proper sense of those words in the body of Christ crucified, then you make any. Psal. 22. v. 14. All my bones are sundered, saith Da∣uid in the person of Christ, and & 15. thou hast brought me into the dust of death. Of which and all that went before, Eusebius saith, Eusebius de∣monstr . Euan∣gel. li. 10. a. 8. what else doe all these signifie but the conditi∣on of (Christs) dead body? Wherefore he presently addeth, and into the dust of death thou hast brought me. Here in expresse words is the dust of death to which Christs body was brought, and besides, all his bones were sundered. Now to be sundered is euidently to be diuided, and that must be with parts or peeces; the naturall coherence where∣with the bones were formerly ioyned, being losed and dissolued, though one part be not seuered from the other. Whether therefore the word broken be properly or figuratiuely taken, I see no cause why the Apostles words may not in either sense be fully true. For if the Ioynts, vaines, sinewes, flesh, and skinne of Christs body from head to foote were properly straeined, rent and torne, besides the seuering of his soule from his body; then was his body truely broken. If by breaking we figuratiuely meane, as others doe, the affliction and anguish of Christs body; then as no part was free from it, so no increase of bodily paine in this life could be added to his suffe∣rings: and so in either respect your hell paines haue their pasport, till you find some fitter place and better proofe for them then either KLO'MENON or MEDVCCA. The next point you vndertake is whether the blood of Christ be the full Redemp∣tion The Defender aludeth the Scriptures with his termes of single & meere. as well of our bodies, as of our Soules in this life. Wherein, because the word Redemption is diuersly taken in the Scriptures, as for deliuerance sometimes from sinne, sometimes from death, sometimes from the power and feare of either; and all the promises of God we haue now in hope, though not some of them indeed till the generall resurrection: you shew your selfe cunning in carping at words, which you labour to turne and wind euery way. But before you come to it, you make a short and swift answere to all the places of Scripture, which I produce touching the force and effects of Christs blood; least you should haue Defenc. pa. 45. li. 12. any neede to trouble your selfe here∣after about any of them. Where, as your manner is throughout your booke, you first chaunge the question with adding your witlesse and senslesse termes of meere, single, and simple to my words, and then without any more adoe, Ibidem li. 7. Your aduised and resolute answere to all is this; & 11. there is not one text any where that hath any meaning of my strange conceite. It were reason, a man would thinke, you tooke the paines to impugne my words, and not to presume you know my meaning against my words, and so to frame it after your fashion with your new found phrases, which I abhor as much as I doe your new found faith. Defenc. pa. 44. li. 32. You will prooue the blood of our Sauiour is the true price of our Redemption, and that as well of our soules as of our bodies. Who denieth this as your words runne? ] It is happie yet that my words runne well, whatsoeuer my conceite be. Now if I meane no more then I speake, and the sacred Scriptures fully concurre with that which I speake; then haue I both the word of God to warrant that I teach, and besides your owne confession that as I speake it, it is truth. Defenc. pa. 44. li. 35. But you know I meane, that no more but the shedding of Christs blood ONLY AND MEERELY, is the iust and full satisfaction of all our sinnes. ] What my meaning is you cannot be ignorant, I haue often declared it, not here only, but in my Sermons and conclusion also, as I haue formerly shewed, and you haue plainely confessed. I will once more repeate your owne words and hereafter by your leaue tell you it is a plaine lye and a meere shift, if you father your termes of Christs meere blood, and single bodie vpon me, as any part of the Question which I mooued, or Doctrine which I defend. Wherefore I pray thee Christian Reader once more to take notice, that I be not driuen in euery page to proue one and the same thing against the Discoursers vnsauery, childish, and Idle phrases, with which he would faine elude the Scriptures, and delude the world. Your confession both of my Sermons and con∣clusion (Sir Descourser) is this; Defenc. pa. 36. li. 9. Sundry times you teach, that Christ did suffer pecu∣liarly and seuerally some proper punishments in his soule, besides his bodily sufferings: yea that this was a part of his crosse, and the effect of Gods wrath on his soule, as well as the suf∣fering in his body. Against my words so often witnessed in my writings, and so open∣ly confessed by your selfe, you take vpon you (by some secret reuelation belike) to know my meaning, that Defenc. pa. 45. li. 3. no more but the shedding of Christs blood MEERELY is the full satisfaction of all our sinnes; which MEERE BLOOD of Christ the Scriptures meane not, nor onely his body SINGLY and SIMPLY considered. ] The MEERE blood, and SINGLE and SIMPLE body of Christ, with such like couerts of your cause, are termes fit for such a teacher as you are, to which if you could once conuert the Question, we must haue as many Lexicons to bring vs out of these Laberinthes, as there be leaues in your booke. Keepe them therefore as whelps of your owne lit∣ture, the faith of Christ and the word of God hath stood without them these sixteene hundered yeeres. What I meane by the body and blood of Christ, giuen, and shed for our Redemp∣tion, and the remission of our sinne; I haue meetly well expressed; I must not in eue∣ry section fall to fresh repetitions. When I speake as the Scripture speaketh, I meane as the Scripture meaneth. They know not your new termes of the MEERE blood, nor of the single and simple body of Christ; but by his blood and death they meane that manner of shedding his blood, and that kind and course of death suffered in the body of his flesh, which the Gospell describeth; no way excluding from Christ, when he presented himselfe before God to vndertake mans cause the due conside∣ration of mans infirmitie and iniquitie abounding, or of Gods iustice therewith dis∣pleased; nor his humble and voluntary submission to the mightie hand and righte∣ous will of his heauenly Father, to excuse vs from the heauie iudgement that other∣wise did hang ouer our heads. So much as the Scriptures mention in declaring the manner of his death and bloodshedding, so much they containe in the name of his Crosse, blood and death. For as the description, which the holy Ghost maketh, is in no point idle; so the comprehension of all vnder one word excludeth nothing for∣merly described. This I take to be a sound and sure way to expound the Scriptures by their owne direction and intention. For since the manner and order of Christs death was so carefully regestred by the spirite of God, that we should not be igno∣rant of it; whensoeuer the Scriptures speake of Christs Crosse, blood, and death, they referre vs to all that, which either by the Prophets was foretold, or in the Gospell is expressed touching the order and manner of his death. And so Christ 1. Cor. 15. vers. 3. died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures (as Paul addeth.) Then to take any thing from it, which is mentioned in the Scriptures; or to adde any thing to it, which is not there expresly recorded; is to depart from the word of trueth, and to dishonor and deface the death and bloud of Christ with our inuentions. This being my meaning euen from the beginning, as my words declare, I moued these two generall questions: The first, Whether in the crosse and death of Christ de∣scribed in the Scriptures, the death of the soule, or the death of the damned, were by any good warrant of the sayd Scriptures comprised: Secondly, Whether the crosse and death of Christ, as the Scriptures describe them, be not the full and perfect price of our redemption from sinne, and reconciliation to God by the testimonie of the same Scriptures, without the death of the soule, or paines of the damned. The Discourser finding himselfe inclosed with these questions, speaketh directlie to nei∣ther, and prooueth nothing in either; but declining the enuie of these speeches, the death of the soule, and the paines of the damned, which indeed are the points misliked and reiected, he changeth the first question into the generall termes of suffering Gods wrath, and the soules proper suffering, which may import manie things besides those two; and in the second, he euery where beareth the Reader in hand, that by the death and bloud of Christ, I meane the MEERE bodily sufferings of Christ, without anie sense or sorrow of the soule in her spirituall powers. And lest the Scripture should stand in his way, he casteth them all behinde him, that any way witnesse the force and merit of Christes death and bloudshedding, as figuratiue speeches; because they name not the MEERE bloud of Christ, nor only his body SINGLY considered. But Sir, all this while you forget, that you haue proued nothing, but onely supposed and a∣uouched what pleased you; and that in matters of faith you may not adde to the word of God without manifest apostasie. The things questioned by me, were the Sermo. pa. 8. li 23. & pa. 9. li. 14. death of the soule, and the verie paines of the damned, as appeareth euidently by my words, when I first mooued the question. Of these you say nothing all this while; which yet you must soundly & fully proue before you may adde them to the words of the Holy ghost testifying the power & vertue of Christes bloud and death. There∣fore howsoeuer you seeme to shift off the Scriptures as figuratiue speeches with your MEERE and SINGLE termes, they will sticke faster by you than so. For as there The Scriptures teach no redēption, but by the bloud and death of Christ. can be no doubt of my meaning, comprising all in the death and bloud of Christ, which the Scriptures report of the order and maner of his sufferings, when he yeel∣ded himselfe to die for the sinnes of the world according to the counsell of his Fa∣thers wil; so you may not presume any thing to be conteined in the death or crosse of Christ, as requisite for our redemption, which is not cleerely witnessed by the Scrip∣tures. Proue therefore by the Scriptures, that Christ died the death of the soule, or the death of the damned, which are the true paines of hell; and then adde it to the crosse of Christ when you will. Till so you do, the Scriptures which I haue produced, stand in their full strength against you. For as they bind all Christian men stedfastly to beleeue that which is written touching their redemption by the death and bloud of Christ; so do they straitly prohibit all and euery, be they men or Angels, to adde any other deuice to the doctrine of our saluation, than what is euidently reuealed, and directly witnessed in the Scriptures. August. con∣tra literas Pe∣til. li. 3. & ca. 6. Whether it be of Christ (sayth Austen) or of any other thing what soeuer touching the faith; I say not, if we, who are no way comparable to him that so spake, but that which follow∣eth, if an Angell from heauen teach you BESIDES that which you haue receiued in the Scriptures, of the Law and the Gospell, holde him accursed. Basil. in serm. de fide. It is a manifest fall from the faith (sayth Basil) either to abrogate any thing that is written, or to bring in any thing that is not written. For Tertul. ad∣uers. aeretices. cap. 8. when once we beleeue (the Gospel, sayth Tertullian) this we first be∣leeue, that there is nothing besides, which we ought to beleeue. So that the meere bloud and single bodie of Christ are but sleights of yours, with vnknowen phrases to draw your Reader from asking or eying your proofes for the death of Christes soule, and the paines of the damned to be suffered by him, before wee could be redeemed. The Scriptures are maine and manifest for that which I beleeue and teach, and which the whole Church of Christ before mee, taught and beleeued these fifteene hundred yeeres, afore your conceit of hell paines in the soule of Christ was either hatcht or heard of. The sufferings of the soule and the wrath of God, which things you now catch holde on to make some introduction to your secret and priuate fansies, are too generall to inferre either the death of the soule or the paines of the damned, except to the rest of your absurdities you will adde these, that the soule neuer suffereth but it dieth the death of spirits; and that Gods anger in this life hath none other effects, but damnation. Defenc. pa. 45. li. 13. Here you vrge a reason against vs: if then our soules be not redeemed by the blood of Christ, our bodies haue no benefite of Redemption from death. ] You hunt so headily after aduantages of words by some ambiguitie in them, that you neither remember what the Scriptures teach, nor what your selfe defend, nor when I vse a word in the same sense that the Apostle doth. It is not my deuise, but the Apostles doing, to take RE∣DEMPTION of the body for the incorruption of the same. Rom. 8. 23. We sigh in our selues, saith Paul, wayting for the Redemption of our body. And againe, you are Ephes. 4. 30. sealed by the ho∣ly spirit of God vnto the day of Redemption. When that day shall be, our Sauiour tel∣leth vs in these words. When the Luk. 21. 28. powers of heauen shall be shaken, and you see the sonne of man come in a cloud with power and great glory, then lift vp your heads; for your Redemp∣tion draweth neere; In all which places Redemption is taken for none of those mercies or graces, which are bestowed on Gods children in this life, but for that glorie and immortalitie, which shall be reueiled on them, when Christ shall come to iudge the world; and namely the Redemption of the body for that incorruption, wherewith Philip 3. 21. our vile bodies shall bee changed and made like to his glorious body. Take then the Re∣demption of the body for the incorruption of the same, as the Apostle plainely doth and I did; and see what absurditie or obscuritie there is in my reason, which you so much wrangle with, and wonder at, as though it passed all vnderstanding. The Re∣demption, which we haue in this life by the bloud of Christ, must needes bee either of body or of soule; we haue no more parts to be redeemed by Christ. But the Redemption of our bodies we haue not in this world, we must waite for it, till 1. Cor. 15. 53, 54. this corruptible put on incorruption. The Redemption therefore which we haue in this life, or shal haue before the last day, is the Redemption of our soules. And so the words of Peter, 1. Pet. 1. 19. You were Redeemed with the precious bloud of Christ, and of the Saints in heauen, saying to the Lambe, Reue. 5. 9. Thou hast redeemed vs to God by thy bloud, pertaine expresly to the Redemp∣tion of their soules, because their bodies then did, and yet do lie in corruption. What so strange monsters or marueiles, doeth your Logicall head finde in this reason, that you should make such wonderizations at it, and protestations against it? Is it not open and easie to all, that be meanely witted or soberly minded? But you haue Defenc. pag. 45. li. 17. three things to note (in my words which you alleage:) 1. The Propo∣sition is vaine and Illogicall, hauing no consequence in it at all. ] It is a speciall point of Art memoratiue in you to note three things, and vtterly to forget two of them. For in this whole Section, you doe not so much as mention any second or third thing to bee noted in those words which you cite. The first and al, which you note, is that my pro∣position is vaine, Illogicall, and vncoherent. ] Your idle and vntheologicall head hath ouer busied it selfe with many mad multiplications, and what ifs vpon this propositi∣on; and yet you come nothing neere the sense or coherence of it. The Proposition hath two parts, whereof the second is either an illation out of the Apostles words, vp∣on the first being a supposition of yours, if we limit it to the time of this life; or if wee speake without restraint of time as you doe, it is a necessarie consequent to the for∣mer, being the condition and cause of the latter. That our soules are not redeemed by the bloud of Christ, but by his soule, is a resolution of yours; wherewith you giue a fresh on-set in the next Section, as the Reader shall there perceiue, though here in shew you somwhat relent after your inconstant maner. That being a position of yours; I added by the Apostles warrant, that our bodies haue not their Redemption in this life, but must stay for it till the day of Redemption, or generall resurrection. And so the rea∣son standeth: Conclu. pa. 240 l. 24. If our soules be not (here) redeemed by the bloud of Christ, (which is your Assertion) our bodies (by the Apostles doctrine) haue no Redemption in this life. But this, That wee should Ibidem 241. li. 6. et m 8. presently haue no Redemption (in body or soule) by the bloud of Christ is quite m contrarie to the words of Peter, who sayth, Yee are redeemed by the bloud of Christ, (not yee shall be;) and of the soules in heauen that say to Christ, thou hast redeemed vs by thy bloud, when their bodies were rotten in the earth. Since therefore ei∣ther body or soule must haue Redemption in this life, and the body as Paul assureth vs, hath not Redemption in this life; Vt supra. pa. 240. li. 31. Ergo the Redemption which we haue in this life by the bloud of Christ, must bee referred to our soules; and our bodies must expect the generall day of Redemption in the end of the world, before they shall haue it. If the sober and wise Reader vnderstand not this reason, or can dislike the sequence of it, I am content he shall condemne it as darke and obscure; but if it be open to all mens eyes saue yours; then is your dull conceite or eger stomacke rather betrayed by your foolish rolling to so many what ifs, then my reason any way refuted. [I alter, you will say, the order of it.] Though I spake then more shortly then now I doe, because I had no lea∣sure to stand so long thereon, yet he that will Reade but the third part of that Section whence you take this, shall finde the very same parts and words, that now I vse, there contained and expressed. But I afterward defend the proposition with the condition annexed to bee simplie true.] When I saw your humour was so franticke, that not vnderstanding my words, you would presently pronounce them in the view of the whole Realme to be a noto∣rious Paradoxe and impietie, I bid you take your vttermost aduantage of my words; and as they stoode, though that were not my first intent, they were sound and good, and your impugning them was prophane and false. I yet auouch the same. For where the Scriptures teach no Redemption but by the death and bloud of Christ, your o∣ther deu sed Redemptions by the death of the soule, and paines of Hell, I account no better then false and prophane. And therefore if our soules be not that way redeemed, which the Scriptures reueile, which is by the death and bloud of Christ; they are not redeemed at all. And being not at all redeemed, I would faine know by the best of your skill, what benefit of Redemption our bodies shall or can haue, more then the bodies of Infidels. Yea set that redemption aside, which the Scriptures attribute to the death and bloud of Christ, and neither bodie nor soule can be saued, but infideli∣ty and the wages therof, I meane damnation both of soule and bodie, preuaile in all men. So that you were not well in your wits, when with such an heat and huffe you cried out Trea. pa. 23. li. 13. What a Pradoxe is it, yea what impietie? But I must chuse whether I will speake this sophistically or absurdly, you say.] Is it any sophistrie or absurditie to speake as the Spirit of God speaketh in the Scriptures? Your MEERE bloud of Christ is indeed absurd Sophistrie: for you imagine by that word, that Christ shed his bloud for our sinnes without any meritorious action or passion of the soule concurring, which in the Redeemer of the world was so impossible, as nothing more. If I speake otherwise than the Scriptures speake, take your pleasure at it, so you bring reason for it; but whe I keepe my selfe within the compasse of their speech, your a ouching that I speake Sophisticallie or absurdlie, reprocheth the Scriptures, whom I follow. In either of those points which you impugne, as that our soules are redeemed by the bloud of Christ, and that our bodies haue not redemption in this life, I haue the Scriptures plainly prece∣dent before me, and therefore except they speake sophistically or absurdly, I in retai∣ning their speech and sense can do neither. The difference betwixt the deaths of the faithfull and infidels, is a thing well The oly hath not his redemp∣tion before the last day. known to me, and approoued by me; yet must the Apostles words stand true, that in this life we haue not the Redemption of our bodies, but we must waite for it Acts 3. 21. till the time that all things be restored. That Christ hath already purchased and obtained it for vs by his death and passion, I make no doubt, as also that we rest in hope assured of it; but Rom. 8. 24. hope which is seene, is not hope: and though the soules of the Saints retaine a firme faith and full expectance of Gods promise for the raising and Redee∣ming of their bodies from corruption, and in the meane time discerne and feele as well the comfort that is in the death of Gods elect, as the great blessings and bene∣fites that follow their death; yet their bodies lying in dust haue no shew nor sense thereof, much lesse haue they that which Paul calleth the Rom. 8. v. 23. Redemption of the body. From which words Saint Austen collecteth very truely, Aug. de nup∣tijs & concupi∣scentia li. 1. c. 1 Si Redemptio corporis nostri secundum Apostolum expectatur, profecto quod expectatur adhuc speratur, nondum tene∣tur. If the Redemption of our body by the Apostles doctrine must be wayted for, that which is expected is still hoped for, but not yet obtained. Take then the Redemption of the body for the incorruption of the same, as Paul doth, whom in that point I followed, and tell me what benefite of incorruption (which is the word you so much storme at) the bo∣dies of the faithfull haue more then the bodies of infidels. You range aside as your manner is, to the ceasing of sinne in the godly, and their resting from labours, as also the entrance of their soules into heauen; as if the bodies of the wicked did sinne in their graues, or were tossed with troubles when they were dead and rotten, or in the Saints your sight did not serue you to distinguish their soules from their bodies. For when I say as Paul sayth, their bodies haue not yet redemption; you replie, their soules af∣ter death haue an entrance into heauen. Euen so, when I say, that the death of the bo∣die to the saints is a part of that wrath, curse, and punishment which God inflicted on all mankinde for their sinne in Adam, as shall after (God willing) more largely appeare; you oppose the benefits which God of his peculiar goodnesse towards his children, hath reserued for them, after they haue obediently and patiently submitted them∣selues to his diuine pleasure, in bringing their bodies to corruption for the sinne that dwelleth in them. And thus by your mangling of matters you confound in the god∣lie their soules with their bodies, and in God himselfe his iustice against sinne with his mercy towards his owne. You might haue learned of S. Austen rightly to seuer them as he doth, though you crosse him in this, as in most of the things that are in question betwixt vs. Aug. contra dua epistolas Pelagianor. li. 4. ca4. Quamuis bonis conferatur per mortem plurimum boni (vnde nonnulli etiam de bono mortis congruenter disputaverunt) tamen & hinc quae praedicanda est nisi misericor∣dia Dei, quòd in bonos vsus conuertitur poena peccati? Though much good come to the god∣lie by death; (whereupon some haue accordingly written of the benefits of death) yet what els in this must we acknowledge but the mercie of God, that the punishment of sinne is turned to good vses? And so that ancient writer of the booke Hypognosticôn amongst S. Austens works: Hypognosti. li. 1. ca. 3. Vt moriantur homines poena peccati est, vt reuertantur ad vitam Domini mise∣rantis est: That men die is the punishment of (their) sinne, that they returne to life againe is the Lords mercie. Defenc. pag. 47. li. 1. Before you depart from this point, that not the bloud of Christ nor his flesh without respect to the merit of his whole soule, was the full price of redemption, you will shew how sundrie of Both body and soule must suf∣fer in Christ. the ancient Fathers doe agree with you sufficiently in this matter, though afterwards in my booke I seeme to bring them against you. ] If you had Fathers to witnesse your fansies of Christes suffering the death of the soule and paines of hell, you would soone recken them and more regard them, than now you doe, when they directly gainsay your late deuice of a new kinde of redemption, which the Scriptures neuer specifie. These Fa∣thers I brought not against you, as you imagine, not perceiuing what maketh with you nor what against you. In shew these places seemed to make against me, and to disclaime that assertion which I concluded out of the Scriptures, that the bloud of Christ redeemed and sanctified both our bodies and soules. Lest therefore the sim∣ple should stumble at any such sayings of the Fathers, not knowing their meanings, I brought them to expound them, and to let the Reader see that indeed I dissented not from them: but confessed, as they intended, that in Christes suffering for sinne the whole man, that is, bodie and soule, must be ioyned together. And if any part of Christs humane nature were wholy freed and exempted from suffering, that part in vs was not fully ransomed. By which they neuer ment that Christs soule must haue se∣uerall sufferings for our soules, and his body likewise for our bodies; but as Adam sinned in both ioyntly, so the punishment of sinne, which Christ vndertooke for vs, must be felt ioyntly in both, and if either part in Christes sufferings were vntouched, some part in vs was vnrestored. This to be the true meaning of those Fathers, and all that their words must inferre, if they will speake trueth, and agree with themselues, as no doubt they doe, your selfe is a witnesse sufficient against your selfe. In defence of your doctrine you say: Treat. pag. 22. li. 21. It is most false, that we precisely say, that Christs body satisfied for our bodies, and his soule for our soules, yea ech of them in a seuerall and distinct kinde of sa∣tisfying: which thing we neuer meant, but acknowledge the sufferings of the whole man Christ do satisfie for vs wholly, without any such precise partition. ] What you dare not affirme, because it is false and repugnant to the Scriptures, I hope you will not impose on the Fathers, so long as their words conclude no such thing. They say precisely Christ Irenaeu . li. 5. cap. 1. gaue his flesh (to be a redemption) for our flesh, and his soule likewise (to be a redemption) for our soules, Whereby they meane no distinct sufferings of Christes soule for our soule, nor of his bodie for our bodies; but a ioynt suffering of both for both, which you call the sufferings of the whole man Christ for vs wholly. So farre we agree; you ac∣knowledging Cyril. de fide ad Theodosium. mine exposition of the Fathers to be such as you doe not, nor dare not impugne: for otherwise you must make them contradict both the Scriptures, and themselues which they neuer ment, if they should say that our soules are not clensed, redeemed, and sanctified by the bloud of Christ: What now inferre you farder out of their wordes? Defenc pag. 47. li. 27. Marke well how these Fathers do not say that Christ gaue his life for a ransome only (as you would construe it) but euen his verie soule for our soules. ] You are a worthie Clerke if you vnderstand not, that nothing but the very soule of man is the life of his bodie, and therefore Christ in giuing his life for vs, must needs giue his verie soule for vs. The one of them doth not exclude the other, as you vainly collect, but implieth the other, as by the vsuall speeches of the Scriptures, and generall consent of all Interpre∣ters olde and new may soone appeare. Matt. 2. v 20 They are dead (sayth the Angell to Ioseph) that sought the childes soule; meaning Herod that went about to destroy Christ in his cradle. Matt. 6. v. 25 Be not pensiue for your soule (sayth our Sauiour) what ye shall eat or what ye shall drinke. Is not your soule of more value then meate? Meate and drinke maintaine life, and so continue the soule in the body, otherwise they are no way needfull for the soule. Matth. 10. vers. 39. He that loseth his soule for my sake, (saith Christ) shall saue it. How can a man lose his soule for Christ, but by laying downe his life for Christ? There shall be no losse Acts 27. vers. 22. of any mans soule among you, but of the ship, said Paul to them that sayled with him; which was performed in that they Ibidem v 44. Philip. 2 30. came all safe to land. So of Epaphroditus Paul saith; for the worke of Christ he was neere vnto death, not regarding his Soule. Nothing is more often in the Scriptures then for life to vse the name of Soule, which is the cause of life; and by the soule to expresse life, which is a necessary consequent of the Soule remaining in the body, as death is of the Soule departing from the body. This kind of speech so familiar with the Hebrewes, and so frequent in the olde and new Testa∣ment, our Sauiour keepeth, when he speaketh of his owne death. ohn. 10. vers. 11. The good sheepe∣heard (saith Christ) layeth downe his soule for his sheepe. I am the good sheepeheard, and Vers. 15. lay downe my soule for (the) sheepe. Vers. 17. Therefore the Father loueth me, because I lay downe my Soule to take it againe. Vers. 18. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe. As also when he said; Matth. 20. the Sonne of man came to serue, and to giue his soule for the ransom of ma∣ny; he intended no more then when he said, I lay downe my soule for ‖ the ‖ sheepe, which must needs be for the ransome of the sheepe. So the Prophet foretold that Christ should Esay. 53. power out his soule vnto death, and make it an offering for sinne; which 1. Ioh. 3. loue of God we know by this, (saith Iohn) that he layed downe his soule for vs. If auncient Fathers and learned expositors may be heard concurring with the Scrip∣tures, and obseruing this in the Scriptures, we want neither old nor new, all confes∣sing it to be a case most cleere, that by dying for vs Christ laid downe his Soule, and gaue it for vs. Christ Athanas. de incarnat. Christi contra Apo i∣narium. bowing his head (saith Athanasius) and yeelding vp the spirite which was within his body, that is his soule, declared whereof he spake (this,) I lay downe (my soule) for my sheepe. Austen; August. de sermone Domi∣ni in monte. li. 1. cap. 15. the Soule is put for the life, as where it is said, he that hateth not his soule, can not be my Disciple. And likewise is not the soule more worth then meate? that is, this life, for which meate is needfull. And (so) that which Christ saith, he will lay downe his soule for his sheepe, by which he meaneth his life, when he pronounceth that he will die for vs, Ambrose; Ambros. in Psal. 118. ser∣mo. 20. Christ tooke vpon him the person of a sheepeheard, and said; a good sheepeheard layeth downe his soule for his sheepe. Ideóque pro rationali grege seipsum passioni corporis non negauit, and therefore for his reasonable flocke he yeelded himselfe to the passion, (or death) of his body. Cyrill. When Christ Cyril. in Ioh. li. 9. ca. 2. might haue declined the rage of the Iewes, and the gibbet of the crosse, he so loued his, that he refused not to die for the life of all. And that this is most perfect charitie, Idem in Io∣hannem li. 10. ca. 22. I will cite our Sauiour himselfe for a witnesse (where he saith;) greater loue hath no man, then to lay downe his soule for his friends. By all this Christ teacheth his Disciples to be so farre from shunning daungers and troubles for the saluation of men, that the death of the flesh must not be refused; for euen to that doth charitie stretch. Fulgentius an other of the Fathers, on whom you would faine fasten your error of Christs redeeming our soules by the death of his soule, and our bodies by the death of his body; not only noteth when and how Christ laid downe his soule for vs, but why that phrase is applyed to Christs death, and to all theirs, that die wil∣lingly for loue, not necessarily vpon constraint. Fulgent. ad Thrasimundum li. 3. The whole man (Christ) laid downe his soule, when his soule departed, his flesh dying on the crosse. And so againe, Ibidem. Christ dying in the flesh, laid downe his Soule; and shewing the difference betwixt deliuering the body to death and giuing or laying downe the soule, He saith Ibidem. Where loue is not, the body is said to be deliuered, but not the soule to be laid downe; as the vessell of election plainly testifieth, If I giue my body to be burnt, and haue no loue, it auayleth me nothing. (Here Paule) declareth, that without loue the body may be yeelded, but not the soule laid downe. For where he pur∣poseth to signifie the purenesse of his loue, he thus writeth to the Thessalonians. Our goodwill was to bestow on you not onely the Gospell of God, but euen our owne soules; and to proue this an effect of his loue he addeth, because yee were deare vnto vs. So that it is proued by ma∣nifest witnesse of Scripture, that there wanteth loue, where the body onely is layed downe to death, but there is charitie, where the soule is laid downe together with the body. Beda. Beda in Euan∣gelium Iohan. cap. 10. Ponere ergo animam, mori est. Sic & Apostolus Petrus Domino dixit, animam pro te po∣nam, id est, pro te moriar carne. To lay downe the Soule is to die. So the Apostle Peter said to Christ, I will lay downe my Soule for thee, that is, I will die in the flesh for thee. Ibidem. A good sheepeheard (saith Christ) layeth downe his soule for his sheepe. He did, that he taught; he performed, that he commaunded, he laid downe his Soule for his sheepe; and shewed vs a way to contemne death, which we must follow, and a paterne after which we must be Printed, which is first to extend our outward works of mercie towards his sheepe; then if neede be to offer our death for them. The later writers are all of the same mind, and expound those words of our Saui∣our, the Sonne of man came to serue, and to giue his soule a ransome for many; and I lay downe my soule for my sheepe; to haue none other sense, then that he would die for vs, as the Fathers before them did expound the same. Erasmus in his paraphrase expres∣sing our Sauiours meaning in both places saith in the person of Christ; Eras. para∣phra. in Matth. cap. 20. Therefore I came euen to serue the welfare of all, in so much that I thinke it no burden to giue my life; by the losse of one soule to redeeme many. And againe; Idem in Ioh. hannis. cap. 10. Therefore my Father loueth me singularly as his Sonne, because of mine owne accord I bestowed my life for the safetie of my Fathers flocke. Bullinger likewise in the person of our Sauiour; Bullingerus in Mat. ca. 20. I came to serue the good of all, and that which is farre greater, I came into this world to giue my life for sinners. And so, Idem in Ioh. cap. 10. I yeeld my selfe to death, and euen to the death of the crosse, that my sheepe belee∣uing in me, may liue by my death. And alleadging and relying on Saint Austens words on the same place, he addeth out of Austen. To lay downe the soule is to die. So Peter the Apostle said to his Master; I will lay downe my soule for thee, that is I will die for thee. Attribute this to the flesh, for when the soule goeth out of the flesh, and the flesh remaineth without a soule, then is a man said to lay downe his soule. What saith the Euangelist? Christ bowing his head gaue vp the Ghost; this is, to lay downe the soule. Musculus; Christ de∣clareth what his Muscul. in Matth. ca. 20. ministerie is; euen to redeeme mortall men, and the chiefest degree of this ministerie is; that he would giue his soule (for them.) Then are we redeemed by the onely be∣gotten Sonne of God, and that dearely, euen with his owne death. For the Lord of heauen and earth humbled himselfe vnto death, and that vnto a most shamefull death. What was more vile or more abiect in the world, then the death of the crosse? And in the person of Christ; Idem in Ioh. cap. 10. Therefore my Father loueth me because I lay downe my soule; that is, because I die for (my) sheepe. Caluine vpon those words of Christ, I came to giue my soule a Redemption for many: Caluin. in Matth. ca. 20. Therefore Christ mentioneth his death, that he might withdraw his Disciples from a peruerse imagination of an earthly kingdome. In the meane time the force and fruite of his death is aptly and rightly expressed, whiles he affirmeth his life to be the price of our Redemption. Whence it followeth that the price of our reconciliation with God, is no where found but in the death of Christ; and so; It is no maruaile that Christ Idem in Ioh. cap. 10. affirmeth him∣selfe to be therefore loued (of his Father,) because he esteemeth our saluation dearer then his owne life. Ibid. He would by this arme his Disciples, least seeing him soone after to be caried to death, they should faint in hart, as if he were oppressed by his enimies, but rather acknow∣ledge it to be the wonderfull prouidence of God, that he should die to redeeme the flocke. Gualter; Gualtherus in Matth. cap. 20. Christ (saith he) came to giue his soule to be the price of Redemption for many. This passeth all offices, that men may yeeld one to another. For as him selfe saith, no man hath greater loue then this, to giue his soule for his friends. But he vouchsafeth to die for his eni∣mies. And dying for vs he bestowed life on vs, because his death was a ransome sufficient for the sinnes of the world. And so; A good sheepeheard (saith Christ) layeth downe his soule for his sheepe. b As if he should haue said, who can deny him to be a good sheepeheard that so Idem in Ioh. cap. 10. homi∣lia. 97. much loueth his sheepe, as not to refuse to redeeme their safetie with the losse of his owne life? Ibidem. And because the Sonne of God hath exposed (or yeelded) his life for vs, who can doubt, but he hath satisfied abundantly for vs? Vitus Theodorus. Vitus Theo∣dorus in Mat. cap. 20. Christ saith the sonne of man came to minister, and to giue his life for the Redemption of all. That surely is the chiefest and truest loue and seruice, when a man serueth his enimies with body and life. And likewise in the person of Christ. Idem in Ioh. cap. 10. I alone am the good sheepeheard and lay downe my soule for my sheepe; that is, by my death men are deliuered from eternall death. I aske now the Christian Reader whether he thinke it a shift of mine, when Christ Christs Soule suffered, but died not for vs. gaue his soule for vs, or our soules, for me to say, that he gaue it by the losse of his life, in such sort as the Euangelists describe; or whether the Scriptures and Fathers toge∣ther with the later writers doe not consent with me in the same exposition of Christs words. This conclusion then that Christ gaue his soule for our soules, doth not inferre that he had distinct times, places, or manners, of suffering or dying for our soules and then for our bodies; (that is erroneous & iniurious to the death of Christ and open∣ly disclaimed euen by the Discourser himselfe) but that in suffering death on the crosse, by which his soule was separated from his body after long and sharpe torments first endured in his body; his soule was the chiefe or rather the onely patient, that dis∣cerned and sustained the bitternesse of the paines, and perceiued the cause for which, and the counsell of God from whence, all that affliction was ordained and decreed. For as we sinned in body and soule, but chiefly in soule, so Christs death for our Re∣demption must grieue both body and soule, but chiefly the soule, which was ioyned with the body in suffering death; that both soule and body might be redeemed: and the paine thereof proportioned to the soule, as the pleasure of sinne chiefly deligh∣ted the soule. More then this, no Father euer ment, and this is no way denied by me. You would faine wring in a conceite of your owne into their words, which is mainly & directly against their words and resolutions in all other places, and therefore which of vs two deserueth best the name of a shifter, let the Reader iudge. The Fathers Defenc. pa. 47. li. 30. striue to expresse an exact proportion, so farre as was possible betweene Christ and vs; first in the parts that suffered in Christ, and are saued in vs: Ibid pa. 48. li. 3. Next in that which Christ suffered for vs, and which we are saued from thereby. ] They iustly conclude, that no parts of our nature are saued in vs, but such as Christ assumed into the vnitie of his person; and therefore in Christs sufferings there must be body and soule, before they could be humane sufferings or auailable for vs. As 1. Cor. 15. by man came death, so by man came the resurrection of the dead. But that they doe or would affirme, that we are saued from no more then Christ suffered for vs, or that we are wholy freed from all those kinds of paines, which he suffered for our sakes, this is a false and fantasticall propor∣tion of your owne inuenting, it is no part of their meaning. Sundry things should we haue suffered for sinne, as the death of the soule, and the death of the damned, besides reiection from all grace and blisse, confusion, malediction, and many other terrors and torments of conscience, which by no meanes these Fathers apply to Christ; but in euident and vehement words auouch the contrarie. Christ likewise suffered wrong, reproch, shame, paine, and death of the body, from which we are not freed; yea ra∣ther we must haue fellowship with his afflictions, and be Philip. 3. 10. conformed vnto his death, before we shall be partakers of the comforts that are in him, or of his resurrection. So that your running to proportions of your owne compounding, when you should bring sound probations for that you defend, is mad Musicke, though best becom∣ming the discords of your doctrine. Defenc. pag. 47. l. 32. As we are saued not in our bodies onely, nor onely in the externall sensitiue part of our soules (wherein standeth that suffering with and by our bodies) but we are saued, redeemed, and sanctified in our whole spirit and vnderstanding also; euen so (by their verdict) Christ suffered for vs not the bodily and outward sufferings by Sympathie onely, but he suffered for vs euen in his minde also. Now this is directly against your present assertion. ] A man can not readily tell, whether your assertion in this place be more false, absurd, or idle. The Scripture teacheth vs, that a man hath but two substances, of which he consisteth, a mortall and visible, which is his bodie; an immortall and inuisible, which is his soule. Our Sauiour, who best knew what man had, saith as much: Matt. 10. Feare not them, which kill the bodie, but can not kill the soule; feare him rather, that can destroy soule and bodie in hell. The names of these parts are sometimes varied, and sometimes diuided into sundrie powers and faculties, but the partes themselues cannot be increased. Salomon spea∣king of mans death, sayth: Eccles. 12. Dust goeth to the earth as it was, (meaning the bodie) and the Spirit returneth to God that gaue it, (meaning the Soule.) Of a Virgin Paul sayth, 1. Corin. 7. she careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in bodie and spirit; that is, in bodie and soule. And writing to the Thessalonians the same Apostle saith that their 1. Thess. 5. vers. 23. whole Spirit, and Soule, and Bodie may be kept blamelesse vnto the comming of the Lord Iesus Christ. Of this place diuerse haue diuersly thought. In 1. Thess. 5. vers. 23. Chrysostome, Theodoret, Ambrose, Ierome, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, commenting on these words, take the spirit for the grace of Gods spirit, wherewith our mindes are lightned and renewed; and indeede sometimes Paul vseth the word spirit, for the gifts of the spirit, as where he saith, 1. Thess. 5. Quench not the spirit; and calleth them our spirits, as the 1. Cor. 14. Spirits of the Prophets are subiect to the Prophets. Howbeit Athanasius de commune essentia patru filij & spir. san ts. Athanasius, Tertullian de resurrectione ca . Tertullian, Epiphan in Anchorato. Epipha∣nius, Nyssenu de de opificio homin . cap. 8. Gregorie Nyssene, August de origine animae ad Vincentium. l. . cap. 22. Augustine, In 1. Thess. c 5 v 23. Bede, and others, take here the spirit for the vnderstanding and minde of man; as also In 1. Thess. c 5 v 23. Caluine, In 1. Thess. c 5 v 23. Zanchius and In 1. Thess. c 5 v 23. Beza doe; who referre the soule here spoken of, to the will and affections of man; not that any of them maketh two soules in man, which were most absurd, but that by those names they note two different faculties or functions in one and the same substance of mans soule. Come now to your words and see how handsomely you proportion them, either to your Authors, or to the trueth, or to your purpose. Not one of the Fathers which you cite, nameth the minde of Christ, but onely his soule and his bodie, saue Nazian∣zene; who speaketh not of Christs suffering in the minde, but of his sanctifying the same, by assuming it in his incarnation. Let himselfe explane his owne wordes in the very same place. Nazianzepi∣stoia. 1. ad Ciedonium. Our mind (some say) is condemned. And what our flesh? is not that also condemned? then either cast away mans flesh (from Christ) for sinne, or admit mans mind, that it may be saued. For if Christ take the worse part (of man) to sanctific it by his incarnation, shall he not take the better part, that it may be sanctified, , by his assuming of mans nature? I speake not this, as if it might not safely be granted, that Christs soule suffered as well by his minde, as by his sense, and you nothing the neerer to your purpose of his suffering hell paines in mind from the immediate hand of God; but to let the Reader see how you catch at Fathers for an aduantage with∣out any shew of their words, and when they make against you, you reiect with disdaine the whole aray of them. Your diuiding of man into his parts, and your resolutions thereupon, are more ab∣surd, and haue neither trueth, learning, nor common vnderstanding in them. Of man (to shew your exactnesse) you make these partes, e bodie, the externall sensitiue part of the soule, the whole spirit, and vnderstanding also. You name here the bodie, the soule, and the spirit, but so vntowardly, that neither your selfe, nor any man els can tell how to make them agree. Hath the soule, if you will needes distinguish it from the spirit, no moe parts or powers to suffer or to be saued, but the externall sensitiue part? will you take the soule to be all one with the spirit, and so make the whole spirit, as much as the whole soule? But the Apostle reckoneth the 1. Thess. 5. whole spirit, the soule and the bodie, (whose words you would seeme to follow) and so seuereth the soule from the spirit. But not by the externall sensitiue part as you doe. Againe, why adde you the vnder∣standing also after the whole spirit? As if it were no part thereof, but a different thing from the spirit? But this is your skill, when you come to any matter of importance, to wrap it in ambiguous and confused termes, that it shall be more masterie to vnder∣stand you, then to refute you. And how commeth it about by your Philosophie, that the sufferings of the soule by and from the body pierce no farder, then into the ex∣ternall senses of the soule? Doe the sufferings of the body offend and afflict the pow∣ers onely, or the substance also of the soule? Is not the very substance of the Soule passible and punishable as well by the powers of sense, as by the affections, and vn∣derstanding? The actions, passions, powers, and faculties of the soule, are they not all grounded on and seated in the substance of the soule, so that from thence all the actions thereof must proceed, therein all the passions thereof must be receiued, and thereon all the faculties thereof depend? Are you so learned in logick, that you will bring vs passions without a subiect, or powers and faculties without a substance? Whether it be therefore by the vnderstanding, will, affections, or sense, that the soule suffereth; the substance thereof suffereth by those powers and meanes, and not any part thereof; for so much as the substance of the soule is not diuisible into parts as be∣ing a spirit, though the powers and faculties thereof may be distinguished, and cal∣led parts. Then is it a strange position of yours that the sensitiue part suffereth, or that the vnderstanding suffereth, and not the soule by either of them, when indeed the substance of the soule suffereth by or from her power or faculties of sense, vnder∣standing, and will, which are the meanes that God hath made to impresse paine on the soule. For the vnderstanding, which you call the mind, is no more a seuerall substance in the soule, then the power of sense is: and the soule not onely discerneth particular things by her facultie of sense, as she doth consequent and generall things by hir fa∣cultie of reason, but by the eares and eyes she heareth the word, and beholdeth the works of God, whence commeth information of faith and truth. Of the vnderstanding Epiphanius saith. Epiphanius contra Here∣ im. 77. &c. I thinke not our mind to be any substance of it selfe, neither hath any of the children ofthe Church so thought; but to be an effectuall power or operation giuen of God, and abiding in vs. Of the sense Tertullian saith. Tertullian de anima. cap. 8. Anima perinde per corpus corporalia sentit, quemadmodum per animam incorporalia intelligit. The soule perceiueth corporall things by the sense, euen as she doth vnderstand incorporall things by the mind. And shewing how both those powers depend on the soule, he addeth. Sit nunc & potior sensu intellectus, dummodo & ipse propria vis animae quod & sensus. Let the vnderstanding excell the sense, so that it be a proper facultie of the Soule, as the sense is. Of the passions of Christs Soule Fulgentius writeth; Fulgentius ad Trasimundum cap. 3. Nunc ostendendum nobis est pas∣sionem tristitiae, maeroris, taedij & timoris, ad animae substantiam propriè pertinere. Now must we shew that the passion of sorrow, heauinesse, and loathing of hart, and feare (which our Sauiour felt) pertaine properly to the substance of the soule. And at the length con∣cluding that Ibidem. the flesh of it selfe can neither haue life, nor sense, nor sorrow, nor desire, nor feare, nor mourning, he saith; Ibidem. Haec ergo cuncta in anima, quam susceperat, pertulit Christus, vt veram totam{que} in se cum suis infirmitatibus hominis demonstraret accepti substantiam. All these (passions) Christ endured in his soule which he tooke, that he might shew in him∣selfe THE TRVE AND VVHOLE SVBSTANCE of a man with his infirmities. The purpose for which you pretend so many Fathers is as idle, as all the rest: for Christs Soule suffered by all her powers but not the death of the Soule. the Soule of Christ might suffer by her senses, by her affections, by her vnder∣standing and will, and yet not suffer the paines of hell, nor the death of the soule, which is your doctrine. Though therefore the Fathers doe say that the soule of Christ suffered in his death and passion, which is a thing I neuer doubted of, much lesse called in question; yet neither auouch they, it suffered your hell paines, neither from the immediate hand of God, as your deuice leadeth; which things are as strange to them, as those they neuer heard of. Defenc. pa. 48. li. 23. By the Fathers, Christ suffered exactly all and whatsoeuer sorrowes and paines, which we should haue suffered, as well spirituall as corporall, as well in all the powers of the soule sub∣iect to suffering, as in that which suffered alwaies with and from the body. This if you would prooue by the Fathers themselues, and not by your false translating and mis∣applying their words, which otherwise haue no such thing, you said somewhat. You haue raked together some places alleaged Sermo. pa. 25. formerly by me, or formerly refuted by me, and out of them you would make fresh shewes, if you could tell how. There is onely one place of Cyrill, taken out of my Sermons by you, (as you doe the rest of your authorities) which hath generall termes apt to be wrested by you, and forced against the Authors minde, which you forget not to straine to the vttermost: the rest are miserably racked, without cause or colour, from the Fathers mindes and wordes. Cyrill saith, Cyrillus The∣saur. li. 10. cap. 3. Omnia Christus perpessus est, vt nos ab omnibus liberaret. Christ suffered all things, that he might free vs from all; where the word ALL is found, which you make the ground of all your descant: but thereby it plainly appeareth you take not the paines to reade the Fathers words in the places where they are written, but rashly catch at them to serue your turne, without all respect to the antecedents or conse∣quents, which would declare the writers meaning. In that Chapter whence these words are taken, Cyrill treateth not of the punishments which Christ suffered for our sinnes, but of the passions and infirmities of our nature; ALL VVHICH Christ re∣ceaued, and suffered to rise in himselfe, that they might be repressed by him, and our nature reformed. And therefore in those words, Christ suffered all to free vs from all; Cyrill euidently meaneth all the naturall infirmities and passions of our flesh. And those are his expresse words twice or thrice in that Chapter. Cyrill. The∣saur . li. 10. cap. 3. When thou hearest, (saith he) that Christ wept, feared, and sorrowed, acknowledge him to be a true man, and ascribe these things to the nature of man. For Christ tooke a mortall bodie subiect to all the passions of our nature, sinne alwaies excepted. And againe. Cyrillus ibid. How commeth it to passe, that these men know not, that all these things must be applied to mans nature (in Christ) which he truely tooke vnto him with all the passions thereof, but still without sinne. And the very recol∣lection of the words which you stand on, conuinceth Cyrill spake of the naturall pas∣sions and infirmities of our flesh. For when he had exemplified his generall wordes, Christ suffered all to free vs from all, by death, feare, and sorrow, which are naturall to our corrupt condition; he concludeth, Ibidem. & it a singulas passiones carnis fuisse in Christo absque peccato commotas inuenies, vt commotae vincerentur, & natura nostra reformaretur ad melius. AND LIKEVVISE ALL THE PASSIONS (or affections) of our flesh shalt thou finde mooued in Christ, but without sinne, that being mooued they might be re∣pressed, and our nature reformed to the better. What is this to hell paines, which I trow are no naturall infirmities or affections in man, or to the proper sufferings of the soule, which you would hence establish; since heere is no mention but of the naturall infirmities and affections of the flesh, which Cyrill calleth the passions therof, as both Diuines and Philosophers doe? ' Thus I take Bernards meaning to be (when he saith) Christ spared not himselfe, who Defenc. pa. 48. li. 12. knoweth how to spare his. ] Your taking may soone shew you to be a wilfull mistaker, but it concludeth nothing for your cause. Doth Bernard say that Christ suffered hell paines, and therein spared not himselfe? you would faine haue him say so, but he is as farre from it, as you are neere it. Bernard in that Chapter which you cite, but neuer saw; (for you went no farder for all your authorities, then my sermons,) speaketh of the sixt and seuenth time Christ shedde his blood for vs; and when he commeth to the piercing of Christs hands and his feete with spikes of iron to fasten him to the crosse; wondering at Christes patience and loue towards vs, that endured such things for vs, he saith; God which either Bernard. de passione Domini. cap. 41. shortneth, lightneth, or taketh from his seruants the force of their torments, did in nothing ease vnto himselfe the wine-presse of his passion: he spared not himselfe, that knoweth how to spare his. Doth this conclude that Christ suffe∣red the paines of hell? or that he shedde his blood vnto death for vs, not sparing him∣selfe, (from that, or, in that, which he suffered) though it were painfull and greeuous to him? But, I my selfe confesse that Christ S rm. pa. 7. suffered and endured all to the vttermost with exact obedience and patience. ] Euen as Bernard fauoured your vntoward fansies, and said nothing for them, so doe I: but doe either Bernards words or mine import, that Christ suffered all, which else we should haue suffered, as you enterlace Cyrils words to make them sound somewhat to your purpose? are you so seely that you can not, or so slie that you will not see the plaine seames of humane speech? If a man should saie you affirme all things boldly, you prooue all things weakely, you translate al thinges corruptly: Doe his words imply, that you translate Euclide and Aristotle? that you prooue the roundnesse of the earth, and the bignesse of the Sunne? or that you af∣firme the sea burneth, and the Moone melteth? Is it not the vsuall course of al speech and speakers, when they expresse how things are done, to restraine the word all with a relation to the same person and action, whereof they spake? as you affirme all things (which you affirme) boldly, you prooue all, (that you prooue) weakely; and you translate all (whatsoeuer you translate) corruptly. Doth not the Scripture obserue the like? The people said of Christ, Mark. 7. he hath done all things well. Will you inferre, that Christ made ships, built Towers, cast Lead, and did whatsoeuer, because he did all things well? or did they intend, that whatsoeuer he did, he did it well? Iohn. 1. The true light saith Saint Iohn lightneth euerie man, that commeth into the world. Where if you take all men without exception, you plant a palpable error vpon Saint Iohns words; if you restraine them to all (that are lightned) his speech is a manifest trueth in Christ, and an excellent honour to Christ. So said I of Christ, that he suffered all, (that he suffered) with exact obedience and patience; not expressing there what he suffered, but how he suffered, to wit obediently and patiently. Which wordes of mine giue you no great cause of aduantage, if you looke well vnto them, and abuse them not after your idle maner. But such poore shifts you are forced to seeke to set some colour on your cause; which otherwise would bewray it selfe to want all good groundes and proofes. As you deale with me, so you doe with Tertullian, Ambrose, Ierom, Cyprian, and Cyrill, whose words partly you mistranslate, partly you misconster, and build vpon them what best pleaseth your selfe without any precedence or sequence of their text. Tertullian saith; Tertul. ad∣uers. Praxeam cap. 30. sic reliquit, dum non parcit. So God left his Sonne, whiles he spared him not. If this make for you, why quote you not the Apostle Paul as one of your partners, who spake the word before Tertullian, and whom Tertullian citeth by name for that word? God Rom. 8. spared not his owne Sonne, saith Paul, but deliuered him for vs all. This place you baulked; because it expoundeth Gods not sparing his Sonne by deliuering him; (for God spared not his Sonne, but deliuered him; that is, God did not spare him from deliuering;) and also for that it excludeth your imagination of Gods immediate hand tormenting the soule of his Sonne, with the substance of hell paines. For if God deliuered his Sonne for vs all, he deliuered him to others, and not to himselfe; and consequently your dreame of Gods immediate hand inflicting hell paines on the soule of his Sonne, is against the Apostles words, God deliuered his Sonne. Which Christ himselfe expoundeth very often in the Gospel, saying; Matth. 17. The Sonne of man shalbe deliuered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him. And againe, Matth. 26. vers. 2. The Sonne of man shall be deliuered to be crucified; and immediately before his appre∣hension; Matth. 26. vers. 45. Behold the houre is come, the Sonne of man is deliuered into the hands of sinners. This deliuering of Christ into the hands of men to be crucified, was the not sparing him, which the Apostle meant; and was that for saking, which Christ testified on the Crosse, as Tertullian thinketh. Tertul. ad∣uers. Praxeam. cap. 30. Filium dereliquit, dum hominem eius tradit in mortem. Hoc & Apostolus sensit, scribens, si pater Filio non pepercit. Sic reliquit, dum non parcit; sic re∣liquit, dum tradit. Ceterum non reliquit pater filium, in cuius manibus Filius spiritum suum posuit. Deni{que} posuit, & statim obijt. Spiritu enim manente in carne, caro omnino mori non potest. Ita relinqui á patre, mori fuit filio. God left (or forsooke his Sonne (as Christ com∣plained on the Crosse) whiles he deliuered his humane nature vnto death. This the Apo∣stle meant when he wrote, if God spared not his Sonne. So God left him, whiles he spared him not; so God left him, whiles he deliuered him. Otherwise the Father forsooke not the Sonne, into whose hands the Sonne commended his spirit. He laide it downe and presently died. For while the spirit abideth in the flesh, the flesh can not die at all. Then to bee left of the Father, was as much in the Sonne, as to die. Here are Tertullians words in order as they stand. Where first he maketh the Sonne to die, when hee laide downe his soule into his Fa∣thers hands. This death, by which the soule of Christ departed from his body, was that deliuering, that not sparing, which Paul meant; and that forsaking which Christ spake of on the crosse. What finde you here for the paines of Hell, or for the proper sufferings of the soule? You may peruert any mans words, if you will, but of them selues these are very coherent and euident. In Ambrose you finde more hold. He saith: Minus contulerat mihi, nisimeum sus∣cepisset f Defenc. pag. 48. li. 17. affectum. Christ had done lesse for me if hee had not beene (altogether) affected, as I should haue beene. ] Though you be no good concluder, yet are you a notable transla∣tour. For you can turne the English not onely cleane from, but quite against the La∣tine. Where Ambrose saith, Christ had done lesse for mee, (if taking my nature vnto him) hee had not also taken my (naturall) affection vnto him) as feare, sorrow, and such like; you misconster affection for punishment, and mine, that is naturally mine, for that which I should haue suffered in hell; and adding the word ( altogether ) of your owne, you make Ambrose say; that Christ was altogether affected (that is punished in soule) as I should haue beene, (in hell) if I had not bene redeemed. But by what Gram∣mar doth affectus signifie hell paines? Feare, griefe, and sorrow, are naturall affections in all men, and passions of the soule; they signifie not in their owne nature the tor∣ments of the damned. How shall we know this to bee Ambrose meaning? Hee that hath but halfe an eye, may see by that whole Chapter the roote of this sorrow, to bee the infirmitie of our nature in Christ, and the cause thereof to be his compassion and pitie had of vs, and for vs. The next words to those which you bring, are. Ambros. in Luc. li. 10. de tristitia & do∣lere Christs. Ergo pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret. And presently, taedio meae infirmitatis affi∣citur. Christ therefore sorrowed for me, who had nothing in him selfe for which he should sor∣row; he is affected with the tediousnesse of my infirmitie. The tediousnesse of our infirmitie af∣fected him, not the torments of hell suffered in his owne soule. Ibidem. Ne{que} speciem incarna∣tionis suscepit, sed veritatem. Debuit ergo & dolorem suscipere, vt vinceret tristitiam, non excluderet. Christ tooke vpon him not the shew, but the trueth of our flesh. Hee was there∣fore to feele griefe, (as a consequent to our nature) that he might ouercome sorrow, and not exclude it. Ibidem. Tristis est non ipse, sed anima. Suscepit enim animam meam, suscepit cor∣pus meum. Anima obnoxia passionibus. Christ was sorrowfull not in person, but in soule. For he tooke vnto him my soule, and my body. Now the soule it is, that is subiect to passions. Is hell with you of late become a naturall infirmitie and affection, that wheresoeuer you reade either of these words, you streight inferre the paines of hell? The causes of Christes sorrow will put all out of doubt, and are plainely recited by Ambrose in the ende of this Chapter, though stifly reiected by you, because they sort not with your conceits. Ibid. Tristis videbatur, & tristis erat, non pro sua passione, sed pro nostra disper∣sione. Christ seemed sorrowfull, and indeede was sorrowfull, not for his owne suffering, but for our dispersing. You say Christs sorrow was for the suffering of hell paines in his soule; Ambrose saith in expresse words; Christ sorrowed not for his owne suffering: which of you twaine shall wee thinke best vnderstoode Ambrose meaning? him selfe, or you? Christ, sorowed, saith Ambrose, Ambros. ibid. for our dispersion; he sorrowed because he left vs orphanes, he sorrowed for his persecutors. All these occasions of sorrow in Christ at the time of his passion mentioned by Ambrose you vtterly disauerre, and in spite of Ambrose teeth, you will haue the infirmitie and affection of mans nature in Christ to signifie hell. Yet Ierom shall helpe at a neede, who saith; Defenc. pa. 44. li. 20. That which we should haue borne for our sinnes, the same (Christ) suffered for vs. ] You might haue done well to haue put quic∣quid for quod, as one of your fellowes hath done alleaging this place, that where Ie∣rom would not say, Christ suffered for vs, whatsoeuer we should haue suffered, your selues may speake it in his name. Neither is it so strange a thing with you to translate all for some. In the very next Page before, citing Ambrose words, hoc in se obtulit Christus, quod induit; Christ offered that in him selfe, which he tooke (of vs;) you render it, Christ offered in sacrifice Defenc. pa. 47. li. 17. ALL that which he assumed; which translation is euidently false, whatsoeuer the illation be. This place of Ierom I haue already answered in the Pag. 350. con∣clusion of my Sermons; and but that the booke happely will not alwaies be at hand, I would spend no moe words therein. The particular can not hurt me, if it be simply graunted; and the generall is not affirmed by Ierom. Howbeit Ierom in plaine speech presently expresseth what he ment Christ suffered for vs. By this (saith he) Hiero. in Esa. cap. 53. it is ma∣nifest, that as Christs body whipt and torne bare the printes of the stripes and wrongs, so his soule truely sorrowed for vs. What neede we any other exposition then his owne, that Christ suffered for vs smart of body and griefe of minde, which were due to vs in this world where Christ suffered for vs, besides the torments of the next world, where Christ neither did, nor could suffer any thing? Cyprians words are far weaker for your purpose, & wider fro your matter. He saith, Christ was called sinne, and a curse; Cypria. de passione Christi. pro similitudine poenae, non culpae; for the likenesse of punishment, not of fault: LIKE is farre lesse then the same. If therefore Christs pu∣nishment were but like, there is no necessitie it should be the same. Againe, when Cyprian nameth the likenesse of our punishment suffered by Christ on the crosse; he meaneth the punishment of sinne, that God inflicted on Adam, and all his of-spring in this life, where Christ suffered for vs, as sorrow, shame, reproch, paine, and death which were the punishments that God laid on Adams transgression in this life. The death of the Soule Adam pulled on him selfe by sinning; that Christ suffered not: the other God inflicted with his owne mouth, and by them accursed and punished sinne in this world, reseruing his terrible and eternall iudgements, which are the paines of hell, to an other time and place, when the bodies of the wicked should be altered and abled to endure those intolerable and euerlasting torments, threatned, but not executed in this world. The first kind of punishment due to all men in this life for sinne, Cyprian saw and knew full well, and by the Scriptures found that to be in Christ on the Crosse; the paines of hell Cyprian knew not, much lesse could he be sure that Christ suffered them, since no such thing is mentioned in the Scriptures. Let then the Reader iudge, whether Cyprian were likely to speake of that, which he knew and read, or rashly to pronounce that to be like, which he neither knew nor read. But if Cyprian bee the fittest man to declare his owne meaning, Cyprian euen in that place speaketh directly against your supposed paines of hell, suffered in the soule of Christ on the Crosse. Admiror te cruci inter damnatos affixum, iam nec tristem, nec paui∣dum, Cypria. ibid. sed suppliciorum victorem eleuatis manibus triumphantem de Amelec. I admire thee, ô Lord, being once fastned to the Crosse amidst the condemned (theeues) to bee now neither sorrowfull, nor fearefull, but despising the punishments (laid on thee) with thine hands lifted vp to triumph ouer Amelec, (the enemies of Gods people.) If Christ once fastned to the Crosse had neither sorrow nor feare, but a neglect of his paines, and a ioyfull tri∣umph ouer all his foes, I trust hee felt not the paines of hell; which were very easie, if they brought with them neither sorrow, nor feare, but rather contempt and triumph. Christ feared before in the garden, you will say, and for feare or paine did sweate bloud.] That Cyprian remembreth and explaineth, wherein you shall see the diffe∣rence betwixt his iudgement and yours of Christs sufferings. Cypria. ibid. Thou diddest Lord (saith he) professe before thine Apostles thy selfe to be sorrowfull vnto death, and for exceeding griefe didst power foorth a bloudie sweate. Hearing this (in the gospel) I was vtterly abashed. For who will not feare, if be feare whom all things feare? His answere I wil set downe in La∣tine, though it will be the longer, as well to let the Reader heare Cyprians resolution in his owne words, which many will desire, and to discharge my selfe from all quarels of mistranslating, whiles I sometimes seeke to make that plaine to the simple, which in the text is more darke and obscure; as for diuers other respects, which I will after mention, when Cyprians minde is fully knowen. His words are, Cypria. de pas∣sione in initio. Sed metus ille infir∣mitatis humanae communem exprimebat affectum, & generalitatem omnium in carne viuen∣tium hoc dolore vrgeri, & dissolutionem corporeae spiritualis{que} naturae hac molestia non posse carere, & hanc poenam vniuersae successioni Adam sine exceptione impositam, vt difficultas extremi transit us timeretur. Hanc nemo anxietatem euasit, & nemo egrediente anima sine amaritudine expirauit. But that feare (of thine o Lord) did expresse the common affecti∣on of mans infirmitie, and the generall state of all liuing in the flesh to be pressed with this sor∣row; and that the separation of body and soule can not be free from this griefe, but this punish∣ment is laide on all Adams posteritie without exception, that the difficultie of departing this life should be feared: this wofulnesse no man euer escaped, neither did euer any man breath out his soule without bitternesse. Here you may learne; first, whence Ambrose, who was a great follower of Cypri∣an, tooke his words of humane infirmitie and affection, and what hee meant by them. Secondly, that this is a punishment (which you denie) laide by God himselfe on all mankinde, to feare and feele death separating the soule from the body. Thirdly, from this was no man euer exempted, but euen Christ himselfe, though he were free from that necessitie, yet would hee be partaker of this our infirmitie. Fourthly, that where on the crosse Christ neither feared nor sorrowed, but shewed him selfe terrible to his persecutors, and a conquerour of all their malice, and a triumpher ouer all their iniuries, yet to his Disciples in the garden hee opened his affection incident to our nature, thereby to confirme himselfe to bee a true man by his taking as well our infir∣mities, as our flesh. Lastly out of Cyprian in that Sermon you may learne, that to Christ the Cypria. ibid. sight of (God) his Father could not bee formidable, that it was his Fathers will the sacrifice of his flesh should begin with feare and sorrow, that hee sorrowed to heale our weaknesse, and feared to make vs secure, by repressing those infirmities in his owne per∣son, to cure them in vs for euer after. All these and many moe good lessons you cleane ouerslip in Cyprian, and broching a new doctrine quite contrarie to his, you lay violent hands on one poore word in that whole treatie, which yet maketh nothing for you; and as though you had performed a worthy worke, grossely to mistake the like for the same, you muster Cyprian as a maintainer of your new made hell. Defenc pag. 47. li. 24. Say as Fulgentius saith, and wee aske no more. Quicquid fuit infirmitatis animae, sine peccato suscepit & pertulit. Christ tooke vpon him and suffered whatsoeuer infirmitie may bee in the soule without sinne. ] I hope you will your selfe accept the condition, which you offer to others, and I require no more. But what is there in these words on which you so stoutly stand, and so confidently crake, that helpeth your deuice forward? Grant them absolutely, and what conclude you? The griefe of hell paines suffered from the immediate hand of God, is an infirmitie of the soule, you must say; if you will say any thing towards the matter you haue in hand. But who euer said so, that knew his left hand from his right? What passing dulnesse and surpassing drowsinesse is this, to make the suffering of hell paines from the immediate hand of God an infirmitie of the soule? As if it were weaknesse in man, not to be stronger then God; or imbecilitie, not to be able to resist his power? [ Feare and sorrow are infirmities; and Fulgentius sayth whatsoeuer infirmitie, that is whatsoeuer feare, or sorow may be in the soule, the same Christ tooke and suffered. ] These must be your collections, if you open your mouth to make any; and these bee so grosse, that no boy would engage himselfe with them. For the name of Infirmitie doth naturally note the speciall kindes thereof, by which they dif∣fer from other things that are not infirmities; it doth not import either degrees, to which they may grow; or the causes, from whence they may rise. Is it then any conse∣quent, that if Christ tooke vpon him all kinds of infirmities, and passions of the soule, he must therefore vndergoe all degrees, and all the causes of feare and sorrow, that may be in the soule? Christ did feare, and Christ did sorow; for those without que∣stion were infirmities of his humane soule. Will it thence follow that Christ suffered all those dangers, losses, harmes, which men in this life doe, and may feare? If these will no way follow vpon Fulgentius words, how will the paines of hell be thence de∣riued, which I vtterly denie to be any infirmitie in mans soule, since no creature is so strong, though he were an Angell, as to decline, or resist the hand of God in punish∣ing? Fulgentius wordes therefore, that Christ tooke vnto him euery infirmitie of the soule, doe not inferre that Christ suffered euery degree, or euery obiect of feare and sorrow, but onely that he feared and sorowed, which maketh as much for your hell paines, as feathers doe to reare a fortresse. The wordes of Fulgentius at your best aduantage doe you little good; his true meaning doth you farre lesse. For going onward to debate this matter more at large, he addeth two conditions to the infirmities and affections of Christs soule: the one that they were naturall, that is necessarily consequent to the nature of man; the other that they were voluntarie in Christ, though in vs they be necessarie. These limitations are very often in that Booke expressed, whence your words are taken. Fulgentius de passione Domini ad Trasimundū lib. 3. Animae tristi∣tiam & perturbationem, quam voluntariam in anima Dei filius habuit sic habuisse credatur, vt etiam ipsas humanae animae passiones, & voluntate veras, & in veritate voluntarias non n gemus. The sorrow and trouble of soule which the Sonne of God had voluntarily in his soule, he must be beleeued so to haue had, that we done them not to be true, because they were voluntarie; nor to be voluntarie, because they were true. This hee maketh common to bodie and soule. Ibidem. Quia verum hominem suscepit, ideo cunctas humanae naturae infirmi∣tates veras quidem, sed voluntarias in eadem veritate naturae duntaxat humanae sustinuit. Because Christ tooke vpon him to be a true man, therefore he sustained ALL the true infir∣mities of mans nature, but yet voluntarie in the trueth of the same nature onely. If you know not what naturall and voluntarie passions in Christes manhood doe meane, you may learne of Damascene, whom an adherent of yours much esteemeth, and often alleageth, though Damascene make nothing for his or your purposes. Wee confesse, sayth Damascene, that Christ tooke vnto him Damascenus orthodox. fides lib. 3. cap. 20. ALL NATVRALL AND BLAME∣LESSE passions. For he assumed the whole man, and all that pertained to man, saue sinne. Naturall and blamelesse passions are those, which are not in our power, and whatsoeuer entred into mans life, through the condemnation of (Adams) sinne, as hunger, thirst, weakenesse, labour, weeping, corruption, shunning of death, feare, agonie, whence (came) sweat and drops of blood. These things are in all men by nature. Christ therefore tooke all these vnto him, that he might sanctifie them all. Howbeit our naturall passions were in Christ according to nature, and aboue nature. According to nature they were stirred vp in Christ, when he permitted his flesh to endure that which was proper vnto it. Aboue nature (they were in Christ) be∣cause nature in him did neuer go before his will. For there was nothing forced in him, but all things voluntarie. When he would he hungred, when he would he thirsted, when he would he feared; when he would he died. The naturall infirmities and passions then, which Christ tooke vnto him, as Damascene teacheth, were common to all men by nature, and so are not the paines of hell; they were in this life, so a not the other; they were sanctified, so cannot the torments of hell be; they were voluntarie, that is, they moo∣ued not in Christ, but at his owne will. Wherefore by Damascenes iudgement, Christ did not suffer your hellish torture from the immediate hand of God, by which he was wholy amazed and ouerwhelmed, as you say, with the waight and anguish of them, which could not be with his will. I haue stood to Fulgentius words, more then which you did not aske; will you now likewise be tried by Fulgentius testimonie, whether you teach an errour exiled from all Christian hearts in his age? Or if you will not, your Reader will soone per∣ceaue, that what was then reiected for an absurditie and falsitie, (I will spare heauier termes till I come to fuller proofes) can not now be professed as pietie. Touching Christs death by which wee are redeemed, that it had in it neither the death of the soule, nor the paines of hell, Fulgentius is very plaine euen in the same booke, where you would haue him so much forget himselfe, as to speake the contrary. Fulgentius ad Trasimundum lib. 3. Quis igno∣ret Christum nec diuinitate, sed in solo corpore mortuum & sepultum? Who can be ignorant (if he be a Christian) that Christ died and was buried not in his diuinitie, but onely in bodie? and againe, Ibidem. In morte solius carnis immortalis fuit. Christ was immortall, nothing dying in him but his flesh. And so Ibidem. Cum sola caro moreretur & resuscitaretur in Christo, filius Dei dicitur mortuus. When onely the flesh died and was raised againe in Christ, yet the Sonne of God is said to haue died. And as though no repeating were susficient; Ibidem. In tota (huma∣nitate) traditus idem Christus, secundum solam carnem mortuus, secundum solam carnem de sepulcho surrexit. The same Christ deliuered in his whole (humanitie) died in his flesh onely, and rose againe onely in his flesh. And least you should wrench aside, as you after∣ward doe, that the name of Christs flesh containeth soule and bodie; besides that the word bodie directly excludeth the soule, which can not be the bodie; and so doeth the buriall and resurrection of Christ, for so much as the soule of Christ neither was, neither could be buried nor raised from the graue; Fulgentius in full and faire words exempteth not only the deitie, but the soule of Christ as well as the deitie from death. Fulgentius eo∣dem libro. Moriente carne non solum deitas, sed nec anima Christi potest ostendi commortua. When Christ died in the flesh, neither can the godhead, nor the soule of Christ be shewed to haue bene also dead. And of hell paines he saith, Ibidem. Dignum fuit, vt animam dolor non contigisset in∣ferni, quam seruitus nequiuit tenere peccati. It was a meete (and right) thing that the paines of hell should not touch that soule, whom the seruitude of sinne could not fasten on. Yet Cyrill in the place aboue cited Defenc. pag. 48. li. 35. SEEMETH to acknowledge A KIND OF DEATH EVEN OF THE SOVLE, from which Christ reuiued againe. But of that in due place hereafter. ] Is the death of Christs soule so slender a matter, that you may collect it by a seeming, and a kind of death, without any mention, or occasion of any such thing comprised in Cyrils words? The Reader may there obserue what your maine intent is, and whereon you fasten your eyes all this while, euen on the death of Christs soule to be requisite for our Redemption, though you finde no such thing in Scripture or Father; but miserably and childishly slide it in at last with a seeming. Now if there be no such thing in Cyrils words, nor any such seeming, how wel deserue you to be hissed out with hands, if not to be hurled out by the heeles, for a seeming sleeper, if not for a waking dreamer? what are those words of Cyrill, that seeme to acknowledge the death of Christs soule? Christ bestowed his flesh as a ransome for our flesh, and made his soule likewise the price of redemption for our soules, although he liued againe, being by nature life it selfe. It is lawfull for you to further euery place you bring, with a mayned and forced translation. Cyrils true words stand thus: Cyril. ad The∣odosium de re∣ctafide. . Without constraint of any, Christ of himselfe laide downe his owne soule for vs, that he might be Lord of dead and quicke: yeel∣ding his flesh in recompence, as a gift fully worth it, for the flesh of all, and making his soule (or life) a ransome for the soule (or life) of all, though he reuiued againe, being life by nature, in that he was God. The words which you would cite, are heere no perfect sentence, as hauing no principall verbe in them, and therefore must be ioyned with the former and depend vpon the verbe ( Christ layd downe his soule ) which gouerneth the whole; as appeareth also by the two participles , yeelding in recompence, and , making, which must be directed by the same nominatiue case that is, and likewise by the opposition of the verbe , he reuiued. Of what death Cyrill here speaketh, is more then manifest by the words of our Sauiour here vsed and deriued from the Gospell, where he said, Iohn 10. None taketh my soule from me, or constraineth me to die, I lay it downe of my selfe; and likewise, Matth. 20. the Sonne of man came to giue his soule (or life) a ransome for many. What kind of death those words of Christ imported, I made it appeare but a little before by the full consent of Scriptures and interpreters old and new, and of Cyrill himselfe, who all with one accord referre both those sayings to the death of Christs bodie, and the losse of his life on the Crosse, when his soule departed from him. Set that downe in Cyrils first words for the death which Christ died by the constant assertion of Scriptures, Fathers, New writers, and of Cyrill himselfe; and then the words which you alleage shew plainely the force of his corpo∣rall death to be auaileable for the bodies and soules of all men, in that his flesh yeel∣ded to death was a recompence or exchange for all mens flesh; and his soule laide downe without constraint of any, was the ransome of all mens soules; and he notwith∣standing rose againe the third day to life by his owne power, as being God and life it selfe, against whom death could preuaile no farder, nor longer, then hee him selfe would. Where are the words that acknowledge the death of Christs Soule, or that so much as seeme to acknowledge a kind of death in the soule of Christ? Here are the cleane contrarie. For if the death of Christs bodie, by which he laid aside his soule for vs, be sufficient to redeeme the bodies and soules of all men, then superfluous and needlesse euen by these words was the death of Christs soule, the whole being fully perfourmed without it. But he gaue his flesh to be a ransome for our flesh, and his soule for our soules, you say, and yet liued againe. ] Cyrill doth not say by seuerall deaths, but by one and the same death, which was the laying down of his soule or life for vs, as Christ himselfe in the Gospel said he would. If those wordes inferre the death of Christes soule, why bring you not the words of Christ himselfe, saying; Matth. 20. The Sonne of man came to giue his soule a ransome for many. You saw the Scriptures themselues and the whole Church of Christ, first and last, I meane all old and new writers, translators and expositors would condemne your folly therin, in most exact words taking soule there for life, which must needes import the death of Christs bodie. And therefore you thought it more safetie to catch at the same words in some Father, for whose meaning there could not be brought so many, and so sound deponents. But all in vaine. For if Christ had no meaning in those wordes to point out the death of his owne soule, then Cyrill alleaging and obseruing the words of Christ, can haue no such purpose as to crosse the Scriptures, himselfe, and all the Fathers of Christs Church in a matter so dangerous and desperate, as the death of Christs soule amounteth vnto. In the meane while his words conclude no such thing, neither in saying nor in seeming; and so your embracing them to that end, argueth your good will to seeke, but your euill lucke to finde any such thing as the death of Christs soule in all the Fathers. Cyrill doth not say Christ rose againe, which properly belongeth to the body, but he reui∣ued or liued againe which seemeth to be spoken of the Soule. ] Then Saint Paul maketh more for you, then Cyrill doth: for he affirmeth both os Christ; to this end (saith he) Christ died, and rose againe, and reuiued, that he might be Lord of dead and liuing. And in∣deed resurrection properly noteth from whence Christ arose, to wit from the graue; Reuiuing expresseth the blessed and glorious life which he enioyed, after he was risen from the dead. Christ himselfe saith of his, they shall come forth (of their graues) Ioh. 5. v. 29. vn∣to the resurrection of life, to separate them from the wicked who shall come likewise forth vnto the resurrection, but of iudgement and condemnation. Notwithstanding in Christ there is either no difference betwixt them, the one euer implying the other; or if we make any, Christs reuiuing alwaies presupposeth his Resurrection as antece∣dent, since he possessed not that immortall and heauenly life, which now he hath, but vpon his arising from the dead. And so the Apostle placeth them, Christ died, and rose againe, and reuiued (into such power and glory, that he was) made Lord ouer dead and quicke. And Cyrill who often times vseth this word ( he reuiued ) of Christ, meaneth the third day after Christs death, when the Scriptures affirme he rose from the graue. So Cyrill and the Synode of Alexandria that ioyned with him in writing vnto Nesto∣rius say of Christ. Epist. Cyrilli & Synode A∣lex. ad Nesto∣rium. , he reuiued the third day hauing spoyled hell; and so in his second confession of the true faith to the religious Queenes, Cyrill de fide ad Reginas li. 2. . Christ spoyling death reuiued the third day. And in his Epistle to those of Egypt. Christ is said (in the Scriptures) first to haue died as a man, Cyrill epist. ad Presbyt. & mo ch Aegypt. , and after that to haue returned to life, by that which he was by Nature. If then he died not in the flesh according to the Scriptures, he was not quickned by the Spirit, , that is he reuiued not againe. So that Cyrill hath not any see∣ming words for the death of Christs Soule; but saith as Christ said in effect before, that the Sonne of man gaue his (soule or) life to be a ransome for the life of all, and not for the Soule of all, which in the singular number is neither good English, nor good Diuinitie, though to smooth it, you put the plurall and say, for our soules, which is not in Cyrill. The words of Ambrose will prooue that Christ offered his Soule for vs; Defenc. pa. 47. li. 17. hoc in se obtulit Christus quod induit. Christ offered in Sacrifice all that which he assumed. ] Be∣sides that you falsifie Ambrose by adding ALL to his words, which haue no such thing in them, you est Ambroses words against Ambroses meaning. For though it may well be graunted, that Christ offered body and soule as a Sacrifice of holinesse and obedience vnto God; and that Christs Soule likewise was laid downe vnto the death of his body to feele the smart thereof, and to be seuered by the force thereof; in which respect Esay saith, that Christ powred forth his Soule vnto death: Yet Ambrose spea∣king of Christs sacrifice for the sinnes of the people, meaneth (as the rest of the Fa∣thers doe) that part of the Sacrifice, which was slaine; which was by his and their confession, Christs body, and not Christs Soule. Heare Ambrose him selfe Ambros. de fide. li. 3. ca. 5. In quo nisi in corpore, expiauit populi peceata? In quo passus est nisi in corpore? Wherein did Christ sacrifice for the sinnes of the people, but in his body? wherein did he suffer (death) but in his body? And so Theodoret: Christ was Theodoret. Dialogo. 1. called a Priest in his humane nature, , and offered none other Sacrifice but his owne body. Athanasius nameth what Christ put on, and what he offered. Athanasius contra Ar anos ratio. 3. The word of God that made all things, was afterward made an hie Priest, . Putting on a body that was borne and made, which he might offer for vs. Nazianzene saith to Christ. Nazianzen. in illud Euan∣gelis, Cum con∣summasset Iesus hos sermones. Thou art a sheepe, because thouwast a Sacrifice; thou art an hie Priest, because thou offeredst thy body. Augustine also, Sacerdos propter victi∣mam, quam pro nobis offerret, a nobis acceptam. Christ a Priest, for the Sacrifice, he tooke of vs, that he might offer it for vs. What that Sacrifice was he sheweth saying: Idem in Psal. 64. Assump∣sit a nobis, quod offerret Domino; ipsas diximus sanctas primitias carnis ex vtero virginis: Christ tooke of vs that he might offer to the Lord, we meane the holy first fruits of his flesh y August. in Psal. 109. (taken) from the wombe of the Virgine. Theophylact; Theophylact in cap. 8 e st. ad Hebraeos. A Priest may by no meanes be without a Sacrifice. It was then necessarie that (Christ) should haue somewhat to offer. Quod autem offerretur praeter eius corpus nil quidpiam erat; necessariò ergo & mortuus est. Now there was vtterly nothing that he might offer, besides his body; it was needfull then he should die. This that Christ tooke a body to offer, is most agreeable to Ambroses mind as well in the booke which you cite, as in other parts of his writings. Ambros. de incarnat. Do∣man. sacra∣mento. ca. 6. Ex segenerauit Ma∣ria, Marie conceiued of her selfe, (to wit, of her owne body) that what was conceiued of her, might be the true nature of a body. And alleadging Saint Pauls words; that Christ was made of the seede of Dauid according to the flesh, Rom. 1. and made of a woman, Galat. 4. He concludeth; Ibidem. Ergo ex nobis accepit, quod proprium offerret pro nobis, vt nos redime∣ret ex nostro. Then Christ tooke of vs, that which hee might offer as his owne for vs, to the ende he might redeeme vs by that which was ours. And declaring what he meant euen by the words, which you bring, Christ offered that in himselfe which hee put on; Ambrose addeth: Ibid. Non igitur diuinitatem induit, sed carnem assumpsit, vt spolium carnis exueret, Christ put not on the nature of his Diuinitie, but he tooke flesh that he might put off the spoyle of his flesh (when he should die.) Now if the flesh of Christ were subiect to all iniuries, how say you, that Christs flesh is of the same substance with his Godhead? What else doe you in so saying, but compare Adams slime and our earth to the Diuine substance? Here Ambrose plainely confesseth, what hee meant, Christ tooke vnto him, and offered for vs; euen Adams slime and our earth, whereof his body was made. Which elsewhere hee pre∣cisely auoucheth, saying. Ambros in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 10. Corpus suscepit nostrae mortalitatis, vt pro nobis haberet quid offerret. Christ assumed our mortall body, that he might haue what to offer for vs. And least you should after your trifling maner, aske whether we exclude an humane soule from the body, which Christ tooke of the substance of his mother, and which hee offered for vs to death on the Crosse, I answere with Ambrose. Ambros. de incarnat. Do∣man. Sacram. cap. 7. Cum susceperit carnem hominis, consequens est vt perfectionem incarnationis plenitudinem{que} susceperit. Nihil enim in Christo imperfectum. Where as Christ tooke vnto him the flesh of a man, it is consequent that hee tooke vnto him the perfection and fulnesse of incarnation; for there is no∣thing imperfect in Christ. And what neede was there, hee should take flesh without a Soule, when as an insensible flesh, and an vnreasonable soule was neither subiect to sinne, nor capable of reward? An humane soule was a necessarie sequell to Christs body, which he tooke of the seede of Dauid and substance of his mother, as it is to all ours before we can be men: but the soule is not comprised in the name of the body, much lesse doeth it re∣ceiue the same conditions and properties which the body doth. Though then I make no doubt, but Christ at his birth and at his death, as all his life long, had both a body and a perfect reasonable and humane soule, indued with all the powers, affections and infirmities of mans nature, saue sinne and the corruption of sinne; yet is it no con∣sequent with Ambrose, that Christs soule was made of a woman as his flesh was, nor that Christ died the death of the soule, when his body died on the Crosse. Let them doubt (saith Ambrose) Ambros. de incarnat. Do∣min. Sacram. cap. 7. of that which the Prophet saith (my soule hateth your new Moones and Sabboths;) This that is testified in the Gospel (therefore the Father loueth me because I lay downe my soule to take it againe) they can not refute to bee spoken of the proprietie of the soule, when as it is spoken of the Lords death and resurrection. The bo∣die of Christ could not die, but by laying downe his soule, as also it could not rise to life, but by taking it againe. So that both Christes death and his resurrection doe cleerely prooue, that he had a true soule as Ambrose noteth, which by his death was seuered from his body, and by his resurrection was assumed againe into his body. And yet that death was proper to Christs body and not to his soule; though the soule felt the smart and sting thereof as well before, as when it departed from his body. Tertull. contra Marcionem. li. 5. cap. 9. Corpus est quod amit tit animam, & amittendo fit mortuum; it a mortui vocabulum corpori competit. Porro si resurrectio mortui est, mortuum autem non aliud est quàm corpus, corpo∣ris erit resurrectio. It is the body (saith Tertullian) that looseth the soule, and by loosing it dieth, so that the word, dead, agreeth to the body. Now if the resurrection be of that which was dead, and nothing can be dead besides the body, Resurrection must likewise pertaine to the body. This death and this resurrection, I meane of the body, was found in Christ, yours is very strange to Ambrose and to all the Fathers. Ambro. de fide li. 3. cap. 5. Per quam nisiper corporis mor∣tem, mortis vincula dissoluit? By what other death (saith Ambrose) then by the death of the body, did Christ breake the bands of death? Thus haue you spent your great store of Fathers with small successe; and though you dissemble where you borrowed them, yet you dissemble not your excessiue brag∣ging of them, as if they were Defenc. pag 49. l. 1. cleane against me, and for you in the chiefest point of this question: where indeede you doe but reach after a word in them here and there, and that not rightly conceaued, or not rightly translated; from whence you would faine inferre your fansies, saue that neither the grounds of trueth nor learning, will beare you out in your conclusions. That Christs sufferings did belong to bodie and soule the Fathers affirme, whether by Sympathie or without Sympathie they say nothing; much lesse that Christ suffered in minde distinctly from soule or bodie. Nazianzene saith he assumed mans mind at his incarnation, that thereby he might sanctifie it; be∣sides him not one of your places so much as nameth the minde. As for Gods imme∣diate hand punishing the soule of Christ, in his passion, if you should fast till you find that in these or any other Fathers, you should fast, not fourtie dayes but yeares. And as though these were not falsities enough to loade the Fathers with, you hoyse vp the top sayle of vntrueth, and flant it out, that Defenc. pag. 49. li. 6. these Fathers say, Christ suffered all these paines, which els we should haue suffered, and was spared in nothing: plainely belying your Authors, which say no such thing, and out-facing your Reader, as if his sight did not serue him to seuer your shamefull additions from the texts of those anci∣ent writers. Cyrill sayth, Christ suffered all things (that is, all naturall and innocent in∣firmities and passions of bodie and soule, as Cyrill explaineth himselfe in the same Chapter, yea in the close of the very same sentence) to whose words you adde of your owne, WHICH els we should haue suffered. Only, you ioyned them at first so cunning∣ly to Cyrils sentence hauing two parts, that a man could not readily tell to which you referred this addition, saue that now in the recapitulation of your proofes, you ap∣parantly tie them to the former. For if you made Cyrill to say, Christ suffered to free vs from all, which els we should haue suffered, that assertion is verie true; onely, these last words are yours and not Cyrils. If you make him to say, Christ suffered all, which els we should haue suffered, this hath neither trueth in it, nor any colour in Cyrils text. Ie∣rome indeede saith, Christ suffered that which we ought to haue suffered, meaning, what Christ suffered, was due to vs, and not to him; but Ierome is farre from your all, which els we should haue suffered. Your sleight then in collecting your conceits from the Fathers sayings, is woorth the obseruing. Nazianzene sayth, Christ in his incarnation assumed mans mind to sancti∣sie it. Cyrill saith, Christ SVFFERED ALL the infirmities and passions of mans na∣ture. Ierome sayth: That which was due to vs for our sinnes, Christ suffered for vs. And Tertullian saith, God spared not his owne Sonne, but deliuered him for vs, that is, God spa∣red him not from deliuering. Out of these foure places, hauing different causes, ends, and respects, for which, to which, & in which they were written, you clout this conclusion, as common to them all, which is repugnant to euery one of them; that Christ IN MIND (so saieth Nazianzene) SVFFERED ALL, (so saith Cyrill) WHICH VVAS DVE TO VS, (so saith Ierome) WITHOVT SPARING, (so saith Ter∣tullian.) By this order and manner of hudling and hampering different things and di∣uerse places together, you may collect what you will, when you will, and out of whom you will; and this is your Defenc. pa. 49. l. 8. cleare and plaine sense of the Fathers against the which you say I can take no exception. After this you fal againe to your first trench more of termes, and wandering a while about the phrases of Gods proper wrath, the true and right punishment of sinne, two counte∣nances in Christ, and the coincidence of his soule and spirit; you would faine conclude if you could, that if Christ suffered the wrath of God for vs, he suffered the true paines of hell; which I auouched you neuer should be able to doe. Whether I or you abuse the Reader with ambiguous and doubtfull words I leaue to his iudgement, that ta∣keth the paines to peruse what is past, and what followeth: truely I disaduantage my selfe very much so precisely to diuide, distinguish and prooue euery thing as I doe, if I ment to slide away with generalities. But you that neither can, nor will specifie any parts, nor bring any proofes of your chiefest assertions, but keepe your selfe safe vn∣der the shelter of certaine phrases deuised by your selfe without any warrant of Scrip∣tures or Fathers, and neuer expounded nor defined in all your writing, saue onely with AS IT VVERE, and after a sort; what meaning you can haue to handle so great matters as mans redemption and saluation after so sleight a manner, besides a vaine ostentation of your contentious and curious humour, I leaue it to the Readers censure. Now to the returne of your termes. Defenc. pag. 49. l. 31. According to the most vsuall and common sense of Gods wrath, so in my whole Treatise I take it for Gods perfect holinesse, iustice, and power properly executing vengeance and pu∣nishment Iohn 3. (whether little or great) due to them on whom sinne lieth. ] Take from you your Psal. 20. termes no where found in the Scriptures, but inuented and authorized onely by your 2. Corin. 3. selfe, and you can not steppe one foote further in this question. You haue named, I know not how often, Gods PROPER VVRATH in the premises, though you neuer tooke the care nor paines to describe or define it. Now you come to the most vsuall & common sense of Gods wrath, which you say is Gods PROPER wrath. Except that old starting hole of yours, which here you call the proper executing of punishment; and there is nothing more repugnant to your owne assertion, then your owne description. For all the afflictions of this life, whatsoeuer they be, come from Gods perfect holi∣nesse, iustice, and power, and are due to the children of Adam for sinne abiding or dwelling in them, though God of his secret counsell may haue other purposes in sif∣ting his Saints for their good and his glorie. Your sense of Gods wrath you say is most vsuall, but you shew not where, nor with whom. If you meane with your selues, I can easily yeeld that; if you meane in the Scriptures, I greatly doubt whether the wrath of God in the Scriptures doe more vsually signifie his euerlasting iudgements against sinne after this life, or his temporall plagues vpon sinners in this life. How∣beit it is not greatly materiall, which is most vsuall, since either is vsuall in the word of God. You quote but foure places for that purpose in your Margin, and misse two of them. For in the 2. Cor. 3. vers. 17. and 9. I finde not the name of Gods wrath at all expressed in either of them. But I so vse the phrase as signifying any punishment of sinne whatsoeuer. ] The Scriptures so vse it before me, and you can giue no reason, why I should not so vse it after them. It is altogether an improper speech, you say. ] So say you, but the Scriptures say not so. They make degrees and differences betwixt the wrath of God in this world and in the next, and his displeasure against the sinnes of his own, and his enemies; but they take not wrath for fauour as you doe, though Gods wrath against the wickednesse of his children be neuer executed without fauor to their per∣sons, which in the faithlesse is farre otherwise. Defenc. pa. 50. li. 5. It is true, all troubles, paines and griefs in their first ordinance were the effects of Gods proper wrath: but in their state and condition now, they are not, namely as the godly doe suf∣fer them. ] You are full of shifts, but they are so slender, that they doe but shame you. After much wrangling you grant it to be true, that all troubles, paines and griefs in their first ordinance were the effects of Gods wrath; you say of Gods PROPER VVRATH. Which last I thinke to be vntrue, though the former be verie true. If by their first or∣dinance you meane the iudgement of God pronounced against Adam and all his of∣spring for sinne, and the punishment irreuocably inflicted on mankinde therefore, it is in effect the same which I auouched against you, and so true, that you your selfe dare not contradict it. For if you should, you should openly gainsay the Scriptures, which witnesse that man was created in all integritie of nature, felicitie of state, and perpetuitie of life; and that by sinne, this impuritie, miserie, and mortalitie, which now we all feele, entred into the world as the wages of Adams sinne, and namely, that Gen. 3. v. 16. paine, 17. sorrow, and 19. death were imposed on Adam (and so on all his) by Gods owne mouth, as effects or degrees of his most iust displeasure against the sinne of our first parents. If you start from this with any shift of words, you start from a maine principle of the Christian faith: but I suppose, that you confesle it by this that you say, they were effects of Gods wrath in their first ordinance, that is, when they were first inflicted on Adam and all his posteritie. But NOVV you say, they are NOT so, specially to the godlie. ] Since what time be∣gan The first man punished for his sinne, after Christ was pro∣mised. your Now? or when was their state or condition changed? These things were generally and irreuocablely inflicted on all men, as the punishment of sinne in the first man, when as yet they were signes and tastes of Gods wrath not in words, but in deeds; notwithstanding we were then, and long before, euen before Eph. 1. v. 4. the foundation of the world, elected and adopted in Christ Iesu to be heires of eternall saluation. Where∣fore 2. Tim. 1. v. 9. God euen at the first, when by your confession they were the effects of his wrath, layd them on all, euen on his owne children, whom he meant euerlastingly to saue; and so doth continue them to this day, as monuments of his iust displeasure against sinne euen in his owne seruants and saints. Yea, before God would inflict them, he made open promise of the womans seed, that it should Gen. 3. v. 15. bruize the serpents head; and then to teach his owne, and not onlie the wicked, for whom he reserued euerlasting destruction, what it was by sinne to prouoke him; he loaded the life of all the godlie with sorow, paine and death; to make them for euer by that grieuous but righteous pu∣nishment of sinne in themselues, the more mindfull how offensiue sinne was vnto God; and the more warie how to giue eare to the Serpent against the voice of God. And therefore at the verie first inflicting of them, if wee cast our eyes either on our owne deserts, or on the lot of the wicked, we shall find the wonderfull fauor of God, not onlie in opening his purpose vnto vs, for our euerlasting saluation in Christ, but euen in so tempering the smart of his rod, that by the punishment we did feele in our selues the weight of sinne in some sort, yet by his mercie we should be strengthened, eased, and comforted vnder that burden in this life; and after be receiued into euer∣lasting blisse. Notwithstanding, when we compare this mortall & miserable conditi∣on here with our creation, and with the abundance of Gods blessings richly powred on vs, when he first made vs; we should beholde what sinne had depriued vs of, and subiected vs vnto, though it did not exclude vs from Christ, who loued vs so dearely, that he would and did giue himselfe for vs, rather than we should euerlastingly pe∣rish. So that the sorow, paine, and death which the godly feele, were euen at the first layd on them by the same mixture of Gods iustice and mercie, with which they now con∣tinue; neither did Christ die for vs, presently to free vs from that sentence of bodilie death, which God had irreuocably pronounced and executed on Adam and his of∣spring, by returning him and them to the earth for manie thousand yeeres before Christ came: but rather in that to partake with vs, that he might saue vs from the rest, which in all the wicked did accompany this death; and in the end to raise vs againe to a better life, lest we should faint vnder the hand of God, who fastneth vs to the affli∣ctions of this life by the example and fellowship of Christs sufferings. For if we suf∣fer with him, we shall raigne with him; and we must first die in Adam, before we can be quickned againe in Christ. They are now profitable for vs, you will say; and so rather helpe vs than hurt vs in this corruption of sinne, with which we are compassed.] I doubt not thereof, and so were they from the first instant that they were imposed on Adam: but how came this corruption of our nature, if not as a punishment of sinne in Adam? and consequently the remedies thereof do also witnesse Gods displeasure against sinne, though they be farre more holesome for vs, than to rot in the sores of our inward corruption. Can any man doubt, but God was and is able to cleere vs, though neuer so corrupt, from the infection and dominion of sinne, by the working of his Spirit more mightilie and casilie than by troubles and griefs, if it had so seemed good to his wisdome and iu∣stice? And had he determined to shew vs onlie loue without all regard to his iustice, how readie was it for him in Christ to haue released as well all corporall and tempo∣rall affliction to his elect, as he did spirituall and eternall? But he resolued otherwise in his most wise counsell for the conseruation of his iustice; and so now healeth our corruption with the salue of affliction, to let vs haue continually presented before our eyes, and impressed in our bodies, what our sinne at first did, and still doth de∣serue, though he neuer withdrew his mercie from vs, which in the end shall most a∣bundantly recompense all. Wherefore it is no reason, that because troubles are pro∣fitable or necessarie for our corrupt state, therefore they are not effects of Gods dis∣pleasure against sinne: yea rather because God could haue otherwise cured sinne in vs, and would not but by perpetuall affliction; it is an argument, that God so hated sinne in our first parents, that he would haue the verie remembring & curing thereof to be alwayes in this life painfull and grieuous to our outward man, though he would also comfort vs in Christ, whiles heere we liue; and heereafter crowne vs with glorie for Christes sake. Neither is this a question of words, whether they be proper or improper in the Scriptures, but a point of doctrine necessarie to be receiued of all men, that the cor∣ruption and dissolution of our nature and life in this world, doth manifest the excee∣ding hatred that naturallie God hath of sinne, who rewarded it in all mankinde so se∣uerely, that he spared neither the bodies, soules, states, nor liues of his elect, from sen∣sible signes of his detesting sinne in them: though for his sonnes sake, in whom they were beloued and adopted, he would by his wonderfull power rather further than indanger their saluation euen by those maladies and corrosiues of sinne. This shew∣eth the greatnesse of Gods power, and goodnesse of his mercie towards vs, but this altereth not the iudgement which God pronounced, and punishment which he in∣flicted on Adam and all his ofspring for sinne. The corruption and infection of sinne, which naturally and continually dwelleth in all the godly, called by Diuines concupiscence, is it no punishment of sinne, because the guilt thereof is remitted in Baptisme, and now it is left in vs to humble vs, and awake vs to call for grace, and to resist sinne, that striuing with it, we see not only the danger of sinne assaulting vs, but the Spirit of God assisting vs, and bountie of God rewarding vs? The actuall sinnes of the faithfull, shall we thinke them no sinnes but fauors from God, because by them God worketh repentance, submission, conuersion, yea faith, zeale, ioy and thanksgi∣uing in his elect? August. de corrept. & gra∣tia. cap. 9. God worketh (sayth Austen) all things for the good of those that loue him, and so farre forth vtterly all things, that if any of them stray, and for sake the right way, euen that God turneth to their good, because they returne more humble and better taught. The like I say of death, and other miseries of mans life, pronounced first by Gods mouth, and still inflicted by Gods hand. They are, as they were, degrees or effects of Gods anger against sinne in Adam; pursuing him and all his posteritie for the confirmation of his iustice, though by Gods mercie towards his, they now serue as they did euen at the first in Gods children, to represse sinne, to worke repentance, to raise confidence in God, and contempt of all earthly things, and to exercise the gra∣ces of Gods Spirit giuen them, as patience, obedience, and such like, and to giue them assurance of a better life. The Church of Christ euer was, and is of the same minde with me, that the death of the bodie with her seeds and fruits in this life, first entred, and still remaineth as a PVNISHMENT of sin. August. de Trinitate. li. 4. cap. 12. Men shunned (saith Austen) the death of the flesh, rather than the death of the spirit, that is, the punishment rather than the cause of the punishment. We came vnto death by sinne, Christ by righteousnesse, & ideo, cum sit mors nostra poena peccati, mors illius facta est hostia pro peccato; and therefore, where our death is the punishment of sinne, his death was the sacrifice for sinne. Theodoret speaking of the separation of bodie and soule, wherby that which is mort all sustaineth death, the soule remaining free from death as being immortall, asketh his aduersarie, Theodor. dia∣logo. 3. cap. 2. ? Doest thou not thinke death to be a punishment? Who answering; The Diuine Scripture teach∣eth so much; Theodoret inferreth; Is death then the punishment of sinners? The other yeelding that this is granted of all men, Theodoret concludeth: Why then, since both the soule and bodie sinned, doth the bodie alone sustaine the punishment of death? Fulgentius: Fulgen. de in∣carnat. & gra∣tia Christs. cap. 12. Nisi praecessisset in peccato mors animae, nunquam corporis mors in supplicio sequeretur. Except the death of the soule had gone before by sinne, the death of the bodie had neuer follow∣ed after as a punishment. And therefore of our flesh he sayth: Ibid. cap. 13. Nascitur cum poena mortis, & pollutione peccati: It is borne with the punishment of death, and pollution of sinne. And of yoong children: By what iustice is an infant subiected to the wages of sinne, if there be no vncleannesse of sinne in him? or how do we see him strooken with death, if he felt not the sting thereof (which is sinne?) Maxentius in the confession of his faith; Maxentius in libello fidei cap. 3. We beleeue (sayth he) that not only the death of the bodie, which is the punishment of sinne, but also the sting of death, which is sinne, entred into the world; because we consent not to these men (who say the contrarie) but to the Apostle, who testifieth that sinne and death went ouer all men. Prosper: Prosperde promissio. & praedict. parte 1. cap. 5. The punishment of sinne, which Adam the root of mankinde receiued by (Gods) sentence, (saying, Earth thou art, and to earth thou shalt returne) and transmitted to his posteritie as to his branches, the Apostle sayth, entred into the world by one mans sinne, and so ranged ouer all men. Beda: Beda in Psal. 34. The death as well of vs men, as of Christ, is called sinne, be∣cause it is the effect and punishment of that sinne which Adam committed. The second councell of Arrange about 450 yeres after Christ confesseth no lesse; Concilium A∣rausic anum 2. cap. 2. If any man af∣firme, that only the death of the bodie, which is the punishment of sinne, and not sinne also, which is the death of the soule, passed by one man to all mankinde, he ascribeth iniustice to God, and contradicteth the Apostle, who sayth; By one man sinne entred into the world, and by sinne death passed ouer all men. Our later writers, though they fully defend that God doth not punish his either to destruction, as he doth the wicked; nor for satisfaction of sinne, as he did his owne Sonne for the sinnes of all his Saints; and to comfort the afflicted, they set before them the presence of Gods power assisting them in their miseries, or deliuering them from their troubles, the purpose of God respecting wholy their good, and the promise of God exceedingly recompencing their patience; yet when they come to the cau∣ses prouoking God to this seueritie, they acknowledge that to be sinne, and teach euery man to descend into himselfe, and to giue God the glorie, in that his righte∣ous iudgement beginneth at his owne house. Of the euils, (which we suffer in this life) Bullingerus decadis 3. sermo. 3. there be many and sundry causes, saith Bullinger, but sinne it selfe is counted to be the generall cause. For by disobedience sinne entred into the world, and by sinne death, diseases, and all the mischiefes in the world. Ibidem. The persecutions and cruell tortures inflicted on the Church of God, or on particular Martyrs, as they were offered them for the confession and testimony of the faith and truth of the Gospell, so for the most part they had for their causes the offences and sinnes of the godly, which the iustice of God did visite in his seruants, though for the good and welfare of his Saints. Ibidem. The people of Israell sinned against the Lord in the desert vnder the Iudges and Kings very often, and very enormously, and were grieuously punished by the Lord; but againe they were speedily deliuered as often as they acknowledged their sinnes, and turned vnto the Lord. Ibidem. If therefore any man suffer any euill for sinne com∣mitted, let him acknowledge the iust iudgement of God vpon himselfe, and humble himselfe vnder the mightie hand of God, confessing it vnto God; and asking pardon with lowly praier, let him patiently beare that which he hath so well deserued to suffer. Zanchij tra∣ctat. Theolog. lib. 1. cap 2. thes. 8. It is certaine, saith Zanchius, that all the punishments and miseries, which we feele in this world, are from sin, and inflicted for sinne. In which place he resolueth by a plaine thesis, that death is the punishment of sinne, and (so are) all those things which are the fruits of death, as well in Soule, as in body, and in (our) externall state. Gualther. homil. 118. in 12. cap. Joh. It is an argument (saith Gualther) of a mind skant religious wholy to despise death, quam per peccatum ingressam, & peccati poenam esse omnes Scripturae testantur, which all the Scriptures witnesse came in by sinne, and is the pu∣nishment of sinne. In the Philosophers commendations (of the death of the bodie) Petri Martyris loci com∣munes, class. 3. lo. 14. & sect. 5. there are some things (saith Peter Martyr) not agreeable to the Christian faith, and to the sacred Scriptures. For we say, that death must not be accounted any good, but an euill thing. Quandoquidem Deus illam vti poenam inflixit nostro generi; For so much as God inflicted it as a punishment on mankind. And so else where: Idem class. 2. loc. 1. sect. 51. Omnes pij statuunt in morte rae diuinae sensum esse, ideo{que} sua natura dolorem & horrorem incutit. All the godly resolue, that in death there is a sense of Gods wrath, and therefore of his owne nature it impresseth a griefe and terror. And if there be any to whom it is contenting and acceptable to die, they haue that from some other fountaine, and not from the nature of death. Musculus in locis communi∣bus theologicis de Ira Dei. There might be assigned (saith Musculus) many kinds of the wrath of God, but for this present we content our selues with a triple diuision thereof, whereby we diuide it into generall, temporall, and eternall. The generall (wrath of God) is that wherewith the whole posteritie of Adam is enwrapped for originall sinne. Hence come all the miseries of mankind, which equally follow the condition of men, and cleaue as well to our minds, as to our flesh. The temporall wrath of God is that (Qua peccat is non impiorum modò, sed & piorum irascitur, ac paenas de illis su∣mit in hac vita,) whereby God is angry with the sinnes not of the wicked onely, but of the godly also, and taketh punishment of them in this life. Whether I speake or thinke other∣wise, then these new and old Diuines haue spoken and taught, let the Reader iudge. But mine owne Authors in the very places, which I alleadge, doe say that the na∣ture of death is changed, and that God is angry with his elect, as a Father with his beloued children, to chasten and amend them.] Peter Martyr saith indeede the na∣ture of death is chaunged by Gods goodnes making that profitable to vs, which of it selfe is very harmefull: but with what condition doth he say it is changed? Pet. Mart. loc. com. classe 3. lo. 14. sect. 7. Puta, si quis obediente animo eam sube at, néque poenam illam reijciat, quam diuina iustitia nos omnes voluerit exoluere: If a man submit himselfe vnto it with an obedient hart, and re∣iect not that punishment, which the iustice of God would haue vs all to suffer. And so it was chaunged, euen when it was inflicted on the elect in Adams loynes. For Christ was first promised to be the bruizer of the Serpents head. Now if death afterward tooke full and euerlasting hold on Christs members, then the serpent preuailed a∣gainst Christ and his chosen, and not Christ against the Serpent. Wherefore God so moderated his sentence, that he adiudged Christes members in Adam no farder then to the earth, whence Christ should raise them, and vtterly abolish from them all the Serpents poyson, that is, sinne, death, and corruption: but this prooueth not death to be good in Gods Children, or to be no punishment of sinne in them, be∣cause God conuerteth it to their aduantage in the ende; no more then their sinnes are good, because God turneth them also to the benefite of his elect. For, as you heard before, Saint Austen saith of their sinnes as he doth of their death, that God turneth them, and all things else to the good of those that loue him. Touching Gods fatherly Anger against the sinnes of the faithfull for their amendment, which Mus∣culus mentioneth; He doth not say as you doe, it is no Anger; neither doe I defend any other kinde of Anger in God then such, as a Religious and wise Father in some sort resembleth, when he persueth the wickednes of his vnruly sonne. Whose per∣son though he fauour as being his Sonne, and by chastisement seeke to reforme; yet is he or ought he to be, not in words or lookes onely, but inwardly and truely displeased and offended with the lewdnesse of his Sonne. And though loue doe tem∣per the correction, that he meane not to kill or ouerthrow his owne flesh and blood; yet the zealous Father spareth not to make his Sonne throughly smart, till he con∣fesse, mislike, and leaue his former loosenesse, and frame himselfe obediently to his Fathers will. Doth not this Father as much hate the vices, as he loueth the person, and seeketh the welfare of his Sonne? And since his Sonne will not be otherwise recalled, may not the sharp correction, which the Father vseth to represse the vnbridled and vntamed appetites of his licentious child, be called punishment? The Scriptures so speake, and so doe the Fathers, as also the later writers; onely this fabler hath found out a new faith, and new phrases of Gods improper wrath, and vntrue punishment of sinne, which God vseth toward his children, that prouoke him with their impuritie and iniquitie. Defenc. pa. 50. li. 26. It may not be said properly, that (Gods) Iustice leadeth him to inflict these things on vs, (as you affirme) but his holinesse and loue. ] Your mouth belike is the measure of pro∣per speeches. If you intend that not onely Iustice, but also Loue did and doth lead God is iust in punishing his Saints. God to inflict these things on vs, you say the same that I affirme; but if you meane, (as you must, if you will crosse my position,) that Loue without Iustice did and doth lead God to inflict these things on vs, then speake you both absurdly and wickedly. For the Scriptures ascribe Iustice and Iudgement to God in chastening his Church, and punishing the sinnes of his seruants, as well as they doe Loue and holinesse. When the Prophet told Roboham and the Princes of Iuda, that 2. Chro. 12. vers. 5. they had left God, and therefore God would leaue them in the hands of Shishak the King of Egypt: the King and Princes Vers. 6. humbled themselues, and said, the Lord is iust. When Ierusalem was burnt and her people caried captiue to Babilon, the Prophet lamenting her miserie saith, the Lord hath Lament. 1. vers. 5. afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: and teacheth her to say; Vers. 1 . Iust is the Lord, for I haue rebelled against his mouth. Daniel at the time, when God would deliuer his people from that Captiuitie, maketh confession of his and their sinnes, and saith; Dan. 9. v. 11. All Israell haue transgressed thy law, and departed from hearkning to thy voice. Therefore the curse is powred vpon vs, because we haue sinned against him. Vers. 14. And the Lord hath watched ouer this euill, and brought it vpon vs, because the Lord our God is iust in all that he doth; for we would not heare his voice. The Leuites after their returne making confession of their sinnes vnto God, & mentioning their afflictions, doe adde; N hem. ca. 9. 33. And thou (Lord) are iust in all that is come vpon vs; because thou hast kep t (thy) truth, and we haue done wickedly. The Apostles confesse the like after Christs comming. Rom. 3. If our iniquitie (saith Paul,) commend the Iustice of God, what shall we say? Is God vniust in punishing? God forbid. Very plainly the same Apostle denounceth Gods iustice and vengeance to all Christians that wrong their brethren; 1. Thess 4. vers. 6. You know (saith he) what Commandements we gaue you by the Lord Iesus, that no man oppresse or defraud his brother: for the Lord is the Auenger of all such things, as we foretold and protested vnto you. And to the Colossians; Coloss. 3. He that doth wrong shall receaue (at Gods hand) for the wrong, which he hath done, and there is no respect of persons. Prou. 12. The recompence of a mans hands (that is works) shall (God) giue vnto him, either in this life if he repent, or in the next if he persist. Prou. 11. Lo (saith Salo∣mon) the righteous are repayed on earth (he meaneth the euill which they haue done to others) how then the wicked and the sinner? For here in this life is the 1. Pet. 4. time, that iudgement beginneth at the house of God. If it first (begin) with vs (saith Peter) what shall be the end of them, who obey not the Gospell of God? Howsoeuer you tattle that God vt∣terly forgetteth his Iustice in afflicting his Church; the Scriptures teach vs, that Iudgement beginneth here at the house of God, for an example of the iust iudgement of God against the wicked, and that the very righteous are repayed on earth the wrongs which they do to others, God by his Apostle openly professing himselfe to be the Auenger of such beleeuers, as wrong or defraud their brethren. Now whether there may be Iudge∣ment, Requitall, and Reuenge in this life from God against euill, without some admix∣ture of his iustice, though he purpose not to destroy the penitent, I leaue it to the Christian Reader to consider. Hath not Christ then borne the burden of our sinnes to free vs from all punish∣ment? How we are freed from sinne by Christ. Christ hath not presently and generally freed vs and euery part of vs from all corruption and affliction of sinne; he will doe it at his appointed time, when the day of our redemption commeth. In the meane time our inward man is freed, though our 2. Cor. 4. outward man dayly perish. For Christ 1. Cor. 15. must raigne till he haue put all his (and our) enemies vnder his feete. The last enemie, that shall be destroyed is death. Then shall be the end of sinne, death, and corruption in all his; and not before: though we be alreadie redeemed by Christ from it, in Gods purpose and promise (which shall then bee fully performed) and in part, whereof we presently haue an assurance in that our soules are renewed in this life by grace, and receiued in the next to a blessed rest and comfort, till that day rise, when Christ will set a crowne of righteousnesse on them all, that loue his comming. Againe we are presently freed from all that, which is solely the punish∣ment of sinne, and hath no farder or other profit or vse in it, then onely to punish and reuenge sinne. And such are none of these things, whereof wee speake. For God in them all hath so tempered a taste of his iustice with his manifold and great mercies, that it is not expedient for vs as yet to be wholly freed from them. This respect pre∣uaileth so farre with God, that whiles the world must dure, hee hath subiected his children to the capitall and penall lawes not of Christian Magistrates onely, but euen of infidels also, for that without discipline of the sword, mans state and life on earth can not be maintained. And therefore the politicke and penall lawes of Princes bee not derogatorie to Christes death, nor iniuries to Christian men, as the Libertines would haue them; not because men haue more right to punish then God hath, or their interest to punish could continue, when Gods doth cease; but for that it is ex∣pedient and needfull for vs so to bee gouerned in outward and earthly things, till the time come, when Christ will 1 Cor. 15. Vers. 24. put downe all rule and all authoritie and power, that God may be all in all. Now if Christs death repeale not mans lawes, how much lesse Gods irreuocable iudgements fastned to our nature, and not hindering our saluation, but renuing the memoriall of our sinne, lest we should forget it, or neglect it; and teach∣ing vs by tollerable and temporall paines, what intollerable torments wee haue esca∣ped by Gods mercies towards vs? Wherefore Christ by his obedience vnto death hath shewed vs an example what to follow, and thereby rather confirmed then reuer∣sed his Fathers sentence for the time, till he come to wipe all teares from our eyes, and to restore vs to the glorious libertie of the sonnes of God, which he hath presently purchased for vs, though he will not presently execute it. Lastly the death of Christ doeth not belong, nor any benefite thereof, but to such as repent and beleeue. After his death Christ commanded Luk. 24. repentance and remission of sinnes to be preached in his name among all nations; and with all denounced, Mark. 16. He which will not beleeue, shall be damned. So that neither the incredulous, nor the impenitent haue any part or pardon in Christes death and sufferings. If then all the children of God would fully repent and perfectly beleeue: surely all which they should suffer in this life (I still except the naturall, and as yet vnchangeable corruption of body and soule, which abideth in them from their birth) were onely trials of the graces, and signes of their blessednesse. Matth. 5. Blessed are they (saith our Sauiour) that suffer persecution for righ∣teousnesse sake: for theirs is the kingdome of heauen. When you doe well and suffer, taking it 1. Pet. 2. patiently, this (saith Peter) is acceptable vnto God. But what praise is it, if when yee be buf∣feted for your faults, you take it patiently? Now how many thousands are there in Christs flocke, which defect in faith and specially in true repentance? Yea how rare are they, that repent when, and as they ought? Then hath Gods iustice cause enough, and enough to punish all, that either shrinke in faith, neglect his will, or slacke repentance; notwithstanding the generall freedome obtained and proclaimed by the death of Christ; and out of this number very few Christians are exempted. Wherefore to make men beleeue, that God hath no iustice, or regardeth not his iustice, to punish them in this life, after hee hath once engraffed them into Christ, because Christ hath suffered all the punishment of their sinnes for them; is but to deceiue them. God is most faithfull in his promises, if we could take assured hold of them; but if wee fall from them by diffidence or disobedience, God wanteth no iustice to aggrauate his hand according to our deserts, though in mercie he spare vs, euen when he striketh vs, and intendeth our conuersion and not our destruction, how sharpe soeuer his plagues be, which would be farre sharper, if his loue towardes vs in Christ Iesu, did not ouer-rule his iust displeasure against our sinnes. Defenc. pag. 50. l. 31. The case with Christ was cleane otherwise. He needed no amendment, but that which he suffered was right punishment. ] Right and proper, if you may be moderator, shall be The Defenders partition of pu∣nishment, appli∣ed to Christ, is insufficient and impious. what please you. What is RIGHT AND TRVE PVNISHMENT you neuer de∣fine; but pretending sinceritie, when you come to the issue, you enclose your con∣ceites with verie, proper, right, and such like phrases, and so take your leaue. But de∣clare, if you can, or will vouchsafe to make others partakers of your mysteries, what is proper and right, verie and true punishment. You must define punishment either by the paine, which is suffered; or by the purpose of the punisher, that is, by the cause, for which it is inflicted. You stand not in this place on the paine imposed, but rather on the purpose of the punisher, or cause of the punishment. For if you measure punish∣ment by the same paines, then tell vs why the miseries of this life, as penurie, sicknesse, and death, be punishments in the wicked, and not in the godly; since they be the same in both, setting aside the purpose of the punisher, which is different in both. They are, you say, for correction and amendment in the godly, not for destruction and ven∣geance, as they are in the wicked. Then the purpose of the punisher, by your intenti∣on, maketh the paine to be punishment; which being referred to another end, as in o∣ther patients, is no punishment, though it be the selfe same paine in both. And thence you draw your conclusion, that since the sufferings of Christ could not be for corre∣ction and amendment in him, therefore Defenc. pag. 52. l. 1. his afflictions euery one, SMALL AND GREAT, were true and proper punishments, and the effects of Gods very wrath for sinne ly∣ing vpon him. Otherwise the bodily afflictions which Christ suffered were the selfe same which the godly often suffer; and yet you auouch them in the faithfull to be no punishments, because they serue for correction and amendment in them; which hauing no place in Christ, you conclude his sufferings great and small to be true, right and proper punishments. But Sir how prooue you this diuision, that all the punish∣ments, (you call them paines) which God inflicteth in this life, are either for cor∣rection or for vengeance properly so called? there is neither sufficiencie, nor pietie in this partition of yours thus applied to Christ. For in the wicked Gods purpose is onely to reuenge sinne, and therefore in the end God allotteth them the iust and full punishment of sinne, which is euerlasting damnation. And in the meane season du∣ring the time of his patience, he mitigateth his hand in respect of that which shall follow, but giueth them no inward grace to repent, whereby they are in all their af∣flictions hardned and ripened for sorer vengeance, as still repining and murmuring at the hand of God but neuer misliking or leauing their sinnes. In the elect when they are disobedient and impenitent, God persueth their sinnes with corporall and tem∣porall plagues, that they may returne and flie vnto him for mercie; to which ende he giueth them grace in the midst of their miseries to acknowledge their offences, and by faith to take hold of his promises made to them in Christ Iesus; and so vpon their submission and conuersion he receiueth them to fauour; whose persons he alwayes loued in his onely Sonne, though he hated and scourged their vncleannesse. In Christ Iesus the case was cleane different from the one and the other. You confesse there was nothing in him to be corrected or amended; then was he not punished for cor∣rection. On the other side, much lesse did God purpose to destroy Christs person being his owne and onely Sonne; as he doth the wicked, whose bodies and soules he will destroy in hell: and consequently Christ was not punished to destruction. That is proper to the reprobate, whose persons God hateth, and leaueth in their sinnes, that they may prouoke his iust wrath to their vtter destruction. Then was Christ neither punished as the godly are for amendment, nor as the wicked are for vengeance; and so your partition is false, and defectiue; and all your collections grounded thereon are like the foundation, that is voide of all strength and trueth. What then was Gods purpose in punishing Christ for our sinnes? euen that which Gods purpose in the death and Crosse of Christ. you alwayes passe by with deafe and dull eares, though it be often repeated and vr∣ged vnto you, because you will not be turned from the trade of your hellish paines. Why God would not haue man redeemed, but by the death and passion (that I call the punishment) of Christ Iesus, the Scriptures yeeld many causes, (though of Gods will no cause may be required;) some respecting God himselfe, some concerning Christ, and some regarding vs. Touching God, the crosse of Christ doth commend his wisdome, shew his power, manifest his loue, content his holines, & preserue his iustice. 1. Corin. 1. Christ crucisied (as Paul sayth) is the power of God, and the wisdome of God to them that are saued, howsoeuer the crosse of Christ seeme foolishnesse and weakenesse to them that perish. Then to controle the carnall wisdome of the world, and to confound the pride and strength of Satan and his members, God would vse the basenesse and fee∣blenesse of the Crosse in sauing his elect. Also, to witnesse his loue towards vs, he de∣creed the same: Iohn 3. So God loued the world, that he gaue his onely begotten Sonne, Ephes. 5. to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling sauour vnto God. With which Sacrifice the ho∣linesse of God resteth so 2. Pet. 1. well pleased, that he accepteth vs as holy, and Hebr. 10. sanctified by the oblation of the bodie of Iesus Christ once made. The vpholding of Gods Iustice by the death of Christ is often specified in the Scriptures. 1. Corin. 15. By a man (came) death, and by a man the resurrection from the dead. 2. Corin. 5. Him that knew no sinne, God made sinne for vs (to wit, a sacrifice for sinne) that wee should be made the righteousnesse of God in him. Therefore it was Iohn 11. expedient, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole Nation perished not. Esa. 53. He was wounded for our transgressions; and by his stripes are wee healed. The Lord layed vpon him the iniquitie of vs all. Hebr. 9. And where a Testament is, there must be the death of the Testator: for a Testament is confirmed, when men are dead. So that by the Scriptures themselues God decreed the Crosse of Christ in mans redemp∣tion, to reueale his wisdome, power, and loue to the world, and wholly to satisfie his ho∣linesse and iustice, which were thorowly displeased and prouoked with mans disobedi∣ence, but as thorowly recompensed and appeased by the submission and obedience of Christ. As for Christ himselfe, it is euident by the Scriptures, that his enduring the crosse declared his obedience, patience, humilitie, charitie, perfection and power, in more effe∣ctuall maner, than without it he could haue done. For therein he Phil. 2. emptied and hum∣bled himselfe, and became obedient vnto death, euen to the death of the crosse. 1. Pet. 2. When hee was reuiled, he reuiled not againe; when he suffered, he threatned not. He Esa. 53. was oppressed and afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth. For so Galat. 2. he loued (vs) that he gaue himselfe (for vs;) Iohn 15. and greater loue than this hath no man, to bestow his life for his friends. But Rom. 5. God setteth out his loue towards vs, that whiles we were yet sinners Christ died for vs. Once (then) 1. Pet. 3. he suffered, the iust for the vniust, that he might bring vs to God; and being Hebr. 2. consummate through affliction, was made the Prince of (our) Saluation. For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted, and became a merci∣full and faithfull high Priest, to make reconciliation for the sinnes of the people. And Rom. 14. there∣fore he died and rose againe, that he might be Lord of the dead and the liuing, and Hebr. 2. through death destroy him that had power of death, euen the diuell. On our behalfe it was not needlesse, that Christ should die the death of the crosse. For besides that we are 1 Cor. 6. bought with a price, lest we should be our owne, euen with the 1. Pet. 1. precious bloud of Christ, as of a Lambe vnspotted and vndefiled, and Rom. 5. reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, which couenant is irreuocable, being sealed with his bloud: by his crosse Christ 1. Pet. 2. left vs an example how we should follow his steps, and be 1. Pet. 4. par∣takers of his sufferings; that when his glorie shall appeare, we may be glad and reioyce. For it is a 2. Tim. 2. true saying, if we be dead with him, we shall liue with him; if we suffer (with him) we shall raigne with him. Rom. 6. We are buried then by Baptisme into his death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glorie of his Father; so we should also walke in newnesse of life: knowing this, that our olde man is crucified with him, that the bodie of sinne might be de∣stroyed, that hencefoorth we should not serue sinne. 2. Cor. 5. He died for all, that they which liue should not hencefoorth liue vnto themselues, but to him, which died for them, and rose againe. Infinite are the places of Scripture witnessing the causes, effects, and fruits of Christs death on the Crosse; all which this Dreamer must denie or delude, before he can de∣fend, that Gods purpose in Christes sufferings was only to punish our sinne lying on him. For if Gods purposes in appointing Christes Crosse, were so acceptable to the Father, so honourable to the Sonne, and so profitable for man, as the Scriptures men∣tion; with what face can it be said, that God punished his Sonne only for vengeance? or that whatsoeuer Christ suffered (all his life long) specially at his death, was Defenc. pag. 51. l. 4. verie wrath and vengeance from God properly taken? Christ suffered the same things here on earth, which the godly likewise do in this life, as appeareth by the history of his death and passion; and other paines or deaths in Christ the Scriptures doe not specifie. Gods counsell in decreeing the Crosse of Christ for mans redemption, considering the true desert of our sinne and terrible vengeance prouided for others, was varie fa∣uourable and fatherly, not ouerpressing the patience of Christes humane nature, nor wearying his obedience; and had in it farre more gracious and glorious intents and euents, than our afflictions can or ought any way to match or approch. If then Gods fauour to his elect make their sufferings in this life no wrath, nor vengeance, nor so much as punishments; why should the exceeding loue and admirable honor where∣with God accepted and aduanced the death of his Sonne for mans saluation, seeme to any sober man verie wrath, true vengeance, or the proper punishment of sinne pro∣uided and reserued for reprobate men and angels? It was not for correction, you say.] What then? ergo for vengeance? Who be∣ing in his right wits would so reason? God afflicteth his Saints often times for pro∣bation, for perfection, for coronation, as the Scriptures auouch, and not for correction. May a man thence conclude by your Logick, that these afflictions of the Godly are true punishment and proper vengeance? Your selfe most withstand it. Why then since Christes afflictions had in them a cleere illustration of Gods wisdome, power, and loue towards man, somewhat blemished and obscured in mans fall by Satans craft, and a full recompence to his holinesse and iustice, neglected and irritated by mans vnrigh∣teousnesse, besides the obedience, sufficience, and preualence of his Sonne thereby de∣clared; why should, I say, those afflictions of Christ great and small, during his life and at his death, seeme to any man that is well aduised, the true wrath, proper vengeance and right punishment that was prepared for sinners? Yea since the proper vengeance and right punishment of sinne must be common to sinfull men with the sinfull An∣gels, in as much as they both sinned, and shall both receaue the due wages of sinne; how can the corporall afflictions of this life, wherein the diuels can not partake with men, be called the proper vengeance and right punishment of sinne? And who but you, hearing our Sauiour pronounce that euerlasting fire is the full payment and pro∣per punishment of wicked and accursed men and Angels, would labour with such loose and lewd collections to bring Christ Iesus within the compasse of the full punishment and proper vengeance due to sinne? Wherefore take backe your riotous and irreli∣gious termes: As they are not prooued by any Scripture, so are they not to be suffered in Christian Religion, because they are but cloudes to cloke the fantasticall frame of your new hell. In the sharpnesse of the punishment exacted by God on the manhood of his owne Sonne for our sinnes, though farre different from that which the wicked doe and shall feele, and which the Scriptures call the wrath to come; (wherein the di∣uels shall haue their portion, euen in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone,) God would haue vs learne, how much he detesteth our sinnes; how easie all the plagues, which we suffer in this life, are in respect of that we deserue; how infinite the loue and mercy of God was towards vs, to lay the burden, which we could not haue borne, on the shoulders of his onely Sonne, who for his dignitie, innocencie, and euery way sufficiencie was able to quench that wrath, that euerlastingly and into∣lerably would haue burnt against vs to our finall and perpetuall destruction of bo∣dy and soule. For if Gods owne Sonne, though he did recompence our sinnes with his infinite humilitie, obedience, and sanctitie, was yet pursued vnto death in most painefull and reprochfull manner for our sakes, before we could be quited from the guilt and load of our sinnes; had we appeared in the iust iudgement of God to re∣ceaue the reward of our manifold iniquities, what could haue beene the end thereof but a most dreadfull damnation of body and soule to hell fire for euer with the de∣sperate and damned spirits? This God would haue vs obserue in the death of his Sonne, though there be many other points of Gods wisedome, power, and loue to∣wards Christ himselfe, which the Scriptures inclose in the Crosse of Christ. That then Gods wrath and displeasure against our sinnes appeared in the Crosse v ngeance pro∣per to the wic∣ked appeared not in the Cr sse of Christ. of Christ, I doe not deny, speaking of wrath after the manner of the Sacred Scrip∣tures. But that any wrath or vengeance proper to the wicked was therein offered or executed on Christ, or that he suffered the iust and full punishment allotted to others for sinne, (Saue that his sufferings were in his person the full price of our Redemp∣tion, I meane a most sufficient satisfaction and recompence for all the sinnes of the world) I find no mention made thereof in all the Scriptures, nor see any iust cause or proofe thereof alleaged by you in all your writings. For since you will not endure, that any thing executed on the godly shall be truely called wrath; it is euident that the wrath which you imagine Christ suffered, must be proper to the wicked, before it can be rightly called wrath; because the godly feele no part of Gods wrath, litle nor great, as you suppose. Now that Christ suffered the wrath of God prouided for the sinnes of the wicked only; and no way common to the godly; this is both a false, and a wicked proposition of yours, & though you euery where vrge it, you no where prooue it, but boldly, as your fashion is, affirming it, you thinke the world bound to embrace it. I find by the Scriptures that the wrath which Christ suffered in Soule and Body, differed from that which is proper to the wicked as well in the Nature and measure of the paines, as in the purpose of the punisher, and inward peace of the sufferer, and in all the consequents of the paines themselues. In this world the wicked find subtraction of all grace and fauour, confusion and desperation; in the world to come exclusion from glorie, Malediction, and damnation wholy and euerlastingly light on them; none of which may be transferred to Christ without intolerable blasphemie. Yet paine you thinke Christ suffered, and more then paine the wicked and damned doe not suffer.] Were that true which is most false, that the damned suffer no more then pain, though indeed in hell cuery thing doth paine them, yet all paines are not of the same nature and kind; and no paines felt in this life come neere the paines of hell whereof this mortall life and flesh is not capable. The paine of fire we see doth presently cut of this life, and some diseases so much heate the body, that they doe the like; and yet the paine and force of this naturall fire, or of any sicknesse is nothing comparable to the fury of hell fire, for which the bodies of the wicked must be made immortall, be∣fore they can endure it. All aches and agues doe paine the body, all feares and sor∣rowes afflict the soule and spirit of man. Shall we thence conclude, that all men at all times, when they are pained or grieued, suffer the paines of hell, because it is paine which the damned doe suffer? It is more then prophane abusing and deluding the terrible iudgements of God against sinne to suppose, that all paines of body and soule are hell paines in nature and kind, which you wrap vnder the fold of proper wrath and right punishment of sinne, because they are paines. Wherefore they must either be the selfe same paines, that God in his iust and fierce wrath inflicted on the damned; or you shall neuer inferre by phrases of your owne making, which only serue to hide your owne meaning, that Christ suffered the paines of hell. As for Gods wrath against sinne, it hath many degrees and parts by the verdict of Gods wrath a∣gainst sinne hath many de∣grees and parts. holy Scripture, though you will not heare thereof. For as Gods blessings & benefits, when he first made man, were of his heauenly goodnes richly prouided for man, and plentifully powred on the body and soule of man; as well for the leading of this life in plenty, safety, and delight, as for the surer attaining of euerlasting ioy and blisse in an other place: so when man by sinne fell from God, by iustice God depriued him and his of all those earthly and bodily fauours and comforts no lesse then of the spi∣rituall and inward gifts and graces of the mind; by that meanes making way to his euerlasting and dreadfull Iudgements against sinne. Now if these externall things bestowed on man in his first creation, were iustly called, and must be confessed in their kind, to be the blessings and fauours of God afforded to all mankind, when he made man and the whole world for his vse; then out of question the taking them away from man, and subiecting him by iustice to the contrary for sinne committed, may as tru∣ly be named, and must be beleeued, to be the signes and effects of Gods displeasure against sinne, which the Scripture nameth wrath. And so God calleth either of them when he Deut. 28. promiseth the one to the obseruers of his Law, and Deut. 28. threatneth the other to the breakers thereof; who vseth not to promise or threaten words but deeds. Nei∣ther hath it any reason because the reiecting of man from the greater and higher bles∣sings of inward grace and eternall blisse was farre the sorer and sharper punishment of mans sinne, that therefore the withdrawing of these should be no degree nor effect of Gods wrath against sinne; no more then the losse of a legge or an arme should be counted no mayme, because a man hath an head and an hart, which are more prin∣cipall parts of his body. Wherefore though in comparison they may be iustly di∣minished, and abased farre beneath the worthinesse of the rest of Gods blessings, which are reserued for his Children in an other life; yet can they not be denyed to be Gods blessings euen in this life: and if to giue them to man, when he was first made, were the fauour and bountie of God towards man, which no Christian may deny; to take them from man for sinne, must truely argue Gods displeasure against sinne, not in improper speech, as you gloze, but in a lesse degree then those, which bring with them perpetuall subuersion of Body and Soule. And when the Scriptures meane to expresse the spirituall and eternall wrath of God, they doe it not by proprietie of words as you pretend; but by different circum∣stances: either of the TIME after this life, when no wrath is executed but that which is euerlasting; as Christ 1. Thess. 1. deliuereth vs from the wrath to come; and thou Rom. 2. heapest vp wrath against the day of wrath, which is the day of iudgement; or of the PERSONS, who are wicked, and the Rom. 9. vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, and for whom is re∣serued the mist of darknesse for euer; as, Ephes. 5. for such things commeth the wrath of God on the Children of vnbeliefe; or of the CONTINVANCE which neuer ceaseth, as Iohn 3. the wrath of God abideth on him that beleeueth not; or of the HIGTH thereof when it is full, as 1. Thess. 2. the wrath of God is come vpon them to the vttermost: or of the CON∣TRARY when it is eternall life; as, 1. Thess. 5. God hath not appointed vs vnto wrath, but to ob∣taine Saluation by Iesus Christ: or of the CONSEQVENTS which are suddaine de∣struction and such like; as, Psal. 2. kisse the Sonne, least he be angry, and ye perish in the way; when his wrath shall suddenly burne, blessed are they that trust in him. By these and such like particulars we may perceiue, when the Scriptures speake of the one wrath, and when of the other; but otherwise the wordes are common to both, as also the cause which is sinne. O Lord, saith Moses, Exod. 32. why doth thy wrath waxe hote against thy people? turne from thy fierce wrath and desist from this euill towards thy People. And againe, Deut. 9. I fell downe (saith he) fortie daies and fortie nights before the Lord, because of all your sinnes, which yee had sinned, doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord and prouoking him. For I was afraid of the wrath and indignation, wherewith the Lord was kindled against you to destroy you, and the Lord heard me at that time also. Exceeding many are the places, which teach vs, that our iniquities auert the outward blessing, of this life, and that our sinnes Iere. 5. hinder good things from vs; Though God after that, comfort his people, when their Esa. 40. warrefare is accomplished, and they haue receaued sufficient Correction at the hands of God for all their sinnes. Surely these warnings of the holy Ghost are not empty words or improper speeches; but effectuall and faithfull instructions for the Church of God; to learne them, that God doth visite their sinnes, when they forget to repent and obey; though he spare them in comparison of that wrath, which is effunded on the wicked. And therefore the name of wrath is rightly and truely applyed in the Scriptures, euen to those afflictions wherewith God scourgeth his owne Children for their negligence and impenitence, though God haue an other and greater, which is eternall wrath, laid vp in store for the Reprobate, who die without Repentance and Remission of their sinnes. Howsoeuer the strife for words standeth, wherein I confesse I may not be brought to disalow the tongue and pen of the holy Ghost; it is most certaine, that the Gos∣pel reporteth of Christs sufferings nothing, but what was common to him with his members, euen in this life where he suffered. The Apostles plainely prooue as much, to wit that we haue Philip. 3. fellowship and 2. Co in. 1. communion with Christs afflictions, and are 1. Pet. 4. con∣formed to his death. Now there is no communion, but where the same things are com∣mon to both, though the degrees may differ. And you your selfe, when it maketh for you, can vrge, that the Apostle speaking of Christs sufferings, saith; Hebr. 4. He was temp∣ted in all things like (to vs) yet without sinne. So that in my iudgement it is a most cleere case, as well by the witnesse of Scripture, as by your owne confession; that all Christes sufferings were LIKE, yea the SAME that ours are, as being common to both; and consequently if you any way vnderstand what belongeth to trueth or reason, the suf∣ferings of the godly must either bee wrath as well as Christes, or if their bee not, his were not, since they were the same. And so the godly must either in all their afflicti∣ons, small and great, suffer as Christ did the proper wrath of God, and true paines of hell, which you make equiualent: or if the godly doe not so suffer, then Christ did not so suffer. If you flie to the purpose of the punisher, which was different in Christ and his members, and thinke there to succour your selfe, you come to short: the pur∣pose of God in Christes afflictions, as I haue shewed by the Scriptures, was farre more fauourable and honourable in Christ, then it can bee to any of the elect. And there∣fore Gods purpose in Christes punishment will far der free him from hell paines, then it will any of the faithfull. The proportion of the pain which Christ suffered, & the inward peace of the suffe∣rer, will proue the same. For where the paines of hell exceed the patience of men and Angels, and are no way possible to bee suffered in the weaknesse of our mortall bo∣dies; the measure of Christes paine was so proportioned to the strength of his flesh, that it neither ouerwhelmed his life, nor his patience. And though his sweate were like bloud in his earnest prayer and Agonie, yet no Scripture decideth, whether that were for paine, feare, or zeale; and that dured but a while in the Garden, where as af∣ter, when his afflictions and paines were at sorest, he shewed no signe of shrinking ei∣ther at the torments of his body, or at the affliction of his minde; but as the Apostle saith, Hebr. 12. For the ioy set before him, endured the Crosse, and despised the shame; not wearied nor fainting in minde, but with most perfect obedience, and quiet patience persisting to the ende. This conflict betweene paine and patience, to serue Gods glorie and obey Gods will, Christ proposeth to all his members on the same condition that it was offered to his humane nature. Reuel. 3. To him that ouercommeth (saith he) will I giue to sit with me in my throne, euen as I ouercame, and it with my Father in his throne. As for the consequents of hell paines, it is so brutish blasphemie to affirme them of Christ, that I forbeare to obiect them. I haue often named them, and you say, you Defenc. pag. 52. li. 8. abhorre such blasphemies as well as doe, that Christ so suffered hell paines. ] But Sir, you & your friends must shew by the Scriptures that God hath seuered these consequents I meane, reiection, reprobation, confusion, malediction diction, desperation, and such like, from the true paines of hell. The Scripture proposeth them as necessarie and infallible conse∣quents to the true paines of hell: You will seuer them, because otherwise Christ must either not suffer the true paines of hell, which euerteth all your new Doctrine; or he must also suffer these, which the Scriptures annexe to the true paines of hell. If you confesse the first, that Christ did not suffer the true paines of hell; the Question is well ended: If you seuer these consequents from the true paines of hell, shew by what authoritie of sacred Scriptures you doe it; and then you may be excused from lewd and wicked presumption. For if God by his word reuealed hath ioyned them toge∣ther, you doe or should know what sacriledge it is for your pleasure to pull them in sunder. Let your Reader therefore iudge, whether you can be quited from the one, except you shew good warrant for the other; which as yet you neither haue done, nor offered to doe. Defenc. pag. 53. l. 6. Your selfe graunt expresly, that the wrath of God is hell; indeede onely it causeth hell to be cruell; yea you grant it to be sharper then hell. So that we see hereby how vainely you say; out of this proposition, Christ suffered for vs the wrath of God for sinne, I shall neuer conclude, ergo he suffered the true paines of hell. I haue here shewed you I trust that this followeth well, seeing the wrath of God, which Christ fel in his spirit, was his right and proper wrath, albeit he suffered not all, nor the whole wrath of God, nor euery part thereof, iust as the damned doe. ] Here you see your full purpose is to conclude, that Christ suffred for vs the true paines of hell, though it hath beene your policie to conceale so much from the Reader all this while. And indeede howsoeuer you dissemble it, because you can no way prooueit, The death of Christes soule, and the true paines of hell or of the Damned are the maine markes which you shoote at; though you closely carie it in other termes, which are more generall and ambiguous, as the wrath of God, and the punishment of sinne, to keepe your Reader from discouering your foolish reasons, and reiecting your wicked deui∣ces. But cough vp your conceites freely, and wander not thus about a wood of words, to shew your contentious spirit, or at least to hide your hatefull mysteries. Here you haue shewed, you trust, that it followeth well, seeing the wrath, that Christ felt in his spirit, was right and proper wrath. ] You haue shewed vs what you intend; but neither here, nor else where doe you shew by what grounds of reason, and trueth you can inferre it. Christ suffered proper wrath and that in spirit, you say. ] You neuer went about to define or describe what proper wrath is; much lesse haue you any way prooued that, which Christ suffered, to be proper wrath. And now on the sudden you bend vp your bri∣stles, and boast you haue shewed, that Christ suffered the true paines of hell. But by what Scriptures I pray you haue you shewed it, or by what Fathers? Or if you haue neither of those to deriue your doctrine from; what groundes of reason haue you produced for it? You haue roued ignorantly, confusedly, and absurdly at the suffe∣rings of mans soule; you haue filled our eares with certaine new phrases of proper, ve∣rie, and right wrath and vengeance for sinne; but first and last you haue proued no∣thing; nay I see not so much as any offer of proofe, but a bolde proiect of trifles and termes to support your errors. But I grant expresly, that the wrath of God is hell.] Hauing shewed by sundrie Fathers the verie page before, that the wrath of God is often taken for the effects thereof, and so for any punishment which God inflicteth for sinne; I granted that hell and Conclus. pa. 247. li. 20. & 21. all the orments there, mightiustly be called the wrath of God, because they are t the sharpest effects of Gods wrath against sinne. What conclude you thence? ergo euerie effect or degree of Gods wrath is hell. If you clamper vs such conclusions, you are fitter to ring a bell, than to write a booke. What shew of reason hath this illa∣tion of yours? The wrath of God is applied to all the paines and punishments of sinne, and so by consequent to hell, as to the greatest vengeance that God taketh of men or diuels for sinne. Will you hence inferre, hell is the greatest punishment of sinne, ergo hell is all the punishment that God inflicteth for sinne, or whatsoeuer God inflicteth for sinne, is hell? By this Logike, a rotten tooth, a gowtie toe, a broken head, or a lame legge, are the true paines of hell, and all men liuing and dying are in the paines of hell. But you will create vs a new compasse of hell, that shall containe all that the wicked doe suffer in this life or elsewhere, be it neuer so little.] If you will fall to creating of new helles, shew your commission; otherwise you may create your selfe a woorse condition than you are ware of. Thinke you that any wise or godlie Reader will rest himselfe vpon such inuentions or such conclusions as these be? Defenc. pa. 53. li 4. Who can say how little or how small the paine was which Christ suffered? ] You onely can tell how great it was; for you say, Christ Ibidem pag. 52 li. 26. suffered a sense of Gods wrath equall to hell it selfe, and to all the tor ents thereof. For this, if you would spare vs as well proofes as words, we might at length perhaps beleeue you meant some trueth. Why presume you to determine a iust equalitie in Christes sufferings to the very paines of hell vp∣on your owne head? What Scripture teacheth you so to say? Defenc. pag. 53. li. 5. Nay, who can (say you) decla or comprehend the infinite greatnesse of it? ] You haue comprehended and de∣clared the iust measure of it; for you make it equall with hell. And yet, as constant in this as in all other things, you presently adde, that [ Christs Defenc. pag. 52. li. 32. anguish might very well be, and was no doubt infinite, euen in those bodily stripes and wounds, whose paines otherwise were Christ a d not suffer paines truely infinite. finite. ] Where if you take infinite for great, or aboue mens reach and knowledge, as sometimes the word is vsed, then speake you nothing to the purpose. For Christes paines may be great and intolerable to vs, though nothing neere the paines of hell. But if you take infinite, as contrarie to finite, which you do in this place by opposing it to finite, then infinite indeed is more than hell: for the paines of hell are finite in de∣gree, though infinite in hauing no end. Howbeit, in the meane while you wrong the Godhead of Christ, in whom nothing is infinite, besides his Diuine Nature, and the force thereof. So that if Christ did suffer paines truely infinite, his Godhead must suffer, which is infinite blasphemie; by reason his manhood being a creature could not, nor might not suffer but that which was finite, both in waight and end. Such spe∣culations you broach out of your owne brest, without any likelihood of trueth or concurrence with the sacred Scriptures; and then you aske Who can limit or measure Defenc. pag. 52. li. 28. the furie of Gods seuere iustice against sinne? ] As if God who is truely infinite as well in power, as in all other points, did his vttermost against Christ; and the creature in Christ were able to beare the brunt of the most that Gods iustice and power could in∣flict vpon him. Such desperate vntrueths well become your sobrietie, who will say any thing, so you may haue some shift of words to shrowd your selfe vnder: but the Scriptures will teach you, that Christes sufferings were of infinite price in respect of the person who was God and man, not of infinite paine which exceedeth the power and strength of all creatures. I aske, do you grant, that Christ suffered Gods wrath in spirit, as the Apostle (1. Thess. 5.) distinguisheth the spirit and the soule? ] I answere, do you heare, that you grosly mistake the Apostle, if you make the soule and the spirit two seuerall substances in man? other∣wise if they be but one, your question is very childish. For the immortall substance of mans soule suffereth, whether it be by her sense, affections, vnderstanding, or will. And this is no Sophistrie deceiuing you with the word soule; but it is the recalling you to conceiue rightly of the soule of man, which is an immortall and spirituall sub∣stance, subiect to paine as well by her vnderstanding and sense, as by her affections and will; and by what other meanes soeuer it pleaseth God to punish her. As for the wrath, which you would haue suffered in Christs spirit, when you tell vs what you meane by wrath, whether the apprehension of Gods wrath against our sinne, or the absolute impression of paine from the immediate hand of God; or the due conside∣ration of the case wherein Christ stood, when he suffered for our sinnes, which might iustly breed feare, care and sorrow in his soule, besides the affliction of bodily paines and anguish, which his immortall and humane spirit must needs discerne and feele; you shall receiue a fuller answere. Till then holde vs excused, if we spend not time to guesse & grope after your blinde and hid fansies. Howbeit, whatsoeuer Christ suffe∣red in his soule, it was religious and meritorious in him, I meane euen the feare, sorow and smart, which hee humbly, obediently, and patiently suffered, as from the hand of God, whosoeuer were the meanes: and other wrath than that, you shall neuer be able to proue was inflicted on Christs spirit or soule. Defenc. pag. 52. li. 28. Who can say, but that this was as hot and scorching as hell fire it selfe? ] We see then your forwardnesse to haue it so; but withall your foolishnesse, that daunting all others as vnpriuie to Gods secrets, and Christes sufferings, you only take vpon you to tell vs out of your casting boxe, how great and how hot the paine was, which Christ suffered in soule; euen as great and as hot as hell fire it selfe. What dreames be these to mocke men withall, and to fraight the Christian faith with? As if you had of late receiued some Reuelation from heauen, that Christes paine was full as hot as hell fire. I will not diminish the paines which the Sonne of God suffered for our sakes; but am well content to aggrauate them to the highest, so farre as the Scriptures giue me any light or leading; but you that extenuate his paines described in the Scriptures, and deuise other paines for him as hot as hell fire, no where testified by the Holy Ghost, what defence can you bring for your doings? ( Who can say no? ) Nay who can say yea, that doth not rush headlong into Gods secret counsels, as you doe? Be these the proofes whereon you pinne the paines of hell suffered in Christes soule? Who can say they were not as hot and scorching as hell fire it selfe? ] Frie in your follie, I wish you no worse fire; if I knew not your vaine, I should thinke you sicker than you are. I haue no doubt but Christes paine on the Crosse was proportioned to his pati∣ence; which God meant to proue, though not to ouerpresse: otherwise the measure of his paine, saue that it exceeded not the strength of his manhood, as I do not know, no more doeth any man liuing, except hee will deceiue himselfe with his owne dreames, as this Discourser doth. For though we may by nature, in some sort, conie∣cture how grieuous it was for Christ to hang three houres by the woundes of his hands and feet, all his bones being vnioynted; yet know we not how farre the power and iustice of God made way to that paine, who can by any meanes, as well as without all meanes, increase paine to what degree he will. For my part therefore I will not meddle with any certaine measure of Christes paines felt in his bodie or soule, by which his soule might easily be afflicted as farre as his humane strength could stretch: but the matching and euening of it with hell fire, I take to be a presumptuous and ir∣religious deuice of this Dreamer, for the reasons which I haue formerly shewed; to wit, that hell paines are not executed in this life, where Christ suffered; nor sufferable to the bodie, which is mortall; nor tolerable to the strength of men or angels. Now though the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit in the soule of Christ exceeded the mea∣sure of angels, as well for himselfe who is Lord and Iudge ouer all, as for vs that re∣ceiue of his fulnesse; yet in his crucifying, the Scriptures note his infirmitie, not his infinitie, and auouch him by the suffering of death, to be inferiour to the angels, and not in strength of flesh to be superiour vnto them, who are not able to endure hell paines with patience, as we finde by triall in diuels. Wherefore assure thy selfe Chri∣stian Reader they are more than follies, which this man fableth of Christes paines e∣quall and euen to hell fire it selfe; and such is his constancie in his new Diuinitie, that sometimes Christ suffered the verie paines of hell themselues, and the same which the damned doe; sometimes Christes paine was equall to it, and as hot as hell fire, and so not the verie same that the damned do suffer, who feele indeed the true force of hell fire, though not in that heat and heigth, which they shall feele it, at and after the day of iudgement. Defenc. pa. 51. l. 18. It is most necessarie and most comfortable to be vnderstood of all men, how the Lord as∣signed to his Sonne in the worke of redemption two persons as it were, or countenances or con∣ditions. His owne naturally, which God euer deerely loued, and our countenance or person or condition, which the Lord truely accursed and punished. His owne Nature felt the sorrow and paine of the curse and hatred: but the hatred and curse was bent against the load of our sinne, wherein he stood foorth as guiltie before God, and appeared as it were clothed there∣with. ] The taking of our Nature, person, and cause by the Sonne of God for our sal∣uation, is a key of Christian pietie that most concerneth, and most profiteth vs, if it be rightly vnderstood. But as Waspes out of sweete flowres gather sharpe and hote li∣quors; so out of the wholsome mysteries of true religion, you labour to encrease the tartnesse of your vnholsome humour. The eternall and true Sonne of God, by the de∣terminate counsell of his Father, tooke our humane nature (that is, both the bodie and soule of man) into one and the same person with his diuine glorie; that by the sanctitie, power, and dignitie of the one, the basenesse and weakenesse of the other might with more certaintie, securitie, and facilitie, performe the worke of our re∣demption. For by the neere and inseparable knitting of those two natures together, not onely the person was able by his owne power to destroy sinne, death, and Satan; and of his owne right to giue the spirit of trueth and grace, and euerlasting righteous∣nesse and happinesse to all that beleeue in him, but his birth, life, and death; that is, his humilitie, obedience, and patience were of infinite price and value with God, by reason the same person that so humbled himselfe to obey the will, and suffer the hand of his Father, was also God; though he could not suffer in his diuine, but onely in his humane nature. And to assure vs of his mercies towards vs by making vs parta∣kers of his graces and merits with him; he tooke all his elect into one and the same bodie with him, ioyning himselfe vnto them by the power of his spirit, as the head to the members, that from him they might draw the strength, hope, and ioy of eternall life; and all his meritorious passions, and victorious actions be fully theirs, as perfor∣med in their names and to their vses, by him that for their sakes became their like and their leader, I meane their head and their Sauiour. And because sinne was the thing which seuered vs from Gods holinesse, and pro∣uoked his iustice against vs, subiecting vs to death and damnation; Christ therefore tooke vpon him the recompence of his Fathers holines by his obedience, & the pre∣seruance of his Fathers iustice by his patience; admitting into his humane soule and bodie, not the infection or pollution of our sinne, much lesse the confusion or destruction due to vs for sinne, (since he could neither be defiled with our sinne, nor damned for our sinne;) but the purgation and satisfaction of our sinnes. To which end, by his obedience he abolished our disobedience; that Roman. 5. as by one mans disobedience (which was Adam) many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one (which is Christ) manie (should) be made righteous; and Coloss. . through death (suffered) in the bodie of his flesh Hebr. 9. for the redemption of (our) transgressions he Col st. 1. reconciled vs to God, and set at peace by the blood of his Crosse, things in earth, and things in heauen; 1. Pet. 2. bearing our finnes in his bodie on the tree, that we might be healed by his stripes, We then were in our selues defiled, hated, ac∣cursed, reiected and condemned for sinne; yet Christ our Redeemer and Sauiour tooke vs into himselfe, and our cause vpon himselfe, not to partake with vs in our spirituall filthinesse, and eternall wretchednesse, but to clense vs from the one, and to free vs from the other. So that we did neither defile, nor endanger him; But 1. Iohn . his blood washed vs from all our sinnes, and by (his) Hebr. 2. death he destroyed him that had power ouer death, euen the deuill. You speake then not onely without booke, but without trueth, when you say, that Christ was euer deerely loued of God for his owne condition; yet in or for our condi∣tion he was truely accursed and hated. You might with as much faith and religion haue said, That Christ by or with our condition was truely polluted with sinne, and truely reiected, confounded, and damned for sinne. For so were we, and if his taking our cause vpon him doe truely and necessarily subiect him to our deserts and dangers, then can none of these things be auoided, which you so much abhorre as blasphemies. All those things were due to vs in the highest degree, euen when Christ tooke vs and our cause vnto him; and were not released vnto vs, but in Christ and for Christ; and con∣sequently if your two countenances and conditions in Christ be such as you make, you may aswell affirme the last as the first, that is as well pollution of sinne, and damnation for sinne, as malediction and hatred for sinne. But who is so foolish amongst men, as to thinke or call him a Theefe and a Felon, that vpon repentance of the partie, and re∣compense for the fact, intreateth and obteineth pardon for one that was a Theefe and a Felon? or so childish to say, that none can ransome a Prisoner condemned to death, but by suffering the same death which the other should haue done? How come you then to conclude of Christ, because it pleased him to be our Mediatour and Redee∣mer, that therefore he was guiltie of our sinne, or liable to the same death of bodie and soule, which otherwise we should haue suffered? A ransome he payd for vs of farre more value than we were woorth, which was his obedience vnto death, and the shedding of his precious bloud for vs. But he neither owed nor payed the destructi∣on or damnation of himselfe, who neither by his person could, nor by his office nee∣ded to suffer any such thing. He came Iohn 6. to giue his flesh for the life of the world; and Ioh. 10. to lay downe his life for his sheepe, that his death might be a ransome for vs, and for our transgressions. Farder or other ransome than this, the Scripture mentioneth none, and therefore God required none, who by his will reuealed hath thorowly expressed what recompense for vs best contented both his holinesse and iustice. Could not Christ stand euer blessed and beloued in his owne Nature and yet be truly accur∣sed and hated in our condition and person? ] In the wicked God hateth and accurseth their persons for their sinnes, because their iniquities are neither ransomed, nor re∣pented, and so not pardoned: but in Christ and his members it was and is farre other∣wise. God still hateth and abhorreth the sinnes as well of the faithfull, as of the wic∣ked; but because he loueth the persons of his elect whom he hath adopted in Christ his Sonne, therefore he destroyeth their sinnes in them by repentance, and remission thereof for Christes sake, and saueth their persons, whom he can not be sayd to hate; though he truely hate their sinnes, by reason that loue and hatred in God can not be permixed or varied, as they are in men. For Gods loue is perfect and constant, as likewise his hatred; and for that cause either in him is perpetuall without ceasing or altering. If Gods loue to men for Christes sake be so setled, that it can not be remo∣ued, nor transferred to the contrarie, how much more then was the naturall and eter∣nall loue of God towards the person of his Sonne, so fixed, and feruent iu the highest degree, that for no cause, and in no condition he could be truely hated or accursed of God? The partaking with vs in penurie, sorrow, shame and death; which first came in as signes and effects of Gods iust displeasure against sinne, and curse vpon sinne; made him the more blessed, and beloued of God; since the voluntarie submitting himselfe to these things in his humane nature, taught vs obedience and patience vn∣der the mightie hand of God; and how rightly to distinguish, and willingly to want temporall and earthly blessings, that we may be partakers of eternall and heauenly. It is no consequent therefore in vs, that we are truely accursed or hated of God, because we are often depriued of his earthly blessings, and so subiected to his tempo∣rall and externall curses; for that we enioy by faith and hope, greater and perfecter blessings; which being in honor, comfort, and vse, farre aboue the other, make vs bles∣sed; and so remaining blessed for possessing the better, we can not be accursed for wanting the smaller; which indeed doe not truely make men blessed or cursed, since the lacke of them doth not exclude the true and eternall blessings of God. Much lesse then might the nature or person of Christ, which so greatly abounded in all spi∣rituall and heauenly blessings, be counted accursed and hated of God, because he was content to taste of those things, which were inflicted on our condition as remem∣brances of Gods displeasure against our sinne. For since no mans person can be truly blessed and truely accursed with God, in as much as they are perfect contraries, and so the preualent state doth prooue the person to be either blessed or cursed, but not both; much lesse then might the person of Christ be both, though he did vndergo some things in this life, which were the priuations of Gods outward and earthly blessings, and so kinds of curses in their first entrance and ordinance. And yet be∣cause those temporall and externall curses were nether permanent, nor predominant in Christs person or condition, whether you respect his owne or ours in him, and he otherwise was a fountaine of blessing for himselfe and all vs; it is euident that Christs suffering those outward and earthly curses (for so the Scripture calleth the priuations of Gods blessings in the same kinds) imposed on mans condition for sinne, could not preuaile to make him accursed or hated with God. For as Christ was 2. Cor. 5. made sinne for vs, and yet no sinner, but still continued holy, Hebr. 7. harmlesse, vndesiled, and separate from sinners: so was he made a curse for vs, and yet not accursed: by reason he endu∣red the smart of our sinne, and tasted of our curse in this life; but he no waies recei∣ued the guilt, or endured the dominion of either; much lesse was he by them depriued of any part of his inward and euerlasting blessings; which being by many degrees superiour to the other, must needs vphold his blessednesse, and ouerwhelme the griefe and name of those curses, which were temporally and tolerably laid on mans state and condition, to make him the humbler in him selfe, the mindfuller of his ma∣ker, and the warier against the flatteries of that old and craftie Serpent the Diuell. You shall doe well therefore, Sir Collector, to learne more reason, if not more Re∣ligion, and euen in naturall things to remember, that the night is darkenes though it haue some light; and the tree may be fruitfull, though some bough wither, and the thiope is blacke, though his teeth be white; and the Bones be hard, though the Marrow be soft; and so in all cases and creatures the most preuaileth, and nameth the subiect, though there be in them some small admixture of the contrarie. The next thing you vndertake is the saluing of a contradiction, with which, you say, you are charged by me: wherein the patient Reader if he be at leasure and haue the Booke at hand, may take a plaine view of your idle Rouing, and litle vnderstand∣ing. For I doe not charge you with saying, that Christ suffered ALL he suffered in his whole manhood, as you vntruely Defenc. pa. 53. li. 2 . report I doe; Let the Page 248. of my conclu∣sion which you cite, be perused by him that will: I there expresly touch the contrary. My words are. Conclus. pa. 248. This Antecedent, as you vtter it, doth neither good nor hurt to the Que∣stion. That Christ suffered in his whole Manhood for the Redemption of our sinnes, is a thing by me neuer doubted, nor denied: (and) that he suffered all that hee suffered in his whole manhood your selfe doe disclaime in the next Page. Your Indefinite proposition I said prooued nothing; and your selfe disclaymed the generall. Where now doe I charge you with saying that Christ suffered all he suffered in his whole manhood? Ira∣ther discharge you from it, then burthen you with it; onely I added, if you should meane otherwise, then your words were vttered, which I did not say, you did; then your Antecedent had a flat contradiction in it selfe. For so you should in one and the same reason affirme, that Christ suffered all which he suffered in his whole Manhood, and yet had some sufferings proper to his Soule. But Defenc pag. 53. li. 22. granting Christ to suffer all that he suffered in his whole Manhood, yet Gods wrath (as Gods wrath) must (you say) be suffered properly and immediatly in his Soule. ] The best part of your defence resteth on As, and As it were, and you take it for fome ine tricke to face out your Reader with an As; but where before you committed one ab∣surditie, now with helping that, you incurre twaine. For still you make one and the same fuffering proper to the soule, and yet common to bodie and soule; which in our countrey is a contrarietie, notwithstanding your As: and adding your As, whereon you presume; you now affirme, that Gods wrath (as Gods wrath) must be suffered pro∣perly and immediatly in Christes soule; and so the bodily sufferings of Christ by this lat∣ter resolution of yours, were no part of Gods wrath (as Gods wrath;) which is con∣trarie to your conclusion but the page before, that Defenc. pag. 52. li. 1. all (Christes) afflictions small and great were the effects of Gods verie wrath; and Pag. 51. li. . whatsoeuer Christ suffered was very wrath properly taken. But you vnderstand suffering. for discerning, and so the soule onlie di∣scerneth Wrath must be measured by Gods intention not mans dis∣cerning. the wrath to be from God, which the bodie suffereth.] Then by your vnder∣standing, Christes bodie suffered nothing at all, because it discerned nothing at all; and so Christ suffered nothing in his whole manhood, which is contrarie to your maine assertion. But heere you take suffering for sensitiue discerning, which may be in the bodie, through or from the soule.] If you may be suffered to leape to and fro, with what significations of words you please to deuise, you may reach what contrarie∣ties you will for the principles of your faith, and one As in the end shall mend all. Were it worth the time or paines to oppose your trifling As, I could aske you, whe∣ther condemnation of sinne, corruption of nature and infliction of death on the chil∣dren of Infidels, be no parts of Gods wrath (as Gods wrath) because they are not yet by age able to discerne the wrath of God: or whether the curse which God layed on the Gen. 3 v 17. earth, and Christ on the Mar. 11. v. 21 figge tree, were no curses; because neither the earth, nor the figge tree, could discerne them? But Gods intention maketh it wrath; not mans discerning: and in man it is wrath on either part, bodie and soule; though onlie the soule can discerne what and which is wrath from God. As for the goodnesse of your reason, if your say may stand for reason, you haue sayd it indeed; but any thing els that you proue there or elsewhere touching the proper wrath of God, or the suffe∣rings of Christes soule from the immediate hand of God, truely I see not; and that I likewise leaue, as I do the rest, to the Readers censure. Hauing freed your selfe from contrarieties, as your maner is, with increasing them, you hasten now to vnload your al surdities: in which, whatsoeuer I haue said, I could thorowly fasten on you, notwithstanding your new found shifts of directly and indi∣rectly, primarily and secundarily; if it could stead Christs Church to haue your spee∣ches proued absurd: but because I seeke to mainteine the trueth of our redemption, which is needfull for all men to know; and not to publish your follies farder than the pride of your owne reasons compelled me; as I shortly touched them at the first, so will I now as shortly ouerrunne them, to-let you see, that I mistake not your words, howsoeuer you will now amend them; and not spend long time in displaying your ouersights which may be better bestowed about the matter itself. You deny not your words, that Christ assumed not our Nature nor any part of it, but only to suffer in it properly and immediatly. You would faine salue them if you could: but how? Defenc. pag. 53. li. 37. All men may see it to be manifest that heere you speake of Christes suffering for our redemption. Why runne you then so vnaduisedly to his incarnation, where Christ assumed our Nature, and not in his passion? Defenc. pag. 54. li 7. Your meaning (you say) was no more b t to exclude that which I affirme, that Christ tooke hi humane soule to suffer in it only from and by the bodie. Would you excuse your follies by belying my words? Where do I affirme, that Christ tooke his humane soule to suffer in it only from and by the bodie? You talke of reasonable and iust aduersa ies; what reason or iustice call you this, to cite words in my name, which I neuer spake nor wrote, and so falsely to excuse your words by mine? And yet there is good difference betweene these two sentences; Christ tooke his humane soule to suffer in it only from the bodie and Christ assumed not our Nature, nor any part of it, but only to suffer in it properly and immediatly. The first admitteth Christes sufferings as one respect why he tooke an humane soule; which is verie true: The other excludeth all other respects of taking bodie or soule, saue only to suffer; which is as false as the first is true. That was not your meaning, you wil say. Then learne to ballance your words better, before you so rashly powre them foorth; and blame not your mi ker, who readeth the words, but seeth not your meaning. But come to your words affirmatiue, since your negatiue are so farre out of square. Defenc. pa. 54. l. 1 . I grant Christ intended, that his humane soule should suffer by Sympathie; but yet this he intended not DIRECTLY nor PRIMARILY in taking two distinct parts of our hu∣mane nature, our soule and our bodie. ] You would seeme learned to the simple by your doughty distinctions of DIRECTLY and PRIMARILY: and vnder this visard of empty words, make them beleeue there lay some great mysteries. But take backe your toyes, wherein you put so much trust: the Christian faith was preached, written, and receiued without these needlesse bon graces of direct and indirect, primarie and secon∣dari : they are but dennes of your deuices to lurke in. Christ tooke our soule and our body vnto him purposely and fully to saue both: which of the twaine hee meant di∣rectly and primarily to suffer in, and which indirectly and secondaril , is a fruitlesse speculation of yours. The Christian faith neither hath nor needeth any such questi∣ons. For since man consisteth of both, and without either can be no man the Sonne of God descending for vs and our saluation, directly and primarily purposed to sane, and suffer in both. And because the body being made of earth, was the weaker and ba r part of man, (the soule in will and reason, though not in power and l ght, as yet, drawing neere to the Angels of God) and by that meanes further remoued from the dignitie and maiestie of the Sonne of God; herefore the Scriptures more carefully expresse that he tooke our flesh; and euen therein suffered death sor the ransome of our sinnes; though he wanted not a soule, when he became man; nor any part in him did or could feele and discerne the paine and affliction of his bodie, but onely his soule. The respects of Christs comming into the world, and suffering sor vs, if we will learne, we need not your termes of directly and primarily; the holy Ghost hath taught vs this to be a 1. Tim. 1. faithfull saying, and worthy of all admitta that Christ Iesus came into the world to saue sinners. Himselfe is a witnesse without all exception; that Matth 20. he came to serue, and to giue his life a ransome for manie. Yea his Iohn 6. fl sh which he gaue for the life of the world, is the bre d that came downe from heauen. If then Coloss. 1. things in earth and things in heauen were pacified by the blood of his Crosse, and we reconciled through death in the bo∣die of his flesh, in which he bare our si es on the tree: It is certaine that Christes bodie, blood, and death on the Crosse, and consequently his sufferings from these and by these, were directly and primarily intended as the meanes of our redemption and re∣conciliation: and your vaine imagination of the soules most principall disposition, in comparison whereof Christ (say you) did not respect this sensitiue suffering by Sympathie with and from the bodie, which is common to vs with beastes; is a lewde and irreligious re∣proch to the death and Crosse of Christ Iesus. For, what if the bodie of a beast may be crucified, and his blood shed, by piercing and wounding as Christs was? shall wee therefore say that Christs death and passion were common to brute beastes? Would any ma frame his heart thus to think, or his tongue thus to speake, but he that is bru∣ter then a beast? Of your hell paines may it not more truly be said, that as you would cast them on Christes soule, they should be common to him with deuils; who I troe are worse then beastes? But these bee meete matters for such a master in Israel as you are. You vntruely and vnlearnedly suppose the corporall afflictions of the Saints, and of Christ himselfe, to pierce no further then into the externall sensitiue part, which you make common to them with beasts: and sufferings proper to reasonable creatures you admit none, but your hell paines, which are common to them with deuils. So that by your profound diuinitie all Christian men suffer either as beasts, or as deuils. Which errour of yours I haue sufficiently refuted before; and by that enformed the Reader that the chastening and afflicting the soule of man by temporall and exter∣nall meanes and paines from the bodie is proper to men, and not common to beasts, who haue no soules, nor to deuils, who haue no bodies: and that God doth thus cha∣sten and correct his children, whose patience is precious in his sight; thereby to trie, encrease, and quicken his graces in them, which is blasphemie to affirme either of beasts or deuils. And from what spirit this can proceede, to yeelde Christ no more sense, taste, nor thought of his bodily sufferings, then you doe to a beast, let the Rea∣der iudge; for my part I abhorre such heathenish, if not hellish comparisons. But sense you will say, is common to man and beast. ] I haue no doubt that beasts doe heare and see, smell, taste and feele, as well as men; but euen in all these fiue, and specially in hearing, seeing, and feeling, the soule of man sheweth difference sufficient betwixt a man and a beast. For man by his immortall and reasonable spirit, discerneth and vn∣derstandeth what he heareth, seeth, or feeleth, which beasts cannot doe; and he con∣ceaueth not onely the things, which affect his senses, but the causes, effects, adiuncts, consequents, and remedies thereof; and thereby frameth himselfe, if he be religious, to behold therein the worke and will of God, which is as farre from beasts, as reason and grace. Though then eares, eyes, and sinewes be common to men with beastes; yet in them and by them the soule of man worketh, and suffereth; which because beasts haue not, it is a verie grosse ouersight of yours (Sir Discourser) to make the bo∣dily sufferings of Christ common to him with beastes; in which the soule of Christ shewed so much obedience, pacience, submission, deuotion, and loue, that God ac∣cepted those sufferings violently and iniuriously inflicted on Christs bodie, but hum∣bly, religiously, and willingly receiued in his soule, as the full satisfaction for our sinnes. Defenc. pag. 55. l. 8. There is no reason in the world, nor likelyhood, that the naturall facultie in Christs soule of proper and immediate suffering for our sinnes should haue no vse; and a suffering of paines onely from and by the bodie should be sufficient; when as in his doing of righteousnesse for vs, his soules ioynt obedience, and mutually knit together in and with his body was not alone sufficient. This must needes be a perfect reason for vs against you, except you could by expresse Scrip∣ture disprooue this proportion of like necessitie betweene the operation of the proper faculties of Christs humane soule, that is betweene his doing and his suffering for vs, which you shall neuer be able to doe. ] When and how came you by this authoritie or libertie, that you may say what you will in matters of faith without all warrant of holy Scripture, and your fansies must stand for authentike, except I can disproue them by expresse Scripture? Nay first proue them, before we receiue them, as you and all other Christians ought to doe, if you will haue them passe for grounds of religion; and then if I can not dis∣proue them by the same Scriptures, they shall go for good. An answer to this perfect reason of yours if you would haue, I answere you with Tertullian: Tertull. de carne Christi. c. 7. Non recipio, quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers. I receiue not this, which you bring of your owne without the Scripture. And with Athanasius: Athanasius de incarnatio∣ne Christi. If you will babble other things besides those which are written, why striue you with vs, that are persuaded neither to heare, nor to speake any thing besides the Scriptures? Shew vs this proper and immediate suffering for sinnes in the soule of Christ (which you so much talke of) by the Scriptures, and we wil thinke our selues bound to answer it; otherwise it is as easily reiected, as it is offered. But there is no reason in the world nor likelyhood it should bee otherwise.] Indeede Proper and im∣mediate suffe∣ring for sinnes in the Soule of Christ, is the Defenders pro∣per deuice. there is no reason in the world, nor likelyhood it should be so as you haue said. For in Christes doings and sufferings there was obserued, and must bee confessed a cleane contrarie course. His doings were all iust and holy, as hee himselfe was, and procee∣ded first from his own mind and will, by the immediate power and grace of Gods spi∣rit in him, whencesoeuer the outward occasions were offered him. The sufferings which he receiued in his body, were all vniust and violent, proceeding from others, that wickedly persued and oppressed him; though in all his afflictions he beheld with his minde, and with his will obeyed the Acts. . hand and Counsell of God, thus by the malice and ignorance of his enemies Acts. 3. fulfilling those things, which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ should suffer. So that Christes obedience and pa∣tience in all his persecutions, came from the same inward powers and graces of his soule from which all his actions did; though the wrongs and violences were first offe∣red his body by the wicked. In his inward affections and passions of feare, griefe, and sorrow; his minde was the first apprehender of the causes, that mooued them; and his will the admitter of them. But as in all his actions he was holy and iust, so in all his af∣fections and inward passions, were they neuer so grieuous vnto him, he was not only righteous and innocent, but religious, and patient; and other passions of the soule in Christ, the Scripture knoweth none. As for your suffering of hell paines in the soule of Christ properly from the immediate hand of God, it is a deuice proper and immediate to your selfe, which you would faine bring in as an other and chiefe meane of our redemption, besides that which the Scripture speaketh of Christes sufferings. Wherein you must pardon me and all true beleeuers, for not accepting your fansies as any parts of our faith. We reade that God is the 2. Cor. 1. Father of mercies: that he is the tormentor of soules in hell with his immediate hand, wee doe not reade; much lesse that hee o tormented the soule of his Sonne in the time of his passion, which is the maine plat of your new found hell. The iudge shall say, Depart from me yee cursed into euerlasting fire, prepared for the diuell and his Angels. Which fire we confesse is created and established by the might, power, and hand of God, as a meane to torment the damned, both men and Angels, according to their deserts; but that this fire is nothing else, but the immediate hand of God tormenting the wicked spirits in hell, as it did the soule of his owne Sonne on the Crosse; I take either of these assertions, not to dis∣semble with you, to bee a grosse and palpable error; strange to the Scriptures and strange to the whole Church of God, before these our dayes, wherein some make it their glorie rather newly to inuent, then rightly to beleeue, what the Scriptures de∣liuer, and the Church of Christ from the beginning receiued, and reuerenced as prin∣ciples of Christian truth and pietie. The next point, to wit that by your new found Rules, you make Christes flesh need∣lesse to our redemption, you graunt is an Defenc pag. 55. . 29. horrible heresie; but you aske how it followeth vpon your words] I did not charge you with maintaining purposely that wicked heresie, but with reasoning so foolishly, & speaking so vnaduisedly, that without your direct meaning, that error was consequent to your words. You would faine see how. Truely it followeth stronger vpon your words then I would wish, or you are ware. For whatsoeuer was by Gods ordinance needfull to the worke of our redemption, that made properly to our redemption. But the sufferings of Christs soule by or from the body (which you call by Simpathy) did not make properly to our Redemption, as you say: ergo the sufferings of Christs Soule by or from his body were not needfull to the worke of our Redemption. Now if the sufferings of Christs flesh were not needfull to our Redemption, then was his flesh needelesse for our Redemption by your illa∣tion. Which of these propositions can you auoyd, but they are either plainly true, as the Maior: or fully yours, as all the rest? Our Redemption being no naturall thing, but wholy depending on the counsell and will of God; whatsoeuer God appointed as necessary for our Redemption, that most properly made to our Redemption; and things needlesse could not appertaine thereto, but improperly. Of all men you may not start from this force of the word PROPER. For with you, improper wrath is no wrath, improper punishment is no punishment, and therefore improper belonging to our Redemption, is no belonging at all, but needlesse to our Redemption. And since Christs sufferings in his body by your assertion, did not make properly to our Redemption; it is euident they were needlesse to our Redemption: and if the sufferings of his flesh were needlesse, the flesh it selfe was needlesse to our Redemption, euen by your owne Conclusions. For Trea. pa. 17. . 1 . Christ (you say) assumed not our Nature, nor any part of it, but onely to suffer in it properly and immediatly, euen for the very purchasing our Redemption thereby∣Otherwise he had NO NEEDE to assume both, but either the one part or the other. You heare your owne Doctrine, that except Christ suffered properly and immediatly in either part of our nature for the purchasing of our Redemption thereby, he had NO NEEDE to assume both. But Christ suffered not properly and immediatly in his flesh for the purchasing of our Redemption thereby, if your words be true, that bodily suf∣ferings properly made not to our Redemption: He had no neede therefore to assume flesh, in which he suffered nothing, that properly made to our Redemption. Here are the Cart-ropes of your owne collections; the sequels whereof if you deny, you must re∣call your owne answers and arguments, so peremptorily pronounced in your Treatise. How false your Resolutions are, and how dissonant from the sacred Scriptures, will easily appeare to him, that hath but halfe an eye. For the sufferings of Christs body were not decreed by God to make no more to our Redemption, then Christs Defenc. pa. 55. l . 37. hunger or his Defenc. pa. 55. l . 37. sleepe, which are your Resemblances; but they were directly intended by God himselfe in Christs incarnation, and expresly foreshewed by the mouthes of his Pro∣phets, and necessarily to be borne in the body of Christ, before we could be redee∣med, in respect of Gods will so setled and reuealed. The Apostle to the Hebrewes going about to prooue that Christ was to offer his body and shed his bloud for our sanctification and Redemption, layeth this for the ground; Hebr. 8. Euery high Priest is or∣dained to offer gifts and Sacrifices. Wherefore it was of NECESSITIE, that this Man (Christ) should haue somewhat to offer. For (else) he were not a Priest. And concluding what must be offered; Christ (saith he) being Hebr. 9. an high Priest of good things to come, by his owne bloud entred in once into the holy place, and found eternall Redemption for vs. Wherefore Hebr. 10. when (Christ) commeth into the world, he saith; Sacrifice and offering (which are offered by the Law) thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou ordained me; then said I, Loe I come to doe thy will, O God. By the which will we are sanctified, euen by the offering of the body of Iesus Christ once. The suffering of Christs body and shedding of his blood were exactly purposed, and openly reuealed in Christs incarnation, as the WILL OF GOD for our Redemption; and the offering of Christs body on the Crosse WAS OF NECESSITIE, as the Apostle teacheth. Our Sauiour said as much; when he Matth. 16. Mark. 8. Luk. 9. began to shew his Disciples, that he must suffer many things of the El∣ders, and of the high Priests, and Scribes, and be shine, and rise againe the third day. And when they had forgotten his words, the Angels put them in mind thereof after his resurrection, bidding them Luk. 24. v. 7. remember, how he spake vnto you saying, the Sonne of man MVST BE deliuered into the hands of sinfull men, and be crucified, and the third day rise againe. And when some of them reporting how he was condemned to death by the Rulers and crucified, skant beleeued he was risen againe, himselfe said vnto them; Luke. 24. v. 25. 26. O fooles, and slow of hart to beleeue all, that the Prophets haue spoken. Ought not Christ to haue suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And to all his Apostles; Vers. 46. Thus it is written, and THVS OVGHT CHRIST TO HAVE SVFFERED. So that Christs bodily sufferings for our Redemption were foreshewed by the Prophets, and OF NECESSITIE to be performed by Christ, in regard they were FOREDECREED of God, as a part of the ransome for our sinnes. For though Pilate with the Acts 4. vers. 28. Gen∣tils and the people of Israell gathered themselues together against Iesus, yet did they no∣thing to him but whatsoeuer the hand and counsell of God determined before to be done. What greater necessitie or proprietie can you prooue by the Scriptures for any other things, which you dreame the Soule of Christ suffered from the immediat hand of God? If these things did not properly make for our Redemption, but indirectly and secondarily and by consequent as you prate; shew by the word of God, that your hell paines pertained more directly to our redemption then these things, which the Scrip∣ture speaketh of. But with your rable of insolent and impertinent termes you come right within Tertullians Rule. Tertullian ad∣uers. haereticos. cap. 2 . You beleeue (these things) without the Scriptures, that you may beleeue (them) against the Scriptures. Yea, Hilarius ad Constant um August. with a magniloquent vanitie you de∣lude the eares of the simple with deceitfull words, whiles you shunne to beleeue that of Christ, which he hath taught to be beleeued of himselfe. It may be, that answerable to the rest of your Idle shifts, you wil now say, Christs bo∣dily The Soules suf∣fering by Sym∣pathie the De∣fenders owne phrase. sufferings made directly and properly to our Redemption, but the Soules suf∣fering them by Sympathie did not.] This is an other of your owne phrases brought in of purpose by you to blind the simple, and to brabble with the learned. What you meane by Sympathie knoweth no man but your selfe. And therefore if that word haue in it any ambiguitie, the fault is yours, who first vsed it, and not mine. I teach as Nature and Scripture doe warrant me, that the Soule of man suffereth, as well by the force of her sense, as of her vnderstanding; and to the body of it selfe, I attribute neither motion, sense, nor life, but all these are the powers and effects of the Soule in the Body; and so is paine an impression on the Soule from or by the Body. As there∣fore the Soule seeth the workes of God by the eyes of her body, and heareth his words by the eares of her flesh, and neither of these by Sympathie: so the whole bo∣dy and euery part thereof serueth as an Instrument, or a meane for the Soule to feele in her selfe, and not by Sympathie, the touch of Gods hand vpon the body. Had the Body sense of it selfe without or besides the operation of the Soule, then might it iustly be called a Sympathie, for the one to feele what the other suffereth and feeleth, as friends doe, that are like affected ech with other: but because all discerning by sense in mans body is proper to the Soule, I doe not see how the Soule should be exactly said to discerne and feele by Sympathie those things, which the body receaueth; but rather by her originall and naturall facultie of suffering from and by the Body, with which she is ioyned to doe all in the body, and suffer all from the body. Howbeit I striue not about the word, which some learned men haue vsed for the Communion of suffering betweene the Soule and the Body; but onely note that the word was first vttered by you, not by me; and therefore if you cauill with the signification of that word, you Cauill with your selfe and not with me. It sufficeth for me, that not onely Christians but euen miscreants, by the paines of their body haue perceiued and ac∣knowledged the hand of God vpon them selues. The Iob. 19. hand of God hath touched me, saith Iob, when he was spoyled of all his goods, and his body blasted by Satan with a sore disease. Dauid in a sharp sicknesse, that consumed his bones, and turned his moysture into the drought of Summer, said to God; Psal. 32. thine hand is heauie vpon me. Yea the Philistimes of Ashdod, Gath and Ekron, when they were plagued with Eme∣rods for detaining the Ark of God, could say, 1. Sam. 5. v. 6. his hand is sore vpon vs. And so much Paul told Elimas the Sorcerer, when he withstood the preaching of the Faith; Behold the Acts 13. hand of the Lord is vpon thee, and thou shalt be blind. Of Christ then there can be no doubt, but he felt the hand, and beheld the counsell of God in all, that the Iewes did vnto him; which whether you may call a suffering by Sympathie or no, maketh nothing to my Question or purpose. It is euident by the Scriptures that God by these outward paines vrgeth the Soules of his Seruants to seeke him; and Christ with∣out vrging, submitted himselfe to the cruell and bloody rage of the Iewes, as to Gods decree and ordinance for our Redemption; who Iohn 19. could haue no power at all against (him) vnlesse it had been giuen (them) from aboue. Hence you goe to examine the deriuation of sinne from Adam, the satisfaction for sinne by Christ, the beginning of sinne in the first man, and the continuing there∣of in vs all: matters of good waight and worthy due consideration; wherein if either you did vnderstand what I said, or not so hastily catch after shewes, that as soone de∣ceiue you, I should need fewer words to represse your follies. But such is your course and custome, that you flie after feathers, and thinke you get great purchases. In your Treatise you framed an obiection in my name, as if I had reasoned, that Trea. pag. 19. li 7. Adams sinne was propagated into vs not by our Soules, but onely by our flesh, which onely we deriue from him: and therefore Christ onely by his flesh and not by his Soule procured satisfaction for vs. Indeede I might haue said that our Bodies, and not our Soules, are deriued from Adam, and shewed the consent of Scriptures, Fathers, and the best writers on euery side, as well Protestants and Papists, as Pagan Philosophers all ioyning in that opini∣on; but I thought not good then to trouble the people with that Question: and there∣fore I rested on a knowne and confessed principle of Christian truth and faith, that we inherite pollution and death from Adams flesh, without resoluing whence the Soule commeth, which I did refraine before the multitude to speake of. And since by the Scriptures the first Adam was a Rom. 5. v. 14. figure of the second, the flesh of Christ giuen for vs must be as able to clense and quicken vs, as Adams flesh was to defile and kill vs. To this reason you here pike many quarrels, but in the end you slide it of, as else where answered. Your first quarrell is, that I force, what I promised to forbeare, euen the difficultie whence the Soule of man is deriued. As though the grounds of our Faith might be doubted, because that Question in former times was vndecided? That we deriue flesh from Adam, and haue men for the Fathers of our bodies, did neuer man yet, that was in his right wits, call in Question, were he Christian or Here∣tick, Iewe, Turke, or Pagan. That likewise wee deriue with our flesh pollution and death from Adam, the faith of Christ rightly grounded on the Scriptures doth not suffer vs to stagger at, though whence our Soules are giuen vs, some haue stood per∣plexed. You thinke it much I should deliuer the one, which is the pollution of our flesh professing not to determine the other; and make it in me a kind of inconstan∣cie to vrge the propagation of the flesh with her sequels, of which no Christian may doubt, because I thought it not fit to trouble the people with the deriuation of the Soule. But so hath the Church of Christ alwaies done; it hath cleerely confessed the deriuation of sinne and death from Adam, and made it necessarie for all Christian men so to beleeue, though some would not hastily, or could not easily resolue the doubt, whence the Soule commeth. Defenc. pa. 57. li. 3. If our Soules arise in Generation from Adam, as well as our flesh, how can your reason be good by any possibilitie? ] The conceit that our Soules are ingendred together with the The Soule is not deriued from the Fathers of our Bodies. seede of our bodies, is so grosse and pestilent an error, and so repugnant to all autho∣ritie Humane and Diuine, and so dissident from dayly experience, that I had no cause to make that a Question in Religion, or therein to refraine the audience of the peo∣ple. Ambros. de Noe & arca. cap. 4. Ex nullo homine generantur Animae. Soules are not generated from any man, saith Ambrose: Clemens Stro∣mat. li. 6. . The principall facultie of the soule, sayth Clemens Alexandrinus, by which we haue dis∣course of reason, is not engendered by proiection of seed. Hilarius de Trinitate. li. 10. Anima vtique nunquam ab ho∣mine gignentium originibus prebetur. The soule neuer commeth from man in the generation of men, sayth Hilarie. Ierom vpon those words of Salomon, the spirit (of man) after death returneth to God that gaue it, writeth thus: Hieronym in Ecclesiast. cap. 12. Ex quo satis ridendi sunt, qui pu∣tant animas cum corporibus seri; & non à Deo, sed à corporum parentibus generari. Where∣by they are worthy to be thorowly derided, which thinke soules to be sowen together with bodies, and not to be from God, but to be generated by the parents of (our) bodies. For since the flesh returneth to the earth, and the spirit to God that gaue it, IT IS MANIFEST, that God is the Father of our soules, and not Man. And when Ruffinus professed he could not tell how the soule came to be ioyned with the body, whether by propagation from Man, or infusion from God; Ierom replieth: If (the soule) Idem Apolo∣gia 2. aduers. Ruffinum. come by propagation, then the soules of men, which we grant are eternall, and the bruit beasts, which die with the bodie, haue one condition. And doest thou maruell that the (Christian) brethren are scandalized at thee, when thou swearest thou knowest not that, which the Churches of Christ confesse they know? Theodoret in many places giueth the like testimonie: Theodoret. diuinorum de∣cretorum Epi∣tome li. 5. cap. de homine. The Church beleeuing the di∣uine Scriptures, sayth, the soule was (and is) created as well as the bodie, not hauing any cause of her creation from naturall seed, but from the Creatours will, after the bodie once per∣fectly made. The most diuine Moses writeth, that Adams bodie was first made, and after∣ward his soule inspired into him, Againe in his lawes the same Prophet plainly teacheth vs, that the bodie is first made, and then the soule created and infused. And blessed Iob spake thus to God: Diddest thou not powre me forth like milke, and thicken me like curds of cheese? thou diddest clothe me with skinne and flesh; and compact me with bones and sinewes. And when by this Iob had shewed the frame of his bodie to be first made, he addeth a thankesgiuing for his soule, saying; Life and mercie thou laydst with me, and thy watchfulnesse preserued my spirit. Idem. depro∣uident. This confession touching the soule and bodie of man, the Church hath learned from the diuine Scriptures. The same reasons and resolutions he repeateth elsewhere in his fift Idem de depro∣ dent Craeco∣rum affect ib. Sermo. 5. sermon touching the nature of man. Leo the great: The Le . epist. 93. a Turibium ca 10. Catholike faith doth constantly and truely preach, that the soules of men were not before they were inspired in∣to their bodies; nec ab also incorporentur nisi ab opifice Deo; neither are put into the bodie by any other workeman than God. And Austen himselfe, who to decline that difficultie, how the soule commeth to be infected with originall sinne, was the first that made this doubt, whether the soule were created and infused, or els deriued from the soule, though not by the seed of the parents; refuseth Tertullians opinion, That the soule riseth from the seed of the bodie, as peruerse and strange to the Church of Christ: August. epist. 157. ad Optat. They, sayth he, which affirme soules to be drawen from the parents, if they follow Tertul∣lians opinion, tooke them to be (in some sort) bodies, & corpulentis seminibus exoriri, and to rise from the seed of the bodie; quo quid peruersius dici potest? than the which what can be sayd more peruerse? Now in Austens rehearsall of heresies, Tertullians assertion, That the soule was a (kind of) bodie, is excused as no heresie; but his conceit, That August. de Tertullian. the state of the soule is propagated by traduction (of seed) is expresly put amongst his August. de Tertullian. errours. From these auncient Fathers swarue not the best of our new writers. Bullinger: Bulling. deca∣du. 4. Serm. 10. All those (other) opinions haue beene refuted with sound reasons by the writers Ecclesia∣sticall, and that receiued and auouched for the truest, which teacheth the soule to be created of nothing, and to be infunded into the bodie from God, when the childe hath his perfect shape in his mothers womb. And that we are not at this day otherwise created of God, than by in∣funding the soule into the bodie first fashioned, Iob is a most plentifull witnesse, where he saith: Thine hands (o God) haue made me, and fashioned me wholly. Didst thou not stroke me like milke, and curd me like cheese? with skinne and flesh thou coueredst me, with bones and si∣newes thou ioyntedst me. Lo here the conception and formation of mans bodie in his mothers wombe most excellently described. It followeth now in Ieb touching the soule: Life and mer∣cie thou hast giuen me, and thy visitation hath kept my spirit. Beholde life, that is the soule, infused of God into the bodie alreadie framed. Therefore rightly and according to the Scrip∣tures do we holde, that mens soules are created of God, and inf nded into their bodies perfect∣lie framed before in the wombe. Caluine: Caluinus in epist. ad Heb. cap. 12. God is the Father as well of the soule as of the bodie; and the only Father, if we speake properly: yet because in creating soules he vseth not the (seruice, or) worke of man, after a peculiar maner, by a kinde of excellencie, he is called the Father of spirits. Beza: Be Za in lihello Qu stionum & Responsionum. I thinke not good to dissemble this, that the doctrine of tradu∣cing the soule, (from the parents) seemeth to me verie absurd, because either the whole, or a part must be traduced. If the whole, the fathers of force must presently dic, (hauing whol∣lie lost their soules:) If a part, how can a part be cut off from a simple (and spirituall) sub∣stance? Vrsinus: Vrsin. tract. Theolog. de peccate. We grant the soules of all men are created of God, when they beginne to liue; for they at one time are created, and vnited to the bodie. Zanchius: Zanchius de , Dei parte 3. li. 2. cap. 4. That the whole soule is created by God, I beleeue, confesse, and teach with the whole Church, and auouch it may be prooued by firme reasons. His reasons are largely deliuered in the fift chapter of the same booke, and all that can be sayd for generation and propagation of soules a∣gainst their creation by the immediate worke of God without any humane meanes, is there learnedly and sufficiently refuted. So that in respect of Austens doubt, whe∣ther God deriue the soule from the soules of the parents, when he putteth it into the bodie being first finished, or createth it of nothing, as he did Adams soule, I did re∣linquish that in question; but as for the soules rising in and by generation from Adam, which you now catch holde of, I neuer meant to fauor that fansie so much as to make it any question in matters of faith; since with one consent Philosophie, Physicke, euident experience, and the Scriptures themselues conuince that to be an erroneous and manifest vntruth. Defenc. pa. 57. l. 8. I haue shewed before at large, that your Minor is nothing true: for pollution that is sinne and reall iniquitie is not in our flesh without a soule. ] You said so much in effect before in your Treatise, and if your word bee a proofe, you haue shewed it; but other proofe you bring none, saue that which inclineth rather to heresie then Christianitie, if you speake to the purpose, and stand to your words as they lie either in your Treatise, or in your Defence. In your Treatise you say, Trea. pa. 21. li. 28. Let vs not bee curious in this hard point, holding this most euident trueth, that sinne is a proper and vnseparable qualitie of the soule, and can not be found being in any thing, where a reasonable soule is wanting. ] If you take the word sinne in his right sense, as you ought to doe speaking of the propagation of sinne, and so comprise in it as well originall as actuall sinne; here are two grosse errors euen against the Christian faith. For if sinne can not be found in any thing, where a rea∣sonable soule is wanting; then can no sinne bee found in the deuils, for they haue no soules. August. Re∣tract. li. 1. cap. 11. Angels to haue soules I doe not remember that euer I read in the deuine and cano∣nicall Scriptures, saith Austen. If Angels haue not soules, then deuils haue none; for they were holy, and now are reprobate, but still Angels, as Christ calleth the deuill and his Angels. Againe, sinne being either actual or originall; children in their mo∣thers Matth. 25. wombe haue not actuall sinne, neither dispute we of actuall sinne, when we talke of deriuing and inheriting sinne; for actuall sinne is neither deriued, nor inherited. If then that, which is conceiued, haue no originall sinne so long as the soule wanteth; since you Trea. pa. 21. li. 4. content your selfe, as you say, with the opinion of the most at this present, that the soule doth not passe together with the seede of our generation and conception; most euidently you denie original sinne, till the soule come to quicken the body; and so contradict the expresse words of Dauid, who saith, Hee was Psal. 51. begotten in sinne and conceiued in iniquitie. No maruell then you stumble at Ambroses words, that wee are Ambros. in Apologia Da∣uid. cap. 11. defiled, before we hau life, as repugnant to your purpose; when you spare not Dauids words, who saith as much, if not more then Ambrose. I Defenc. pag. 5 . li. 10. pray omit mens Authorities in this case, and prooue by sound reason, that which you would. For pollution that is sinne and reall iniquitie, is not in our flesh without a soule. ] We were best to omit all learning, experience, and trueth; that onely your conceits may stand vpright. It hath pleased God in things naturall, by sight and experience to leade Philosophers and Physitians to the trueth of his workes; as farre as mans wit can reach; and with one consent they resolue, that the reasonable soule of man neither riseth in the body, nor commeth to the body presently with the conception. Mo∣thers and midwiues doe certainely distinguish the time of quickning, from the time of conceiuing; and hee that would perswade them, that the child quickneth immedi∣ately vpon the conception, might as easily bring them to beleeue, that the moone is made of a greene cheese. But sound reason you require. ] As if trueth of experience were not the soundest reason men can giue, till God doe speake. That the body is not straight way framed vpon the conception, many thousand scapes in all femals, and namely in women doe perfectly prooue. The Physitians and Philosophers inter∣pose many monthes betweene the conception and perfection of the body. Iob him∣selfe declareth that we were first Iob 10. as milke, when we were in seede; then Iob 10. condensed as curds, when we turned to bloud; and after that Iob 10. clothed with skinne and flesh, and lastly Iob 10. compacted with bones and synewes, before we receiued life and soule from God. The new Testament noteth these three degrees in forming our bodies; to wit, seede, bloud, and flesh; and calleth our parents the fathers of our bodies, but not of our spirits, which God alone is. If then nothing can be defiled with sinne, as by your doctrine you resolue, except it haue a reasonable soule; of necessitie wee either had reasonable soules at the instant of our conception, which is a most famous falsehood repugnant to al learning, experience, and to the words of Iob; or else we were not conceiued in sinne, which is a flat heresie dissenting from the plaine words of the sacred Scriptures, and from the Christian faith. Choose which of these issues you will; you either way shew your selfe to haue little sense, and lesse trueth. But I must Defenc. pa. 57. li. 13. adde the word onely, or else I say nothing against you. ] No good Sir, that shall not need. We inherite pollution by Adams flesh before our Soules come to our bodies; and that sufficeth for my reason, though the pollution, which we inherite, be deriued as well from the Soules, as from the Bodies of our Parents; because their bo∣dies, when they begat vs, were ioyned with their Soules, whose naturall and animall faculties were still in them wholy corrupted, and their sinnes communicated vnto their bodies, though their spirits were renued and sanctified. The very Seed, of which we were begotten and conceaued, was an vncleane thing, (as Iob calleth it, when he saith; Iob. 14. Who can make a cleane thing of an vncleane? ) and corruptible; that is full of Corruption, as Peter nameth it when he saith; 1. Pet. 1. borne againe not of corruptible Seed, of which we were borne by our Parents. The corruption of sinne then is first deriued by our Bodies, though our Soules be likewise wrapped in the same pollution and con∣demnation, that our bodies are; and sinne still abideth and rebelleth in our flesh so long as we liue, though our Soules be washed and clensed from sinne. And therefore the Apostle calleth our flesh, Rom. 8. v. 3. the flesh of sinne, in the similitude of which Christ was sent, and confessed that Rom. 7. in his flesh dwelt no good thing; assuring vs, that though Christ be in vs, Rom. 8. v. 10 the body is dead because of sinne, when the Spirit is life, (or liueth) because of righteousnesse. Neither is this newes to Zanchius, whom you cite in your Treatise as if he fauoured your error. Zanchij trac∣tat. Theolog. cap. 4. de pec∣cato originali. Quod attinet ad contagium illud, certe citra controuersiam, in corpore primum inest, & deinde per corpus in animam deriuatur. Iob docet aperte cap. 14. Quis potest facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine? Quid autem proprie de immundo concipitur semine? Caro. As for the contagion (of originall sinne) that is sure∣ly without Question first in the body, and after by the body is deriued into the Soule. Iob teacheth vs plainly in his fourteenth Chapter. Who can make one cleane, conceaued of vn∣cleane Seede? Now what is properly conceaued of vncleane Seede? Flesh. If any man list to read more I remit him to that place of Zanchius, least I should be ouerlong; or else to Peter Martyr where he largely treateth thereof against Pigghius. Pet. Martyr ocis communi∣bus class. secun∣de loco primo Sectio. 26. The common receaued Opinion is (saith he) that the Soule draweth originall sinne by her coniunction with the body, which is infected and vitiated from our Parents. Wherefore if any aske, what is the seate or subiect thereof, (as they vse to speake;) We answere, that originall sinne hath place in the flesh as in the roote, and beginning thereof: afterward from that fountaine, it occupieth the Soule, and so is extended through the whole man. Idcirco semen est instru∣mentum quo hoc peccatum ex parentibus traducitur in filios. Therefore the Seede (of man) is the instrument whereby this sinne is traduced from the Parents to the children. And least he should seeme to rest himselfe on the receaued opinion onely, not long after he ad∣deth. Idem Sectio∣ne. 30. Now reasons are to be brought, which may firmely and soundly prooue, that originall sinne is propagated in men by Seede and generation. And that we will therefore shew out of the Scriptures, because many reclaime and thinke this whole matter to be a fiction. Defenc. pag. 57. l. 19. With one breath you ouerthrow your selfe. For you say we haue pollution before the soule commeth, whence soeuer it commeth. Yea, whence soeuer? What if the soule doe come in and by generation? you see how you crosse your selfe. ] To that peruerse and false supposition of yours, that the soule of man commeth in and by generation, which now you cleaue so fast vnto for an aduantage, I neuer gaue any allowance or forbearance. Looke to my words as narrowly as you can. I say, the minor (proposition of my reason) is cleere Conclus. pa. 252. l. 25. without intermedling with the question, whence, (not when) the soule commeth. I there resolue, that the soule is the life of the bodie, not of seede nor of blood, as you grossely would wrest my speech; and therfore before life come, the soule which bringeth life, commeth not to the bodie. Then if pollution cleaue to the flesh before life come, (as Ambrose teacheth) and consequently before the soule come, (which commeth not before the bodie is made, as I auouch) whence soeuer it commeth; it is euident that Adams flesh defileth, and so condemneth vs (before the soule come.) You in the abundance of your wit, take whence soeuer to be as much as when soeuer; and so by your misconceiuing you would fasten a contradiction to my words. But coaxe not your selfe with such contra∣rieties grounded vpon your owne most ignorant mistaking; I made no question of the time, when; but of the roote, whence, the soule commeth. I learned by Leo, that I o. epist. 93. ad Furibium. the Catholike faith did truely and constantly teach, that the soules of men were not before they were inspired into their bodies: and consequently the bodie must first be framed, before the soule can be inspired. And the contrarie conceite, which you now take holde on, is a manifest repugnancie to the Church, and faith of Christ. I saw that inconuenience which you see not, when you pronounce, sinne is not in our flesh without a soule, that is neither before, nor after the soule. For if the soule of man arise in and BY GENE∣RATION, and that can be no man which neuer had mans bodie; what kind of crea∣tures, I pray you, call you those abortions and scapes, that passe from their mothers, when they are yet but seede or blood, before the body be framed? Soules they haue, in and by generation, as you now suppose; bodies they haue none, that be humane. Men therefore they be not for want of bodies; other kinds they are not, seeing they haue soules; what name then will you giue to these vnfashioned births, hauing reaso∣nable and immortall spirits as you imagine, or what place will you assigne them after this life? 2. Cor. 5. We all must appeare before the Tribunall of Christ, euery one to receiue things done (in or) by his bodie. They haue nothing to receiue for any thing done in or by their bodies, which they neuer had; neither can they expect the resurrection of the bodie, which pertaineth not to them. 1. Cor. 15. It is sowen (saith the Apostle) a naturall body, it is raised a spirituall bodie. These haue no naturall bodies of men, and so shall neuer rise with spirituall and glorified bodies; yea they haue no part in Christs resurrection, which was corporall, since they do not communicate with him in their bodies, which may be conformed to his glorious bodie. You must then deuise some new name, and some new place for those new creatures of yours, which hauing no bodies of men, can not by the Scriptures looke either for the resurrection, or for the saluation pro∣mised to men. You doe not auouch it, you will say, you did but obiect it.] Your most euident truth, as you call it, that sinne cannot be found being in any thing, where a reasonable soule is wan∣ting, doth directly inferre, that either we were not begotten and conceiued in sinne, which is an euident heresie, repugnant to Dauids wordes; or els the vntimely fruites and scapes of women, haue reasonable soules at the very instant of their conception, when sinne is found in them by Dauids words, which is this grosse, absurd, and false conceite, that now you would shunne. If you flie for helpe to actuall sinne; haue children actuall sinne in their mothers wombes, or as soone as they haue reasonable soules? Or is actuall sinne traduced and inherited from Adam? or spake I of actuall sinne when I said, we inherite pollution from Adams flesh before the soule commeth? Will you sticke to it, and say; originall pollution is no sinne? Dauid conuinceth you, who saith, he was Psal. 51. begotten in sinnes, and conceaued in iniquitie; and Paul affirmeth that Rom. 5. v. 12. death went ouer all men, (infants not excepted) for so much as all men haue sinned, and euen ouer them also who Vers. 14. sinned not after the likenesse of Adams transgression; that is, who did not commit sinne as Adam did, actually and voluntarily; but naturally in∣herited sinne from Adam, which Rom. 4. v. 20. dwelleth in them from the houre of their concep∣tion, to the time of their dissolution; and Verse 23. worketh the euill in them that they would not; leading them captiue to the law of sinne which is in their members. But how could Dauid say, he was conceiued in sinne, when at the time of his con∣ception he had neither bodie nor soule?] Howsoeuer mans reason iudge thereof, which yet often giueth the name of the whole to a part, and the titles of things repre∣sented to their images; with God nothing is more frequent than Rom. 4. v. 17 to call those things which are not, as though they were; because he not only made all things of nothing, but quickeneth the dead, and hath things past and to come present before him. Leui is sayd by the Scripture to haue Hebr. 7. payed tithes to Melchisedech by Abraham, as being then in Abrahams loines, when Leuies grandfather was not yet borne. So God by his Prophet spake to Cyrus many yeeres before Cyrus was borne, calling him his anoin∣ted, and saying to him by name, Esa. 44. & 45. thou art my shepheard. So certaine is the counsell of God, and his purpose so immutable, that he speaketh in the Scriptures of things to come, as if they were past or present. Out of this infallible decree of God, Dauid and Iob call that seed which was prepared to be the matter of their bodies, by the names of themselues, because it could not be altered, what God had appointed. But the void conceptions of women, which miscarie before the bodie be framed, neuer had either life or soule; and so neither name, nor kinde; but perish as other superflu∣ous burdens and repletions of the bodie, which God hath appointed to no vse, saue to ease the bodie. In satisfaction for sinne you runne the same course that you do in the rest: for nei∣ther vnderstanding my words, nor almost any mans els rightly, you fight with your owne fansies, as if they were parts of my faith. I sayd, the Scripture acknowledgeth no satisfaction for sinne but by death. I did and do so say; what then? Defenc. ag. 57. li. 26. Still we must note, that by death you meane onlie the bodilie death. ] In Christes person I alwayes meane by the death which he suffered, the death of the bodie; though you would include the death of the soule, which I do not. In the wicked I take death for all kinds of death, corporall, spirituall, and eternall. What can you hence distill? Then Defenc. pag. 57. li 32. surely the wicked should satisfie easily for their sinnes. Farre be it from me to vtter such a sentence. ] Doe the wicked with any kinde of death satisfie for their sinnes? or is their condemnation to hell paines therefore eternall, because by no death they can satisfie for their sinnes? Were the iustice of God once satisfied by any thing the wicked could suffer, their torments should cease; but their punishments euerlastingly continue, for that no sa∣tisfaction can be made to God by them, suffer they neuer so much, or neuer so long. Whose follie then is it, to pronounce, that the wicked may satisfie for their sinnes? mine or yours? I sayd no such word; I directly auouched the contrary. Serm. pag. 43. li. 23. The paines of hell haue neither worth nor weight sufficient in themselues, to satisfie the anger, or to procure the fauor of God. Satisfaction for sinne I ascribe to none but onlie to Christ, and in him to no death but onlie to that of his body. Will it thence follow, the Scripture acknow∣ledgeth no satisfaction but by (some kind of) death: ergo the wicked may satisfie for their sinnes by the deaths which they suffer? Be it farre from all wise men to make such consequents, and from all Christian men to make such conclusions. The antecedent in effect is confessed by your selfe. Defenc. pag. 58. li. 20. The Scriptures (you say) do shew indeed that Christ should not satisfie without death. I sayd the same. By satisfaction, I meant full satisfacti∣on, when no more could be exacted, as the word importeth; and not the concur∣rents or precedents to satisfaction, when the chiefest is vnpayed. Why then doth your absurd and leud conclusion folow more vpon my words than vpon your owne? My proofs are not good, with those you finde fault.] If yours were no worse, they would go more currantly. The Apostle sayth: Christ is the Hebr. 9. Mediator of the new Te∣stament, that through death, which was for the redemption of transgressions, we might re∣ceiue the promise. Heere death is auouched to be the redemption, which is all one with satisfaction, for sinne: for wherewith we are redeemed, therewith God is satisfi∣ed. Defenc. pag. 58. li. 3. Christes bodily death meerely and alone (you say) without any thing else together therewith (which is my intent) is not heere mentioned.] You will not tell where your shoo wringeth. Death was for the redemption or satisfaction for sin sayth the Scrip∣ture. Now the death of Christes bodie, or of his soule, or of both, must here be con∣tained. The death of Christes soule you dare not openly professe, and therefore all this while you carrie it couertly vnder the sufferings of Christes soule. But you must come plainly to it: for these assertions of the Apostle; Hebr. 9. Death was the redemption of our transgressions, and we are Rom 5. reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, will make this to be the question, as I first set it; whether the death of Christes soule, or the death of the damned, which is the true paines of hell be a necessary part of Christs satisfaction and our Redemption. Other sufferings of the Soule are meere shifts to harbor your folly, if you striue in words; or your impietie, if you striue indeede for the death of Christs Soule, as requisite by the Scriptures to our Saluation. That Christ did not die the death of the Soule I doe not prooue; there is no cause I should, it is your as∣sertion that he did, and must be prooued by you; which you be so farre from com∣ming neere, that you purposely conceale it, and onely skirre at it here and there in SOME KIND OF SENSE. Otherwise you offer nothing as yet to the Reader, but the Defenc. pa. 58. li. 35. proper sufferings of the soule; which I trust are not alwaies priuation of grace, and exclusion from blisse. For so the faithfull should neuer haue any proper sufferings of the Soule, or else vtterly loose both the spirit and fauour of God, which they ne∣uer doe. The other Authoritie which I cite, ( In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die the death ) is not so sound you thinke. For Defenc. pa. 57. li. 31. am I sure that death here is but the bodyly death onely and no more? I no where say, that death threatned in these words was onely the death of the body; it is one of your rash and rude illations, it is none of my assertions. I knew that God gaue this Commandement, and threatned this punish∣ment as well to Adams posteritie, as to his person. Otherwise had this prohibition beene made to Adam alone, neither could the woman haue beene within the com∣passe of it, who was not then created when this precept was inioyned, neither could Adams of-spring haue tasted of death, as well as Adam, if this penaltie had stretched no farder then to Adams person. But he being the roote and stocke of all mankind, as he receaued blessings by his creation, which should be common to all that descen∣ded of him, so by his transgression he lost them as well from his Issue, as from him∣selfe, and subiected them to the same death and condemnation, that he did him selfe, when he rebelled against God his Creator. Death we see executed on all the children of Adam; and therefore we may not doubt but death was threatned to them all, be∣fore it was inflicted on them. Howbeit the commination in this place is like to Gods th eats in all other places against the transg ssours of his Law. It denounceth what shall e due vnto all, but it bindeth not God, that he shall not haue power to release, or mitigate what, and to whom pleaseth him. In death then here threatned I containe all kinds of death; corporall, spirituall, and eternall; either as expressed in the gene∣rall name of death, which is common to them all, or as consequent ech to other and coherent, if by Gods goodnes and mercies in Christ Iesus they be not seuered. Saint Austen learnedly and truely teacheth the same. August. deci∣uitate Det. li. 13. cap. 12. When it is asked, what death God threatned to the first men, if they transgressed the Commandement giuen them, whether the death of the body, or of the soule, or of the whole man, or that which is called the second death; we must answere, ALI. When therefore God said to the first man, what day soeuer yee eate thereof, yee shall die the death, that threatning contained what soeuer death there is euen vnto the last, which is called the second death, and after which there is none other. If any man stand more strictly on the time and kinde of death, when and which Adam should die by this Commination; Saint Austen hath an other answere. August. deci∣uitate Dei. li. 13. cap. 15. In that which was said yee shall die the death, because it was not said, deaths; if we vnderstand that onely death whereby the soule is forsaken of her life, which to her is God; (for she was not forsaken, that she might forsake, but she did (first) forsake that she might (after) be for∣saken) though I say we vnderstand, that God denounceth this death, when he said, what day yee eate thereof, yee shall die the death; as if God had said, what day yee forsake me by diso∣bedience, I will forsake you by iustice; Surely in that death were the rest denounced, which without Question were to follow. For euen in that a disobedient motion rose in the flesh of the Soule disobeying, for which they couered their priuie parts, one death was perceaued, wherein God forsooke the Soule. And when the Soule forsooke the body now corrupted with time, and wasted with age, an other death was found by experience, which God mentioned to Man, when punishing sinne he said, earth thou art, and to earth shalt thou returne: that by these two deaths that first death of the whole man might be accomplished, which the second death at last doth follow, except man be deliuered by the grace of God. By Saint Austens iudge∣ment concording with the Scriptures, God threatned all kinds of death to the trans∣gressor; the death of the Soule the same houre to take place that he disobeyed; the rest to follow in their order; as next the death of the body, and at last eternall death of body and soule, if the grace of God by Iesus Christ did not release and free man from it. That the death of the Soule tooke present hold vpon the disobeyers, the Scripture giueth testimony sufficient, when it noteth their shame, feare, and flight of Gods presence, who before sinne was their delight, ioy and blisse. The death of the body was a long time differred in Adam, euen Gen. 5. v. 5. nine hundred and thirtie yeeres, be∣fore it did separate his Soule from his Body, but it began presently to worke and shew his force in either of their bodies. Theodoret an Genes. Que . 38. The sentence of mortalitie God called Death, saith Theodoret. For after Gods sentence Adam euerie day expected (or feared) Death. Beda saith the like. That which God said, Ge∣n 2. In what day soeuer thou shalt eate thereof, thou shalt die the Death, was as if he had said, Morti deputatus eris, thou shalt be deputed (or adiudged) to death, not that he should that very day die, but be mortall. Chrysostom imbraceth the same opinion. Chr n . In what d y soeuer yee shall eate of the tree, yee shall die the Death. But Adam liued still; how then died he? By the sentence of God and the nature of the thing it selfe. For he that maketh him selfe subiect to punishment, is vnder pun shment, sinonre, tamen sententia; If not by deede and execution, yet by guiltinesse and sentence pronounced. So that if we will rightly conceiue Gods commination to Adam, we must so take the words of God, as threatning Adam and his posteritie with all kinds of death, to which they all should bee subiect as guiltie thereof and deseruing the same; though hee would keepe to himselfe the dispencing and moderating thereof, not binding him∣sel e thereby but the offenders, as euery supreame Iudge doth on earth after sentence giuen, and before execution finished. Else, if wee e God, who is trueth it selfe, to the rigour and tenor of those words without reseruing power to him to dispose of Adam and Adams of-spring at his pleasure; and in the words, Thou shalt die the death, comprise the execution of all sorts of death, which can not be reuoked: then we con∣clude Adam and all his issue without remedie or mercie vnder all sorts of death, that is vnder spirituall, corporall, and eternal death; which is not onely an vtter ouerthrow to all Christian eligion, promising saluation in Iesus Christ, but a mecre madnesse a∣gainst all mankind, deuoting them without exception or mitigation to eternall de∣struction of body and soule. Wee must therefore know that God truely and iustly threatned Adam, and in him all mankind to be guiltie of all so ts of death, and to bee thereto subiected as to their due, if they transgressed against him; but this comminati∣on neither included execution of all sorts of death on all mankind, nor excluded pardon where pleased God; onely thence may rightly bee gathered; fi st, that all A∣da of spring should bee condemned and subiected to the guilt of all, as deseruing all the one no lesse then the other. Secondly, that some of Adams issue should effec∣tuall feele the sting of all, which God allotted to the reprobate. Thirdly, that euen the elect as well as the reprobate, should beare in themselues the monuments of this transgression by the corruption & dissolution of their nature, though the one should in this life bee reformed by the working of Gods spirit in them, and the other bee re∣stored after this life by the Resurrection from the dead. All these wee finde perfor∣med by God in the trueth of his iudgements, and therefore we may be sure they were intended at the time of his threatning. And consequently this collection is very true, that God threating Adam with these words, Thou shalt die the death; purposed, if A∣dam transgressed, that none of his posteritie should escape the death of their bodies, to which, God foorthwith punishing sinne, irreuocably subiected Adam and all his children, as Gods owne words declare, when he said to Adam, and in him to all men, Genes. 3. Dust thou art and to dust shalt thou returne. The iudges reuenge then for sinne, which we deserued and to which we were iustly condemned, was temporall & eternall death, of the body and soule, heere and in hell. But this was not executed on all, because some were freed by the fauour of God in Iesus Christ, though none excused from a corporall death; which prooueth my position the truer, that God neuer released sinne to any, no not to his owne Sonne, without some kind of death. It Defen pa . 58. li. 7. must not be forgotten, that here you renounce all satisfaction for sinne, in respect of me∣rite as from Christes soule vtterly. ] If you meane I vtterly renounce all satisfaction for sinne as from the death of Christs soule, I easily graunt it; and would gladly heare what you can say against it, because the soule of Christ, as I beleeue, could not die the death of spirits. But if you conceiue; that Christes soule had neither part, sense, nor merit in the death of his body, by which satisfaction for sinne was fully made, it is the weamishnesse of your wit to mistake so much, and vnderstand so little. I attributed all sense of paine as well in death as other wise to the soule of Christ; and the death of his body I communicated to his soule, by reason it is a separation of the soule from the body, not thereby to bee depriued of sense or grace, which Christes soule could not be, but therein to feele the paine and sting which the death of the body brought with it. I tolde you but the Conclus. pag. 251. leafe before out of Austen; that August. de ci∣uitate Dei. l. 21. cap. 3. the paine which is called bodi∣ly, belongeth rather to the soule, and that the E . li. 14. ca. 15 paine of the flesh is only the offending (or af∣flicting) the soule by the flesh. Wherefore I made the soule of Christ to be the principall agent in all his meriting, and patient in all his suffering; and though the soule of Christ could not pay the satisfaction for our sinnes by her death, because shee could not die; yet that is no impediment, but the soule of Christ might haue, and had the chiefest paine, sense, and merit in the death of Christes bodie, by which the whole person made full satisfaction for the sinnes of the world. And this is so farre from renouncing all me∣rit of satisfaction from the soule of Christ, as you conceiue, that it ascribeth the whole power and force thereof to the obedience and patience of Christes soule, and maketh the bodie the instrument ordeined of God to conuey paine vnto the soule; and to lie dead when the soule is departed from it. As for Bernards words which I alledge, if you did or could tell how they crosse mine, I would take the paines to reconcile them; now you say they sute not with mine: but awake out of your wonted maze, and you shall see that I giue the chiefe place and part in the meritorious sacrifice vnto the soule of Christ, which you dreame I doe not; as also that you neither like nor allow of Bernards words. For he declaring the cause and maner, why and how Christes minde was afflicted in his passion, sayth, it was with a Serm. pa. 4. double affection of most hu∣mane compassion, on the one side, for the vncomfortable griefe of the holy women; on the other, for the desperation and dispersion of his disciples. These causes you reiect as fond and absurd, and now you would seeme to ioyne with Bernards words. But you must say of him, as you doe of Ambrose, and pray that Defenc. pag. 57. li. 10. mens authorities may be omitted in this case; for all the Fathers of Christes church are vtter strangers or enemies to your new doctrine. Defenc. pa. 58. l. 20. That nothing may satisfie for sinne but death, is not sound; the Scriptures doe shewe in∣deede that Christ should not satisfie without death: but they denie not, that there are other parts of Christs satisfaction, which differ from his death, as his bloodshedding, his shame, his Euery thing in Christ was me∣ritorious, but not satisfactory for sinne. reproches, his apprehension, his buffeting; and besides that, pouertie, hunger, and wearines. These doubtlesse, yea all other sufferings of Christ what soeuer, small or great, are satisfacto∣rie and meritorious. ] That all Christes actions and passions were meritorious with God, I haue no doubt; but that all his sufferings as well naturall as voluntarie, did euery one, small or great, satisfie for sinne, This is a speech of yours, which except it be well qualified, hath in it an whole heape of absurdities and contrarieties. For if the least and the first thing that Christ suffered either naturally or voluntarily did satisfie for sinne, superfluous were all the rest to our redemption, when God was once satis∣fied. And so by his birth or circumcision you graunt a Supersedeas to all his life and death as needelesse to our redemption. Then the which what can be more repugnant to the word of God, and faith of Christ, and euen to your selfe, who by this meanes make your hell paines of no importance to our saluation? By satisfaction you meane not full satisfaction; but that which any way tendeth to satisfaction, or is requisite be∣fore satisfaction can be made.] It is easie and often with you to abuse words, though you talke much of their proprietie. What is Satis in Latine, whence to satisfie com∣meth, but enough? and what is enough for sinne, but after which more is not requisite? If then Christ satisfied, that is, did or paide enough for sinne by the first of his sufferings, then all that followed, as I inferred, were more then enough, and consequently super∣fluous. That you will say is the proper and strict signification of the word satisfie, but you take it more largely.] For the abuse of words I will not greatly striue, so you build thereon no impieties; howbeit when I say that nothing might satisfie for sinne but death; I take satisfaction properly for the last and full payment, after which no more was due for sinne; and that apparantly by the Scriptures was the death of Christ, be∣fore which the rest was not sufficient, and after which no more was required by the righteous will and counsell of God. So that although the obedience and patience of Christ all his life long did tend to satisfaction, and made way for satisfaction, as his hunger, wearinesse, pouertie, and such like; yet none of these did satisfie for sinne, or ac∣quite vs from sinne by the verdict of the holy Scripture; but Christ after all these must yeeld himselfe to suffer that kind of death, which the iustice of God should appoint and ordaine, before we could be freed from our sinnes. His blood you thinke did wash vs from all our sinnes. Because his blood was shed for vs euen vnto death, there∣fore his bloodshed expresseth the manner of his death, as likewise his apprehension, buf∣feting, reproches, and shame; which the Scripture describeth in the order of his death, and therefore compriseth vnder the name of his death. For by Christes death, as I haue often said, the Scripture meaneth that kind of death in all respects and circum∣stances, which the Euangelists in their writings report. Defenc. pag. 58. l. 29. Who will grant in proper speech, that those are his death? ] The name of Christs death in the Scriptures containeth all those things, which were coincident and concurrent to that death, which Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures. Neither What is conta∣n in the name of Christs death by the Scrip∣tures. shall we neede your figure Synecdoche, by a part of Christs sufferings to vnderstand all that he felt or suffered from his mothers wombe: that is a loose deuise of yours to make any thing of euery thing; and so to confound the Scriptures, that no man shall knowe either what to beleeue, or what to beware. For where S. Iohn saith, the blood of Christ doth clense vs from all our sinnes; by your Synecdoche you imagine that the Matth. 26. wine, which he dranke at his last Supper; Iohn. 13. the water, wherewith he washed his dis∣ciples feete; Iohn. 11. the teares which he shed for Lazarus death; Iohn. 4. the iourney, which he tooke to Galilee; the Matth. 8. sleepe, which he fetched in the ship; the Matth. 4. hunger, which he sustained in the wildernesse; and what not, should doe the like; since euery thing that befell our Sauiour, small or great, did satisfie for sinnes, as well as his death and pas∣sion. What els is this but to mayme and mangle the Scriptures, which name the blood of Christ to be the price of our redemption, and his death the meane of our re∣conciliation; if euerie thing that Christ did or endured shall be of the same force and weight to satisfie for sinne, that his bloud and death were? His bloud, you will say, is not his death.] The shedding of his bloud vnto death, which the Scripture inten∣deth by his bloud, is a plaine description of his death: Matth. 26. This is my bloud, sayd he, which is shed for many for the remission of sinnes. And the rest which were appendants to his death, expresse the maner of his death, which the wisdome and iustice of God would haue to be full of violence, iniurie, reproch, contempt, shame and paine. All which as they note the maner of his death, so are they inclosed by the Scriptures in the name of his death; and that I trust more properly being parts thereof, than the naturall in∣firmities of his bodie, as sleepe, hunger and wearinesse; or the voluntarie euents of his life, as the rest of his actions and passions, long before the houre came that he should be deliuered into the hands of sinfull men. Defenc. pa. 58 li. 33. Why may not the proper sufferings of Christs Soule be as well admitted into the worke of Christs satisfaction, although his SOVLE COVLD NOT PROPERLY DIE?] The sufferings of Christs Soule at the time of his death, which the Scriptures mention, we easily admit into the worke of his satisfaction for sinne; but your satis-fiction of hell paines and of the death of Christs Soule we doe not admit; because the holy Ghost so diligently describing the whole order and manner of Christs sufferings, when he went to his death, teacheth no such thing as you falsely collect from certaine words of his, and chiefly from his bloody sweate; whereof not knowing precisely the cause, you surmise what best pleaseth your humor without all warrant of the word of God. Prooue therefore by the Scriptures, and not by your owne ghesses, that Christs Soule suffered these things from the immediate hand of God, which you suppose; and we shall soone find a place for them, in the worke of Christs satisfaction for sinne. Till then giue me leaue to expound the Scriptures by themselues, and not by your vnioynted and vntidie Commentaries confounding Christs life and death, nature and will, affections and punishments, satisfaction and merits; as if they were not different parts of our saluation, to take our nature vpon him, to worke all righteousnes in our names, to suffer a shamefull and painfull death for our sinnes, and to obtaine all spirituall and celestiall graces and comforts, here and in heauen for vs. The first sinne committed by Adam, and our continuall treading in his steps, rest yet vndiscussed; wherein we should not neede many words, if you could, or at least would rightly conceaue what is said; and not ignorantly or purposely mistake, and measure all things by your hastie humor. To prooue that Christ must satisfie for sinne by the proper sufferings of his Soule, and not with or by his body, you brought this reason in your Treatise. Trea. pa. 19. li. 27. Whereby Adam first did, and we euer since doe most properly commit sinne, by the same the second Adam Christ hath made satisfaction for our sinnes. But Adam first did, and we euer since doe most properly commit sinne in our Soules, our bo∣dies being but the Instrument of the Soule, and following the Soules direction and will. There∣fore Christ in his Soule most properly made satisfaction for vs: In my Conclusion to your obiections I first denyed your Maior or former proposition. For though the Soule of Adam, as also our Soules quickly might, and worthily did die for sinne and by sinne, wherein they were the principall agents; yet the Soule of Christ by no warrant of holy Scripture did, or could die the death of Spirits, and so could make no satis∣ction for sin by her death. Now by the Scriptures without death there was no satisfa∣ction for sin: and therefore the soule of Christ must satisfie for sinne by the death of her body, & not by any death proper to her selfe. And so much the Scriptures auouch teaching vs, that we haue Ephes. 1. redemption euen the remission of sinnes through his blood, & are Rom. 5. reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne: who 1. Pet. 2. bare our sinnes in his body on the tree, that we might be deliuered from sinne, and healed with his stripes. And without satisfaction to God for sinne we haue neither remission of sinne, nor redemption from sinne, nor re∣conciliation with God. Vpon this ground I then did & still do reiect your maior, as guarded neither with text nor truth, but leaning only to your priuat liking, as the best helpe to commend it. From thence I came to your assumption or second proposition; that Adam first, and we euer since most properly committed sin in our soules, our bodies being but the instruments of our soules, & following the Soules direction and will. The which be∣cause it had diuerse branches, one touching Adams transgression, an other touching ours; and likewise two parts, the soule & body in either; I reserued for diuers answers. In Adams sinne if you meant, as your words made shew, that his Soule and bodie were ioyned in transgressing Gods Commandement, the Soule as the agent, the bo∣dy as the instrument; That I said was MOST TRVE, but repugnant to your inten∣tion and maine Conclusion. For then as Adams Soule transgressed the Commandement with and by her bodie; so in fatisfying for sinne Christs Soule must be punished by and with her bodie, which was the thing you so much laboured to ouerthrow. To this you now replie. Defenc. pa. 59. li. 8. Nay, the Conclusion will follow, that the immortall part, the minde, was puni∣shed peculiarly, and not by and from the body onely: seeing in all euen outward sinnes the Soule sinneth both principally, and also in a proper and peculiar manner by it selfe, yea be∣fore the body sinneth. Albeit the body sinneth also secondarily and in a manner proper to it selfe, euen as the instrument as you say. ] The principall and peculiar action of the Soule, in sinnes that be common to the Body and Soule, maketh no proofe that the Soule must haue a distinct and seuerall punishment from the body; or that it may not be punished from and by the body. The true and full punishment of all sinne in all the wicked is the casting of Body and Soule into hell fire, where one and the same punishment is common to both, euen as their sinnes were; notwithstanding the pro∣per and peculiar manner which the Soule hath in sinne by it selfe aboue the body. The punishments of this life are likewise common to both. For the Soule feeleth whatsoeuer greeueth the Body, neither can any thing offend the Soule, which doth not likewise disquiet the Body. How beit the effects and impressions of one and the same punishment are different in Soule and Body; not onely because the Soule is the chiefe patient and sentient in all paine, as it was the chiefe agent, and disponent in all sinne; but also for that the Soule seeth and greeueth farder vpon feeling the paine, then the body can doe. For the Sense of the Body can onely iudge how tolerable, or intolerable the paine is; but the Soule reacheth vnto the cause, continuance, and con∣sequence thereof, which often times afflict the Soule as much, or more then the paine it selfe. This difference dependeth on the nature of the Soule which because it is en∣dued with reason, remembrance, and intelligence, perceiueth not onely things pre∣sent and subiect to sense, as the Body doth, but things past and future together with their dependences; and things spirituall, as well as corporall; and the losse of ioy and blisse, no lesse then the anguish of perpetuall paine and miserie. So that in all pu∣nishments of sinne, which be common to the Soule and Body, the Soule is farre dee∣per engaged in the griefe thereof, then the Body can be. But this is no reason to proue that Christs Soule must die the death of Soules, or feele the paines of hell, because his Soule considered better of his paines then his body could doe. Two Rules of Gods Iustice in punishing the sinnes of men the Scriptures report. Which though they be kept in all others, yet may no man affirme them of Christ, far∣der then the Gospell giueth euident Testimonie to them. The one is the meanes, the other is the measure of punishment. As, Wisdom. 11. Wherewith a man sinneth, by the same also shall he be punished: and Reuel. 18. How much she exalted her selfe and liued in pleasure, so much torment and sorrow giue yee to her. Neither of these ruies could rightly fasten on Christ, because he neuer sinned; and therefore touching the meanes, by which he satisfied for our sinnes, the Scriptures and not your imaginations must be consulted. Now they testi∣fie that he 1. Cor. 15. dyed for our sinnes according to the Scriptures; and that we were 1. Pet. 1. Redeemed by his pretious bloud, which was Matth. 26. shed for Remission of sinnes. Here is the satisfaction for the sins of men which the Scripture deliuereth without any other death of the soule, or of the damned, which men must suffer, if they be not freed from it by the death and blood of Christ; but Christ neither did nor could suffer. For the measure of paine, which Christ suffered in the death of his body described in the Scriptures, we must leaue it to God, who only knew what proportion of paine in the person of his Sonne was sufficient for the sinnes of the world, & not therein trust the deceitfull ballance of your presumption, who neither know what degree of pain Christ suffred on the crosse; nor how much in the person of Christ would satisfie the iustice of God for our sinnes. Only this we are assured, that he Hebr. 5. learned obedience by that which he suffered, & his pati∣ence was thereby proued, but neither of them ouerwhelmed, or endangered. And therefore that Christs paine on the Crosse was equall to hell paines, or the very same, which the damned do suffer; these be your rash and violent intrusions vpon Gods iu∣stice; allotting to Christ out of your owne braine the same punishment (as you call it) in substance, that the wrath of God inflicteth on the wicked and damned for their sinnes; but in all these collections you rest on the rules of your owne reason without any war∣rant of the word of God, which neuer sorteth our Sauior in his sufferings with the re∣probate & damned; and contrary to the Christian faith, which groundeth the waight of our redemption, and strength of our Reconciliation to God vpon the infinitie of the person that died for vs, and not of the paine that was suffered in our steeds. Defenc. pa. 59. li. 14. Yea farder I meane, that some sinnes the Soule acteth in and by it selfe meerely: and therefore it suffereth likewise some punishments meerely in it selfe, which touch not the body at all, vnlesse it be by Sympathie onely, and that onely when they grow vehement. ] What you now meane vpon better aduise, maketh nothing to the Conclusion, which you would haue forced out of your former words. Your assumption was, that Adam first did, and we euer since doe commit sinne most properly in our Soules, our bodies being but the Instruments of our Soules. In which words you speake of no sinnes, but onely such as Adam did, and we still doe commit ioyntly with Soule and body, though most pro∣perly in the soule, the body being her Instrument or accessarie to follow her direction and will. And would you wrie and wrangle neuer so much, from sinnes common to Soule and Body, most proportionably followeth punishment likewise common to Soule and Body; though in that common punishment the Soule perceiueth and fee∣leth greater and grieuouser hurt and smart, then the body can doe. If now you adde a farder meaning then you there expressed, your reason remaineth as weake as it was at first, and your new meaning must haue a new answere. For which I must pray the Reader to stay till we haue more fully examined Adams fact, where you first began, and wherein you would seeme to haue some great aduantage. Howbeit if you marke well either your own purpose, which you offer to prooue; or your Assumption, which you bring for proofe thereof; or my words depending thereon; you will haue but a cold suite of all this hoate challenge. Your purpose was to prooue, that Christs suffe∣rings for sinne must be proper to the Soule, and not with, from, or by the Body, which you reiect as common to vs with beasts. The reason, which you brought for it, was, that Adam first & we euer since (so) sinned, that is, MOST PROPERLY in our Soules, our Bodies being but the Instruments of our Soules to follow the Soules direction and will. Now because your wonted phrase (MOST PROPERLY) is so loosely set in your assumption, that a Man can not tell whether you meane most properly in the Soule, to∣gether with the Body being the Instrument of the Soule, as your words lye; or else most properly in the Soule, without and besides the Body, which is it that you intend, & must conclude before you can thence inferre the proper sufferings of Christs soule, without and besides his body: I asked you which of these twaine you ment. If the for∣mer, then Adam first, and we euer since committed sinne ioyntly with Soule and Bo∣dy, the Soule being the Principall, and the Body her Instrument and accessarie. This I said was most true, but repugnant to your purpose, as I before haue shewed. But if you ment OTHERVVISE, that Adam transgressed the Commandement of God MOST PROPERLY in his Soule, without his Body concurring to the same trans∣gression, which is more pertinent to your purpose; then you contradicted, the fact of Adam and Gods precept, both which doe plainly witnesse, that Adam disobeyed as well by Body as by Soule. If you will needs examine my words vpon this your intention and assumption, I am well content. That Adam sinned in soule and bodie, I say is most true. There is my full resolution: Against this I neuer goe. But if you meant Conclus. pa. 254. li. 6. OTHERVVISE, that Adam brake the commandement of God, not by his body properly, but by his soule (only) as your words most properly might intend, then your assumption was a manifest contradicti∣on to the fact of Adam, and to the precept of God. That the bodie alone without the soule doth or can commit actuall sinne, which hath neither life, sense, motion, nor action without the soule, is a position so absurd and false, that I thought it not woorth the mentioning. I asked you then whether you meant that Adam brake the commande∣ment, not by his bodie properly, as by an instrument to his soule, which is Defenc. pag. 59. li. 13. proper to the bodie, as your selfe confesse; but by his soule without his bodie, that is, by his soule onely. For what is by the soule, and not by the bodie; but by the soule onely? I asking you that question of your meaning, you as eclipsed of your wits, suppose that I say, Adam sin∣ned onlie by his bodie and not by his soule; as if Adam when he sinned, were a body without a soule; or his bodie did any thing without the direction and operation of his soule. This is therefore a verie foolish dotage of yours, to dreame that I defend Adam sinned by his bodie without his soule, when I prooue and inferre by Adams fact and Gods precept, that Adam transgressed not by his soule (only) but by his bo∣die (also:) euen as in murder, theft, and adulterie, these facts men commit by their bodies (as instruments) and not by their soules ( alone or without their bodies.) For can men commit these facts without their bodies, or are their bodies requisite as well as their soules before they can commit these facts? Adam was Defenc. pa. 60. li. 2. as well forbidden o desire or like that fruit, as to eat it; which you denie. ] To proue that Adam sinned not onely by his soule, but also by his bodie; I brought the words of Gods precept, Thou shalt not eat thereof. Which commandement since Adam wholly transgressed, the words had more in them than the prohibition of desi∣ring or liking; and Adams sinne reached farder than to liking or lust, euen to the complete fact, whereby the commandement of God was thorowly in euerie part of man broken, which could not be done without the ioynt actions of Adams bodie. Wherefore take backe the heresie of the Pharisees to your elfe, and bestow it among your friends that haue lent you their labours in this Defence. I am not to seeke, that Gods law is transgressed as well with heart and tongue, as with hand and deed. How∣beit, I distinguish facts from words and thoughts, and auouch that FACTS can not be performed without the bodie. And yet are there speciall reasons which you see not, why the wisdome of God would not giue this commandement without euident mention of an outward fact. For the breaking of this precept was the transgression, that should subiect Adam and all his posteritie, to the dominion of sinne and death, in euerie part of bodie and soule. Wherefore God would not haue the first sinne to be secret within the soule alone; that all Adams of-spring should openly behold and confesse the wickednesse, vnworthinesse, and vnthankfulnesse of their first parents, that so lightly regarded and presently transgressed the charge and precept, that God gaue vnto them. Secondly, since Adams cariage in this case should be the retaining or loosing of all Gods graces and blessings for him and his children, bestowed on man in his first creation; the transgression must reach to all the senses and faculties of bodie and soule, that should infect and corrupt all the parts and powers of bodie and soule. Thirdly, the first sinne was to extend as well to bodie as to soule, lest the soule sinning should be adiudged to euerlasting death, and the bodie not sinning reserued for eternall life; and so man be diuided contrarie to his creation, the one part in hell, and the other in heauen, which was vtterly impossible. And if Adam after liking had yet remembred Gods precept and threat, and so refrained the eating of the forbid∣den fruit, it would trouble your wits to make a true answer, whether Adam had obey∣ed or transgressed the commandement. But it sufficeth for my purpose, that Adam sinned ioyntly with both parts, as well with bodie as with soule; and so Christ, (if your proportion were any thing needfull, which I wholly reiect, as needlesse in the Sonne of God) by this reason of yours needed no proper sufferings of the soule with∣out and besides the bodie. Defenc. pag. 59. li. 34. Paul vnderstoode (Rom. 7. vers. 7.) when hee became a Christian, that the desiring of euill is sinne before the outward act bee consummate. ] You alleage Saint Paul, as you doe the rest, for matters that he neuer meant. Paul speaketh not Rom. 7. vers. 7. there of the actuall de∣sire of euill, when the will hath thereto consented, such as was in Adam, when hee re∣solued to eate the forbidden fruite; but of the naturall inclination and first motions to sinne, which are in vs after Adams disobedience, but were not in him before his fall. For that precept, thou shalt not lust, conuinceth and condemneth our nature to be cor∣rupt and sinfull, to which originall concupiscence (the roote and spring of all sinne in vs) cleaueth so fast, that euen in our cradles this corruption excludeth vs from the kingdome of God, if we be not regenerate in Christ by water and the holy Ghost. In Adam besore sinne there was no such thing, his nature was vpright and sincere, as it was first created, and voide of all concupiscence intended by this precept, as the See Peter Martyr, M. Mus∣culus, Caluine, Gualter, and others vpon this place. Rom. 7. verse 7. best learned of our time teach, till by his transgression sinne entred and infected both body and soule. Neither doe you conceiue right of Paul, as he was a Pharisee, when you suppose he tooke the outward fact of sinne onely to bee sinne. Neuer read he, thinke you, when he was a Pharisee, the words of Esay; Esay. 7. Aram hath taken wicked counsell against thee, but it shall not stand? Nor of Salomon; The Prouerb. 15. thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, and the Et 24. euill thought of a foole is sinne? Could hee not tell, what to iudge of Hamans Ester. 3. thoughts against the Iewes, or of Achitophels 2. Sam. 17. purpose against Dauid, or of Balams Numb. 31. counsell against the Israelites? The very heathen Philo∣sophers placed vertues and vices in the minds of men, and the prophane Poets would haue mens enterprises measured by the intent, & not by the euent. The Pharisees were neuer so blinde, as to thinke all counsels, thoughts, desires, and lusts to bee lawfull, against the manifest and expresse words of the law and Prophets; but they blindly mistooke the law of God, as forbidding externall facts onely which are hurtfull to others, vpon paine of malediction and damnation. They rather stood vpon the Po∣pish opinion of veniall and mortall sinnes, and did not thinke that veniall sinnes did exclude them from the righteousnesse of the Law, nor from the kingdome of heauen. Of that opinion was Paul when he was a Pharisee, but vpon his conuersion and better instruction by the spirit of Christ hee vnderstoode, that not onely euill desires and thoughts were forbidden by the seueral precepts of Gods law as deadly sinnes, which the Pharisees would not admit, to vphold their owne righteousnesse; but that euen the secret tentation to sinne, and the inward propension and corruption of our hearts are interdicted and condemned by this precept, thou shalt not lust, as sinne sufficient to exclude vs from the kingdome of God. Defenc. pag. 59. li. 18. & 28. Your doctrine is very strange, where you teach, that the soule properly committeth no sin, but by & with the body; that is, the soule in it selfe & by it selfe alone sinneth not. You say, all prouocations and pleasures of sin the soule taketh from her body, all acts of sin she committeth by her body; which speeches are exceeding vntrue and hurtfull. ] To him that either fully can not, or rightly will not vnderstand what is said, all things seeme strange; other∣wise set aside your olde ordinarie phrases of proper and meere, without which you can say nothing; and the matter which you so much maruaileat, is very plaine, as well by the rules of Scripture, as proofes of nature. Is it so strange a doctrine with you, that the whole man, and not this or that part of man, is by the word of God charged with the committing of euery sinne, and guiltie thereof in such sort, that the whole person is defiled therewith, and shalbe condemned therefore? Luke. 5. Depart from me Lord, saith Peter to Christ, for I am a sinfull man. Psal. 32. Blessed is the man, saith Dauid, to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne. Luke. 18. O God be mercifull vnto me a sinner, saith the Publicane. Rom. 2. Tri∣bulation and anguish vpon the soule of euery man, that worketh euill, saith the Apostle. By which, as by infinite other places of Scripture wee are taught, that the whole person, which is man himselfe, is the sinner, by which part so euer he sinneth. Iohn. 8. Euery one that committeth sinne, is the seruant of sinne; saith our Sauiour. Can the soule be in bondage for sinne, and the body bee free? Deut. 27. Cursed is the man, saith Moses, that keepeth not all the words of the law to doe them. Can the soule bee accursed for sinning, and the body be blessed as not sinning? The Rom. 6. wages of sinne is death, saith the Apostle. Shall death preuaile against the Soule for sin, and the Body escape death as voyd of sinne? Surely no. Sinne defileth the whole Man, by what part soeuer it is committed; yea the very thoughts of the hart coinquinate the whole man. When the Pharisees held opinion, that meate eaten with vnwashen hands defiled the Body, our Sauiour reprooueth that error in them; and teacheth his Disciples, that Marc. 7. nothing without a man can defile him, when it entreth into him: but the things which come foorth of him, are they that defile the Man. For from within out of the hart of Man come foorth euill thoughts, couetousnesse, wan∣tonnesse, a wicked eye, pride, foolishness. All these euils come from within, and defile a Man. Where we see that enuie, (which Christ noteth by a wicked eye) and pride, and such like inward sinnes, yea and euill thoughts defile the Man, that is as well the Body, which the Pharisees tooke to be defiled with vncleane hands, as the Soule. The Apostle stretcheth the infection of sinne farder, euen to the meates them selues, that are eaten of the wicked. Tit. 1. v. 15. All things (saith he, speaking of meates, which the Iewes counted vncleane) are cleane to the cleane; but to the vncleane and vnbeleeuers nothing is cleane; but euen their minde and conscience is vncleane. So that the vncleannesse of the inward Man, defileth the outward Man, and all things, which the outward Man vseth. This is so true, that not onely the guiltinesse, and filthinesse of sinne is in this life com∣municated from the Soule to the Body; but both shalbe therefore condemned in the righteous iudgement of God to euerlasting fire. 2. Cor. 5. We must all appeare before the tribunal of Christ euery man to receiue the things done by his Body. Where all sorts of sinnes in thought, word, or deede, are by the Apostle called , or as others read, , things done by the body, or the things proper to the Body. And though we expound it, as some doe, for the things done in the Body; yet all three ex∣positions conuince that the Soule can not sinne without the Body, but by or in the Bodie; and that the condemnation for sinne reacheth as well to the Body, as to the Soule. Else the resurrection of the Body were superfluous in the wicked, if Gods Iustice did not determine for sin to punish the Body together with the Soule. Where Tertullians Rule taketh place to prooue them both guiltie of sinne, that shall be both punished for sinne. Tertullianus de resurrect. carnis. They can not be seuered in the reward which were ioyned in the worke. Let not the flesh be partaker in the sentence, (that is of iudgement) if it were not partaker in the cause, that is in sinne. Of his opinion in this point were all the learned Fathers of Christs Church. Athenagoras an ancient and Christian Philosopher and writer, in his Treatise of the resurrection of the dead, ve ie learnedly persueth this argument, and by manie reasons proueth, that the whole man sinneth, and not this or that part; and therefore the whole, as well bodie as soule, must be iudged for euerie sinne. Athenagoras de resurrectione . If t whole na∣ture of man (sayth he) be vniuersally composed of an immortall soule, and a bod made and at tempered thereto; and God hath not giuen either birth, breath, or this whole life to the soule by her selfe, or to the bodie apart, but to men consisting of these (two:) it is altogether neces∣sarie, (since one liuing creature consisteth of both, and feeleth all the affections of the soule, and doth and performeth whatsoeuer belongeth to the bodie, and all things needing the iudge∣ment of sense or reason) the whole course of these things should be referred to one end; : that all should wholly concurre to one harmonie and sympathie, (that is, to one ioynt action and passion) of the (whole) man. And if there be one ioynt action and passion of the whole li∣uing creature, as well in those things that proceed from the soule, as in those that are performed by the body; then must there be one close and reward for all these things. Ibidem. , I affirme both together to be a man composed of bodie and soule, , and the man so composed to be brought to iudgement for all his actions, and for them to receiue either honour or punishment. Ibidem. It is therefore appa∣rent to euerie man, that according to the Apostle, this corruptible, though it be dispersed, must put on incorruption, that euerie one may iustly receiue the things that he hath done by his bo∣die, whether they were good or bad. Gregorie Nys ene teacheth the verie same in effect. . What define we a man to be? both (a bodie and a soule) ioyned together, or either of them seuered? It is manifest, that the coniunction of both maketh a man. Let vs also consider this, whether those things which men do and commit; for example, adulterie, murder, theft, and whatsoeuer is consequent to these; or on the other side, sobrietie, continencie and euerie action that is opposite to vice, may be sayd to be the effects of both, or be referred to the soule alone. dem. But in this the trueth is manifest. For in euerie action both coupled ech with o∣ther, doe ioyntly vndertake and performe the things which are done. I dem. If then in good deeds the bodie laboureth and suffereth together with the soule, and in sinnes it is not absent; what moueth thee to bring the soule without her bodie into iudgement? Thine assertion is neither iust nor well aduised. For if the soule alone and by her selfe haue sinned, God will then punish her al ne; but if she haue a manifest helper, the iust Iudge will not let that escape. Epipha∣nius refu ing those that thought we should rise with another bodie than here we liue in, sayth. How shall the soule remaine alone, the bodie not present, that sinned together with . it? Such a soule may contradict the iudgement of God, and say: I (alone) sinned not, but the bodie (with me.) For since I departed from the bodie, I committed neither fornication, nor adultrie, nor theft, nor murder, nor idolatrie, neither did I any euill; and her defence shall be found reasonable. Vpon this reasonable defence of hers what shall we say? Shall the iudge∣ment of God cease? or will God punish men vniustly? God forbid. Therefore as God made the man one compound of bodie and soule, the iust Iudge will raise the bodie againe, and giue it his owne soule, and so shall the iudgement of God be iust, both parts communicating either in punishment for sinne, or in reward for vertue. Ambrose giueth the same reason for the resurrection of the bodie. de . Et haec est series & causa iustitiae, vt quoniam corporis ani∣mi{que} communis est actus, quae animus cogitauit, corpus efficit; vtrum{que} in iudicium veniat, vtrum{que} aut poenae dedatur, aut gloriae reseruetur. This is the course and ground of iustice, that because the act (of sinne) is common to bodie and soule, the bodie performing what the minde deuised, both should come into iudgement, and both be awarded to punishment, or reserued to glorie. For it seemeth almost absurd, where the law of the flesh impugneth the law of the mind, and the minde often doth that which she hateth whiles the sinne (or corrup∣tion) of the flesh dwelling in man worketh, that the soule should be subiected to the iniurie as guiltie of anothers fault, and the flesh should enioy rest, which is the author of the miserie; and the soule alone should be punished, which alone did not sinne; or alone be glorified, which alone did not striue for glorie. Theodoret treadeth the same steps, though with a larger pro∣cesse: Theodoret. de prouidentia. Serm. 9. To suspect that soules alone shall be released, or punished, and the bodie cast away to corruption, as a brute thing and altogether vnprofitable, what reason can it haue, that the le depriued of the bodie should be adiudged to torment? For being condemned shee may worthily say to the Iudge: I did not alone transgresse thy lawes, Lord, but together with the bo∣d e ! fall on the rocks of wickednesse; or rather if I must speake the trueth, the bodie drew me into the pit of sinne. Snared with his eyes did I curiously view the beautie belonging to o∣thers and affected both lands and riches, they compelling me to behold such things. The affe∣ctions of the bodie brought me to seruitude, and tooke away the libertie which thou gauest me. I was forced , as bred with him and his fellow-seruant, to minister vnto him, and prouide for his wants. Often times grieued therewith, haue I yeelded to the necessi∣ties of the flesh, yea not knowing what els to do, and verie much sorowing, haue I beene driuen to wait on the desires of the bodie. And often haue I resisted, and stifly repelled his snares; but his continuall conflicts manie times ouercame me. When I repressed him, I afflicted my selfe, for I receiued backe the griefe: when I cherished him, I was impugned by him, enduring his wanton assaults. Therefore assigne not me alone to punishment, ó Lord, but either free me to∣gether with the bodie from these straits, or cast that together with me into torment. How∣beit the Iudge needeth no such supplication; but as he gouerneth wisely, so he iudgeth iustly, restoring the bodie; to their soules, and so giuing to euerie one according to their deserts. Da∣mascene alledgeth the coniunction of the soule with the bodie, and the cooperation of both in all vertues and vices, as causes sufficient why the bodie must be iudged and rewarded together with the soule. Damascen. de fide Orthodoxa. l 4. cap. 28. If the soule alone sustained the trials of vertue, alone shall she be crowned: and if she alone were intangled with pleasures, iustly she alone must be punished. ; but because she had no seuerall being (from the bodie) nei∣ther passed thorowe vertue or vice without the bodie, iustly shall both together receiue re∣w (of good or bad.) For the better conceiuing the trueth of these speeches, we must know what these What powers an faculties of the Soule the Father call cor∣porall, and why. Fathers meane by the bodie; and what powers and faculties of man they comprise in that name, and why: so shall wee the sooner discerne what cooperation in sinne mans bodie hath with his soule. The bodie, as it is the instrument or seruant of the soule, to do good or euill, is no dead nor senselesse lumpe of flesh; but hath annexed vnto it, besides life, both sense and motion, and those as well inward as outward. For externall and internall sense and motion are not only performed by vitall and animall spirits, which are plainly corporall; (though their vigor and force be from the soule, which bringeth life and sense;) but so affixed to the bodie, that they die with the bo∣die, and are not found in the soule, so long as she is separated from the bodie. Those faculties these Fathers ascribe the rather to the flesh, because in some sort they be in beasts, who in their kinde haue sense and motion, both outward and inward; and sen∣sitiue desires and affections depending thereon: which all must needs be corporall, for that brute beasts ledde only by sense to desire and delight in things present before them, haue no spirituall nor immortall part from which they should proceed. The same powers of sense, and sensitiue appetites, and affections in mans bodie, these learned Fathers account and call corporall, not that they discerne or moue without the soule, but that the sensitiue and inferiour powers of the soule are mixed with corporal spirits in man, and by them apprehend and desire externall & sensible things, by which cor∣ruption of senses and affections the soule is drawen to diuers delights and desires, that are continuall occasions and inducements to sinnes. Therefore Theodoret nameth , the desires, affections, assaults and conflicts of the bodie seeking by pleasures and sundrie lusts to conquer the soule. Neither want they the warrant of holy Scripture in so speaking. Rom. 6. Let not sinne reigne in your mortall bo∣dies, sayth Paul, to obey it in the lusts thereof; neither giue your members to be weapons of vnrighteousnesse vnto sinne. So that the members of our mortall bodie are called by the Apostle the weapons of vnrighteousnesse, by which sinne fighteth against the soule. Iam. 4. Whence are warres and strifes in you, sayth Iames? not hence, euen from the plea∣sures which fight in your members? 1. Pet. 2. Abstaine, sayth Peter, from carnall desires, which fight against the soule. Rom. 7. I delight in the law of God, sayth Paul, according to the inward man: but I see another law in my members fighting against the law of my minde, and leading me captiue to the law of sinne, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? Where the inward man (which is the mind light∣ned and the will directed by grace) is diuided against the outward man, which must n eds be the inferior powers of the soules ioyned with the parts and spi its of the bo∣die, wher and whereby sinne still dwelling in our earthly aud irregenerate mem∣bers, iusteth aga nst the spirit, and striueth against the minde; which Peter calleth fighting against the soule. To strengthen this doctrine, which you thinke so strange, it shall not be amisse to consider somewhat further, what communion the soule hath with the bodie; that thereby we may perceiue, what vse the soule hath of her bodie in well or euill doing. The habitation of the soule in the bodie, and her coniunction with the bodie making one man of two contrarie parts; mortall, and immortall; visible, and inuisible; rea∣sonable, and vnreasonable; is so wonderfull a worke of God, that the manner there∣of wholly pas eth our vnderstanding: onely by consequents, and effects wee gather, what she vseth in the bodie, what she perceiueth by the bodie, and what she imparteth to the bodie. Howbeit her habitation in the bodie, and vnion with the bodie, com∣posing one person of both, called man, is sufficient by the Scriptures, if we knew no more of the communion that is betwixt them, to make both parts guiltie of all sinne committed and liable to the punishment thereof both in this world, and in the next. And so much the Scriptures teach vs, when they require confession of our sinnes, or promise remission of our sinnes or threaten vengeance for our vnrighteousnesse; where∣in the bodie is not seuered nor excepted from the soule, but both are con oyned in one person, to whom and euery part of whom, either mercie is afforded vnto saluati∣on, or iustice awarded vnto damnation. And yet because the communion which is betwixt the soule and bodie, will giue vs some light, how the soule vseth the helpe of her bodie in accomplishing her actions; I may not omit to speake thereof, though happily it will be somewhat obscure to the simple, and more remote from their vn∣derstanding, then in this case I could wish. As man was ordained of God to haue in him the seuerall operations, of life, of sense of reason, so was the soule created with three diuerse faculties answerable to those three functions; to wit, with a vitall or vegetatiue for the first, with a sensitiue and mo∣tiue for the second, with a reasonable or intellectiue for the third. The vitall facultie prouided for the quickning, nourishing, increasing and preseruing of the bodie in moderate strength to the discharge of our dueties to God and our neighbour, is so fastned to the bodie that without the bodie it hath neither vse, nor action. The second facultie called sensitiue was giuen of purpose to the soule, not onely to perceiue by sense the natures, helpes, and vses of all externall and sensible things, and by voluntarie motion to pursue that, which was profitable for vs; but chiefly, that by seeing the workes & hearing the words of God we should come to the know∣ledge of his will, and open our lippes to praise his name, and to direct and comfort others; as also stretch out our hands to aide and relieue our selues and our brethren, and with all the partes of our bodie to performe all outward actions and dueties of pietie and charitie. To which ends because sense and motion both externall and in∣ternall were requisite as well as reason, the wisedome of God hath placed in the body, and specially in the head and heart (the seates of vnderstanding and will) certaine thinne, quicke, and aeriall vapours, or spirits, which rise from the blood, and are brought by the braine to a marueilous force and agilitie, that they should carie to the minde of man with incredible celeritie the resemblances of all things subiected to sense, and with like vehemencie stirre and excite the heart and will of man, with con∣sent to imbrace, and with all the powers and partes of soule and bodie to follow after that, which prouoketh and delighteth the sensitiue spirits. So that these corporall and actiue spirits are the meanes, whereby particular things and circumstances, together with their profites and pleasures, are in a moment presented to the mind: and the heart and will likewise mooued and inflamed to accept and allow that, which conten∣teth and pleaseth the senses. For according as the things obiected to sense, or remem∣bred after sense, seeme good or euill to the powers of the soule vnited with these spi∣rits, so is desire or anger kindled by pleasure on the one side, and dislike or griefe on the other, which presently and violently preuaile with the soule, where grace wan∣teth, and lust and striue euen in the Saints against the spirit of God. This is that part of the soule, which in the faithfull is not regenerate, whiles here they liue; lusting still after the things of this world, euen the delights of the flesh, the desires of the eye, and the pride of life; and by these baits and snares fighting against the Soule. The third power of the Soule is intellectiue, that is the mind endued with vnder∣standing and will; which in the naturall man is ignorant of God and auerse from God by corruption of sinne, and so caried through the loue of it selfe either to carnall pleasures at the prouocation of the senses, or to vaine desires vnder color of humane reason and glorie. This part in the faithfull is lightned and perswaded by the Spirit of God to see and acknowledge the good and acceptable will of God, and strength∣ned with a measure of grace to resist the dominion of sinne dwelling in our mortall bo∣die, that is in the sensitiue powers and affections of the soule mixed with the members and spirits of the body; though in this life the mind euen of the regenerate hath not that perfection of knowledge and loue, which the law of God requireth; and there∣fore shrinketh often from the leading of Gods spirit by ignorance and infirmitie, but neuer by rebellion and obstinacie. This much being said touching the powers of the Soule, which may more largely be perused in that learned Zanchius de operibus dei part. 3. lib 2. cap. 3. worke of Zanchius alleaged by this Discourser; It is most euident by the very grounds of humane and Diuine learning and experience, that the principall part of the Soule, which is the mind enabled with reason and will, hath in all sorts of sinnes a manifest communion with the Body; either by information of the senses, or by tentation from the affections, or by impression on the spirits and parts of the body, or by the ready subiection of the whole body to the will; besides originall corruption, which the Soule draweth from the Body, sufficient of it selfe to make the Body guiltie of all euill committed by the Soule, and actuall execution, whereby the Soule needeth and vseth the Body to effect and accomplish, whatsoeuer she intendeth. And first of information for the senses. The knowledge of good and euill, which the Soule of man hath in this life, is not infused by creation, as it was in Angels, to whom that kind of knowledge is peculiar, but collected from the sense, and taught by time, as we see by experience in all man∣kind without exception. I still reserue the reuelation and inspiration of Gods Spirit; when, where, and to whom pleaseth him. A plaine proofe of the former point we dayly behold in children, who vtterly know nothing, no Ionas. 3. not their right hand from their l ft, as God himselfe testifieth, till by sense and vse they learne to distinguish, and at length to conceaue the things set before them. The Rule of naturall Philosophie ex∣pressing, that the vnderstanding hath nothing, which came not from the sense, you would faine tumble out of your way, but it is very true and consonant to the Scriptures, if it be taken as it was ment, and the reuelation of Christs Spirit thence excepted, of which in deed the Philosophers knew nothing. For that was not spoken of conclusions in reason, as if they must be first in sense, before they could be inferred by consequent; nor of the diuiding and compounding things in mans imagination, that came from the sense, as dreames and fictions; but of the principles or premisses in reason, which must be plaine to the sense; and of the naturall and true proprieties and differences of all particular things, which the sense must first apprehend, before the mind can right∣ly discerne them. So that the mind conceaueth truely no singular things, which were not first apparent to the sense, since man hath no naturall meanes giuen him of God to get the true knowledge of any thing, that is not reuealed or inspired from aboue, but onely his senses. To this the Scriptures beareth witnesse, where the meanes to in∣forme mans Hart of good and badde, in which sinne consisteth, are set downe to be the eyes, and the eares, still sauing to God, what he reuealeth by the power of his spi∣rit. Ignorance and neglect of Gods will, whence all sinne commeth, are described in the Scriptures by the dulnesse of the eare, and blindnesse of the eye. God hath giuen them (saith Paul) the spirit of slumber; euen eyes that they should not see, and eares that Rom. 11. they should not heare vnto this day. Our Sauiour confirmeth the same out of the Pro∣phet Esaie. Matth. 13. The Hart of this people is wexed fatte, they heare dully with their eares, and winke with their eyes; least they should see with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and (so) vnderstand with their harts. But blessed (saith he to his Disciples) are your eyes, for they see; and your eares for they heare. In so much that the Apostle doubteth not to assure vs, Rom. 10. faith commeth by hearing, when the hart beleeueth vnto righteousnesse, and without hearing there is no beleeuing; How shall they beleeue in him, of whom they haue not heard? And God requiring his people to be wise and learne, saith, Esa 2. Heare ye deafe, and yee blind behold, that yee may see. As God then vseth no outward meanes besides his works and his words to teach vs his will; so hath he giuen vs no naturall course to learne, but by the eyes and the eares; by which we must come to the knowledge of all heauenly, and much more of all earthly things. The loosing and decaying of mans knowledge in this life, after he hath gotten it, will proue the same, no lesse then the lacking thereof, before he doth by sense attaine it. For when the sensitiue spirits in the braine be either grosse and heauie, as in fooles; or extreame hoate and whirling as in madde men; or obstructed and choked as in Le∣thargies and Apoplexies; men want the vse of reason, because the obiects, whereon the minde worketh, are by these meanes hindered and hid from the vnderstanding. This is the true resolution both of Philosophers and Diuines. Zanchius de operibus dei part. 3. li. 2. cap. 2. fol. 507. Ad facultatem intel∣ligentem exercendam non eget (mens) organo tanquam medio, per quod intelligat: quanquam eget obiecto, in quod intueatur, & ex quo intellectionem concipiat. Hoc autem obiectum, sunt phantasmata, seu rerum a sensibus perceptarum simulachra ad phantasiam perlata. To ex∣ercise the facultie of vnderstanding the mind of man, saith Zanchius, needeth no instru∣ment, as a meane by which she may vnderstand, but she needeth an obiect, whereon to looke, and whence to conceaue the act of vnderstanding. This obiect are the sensitiue apprehensi∣ons, or the resemblances of things receaued from the senses and caried to the phantasme or imagination of man. And to this obiection that vpon the hurt or wearinesse of the braine we find by experience, our mind can not vnderstand and worke in those things as it did before; he answereth. Zanchius ibi∣dem. fol. 507. Ideo non potest lesis aut defatigatis turbatis{que} organis mens nostra intelligen∣dis contemplandis{que} rebus operam dare, quia phantasmata ipsa, quae sunt in organo corporali, & quae sunt ceu obiectum intellectus, turbato ipsorum organo, videri & percipi non possunt. Therefore our mind can not contemplate and conceaue, when the instruments are hurt, wea∣ried, or troubled, because the resemblances of things, which are in a corporall instrument, and are as an obiect to the vnderstanding, can not be seene and perceaued. For the Ibidem. resem∣blances of things in mans Imagination are to his vnderstanding and mind, as colours are to his sight. Now the eye seeth nothing but the colour of euery thing, though therewith∣all it distinguish number, quantitie, motion and figure, and so taketh the knowledge of euery sensible thing. In like manner without the similitudes and shapes of things caried from the sense to the phantasiue imagination or apprehension, and there re∣maining, the mind vnderstandeth nothing of those things, that are without it; and no knowledge is naturally within it, but what God hath reuealed to it. His conclusion is. Zanchius de operibus Dei part 3 li. 2. cap. 3. Thesi. 2. de phantasia. Haec partis sensiti facult as propinqua est intellecti , & huic suppeditat materiam cogitandi, intelligendi, & denique omnia sua officia faciendi. This facultie of the sensitiue part, is placed neere vnto the intellectiue, and ministreth thereunto matter of Cogitation, vn∣derstanding, and performing all her dueties. In inward tentation to euill, Saint Iames rule doeth generally take place. Iam. 1. Euery man is tempted being drawne away, and entised by his owne concupiscence. And lust concei∣uing bringeth foorth sinne. So that lust naturally dwelling in vs, and conceiuing and brin∣ging foorth sinne, is the very mother and nurse of all sinne in vs. Austen maketh two chiefe rootes of sinne in man, desire, and feare. August. in Psal 79. Omnia peccata du res faciunt in ho∣mine, cupidit as & timor. Cogitate, discutite, interrogate cord vestra, perscrutamini con∣scientias, videte vtrum possunt esse peccatanisi cupiendo aut timendo. Two things cause ALL SINNES in men, desire and feare. Bethinke your selues, discusse, examine your hearts, search your consciences, and see whether there can possible bee any sinnes, but by desiring or fearing. Where least Austen making two fountaines of all sinnes, desire, and feare; should iarre with Saint Iames, that setteth downe lust for the first spring of euery ten∣tation to sinne: we must either take tentation, of which Saint Iames speaketh, for a de∣lightfull prouocation to sinne, resting within vs; and terrour, which Austen addeth, for a violent and externall induction thereto proceeding from others: or else wee must deriue, desire and feare from the loue of our selues, which originally dwelleth in vs, and lusteth after euery thing that liketh vs: or lastly wee may ioyne the one as a consequent to the other; since the naturall desire wee haue of our owne ease and wel∣fare, breedeth in vs that dislike and feare of euill, which so much vrgeth and forceth vs. If then desire and feare, be the motiues and inducements to ALL SINNES, that men commit; as most resolutely Saint Austen auoucheth; and these two desire and feare, on which depend the rest of our affections, be passions of the sensitiue part of the Soule permixed in this life with corporall spirits: certainely all sinnes in men haue their prouocations and incitations from and by bodily senses, spirits, or motions. Clamens A∣lexand. Stro∣mat. li. 6. . By bodily spirits (saith Clemens Alex∣andrinus) man hath sense, desire, reioyceth, and kindleth to anger; yea and by the same (spi∣rits) doe the thoughts and resolutions of the minde proceede to action. Athenagoras de resurrection mortuorum. , &c. Where is it iust, sayth Athenagoras, that DESIRES, pleasures, FEARES and sorrowes should haue their mo∣tion (or rising) from the body, and the sinnes occasioned by them, and the punishments for the same sinnes should lie on the Soule alone? Damascene defining the passions or affections of the Soule, saith. Damascenus orthodox. fidei li. 2. cap. 22. . A passion (or affection of the Soule) is a sensible motion of the desiring or appetitiue facul∣tie, vpon the imagination of good or euill. In which description are three plaine proofes, that the passions of the soule (which by the confession of Damascene, and all other Diuines are Ibidem. li. 2. cap. 12. DESIRE, FEARE, ioy and sorrow ) doe not mooue in this life without the body. First in that they are sensible motions, they must be perceiued in the body; next in that they rise from the sensitiue appetite, they are conioyned with the body; thirdly in that they come vpon the phantasiue imagination of good or euill, they are kindled from the senses of the body. What sensible motions these affections of the soule doe raise in the outward and inward parts of man, we shall anon perceiue, when we come to the impressions, that the soule maketh on the body: in the meane time it is not amisse to know, how Satan, who hath that name from his desire and power of tempting, worketh and preuaileth in his temptations vpon men. It is euident by the Scriptures, that God alone searcheth, and changeth the heart of man, because he alone is the maker of it; and therefore Satan, though he be a spirit, yet can hee not by himselfe either discerne the thoughts, or alter the will of man; but in the one he obserueth the secret impressions of the soule on the bodie; and in the o∣ther he stirreth and vseth the spirits and affections of the bodie against the soule. So that when he will put any euill thoughts into the hearts of men, as he did into Iohn 13. Iu∣das and Act. 5. Ananias, and dayly doth into the children of disobedience, and often time, into the godlie themselues, when he is so permitted; he can not of himselfe turne and winde the heart as pleaseth him, that is proper to God alone; but he abu∣seth our eares and eyes, or els he stirreth the humors and spirits of the bodie, and by tempering and mixing the resemblances of things receiued from the sense, and reser∣ued in mans imagination, he obiecteth to the mind what he listeth, and incensing the How the diuell may discerne and incense our affections. affections, that are likewise bodilie, he trieth whether he can draw the heart to con∣sent. Which he discerneth not by any inward power of his owne, but by the diffe∣rent motions of the heart, where the will of man is seated, and according as he findeth his temptations to be either refused, or admitted in the heart of man, so he either de∣sisteth from his lost labour, or persueth the suggestion once allowed, till the sinne be performed. S. Austen discussing how diuels could diuine at mens thoughts, and in∣duce mens hearts, sayth: August de Diuinatione Damonum. cap. 5. Suadent miris & inuisibilibus modis, corpora hominum non sentientium penetrando, sese{que} cogitationibus eorum per quaedam imaginaria visa miscendo, siue vigilantium, siue dormientium: The diuels persuade by maruellous & inuisible means, entring the bodies of men when they feele it not, and by certaine resemblances or sights of the imagination intermingling themselues with the thoughts of men, either waking or sleeping. Of discerning our thoughts, the writer of Ecclesiasticall opinions amongst S. Austens works, sayth: De ecclesiast. Dogmatibus. cap. 80. Internas animae cogitationes diabolum non videre, certi sumus, sed motibus eas corporis ab illo, & affectionum indicijs colligi, experimento didicimus. We be sure the di∣uell seeth not the inward thoughts of the heart, yet finde we by experience, that he collecteth them by the motions of the bodie, and the shewes of mens affections. To which S. Austen a∣greeth: August. de Diuinatione Damonum. cap 5. Sicut apparet concitatior animi motus in vultu, vt ab hominibus quo{que} aliquid fo∣rinsecus agnoscatur, quod intrinsecus agitur: Ita non debet esse incredibile, si etiam leuiores cogitationes dant aliqua signa per corpus, quae obtuso hominum sensu cognosci non possunt, acu∣to autem damonum possunt. As a vehement motion of the minde appeareth euen in the coun∣tenance, that men may outwardly perceiue what is inwardly purposed; so ought it not to be incredible, that the lighter thoughts of men giue some signes by the bodie, which can not be de∣scried by the dull sense of men, but yet may be discerned by the quicke sense of diuels. By themselues then diuels can not infuse any thoughts into vs; that onely belongeth to the spirit of God; immediatly to inspire the heart of man; neither can they so much as discerne our secret thoughts, which none can do, but he that framed the heart; yet as the soule getteth her knowledge by resemblance and informance of things carried from the senses to the imagination, and thence presented to the minde: so the diuell hath his meanes to worke in the outward and inward senses, which haue corporall seats and spirits, and by the similitudes and shewes of things there found, to offer sug∣gestions to the minde of man. Whether it be therefore the world without vs, the flesh within vs, or the diuell both without and within, that tempteth vs; our senses, imagi∣nations and affections are the meanes which are vsed by all those three; and these haue such vnion and communion with the bodie, that after death there is no meanes for new temptations to be offered, nor new sinnes to be committed, but ech man shall receiue iudgement for the things done in the bodie, and not after or before the bodie. That all the thoughts of man, be they neuer so light, giue signes in the bodie, I by no meanes affirme: for so the diuels should easily discerne thoughts; and S. Austen wisely did moderate that assertion, and make some doubt, August. re∣tract. li. 2. ca. 3. how thoughts are knowen to diuels; but in sinnes, (of which I speake, not of thoughts) it is more manifest, that the diuell hath his meanes to see, whether his temptations take place in the heart or no. For when S. Iames sayth, Iames. 4. Resist the diuell, and he will flee from you; surely the di∣uell must see when he is resisted in the heart of man, els how shall he flee? E hes. 4. Giue no place to the diuell, sayth Paul. Then doth the diuell perceiue, when place is giuen vn∣to him, that he may enter and possesse the heart; neither are his temptations so vainly offered, that he can not discerne when the heart imbraceth them. The soule therfore pleased or displeased with euill, causeth certaine naturall motions and impressions on the bodie, by which the wicked spirits obserue the inclination of the heart; and that to them is as cleere, as the outward carriage of the countenance is to men, or the in∣ward feeling of our affections is to our selues. Of outward motions and impressions Iesus the sonne of Syrach sayth: Eccles. 13. The heart of man changeth his countenance, either to good or euill. Ibid. v. 27. A cheerefull face is the token of the heart for good: and when the countenance falleth, the heart is displeased. Why is thy Genes. 4. countenance cast downe, sayd God to Cain, reprouing his dislike, that Abels sacri∣fice was preferred? And when Labans heart altered towards Iacob, Labans Genes. 31. counte∣nance was not as it was before. Genes. 33. I haue seene thy face, as the face of God, because thou hast accepted me, sayd Iacob to Esau; and vsually in the Scriptures, to finde grace in the eyes, noteth a fauourable and louing respect had to any. Nature teacheth vs as well as Scripture, that anger and fauour, sorrow and ioy, feare and shame, and all the affections of the heart appeare in the verie faces of men, and so doe pride, enuie, luxurie, a arice, impudencie, and such like vices betray themselues by the very lookes. The Esa 2. loftie eye of man shall be humbled, that is, his pride shall be abased. The Eccles. 14. wicked enuieth to see with his eye, and turneth away his face; and the eye of the couetous is not satisfied with any part. Of wantons Peter sayth, They haue 2. Pet. 2. eyes full of adulterie. By what outward signes of face, eyes, gostures and motions of the bodie, the inward affections and dispositions of the minde may be gathered, would be long to deliuer. Tertullian sayth truly; Tertullianus de resurrectio∣ne carnis. Fa∣cies intentionum omnium speculum est. The face is the glasse of all (our) intentions or affe∣ctions. And Ambrose: Habitus mentis in corporis statu cernitur. The disposition of the Ambros. officio. li. 1. cap. 18. minde is perceiued by the state of the bodie. Basil. in Psal. 29. . What is more deformed (sayth Basil) and more displeasing euen to the sight, then the soule when she is in her affections? Obserue an angrie man, and the fiercenesse of his looks. Marke a man sorrowing, and the basenesse and deiection of his soule. One that is subiect to luxurie or gluttonie, or amazed with feare, who can endure to beholde? . The disposition of the soule piercing to the very out∣sides of the bodie, euen as the prints of the seemlinesse of the soule appeare , in the composed behauiour and gesture of the godly. The alterations of the bloud, and motions of the spirits within the bodie, which All affections make sensible alterations in the hart. the soule raiseth in all her affections, are not so open to the eye as the former, yet are they the causes of all outward mutations, and sensible enough to the parties them∣selues, when they grow any thing vehement. For this is Gods ordinance in all things which haue sense or reason, that good any way perceiued, should delight, stirre, and inflame the will and appetite of beasts, men and angels, with desire and loue thereof: and euill contrariwise should not onely auert and quench the will and appetite with hatred, but offend and oppresse the patient with feare and griefe. When then the soule of man vnited to her bodie, liketh any thing obiected or apprehended vnder the shew of good; she kindleth and moueth her selfe to attaine her desire, and there∣withall incenseth the vitall and animall spirits, which warme the bloud, enlarge the heart, and diffuse themselues to persue, or embrace the good that is approching or present. And when she seeth any euill which she can not decline, but must endure, she staggereth, and sincketh for feare, which quencheth the spirits, cooleth the bloud, and closeth the heart, depressing all three with a slacke, colde, and heauie remisnesse. If she may withstand or requite the euill that is towards, she raiseth her selfe to anger, which maketh the bloud to boile, the heart to swell, and the spirits to flie to the out∣most parts, as readie to resist or reuenge. So that LOVE and HATRED of good and euill obiected to the sense or minde of man, are the two chiefe springs of all his affections and actions; and the branches thereof, which are desire, feare, ioy, griefe and anger, moued either by the sense or vnderstanding, haue their manifest or secret alte∣rations of the bloud, and motions of the heart, by the intension or remission of the spirits kindled, or quenched more or lesse, according as the obiect of good and euill is greater or nearer. By this meanes the soule affected and mooued with good or euill, affecteth and moueth her bodie, and sheweth her inward disposition and incli∣nation to either; and the heart of man, which is the seat of will, hath his naturall and different motions raised by the soule, vpon het liking or disliking of good or euill, perceiued by sense or by vnderstanding. These alterations and motions naturally impressed by the soule on the bodie, not onely Philosophers and Physitians haue obserued, but the Diuines of all ages, that haue waded therein, haue fully confessed. Aristotle by the rules of nature collected and inferred thus much: Arist. de ani∣malium moti∣ ne. cap. 8. . The beginning of motion is that, which in our actions must be persued or declined; and of necessitie heat and cold do fol∣low vpon the cogitation or imagination of either. That which is grieuing, is declined; that which is pleasing, is persued. Howbeit, in small things this is scant sensible. Ibid. cap. 7. So that almost all things grieuing and pleasing (vs) bring with them a (sensible) kinde of colde and heat; as it is euident by our affections; the parts enlarging by heat, and shrinking with colde. This alteration, either the sense, or the imagination, or the cogitation can make. Wherefore some shake and feare onely vpon the cogitation of things. The euill or good which grieueth or pleaseth vs, bringeth naturally colde or heat to the bloud, and so enlargeth or shrin∣keth the heart; which alterations do come as well vpon cogitation and imagination, as vpon sense. Galene an exact and skilfull obseruer of mans bodie, writeth that the first and principall cause of shaking is the Galenus de causis Sympto∣matum. li. 2. cap. 5. recourse of the naturall heat to the inward and outward parts, which is found in manie affections of the soule; and with the same are as well the spirits as the bloud caried sometimes inward to the fountaine (of the heart) and there compressed; sometimes extended to the outward parts, and there diffused. Those spirits and bloud, together with the heat that is in either or both, the soule vseth for her first instruments in all her operations, or els dwelleth in them; and those motions of the soule we may plainly be∣holde in manie other things, but chiefly in the affections of the soule. For feare presently dri∣ueth the spirits and the bloud to the inward parts, and presseth them to a narrow roome by coo∣ling the outsides of the bodie. Anger doth hastily send forth, diffuse, and heat (the bloud and spirits) and therefore the beating of the arteries and the heart, in them that feare, are small and weake; but very great and vehement in them that are angrie. That feare doth straiten and contract the hart, and ioy dilate it and make it leape, and the signes of either preuaile and appeare in the body; the auncient Father Saint Basile did long since obserue. Basil. Homil. 4. de gratiar. Actione. Teares (the effect of griefe) doe rise, saith he, when an impression against our wils doth strike the Soule, and draw it together, the spirit about the heart being compacted and straitned. Ioy is as it were the leaping of the Soule exul∣ting (or aduancing it selfe) for things answerable to our mind. Wherefore the Soule sheweth signes in the Body accordingly. For in those that sorrow the masse of flesh is pale, wanne, and cold. In those that reioyce, the habite of their body is floorishing and ruddy, the Soule euen leaping, and for pleasure offering to rush to the outmost parts. Thomas Aquinas a man well learned, though led with the errors of his age, very truely noteth; First, Quod in Thomas 1. 2. q aest. 24. a t. 2. a 2. omni passione animae additur aliquid vel diminuitur a naturali motu Cordis, in quantum cor intensiùs vel remissiùs monetur: That in all the passions of the Soule somewhat is added to, or diminished from, the naturall motion of the hart, in as much as the hart mooueth either swifter or slacker. Secondly, that Quaest. 84. ar∣tic 1. in respons. From the loue of temporall things all sinne proceedeth; all (our) affections being caused by loue, which Quaest. 25 ar∣tic 2. quaest. 28. artic. 5. melteth and mollifieth the hart, that the thing loued may pearce it, contrary to coldnesse and hardnesse of hart, which is a disposition repugnant to loue, whose perfection is to be zealous and feruent. The cause of all sinne then, which is the loue of our selues and of temporall things delighting vs, so flameth in our harts, that it seeketh all occasions, and vndertaketh all actions to content our appetites; and this heate and motion of loue being impressed in the hart by the soule, it is manifest that the consent of sinne is communicated from the Soule to the Body. Leonardus Fuchsius a learned Phisitian of our time, and a professor of true Religi∣on, in his institutions of Phisicke sheweth, that ioy Fuchsius in∣sti utio medici∣ne. li. 1. Sectio. 7. cap. 4. sorrow, hope, desperation, confidence, feare, loue, hatred, mercie, enuie, anger, wrath, waspishnesse, rage, shamefastnesse, blushing, staggering, hastinesse, humanitie, morositie, and such like haue their MOTIONS in the hart, heating or cooling it, and so dilating or contracting it more or lesse, accor∣ding to the differences and degrees of their impressions. Zanchius a wise and worthy Diuine treating of the parts of the Body, saith; Zanchius de operibus Dei part. 3. li. 2. cap. 1. Numer. 7. The second vse of the hart is to impart vitall spirits specially to the head, in which the mind properly worketh, and so to minister matter whence the sensitiue spirits are produced in the braine; by which, motion, sense, and cogitations are stirred. The third vse of the hart is that it should also be the seate, fountaine, and cause of all our affections. For there are in the hart two motions, the one of pulse, to main∣taine life by the ordinary breathing in and out of the ayre: the other of affection, which fol∣loweth the thought of man, and is made by the extraordinarie dilating of the whole hart, as in ioy; or compressing it, as in sorow. With sorow and griefe we pine away, with ioy we reuiue. Whereupon the hart in one affection is opened and cheered, in the other it is shut and dryed. Hereby we perceiue why the Scripture by the name of the hart vnder standeth the WILL and all the affections of man, as by the name of the minde it noteth all the thoughts and know∣ledge of man. Wherefore as motion, sense, and cogitations spring from the braine or head, so all affections from the hart. Then Ibidem. from the hart ascend to the braine vitall spirits, whence sensitiue spirits are engendred. By these sensitiue spirits thoughts are mooued, and knowledge planted in the mind. Againe, those sensitiue spirits by cogitations and conceptions strike the whole hart, and kindle diuers affections, and raize diuers motions in it. And this hath great profit in Diuinitie. For besides that we vnderstand how the Soule vseth the Body, and work∣eth by the Body; two chiefe points of true godlinesse are illustrated by this Doctrine: the KNOVVLEDGE and LOVE of God, whence commeth obedience and the obseruance of all his commaundements. For the holy Ghost sliding into our harts first lightneth the minde, which worketh in the head, and with that effectuall knowledge kindleth in our hart the af∣fection of loue. And from thence commeth the motion (of all the parts) to performe the will of God. By this meanes God truely dwelleth in our mind, in our hart, and in our whole Body. There is then neither good nor euill affection in the soule of man, which is not some∣what communicated to the hart of man, & expressed by the very motions of the hart; that the body may iustly be drawen by consenting and seruing in either, to the reward and punishment of either. The READY SVBIECTION of the Body to the Soule in all sinne is the last point that I mentioned of their mutuall communion. For though vnderstanding and will were giuen at first with all facilitie to rule and gouerne the other powers and parts of Soule and Body; yet the corruption of sinne once entering, not onely diuided the Body against the Soule, but euen the Soule against it selfe. So that in good things this corruptible Body is now an heauie burden loading the Soule, when it is lightned with grace; and the inferiour and sensitiue powers of the Soule rebell and striue a∣gainst the spirit, which renueth the inward man of the hart. Some ignorance, infirmi∣tie and selfeloue remaine still in the mind, as defects, till we come to the place, where our knowledge and loue shall be made perfect; but when we would doe good, euen then the law of sinne in our members Rom. 7. REBELLETH against the law of our mind, and leadeth (vs) captiue to the law of sinne, that is in our members. The Galat. 6. flesh lusteth against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh, and these are repugnant the one to the other, so that we can not doe the things which we would. For which cause the Apostle professed of him∣selfe, that he did 1. Cor. 9. presse downe his body, and bring it into subiection; least (the Body re∣belling and preuailing against the spirit) he should become a cast-away. This sharpe and strong resistance, which our earthly members make against the mind and will delight∣ing in the law of God, and guided by his spirit, sheweth the willingnesse and readi∣nesse of the flesh to conspire and ioyne with the WILL in the seruitude of sinne; to make her members the weapons of vnrighteousnesse; so that the will no sooner consenteth to any euill, but the sensitiue and motiue powers of the Soule permixed with the bodily spirits, attend with delight and forwardnesse to promote and execute ech sinfull purpose. This is that Ephes. 4. greedinesse, which the Apostle noteth in some to vn∣cleannesse, from which if either feare or grace restraine, it is not without some sensible griefe to the flesh, disappointed of her desires and lusts. We see the manifest and manifold coniunction and communion of the soule with the bodie as well in good as in euill; which is strange to none, neither Philosophers, Physitians, nor Diuines, but onely to this Discourser, to whom all sound and true learning is strange. For not onely vertues and vices are common to both; but spiri∣tuall graces, as faith, hope, and loue, the soule in this life receiueth, perceiueth, and practiseth together with her bodie, and by her body. Athenagoras de resurrecti mo tuorum. Vertue and vice, saith Athe∣nagoras, can not so much as be conceiued in the soule without the bodie. For the vertues, that are, we know to be the vertues of men, (as also the vices that are contrarie) and not to be in the soule apart from the bodie, or consisting by her selfe. Of faith we said before, it commeth by hearing: and so doth hope, since that is expected which is beleeued. Touching Rom. 10 loue, God by his law commandeth himselfe to be loued Marke 12 with all our mind, with all our heart, with all our soule, with all our strength; not making an emptie variation of words, but binding all the parts and powers of bodie and soule, capable of that affection or seruiceable to it, with one common duetie to perfourme him loue. The soule then beleeuing and louing the promises and graces of God, openeth the heart and diffu∣seth the spirits to accept and imbrace the goodnesse of God in like maner, as she did before dilate it to entertaine the desires of earthly things; and God detesting an h hard and opho. 1. frozen heart, as voyde of all loue, requireth to haue the . 5. bowels mooued to∣wards Mark 16. him, and the heart kindled with a vehement Cap. 8. flame: describing zeale and deuoti∣on by the naturall motions and passions, which are felt in the heart, when it is affected with vehement and strong loue. So in repentance the soule depresseth and humbleth the heart, raising it againe with hope, which before was exalted with pride, and in∣censed with selfe loue; by the same naturall meanes and motions testifying the one, that she did the other, and drawing the body with the powers and parts thereof to the obedience of faith, so farre as the law of sinne lusting in the flesh will permit, and the measure of grace giuen vs doth preuaile. Against this doctrine you would seeme to bring many obiections; but they are such as will prooue you either to vnderstand nothing at all besides your owne fansies; Our naturall knowledge com∣meth by s nse. or to play with shadowes, when you most professe to be serious and earnest. Your first is; Def nc pag 0. l 9. Heresies, Turcisme, and Atheisme are committed and determined simpl ly in the mind, without any necessarie imployment of any parts of the bodie. ] If you can tell me what reli∣gion you were of in your cradle, before you did speake or vnderstand; your instance were of some waight. But if men be taught as well errors as trueth, by their parents and masters, then this is a wodden reason to make vs beleeue, that heresies are inspi∣red without teaching or hearing. S. Paul saith, Rom. 10. Faith commeth by hearing; and so I trust you did first learne it, and not by reuelation. If we be not borne Christians in knowledge, but must be taught; no more are any men borne Iewes, Turkes, or He∣retikes, but their eares and hearts must be first infected with the tongues or pennes of others. This is one of your surest weapons, wherewith you thought to doe great workes: but put it vp; at such strawes children will not stumble. The first inuenters of heresies, you will say, were not taught. ] The first authors of errours shut their eyes or eares against the trueth offered them, and so declined from trueth to falsehood, by leaning rather to their owne corrupt iudgements grounded on earthly reasons, then to the voyce of God directing them aright. For why doe men disbeleeue and im∣pugne the word of God, as all heretikes do; but because they measure diuine things, that passe their reach, by humane sense and experience, which are not gathered with∣out the bodie? The Turkes are strangers (you thinke) to the word of God, and Atheists are vtter despisers of it. ] The Turke destitute of trueth, and so notable rightly to iudge of Gods fauours in this life, bendeth his eyes on the worldly miseries of Christians, and comparing them with the victories and felicities (as he thinketh) of his owne na∣tion, condemneth the faith of Christ, as displeasant to God, by reason of the manifold afflictions of the faithfull, and preferreth his owne profession, and Mahomet the first erector of it as most acceptable to God, because they haue their desires in this world, and are conquerors ouer Christians, not knowing the finall reward of the one and of the other after this life. Atheists are caried with almost the same respects to denie or desp se the power and prouidence of God. For they being earthly minded, and see∣ing the wicked and prophane persons not onely free from punishment, but most to flourish in this life, doe hence collect, there is no God; whose patience and iustice they deride, because hee dispenseth not transitorie things according to their ex∣pectation. Defenc. pag. 61. l. 4. Further as the Angels sinned in the beginning by their meere spirituall conceit against God, so nothing letteth but that man in his Angel-like nature (the reasonable soule) may sinne likewise, without any bodily meanes thereunto. ] This is another of your reasons not much vnlike the former. For in Angels, which now are deuils, their vnderstanding and will might and did sinne, because they were spirits, and other essentiall partes in them we doe not know. In men that cannot be, because they consist of bodie and soule, and haue many powers of the soule permixed with the bodie, and so must sin in both the parts of their nature, before they can sin, as the Angels did, that is, in their whole substance. If then you see no difference betweene Angels, that are only spirits, and men, that must haue bodies as well as soules, before they can be men; your An∣gel-like nature is not very bright. If you see the difference, and yet vrge your conse∣quence; that is a meere spirituall conceite of yours, but vtterly voyde of all reason. For as well men as Angels must sinne in their whole natures, least whiles you place one part in hell as nocent, and the other in heauen as innocent, you bring vs as strange iudgements, as you doe doctrines. In Gods iudgement, Cyrill. in Ioan. lib. 1. cap. 9. Ea solummodo quaeruntur, quae cum corpore gessit; those things onely are required, (saith Cyrill) which (man) com∣mitted with his bodie. Neither will this serue your turne, that the bodie is the instru∣ment of the soule. For as whiles man liueth, many faculties of the soule are tempered with the bodie; so when man sinneth, the whole soule is not guiltie, if the sensitiue powers and affections of the soule be exempted from sinne. And since by Gods or∣dinance after Adams fall, the corruption of sinne first riseth in the bodie, the informa∣tion and tentation to sinne commeth from the bodie, and the consent of the soule to sinne is impressed on the bodie, as also willing subiection to sinne is yeelded by the bodie; this is let sufficient, why the soule alone neither can, nor doeth sinne in this life without her bodie. Defenc. pag. 61. l. 8. Also as we can thinke well without vsing our bodie, God so inspiring vs: so may we thinke. ill (which is sinne) our inborne corrupt vnderstanding, and reason, and will moouing vs only. ] If Gods power be not tied to the course of nature prescribed vs, will you thence in∣ferre, that we are likewise freed from it? He that framed the heart, can open it, and alter it as pleaseth him; but that is no charter, for vs to chalenge any knowledge, saue what is naturally gathered with our eyes, or with our eares, or supernaturally reuealed to vs. Wisedome infused from our cradles we haue none; we KNOVV not our right hand from our left, till by time we be taught; and our teachers, be they men or Angels, must vse our outward senses, or our inward imaginations to direct and instruct vs: otherwise we can neither conceaue nor vnderstand, what they say or shew, since they can not lighten our hearts. And when God doth inspire vs with that which is good, he not onely openeth our hearts, but filleth them with the loue of his truth & good∣nesse, without which 1. Cor. 13. all knowledge is nothing. Now the loue of God diffused in our hearts here on earth, raiseth the selfe same inward and naturall motion of the heart, which is incident to that affection; and which other kindes of loue doe; least our hearts should be colder and slower in louing God, who requireth all the partes and powers of soule and bodie to be deuoted to his loue, then they were in affecting and louing the world. So that first your Antecedent is false; for things inspired must be embraced with the whole heart, before they can please God; and your consequent is orse; since God worketh aboue nature in things that be good, and leaueth vs in things that be euill, to the naturall course of our corrupt condition, which receaueth sinne from the soule and bodie, and imparteth it vnto both, that neither scape vn∣punished. Defenc. pag. 62. li. 29. If the Soules operations were so necessarily tied to the faculties and instruments of the bo∣dy, as you doe auouch, I greatly doubt how the Soules immortalitie will be defended against the effect of your assertion. ] I giue the body no essentiall cooperation with the Soule in vn∣derstanding and will; I giue it a prouocation, impression, subiection, and execution in euill, which argueth a communion with the Soule in sinne, though vnderstanding and will bee the proper actions of the Soule. Now if the soule, so long as shee is ioy∣ned with her body, communicate her sinfull operations to the body, is that any proofe shee can not bee seuered from the body? Children in their cradles haue no knowledge of good and euill. Shall they therefore remaine children for euer in minde, and not discerne either their happinesse in heauen, or their wretchednesse in hell? What here they want because the soule is coupled with the body, shall there be supplied, when the soule is parted from the body. Here the soule seeth with the eyes, heareth with the eares, and speaketh with the tongue; but after this life our Sauiour teacheth vs, that the Soule shall see, heare, and speake after an other maner, as spirits doe, though shee want eyes, eares and tongue. Here the soule can not mooue from place to place, but with her body: when shee is seuered, shee shall be caried to Para∣dise, or hell without her body. Here the passions of the Soule, desire, ioy, feare, and sorrow are common to both parts of man: hereafter they shalbe proper to the soule, so long as shee abideth vncoupled to the body. Here foolishnesse, madnesse, forget∣fulnesse, sicknesse, wearinesse, do hinder the operations of the soule: there shall bee no such thing. Here the soule sinneth, repenteth, and beleeueth: there is no place, nor power to commit new sinnes, nor to repent the olde. S. Austen sayth thereof. August. in En∣ch rid. cap. 11 . Istis voluntas, illis facultas non poterit esse vlla peccandi. The Saued can haue no will, the Damned no power to sinne. So that the condition of the Soule seuered from the body, much differeth from the state of the soule ioyned with the body; and though shee communicate her actions good and bad in this life to her body, yet in the next shee shall vse her vnderstanding and will, and feele her affections and passions without her body. Defenc. pag. 62. li 32. Surely it bringeth in the heresie of Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, and of certaine Anabaptists, that the Soule hath no being till shee resume her body at the last day. ] Your ig∣norance is no argument to bring the soule a sleepe, till shee resume her body. Shee hath no seueral being from her body in this life, for that Man consisteth of soule and body vnited and ioyned together. Shall shee therefore not bee seuered, or haue no being, when shee is seuered? Are you a Diuine and doe not know, that God hath so framed the Soule, that shee may be vnited to the body, and also seuered from the bo∣die, without losse of her essentiall powers, which yet during this life are seated in the body, and in some sort assisted by the body? The very faculties of sense and motion, which are permixed with the body, and can not be exercised but in the body, retaine their roote and force still in the Soule, when their operation ceaseth for want of the body. To gather knowledge, and declare consent, the Soule heere vseth the spirits and parts of the body; yet after this life her vnderstanding and will shall not onely persist the same, which they were, but be exceedingly encreased and confirmed. For 1. Cor. 13. now we see through a glasse darkely, but then face to face. Now we know in part; but then shall we know, euen as we are knowen. Yea loue and ioy, which here are discerned by the mo∣tion of the heart, and alteration of the spirits, shall there bee most perfect, and neuer fall away. So that your doubt of Pope Iohns heresie to be consequent to my position, is a drowsie slumber of your distempered braine, it hath no coherence with any con∣clusions or assertions of mine. Defenc. pag. 62. li. 35. Hence is it, that you say, Gods iustice punisheth the soule (onely) by the body, that is, not till the resurrection. ] You can hatch errours foule enough, and fast enough, if you may be suffered to adde and alter, what pleaseth you, in other mens words. Betweene the professions of Arians & Christians, there was but a diphthongs difference, for . A∣theists holding there is (NO) God, swarue but one sillable from the truth. What he∣resie then may you not come by adding (ONLY) to my words, which I precisely did decline; and made a manifest exception against it, lest any should suspect it? Giue me the like libertie in your words, and I will find you holes in euery leafe to harbor the grossest heresies, that euer were heard of in Turke or Pagan. But Sir, this is the diuels occupation, plainely to peruert the words, that otherwise containe nothing in them but the trueth. That the Conclus. pa. 254. li. 34. & pa. 255. li. 1. iustice of God both temporally and eternally punisheth the soule by the bodie, which are my words, is a notorious and manifest trueth: for he punisheth temporally in this world, and eternally in the world to come after that sort; so that no man is so doltish as to doubt thereof. That God neuer punisheth otherwise in this life, nor the next, but (ONLY) so, this is your exorbitant imagination, it is no conclusion depending on my words, much lesse any part expressed in them. Defenc. pa. 62. li. 38. In trueth thus you must needs affirme and holde, you can not auoid it, if you will hold your maine question. ] In trueth your Mastership is mis-sighted; I do not see, nor you do not shew, how any such thing is consequent to my question. The absurditie, with which you would intangle me, that Defenc. pag. 63. li. 3. els God did not properly punish Christ for our sins, is weaker than a spiders webbe. The proper punishment of sinne, without respect to persons, is spi∣rituall, temporall, and eternall death; which Christ could not suffer. The full satisfacti∣on and punishment of our sinnes in Christes person, was the death of his bodie suffe∣red on the crosse, with those paines preceding and accompanying it which are descri∣bed in the Scriptures. And this is so euident and easie, that besides such conceited Sirs as you are, few do or need doubt it. Defenc. pa. 61. li. 11. If I grant this point of heathen Philosophie, that the Soule taketh occasion to thinke all things, which she thinketh, vniuersally from the Body and bodily obiects, yet it followeth not, The meanes of mans know∣ledge. that she taketh occasion to mis-thinke from thence also. ] Doe you call that heathen Philo∣sophie, which is so plainely perceaued by nature, so fully confirmed by Scripture, and so vniuersally confessed on all sides, that the very Heathen could not gainesay it? Tell vs I pray you, if you haue lately lighted on any new way, how Man may come to knowledge, but either from sense, or by reuelation. Our Sauiour knew no more waies, when he said to Peter, Matth. 16. Flesh and blood hath not reuealed it vnto thee, but my Father which is in Heauen. Where men, that are teachers or learners, are called flesh and blood, be∣cause without the Body the Soule learneth nothing in this life, but what is reuealed vnto it by the spirit of God. Saint Iohn knew as few. 1. Ioh. 1. v. 3. That (saith he) which we haue seene, and heard, declare we vnto you, that you also may haue fellowship with vs. This a man would thinke were plaine enough, that all knowledge must be either naturally infused in vs, as it was in Angels; or collected of vs by sense and experience, or reuealed to vs from God. For if we be borne voide of all knowledge, as the Scripture expresly testi∣fieth we know not (at first) our right hand from our left; then must we get it by meanes. And meanes to come by the knowledge of particular and externall things, what can you assigne besides the sense? If therefore the Heathen saw this, and you see it not, you prooue your selfe to haue lesse vnderstanding then the Heathen. The Soule in∣deede by the power of vnderstanding and reason wherewith she is endued of God, doth in continuance obserue, discerne, and compare the agreements and contrarie∣ties of things, as also their causes and consequents; and what of her selfe she can not perceaue, she learneth with more ease of others, who are longer and better acquain∣ted therewith, and whose phantasiue spirits are thinner and quicker to pearce into the depth of things. The differences then and defects of mens wits doe cleerele witnesse, that not onely the instruments of sense, but the Imaginatiue spirits must concurre to attaine and encrease knowledge in this life, vnlesse God inspire the Hart aboue na∣ture; which he doth when and where pleaseth him. These may be the meanes of thinking, and yet not the causes or occasions of mis∣thinking.] The naturall meanes of thinking must still be the meanes of well and ill thinking: they varie not, howsoeuer the minde varie in her resolutions. What or how manie may be the causes or occasions of ill thoughts, maketh nothing to this question; it sufficeth for my purpose, to make the bodie liable to the punishment of euery sinne, that the parts, powers, or spirits of the Body haue any communion with the suggesting, admitting, or performing of ech sinne. For in all sinne not onely the Doers, but the leaders, directors, aduisers, helpers, consenters, allowers, and reioy∣cers are in their degree partners with the principall. Yea all the instruments are iustly detested, where the crime is worthily condemned. But whence ill thinking commeth, can you tell? A man may thinke and speake of all the errors and heresies in the world, and yet not sinne. It is the liking and embracing of them, that maketh the offence, and not thinking or reasoning of them. The will then causeth thoughts to be good or euill, the vnderstanding doth not. Now the will must haue somewhat to lead it, which is either the show of truth, or the loue of some other thing, which doth preiudice the truth. There is no truth but in the word of God, which we must either heare or read, before we can apprehend. If we stop our eares against the word of God, shall not that wilfull deafenesse of ours turne to the deserued destruction of Body and Soule? If we open our eares, but not our harts to the voice of God, doth not the loue of some earthly good, or feare of some temporall harme close our harts against the truth? Both which, as well loue as feare, come from the bodily senses and affections, and make their manifest impression on the hart, leading the will to consent to their law. For where all ill thoughts are against veritie, charitie, or temperance; men are ledde from the truth, by August. de vtilitate . ap 1. commoditie, glory, soueraigntie, or credulitie, as Austen obserueth; whereto if we put, ease, enuie, and luxurie, we see the causes of all ill thoughts, which haue no place in the Soule apart from the Body. Defenc. pa. 62. li. 15. The proper prouocations and pleasures of sinne, are often times not outward at all, but the m ere peruersitie and malignitie of our euill mind is vsually the very cause of ill thoughts, and ill determinations. ] You would say some what, if you could tell how. Doth any Prouocations and pl asures c me by the senses. thing properly prouoke it selfe? Doth the fire prouoke it selfe to burne, or the Sunne prouoke him selfe to shine? Lamenesse maketh a creeple to halt, it prouoketh him not. And so doth pitch defile the hands, and not prouoke them to fowlenesse. The next and necessarie causes of things are called efficients, and not provocations. So that will you, nill you, prouocations are externall either to the person, or to the part, that is the principall, or speciall Agent. The Apostle teacheth you how to vse the word properly, when he saith, Galat 5. , prouoking one an other. The very com∣position of the word proueth as much, , or prouocare, is first to call or vrge a man to any thing, before he him selfe be willing. Then the naturall and inward cor∣ruption of the minde is no prouocation, but the cause ef cient of ill thoughts; and if there be any prouocations, they must be externall to the part, or partie prouoked. And did you know the principles of learning, or grounds of nature, you would soone perceaue, that as well the will of man, as his desire is led with respect of somewhat, that is good, or at least seemeth good, which prouoketh and draweth both sense, and will to performe her actions. Now though the desire Antecedent, and delight con∣sequent be inward and inherent, yet the good things which we affect, and would at∣taine, are then externall when we pursue them; and when we vse them or enioy them, they are but conioyned with vs in possession or opinion, which contenteth both Bo∣dy and Soule. As you do not vnderstand what PROVOCATION meaneth; so do you lesse per∣ccaue what PLEASVRE is. You mingle Soule and sense, head and heeles toge∣ther to make some shew of opposition; but in the end you bewray your presumptu∣ous ignorance, and daube it ouer with your wonted words of PROPER & MEERE, which are as much to this purpose, as salt to make sugar. The PROPER prouocations and pleasures of sinne are often times, you say, not outward at all. ] I vsed not the word out∣ward; but sayd, the Conclus. pa. 254. li. 32. soule tooke from the bodie all PROVOCATIONS and PLEA∣SVRES of sinne (brought to effect) and committed all ACTS of sinne by her bodie: you neither marke the restraint which I made in the beginning of that section, of all sinnes Ibid. li.. 20. brought to effect, neither see the words following in the same sentence, which ex∣presse as much, the Ibid. li. 33. acts of sinne committed; but rouing quite from the matter, you arle at my words without iudgement or memorie. For as you fumble about pro∣uocations, so do you about pleasure, which you would make to be meerely spirituall. But notwithstanding your toying with termes, that is properly PLEASVRE, which the soule taketh by or from the bodie. Cicero the father of the Latine tongue dispu∣ting of pleasure, sayth resolutely: Cicero de fini∣bus bonorum & malorum. li. 2. Omnes iucundum motum, quo sensus hilaretur, Graecè , Latine voluptatem vocant. All men both in Greeke and Latine call that pleasing mo∣tion wherewith the sense is delighted, Pleasure. And againe: Ibidem. In eo voluptas omnium La∣tinè loquentium more ponitur, quum percipitur ea, quae sensum aliquem moue at, iucunditas. That is called pleasure by the vse of all that speake Latine, when any delight is felt which mo∣ueth some of the senses. Plato in his Dialogue called Protagoras, referreth Plato in Protagor. ; gladnesse to the minde, and pleasure to the b die. Aristotle, though he often extend the name of pleasure with some addition to other delights, yet plainely confesseth the word alone signifieth bodilie pleasure. Ari . ethi∣e . li. 7. ca. 14. . The pleasures of the bodie haue obtained the inheritance of that name. So Clemens Alexandrinus: i. 6. By bodily spi∣rits a man hath SENSE and PLEASVRE. And Athenagoras likewise: De resurre∣ctione mortu∣orum. Desires and pleasures haue their motion from the bodie. Zanchius no meane Philosopher and Di∣uine, sayth: Zanchius de operi us Dei parte 3. li 2. ca. 3. th s. 8. Affectuum omnium duo sunt capita, voluptas & dolor. Pleasure and paine are the two chiefe heads of all the (sensitiue) affections. And did not the word pleasure alone without addition signifie the delights of the senses, as by these Philosophers and Diuines we see it doth; yet the soule taketh no delight, which the Scriptures do properly call gladnesse and ioy, but she doth commu∣nicate the same to her bodie; insomuch that the Scriptures expresse the delight and ioy of the soule by the mouing and leaping of the heart, as it doth sorow by the shrin∣king and gathering together of the heart. That the heart is the seat of ioy and sorow, is euident by the word of God. Iohn 16. Your heart (sayth Christ) shall reioyce. Psal. 4. Thou hast giuen gladnesse into mine heart, sayth Dauid to God. And againe: Psal. 16. Wherefore mine heart reioyced. And that the affection of ioy in the soule is discerned by the motion of the heart, is there as manifest; 1. Sam 2. Mine heart leaped, that is, reioyced in the Lord, said An∣na, when she had obtained Samu l at the hands of the Lord. Pro. 24. Let not thine heart leape, sayth Salomon, that is, reioyce not at the fall of thine enemie. Psal. 13. My heart leaped (for ioy) in thy saluation, sayth Dauid. And God promising comfort and ioy to his people, sayth; Zach. 10. Their hearts shall be glad, as with wine; yea their heart shall leape (with ioy) in the Lord. Which motion Dauid ascribeth to his soule, saying; My Psal. 35. soule shall leape (for ioy) in the Lord: and the virgin Marie to her spirit, where she sayth; My Luc. 1.. spirit hath leaped (for ioy) in God my Sauiour: thereby shewing that the spirit and soule of man affected with ioy and gladnesse, doth raise and stirre the hea t to a sensible kinde of dilating and leaping; euen as in sorow she contracteth and gathereth the heart to∣gether. I wrote vnto you, sayth Paul, in much 2. Cor. 2. compression, , and shrin∣king of the heart, that is, sorow, which contracteth and shrinketh the heart together. A better proofe, that soule and bodie do communicate together in ioy and griefe, we can not haue, than that life and death thereon doe depend. Eccles. 30. The ioy of heart is the life of man, and sorrow hath slaine manie. Which Salomon confirmeth, saying; Pro. 17. A ioyfull heart preserueth (the Chalda ca pa∣raphr. in Pro. 17. bodie) like a medicine, but a grieued spirit drieth the bones. So that all delight of the minde in sinne, which you call pleasure, if it affect the soule, it is communicated to the bodie: if it be so small, that it pierceth not the soule, nor mo∣ueth the heart, it deserueth none of those names. In examining the acts of sinne, you keepe the same course that you do in the rest; you light on a licentious phrase, and publish that for a proofe. For where I sayd, all acts of sinne the soule committeth by her bodie, by acts noting deeds, which the soule can not performe without her bodie; you tell vs, the soule can Defenc. pag. 61. li. 3. act manie sinnes meerely in itselfe, without the cooperation of the bodie. And though I do not denie, the soule hath her kinde of action in all sinne, which is actuall, whence the name of actuall sinne rea∣cheth to thoughts, words, and d eds; yet thoughts are no acts, neither by the rules of Philosophie, nor of Diuinitie. Cicero a man no way to seeke in the true proprieties of words, prescribing the maner how histories should be written, saith; Cicero d Orat. li. 2. In rebus mag∣ni memoriá{que} dignis consilia primum, deinde acta, postea euentus expectantur. In reporting of weightie matters and worthie of memorie, first the counsels, then the acts, lastly the euents are expected. Where counsels containe purposes and determinations, and acts, . quid actum aut dictum sit, what was sayd, and what was done. Aristotle a man too well learned to misse his termes, sayth; the end of speculatiue knowledge is trueth, , nd of actiue knowledge the worke. Damascene noting their difference, sayth; n , . We must know, that an action is one thing, an act is ano∣ther thing. And though the words be often vsed one for another by liberty of speech, . yet in proprietie, , an act is the performing of the action. I idem. . For the minde first dis∣cussing the euent, then worketh by her bodie; and that he defineth to be , an act. See we not the same confirmed by the Scriptures? The Acts of the Apostles writ∣ten by S. Luke, do they declare the secret thoughts, or open words, and deeds of the Apostles? The Acts likewise of Councels, as the Acts of the Councell of phesus, expresse they what the Bishops there inwardly thought in their minds, or what they publikely spake and decreed? So that the signification of the word ACTS, which I followed, was neither deuised nor abused by me, but our new kinde of speech, that the soule ACTETH manie sinnes meerely in it selfe, is a vaine and idle opposition, since the soule must worke by the bodie before it can be an Act. Defenc. pa. 6 . li. 18. I graunt that occasion is often taken from the outward senses. But it is meerely taken by the corrupt and peru rse minde, not giuen by the sens s. Which though they be otherwi e cor∣rupt, yet simply in seeing naturall things they sinne not. ] You be very like to handle a Que∣stion well, when you doe not so much as vnderstand the words therein contained. When it commeth in question, whether in all prouocations, pleasures and acts o sinne, the Soule vse her body or no; you answer, the mind is the principall agent in sinne, and not the body; as if that were any way pe tinent to this matt r. Who deu teth but life, sense, and motion come from the Soule to the body, and in euery of the the Soule is the chiefest agent? in so much that these faile, when the Soule departeth from the body? yet that doeth not p ooue, that in all these things the Soule doeth no vse her body. You say, occasion of sinne, is not giuen by the senses, but taken by th . ] Then doeth the world, which onely offereth things to the senses, giue les e occa on to sinne; and Saint Iohn had no cause to say, 1. Iohn. 2. All that is in the world, th of the fl sh, the d sire of the eyes, and pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world; and whole 1. Iohn. 5. world eth in euill. For the things, which are in the world, are the good creatures of God, and by their first institution serued to show the bountie of God, and to p ouoke man to thankfulnesse, and expectation of better things, which shall not pe ish. But man poysoned with sinne abuseth them all, and turneth his desire and lo from God to transitorie and earthly delights. And so now considering his corruption, they are not onely occasions, but prouocations to induce and intise him to sinne. And therefore God knowing vpon the fall of Adam, what snares they would become vnto Man, for whose sake they were made, Rom. 8. subiected them all to vanitie, calling Satan Prince and Iohn. 12. phes. 16. Ruler of this world; for that by infecting man with sinne, he had altered and i uerted the vse and ende of the whole world. If then the creatures, which in themselues are senselesse and altogether innocent, bee now baites to drawe men from God. and so made occasions of sinne, how much more are the senses of man allu sinne? which not onely present these pleasures to the minde, but inflame the af ctions to persue them, and worke the will to imbrace them? The corruption, you say, is properly and principally in the minde, which being first sinfull, abuseth their operation. ] As if all the powers of the Soule obeying the will, that is euill, were not subiect and se uants to sinne, as well as the minde? Or the senses and affections of man rebelling against the minde, and incensing the will with their delights and desires, were not sinfull as well as the minde? It is the Soule, that taketh her pleasures of sinne, as well by her senses, as by her vnderstanding; and to that end setteth her sensitiue powers on worke; the naturall action of the vnderstanding is no more sinfull in it selfe, then is the sense; but the corruption of the Soule abuseth them both in their kinds to content her sinfull appetites. Though then the senses bee not the very causes of sinne, which resteth chiefely in the will, yet since the Soule ioyneth her selfe vnto the powers of sense by them to imbrace and enioy the pleasures of this life aboue or against the loue of God, at least they must be occasions of sinne, if they be no more. For Defenc. pag. 61. l. 28. you to affirme that the Soule committeth all acts of sinne by the body, and that God did not forbid Adam to like or desire that fruite, is more then strange doctrine. ] In you no∣thing is strange, no not new hels, new heauens, new deathes of the Soule, and new re∣demptions of mankind, vnknowen to the Scriptures and all the fathers of Christes Church; but vnto you euerie thing is strange, that fitteth not your distempered taste. My words, that the soule committeth all acts of sinne by her bodie, what differ they from Cyprians, which I cited, that the Cypria in de Christ . spirit by the flesh performeth whatsoeuer it affecteth? What diuersitie finde ye betwixt them, saue that I say soule for spirit, bodie for flesh, all for whatsoeuer, and acts for things affected? my words being somewhat plainer and ea∣sier than Cyprians, and for ought that I see, hauing no disagreement? The other words, that God did not forbid Adam to like the fruit, smell of your owne forge, which reporteth nothing truely. For to prooue, that Adam transgressed the commande∣ment with more than his minde, I obserued, that God did not say to Adam, Thou shalt not like it, which the soule of Adam did, but Thou shalt not eat thereof. Which pre∣cept since Adam did wholly violate, it followeth, he sinned with his hand & mouth, and not with his minde alone. You clippe off that which I concluded; and negle∣cting the affirmatiue which I adioyned, you note the negatiue, which I did not sim∣plie exclude, but augmented with an addition of another part, that Adam sinned al∣so with his bodie, and therefore not with his soule alone, or without his bodie. The Defenc. pag. 61. li. 35. place of Scripture which Tertullian, as you say, pointeth vnto, that out of the heart come euill thoughts, being considered, will prooue the contrari . For Christ heere mea∣neth not by heart any part of the bodie, but meerely the minde and soule of man, and that with opposition to the bodie in this case of sinning. ] You found in your Note-booke, that the heart of man is taken in the Scriptures for his will and affection moued with know∣ledge either from the vnderstanding or from the sense; but the reason why it is so vsed, you neuer read, or doe not remember. For if a man should aske you, why the hart of man rather then his hand or his heele doth import in the Scriptures his knowledge and will, what answere would you frame? That it is a figure of speech without all rea∣son or cause? Such indeed are your figures, but the holy Ghost vseth no such. The Scriptures by the parts of mans body expresse the powers of mans soule, there seating, and there working: as sight, by the eye; hearing by the eare; speaking, by the tongue; going, by the feete; doing, by the hand; lusting, by the raines; and many such. The very same reason causeth the hart of man to be taken in the Scriptures for his will, which is seated in that part, and by which all his cogitations, affections, and Actions are made good or euill. So that the vse of the hart in the sacred Scriptures well consi∣dered, doth first plainely prooue, that the chiefe Seate of the Soule is the hart; and next that there it worketh, where it dwelleth, euen in the hart, and on that part im∣presseth all her affections & resolutions, when they once grow to be liked or disliked. And this is so farre from opposition to the Body in cause of sinning, that it doth ma∣nifestly communicate sinne vnto the Body. In Defenc. pa. 62. li. 2. effect (Christ) saith not the Body sinneth by taking in, but the Soule by sending out; that is to say, the Soule onely properly sinneth, and not the Body at all; no not in grosse facts, except as the Body is the Instrument, the Soule being the Agent. ] Your exposition of our Sauiours words, and your illation vpon them, doe well become one the other. Our Sauiour doth not say, the Body sinneth not; But Matth. 15. that which goeth into the mouth, or eating with vnwashed hands, defileth not the man. Now this must be your reason, if hence you make any. Eating or meate defileth not a man. Ergo the Body sinneth ot. How good this argument is, I leaue to your friends and your selfe to consider. But you farder inferre; That which commeth out of man, defileth man, ergo, the Body sinned not at all, no not in grosse facts, except as an Instrument. This is figuratiue Logicke, to make the consequent cleane contrarie to the Antecedent. Out of our Sauiours words, that which commeth out of man, defileth man, it rightly followeth, that sinne comming from the hart defileth man, to wit, the whole man, and so both Body and Soule. For man is not this or that part of man, but the person composed of both. Who then besides you vpon these words of Christ, that murders, adulteries, thefts, lyes, and slaunders defile a man, would conclude that these defile not the Body, or else though they defile the Body, yet that sinneth not, as if Christ spake here of any pollution, but of sinne? The Body you say, sinneth not, except as an Instrument. ] How the Body sinneth we neede not discusse, so long as it is cleere by our Sauiours voice, that the sinne of the hart de∣fileth the Body, as well as the Soule, that is the whole man; more I doe not affirme, not require. And so much doe euill thoughts, no lesse then euill deeds by the positi∣on of our Sauiour; euen they defile the man, as well as adulteries, thefts, murders, and such like. Your admitting at last the Body to be an Instrument of sinne, doth rather strengthen then weaken mine Assertion. For since the Body is no dead but a liuing in∣strument, and so capable of pleasure in sinne, as also of paine in punishment, it iusti∣fieth my Collection, that sinne is common both to Body and Soule, and the satisfac∣tion for sinne must likewise be common to both. But yet as I obserued, the ancient Fa∣thers haue in this Question comprised in the name of the Body the powers of life and sense permixed with the Body, as also the sensitiue desires and affections, which some∣times obey, and sometimes rebell against the mind; and these in man are not onely capable of sinne, but the causes of sinne; and in that respect the Body with his sensi∣tiue powers and desires is more then an Instrument. Defenc. pa. 62. li. 13. That which you adde of bo ly infirmities letting the operation of the Soule, as in Le∣thargies, Apoplexies, sleepe, frensie, &c. Peraduenture then it thinketh and considereth more freely in it selfe, and by it selfe, then when the Body setteth it on worke otherwise a other times. ] To let the simpler sort see that the Soule doth not sinne in her vnderstand∣ing and will without coniunction with her Body, and some concurrence of her Body; I specified three or foure cases open to all mens eyes, as sleepe, frensies, Lethargies, Apoplexies, which are often so strong that they leaue in man no vse of sense, reason, memorie, nor will, whereby he may or doth sinne. To this you answere, Peraduenture (the Soule) then considereth more freely in it selfe and by it selfe, then when the Body set∣teth it on worke. ] A Resolution without peraduenture agreeable to the rest of your Doctrines; that men depriued of their senses, wits, and memories, perhaps perceiue more, iudge righter, and remember better, then when they were indued with all three. Surely if madnesse with you may be sobrietie, if Lethargie may be memorie, if the ouer∣whelming of sense, reason and remembrance as in strong Apoplexies, may be the en∣creasing of them, you shall doe well to professe this new Phisicke, with your new Di∣uinitie, that it may shew the perfection of your puritie. Many such Conclusions will driue vs to thinke, that your considerations are wiser, when you sleepe, then when you wake. If this conceite be true, you were best perswade men to runne out of their wits, or to desire and procure Lethargies and Apoplexies as much as they can, that their Soules may be then more considerate. What it pleaseth God sometime to re∣ueale or shew to men in sleepes and traunces, we are not to meddle with; they are things to vs vnknowen; the naturall and ordinarie course of vnderstanding and re∣membring appointed by God for men is that, which we reason of; and that is often so stopped and hindred by sicknesse or violence, that neither reason, memorie, nor will can rightly performe their functions. Which is so well knowne not onely to Philoso∣phers and Phisitians acknowledging strong Lethargies and Apoplexies to be the de∣cay, and sometimes the ouerthrow of reason and memorie, but vnto Diuines, that with one consent they grant men oppressed with violent furie, or naturall follie not al∣wayes to sinne in their actions, no not of murder, adulterie, theft, and blasphemie, for want of iudgement and memorie to direct their willes. But how commeth this sudden change in you now to confesse, that the bodie set∣teth the soule a worke in her thoughts or considerations, good or badde, who not ten l nes before vtterly denied, that the bodie sinned at all, no not in grosse facts, otherwise then as an instrument? Doth the axe set the hewer on worke? or the saw the drawer? or the penne the writer? The Agent moueth the Instrument, the Instrument setteth not the Agent on worke. And if the bodie setteth the soule on worke, I hope it is to do euill as well as good, vnlesse you will defend, that from the bodie commeth nothing but that which is good. Why then, if the bodie set the soule on worke, when we are waking and well adui ed, shal not the bodie haue communion in sinne with the soule, which is the verie point you here impugne; and yet here you acknowledge before you be ware? Defenc. pag. 62. li. 17. It can neuer be proued, that the soule (in those accidents and infirmities) vtterly cea∣ h opera and c n doe nothing. ] If it could not, what is that to this purpose? The operation of the soule is so hindered by them, that often it doth not sinne, and that is sufficient to prooue all sinne to be common to soule and bodie, which is our que∣ n. Let the soule p incipally and properly sinne (if in the soule you comprise all the powers of reason, sense, and life, which proceed from the soule) and the bodie be only her instrument, yet so long as the soule can not actually sinne, except the bodie haue l fe and sense, it is euident that in sinne the bodie must concurre with the soule. Now if we adioyne life and sense to the bodie, which is the subiect of both, though the cause of neither, as the learned and ancient Fathers doe; and the Scriptures like∣wise, when they speake of the temptation and rebellion of the bodie and the mem∣bers therof, conteining no more in the soule of man, then the will and vnderstanding, which they call the minde, or the inward man: then apparently the bodie is not only the instrument or occasion of sinne by his desires and pleasures, but the first and last s at of corruption in this life, and the continuall Agent and Atturney for sinne and Satan during th s life: insomuch, that infecting and subiecting the soule to the lusts of the flesh, it maketh the soule be called flesh, which she can not be in substance, but in cohe nce and obedience to the flesh. August. de fide & symbo∣lo. ca. 10. Cr imus carnis resurrectionem, non tan∣t m quia reparatur anima, quae nunc propter carnales affectiones caro nominatur, sed haec eti∣ m visibilis caro, quae naturaliter caro est, cuius nomen anima non propter naturam, sed pro∣pter affectiones carnales accepit. We beleeue the resurrection of the flesh, sayth Austen, not o ly because the soule is repaired, which now is called flesh for her fleshly affections, but euen th v ble fl sh which is naturall flesh, whose name the soule taketh, not by admitting the na∣ture, but the affections of the flesh. So Ambrose: Ambros in Epistol. 1. ad Corinth. ca. 5. Victa anima libidine carnis fit caro. The s le ouercome with the lust of the flesh, becommeth flesh. And againe: Ibid. in Psal. 118. serm. 4. Qui secundum corporis app tentiam viuit, caro est. He that liueth according to the desires of the body, is flesh. For Idem in epist. ad Rom. ca 6. fl sh is vnderstood to be sometimes the world, sometimes the bodie of man, or the soule it selfe following bodily vices. Ierome likewise: Hier. li. 3. in epist. ad Gal. ca. 5. Anima inter humum & ignem, hoc est in∣ter ca m spirit consistens, quando se tradiderit carni, caro dicitur, quando spiritui spi∣ritus app llatur. The soule consisting in the middle betweene earth and fire, that is, betweene the sh and the spirit, when she yeeldeth her selfe to the flesh, she is called flesh, and when she yeeldeth her selfe to the spirit, she is then termed a spirit. And shewing more largely, that by the flesh is meant the body, he addeth; Ibidem. The flesh feareth colde, disliketh hunger, is ned with watching, burneth with lusting, mollia quae{que} & iucunda desiderat; desireth all e e and pleasure. So that the delights and desires of the bodie, which are sensuall and c ll, do not onely draw the soule to sinne, but causeth the soule to be called flesh, in that she yeeldeth or giueth her selfe to the lusts and pleasures of the flesh. Y t can it not be prooued, you thinke, that the soule vtterly ceaseth her operation. ] So long as the bodie liueth, the soule can not vtterly cease all her operations of reason, sense, and life; for then of force she must depart her bodie: but in extreame madnesse and forgetfulnesse of all things, as Lethargies, Apoplexies, and euen in sound sleepe she vtterly ceaseth from actuall operation of sinne, for want of vnderstanding and re∣membring what she doth. The punishment of Nabuchodonosor described in Dani∣el, is an euident proofe, that all operations of reason and memory may vtterly cease in the soule of man heere in this life, though the faculties or powers thereof can neuer faile. The Scripture sayth of him; Let Dan 4 v. 13. his heart be changed from a mans, and the heart of a beast giuen him. Which was performed by the madnesse and fur e that Nabucho∣donosor fell into▪ as all sorts of writers, prophane and Christian, do witnesse. Eusebius citeth two maruellous ancient and prophane Historiographers, useb. prae a∣rat. euangeli. . li 9. a. 4. Abidenus and Me∣gasthenes, that Nabuchodonosor was useb. prae a∣rat. euangeli. . li 9. a. 4. fur re diu tus captus stroken from heauen with a madn . Ierome sayth, Nabuchodonosor was so Hi ron. in ca. 4 Danie . furious and madde, that he remem∣bred not the good which God promised him for his restitution. Theodoret sayth of him, he was . cast from m n for his disease: who being taken with furie and madnesse would haue done . Beda. Nabuchodonosor the King was Be n Iob. ca. 12. turned to a bru shnesse of minde, when by Gods iudgement his h bitation is written to haue beene with beasts seuen yeeres. Lyra. Nabuchodonosor lost the vse of reason by madnesse, and so became as a beast; and during the time of his madnesse abode in the sields with beasts. Munster ex∣pounding . the words of Daniel touching Nabuchodonosor sayth; Let humane reason be taken from him, and the sense of a b ast giuen him. For . growing m dde with the change of his ginatiue power, he caried himselfe as a beast. Whether it were with madnesse or br shnesse that Nabuchodonosor was strooken, I greatly force not; it is certaine by the words of the Scripture, that humane reason and sense was taken from him for se∣uen yeeres; and consequently, the soule of man may vtterly cease all operation of reason and vnderstanding euen in this life. This will not be strange to him that rightly considereth the state of men possessed with diuels, and reported euen in the Scriptures. The madnesse of him whom the Gosp ll describeth in the coast of the Gadarens, that no chaines could holde him, but Mar . 5. he liued among the graues, Lu . 8. naked, and Mar . 5. cried night and day, Mar . 5. striking himselfe with stones, and fiercely assaulting all hat passed by the way, sheweth that all humane reason Matth 8. and memorie were quite banished from him by Satan, turning and tossing the corpo∣rall imaginations and affections of the possessed as pleased him, and distracting the wi s and subuerting the remembra e, so that the surious person in apprehension and operation differed nothing from a raging beast. A learned and publike professor of Physicke writeth thus of raging frensie: I arti meden li 2. sect. 1. a. 9. Madnesse is an hurt in the braine corrupting all morall vertues; and first the imagination it selfe; (for they imagine those things that are not :) condly, the verie cogitation and r son of man; for with them there is no distinction bet t honest and d shonest, good and euill, friend and foe: thirdly, it corrupteth memorie, so that they pre ly get the thing euen then s ene or heard. And what maruell to see this p ormed by di els and diseases, when the defects of nature do often leaue to men nei er vse of reason nor remembrance? S. Austen sayth of naturall fooles; . Qui∣d m tantae sunt tuitatis vt non multùm a pecoribus differant; Some are so sottish, that they differ not mu from brute beasts. Which Galene confirmeth, where he sayth, that the euill aff ction of the braine is much intended, . ; when together with the m morie reason is abolished, as in sottishnesse. . For both these (rea∣son and memorie) are lost in l thargies, and all sleepie affections. If the soule haue no communion with her bodie in thinking and remembring, how can the defects or di∣sten pers of the braine with heat or colde take away the operation and vse of reason and memorie; which both learning and experience doe manifest? Yea go no farder then sound sleepe, which is the proper affection and ligation of the sensitiue faculties; and if the soule do freely thinke and will, when the bodie sleepeth, why should we not as vsually sinne in sleepe, as when we wake? but that is repugnant to the principles of trueth, as Tertullian well obserueth; . Et bonafact a gratuita sunt in somnis, & delicta secura: non magis enim ob stupri visionem damnabimur, quàm ob Martyrij coronabimur. Both good deeds are thankelesse in sleepe, and offences blamelesse: for we shall be no more con∣demned for dreaming of adultery (committed) then we shall be crowned for dreaming of mar∣tyrdome (suffered.) It is euident therefore, that in sinne the sense hath such a commu∣nion with the soule, that without it the soule doth not sinne. If by naturall dreames you would prooue the perpetuall operation of the soule, euen when the bodie is at rest, (for celestiall dreames come not often, and but to few;) remember first, that all ages and persons do not dreame. Arist. de . ca. 3. . It hath hapned to some, sayth Aristotle, that they ne er dreampt in all their life. Plinie and Plutarch confirme Pl nius na∣tural. hist. li. 10. ca. 75. Plutarch. d ora. ul. de ct. the same. Arist. ib d. To some (sayth he) dreames happen when they grow in yeeres, who before that time neuer dreamed. Next in those that vse it, straight vpon meat, (whiles sleepe is sound) they dreame not, but vpon distribution and reuocation of the naturall heat vp to the head. Thirdly, in dreames (except they be from God) it is certaine that mens imaginations, which haue corporall spirits and seats, worke as well as their minde; and so the operation of the soule in sleepe is no way continuall, nor excludeth the bodie, though the outward and common sense be bound and oppressed with sleepe. And euen the first ordai∣ning of sleepe for man by God proueth, that in meditation & contemplation the spi∣rits of the braine (which are aeriall, yet corporall) are vsed by the soule in this life. For with inward and earnest intension of the minde and vnderstanding those spirits waxe hoat and drie, and therefore of necessitie must be cooled and tempered with sleepe; otherwise if men lacke sleepe long, frensie disturbeth both reason and remembrance. By the maner of curing Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Frensies, and such like, Ga∣len resolutely concludeth, that the Galenus de l cis affect . li. 3 ca. 5. discourse of reason and remembrance of sensitiue imaginations haue their seat in the bodie of the braine, ; and the first instrument of the soule to all sensible and voluntarie operations is the spirit, that is in the hol∣lownesse (or celles) of the braine. Damascene being a Diuine, sayth as much: The Damascen. Orthodoxe fi∣dei. li. 2. ca. 20. power of imagination receiuing (the resem ances of) naturall things from the sense, de∣liuereth the same to the cogitation and consultation of the minde, (for they both are one;) which taking them and iudging of them, sendeth them to the memorie. Ibid. ca. 19. The instrument (of the cogitatiue and consultiue part (of the soule) , is the middle celle of the braine, and the animall spirit that is there: and the Ibid. ca. 20. instrument of the part m moratiue is the hinder celle of the braine, and the animall spi∣rit that is in it. Where the instrument is taken for the seat in which the soule wor∣keth, and obiect, from whence the soule receiueth the representations of things, on which she worketh. If the soules operations hang so necess rily on the bodie, the doubt is how she may be sepa∣rated from the bodie. ] The power, by which the soule discerneth and iudgeth of things offered by sense, or by reuelation, is internall and essentiall, so that when she is seue∣red, she is fully possessed of that facultie as part of her nature. The meanes, by which she commeth to the knowledge of externall and particular things in this life, are natu∣rally her senses and spirits, by which she worketh in the body; supernaturally the power of God, which now and hereafter lightneth the eyes of the soule, and not onely con∣tinueth her knowledge here obtained, but increaseth the same, and representeth to the mind and conscience all things good or bad here obscured, neglected, or forgot∣ten. The separation of the soule from the bodie, and her knowledge after this life, depend not vpon her naturall power and strength, but vpon the worde and hand of God, who can Heb. 4. diuide the spirit from the soule euen in this life, and either take or giue both sense and reason, from her or to her as pleaseth him. From Nabuchodonoser God tooke all cogitation and operation of humane reason and sense; hee doth the same to others, when it liketh him. Paul liuing was rapt 2. Cor. 12. into the third heauen, whe∣ther in the bodie, or out of the bodie, he could not tell; (but either way was easie to God:) as also Iohn, when he was in the bodie, was willed to Reuel. 4. ascend vp to heauen, and was there in his spirit, his bodie not dying in the meane space, whiles his spirit was ab∣sent. To children that vtterly know nothing in this life, God will giue exact and per∣fect knowledge of their States, by reuealing vnto them either his mercies, or their miseries. In vs all God will 1. Corin. 4. lighten the secrets of darkenesse; and as he is trueth, so suffer no trueth to lie hid in his presence. We shall not onely remember all the workes of our hands, and 1. Corin. 4. counsels of our hearts, which now we haue forgotten, but we shall see each others deedes and thoughts, which is no way possible for our naturall abili∣tie, so farre as shall be needefull for the declaration of his iust iudgement. For Luke 8. no∣thing is secret, that shall not be open, neither is there any thing hid, that shall not be knowen, and come to light. Therefore neuer doubt, whether the soule hauing left her naturall and corporall meanes of knowledge shall sleepe till the day of resurrection, shee shall haue an other manner of knowledge, then here shee had, either to her euerlasting comfort or confusion. She shall then perceiue and discerne the things, which 1. Cor. 2. eye neuer sawe, nor eare euer heard, nor euer ascended into the heart of man here on earth. Howbeit neither the separation nor intellection of the soule pertaine directly to this question. I speake not of cogitations, nor of operations of the soule, except they be sinnefull, and those cease after this life, though the knowledge of the soule remaine; and in this life when sense, discretion, or memorie doe wholy faile, (vnles e it be by our owne fault, as in gluttonie, drunkennesse, immoderate passions of loue, or anger, and such like) there also the committing of actuall sinne faileth. Defenc. pag. 63. l 9. Further you commit two grieuous faults: 1 Tertullian the principle ground, which you haue for your opinion here, is wonderfully ill vsed: 2 you are strangely contrarie to your selfe in your verie winding vp of the matter. Li. 36. It seemeth that Tertullian cited before the reason of the Heretikes, holding that the soules slep ill the day of iudgement, and receaued no reward at all in the meane time for want of the societie of their flesh; but Pag. 64. l. 20. Tertullian answereth and renounceth all the same. And so those were the Heretikes words against Tertullian, which you alleage out of him in steede of Catholikes. ] It is no fault in you to reade so loosely and erre so grossely, that you see neither Tertullians intent, methode, nor proofes; but wil∣fully taking the words that are his owne, an common to him with the rest of the an∣cient and Catholike Fathers, as if they were the wordes of Heretikes, to blurre him and the rest with the spot of heresie, when they speake a trueth receiued and beleeued in the Church of Christ. It seemeth, you say, Tertullian cited the reasons of the Heretikes houlding the soule slept till the last iudgement. ] It is past seeming, that either your eyes were not open, when you reade that place of Tertullian, or your wits so weake, that you could not vnderstand your Authour. Tertullian in that booke speaketh not one word of the sleeping or not sleeping of the soule till iudgement; hee directeth his whole discourse against such as denied the resurrection of the flesh, and therfore held the soule alone after this life should euer lastingly be rewarded, or punished without the societie of her bodie. To reprooue that heresie, which is the ouerthrowe of all Christianitie, Tertullian diuideth his Treatise into two principle parts; the reasons in∣ducing, and the promises in the Scriptures assuring the resurrection of the bodie. The reasons inducing it he recalleth to three chiefe stemmes. For where the Heretikes to discredite the resurrection of the flesh, opposed the 1 basenes of the flesh vnworthy to rise; 2 the distruction of the flesh by fire, water, deuouring, rotting and such like, as impossible to be restored; 3 the dulnesse of the flesh, as hauing neither will, wisedome, or sense of it selfe, but being onely the vessell of the soule, and so subiect to no punish∣ment, in that it is guiltie of no sinne: Tertullian to surprise them in their owne princi∣ples, produceth the number of honours that God hath done to mans flesh in this life, the examples of Gods power reuiuing things dead, and restoring things perished, and the rule of Gods iustice, which must not acquit the bodie, that is partner with the soule in all her actions. The first part he concludeth in these words. Tertull. de re∣surrectione car∣ . cap. 9. To summe that I haue said; the fl sh, which God framed with his owne hands after his image, which hee quickned with his breath after the similitude of his life fulnesse; which he aduanced to possesse, vse, and gouerne all his workes, which he adorned with his Sacraments and disciplines, whose cleannes he loueth, whose correction he approoueth, whose suffering he holdeth precious, shall it not rise againe, that so many waies belongeth to God? The second part he bindeth vp in this wise: Tertullianus ibide . ca. 12. All things returne to the state which they lost; all begin when they cease, and therefore are ended, that they may be renued. Nothing perisheth, but to be kept. This whole course of things (in heauen and earth) is a witnesse of the Resurrection of the dead. God did first worke it, before he did write it; he declared his power, before he spake the word. He sent nature to teach thee, that thou mightst the more easily beleeue prophesie, being first the Disciple of Na∣ture; and not doubt, that God could raise the flesh, whom thou knowest to restore all things. And if all things rise againe to man, for whom they were made, and not to man, except to his flesh; what an absurditie is it, that the flesh should vtterly perish, for whose sake, and to whose vse nothing perisheth? Before he entreth the third part, he maketh this preface. Tertullianus ibide . ca. 14. Exorsi sumus ab AV∣THORITATE carnis, de hinc prosecuti de POTENTIA dei: velim etiam de CAVSA requiras: quia subest dicere, & si caro capax restitui, & si diuinitas idonea restituendi, sed ca sa restitutionis pr sse debebit. We began with the ESTIMATION of the flesh, whether that being perished were meete to be restored; we then handled the POVVER of God, whether that be so great, as vseth to repaire things decayed: Now if both those bee admitted, I would haue you require the CAVSE, whether there be any so waightie, as to make the resurrection of the flesh necessarie, and euery way answerable to reason; for that wee may say, though the flesh be fit to be restored, and God able to restore it, yet there ought to be a cause why it should bee restored. The cause of resurrection, Tertullian persueth plainely, pithily, pur∣posely in three whole Chapters; expresly and directly teaching, that the whole man must bee iudged, to wit both body and soule, because the whole man liued, and ioy∣ned in euery action. Ibid. ca. 1 . This is the whole cause (saith he) yea the necessitie of the resurrecti∣on, most agreeable to God, the appointing of iudgement. For that, which must bee iudged, must be raised. The iudgement of God we affirme must be beleeued to bee full and perfect, as it is finall, and euer after perpetuall; and therefore the fulnesse and perfection of iudgement not to be without the representing of the WHOLE MAN. Now the whole man consisteth in the mixture of two substances, and so must bee presented to iudgement in both, since the whole must be iudged. Such then as he li d. such must he be iudged, because he must bee iudged for his doings whiles he liued. Descending then to shew that the Soule and body ioyned in all things good and bad here on earth, and taxing his aduersaries the heretickes as absurd, for diuiding the body from the Soule in the actions of this life; hee thus cha∣lengeth them in the very next words: Tertullianus ibidem. 15. Age iam scindant aduersary nostri carnis animae{que} contextum priùs in vitae administratione, vt it a audeant scindere illud etiam in vitae remune∣ratione. Negent operarum societatem, vt meritò possint etiam mercedem negare. Non sit particeps in sententia caro, si non fuerit & in causa. Goe on then, let our aduersaries first seuer the ioynture of body and Soule in the administration of this life, that so they may dare to part the same in the Remuneration of this life. Let them denie the fellowship of actions, that they may iustly de e the reward thereof. Let not the flesh bee partner in the sentence (of iudge∣ment) if it were not companion in the cause (or desert.) But so farre is it, that the Soule alone did passe this life, that we doe not exempt thoughts, though sole, and not brought to effect, from the communion of the flesh. For in the flesh, and with the flesh, and by the flesh, is that done of the Soule, which is done in the hart. This part of the flesh, as the chiefe castle of the Soule, the Lord taxeth, when he reproueth thoughts, (saying) Why thinke you euill in your harts? And againe, He that beholdeth a woman to desire her, hath committed adulterie in his hart. So that thought without deed or effect, is the act of the flesh. Neuer is the Soule without the flesh, so long as she is in the flesh. She doth euery thing with the flesh, without which she is not. Looke then whether thoughts also be administred by the flesh, which are outwardly perceiued by the flesh. Let the soule reuolue any thing (with her selfe,) the countenance maketh shew thereof. Let them deny the fellowship of facts, when they cannot deny the fellowship of thoughts, (betweene the Body and the Soule.) Thus stand Tertullians words. I aske now the simplest Reader that is, whether the ancient writer ernestly pursue his maine and co∣herent matter against his Aduersaries the Heretikes, or whether he alleadge their rea∣sons against himselfe. The Discourser could not see the wood for trees; but like a babie mistaketh the full and continuall text and proofes of Tertullian for his Aduer∣saries words, though Tertullian himselfe expresly auouch the contrarie. His Aduersaries reasons if you would faine know, Sir Discourser, you may reade them in the next Chapter, as like yours, as if the one had hatched the other. Ibidem ca. 6. Dicent carnem nihil sapientem, nihil sentientem, per semetipsam, non velle, non nolle, de suo habentem, vice poti s vasculi apparere animae, vt instrumentum, non vt ministerium. Itaque animae so∣li iudicium pr idere, qualiter vsa sit vasculo carnis: vasculum veró ipsum non esse senten∣t obnoxi m. These (Hereticks) will say, that the flesh hauing neither vnderstanding nor sense of it selfe, and neither will nor nill of his owne, is added to the Soule as a VESSELL, and INSTRVMENT, not as a SERVANT. And therefore the Soule alone must an∣sw re in iudgement. how she hath vsed her vessell; but the vessell it selfe is in no danger of entence. Is not this the very roote of your reason, when you say, Defenc. pa. 2. li 4. the body sinneth not at all no not in gr sse facts, except as it is the instrument; Otherwise the body sinneth not at all? And if the Body be free from sinne, then certainly it is fr e from condemnation. For neither part of man is condemned, but for sinne. And Tertullians inference is as good against you, as it was against those Hereticks which denied there was any cause or the flesh to rise againe to iudgement. . Iam ergo innocens caro, ex parte qua non reputa∣bu tur illi operae malae: & nihil prohibet innocentiae nomine saluam eam ieri. Then surely the fl sh is innocent, in as much as euill works shall not be imputed to it, and there is no let why the fl sh should not be saued in respect of his innocencie, (though the Soule be damned.) Wherefore you must bring the Body within the communion of sinne, or cl ere it in iustice from all condemnation, and so frustrate the cause of resurrection. The last is the error, which Tertullian so much impugned; the first is the thing, which Tertulli∣an and I a rme, and you would seeme to withstand as exceeding urtfull and vntrue. Howbeit your nder shifts auoide not Tertullians proofes, much lesse doth your rash censure preiudice his assertion, that was common to him with the best learned in Christs Church, as I haue shewed. The difference betwixt an instrument, and a ser∣uant. Tertullian forgetteth not: . Euery vessell or instrument is altogether of another matter from the s bstance of man. But the fl sh, that was at sirst sowed in the wombe, framed, and borne together with the Soule, Etiam in omni operatione mis tur illi, is ioyned with the sam in euery action. The Body is called by the name of a vessell for that it receaueth and hold∣ th the Soule; but it is also m n by communion of nature, who hath the flesh in his operations n t a an nstrument, but as a seruant. The Apostle knowing this, that the flesh doth nothing o it sel which is not imputed to the soule, notwithstanding determineth the flesh to be sinfull, le st it sh uld e tho ght to be free from iudgement, in that it is lead by the Soule. Otherwise not so much a eproofe could agree to the flesh being voide of fault. But T rtullian afterward . renounceth, you say, all this same. ] If you spake of your selfe, I would easily admit, that you would faulter in your words, and for want of iudgement o truth, vnsay that which before you said; but Tertullian in this place is farre from it. He ratifieth that which he affirmed from the beginning, it is onely your bluntne , that rightly conceaue him not, as you doe nothing else. For he doth not exclude the body from the communion of ech sinne, to which he fastned it before, but he noteth, that as the Soule when she sinneth with her Body, beginneth with desire, tho ght and ill of her owne, BEFORE the Body y eldeth seruice and assistance to ac∣complish the sinne, so it is not repugnant to iustice, that after this life the Soule should BE IN to suffer, BEFORE the Body be restored to her. This is not my imagina∣tion of Tertullians speech, it is his owne explication and restriction to the wordes which you bring. . Id irco pro quo modo egit, pro eo & pat ur apud Inferos; prior degus∣ ns dicium sicut prior induxit admissum. Therefore the Soule suffereth in hell after the me manner, w ich she obserued in sinne, first tas ng iudgement, as she first induced the sinne. uery child seeth, that PRIOR in Tertullians words applied to the Soule, must haue relation to POSTERIOR intended to the flesh, and consequently that ech sinne must be common to both; yet so that the soule first beginneth it by thought, will, and desire, and the bodie followeth with subiection and seruice. This distinction or distri∣bution between the soule & the body, but still IN THE SAME SINNES; Tertul∣lian obserued before, when he sayd, Ibid. ca. 15. Etsi anima est quae agit & impellit in omnia, carnis o equium est. Though the soule be that which leadeth and vrgeth to euerie thing, yet the fl sh s it which ye ldeth seruice. Ca. 16. And againe: Animae imperium, carni obsequium distribu∣ s. We assigne the rule and direction (in good and euill) to the soule; the seruice (or at∣tendance) to the flesh. So sayth he in the words which you bring, though mistransla∣ted and misapplied: Ca. 17. Quantum ad agendum de suo sufficit, tantum & ad patiendum. How mu h (the soule) brought of her o ne towards the action, so much she bringeth to∣wards the su fering: and notas you translate, Defenc. pag. 63. li. 1 . for asmuch as it sufficeth by it selfe to doe some hat. Where you commit two faults, to make the words sound somewhat to your sense; the first in rendering Quantum, how much, very doubtfully, as if it were , forasmuch as; the econd in Englishing de suo, by it selfe, of purpose to exclude the concurrence of the bodie; which Tertullians de suo doth not. For in a ioynt action that is common to manie, men may bring some things de suo, of their owne; and yet that barreth not the others to bring likewise de suo, some things also of t eir o ne. The like course you keepe in the rest: for where Tertullian sayth, Ad agendum au∣tem de suo s fficit; h bet enim de suo, solummodo ogitare, velle, cupere, disponere: ad per ndum autem operam carnis expectat. To do ought, the soule of her owne is not suf∣ ; for of her owne she hath only thought, will, desire, and disposition, but to performe any thing s e expecteth or needeth the helpe of the flesh. You forget, that minùs in Latine is a neg iue, and heere standeth to the Verbe; which you make a comparatiue, and put to the Gerund; and so where Tertullian sayth, the soule is not sufficient of her owne to do any thing (he meaneth perfectly or fully, by which words he after expoundeth himselfe) you make him say, the soule is sufficient by it selfe to do the lesse; for it is able of it selfe only, to thinke, to will, to desire, to dispose. Where the word solummodo, ONLY, which is added to the Verbes following, you cut from them with a point, and ioyne it to the Pronoune precedent, saying, it is able of it selfe only; meaning without the body, there∣by to exclude the bodie from all communion and impression of the thoughts, which Tertullian before did impart to the bodie. And thus by wresting Tertullians words, you make him c ntrarie to himselfe, because he should not seeme contrarie to you; which is the cou se of your vnlearned skill, vsed euery where by you, when any thing standeth in your way. Otherwise Tertullians words are plaine enough after his ma∣ner, and no way repugnant to that which went before, but haue in them rather an ex∣position, what seruice and sub ction the bodie yeeldeth to the soule in sinne, without which the soule can accomplish no sinne. For though desire, cogitation, and will are in the soul as her owne, and come from the soule to begin euery sinne, yet she can per∣f no sinne without her bodie. Likewi your col ection out of Tertullian, that the Defenc. pag. 63. li. 30. soule now without the flesh re∣ceiu th i gement for such actions, as of it selfe it was sufficient to doe, ] hath neither any The foretact of iudgement in hell is neith r full, finall, per∣petuall, nor g ∣nerall. trueth in it nor concordance with your authors sense or words: for Tertullian confi∣dently pronounceth, that the De resurrect. carnis. ca. 14. iudgement of God must be beleeued to be FVLL, FI∣NALI, and PERPETVALL; none of which agree to the iudgement that you pre∣tend for the actions of the soule alone without the bodie. It is NOT FVLL, be∣cause the one halfe of man is absent: it is NOT FINALL, because an other iudge∣ment and sentence shall follow after: it is NOT PERPETVALL, because it du∣reth but till the resurrection, when both soule and bodie shall be cast into euerlasting fire: it is NOT GENERALL, because such of the wicked, as liue when Christ shall come to iudge the quicke and dead, shall not haue their soules punished apart from their bodies. This doctrine therefore is verie false, that sinnes m erely spiri∣tuall, as you terme them, namely, Heresies, Turcisme, and Atheisme, shall not be punished in, or after the last iudgement, when the bodie shall be reunited to the Soule, because their punishment the soule alone must suffer, since she alone com∣mitted them, as you say, without any consent or communion of her bodie. Neither doth Tertullian call this punishment of the soule without the bodie simplie or abso∣lutely IVDGEMENT, but the TASTE or SHEVV of iudgement. Hilarie saith rightly of it. Hilarius in Psal. n. 2. The day of iudgement is the repaying of eternall ioy or paine. The time of death in the meane space hath euery one tied to his state, dum ad iudicium vnumquemque aut Abraham reseruat, aut poena; Whiles either Paradise, or punishment keepeth euery man for iudgement. So Tertullian Tertull. de anima. cap. 58. Cur non putes animam & puniri & foueri in inferis sub expectatione vtriusque iudicij in quadam vsurpatione & candida eius? Why shouldest thou not thinke the Soule to be comforted and punished below in the earth vnder the expectation of either iudgement (of eternall happinesse or cursednesse) in a kind of vsurping and fore∣shewing thereof? That Tertullian here calleth De Resurrect. carn . cap. 17. degustans iudicium, a foretasting of iudge∣ment, but no full finall, perpetuall or generall sentence, which are the properties of Gods iust iudgement against all sinnes of thoughts, words, or deeds. Tertullian confesseth that the Soule doth De anima. cap 58. not diuide all her works with the ministerie of the flesh, and that the Diuine censure doth pursue the onely thoughts and bare Wills of men. And therefore he saith, Ibidem. ca. 40 Sensus delictorum etiam sine affectibus imputari solent ani∣me. The very purposes (or desires) of sinne without their effects are imputed vnto the Soule. ] When Tertullian speaketh of sinne committed by the Soule alone without the Body or the helpe thereof, he meaneth without any EXTERNALL PART of the Bodie concurring thereto; as in outward facts, when hands, or feete, or other members of the Body are imployed to bring the sinne to a sensible act and effect. Take his owne example in both these places. Ibidem. cap. 40. & 58. Qui viderit ad concupiscendum, iam adulterauit in corde. He that seeth a woman to desire her, hath committed adulterie in his hart. Is any man so childish as to thinke, the Soule can see or desire a woman without corporall sense or concupiscence? There is then in that case plainly the concurrence of the eyes and af∣fections, which are bodily; but yet because the Act is not accomplished, the sinne re∣mayneth in the hart alone, and proceedeth not vnto the DEEDE. And so diuiding sinnes into thoughts, words, and deeds, as Saint Austen and other Diuines doe, when words and deeds are forborne, they often say that men sinne in thoughts alone; but this doth not exclude the inward coniunction and communion of the Soule with the Body in sinne, which is denied to be corporall, because it is not open to the sense Not∣withstanding the powers of the Soule vsed therein are permixed with the spirits of the Body, which are corporall in comparison of the Soule, though spirituall in respect of the grossenes of the flesh, in that they are aeriall, and approch the nature and purenes of ayre, to which the word spirit is vsually applyed. So that the diuerse taking of the Body, sometimes for the outward masse of flesh subiected to sense, sometimes for the inward powers of life and sense tempered with the body, causeth this difference of speech in Tertullian and the rest of the fathers; who all concurre in this, that except the body haue life and sense, the Soule can commit no actuall sinne. For we must not onely be liuing, but awaked and aduised, before wee can voluntarily runne into sinne. Of sleepe, which bereaueth vs of sense, I haue spoken before; of death, which taketh life from vs, it is also certaine that thereby sinne ceaseth in vs. Rom 6. He that is dead is freed from sinne, saith the Apostle, that is, sinneth no more; so Chrysostome expoundeth it. . . He that is dead is deliuered from sinning any more. And Ierom. . Mortuus omnino non peccat. The dead doth by no meanes sinne. Ambrose. . Impius si moriatur, peccare desinit. The wicked when he dieth, ceaseth to sinne. Epiphanius. . In the next world after a man is dead, there is no righteousnesse, nor repentance: , nor any workes of sinne. For as Hilarie obserueth, Decedentes de vita, simul & de iure decedimus voluntatis. When we depart this life, we are withall cut off from all libertie of Will. Theophylact. The . Apostle speaketh thus of euery man. For he that is departed from this life, is iustified from sinne, to wit, he is loosed and deliuered from it. Our new writers affirme no lesse. Bul∣linger. This is a generall Rule, the dead doth not sinne at all; yea, he can not sinne. Pe∣ter Martyr vpon the same place. . The dead cease from their euill actions, in which before they liued. Caluine. The . Apostle reasoneth from the proprietie of death, which abolisheth all the actions of this life; Beza. The za, Anno∣tat . in 6. caput ad Romanos. Apostle speaketh of the effect of death, which maketh vs when we are dead, necessarily to cease from the actions of this life, and consequently from sinne. So that leroms conclusion is very true. The Hierony in Ecclesiast. ca. 9. dead are able to adde nothing to that, which they brought with them out of this life. For neither can they doe well, nor sinne, neither encrease vertues nor vices. If then the Soule can not sinne, except the body haue life and sense, (for neither in death, nor sleepe men doe sinne) without question the bo∣dy must concurre to the committing of all sinne; and the action is common to both. And if not onely life and sense be required in the body, but intelligence and remem∣brance to discerne good from euill, must remaine vnperished, before the Soule can sinne, (for otherwise Insants, mad men, and others stroken with Lethargies, Epilep∣sies, and Apoplexies, should doe nothing but sinne, by continuall omitting of good, if not committing of euill) and these naturall infirmities, or violent distempers of the braines come from the body, and ouerwhelme the actions of reason and memorie; how can the body bee excluded from the communion of all sinne, whose parts and spirits, if they bee inflamed or obstructed, doe excuse men from sinne, by hindering the iudgement of good and euill? And where no sinne is committed, but that which is either embraced with loue and delight, or else inforced with feare and dislike; and all these haue their sensible impressions and motions in the heart; how should the bo∣dy bee free from any sinne, which hath his manifest delectation and contentation in euery sinne, bee it neuer so inward and spirituall? Howsoeuer then your vnlearned and vnbridled humour pronounce this Doctrine to bee exceeding vntrue and hurtfull, and more then strange, and euen hereticall; it is a faire, plaine, and Christian trueth, that all sinne in man is common to body and Soule, and that as both parts do ioyne in the committing of each sinne, so shall both bee coupled in the punishment of each sinne; though the Soule, as shee first beginneth, and most affecteth sinne, whether by her sense, or vnderstanding; so shall shee first taste, and most feele the iust iudgement of God against sinne. Lastly you contradict your selfe. For you graunt, that the Soule hath Defenc. pa. 64. li. 10. some suffe∣rings in this life and the next, which come not by the body. ] I graunt it indeede; and there∣fore your impudencie is the more, who by adding (onely) to my former words would make mee say the contrarie. I Ibidem li. 15 suppose you denied before the Soules punishment without the body. ] Where and what are my words that make the deniall? You and your friends haue skanned them often, and neere enough; shew them, or else your suppo∣sing will prooue by your leaue but a shamelesse inforcing. The strongest words, that I haue sounding that way, are these; Conclus. pag. 254. li. ima. The iustice of God both temporally and eternally pu∣nisheth the Soule by the body. Which words are apparently sound and true; and there∣fore you could not falsifie them, but by putting (onely) of your owne vnto them, which was no part of my speech nor intent. Defenc. pag. 64. li. 19. Seeing now you graunt it, therefore it fol∣loweth by your owne words, that the wicked sinned meerely in and by their Soules. ] It is a world to heare a man conclude so much, and conceiue so little. For first though the Soule bee punished without the body, yet is that not the full punishment of sinne (which is and must bee eternall) for want of the body; and therefore this reason is rightly returned on your owne head. For if the body (as you say) doe not sinne at all, then should the Soule euerlastingly bee punished without the body. But that is ex∣presse heresie, gainesaying the resurrection and condemnation of the body to euerla∣sting fire. Since then the punishment of the Soule is not full without the body, it is a necessarie point of Christian truth, that the body did sinne as well as the Soule; other∣wise it should vniustly be punished together with the Soule. Againe, what if the body before Iudgement bee not punished in the same place, nor with the same paine that the Soule is; is that a consequent, the body is free from all punishment of sinne? As though priuation of life, corruption to dust, subiection to the curse, and obligation to eternall fire were no punishments, which are allotted to the body for the time, till the day of generall resurrection and iudgement. Wherefore this reason also recuy∣leth vpon you. For if the bodies of the wicked, when they bee seuered from their Soules, are not exempted from some punishment of sinne; that rather inferreth the body was partner with the Soule in sinne, then vtterly innocent, as you would haue it. How Defenc. pa. 64. li. 23. sound this is I wot not, where you yeelde none other reall and positiue punishment now to the Damned, but remorse and remembrance of sinne onely, as it seemeth. ] What talke you of soundnesse, till you shew your selfe to haue more sense in matters of Re∣ligion? To repeate all the paines, which the damned doe suffer, would trouble your wits; and if I could doe it, to what purpose were it? I said, the Soule seuered from her Body was punished in hell with the Conclus. pa. 257. li. 19. remembrance of sinne, gnawing the conscience; Conclus. pa. 257. li. 19. losse of Gods fauour, afflicting the mind; Conclus. pa. 257. li. 19. besides the paine of fire, which torment is vnspeakable. Your eyes did not serue you to see those words, besides the paine of fire; You vouch, I yeeld no punishment to the damned now but remorse and remembrance of sinne ONLY.] Let your discrete Readeriudge, what dealing this is, and how well you deserue to be beleeued vpon your word. The fire of hell you will say, is no reall nor positiue punishment. ] The triall of that will cost you deere, you were best forbeare your dreames, till you bring your proofes. You would haue, if I ghesse right at your mea∣ning, immediate paine from the hand of God tormenting Soules in hell: but when you prooue, that God is not able as well with meanes to punish the Soules of the wic∣ked, as without meanes; and that the fire of hell so often threatned in the Scriptures, is but a figure of speech to make vs afraid, we wil harken after your new reall and posi∣tiue punishments, which you so highly esteem, because they are deuised by your selfe. In saying that Christ was not free from some proper punishments to his Soule, as sorow and Pain. proper to the Soule, is not by and by the paines of hell. feare in his Agonie, Defenc. pa 64. li. 26. If you meane as you speake, then it followeth euidently from your owne words, that Christ suffered proper punishment in his Soule from the very wrath of God, which in a word is the granting of our whole Question. ] He that will follow you in your fansies and follies, shall haue some what to doe. That sorrow and feare for what causes soe∣uer are punishments of our first sinne inflicted on Adam and all his posteritie, whiles here they liue, is newes to none, but to you. Saint Austen saith, August de verb domini secundum Io∣hann m Ser∣ o. 42. Sunt duo tortores ani∣mae, Timor & Dolor. There are two tormentors of the Soule, sorrow and feare. Now tor∣ment without sinne the Soule should neuer haue had. Fnding then Mark. 14. sorrow and Mark. 14. feare in the Soule of Christ by the witnesse of the Gospell, though the cause thereof be not expressed, I resolued that Christ tasted these, which were punishments of sin by their first institution, as well as other our infirmities of Soule and Body. What followeth hereupon? That Defenc. pa. 64. li. 28. these were proper punishments inflicted on Christ by Gods very wrath. ] Who saith so? You or I? They are your words in deed, but no way mine. It followeth, you say, euidently from my words. ] As how? Christ was not free from SORROVV and feare; and these were punishments of our first offence; ergo, what? Ergo, the whole Question is granted in a word. ] Ergo fooles might flee, but for want of wings. The Question is, whether Christ died the death of the Soule, or suffered the paine of the damned. You heare me say Christ sorrowed and feared; as also he hungred in the de∣sert, and thirsted on the Crosse, which likewise came into mans nature as punishments of sinne; will it hence follow, that hunger and thirst are the paines of hell? No more doe sorrow and feare inferre the whole Question, except in a mad moode you will auouch, that no man can feare, or sorrow, vnlesse he suffer the paines of the damned, and death of the Soule. [ But Christ suffered these as a punishment of our sinnes, you will say.] And so did he those. For though euery thing, which he suffered, did not yeeld satisfaction for our sinnes, because death was required to make the full paiment there∣of; yet euery infirmitie and miserie, that he felt consequent to our condition, were recea ed in him as punishments for sinne fastned to our nature and state. Defenc. pa. 64. li. 30. I feare you meane his holy affections, as deuotion to God, and compassion to men. ] Were there any sufferings in Christ, that were vnholy? Would you haue him afraid, that he was or should be reiected and condemned of God? Or sorrow for the losse of Gods grace, and sauour in him selfe? That were vnholinesse in deede, to be in any sort so af∣fected, and without hainous blasphemie you can not suspect that of Christ. But his paine, you thinke was infinite. ] Then was his patience and obedience the more religi∣ous and pretious in Gods sight, wheresoeuer he felt the paine, either in Soule, or in Body, or in both. And when you haue said what you can, and deuised what you will, except you will weaken Christs faith, hope and loue in God, which without sinne can not be, you must leaue feare and sorrow in him to be naturall and holy affections, and no way defiled with our sinne. The obiect or cause of Christs feare is that you would speake of, if you could tell what to make of it; but you dare not depart from your couert of Gods very wrath and proper punishment for sinne, least you should vtter as many absurditics as syllables. That feare and sorrow then were affections in Christ, I thinke no man doubteth besides you; and that they were in him most holy, you dare not deny, least to folly you should ioyne heresie; and so notwithstanding your feare what I meane; sorrow and feare in Christ were most holy affections, whatsoeuer the occasions of his feare and sorrow were. If they were affections common to Body and Soule, how then were they punishments proper to the Sonle. ] I vse not PROPER, as you doe, for that which is peculiar to the Soule, and not imparted to the Body; for so no feare nor sorow is proper to the Soule in this life; and least of all Christs; whose Body no doubt was afflicted with the feare of his minde; which as you thinke astoni∣shed and ouerwhelmed all the powers of Christs Soule, and senses of his Body; but I take proper for that, which first beginneth in the Soule, though it after offend the Body. Otherwise the Body feeleth nothing, which doth not affect the Soule, neither is there any feare or sorrow in the Soule, which is not impressed on the Body. The sor∣row 2. Cor. . of this world worketh death, saith the Apostle, which it could not do but by chan∣ging and decaying the Body; and godly sorrow, for sinne, though it make a deepe im∣pression in Soule and Body, yet the pardon of sinne, and comfort of grace doe more reuiue the spirits, then sorrow doth quench them; and so that hurteth not mans life, as worldly sorrow doth. But why cite I the Fathers, that Christ did not feare either death or hell? ] Forsooth be∣cause you and your friends make that the cause of Christs feare and Agonie, though now you hide it vnder the name of Gods proper wrath. And if it be an absurd, impudent, and impious assertion to say that Christ trembled or doubted for feare of hell, as due to him, or determined for him, what is it then to defend, that he did and must suffer the very paines of the damned and of hell, before we could be redeemed? If he did not feare it, how could he suffer it, since he was not ignorant what should befall him? A naturall feare, you say, he had of death and hell. ] A disliking and declining of hell Christ might haue as well for him selfe, as for vs, that were ioyned in one Body with him; but a doubtfull feare, what should be the end of him selfe or his sufferings, he could not haue. The weaknesse of mans nature might also iustly tremble and shake at the might and power of God prouoked with our sinnes, which were to be answered and ranfomed by his Body; but other feare Christ could haue none, and these I trust be religious submissions, and not amazed confusions, such as you put in the Soule of Christ. You come now to your fortifying of your speciall reasons, not speciall for any more excellencie in them, then in the rest, which you may safely sweare; but for that they more specially touched the question, as you say, though you neuer offered to come necre it. To the words of Esay the Prophet by you cited, that Christ Treat pag. 34. bare our iniquities, and sustained our sorowes themselues, I answered shortly: the words made no∣thing to your purpose; the text did not expresse, whether Christ sustained all or some. What now replie you? Defenc. pag. 65. l. 13. I meane all and euery whit, so farre as possibilitie will admit. ] Keepe your meaning to make sawsigies: as I aske not after it, so I little regard it. How prooue you the Prophet meant so? Not by his words; for they are not gene∣rall: what other helpe you haue to come by his meaning, I would gladly heare. Ibid. li. 17. The verie text expresseth (so much) WITH GREAT EMPHASIS: Christ bare our sorowes themselues. ] You shew your skill, when you come to your proofs: for first this is no Emphasis; and were it, how prooue you, that an Emphaticall proposition is all one with a generall? The words, if you did rightly translate them, are not, he bare our sorowes themselues; the affixe cleaueth to the Verbe and not to the Noune, but our sorowes he bare them. Where the Pronoune (them) is a superfluous addition, as the best learned in the Hebrue tongue obserue in the like; and not an emphasis, as you would haue it. Foster in his rules before his Hebrue Lexicon, sayth, the Hebrues often . put the Noune before, whose case they after repeat by a Pronoune affixed to the Verbe: as in Iob. 3. verse. 6. That night, let darkenesse oppresse it: and in the 90. Psalme, The dayes of our life, they are seuentie. Pagnine likewise in his Hebrue Institutions tea∣cheth, that Pagnin In∣stitut. Hebraic 4 a. 17 many things in the Scriptures are redundant (or superfluous) as touching the sense, which yet grace the speech: as in Genesis ca. 1. verse. 30. Euery creeping thing, in which is the breath of life in it: and so Exodus ca. 25. verse. 29. Thou shalt make basons, with which to couer with them. Petrus Martinius in his Hebrue Grammar noteth, that Pleonasmus, which is a superfluous addition, is much vsed in Hebrue: as in the first Psalme; The wicked are as the chaffe, WHICH the winde tosseth it. And Iunius; There is in the Hebrue tongue a pleonasmus (or superfluitie) of the Pronoune ioyned with the Verbe: as Ierem. 5. verse. 5. I will goe, I, to the great men. Cornelius Bertrame in his table of things worthie to be obserued, ioyned to Pagnines Hebrue Lexicon newly augmented by Mercer, Ceuallere, and himselfe, sayth, The Relatiue, and euen the affixe are often redundant (or superfluous) in Hebrue. Whereof the learned Rea∣der may see many examples in the theme Bachar; as, the . citie▪ which I haue chosen it, and . Dauid whom I haue chosen him, and elswhere, which I omit for breuities sake. S. Peter doth imitate that phrase in Greeke, when he sayth, . By whose (his) stripes you are healed. Our English tongue admitteth the same kinde of speech: as if we should say; our dayes, we waste them in vanitie; our bodies, we weaken them with intempe∣rance; our foes, we flatter them; our friends, we neglect them; and such like: where the Pronoune following the Verbs, repeateth only the words, and directeth the ca∣ses that went before, as the Hebrue affixe doth, but addeth no force vnto them. Yet grant it were an emphasis; doth not an emphasis stand as well to a singular or particu∣cular proposition, as to a generall? My Redeemer, sayth Iob, Iob. 19. I my selfe shall see, and mine eyes shall beholde, and none other. Here is a triple emphasis, and yet the propositi∣on singular. Our soule, it is exceedingly filled with the mockes of the wealthie. Where . 123. there are three more emphaticall veheinencies, and yet no proofe, the proposition should be generall. This we conclude the rather, because the sense of paines and sorowes onely was the ran∣some ordained by God in Christ, that by them our sinnes should be satisfied. ] This supposall is not true, and yet were it admitted, it concludeth not that which you vndertooke to . proue. For there must be more in mans ransome, than the sense of paine and sorow only: otherwise euerie man might haue beene a Redeemer as well as Christ. You exclude by your adding of ONLY, the chiefest waight and worth of our redemption, which was the dignitie and innocencie of the person that suffered. For as Gods holinesse was infinitely despighted, and displeased with our disobedience in Adam, and his Iustice thereby infinitely prouoked; so in the satisfaction for sinne his Holinesse was to re∣ceiue an infinite recompense, which was the obedience of his owne Sonne; and his Iustice to finde a sufficient barre to breake off the extremitie and perpetuitie of ven∣geance due to our sinnes. Both these the Scriptures expresse in mans ransome, as well as the paines. A . 20. The Church of God, which he purchased with his owne bloud, sayth Paul. Where the person of the Purchaser giueth full force to the price that was payd, since the bloud of none but of him that was God and man, could performe so much. Againe, in the very price it selfe, the innocencie of the Sufferer is a part, as well as the patience. So Peter auoucheth: . You were redeemed with the precious bloud of Christ, as o a Lambe vnd filed and vnspotted. It sufficeth not, that he was a Lambe, he must be vnspotted and vndefiled, before he could be accepted for our sinnes. Wherefore not the suffering alone, but the Heb 9. offering himselfe without spot to God through the eternall spi∣rit, purged our consciences from dead workes. This you are not willing to heare of, who auouch Christ to be reat. fol. 42 li. 20. sinfull, defiled, hatefull, and accursed by our sinnes; but I trust there are few, that will forget the doctrine of the Holy Ghost, that Christ must be Hebr. 7. ho∣lie, innocent, vndefiled, and separate from sinners, (before his sacrifice could be accepted for vs) to giue eare to your vaine, if not wicked illations. But admit, that suffering onely were the ransome of our sinnes; what will follow? Ergo, Christ suffered all the verie same punishments that were due to vs, or which the damned doe suffer? Who reasoneth thus, but he that is neither acquainted with trueth nor reason? I speake not how blasphemous and impious your conclusion is, but I aske how it any way hang∣eth to your antecedent. Defenc. pag. 65. li. 22. What soeuer in this life might be painfull, and was due to mankinde generally for sinne, and in it owne nature was no sinne, that Christ suffered wholly and altogether for vs, euen the same which els we should. ] This lacketh a faire deale of your generall and emphaticall collection, which you would force out of Esay, as if Christ had borne (all) our sorowes themselues, that is, all the same which we should haue borne. You of your owne head make here three recantations of that vniuersall proposition, which you goe about to proue. And if your authoritie stretch so farre, I hope I haue as good right to put in S. Peters limitation, that Christ 1. Pet. 2. bare our sinnes himselfe in his bodie on the tree: and S. Iohns; that Christ was Ioh. 1. full of grace and trueth, of whose fulnesse we all haue receiued: and S. Pauls; that Christ was Rom. 4. deliuered for our sinnes ( Mark. 14 into the hands of sinners) to do Act. 4. whatsoeuer the hand and counsell of God had before determined to be done. Put these exceptions to your generall assertion, which haue as good interest as any of yours, and better than some of yours, and inferre what you can. Your emphasis will not doe you a penie woorth of good, nor me a farthing of hurt. For as the death of Christes soule doth defile him with sinne, and exclude him from God; so the true paines of hell can neither be suffered in this mortall life, nor at mens hands, nor leaue in Christ any sparke of grace or trueth, which are absurdities and impieties enough to breake the greatest beame that is in your building. But let vs see how handsomely you con∣triue your exceptions. Whatsoeuer in this life might be painfull, and was due to mankinde generally for sinne, all that and euen the same Christ suffered wholly for vs. ] Due to mankind in this life for sinne, are all and all sorts of corporall griefs and plagues, as blindnesse, dumbnesse, sicknesse, and such like defects and distempers of bodie and minde as na∣turall and extreme follie, frensie, lethargie, and many moe. Did Christ suffer all and the very same in this life wholly and altogether, as you auouch he must? DVE perhaps you take for that which is appointed, and inflicted on all men generally for sinne. Is no more due to any man for sinne than he suffereth? dealeth God fully with euerie man according to his sinnes? This is doctrine false enough: but wrest wordes to your will, for that is your strength; was all that and the very same which Christ suffe∣red determined and appointed for all men to suffer? were all men to be whipt, crow∣ned with thornes, and hanged on a tree as he was? If you vse to flappe men in the mouthes with such manifest falsities in stead of your holy verities, they will thinke you suffer somewhat that Christ neuer suffered, though you would indanger aswell his wits as his merits for the time of his agonie. That which you conclude, is Defenc. pag. 65. li. 25. mine owne plaine confession (you say) pag. 138. 286.] The Reader by this time is so much vsed to your fittens and fansies, that he will trust neither your collections nor assertions vpon my words. I vtterly say no such thing, I spake indefinitely: that Conclus. pa. 1. 38 smart, paine and griefe of bodie or minde, be it neuer so great, will commend the obedience and patience of Christ, so it haue no sense of damnation, or sepa∣ration from God. And in the next place, when you had obiected, the ead (Christ) must suffer what the members doe; (where I hope you meane in this life, for the mem∣bers of Christ suffer not the paines of hell after this life; I answered, Conclus. pa. 138. The punishment of sinne which proceedeth (in this life) from the iustice of God (vpon the members of Christ) and is no sinne, that Christ might and did beare, but in no wise those terrours and feares of conscience, which proceed from sinne, and augment SINNE, and sometimes light on the members of Christ for a season to humble them. What maketh either of these places for Christes suffering the paines of hell? If you see so much in them, you see more than I did at the first vttering of them, or yet doe vpon better reuiewing them. I did and do grant, that Christ suffered the same punishments which Gods iustice infli∣ctea on all mankinde for sinne, during the time of this life, and haue no sinne nor sinfull adherents in them, as doubting, distrusting, and despairing haue; if you vrge no more, we shall soone agree. Where then is the death of the soule, which without sinne can not lose her life in God? and where are the true paines of the damned, which are not inflicted on all mankinde, though they were due to all; nor imposed on any during the time of this life, since this corruptible flesh and mortall condition of man is not capable of those violent and terrible iudgements which God had reserued for ano∣ther world, where bodie and life shall dure for euer in eternall torments? Defenc. pag. 66. li. 3. All these our due sorowes, and all this our sharpest deserued paine, euen Gods owne im∣mediate hand smiting the soule for sinne, (which farre exceedeth and comprehendeth all o∣ther paine) Christ without any dispensation or qualification whatsoeuer endured for vs. ] If Esay had sayd so much, it would make somewhat for your matter; but since it hath no better warrant than you say, you shew vs how full you are of idle and vaine conceits, and how ready rather to turne heauen, earth, and hell vpside downe, than to faile of your fansies. But to me and others that rest our faiths not on your sleights, but on the sacred Scriptures, you multiply monsters in all these your newest deuised, and shar∣pest supposed paines from the immediate hand of God smiting the soule of Christ. That all paines here and in hell are ordeined and strengthened by the power of Gods hand, I make no doubt; but that in all temporall or eternall paines due to the soule for sinne, God vseth his immediate hand on earth and in hell, I wholly reiect this as a fantasticall error of yours, and giue it no place neither in the soule of Christ, neither in the soules of the damned. We see how easie and vsuall it is for God, by the bodie to afflict the soule, and to make it feele the force and rage of euery griefe. He like∣wise maketh the soule afflict her selfe, as well with feare and sorow, as with remem∣brance, intelligence, and conscience of her sinnes past, and paines to come. The same God is able with the same power to make the weakest creature torment and punish both soules and diuels, since hee giueth strength to men and angels; and taketh it from them, when pleaseth him. That therefore euerlasting fire prepared for the diuell and his angels, into which all the wicked shall be cast, is nothing but a secret smiting of the soule by the immediate hand of God, I auouch is a palpable errour contrarie to the plaine words of the Scripture, and to the whole Church of Christ, as I haue formerly shewed. And that the soule of Christ was so smitten in his passion, is a bolde and bare presumption of yours, lately broched to deriue your new-found hell to the soule of Christ, without any trueth or shew of sacred Scripture. And yet all this being admit∣ted, it will not proue the paines of hell, nor the proper wrath of God in the soule of Christ. For put the case, that Christ suffered as much paine in this life as was possible for man to suffer; so long as he fuffered it patiently, willingly, with full assistance of grace, and assurance of Gods fauour and loue toward him and his, it is euident this is not the paines of the damned, nor properly the wrath of God. So should all Martyrs and others of the godly, whose soules are wrested from their bodies with extreame and intolerable torments, be in the true paines of the damned, which is a falshood flatly repugnant to the word and promises of God. And that a finall separation from God, confusion, desperation, and eternall damnation shall torment and afflict the soules of the damned, no more than a positiue paine doth the faithfull in this life, not exceeding the strength of man, or ending this life with the sharpnesse thereof in hope and comfort of eternall bli le; this is such a brutish position putting no difference be∣twixt comfort and confusion, hope and despaire, blessednesse and cursednesse, sal∣uation and damnation, the fauour and terrour of God, nor giuing any more ease nor ioy to the one than to the other, that I thinke few men besides you will runne on these rocks. First then, that God is not able to punish the soule seuered from the bo∣die by meanes, but himselfe must be the immediate and onely tormentor of soules in hell, this hath no trueth in it. Next, that Christes soule was thus tormented and pressed with the immediate hand of God, hath no ground besides the giddinesse of your head. Lastly, if both those were receiued, yet was there great distance betweene the feare and sorow of Christ suffering in perfect affiance, and expectance of eternall ioy and honour from God; and the terrors, griefs and torments of the damned, re∣iected and condemned of God to perpetuall and vnsufferable paines; so that your conceits in this place are weake, false and wicked. The smiting of the Soule by Gods immediat hand, farre exceedeth and comprehendeth, as it were, all other paine; and that Christ suffered without any dispensation or qualification whatsoeuer. ] You need no Qualification to holde as many absurdities, as your pen can heape together; you dispense with your selfe. That your new hell, which of your owne head you make to be the smiting of the Soule with Gods immediate hand, farre exceedeth all other paines; you speake the words, but where are the proofes and deeds? The true paines of hell, which God hath ordained and denounced in his word, farre exceede the power and patience of men and Angels; neither can they be suffered in this mortall flesh, and feeble life of ours; which fainteth vnder extreme anguish, and parteth the Soule from the body by farre lesser paines, then hell hath any. Chrysostome saith of them truely, Homil. 49. a Populum An∣tiochenum. Name fire, sword, deuouring beasts, and if any paine bee more grieuous (in this life) attamen ne vmbra quidem sunt haec ad illa tormenta, And yet these are not a shadow to those torments. Now your new made hell, that so farre exceedeth and comprehendeth all other paine (as you pretend,) not onely Christ did suffer with quietnesse and patience, but the members of Christ, that are no more then men, and the wicked, that are the worst and the weakest of all men, in respect of inward strength, endure the same, as you affirme in this life. Yea, so terrible are your late deuised paines and sufferings of Gods wrath, which as you say Treatis. pag. 77. alwayes accompanie them that are separated from the grace and loue of God, that they neither end the liues, nor waste the flesh, nor breake the sleepe of the wicked. This exceedeth, you say, and comprehendeth all other paine. ] But the pains of hell indeed haue an other maner of tor∣ment and terrour in them, then to suffer men to eate and sleepe. These be your moc∣keries of Gods wrath, and not the hell which he threatneth. If it comprehend all o∣ther paines, that are mediate, and those as well priuatiue, as positiue; how is it then im∣mediate? Can it both comprehend all paines that haue meanes, and yet bee without all meanes? But what may not you say, that without any dispensation take vpon you to found a new hell, and subiect the Soule of Christ vnto it as a principall part of our Redemption? Defenc. pag. 66. l. 8. & 10. Thus Ierom also expoundeth this very Text, against whom you may turne your vaine and friuolous insultation for his indefinite speech, to whom it pertaineth in this case, as well as to me. ] If you could prooue, that Ierom intended a generall conclusion, as you doe, then were Ieroms indefinite proposition somewhat too short to declare his meaning; but who saith that Ierom meant so, besides your selfe? Ieroms proposition therefore to his purpose is sober, and sound; and yours ouer-reaching the trueth of Ieroms As∣sertion, hath neither veritie, nor sobrietie in it. Ibid. li. 18. In learning and reason an indefinite pro∣position, is to be taken as vniuersall in a necessarie matter. ] But if the matter be not plainely necessarie, that the Assertion may be fully generall; to conclude a generall vpon an in∣definite, is inexcusable ignorance, and oftentimes intollerable madnesse. If it bee simply necessarie, then is it as true in all, as in one. But how commeth this to bee a matter wholly necessarie, that whosoeuer will redeeme or deliuer a prisoner, must suf∣fer all things without exception, which the prisoner should? I troe, if that were true, few prisoners would bee ransomed amongst men; and in Christ it is not only most vn∣true, but furious and heynous blasphemie, to say hee must, or did suffer all the same, which was due to vs. For so Christ must bee excluded from all grace and glorie, and subiected to euerlasting confusion and damnation, as wee should haue beene. And if you make this a matter simply necessarie in Christ, before we could bee redeemed, I know not what you may adde to augment this franticke impietie. Ibid. li. 21. It is a necessarie matter, you say, yet but Ibid. li. 21. so farre as knowen possibilitie admitteth, and indeede no farder. ] Well fare your learning, that in one and the same sentence auouch this to be necessa∣rie, and not necessarie; and so generall, and not generall. These bee the flowers of your best digested doctrine. But Sir, if the generall Assertion be blasphemous, then is it no way necessarie, except you haue a qualification to make blaspemie a necessarie matter. If the Assertion may not be generall, least it be hereticall and worse, why la∣bour you so earnestly against the words of the Text, to fasten the generall not on Ie∣rom onely, but on Esay also? Will you needes make the Prophet a blasphemer for companie? But you will delay the blasphemie with a knowen possibilitie. ] If there be knowen impossibilities to hinder this generall Assertion, as indeede there be many, how commeth it to be a matter so necessarie, as you make it? Be impossibilities gene∣rall, and necessarie with you? This is the first rule of reason and Art, that I heard come from you, since you entred this question; but if your iudgement serue you no better to discerne betweene matters necessarie and vnnecessarie, I would wish you to keepe the rest of your Logicke for Loyterers hall. Did you thinke Sir Discourser, with a vaine bragge of a necessarie matter to outface the Reader, where if you could prooue it to be necessarie, you need not flie for helpe to any rules of reason? Your Rule there∣fore is sensibly false in earthly Ransomming of prisoners; and much more false and impious in the Sonne of God, who would and might tast by his man-hoode the mi∣series of this life, but in no wise be partaker of our inward, or euerlasting pollution, or con∣fusion. Though you added (malediction) to Ieroms words, yet that is you say, Defenc. pag. 66. l. 31. & 28. None other but an honest falsifying of your Author, to expresse his meaning; and a silly deuise of mine to turne off Ierom without an answere. ] Your proofe of Ieroms meaning is as weake, as your addition to his words was false. The words cited by Ierom immediatly before, are these, the chasticement of our peace is vpon him; and not as you vntruely auouch, (the Apostles words) He was made a curse for vs. That indeede goeth before, but be∣fore also goe the misiudging, wounding, and hanging of Christ on the Crosse. Now the relatiue following, (QVOD enim ) must either be referred to all that went before, and so not to malediction apart from the rest, or to that which went next before, which is the chasticement of our peace. And so either way you were ouer bold with your Author, to referre his words whether pleased you. And farder answere to Ierom there needed none. For to no proofe needed no answere. And yet what better answere could you haue, then for Ieroms meaning, since his words are not generall, to haue Ieroms con∣clusion in that very place Conclus. fo . 350 li. 4. brought you, which best serueth to shew Ieroms intent? Of Christs hanging on the Crosse Ierom speaketh, noting that to be a cursed kinde of death out of the Apostle, which I am farre from denying. So doth he of digging Christs hands and feete out of the Psalme, and of the rest of Christs wounds and stripes, by which we were healed, out of the Prophet, whom hee expoundeth; All which Christ suffered for vs, being in deed due to vs for our sinnes. Leaue out your falsifying of Ieroms words and sense, that ( whatsoeuer curse ) was due to vs for our sinnes, Christ suffered for vs, and I see no cause why Ieroms words should neede any answere. Defenc. pag. 66. li. 32. That this place of Esaie, and the whole Doctrine, which I auouch, touching these fuffe∣rings of Christ, may be the better receaued, let vs note that the publike Doctrine appointed by Authoritie to be taught throughout England expresseth the same; Namely, Nowels Ca∣techisme. ] Since the Scriptures, which plentifully and plainly teach vs the true price and meanes of our saluation, giue no warrant of your new found Doctrine, and the whole Armie of Auncient and learned Fathers, who could ill instruct the people committed to their charge, if they themselues were ignorant of the true meaning of their Creed and Catechisme, neuer heard nor thought of your late deuised Redemp∣tion by Christs suffering the very paines of hell, and the same which the damned doe suffer, without any dispensation or Qualification, for so it liketh you to speake; if you could produce moe new writers of your mind, then you doe or can, they must par∣don me for not admitting any Doctrine touching our Redemption, but what I see grounded on the plaine euidence of the Sacred Scriptures; and so receaued in the Church of Christ before our Age. I list not to deuise or approue a new Saluation vn∣knowen till our time, and if any man be otherwise minded, he shall goe alone for me. God grant me to be a member of that Church, which hath reuerently receaued and faithfully beleeued the simplicitie of the Scriptures touching our Redemption by the death and bloud of Christ Iesus. Howbeit I see many men speake diuersly, that meane nothing lesse then your late found hell, inflicted by the immediat hand of God on the Soule of Christ. Where then you dreampt in your Treatise, (as you still doe in your Defence,) that whosoeuer named the wrath of God in Christs sufferings, or cal∣led his Crosse a cursed kinde of death, was wholy of your side; I did in few lines re∣prooue that folly of yours, and since you quoted no speciall words neither out of Master Nowels Catechisme, nor out of the Bible appointed publikely to be read in the Churches of this Realme, nor out of the Booke of Homilies, that were worth the standing on; there was no cause why I should wast time to hunt after your mea∣ning. If you would haue an answere, it was meete you made your Arguments, and pressed your Authorities, as well as you could; and then you should soone see what I said vnto them. But as I then foretold, so you now performe; Your buzzing head no where findeth the wrath of God, or horror of Iudgement against our sinne to be appre∣hended by Christ, but you straightway conclude all your conceits from the first to the last. These words when I reade them in any man, offend not me, as they helpe not you, except you wrest them after your manner to hide vnder them your new found hell, and the rest of your presumptuous and irreligious humours. Begin with the Catechisme, and see what choise you haue made thence. Defenc pag. 66. l. 37. There it is thus taught. He payd and suffered the paine due to vs, and by this meanes de∣liuerd vs from the same. With Christ as our suretie God dealt as it were with extremitie of law. Christ therefore suffered, and in suffering ouercame death, the paine appointed by the euerliuing God for mans offence. ] What of all this? What one worde is here sounding towards the death of the soule, or the death of the damned after this life? The Ca∣techisme in the very same sentence expressely speaketh of the painefull and reproch∣full death which the Iewes inflicted on Christ, the manner whereof is orderly described in the next answere before. These things (sayth the Catechisme) the Iewes did vnto him cruelly, maliciously, and wickedly; but Christ willingly of his owne accord suffered ALL THOSE THINGS (from the Iewes) to appease with this most sweete sacrifice his father offended with mankinde, vtque paenas nobis debitas dependeret & persolueret, atque nos ex illis hoc modo eximeret: and to pay and satisfie the punishments due to vs, thereby to exempt vs from them. Cum Christo quasi sponsore, pro nobis sic passo, Deus summo quasiiure egit. God dealt after a sort seuerely with Christ as with a surety, suffering thus for vs; but to vs, whose sinnes, deserued punishments, and due paines (transtulit in Christum) hee transferred on Christ, God shewed singular mercie and clemencie. All this is plainely referred to the pu∣nishments and paines, which Christ suffered at the hands of the Iewes by the secret coun∣sell and appointment of God, that thereby he might pacifie the wrath of his Father, and deliuer vs from the shame, paine, and death due to our sinnes, which God trans∣ferred and remoued from vs to Christ, that he might suffer them, and we be freed both here, and hereafter for them. Wherein great fauour and mercie were shewed to vs; and Christ as it were a Suretie subiected for vs after a sort to the rigour of the Lawe. What hurt is there in these wordes, if you leaue haling and pulling them from their right sense? The Authour of the Catechisme warily forbeareth the generall, which you seeke after so greedily, and when hee commeth to the places that might seeme harsh, he qualifieth them with quasi, as it were, not meaning to presse those phrases, as you doe, to the vttermost. Wherefore he saith that Christ was, quasi sponsor, a kinde of suretie suffering for vs, and that God dealt with him, Quasi summo iure, as it were with riger, in respect of the lenitie shewed to vs. Which speeches if you poyson them not with your bitter conceits, I mislike not, so long as they be stretched no further, then to, SIC passo pro nobis, Christ THVS suffering for vs at the hands of the Iewes; to which the writer of the Catechisme wisely restraineth his wordes of Christs suffe∣rings in that whole Section. The death therefore, which hee saith Christ suffered as the punishment appointed by God for haynous offences, or for mans wickednesse, and thereby conquered the deuill, who had the rule of death; was the cruell and shamefull death, which the Iewes put Christ to on the Crosse, which was the death that God either allotted to all men for sinne; or prescribed specially for grieuous of∣fences, as an accursed kind of death, euen in this life, where Christ suffered, though euerlasting death did ensue the wicked in the next world, from which Christ was free. Neither can the deuill be said to be the ruler of the second death, if it be inflicted as you would haue it, by the immediat hand of God, except you make the deuill ruler and gouernour of Gods immediate hand, which is notorious blasphemie. It is there also written, that Christs Defenc. pa. 67. li. 7. will was to suffer all extreamitie for vs, who had deserued all extreamitie, and all these things being taken vpon him, hee destroyed them all. ] You sliely slippe your Authors words in the question prefixed, which is the cause of this answere, and lighting on a Latine phrase, which you scant vnderstand, you pursue that to the pit of hell. The question proposed in the Catechisme is this. Since Christ had power in himselfe to choose what kind of death he would, why would he rather be fastned to the Crosse, then suffer any other kind of punishment? The answere is. Vltima omnia pati voluit pronobis, quia vltima omnia eramus commeriti. Christ would endure for vs in all things the vttermost (which the Iewes could doe vnto him) because in all things we had deserued the vttermost. And that the phrase, vltima omnia, the vttermost in all things, is referred to the Iewes, to note the worst they could doe vnto Christ, appeareth by that which is added as a reason of those words. For the Crosse (saith he) was of all o∣thers a detested and abhorred kind of death, which yet Christ would chiefly sustaine (at the Iewes hands) for vs, that he might receiue on him the grieuous curse, which our sinnes had fastned to vs, and by this meanes deliuer vs from it. All despightes, all reproches, and punish∣ments (offered him by the Iewes) Christ counted light for our saluation, and endured to be contemned, and abiected (by them) as the basest (or vilest) of all men. So that the Catechisme had no intent to say, that Christ willingly would suffer the worst that God could doe vnto him; that were defiance to Gods power and iustice, which was far∣dest from Christs thought, and must be from the Catechizers words, except you will haue him blaspheme: but in deede our Sauiour did submit himselfe to the worst and vttermost, that men could doe vnto him, which was the determinate counsell of God for the satisfaction of his iustice, and redemption of our sinnes; and therefore Christ made choise of the Crosse to yeeld vp his life, that the Iewes might to the last breath loade him with all maner of despightes, reproches, and tortures, which they by Satans instigation failed not to performe. Leaue then your peruerting of other mens words, and subuerting of their meanings, and I see no one syllable yet cited by you out of the Catechisme, that tendeth towards your new found hell, or the death of the damned to be suffered in Christs soule. But Christ (you thinke) could deliuer vs from no more then he suffered for vs. ] You might haue learned the contrarie to that out of the Catechisme; where you are plain∣ly taught, that Christs corporall and temporall wrongs, reproches, and paines inflicted on him by the Iewes, did quit vs from all spirituall & euerlasting debts, deaths, feares and paines. Catech smu Alexandri Ne∣welli & grece edit Anno. 1573. Christ in our name and place vndertooke to his Father to satisfie him for our sinnes, and with the most sweete sacrifice of his obedience, to appease his Fathers wrath con∣ceaued against vs for our obstinacie, and so to restore vs to fauour with God. And therefore Christ the most innocent Lambe of God was bound with cordes to free vs, who for our deserts were deliuered captiues to Satan, sinne, and damnation: Christ, who was vtterly without all fault, was accused, and condemned by the sentence of an earthly Iudge, that he might ab∣solue vs before the heauenly Tribunall, who were euery way guiltie and most worthy of dam∣nation: Christ with his precious bloud shed for vs, did wash and clense the spots and filthinesse of our sinnes: Lastly Christ with the reproches, which he sustained most vndeseruedly, and with the most shamefull, and most sharpe death, which was inflicted on him, deliuered vs from the punishment, ignominie, and death euerlasting, which we had most iustly merited with our wicked offences: and so all our sinnes were buried in obliuion, and remooued farre from the sight of God by Christ. This doctrine if you could brooke, you would not so much disable the sufferings of Christ at the hands of his persecutours, as you doe; not so hastily commit the soule of Christ to the paines of the damned from the immediate hand of God, before you wil acknowledge our redemption to be perfect by the crosse and death of Christ: but as your manner is, you steppe by whole leaues that are a∣gainst you, and stumble at a word, that happily may be wrested from his right sense; and that you thinke is strong enough to beare the waight of all those absurdities, if not impieties, which you would reare. Defenc. pa. 67. li. 9. Marke also what doctrine the Law of this Realme consonantly publisheth and comman∣deth in the homilies of Christs passion. The first homily maketh Christes putting himselfe betweene Gods deserued wrath and our sinne, the extreamest part of his passion. ] You al∣leaged the Catechisme rather for your pleasure, then any profit to your cause; you do the like now with the booke of Homilies. You cite but little thence, and that to litle purpose. That Christ put himselfe betweene Gods deserued wrath, and our sinne, to ap∣peare the iust displeasure of God kindled against vs and to auert it from vs, I knowe no man that maketh any doubt thereof; and I maruaile to what ende you alleage it. For what needed a Redeemer, but to saue vs from the wrath of God prouoked by our wickednesse, and armed with infinite power to take vengeance of mans vnrighteous∣nesse? Or how could Christ be a Mediatour, if he did not stand betweene vs and the dreadfull anger of God irritated by our iniquities, to quench the same, and to keepe vs from euerlasting destruction? But the Homily, you say, maketh that the extreamest part of Christs passion, which was a further feeling then the sense of bodily paine onely. And therefore by the Homilie he felt Gods proper wrath spiritually which our sinne deserued. ] You no sooner heare the name of Gods wrath, but you run to your old bias, and straight∣way pitch on your hell paines. There are no such words in all that Homilie, as that Christs putting him selfe betweene Gods wrath and our sinne, was the extreamest part of his passion. Gods wrath against mans sinne, was indeede the cause of all that Christ suffered, and not the extreamest part onely of his sufferings, by which you would ex∣tenuate the rest, as not extreame enough, till that were added. But the Booke of Ho∣milies teacheth you no such Doctrine; that proposeth the death of Christ suffered in his Body on the Crosse for the FVLL and ONLY (satisfaction or) amends of all our sinnes. Heare the words, that the Reader may see what a counterfeite pretence you make of publike Authoritie, as if it were consonant to your new conceited errours, when it plainly impugneth them. The first Ser∣mon of the Pas∣sion. pag. 5. So pleasant was this Sacrifice, and oblation of his Sonnes death, which he so obediently and innocently suffered: that God would take it for the ONLY and FVLL AMENDS for all the sinnes of the world. No Pa o post. pag. 6. tongue surely is able to expresse the worthinesse of this so pretious a death. Yea Ibidem. there is none other thing that can be named vnder heauen to saue our Soules, but THIS ONLY VVORKE of Christs pretious offering of his Body vpon the Altar of the Crosse. The death of Christs Body you thinke did not manifest the wrath of God against our sinnes; the death of the Soule and paines of hell must be added before the wrath of God will appeare in Christs Crosse.] So teach you; but the Booke of Homilies teacheth the cleane con∣trarie. The second Sermon of the Passion. pag. 9. Christ being the Sonne of God, and perfect God himselfe, who neuer committed sinne, was compelled to come downe from heauen, and to giue his Body to be brused and broken on the Crosse for our sinnes. Was not this a manifest token of Gods great wrath and displea∣sure towards sinne, that he could be pacified by NO OTHER MEANES, but ONLY by the sweete and pretious bloud of his deare Sonne? Therefore in the Booke of Homilies, as there is no mention, so is their no intention, that Christ suffered spiritually the pro∣per wrath of God, which our sinnes deserued. These are your phrases and fansies added to the booke of Homilies, which neither speaketh nor meaneth any such thing, as you idlely inferre. Defenc. pag. 67. li. 20. Againe, Christ bare all our sinnes, sores and infirmities vpon his owne backe; no paine did he refuse to suffer in his owne bodie. But as he felt all this in his bodie, so he must feele the greatest part primarily and much more deeply in his soule: ergo he refused not to suffer all the paines of the wrath of God both in bodie and soule. ] This kinde of ergoing passeth mine vnderstanding. To the first proposition taken out of the booke of Homilies, that Christ bare all our sores and infirmities vpon his owne backe, refusing no paine in his owne bodie, to deliver vs from euerlasting paine, you put what pleaseth you, without any proofe; and then you inferre what you list, without any sequele of reason or trueth. For how hangeth this geere together? Christ bare all our sores and infirmities in his owne bodie, ergo he suffered all the paines of Gods wrath both in bodie and soule. Are there none other paines of Gods wrath, but the sores and infirmities of our bodies? And if Christ did suffer all bodily paine incident to men heere on earth, doth it therefore follow, that he suffered all the paines both of bodie and soule, that Gods wrath here and els where hath prouided for sinners? If a man would set himselfe purposely to crosse the booke of homilies, I know not how he might do it more directly then you do, to conclude expresly the contrary to that which is there deliuered. It is no mar∣uell, that so manie writers are of your side, as you say, when you can enlarge them and interlace them after this sort; but you shall doe well to thinke, that your Reader now hearkeneth after the publike doctrine of this Realme authorized by the lawes there∣of in the booke of homilies, as you professed; and not after your secret conceits in∣tercepting and peruerting the trueth there taught, by your pernicious and errone∣ous glozes. Christ, you say, Defenc. pag. 67. li. 20. must feele the greatest part of his bodily paines primarily in his soule. ] Haue you not brought vs monsters enough in matters of faith, but you must hatch vs more? Must bodily paines (for of those speaketh the booke of homilies, as appea∣reth by the next words; Christ refused no paine in his owne bodie; and the first wordes are; he bare all our sores and infirmities on his owne backe ) must I say bodily paines be felt primarily in the soule? If you shift all sense to the soule, then the bodie beareth, that is, feeleth nothing; and so you refute the booke of homilies, you follow it not. If you allow sense to the bodie, tell vs I pray you how violence first offered to the bodie is primarily felt in the soule. It may be betwixt first in English, and primus in Latine, you haue found some deepe difference. The soule, you thinke, doth primarily consider of the paines of her bodie, that you meane by feeling. ] Then leaue you to the bodie a second consideration of his owne paines; and so you giue reason and memorie to the bodie distinct from the soule, which well becommeth a man of your wisdome. That Christ duely considered of the cause for which he suffered, and of the Iudge by whose ap∣pointment he suffered these things in his bodie from the Iewes, I haue often sayd it, and you haue often reiected it as not sufficient to satisfie the wrath of God against our sinnes; and therefore you euery where vrge the proper punishment, and iust reward of sinne due to vs on the soule of Christ; and when you come to proue it, you rest on the religious consideration that Christ had of his sufferings, and call that the wrath of God; as if you might choppe and change the wrath of God to your best liking, and neuer be constant in any thing. Howbeit, the question now is, what the publike ho∣milies teach the people to beleeue of the worke of their saluation; and not how you can shift and sheere wordes, to make them sort with your errours. Shew therefore somewhat out of the booke of Homilies established by the lawes of this realme, that may cleerely confirme, or concurre with your doctrine, and sell vs not the verdiuyce of your owne deuices in stead of good wine allowed by publike authoritie. Christ Defenc. pag. 67. li 24. tooke vpon him the reward of our sinnes, the iust reward of sinne. But the same homilie sayth, the reward of our sinne was the iust wrath and indignation of God, the death both of bodie and soule. Therefore by the homilie Christ tooke on him for vs the iust wrath and indignation of God, the death of the bodie and soule. ] Your trade of iugling will but shame you, if you can shift hands no cleanlier, then here you doe. Your first and se∣cond propositions here cited out of the Booke of Homilies are so curtayled by you, that they seeme nothing lesse then that they are in their right places. The writer of the Homilies hauing taught the people, that Christ The second Sermon of the Passion. came to saue the house of Israell by giuing his life for their sinnes, and that sinne caused the onely Sonne of God to be crucified in the flesh, and to suffer the most vile and slaunderous death of the Crosse; and consequently willed them to The second Sermon of the Passion. remember how grieuously and cruelly Christ was handled of the Iewes for our sinnes, and to set before their eyes Christ crucified, with his body stretched on the Crosse, his head crowned with sharpe thornes, his hands and his feete pearced with nayles, his heart opened with a speare, his flesh rent and torne with whips, his browes sweating water and bloud by this stirreth vp the hearers to the The second Sermon of the Passion. hatred of sinne, that was so grieuous in the sight of God, that he would not be pacified, but onely with the bloud of his owne Sonne. And though there were a thousand The second Sermon of the Passion. examples in the Scripture shewing how greatly God abhorred sinne, yet this one is of more force then all the rest, that the Sonne of God was The second Sermon of the Passion. compelled to giue his body to bee bruised and broken on the Crosse for our sinnes. After these premoniti∣ons follow your words, The second Sermon of the Passion. Christ hath taken vpon him the iust reward of sinne, which was death, not the whole reward of sinne, which is an vtter exclusion from all grace and glorie, and the eternall damnation of body and Soule in hell fire, but the death of his body bruised and broken on the Crosse, by the cruell rage of the Iewes, which is particu∣larly and plainely before described. Now the death of the body inflicted on all man∣kind for sinne is the iust, though not the full reward of sinne; and by suffering that, Christ freed vs from all condemnation of sinne, which otherwise in vs would haue beene euerlasting. And this explication the same Homily addeth to the former words, which you cite, though you purposely suppresse it. The second Sermon of the Passion. pag. 5. When all hope of righte∣ousnesse was past on our part, and wee had nothing whereby wee might quench Gods burning wrath, and worke the saluation of our Soules; Then, euen then did the Sonne of God come downe from heauen to be wounded for our sakes, to be reputed with the wicked, to be condem∣ned vnto death, to take vpon him the reward of our sinnes, and to giue his body to be broken on the Crosse for our offences. Here are both the places, which you patch together; the one noting Death to be the iust reward of sinne, the other expressing what kind of death Christ suffered for vs as the reward of our sinne, euen the breaking of his body on the Crosse for our offences. In the second proposition you shew more deprauing of the publike doctrine of this Realme. For where the second Homily saith in expresse words, that our The second Sermon of the Passion. pag. Grand∣father Adam, by breaking Gods commaundement in eating the Apple forbidden him in Pa∣radise, purchased not onely to himselfe, but also to his posteritie for euer, the iust wrath and indignation of God, who condemned both him and his to euerlasting death both of body and Soule; you transferre this iudgement from Adam to Christ, which the Homily doeth not; and least you should bee taken tardie with open blasphemie, you leaue out the word EVERLASTING, which is euident in the Homily, and vpon those maimed and forged collections you inferre, that by the Homily Christ tooke on him for vs the death both of body and Soule. ] Why say you not, Christ tooke vpon him EVERLAST∣ING death both of body and Soule, which was the iust and due purchase (or wages) of our sinne by the plaine words of that Homilie? You feared blasphemie, and there∣fore you chose rather to falsifie the place, then to want some defence for your Doc∣trine. Christ you will say, died that death, which was the reward of our sinne, by the Booke of Homilies. ] To belie publike Authoritie, so grossely, in so great causes, is a qua∣druple iniquitie. What death Christ died for our sinnes, is openly professed and euen pictured before our eyes in this very Homilie; the words I repeated in the Section before. What death was the wages of our sinne, if the word euerlasting did not fully declare, the same Homilie in the same Section, whence your words are taken, doth twice most abundantly teach. The second Homilie of the Passion. li. 24. Adam tooke vpon him to eate, (of the tree forbidden) and in so doing he died the death, that is to say, he became mortall, he lost the fauour of God, he was cast out of Paradise, he was no longer a Citizen of heauen, but a fire brand of hell, and a bond-slaue to the Diuell. And sixe lines after. Ibidem. So that now neither Adam, nor any of his had any right, or interest at all in the kingdome of heauen: but were become plaine Re∣probates and cast-awaies, being perpetually damned to the euerlasting paines of hell fire. It would fairely fit your new Doctrine to defend that Christ was a Reprobate and a Cast∣away, yea a fire-brand of hell, and a bond-slaue to the Diuell, perpetually damned to the euerlasting paines of hell fire. And though I be perswaded you detest these diuelish im∣pieties, and hellish blasphemies; yet you regard little your cause, or your conscience, which vouch in Print, that Christ suffered that reward of sinne, which by the Booke of Homilies was due to vs; all those things by the same Booke in the same place be∣ing due to vs. You will shift of this matter, as if these things might be granted in sub∣stance, not in circumstance, and in our countenance, not in his. But such shifts are so shame∣full and sinfull in this case, that I thinke your owne friends wil altogether mislike your flying to the Booke of Homilies for the death of the Soule, or the iust reward of sinne in all mankind there mentioned, to be suffered in the Soule of Christ. Treat. pa. 80. li. 33. Also our great Bible appointed by Authoritie to be read in publike Churches expres∣ly saith as much ] It is a poore pittance, when you finde no helpe for your new made hell in the whole Text of the Bible, to run to the Printers additions set by the sides of the Booke, who often annexe things in the Margine for direction or explication, as they thinke good, which declare the Printers or Correctors, but not the Authors nor Translators mind. Your wits I trust be not so weake, but you can discerne between the English translation of the Text commaunded to be publikely read in the Church, and the Marginall notes added by others without any warrant of publike Authority, for ought that I see. And therefore I take not my selfe, nor any man else, to be bound to those notes, farder then they euidently concurre with the truth of the Text; though they may be sometimes profitable for the opening of hard places. That Christ Luke. 22. vers. 24. was in an Agonie, the Euangelist affirmeth, and the English Translator hath done his duetie in expressing so much; but what the cause was of that Agonie, is beyond the Commission of a Translator to specifie, since the Scripture concealeth it; and so publike Authoritie, which appointed the English Translation to be openly reade in the Church confirmeth not the Marginall appositions, which may not be read in the Church, though they may be receiued so farre as they haue manifest coherence with the Text, or consequence from the Text, in respect rather of their veritie then Au∣thoritie. For these notes at first were not affixed, and in sundry editions they haue been altered, & increased as the Corrector liked, & euen this note which you alleage, somewhat differeth from the Geneuian notes, whence this and the most of the rest were taken. The words of the Geneuian edition vpon this place are these: Annotat. in cap. 22. Luc. vers. 44. The word (Agonie) signifieth that horror that Christ had conceaued not onely for feare of death, but of his Fathers Iudgement and wrath against sinne. The Printer of the great English Bible, or his Corrector, ouer against those words of the Text, he was in an Agonie, setteth this obseruation in the Margine; In Lu . cap. 22. vers. 44. He felt the horror of Gods wrath and iudgement a∣gainst sinne. I refuse not those words as if they gainsaid the Doctrine, which I de∣fend; but I see no farder ground in them then ghesse, when they ayme at the cause of Christs Agonie, which the Scripture suppresseth. Howbeit let the words stand in their full strength; though by no meanes I ac∣knowledge either Authentike or publike Authoritie in them; they rather euert, then support your opinion. The vttermost here ascribed to Christ is HORROR, that is, a shaking or trembling feare of Gods Iudgement and wrath against sinne, which all the godly finde in them selues, when they enter into the serious cogitation of Gods holinesse displeased, and his Iustice prouoked with their sinnes; but this is farre from the death or paines of the damned, except you make the vengeance of the Reprobate all one with the repentance of the faithfull. This therefore is like the rest of your proofes, no way tending to your purpose. The feare of Gods wrath against sinne, which is common to all the godly in this life, though not at all times, hath no fellow∣ship with the feare of the Reprobate, much lesse with the torments of the damned. The one is a religious and godly sorrow for sinne, which worketh saluation, and yet agniseth with feare and trembling the iustnesse and greatnesse of Gods wrath against sinne: the other is the beholding of the terrible and eternall destruction of Body and Soule prepared for them without all hope of ease or end. In Christ there might be a double cause of this horror conceaued or felt by him, as affections are felt in the Na∣ture of Man; the one touching vs, the other touching himselfe. Christ might trem∣ble and shake at the terror of Gods Iudgement prouided for vs, which was euerlast∣ing damnation of Body and Soule in hell fire; and the more tenderly he loued vs, the greater was his horror to see this hang ouer our heads; euen as we naturally tremble to see the desperate daungers of our dearest friends present before our eyes. And if Paul said truely of him selfe, 2. Cor. 5. we knowing the terror of the Lord, meaning the terror of the Lords Iudgement against sinne; how much more then did the Sauiour of the world know the same? the cleare beholding of which might iustly worke in him a ma∣nifest horror, to teach vs to take heede of that terrible Iudgement, at the sight where∣of for our sakes he did tremble in the daies of his flesh. An other cause of that hor∣ror might concerne himselfe. For since the wrath and Iudgement of God against our sinne was so terrible to behold, that Christ in his humane nature trembled at it; how could it but raise an horror in him to know, that he must presently receiue in his owne Body the burthen thereof, and make satisfaction therefore with his owne smart? which how farre it would pearce his patience, the weakenes of our flesh in him might well feare and tremble, though his spirit were neuer so resolute and ready to endure the most, that mans nature in this life could sustaine with obedience and confidence. So that either the sight of Gods wrath against sinne due to vs, or the satisfaction of the same which Christ was to make, might vrge his humane nature to that feare and trembling for the time, which these notes obserue; and yet neither of these come neere the feare of the wicked, or paines of the damned. Besides that religious hor∣ror and feare is nothing lesse then the paines of hell inflicted on the Soule by the im∣mediate hand of God, which is the deuice, that you seeke to establish. Defenc. pag. 67. li. 28. Thus my Text of Scripture is also iustified, that Christ gaue himselfe the price of Re∣demption for vs, WHICH ELS VVE SHOVLD HAVE PAYD.] If wresting, ad∣ding, and altering may be called iustifying, then is your sense of that text iustified in∣deed; otherwise there is nothing yet alleadged, that any way approueth that meaning of the text which you would inforce. The price of our redemption Christ payd; not the Christ payed a price for vs which we could not pay. same, which els we should haue payd, had we not beene redeemed; (for so Christ must haue suffered euerlasting damnation of bodie and soule, which was the payment ex∣acted of vs) but he payd a PRICE for vs, that more contented his displeased Fa∣ther, than our euerlasting destruction could haue done. You dallie therefore with the doubtfulnesse of the word PAYD, which sometimes signifieth the enduring of punishment, sometimes the yeelding of recompence. The Price of our sinnes which we should haue payd, that is, the punishment of our sinnes, which we should haue sustei∣ned, was eternall destruction of bodie and soule in hell fire; and other payment we could make none. This payment due to vs, or punishment which we should haue payd, the person of Christ could not suffer; it is most horrible blasphemy so to speake or thinke; but he payd a price for vs, that is, a SATISFACTION and AMENDS for our sinnes, which by no meanes we were able to pay. And so much the word ANTILYTRON noteth, euen a Price, Recompence, or Ransome in exchange of the punishment or imprisonment which the captiue should suffer. This Price, you will say, was himselfe. I make no doubt, that Christ gaue himselfe to die, but NOT TO BE DAMNED for our sinnes, as we should haue beene. Neither can the com∣mon custome of redeeming captiues inferre any more than the giuing of a price for the Prisoner. And therefore I did iustly aske, Who told you that the Scripture here speaketh after the common vse of redeeming Captiues taken in warre. And where you answere, the Defenc. pag. 67. l. 35. nature of the word ANTILYTRON importeth so much, which is properly vsed in such cases; you vndestand neither the nature of the word, neither the maner of our redemption rightly. For first the word , whence Antilytron commeth, properly signifieth a mutuall redemption of ech other, as Aristotle Arist. Eth. li. 9. ca. 2. obserueth; and so we should redeeme Christ, as he redeemed vs. Where∣fore the word is heere improperly taken, and signifieth no more than LYTRON without composition. Againe, the common vse of redeeming Captiues, is either to free Prisoner for Prisoner, or to take money for the ransome of libertie; neither of which tooke place in our redemption: and therefore the common custome of re∣deeming of men taken in warre hath no likenesse with the redeeming of the world, since God tooke no money for our ransome as men vse to do for their Prisoners; but the life of his only Sonne for the libertie of his rebellious seruants, which men vse not to doe. Neither did Christ offer a price proportioned to our value or abilitie, but farre excelling our persons, and exceeding our power. It was therefore a very colde comparison to resemble the freeing of mens bodies for golde and siluer (which Cap∣taines esteeme more than they doe Prisoners) to the redeeming of their soules by the precious bloud of Christ; and such as S. Peter reiected before me in euident words: 1. Pet. 1. Yee were not redeemed with corruptible things, as siluer and golde, but with the precious bloud of Christ, as of a lambe vndefiled and vnspotted. And for you or any man els to say, that Christ suffered no lesse, nor none other, than we should haue suffered, or payed no more than we should haue payd; is to subiect the soule of Christ to our deserued confusion and condemnation, and to euen our persons, who are wretched and sinfull men, with his, who is the true and eternall sonne of God; either of which is a sensible defacing of his dignitie, innocencie, and obedience, wholly requisit to our redemption, and vtterly impossible to our condition. Defenc. pag. 67. li 38. You seeme to inferre, that I forsooth doe holde with your opinion, that Christ payed the price of our redemption (properly) to the diuell, and not to God. ] If you should leaue be∣lying and falsifying of other mens speeches, you should leaue one of your chiefest de∣fences. For when you can take no aduantage of my words, you sticke not to straine them to your b nt; and as though mistaking and wresting were not wrongs enough, you inlarge them and interlace them not only with things neuer intended by me, but with plaine contrarieties to that which is conteined in my words. To shew how full and perfect our redemption is by the bloud of Christ, in my sermons I say; Serm pa. 60. & 61. The bloud of Christ doth redeeme, cleanse, wash, iustifie and sanctifie the elect; it doth pacifie and propitiate the Iudge; it doth seale the couenant of mercie, grace, and glorie, betwixt God and man; it doth conclude and binde the diuell. And lest any man should mistake that I sayd, The price was so sufficient, that it did not onely pacifie and propitiate the Iudge, but conclude and binde the diuell, that otherwise had a challenge to vs as to the seruants of sinne and corruption; I added: Serm. pa. 64. li. 30. It was an iniurie to Christ for vs to thinke his bloud was shed to sa∣tisfie the diuell, but Christ offered his bloud as a sacrifice to God his Father, to satisfie the iu∣stice of God prouoked with our sinnes; and yet Satans extreme rage against the person of Christ (in conspiring and compassing his death with all contumelie and crueltie) turned to his vtter ruine: God raising againe the Lord Iesus from death, and giuing him power to spoile the kingdome of the diuell, in recompence of the wrong which he receiued at Satans hand. Thus was the bloud of Christ a price most sufficient for all the world; the voluntarie offering whereof by Christ himselfe, was the sacrifice that appeased the wrath, satisfied the iustice, and purchased the fauour of God towards vs; and the wrongfull spilling whereof, which Christ with patience endured, did exclude the diuell euen by Gods iustice, from all the challenge, that otherwise he had vnto vs. Doth this make the p ce of our redemption, which was the bloud of Christ, to be payed properly to the diuell, and not to God? or rather cleane contrarie, that this price was willingly offered, and so properly payed to God for the satisfaction of his iustice, and by no meanes yeelded or payed to satisfie the diuell; but the iniurious shedding thereof by the procurement of Satan, did iustly discharge all the members of Christ from the power and challenge of the diuell, who afore possessed them by the rule of Gods iustice? And to this sense I did restraine the words of Ambrose, to make him accord with the rest of the Fathers; who with one voice confesse, that God would not vse power alone, but euen iustice to the diuell, in taking man out of his hand; and therefore ordered the price of our re∣demption in such sort, that it should not only fully satisfie and pacifie his owne wrath by a willing and precious oblation, but iustly exclude all the power and possession of darknesse from the elect, by Satans malitious and contumelious attempt against the person of the Sonne of God. Neither is this doctrine so strange as you would make it, but only to those that ne∣uer waded farther then the mire of their owne inuentions. Irenaeus that ancient Fa∣ther vrgeth this as a r ason why Christ must be man as well as God; that the diuell might be conquered by iustice. Christ therefore, sayth he, coupled and vnited man to God. Ireneus. li. 3. ca . 20. Si nim homo non vi isset inimicum hominis, non iuste victus esset inimicus. For if a man had not vanquished the enemie of man, the enemie had not beene iustly vanquished. So Theodoret: When the Creator saw our nature of it selfe to ioyne with that cruell Tyrant q Theodoret. de Prouidentia Sermo. 10. (the diuell) and to fall into the deepe pit of wickednesse, he wrought our saluation wisely and ius ly. For neither would e vse his POVVER alone to free vs, nor arme his MERCIE alone against him that had mans vnder ser itude, le t he should exclaime of this merc as v iust; but God t oke a with clemencie, and adorned with iu∣stice. The effect whereof, (for the whose discourse is somewhat long) we may per∣ceiue by the words which Theodoret ascribeth to the person of Christ: for thus hee maketh Christ to speake to the diuell: Theodoretus Ibidem. Because thou, who receiuedst power against sin∣ners, touched my bodie, that of no sinne forfeit thy power, and cease thy tyran∣nie. I all ( ) from death simply vsing the power of a Lord, but a righteous power. I the death, I haue suffered death; and not subi ct to death. I did admit . No way guilt e, I was reckened with the guiltie; and be∣ing free from debt, I was numbred . Sustaining therefore an vniust death, I dissolue the death that is deserued; and imprisoned wrongfully, I free them from prison that were iustly detained. And lest you should say of him, as you doe of Ambrose and Au∣sten, that he doth but play with the figure, e airely preuenteth that idle shift of yours in these words: Ibidem. Let no man thinke, that herein wee (dallie or) trifle; for by the sacred Gospels, and doctrines of the Apostles we are taught, that these things are so. Leo likewise not once or twice publikely teacheth that doctrine to the people: Leo Sermo. 5. de passione D. m. The iust and mer∣cifull God did not so vse the iniurie of his will, (those are his words) that to restore vs, hee would only shew the power of his clemen ie, but because it was a consequent, that man commit∣ting sinne should be the seruant of sinne. God so fitted the medicine to the sicke, the pardon to the guiltie, and red mption to the captures, that the iust sentence of condemnation should be dissol∣ued by t e iust worke of the . For if only the Godhead should haue opposed it selfe for (vs) sinners, not so much reason as power should conquer the diuell. The Ibidem. Sonne of God therefore admitted wicked hands to be layed on him, and what the rage of the persecutors offe∣red with patient power he suffered. This was that great mysterie of godlinesse, that Christ was euer loaden with iniuries, which if he should haue repelled with open power and manifest vertue, he should haue exercised onely his diuine strength, but not regarded our cause, that were men. For in all things, which the madnesse of the people and Priests did reprochfully and vnto him, our sinnes were wiped away, and our offences purged. The diuell him∣selfe did not vnderstand, that his crueltie against Christ should ouerthrow his owne kingdome, WHO SHOVLD NOT LOOSE THE RIGHT OF HIS FIRST FRAVD, IF HE COVLD ABSTAINE FROM THE LORDS BLOVD. But greedie with malice to hurt, whiles he rushe h on Christ, himselfe falleth; whiles he taketh, he is taken; and persuing him that was mortall, he lighted on him that was the Sauiour (of the world.) Iesus Christ being Leo Serm. 10. de passione Dom. lifted vp on the tree, returned death vpon the Authour of death, and strangled all the principalities and powers that were against him, by obiecting his flesh that was possible, giuing place in himselfe to the presumption of (our) ancient enemie, who raging against mans na∣ture, that was subiect vnto him, durst there exact his debt, where he could finde no signe of sinne. Therefore the generall and mortall hand-writing, by which we were solde, was torne, and the contract of our captiuitie came into the power of the Redeemer. The person of the Sonne took vpon him Leo Sermo. 12. de passione Dom. properly the reparation of mankinde, that whose maker he was, he might be their restorer; so directing his counsell to effect, that to destroy the kingdome of the diuell, he rather vsed the righteousnesse of reason, then the power of his might. For whiles the diuell raged on him, whom he held by no law of sinne, he lost the right of his wicked dominion. I repeat the more, to let the Reader see, that the Fathers in this case doe not play with figures, as this Discourser dreameth, but they consonantly propose and vrge with ear∣nest and euident words a great point of Christian pietie. Gregorie teacheth the same lesson: Gregorius mo∣ra m. i. 3. cap. 11. When Satan tooke Christes bodie to crucifie it, he lost Christes elect from the right of his power. And by Gods speech to Satan concerning Iob, Beholde he is in thine hand, but saue his life; hee thus decla eth Gods Commission to Satan touching Christ: Ibidem. T ke thou power against his bodie, and lose the right of thy wicked dominion ouer his lect. Damascene also noteth, that one respect why Christ was made man, was to stoppe the diuels murmuring, if God should haue taken man out of his hands by the power of his Deitie. D ascen. Orthodox fidei li. 3. ap. 18. Christ was made man, sayth he, that that which was conquered, might conquer. God was not vnable, who is able to doe all things by his almightie power and force, to take man from the Tyrant (that hel him;) but that would haue beene a cause of complaint to the Tyrant that had conquered man, if he were forced by God. Therefore God who pitied and loued vs, willing to make man, that was fallen, the conqueror of Satan, became man; restoring the like by the like, that is, man by man. And in this, sayth Damascene, appeareth Ibidem. li. 3. cap. 1. Gods iustice, that man being ouerthrowen, he would haue none other (besides man) to conquer the Tyrant, neither would he by violence take man from death, but whom death had of old brought into bond ge by sinne, e en him would the gracious and righteous God make conquer againe. What reason then haue you to reuell at Saint Augustine and Saint Ambrose in such sort as you doe, that Defenc. pag. 68. . 14. their names are of no waitht to warrant such a Doctrine as those words (of theirs) pretend; Or what teach they different from the rest of the Fathers, if their words be rightly taken, and not wrested aside to your crooked concei s? That the bloud of Christ was so sufficient a price for vs, that not onely the voluntarie sacri∣ficing thereof, throughly satisfied the displeased Iustice of God, and obtained remis∣sion of all our sinnes, but e en the wrongfull shedding thereof by Satans instigation wrought the subuersion of Satans power and right in all the lect; (God by the rule of Iustice giuing vnto Christs manhoode the spoyle of Satans kingdome or the pa∣tience which Christ shewed whiles Satan by the mouthes and hands of the wicked spoyled Christs humane nature of honor and life for the time) what danger is there in this to the Christian Faith, or what repugnancie to the sacred Scriptures? Esa. 3. THERE∣FORE VVILL I giue him his part in many things, ( aith God of Christs manhoode) and he shall deuide THE SPOYLE of the mightie, (or with the mightie) because he pow∣red forth his Soule vnto death; this the Apostle sh weth was executed against the Di∣uels them selues. Christ Coloss . SPOYLED Principalities and Powers, and made a shew of th m openly, triumphing ouer them in his owne Person. According as God threatned the Serpent vpon his first deceauing the woman; Genes. 3. I will put enmitie betweene thy se de and her se de: he shall bruize thine head, and thou shalt bruize his heele. Where God expres∣seth plainly the Recompence, that the seed of the woman should haue for suffering Satan to bruize his he le, euen the bruizing of the Serpents head. For nothing is more equall with God, then to Matth. 7. rem ate the same measure to men, and Angels, that they m te to others. It was therefore a thing most iust in the sight of God, as he sub∣iected Man to Satans power, when by sinne he first conquered Man; so he subiected Satan to the will and power of Christs manhoode, when by righteousnesse Christ con∣quered the diuell. And as Christ patiently endured to be wrongfully depriued of his life by the meanes and members of Satan, so in requitall of that presumption, and iniurie, Christ powerfully and iustly dep ed Satan of all his ight and interest to the Elect, for whose sakes Christ gaue his life. This excludeth not the voluntarie seruice and sacrifice of Christs obedience vnto death, wherewith the Iustice of God was sa∣tisfied and appeased; but this sheweth, that as God had chiefe regard of his owne Iustice and mercie towards man in giuing his owne Sonne to be the pacification of his wrath, and propitiation of our sinnes, so he dealt iustly with the diuell in causing the spoyler to be spoyled, and for the wrongfull and spitefull inuasion, that Satan made against his Lord and Master, to loose all the Dominion and power, that otherwise he claymed ouer Christs elect. And so the Price of our Redemption whatsoeuer you trifle to the contrarie, did not onely discharge the guilt of our sinnes, and our debt to Gods iustice by Christs willing obedience to God euen vnto death, but the furious and iniurious intermedling of Satan therewith, so closeth his mouth, that he seeth and knoweth our deliuerance and his destruction to be iust. Defenc. pa. 68. l. 15. I am out of doubt that the Fathers doe but play with figures; or if they meane indeede to teach such a Doctrine, we are to learne by their good leaues how to speake and thinke more wholesomely (then they doe) out of the Scriptures. ] Whether they play with figures or no, I referre it to the Iudgement of indifferent Readers, that will take the paines to peruse the places. It is a good signe they speake in earnest, when they double it, and treble it in their open Sermons and writings, and render the causes thereof pith ly and plentifully, as Theodoret and Leo doe, and chiefly Saint Austen in August. de Trinitate. li. 13. cap. 12. 13. 14. & 15. foure whole Chapters of his Booke de Trinitate; whose learning and iudgement though you set light by, because they sort not with your fansies, I confesse I reuerence, for that the whole Church of Christ hath done the same before me; and I see nothing in the word of God repugnant to their Doctrine truely conceaued. But you haue learned to speake more wholsomely as you thinke out of the Scriptures; I pray you then let vs heare your wholesome speech. Defenc pag. 68. l. 6. & 10 I vrge that the enemie must haue a price for his Captiue. I pray, who is that enemie which must be satisfied? the Diuell? God forbid. Gods Iustice onely is that offended Mat. 5. 25. Ene∣mie to whom our Ransome was paid, the Diuell was but Gods sla e and Executioner. ] There is no man for ought that I know, which saith the Diuell must be satisfied; it is your partiall humor that leadeth you so to surmise; my Sermons professe it were an Serm. pag. 64. li. 30. Iniu∣rie to Christ for vs to thinke, his bloud was shed to satisfie the Diuell; but the enemie to Christs elect. (which is the diuell and not God) must be conquered and spoyled, though not satisfied: And that as S. Austen rightly obserueth, God would haue done first by Iustice, and then by power. August. de Trinitate. li. 13. cap. 13. Because the Diuell by his peruersenesse was a desirer of power, and a forsaker and impugner of Iustice; and men did so much the more imitate him, how much the more neglecting or hating Iustice, they did studie to be mightie; and were either inflamed with the getting, or delighted with the hauing thereof: It pleased God, that for the taking of Man out of the diuels power, the diuell should not be conquered by power, but by Iustice; and so men imitating Christ should seeke to ouercome the diuell by Iustice, and not with power. Ibidem. ca. 14. By him that dyed and was so mightie, to vs that were mortall and altoge∣ther weake, both Iustice was commended and power promised. Of these twaine, the one Christ performed dying, the other rising. For what is more iust, then to come (willingly) to the death of the Crosse for righteousnesse? And what is more mightie, then to rise from the dead, and ascend vp to heauen with the same flesh, which was slaine? First then by righteousnesse, and after by power Christ Conquered the diuell. Ibidem. ca. 15 It is no hard matter to perceaue the diuell to be conquered (by power,) when Christ, who was slaine by the diuell, rose againe: that is harder and deeper to be vnderstoode, that the diuell was conquered, when he seemed to himselfe to be the Conquerer; to wit, when Christ was slaine. For then Christs bloud, because it was his, that had no sinne, was shed for the remission of our sinnes: that whom the diuell iustly detai∣ned and tied to the condition of death, as guiltie of sinne, those he might iustly loose through Christ, whom being guiltie of no sinne, he vniustly put to death. With this Iustice was the Diuell vanquished, and with this bond was the strong man bound, that his things should be taken from him; which were with him the vessels of wrath, and bee turned to vessels of mercie. And after proofe made out of the Scriptures, that we are translated from the power of darknesse, and of the diuell to the kingdome of God, and of his beloued, in who we haue Redemption for remission of sinnes, then follow the words which you so highly chalenge. Ibidem. ca. 1 . In this Redemption the bloud of Christ was giuen for vs as a Price, QVO ACCEPTO which being taken, (that is wrongfully pursued and vsurped, as the diuels manner is to take things which are not his, and not willingly offered or law∣fully receaued, as God did accept the same at the hands of his Sonne) the diuell was not enriched, but fast tyed, that we should be loosed from his bands. The bloud of Christ patiently shed vnto death was the Price of our Redemption by the witnesse of the whole Scriptures, which Christ obediently and voluntarily offered to his Fathers will for the full remission of our sinnes, and our perfect reconciliation with God. This bloud could not be iustly shed by any, because it was innocent and holy. They must therefore be iniust and wicked that should shed the righteous bloud of that vndefi∣led Lamb. Wherefore the secrete counsell and iustice of God deliuered Christ being thereto willing, into the Mark. 14 hands of sinners, and permitted him to the Luke. 22. power of dark∣nesse with all reproch, shame, and torture to take his life from him. This obedience and patience of the Redeemer, in suffering the rage and violence of Satan and his members, God so highly accepted and recompenced, that not one∣ly his wrath was appeased, and our sinnes remitted, but all power in heauen and earth, as well ouer Satan as ouer all his kingdome, was giuen vnto the manhood of Christ, to take from the power and feare of the diuell, whom Christ would, and to adiudge that cru ll and bloudie tyrant with all his adherents to euerlasting destruction. For though the Diuine nature of Christ, in that hee was the Sonne of God, were a right∣full and powerfull Lord ouer Satan and his whole kingdome (sinne, death, and hell not excepted) to dispose thereof at his pleasure; yet the humane nature of Christ had of it selfe no such right or prerogatiue, in respect it was a creature, and so lower and weaker then the condition of Angels, sauing for the personall vnion thereof with the Godhead of Christ. And therefore as the wisedome of God thought it no match nor honour for the diuine Maiestie of Christ to spoyle the diuell, that was but a base and vile seruant in comparison of his Almightie power; so the iustice of God would not aduance the manhood of Christ to the heigth of his kingdom to rule all things in heauen, earth, and hell, till hee had humbled himselfe to the death of the Crosse for remission of our sinnes, and receiued violent wrong from the diuell in putting him to death. In reuenge and recompence whereof, as all these fathers confesse, God tooke iust cause to make not the Diuine nature, which had that right before and could not loose it, but mans nature, which Satan had by sinne conquered and sub∣iected to himselfe, to be in the person of Christ conquerer and Lord ouer Satan, and all his power, to take whom hee would to make them vessels of mercie; and to reserue the rest as vessels of wrath vnto the terrible iudgement of Christ. Wherein these Fa∣thers doe not swarue from the Pophets and Apostles meaning, howsoeuer they vse different words; that Christ should Esa. 53. v. 12. diuide the spoyle of the mightie, because hee powred out his Soule vnto death; And that Philip. 2. therefore God highly exalted, and gaue him a name, at which euery knee boweth, in heauen, earth and hell, for that hee was obedient vnto the death of the Crosse. Neither doth Ambrose, when he speakerh of a Price required by the diuell or yeel∣ded to the diuell, meane any more then a CAVSE SVFFICIENT why the spoyling of Satans kingdome was giuen vnto the manhood of Christ, and al the power of dark∣nesse, sinne, death and hell, put vnder his feete. For a Price doeth not alway import an honourable condition, or a pleasing satisfaction, as it signifieth when it is referred to God; but as in Greeke, which is properly a Price, noteth either Reward, or Re∣uenge; so doth pretium in Latine comprise both, and generally whatsoeuer is balanced one against the other, to be exchanged one with the other, is the price of ech other. So that it is no dishonour to the bloud of Christ to be so precious, that not onely the vo∣luntarie offering therof did fully satisfie the iustice of God displeased with our sinnes, but that also the wrongfull shedding thereof (which was necessarily to be committed to Satan and his members, as the onely fit instruments for such an impietie) was a iust occasion, why God in requitall of that wrong, made the manhood of Christ the sub∣duer and destroyer of Satans kingdome. Not that the diuell had any right or com∣mand ouer vs, against or without the will of God; but that hee was so blinded by the wonderfull wisedome of God, in reuenge of his subuerting the first man, that he was made, by shewing his malice against the manhood of Christ, an Actor in our Redemption, and the Author of his owne subuersion, whiles without his knowledge, and against his meaning, hee was Gods instrument for our saluation, and his owne destruction. This you can not quietly brooke, because you make the chiefest point of our Re∣demption to bee the killing of Christs Soule with Gods immediate hand; and so farre are you from confessing Christ to be vniustly slaine as an innocent, that you defend him to be sinfull, hatefull, defiled with our sinnes, and hanged by the iust sentence of the Law, and the diuel to be onely a minister and executioner of Gods iudgement against Christ. Yea your similitude, if you stand to it, of prisoners taken in warre, and your ransome yeelded to God as to an enemie for his captiues, setteth iarres if not warres betweene the first and second person in Trinitie, by making God the Father an enemie both to the Redeemer and Prisoner. For among men, whose vse and custome you presse in this place, the detainer is alwayes a professed enemie to the redeemer, since confe∣derates doe not vse to take or detaine ech others subiectes or seruants, but open ene∣mies. The Ransomer then, and the prisoner haue one and the same enemy; and con∣sequently by your resemblance, God is an enemie as well to Christ as to vs. The proofe which you bring, to shew God to be an enemie to his elect out of the fift of S. Matthew, is impertinent to the cause, and di erent from the trueth. For besides that the new writers, as In Matth. cap. 5. Erasmus in his paraphrase, In Matth. cap. 5. Bucer, In Matth. cap. 5. Bullinger, In Matth. cap. 5. Mus∣culus, In Matth. cap. 5. Caluine, In Matth. cap. 5. Gualterus in their commentaries vpon this chapter; and the old, as Tertulli nus de pati ntia. Tertullian, In Matth. cap. 5. Ierom, In Matth. cap. 5. Chrysostome, Hilarie, In Matth. cap. 5. Theophylact, In Matth. cap. 5. Euthymius and others, with one consent referre this admonition of Christ to men, that are Aduersa∣ries, H lar. in Matth. ca. 4. Iudges, and Iaylours here in this life; which is wide from your purpose; your ma∣king of God to be an Aduersarie in that place, acknowledgeth a superiour Iudge to God to whom the Aduersarie must by complaint, not by command deliuer vs; and your comparing the deuill to an obedient minister of the Law, excuseth him from be∣ing a rebell to God, and an accuser of men. But if you would speake or thinke as the Scriptures leade, which you pretend, but not perfourme; you should finde in them, though not in this precept, that the deuill is by a speciall kind of notation, called our ENEMIE, as indeede he is the ancient, eger, and continuall supplanter and impug∣ner of man, and that God to his elect is and euer was a gracious and louing father, when he was most displeased with their sinnes; and euen then so carefull and mind∣full of their saluation, that he gaue them his owne Sonne, when they were his Ene∣mies to d e for them, and by that death to make satisfaction and purgation of all their sinnes; which was not the part or worke of an Enemie how much soeuer his holines then did, and still doth dislike their vnrighteousnesse. And since the punishment of our sinnes was layd vpon Christ, and we healed by his stripes; if therein God pro∣fessed Enmitie to his elect, and executed it all on Christ, the deuill being but the Iaylor and Executioner, or as else where you say, an Instrument onely, and by that pa∣rable not to be blamed, for doing no more, then he is commaunded by the Iudge; your wholesome doctrine commendeth the deuill as an obedient seruant, and ma∣keth God an Inferiour, and yet an Enemy to the manhood of Christ. Which if you did not meane, you must temper your words and proofes better, and learne not so egerly to reiect euery phrase in an ancient Father, that pleaseth not your palate, when your selfe spake and wrote so licentiously and dangerously. But Defenc. pa. 68. l. 30. & 28. I fit your similitude, you say, to your desire farther then your selfe did expresse; be∣cause I say, the Ransomer is not bound to be Prisoner for his Redeemed, but may satisfie the enemie by money or otherwise. ] You are a happie man, that euery thing fitteth your desire. You positiuely teach, that Christ our Redeemer must suffer the selfe same paines of hell, which we should haue suffered. The reason you yeeld for it, is a poore similitude drawen from the common vse and custome of men in redeeming their cap∣tiues taken in warres. I replyed, that your similitude prooueth no such thing, be∣cause amongst men the Ransomers neede not, nor doe not sustaine the same seruitude and imprisonment, which the captiues doe and must, if they be not redeemed. [Yet the whole price, you say, must be payd by the Ransomer, which the captiue otherwise should.] You reason from the willes of men, which preferre money before captiues, to the will of God, who regardeth no money; which kind of reasoning I reiect as n way matching our redemption; and yet if it were admitted, exchanges, recompences, and conclusions of peace, which are no way in the prisoners powers, are amongst men as vsuall as Ransomes. It is therefore no way needefull by this similitude, that our Re∣deemer should suffer the selfe same paines, which we should haue suffered. A recom∣pence aboue our power, and so not possible to vs, was easie to him, that so farre ex∣ceeded our condition; and that by your owne similitude might more then suffice for the prisoner. For though men will not take lesse then the worth of their Captiues, as they conceiue their abilities or likelihoodes of seruice, yet that doeth not hinder the Sonne of God to giue for vs farre more, then our value could, or can reach vnto, be∣cause he had infinite riches of holinesse, righteousnesse, and obedience in his power, which we haue not. He might not therefore giue lesse then we were worth, but more he might, and did giue: not by suffering hell paines in a sharper sense & greater mea∣sure, then we can endure, which is your fansie; but because those things, which he suffered, were of infinite price in his person, which in ours would amount to no such rate. From the sorowes which Christ did beare for our sakes, you came in your second reason to the curse, which hee tasted for our sinnes; and because the Apostle saieth, Christ was G lat. 3. made a curse for vs, in that he hanged on a tree to redeeme vs from the curse of the Law; you would thence conclude, that Christ suffered for vs the verie paines of hell, and the death of the soule, as part of that curse, which the Law denounceth to all sinners. You were answered by me, that before your conclusion would any way follow vpon your premisses, you must make your first proposition generall, that the whole curse of the Law, and all the parts thereof were suffered by Christ. Now this ge∣nerall assertion, that Christ suffered the whole curse of the Law and euery part there∣of, was not onely false, and farre from the Apostles words, but so wicked and impi∣ous, that without horrible blasphemie it might not be affirmed of Christ. For the whole curse of the Law plainely compriseth in it excecation, induration, desperation, confusion, a finall pri ation of all grace and glorie, and euerlasting damnation of bo∣die and soule to hell fire; none of which our Sauiour could suffer. To this what now reply you? Christ suffered our Defen p . 74. li. . whole curse onely so farre, as possibilitie of things could admit, that is, with those three limitations, which are before expressed. ] You litle thinke the discreet Reader smileth at your proud and foolish presumption, that in the Apo∣stles name, and vnder the Apostles wordes would canonize your owne pelting con∣ceites, and then blow and suppe with a breath, denying that which you affirme, and affirming that which you denie. For what haue the Apostles words to doe with your three limitations? And if there be no possibilitie to draw Pauls speech to the WHOLE CVRSE of the Law, without apparant and palpable falsitie and impietie; why striue you for the generall, that you dare not stande to without three limitations, which prooue the generall not to be simply true? First then in steede of Pauls warrant, you obtrude your owne, and imagine your naked speech to be an armed proofe. Next you say Christ suffered the WHOLE CVRSE of the Law, saue three exceptions, which denie the whole; and so in effect you affirme, Christ suffered the whole curse of the law, and yet not the whole, but onely so farre as possibilitie could admit; that is in plaine termes, or in plaine trueth, it was not possible Christ should suffer the WHOLE CVRSE of the Law due to sinners, since by that suffering he could neither saue vs, nor be saued himselfe. This gappe was so great, that you foresaw euery man would eye it, and therefore you brack it vp with an other bush euen as good as the former. For in this wise you seeke to preuent that obiection. But you will say; [ . pa. 74 . Thus we make it not the whole curse of the Law. Yes we call it rightly the whole curse, for as much as Christ suffered it in his whole manhood euen in all the powers of his spirit, and soule, and bodie. ] Here we see what your wisedome doth and sayth; but what saith the Apostle? Did he speake or thinke as you doe? His words we haue farre different from yours; now your proofe of his meaning were worth the hearing. Christ, you say, suffered it in his whole man∣hood. What then? Ergo he suffered the whole curse? You must found a new Vniuer∣sitie, where your Logicke must get grace to proceede by it selfe without controle: it is so repugnant to all rules knowen to vs, that we can not so much as conceaue it. For thus you reason. The whole manhood of Christ suffered the curse, that is some parts of the curse: Ergo Christ suffered the whole curse. As well you may reason; the whole man in all Gods seruants performeth some parts of the Law; ergo all the seruants of God performe the whole law. You would be loth to be answered your debts, if you haue any, with such accounts: for if a man did owe you ten pounds, and with all his heart and both his hands did bring you ten pence, your reason here will conclude, he hath payd you the whole, though that I thinke would scant content you, if you were a Creditour. You be neerely driuen, when such shifts must serue you, or els be taken with a non-plus. What els is this but a cleere confession, that Christ could not suffer the whole curse of the law, when you dare not otherwise defend it, but that the whole manhood of Christ suffered some parts of the curse? It was, you say, Defenc. pa. 70. li. 3. in nature and veritie the true and proper curse of the Law, which Christ was made for vs. ] You be safe now you e come to your accustomed anker of PROPER and VERIE: holde you fast there, and you may be sure no man shall hale you out of this harbour, till you list to tell what you meane by proper and verie, which you will neuer doe. But in the meane time how proue you, that Christ did suffer the whole curse of the Law due to vs; which is a false and wicked assertion leudly fathered by you vpon the Apostles words? And if you recant that generall proposition, what handfast hath your con∣clusion? For if you reason thus; Christ suffered some parts of the curse which the law threateneth for sinne; ergo he suffered the true paines of hell; your Reader will assoone inferre, ergo you haue neither learning nor vnderstanding. Defenc. pa. 69. li. 15. There is no colour to make the curse which Christ suffered for our sinnes, like to the curse which senselesse creatures doe sometimes beare for mans cause. ] Hauing made so foule a shipwracke of your owne cause, as to be forced to confesse, that Christ did not suffer the whole curse of the Law, which before you stifly affirmed; to recouer some part of your losses, you spurne at my speeches, as hauing neither trueth nor colour: but report them right and spare them not; which I doubt you will not doe, because you make your entrance with so false a colour. For I no where make the curse which senselesse creatures beare, like to the curse which Christ suffered for vs. Let the pages which you cite, 262, 263, in Gods name be seene; but speaking of Gods curse against the sinne of man, I sayd, that Conclu . pa. 26 . li. 33. not onely the bodies and soules of the wicked were cursed and consumed with plagues, resting in them and on them, but all that they tooke in hand, and all that belonged to them, was likewise accursed. And citing the 28. of Deuteronomie, wherein a Calender of curses is denounced by the law against sinners, I added, that Chapter perused, would easily shew, how Ibidem. pag. 263. li. 14. farre the curse of God in this life persueth sinners, besides the horrible torments of the next life kept in store for them. So that I did not there compare or liken the curse of God on senselesse creatures, to the curse which Christ tasted for vs, as your idle imagination apprehendeth; but I shewed how farre the curse of the Law extended, and thence inferred, that if Christ did not suffer all the things there mentioned, he did not suffer all the parts of Gods curse in this life; Ibidem. pag. 263. li. 22. be∣sides the graund curse, that closeth vp all, and continueth for euer; Depart from mee yee CVRSED into euerlasting fire. You close your eyes against the force of my reason, which is euident, and prie for that which is not there; and when you finde it not, you patch out this point with plaine vntrueth, as if I made Christ and the senselesse crea∣tures like in the curses which they suffered. Defenc. pa. 69. li. 20. You make a reason to proue that hanging on a tree mentioned in Moses, is not all one with this curse of the Law in Paul. Neither did I, nor doe I say, that it was all one. This I sayd and still say, they were both of one and the same nature. ] You take great pride in poun∣cing of proper speeches, wherein you would shew your wit by wresting them to what please you. A reason I made, which for ought I see, you do not vnderstand, howsoe∣uer you play your part with my words, which is neither to confute them, nor con∣ceiue them rightly; but all is one with you, so you say somewhat, you care not how vnlound it be. I obserued in my Pa . 273. li. 24 & 2 . Conclusion, that S. Paul in his Epistle to the Ga∣latians, cap. . alleadged two kindes of curses out of Moses; the one pertaining to the committing sinne; the other to the suffering punishment for sinne. Gal 3. v. 10. Deut. 27. Accursed is euerie one that abideth not in all things written in the booke of the Law TO DO THEM. Here is the curse of doing euill, to which all men are subiect immediatly vpon the fact, not A double cu se of sinne. ten or twentie yeeres after, when happily God ariseth to visit their sinnes, and there∣fore this importeth not only a desert of future vengeance, but the present detestation which God hath both of the deed which is euill, and of the doer who is wicked. An other kinde of curse the Apostle noteth out of Moses, which is to hang on a tree; Deuter. 21. Cursed is euerie one that hangeth on a tree. Heere is a curse in suffering euill, whereof the former is the cause: for by Gods law no man should suffer euill, but he that doth euill. You in a iollity to aduantage your cause, would needs pronounce, Treati . pa . 35. li. 18. it were vaine and senselesse to thinke the Apostle here spake of two seuerall kinds of curses; taxing in your huffe not onely Chrysostome, who expresly teacheth, it was another curse, and not the same; but euen the Trueth it selfe to be vaine and senselesse, which euidently conuin∣ceth the one to be in nature very much different from the other. For the detestati∣on which God hath of sinne assoone as it is committed, whereby he reiecteth the deed as repugnant to his holinesse, and hateth the doer euen before punishment, is a plaine distinct thing from the vengeance that is consequent and agreeable to Gods iustice. Much more then doth it differ from the iudiciall punishments of men, whereto Moses pointeth when he speaketh of hanging, which though they haue a dependance vpon Gods will and law, so farre as they follow the same, yet must they differ as much as the persons, punishments and powers of God and man doe. Cur∣sed, sayth Moses, is euerie one that abideth not in all things written in the booke of the Law. This curse is present vpon ech sinne, and generall to all the wicked in the middest of their greatest prosperity and securitie. The punishment due to sinne is not so; that is deferred till God see his time; and then most dreadfull, when men can not commit new sinnes, as after this life. Wherefore as all creatures reuenge mans sinne, and yet are not all of one nature, though in that seruice to God they al agree; so the plagues and curses of sinne be not of one nature, notwithstanding they be powred on men to punish their offences. Defenc. pag. 69. li. 24. I meane they are both of one and the same Nature, that is, true and proper curses of God. Well crowed yet before your courage come downe. Shall all things that pro∣ceed from one cause, or that haue one generall wherein they agree, be all of one and the same nature? Then men and mise be of the same nature, for they are both liuing creatures. Then angels and andierns, starres and strawes, and all things created, haue the same nature, because they are all the works of God. Then vices and vertues, and all contraries be of one and the same nature, in as much as they are inherent in one subiect, and destruent ech to other. And to go no farther then your owne example; then hunger and hell fire are both of the same nature, because they both are true and proper curses of God vpon the wicked. Be they great or litle, you will say, they are all punishments.] So the rest are all the works of Gods hands, and yet were it mad-me∣rie Diuinitie to say they are all of one and the same nature. Deut. 28. The fruit of the bodie, of the Deut. 28. ground of Deut. 28. cattell, Deut. 28. kine and Deut. 28. sheepe, are the blessings of God, and promised to the obseruers of his LAw; and yet I trust they be not of one and the same nature with the ioyes of heauen; though little and great, they be promises and rewards of obe∣dience. Defenc. pag. 69. li. 25. One was the whole, the other a part; but both of them the true and proper curses of God. ] The one is the cause, the other is the consequent or effect, but not a necessarie, much lesse an essentiall part of the other. For a man may bee truely accursed, and yet not hanged; as also he may bee iustly hanged, and yet not truely or properly accursed of God. The penitent thiefe on the Crosse came deseruedly to his death, as himselfe Luk. 23. v. 41. confessed, and yet was not thereby truly accursed, since he was that day receiued in∣to Paradise. His death was an accursed kind of death, as also Christes was, though the one did blesse, and the other was blessed, euen vnder that punishment, which Christ did willingly and the thiefe patiently suffer. Defenc. pag. 69. li. 27. Paul saith not as you affirme, that Christ was made that curse, only, that iudiciall curse, whereof onely Moses speaketh. ] Much lesse doth Paul say, as you teach, that Christ suf∣fered the whole proper curse of the law. I measure Pauls meaning by his proofe, you extend it to your fansie. So that, as I say, Paul prooueth that he meaneth; as you say, Paul meaneth that hee prooueth not. Which of our constructions commeth neerest the Apostles mind, the Reader will soone perceiue. Defenc. pag. 69. li. 31. Paul handling before generally Gods curse and the punishment of the Law against sinne, and shewing we are redeemed from it by Christs being made the same for vs, he confirmeth it by applying Moses iudiciall punishment against certaine transgressours, being it seemeth a fi∣gure of Christ herein. ] If you may adde what fansies and falsities you list to the Apo∣stles words, you will make at length some shew of proofe, if not from Pauls text, yet out of your owne trifles. There is not one true word in all this Preface of yours to Pauls proofe: for neither doth the Apostle in that place handle generally the punish∣ment of the Law against sinne, nor shew, that Christ was made the same for vs; neither did Moses appoint (hanging) by any iudiciall Law against transgressours, neither were o enders so punished, a figure of Christ herein. Paul in that place handleth the righ∣teousnesse of faith in Christ, as bringing the blessing of Abraham, and freeing from sinne, which the law conuinced and accursed. The law threatneth a curse vpon eue∣ry breach thereof, but it inflicteth not actuall punishment vpon euery sinner. And therefore the curse of the law in Pauls first words is either the DETESTATION, which God hath of sinne and sinners, whom in time appointed he meaneth euerlast∣ingly to destroy; or the OBLIGATION to temporall and eternall euill, which sinne hath in it. Neither of which Christ was made for vs, since hee tasted not the same, but another kind of curse, which was the temporall punishment of sinne by the hands of men; and by that obedience to the will and counsell of God, hee freed vs from the guilt and wages of sinne, which the law denounced. To note the differen∣ces of those two curses, the Apostle putteth the Article to the first for the more vehe∣mencie, and not to the second, saying: Galat. 3. Christ redeemed vs from that curse of the law, being made a curse for vs. The curse then or punishment of sinne in the person of Christ, was hanging on a tree: to which Moses by his iudiciall law adiudged no man. Deut. 17. Worshippers of other Gods, Leuit. 24. blasphemers, Numb. 15. breakers of the Sabbath, Deut. 21. disobei∣ers of parents, and 22. Adulterers were to bee stoned to death by the law of Moses. Gene. 9. Numb. 25. Murderers were to loose bloud for bloud, and Deut. 19. false witnesses to suffer that they meant to others, whether it were eye for eye, hand for hand, or life for life. But by no iudiciall law, that I reade, did Moses appoint any transgressours to be hanged. By the expresse commandement of God, who is aboue the law, Moses tooke the chiefe of the people that coupled themselues with Baal Peor, and Num. 25. vers. 4. hanged them vp before the Lord against the Sunne. And Ioshua vsed the same kind of death in some that were Iosh. 8. & 10. strangers, and not Israelites: otherwise Moses neuer commanded, but onely per∣mitted the Magistrate to hange transgressours; yet so, that Deut. 21. the body should not remaine all night vpon the tree, but be buried the same day, because the curse of God was (executed) on him, that was hanged. So that God not appointing any man by his law to bee han∣ged, but leauing that libertie to the Magistrate so to reuenge malefactours, where the law did not specifie their punishment, they could bee no figures of Christ; as well in re∣spect they were wicked, that must be so vsed, who were not fit to be figures of that in∣nocent & vndefiled Lambe, as also that men had no power to erect figures of Christs death & passion, but must leaue that to God to represent the sufferings of his Sonne as he saw cause. Defenc. pag. 69. li. 36. They that were hanged by the iust sentence of the Law, they were herein accursed, that is they herein sustained the lawes true and deserued punishment. ] But if they were INNO∣CENTS oppressed by vnrighteous iudgement, which is no newes among men, as we see by the death of our Sauiour; or if they were PENITENTS, though their punish∣ment were neuer so deserued, neither of these could be truly accursed before God, & yet might be hanged, and so subiected to the corporall curse of the Law. For though Moses had no meaning to haue men vniustly hanged, yet had he lesse purpose to pro∣nounce them damned, that died for their sinnes, if they repented: and therefore he commmandeth the bodies to be buried the same day, because the Curse, that is, the Rigour and Reuenge of the Law was executed on them; and consequently Moses ex∣tendeth not this curse farther then this life; which maketh nothing to the paines or perpetuall curse of the damned. And here the Reader may plainly perceiue you to sincke in the sands of your owne subtilties: for here you confesse, that deserued hang∣ing is a TRVE CVRSE and PVNISHMENT, notwithstanding, if the guiltie repent, as the Theefe did on the Crosse; I hope you will leaue him the child of Gods mercie, whom Christ receiued into Paradise. And consequently by your owne con∣fession, the paines and afflictions of this life, when they are deserued, are curses and true punishments of sinne to Gods children, though their soules be blessed by their sub∣mission and conuersion vnto God. Which ouerthroweth all, that you formerly haue said touching the troubles and vexations of this life, and that you presently meane to conclude of Moses curse applied to Christ. Defenc. pag. 70. l. 1. By applying this text of Moses in this sense, and in this respect to Christ, it is well confir∣med to be in nature and veritie the true and proper curse of the Law, which Christ was made for vs: for such also in deede was the nature of that iudiciall curse of Moses. ] Moses we see had no meaning to make their soules accursed, whose bodies were hanged on the tree by the iust iudgement of the Magistrate, if the malefactours truely repented their wicked offences. How much lesse then ment he to subiect the Sonne of God to the internall or eternall curse of the Law, for that he was vniustly and wrongfully hanged on a tree by the malice and spight of his Enemies. And yet in both as well poenitent as innocent, hanging is called a curse, that is, a true and corporall punishment appoin∣ted by God for sinne, though mans error inflict it on innocents, or true repentance abolish the rest, that would follow after this life, if God were not reconciled vnto vs. In the wicked then, which persist in their mischieuous purposes without repentance, your reason taketh place, that hanging to them is a part of that true and terrible curse, the whole whereof shall be executed on them for their sinnes; but in repentants it is starke false, and in Christ of whom this question riseth it is irreligious and impious to say, that he suffered the whole curse of the Law prouided for sinne, or the death of the soule and of the damned, which is properly due to sinners. Defenc. pag. 70. li 10. Now vnderstand Chrysostome thus, as we before haue distinguished the punishment of Christ and of the damned, and then we differ not. ] Suppose Chrysostome to teach falsly, and talke absurdly as you doe; and then you may soone bring him to weare your badge; but leaue him at libertie to tell his owne tale, and hee is farre enough from your follies. Ib. . 12. He sayth they were d erse curses in Christ and in the damned, to signifie diuerse manners of one and the same curse in Nature. ] He speaketh not of the damned at all, he speaketh of the whole people of the Iewes, which were vnder the curse of the Law for sinne, till they were thence deliuered by Christ, which the damned neuer were, nor shall be. His words are: Chrysost. in 3. cap epist. ad Galat. The people were in danger of another curse, which saith, Cursed is euery one which abideth not in the things written in the booke of the Law. For not one of them had obserued the whole Law. Christ then since he was not subiect to the curse of transgression, admitted this curse (to hang on the Crosse) in steede of that, to loose the people from their curse. Chrysostome truely, learnedly, and consonantly to the rest of the ancient Fathers, distinguisheth two kindes of EVILS or CVRSES incident to men, which are sinne, and the punishment of sinne. The one is an vniust action pleasing man, but displeasing God: the other is a iust passion pleasing God, but displeasing man. Tertull. con∣tra Marcion m. lib. 2. Mala dicuntur, & Delicta & Supplicia. The OFFENCE and the REVENGE are both called uils, sayth Tertullian. August. contra tum. Duo sunt genera malorum, peccatum, & poena peccati: there are two sorts of Euils, sayth Austen, Sinne, and the punishment of sinne. For August. contra A mantum c p. 26. by Gods prouidence ruling all things, (as) man doth the euill, which he will; (so) he suffe∣reth the Euill which he will not. Then sinne is not onely euill before it be punished, but a greater euill, then the punishment is; since it is an euill in his owne nature repug∣nant to the righteousnesse of God. Now as God is all good, and therefore all bles∣sed; so sinne forsaking God, falleth from goodnesse, and so from blessednesse; and is consequently more accursed with God then punishment is, and ought so to be with men, if they be rightly aduised, as being the cause and continuance of their punish∣ment. For accursed signifieth as well detested and depriued of blessednesse, as subiected to miserie, or deuoted to destruction. So that sinne in it selfe is a curse with God, that is hated and detested of God, and depriuing man of all communion and parti∣cipation with the fountaine of blessednesse, though no punishment did follow. Yet because men would with neglect and desp ght of God, abide and reioyce in their wickednesse, if sense of grie e and paine did not force them to feele thei wretched∣nesse; therefore the wisedome and iustice of God pursueth such, as dwell and de∣light in their sinnes, with sharpe and bitte plagues, that loc ing on their miserie, they may timely repent, or eternally lament their obstinacie. To these two kinds of curses Chrysostomes wordes and proofes doe leade. The whole people were not damned, as you deuoutly d eame, but they had sinned, and so were subiected to the danger of Gods displeasure fo sinne, and of his indignation against sinne. From this Christ was free, for he did not sinne, was guile found in his m uth, as Chrysostom concludeth out of the Scriptures. Since then Christ was Chrysost. in . ca ep st. ad Galat . not subiect to the curse of Transgression, he admitted other Curse, eu n the punishment of sinne, which is a curse also for sinne, though of an other Nature, then the commit∣ting of sinne; by one to dissolue the othe ; that is, by his owne paine to abolish the guilt of our sinne. Chrysostomes wo ds are as pl ne as his proofes: Chrysost. i id. The curse of transgressing was another curse, and not the which Christ suffered. Yea Christ might not be subiected to that curse, to which the people were for transgressing the law, but changed that for another, and so loos d their curse. ; ano∣ther, and not the same, be as forci le wo ds to shew different natures and persons, as any the Greeke tongue hath; and your shift of di erse degrees in the same nature, is a childish toy, since much and little, like and vnlike s ew diuers degrees or measures in one nature, but another, and not the same thing, directly noteth the substance or nature to be diuers. Defenc. pag. 70. . 20. Austen on whom you triumph, is stretched beyond his meaning, he dea eth against a Mainich e, who denied that Christ had true human flesh. Now he proueth, that Christ truely died, because the Apostle saith he was made a curse for vs, in that he hanged on a Tree. I haue cause to content my selfe, that so lea ned and religious a Father, as Saint Augustine was, & so highly reuerenced in the Church of God, did more then twelue hundred yeers since, in his conflicts with Hereticks refute the greatest part of your positions, as repugnant to the faith of Christ, and the soundnesse of the Sacred Scrip∣tures. And I thinke few men so foolish as in the grounds of our Redemption and sal∣uation by Christ to reiect the Doctrine, which he taught, as false; and receaue your scambling conceits as true. And in my Iudgement you were best to take heed, least if the resolutions, which Saint Austen and other Catholike Fathers made against He∣retickes, disprooue your new found faith, you be taken tardy with bringing Baggage into the Church of Christ, long since condemned and banished from the Creede of all Christians. What Saint Austen proueth; you are no fit reporter, except you did read more attentiuely, and iudge more sincerely. For did you euer peruse the words wrong course in so wise a Father, if he meant purposely to prooue against the Mani∣chees that Christ truely died for vs, and not in shew onely as they supposed, to ouer∣skip all the Testimonies and circumstances of Christs true death recorded in the Scriptures, as his Matth. 2 . Lu 23. giuing vp the Ghost, Pilates Ma k. 1 . 44. 45. examining, and the Centurions Ma k. 1 . 44. 45. con∣fessing the truth thereof, as also the Souldiers Io . 19. v. 33. perceiuing him alreadie dead, and so not breaking his l gges, but pearcing his side with a speare, and the* Lu 23. gazing and . . watching of his nemies, and of the whole multitude ouer him to see him die, as likewise his buriall by his owne followers, the sealing of his Tumbe, and his lying three dai s in the graue; to omit I say all these things with silence, and to produce a word, which the Manichees reiected as odious and iniurious to Christ, and the Christians defen∣ded none otherwise then as common to all men, that die, both good and bad; were no small ouersight in so learned a writer. But this is a ite of yours to shift of the truth of his answere, it is no part of his meaning. He sheweth against the Manichees, and likewise against you, since you defend the Contrarie, that the death of the Body is in all men the punishment of sinne, and that this death INFLICTED ON MANS NATVRE for sinne, which is the MORTALITIE OF OVR FLESH, by the Scriptures is called a Sinne, and a Curse euen in Christ; not that Christ was properly and truly accursed with God, as transgressours are, which is your erroneous assertion; but that he submitted himselfe to receiue the punishment of sinne in his owne person by the death of his Body, which was common to him with all men. If the former words of Saint Austen were not plaine enough, he hath playner. August. con∣tra Faust. i. 14. cap. 7. If thou deny Christ was accursed, deny Christ was dead. If thou deny he was dead, now ightest thou not against Moses, but against the Apostles. If thou confesse him to haue beene dead, confesse that he tooke the punishment of our sinne without sinne. Now when thou hearest the punishment of sinne, beleeue it came either from (Gods) blessing or cursing. If the punishment of sinne came from blessing, wish alwaies to be vnder the punishment. But if thou desire to be thence deliuered; beleeue, that by the iust Iudgement of God the punishment of sinne came from the curse. Confesse then that Christ tooke a Curse for vs, when thou confessest him to haue beene dead for vs; Ibidem. Nec aliud significare voluisse Mosen, cum diceret, maledictus om∣nis qui in ligno pepend rit, nisi, mortalis omnis, & moriens omnis, qui in ligno pependerit; and that Moses had none other meaning, when he said, Accursed is euery one that hangeth on a Tree, then to say, euery one that hangeth on a Tree, is Mortall and dieth. He might hau said, Accursed is euery Mortall Man, or accursed is euery one that dieth. How thinke you, would Austen prooue that Christ truely died, because he was truely accursed, or that Christ tooke vpon him a Curse, because he tooke vpon him the death of the Bodie, which is the punishment of sinne in all mortall men, and so proceeded from the curse whereunto all men for sinne were subiect? He doth not defend the Apostle by Mo∣ses, but he expoundeth Moses by the Apostle, and so resolueth in plaine words, that Moses had none other meaning, when he said, accursed is euery one that hangeth on a Tree, then if he had said, accursed is euery mortall man, because death came first on all men as a Curse for sinne. You acknowledge not the death, which all men die, to be a punishment or Curse for sinne. But all the wit you haue, will not answere Saint Austens reasons. For the death of the Body, which is common to all mortall men, must of force be a blessing or a Cursing. If it be a blessing, why doe we beleeue, or hope to be free from a blessing? but if we detest continuance vnder it, and desire de∣liuerance from it, then certainly the death of the Body in all men, euen in the Saints of God, was and still is a punishment and Curse of Sinne, till Christ raise vs from it. An other reason Saint Austen vrgeth to the same effect, which is this. August. ea∣d m. cap. 6. Vnlesse God had hated sinne, and our Death, he would not haue sent his sonne to vndertake, and abolish the same. What maruaile then, if that be accursed to God, which God hateth? God, that is him selfe all life, and gaue vs life as his blessing in this world, must needs hate death, which is priuation of life, as repugnant to his Image, and euerting the worke of his hands, wherewith he ioyned Soule and Body to participate in life. And though by his Iustice he inflicted death on all men for sinne, yet of his mercie he sent his owne and PAINFVLL death, to be that part of the curse which Christ suffered for vs. This I hope is more then shame, though shame and reproch were not the least parts of Gods curse against sinne euen in Christ. You would needs in a brauado set vp your bristles, and aske, What, Treatis. pag. 38. i. 20. nothing but the shame of the world? will any man of common sense affirme, that this was all the curse that Christ bare for vs? ] I replied, that shame and ignominie was an expresse part of the curse which Christ dying suffered for vs, and that there was no cause you should so much disdaine Chrysostome and Austen for so saying. The Scriptures themselues in that point concurred with them, as I haue fully shewed in my Pag. 267. Conclusion, and you can not auoid it. Lest therefore your Reader should take you to be tongue-tied, you cleane change the case, and would haue men beleeue, that I defend and endeuoured to proue, that Defenc. pag. 71 li. 13. shame was the whole curse which Christ endured. As though I alleaged not S. Austen at Serm. pag. 92. & 93. large, to proue that death in all men, Christ not exempted, was a part of the curse inflicted on man∣kinde for sinne. And therefore when Chrysostome sayd, the Conclus. pa. 271. crosse is the onely kinde of death subiect to the curse, I did not set him and Austen at variance, as if the one did trippe the other, but I thus reconciled them; that Conclus. pa. 271. li. 11. not only death, (as in all men) but the ver e kinde of death which Christ died, was accursed by the very words of the Law in Chrysostomes iudgement. This then is one of your familiar trades and trueths, to set downe that in my name, which I neuer spake nor meant; and so by lying, when you can not by reasoning, to support your cause. Indeed if a man will admit your ab∣surd and false positions, so much is consequent out of their words. For where you will not haue the death of the bodie to be any part of the curse inflicted on sinne, ex∣cept the death, of the damned be coherent with it, as in the reprobate; it followeth from Chrysostomes words, that the corporall death of Christ seuered from all other sorts of death had no part of Gods curse in it besides shame, which yet is as farre from being a true curse, where the cause is good, as death it selfe; since neither shame nor death are true and inward curses, when they are suffered for righteousnesse, but rather causes and increases of blessing; not in, nor of themselues, but by Gods goodnesse accepting, and recompensing them with all fauour and blisse. Defenc. pa. 71. li. 14. Againe you mislike, that I sayd Christs dying simplie, as the godlie die, may in no sort be called a Curse or accursed. ] I mislike, that you can not or will not distinguish, what death is in it selfe euen to the godly, and what is consequent after it by Gods mercie towards his Saints. And heerein I say, you want both trueth and iudgement: for things are to be named by their natures, and not by the sequents, which often God sendeth cleane contrarie to the purposes, and practises of Satan, and his members. Tyrannie, shall it be no crueltie, because it maketh Martyrs? Sinne, shall it not be displeasing to God, because it humbleth the faithfull by repentance? The corrupti∣on of mans nature, shall it not be sinne, because thereby God exerciseth his Saints to watchfulnesse and prayer? Euen so the death of the bodie, which God at first inflic∣ted on all his Elect for sinne, shall it be no punishment, for that God doth comfort his in death, and reward them after death? Defenc. pag. 71. li. 16. [ I affirme, death to the godly is no curse pro∣perly. ] And I a irme, that when you can not tell how to start from the force of truth, you do nothing but lie, or flie to your phrases of proper and verie: which here, as in other places do you no good. In the fifteenth line of this page, you say the death of of the godly may IN NO SORT be called a Curse or Accursed. In the sixteenth, whiles you offer to proue those words, you confesse them to be false. Death to the no Curse properly, you say, but a benefit and aduantage; then improperly death is a curse: and before you sayd, It may in no sort be called a Curse to them. If in no rt, then neither properly nor improperly. What then is that Enemie that must be dest oyed, a cursing or a blessing? Can it be an enemie to Christ, and yet a blessing to the godly? I cannot better refell your folly, then S. Austen doth in this verie case. If death be a ble ing to the bodies of the godly, neuer desire to be deliuered from it: what n ed you beleeue, or loue the resurrection of the flesh, which is the destruction of death in the bodie; it death be a benefit to the bodie? But if this be repugnant to Christian religion, then hath death in it euen a shew of Gods curse on the bodie for sinne, which must be destroyed, before Christ can fully reigne in all his Saints. [ Yet is it to the godly no curse properly. ] The heigth of your learning hangeth on the helpe of this word PROPERLY; we yet came to no point in all our defence, but when you see your selfe pressed, you straightwayes post to PROPER and VERY; and yet you neuer define either, nor take the paines to expound your selfe, lest you should be taken with open heresie and blasphemie, in applying one and the same curse pro∣perly and truely to Christ and the damned. Defenc. pag. 7 . li. 19. You say I am to young a Doctour to controll Saint Austen herein; and I say you are a Doctour not olde enough to prooue Austen contrarie to me in this point. ] A farre younger then I am will soone discerne by that I haue sayd, that S. Austen is repugnant in this point to your proper and verie nouelties: for where you say, Death to the godly may in no sort be called a curse; S. Austen thus expoundeth Christes words to the godlie: August con a Faustum. li. 14. ca. 12. Feare not those which kill the bodie, as if Christ had sayd, Nolite timere male dictum mor∣tis corporalis quod temporaliter soluitur. Feare not the CVRSE of a bodily death, which in time is dissolued. And so when he resolueth Moses had none other meaning in this sentence, Cursed is euerie one that hangeth on a tree, then if he had sayd; Mortall is euerie one that hangeth on a tree. Ibid. ca. 7. Poterat enim dicere, maledictus omnis mortalis, aut ma∣ledictus omnis moriens. For Moses might haue sayd; Cursed is e ry mortall man, or cur∣sed is euerie man that dieth. If Moses might truely haue so sayd, as it is euident by S. Austens position, then I trust death in some sort may be iustlie called a Curse, euen to the godlie. But S. Austen sayth, that the death of the bodie is good to the good, and euill to the euill. ] That speech S. Austen sayth, may be tolerated, not in respect of death it selfe, which is euill; but of the mercies of God, which follow the faithfull after their deaths. His words, which you skippe (as your maner is to do when any thing maketh against you) are Dici potest: It may be sayd. But vpon that speech he presently moueth this questi∣on in the beginning of the next Chapter. If the death of the bodie be good to the good, August. de ciuitate D li. 13. ca 3. quo modo poterit obtineri, quòd etiam ipsa sit poena peccati? how may it be resolued, that it is also the punishment of sinne? His resolution you did not reade, or not regard, because it resisted your fansie; but thereby the Reader may see what credit is to be giuen to your words, when you crake of Fathers. August ibid. We must confesse, sayth Austen, that the first men were so created, that if they had not sinned, they should haue tasted no kinde of death; but the verie same, being the first sinners, were so punished with death, that what∣soeuer should spring from their root, should be held subiect to the same punishment. And dis∣cussing the question proposed more at large, he resolueth: August. de ciuitate Dei. li. 3 ca. 4. Sic per ineffabilem Dei misericordiam & ipsa p na vit orum transit in arma virtutis, & fit meritum iusti etiam supplicium peccatoris. So by the vnspeakeable mercie of God the punishment of vice becom∣meth the armour of vertue, and the reuenge of a sinner is made the merit of the iust. Ibidem. Non quia mors bonum aliquod facta est, qu antea malum fuit, sed tantam Deus fidei praestitit gratiam, vt mors, quam vitae constat esse contrariam, instrumentum fieret, per quod transi∣ in vitam. NOT THAT DEATH IS BECOME ANY GOOD, which before was euill, but so great fauour God hath yeelded vnto faith, that death, which most certainly is contrarie to life, is made an instrument (for the good) by which they passe vnto life. And to make men the better to vnderstand the effect of his speech, he bringeth an example out of the Scriptures, where the law is called the strength of sinne. August. de ciuitate D i. i. 13. ca. 5. Why, sayth he, rehearse e this? Because that, as the Law is not euill, when it increaseth the lust of sin∣ners, so death is not good, when it augmenteth the glorie of the sufferes: but as the vniust doe e lly vse not onely euill, but also good things; so the iust doe well vse not onely good, but euen things that be euill. Hence commeth it, that the wicked vse the Law ill, though the Law be good, & BONI be è moriantur, quamuis sit mors malum, and the good die well, though death be euill. I haue touche at large Saint Anstens reasons and resolutions in his owne words, because the Re der should the more cleerely conceiue him, and the discourser see him contrarie to his conceits euen in this point, which he so much denieth. The death of the body, which the godly doe suffer, is to this day an euill of it selfe, and the punishment of sinne; but God of his mercie towards his, hath giuen such grace, not to death, but to their faith, that by suffering death patiently, they shalbe the more plen∣tifully rewarded. But as no wise man will say the Law is euill, when the wicked abuse it to kindle their lusts, so may no sober man say, that the death of the faithfull is good in it selfe, though by Gods goodnesse it bee made to them a triall of their patience, and a passage to a better life. You say the nature of death is changed, and not to the faithfull any longer an euill or part of the punishment and curse, which was laide o sinne. S. Austen saith the contrarie. It is still an euill as it was, and the nature thereof is not changed, though the vse thereof be changed by faith, and the consequents al∣tered by Gods goodnesse. Now things must bee esteemed by their nature, and not by their vse, as Austen teacheth. For euill men vse good things euilly, yet that ma∣keth not good to bee euill, because their vse is inuerted; and euen so, saith Austen, good men haue a good vse of death, which is euill, yet that maketh not the death, which they suffer, to be good in it selfe, or in nature to bee such, as by Gods fauour it is to them. When the death therefore of the faithfull is said by Saint Austen or any others to be good, they meane the vse, and not the nature thereof; and when they say it is euill, or a curse, they meane the nature and not the vse. For touching the nature thereof the Apostle, who must be heard, saith fully and resolutely; Death is an 1. Cor. 15. vers. 26. enemie, that must be destroyed, euen in the godly. And touching the vse thereof, the same A∣postle saith. Philip. 1. To mee Christ is life, and to die is gaine. Against this you neither doe, nor can bring ought, besides waste words, and places either not vnderstood of you, or wrested by you, as spoken of the nature of death, when they meane the vse of death, which the faithfull haue by Gods abundant blessing. Defenc. pa. 71. li 26. Your selfe doe say, The vengeance of the Law once executed on the suertie, can no more in Gods iustice be executed on vs. ] In the vengeance of the law is comprised, cor∣porall, spirituall and eternall death. The whole Christ neither did, nor could taste, and bee a Sauiour. A part he therefore tasted, which was the death of his body, and there∣by freed vs from the rest, which was due to our sinnes. From the death of the body he hath not as yet wholly deliuered vs, but hee will; and in the meane time hee hath broken the linckes of death (whereby those three were coupled together) first in his owne person, who suffered the first kinde of death, and neither of the other, and by vertue thereof hath done the like in all his Saints, leauing their bodies for a season vn∣to death, as his was, that he may raise them after with greater power and glorie, then if they had neuer died. What doeth this hinder, but death may truely bee called a Curse, as in Christ, so in his members; and though execution of vengeance be restrai∣ned from vs, yet imitation of Christ is not excluded, neither is the generall sentence pronounced against the sinne of all mankinde, (To dust thou shalt returne) reuoked but by the resurrection from the dead [ how then was it vengeance on Christ, if it were due to mans nature? ] Death was due to mans nature for sinne, and consequently not due to Christ that had not sinned. When therefore it was laide on him, that deserued it not, it must be taken as the wages of our sinne in his person; and so was a wound to him, though a medicine to vs, because hee Esay 53. was wounded for our transgressions, and wee were healed by his stripes. Defenc. pa. 71. li. 28. Our publike doctrine in England set foorth by Master Nowel, confirmeth as much. To the faithfull, death is now not a destruction, but a changing of life, and a very sure and short passage to heauen. ] Euery thing that is licensed or liked, as profitable to bee publikely read or taught, is not by and by authorised in all things, nor made the publike doct∣rine of this Realme. You would faine oppose Master Nowel to Saint Austen, who if hee were liuing would giue you no thanks therefore. Saint Austens Faith hath beene allowed and receiued by all Synods and Councels since his time, and by the whole Church of Christ, as fit to guide and leade not onely learners, but makers of Cate∣chismes; and therefore the match, if they were repugnant, is somewhat vnequall: but indeede you haue neede to bee taught, how to vnderstand your Catechisme. That death is a destruction to the godly, can you tell who saith so, except it bee your selfe? That it is a changing of life and short passage to heauen, if you meane to the soules of the faithfull, as the Ca echisme doth, no man doubteth thereof; if you meane to their bodies, that they by death change life, and so haue a short passage to heauen, it is a notable falsitie, and heresie, gainsaying the verie grounds of the Christian faith. For priuation of sense, and corruption to dust, is no life, much lesse an heauen; except you will multiplie heauens as you do helles, without reason or trueth. It is most true which the Catechisine intendeth, that death is this to the souls of the faithful, but not to their bodies as yet till the generall day of resurrection; and then the destruction of death in their bodies shall bring them to the full possession of heauenly glory, proui∣ded both for soule and bodie: till that time, their bodies lie vnder the dominion or power of death, which is not yet destroied in euery part of vs, because of sinne dwel∣ling in our bodies, though it throughly be conquered in the person of Christ, and shall be likewise in vs at his appointed time. As little to the purpose is that, which you cite next out of the Catechisme, that Defenc pag. 71. li. 35. Death, which before was a punishment, is now become a vantage. ] For he meaneth, that death before had nothing in it, nor after it but punishment, and so was wholly and onely punishment; which now by Christ is altered, and made an aduantage to vs, as well in respect of the manifold miseries and offences of this life, from which we are deliuered, as in regard of the felicitie and securitie, which the soules of the Saints de∣c ased enioy: but this is nothing to their bodies, which lie depriued of life and cor∣rupted to dust till the finall restitution. Neither is this a comparison with our con∣dition before sinne, (in which we were created,) when soule and bodie should ioint∣ly haue beene translated to the kingdome of heauen without any sense or touch of death, if we had stood fast in obedience; but this noteth, what death is after sinne committed without Christ, and rightly saith, that when once by sinne we were plun∣ged into the depth of all miserie, as a punishment for sinne, then the grace of Christ by the death of his body brake off the chaines of internall and eternall death knit to the former by Gods iustice, and made the naturall death of our bodies, which with∣out Christ was onely a punishment, and the entrance to all other mischiefes of sinne af∣te this life, to become now an aduantage to the soule, which is presently freed from the labours of this life, and inuested and secured with euerlasting blisse. But the body is not yet quited from the burden and corruption laid on it by Gods iustice for the punishment of Adams sinne; and the soule in the midst of her comforts, not onely feeleth the want, but sheweth her desire to receaue her bodie, as appeareth by the pra er of the soules vnder the Altar; who desire not now in heauen reuenge of their persecutors, whom they pardoned and praied for on earth, but woondering at Gods patience, that is daily prouoked and abused, they desire the day of R uel. 6. iudgement, though th t bring with it the destruction of the wicked, because they shall then receaue their bodi s, and with them the fulnesse of Gods promises. That place of the Catechisme doth notably contradict you, who call death to the Defenc pa . 7 i. 3 . G dly the gate of hell; a strange and most vntrue translation: ] The Catechisme speaketh of the soules of the godly, who without Christ were assured by death to enter the bot∣tomles pit of hell, and now by Christ doe safely passe from death to heauen; but what is this to their bodies whereof I speake? doe the bodies of the Saints passe straight vpon death to heauen, as their soules doe? I trust your Catechisme saith not so; and therefore no way contradicteth me. [But I translate it so, when I call death the gate of hell, which is s range and vntrue. ] No good Sir, when I translated the text, because the word Sheol was doubtfull and imported all the power and strength o hell against bodie and soule in this world, and in the next, I retained the verie worde Sheol; as may be seene in the page of my Sermons, which you cite, pag. 150. li. 32. yet what was ment by heol in that place, when I came to examine, I did incline ra∣ther to the word hell, then to the word Graue, since we had in English no more words to expresse the power or danger of Satans kingdome on earth. For neither the griefe, which Ezechias conceaued, nor the phrase, which he vsed, might be rightly referred to the graue. It was not the graue that Ezechiah did so much feare, and so much de∣cline, it was the doubt of Gods displeasure, that vpon deliuerance of him and his citie from the hands of Senacherib, presently strooke the king with sicknesse, and de∣nounced death vnto him, as vnworthie to enioy that protection, which God had shewed from heauen in defence of his people against their enimies: and therefore in the bitternesse of his soule, which he confessed did Esa. 38. v. 14. oppres e him, he said, he should goe to the gates of Sheol, that is, to a dangerous conflict with death, betweene hope and feare of Gods fauour or anger. Neither doth Sheol there import onely the graue: for at first Ezechiah resolued he should die, and so goe farder then the gates or en∣trance of the graue. Neither doth that phrase in other places of Scripture expresse barely the buriall of the bod e. Matth 16. The gates of hell, sayth our S uiour, shall not preuaile against my Church, by which he meaueth nothing lesse then the graue. Iob. 38. Are the gates of death knowen to thee, saith God to Iob, who could not be ignorant, what the sides and bottome of a graue were? Psal. 9. Thou liftest me, saith Dauid, from the gates of death, when yet he was sure to come to his graue. And had Ezechiah from the griefe of his hart, vnder which he Esa. 38. v. 14. chattered like a Swallow, and mourned as a Doue, pronounced death to be the Gate or first inuasion, that hell or Satan made one mans Body for sinne, what had you to say against it? Wisdom 2. By the enuie of the Diuell, saith the wise man, Death en∣tred into the world. The Apostle saith as much, Rom. 5. By sinne Death e red into the world, not as a blessing of God, but on all men to Condemnation. From this Condemnati∣on the Soule by Christ is presently released; the Body is also promised, but yet not cleered from that Condemnation to Death which sinne brought with it. And since the Apostle calleth it an Enemie to Christ, and Austen doubteth not to name it a corporall Curse, why should I not number it rather amongst the gates or powers of hell, then of heauen, since the diuell was the Author, and Christ will be the destroyer thereof. It offendeth you that I say, if we will reason what death is in it selfe, we must resolue it to be a part of Gods curse; which you say is no answere. For who euer denied it to be in it selfe a part of Gods curse for sinne? but (your) expresse words are, death is to the godly no curse properly. ] Doe you now find the foile, how foolishly you haue all this while supported an errour, that yo now come with properly to proppe it vp, least it fall on your head? You can now with shame enough confesse, Defenc. pa. 72. li. 33. WE KNOVV AL SHAME AND AFFLICTION TO ALL MEN IS A KIND OF CVRSE. Then death, a man would thinke, may rightly be called a kind of corporall curse; since that is the sharpest and forest of all outward asf ictions. [ Ibid. li. 32. A kind of curse, who euer denied that? say you. ] Euen your wisedome hath all this while denied it. In your Treatise you bleated forth this resolution. Trea. pa. 45. li. 1. Therefore Christes dying simply as the godly die, MAY IN NO SORT HERE BE CALLED A CVRSE, or accursed. You iterate the ve∣rie same in your defence. Yea, it is the maine ground of your second speciall reason. Defenc. pa. 71. li 15. Christ, you say, was made a curse sor vs or accursed in his death. But to die simply as the godly doe, may in no sort be called a curse or accursed. Christ therefore endured the curse and wrath of God truely. [Your Defenc. pa. 72. li. 6. expresse wordes, you say, are; Death to the godly is no curse properly, but a vantage. ] Are not the other your expresse wordes also that the death of the godly MAY IN NO SORT BE called a curse or accursed? and doth not the force of your reason wholy depend vpon these later wordes? For had you confessed that death, shame and paine were to the godly corporall curses; how then conclude you, that Christ was properly accursed? Because the Apostle saith, He was made a curse? Doeth the Apostle say, he was made a curse properly? It would empt and waste all the wit in your head, from the one to conclude the other. Against your pre∣c e Negatiue, that death in the godly might in no sort be called a curse, I opposed the contrarie, that the death of the bodie was a curse for sinne laide on the bodies euen of the elect; and therefore might iustly be so called in vs, and much more in Christ, though the force of that curse were quenched in Christ, and the coherence thereof interrupted. In floting to and fro you fell to the curse of the Law, and the curse of God, and there, as your fashion is, you auouched what you listed, without any proofe or witnesse be∣sides your selfe; telling vs that Paul mentioned Christs hanging on the tree as a part of the curse of the Law, thereby impolying the whole to be executed on Christ. The whole curse of the Law in my conclusion I shewed to be Conclus. pa. 265. li. 26. externall, corporall, internall and eternall plagues and punishments; and asked you which of these you affirmed of Christ. Externall and corporall curses in Christ I did grant; internall and eternall curses of the Law, which are want of grace, and losse of blisse, with perpetuall dam∣nation of bodie and soule, I said could not be ascribed to Christ without enormous and haynous blasphemie. To this when you should answere, you turne with a trice to your world of wordes, and say, your question was, Whether death to the godly were a curse properly or no. But sir remember the reason was yours, which if you doe not fully proo e, you must wholly loose. You should therefore first define, what a proper curse is, and then applie the parts thereof, as well to Christ, as to the godly; and in so do∣ing, we should soone haue seene both the sense and trueth of your speach. Now you hold fast to the ambiguitie and vncertainetie of the word proper, as though it were e∣nough for you to deliuer Oracles with the breath of your mouth; you say the worde, and then the field is wonne. Defenc. pag. 72. li. 4. Our question is not, what death is in it selfe but what death is to the godly. ] You are so wedded to your owne wordes, that you vnderstand no man els, and scant your selfe. When I reason what the death of the godly is in it selfe, I speake not of the death, which they do no not suffer, that is not their death at all, which they no way feele; but since they die the death of the bodie, that death which they suffer, is to them one thing in his owne force, which they taste and endure, and the consequents after death, by Gods mercie prouided for his seruants, are most euidently other things, and he that cannot distinguish this, is no way worthy to beare the name of a Diuine. For the ioyes of Gods heauenly kingdome are after death prepared for the godly. Shall we therefore say, the ioyes of heauen are death? Besides the smart and anguish which afflicteth the soule when she is driuen from her bodie, death in it selfe is the separation of the soule from the bodie, with priuation of sense and life in the bodie, and resolution of the same into dust. The ioyning of the soule with the bodie was a most wonder∣full worke of God in his creation, and consequently Gen. 1. v. 31. verie good, by the plaine words of Moses. Then is the dissolution of the soule from the bodie repugnant to that which is verie good, and of force euill; as being contrarie to good. The making of mans bodie from Gen. 2. v. 7. the dust of the ground was likewise verie good, by the same witnesse of Moses. Then the returning of the bodie to dust againe must be an euill vnto man, destroying that excellent worke of God. And if sense, motion and action be bles∣sings of God on mans bodie, then the bereauing of these must needs be curses in their kinde. Yea since life was no small fauour of God bestowed on man, when he made him a liuing soule; & (as all the rest in their degrees) was verie good: then death which is the priuation of life, is the taking of Gods good blessing from mans bodie, which cannot chuse but be a curse. It is recompensed, you will say, with a better bles∣sing, euen with the blisse of heauen. ] The soule is, but not the bodie, so long as death preuaileth on it. And this blessing consquent is no way pertinent to the nature of death, no not as the godly do suffer it; but it is a fruit of Gods fauour reserued for the faithfull in Christ Iesus, who remoueth death from their soules, and will doe the like from their bodies, when the time commeth. Without death, you thinke, we can not come to Gods presence. ] And why is that, but because the corruption of sinne dwelleth in our bodies, which is not meet for the kingdome of God? 1. Cor. 15. Corruption cannot inherit incorruption. And whence came this corruption, but from sinne? and consequently the displeasure of God against sinne, both brought corruption to our bodies, and for corruption keepeth our bodies vnder death, excluded for the time from his hea∣uenly kingdome. Yet this is no proper curse to the bodies of the Saints] Had you but once decla∣red what you meant by proper and true curses, sixe lines had long since leuelled this question: but you according to the heigth of your skill, that neuer troubled your selfe but with a few fond conceits, and some vnsetled sentences, trace to and fro some∣times with no curse in any sort, sometimes with no true curse, and sometimes with no curse properly, and will not be drawen to steppe one foot farther. And though I haue no cause to how your timber, that you leaue ragged, yet for their sakes that would see the trueth, I am content to square your worke. Of Gods curse I must say as I did of Gods wrath; (for the wrath and curse of God are all one in effect) it noteth either Gods detestation of sinne, or his commination to sinne, or which is most to this case, Gods indignation or pnnishment prouided for sinne, or executed on sinners. For as man is sayd to blesse with his minde, mouth, or hand, when he meaneth, prayeth, or doth good to any; so is he sayd to curse by thought, word, or deed, when he desireth, vttereth, or worketh euill to any. God is like∣wise sayd to curse in soule, when he detesteth and hateth euill; in voice, when he pro∣nounceth or threatneth euill; in iudgement, when he decreeth or inflicteth euill. To shew how execrable sinne is to God, the Scripture sayth, these things God Pro. 6. v. 16. HA∣TETH, and his soule ABHORRETH them. And so, the way of the wicked is Pro. 15. ABOMINABLE to the Lord. The threats of God against sinne, and his plagues vpon sinne, are euery where extant in the Law, and chiefiy in the 27. and 28. of Deu∣teronomie; where not onely the greatest sinnes are namely and all sinnes in the close generally accursed, but the manifolde plagues of this life persuing the states, the bo∣dies, and soules of sinners are numbred. August. con∣tra Faustu Manicheum. li. 14. ca. . Maledictum est omne peccatum, siue ipsum quodsit, vt sequatur supplicium, siue ipsum supplicium, quod al o modo vocatur peccatum, quia sit ex peccato. Accursed is all sinne, sayth Austen, as well the deed, which prouoketh punishment, as the punishment it selfe, which in another sense is called sinne, because it com∣meth from sinne. The plagues and curses of sinne extending as farre as sinners haue any parts, of which they consist, as bodie and soule; or places, in which they may be, as here so in hell; or pertinents, which they may haue or need for the ease and vse of this life; I called in my conclusion, externall, corporall, spirituall and eternall plagues or pu∣nishments of sinne. Contrarie to cursing is blessing, which is good purposed, promised, o performed to obedience, as Cursing is euill intended, threatned, or prepared for disobedience; and so by the one Contrarie we may rightly measure the other: yea the names of be∣nediction and malediction, which is blessing and cursing, are deriued from bonum and malum, good and euill. And therefore, as we conceaue good and euill, to proceede from the bountie or Iustice of God, so must we recken his blessings and curses to be. Matth. 10. None is good but onely God; that is all true goodnesse is naturally, supreamely, infinitely, and vnchangeably in God, as likewise all true blessednesse is. Neither can any thing haue any degree of true goodnesse or blessednesse, but onely by deriuation from God, and by participation with God. Capable of God, that is of the holinesse, and happinesse, that is in God, and commeth from God, are no Creatures but men and Angels; since on∣ly they haue cognition and fruition of his true goodnesse and blessednesse. To omit the Elect Angels, that haue their measure of heauenly light and power, grace, and loue, righteousnesse and holinesse, ioy and securitie in the continuall presence and seruice of God; when God decreed to reueale him selfe to Man, he gaue him a rea∣sonable Soule endued with vnderstanding and will, to discerne, and desire the good∣nesse, that is in God, and by louing and obeying Gods righteousnesse, to haue Com∣munion with his blessednesse. The better to declare him selfe to man, God gaue him a Bodie to be quickned by his Soule with Life, sense, and motion, as a Tabernacle for the Soule to dwell and worke therein; and made heauen and earth, and all the furni∣ture thereof, for the vse, delight, and safegard of his Body; thereby to assure Man of his exceeding care for man, and bountie towards Man; which were not onely won∣derfull causes of thanks, but euident proofes of greater fauour, and honor reserued for him in the heauens, if he loued and serued the Author, and giuer of these earthly things. The integritie then, and safetie; the sanitie, Actiuitie, and perpetuitie of mans Body free from all dangers, distempers, decases, diseases, and death: The excellent beau∣tie, plentie, vtilitie, and varietie of the Creatures seruing mans vse, obeying mans Rule, and increasing mans delight, were all the maruelous blessings of God on man, not onely testifying to him the wisedome, power, and glorie of the Creator by their natures, properties and forces, but leading him by the eyes, eares, and all other senses to the ad∣miring, embracing, and honoring of that great and mightie Lord, that by these pled∣ges proposed himselfe, with all his spirituall and vnspeakable riches, to be the spouse of mans Soule, and reward of his loue. He therefore that denieth or doubteth these to haue beene the blessings of God on man, when he first made man, and so to re∣maine at this present; is an vnthankfull and wicked abuser, and despiser of Gods goodnesse, and bountie towards him selfe and all mankind. The gifts of God on the Soule of Man were farre worthier then those corporall and externall blessings. For God gaue vnto Man reason and vnderstanding, to be∣hold the greatnesse, and withall the goodnesse of God, and free will, to cleaue fast vn∣to him, without preferring any Creature before him, or matching any thing with him; as likewise affections to inflame the hart with burning and vnceasing loue; Man fee∣ling no defect, nor finding any impediment in that innocencie, tranquillitie, facilitie and consonancie of all the powers and parts of the Soule and body, to the knowledge, loue, and seruice of God. But none of the gifts and graces of God, either outward∣ly prouided for man, or naturally ingraffed in mans Body or Soule, did make Man truely blessed. For had he beene truely blessed by these, he could not so wretchedly haue fallen from these into the Seas of miseries, and heapes of curses, with which he was after for sinne ouerwhelmed. Wherefore we must resolue, that as God is onely truth, because he is by Nature immutable; and onely blessednesse, because no euill can approch him, so no blessing can rightly be called true, but that which is perpe∣tuall; nor full, but that which is free from all miserie. Saint Austen saith wisely. August. de Trinitate. li. 3 cap. 8. Nullo modo poterit esse vita veraciter beata, nisi fuerit sempiterna. By no meanes may any life be TRVELY blessed, except it be EVERLASTING. And againe, August. in Psal. 123. Veritas immortalis est, veritas incommutabilis est. Truth is eternall, truth is vnchangeable. And so Ambrose Ambros. de ijs qui mysterijs initiantur. Creaturae non potest esse veritas, sed species, quae facile soluitur, at{que} mutatur. There can be no truth, but a shew in the Creature, which is easily lost, and changed. And therefore Austen expoundeth August. de Trinitate. li. 13 cap. 9. beatam vitam stabilem, id est, veram; a stedfast, that is a true blessed life. For how can that be thought a true blessing, which may end in euerlasting wretchednesse? True blessings then there are none, but such as ioyne vs to God, who is the true fountaine of all true blessing, that without any separation or defection from him, we may be partakers of him. By true blessing we shall best vnderstand what true cursing is: for as EVILL is no contrarie nature to GOOD, but onely the defect or priuation of good; so there is no true curse to vs, but that which bereaueth vs of our true blessing. August. de Moribus MA∣nicheorum. cap. 4. Malum non se∣cundum essentiam, sed secundum priuationem rectissime dicitur. Euill is most rightly sayd to be no essence, but the priuation of good. To cleaue fast to God, who is only and wholly our good, is the true blessing of men and angels; and consequently to be seuered from God, and to loose all communion with him, is the true curse of men and angels. The true blessings of God bestowed on his children, though they be indeed infinit, yet may they be reduced to these three summes, according to the times wherein they were, are, and shall be performed: that is, TO THE LOVE of God freely affourded vs before the world, whereby we were elected and adopted in Christ Iesus our Saui∣our; TO THE LIKENESSE of God, which we haue in this world, where we are conformed to the image of his Sonne by the working of his Spirit, our sinnes being remitted, that diuided vs from God, and our hearts sanctified with the faith and loue of his trueth; and to THE IIFE of God, which after this world shall be reuealed and imparted vnto vs in the heauens, where shalbe perfect blessednesse without want of any good, or feare of any euill. The priuation of these three blessings bringeth three euils, which are maine and true curses to the wicked. F st, the dislike of God refusing them, the sting of sinne defiling them, the sting of death excluding them from all ioy and peace, r st and ease of soule and bodie for euer. Applie this to Christ and his members, and we shall presently finde by the rules of our Christian faith, how farre they agree to either. No true curse can be ascribed to Christ, which shall seuer him from God, without apparent impietie: for neither the fauour of Gods fauour towards his manhood, nor the fulnesse of grace and trueth in his soule, nor the stedfast and most assured expectation of euerlasting ioy and glorie set before him, euen in his greatest afflictions and temptations, may be doubted of by any that will retaine the name of a Christian; besides the perpetuall and personall v∣nion of his manhood with his Godhead, to which was consequent such a communion with God, and fruition of God, as no elect man or angell euer had, or can haue. Wherefore you must either defend, that the true curse of God did not seuer him from God, but that one and the same nature in him might be truely blessed, and yet truly accursed of God at one and the same time; which are monsters meet for your doctrine; or els you must wholly forbeare to aff rme any true curse of Christ, that shal separa e him from God; and what other true curses you will attribute to him, I would gladly heare. The like, though in farre lesse measure, I yeeld to the membe s of Christ: for since they were before all worlds beloued, elected, and Ephes 1. blessed with all spirituall blessings in Christ, and the 2 Tim. 2. foundation of God standeth sure, hauing this Seale, the Lord knoweth who are his; yea the Rom. 11. gifts and calling of God are without rep ntance. And the Apostle is fully perswaded, that Rom. 8. neither death, nor life, nor angels, r princi∣palities, nor things present, nor things future, nor heigth, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus; but that, whom God did Rom. 8. predestinate, those he called; and whom he called, those he iustified; and whom he iustified, those he glorified: I see no true curse, no not sinne it selfe, that can fasten on Christes members to their destruction; but howsoeuer Ephes. 2. by nature t ey were the chil∣dren of (Gods) wrath, as well as others, yet by grace they are saued. and Rom. 8. all things shall wo for the best to them that loue God, and are loued of him. They may want the e g ft, and graces for a time, and so not feele the fruits of Gods election and voc tion, but with God they are truely blessed, because they are surely setled in hi fauour, and fore-appointed to be heires of Saluation, though they lie cens ed for a while in the masse of Adams condemnation. The loue and then of God is the originall of all true blessing, and since that is vnmouea le towards the lect, how much soeuer they be sometimes plunged by sinne and Satan into feares and doubts of their saluation, all that is to humble them, and not to destroy them; and with God, who is trueth it selfe, they are truely blessed, as being adopted in Christ, though in mans iudgement, and euen to themselues, they seeme neuer so much accursed. What curses, you aske then, may be on the godlie?] Gods loue, which is the ground of all true blessing, can not varie towards them; it is euerlasting and immu∣table like himselfe. All other blessings, saue this, they may want for a season in this world, as before they are lightned and called to the knowledge of God, they haue no blessing in them more then the very Reprobate haue. After they are engrassed in Christ, they may be tos ed and turmoyled with the very same e ernall and corporall plagues and punishments that the wicked are, and often times with greater and tha -per; but then they are supported with inward grace and comfort, which others are not; and when by ignorance, feare, or infirmitie they fall, they shall not perish. Where then in the Curses of God inflicted on the wicked in this world and the next, three things must be marked; their D PRIVANCE of his bles ings of all sorts, their COHERENCE together, and CONTINVANCE for euer; the godly commu∣nicate with the wicked in some part of the first, that is, they may be sequestred from such externall and corporall blessings as this life requireth, but of spirituall they can not vtterly be dep ued, because they must be Iohn. 3. regenerated, and Coloss. 3. renued in the inward man to the Image of God, and Ephes. 1. sealed by the holy spirit of promise, that they may be partakers of Christ here in this world, Ephes. 1. in whom they haue Redemption, euen the Remis∣sion of sinnes according to the riches of his grace. In the rest they may not communicate with the wicked. For where the Curses of God doe FOLLOVV one another vpon the Reprobate, and abide for euer in the highest degree, from this the godly are who∣ly free, as Galat. 1. DELIVERED by the mercies of God in Christ from this present euill world, and 1. Thess. 1. from the wrath to come. If then we be saued from these things by Christ, how much more must Christ him selfe be saued from them, before he could saue others? So that Christ, as I said at first, by submitting him selfe to a part of the curse of the Law, which depriueth vs of all earthly and bodily blessings, and of life it selfe, quenched the whole Curse of the Law, and by his shamefull, wrongfull, and painefull death quited vs from euerlasting death, which was the iust reward of our sinnes. You say if by the Resurrection of Christ, Defenc. pag. 72. li. 11. the Nature of death were changed, then till Christ was risen, death was a punishment to the faithfull themselues. I wonder what mea∣ning there is in this Argument. As well you may say that none were saued till Christ was risen. ] Wonder then at your owne conceits reasons and Authorities. For if the na∣ture of Death were changed, as you suppose it was, since it was first inflicted on Adam, I asked you how and when? before the change you doe not doubt, but it was a punish∣ment, you must graunt, to the godly; for Christ neuer changed the Nature of Death to the wicked. Then if the change were made by Christs dying and rising from the dead; how thinke you doth it not follow vpon this confession, that death, BEFORE it was changed in the godly by Christs Resurrection, was a punishment euen to the godly? And to this end you bring the Catechisme in this very Section. Death which BEFORE was a punishment is now by Christ become a vantage. ] If death were neuer but a vantage to the godly, euen when it was first inflicted, then the change, that you dreame to be made of death in the Godly, is but a fansie. If NOVV it be so, which BEFORE it was not; then BEFORE, what else could it be to the godly, but a pu∣nishment of sinne? My Resolution was and is, that Christ was first promised by Gods owne mouth, Genes. 3. to bruize the Serpents head, before death was inflicted on Adam and his of-spring. And therefore the punishment of mans sinne following could extend no farder in the Elect, then to the death of the Body; vnlesse you will make Gods punishment repugnant to his promise of Christ made before to his Elect; which were to charge God with Inconstancie. And therefore either the death of the Body was neuer any punishment of sinne in Adam, which is repugnant to the Scriptures, and the full consent of all Diuines, old and new, or else it resteth still the same to the Elect, which it was at first, when it was inflicted on them in the person of their first Father. Indeede the promise of Christ to the faithfull brake of the sequence of eter∣nall death, which in the wicked is coherent to the death of their Bodies; and that made God in his Iudiciall sentence pronounced against Adams sinne to comprise no more, but Adams returne to dust, for that he meant no more to his Elect, though he would suffer death to haue his full force against the Bodies and Soules of the wic∣ked both in this world and in the next for euer. As for the Saluation of the faithfull before Christs comming in the flesh, I see not which way that should be endangered by their afflictions in this life. It is written of Lazarus dying before Christ, that Luke. 16. in his life time he receiued euill, and therefore after death, he was comforted. So that their chasticement in this life, which was a moderate and fatherly correction and punishment of their sinnes, could be no impediment to their saluation, but worke rather in them, that were patient in their troubles, as it doth in vs, an 2. Cor. 4. excellent and eternall waight of glorie. For in that the Iudgement of God began here in this life with them, their humbling themselues vnder the mightie hand of God with true Repentance of their sinnes and full assurance by faith that in the promised Seede their sinnes should be pardoned, caused God of his mercy to Iam. 4. turne their eauinesse into ioy, and in 1. Pet. 5. due time to exalt them. Defenc. pa. 72. li. 30. Further you except against me touching Innocents and Martyrs executions, who I say are most blessed. ] If you meane their Soules are most blessed, I said as much before you: if you respect their patience and loue in laying downe their liues for the truth, I make no doubt the death of Gods Saints is precious in his sight. But if the suffering of death were a blessing and aduantage, as you would haue it, it were no such thankes with God to taste of his blessings for his name sake. The greatnesse of their reward sheweth the sha pnesse of their conflict with the sting and smart of death; which be∣cause they refuse not for Christes cause, their patience is the more precious in Gods sight: but this doeth not prooue the corruption of their bodies turned to dust to bee any blessing; but rather an enemie, that must be destroyed, before their bodies shall enioy the true blessing of immortall glorie, that is reserued for them. Defenc. pag. 72. li 36. The holy men are in trueth most glorious and blessed in them. ] If you speake of their bodi s, you speake falsly and directly against the Scripture, which expres ely saith, They are 1. Cor. 15. sow n in cor∣ruption and dishonour, but they shall be raised in incorruption and dishonour; and what can be more repugnant to the trueth, or more reprochfull to the resurrection from the dead, then to say, that corruption in the bodies of the Saints is most glorious and blessed. Defenc. pag. 72. li., 8. The Saints and Martyrs can not be properly cursed, and properly bl ssed too in any mea∣sure. ] Can you see that in the members of Christ, and can you not see so much in Christ himselfe? You defend with might and maine, that Christ was properly and truely accursed; and that he was also truely and properly blessed, except you will bee wor e then a Turke, you may not denie. For euen his manhood was personally ioy∣ned with his Godhead, and more abundantly blessed then any Martyr can be, as ha∣uing in him the fulnesse of blessing for him selfe, and vs all. How hangeth then this not onely monstrous, but impious Assertion of yours together, that the Soule of Christ was truely and properly most abundantly blessed, and most properly cursed at one and the same instant? You will come in with your two countenances and conditions, his owne and ours; but in vaine doe you salue a manifest contrarietie and impictie with countenances. Christ was truely accursed in no condition or countenance, since he was most blessed in himselfe, and the spring of all blessing to vs. Defenc. pag. 73. l. 1. The Soules of the Martyrs are not blessed, vnlesse their bodies be blessed also, and free from the true cur although you seeme to den e this point. ] Of the TRVE curse aide on the bodies of Martyrs, I spake neuer a word, and therefore that is no vncouth Asser∣tion of mine, as your phrase is, but an impudent fiction of yours, that thinke best to bel e the trueth, when you cannot otherwise preuaile against it. I said not a wo d mo e then Saint Austen said before me. August. con∣tra austum Man h. li. 14. cap. 12. Maledictus omnis moriens. Accursed is eue∣rie one that dieth. And when the godly are so streightned, that they must either com∣mit Idolatrie, or suffer Martyrdome, euen in that case of Martyrs, Saint Austen saith. El gendum est maledictum in corpori morte, quo maledicto & ipsum corpus in Resurrectione liberabitur, deuit andum autem maledictum in animae morte, ne cum suo corpore in aeterno ig∣ne damnetur. A Christian, when these two are proposed, must chuse the curse of a bo∣dily death, from which curse the body shall be freed in the Resurrection, and hee must shunne the curse of the death of the Soule, least that be together with the body condemned to euerla∣sting fire. And to prooue this to be, non Anicularis mal dictio, an olde wifes curse, as the Manichees called it, but a propheticall prediction, hee giueth sound reasons to all, that list not to mo ke and elude the trueth as you doe. Contra Pau∣stum li. 14. ca. . Morsipsa ex maledic o. Death it selfe came from the curse, that was laide on all mankinde for sinne. Ibidem. Male∣dictum est omne peccatum, si e ipsum quod sit, vt sequatur supplicium, si c ipsum supplici∣um, quod al o modo vocatur peccatum, qu a fit ex peccato. Accursed is all sinne, whether it b e the fact deseruing punishment, or the punishment it selfe, which is after a sort called sinne, because it is cau d by sinne. Which words though you afterward idlely abuse, yet are they sound and consonant to the Scriptures. Of sinne there is no question, but that is in it sel e truely accursed (as being the roote and cause of all Gods curses vpon men and Angels) where it is not remitted; and howsoeuer of mercie God doeth pa don it vnto his Elect, yet hee hateth their sinnes in such sort, that either sinne must die in them by true and hartie repentance, or they must perish with it. For to the im∣penitent no sinnes are pardoned; Luke. 13. Except yee repent, saith our Sauior, ye shall all perish likewise As sinne is accursed, so all punishment of sinne, saith Austen, is accursed; meaning till it be released, and no longer a punishment of sinne. Which he auoucheth not of the wicked onely, whose punishment is perpetuall, and therefore truely and properly a curse, but of all the godly, when they suffer for their sinnes. August. de Trinitate. li. 4. cap. 12. We, saith Austen, came to death by sinne, Christ by righteousnesse: and therefore where our death is the pu∣nishment of sinne, his death is the sacrifice for sinne. And that the death of our bodies is hatefull to God, euen as our sinne is, he resolueth in these words. August. con∣tra Faustum. li. 14. cap. 6. Nisi Deus odisset peccatum, & mortem nostram, non ad eam suscipiendam atque delendam filium suum mitte∣ret. Except God had hated sinne, and also death in vs, he would neuer haue sent his Sonne t vndertake, and destroy our death. For so much the more willingly God giueth vs immortali∣tie (of our bodies) which shalbe reuealed with Christes comming, how much the more mercifully he hateth our death, which hung on the crosse, when Christ died. Here you may learne that the bodies of Martyrs are so acceptable to God, that he hateth death, which detaineth them in dust; and that the loue, which he beareth to the one, is the cause why he will destroy the other, as an enimie to them, hom he loueth, and therefore iustly hated of him: but in the meane time, how false is this reason, which you so much stand on? God in his secret and euerlasting counsell loueth the soules and bodies of his Saints, as being the 1. Cor. 6. members of Christ, and 1. Cor. 6. temples of his holie spirite: therefore he hateth neither sinne in their soules, nor death in their bodies. Nay rather the more he loueth the one, the more he hateth the other, and sent his Sonne to destroy both sinne and death in his elect, as the Enimies, that hinder and defer the true blisse promised to his seruants. Defenc. pa. 73. li. 7. You say we must call things by those names which God first allotted them. That I deny, if God since euidently hath altered them. My rule had more reason in it, then you doe comprehend. For if it be written of Adam in his innocencie, that God Gen. 2. v. 19. brought (all liuing creatures) vnto man to see how hee could call them, and how soeuer the man na∣med the liuing creature, so was the n me thereof; how much more shall it be verified of Gods wisdome, Ia . 1. With whom is no change, that he Acts. 15. knew all his workes from the be∣ginning of the world, and therefore 1. Pet 1. the word of the Lord abideth for euer, that he may be Rom 3. iustified in whatsoeuer he saith? [but God, you say, hath made the alteration him∣selfe.] or else your conceite deceiueth you. For God hath not reuoked the generall iudgement, which he gaue vpon all men for sinne, Ge es. 3. Dust thou art and to dust thou shal returne, but he hath performed his promise made before he inflicted this pu∣nishment, that the Seed of the woman should bruize the Serpents head. And therefore there is no change made by God, as you imagine, but he qualified his sentence at the first pronouncing of it on all his elect, euen as it standeth to this day. And were there that addition since made by God, which you vntruely dreame of, Yet Saint Austen G d wor th good by uill. telleth you, that altereth not the name of punishment first imposed on all, but shew∣eth Gods goodnesse towards his owne. August. de c uitate D i. li. 13. cap. 6. Whatsoeuer it is in those that die, which with bitter paine taketh away sense, by religious and faithfull enduring it, it increaseth the mer te of patience, Non aufert vocabulum poenae, it taketh not away the name of punishment. His firme resolution is. Ibidem. Wherefore as touching the death of the body, that is, the separation of the soule from the bodie, when such as die suffer it, Nulli bona est, it is good to no man. And noting the vse, that God maketh thereof in crowning his Saints, with as ample words, as you haue any; he resolutely concludeth. Ibidem. li. 13. cap. 7. Mors ergo non ideo bonum videri debet, quia in tantam vtilitatem non vi sua, sed diuina opitulatione conuersa est. Death the OVGHT NOT TO BE THOVGHT GOOD, because by Gods mercie, and not by any force of his own, it is turned to so great vtilitie. And this assertion you and your adherents must yeeld vnto, least you rather conuince your selues, then that woorthy pillour of Christes church to be in an errour. For the ground that he standeth on, is sure. God turneth euill to a good vse, and will you therefore denie euill to be euill, because God vseth it well? to how many good and blessed purposes doth God vse the diuell? and shall the diuell by your doctrine now cease to be a diuell? what excellent effectes doth God worke by the sinnes of the faithfull? shall we therefore not call them, nor account them sinnes? you be cleane out of your byas good Sir, when you come in with your changes made by God, to alter the names or natures of things that be euill. Defenc. pag. 73. li. 10. Afflictions and death, which originally and Naturally were punishments for sinne, and so are still in the wicked, the same to the godly are since changed, and now not punishments nor curses. ] To wise men there is enough said; to bablers, who will still talke they know not what, nothing is enough. The Scriptures and Fathers may not be set aside to giue way to your follies. Daniell confessing the sinnes of himselfe, and of his people Israel, plainly saith. Dan. 9. Therefore the Curse is powred vpon vs, written in the Law of Mo∣ses the seruant of God, because we haue sinned against him. Baruc made the same Barue. 1. & 3. confes∣sion during the Captiuitie. Saint Iohn in his Reuelation, of the Citie of God now brought to the presence of the Lambe saith, Reuel. 22. There shall be no more Curse; meaning amongst the faithfull, as there was before. For the wicked then shall be most deepe∣ly accursed. Saint Austen learnedly and largely writing of the miseries of mans life saith. Augu t. de ciuitate D i. li. 22 ca. 22. Quot & quantis poenis agitetur genus humanum, quae non ad malitiam nequitiam{que} iniquorum, sed ad conditionem pertinent miseriam{que} communem, quis vllo sermone digerit, quis vlla cogitatione comprehendit? With how many and how great punishments mankinde is persued, which pertaine not to the malice and leudnesse of the wicked, but to the common condition and calamitie of man, what tongue c n expresse, what heart can comprehend? And repeating many particulars, which there may be seene, he concludeth: Ibidem. Satis apparet humanum genus ad luendas miseriarum poenas esse damnatum. It appeareth sufficiently, that mank de is condemned to endure the punishments of miseries. And lest you should flie to your shift of improper speeches, as your maner is, S. Austen exquisitly discus∣seth and resolueth this question that these miseries and afflictions come from the iust iudgement of God for the punishment of sinne, though withall God meane to recall his owne from sinne. August. in expositione e∣pistolae ad Ro∣manos inc ∣ata. So great is the constancie of Gods iustice, that when SPIRITV∣ALL and ETERNALL punishment is released to the penitent, yet CORPORALL af∣flictions and torments, with which we haue knowen many Martyrs to be exercised, and lastly DEATH it selfe, which our nature d s rued by si , is remitted to none. Quod nim iusti ho∣mines & pi tamen exsoluunt ista supplicia, de i sto Dei iudicio venire credendum est. And that euen iust and godly men doe abide these punishments, we must beleeue it to proceed from the iust iudgement of God. S. Peter plainly sheweth, that euen those v rie sufferings which the righteous endure, pertain to the iudgement of God. Neither was S. Au ten ignorant of Gods good purpose in afflicting his Saints, but he therein auoucheth as I do, that iustice is tempered with mercie. August. de vera re igione ca. 15. Iustitiae pulchritudo est cum benignitatis gratia con∣cordans, vt quoniam bonorum inferiorum dulcedine decepti sumus, amaritudine poenarum rudiamur. It is the beautie of Gods iustice conioyned with the grace of his clemencie, that because we were deceiued with the sweetnesse of our inferiour pleasures, we should be chastened with the bitternesse of punishments. Which he specifieth in the bodie of man: that the Ibidem. bodie of man, which before sinne was in his kinde most excellent, after sinne became weake and sub cted to death, though this were the iust reuenge of sinne, yet it sheweth more of Gods mercie, than of his seueritie. Consult all your Consorts in this Realme, and send for helpe beyond the seas, as you did in making your Defence, and you shall neuer be able to ouerthrow this position of S. Austens, which is the verie point, that at first I maintained. And because you are so pert with the publike doctrine of this Realme, looke not in your Catechisme prouided for boyes, which yet you had need more exactly to learne, but in the booke of Common prayer aduisedly considered of by the whole Clergie, and confirmed by the full authoritie of Prince and Parliament to be vsed in all the Churches of this Realme, and you shall there see the same confession made by the mouthes and hearts of all the godly in this land, since the profession of true reli∣gion here e tablished. The Church of England in her publike prayers to God, where she may neither faulter nor dissemble, thus maketh he humble, but true petitions vn∣to God: Lord we beseech thee, that we which are iustly punished for our offences, may be m rcifully del ered by thy goodnesse. So againe: The f rth Sunday after th. . God which knowest &c. grant to vs the e. l h of b die and soule, that al those things which we suffer for sinne, by thy helpe m may well ouercome. And amongst the prayers after the Letanie in time of dearth and fa∣mine: Grant, that the scarsitie and dearth (WHICH VVE IVSTIY SVFFER FOR OVR INIQVITIE) may through thy goodnesse be turned into cheapnesse and plentie. And likewise there for faire weather: We humbly beseech thee, that although we for our iniquities haue worthily deserued this plague of raine and waters, yet vpon our true repentance thou wilt send vs such weather, whereby we may receiue the fruits of the earth in due season, and learne both by thy punishment TO AMEND OVR IVES, and for thy clemencie to giue thee praise. See you heere the faith and confession of the Church of England: That we are iustly PVNISHED for our offences, with extern ll and temporall afflictions. And by those punishments we should learne to repent and amend our liues, that God of his goodnesse may release vs of the Plagues which we haue worthily d erued for our iniquities, and iustly suffer for our sinnes. Gods purpose is to amend vs you will say, and not to punish vs.] The Church of England eleeueth that God doth both. He doth pun sh euen his owne for example of his iust i gement yet not to destruction, as he doth the wicked, but to rep ntance, that is, to the acknowledging and amending our mi deeds. [This you thinke is not properly pun shment.] It is not properly ven∣geance, because the measure is tolerable, and the purpose is fauourable. [Only Christ, you say, suffered the whole proper punishment of our sinnes. In Christ the measu e of puni hment was tolerable, not exceeding his strength and patience; and the purpose of God in punishing him was arre more honourable; to wit, for the full satisfa tion of Gods iustice by the innocencie and dignitie of Christes person for the clensing and sauing our soules and bodies, for the dest oying of Sa ans power and force by the rule of righteousnesse, and for the exalting of Christes manhood to be the Lord in heauen and earth ouer quicke and dead. So that pun shment in the wic∣ked is to de ruction, in the godly to Correction and E endation, in Christ to satis∣faction and humil ation, before the glorie of Gods kingdome was layed on his shoulders. You must remember, Defenc. pag. 7 . li 20. your owne place of A sten: Mal dictum est omne peccatum. Th c rse all sinne, which is two s ld, either that which we co mit against Gods la , or els the very punishment of that sinne. ] You should remember to vnde stand first S. Au∣st ns Latine, and then S. Austens meaning. MALEDICTVM is not eere a Sub∣stantiue, as you mistake it, but an Adiect e, as appeareth by S. Austens vsing in this ve y sentence, but the line before, the Masculine gender Maledictus, to which this is ioyned with a Coniunction Copulatiue; and his al ering the case with a Preposition, the verie word before, where he vseth the Substantiue: for thus stand his words; August. con∣tra ustum . li. 14. ca. 4. Hoc est enim mortuus est, quod maledictus, quoniam mors ipsa ex maledicto est, & male∣dictum est omne peccatum. D ad is all one with accursed, because death commeth from the curse, and a cursed is all sinne; and not as you say, The curse is all sinne. The words next before contradict it: for death, which is the punishment of sinne, S. Austen sayth pro∣ceedeth from the curse; and by that concludeth it to be accursed, but not the curse it selfe, whence death commeth: for that which commeth, and that whence it com∣meth, must be different. Ne ther doth S. Austen meane, that the act of sinne com∣mitted by man is the curse of God, since that must be omewhat in God, besides the punishment which proceedeth from God; but sinne committed by man is hated and d tested by Gods holinesse, and that hatred and reiection of sinne, which is in God, is the first curse of sinne. And so S. Austen expoundeth hi selfe: Ibid ca. 6. Quid ergo mirum, si maledictum est Deo, quod Deus od ? What maruell then, if that be accursed to God, which God hateth? So that the hatred and detestation, which God in his holinesse hath of sinne, and of the person for sinne, whereby his iustice decreeth vengeance on the sin∣ner, is the curs that is consequent to sinne: and so the word EXECRABLE signifieth one detested, hated, and re ected. Accursed is sometimes taken for worthie of the curse, and deseruing the same, and so may the godly be sayd to be accursed in them∣selues, that is, prouoking and deseruing the curse, though in mercie God spare them, and holde them blessed in Christ, who are beloued for Christ s sake. The punish∣ment of sinne, which is most iust with God, is a curse to the sufferer, that is, g ieuous and hatefull to him, as sinne was hatefull to God when it was committed. And so much the word MAIVM, whence maledictus commeth, signifieth in the Scrip∣tures, that is, euill, or displeasing to God or man. For as sinne, which man committeth, is displeasing, that is, euill in the eye of God, though the doer delight therein; so pu∣nishment, which man suffereth for sinne, is g ieuous, that is, euill to the sense of the sufferer, though it be most righteous with God, that is the Inflicter. Defenc. pag. 7 . li. 22. Now your Testimonies Pag. 96. doe meane Christ was not made a Curse or sinne the first way, that is he was not in himselfe sinfull nor hated; they deny not the second, that he was How Christ was made a Curse for vs. made the proper punishment, or Sacrifice for sinne. ] You reach beyond your strength, when you come to interpret Fathers. And no maruaile, for you that vnderstand not your Catechisme rightly, how should you intermeddle with expounding those, whom you neuer read, nor regarded? and that will well appeare by your exposition in this place. What Christ was naturally and continually in himselfe, he can not be said to be made that for vs. To be MADE importeth a change, which was not before, and FOR VS excludeth the respect of himselfe, and noteth as much as for our good, or for our sakes. So Christ when he was true God, and with his Father from euerlasting, was Iohn. 1. made flesh, not for himselfe, but for vs, Esay. 9. vnto vs, saith the Prophet, a child is borne, and vnto vs a Sonne is giuen. Euen so, when Christ 2. Cor. 5. knew no Sinne, he was made sinne for vs; and when he was the promised Seede, in which Galat. 3. all Nations should be blessed, he was made a Curse for vs. When then the Scriptures or Fathers obserue, what Christ was made for vs, they imply that before, and of himselfe he was other∣wise. Now of Saint Pauls words, Christ was made a Curse for vs, Cyrill and Epiphani∣us bring two different expositions. The one, which is Cyrils, that Christ was Cyrill. in De∣fensio. 1. Ana∣thematis. ad Ori ntales. not truely accursed, but reputed amongst the vnrighteous, being indeede iust; and as his Con∣demnation by men did acquite vs with God, so his being reputed and esteemed by men amongst the wicked and accursed, did cleare vs from the Curse before God. The other, which Epiphanius followeth, that as God promised by his Prophet, saying, Ose. 13. ó Death, I will be thy Death, ó hell, I will be thy destruction: So Christ was Epiphanius contra Marci : heres. 42. made a Curse to the Curse, that is a dissoluing of the Curse, and a blessing to all that beleeued in him. To both these you answere, Christ was not made sinne in himselfe. ] As much to the purpose, as Charing Crosse to Cheape side. For they doe not onely say, that he was iust and blessed in himselfe, but they shew how Saint Pauls words must be vn∣derstood, that he was made a Curse amongst men, that is reiected and condemned as a wicked Malefactor; or that he became a Curse to the Curse, that is a Destroyer of the Curse due to vs. Neither of these can you refute, and therefore your Reason drawen from these words of the Apostle, is not worth a rotten rush to conclude any thing for your purpose; and either of their expositions hauing two parts; a Negatiue, and an affirmatiue, you cleane misse their meaning in both, and say they deny not, but Christ was made a Defenc. pag. 73. li. 25. Sacrifice for sinne. Now if you remember Saint Austens words, on which you would seeme to stand, you shall see two Conclusions directly drawen against two points of your new found Doctrine. For if nothing can be truely accursed in Man but the committing of sinne, and iust suffering for sinne, as you concea e Austens words, then Christ could n i∣ther way be truely accursed. For first Esa. 53. 1. Pet. 2 he did no sinne; and committing none, he could not be accur ed by the guilt of our sinne, as you teach he was. Secondly, the punish∣ment of sinne is not truely accu sed, till it be iustly deserued. But Christ was iust and holy, as the Scriptures auouch, euen when he suffered for vs. He 1. Pet. 3. suffered the iust for the vniust; and Act. 3. ye denyed the holy one and Iust. Therefore Christ was not truely ac∣cursed by his suffering for sinne. And you your selfe before you be ware, confesse thus much, whiles you would auoyd these Fathers, and vphold the Apostles words as per∣tinent to your purpose. For you graunt the Apostles meaning to be, that Christ was made a Sacrifice for sinne; and consequently that he could neither be defiled with our sinne, nor accursed for our sinne. For a Sacrifice though it be slaine, and beare the sinne of others; yet is it not onely cleere from sinne, but holy to God, and accepted for sinne. If the Sacrifices, which were but figures of the true Sacrifice, were neither defiled nor accursed, though they were slaine for sinne, how much more then shall the death of the true Sacrifice be in deed vndefiled and blessed with God, for which all our sinnes are remitted, and our Curses abolished. And this iustineth both Cyrils and Epiphanius exposition. Christ was . not in truth a curse, or sinne, saith Cyrill; but he was called by those names, that he might abolish the cur e nd sinne. For so are Sacrifices in the Scriptures called sinne, which abolish sinne, and the curse for sinne. The same reason may serue for Epiphanius words. Christ . tooke away the curse for our sinne, when he fastned himselfe to the Crosse, as a voluntarie Sacrifice for sinne: and so much Ambrose expresseth. God Ambros. in . ed Galat. cap. 3. deliuering Christ, that was there to willing, vnto death for those, who were vnder the curse of the Law, made him a curse after the same maner, that a sacrifice offered for sinne, is in the Law called sinne. Thus whiles you would vndertake to answer these Fathers, you haue confes ed, that not onelie they refused your hatefull exposition of the Apostles words, but euen refute your sin∣full doctrine, that Christ was truely defiled with our sinnes, and truely accursed for our sinnes, when they acknowledge Christ to be the true sacrifice for sinne, and there∣by to purge our sinnes, and abolish our curse, being made of God a death to death, and a destruction to hell. Nazianzene saith, Nazianz su∣per illud quum consumm sset Iesus hoss me. Christ not onely receaued on him all absurd and odious names, but that, which is most absurd of all others, he was called sinne it selfe, and THE CVRSE IT SELFE, though he were not so. For how should he be sinne, that freed vs from sinne? or how should he be a curse (indeed) that Redeemed vs from the curse of the Law? Nazianzene admireth Christs patience and humilite, that endured to haue himselfe accounted, called, and abused by men as a sinfull and accursed wretch; and saith, Christ was content so to be made a curse for vs, when indeed he was none, by the wrong, which he suffered at mens hands, to free vs from the iust desert of our sinnes with God. Which exposition I bring to let the Reader see, how much the learned and godly Fathers detested your proper and true curses in the whole man∣hood of Christ. But we shall haue fresh proofe, Defenc. pa. 73. That your speech was sound, your reason euident, and that I openly peruerted your words. ] You were neuer brought vp belike, but where will went for reason, and speech for proose; you tell vs so often of sound and euident rea∣sons, when you bring nothing besides your naked and absurd fansies. Your speech, you say, was sound that li. 26. Christes dying simply, but as the godly die, might in no sort heere be called a curse. ] Take home your As, that you set running abroad to breed a brab∣ble, and your speech hath neither soundnesse nor sense in it. That Christ died the same kinde of death, which the godly die, I meane the death of the bodie, (and not of the soule, nor of the damned) is a plaine position of the Scriptures. Co inth 4. We are af∣flicted, persecuted, and deiected, saith Paul; Co inth 4. euerte where we beare about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Iesus: and againe, Phil. 3. I count all things losse, that I may be CONFOR∣MED to his death. Christ laid downe his life for vs, saith Saint Iohn, and 1. Ioh. 3. we ought to lay downe (our) liues for (our) brethren. Aug st. in . 70. Ibi mortuus est Christus, vbi tues moriturus: there (or in that part) Christ died, in which thou shalt die. . Hactenus morerentur ad Christi gratiam pertinentes, quatenus pro illis ipse mortuus est Christus, carnis tantum morte, non SPIRITVS. We are Redeemed, that such as pertaine to Christes grace should so farre forth die, how farre forth Christ himselfe died for them, that is onely the death of the bodie, and not of the SPIRIT. So that the godly are conformed and matched with Christ, as touching the kind of death, which must be common to both; and that being a punishment and curse on our nature for sinne, why is it not truely saide of Saint Austen, that Christ receaued our curse, that is a bodily death, to free vs from euerlasting death, which is the true curse of body and soule? Defenc. pa. 73. i. 28. The reason is euident, because the text heere doth speake and treat of the curse of the Law against sinne: such therefore was Christs curse, which he sustained. ] The text spea∣keth of the curse of the Law pronounced against vs for violating the Law. That curse the Apostle doth not applie to Christ, as you doe; but bringeth another text of the Law, where the violent and shamefull punishment of hanging on a tree is called a curse. To which since Christ submitted himselfe for our akes, and so suffering a curse of punishment, he discharged vs from the whole curse of the Law due to vs for transgressing. Wherefore your leaping from the one curse to the other, and from a part to the whole, is no euident reason, but an euident falsehood, which Chryso∣stome, Augustine, Ambrose, Nazianzene, Epiphanius and Cyrill doe mightely im∣pugne, and your selfe in the end doe yeeld, Christ may be rightly called sinne and so a curse, in that he was a sacrifice for sinne and for the curse, which is as cleane contrary to your Assertion heere, as holinesse and righteousnesse is to vncleannesse and wic∣kednesse. You Def nc. pag. 73. li 36. openly peruert my words, affirming that I say death here, (that is Christes death no∣ted, Galat. 3. vers. 13.) may in no sort be called a curse, when I expresly euen there, and euery where say the contrarie. ] You are very iealous, that I goe about to cleare you from your absurd and false conceits without your consent; but your feare is needlesse, as your quarrell is causelesse. I applied not HERE to Christes death, as you most fond∣ly mistake, and inuert my report of your words, but I referre HERE to the curse there mentioned, obseruing in you, that you defended Death (which all the godly haue common with Christ, as touching their bodies,) Conclus. pa. 268 li. 17. might in no sort here be called a curse, that is the curse, which the Apostle here nameth. I am so far from enuying your glorie in this point, though I pitie your folly, that where you make Christes Defenc. pag. 52. li. 1. Afflictions eue∣rie one, both small and great, (from the day of his birth to the houre of his death) to bee proper punishments and so true curses and effects of Gods very wrath in him for our sinne; I will adde, if you will, that Christes hunger, wearinesse, weeping and growning in spirit (for these are afflictions brought into mans nature by sinne) are likewise defended by you to be true curses in Christ. Howbeit you shall doe well, in all these miseries and infir∣mities of our life and nature, to finde out Christes most blessed humilitie and charitie, not refusing them for our comforts, and leaue the proper and true curses of God for the diuell, and his associates. D fenc. pag. 74 li. 1. Your greatest exception is, that this curse laide on Christ, cannot b e vnderstood of the whole curse of God, or of the law. ] The exception is such, that withall the wits and shifts you haue, you shall neuer auoide it. For where the whole curse of the Law hath in it corporall, spirituall, and eternall death well deserued by sinne, and most iustly inflicted on sinners, as we see in the wicked and reprobate, who for sinne are subiected to these three deathes or curses; the two last, which are spirituall and eternall death, you can not offer to Christ without hereticall and diabolicall blasphemie; and to draw the A∣postle into that societie, were arrogant and impudent impietie. Since then there are so notorious impediments, why Christ neither did, nor could suffer the whole curse of the Law denounced to sinne, and prouided for sinne, with what face and consci∣ence you shift and shuffle this geere, let the Reader iudge, if he haue either godly wis∣dome, to which you appeale; or but humane sense, from which I doe not appeale. Your conueiance is as weake, as your cause is wicked. Christ, you say, suffered the whole curse of the Law, saue what you excepted thence, Defenc. pag. 74 li. 19. onely so farre as possibilitie of things could admit, that is which you saw was impossible he should suffer. And so wee haue here your owne confession, that possibilitie of things could not permit Christ to suffer the whole curse of the Law, and yet you make the Apostle to meane all these impossibilities. For he maketh none of your exceptions. But looke somwhat neerer, and you shall see greater barres to that totall assertion then impossibilities, euen hor∣rible impietie and blasphemie; which if they barre not you from your boldnesse, they terrifie me and all good Christians to come within the sound of them. This shift be∣ing shame l, you slide to another as absurd and impertinent to your purpose, as the former. For were it granted, which yet is no way prooued, that Christ suffered some parts of the curse in his whole manhood, will you thence inferre, that he suffered the whole curse? By what hold-fast hangeth this together, but by your headynesse, that will say any thing? If a man should thus reason: Paul with his whole manhood wrote part of the Scriptures: Ergo, hee wrote the whole Scriptures: or Nymrod and his companie laboured with all their might and skill to build part of the Tower of Babel: Ergo, they built the whole tower of Babel, notwithstanding God skattered them; would you not deride these reasons? Yours is as ridiculous. Defenc. pag. 74. li. 31. In other respects, this suffering of Christ may ell be called the whole curse or punishment of sinne. ] Your other respects since you thinke them not worth the repeating, I thinke them lesse worth the refuting. If you haue said ought before touching this matter, I haue not left it vnsifted; and as you send mee to prie after your proofes, I send you to toote after my answeres. Onely this is worth the noting that where you referre your selfe to your eleuenth page among others; I finde nothing there to this purpose, but that you say namely of Pag. 11. li. 25. & 27. Reiection, malediction, and dereliction; o In Christ could vtterly be none of these: and here you say, the whole Malediction of sinne and of the Law was tru∣ly and properly suffered by Christ. Such graces you haue to declare your meaning by plaine Contradictions. Defenc. pa. 74. li. 23. Marke if our publike Doctrine be not the same. Diram execrationem suscepit. ] I marke well enough how you wrest and wrong the Catechisme, to force it to your error. The Chatechisme saith; that kind of death was aboue all others execrable and detestable, which yet Christ chiefly would suffer for vs, that he might receaue that grieuous Curse, which our sinnes had deserued, on him selfe, and so quite vs from it. That kinde of Death, which all men iustly detested and abhorred, Christ would chiefly chuse, that thereby he might receaue on himselfe the grieuous Curse, that was due to vs, and so quench it. The Catechisme then graunteth, this was all the kinds of Death that Christ suffered for vs, which because it was full of shame and paine, he calleth a greeuous Curse or punishment. What is this to the whole Curse of the Law, in which the death of the Soule by want of grace, and the death of the damned, which is the second death, are comprised? You would faine haue all men of your mind, and that maketh you thinke euery man speaketh in your sense; otherwise the Catechisme, if you peruert it not, is cleere enough from your conceits of hell inflicted by Gods immediate hand on the Soule of Christ, though it talke sometimes of things not altogether so fit for Childrens vnderstanding. And had the Catechisme gone farder to mention other de∣grees of our Curse, yet so long as, in se suscepit, is not precisely to suffer the same, but to vndertake and to discharge all, that is due to vs, Christ might well, and did take vpon him in his Body to pay the Price and amends of our whole Curse, but not to suffer all the parts thereof, which were spirituall and eternall death, though he gaue Recompence and satisfaction euen for those, when he quited vs from them. Defenc. pa. 74. li 33. After this you thinke it strange, that I say, Christ suffered and dyed iustly, and was hanged on the Tree by the iust sentence of the Law; and that so he was by imputation of our State and Condition vnto him, sinnefull, defiled, hatefull, and Accursed. ] You coyne so ma∣ny fresh and false presumptions and positions, that I thinke nothing strang in you; so you may flie to a Phrase, or cast a countenance on the matter at the last. Howbeit I take indeede these two positions of yours to be very contumelious and iniurious to the person and death of Christ, and no way iustifiable by the sacred Scriptures. And therefore you had neede looke to your proofes, that they be sound; a needlesse re∣proch to the Sonne of God is some sinne, I can tell you. Ibid. li. 36. [ All which I auouch, because he vndertooke by Gods ordinance as our Surety, to receaue our condemnation vpon him so far as his own nature and condition could possibly admit. ] If vouching were proouing, this matter were at an end; but it will cost more then hoate liquor before all this be right∣ly concluded out of the Scriptures. You soake it out from a poore similitude of a Surety ioyntly bound with the Debtor to pay the whole and the v ry same, in which the Debtor is condemned; but the word of God will allow you no such Thraldome in Christs Suertiship, much lesse our whole Condemnation to be any way possible in his person. He discharged he whole from vs, that is as well spirituall as eternall death, and satisfied for both by a iust exchange; but he suffered neither of them, because the Sonne of God by no rule of Gods Iustice could be voide of grace, nor con∣demned to euerlasting fire, as we most iustly were. You did well therefore to bind your owne Similitude to a Post, least it should fall on the Rocks of open heresie and blasphemie; but your restraining of it, least it should be both false & wicked, sheweth the tude to haue no iust ground in the word of God, though some Resemblance thereof may be tolerated, so long as i is not vrged to conclude any more then the Scriptures confesse. For similitudes in Gods causes are so farre al owed, as they are expr applied by the spirit of t h, and no arder; otherwise by pretence of a Pa∣rable we may prooue what we list: but you were best deuide your Assertions, and so we shall the sooner dispatch them. Defenc. pag. 75. li. 4. Ag st my Ass on yo say, by no sent nce of the Law Christ hanged on a Tree. ] I say so still. For the sentence of the Law pe mitting or prescribing men to e hanged, touched no man besides the offender; and not him, but vpon desert iustly prooued before them, that had the ex on of the Law in charge. hus Christ was not hang∣ed, but most iniuriously ouerwhelmed with the out ies and tumult of the people, when the Iudge professed him innocent, as indeede he was before God and Man. Ibidem. li. 7. [ I answere, to d e for sinne, was a necessarie part of the generall Curs vpon all sinners. ] And I reply, you know not what you answ e. The Law of Moses appointed death to no Man by the course of nature, but by the violent hands of others, that were Magi∣strates. The Naturall death, which followeth all men, was inflicted by Gods owne voice on Adam in Paradi e as a punishment of sinne, and is irreuocably inherited by all Adams Children, not by the sentence of Moses Law, which came more then two thousand yee es after Adams fall but by the order of Gods Creation, which deriued from the Parents to the Children the branches as well of obedience, as disobedience. The sentence of Moses Law Decreed not death against all offences, though it pro∣nounced the Curse vpon all; but against Idolaters, blasphemers, disobeyers of Pa∣rents, Murderers, Adulterers, and such like; to whom there were no Sacrifices pre∣scribed, but death awarded. These two deaths then, a Naturall by the hand of God on all men, and a violent by the hands of the Magistrate on some certaine offenders, haue difference enough a man would thinke; so that when the one is proposed, for you to runne to the other, is a manifest faile in your answere, and a flat confession, that you can not prooue, Christ was iustly hanged by the sentence of the Law. And yet you mistake your selfe euen in that, to which you flie for helpe. For Christ was not subiect by Nature, but onely by will, to the death of the Body, because he was cleere from actuall and originall sinne by which death first entred into the world, and inua∣ded all men. Now in the violent death which Christ receaued from publike Autho∣ritie by the sentence of Pilate, the Iudge perceaued, a d not once nor twice pronoun∣ced him faultles, and when he could not otherwise appease the rage of the People, but by condemn ng Christ to death; Pilate Mat h. 27. tooke Water, and washed his hands before the Multitude, saying; I am innocent of the bloud of this Iust Man, looke you to it. With what face then can you being a Christian auouch, that Christ was iustly hanged by the sentence of the Law, when God so prouided, that he, which gaue the sentence, should often and earnestly witnesse the Contrarie. Defenc. pag. 75. i. 8. What say you then to Christes death? did he die iustly? if he died by the rule of Gods iustice, then he died iustly. ] I say the longer you reason, the farder you straie from the Christ was st and Innocent in his death. Question and yet conclude nothing. God hath a double rule of his punishing Iustice, the one r aled, by which we must be gouerned; the other reserued to himselfe, which we must reuerence, because it cannot be but iust in him, though it be hid from vs. The sentence of the Law is the reuealed will of Gods reuenging Iustice, by that I vtterly denie, that Christ any way deserued to be hanged. And thus much Saint Peter affirmeth, when he saith, 1. Pet. 3. Christ suffered; the iust for the vniust, that he might present vs to God. If Christ by Gods reuealed will suffered iustly, then Christ himselfe must be vniust. But if he were iust, euen when and as he suffered, then were his suffe∣rings vndeserued euen by the sentence of the Law, which is the will of God prescri∣bed vs, that we must follow. Otherwise who can suffer as Martyrs or innocents, if we speake of Gods secret Iustice, since he hath cause enough to deliuer all men for their due deserts to death, when pleaseth him; though he be graciously content, that his seruants shall die most innocently in respect of his will reuealed, that is not for any of∣fence, which their persuers can iustly chalenge; and most gloriously, when they giue testimonie to his trueth with their bloud, who yet in his sight may not, nor can not iustifie themselues. This therefore is another leape of yours, to start from the sen∣tence of the Law to the secrets of Gods counsell; and most vntruely and iniuriously to pronounce men, that are sinners before God, to be innocents in their deaths; and Christ, that was truely innocent before God and man, to be iustly hanged by the sentence of the Law. As you misse the Rule, so doe you the Iustice of Gods will; and that which you would make to be the curtaine of your cause, I take to be the very puddle of your er∣ror. For where you would insinuate, that either Christ was iustly put to death, or els God did vniustly deliuer him to death, your ignorant abusing, or aduised inuerting the name of Gods Iustice breadeth in you this sensible ouersight. The Scriptures most truely confesse, that Psa. 145. v. 17 God is iust in all his waies; not in punishing onely mens of∣fences, but in giuing grace, forgiuing sinne, promising and performing life eternall; and generally whatsoeuer he doth, in him is iust and holie. There is as great iustice, that God should doe Matth. 20. with his owne what he will, as that he should repay men their deserts. For if we ascribe no iustice to God, but in rewarding our works, then was he vniust in creating vs of nothing, when we could deserue nothing: then is he vniust in sauing vs, when he condemneth others, since we deserued no better then others. Accursed be that mouth, and minde, which calleth or counteth the fauour and loue of God, wherewith he embraceth his; the grace and mercie, which he affoordeth his; the glorie and blisse, which he will giue to his, to be vniust. Yet were none of these things deserued by vs, though he be most iust in giuing what, and where plea∣seth him. 2. Th ss. 1. It is a righteous thing (saith Paul) to recompence rest to you, which are trou∣bled, and yet no way deserued. If . Iohn 1. we confesse our sinnes he is faithfull and iust (sayth Iohn) to forgine vs our sinnes. We need not woonder at this, how God is iust in pu∣nishing sinne, and also iust in forgiuing sinne; he vseth his right in the one, as master of his owne, and repaieth men their deserts in the other, which is their due. . Since all the wa es of he Lord (saith Austen) are mercie and trueth, neither can his grace be vn∣ , nor his Iustice be cruell. Can we then finde how God is iust in giuing vs good things, which we neuer me∣ d, and doe we stagger how he might be iust in deliuering Christ to corporall and . externall paines and death, which he neuer deserued? [ It is no wrong (you say) for the L w to lay the penaltie on the suertie. ] Much lesse was it vniust with God, to receau recompense for our sinnes at the hands of his owne Sonne, who was willing and able to make it, when we were not. [But he must be guiltie of our sinnes, before he could be iustly punis d for our sinnes. ] Who tolde you so? Your similitude of a Suretie bound to see the debt discharged? Keepe your bonds to hang abont your heeles. A man may discharge anothers debts, and beare anothers burden, as well willingly and free∣ly, as vrged and arrested by the law. What iustice hath mans law to accept the sure∣tie for the debtour, but the will of the offerer? How much more then was it a righte∣ous thing with God to accept a satisfaction for our sinnes at the hands of his owne Sonne, not because he was thereto bound, or any way guiltie with vs, but only because he was able and willing to beare our burden when we were weake; and rebate the ri∣gour of Gods vengeance by the innocencie and dignitie of his person, which was farre aboue our power? For if amongst en it be an honorable iustice for the stron∣ger to helpe the weaker, and the richer to relieue the poorer; and the lesse we be bound, as to our Enemies; the more willing, the more righteous: who that hath but one spa of Christian sense, will doubt whether it were most iust with God, to admit the ransom which his own Sonne most willingly offered for vs, when we were his Ene∣mies; or will conclude that Christ must iustly des e death, because he did willingly die for vs? You see now what I say to Christes death; he died most iustly to God, be∣cause most willingly for vs, and yet most vndeseruedly, because most innocently. Defenc. pag. 75. li. 11. If Christ died not by Gods iustice, then woe and thrice woe to vs: for it can not be, but Gods iustice must be executed. ] If Gods iustice against vs were not satisfied by his Sonne, and so appeased, wo were it with vs; but if any man be so madde headed, that either the Sonne of God, or himselfe must be euerlastingly damned for the full exe∣cution of Gods iustice against sinne, then woe indeed to that hellish infidelitie; and blessed for euer be Gods loue and mercie towards vs, that accepted the death of his Sonne for our sinnes, which Christ willingly off red as the price of our redemption, when he could by no sentence of the law be thereto bound. Iohn 10. Therefore my Father loueth me (sayth Christ) because I lay downe my life (for my sheepe). None taketh it from me, but I lay it downe of mine owne selfe. And so the Prophet foretold of him. Es . 53. If he will (or shall) lay downe his soule (or life) for sinne, he shall see his seed, prolong his dayes, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hands. Defenc. pag. 75. li. 17. What if (hanging on a tree) were no necessarie part of the g erall curse? it was ne∣uerthelesse iust from God vpon him, as well as his death. ] Neither th, nor hanging, nor any part of Christes punishment was iust from God, as deserued by Christ, either in respect of his nature, or of his office, but all was most iust with God euen on Christ in respect of Christs owne free willingnesse, to reconcile vs to God with his death, ra∣ther then we should perish. And if both these were iust in Gods secret Counsell, by reason of Christs good liking so to ransome man, what is that to the sentence of the Law, which Iudgeth euery man according to his works, and punisheth only the trans∣gressour, out of which number Christ is excepted by the continuall Caueats of the holy Scriptures. Defenc. pag. 25. li. 26. [ Still I meane iustly in respect of God alone. ] And still I say iustly in respect of Christs willingnesse only, which is nothing to the sentence of the Law. For the law respecteth the euill desert of the Transgressour, and not the good will of the Redeemer or Suretie. Defenc. pag. 75. li. 0. You mislike that Christ should suffer iustly, because he suffered willingly for vs; which hindreth not at all. ] Since that was most iust with God in his secret counsell, whereto his Sonne was most willing; I vtterlie misliked, as the whole Church of Christ before me did, that the Sonne of God should be thought to be bound to death, who must be most free; or deseruing death by the sentence of the Law punishing sinners, be∣cause he was willing to beare our burden. And if you looke well about you, you shall find the second person in Trinitie vndertooke to ransome vs from our sinnes, long before his manhood was borne, euen from the foundation of the world; and to lay any band vpon the Sonne of God, besides his owne good will and pleasure, aduise The second per∣son in Trinitie could not be bound but by his loue to vs ward. you whether it tendeth. And since God would not haue the death of Christes man∣hood, but as a sacrifice most freely & willingly offered vnto him for sinne, least there should appeare any constraint or necessitie layd on the person of Christ; let the Rea∣der iudge, with what trueth you not onely bind the second person in Trinitie to be subiect to the sentence of the Law, but taint the soule of Christ with the vncleannesse of our sinne because he suffered the punishment thereof in our steedes. Defenc. pag. 75. li 32. [ The volun∣tarie suertie beareth his penaltie iustly, when he sustaineth that, which the Debtour by Law should sustaine. ] It is a penaltie to patience to heare you talke so vnwisely and vniust∣ly of Iustice. Shall mercie and charitie in Christians, that ease other mens shoulders, or pay other mens debts, be taken now with you for the iust desert of a penaltie? How much lesse then may the loue and fauour of God redeeming vs with his owne blood, and aling vs with his owne strip s, be called a ust and well deserued punishment? Mans law may exact the debt, where the Suertie standeth bound to the aw to see it satisfied. From one freely offering to pay another mans debts, the Law may iustly receiue it, because he is willing, but the Law cannot exact it, because he is at libertie; which is the true difference betwixt a Suertie bound, and a free Ransommer; and yet neither is guiltie of the prisoners offences. Defenc. pa. 75. li. 33. You say, no Law; you are sure, not Gods law alloweth a murderer or like offender to be shared, and another that is willing, to be hanged in his steede. ] You haue all this while dallied with Gods iustice, you now begin to play with Gods Law, that where trueth fa th you, you may yet at least make some shew with wordes, as all wranglers doe, when they be driuen to the wall; whereof the discreet Reader may take a sensible ob∣seruation in this place. You haue bene spuddling here, and spending more then two leaues to proo e that Christ bare the true curse of the Law, which was due to vs for sinne, and that the Apostle speaking thereof (Galat. 3.) could haue none other mea∣ning; and therefore you resolued that Christ was hanged by the iust sentence of the Law, which otherwise must light on vs if it were not laid on him. What Law ment you all this while, or what Law doth Paul dispute of in that place? Not of that Law which accurieth and punisheth sinne? That Law, I said, admitted no Suerties, but reuenged the malefactours themselues, and therefore by the sentence of that Law Christ could not be iustly accursed, or hanged in our steedes. Against this when you can say nothing, you get you to the Gospell of Christ, which proposeth glad tydings of our Redemption from the burden of our sinnes and from the curse of the Law by the most willing and innocent death of the Sonne of God for our sakes, and by that Lawe you say Christ might, and did die for vs as our Suertie. I aske the indifferent Reader, whether this be not a plaine running from the question and a resigning of all that you haue said before, touching t e es accursing of Christ as our Suerti ? For the Gospell I trust doth not pronounce Christ to be either accursed for our sinnes, or defiled with our sinnes, but shewed him to be the blessed Seede, that bruized the S pents head; and the vndefiled and vnspotted Lambe, that tooke away the sinne of the world, with his most innocent and precious blood. This shifting therefore, which is so vsuall with you, that as long as you can wrench a word, you will not yeeld to the trueth, will breake the necke of your cause in the end with all considerate Rea∣ders, howsoeuer it may content you for the time. But let vs heare the rest. Defenc. pag. 75 li. 38. I answere it is not true, which you say, That Gods Law alloweth no Suerti s. Vnder∣standing here by Gods reuealed will, and his most holy and gracious ordinance for vs. Though indeede this is not his Law properly, but his Gospell. ] You lacke here English as well as trueth, except it be the Printers fault, and not yours Vnderstanding here in your words hath nothing to follow it, I thinke you would say, Vnderstanding h by Gods Law, Gods The Gospel dif∣fereth much from the Law. reuealed will, &c. I neuer made doubt whether the Gospell proposed the wonderfull loue, mercie, good will, and fauour of God the Sonne towards vs in offering himselfe to make the purgation of our sinnes in his owne person; and likewise the wisedome, power, iustice, clemencie, grace and goodnesse of the whole Trinitie in accepting that offer for our saluation; but such I said was the infinite dignitie of the person, be∣ing true God, that he could by no Law be bound, but onely ledde by his owne good will and pleasure, as a voluntary and free Sauiour. Which libertie the iustice of God so farre tendred and preserued in the humane nature of Christ, that he could not in rigour exact death, as a debt from a Suertie, but receiue it, as a voluntarie sa∣crifice from a willing and free Redeemer: for which cause, neither the desert of our Christs death not eracted as a de t, but rece ∣ue: as a volun∣tarie sac ce. punishment, nor the filth of our sinn s, nor the trueth of our curse could cleaue vnto him: but his death was innocent and altogether vndeserued though he died iustly to God as well in espect of vs, for whom he suffered, who deserued farre worse; as in regard of his owne will and offer, who refused not the smart of death, thereby to breake th chaines of death, and to deliuer vs from the power of darkenesse. For the name of the law in generall, how farre that word might be stretched, I did not questi∣on, since you spake directly of that law which accurseth and punisheth sinne, as the A∣postle doth, alleaging in plaine words both the curse and punishment of Moses law. Otherwise, I knew the Apostles words in this verie Epistle: Galat. 6. Beare yee one anothers burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ, which is, in libertie and Galat. 5. loue to serue one an other, as Christ did vs. Defenc. pag. 7 . li. 7. No similitude (you say) can proue Christ in taking our person on him to be sinfull, defi∣led, hatefull and accursed. I denie this saying vtterly. ] I like your wit well, that when you should go to proue your affirmatiues, you fall to denie my negatiues. This is a short way to shunne all paines and proofs, for you to say what you list, and when you denie the contrarie, the matter is fully proued. But Sir you forget that my assertion hath in it the plaine words of the Holy Ghost, and the maine grounds of Christian religion, that Christ as well in his nature and actions as in his sufferings and sacrifice, was Hebr. 7. holie, harmelesse, seuered from sinners and vndefiled. This you vtterly denie. If you make no more bones in denying the words of God, your Reader will as easily denie you to be a Christian, whatsoeuer I do. [ Defenc. pag. 76. li. 26. In his owne nature, and in respect meerly thereof, he suffe∣red both at the Iewes hands and before God, the iust for the vniust. ] A faire gloze, and full against the text. When Christ died, was it for himselfe, or for vs, that hee suffered? He suffered not in any respect of or for himselfe, no not before God, and yet he 1. Pet. 3. suf∣fered the iust for the vniust, sayth Peter. Which words Peter could not speake in re∣spect of the Iewes, who killed Christ, for they tooke Christ to be most vniust, and they had no meaning, nor power to put him to death for the redemption of the world; but Peter speaketh this of Christ, who knowing himselfe to be iust and inno∣cent in the sight of God, was yet patient and willing, when he suffered for the vniust. By this example Peter often exhorteth the godly to follow Christes 1. Pet. 2. steppes, and to suffer wrong patiently, when they do well. For that is more acceptable to God, then when they are buffeted for their faults; because they are 1. Pet. 3. blessed, that suffer for righteous∣nesse sake, as Christ did. You turne the text cleane contrarie, and would haue men be∣leeue, that Christ was not only sinfull, accursed, and defiled with our sinnes, but the greatest sinner and most vniust person, that euer suffered, as guiltie before God of all their sinnes for whom he died. Defenc. pag. 76. li. 20. Yet this is not inherently, but by imputation, the Lord translating by his ordinance the sinne of men vpon him. ] Afore we enter to speake farther of the filthinesse or guiltinesse of sinne inherent or imputed, and the malediction on either; I thinke it fit for the Rea∣der How sinne ma∣keth men vn∣cleane. to know what is conteined in those termes, lest the Defender carie his conceits in a cloud, as his meaning and maner is to do. In sinne, besides the auerting of the will from God by defection, and hardning of the heart against God by rebellion, the loue and affections of the soule, which should be inflamed with sinceritie and puritie of Gods holinesse and goodnesse, are wholly deiected, and egerly fastened vpon base, vile, vaine and vncleane things; and thereby the soule growing like to that which it loueth, (for loue causeth a societie and similitude with the things loued) b ommeth base, vile and vncleane in all her delights, desires, parts and powers. Which impure∣nesse and pollution of the inward man, when God beholdeth, he reiecteth, hateth, and detesteth, as well this corruption inherent in the soule, as the deeds and acts of sinne past with vs, but present still with him, and accusing vs in his sight, by the wit∣nesse of our owne conscience, which we can not auoid. This when God setteth be∣fore the eyes of the wicked, letting them see what they haue refused, and what they haue embraced, and how deformed and defiled they are in comparison of his beautie and sanctitie; as also what they haue done against the light and leading of their owne conscience, they fall ashamed of their vncleannesse, and confounded with their guil∣tinesse, finding the iust vengeance of God to hang ouer their heads with a desperate and most dreadfull expectation thereof. These things are not doubted by any good Diuines, and therefore it shall suffice shortly to touch some places teaching no lesse then I haue sayd. Tit. 1. To the vncleane and vnbeleeuing (sayth Paul) nothing is cl , but euen their mindes and consciences are defiled. Of euill thoughts and deeds proceeding from the heart our Sauiour-generally pronounceth; These are Math. 15. the things which de∣file a man. S. Peter sayth of the wicked: They are led with 2. Peter. 2. v. 12 sensualitie, as bruit beasts, perishing in their corruption; and are not onely spots and staines, but after they had esca∣ped 2. Peter. 2. v. 13. from the 2. Peter. 2. v. 20. filthinesse of the world, 2. Peter. 2. v. 22. turne againe as swine to wallowing in the mire. This is the vncleannesse of sinne as well inherited from Adam, as increased by continuall transgressing, which defileth the sinner, and cleaueth to the soule, till she be washed with the bloud, and renewed by the spirit of Christ. The guiltinesse of sinne is double; in regard either of the sinne committed, or of the punishment prepared. The Rom. 2. witnesse of our conscience priuie to our doings, when our cogitations accuse vs, and 1. Iohn 3. our harts condemne vs, this is the conuiction hat God doth and will vse in Iudgement; himselfe as greater then our harts, not onely know∣ing, but reuealing the things 1. Cor. 4. hid in Darkenesse, and 1. Cor. 4. manifesting the Counsels of ech mans hart. The guiltinesse of punishment noteth the iust deseruing thereof by vs, or the fast binding of vs thereto by the rule of Iustice. Gen 43. If I bring not backe thy Sonne vnto thee, said Iudah to Iacob his Father, I will sinne vnto thee euery day; not meaning he would euery day offer new offences to his Father, but that he would be guiltie of that sinne for euer. Whosoeuer shall eate this Bread, saith Paul, or drinke this Cup of the Lord 1 Cor. 11. vnworthily shall be guiltie of the Body and bloud of the Lord; that is, guiltie of sinning against the Body and bloud of the Lord. Now the workeman is worthie of his re∣ward, whether it be in good or euill; and therefore punishment is the wages of sinne worthily deserued, or certainly reserued for sinners by the Iudgement of God. When the high Priest asked the Councel touching Christ, Matth 26. behold ye heard his blasphemy, what thinke ye? They answered he is guiltie of death, that is worthie to die, and so they Mark. 14. con∣demned him as WORTHIE to die. Sometimes is obliged, and assured of pu∣nishment, as Mark. 3. he that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, shall neuer be pardoned, but guil∣tie (that is assured) of euerlasting condemnation. So likewise the true malediction of sinne is triple. For as the true blessings of God The Curse for s nne is triple. haue three degrees; First, his loue, which is the roote of all our happinesse, then his grace, which is the meane of hauing that, which is fit for this life, and of hoping for the rest; and lastly, his glorie, which is the full fruition of the reward for his in the heauens: so the true Curse of sinne, which is the depriuation of all true blessing, hath the same degrees; I meane, the losse of Gods loue, which is his hatred and detestati∣on of sinne; the lacke of his grace, to know, like, or imitate his goodnes in this life; and lastly the repulse from his kingdome with the terrible iudgement, and eternall miserie prouided for the wicked. Come now to your Termes of sinfull, defiled, and accursed; and see how well they Christ not defi∣le with our sinnes. agree to Christ. First, if the holinesse of God were so great in his Person, as to purge our vncleannesse, much more was it able to resist our Corruption, and to keepe him from being defiled with our sinnes, from which he clensed vs. Againe, if he were any way defiled with our sinnes, he must needs offer Sacrifice first for himselfe, and then for vs. But this is quite repugnant to the Apostles Doctrine; who saith, Christ Heb. 7. v. 27. nee∣ded not to offer vp (any such) Sacrifice for himselfe. Thirdly, if he were defiled by our sinnes, his office must defile him; his nature, nor Actions could not. That which was borne of the Virgine, was Luke. 1. v. 35 HOLY, his life was innocent and iust; 1. Pet. 2 he did no sinne, nor 2. or. 5. knew no sinne; his office was more holy then either of these. For these re∣sisted sinne, but his office clensed sinne. Now to clense others from sinne, required more holinesse, then to keepe himselfe from sinne. The one is the holinesse of the Creature, the other of the Creator. And how should the Priesthood defile him, when the Sacrifice was holy, and vndefiled? Christ Heb. 9. offered himselfe without spot to God, saith the Apostle directly speaking of his Sacrifice. And Peter calleth him the 1. Pet. 1. Lamb vnspotted and vndefiled, which must be in respect of his Sacrifice. For he was the Lamb of God, Iohn. 1. which tooke away the sinnes of the world. Else how could he be a Ep . 5. Sacrifice of a sweete smelling sauour vnto God, whose Habac. 1. eyes are pure, and can not behold wickednes, if he were any way vncleane with his owne, or with our sinnes? and if our sinnes could then defile him, or make him vnclean, he is at this day sitting in the heauens, defiled & vncleane. For we haue the very same coniunction with him now that we had then, being members of his Body, as then we were, and he our head; and he still presen∣teth vs to God, as then he did, and euen by the vertue of those sufferings, which he sustained here on earth for vs. So that his mediation is now by the power of that Pas∣sion, which he then endured, and if his assuming Sinners into his Body, or being the propitiation for our sinnes, could then touch him with any vncleannesse, he can not be free from it at this present. But his Priesthood was holy then and vndefiled, and so remaineth still both pure and perpetuall. And if in the figuratiue Sacrifices of the Law, neither the P st, nor the Sacrifice were defiled with the sinnes of the People, but were sanctified and accepted, when the one did offer, the other was offered for sinne; what ground of truth can it haue, that the true, most holy, and acceptable Sacrifice for sinne, which indeede purged the sinnes of the world, should defile either the Per∣son of Christ, or his office, or his action in that oblation. Lastly since all pollution of Soule is inherent, which you graunt was not in Christ, how should he be defiled, that had nothing in him, but holinesse and righteousnesse, which I trust are not defiled? If Christ were not defiled with our sinnes, then was he not sinfull. One sinn defileth, how much more then doth the fulnesse of sinne make Christ vncleane, which is your de∣uotion to the Sonne of God. I meane not inherently, but by imputation. [You meane he was defiled and sinnefull, not truely, but falsely. Did you speake of men, who erre in their iudgements, it might be borne; but when you speake of God, there is no imputation with him, but in trueth; vnlesse you will change the Apostles doctrine, Rom. 3. Let God be true, and euery man a liar; and say, God must be a lyar, afore you can speake trueth in this behalfe. God doth impute righteousnesse to vs that be sinners, by pardoning our offen∣ces, and accepting vs for Christes sake, when of our selues we are most vnwoorthie; but vncleannesse he doth not impute, where none is found, because he giueth freely by mercy, and condemneth iustly by desert. The punishment of our sinnes Christ did willingly beare in his bodie, the guilt of our sinnes he did not, and that made his suf∣ferings the more righteous, as being without desert or guilt. [Did God then wrong his Sonne in afflicting him?] he laide the burden of our iniquities on the bodie of Christ, who was willing to redeeme our danger with his owne death, and by the infi∣nite dignitie of his person able to support the one, and abolish the other: and that the rather because euerie part of Christes manhood was holie and vndefiled, and so by the rule of Gods iustice no part of him could be pressed with spirituall and eternall death. Which is a plaine proofe, that the guilt of our sinnes tooke not hold on him. For then as well spirituall as eternall death, which both are due to sinne, must haue fastned on Christ, which we see to be false: yea the death of the bodie could not wrest his soule from him, but he must lay it downe of himselfe. And if the desert of a corporall death did not binde him, how should the guilt of eternall death be due to him, which was the ust wages of our sinne, but no way due to his person, since he did assume our sinnes to cleere vs from them, and not to subiect himselfe to the guilt, or filth of our sinne, though he were content to make full satisfaction for them, but not to defile himselfe with any pollution of them? Defenc. pag. 76. li. 9. How could he be by God properly and truly punished and cursed for sinne, but that he was sinfull & hatefull? Nay how could he either clense vs, or reconcile vs to God, if he were Christ could not clense v , of he were defiled by vs. sinfull, & hatefull to God as well as we? As we had Christ for our Redeemer, because we we e hated of God for sin, so if you bring Christ within the same danger & displea∣sure with God, he must haue another to mediate to God for him. God respecteth not those whom he hateth; nor heareth any that is sinful, without some other to propi e for him. And where you quote Scriptures to vphold your wicked follies and phrases, they prooue the cleane contrarie. Ezech. 18. vers. 20. The soule that sinneth, the same shall dic, saith God by Ezechiel. But Christes soule did not die, either by want of grace, or losse of glorie, which are the deaths proper to sinners. Christes soule therefore by the verie place which you cite, was not sinnefull. Genes. 18. vers. 25 Shail n t the Iudge of all the world doe right? saide Abraham to God. What right is there ment, but that God will not destroy the righ∣teous Vers. 23. with the wicked, as Abrahams words before import? Since then Christ was not destro ed either in soule or bodie, but by death made conquerer of death, and a Saui∣our to all his what a venemous mouth haue you to match him with the wicked, or to make th s destruction? And heere the Reader may obserue how religiously you wrest the Scriptures to reproch the Sonne of God; and where you can by no sufficient te∣stimonie prooue Christ to haue beene sinnefull or hatefull to God, as you d fend, when he died for our sinnes; you sort him with the reprobate and damned, and then ge the Scriptures against him, that directly speake of them. I wish you to leaue this lewd deuotion, and not to thinke to shift off all this with a pretended imputation. Our sinnes God did impute, that is, impose on Christ, for e b re them in his bodie on the ee; but this was right with God, because Christ was both willing and able to beare them; and an honour to the humane nature of Christ, to be made l ord ouer all his enimies for the short affliction, which he suffered at their hands; and Sauiour of all beleeuers for the submission and obedience, which he performed on the crosse; in which Gods exceeding mercy towards vs, and loue towards him did most mani∣festly appeare. Did not God then hate our sinnes, when he punished his owne Sonne for them?] The lo e of God to hi onne ouer d his h red against r sinn . If that ground of Christian religion could haue contented you, that God throughly hated our sinnes, which Christ assumed, and yet so loued the person assuming them, that the fauour he bare to the one, ouer-rul d his anger due to the other; and therefore after sharpe chastisement on the person, least wee should thinke our trans∣gressions to be lightly regarded with God, (and yet such, as the sufferer willingly re∣ ued to maintaine the iustice of his Father) exalted him with infinite honour, and gaue him all power in earth and heauen, and made him onely Lord ouer all both men and Angels: If this confession of true Religion had pleased you, you neuer needed to haue defiled your pen with these sinfull, hatefull, and accurs d termes. But ha ing itching eares, and humorous heads, you measure the greatest mysteries of our salua∣tion, by the similitude and proportion of humane reason and actions, and thence de iue according to your fantasies, that which Scriptures and Fathers doe vtterly disclaime. Defenc. pa . 76. li. 11. It is written, God sent his Sonne in the likenesse of sinfull fl sh for sinne, and condemned sinne in (his) flesh, in which likenesse he stoode before God. The Scripture teacheth, that Christ was made Heb. 2. like to his brethren in all things, and did partake with them in flesh and bloud, but the same Scripture addeth Heb. 4. without sinne. So that the likenesse of sin∣full flesh excludeth all touch or taint of our sinne, though it admit the likenesse of our flesh in Christ. And indeede betweene his and ours, there was no difference, saue the corruption of sinne, which dwelleth in ours, and did not in his. You doe therefore learnedly collect out of the Apostles words, that where he saith, Christ was sent in the likenesse of sinfull flesh, for that he had true flesh, and no sinne; you make Christ to be de∣filed and accursed with sinne, for hauing the likenesse of our flesh. But the Syriacke translation saith, God condemned sinne in (Christes) flesh. ] The condemning of sinne in the flesh of Christ, was the cleansing and abolishing of sinne by the body of Christ, which the Apostle calleth Heb. 9. ve . 6. 28. , the destroying and taking away of sinne Heb. 9. ve . 6. 28. by the sa∣crifice of him elfe. The text doth notsay, that God condemned Christ for sinne, but contrarie, that God condemned sin; that is, pardoned the guilt, weakned the power, remooued the sting, and abandoned the memoriall of all our sinnes for the obedi∣ence and patience, which Christ shewed in his flesh. So that it is you, and not the A∣postle, nor the Syriacke translator, which would faine bring Christ within the com∣passe of condemnation for sinne, where they say quite otherwise, that not hee, but sinne was condemned, that is destroyed in or by his flesh. Chrysostome saith rightly; Chrysost. Ho∣ . 13 n Epist. ad Roman . Thou seest sinne euery where condemned, not the flesh, which was crouned, and obtained iudgement against sinne. And Austen taketh libertie to expound the Text against your Syriacke translation. Contra . l . cap. 2. By the similitude of sinfull flesh, (saith he) which was Christes, God condemned sinne in the flesh of sinne, which was ours. Defenc. pag. 76. li. 14. God made him sinne for vs, that we might be made the rightcousnesse of God in him.] Other men read the Scriptures, to learne thence all thanks, submission, and seruice to the Sonne of God, for his vnspeakeable loue and mercie towards vs, in taking the burden of our sinnes, and laying it on his owne shoulders. You thresh and winnow the Scriptures to catch vp chaffe to cast in his face. And though there be neuer so manie old and new writers, that would leade you to the true sen e of these words, you leaue them all, and will needs by wilfull abusing the Scriptures haue Christ to be sin∣full and defiled, hatefull and accursed euen to God, for taking vpon him to purge vs from our sinnes. I shewed you the iudgement of Austen and Ambrose in my conclu∣sion for the right vnderstanding of these words, but you satisfied with nothing, saue with your owne sense, pas e surly by them, and the rest as Defenc. pa. 76. li. 37. multitudes of men, and pre∣ferre the proud conceit you haue of your selfe, before them all. Yet for the Readers sake that he may settle his iudgement with trueth and sobrietie; he shall see the con∣sent of all ages and writers, how Christ was made sinne for vs, and how he condem∣ned sinne in the flesh. Origen, Origen. li. . in 8. cap. epist. ad Romanos. that Christ was made the sacrifice for sinne, and offered for the clensing of sinnes, all the Scriptures witnesse: touching this sacrifice of his flesh, it is said, he condemned sinne in the flesh, as the same Apostle else where sayth, he appeared in the later times to destroy sinne. By this sacrifice then of his flesh, which was offered for sinne, he condemned sinne, that is, he chased sinne away, and abolished it: Cyrill, Cyrill. epist. ad d pro . Christ is therefore made according to the Scriptures a sacrifice for sinne. For this cause we say, he is called sinne at selfe: for so Paul writeth: Him that knew no sinne, God the Father made sinne for vs. We doe not say, that Christ was made a sinner, God forbid: but being iust, yea Iustice it selfe, the Father made him a sacrifice for the sinnes of this world. Ierom, Hiero. in 2. ad Corinth. cap. 5. the Father made Christ, who knew not sinne, to be sinne for vs; that is, as the sacrifice offered for sinne, is called sinne in the Law. In Leuiticus it is written. He shall lay his hand on the head of his sinne; So Christ being offered for our sinnes, tooke the name of sinne. Augustine, August ∣tra li. 2. ca. 2. Christ then did no sinne, but God made him sinne for vs: that is as I haue said, a sacrifice for sinne. For if thou remember, or wilt reade, thou shalt finde in the bookes of the old Testament, the sacrifice for sinne to be called sinne. Againe, God then Id m contra Pelag. & de p ∣cato origi . li. 2. ca. 32. made Christ sinne for vs, that is a sacrifice by which our sinnes should be remitted, because sacrifices for sinne are called sinne. And so in the questions vpon Numbers. It is said (he shall offer a Lambe) for a sinne, because that which was offered for sinne was called sinne. Whence it is, that the Apostle saith of the Lord Christ; him that knew no sinne, God the Father made sinne for vs, that is a sacrifice for sinne. He that will see this more at large repeated and confirmed, let him read at his leasure Saint Austen 120. Epistle cap. 30. the third booke, and 6. Chapter, against the two Epistles of the Pelagians: his Enchiridion, cap. 41. besides the seuenth Sermon De verbis Apostoli, and the 48. Sermon, De verbis Domini secundum Ioannem, which I formerly alleaged. Oecumenius, the sacrifice, which is offered for sinne, is called sinne, as the Prophet saith, they eate the sinnes of my people, that is the sacrifices for sinne. So the Fa∣ther made the Sonne a sacrifice to be offered for sinnes. Primasius likewise, Pri i 5 cap. 2. ad Co∣rinth. the sacrifice for sinne is in the Law called sinne, though it did not sinne; as it is written; and he shall laie his hands on the head of his sinne. So Christ being offered for our sinnes, tooke the name of sinne. Sedulius i loc . Sedulius obserueth the same words. Beda eda in 8. ca. epist. ad Romanes. Our Redeemer was made sinne, that we might be the righteousnesse of God in him. How? In the Law the sacrifices, which were offered for sinne, are called sinne. When the offering was brought for sinne, the Law sayth, the Priests shall put their hands vpon the sinne, that is vpon the sacrifice for sinne. And what els was this, but Christ the (true) sacrifice for sinne? Behold by what sinne he condemned sinne; by the sacrifice, which he made for sinne, euen thereby he condemned sinne. To skip Hay∣mo, Lyra and others, the eleuenth Councell of Toledo in the confession of their faith. Concili Tolet. 11. i confess. . Christ in the forme of man, which he assumed, is according to the trueth of the Gos∣pell beleeued to haue beene borne without sinne, and to haue died without sinne; who alo was made sinne for vs, that is the sacrifice for our innes. The new writers beare euen with the old: To omit, Erasmus, Bullinger, Peter Mar∣tyr, Musculus, Gualter, Vitus Theodorus, and others, who doe follow the same steps; Aretius vpon these words God by sinne condemned sinne in the flesh, that is saith he: . 8. epist. ad Ro∣manos. All our sinne in our flesh, God condemned by or for sinne, to wit by or for the Sacrifice ap∣pointed for sinne. Now Christ is the Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinne of the world; this Lambe is called sin, because in the Law the sacrifices are called the sinne for which they are offered. Hence is it that Christ, who knew no sinne, was made sinne by his Father. Beza in his notes on the New Testament, and on those words: Him that knew no sinne, God made sinne; sayth: Paul Beza in . ca. 2. epist. ad . calleth sinne in this latter place, the sacrifice for sinne, after a maner of speech proper to the Hebrewes, with whom the word Ascham is so taken as Leuiti∣cus 7. 2. Tremelius the publisher and interpreter of your Syriack Testament, obser∣ueth the like vpon the same place: Him that knew no sinne, he made sinne for you: that is, a Tr melij ob∣ser it in 2 ad Corinth. 5. v. 21. sacrifice for sinne, which euery where in the bible is called Chattath; by which name sinne also is called: The booke of Homilies authorised in this Realme holdeth so fast to this exposition, that it setteth it downe in the Apostles name, as the Apostles true mean∣ing. S. Paul likewise sayth: The second Se mō of the Passi n. p . 5. God made him a sacrifice for our sinne, which knew no sinne, that we should be made the righteousnesse of God in him. Defenc pag. 76. li. 18. The Apostle farder sayth, the second time Christ shall appeare without sinne, meaning that the first time he appeared with sinne. ] Put the Apostles words vttered in the same place, touching Christes first appearing with sinne, to these which you cite, and the sense is plaine and easie of it selfe. Heb 9 v 26. In the end of the world Christ appeared once, to put away sinne by the sacrifice of himselfe, and Ibid. v. 28. vnto them that looke for him, he shall appeare the second time without sinne vnto saluation. Christes first appearing was with sinne; that is, either with an offering for sinne, or with the infirmitie, tentation, mi erie and mor∣talitie How Christ shall the second time appeare without sinne. of sinne (for such was the time of his humilitie, when he came to purge sinne by the oblation of his bodie): the next time of his appearing shall be in glorie, that is, without either sacrifice for sinne, or any other infirmitie of sinners. For sinne applied to Christ in the Scriptures may receiue a triple interpretation, as Austen obserueth; and yet none of them maketh Christ sinfull, hatefull, or defiled, which is your vn∣cleane doctrine. August. c n∣tra duas Epist. Pelag. li. 3. ca. 2 We affirme (sayth Austen) that Christ had no sinne neither in soule nor fl sh, and yet in taking flesh after the liken sse of sinfull flesh, by sinne he condemned sinne. Which being somewhat obscur ly spoken by the Apostle, may be two wayes opened: either be∣cause the similitudes of things vse to be called by the names of the things themselues; and in that respect the Apostle would call the similitude of sinfull flesh, Sinne: or els because the sa∣crifices for sinnes in the Law were called sinnes; all which were the figures of Christs flesh, the true and only sacrifice for sinne. A third way is, that the punishment of sinne is August. con∣tra . li. 4. ca 4. af∣ter a sort called sinne, as being a consequent to sinne, which S. Austen before testified; and in that respect, as well mortalitie, as all other miseries and infirmit s, that inuaded mans nature for sinne, may be called sinne, that is, the effects of sinne. The wrong∣full and shamefull death of Christ, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophylact, and o∣thers, take to be the punishment of our sinnes in the flesh of Christ, and in that regard they thinke Christ was made sinne, that is, punished as a sinner, though he were inno∣cent and righteous. Chrysost. in 5. ca. 2. Epist. ad Corinth. Him that was righteousnesse it selfe, God made sinne, that is, he suf∣fered him to be condemned as a sinner, and to die as one accursed; for accursed was he that hung on a tree. Christ, sayth Theodoret, Theodor. in 8 ca. E ist. ad Romanos. when he had fulfilled all righteousnesse, and not admitted any blemish of sinne, and yet as a sinner sustained the death of sinners, he reproued the iniustice of sinne, that deliuered his bodie to death no way deseruing it, and dissolued both sinne and death. Theophylact, as his maner is, followeth Chrysostome almost word for word: Theophylact. in 5. ca. 2. Ep st. ad Corinth. The Sonne who knew no sinne, and was righteousnesse it selfe, the Father made to die for vs, as if he had beene a sinner and malefactour. S. Austen ioyneth with them: August. de verb Apost. rm. 14. Christ had the similitude of sinfull flesh, because his flesh was mortall, sin vllo omnino peccato, but vtterly without any sinne, that by sinne for similitude, he might condemne the sinne that is in (our) flesh, through true iniquitie. True iniquitie in Christ there was none, mortalitie there was. Peccatum non suscepit, sed poenam peccati suscepit. Suscipiend sin culp poenam, & poenam sa it, & culpam. Christ tooke not (our) sinne vnto him, he tooke the punishment of (our) sinne. And taking the punishment without any fault, he healed both the punishment and the fault. I leaue the Reader to his choise, which of these he will embrace, or whether he will conioyne them all together; (for the one impugneth not the other) they all impugne the Defenders false collections, and lewd surmises out of these pla∣ces, that Christ, when he is called sinne, is intended by the Scriptures to be defiled with our sinnes, and hatefull to God, and accursed of him for our sinnes, which the Church of Christ did neuer endure to heare. Defenc. pag. 76. li. 16. Master Caluin warily enough sayth, Vt personam nostram suscepit, peccator erat, & maledictionis reus. As Christ tooke vpon him our person, he was a and guiltie of the curse. ] I had rather you had commended Master Caluins wisdome to ioyne with the whole Church of God in giuing Christ his due, then his warinesse in going a by-way, without all the learned and Catholike fathers, to hemme Christ within the guilt of our sinne and curse. Master Caluin truely I honour for his great gifts, and paines in the Church of God; but I may not take him for the first founder of Christian religi∣on, and therefore where he dissenteth from the worthie Pillers of Christs Church in matters of Doctrine, I dissent from him. And I more commend his warinesse else∣where, and thinke it fit, that when his speech soundeth somewhat hard, or offensiue Hard speeches should rather be qualified then strained to the highest. to the Godly, it should be expounded by other places of his writings, least you make him in so waightie points, as these are, very inconstant, or very inconsiderate. This therefore, which you bring, I interpret by none other then himselfe, vsing the very same words, of the very same matter, in his Commentaries vpon the very next Epistle of Saint Paul before this, which you quote. You shall haue it in Latine, because you shall see how he qualifieth these very words, which you would presse to your aduan∣tage. Caluinus in 5. cap. 2. epist. ad Corinth. PERSONAM nostram QVODAMMODO suscepit, vt reus nostro nomine fie∣ret, & tanquam peccator iudicaretur, non proprijs sed alienis delictis: quum purus foret ipse, & immunis ab omni culpa, paenam{que} s biret nobis, non sibi debitam. Christ tooke vn∣to him our Person AFTER A SORT, that he might be accused (or Iudged) in our Name, and condemned as it were for a Sinner, not for any of his owne offences, but other mens, since he himselfe was pure, and FREE FROM ALL FAVLT (or guilt,) and suffered the punishment due to vs, not to him. Take these mitigations from Master Caluins owne mouth, and then your labour is lost in putting his words to the Racke; and these are farre truer, then your whirlegigges set running by the businesse of your Braine. Christ was AFTER A SORT A SINNER, (Saith Caluine) that is Christ presented the Persons and procured the cause of vs at were sinners, and was guiltie, that is, accused, condemned, or punished in our steedes. Re doth not alwaies import an offender, if you know what Latine meaneth, it noteth one uius res agitur, whose cause is handled, or brought into Iudgement, whether he be guiltie, or innocent. And when it goeth farder then iudiciall inquisition, it may be applied either to the fault which is conuin∣ced; or to the Iudgement, which is decreed; or to the punishment, which is deserued, or appointed. And so the word in Greeke (which the new Testament vseth for guiltie, or worthie of, or subiected to punishment,) is as much as fast held either by the Crime committed, or by the sentence pronounced, or by the punishment prepa∣red and assured. Thus you see Caluins words limited by himselfe, make nothing for you, and howsoeuer you rack the word Reus, you may not thereby bring Christ to be defiled, or hatefull with our sinnes, except mercie, humilitie, and charitie by your learning defile the Sonne of God, and make him hatefull to his Father. Euen Defenc. pag. 76. li. 22. as by Gods true and reall imputation, not by any i hesion, we now in this life are iust, holy, and blamelesse before God; so was he sinfull and defiled by Imputation, not inherently. ] This is neither the Apostles speech, nor sense; it is your soone-come and soone-gone gathering from the Apostles words. The one is the cause of the other, but the one is not in all points proportioned to the other. God made him Sinne for vs, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him; Thus speaketh the Apostle. Omit Christs Sa∣crifice for sinne, whereby our sinnes were pardoned and purged, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him, by the remitting of all our sinnes, and the restoring vs to the fauour of God; and graunt these words, that our sinnes were im∣puted to him, that his righteousnesse might be imputed to vs, which yet are not the Apostles words; where is the proportion you so confidently speake of, that as we are made his righteousnesse, so he was made our sinne? This comparison vnlimited it notor ously false; and were it true, it euerteth all your frame. The full and euerlasting The Apostle maketh th a consequent, not comparison. reward of his righteousnesse is allotted to vs. Was the wages of our sinnes so imposed on hi ? His righteousnesse is now imputed to vs, because it shall be perfectly inhe∣rent in vs, and is presently sealed vnto vs by the spirit of adoption, whereby our harts are inherently sanctified. Were our sinnes so imputed to him, that they should after∣ward perfectly possesse him? To vs God imputeth Christs righteousnesse without our consents, and often without our knowledge, as in children baptized. Were out sinnes imputed to Christ without his vnderstanding or will? In vs God hateth out sinnes, and ioueth our persons for Christes sake. To keepe this comparison, will you say that God hated the righteousnesse of Christ, and loued the sinne imputed to him for our sakes? And were there not so many differences in the maner of Christes ha∣uing our sinnes, and our hauing his righteousnesse, as there are; yet are you no whit the nearer. For as we no way deserue to be his righteousnesse, so he no way deserued to be our sinne. And though God forget all our sinnes, and putteth them vtterly out of his sight, when he washeth vs from them; yet God did not wholly cast Christs righteousnesse out of his remembrance, when he did punish him for our sinnes. Christ therefore tooke our sinnes from vs, and layed them on himselfe; but he doth not take his righteousnesse from himselfe to giue it to vs, but doth impart it to vs, as hauing enough for himselfe and for vs, because he is God as well as man. So that all our sinnes were imputed to him to make vs iust; yet all his righteousnesse is not im∣puted to vs to make him a finner, as you would haue him; but he bare the punish∣ment of our sinnes, which the Apostle calleth sinne, that we might receiue the reward of his righteousnesse, not in cogitation or computation only, but in deed and execu∣tion. For euen in this life, where we a e continuall sinners, we haue no righteous∣nesse, but what is ioyned with the reall remission of our sinnes pardoned for Christes sake, and with the grace of Gods spirit purifying our hearts by faith, and inflaming them with the loue of Gods goodnesse and mercie towards vs. Our righteousnesse then in Christ hath more then imputation, though imputation be also needfull; it hath the seale of Gods spirit possessing our hearts, and the inherent graces of faith and loue, which God accepteth at our hands, and thereby maketh vs partakers of Christes righteousnesse, for that we beleeue in the name of his only Sonne. Defenc. pag. 76. li. 29. Whereas you say the Fathers haue two good senses of the Apostles words, (Christ was made sinne for vs) the one, That God made Christ a sacrifice for sinne, the other, That God vsed him, As he doth sinners, what is there in both these, which we acknowledge not? Yea what is this later, but the very same point, which we vrge? ] You admit both, and yet vnderstand neither, as you ought to doe. If you acknowledge the death and . bloud of Christ to be the true and onely sacrifice for sinne, then must you acknow∣ledge these three things in it: that it was pleasing to God, vndefiling the Priest, and elensing the sinner. If as well the oblation, as the offerer were holie and acceptable to God, why doe you defend, that Christ was sinnefull and hatefull in his sufferings for sinne, which was the sacrifice, that he offered for sinne? If it clensed the offender, how could it de ile the sacrificer, who was the Mediatour to God for abolishing sin? you will haue one and the same sacrifice to be holie, acceptable, and auaileable for sinne; and yet to be defiled, hatefull, and accursed with sinne; you may call Esay 5. ligh darknesse, and good euill, and thinke the prophet denouneeth no woe to you, because your inuentions are priuiledged. But to mine vnderstanding, and I thinke to your Readers, these plaine contrarieties of holy and defiled, acceptable and hatefull, righ∣teous and sinnefull, in one and the same sacrifice and sufferer, at one and the same time will not stand together, but you must be colted or cursed in your warbling con∣ its. Defenc. pa. 76. li. 33. It is nothing else in all this Question that we held, but that God vsed Christ our Re∣deemer and Suertie, As he doth sinners, so farre As possibilitie admitteth. ] You neuer want an As, to helpe you at need. You heare the Fathers say, (for of their sense you speake) that God permitted the wicked to reproch his Sonne, and to put him to a shamefull and cruell death, as if he had beene the vilest malefactor amongst the mul∣titude; thence you collect that God punished Christ, As he doth sinners, that is with the greatest and sorest torments of death and damnation, that are in this life or in hell. But this As doth rather plunge you into the mire, then plucke you out of it, and therefore you adde so farre as possibilitie admitteth. Now how farre that is, by whom shall we be tried? by the Scriptures and Fathers, or by your shallow con∣ceits and fancies? you haue beene told often enough, that where the Scriptures make three kinds of death due to sinners, and for sinne; the death of the bodie, the death of the soule, and the second death, which is the euerlasting torment of bodie and soule in hell fire; and all the learned and Catholike Fathers hold the same con∣fession; the two last deaths spirituall and eternall, are not onely impossibilities, but horrible blasphemies to be ascribed to the person of Christ; and to either of these, you would not yet speake one word, but by stealth. Now you haue gotten hold of a double As, saying that God vsed Christ, As he doth sinners, so farre As possibilitie admitteth, you thinke your selfe safe: and out of this As, you will frame vs new deaths of the soule, a new Hell, and all the same, which the damned doe suffer in substance, not in circumstance. But we haue long looked for your proofes, and till they come, tie vp your As to serue you for another turne. Defenc. pag. 76 li. 35. For this the Fathers are not silent, if I were so ambitious as you in producing multitudes of men. Only Cyprian, and Athanasius and Austen shall content me in this. ] Whether my care to teach nothing touching matters of Faith, but what I see confirmed by the You would no fa e to cit Fa∣thers, if yo had the . Scriptures, and confessed by the writings of the Auncient Fathers, may be called Ambition, I leaue it to the Reader: my paines haue beene the more therein, which if any condemne, I referre the Cause to him, that iudgeth Iustly. But if it be Ambiti∣ , to let the Reader see, that I follow the steps of so learned and approoued Teach∣ers, what is it for you, being I trust no more then a Man, to deuise a new Saluation & a new Redemption, which neither Scriptures nor Fathers either professed or pub∣lished? howbeit if these three Fathers, whom you name and meane to cite, make any way for your n w found fansies, they shall content me also, so you doe not peece out their Texts with your vntruths, for then you alleage not them, but your selfe vnder their shadowes. Defenc. pag. 66. li. 38. The first (who is Cyprian) saith; Christ sustained and suffered him selfe to bee called sinne and a curse by Moses and the Apostle, because he had the like punishment, as we should haue had b t not the like fault. ] Cyprians words we haue already once heard, and once answered; there the Reader shal find them more at large; they make nothing for you, but rather against you. For first it is euident by Cyprians sentence, that Christ was call d sinne, and a curse by Moses and the Apostle, not for any guilt or fault deriued from vs, but onely by reason of the likenesse of punishment with those, that were sin∣ners and accursed. Then was not Christ defiled or sinfull by sustaining our person o cause, for so much as he had no likenesse, nor communion with our sinne, but on∣ly with our punishment. Now the punishment which Christ suffered could not defile him, but rather commend his obedience, patience, and charitie towards God and man. [But he had the like punishment, as we should haue had. ] Likenesse as well consist∣eth in the part, as in the whole; and if it were but like, then was it not the same; except you haue forgotten as well the rules of reason, as of trueth. Nullum simile est id m. Nothing is like to it selfe. If then it were like, it was not the same. What get yo now by Cyprians words, or what doe I loose by them? [ Defenc. pag. 77. li. 3. Your slight answere, that it was like in part, not in all, salu th not the matter. ] It pleaseth not your affection, but it fully remooueth your obiection; and the trueth of it is most manifest. For if Christs punishment were in all points like, as we should haue had for our sinnes, you know well enough by this t e, how lewd and false that Assertion is, which you would sow vnto Cyprian. And therefore as likenes in part i su cient to verifie Cyprians words, so doth it iustifie his speech to be sober and sound, which you would haue to be ∣ous and impious. Cyprian Ibidem. li. 4. meaneth Christs punishment was so like ours, as wa possible. ] We talke of Cyprians words, which are extant, not of his meaning, which you know not, and would fa ne force to be like to yours. This is a poore reply, when you can say nothing out of Cyprians words against mine exposition of them, for which I yeeld so iust ground; to flie to your owne imagination of Cyprians meaning, which yet is false and foolish. For it was possible (if we respect nothing but possibilitie, omitting Gods Counsell and Decree) for Christ to haue suffered longer time, and other sorts of bodily paines, as fire, fleaing, and such like at the Iewes hands; so that your pos∣sibilitie was no part of Cyprians meaning, but a waterish deuice of your own to frame Cyprians words to your fansie. Defenc. pag. 77. . 6. Al by this your we ke answere you are contrary to your selfe, in that you acknowl dge God vsed Christ, as he doth sinners. Well you may deuoutly dreame of Contrarieties, but your eyes dasle too much, to see them truely. Doth euery Aduerbe of Similitude with you make a full and perfect Resemblance in all points? Matth. 10. I send yo saith Christ, as sheepe among W lues. Will you put hornes and haire vpon Christs Disciples to make them as sheepe? Psal. 19. The Sunne, saith Dauid, commeth foorth as a Brid groome out of his Chamber, and reioyceth, as a migh e Man to runne his Course. Will you build a Chamber for the Sunne, and allow him two feete and ten toes, that he may leape and runne his race, like a man? 1. Pet. 2. As new borne babes, saith Peter, d ire th sincere m ke of the word. Will you bring men backe to their Cradles, swadling clo ts, and the teats of their Mothers, that you may verifie this simil tude in them? There can nothing be more senselesse, absurd, and false, then to require euery Similitude or Comparison to be full and per ct in all points. Throughout the Scriptures, any one thing, that is common to many, or any resemblance of that, which an other hath, rueth to frame thence a Comparison or similitude. So that any one pun shment inflicted on Christ, which Gods Law threatneth to sinners, was suff cient to make good my words, th t God vsed Christ, as he doth sinners. How then doe you conclude from my speech; that Christ was vsed in all things, as sinners are both here, and in hell? or that God laid on him punishment so l ke to that, which we should haue had, as was possible? T e it is, though not by any force of my words alleaged by you, that God by his secr te o di∣nance l id on his Sonne not onely the common Infirmities of mans Nature, and mise∣ries of mans life, but also shame, reproch, paine and death, which are by his Law re∣se ued, and threatned to sinners; but touching the death of the Soule, or true paines of hell, which all this while you fish for, you finde nothing in my words, nor in any of these Fathers, whose names you abuse. Defenc. pag. 77. li. 8. Athanasius saith, Ipseper se sententiam soluit s b specie condemnati: He himselfe sa∣tisfied and the sentence of the Law, vnder the . appearance of a DAMN D MAN. Did not God then vse him, as he doth sinners, in all extremitie of punishment so far as was possible? ] You doe wisely not to be in producing multitudes of Men. as you call them: for you doe but shame your selfe, and sincke your cause, when you co e to shew the grounds of your Doctrine by the test monies of ancient Fathers. As they say nothing for you, so you vnderstand nothing in them, no not the cohe∣rence, or force of th ir words, or sentences. It is no small matter, that here you vnder∣take out of Athanasius, to prooue in Christ the appearance of a DA D MAN, which by and by you interpret to be all extremitie of punishment vsed by God to sin∣ners, so farre as was possible, the paines of the damned not excepted I would gladly aske you, whether you purpose to cite places as you find them, to seeke out the truth, or only professe to picke out heere and there a word to make you availe to hide your head for shame. You maruell what I meane, I will soone tell you. You alleage but fower words out of Athanasius, besides Prepositions and Pronouns, and in them you commit fiue notable faults, and three of them grosse, wilfull, and wicked corrupti∣ons. Sententiam, you call, the sentence of the Law; Where Athanasius expresly noteth the sentence, which God gaue against Adam for eating of the forbidden fruit: Soluit, you interpret, he satisfied; where the word is, he loosed or dissolued it: , you translate vnder the appearance; Athanasius meaning the substance of mans soule and bodie, which he calleth the fourme of man: , you render, of a Dam∣ned man, applying it to Christ for some countenance to your cause, in laying the paines of the damned on the soule of Christ; where Athanasius speaketh that word of Adam, that was condemned for sinne, in whose substance or forme Christ appea∣red, that is a true man, to dissolue the sentence giuen against Adam, when he was first condemned. And that which is most intolerable, where Athanasius in the same sen∣tence the verie next words, expresly addeth, that Christ was altogether vntouched ei∣ther with condemnation, or with sinne, to shew that he ment Adam in the former word of condemnation, you purposely skippe and neglect that which should lead you to the trueth of his speech, and directly against his plaine and manifest words, you referre Damnation to Christ, as if in spite of Athanasius, though he earnestly and openly professe the contrary, you would wrest his words to dishonour and belie Christ, and make the Reader beleeue, that some before you had ascribed damnation vnto Christ. But be ashamed of these monstrous falsifications if you haue any shame in you; or if not, your Reader will soone perceaue, what cause it is you haue in hand, that must be vpheld with such hatefull forgeries. Athanasius doctrine is very sound and good, though you will not acknowledge it, What Athana∣sius speaketh of Adam, the De∣fender referreth to Christ. that Christ in his owne person, taking our humane nature vnto him, dissolued the sentence, that he gaue against Adam, when he condemned him for transgressing: and by his bodie dead and laid in the graue, he freed our bodies from the power of corruption, and with his soule descending into hell, he quited our soules from all the right and power, that hell had ouer vs by sinne. This whiles Athanasius mindeth to expresse, he saith; He that examined (Adams) disobedience, and gaue iudgement; compri∣sed a double punishment in his sentence; saying to the earthly (part) earth thou art, and to earth thoushalt returne; and to the soule, thou shalt die the death; and thereupon man is de∣uided in twaine, and condemned to goe vnto two places; (to wit, his bodie to the graue, and his soule to hell.) Athanasius de Incarnation Christi. It was therefore needfull, that the pronouncer (of that sentence) should himselfe, by himselfe dissolue his owne sentence, , appearing in the forme (or substance) of him, that was condemned, but yet without either condemnation or sinne, that the freedome of the whole man might be (wrought) by man in the newnesse of the image of the Sonne (of God). I shall not need to prooue, that Philip. 2. v. 6. & 7. is the substantiall forme as well of God, as of man; the Apostle applieth it to both; and Athanasius in this verie place saith. Athanas. vt supra. . The fourme of his owne soule vnsubiected to the bands of death, Christ sent present before them; and so againe Christ Athanas. vt supra. deliuering vs, , in his owne perfect and true form (or substance) answerable to ours. This could you not chuse but see, if either you perused Athanasius himselfe, or the verie Defenc. pag. 17. d marg. li. 8. page 181. of my conclusion, which you cite, and whence you tooke this authoritie; where it is euident by the full wordes of Athanasius in the same sentence, that Christ was cleere from sinne and vn∣condemned, and that man was the person condemned for sinne; which you could not misse without infinite negligence, or inexcusable blindnesse. Defenc. pag. 77. l. 15. Austen we saw a little before. ] We saw his name, as now we doe, but we sawe no words of his, that any way made to your purpose. He saith; Accursed is all sinne, whe∣ther it be the deed (deseruing) or the punishment (deserued) which is called sinne, because it commeth (by or) from sinne. And likewise that Christ receaued our punishment with∣out sinne, that thereby he might dissolue our sinne, and end our punishment. Truely accursed is sinne, and the punishment inflicted on the of ender for sinne abiding without re∣mission or repentance; otherwise punishment after sinne remitted, as in the godly; or without desert of sinne, as in Christ; is not a true curse separating from God, not from the true blessings of God, which make vs certainly and euerlastingly happie: but it is a curse depriuing vs of externall and corporall blessings, which God of his bountie first bestowed on the life of man, and often recalleth for triall of obedience, and chastising of disobedience, as also for preuenting occasions of sinne, and auoi∣ding of greater vengeance, if we should be suffered to walke secure and carelesse in the waies of our hearts. Christ then receaued a curse for vs, which in him was the chastisement or punishment of our sinne; yet as he no way deserued it, so was it not destruction, which lighteth on the wicked for their wilfull persisting in sinne, but a proofe of his obedience, and a full satisfaction for our offences, respecting his per∣son that suffered it, who was God and Man, and is by Saint Austen called our Punish∣ment, as well for the cause, which was wholy ours, as for the likenesse it had with the punishments prouided for vs in this life, where Christ suffered; and not in hel, where Christ could not suffer. Dio i. de Di∣uin Nom ni∣bus. cap. 4. It is no euill (in it selfe) to be punished, but to deserue punish∣ment. And so Basil. P sal. H mil. 9. quod Deus non sit Author . The true euill is sinne, whose end is destruction; that which seemeth euill with afflicting (or greeuing) the sense, hath the force of good in it. Defenc. ag. 77. li. 17. Your former sense that Christ was a sacrifice for sinne, how differeth it from your second, that he was punished for our sinnes? ] With you it may be a question, with me it is none. For though they were both ioined in Christes sufferings, yet that is no reason to take away their difference. In the sacrifice, which Christ of ered vnto God for the sinnes of the world, himselfe was the Priest and the Offerer, and by his willing obedience, In his Sacrifice to God, Christ was a willing offerer: in his Martyrdome from men he was a patient sufferer. submitting himselfe to his Fathers will, made a recompence for our sinne, which we could not doe. In his Martyrdome, he was a patient sufferer of that, which the Iewes with cruell and wicked rage wrongfully laid on him, when he was deliuered by Gods determinate counsell into their hands. Now betweene his patient suffering from men, and willing offering to God, there is some difference, if you could see it, though they were both coupled in his death. [ they both prooue directly and necessarily, that he must be indeed sinnefull by imputation. ] The one prooueth that he bare our sinnes in his bodie on the tree, but by no meanes, that he was guiltie of them: the other sheweth, that he clensed our sinnes, and so was no way defiled with them. [ How could he be truely punished for sinne by God, but that he was sinnefull by imputation? ] Because he was most willing and able to make recompence to God for our sinnes by the dignity and innocencie of his person, which we could not. And who but you concludeth a Me∣diatour A Mediator ot g iltie of the sinne for which he th mediat. and Redeemer to be guiltie of their sinnes, for whom he maketh mediation and Redemption? If a man intreat pardon for a theefe or a traytor, vpon repen∣tance, and satisfaction for the wrong; shall he by your Diuinitie be a theefe and a trai∣tour, as well as the prisoner? If it were not lawfull for Princes to pardon, then were it vnlawfull for others to aske it: but in af oording mercie, where repentance is pro∣mised, and none wronged, Princes shew the power and right of their swordes in Gods steed, as well to accept the penitent, where they please, as to reuenge the ob∣stinate. Shall it not then be much more iust with God, in whose only will and hand is the supreame power of all things, to release his wrath, and pardon his prisoner vp∣on repentance, and recompence offered to his iustice? How can any suffer at Gods hand, except he be reputed sinnefull? ] For such as were his owne, Christ might suffer, and be no way touched with any guilt of their sinne, but rather accepted with God, and honored with men for the greatnesse of his mercy and charitie. And if he be no good shepheard, that flieth to saue his owne life, and lea∣ueth his flocke to the woolfe; but the goodnesse of a shepheard is tried, as our Sa∣uiour saith, by ventring his life for his sheepe; how commeth it into your braines, to make Christ a sinnefull and hatefull shepheard for giuing his life for his sheepe? 1. Iohn. 3. We ought, saith Saint Iohn, to lay downe our liues for (our) brethren. Shall that wrappe vs vs within the guilt of other mens sinnes, or rather commend our obedience to God, when we venter our liues, our dueties so requiring, to preuent other mens harmes? [But God himselfe, you will say, doth not punish in this case; and therefore he hol∣deth vs not guiltie.] As though an haire of our heads could fall without Gods appointment and decree? or he would accept it as his seruice, if it made vs sin∣full? What rude and lewd ignorance is it, to make that sinfull in Christ, which is commended to vs by his example, and commanded vs for his loue, and the good of others? Defenc. pag. 77. li. 23. The Iewes sacrifices, the expresse figures of Christ do most liuely set out this thing. When they were brought vnto God, the people must lay on their hands vpon the heads of the beasts: shewing thereby, that their Leu t. 16. 21. sinnes were put vpon the sacrifice, and that God so accounted them indeed to be. ] As your doctrine is most vnsauerie, so your proofs be most vnsound; your fansies are so fraighted with falshood, that you can not almost speake a trueth. To what end the bringers of Sacrifices did lay their hands on the heads thereof, is not expressed in the Scripture, though you boldly auouched it by the example of the Scape-goat, on which the high Priest alone imposed his hands. In Leuit. 3 v. 2. 8. 13. peace-offerings of thanksgiuing, where was no mention of sinne, as well as in burnt offerings and sinne offerings, the people Leuit. 3 v. 2. 8. 13. layed their hands on the heads of Why the People la d their han s on the heads of their Sacrifices. their sacrifices; and in sinne-offerings the laying on of their hands might be a confes∣sion of the fault which they were guilty of; or of their desert, that they were worthie to die; or of their faith in looking to be saued from their sinnes by the bloud of the true Sacrifice, which should purge them from all their vncleannesse. The Scape-goat, which you make a president for all other Sacrifices, but very falsely, was not slaine at all, and had no hands layd on him, saue the high Priests alone, and liuing caried away the sinnes of the people into a land not inhabited. What resemblance hath this with the bloudie sacrifice of Christ for sinne, or what comparison can you make betweene them but by contrarieties? The other bloudie Sacrifices, which vndoubtedly were figures of Christ, teach no such thing, as you imagine, but rather plainly confute it. For as in nature they were not capable of the guilt, but onely of the paine of sinne, which is death; so in vse they were holy, and in their reference to the true sacrifice, accepted for the sinnes of men. And because you now admit them to be expresse and liuely figures of Christ, which in the beginning you denied, resolue your Reader, whether they were defiled and hatefull to God or no. The Scripture sayth of them, they were most Leuit. 7 v. . 6. & 10. v 7 holy, and Leuit. 1. v. 4. accepted as offerings of a 13. 17. sweet sauour vnto God. And if the figuratiue Sacrifices, when they did beare the sinnes of transgressors, were not de∣filed therewith, but most holy and accepted to God; what true Christian will endure your vncleane thoughts and words, that the Sonne of God was defiled with our sinnes, and hatefull to God for them, when he assumed them, to abolish them by the shedding of his bloud, and to purge vs from all pollution of flesh and spirit? Neither trust to your termes of imputation, to saue you from impietie of heart and mouth, our sinnes were imputed to Christ to beare the burden of them in his bodie, that is to be chasti ed for them, but not to be defiled with them, or guiltie of them, much lesse to be hatefull to God and truely accursed for them. Defenc. pag. 77. li. 30. The comparison of Christ with a Suretie, is neither a simple similitude, as you simplie Christ no way ound to be our Suretie. call it neither is it vncleane, but a olie and sit representation of Christes paying our debt for vs. ] Christes vndertaking our cause, and paying our debts in farre more ample and pleasing maner to God then we were able, I no way reiect or reproue; (it is the an∣k r and holde of our saluation) but that you bound him thereto by a single simili∣tude of a Suretie, who could not be bound farther then his owne loue and liking did leade him, I did and do mislike; and say, if you take not heed thereto, it breedeth a pe tilent and perni ious heresie. For it is most certaine, that long before the man∣hood of Christ was conceiued, the second person in Trinity vndertooke our redemp∣tion; and in that respect the true and eternall God euen from the beginning profes∣sed himselfe to be our Redeemer. Iob. 19. I am sure, sayth Iob, that my Redeemer liueth. Psal. 30. Thou hast redeemed me, ô Lord God of trueth, sayth Dauid. Of the Israelites he like∣wise sayth: Psal. 78. When he slew them, they sought him, and remembred that God was their strength, and the most high God their Redeemer. Esa. 44. He that made thee, (sayth Esay) thine husband (whose name is the Lord of hosts) and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, shall be called the God of the whole world. And againe: Es . 63. Thou ô Lord art our Father, our Redee∣mer, thy Name is for euer and euer. And lest any should diuert this to the deliuerance out of Egypt, which was a figure of their true redemption from sinne and Satan; Da∣uid saith. Psal. 34. The Lord redeemeth the Soules of his seruants, and none that trust in him, shall perish; yea Psal. 130. He shall redeeme Israell from all his Iniquities. And so God in his owne per∣son speaketh by his Prophet. O e. 14. I will Redeeme them from the hand of hell, I will Redeeme them from death; Repentance is hid from mine eyes. Here is he, that first vndertooke out cause, and professed and promised to be our Redeemer, uen the Sonne of God, Hebr. 1. who being the brightnesse of glorie, and the Character of his (Fathers) substance, (or liuely Image of his Person) supporting all things with the word of his power, made the pur∣gation of our sinnes by himselfe; that is, in his owne Person. Now if you being a Chri∣stian, haue any bands to tie God withall, besides his loue and his truth, you were best shew them forth; we shall otherwise take you, if you stand vpon it, for little better then an Arian, to lay subiection or seruitude on any of the Persons in the most glori∣ous Trinitie. Defenc. pag. 77. li. 34. The word is vsed in the Scripture it selfe, he was made a Suretie of a better couenant. Is not this sufficient to warrant the goodnesse and aptnesse of the similitude against your vn∣dutifull reproofes of it? ] It is not written in the Scriptures, that Christ was made our Suretie to God, much lesse that he was a Suretie bound to the Law to pay our debts for vs. Our debt was euerl ting damnation of Body and Soule, which either Christ or we must pay or suffer, if your prophane vrging of this Similitude take place. The Scripture saith, Hebr. 7. He was made a Suretie of a better Testament; proouing expresly by Hebr. 7. Christ a Surety to vs of the new Testament. the Comparison of two Testaments, a former and a weaker, which was the Law; a later and a better, which was the Gospell; that Christ was not a Suretie of the Law, nor to the Law, as you falsely conceaue, but of a better Testament, then the Law; that is, he was Gods assurance to vs, that all his promises of ercie, grace, and glory should stand fast, notwithstanding our iniquitie, indignitie, and Infirmitie were neuer so vn∣meete and vnworthie thereof. This Suretiship of Christ, to establish with his bloud the new couenant, which God made with vs, not we with him, without all respect of our merits to pardon our offences, and to make vs heires of his heauenly kingdome; the Scripture mentioneth, which is no more like to your Suretiship, then freedome is to bondage. I therefore reprooued not the word, which my selfe also did vse, I re∣prooued your seruile applying the word to bring Christ from loue and libertie, which led him to be our Redeemer, vnto thraldome and debt, to make him thereby sinfull and defiled with our vncleannesse. And is it not worthie of reproofe, when a word is vsed in the Scriptures to one purpose, for you to take vpon you to draw it as you list to your deuices? It is plainly written in the Gospell; Matth. 20. The Sonne of man came no to be serued, but to serue. Will you hence presume your selfe to be Christs Master, and take him bound to fulfill your Commandement, as seruants must their Masters? He saith of himselfe Psal. 22. I am a worme and not a man. Will you trample on him, as you doe on wormes? God hath giuen vs his Spirit as Ephes. 1. the pledge of our inheritance. Shall we claime power ouer Gods spirit, as we doe ouer pledges, that are in our possession? What wickednesse may not be bolstered, if we stretch Similitudes vsed in the Scrip∣tures, farder then they were intended, and we authorized? Defenc. pag. 78. li. 1. You say Christ was not as a Suretie bound to the Law, but of a better couenant euen of grace. Verely a Suretie to vs of both. ] Verely if you say, that Christ was bound to vs, or to the Law, in both; that is, as well to beare our sinnes, as to giue vs grace, you broch two apparant blasphemies. If you shift with saying, Christ doth assure vs he hath done both for vs, you slide from your former Assertion. For that both these are done by Christ, we bothagree, only you would haue him, when he bare our sinnes, to be thereto bound, and in that respect worthely Trea pa. 93. li. 6. & 9. condemned by the iust sentence of the Law, which layeth the Penaltie on the Suretie, when the Debtor cannot discharge it. I told you, that not onely we were in our selues to wicked and hatefull, as being Enemies, to haue any loue or fauour due to vs from God, but also the Person of the Redeemer was so full of might and maiestie, that no bands could be laid on him by the Lawe, because he was afore the Law, and aboue the Law, that vndertooke our Redemption. To this what reply yon? [ He was a Suretie to vs of both. ] But was he bound to vs, or It is a most hain us error to subiect God to any bondage. to the Law in either? Why speake you not to that, which is in Question? It would well become the rest of your conceits, to say that Christ was bound to redeeme vs be∣ing his Enemies, and that the Sonne of God was bound to beare our burdens for vs. [ He promised so to doe. ] Then the Loue of God which began it; the Will, which pub∣lished it; and the Truth, which performed it; are the more to be magnified by vs in the Sonne of God; who could owe vs no duetie; nor be bound to vs, nor to the Law. [ Those are the greatest bands that God can enter. ] If Gods Counsels, purposes, and Pro∣mises be bands to barre the freedome of his fauour, grace, and mercie; and in all these to impose on him a necessitie, then is there in God no freedome, but onely bondage; which God forbid should come within any Christians hart. He is most constant in all his thoughts, words, and waies; which we may not thinke, much lesse call debts to vs, or bands to him, without euident and extreame impietie; but as he giueth all things to all, and oweth nothing to any, which the Scripture calleth his Grace, whereof he is a giuer, and not a Debtor; so he cannot repent or change, as men doe; which we must ascribe to the infallible stedfastnesse of his most wise and glorious will; the only Rule of all his gifts and works. No band then, if you know what a band meaneth, can be fastned on God, since that hath in it a debt, which must of necessitie be yeelded, whereto the partie may be compelled and forced by the right of the Law, which cha∣lenges in Gods promises are most prophane and heathenish Blasphemies. Defenc. pag. 78. li. 11. It is written that Christ was made, Hyponomon, subiect to the Law, or vnder the Law, which you mightely denie against expresse Scripture. ] You are so well acquainted with corrupting and deprauing other mens words, that you make no care to doe the like to mine. That Christ was vnder the Law, I neuer denied, no more then that he was Christ made himselfe vnder the law by loue, when he was free from the Law, and Lord of the Law. vnder death; but I said he was not bound to the Law, no more then he was bound to death, though he willingly for our sakes subiected himselfe to the rudiments of the Law, (for of those the Apostle speaketh) to liue vnder them for a time, and to taste of death, that he might in the end abolish them both. For as Christ would be Circumci∣sed, and Baptised, though there was nothing in him needfull to be pared or washed away, but rather that fulfilling all righteousnesse, he might commend both the one and the other with his person and presence: so would he obserue the ceremonies of the Law, not tied like a Seruant vnto them, but content to vse them, as Lord ouer them, till he saw his time, which he did not sticke to professe of himselfe, when occasion was offered. The Matth 12. vers. 8. Sonne of man (saith he of himselfe) is Lord euen of the Sabboth: And so likewise, Matth 12. vers. 6. I say vnto you, that here is one greater then the temple. By which words of his it is euident, that he was not bound to the Law, who called himselfe, as he was the Sonne of Man, Lord of the Sabboth, and so of all the Law; but as he laide downe his life, when the Law could not take it from him, and was obedient vnto death, though death were in his power; so would he subiect himselfe to the carnall com∣mandements of the Law, though he were free from them, as being the truth and end of the Law. For the Law was our Schole-master to Christ, to whom when we were come by faith, which made vs the Galat. 3. Sonnes of God, we were no longer vnder a Schoole-ma∣ster. How much lesse then could Christ himselfe, who freed all, that beleeued in him, from obseruing the Law, be bound or of necessitie subiect to the Law; which neede not lead him to himselfe, nor could not force him, that was personally the Sonne of God, to be a seruant vnder the types and figures of the Law, farder then his owne wil induced him. I made a reason that Suerties bound to the law to pay other mens debts, might not looke to haue all referred to their liking and power. as Christ had to his, but to an∣swer the penalties of the law, to which they were obliged. Defenc. pag. 78. li. 15. es forsooth, such a Suertie, as he was, might worthely be a gratious Mediator: he was no ordinarie Sucrtie. ] You labour to binde Christ to the thraldome of condemnation by the similitude of humane lawes, which subiect the Suertie to the arre condition, that they doe the debtour: and now when you see that resemblance to faile, you exempt him from the seruitude of Suerties, because he was no ordinarie Suertie. Doe you now finde, there Thou h Christ ay be called a voluntarie Sureti , y t was he truely a mer∣cifull Redeemer. is great difference betwixt a Suertie and a Redeemer, and howsoeuer the speech may be true, that Christ was a kinde of Suertie for vs, yet may we not make him a seruant obliged to vs, or with vs, but a willing and free Redeemer. For after our transgressi∣on committed, and iudgement giuen vpon Adam and all his posteritie by Gods owne mouth, a Suertie commeth to late, a Redeemer is not too late before executi∣on; and therefore the Scriptures doe euerie where giue vs a Redeen er, to note that we were condemned, and reserued vnder feare and danger of euerlasting punish∣ment, till the Redeemer interposed himselfe, and offered such ransome and restituti∣on, as should more content and satisfie the holinesse and iustice of God, then out condemnation could doe. The person that vndertooke our redemption, was not Christes humane nature, which as then was not, but the Sonne of God in his owne person assumed on him to make ful satisfaction for our disobedience; not by suffering euerlasting death, which was due to vs, but by giuing a better and more pretious re∣compence, then we were woorth. And this he would doe by submitting himselfe to obey and serue in our nature, and in our steed, and so offer the most acceptable Sa∣crifice of humilitie and obedience vnto death, that Gods holinesse might be hono∣red, which we d spised; and his iustice satisfied, which we prouoked. Let all men therefore aduise themselues, how they binde the person of the Sonne of God to their obligation or condemnation; it was he, and none other that vndertooke for vs, and by whose fauour, power, dignitie, sanctitie and humilitie ioyned in one person with our weake and fraile nature, the worke of our redemption was performed. Defenc. pa. 78. li. 23. You say he could not be bound to the Law, because he was aboue the Law. He was a∣boue the Law in his Godhead, but in his manhood he became for vs vnder the Law. If you speake of Christes manhood apart from his Godhead, you vtterly ouerthrow all our saluation. For set aside the personall vnion of man with God in Christ Iesus, and his humane nature could do vs no good. Since therefore his Godhead was from euer∣lasting, and a perfect and distinct person in the T initie before his manhood was cre∣ated, which had neuer any existence by it selfe, but in coniunction with his Deitie from the first instant of his conception; when we speake of the person of Christ, we Christ vnder∣ to be our Redeemer 4 0 yeeres before he was made man. must speake either of his Godhead, which was before his incarnation, or ioyntly of both after his assumption of man into God. Then either we had no Surctie for our redemption the foure thousand yeeres that Christes fl sh was vnmade of his mother, or els the Sonne of God in his owne person was our Suretie. So that our Suretie for foure thousand yeeres could not be bound to the Law by your confession: and when the same Sonne of God tooke vnto him our humane nature into the vnity of his per∣fon; HE, that is, the Person could be no more bound to the Law then he was before. For the Godhead was of more power to free the manhood of Christ in that Person from the Law, then our flesh in Christ was to subiect the Godhead vnder the Law. Wherefore the person remained free and vnbound, yet would he submit himselfe to obserue the signes and sacraments of the Law, as he did humble himselfe to the death of the Crosse, to neither of which the person was bound by any legall seruitude, but only by voluntarie submission, that his obedience being no way tied, might be the more precious in Gods sight. For as the 1. Cor. 2. Lord of glorie was crucified, and we are om 5. re∣conciled to God by the death of his Sonne, so God sent his Sonne Ga at. 4. m de of a woman, and made vnder the Law, to redeeme vs and giue vs the ad ption of children: but as he was made flesh by no compulsion nor obligation, no more was he subi ct to the Law by any other meanes, then by his owne loue and liking for vs. Neither doth the Scripture binde the manhood of Christ vnto the Law. For 1. Tim 1. the Law was not giuen to the righteous, sayth the Apostle. Which if it were possible to be true in any, it was most true in the manhood of Christ, who had neither in birth, life, nor death any taint of sinne. Galat. 5. If ye be led by the spirit, sayth Paul, ye are not vnder the Law: for against such there is no law. Whether you thinke the manhood of Christ was endued and guided with the spirit, I referre it to your owne conscience. If it were, then against him was no law, though in loue to vs, which was the fulfilling of the law, he would humble himselfe, not vnder the law only, but vnder the worst of men, to be the Psal. 22. contempt of men, and reproch of the people. Ioh. 8. If the Sonne shall make you free, you shall be free inde d, sayth our Sauiour. For the seruant abideth not in the house for euer, but the Sonne abideth for euer. If then, when we are made the sonnes of God by faith, we can be no longer seruants to the law, because the law ingendreth bondage, which is repug∣nant to the libert e wherewith Christ hath made vs free; how much lesse could the manhood of Christ, which not only freeth vs, but was personally borne the Sonne of God, be a seruant and in bondage to the law, sau onely because he would humble himsel e to serue in our steads? This Paul learned of his master, and followed in his ma ter, when he sayd: 1. Cor. 9. Though I be free from all men, yet haue I made my selfe seruant vnto all men, and am made all things to all men, that I might by all meanes saue some. So that by your leaue it is a plaine errour in you, because Christ submitted himselfe willingly to the l w, to conclude his manhood was bound to the law. not of m else in his manhood bound to the law for vs, but freely and voluntarily Gods gratious eternall decree appointing him, so he became bound to the Defenc. pag. 78. li. 26. . The eader will finde in the end, that your greatest strength is the mistaking o o her mens words and abusing of your owne. For when you haue wrangled foure leaues to e Christ to the true curse of the law, and to hang him by the iust sentence of the same law, because he stood bound with vs as a Suretie to pay our debts; now at last long lingering, you say, he did freely and voluntarily vndertake to redeeme vs, yet loth to let go. you adde, and so became bound to the law. Sir, you should tell vs, W o did ely and voluntarily vndertake our redemption, and WHEN. For if it were vndertaken by the Sonne of God long before Christes manhood was borne, you the Sonne of God to the law, which before you disclaimed. And did od, thi ke you, eternally decree and appoint his Sonne to be bound to the Law? of , if you appoint any of the persons in Trinitie to be one bound th n another with any manner of bondage or seruice. Then as the Sonne co ld not e bo nd, because he was God; No more would the Father binde the S nne, whose loue to vs ledde him to vndertake our Redemption; and to binde him that was willing, was to distrust him, which suspition I hope you will not impure to the Father against the Sonne. The Father therefore in the same loue to vs, where∣with The willing of∣fer of the Sonne to be our Redee∣mer did induce the decree of the whole Tri∣nitie. his Sonne offered to be the person, that should redeeme vs, accepted the offer of his Sonne, and gratiously decreed with one consent of the whole Trinitie, as well the manner, as the meane of our redemption; which decree did not binde, but accept and approoue the loue of the Redeemer. And when the time came, that the Sonne of God would execute this decree made as well by himselfe, as the other persons in Trinitie, he tooke an vndefiled humane bodie and soule into the person of his God∣head, which he so reple ished with the woonderfull light, and supported with the infall le strength of his spirit, that it most willingly embraced, and most earnestly af∣fe ted the same submission and obedience, which the diuine nature of Christ was ple sed to yeeld for our redemption. So that the manhood of Christ neuer hauing any subsistence by it selfe apart from the Godhead of the Sonne, it neuer had any hu∣mane action or pas ion in birth, life, or death, which pertained not to the whole per∣son consisting of God and man. And in that respect the Scriptures say, Ga at. 4. God sent his Sonn ma of a wom n, and made vnder the Law, and we are Rom. 5. reconciled to God by the death of hi Sonne; the 1. Cor. 2. crucified the Lord of glorie, and God Act. 20. purchased his church with his owne bloud. Which speeches could haue no trueth in them, as likewise our salua∣tion no certaintie, if the manhood of Christ could haue had any action or passion asunder from the Godhead. The person therefore of God and man after his incar∣nation, was subiect to the Law, and euen the same person, that from the beginning vndertooke our redemption, and so not the manhood of Christ, as you would shift the matter off, but the person of God and man must be bound to the Law, if our Suertie were bound. May not God be bound by his promise?] Then must you say, that God is bound to giue vs grace, mercie, and glorie, because he hath promised euerie one of these, Gods promise ust not e cal∣led on age and hath sworne to performe them; and so you turne the whole Scriptures vpside downe, and put your selfe in Gods place, and make him your attendant and seruant, because by an immutable decree he hath promised to heare vs, when we call; and helpe vs in time of need. By this Diuinitie like to the rest of your deuices, the loue, fauour, compassion, bountie, mercie, trueth, and maiestie of God shall be not one∣ly a necessitie, but euen a bondage vnto him, which blasphemie no Christian eares I hope will endu e. God therefore is a most mercifull promiser, a most gratious giuer, and a most faithfull performer; his promises are assurances that he will giue, what he saith; but they are no bands, that he must yeeld, what he oweth; because we haue neither meanes to deserue them, nor ight to chalenge them, nor power to exact them; but onely need to receaue them, praier to entreat them, and thanks to ac∣knowledge them. He is content to make himselfe our debtour by promise, to let vs see, how much we are bound to him, that deseruing nothing, we are yet by his mercy assured of all things. De nc. pa 8. li 29. Though he who ordinarily Redeemeth a prisoner from the Enemie, be not bound, but con∣tent so to doe, yet a Suertie being content becommeth bound, and so Christ our Redeemer be∣came bound, as a Suertie to pay our debt for vs. ] Though the Scriptures euerie where calling Christ a Redeemer, and no where a Suertie to God for vs to pay our debts, (but Gods Suertie or assurance to vs) doe by the verie name giue vs to vnderstand, that God must needs be lesse bound then men, which are not bound but content to redeeme others from their enemies; yet you will haue your will in spite of Scrip∣tures and Fathers, and make Christ no Redeemer indeed, by taking his freedome from him, but bi de him with your similitudes to doe that in thraldome, which in loue and me cie he was content to doe for vs. And where Gods decrees and promi∣ses, which a e most faithfull and firme assurances, can not be called bonds in him without blasphe ie, yet you will haue him bound to saue vs, because he promised to deliuer vs. And our debt being eternall damnation of bodie and soule to hell fire, you will tie Christ to paie our debts without dispensation or qualification; except it please you with your possi ilities to releeue him. And the law, to which you will haue him bound, was first that, which inflicted penalties on vs for sinne; then it was the Gospell, which shewed vs our saluation in Christ; and now it is the eternall de∣c e of God, whereby Christ was appointed to be our Sauiour. And all this impiety and inconstancie you build neither on Scripture nor Father, but vpon the similitude of a Suertie taken from Westminster Hall, where men mistrusting ech others words and willes, take bands with Sureties to haue their due payed them. But know you good Sir, that God had no distrust of his Sonnes will and loue to vs, nor doubt of his abil ty to performe our redemption, and therefore bound him not, as you desperately dr ame, when he offered to be our Redeemer; but accepted his loue, which could not faile; and his will, which could not change; making no decree for the maner of our redemption, but what the Sonne himselfe with the rest of the persons in Trinitie liked for the preseruing of his owne diuine iustice, and shewing of his owne excee∣ding loue towards vs. Then as it is certaine by the Christian faith the Sonne of God could not be bound to helpe or redeeme vs being his enemies, nor to humble himselfe to the forme of a seruant, but only was thereto led with the loue of his Fathers glorie, and of our safe∣tie: so it is euident, that the same person, after he had assumed our nature vnto him, could not be forced with any necessitie, nor vrged with any commandement against The person of Christ could not be bound, but his humane will was gu ded by his diuine will. his will, but the humane will of Christ was so guided and directed by his diuine will and power, that it readily and gladly submitted it selfe in all things to the will and pleasure of his Father, which indeed was also the will of his owne diuine nature; for∣somuch as the three persons in Trinitie haue all one & the same glorie and maiestie, will and worke. And therefore aswell the Scriptures, as the Fathers do plainly testi∣fie, that euen Christes manhood had power enough giuen it to withstand all that was offered him by men or diuels, but that for our sakes the person would submit him∣selfe to the seruitude, infirmitie, miserie, and mortalitie of our condition; therein to comfort vs, thereby to redeeme vs, and therefrom to deliuer vs; which he could not do but in his humane nature, since his Godhead was impassible. This fredome and power not to be bound, nor compelled to any of his sufferings, we must reserue to the person of Christ, that his obedience might be meritorious and voluntarie, not only at his first consenting thereto, which is this Defenders drift, but in his continuall persisting therein, and finall performing thereof; that is, in all and euery part of those things which the wisedome of God thought requisit for our re∣demption. Luc. 17. When you haue done all those things, sayth our Sauiour, which were appoin∣ted you, say. We are vnprofitable seruants; we haue done that which was our bounden duetie to d e. Will you bring Christ within the compasse of an vnprofitable seruant, by do∣ing that he was appointed and bound to do? Ad Phil ∣mon. v. 14. Without thy liking (sayth Paul to Phi∣lemon) I would do nothing, that thy good should not be as it were of necessitie, but willingly. If God so much respect the willingnesse of the heart, that he will not haue men tied with necessitie to doe good, shall we thinke, that he would binde his owne Sonne to the obedience of a seruant, and not suffer his submission to be voluntary, that it might be acceptable and thanks worthy to God? And to what purpose lay you these bands on Christ? If he were willing, there needed no bands besides the Os . 11. v. 4. bands of loue, which is the surest hold that God requireth of vs. If he were not willing, his vndertaking our cause, was neither loue to vs nor obedience to God, (who loueth a cheerefull giuer) but a compulsion or exaction, which ouerthroweth the very ground-worke of Christes submission and our saluation. To preuent all lewd and wicked surmises of bonds, duetie, or necessitie to be layd There was no necessitie in our Redemption, but Christs will, power, and li∣bertie. on the Sonne of God in redeeming vs, the Scriptures exactly say, that Eph. 5. v. 25. Christ loued his Church, and gaue himselfe for her; that is, he was led by loue, and by no compulsion no commandement, to giue himselfe for her, which otherwise by no meanes could be exacted of the Sonne of God. And therefore he Phili . 2. EMPTIED HIMSELFE, ta∣king the forme of a seruant, and HVMBLED HIMSELFE, becomming obedient vnto death, euen the death of the Crosse; to assure vs it was loue, that caused him to giue him∣selfe; that is, at first to offer, and after to yeeld himselfe for vs, which otherwise could by no decree nor band be imposed on him, nor required of him. And this libertie to do and suffer of his owne accord euerie thing, which he in his diuine wisdome, toge∣ther with the Father and the Holy Ghost, thought meet for mans saluation, the per∣son of Christ kept vntouched euen to his death, in his death, and after his death; himselfe most plainly professing so much of himselfe in the laying downe of his soule, that Iohn. 10. none tooke it from him, but he layd it downe of himselfe; and Iohn. 2. would in three dayes raise vp againe the temple of his bodie, by taking his soule vnto him. And this was the charg and appointment that he receiued of his Father, to do and suffer these things of himselfe, that is, without any band, force, or necessitie, but only of his owne ac∣cord and voluntarie obedience to that which was his Fathers will, because it was first his owne good will and offer, and so accepted and decreed to the whole Trinitie, as a most sufficient amends for mans disobedience, and a most iust and full desert of mans adoption and saluation by the meanes and merits of Christ Iesus. For which cause the Scripture resolueth vs, that Christ Eph. 5 v 2. loued vs, and gaue himselfe for vs, to be an offe∣ring and a sacrifice of a sweet sauour vnto God, that is, a most willing, free, and acceptable seruice, and satisfaction to God for all our sinnes. The Catholike Fathers were very carefull to continue this Doctrine in Christs Church. August. d fi de contra Ma∣nu eo. cap. 26. Nos Dominum verum hominem suscepisse credimus, & in ipso visibiliter inuisibilem apparuisse, in ipso inter homines conuersatum fuisse, in ipso ab hominibus humana per∣tulisse. Totum autem hoc nulla fecit necessitate. We (Christians) saith Austen beleeue that the Lord tooke vpon him the true Nature of Man, and therein did visibly appeare to men, when he was before inuisible, and in his Manhood conuer ed amongst men, and in the same s ffered the t ings, which men may offer to men. All this did e with no necessitie. To shew what Christ suffered from men; Austen addeth. The word was made flesh by his owne power, and was borne, and suffered, and died, and rose againe, Nulla sua necessitate, sed vo∣luntate & potestaue; By no nec ssitie laid on him, but of his owne will and power. And so: Idem in Psal. 87. H s humane infi mitatis affec us si t ip m carnem Infirmitatis hum nae, a mortem carnis human Dominus Ie us non conditionis necessitate, sed mi ationis voluntate susce∣p t. These affections of ma s Infi mitie, as al o the flesh of mans we kenesse, and the death of mans flesh, the Lord Iesus tooke vpon him not by any necesstie of Condition, but by the good will of is mercie. As else where. Ostendit Domi us volunt e se pati, non necessitate. Idem n Io∣hannem. tracta. 1 . Ergo quod p ssus est, misericordia fuit. The Lord sheweth that he s ffered by his owne will, and by no ne essitie. It was therefore mercie that made him suffer. uery where Saint Au∣sten is resolute, that Christ suffered, and died, . when he would, as he would, and because he woul . Ath asius. Christ seeing the goodnesse of his F ther, and his owne suffciencie, and po er, ; was . moue with ue towards man, and pittiyng our infirmitie, he put on the same, and hauing Com assion on our mortalitie, he clothed himselfe therewith: . ; and willingly tooke vp the Crosse to him e, and ent to his death vncompelled. Chrysostome. . Sei sum tradidit, vt indicet quod volunta p ssionem suscepit, & non necessitate, neque vt, sed volens & spenté. Christ gaue himsel e, to shew that he vndertooke his Passion wil ngly, and not by any nec ssitie or exaction, but of his owne will and accord. . Passus est quia voluit, resurrexit quia potuit. Christ suffered because he would, and rose because he could. And so By his deeds Christ hat e w nt to hi P ssion by no force nor necessitie, but of his owne accord. Am∣br e. as no eruant to death, but free among the dead. For he was free that had . powe death. I em de fide . 2 cap 1 By the power of his Du nitie e laid downe his Soule, and tooke . T ou sec his goodn sse in that he laid it downe of his owne accord: thou seest his power in that e to ke it againe. Idem. i. . . 1 . At the ime when plea ed him, the Lord Iesus emptied himsel e nd suffered when he would. Ierom. Death came not vpon Christ, but Christ cam ; or Death in him found no way for his power. He was no Debtor to Death and sinne, b t he was offered, because he him elfe would. For . he ustained not tbe Crosse . by any ne essitie, but willingly, otherwise if he h d not beene off red by his owne good will, he . mig t h ue de lined tho e that were sent to (take) him, whom he met without feare, and of his o ne accord off red him elfe to them. Grego ie. In carne veni ns Dominus non culpam nostr m ex vitio, non poenam ex ne∣cessit te ; nulla enim labe peccati pollutus, reatus nostriteneri conditione non potuit: atque id o m rtem nostrā omni necessitate c lcata, cum voluit, sp nte suscepit. The Lord com∣mi g in, flesh, neit er tooke on im our fault by any infection, nor our punishment by any coacti∣ n, for being filed with no st ine of sinne, he could not be held by any condition of our guilti∣ , and there ore reading all necessitie vn er his feete, of his owne accord, when he would, e admitted o r d ath. Nos omnes cum nolumus morimur; quia ad solu ndae penae debitum . conditione coarc armur. Ille autem quia nulli admixtus est culpae, nulli ex ne∣c e . Sed quia culpam n stram dominando subdidit, poenam nostram mi∣ ando suscepit. We all die against our wils, because we are tied by the condition of our sinne to the debt of nduring punishment. But he that was entangled with no fault, could not be b und to any pe ltie by nec ssitie. Yet because he subdued our sinne by raigning ouer it, in and piti (to vs) he vndertooke our p nishment, as he himselfe saith: I haue power to my , no man taketh it from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe. Beda. . Iesus hungred, it true, but because he would. He slept, it is true, but because he would. He sor∣rowed, it is true, but because he would. He died, it is true, but because he would. I em in Psal. 87. It was in his power to be so or so affected, or not. These affections of mans infirmitie, Non con∣ditione necessitatis, sed voluntate miserationis suscepit, si ut & carnem & ipsam etiam mor∣tem; Christ tooke vnto him not by any b nd of necessitie, but by the good pleasure of his mer∣cie, as he did flesh, and death it selfe. Wherefore his death was truely free, not forced; be∣cause he had power to lay downe his soule, and take it againe. Idem Q st 13. de Arbitri . He that dieth of necessitie, can not rise of himselfe. Christ then, who wanted all fault, was not tied to the necessitie of death. Therefore Christes death was voluntarie, not necessarie; and so he might rise of himselfe. Damascene, Damas Orth doxa fide li. 3. ca. 20. Naturall things (affections and passions) in Christ did not pre∣uent his will, there was nothing forced in Christ, but all voluntarie. At his owne will he hun∣gred, at his owne will he thirsted, at his owne will he feared, at his owne will he died. Bernard. Bernard. fe∣r a paenosae. Not onely Christ was willing, and was offered, but he was offered because he was willing. Christ being equal with God emptied himselfe by taking the forme of a seruant, and being rich became poore for vs, and of great was made little; of high, low; of strong, weake; and hungred, and thirsted, and was wearied in his iourney, and the rest, which he suffered of his owne accord and not by any necessitie. Idem ibid. He was voluntarily incarnate, he voluntarily suf∣fered, and was voluntarily crucified. Idemotid. For had he not died voluntarily, that death had not beene meritorious. How much more vnwoorthely he died who deserued not death, so much the more iustly (man) liueth, for whom he died. What iustice, thou wilt aske, is this, that an innocent should die for a malefac our? NON EST IVSTITIA, SED MISERI∣CORDIA. Si iustitia esset, iam non gratis, sed ex debito moreretur. It is no iustice, it is mercie. If it were iustice, then should he not die fre ly, but endebted thereto; and if endebted, then he indeed should die, but the other, for whom he died, should not liue. Yet though it be not iustice, it is not against iustice; otherwise he could not be both iust, and mercifull. The verie Catechisme, on which you seeme so much to stand, diligently teacheth and vrgeth the same doctrine, howsoeuer you be slipt to some Sc ueners shoppe to draw Indentures to binde Christ to the penaltie of the Law, as your Suertie. Catechis. an 1574. edit, fo. 66. Laquet ipsum debit as hominum sceleri, sibi indebit as paenas sua voluntate inse suscepisse, subijsse, & nostrorum flagitiorum maculas morte voluntaria, & suo innocente sanguine luisse, atque eluisse. It is euident, that Christ admitted, receaued, and suffered of his owne good will the paines due to mans wickednesse, but not due to him, and with a voluntarie death, and his owne innocent bloud did wash, and clense the spots of our filthinesse, And againe. Fol. 67. It is euident, the Iewes had not in their power these things, or times; sed sua ipsum voluntate, nulla v coactum, harc mortem pro nostra salute oppetijsse; but of his owne accord, without anie c action, Christ died this death for our saluation. Where also this is set downe as a true position; that, F l. 67. eligendae mortis optio penes ipsum fi t; the election and direction of his death was left to his owne power and choise; which the whole Church of Christ hath hi∣therto ascribed to the power and will, loue and mercie of the Sonne of God, reiecting your bands and obligations lately deuised to barre the freedome, and abridge the power of the Sauiour of the worlde, because you would tie him to the paines of hell. You see not, you will say, how these Fathers make against you.] None otherwise but that they directly denie, that which you affirme. Christ, you say, though of good The Fathers disclaime all necessitie in the death of Christ. will he was at first content so to doe, yet after became bound to the Law to pay our debts. Now he that is bound must needs obey; and so you lay on Christ not onely a necessi∣ty, but also a dutie. These Fathers with one consent disclaime al necessitie in the death of Christ, and consequently they confes e, he was free from all bands and debts, but in loue and mercie, as a free Redeemer, he would giue himselfe for vs, which was a farre greater price, then we were woorth, or could owe. And these multitudes of men, as you call them, though they be not of equall strength with the word of God, which is the touchstone of all trueth, yet doe they plainely prooue, that you inno∣uate the faith of Christes Church, which in their seuerall ages they all beleeued and professed: and for their faith they haue the manifest wordes of our Sauiour, that none tooke his soule from him, but he laid it downe of himselfe; and the witnesse of the Apo∣stle, that Christ for loue gaue himselfe for vs: which argueth, that he was vrged there∣to with no violence, necessitie, nor dutie, much lesse was thereto bound: and you for your deuice haue the curiositie of creditours, & the discredite of debtours, of whom men require Suerties with bands, because they trust not their words and promises; much lesle their willes and dispositions. But this iealousie in the Sonne of God, is hainous blasphemie; & therfore there could be no cause to bind him, as there could be no distrust of him, since our miserie, and his mercie were motiues enough to in∣cline, and continue his loue, though we leaue him at his full libertie without all ser∣uitude or necessirie. ph. 5. Gods decree and his owne good will was, that he should satisfie and pay none otherwise Defenc. pag. 78. li. 34. for vs, then so as he did. ] There can be no question, but in creating, condemning, and redeeming man; the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghost had one and the same will and decree, yet except with the Arian heretickes you make an inequallitie of the persons in the most blessed Trinitie, you can impose no seruice, nor suffering on the Sonne of God by any decree, but what must come from his owne good pleasure, offer, and perfourmance. And that the Scriptures euerie where imply, when they say; Gal t. 2. Christ loued vs, and gaue himselfe for vs; that is, he FIRST of loue towards vs OF∣FERED to serue and suffer in our places, and AFTER of the same loue submitted himselfe to performe his purpose and promise of our saluation. So that Gods de∣cree was no iniunction, nor ordinance, that his Sonne should doe it, but an ACCEP∣TATION of his Sonnes loue and mercie towards vs, and an APPROEATION, that it was a most sufficient recompence for all the transgressions of men. And the Father is said Rom. 8. to giue his Sonne for vs, not that he loued vs better then he did his Sonne, whom he infinitely loueth, as himselfe, and for whose sake onely he accep∣teth vs; not that he vsed any authoritie or power ouer his Sonne, to appoint him to this seruice; but that knowing the strength and sufficiencie of his Sonne, to be as his owne, and seeing his loue and mercie towards vs, which was common to him with the rest of the persons in that most glorious Trinitie; the Father out of the same loue towards vs thought it fitter to accept the offer of his Sonne, then that we should pe∣rish. And therefore though the Father loued his Sonne as himselfe, yet he was con∣tent his Sonne should beare our burden, which we could not without euerlasting destruction, and his Sonne could with exceeding honour, and admiration of his mercie, humilitie, obedience, and patience. If you slide from the Godhead of Christ to his manhood, to binde that, because it was a Creature, and not the Creator, by di∣uiding the person of Christ you runne into the heresie of Nestorius condemned in the generall Counsell of phesus; and yet releiue not your selfe. For the person, and not this or that part of his nature, must be the Redeemer, since neither man could saue vs, vnlesse he were also God, nor God could die for vs, vnlesse he were also man, and so did suf er death in his humane nature. So that the Suertie, as you call him, that vndertooke our saluation, not onely from the beginning, but before the world, was precisely the person of the Sonne of God, and not the humane nature of Christ, and therefore you must either binde the Godhead of Christ as our Suertie, or free his manhood from all bands. Neither could any of Christs sufferings be of infi∣nite price and merite for vs, except we as ibe them to the voluntarie obedience of the person, since the death of a iust man could not be the redemption of the worlde, but the death of that person, which was more woorth then all the world. If then Christs sufferings take their force and value from the person, they must likewise haue their freedome and election from the person. Defenc. pag. 78. li 36. Those sentences of your Authors Gregorie, Austen, and Ambrose, if they be spoken simply, seeme very harsh, where they say, that Christ could haue saued vs otherwaies then by suffering and dying for vs. For herein they oppose Gods absolute omnipotencie against his expresse and reuealed will; which how it may be liked in Diuinitie I know not. ] Yours is more harsh, that reprooue them, before you vnderstand them; and chalenge that as false, which is most apparantly true by the maine grounds of Christian Religion. For if you auouch Gods power to extend no farder then his works, as if God could doe no more, then he hath done, or will doe; is a manifest denying of Gods omnipo∣tencie, which is larger then either his will, or his works; and though his works must alwaies be measured by his wil, yet must his power be limited to neither, because God is able to doe many things, which he neuer did, nor will doe. And in his works, if you bind him with any necessitie, to do as he did, and leaue him not at libertie to doe all things according to his owne wisdome and will, you reuiue the accursed error of the Manichees, against whom Saint Austen fully resolueth. A gust de ∣de contr Ma∣nichees. cap. Nullam ergo necessitatem patitur Deus, neque necessitate facit, quae facit, sed summa & ineffabili voluntate ac po∣testate. God then suffereth no necessitie, neither doth he the things, which he doth, with any necessitte, but with a supreame and vnspeakeable will and power. So that the words of Gre∣gorie, Austen, and Ambrose are most true, that God had other meanes in his power to saue vs, then by the death of his owne Sonne; but a BETTER or more conuenient way to demonstrate his loue, and mercy towards vs, and to manifest his wisedome, power, and iustice against sinne, death, and Satan, he had not; for no Question God chose the best. And why these words should offend any Christian man I see no cause, since they be both sound and sober. They oppose Gods power against his expresse and reuealed will.] You were told, it is an error to restraine Gods power to his will, as if he could not doe more, or other∣wise, then he hath done; but in this you conceiue them not. For they doe not say, God had meanes to change his will, or to alter his promise once published, but when he first decreed this way to saue man, it was in his power to haue appointed an other way, if it had pleased him. So that God was not tied to determine this way by any necessitie, as if the power of euill preuailed against him, or choyse of other meanes failed him; but this in the wisedome of God, common to all three persons in that most holy Trinitie, was allowed as the most honorable and acceptable way to God, and most fauorable and comfortable to man. And this confession, which you so much controle, hath beene vsed by Diuines of all ages, howsoeuer you know not what to make of it in your new Diuinitie. Cyprian before their time. Cypria de Passion Chr ∣sti. Et sine hoc holocausto poterat Deus tantum condonasse peccatum, sed facilitas veniae laxaret habenas peccatis ef∣frenibus, quae etiam Christi vix cohibent passiones. God was able to haue pardoned so great sinne without this Sacrifice, but the facilitie of forgiuenesse would loose the raynes to vnbrid∣led sinnes, which euen the sufferings of Christ doe skant represse. Nazianzene euen with e Naz z 1. Epist. ad Cl ∣donium. the eldest of them. It was possible for God (to saue man) without taking flesh by his only will, as he did, and doth worke all things without the helpe of a Body. Damascene after them. Damasc . Or. thod . fidei. li. 3. cap. 8. He was not vnable, that can doe all things, by his Almightie power and strength to take man from the Tyrant, (that possessed him.) Bernard likewise. Bernard. s ∣per Cantic. Serm . 11. Was not the Crea∣tor able to restore his worke without this difficultie? He was able, but he chose rather to wrong himselfe then the most lewd and hatefull vice of vnthankefulnesse should haue any co∣lour in man. Zanchius resolueth the same. Zanchiu in 2. cap. ad Phi∣lip. Could not mankind be deliuered by any other meanes (then by Christs death?) who can doubt it? Solo nutu & iussu ac voluntate di∣uina poterat. It might haue beene deliuered by the onely becke Commandement and will of God. Master Caluin, whose warinesse you so much commend, where he maketh any thing for you, doubteth not in this Assertion to ioyne with Ambrose, Austen, and Gregorie against you. Caluinus i cap. 15. Ioan∣nis. vers. 13. Poterat nos Dominus verbo, aut nutu redimere, nisi aliter nostra causa visum esset. The Lord might haue Redeemed vs with a word, or a becke (of his,) but that for our sakes he thought good otherwise to doe it. The Booke of Homilies, on which you would seeme so much to depend, goeth farder then either Ambrose or Austen, & saith; The second Sermon of the Passion. pa. 11. Was not this a sure pledge of Gods loue to giue vs his owne Sonne from heauen? he might haue giuen vs an Angell, if he would, or some other Creature; and yet should his loue haue beene farre aboue our deserts. Defenc. pag. 79. li. 4. All these Similitudes of Mediator, Redeemer, and Suretie may stand very well toge∣ther in the office of Christ, though you would perswade vs the contrarie, yea rather they con∣firme ech other. ] The names of Mediator & Redeemer are exactly affirmed of Christ, and often authorised in the Scriptures; the name of Suretie to God for vs is not; he is called Gods Suretie to vs of a better Testament, then the Law; because God in him, and by him hath assured vs of his mercie and grace in this life, and of his hea∣uenly kingdome in the life to come. And if you will needs vrge the Similitude of Sureties from the course and custome of humane Lawes, which appoint and admitte Sureties, they vtterly exclude vs in the case that we were in, from hauing any Sureties. For neither in Panorm tan. r brs. de fide ussoribus. Capitall crimes, nor in D gest. li. 2. Tit. 11. si quis cauti nibus. le∣g q tiens. Corporall paines doth mans Law allow any Sureties. Againe no D gest. li. 2. Tit. 11. si quis cauti nibus. le∣g q tiens. Suretie standeth bound for a seruant, much lesse for a condemned, & dead person. Since then we were not only the seruants of sinne; but for haynous offen∣ces condemned, Soule and Body, to euer lasting perdition, and already dead in Soule by sinne; no course of Law allowed vs Sureties. Moreouer, the Prince who is the Lord ouer the Law, may be no Suretie, because he is not chalengable by the Law. how then will you bind the King of Kings to be our Suretie, as if the most Soueraigne were most subiected to the Law? besides, Christ freed vs by giuing himselfe, and his life for vs. What Sureties doe so? Christ bought vs with a Price to be his seruants. Doe Sureties buy their debtors to serue them? Christ gaue infinitely more then we were worth. Is that possible for Sureties? Christ did change our punishment in his person from eternall death to the death of the Crosse. Haue Sureties that libertie, or authoritie? We rested on Gods promise for our Redemption, before it was perfor∣med. Know you not that a bare promise, by mans Law, doth not bind, though God be fa thfull in all his words? Albeit then Christ recompenced our debt, and voluntarily by his owne death discharged our danger, being no way thereto bound, yet since he obserued none other conditions of a Suretie, and no right or Law did allow vs Sure∣ties; I see no cause, why you should change the honor of a free Redeemer, so much mentioned in the Scriptures, into the Thraldome of a Suretie bound with vs, as you say to pay our debt, which was euerlasting destruction of Body and Soule. Defenc. p g. 79. h. 10. Our publike Churches Doctrine also auoucheth that e was our Suretie. ] Our Church alloweth that Catechisme to be taught in Schooles to Children, with whom it may be you se ke to be sorted, because you neuer waded any farder, vnlesse in one or two new writers, that fit your fansie. It doth approue likewise, and appoint Erasmus Pa aphrase to l e openly in the Church for euery man, that doubteth of any thing in the n we Testament, to reade for his instruction; and yet you will not take euery word in Eras∣mus Paraphrase for the publike Doctrine of the Church of England. For so you should oone exclude the most of your new conceits. But what saith the Catechisme, that Christ was bound to suffer for vs, or did endure the same damnation which we d serued? It sayth, that Christ was our Suretie. ] The Catechisme goeth not so farre, but sayth, God dealt cum Christo quasi sponsore, with Christ as it were with a Suretie. Christ then did voluntarily assume some similitude, but not the strict and exact con∣dition of a Suretie, euen by the tenor of the words which you cite; though you guile∣fully translate them, as if Christ had beene our Suretie. It is one thing to hold, Christ was our Suretie, and ioyntly bound with vs by law to pay our debts, which is your errour; and another thing to say, Christ was as it were a Suretie, or did of his owne ac∣cord discharge our debts for vs. The Catechisme in this very section precisely noteth, that he was not bound as Sureties be, but of his owne will suffered for vs the cruell and wicked rage of the Iewes, in putting him to death. Fol. 64. Haec quidem illi in eum cru∣deliter, malitiose, at impiè perpetrarant: verum ip e sua s onte, ac volens haec omnia per∣pe s, at perfunctus est. These things (before described) the Iewes did cruelly, maliti∣o ly and impiou against him; but he OF HIS OVVNE ACCORD and good will, (not bound) suffered all these things. And before he commeth to your words, he sayth, but it i not vnusuall amongst men, that one should vndertake and suffer for another. By which he doth not meane, that by right or law one man may be bound to suffer or die for another, but by liking or loue, men are sometimes thereto led. Otherwise the law both of God & man is directly against all such suffering. . Sancimus ibiesse poenā, est. Peccata suos teneant authores, nec vlterius progrediatur metus, quam reperi∣a r delicium. We appoint (say the Emperours Arcadius and Honorius) that punish∣ment shall be there where the fault is. Let offences binde their committers, and let no feare of punishment extend farther than to such as be guiltie of the crime. Gods law doth ratifie the same. The wickednesse of the wicked shallbe vpon himselfe. The sonne shall not beare e Ezech. 18. vers. 20. the of the father, neither shall the father beare the iniquitie of the sonne; but the same soule that sinneth, shall die. Wherefore the Catechisme, if he vnderstood what he said, as I truely thinke he right-well did, could not deriue Christes bodily sufferings from any band or Suertiship allowed amongst men by Law, but onely from Christes loue and will, which is aboue all law, by which indeed he humbled and emptied himselfe to the death of the crosse for our sakes, when there was neither law, nor band to compell him to it. Defenc. pag. 79 li. 22. Also Cyprians words are plaine, and can not beare any other sense than I make of them, that Christ was a verie Suretie for his people, and suffered such a forsaking of God touching sense of paine, and want of present feeling of comfort in his paines, as the damned doe. ] I did well to say, you neither vnderstood, nor liked the meaning of Cyprian: for where there is nothing in Cyprians words, that bolstereth your error, you haue made such a construction of them, or rather such a contradiction to them, that few men besides you could deuise the like. For by them you bring the person of the Sonne of God in his humane nature, that was alwayes full of grace and trueth, To haue no MORE SENSE NOR COMFORT OF GOD for the time, THAN THE DAMNED HAVE. From which p stilent position, though you kisse your hand in it, I wish all the godly to blesse themselues. But let vs first see, on which words of Cyprian you graffe this golden fruit; and then, how true it is, and agre able to the faith. Your foundati∣on s, because Cyprian sayth of Christ; Thou diddest shew, Cy rian. d Pass. Christi. anxietates illius querimoniae verba esse dil ctorum tuorum, quorum personam & causam assumpseras; the pensiuenesse of that complaint (My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?) to be the words of thy beloued, whose person and cause thou hadst assumed. What is this to your purpose? or how doth this patronize your violent and wicked assertion? The dolors of Christs complaint on the Crosse, that he was forsaken, were the words of his beloued: that is, Christ spake those words in the name and behalfe of his Elect, that they were forsaken of God; not of his owne person: as Austen saith of the same; August. in Psal. 21. That was the voice of Christes members, not of the head. And Leo: Leo de Passi . Domin. Serm . 16. Sub redemptorum suorum voce clama∣bat. Christ cried (those words) vnder the voice of his Redeemed. Now this being Cy∣p ans plaine speech, that those were the words of his Elect finding themselues for their sinnes worthie to be forsaken of God; how come you to turne Christ into his beloued, that is, the head into the members, and his beloued into the damned? and then to conclude of Christ, that he had no more sense nor comfort of God in his paines, than the damned haue? Such another leape will easily bring you and your followers from faith to infidelity, and if you take not heed the sooner, from the num∣ber of the Elect to the rancke of the Reprobate, which take so light occasion to draw Christ into the same desperation for the time with the damned. Cypri ns words (you say) can not beare any other sense. ] It is not enough for you shamefully to peruert Cyprians words, but you must proudly proclaime in print, that they can haue none other sense than you list to like of; when his speech expresly doth import the contrarie. If you had auouched so much of Christes words, we would desire no better interpreter then Cyprian, who saith, those were the wordes of Christs be∣loued; and so that forsaking had no direct application to Christes person, but a mer∣cifull relation to his members, who might often inwardly feele, that they were forsa∣ken of Gods fauor and assistance for the time, though not as the damned are.] MEE, you thinke, in Christes words must signifie his person, and not his members.] But Cyprian is expresly opposite to you in that point, and saith; MEE there, is as much as MY BELOVED, or chosen members. And for this exposition Cyprian hath the manifest precedence of the sacred Scriptures, in which Christ often speaketh of his members, as of himselfe, by the verie same words. Saul, Acts. 9. Saul, why persecutest thou mee; that is, my members, whom I loue and esteeme as my selfe? and this is no ca∣uilling euasion; the Iudge at the last day shall award heauen and hell with the warrant of this speech. Matth 25. I was hungrie, and yee gaue me meate; I thirsted, and yee gaue me drinke; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I was naked, and yee clothed me; I was sicke, & yee visited me; I was in prison, and yee came vnto me; and so foorth; where in one Chapter Christ calleth his members by the name of himselfe 27. times. All which are most false of Christs person, for he then raigned in glory at the right hand of his Father, & endured none of those miseries; but yet they are most true in his members, whom he calleth by the name of himselfe, because he loued them as himselfe, & more then himselfe, since for their sakes he humbled, and emptied himselfe. And this reason of his words, him∣selfe will giue before men and Angels. In as much as you did it vnto one of the least of my brethren you did it vnto mee. The same is verie vsuall in the Scriptures. Luke. 10. Hee that heareth you, heareth me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth me. Matth. 10. He that receaueth you, receaueth mee. 1 Sam 8. They haue not reiected thee, said God to Samuel, they haue reiected mee. Zachar. 2. He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of his eie. Where a most louing accep∣tation is shewed of the sufferings and seruices of men for Christes sake, but no proper attributton verified of Christ. This Damascene expresseth by making Damasc. Or∣ ae sides. li. 3. cap. 25. two kinds of appropriation vnto Christ in the Scriptures; one naturall and substantiall, the other personall and habituall. Naturall, as when the Lord in Nature and trueth being made a man, had experience of things incident to our Nature. Personall and habituall, (as) when one putteth on the person of another, for pit∣tie or loue, and vseth speech (in his name and for him) NOTHING APPERTAI∣NING TO (the speaker) HIMSELFE. According to which, Christ appropriated the curse and dereliction due to vs; not himselfe being made those things, but assuming our per∣son, and reckoning himselfe with vs. Ibidem. li. 4. cap. 19. For neither as God, nor as man, was he euer forsaken of his Father; neither was he made sinne, nor a curse. Assuming therefore our person, and reckoning himselfe with vs, (as the head for the members) he spake these things. For we were guiltie of sinne, and malediction, as incredulous and disobedient, and for that cause were forsaken. Which are Cyprians plaine words also. Cyprian de Passione. Quòd pro eis voluisti intelligi, qui de∣seri à Deo propter peccata meruerant. Thy complaint of forsaking, thou wouldst haue vn∣derstood (as spoken) for them, who had deserued to be forsaken of God in regard of their sinnes. Then by Cyprians iudgement Christ spake those wordes neither for himselfe, nor of himselfe, but for those, and of those, that deserued to be forsaken of God, whom he calleth by the name of himselfe, as he doth oftentimes elsewhere in the Scriptures, because they were members of his bodie, and as deare to him, as him∣selfe. If this be all that Cyprians words imply, how come you to make that false and The Def nder pareth Christ n want of com∣fort with the da ed. prophane collection out of Cyprian, that Christ suffered such a forsaking of God touching sense of paine and want of present seeling of comfort in his paines AS THE DAM∣NED DOE? You would faine set your infernall imaginations to sale vnder the names of some of the auncient Fathers, to inure your Reader with the name of the DAMNED, lest he should detest your irreligious presumption, if you should pro∣ferre these pedegrees in your owne name. But a man may know the fowle by the feather; and your deuices shew themselues by the verie vtterance of them. For ex∣pressing two points in Christes sufferings, the one is sensiblie absurd, the other ap∣parantly false and wicked. The paine of Christes soule, you euery where defend, was inflicted by the immediate hand of God, and was the selfe same, which the damned doe suffer. Then how could this be called a forsaking in Christ, when it was rather a plaine persuing of him by Gods owne hand? Doth a man depart from an other, when he persueth him, or forsake him whom he followeth with the stroke of his hand? If therefore Christes suffering in soule came from the immediate hand of God, as you dreame; Christ should haue said, my God, my God, why persuest thou me? or why doth thine hand oppresse me? and not, why doest thou forsake me, and leaue me in the hands of mine enemies without any shew, that thou regardest or respectest me? The second point is farre woorse. For if Christ had no more comfort in his paine the the damned haue; then Christ for the time of his suffering had neither faith, hope, grace nor loue of God, nor any fauour with God, nor xpectation that hee himselfe should be saued, much lesse that he should saue others; from all which the damned are cleane cut off. Indeed this was the conceit, that the diuel by the mouths of the wicked did vrge against Christ, to vpbraid him with his case as desperate, and to persue him as forsaken of God; and therefore this resolution, that Christ was thus indeed forsaken, or felt no more present comfort then the damned doe, is plain∣ly the diuels Diuinitie, and maketh as flat a contradiction to all the Scriptures, as any the damned themselues could deuise. For Dauid ledde by the spirit of God, sayth exactly of Christes sufferings in the person of Christ, Psal. 16. I set the Lord alwaies before me, he is at my right hand, that I shall no slide. Therefore my heart is glad, and my tongue re∣ioiceth; my flesh also doth rest in hope. And the Apostle saith, that Heb. 12. Iesus for the ioy that was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame. And he that against these expresse Scriptures auoucheth, that Christ had no more feeling of any comfort in his paines, then the damned haue in theirs, I see no cause why the whole Church of Christ should not hold him madde, or woorse. But you meane no present comfort.] As if faith, hope, and grace, the assured fauour, and promise of God, yea personall coniunction with God, and his owne certaine knowledge that he should rise againe the third day Lord of the quicke and dead, and Sauiour of the whole world, did not yeeld him present comfort in the middest of his greatest paine; insomuch that the Apostle saith, Christ endured the crosse, (hee meaneth with patience) and des ised the shame thereof. So great was the ioy proposed, and comfort conceaued, euen in the sharpest of his sufferings. [By present comfort you meane present deliuerance.] Meane what you will, your meaning is lewd and wicked, to broche the doctrine of diuels vnder parables and paraphrases of abused wordes, and sl e comparisons with the damned. For if Christ h d hope, then had he comfort; because hope confoun∣deth not. If he had no hope, then did he despaire; and so must you admit in Christ either consolation, which you den e, or desperation for the time, which must be ioy∣ned with infidelitie, f r that he could not want hope, but by lacke of faith, since Gods promises, and his owne knowledge did assure him, that hee was ordained and annointed of God to be the Sauiour of the world. I omit, that dere iction is one of the properties of the damned, of which before you said, Defenc. pag. 11. li. 25. & 27. there cou d v terly be none of these in Christ. Now belike vpon some new inspiration from the father of lies, you haue found, that Christ suffered such a forsoking of God, as the damned do . With such mysteries of impietie and contrarietie, you da be vp your new redemption by the pa nes of hell and of the damned. But the Apostle teacheth vs, that 2. Cor. 1. as the sufferings of Christ abound, (in his members) so their consolation abo ndeth through Christ. And if wee Rom. . reioice in trouble, knowing that 2. Tim 2. suffering (with him) we shall raigne with him: how could patience, that breedeth hope in vs, and maketh vs perfect, exclude him from all comfort, whom God did Heb. 2. consum ate with affliction, and Heb. 5. made the Author of eter∣nall sal ation to all, that obey him? Def nc pag. 79 li 28. I adde vnto all this last of all your owne grant, where you fully yeeld, that Christ was our Suertie to the Law, and that he did suffer iustly, or in Gods iustice. The vengeance of the Law say you. once executed in our Suertie can no more in Gods iustice be exacted on v . I mislike not the na , but the bondage of a Surety in Christ The name of a Suertie is not it that I mislike, but your concluding from the simili∣tude thereof, that Christ Conclus. a. 279. li. 34. was bound to suffer hell paines in our steed, and was defil d and hatefull to God by our sinnes. So much resemblance Christ had with a Suertie, as suf∣fering in our steedes and for our sakes, to cleere and acquit vs by his sufferings; but that he was thereto bound, or therewith defiled, these were the two points, that I misliked to be drawne from the similitude of a Suertie; and heerein I said the Scrip∣tures rather make him a Mediatour and Redeemer, them a Suertie. I say the same still, but that you doe not, or will not perceaue it, least you should want somewhat to quarrell with. ( Defenc. pag. 79. li. 35. But I ouerthrow mine owne chiefe exception which I make that Christ was not our Suertie to the Law to pay our debts. ] When I say, Christ died for vs, Con lus. pa. 279. li. 28. NOT AS A SVERTIE BOVND TO THE LAVV, you put BOVND in your pocket, to serue you an other banket against you be disposed; where if you did loue trueth, as well as you doe talke, you would farely report, though you did not fully vnder∣stand my words. I said, it was not written in the Scriptures, that Christ Ibid. li. 25. was a Suer∣tie to the Law to pay our debts; If you haue found where it is so written, shew the place, and take the prize: you will prooue it out of my words, you say; at least if you could; and yet betweene my wordes and the Scriptures, when you liste, you can put difference enough. But let vs see how you deduce it out of my words, that Christ was bound to the Law to pay our debts for vs. That he did submit himselfe to the curse of the Law, to discharge vs from all our debts to the Law, I neuer denied; the Apostle saith, Galat. 3. Christ redeemed vs from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for vs, that is in our steeds, or to our vse. The Question is whether he did this willingly, freely, and of his owne accord, as I with the whole Church of Christ affirme he did; or whether he were bound to the Law so to do, which is your new found faith to defile Christ with our sinnes, and to hang him iustly by the sentence of the Law. You haue laboured a long while in vaine, saying much and proouing nothing; what now con∣clude you out of my words? The vengeance of the Law was executed on him as our Suertie.] The vengeance of the Law due to vs was executed on him, that of his owne fice-will put himselfe in our places, by his suffering (who was an innocent, and the Sonne of God) to ouer∣throw the curse of the Law, which we could neuer haue done, but rather by our pu∣nishment haue confirmed it. How prooue you now, that he was bound thus to doe, or that the Law did allow vs Suerties? You haue my words, make your best of them. [He was our Suertie.] May not a man as well freely, when hee seeth his time, dis∣charge A man may a scharge an others dobt and not be bound thereto. an others debts, as if he were bound? must euerie man, that will shew mercy, be thereto tied with bands? was not the loue, which the Sonne of God bare vnto vs, as good an assurance, as all the bands you haue brought in, to make him a seruant vnder the Law, that was Lord ouer the Law? [Those are not properly Suerties.] Amongst Banckrowts and Vsurers they are not, but honest and able men do most desire such. How much lesse then ought we to binde the Sonne of God, as if his credite were crazed, or haue him in suspition, except he will enter an obligation to redeeme vs? [ The debt can not now by Gods iustice be exacted on vs. ] And why? be∣cause The rule of Iu∣stice suffereth the stronger to beare the bur∣den of the wea∣ker. God in his mercie towards vs, liked rather to accept the obedience of his Sonne for vs, then to execute his vengeance on vs. Which since he did no way owe for himselfe, being not onely a most innocent man, but the most excellent Lord of hea∣uen and earth, his sufferings were in vaine, if they preuailed not for vs. [For vs then they were iust.] Farre woorse were well deserued by vs, and reserued for vs, if the Lord of glorie had not interposed himselfe: but his willing admitting the punish∣ment due to vs in his owne bodie did not make him guiltie of our sinnes, nor woor∣thie of our punishment. [If Christes sufferings were iust in him, how was he an inno∣cent?] Because God is as well righteous in his fauour, as in his anger; and no lesse iust in sauing his elect, then in condemning his enemies. Wherefore Christes suf∣ferings were not due to him by Gods reuenging iustice; but in his righteous mercie towards vs, he laid our burden on him, who was well able to beare it, and of his owne good will desired it. And this suffering as an innocent, with his vndeserued death to releeue others, was more righteous and glorious in the sight of God by infinite de∣grees, then if he had patiently suffered, and deserued it. It was therefore exceeding mercy in the Sonne to offer it, and maruellous clemencie in the Father to accept it; and in both most admirable loue to performe it, which is neuer vniust with God. And this though you for a shift call Law, the Scriptures call grace by faith in Christ, which is not of the Law, nor by the Law, that increaseth sinne and causeth anger. Iohn. 1. For the Law was giuen by Moses, but grace and trueth by Iesus Christ. But heereof I haue spoken enough before, I may not repeat it for your pleasure. Defenc. pa. 80. li. 7. Your Similitude of a Kings Sonne intreating for his Fathers Rebels is very weake, and ouerthroweth, if it were good, a confessed point of Christs Redemption. ] Because you coyne new Principles of Religion, you thinke your selfe Authorized to make newe Rules for Similitudes. In the Scriptures it is not required, that Similitudes made of Similitudes are not alwaies of things lawfull. God, or of Christ his Sonne, should be lawfull in euery part of the Comparison, but onely that they be possible, and so propose the thing which the holy Ghost would intimate. 1. Thess. 5. The day of the Lord shall come euen as a Theife in the night. Will you iusti∣fie night Robbers because Christs comming is resembled to theirs? Christ draweth. a comparison from the Luke 18. vnrighteous Iudge, to God; and taketh likewise a Similitude from Matth. 25. Vsurers and Extortioners to teach that God will haue his gifts carefully im∣ployed. Will you by that Parable make it lawfull to lend money for aduantage? Or for men to reape, where they did not sow, because these things are proportioned to Gods graces? Christ bringeth the Similitude of an vnfaithfull Steward, that wasted his Masters goods, and abated his Masters debts; and saith, the Lord (and Master) Luke. 16. commended the vniust Steward, that he had done wisely. Will you hence vphold pro∣digalitie and infidelitie in seruants, which cosen their Masters, rather then they will worke or want? Similitudes we see of things most vnlawfull are made and referred to Gods Actions by Christ himselfe, and therefore it is no weakning to my Simili∣tude (whatsoeuer you say,) that no King hath power by Gods Law to lay bodily death on his Innocent Sonne. I doe not by that resemblance make any thing law∣full or vnlawfull; but shew how euill it becommeth Prisoners and Captiues to twite or vpbraid their Redeemers and deliuerers, as if they were defiled, and guiltie of their Sinnes, for whom they mediate and intreate. Of bodily death I spake neuer a word, that is your Idle conceite added to my comparison. But the Similitude fitteth not Christs sufferings in our Redemption.] No more doth any Similitude, that man can make. I say of Christs death, as Saint Austen saith of his birth. August. Epist. 3. ad Vo us. If you seeke for areason, it shall not be wonderfull; if you aske for an ex∣ample, it shall not be singular. The Acts of men may in some sort resemble or imitate, they cannot match or euen the works of God. But why are you so curious in other mens Similitudes, that are so carelesse of your own? Doth your example of a Suretie fit the bodily sufferings of Christ? I hope humane lawes haue no power, nor practise to take mens liues away for Suretiship; nay they allow no Sureties for any corporall paines, as we saw before, because no man is Master of his owne Body to engage the whole, or any part thereof to be mangled or maymed, vnlesse he will be an homicide of himselfe, which Gods Law doth not permit, nor mans Law accept. How much lesse then doth your Suretie resemble the paines of the damned suffered in the Soule of Christ, as you say, from the immediate hand of God? If men haue no power to pawne their owne Soules, nor to kill other mens; your similitude of a Suretie bound to the Law to pay an other mans debts, is as wide from Christes sufferings, as mine and farre wider. For he must be Suretie not onely life for life, but Soule for Soule, which Mans Law doth not meddle with. And yet your owne example of a Suretie serueth my turne to declare your Doctrine to be false, as well as any other. For if a Man fined by a Court for ryots, contempts, or other misdemeanures, and commit∣ted to prison till he pay the same, find friends that to purchase his libertie, will make present payment of his fine; haue you any reason or conscience to charge them as guiltie, or partakers of those Riots, or other offences done by him whom they de∣liuer? If men may be Sureties, Mediators, and ransomers of others, and yet not de∣serue to be blamed for other mens Crimes; why could not the Sonne of God take vpon him the punishment of our sinnes, and yet be most free from the fault and guilt thereof? [Because God did punish Christ, you will say, with his immediate hand, which he would not doe, if Christ were Innocent.] Soft Sir, that is no way prooued, but barely pretended by you, that God was the Tormentor of Christs Soule with his immediate hand: The Scriptures teach the contrarie, that God Marke. 14. deliuered him into the hands of sinners, Acts. 4. to doe what soeuer Gods hand and counsell had determined before to be done. And though the wicked be Esa. 10. the Rod of Gods wrath; and the staffe in their hands is his Indignation; Yet serue they their malice in afflicting the faithfull, when God hath an other end, which is most iust and holy, to put his Saints to the tryall of their obe∣dience, and patience, in suffering for righteousnesse sake, that he may be glorified in them, and they exalted and crowned by him. In the cruell and wrongfull death of his Sonne, to which Christ willingly submitted himselfe, God had farre greater and waightier causes and works, euen the Redemption of the world, and the demonstra∣tion of his Diuine power and wisedome, and such like, which I haue often mentio∣ned, and therefore doe presently passe them with silence. Defenc. pag. 80. li. 28. An other Reason of mine you impugne with marueylous skorne and detestation. That seeing Christ on the Crosse spoyled powers and Principalities, and made a shew of them openly triumphing ouer them; Therefore I collected that Christ selt (the diuels) as the very instruments, that wrought the very effects of Gods wrath vpon him. I grant I tooke it to be not a ridiculous, but impious iest rather then a tolerable reason, for you to conclude, that because Christ triumphed ouer diuels, therefore diuels tormented his Soule with the very effects of Gods wrath; which euery where you make to be the paines of the damned. And surely as yet, why I should conceiue better of it, I see nothing either proued or produced by you. First you assume, that these words of the Apostle were spoken of Christ hanging on the Crosse; but what Scripture assureth that besides your selfe? you peremptorily put it into the Text by saying, Trea. pa. 45 li. 9. Christ on the Crosse spoy∣led Principalities, but your additions are no good illations with me. The place, if you take the paines to turne to it, doth rather shew the Contrarie. To proue that the faithfull are tied neither to the Rites and shadowes of the Law, nor to any submission or seruice of Angels, the Apostle bringeth Christs death for the one, where the hand∣writing of Ceremonies, that kept vs in bondage, was fastned to the Crosse, and so cancelled, and we freed from it; and for the other he bringeth Christs Resurrection, by which all contrarie powers were openly spoyled, triumphed, and subiected to Christ, as to the head of all power and principalitie. (Yee were) Co'oss. 2. 12. buried with him in Baptisme, (saith Paul) with whom yee were also raised; and (when yee were) Vers. 13. dead in sinnes, and in vncircumcision of your flesh, he quickned (you) together with him, forgiuing your sinnes, (and) 14. cancelling the hanauriting of ordinances that was against vs: (and) 15. spoyling powers and principalities, he made an open shew of them, triumphing ouer them in himselfe. Yee died and were buried with Christ, who fastned the handwriting of or∣dinances to the Crosse, that he might abolish it, from hauing any right to tie or yoke his members. Yee likewise were quickned, and raised together with Christ, who rising spoyled powers and principalities, and triumphed ouer them in his own Person, that he alone might be Lord of quicke and dead, of Men and Angels: so that these words, (spoyling powers and Principalities, and triumphing ouer them,) are not referred to the Crosse, for any thing that appeareth in the Text, but to Christs Resurrection, and take their truth and force from his subiecting all power in heauen and earth vnder him by his rising againe from the dead. This triumph ouer Satan and all his kingdome the same Apostle to the Ephesians setteth downe as a consequent to Christs death, and pertinent to his Resurrection. Ephes. 4. Ascending on high he led Captiuitie Captiue; and this, he ascended, what meaneth it, but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth? So that ascending from the lower parts of the earth, he led Captiuitie Captiue, which is all one with, he triumphed ouer powers and Principalities. The Syriack translation of the New Testament, together with the ancientest of the Latine Fathers, doth not only so interpret the place, but it doth expresse so much in the verie text; that Christ had this conquest after his death. The Syriack translation sayth: Syriaca tran∣slat in vers. 15. cap. 2. ad Co. ss By the dispoiling (or putting off) his bodie (Christ) made shew of principalitics and powers, and confounded them openly, (backnumch) in his owne person. For kenumah, whence backnumch is framed, in that tongue properly signifieth a Person. The transla∣tions which the eldest Fathers of the Latine church either made or followed, contai∣ned as much. de Trinitate . 1 . Apostolus de Christo refers vt exutus carnem potestates dehonestauit pa∣lam triumphatis illis in semetipso. The Apostle reporteth of Christ (sayth Nouatian) how putting off his flesh, he disgraced powers, openly triumphing ouer them in his owne person. Neither doth he idlely propose him putting off (his) flesh, but because hee would haue him conceiued in his resurrection to put it on againe. Hilarie sometimes translated it: Hilarius de Trin tate. li. 1. Exu∣tus carne, and sometimes Idem. de Tri∣nitate. li. 1 . Spolians se carne, & Principatus & potestates tradux it cum fi∣ducia triumphans cos in semetipso. Christ putting off, or stripping himselfe of flesh, led powers and principalities (captiues) with boldnesse, triumphing ouer them in his on ne person. Both which he repeateth in his ninth booke, shewing how they may stand together, and adding; Idem. li 9. Spoliata enim caro Christus est mortuus; The flesh put off was Christ now dead. So Ambrose alleageth this place: Ambros. de . li. 3. ca. 2. Carnem se exuit; Christ put of his flesh. And Pa∣cianus: Pacta . serm. de Baptism . Exuens se carnem traduxit potestates libere triumphans eas in semetipso. Christ putting off his flesh, carried powers (as Captiues) freely triumphing ouer them in his owne person. S. Austen Epist. 5 . & de Agone Chri∣sti. ca. 2. often citeth the same place, interpreting the word , (as the rest doe) Exuens se carnem or carne; and thereby noting Christes laying aside of mortalitie. August. con∣tra Faustum. li. 16. ca. 19. Apostolus dicit, exuens se carnem, principatus & potestates exemplauit, fiduci∣aliter triumphans eos in semetipso. The Apostle sayth, Christ putting off flesh, made an ex∣ample of principalities and powers, and confidently triumphed ouer them in his owne person. Where he sayth, Christ douested himselfe of flesh, by flesh in this place we vnderstand the mortalitie of flesh for which the bodie is properly called flesh. Zanchius a learned and adui∣sed Reader and weigher of antiquitie, not onely followeth this exposition himselfe, saying, Zanchius de operibus Deo parte 1. li. . ca. 13. Resurgendo de inferis triumphauit, principatus{que}, & potestates expoliat as in tri∣umphum captiuas abduxit, vt est ad Coloss. 2. By rising from the lower parts, Christ trium∣phed and spoiled principalities and powers, carying them captiue in maner of a triumph, as is in the second to the Colossians: but he also giueth his testimony of it. Therefore nothing hindereth, but what Paul here writeth, we may interpret, as the words doe sound, of a reall tri∣umph of Christes soule (seuered from his bodie) in the sight of God onely, and of the blessed spirits, specially since the Fathers for the most part do so expound it, and of our writers not a few, nor the meanest. Bethinke your selfe now, how wide you range from the Apo∣stles meaning by the exposition of so many learned and ancient writers. Christ rose Conquerer of death and hell. Ergo, say you, the diuels tormented Christes soule be∣fore he died, with the very paines of the damned. If any man be so patient to like this Logicke, and not to laugh at it, I much maruell, seeing the Conclusion so meere a stranger to the Antecedent, which hath no coherence with it. But some, you will say, expound it of the Crosse.] That is more repugnant to The diue tor∣mented not Christs Soule on the Crosse. your purpose than the former: for if not only after, but euen on the Crosse, Christ had that apparent and glorious triumph ouer Satan and all his power, which the Apostle speaketh of; then was Satan farre from tormenting Christes soule with the paines of hell, as you imagine. [There was a conflict, you thinke, before the conquest.] A conflict argueth a resistance for the time, but no preualence. Reuel. 12. There was a battell in heauen (sayth S. Iohn) Michael and his Angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon fought, and his Angels, but they preuailed not. And the great dragon, called the Diuell and Satan, was cast out into the earth. Shall we say, that the dragon and his angels, euen the Diuell and his assistants, preuailed against Christ, because they resisted and encoun∣tered him? If this please you not, take the Similitude which our Sauiour himselfe v∣seth of his owne doings towards the Diuell. Luk. 11. When a strong man armed keepeth his house, the things that he possesseth are in peace: but when a stronger then he entreth vpon him, and ouer commeth him, he taketh away all his armour wherein he trusted, and diuideth his spoiles. M k. 3. And no man can enter into a strong mans house, and take away his goods, ex∣cept he first binde that strong man, and then spoile his house. If Christ then did enter on Satan, and binde him, and disarme him, and so spoile him, that he might make an o∣pen shew of him, and of all his power; what necessitie is there, that Christ being the stronger, should be endangered or oppressed by Satan, farther then hee himselfe would? The conquest was bloudie; for so much as in ouercomming Satan, Christ lost his life. He lost it not, he layed it downe to put the diuell to greater confusion: for when he was, not onely weake and wounded vnto death, but past all helpe and hope, as Satan in his pride presumed, then Christ raised himselfe from the dead, and ouerthrew the whole kingdome and strength of Satan, spoiling him of all his force, and leading him captiue with a most glorious triumph in the sight of God and his Angels. And though you can not digest it, yet I make no doubt, but Leo de Passi∣one Demi . Serm. 14. the omnipoten∣cie of the Sonne of God, by which he is equall to his Father in the same essence, was able by the only command of his will to haue taken mankinde from the dominion of the Diuell: but the submission and humilitie of the Sonne of God vnto death was so vnknowen and vn∣looked for to Satan, that his confusion was the greater, when he saw with his owne eagernesse he had beene the instrument of mans redemption, and his owne de∣struction. Defenc. pag. 80. li. 35. Doth not the verie maner of speech import some mightie contention and violent opposi∣tion, where yet at length an absolute and most glorious triumphant victorie was obtained? ] The words import a glorious conquest, but what contention or opposition could there be betweene the Sonne of God and the diuell, farther than pleased Christ him∣selfe to permit and admit? I hope you will giue the diuell no power nor abilitie to re∣sist God against his will. It was Gods will, and Christs good liking, that the Genes. 3. serpents head should be crushed by biting the heele of the promised seed; for so the Scripture expresseth the contention and opposition, that Satan should be suffered to haue a∣gainst Christ. Grant then Christ suffered the diuell, by the violent hands and tongues of the Iewes to doc his worst (which may be proued by other places of Scripture, though not by this that you bring) what thence inferre you? [ Defenc. pag. 81. li. 1. This must be conceiued and felt by Christ. ] What must Christ conceiue and feele? The question is not whe∣ther Christ wanted sense, but what the diuell did against him. [ Pag. 81. li 2. These could be none other effects, but only of Gods proper wrath, seueritie, and indignation against the sinne of the world. We are no whit the wiser for this answer, though this be plainly repugnant to your former principles, which make the soules proper suffering in Christ to be from the immediate hand of God, and that the diuell, I trust, is not. If it be truth that you teach, why speake you not more directly and particularly, what it was that Christ suf∣fered from the diuell? Are your mysteries so bottomlesse, that they can not; or so truethlesse, that they may not be specified? [ Defenc. pag. 81 li. 4. It could not be the reuealing of any glorie or comfort, which such instruments procured vnto him, and wrought vpon him. ] Make you the diuell the authour of Reuelations vnto Christ? It may be he is the founder of your fansies; but Christ needed no such Reuealers. Or do you reason, that because the diuell reuealed no comfort to Christ, therefore he tormented the soule of Christ? These are some new found Reuelations, they are no conclusions in any diuine or hu∣mane learning. [ Against this you bring not a word. ] I need not bring any thing against it, till you bring somewhat for it; but you be farre from prouing it, that can not, or dare not expresse it. . Defenc. pag. 81. li. 9. What if no tongue can expresse the maner, as neither haue I once endeuoured to expresse it: shall not therefore the testimonie of the Holy Ghost be true, that on the Crosse Christ had such a conflict as I haue obserued? ] Few men besides you conclude that which they can not expresse; but your maner is to prate of your obseruations, as if they were some reuelations, which yet you neither vnderstand, nor can declare. The testimo∣nie of the Holy Ghost is as true as yours is false, and hath no more concordance with your conceits than light hath with darknesse. [ A conquest, you say, implieth first a con∣flict; ] But a conquest extendeth farther than the conflict: for not only the persons and weapons of the resistants are in the Conquerers power, but all the goods, rights and dominions, that any way belong to the vanquished. It is therefore true, that Christ subduing Satan, subdued sinne, hell, eternall malediction, confusion, despera∣tion, and damnation: but these things did not inwardly assault Christ, howsoeuer by the mindes and mouthes of the wicked Christ was reputed and reproched as a repro∣bate. The Scriptures then describe the outward tentations and afflictions, that Christ suffered from the malicious thoughts, tongues, and deeds of the Iewcs fired and inflamed by Satan to this mischiefe; but of your mysticall, internall, and Satani∣call prouocations and torments the holy Ghost speaketh not a word. I gaue you oc∣casion enough to speake of these things, when I tolde you the diuell had nothing to doe with the soules of men, but either to tempt them, or torment them, which words you report; but you after your loose maner leade your Reader by by-wayes and crosse-paths, to eye other things, & then you glance at my exceptions, forgetting still, that the reason which you made, remaineth both weake and idle, for ought that you haue brought, first or last. Defenc. pag. 81. li. 17. Before I answer you directly, this we may consider: Christ might, and no doubt he did in his soule discerne, conceiue, and applie to himselfe, all the rage, malice, and violence of the Iewes tormenting him to death, as set on fire by Satan himselfe, and by all the powers of hell. ] You were to proue, the diuell himselfe did worke on the Soule of Christ without any meanes of men, whom he maketh his Instruments for his wicked purposes; and now you tell vs that Satan did set the Iewes hands and tongues on worke, to reproch the Soule, and torment the Body of Christ. This that you last say, is most true, and ouer∣throweth all that you would say. For if Christ discerned and felt no worke nor force of Satan, but by the mouthes and hands of the Iewes, then certainly Satan had no such inward and spirituall conflict with Christ, as you imagine; much lesse had Satan any power to possesse and torment the Soule of Christ, which is the thing you must proue, before your hell paines will be haled out of Christs triumph. [ Defenc. pag. 81. li. 22. These (powers of hell) also were set on worke by the Iustice and seuere wrath of God now purposety laying punishment on his Sonne, thereby to take Satisfaction for all our sinnes. ] If you meane that God by his secret Counsell and Iustice losed the raines to Satan to shew his malice against Christ by the mouthes and hands of the wicked, as he doth in the afflictions of all his Saints, for purposes to him knowne and by him liked; I see not how this should any thing helpe your Cause: but if by this you would, that Satan was Gods Instrument inwardly to torment the Soule of Christ, or that the diuell had any speci∣all Commission to inuade the manhoode of Christ, otherwise then by the violent hands and virulent tongues of the Iewes; as it is most false, that you ashrme, so is it most wicked, that you intend. Defenc. pag. 81. li. 24. Now this feeling and suffering in the Soule of Christ made an other kind of impression in him, and was infinitely more grecuous and dolefull as touching the present sense, then other∣wise the meere outward stripes and wounds of men were or could be. ] Sir you haue cast out your nets all night, and caught iust nothing. We know the diuell can not touch any haire of our heads till he receaue power from God so to doe. This our discerning and acknowledging the hand of God in setting the wicked on worke, as you call it; in giuing them leaue to sift his Saints, as I say, and to exercise his graces in them, doth breede no such feare nor torment of conscience, as you talke of in Christ, so long as we are perswaded, that God loueth vs, and doth all things for the best, and that the sharpest triall in this life is the speediest way to his kingdome. If we that be sinfull, and fraile, subiected indeede to the iust remorse of our consciences, can yet appre∣hend and discerne the rage of Satan, and of the wicked, armed with power from aboue to make triall of our Faith and Patience, and not be dismayed nor tormented in mind, in any such sort as you speake of: what shall we thinke the Soule of Christ, full of grace, and of the holy Ghost, inseparably ioyned with his Godhead in one and the same person, could conceaue of these his sufferings, or Satans incensing the Iewes against him, but as the truth was, that he well liked, and God approoued and annoin∣ted him to be the Sauiour of the world, and the destroyer of Satans kingdome for this obedience and patience, which he should shew in admitting the Iewes to execute Satans furious rage against his Body? You would haue Christ to conceaue, that he was sinfull, defiled, hatefull and accursed of God, and in that respect God was become an Enemie to him, and had forsaken him; but these mysteries of iniquitie and Infi∣delitie were farre from that holy, vndefiled, and acceptable Sacrifice, which the vn∣spotted I amb of God did offer for the sinnes of the world. But why shrinke you, and shift you thus from pillar to post; and make sometimes the immediate hand of God to be cause of Christs suffering in Soule, sometimes the working or conflicting of Satan with him, and sometimes Christs owne apprehension that the Iewes and the diuell were set on worke by the secret wrath of God; and all this while you doe not once endeuour you say, to expresse the manner of it? where in deede you doe nothing but waue to & fro, not knowing where to stand, or what to hold, but only to requoile to your accustomed couerts of Gods proper wrath and indignation against sinne, from which you thinke you may frame what fansies you will. Defenc. pag. 81. li. 33. In your Booke you speake directly against the maine ground of it; affirming that God himselfe did nothing to Christ; that is he did not PROPERLY punish him. ] Indeede I doe defend, that God with his immediate hand or power did not torment the Soule of Christ; otherwise that God gaue power to the Prince of darkenesse to come against him; and Matth. 27. deliuered him into the hands of sinners, to doe (vnto him) Acts. 4. whatsoeuer the coun∣sell of God had determined before to be done; that I euery where confesse and anouch. Himselfe saith, his Iohn. 18. Father gaue him the Cup, which he did drinke; to shew as well the Fatherly moderation, as the righteous permission of his sufferings; more then which no Scripture doth enforce, though it call that Gods hand or deede, which God by his loue did approoue and ordaine, and by his wisdome and power direct and order for the performance of our Saluation. [ Defenc. pag. 82. . 2. The very truth and Gods nord it selfe is flat contrarie to you. Your fansies perhaps be very strong against me, but as for the Scrip∣tures, you vse to crake a great deale more of them then you haue cause. He that can tell the meaning of Iobs words, when he said, Iob. . the Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath taken, though the Sabeans and Chaldeans tooke his Oxen and Camels from him; and Iob. 19. the hand of God hath touched me; when yet Satan Iob 2 smote him with sore Boyles from the sole of his foote vnto his Crowne; shall soone disperse the mists, that you would make out of the word of God. is written, God made him sinne for vs: Yea he made his Soule sinne. Which is nothing Defenc. pag. 82. else but the Lord laid vpon him the iniquitie of vs all. You shew your skill and vnder∣standing in the Scriptures. To prooue that God with his immediate hand did afflict and torment the Soule of Christ, you note that God did appoint him to be the Sacri∣fice for sinne, and that Christ accordingly did offer vp his Soule, (or life) to be dispo∣sed at Gods pleasure. What is ment by sinne in those words of the Apostle, God made him sinns for vs, I haue largely shewed before; whence you may conclude, that God did appoint and approoue Christ to be the Lamb, that should take away the sinnes of the world, because he was vndefiled, and accepted of God as a most sufficient ex∣change or recompence for the sinnes of men: but torment from the immediate hand of God these words doe not touch, and therefore you might haue as well saued your Paper, as lost your paines. The next words, that Christ made his (owne) Soule, (or life) an offering for sinne, to what purpose you bring it I can not ghesse, except it be to let your Reader see, that you doe not vnderstand whereabout you goe. For how doth Christs giuing of his life for many, proue that his Soule was afflicted by the very hand of God? Had Gods immediate hand tormented his Soule, when he commen∣ded his Spirit into his Fathers hands, by your Doctrine he commended it not to rest, but to Torment. [ This is nothing else, you say, but the Lord laid vpon him the iniquitie of vt all. Then none of these three Texts come any thing neere your intention, that God with his owne hand laid the punishment of our sinnes on Christ, since the last word, by which you expound the rest, inferreth no more, but that God caused or made our sinnes to come against him. In which words, as in all the rest implying any such thing, the Prophet meaneth; God was the Supreme Cause and Author of all Christs sufferings, which I no way deny; but not the immediate executioner with his owne hand, as you haue lately deuised, and now would prooue, if you could tell how. This Phrase in the Scriptures, that God DID these or these things, concludeth not that he did them with his immediate hand, but that he was the Decreer, director, and disposer of those things by his iust Iudgement to punish sinne, or by his wisdome to make triall of his Saints; God vsing for his Ministers and executioners, Men or Angels, good or bad, as seemed best to his heauenly will and Counsell. Amos 3. Is there any euill in the Citie, and the Lord hath not done it? saith Amos. Where he doth not ascribe all euill of punishment to the immediate hand of God, but to the Soueraigne Iudge∣ment and power of God appointing and ordering what shall be done. Esa. 45. I am the Lord, there is none other; making Peace, and creating euill. In both God had and hath his In∣struments, though in both his will and power did and doth preuaile. When Dauid had sinned by killing Vriah, and taking his wife, God thus threatned him by Na∣than the prophet. 2. Sam. 12. I will raise vp euill against thee out of thine owne bouse, and will take thymiues before thine cies, and giue them to thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wiues in the sight of this Sunne. For thou didst it secretly: but I will doe this thing before all Israell and the Sunne. Shall we attribute Absolons vnnaturall rebellion against his father, and his most shameles incest to Gods immediate hand, and so make God the onely author of so horrible sinne, which is the heigth of all wickednesse? Or did God by his iust iudgement giue libertie to Satan to lead Absolon, that ambitious murderer of his eldest brother, by the wicked counsell of Achitophell to this impudent villanie? So when Iob sayth, The Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath taken it; did he meane that God tooke it with his immediate hand? or that God by his righteous iudgement did enlarge the diuell, and those wicked robbers to make triall of him by the losse of his goods and children? Iob. 2. Stretch out thine hand, and touch his bones and his flesh, said Sa∣tan to God, when he desired leaue to strike Iobs body. Whereupon Saint Austen sayth. August. ad Simplicianum. li. 2. Epist. 1. Manum Domini appellabat permissam à Domino manum suam, id est, ipsam po∣testatem quam volebat accipere. The hand of the Lord (Satan) calleth his owne hand per∣mitted by God, that is, the power and leaue which he would receaue. God himselfe thus speaketh of the Assyrians, that oppressed his people. Esa. 10. O Ashur, the rod of my wrath; the staffe in their hands is mine indignation. God then vseth the wicked both men and Angels, to execute his iudgements, and exercise his seruants, though they haue no such knowledge or purpose; and their rage and deeds he calleth his anger and acts, because he giueth them power and leaue, without which they could not stirre to hurt any of his creatures, much lesse any of his seruants. Which Christ signified to Pilate, when he said; Iohn. 19. Thou couldest haue no power at all against me, except it were giuen thee from aboue. Defenc. pag. 82. li. 7. The Prophet sayth, the Lord delighted to bruize him, and afflicted him, or slew him. ] In points of faith vndoubted, men may dally with diuersitie of significations, and doe no hurt; but if you will erect new religions, and then iustifie your inuentions with What the Pro∣phets fore tol e of Christs suffe∣rings, that the firme was ve∣rified. new translations to your liking, you bring vs now not the word of God, but the hu∣mour of your owne head. If I may be allowed the like libertie, I can soone coole the fire of your words, by the same rules that you kindle them. For the words may signifie; The Lord would humble him and made him expectant, (or patient.) The proper signi∣fications of the words, you will say, must be preferred. But none of them can be veri∣fied of Christs sufferings, at the least if we beleeue your Lexicon. For dacha, with you, is to bruise or beate to powder, and ch l properly noteth the labour of Women in child∣birth, as chalah doth to be painefully sicke; which things agree not properly to the Pas∣sion of Christ. Since then we must be forced to the consequent or adherent significa∣tions of the words, mine haue as good right to be receaued as yours. How beit to di∣rect the Reader the safest way in this case; Neither you, nor I must intrude our deui∣ces vpon the words of God, but what the Euangelists describe in Christs sufferings, that without Question the Prophets foresaw, and foretold in their Predictions. The words then of the Prophets must not inferre any new fansies of yours, nowhere con∣firmed in the Euangelists; but what the Gospell witnesseth Christ did suffer, that Esay foresaid Christ should susfer. The immediate hand of God tormenting the Soule of his Sonne, is no where testified in the Gospell: It was therefore no where foreshewed in the Prophets. But the true & accustomed translation may stand for good; the Lord would bruise him or humble him, and made him weake. And where you catch hold of the word khaphets, as if it were Gods owne action, because he tooke pleasure and de∣light therein, besides that the word signifieth to be willing and content as well as to de∣sire and delight, that part of your exposition refuteth the rest. For God taketh no plea∣sure in punishing, as the Prophet confesseth of him, Lament. 3. vers. 33. He doth not punish with the hart; and as hee witnesseth of him selfe, Azech 1 . vers. 32. I take no pleasure in the death of him that dieth. Where you must either translate the wordes, that God tooke pleasure to humble and weaken his Sonne to trie his obedience and patience; or else that for our sakes rather then we should perish, God was content, or would bruize him with stripes and wounds due to vs, and made him taste of our Infirmities; yet neither way con∣uinceth, that God did this with his owne hand. For Psal. 116. The death of his Saints is pre∣tious (which is as much as pleasant) in his sight; and then most pretious, when with Faith and Patience they despise for Gods cause, all that their pursuers can doe vnto them. Defenc. pa. 82. li. 8. The Apostles doe acknowledge that both the counsell and hand of God was in Christs pu∣nishment. ] The place which you bring, Acts 4. verse 28, doth cleerely confute your erroneous conceit, and answer all that hitherto you haue cited to the contrarie. Acts. 4. A∣gainst thine holy Sonne Iesus both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the peo∣ple of Israel, gathered themselues together, to doc what soeuer thy hand and counsell had de∣termined before to be done. Let the simplest that is, heere iudge, whether the Apostles in this their praier acknowledge any thing done to Christ in his sufferings by Gods owne hand without all meanes, as you imagine; or whether they doe not expressely auouch, that both rulers and people of Iewes and Gentils were Gods meanes to doe that, which his hand and counsell had before determined to be done. So that Christ was not left to the will and power of his enemies, to doc with him what they would, but to doe that vnto him, which Gods wisdome determined, and hand guided to be done. Heere apparantly is the hand of God named and confessed, but mediate; that is, ordering and disposing the Iewes rage and violence according to Gods fore∣setled counsell. Wherein the goodnesse of your iudgement and cause appeareth, that when you should prooue any thing, you produce places that euidently impugne your purpose. With like discretion you cite that which followeth. For what if God condemned (that is, abolished) sinne in the flesh, (of which words I haue spoken enough before) doth that imply, that God punished Christes Soule or bodie with his im∣mediate hand? Small store of proofes you haue for your vpstart doctrine of God tor∣menting Christes soule with his immediate hand, when you turne aside to texts, that no way mention any such matter, and prate in your pride, that the word of God is flat contrarie to me. Defenc. pa. 82. li. 12. Gods owne hand then did smite Christ, and inflicted on him whatsoeuer he suffered, as the condemnation of sinne. Well leapt; From Gods hand vsing the Iewes and Gentils as his meanes to doe to Christ whatsoeuer his counsell had determined, you step to Gods owne hand, excluding all meanes; directly against the profession of the Apo∣stles, and the whole Church with them, and against the tenor of the new Testament, which sharpely rebuketh the rage and wickednesse of the Iewes, that put Christ to death. Were you not caried with the spirit of slumber and giddinesse, could you thus loosely conclude so weightie causes, not onely without, but against the Scrip∣tures? [ Ibid. li. 16. The punishment ordained for sinne by the iustice of God, and inflicted by the hand of God (whatsoeuer meane it pleaseth him to vse) is called the wrath of God, as you acknow∣ledge. ] My words make as much for you, as the Apostles did euen now, when they expresly contradicted you; but such as your cause is, such is your conscience; you duck and diue, you care not where nor whether, so you may haue a generall Phrase to beare you aboue water, when you are out of breath. You set your selfe to prooue that God with his immediate hand afflicted the Soule of Christ; and when your proofes faile you, you catch vp my words auouching Conclus. pa. 245. li. 31. the punishment ordained for sinne by Gods Iustice, or inflicted on vs by Gods hand (WHATSOEVER MEANE HE VS ) is called the wrath of God. Would you hence inferre, that because God vseth meanes, therefore he vseth no meanes, but inflicteth all punishment of sinne with his imme∣diate hand? Or because all punishments great and small on vs, or on whomsoeuer, come from the Souera gne power & hand of God, therefore God vseth no meanes? Or what other absurd conceite would you collect out of my words? I speake not here of the Reprobate, I speake of all mankinde, though you leaue out my words (inflicted ON VS) of purpose to serue your owne sense. Neither do I say it is Gods eternall or spirituall wrath, but all afflictions imposed on vs for sinne, by what means soeuer, are in the Scriptures called the wrath of God, as I haue else where shewed, albeit they tend not to damnation, nor destruction. What is this to Gods immediate hand punishing the Soule of Christ? Or which way recall you this to the Conquest, that Christ had ouer Satan and all his power, wherewith you began? Defenc. pag. 82. li 8. Then how may we thinke Gods infinite iustice and power punished Christ? ] You must goe by thoughts indeed, and neither by warrant, nor word of holy Scripture. How Christ bare our sinnes in his body on the tree, and gaue the same to be Matth. 26. broken for vs, and 1. Pet. 2. his bloud to be shedde for many, for the remission of sinnes; we shall need no thoughts nor concerts of yours: the description of his sufferings is so particularly and precisely set downe in the Scriptures, that no man doubteth thereof besides you, that respect moreyour secret sansies, then the publike histories of the Euangelists. Defenc. pag. 82. li. 21. In his spirit certain e suffered spirituall and incomprehensible punishments being no sinnes such as mens soules are subiect vnto, as from God. ] Though by no learning you can truely deriue a∣ny such thing from the Scriptures, touching the tormenting of Christs soule by the immediate hand of God, yet your conceit is so strong, that you CERTAINLY auouch any thing. For in these few words you presume more then you will prooue whiles you liue; to make God with his immediate hand to afflict the soule of Christ with the same paines, that the damned are tormented; and other reason for it you haue none, but because all power in heauen, earth, and hell is from God; and called the hand of God. By which the Scriptures doe not imply the immediate hand of God, but his power working by meanes appointed and established by him. In the Scriptures God is euery where proclaimed to be THE LORD OF HOSTES, and therefore as there is no power in Angels, Diuels, Men or other creatures, that cometh not from him, so they are not idle armies, nor lookers on, but are indued with power from God as well to protect, as to punish where, when, how, and whom they shal be appointed. Which the wisdome and power of God hath ordained and setled, not to shorten his arme nor to weaken his strength as needing assistants, but by constituting Seruants and Ministers vnder him, to let men and Angels, good and badde, conti∣nually behold how mightie and wise, righteous and glorious he is, that wanteth no meanes to execute his will, and yet directeth all things by his wisdome. Is not God able to preferre and keepe his Saints by his word or his will without aide of others? who doubteth it? And yet Psal. 91. He giueth his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all thy waies. And Psal. 34. the Angell of the Lord pitcheth round about them, that feare him and deliuereth them Is he not able also to punish with his own hand, & to reuenge his ene∣mies without helpe of his creatures? Who denieth it, that knoweth what belongeth to a God? And yet Dauid praied thus against his enimies. Psal. 35. Let them be as chaffe besore th nd, & the Angel of the Lord scatter them. Let their way be darke & slippery, & the an∣gel of the Lord persecute them. And the Psalmist, describing the plagues powred out on Psal. 78. Egypt, saith; God rest vpon th the fiercenesse of his anger, indignation wrath, & vexation; the sen ing in of euill angels (amongst them.) God then in this life vseth men & an∣gels to per orme his iudgements, & chiefly the diuel is vsed againstsinners, as we may see by the Apostles peech and course, who deliuered hainous offenders vnto Satan, as vnto the publike tormentor appointed by God to execute vengeance; wherein though he were to haue power & leaue from God, yet execution was allotted to him. The auncient Fathers haue duely obserued so much out of the Scriptures. August. ad. Simpli. anum. li. 2. quaest. 1. V i∣tur Deus ministres eitam malis ad vindictam malorum, vel ad bonorum probatio∣ m. God vseth as his ministers euill spirits, saith Austen, to reuenge the wicked, and to trie the good. Saint Ierom. Hierony. in Io l. cap. 2. Non solum homines ministri s t, & vltores ira eius, sed etiam contrariae fortitudines, quae appellantur furor & ira Dei. Not onely men are Gods ministers, and reuen of his wrath, but also the contrarie powers (which are diuels) are called the wrath and displeasure of God. For . as the Babilo ans punishing Ierusalem are called Gods armies so wicked angels are called Gods hosts and camps, whiles they execute the Lords will. I s Basile. Basil. Psal. 3 . Euill spirits which execute punishment on the wicked and the powers that serue in that sort) are called the Anger and wrath (of God.) And that this was a receaued opinion amongst Christians, Ierom giueth testimonie, where he saith. Hierony in cap. 30. Pl rique am uroris Domini Diabolum interpretantur, cui tradimur ad pu∣niendum. The most of our men interpret the wrath of Gods furie to be the diuell, to whom we are deliuered to be punished. And to that end this office is assigned the diuell and his angels. Idem. in cap. 30. to mentis praepositi sunt. Wicked angels are appointed to inflict or execute torments. Wherefore this resolution is learnedly, and truely made by Zan∣chius. . Du ad summam sunt officia ad qua Damones omnes sunt a Deo destinati. There are summar ly two offices, to which all the diuels are appointed of God. One that by their tentations the godly elect may be exercised in patience and humilitie, and so their saluation more and more urdered: the other, that God by them, as his ministers and executioners, spirituall and corporall punishments on th wicked reprobate. Ibidem. Id quod maxime fine seculi &c. Which shall most be seene in the end of the worlde, when God shall per∣fourme that the diuels shall be tormented themselues, and torment others in the place of eter∣nall punishments. You take the diuels office from him, and impose it on God him∣selfe, making him the tormentor of damned soules, with his immediate hand, to which incomprehensible punishments as you call them, you subiect the soule of Christ on the crosse, without ground or grant of holie Scripture; and as if this were not desperate impre enough, with obstinate impudencie you say, CERTAINLY it was so. . Some, God himselfe immediatly inflicted, some he inflicted by meanes and instruments, but his hand principally, which did whatsoeuer was done vnto him. ] You told vs not twelue lines before, that Gods owne hand inflicted on Christ whatsoeuer he suffered; now you tell vs, some God himselfe immediatly inflicted, some by meanes and instruments, . but . The first is a notorious and presumptuous vntrueth, no way by any Scripture; the next is a trifling cauill, or a pestilent blasphemy: for you meane no more, then that God was the principall and Appointer how in and his should haue power ouer Christes bodie; so God is the principall Agent not only in all the usterings of Martyrs and Innocents, but the supreame and Director and Disposer of all things done by angels, men, or di∣uels. A thought can not rise in the heart, a word can not proceed out of the mouth, the hand can perfor act, without the power and will of the Creatour. In Acts. 7. him , moue, and ur being; and so haue the Angels, all whose power commeth from him, and him. But if you meane, that God by his reuealed will, or publike ordinance s t the Iewes and the diuell on worke to kill his Sonne, then you must either excuse them by Gods authoritie, or charge God with the same iniquity. Defenc. pa . 82. li. 27. You can not say, that Christes punishment was Gods meere and bare permission onelie. ] What you meane by meere and bare permission, I know not; it proceeded, I say, from the kinde of will and power in God, whence all the trials of his saints and deaths of his come, though this were of more moment then all theirs; in that it tou∣ched a greater person, and tended to a greater honour then men might haue. Ibid. li. 2 . Nay punishment was God: written and reuealed will his expresse and publike ordinance, and most appointment from the beginning of the world. God in his written and vn∣written decrees, in his publike and priuate ordinances, is equally wise, iust and holy; that is, he is alwayes like himselfe. Wherefore this farre set Preface hath in it no strength to the whole of Christes sufferings to Gods immediat hand. Did not God expresly by his Prophet denounce to Dauid, what he would doe against , wise, and deuouring him with the sword? And yet I trust you will not impute ambition, rebellion and incest to Gods immediat action. What Matth. 24. affliction and tribulation the Church shall suffer towards the end, what 2. Thess 2. strange illusions and lying wond rs shall leade them to beleeue lies, that receiue not the loue of Gods trueth; what . Tim 4. heresie and 2. Tim. 3. iniquitie shall abound in the latter dayes; the written and reuealed will of God, his expresse and publike ordinance, doth appoint, foretell and assure. Shall we therefore ascribe all these persecutions, delusions, and transgressions to Gods immediat action? Except you be madde, you will be of another minde. In decreeing, ordering, and effecting all these, God is most iust pure and holy; and yet these actions in their immediat authors, perswaders, and approuers, are most vniust, impure, and vnholy. Wherefore this prating of Gods meere and bare permission will nothing helpe your false and wicked collection. [ But God, you say, appointed Christes sufferings from the beginning of the world. ] As if any thing were new and lately remembred with God. From the beginning of the world all his works were knowen to him; little or great, all are alike decreed, appointed, and setled with him. Defenc. pag. 82. li. 33. The whole suffering of Christ was Gods owne and most proper action. ] Most proper is that which is more PROPER then all other, or at least as proper as any. If these words of yours be true, then all that Christ suffered in bodie, was as properly Gods action, as the creation of the world, the renouation of mans minde, the infusion of grace, the mission of the Holy Ghost, and glorification of his Elect. And consequently Christ suffered nothing at the hands of men, but all that is reported in the Scriptures of his outward sufferings, is fabulous and false, which is blasphemie in the highest degree. [ Defenc. pag. 82. li. 34. The wicked I es and Diuels were only instruments to do that which he set them on worke to doe, though they thought not so. ] If God had the wicked Iewes and Diuels or his in∣struments in afflicting Christ, then was the whole suffering of Christ not so properly Gods action, as those things which God doth by the immediate working of his spi∣rit, and power of his will, without all meanes or instruments vsed by him. And when all this flourish is faded away, tell vs why the crucifying and wounding of Christes bodie and shedding of his bloud by the rage of the Iewes, was more properly Gods action, then the beheading of Iohn Baptist, or stoning of Steuen, or the violent death of any Martyr; in which God decreeth, directeth, and appointeth what shalbe done, though the wicked vnawares performe Gods con ll by satisfying their bloudy rage and furie. If you answer, that absolutely and immediatly God worketh all in all, then referre you all the wickednesse in the world both of men and diuels to Gods imme∣diat action; which is not an heape, but an hell of blasphemies. If you meane, that God worketh all the good which is in euery action, but not the malitious and furious desires of the diuell and his members, then are you no whit the neerer to make the whole suffering of Christ to be Gods most proper action. For not in Christes suffe∣rings only, but in the trials and afflictions of all his Saints, as in all the punishments of the Reprobate God hath his most righteous iudgements, and most holy purpo∣ses, which the diuell doth execute, not knowing Gods counsels, and hating Gods seruants, as he doth God himselfe; and so by Gods secret wisdome and almightie power is made an instrument by his eger malice to serue their good, and promote Gods glory, whiles he laboureth their destruction and Gods dishonour. Of this S. Austen wisely and soberly sayth: August. de . li. 4. ca. 13. Nescit Diabolus quomodo illo & insidian & rente v tur ad salutem sidelium suorum excellentissima Dei sapientia. The diuell doth not know how the most excellent wisdome of God vseth his lying in wait, and raging, to the saluation of the faithfull. Defenc. pa. 82. li 36. Now we come to answer you more directly touching the text i hand. Where you would intimate, that Christ on the Crosse was not tempted by the powers of hell, because Christ could not be tempted by Satans inward suggestion, but only by the eare receiuing an outward voice; this I suppose also is a singular conceit of your owne, without any title of Scripture to proue it by. I can not call your conceits singular, they are so void of all reason and iudgement; priuate they are to your selfe, and depriued of all trueth, and testimonie either of Scripture, saue such as you most ignorantly abuse, or of the Church of Christ before you, which you regard not, as drowned in the depth of your selfe-pleasing pa∣radoxes. Whether I haue grounds of Scripture, and the consent of Christs Church, for that which I defend in this and other points refused by your curious conceitfull head, the Reader shall see before we depart. But in the meane while you forget, Sir Defensor, that you should proue this to be the Apostles meaning in those words pro∣duced by you, Christ spoiled powers and principalities, which you neuer offer to doe. You denie that I affirme, and without any farther processe you presume your fansie to be the Apostles sense; which is your common course throughout your writings. Could you desorce mine exceptions, as you can not, that maketh not your expositi∣on the truer, nor your argument the stronger, till you haue iustly proued this, which you pretend to be the Apostles purpose. Defenc. pag. 83. li. 4. What reason can you giue, that where the minde conceiueth any temptation, there of ne∣cessitie must be concupiscence, and corruption of the flesh? &c. In vs men it is so you say; I grant it is so: but that of necessitie in nature it must be so, I see no reason in the world.] The conceiuing & discerning of a tentation is not the point we speake of, but the profering and suggesting it; and why that can not inwardly be done by the minde of man with∣out corruption of sinne, the reason is euident in the Scriptures. For a tentation to sinne is not a cogitation or imagination, but a prouocation and motion to sinne, which is sinfull in the Tempter, since it is no lesse euill di ectly and purposely to pro∣uoke to sinne, then to consent or commit sinne. For which cause the Scriptures a∣scribe that office namely to the diuell, to be the Tempter vnto euill; and S. Iames Acts 5. v 3. Matth . v 3. expresly and truely demeth it of God, as from whom being good, commeth nothing but that which is good. And consequently, as Iames. 1. God can not be tempted with euill, so nei∣ther g Thess. 3 v. 5. tempteth he any man (to euill) sayth Iames; thereby teaching vs, that he must first be tempted, or filled with euill, that tempteth and leadeth another thereto. Since then Man in his first Creation was made after the Image of God, that was very good, and void of all euill; though he might be outwardly tempted, because he was mu∣table, yet could e not inwardly be tempted by his owne heart, because he was inno∣cent: for that which was right and good, as euery part within man was, could not per∣swade or prouoke man to euill, but like must leade the like. And this is the reason of that generall rule in Saint Iames touching inward tentation, where he saith: Euery one is tempted, when he is drawen and enticed by his owne concupiscence. The Apostle speaketh not this of outward tentations, but of inward; sending men to the corruption of their owne hearts and lusts, by which Satan secretly prouoketh them to sinne, with∣out externall speech and presence, which all the godly would soone detest and ab∣horre; but baiting them with their owne desires and delights by meanes of that con∣cupiscence which naturally dwelleth in them, and not onely serueth the diuell as an instrument to farther his wicked suggestions, but of it selfe lusteth after euill, and striueth against the Spirit of grace. If this were not in Adam before his fall, then could the diuell worke in him by no inward motion of infidelitie or iniquitie, since the parts and powers of the soule that should suggest either, must be infected and in∣clined to either, before they could prouoke and allure the rest to consent. Howbeit, the question is of Christ, whether he could inwardly be tempted to euill by the cogi∣tations or thoughts of his owne heart, though neither consent, nor act did follow; and herein I thinke you will shew your selfe to haue a fountaine of folly, if not worse, springing out of that vnquiet braine of yours. Defenc. pag. 8, li. 11. I suppose you haue no reason to affirme (as you doe) that Christ in the wildernesse was tempted by Satan by outward voice only. ] The discreet Reader, when he hath well con∣sidered your vanities in this place, will the lesse woonder at, and the sooner discouer your nouelties in other things. Haue I no reason to affirme, that Christ was tempted in the wildernesse by the outward voice of Satan, when the Scriptures directly record the words and deeds of the Diuell to Christ, as also Satans presence before him, and departure from him? Doth not the Scripture expresly say, that the diuell tooke him Matth. 4. vp into the holy citie, and set him on the pinnacle of the Temple: and againe tooke him in∣to a very high hill, and shewed him all the kingdomes of the world, and the glory thereof? Are not the diuels words to Christ in three seuerall temptations likewise set downe by the Euangelists, Luke and Matthew, whereby he tempted Christ; first to make (the) stones, (that lay in sight) bread; then to cast himselfe from the pinuacle of the Tem∣ple; and lastly, to fall downe before the diuell, and to worship him? [It was a temptation, you will say.] The words and deeds of Satan were, So sayth the Scripture; but not that Christ imagined these things, or that the diuell mooued Christes heart thus to thinke. It is a narration of things done and spoken, not a vision or cogitation what might be profered by Satans suggestion; the Diuell sayd to Christ, Luke 4. If thou wilt bow thy knee , (before me or) in my presence, all this (glory of the world, which I haue shewed thee) shall be thine. To whom Christ replied with iust indigna∣tion; , Get thee behinde me Satan. Matth. 4. It is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him alone shalt thou serue. And so the Diuell left him, and loe, the angels came, and ministred vnto him. Why may not the rest of the Histories in the Gospell be thoughts and imaginations aswell as this, since they haue no plainer words nor deeds then this? Defenc. pag. 83. li. 13. It seemeth rather to be manifest, that (Christs) temptation was meerely in cogitation, and in the thoughts of his heart, so mooued by the spirituall suggestion of the diuell. ] Be∣sides your manifest gaine-saying the wordes of the Euangelists, that the diuell did and spake thus to Christ, as the Gospell reporteth, and carried him to the temple, and to the mountaine; you make the thoughts and cogitations of Christes heart to be in∣wardly mooued with Infidelitie, presumption, idolatrie and blasphemie. For such in ef∣fect were the perswasions, that Satan profered Christ by word of mouth; which if you thinke Christs heart suggested to himselfe in Satans steed, and by Satans meanes, then bring you worse then corruption into the soule of Christ. For a Prou. 24. foolish thought as sinne, saith Salomon; and Prou. 5. an euili thought is an abomination to the Lord. What then are perfidious, presumptuous, mendacious, and blasphemous thoughts, I saie thoughts suggesting and perswading these hainous sinnes, though consent or act doe not follow? and yet if you looke well to them, you shall see false and wicked asseuera∣tions in Satans words, which if any mans heart suggest vnto him in the same forme, that Satan vttered them, he is guilty of the same impietie with Satan. To shew his pride and vaunt his power, Satan sayd; Luke 4. all (the authority and glory of earthly king∣domes) is committed to me, and I giue it to whom I will. If any mans heart or thought do but say, or suggest the same to it selfe after Satan, doeth not his heart affirme a lie to Gods great dishonour, as Satans mouth did? You therefore and your hobler, that would raine helpe you out of this quake mire, by setting his censure in the margine, may do well to beware of maintaining such spirituall cogitations in Christ as proceeded from the diuels mouth by the witnesse of holy Scripture, and are meet for none but for him and his members: and to tread rather in the plaine path of the Holy Ghost, that Satans voice vttered those blasphemies, which Christes heart so detested, that he could no longer endure the diuels speech, when he brake out to such open impietie, that he put himselfe in Gods stead, but commanded him away. And when you next suffer any man to reuise your doings, intreat him not to crosse you and himselfe so fondly as this Corrector doth. For where you say it is manifest, that Christes temptation was meerely (that is onely) in cogitation, your owne ouerseer controleth that as an error, and sayth, Defenc. pag. 83. ad mar∣gin h. 15. OR ELS by some such outward obiects, which might worke that spirituall cogitation in Christ, as Satan might well know how. What these meanes were or might be, this Huckster knoweth no more then you doe, but it suffi∣ceth some of your sort neuer to holde their tongues nor pennes, though they know not what you say or write. Outward obiects to worke any such cogitation in Christ, must be by the eare or by the eye. The eare in Christ you denie to haue beene the in∣strument that receiued this temptation; though the Scripture by plaine consequent auouch so much. What obiect of the eye could leade Christ to thinke, that Satan was the Disposer of earthly power and glorie; and that the Diuell would affoord him all, if he would bow his knee in the diuels presence to acknowledge the giuer, can you tell? In vs, since the soule was weakened, corrupted, and diuided against it selfe by sinne, the diuell can (when he is permitted so to doe) stirre the imaginations of men either sleeping or waking, and moue their affections; otherwise he can im∣presse no cogitation in the soule, but must proferre the suggestion by some speech of his owne or others. In Christ he could do nothing, farther than Christ was willing to permit; the words of our Sauiour are very plaine: Iohn 14. The Prince of this world com∣meth, but in me he hath nothing, that is, no power, place, nor worke. So much the di∣uels themselues confessed. Luke. 4. What haue we to doe with thee, thou Iesus of Nazaret? And since he was stronger than the diuell, and tooke his armour from him, and bound him, and cast him out of others, neither could he so much as enter hogges without Christes leaue, how was it possible the diuell should worke any cogitation in Christ, but what Christ was willing he should? Now, will, that Satan should impresse these impious cogitations in his heart, Christ had none, nor could haue any; since with dis∣daine he put the diuell to silence vpon the hearing of that blasphemous and idola∣trous suggestion. Wherefore it is euident, that these things were spoken and done by Satan, euen as the Scriptures describe them; and we may not for our pleasures make them imaginations, not actions; cogitations, not speeches. Of this opinion with me, haue beene the best learned of all Ages in the Church of Christ. Ignatius. . How wast thou not afraid, (saith he) ô thou the worst of all wicked spirits, , to vtter such a voice against the Lord, if thou wilt fall downe on earth, and worship me? Irenaeus citing the words of Christ, Depart Satan, saith: Irenaeus lib. 5. ca. 18. The Angell, that fell from God, is destroyed by that voice, detected who he is, and conquered by the Sonne of Man. Tertullian maketh the diuell to bragge of this tentation in this sort. Tertullianus aduersus Pra∣ eam. Ego ad ipsum Deum accessi, ipsum cominus tentaui. I came to God himselfe, and tempted him hand to hand. Athanasius. The Lord conuicted the diuell first in the Mountaine, pul∣ling from him the folds (or couerts) of his brest, and shewing, that he was the diuell, reproo∣uing . him to be none of the Saints, but Satan the Tempter, in saying, goe behind me Satan. Vincentius Lirinensis. Vincentius de Haeresibus c . 37. Sicut tunc caput capiti, ita nunc quoque membra membris lo∣quuntur. As then (in the Wildernesse) the head spake to the head, so now the members (of the diuell) speake to the members (of Christ.) Ambrose. Ambros. in ucam i. 4. de 2 tentatione Christ. Christus, quia fortior, facie ad faciem tentatur. Christ, as the stronger, was tempted face to face. Austen. August. de consens. Euang. li 2 ca. 6. Incertum quid prius factum sit, nihil tamen ad rem, dum omnia facta esse manifestum sit. It is vncertaine, which (of the two last Tentations) was first done, but that skilleth not, so long as it is mani∣fest, they were all done. Gregorie. Gregorius in Euangel. ho∣m 16. Omnis Diabolica illa tentatio foris, non intus fuit. All that Tentation (of Christ) by the diuell was without, not within. (Christ.) And so againe. Moralium in Io . 3. ca. 11. Sic dignatus est haec exteriùs cuncta suscipere, vt mens eius interiùs inconcussa maneret. So the Lord vouchsafed to receaue all these tentations outwardly, that his minde inwardly stoode vnshaken. Beda followeth Gregorie. Beda in 4 ca. Matth. All that Temptation of the diuell (saith he) was not inward, but outward. Damascene. Damasce. fi es li 3 ca. 20. Christ was tempted, and did ouercome. . The wicked spirit then suggested from without as he did vnto Adam, not by thoughts. For Adams Tentation was not by thoughts, but by the Serpent. Theophylact. Theophylact. in Matth ca. 4. . The diuell appeared to Christ (in the Wildernesse) by some sensible shape. For Thoughts the Lord would not admit. God forbid, (we should so thinke.) Sensibly therefore the diuell shewed (Christ) on the Hill all the kingdomes, propo∣sing them before his eyes by some shew, or appearance. The very ordinary Gloze could say. ordi∣na in Matt. ca 4. Nota, haec omnia corporeis sensibus esse completa. Nec mirum si se permiserit circum∣ferri, qui permisit se crucifigi. Note that all these tentations were accomplished to the senses of the Body. Neither is it a marueile that Christ suffered himselfe to be caried about (of the diuell,) when he suffered himselfe to be crucified (by him.) The best learned of the new Writers dissent not from these; though in one point Christ not temp∣te by his owne heart. some make a doubt, whether that were done by inspection, or vision. Zanchius. Christ in ca. Philip. Was not tempted by prouocation of flesh (within) as we are; which Tentation is not without some sinne for so much as Concupiscence is sin. This Christ had not. Sed tentatus à tentatore externo, hoc est à Satana, But he was tempted by an externall Tempter who was Satan, WHICH MIGHT BE VVITHOVT SINNE. Caluin saith, it is no absurditie that Christ should be tempted of Satan, Caluini har , in Matth. 4. Modo ne intus, hoc est, in mente & anima quic quam putemus passum fuisse; so as we doe not thinke, that Christ suffered any thing within the mind, or Soule. Gualter. Gualter s in Lucae. 4 hom. 38. Neque aliquis putare debet illum cogitationibus eiusmodi, quae, etsi nihil aliud accedat, per se peccati nomine censentur, vel momento indulsisse. Externis tamen sensibus ista obiecit Satan. No Man ought to thinke, that Christ suffered (or admitted) these cogitations, not a moment; because, though nothing else be added besides thought, yet of themselues they are within the compasse of sinne. HOVVBEIT SATAN proposed these things to Christs senses. Yea, of the sight of all the kingdomes of the world in a point of time, which some thinke was a vision, he saith; Ibidem. Non nuda modo imaginatione factum existimo. Ista enim simplici narratione, vt rem veram gestam, Euangelistae exponunt, & tam diligens loci at que temporis notatio id omnino innuere videtur. I doe not thinke, that this was done by imagination only. For the Euangelists report these things with a simple narration, as a matter of fact; and their exact noting of place and time seemeth vtterly to confirme the same. Vitus Theodorus. Vitus Theo∣dorus in Matt. ca. 4. Historia est, quomodo Iesus post baptismum à Diabolo tenta∣tus sit. It is an Historie (and neither Vision nor Cogitation) how Iesus after Baptisme was tempted of the diuell. Aretius. Aretius in c . 4. Matth. Manifestum est presentem corporali specie cum Christo egisse. Nam incessum illi tribuit, & congressum cum Christo pronomen emphaticé de∣clarat; preterea sermonem habet, loquitur, proponit, cit at Scripturam, quae corporalem prae∣sentiam Satanae arguunt. It is euident, that the diuell tempted Christ in some corporall shape. For the Scripture giueth him an accesse to Christ, and the Pronoune (to him) declareth em∣phatically his congresse with Christ; besides he talketh, and vttereth words, proposeth, and citeth the Scriptures, which argue the corporall presence of Satan. In Erasmus, Bullinger, Musculus, and others, it likewise appeareth that this Tentation was externall, which for length I omit. Yea the Reasons, which leade you to make it an Imagination and spirituall Cogitation of Christs, are so childish, that they will rather euert, then any way establish your conceite. Defenc. pag. 83 li. 18. Christ fasted but fortie daies and fortie nights, and so long he was in the Wildernesse. Seeing then Christ was in the Wildernesse all the while that he was tempted, how could he be Really and Actually on a Pinnacle of the Temple at Ierusalem? ] Learne first to vnder∣stand Christ was tempted after fortie da es. the Scriptures, before you charge them with Contradictions. Saint Marke, whom you would oppose to the rest, omitting the particular circumstances of Christs temptation, saith in generall words, that Christ was in the Wildernesse fortie daies, (& was) tempted of Satan. Hence you would infer, that after these forty daies Christ was not tempted; but which way? can you tell? The Euangelist, whose words you pretend, deuideth these two, which you ioyne together, as the point betweene them in all our Greeke Copies doth cleerely conuince. And were they not diuided, thence perhaps you might prooue, that during the time of fortie daies he was in some sort tempted, but that he was not tempted after the end of fortie daies, those words doe no way imply. Besides you take foolish and irreligious paines to conclude by a lame consequent out of one Euangelist, that which two others directly and expresly re∣fute, as if you would trippe the holy Ghost in his Tale. Saint Mathew saith, Matt. 4. v. 2. Christ fasting fortie dayes and fortie nights, afterward began to be hungrie. S. Luke is plai∣ner: Luk. 4. v. 2. Fortie dayes (sayth he) was Christ tempted of the diuell, and he did not eat any thing in those dayes. , and those (fortie) dayes ended, after∣ward he began to hunger. So that apparantly Christ fasted fortie dayes eating nothing, and at the end thereof began to be hungrie; which occasion the diuell tooke first to tempt him openly, and so spight of your cauilling conceits, Christ was tempted after the end of fortie dayes, whatsoeuer he was before. Now those words in Saint Lukes text, ( Fortie dayes tempted of the Diuell ) Eusebius and Cyrill, two ancient Greeke Fa∣thers, o Cyril. de recta fide ad Regin . li. 2. de Sacerd. Christi. reade disioyned, referring the fortie dayes to Christes being in the wildernesse. Euseb. de∣monst. Euang. li. 3 cap. 2. He was ledde of the Spirit in the wildernesse fortie dayes, (where the text which they al∣ledge maketh a point;) being tempted of the diuell. How beit, it is not materiall to me, whether we say, that Christ abode those fortie dayes in the Wildernesse, or he was tempted those fortie daies in the Wildernesse, since it is plaine, that Saint Luke speak∣eth of other Temptations during those fortie daies, then those three, which himselfe and Mathew exactly note, begun after the end of those forty daies. Euthymius obser∣ueth, that Marke and Luke doe say, Euthymius in 4. ca. Matth. Christ was also tempted in the forti daies: so that it is manifest the Diuell tempted him in those daies a farre off, by sleepe, sloth, heauinesse, and such like. But after he knew him once to be hungrie, then he set vpon him, propè & manifesté, neerely and openly. Defenc pag. 3. li 23. Chiefly when the Diu shewed him all the kingdomes of the world, and the glorie of them, and that in the twinckling of an eye, how could that possibly be done really, actually, and externally? ] The two things, that stumble you, are the shortnesse of the Time, and the largenesse of the world, all whose kingdomes were shewed to Christ; which you sup∣pose could neither be viewed in one place, nor in the twinckling of an eye. For the Time; Saint Lukes words are, , Eras i An∣ ot. in ca. 4. Luc . by which Prouerbiall speech, saith Erasmus, the Graecians expresse a short time. The Syr ack Translation importeth as much. For that saith; Satan shewed him all the kingdomes of the earth in a small time. Neither doth the word , which S. Lukevseth, necessarily signifie an indiuisible time, but a short time As where Plutarch sayth, . . our whole life is but a touch or small stay of time. And likewise Phauorinus: Phauorinus in verbo . . In a point is a good pause or time to breathe. The Apostle vseth the word Gal. 6. v. 17. for the spots and scarres of the stripes which he receiued in his bodie for the Gospell of Christ. Howbe t, let the word haue his full strength, it can signifie but that part or point of Time, in which we may see, or speake, as punctum doth in Latine. Philip. 2. Hoc punctum temporis, quo loquor. This point of time wherein I speake, sayth Cicero. And Lucretius: Lucret. li. 4. Temporis in punct rerum simulachra feruntur. In an instant of time the resemblances of things are caried to the eyes. So that doth not enforce such an insensible time as you pretend; though the diuell tooke no long time to shew those things, and Christ tooke lesse to beholde them; for he knew better then the diuell did, the vanitie of that worldly glory which Satan so much magnified; and since for our saluation Christ had layed aside the brightnesse of his diuine Maiestie, during the time of his humilitie; I verily thinke he would not vouchsafe all earthly pompe any longer view then the turning of an eye to it, and from it; not that he doubted any temptation in it, but that he despised it as not worthy of his sight, who was Lord of all heauenly power. The manner also how those things were shewed to Christ, may seeme to haue some question; yet that doth not prooue it an imagination, because the waies were many, by which it might be truely performed. Some thinke the word , (Satan shewed him all the kingdomes of the world) includeth no particular inspection of euerie place, but a generall direction to the coasts and parts of the earth, where those kingdomes lay, the rest being supplied by speech, and not by sight. So the author of the exposi∣tion vpon Matthew vnder Chrysostoms name. Ho l. 5. in 4. a. Matth. Satan shewed those things, not so that Christ saw the kingdomes themselues, or the cities, people, gold and siluer in them; but the parts of the earth, in which euerie kingdome, and the chiefe citie thereof stood. For Satan Ibid . might most directly point with his finger to euerie place, and in words expresse the state, and honor of euerie kingdome. So Euthymius. Euthymius in 4. ca. Matth. Satan in a moment of time, as Luke saith, that is, in a small tyme pointed with his inger to the parts of the earth, in which the kingdomes of the world were. This exposition Musculus in 4. ca. Matth. Musculus a man of no meane learning amongst our new writers followeth. Satan also might shew, and Christ might see the places themselues, and the pompe thereof: for Satan being an Angell, had another maner of sight, euen in the bodie which he assumed, then we haue: and Christ, when pleased him, could see whither, and what he would. That the Angels of God heare and see the particular words and actions of all men here on earth, S. Paul is a witnesse, where he sayth: 1. Tim. 5. I charge thee in the presence of God, and of the Lord Iesus Christ, and of the elect Angels, that thou ob∣serue these things without preiudice or partia tie. And againe, we are made a Cor. 4. spectacle to the world, to angels, and to men. And likewise: s The woman ought to haue power on her head, because of the Angels; that is, she ought to couer her head in signe of subie∣ction to the power of the man, because the Angels beholde this, as all other actions of men, either in the Church or in the world. From this power to heare and see what is sayd and done on the face of the earth, euen in the secret and darke places thereof, the diuell is not excluded, in that he is an Angel, though fallen from heauen, and cast vnto the earth, yet an Reuel. 12. accuser, and so a beholder of good, whom he impugneth, and of badde, ouer whom he ruleth. And what maruell, that Angels, who by their crea∣tion excell (vs) in power and might haue this incident to their condition, when as men, God opening their eyes, can see things done in heauen and earth, which naturally they can by no meanes see? When Dothan was besieged by the Aramites to appre∣hend Elizeus, and his seruant was afrayd at the sight of them, the Prophet encoura∣ging his seruant, sayd: 2. Kings 5. Feare not, for they that be with vs, are moe then they that be with them: and prayed God to open his seruants eyes, which the Lord did; and 2. Kings 5. he looked, and beholde, the mountaine was full of ierie charets and horses, round about Elizeus. Mark. 1. Assoone as Iohn was come out of the water, where he baptized Iesus in Iordan, Iohn saw the heauens cleaue asunder, and the Holy Ghost descending on (Christ) like a Doue. Steuen likewise not only had his face changed in the Councell, Acts 7. as the face of an An∣gell, but looking stedfastly into heauen, saw the glory of God, and Iesus standing at the right hand of God. Which though the incredulous Iewes did no wayes beleeue, but stop∣ped their eares when they heard him so say, and ranne vpon him all at once, and cast him out of the citie, and stoned him as a blasphemous liar, yet can he be no Christian, Christ might see what he would. that doubteth whether Steuen saw this with his bodily eyes or no; the Scripture be∣ing so resolute for it, how impossible soeuer it be to our eyes. This power to beholde things farre distant, notwithstanding all impediments interiected, not onely Christ had when he would, as appeareth by his words to Nathaniel; Ioh. 1. v. 48. Before Philip called thee, being vnder the figge tree I saw thee (for which Nathaniel acknowledged him to be the Sonne of God;) but he promised his, that they should see greater things. Vers. 50. Be∣cause I sayd to thee, I saw thee vnder the figge tree, beleeuest thou? Thou shalt see greater things then these. Vers. 51. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, henceforth you shall see the heauens open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending vpon the Sonne of man. Since then Christ could and Luke 10. vers. 18. did see Satan, like lightning, fall downe from heauen; I make no doubt, but he could open his owne eyes to see the remote parts of the earth, when it pleased him, though vsually he did it not, by reason he needed it not: for he knew all things, and euen what was in man, which the Angels doe not; and therefore needed not any such vse of his eyes, but when he saw his time; which in this case he might like, lest the d uell should despise him, as hauing greater power and cleerer sight then Christ did or could shew himselfe to haue. For which cause also Christ would stand on the pinnacle of the Temple without the diuels helpe, to let him know, that he wanted not power to doe greater things then the diuell vrged him vnto; but onely that hee would take his owne time, and do nothing at the diuels instigation or motion, nor re∣pugnant to the will and pleasure of God. A third way the diuell had, if Christ would permit it, to set these things before our Sauiours eyes. Satan is able not onely to assume, what shapes he will, and to trans∣forme himselfe into an Angell of light, but also to make specters and shewes of any thing in the aire, and to deceiue the eyes of men, when he is suffered by God so to do: which not onely experience of all ages, but the Scriptures themselues confirme; wherein all 2. Thess. 2. false woonders and signes are ascribed to the operation of Satan. By this meanes Simon the Sorcerer so bewitched the whole citie of Samaria, that Acts 8. they all from the least to the greatest gaue heed vnto him, and sayd; This man is the great power of God. The Sorcerers of Pharaoh Exod 7. turned their rods into serpents, and changed the ri∣uers into Exod 7. bloud, and brought Exod. 8. frogs vpon the land of Egypt, as Moses and Aaron did; and other miracles could the diuell haue done, as we see by killing of Iobs Iob. 1. sheepe and seruants with fire from heauen, and the Iob. 2. smiting of Iobs bodie with sore boiles, had not the hand of the Almightie stopped him, and thereby made the Sorcerers confesse, that Exod. 8. v 19 there was the finger of God. It was therefore no hard thing for Satan to frame the ap∣pearances of kingdomes and cities, and shew the similitudes of them from euery part of the earth, since they are but the figures and semblances of things that we see with our eyes, which Angels good and badde haue in their power, when they are sent of God to do his will. Howbeit, Satan could not delude the eyes of Christ without his knowledge and leaue, though Satan did not so thinke. And therefore all these wayes being possible, yet I thinke the second most agreeable to the words, and see no cause why we should measure Christs sight, (when pleased him) by mans reason, when as he did so many things heere on earth aboue all humane power and reason. For he often Marke 4. walked on the sea; and Iohn 20. came, and stood in the midst of his disciples, when the doores were shut; and made the ship that receiued him in the sea of Tiberias, Iohn 6. to be by and by at the land, whither they went; besides many thousand miracles, which he wrought with his word and hand, whiles he conuersed amongst men. Of which, if no Christian may make any question, why flie you to imaginations or visions, so long as Christ had power enough with his eyes to behold whatsoeuer Satan could shew him. It was Satans act, you will say, to shew them, and not Christes. Satan as an angell might see them, and shew them; and Christ must either confesse, that he could not see so farre, which would argue him to be feebler and weaker in power then the Tempter, and so not the Sonne of God; or els be pleased to see whatsoeuer Satan could shew, which was easier for him to see, that was God and man, then for Satan to shew, that was but a reprobate angell, and could doe nothing, sauing what was per∣mitted. Whatsoeuer the meanes were, by which Christ did see that which was shew∣ed Histories are not Visions. him, it is euident, that the Scripture directeth vs to a sensible view taken of earthly things and places, and not to a vision, much lesse to a cogitation. For to what end was Christ caried to an exceeding high mountaine, if he did behold those things but in thought, and by a vision? Cogitations and visions need no hilles, and therefore that circumstance expressed by the Euangelists, refuteth your dreame of spirituall co∣gitations. And so doth the danger, whereto Satan perswaded our Sauiour to put himselfe, by falling from the pinnacle of the Temple, to see whether the Angels would beare him vp from dashing his foot against a stone. What danger of dashing his feet against the stones could there be in a cogitation without an action? And as for visions, besides that the Scriptures vse to distinguish dreames and visions from histories and actions, what visions could the diuell shew Christ, except they were de∣lusions? And that Christ would suffer him to delude his spirit, is far more incredible, than that he would be content to see what Satan could shew. But though the maner may be darke vnto vs, yet is the matter euident, that Satan with the shew of earthly glory would haue allured Christ to accept the kingdome of the earth at his hands. Now the eyes were the greatest prouocations that Satan could vse in that case, since all Christes cogitations were righteous and holy, despising all carthly honour and pompe, as vaine and transitorie; and if the eye could not be affected therewith, the minde of Christ was farther from embracing it. D fenc. pag. 83. li 26. I must needs thinke, that as Satan was a subtile spirit, so he could and did sometime spi∣ritually suggest temptations into Christes heart, and yet vtterly without all sinne: which we at no hand can doe, because we are all naturally apt and inclining to euill, as Christ was not. ] Satan could im∣presse no euill in Christs heart. And I must needs thinke, that you neither vnderstand what a temptation is, nor what detestation of sin was in the Soule of Christ, that you make him willingly subiect his heart to the motions and suggestions of Satan vnto euill. For a thinking vpon euill to detest it or disswade it, was common to Christes humane soule with the best saints of God, and euen with the elect Angels, and was the worke of Gods spirit; but an in∣ward temptation to euill, that is, a persuasion or motion of the heart to sinne, Christ needed not admit without his owne consent, (since the Prince of this Iohn 14. world had no∣thing in him ) and could not giue way to any such prouocation without corruption of sinne. In that you attribute more to Satans subtiltie, than to Christes power and in∣tegritie, being both God and man, and in his humane soule endued with the fulnesse of the Holy Ghost, you shew your selfe a good Proctor for the Diuell, that giue him abilitie to inuade the soule of Christ, and to impresse in him most sinfull and wicked cogitations, which you call spirituall, because they proceeded from the spirit of error and infidelitie; not remembring, or not beleeuing that Christ was Lord ouer Satan, and displaced him from such as he formerly possessed, and preserued his Disciples as well from the subtiltie as furie of Satan, that in the end they might tread him vnder their feet. If then Christ could, and did 1. Iohn 3. dissolue the works of the Diuell, and Acts 10. heale all that were oppressed of the Diuell; because he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with p wer: how could the diuell at his pleasure instill perfidious, presumptuous, and blas∣phemous thoughts into the heart of Christ? Which if Christ were willing to admit, they could not but infect him with sinne; if he were vnwilling, and yet forced to en∣dure them, that infirnitie and miserie subiecting him to the perpetuall motion of sinne in his owne he rt, nothing differeth from our naturall corruption, when we dis∣s nt from the nticements thereof by the guiding of Gods spirit. Defenc. pag. 83. li. 30. Yea the Text to the Hebrewes seemeth to proue it also: Christ was tempted in all things like vs without sinne. Then was he tempted both outwardly and also meerely within: for so re we. A light shew of Sc ipture will serue you to make a flourish for your fansies. In the begining of this very Page, Li. 6. You graunted in vs, that where the mind conceaued any Temptation, there of necessiti must be concupiscence and corruption of the flesh; which in Christ might not e. Now you turne round, and will haue Christ outwardly and in∣wardly Tempted in all things like to vs; and doe not see, that if this Temptation be in all points l ke to ours, then mus Christ haue concupiscence and corruption of the flesh by this consequent of yours, euen as we haue. Or if you confesse therein a diffe∣rence betwixt vs and Christ, because inward Temptations in vs (though we by grace di ent from them) are sinnfull, as proceeding from the corruption of our harts, which in Christ, can not be: then doe you falsely and against your own knowledge vrge this place of Scripture to proue that Christ was tempted meerely within, as we are. Where∣ ore the words of the Apostle are very true, that Christ was tempted in all things, that is, tried with all kinds of externall a ictions and vnsinfull affections as we are; but as for the internal motion and prouocation of the hart to sinne, which is in vs, that could not be in Christ, because the Apostle in expresse wordes excepteth from Christ all commun on of sinne with vs. Defenc. pag. 83. li. 33. This was meerely by conceauing and considering of Satans wicked spirituall motion in his spirit, which it was p ssible he might d e without any yeelding thereto. ] The conceauing The heart sug∣gesting euill sinneth. and considering of Satans motion to sinne, is no sinne; but for our harts to suggest wicked motions and perswasions to sinne either of themselues, or as Satans Instru∣ments, when our spi ts di ent, that is the naturall and sinfull corruption of our flesh, which we can not auoide; and yet is it sinne neuerthelesse in vs, though it be inborne and inuoluntary. What then was it for Christ, when Satan had no power ouer him, nor right in him, to make his hart of his owne accord the diuels Instrument to suggest wicked cogitations and perswasions vnto him, as you defend in this place he did, but to giue place to the diuel to fill his hart with wicked spirituall motions, as you call them? which God forbid, should come within any Christian mans hart. And therefore if ig∣norance carie you to th s conceite, recall it in time; if Pride, for my part I must needs de st t as much as I doe any point in all your Defence. Defen . pag. 83. li. 37. Thus t en it was possi le, and most likely it is also, that Christ was assaulted and wrast∣l withall by the diuels spirituall suggestions now when in his most bitter Agonie he hanged on the Crosse. In steed of full and infallible proofes to iustifie your strange conceits, you pretend possibilities and probabilities, which to me are nothing else but igno∣rant, and absurd imp eties. For you labour tooth and nayle to shew the holinesse of your cause, by drawing the Sonne of God within the limites of our sinnes, not onely a earing them on the Crosse in his Body, which the Scriptures affirme; but as desi∣ with th m, and hatefull to God for them, and guiltie of them, not by Imputation alone, where you first began; but by the violent and inward impression thereof in Christs hart, and on Christs Spirit, through the working of Satan. And the sinnes, wherewith you would haue Christs owne hart by Satans Instigation assault him in the Wildernesse, were no lesse then distrust in God, presumption to tempt God, and blasphemous adoring of the diuel, besides a manifest and malitious dishonor to God, that Satan gaue all the kingdomes of the earth to whom he would. And on the Crosse you ascribe to Christ in like manner the spirituall and inward cogitations of reproba∣tion, dereliction, malediction, confusion, desperation and damnation, wherewith his owne hart tempted him, as you would haue it, by the diuels spirituall suggestions: since this is the inward conflict, which you dreame Christ had with the powers of hell not outwardly filling his eares with these reproches from the mouthes of his bla phe∣mous Persecutors, as the Scriptures witnesse; but the diuell inwardly so distracting and diuiding Christs thoughts, that his own cogitations by your vngodly resolutions prompted and suggested these things vnto him, as thereto stirred and incensed by Satan. Defenc. pa. 84. li. 5. You say he was tempted of Sat n all the time of his abode heere on earth. ] I haue no doubt, but Satan did what he could as well by flatteries, as by contumelies to sift the soule of Christ all the time of his abode heere on earth: but he did not this with his owne voice, saue onely in the wildernesse; by others he did it, and sometimes by such as were neere about Christ; as when Peter Matth. 16. tooke him aside, and said, Master spare thy selfe, this shall not be vnto thee. To whom Christ replied, Get thee behinde me Satan, thou art an offence vnto me, because thou sauourest not the things that are of God, b t of m n. Where Christ sharpely rebuked Peters counsell and loue as stirred by Satan, vnder shew of good will to hinder him in his purpose of mans Redemption. But I neuer said, as you alleage my words, that Christ was tempted by Satan all the time of his ode on earth; by which you would haue men beleeue, that I confesse Satan inward∣ly tempted Christ all his life long. My words are, He Con lus. pa. 283. li. 4. was tempted in the desert by Sa∣tan himselfe, and by Satans members all the time of his abode on earth. [ Defenc. pag. 84. li. 6. Then you denie not, but now euen on the crosse Christ was tempted and ass lted by Satan, that is by Satans instruments mooued and enraged by him. That men may be the diuels instrumens in perswading or persuing others, both which are called temptations, there is no cause why any man should doubt; and if these externall temptations could haue sufficed your humorous head, you needed not to haue plunged your selfe so dangerously, as you haue done, into the spirituall cogitations of Christs heart leading and moouing him to sinne in Satans steede. Yea rather you would haue seene, that as men cannot be Satans willing instruments in this case, but they must be partakers of Satans wic∣kednes e, so the heart and thoughts of Christ could not be Satans meanes to suggest any sinne to Christ in Satans place, because euerie part and thought of Christ was ho∣lie and vndefiled. God himselfe conceaueth and considereth of all mens wickednes , when he reprooueth or punisheth the sinnes of men. To conceaue therefore or con∣sider, what Satan by his owne voice, or by the mouthes of his members saide vnto Christ, was no way vnfit for Christes humane integritie, and puritie; but that Christs heart or inward thoughts should suggest or perswade the same vnto him, which Sa∣tan and his members did, if you know what you say, you cannot auoide either hay∣nous impietie, or monstrous stupiditie. Defenc. pag. 84 li. 9. This is none other indeed but that which in the entrance of this Question here I obser∣ued: which as I haue before shewed, sufficeth to prooue Christs combating as it were, & wrast∣ling with the powers of ell on the crosse. Ment you no more al this while, but that in tor∣menting & reuiling Christ on the crosse the Iewes were Satans instruments? What needed then so many foolish and lewd speeches of Satans Defenc pag. 83. li. . 14. 27. 7. inward & spirituall motions, and mptations spiritually suggested into the heart of Christ? And what proofe is this of Gods proper wrath and indignation laid on the soule of Christ, that the wicked de∣rided him, as they doe God himselfe? Or is this all the spoile and triumph that Christ had ouer hell and Satan, that he endured whatsoeuer mockes and paines they could deuise? This no doubt he did, and so did frustrate all the force of hell with his patience, and confidence in God his Father, but he had an other manner of triumph and recompence for the wrong, which he suffered at Satans hand, except you list to deface his glorie, as you doe his innocencie. Howbeit the Reader may heere per∣ceaue on what conceits and coniectures your new redemption by the paines of hell is founded, euen on your owne dreames and deuices, which you cannot expresse, and da e not specifie for feare of hatefull absurdities and impieties. Defenc. pag. 8 . li. 12. But you obiect against this, that outward temptation by the mouthes and hands of the wicked is no effect of Gods wrath. No is? Heere you are cleane contrarie to your selfe and the trueth. ] Were it newes to see you wander either from the trueth or from your owne positions, heere a man might take a full view of your idle and forgetfull rouing and snatching at euerie thing, where not taking the paines to pe use the whole reason, or to looke fower lines farder to the knitting of the conclusion, or to weigh the wordes themselues, which you bring, you foolishly mistake my words grounded on your as∣sertion, as if they were mine owne intention; and presse them as contrarieties in me, which are absurdities in you. Out of these words of the Apostle, Christ spoiled powers and principalities, triumphing ouer them, you would needs conclude in your Treatise af∣ter your dissolute and distempered manner: Trea pa. 45. li. 11. 20. 22. These principalities are the diuels, there∣fore it is certaine he felt them, the verie instruments, that wrought the verie effects of Gods seueritie and wrath vpon him. By the verie effects of Gods wrath vpon Christ in this place, you ment Conclus. pa. 284 li. 14. the force of Gods proper and immediate wrath vpon the soule of Christ, as I admonished in that sentence, part whereof you cite to make me contrar e to my selfe. Since then the diuels, if they wrought any thing on the soule of Christ, must either Il id. p g. 283. li 21. tempt or torment his soule; (as I first obserued) pa. 284. li. 8. and inward temptation by the heart Christ could haue none, (because that proceedeth from concupiscence and cor∣ruption of sinne, from which Christ was most free) and li 9. outward temptation by the mouthes and hands of the wicked is no (such) effect of Gods wrath, (as you mentioned in those words;) li. 15. but rather a triall of Gods gifts and graces bestowed on vs: It rested, I said, by your owne words, (as a consequent from them) that Christ felt the diuels tormen∣ting his soule. Out of this illation from your conce ts you catch the middle wordes, wherein I said, that outward temptation was no effect of Gods wrath (by you intended in this place) and will needs haue it in me a contradiction to my selfe and to the trueth; not seeing that I presently in the same sentence shew, what wrath of God you meane, and to what part of Christ you fasten it in this collection; and in my conclusion note, that by the true construction of your owne wordes these things follow vpon your owne supposals. Notwithstanding all this let the words lie, as they doe; and Gods wrath there not be taken in your sense, nor depend on your principles (which yet in all mens eies saue yours, will be plaine enough, considering the reason is a collection from the true intent of your owne wordes, as I admonished the Reader in that verie place) what fault now finde you with the wordes themselues, imagining they were mine owne, and not drawen out of your vessell? Defenc. pag. 84 li. 15. Elsewhere you truely acknowledge that all outward crosses and fflictions, small or great, are in their nature punishments of sinne, and effects of Gods wrath. Now those doubtlesse are temptations. ] But you impugne that say∣ing, when you please, and will haue all af ictions in vs (of whom I speake) chang∣ed into blessings; and when the Scripture calleth them wrath, that speech you say is most improper: and now for an aduantage you creepe to the contrary. For if you marke my words in this place, I speake of the temptations of the godly, which come from the mouthes and hands of the wicked, and a e trials of Gods gifts and graces bestowed on vs, which are not imparted to the wicked. And therefore if now I crosse the trueth, when I say (as you suppose) that the temptations and a ctions of the godly are no effects of Gods wrath, then haue you all this while mainely and mightely resisted the trueth, in making this one of the chiefest strengths of your cause, that no crosses or afflictions in the godly are signes or effects of Gods wrath against sinne. Howbeit you leaue my wordes and make consequents of them full like your owne, that is, without toppe or taile, when you come to oppose my speeches one against the other. For where tentation in the Scriptures is sometimes taken for persecution and affliction, sometimes for perswasion and allurement to euill, and sometimes for probation or triall, what a man will doe; you take hold of the ambi∣guitie of the word, and where one place speaketh of perswasion to euill, the other of affliction, you iumble them together, and make the one repugnant to the other. Now though afflictions may be called temptations, yet all temptations are not af∣flictions, nor effects of Gods wrath: otherwise Adam could neuer haue bin tempted in Paradise before sinne; and friendship, fauor, and flatterie do more often and more properly tempt or prouoke, then affliction, which doth more violently prooue the obedience and patience, that is in men. What temptation might well be ment in this place, appeareth by the word of torment opposed to it, when I said the diuell doth ei∣ther tempt, or torment: where temptation, if you will needes take the words them∣selues, must note that which is no torment, and consequently be taken for perswasion by faire and friendly words or meanes, by which the diuell tempteth as dangerously, as by force and violence. And so neither way you hit the trueth, nor can conclude any contrarietie in me, though indeed I spake those words out of your sense of Gods wrath, which is pregnant enough against you, knowing that in your reason, which I refute, you made the diuels to be the verie instruments of Gods proper and spirituall wrath against the soule of Christ. Defenc. pag. 84. li. 21. You say outward temptation is rather a triall of Gods gifts and graces bestowed on vs. And is not inward temptation in the godly so to? I pray you what oddes is this that you make betweene inward and outward temptations? ] If you know no oddes betweene outward Difference of outward and inward temp∣tations. and inward temptations, you be deepely seene in Diuinitie. Saint Iames telleth you, that Iam. 1. v. 14. euerie man is tempted, when he is drawen away, and intised by his owne concupiscence, which of it selfe naturally lusteth against the spirit, and much more when it is inflamed by Satans suggestions and motions. This kinde of temptation riseth from the cor∣ruption of our sinnefull nature, and is the poison of sinne dwelling in vs, the verie motion whereof is forbidden by the law of God, Thou shalt not lust; though it be pardoned in the elect for Christes sake, as all their sinnes are. Outward temptations haue no such necessary condition. It is no sinne to be tempted externally; otherwise Adam had sinne before his fall, and Christ himselfe was subiect to sinne, for they both were outwardly tempted, though not inwardly, as I teach, and the Church of Christ before me taught the same, howsoeuer you take a pride in departing from the full conse t of all learned and religious antiquitie to maintaine your vpstart and most absurd no elties, that with figures and fansies you may seeme wise in your owne conceit. Defenc. pag. 84. li. 29. 33. 36. Furder, Satan might spiritually and extraordinarily worke together with these his In∣struments outwardly afflicting Christs body, and Christ likewise extraordinarily might appre∣hend the same; And thus might Christ suffer most strange Temptations, and incomprehen∣sible sorrowes from the furious rage of Satan, and malice of wicked men. ] Here are many mights, rashly and falsly supposed of Christ, but not a mite of Salt, or truth in them. Is it lawfull for you, Sir Defender, to dreame what you list of Christs sufferings, and when you are required proofe thereof, to say; It might be so extraordinarily? What absurdities and heresies may not thus be maintayned, if euery addle braine shall frame to himselfe new Passions and strange Temptations in Christ, and all on this ground, forsooth it might be so? Their eares must exceedingly itche, that will leaue the writings of the Euangelists and Apostles, and listen to your extraordinarie might be. But what might be? Might Christ vpon all this spirituall fury and subtilitie of Satan, or concur∣rence and cooperation of the Iewes, haue his Faith, hope or loue of, and in God faile, or decrease? could he mistrust or doubt, that he might perish, and neither saue himselfe, no vs? why Role you thus with Roperick Termes, and frights of franticke men, when you speake of Christs Temptations, as if hell or Satan were to strong for the Spirit and grace of God in Christ, or could seuer the vnion made with the mightie hand of God of Christs humane nature into one Person with his Diuine? It may be your strange fansies doe often put you to such plunges; but he that stedfastly beleeueth in the Sonne of God, and knoweth the truth and force of his Masters words, when ready to goe to his Passion he said to his Disciples; Iohn. 16. , be bold ( or consident ) I haue ouercome, the world; will neuer doubt such dangers as you dreame of. For in the world which Christ ouercame, is the Prince thereof comprised, euen the diuell; whom be∣fore Christ pronounced to haue nothing, that is no part nor place in him. And to me that am assured, the diuell could doe nothing against Christ, but what Christ himselfe would, and that the Sauiour of the world had power enough not onely to resist, but also to represse the fur e and subtilitie of Satan with his word or becke, saue what him selfe would permit, to let the diuell see his violence endured, his as aults repelled, his temptations reiected, and his whole kingdome despised aud troden vnder foote; these Tragicall Termes of yours are but blusterings of a busie Brayne and blastes of an vnstayed Tongue, that would say somewhat, and can not tell what; and therefore hideth his isformed fansies vnder the visard of strange and incomprehensible con∣ceites. Defenc. pag. 85. li. 1. Here now we may see how vniustly you conclude, that Satan could no other way assault Christ, as an Instrument of Gods wrath, but onely by executing torments on his Soule, euen in such wise as he tormenteth damned S ules in hell. ] We see you haue opened your packe of strange wares, and wastfull words; and otherwise besides your owne liking, you haue brought nothing for all this pel e and Trash, that you haue vttered. My words that are short, but expressing the same, (which you with many circumductions fetch about to couer the presumption of your cause,) you much mislike; and yet if you weigh them well, you shall see they containe the very summe of your deuices. To be tempted with suggestions of malediction, reiection, confusion, desperation and damnation, (so they take no place, no find no harbour in the hart of man) can haue no such in∣comprehensible sorrowes, nor hellish Torments, as you talke of. The Hart by Faith presently and throughly resisting quencheth all those fierie Darts of Satan, as flaxe vnder foote. And therefore you must either take from Christ present and perfect re∣sistance, by de reasing his faith, and s aggering his hope, or else you can neuer sinck him into such sorrowes, as you suppose. You giue him Trea pa. 45. li. 25. a glorious conquest at the last; but in the meane while you leau him not onely fearing and fainting, but euen ouer∣whelmed, and all con ounded with these strange temptations and incomprehensible sor∣rowes; which sometimes, you say come from Ibid li. 24. the immediate hand of God, and some∣times from the diuels, Defenc pag. 15. i 8. as Gods Instruments working the very effects of Gods wrath vpon him. And these paines, you say, were not onely as sharpe as any are in hell, but euen the same which the damned doe suffer: Now wherein haue I wronged you except with too much sparing you? What, in saying you defend, that Satan executed Torments on Christs Soule, such as he doth on the demned? Your words import no lesse. The di∣uels you say, were Gods Instruments to work on Christ the very effects of his wrath. Now what are the effects of Gods wrath Defenc pag. 15. i 8. equall to all the paines of hell, and Pag. 12. li. 0. the same which are in ell, but the torments of the damned Soules in hell? [But you would haue Christ as well inwardly tempted, as Tormented by the diuell; and where you defend both, I reported but one.] Pardon me that wrong; I would haue hid your folly, but you will not suffer me. Howbeit I refuted the one, and left the other, as worthie none other answere, then that, where in the Scriptures the diuels confesse Christs word and presence did torment them, you without Scripture haue found the diuels tormented Christ. Defenc. pag. 85. li. 4. That can be, say you, no other way then by Satans verie poss ssing of those soules. Which grosse and infernall speculations of yours, (for trueths you can not make them) I vtterly leaue to your owne discussing. Are your fansies become so fine, that what the Scriptures teach of Satans possessing mens soules or bodies, must be grosse; and your inuenti∣ons without wit or reason, must be spruice? What sayd I in any of these things which the plaine words, or maine grounds of the Scripture do not confirme? That the di∣uell can not worke, but where he is? Will you giue him more then an almighty pow∣er, to worke where he is not, or will you affoord him an omnipresence equall with God, that he may be euery where, to the end he may worke euery where, as God doth? Satan may torment the soule, you will say, and not possesse it.] The diuels that could not worke on swine, but they must first Matth. 8. enter them, before they could make them runne headlong into the sea, can they worke in men, before they enter and possesse them? The Cananite that intreated Christ to haue Matth. 15. mercie on her daughter, who was Matth. 15. miserably vexed with a diuell, receiued at length this answer; Mark. . For this saying, goe thy way he diuell is gone out of thy daughter. The father that brought his lunaticke sonne to Christ, confessed Mark. 9. he had a d mbe spirit, which did teare him, and cast him often into the fire, and into the water to destroy him: and Christ confirmeth his words in saying; Mark. 9. Thou dumbe and deafe spirit come out of him, and enter no more into him. So that the di∣uell cannot inwardly torment the bodie of man or beast, but he must enter it, and so possesse it. How much lesse can he torment the soule or worke therein, but he must likewise possesse it, and haue it in his power, before he can afflict it? The entring and possessing of mens bodies and soules by diuels, are no such infernall s as you would make them; they are the caueats and admonitions of Christ himselfe. Matth 12. When an vncleane spirit, sayth he, is gone out of a man, and returning, sindeth his house (whence he came out) emptie, he taketh vnto him seuen other spirits worse then himsele, and they enter in, and dwell there; and the end of that an is worse then the begin∣ning. And Luke 11. when a strong man armed keepeth his house, the things which he possesseth are in pe . So that the Scriptures warne vs to haue Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, l t the diuell finde them emptie, and so enter aud possesse them. Now touching your Iuniper conceits, that Satan inwardly did worke or stirre in Christes heart those strange temptations which you talke of, which indeed were wic∣ked and impious cogitations; or that he did torment the soule of Christ with the paines of the damned, what Scripture I pray you doth warrant these worse then infer∣nall speculations? For the diuels themselues confessed, they had nothing to doe with Christ; and you make them the raisers of strange temptations in Christes heart, and inflictors of incomprehensible sorrowes on Christes soule. And where they truly ac∣knowledged that Christes word and power tormented them, you haue deuised, that the diue should vnspeakably torment Christ on the Crosse. So lawfull is it for you, and vsuall with you, to take the fulnesse of power and grace from Christ, and to sub∣iect his soule and spirit to Satans subtiltie. Defenc pag. 85 li 9. Notwithstanding this heere I , that howsoeuer the meanes or maner was of Sa∣ and his furious bands assaulting of Christ on the Crosse, it made certainly an impression of most sorrow and torment in his soule. ] Your single and double vouchers with certainty and warranty are so rise, that no wise man will take your word for a grey go e quill. You auouch it and you are certaine of it, but how proue you one line or letter of all that here you say? Christes stripes and wounds receiued of the Iewes, were painfull to him; and the taunts, mocks, and blasphemies of all sorts vttered a∣gainst him, were g euous vnto him; but what is this to the most dolefull and incompre∣hensible torments inflicted on Christes soule, as you say you be assured, by the diuell? The Euangelists expresse what was done and sayd to Christ on the Crosse, that you disdaine as grosse; and in your curious, but irreligious subtilitie, will haue the diuell not only tempt inwardly the spirit of Christ with strange and most wicked cogitati∣ons; (for the diuell hauing by your doctrine power and choise what he would sug∣gest, would forbeare no wickednesse) but incomprehensibly torment the soule of Christ; and when you should make proofe thereof, you tell vs you auouch, it was certainly so. Defenc pag. 85. i 12. Christ felt and discerned by that meanes the verie stroke of Gods owne hand vpon him, and receiued the sting of his wrath and indignation therein, which then wrought and was re∣uealed chiefly then vpon him for all our sinnes. ] Meane you that Christ felt the stroke of Gods owne hand by the temptations, or by the torments which Satan offered to his soule? If by temptations; besides that you giue S. Iames the lie, who sayth, Iames 1. God tempteth no man (with euill,) you make God with his owne hand to moue and pro∣uoke Christ to wickednesse, which is more then infernall wickednesse to auouch, If you meane by torments; those you teach must come from the immediate hand of God vpon the soule of Christ; and will you make the diuell to be Gods immediate hand? Choose here, whether all your graue discourse (at your first entrance into this questi∣on) of the soules proper and immediate suffering shall be wholy idle, and vtterly false, or whether the diuell shall be Gods immediate hand. Gods immediate hand is his eternall, diuine, and almighty power, which if you admit the diuell to be; I must con∣fesse all my speculations, beleeuing but one God, and him to be most pure and holy, are plaine and grosse in respect of your new found hell, and your eternall and al∣mighty Ruler thereof, the diuell. As for proofe, I should wrong you to aske for any; it is not your maner to vouchsafe to proue what you say; but to say what you list vn∣der certaine generall stales of words; which are but dennes of theeues to rob Christ of his sanctitie and glorie. What Christ discerned in his sufferings, is neuer like to come from you with any trueth, you follow your fansies so much as your best guides; which leade you to a sidelesse and bottomlesse pit of absurd dreames and doctrines. You distinguish nothing, you define nothing, you proue nothing; onely you wallow in the mire of strange temptations, and most dolefull and incomprehensible sorrowes; how, why, or what, you can not tell, but the hand of God serueth you at all assayes to bring out your misborne and misshapen speculations vnder some shew of religion, because you pretend the power of God. For my part, what the Scriptures euidently auouch of Christes sufferings, that I faithfully beleeue; what is deuised or added by mens imaginations and fictions, I vtterly reiect not as false and presumptuous only, but as absurd and irreligious. What the Scriptures say Christ discerned in his sufferings, I haue often specified, which farre differeth from your strange and imaginary speculations. They auouch of Christ, that he Acts 2. saw God alwaies at his right hand, that he should not be shaken; and ther∣fore his heart was glad, and his tongue reioyced. And Heb. 12. for the ioy proposed vnto him, (and therefore discerned by him) he endured the crosse and despised the shame thereof. Christ himselfe after his last supper, Ioh. 18. knowing all things that should befall him, and that Ioh. 13. his houre was come, that he should depart out of this world vnto the Father, and that the Father had giuen all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God; not onely pronounced the diuel, for all his comming against him, Ioh 14. had nothing in him, but speaking directly of his passion, said; Ioh. 17. Father the houre is come, glorifie thy sonne, that thy sonne may glorifie thee; as thou hast giuen him power ouer all flesh, that hee might giue them life euerlasting. I haue glorified thee on earth, and now Father glorifie me with thy selfe, with the glorie which I had with thee before the world was. With this most assured and infallible perswasion and resolution Christ passed to his passion to be glorified, and thereby declared to be the Sonne of God. Which the Theefe on the crosse con∣fessing, receaued that present day an euerlasting reward in Paradise; And the Centu∣rion and Souldiers, that watched him, when they saw the manner of his death and woonders consequent, acknowledged, saying; Matth. 27. Truely this man was the Sonne of God. Against this foundation of faith and knowledge in the soule and spirit of Christ, if you dreame of any doubt or feare, that did arise in the heart of Christ vpon any sug∣gestions of men or diuels, you make him a liar and a sinner. His faith could not shrinke without hainous infidelitie, because he was assured of his personall vnion with God, and of his inunction with power and the holie Ghost from God, by the voice of his Father speaking thrice from heauen vnto him, by the visible descent of the holie Ghost vpon him at his baptisme, by the seruice and adoration of Angels, by the power and commaund, which he had ouerall creatures, and ouer diuels themselues. Wherefore the least doubt or distrust in Christs heart, that his person might perish, or his sacrifice be reiected, or that his Father was or could be displeased with him, must needs haue beene most detestable impietie. And this cleerenesse of faith and know∣ledge standing fast, and immooueable against all the powers of hell, what strange temptations or incomprehensible torments could the diuell worke in the soule of Christ, the Scriptures assuring vs, that the Ephes. 6. shield of faith (euen in vs) quencheth all the fi rie darts of the wicked, and that Iames 4. the diuell will flie from vs, when he is resisted? And therefore as 1. Pet. 4. we reioice, (and ought so to doe) in that we be partakers of Christs suffe∣rings; so Christ in all his sufferings had exceeding both comfort and ioy, though the anguish of his flesh were very painfull vnto him, whereto the manhood of Christ did ful mit it selfe, according to the will of God. Defenc. pag . li. 16. Neither say you any thing whereby you doe or can ouerthrow this assertion. ] What can, or need more be said against this, and all other your false and vaine conceits, then that they haue no ground in the word of God, but are couered with certaine close and currant phrases, which you neuer expound, least you should lie open to infinite ab∣surdities, and impieties. As euen in this case, which is now before vs; you tell vs, Christ dis erned the very stroke of Gods own hand, & receaued the sting of his wrath: where these words, the stroke and sting, being metaphores, designe no proprietie nor particu∣laritie of Christs sufferings: but any of those paines, which Christ receaued in his bo∣die, may iustly be called the stroke of Gods hand, or sting of his wrath. So that you se∣cretly carie your meaning in euerie place with some ambiguous words, which cannot be directly refuted, because there is no speciall thing mentioned in them, but gene∣rall and metaphoricall circumstances guilesully proposed. Defenc. pag. 85. li. 17. Our authorised doctrine in England agreeth with me, saying, he fought and wrastled as it were hand to hand with the whole armie of hell. ] At least you dreame so, but where are the words, that expresse any such thing, as you take vpon you to maintaine? The Catechisme saith, Christ encountered, and wrastled with the whole power of Satan. I saie no lesse, but still obseruing Christs owne words, that Iohn 14. within him (Satan) had nothing. You suppose, that Christs owne heart was a souldier of Satans, and fought against his fa th by seruing the diuels turne; the Catechisme saith no such thing. Satan with all his power and pollicie, force and urie did what he could, by the mouths and hands of the wicked to tire Christs patience, and shake his confidence, but he could do nei∣ther; Christ persisting in most perfect patience, faith, and obedience to the verie breathing out of his soule. To aggrauate the paines of Christes stripes and wounds, Satan omitted no meane, that by men he could execute. To vndermine and batter Christes faith, the diuell opened the mouthes of the Luke 23. People, that gazed on him; of the high M k 15. Priests and Luke 23. Rulers, that conspired against him; of the Scribes and Pharises that derided him; of the l Passengers, that shooke their heads at him; of the Matth 27. Soul∣diers, that crucified him; of the Theefe, that hung with him; to mocke, reuile, and blas∣phem him; as falsly calling himselfe the Sonne of God, and forsaken of God, and left vnable to saue or helpe himselfe. Their tentations the Scriptures doe specifie, which were sufficient to trie the stedfastnesse of Christs faith and hope; of others they make no mention. And to these, or any other if you thinke Christs heart did yeeld but by fearing or doubting, whether their words were true or no, you take from him all assu∣rance of faith, and place him in the midst betweene fidelitie and infidelitle, hope and despaire, as not resolued whether God would deceaue him, and forsake him vnder the burden of our sinnes, and his sufferings. This perplexitie would indeed haue beene a strange temptation, and horrible torment of minde, but withall a manifest faile in faith, and ecclipse of hope, which if you take from Christ, you robbe him not onely of his comfort, confidence, and glorie; but euen of all pietie, patience, and obedience for that time, as doubting whether God were faithfull in his promise, and whether the coniunction of God and man in his person might be seuered and dissol∣ued or no. But of these temptations, feares, and sorrowes, I wish you to take heede, least if you defile the merits, or diminish the graces of his sufferings, you declare your selfe to be any thing rather then a Christian, and to haue no part in the kingdome of God, and of Christ, by dishonoring the Father, and the Sonne to serue your owne fansies. Defenc pag. 85. li. 20. Where you detest my sense of the Apostle in this place, and yet giue no inkling of anie other sense at all, it is more then half a conclusion against you, that my interpretation of it is vniustly by you reprooued. ] Such conclusions doe well become a man of your iudge∣ment. The Defender ainly presu∣meth all places of his vnanswe∣red, to be gran∣ted. As though I must be bound to make Commentaries vpon all the Scriptures, which you abuse, or else you will take the trueth tardie by my default. It sufficed good Sir, that your application had neither coherence with the Apostles words, nor deri∣uance from them; and so was woorthely reiected as voide of all reason and sense. For this, that Christs soule was inwardly tempted, and tormented by diuels, because he triumphed ouer them most gloriously, this, I say, to all wise men is rather a merie∣ment or a prattlement, then an argument. That they resisted, or inuaded, might happely be collected, not from the force of those words, but from the disposition of such enemies: yet which way they inuaded, or how farre they preuailed, can no way be thence coniectured, though it be strongly by you conceited. The Apostles words as I haue shewed, may either declare the glory of Christes resurrection, wherein all knees of things in heauen, earth, and hell did bow, and stoupe vnto him rising from the dead; or, as some apply them, expresse the power and glorie of his Passion, in which by the perfection of his innocence, patience, and obedience, he spoyled sinne and Satan of al their right and force ouer his Elect, and caried all his Enemies as Cap∣tiues in an open shew before God and his Angels, notwithstanding all the instance, or resistance they could make. From either of these senses how you can inferre, that Satan tormented the Soule of Christ, or that he impressed in Christs hart spirituall wicked cogitations or motions, I verily doe not see, except you haue a Patent to make Conclusions contrary to their Premisses. Defenc. pa. 85. li. 25. Then you come to confute my fourth Reason, but the mainest points thereof you haue not so much as touched; I shewed that the Godly sometimes in this life, doe feele a tast of Gods insinite wrath, and euen of hellish sorrowes. 2. That Christ our Redeemer suffered for vs as deepely, yea deeper, then euen any of vs heere doe suffer, but all this you can here clenly passe ouer without any word to it. ] The matters were belike very waightie, and your proofes many, that I was forced to passe them with silence. Indeede I neither tooke, nor had any more time to refute your Treatise, then whiles my Sermons were in Printing, as they know, that had the doing thereof: and that made me the shorter in refelling your Reasons, and sometimes the darker in proposing ruine owne; but as for this, which here you complaine of, I saw no cause, why in that speedie dispatch, I should trouble my selfe any longer with it. The first Proposition in some sense I admitted; the second, which you barely supposed without proofe I reiected as iniurious to Christ, and re∣pugnant to the Apostles words, which you alleaged for it. Neither haue you in this long aduised, and farre consulted Defence so much as medled with the instances, that I gaue against your false Collection. Let him that will, read the 286. Page of my Conclusion, and see whether touching the maine points here pretended, you were not briefely, but truely answered, and stand yet staggered with the parts there speci∣fied. The summe of mine Answere to both, as my words there witnesse, was this. Conclus. pa. 286. li. 7. The Terrors of minde, which we fecle through conscience of our vnworthinesse, ignorance of Gods Counsell, and distrust of Gods fauour, Christ neuer felt; his Faith admitted no doubting, his loue excluded all fearing, his hope reiected all despairing. Ibid. li. 15. He was tempted in all things alike, except sinne. Then neither the rootes, parts, nor fruites of sinne must be in him: but the Apostle, that excepteth sinne, excepteth all sinfull adherents. What say you to this, is it no Answere? I would gladly heare what you can reioyne against it. But you, that skip euery thing, which toucheth you to the quicke, and iette in your ge∣nerall Phrases, like a Crow in a gutter, ouer leape what you list; and then for a shew surmise, that your Reasons and proofes are silenced. Well I may speake now more largely and plainly, but in effect I can speake neither more truely, nor more directly: then I then did. Yet for your pleasure I will not refuse to put your Propositions once more on foote, to see how currant they are. Defenc. pag. 85. li. 27. The Godly sometimes in this life doe feele a tast of Gods infinite wrath, and euen of hel∣lish sorrowes. You commit but three foule ouersights in this one proposition. 1. You marre the whole, and make it impertinent to your purpose. 2. You contradict your Contradictions in the Defen∣der. maine Positions. 3. You rest on euident ambiguities, or open falsities. What some of the godly doe sometimes feele either in Body or Soule, maketh nothing to Christs sufferings by your owne Confession. Your owne Rule is. Defenc. pag. 86. li. 32. In these words Christ was like vs in all Temptations and afflictions, we are to vnderstand all, that are incident to man∣kind generally, not which happen to any man particularly. So that what the godly doe sometimes feele (for not onely Children and Infants, but many thousand Christians die free from these hellish sorrowes of yours) may not be made a President for Christs sufferings. And where you, or your Corrector would after salue this ouersight, by saying in the margine; Defenc. pag 8 in mar∣gine. li. 1. which though all generally feele not, yet generally is due to all in respect of sinne; you multiply your absurdities, you mend not the loosenesse of this Proposition. For due to all in respect of sinne, are all manner of externall and corporall plagues, from many of which your selfe would exempt Christ by this obseruation of yours; and likewise reiection, confusion, desperation, and eternall damnation are due to all in respect of sinne, from which if you doe not exempt Christ, you exempt your selfe out of the number of the Faithfull to take a worse course then Iudas, who yeelded his Masters Body into the hands of men, where this conceit yeeldeth Christs Soule into the power of diuels. Secondly, be you now of the minde that the Godly doe sometimes feele a Tast of Gods wrath? How often haue you resolued, and Proclaimed in this Booke, that Defenc. pa. 13. li 8. to the Godly their afflictions, both small and great, are no effects of Gods proper wrath, and now they sometimes feele a Tast of his Infinite wrath? What shift to saue this repugnancie, can you deuise? [Gods Infinite wrath perhaps is not his proper wrath.] It is the same, you say, that Christ suffered, and since Christ by your Doctrine suffered none but the proper wrath of God, the Faithfull feeling the same, that Christ did, must suf∣fer the same kind of wrath, that Christ suffered. Againe, can you find vs an Infinite wrath in God, that is not properly wrath? What hath Gods proper wrath, of which you haue iangled so much, more then Infinite in time, or degree, or both? but these Resolutions of yours be like your Inuentions, they hang together, as drunken mens steps, or mad mens dreames. Consult I pray you with your friends, and aske them what answere you shall yeelde to this forgetfulnesse of theirs, or variablenesse of yours. Thirdly, what meane you by hellish sorowes? If you thereby note the feare of hell, Men ay feare but not suffer the true paines of hell in this lise. which may often afright the seruants of God in this life, is that the worst the damned feele? Haue the true paines of hell no more in them, but a feare thereof? Is it possi∣ble for men in this mortall flesh and life to endure the true paines of hell, and of the damned? If you so thinke, you new stampe vs a strange, but an easie hell, in respect of those terrible iudgements, which God hath ordeined for the wicked in the world to come. Will you flie to your metaphors, and say that hell paines are taken for great and exceeding? Then play you with figures and phrases, as your fashion is, and come nothing neere to the substance of the cause. So that the one is a sensible vntrueth, the other is a shifting trifle brought in to lengthen the tale, when matter faileth. And when all is sayd, so much is sound, as I forwarned at first, that Conclus. pa. 286. li. 29. fearing, doubting, or distrusting lest God will for our manifolde sinnes cast vs from his presence, and condemne vs to hell, commeth in vs from the guiltinesse of conscience, and weaknesse of faith and hope, which in Christ neither had, nor could haue any place. My next proposition, which you left vntouched, is, that Defenc. pag. 85. li. 28. Christ our Redeemer suf∣fered for vs as deeply, yea deeper then any of vs here do suffer, or can suffer. ] This propo∣sition no way helpeth your intent, and besides, wanteth both parts and proofs: for if the whole were granted, as you offer it, you can neuer thence conclude, that Christ suffered the true paines of the damned, till first you shew, that all the faithfull in this life do likewise suffer the true paines of the damned, which were a monstrous miscre∣ance meet for your new made hell. Such desperate and reprobate assertions, as haue no touch of proofe, nor taste of trueth, you place in the foreward of your fanseries. [But Christ you say, suffered as deepely as euer any of vs heere doth, or can suffer. ] Then did Christ by your doctrine not only doubt, and distrust, but euen despaire his owne saluation: for so haue many done, that after were recouered and restored by grace; and so you wrappe the Sonne of God not onely within the guilt, but within the verie sincke of our sinnes inherent, now not in the temptation, but in the perswasion of the heart: for therewith haue many of the Elect beene grieuously afflicted for the time. This it is for a man of your vnderstanding, to wade in waters aboue your heigth, and to finde no bottome till you come to the depth of all impietie, which you do not in∣tend, but can not auoid by the consequence of your positions. Two lines and lesse in my Conclusion, euen where you complaine for want of answer, would haue eased you of all these frantike imaginations, had you but soberly considered them, or aduisedly sought to disproue them. Christes Conclus. pa. 286. li. 10. faith (I sayd) admitted no doubting, his loue exclu∣ded all fearing, his hope reiected all despairing. Which of these doe you or dare you de∣nie? Whether doubting be infidelitie? S. Iames sayth; Iames 1. Let a man aske in faith, , nothing doubting, or staggering: sor let not such a man thinke, that he shall receiue any thing from the Lord. That condition our Sauiour addeth vnto saith: Matth. 21. If you shall haue faith, and not doubt: for doubting, as Paul writeth, proceedeth from in∣fidelity. Abraham Rom. 4. doubted not of the promise of God through vnbeliefe, but was strength∣ened in faith; , being fully assured, that he which had promised was able to per∣forme it. Therefore Christ sayd to Peter: Matth. 14. O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt? and to all the rest; Matth. 8. Why are you fearefull, ô you of little faith? So that faith is a full and constant perswasion of Gods promises without all feare or doubt, that we may be de∣ceiued or defrauded. Then must there in Christ be either no doubting, or small faith. And if vnbeliefe in vs be sinne, what was it in Christ after so many and so cleere eui∣dences of Gods owne voice and oath vnto him? Psal. 89. I haue sworne to Dauid my seruant, Thy seed will I stablish for euer. And againe; I haue sworne once by mine holinesse, I will not faile Dauid, his seed shall endure for euer. And likewise; Psal. 110. The Lord sware and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for euer after the order of Melchisedech. After these oathes, promises, and speeches of God from heauen to the manhood of Christ, all doubting and distrusting is most hainous and horrible sinne; which, if any man attribute to Christ, he is worse then a Iew or a Turke. For they know him not; we doe know him to be the Sonne of God, and Trueth it selfe. Set this downe for an infallible rule in Christian religion, as indeed it is the foun∣dation of all our saith (for if Christ might be a liar and a sinner, we are but deceiued in trusting to him) and none of these inward torments or deepe sufferings which you despe∣rately dreame of, can be fast ed on Christ. So long as Christes heart and spirit stood fixed and immoued in the graces and promises of God, no such strange doubt or feare, temptation or torment, as you talke of, could afflict him. No force of Satan, no sting of sinne, no storme of wrath could confound him, or amaze him. In vs these things are possible, because the corruption of flesh, and want of grace often pinch vs with remorse of conscience, and remembrance of sinne committed; but in Christ there could be no such thing. And all your drifts to make him like vs in our sinfull affections, and conflicts with confusion and desperation, as they haue no ground in the Scriptures, so are they weake and wicked, in that you measure the fulnesse of Christes graces, and his freedome from all sinne, by the faithlesse and fearefull as∣saults, that sinne and Satan make on the corrupt and irregenerate parts and powers of our soules. Wherefore as I first resolued, so I now reiterate by reason of your impor∣tunitie, that 1 Iohn 4. perfect loue (in Christ) did cast out feare, and Rom. 5. reioycing vnder hope made him with patience to expect the performance of Gods promises, and with all obedi∣ence to endure whatsoeuer the counsell of God had soredetermined to be done vn∣to which must be farre from Christ? Is Infidelitie, and distrust no sinne with you, that you make it common to Christ with vs? or are doubting and fearing no parts of infidelity? or what feare or doubt of his saluation could incomprehensibly torment the soule of Christ, except his heart did first encline from faith to feare, and so apprehend the griefe of Gods fauour lost, or in imminent danger to be lost? You haue giuen vs three variations of this incomprehensible and infinite paine and griefe, which should torment the soule of Christ, and yet you know not where to rest. The first was vnspeakeable smart and paine from Gods immediate hand, in∣flicting What torments the Defen er hath de sed for Christes soule. the same anguish on the soule of his Sonne, that he doth on the damned spi∣rits. For this you haue neither script nor scrole, text nor title in the word of God; it is a bold and lewd deuice of yours presuming what you please of Gods hand, because it is diuersly taken in the Scriptures. From thence you lept to diuels, and made them Gods instruments to torment the soule of Christ with strange temptations, and in∣comprehensible sorrowes suggested into the soule of Christ. Then you made Christs owne heart conceaue, and discerne from the wordes and acts of the Iewes fired and enraged by Satan, the dreadfull and painfull strokes and stings of Gods anger, and iust indignation against him for our sinnes; and yet all these are but the tumultuous dreames of your owne head, and certaine wastefull words that may be drawen to di∣uers senses, besides which you haue neither expressed nor confirmed any thing. Now you begin to make Commentaries vpon the Apostle to the Hebrewes, which are as cleere as a coale, and as sound as a satchell of saw-dust. Defenc. pag. 86. li. 10. First, en ho, in that which himselfe suffered, signifieth either the Defenc. pag. 86. li. 10. matter wherein Christ is able to succour vs, or the Defenc. pag. 86. li. 10. meanes whereby he becommeth readie and fit to succour vs, or els the occasion and Defenc. pag. 86. li. 10. reason, why he is the readier to succour vs, euen in that he himselfe suffered and was tempted. ] Your expositions be like your conclusions, they haue nei∣ther root nor rinde. Here are in shew three parts of a diuision, all which indeed (you say) are Defenc. pag. 86. li. 31. but one and the same in effect, and so your triple diuision senselesse and need∣lesse, the parts importing one thing; and the Li. 27. first way seemeth to you not the vnlikeliest; which, if you put any difference between them, is the falsest & farthest from the Apo∣stles meaning. For that Christ helpeth men in nothing, but what himselfe first suffe∣red, that he suffred al particular degrees, & speciall sorts of afflictions, as well in soule as in bodie, which may befall any man; these are so lowd lies, that but you, no man would make either of them the apostles speech or purpose. But your lucke is to light on the worst, or your choise leadeth you to fansie the foulest, that you may differ fro other men, & be singular in your own sense. For your selfe see, & say, Li. 35. all the particular (kinds of) crosses in the world neither could nor can possibly come to any man, and so not to Christ. Why then make you that the likeliest meaning of the Apostles words, that Christ suffered all the matter, that is, all those kinds of paines wherein he succoureth vs? If you meane generally, that Christ tasted all sorts of paines, that is, both corporall and spirituall, then shall you neuer conclude, that he tasted this or that kinde of paine in speciall; but it sufficeth that Christ had not only a diuine respect in mercie, but an hu∣mane sense and experience of our miseries both outward and inward, to assure vs, that he is compassionate and tenderly affected in our infirmities and extremities, because he himselfe felt the sharpnesse of feare, sorow, shame and paine, whiles heere he liued; and hath not forgotten how neere they pinch the weakenesse of mans nature. And more the Apostle meant not in those words then to shew, the Sonne of God would in his owne person and humane nature feele our infirmities and miseries, that he might haue an humane commiseration and compassion of vs, when we are afflicted, by the remembrance of his owne sufferings, which the words doe fully fit. For Heb. 2. en ho, in that (or in as much as) he suffered, when he was tempted (or tried) he is able (with more tendernesse of heart) to helpe those that are tempted. Defenc. pag. 86. li. 18. Which way soeuer of these three we take the words, yet they plainly inferre, that Christ him selfe felt all the miserie and smart of our sufferings and Temptations, which at any time we feele. ] The smart and griefe of reiection, confusion, desperation, and such like Christ neuer tasted, because they are faithlesse, and gracelesse, feares and sorrowes in vs. Yet in these Christ can and doth s ccour vs, not because he suffered the same, but for that he knoweth what affliction of spirit, feare, and sorrow bring with them, by his owne experience, not of the same obiects, which are sinfull; but of the same affec∣tions, which are naturall. And none of these waies, which you mention, came neere the concluding of any such thing, except you vrge the first against all truth and sense acknowledged euen by your selfe, where you say, Defenc. pag. 87. li 21. I speake not of euery particular in each of them, or which euery man meeteth withall. Graunt then, that Christ in his man∣hood would eele the sharpest impressions, that feare or sorrow, shame or paine could make on the Body or Soule of Man, but still without sinne: is that a proofe that Christ ed reiection, confusion or damnation, because he tasted how deeply feare could af ct mans nature? What ignorant and vncoherent Collections are these; Christ t ed the sharpnesse of all our affections, as namely of feare, sorrow, and shame; ergo he had all the same causes and obiects of feare, sorrow, and shame, that we do and may eele? Who reasoneth so that hath any reason left in his head or hart? This the KATA PANTA, in all things, doe fully import. The words kata panta, in all things, or altogether, may haue out of the very Text of the Apostle to the foure seuerall references, and none of them neere the false construction that you make of them. The first is, he must be like his bretheren, in all the parts of Mans nature; for e not the (nature of) Angels, but the Seede of Abraham. Where∣fore in all things, (that is in all the parts and necessarie consequents of Mans nature) he mu be like Bretheren. 2. He must be like not this or that Brother, and so not like any particular Persons in any speciall cause or Circumstance, but wherein they all a e Bretheren each to other, Hebr. 2. in all those things he must be like them all. 3. It is but a likenesse, that the Apostle vrgeth in all these things, there is no equalitie, much lesse an Identitie required in those words, not that Christ in patient su ering of afflicti∣ons did not pa all, but these words import a Similitude, and haue no farder force. 4. These and all other things, that were in Christ, must be in him without sinne; H r. 4. he was tempted in all things after a likenesse, (but) without sinne. So that in all his Infirmities, affections, Temptations, and afflictions he was still free from sinne, which may be the Apostles m aning in the la r place, to note, that how diu rs soeuer Christs Tempta∣tions were, yet he was temp d in all things without sinne. Then all such feares and sor∣rowes, as h ue in them any doubt or distrust of Gods fauour, aud Christs Saluation, are vtterly excluded from him by the Apostles owne limitations, and therefore you loose but your labour by pretence of these words to bring Christ within the compasse of your feares and sorrowes. Defenc pag. 86. . 2 . Hereto erueth our publike Doctrine, Diram execrationem in se suscepit. ] You handle the , as you doe the Scriptures and Fathers, turning them from their right What Christ for . sense to serue your priuate Doctrines. Christ vndertook our curse, saith the Ca isme; what then? Christ vndertooke all our sinnes; and all the punishment due vnto them, not to it in the same kinde, but to dissolue it in his Person, and to discharge vs of it. Yea he vndertooke our reiection, confusion, and damnation; to satisfie them, not to beare them; to cl them, not to beare them. So that hence you may conclude a Satisfaction and dissolution made by Christ of all these things, that were due to vs; but you may not inferre, that he was vtterly reiected, inwardly confounded, or eter∣nally condemned; as we should haue beene, and the damned are. Againe, he tooke vpon him the Satisfaction and recompence of all our sinnes and paines. But where? Saint Peter aith, Christ bare our sinnes in his Body on the Tree; and Saint Paul saith, b . 2. Christ things in , and things in heauen, by the bloud of his Cr , and recon∣ c 2. vs in the Body of his flesh. Christ vndertooke then to abolish our curse and con∣d tion, but in the Body of his flesh, where he reconciled vs vnto God. So that you must bring words out of the Catechisme, before your Doctrine will drawen. And by your leaue, I take the Catechisme permitted to be taught in Schooles, but not Authorized for the publike Doctrine of this Realme. Neither are you the Man, that so much respect authoritie farre more publike then this, where it sorteth not with your fansies. But here you haue caught a word or two, that may be misused, and that is the cause the Catechisme is so much magnified by your priuate Authoritie, as to be the publike Doctrine of this Realme. Which I speake not to dis∣grace the Booke, but to make difference betwixt your verdict, and the Iudgement of the whole Realme. Defenc. pag. 87. li. 7. You might haue giuen a good sense of my words (if you had any mind ) as of those generall and large words of the Scripture, whereupon I grounded my selfe. ] It is more then time, we should yeelde such a ghest as you are, the same submission and reue∣rence, that we giue to the Sacred Scriptures; specially when you abuse the words of the holy Ghost to your priuate & vnsound conceits. In the word of God I am bound to looke to the meaning of the Writer, who could not erre; and therefore howsoeuer the words, if they were another mans, might be reiected, yet in the Scriptures they are to be receaued with all Religion, because he endited them, that is e Spirit of truth; and he hath a found and euident Doctrine in them, though we vnderstand it not. And therefore we must seeke to other places of like sense, or more light, that we may learne the meaning of the holy Ghost. Expect you the like d tie, when you de iue your sullaine and vnsauorie fansies by false and loose consequents from the words of holy write? as if you were not bound to beware how you abuse the Scrip∣tures, but we must looke on, and hold our peaces, whiles you peruert the words of the Prophets and Apostles at your pleasure? You made a number of false Propositions and Conclusions without all wa ant of the word of God; as, Trea pa. 46. li. 10. Thus doe the members of Christ suffer: therefore of n Christ our head suffered the like: yea farre greater terrors of God, and assaults of the diuell. And so you Reason, Ibid 32. & pag. 47. li. 1. which can not be refuted by the witte of Man; vs not but wherein he had experience of our Temptations, but he succoureth in these Temp∣tations of feeling the sorrowes of hell; Therefore he himselfe ha experience of the s me. ] Where to shew your witte, you ioyne an affirmatiue conclusion o a negatiue maior, and in defiance of all truth and reason, you make this childish and ignorant manner of reasoning to be irrefutable; And so your pleasant Electua , that Trea pag. 45 li. 33. of all absurditi s this is the greatest, that meere men should suffer more deepely and more bitterly (the sor∣rowes and paines of hell) then Christ did. All these you build vpon this foundation, Christ was Heb. 4. Tempted in all things after aliken sse, (but) without sinne: no that he is any such intention or direction in the Apostles words, but that you will mak such a Construction of them, and no man must say nay. To let you see your folly and iu this point, I Co lus. pa. 283. shewed you many corporall paines and sorrowes, and likewise many spirituall, which Christ neuer felt, as touching the causes and obiects of those afflictions, though I did not exempt him from the generall sense of those affections. In the Body of Man, I named blindnesse, dumbnesse, lamenesse, sicknesse, breaking of bones, burning of fire, and such like which Christ neuer suffered; and y t in all these he can and doth succour others. In the Soule I reckned blindnesse, and hard∣nesse of hart, vnbeliefe, desperation, frensie, and vexation with diuels, all which Christ hath often cured and healed, and readily can, though he were neuer plunged into these, as men are. Wherefore your maine and immooueable Collection out of the Apostle, as you dreame, that Christ succoureth vs not, but wherein he had experi∣ence of the same, was a blind and false in sion of yours vtterly mistaking the Apostles words and meaning. To this what reply you? Defenc. pag. 87. li. 18. The Apostle and both doe speake of the sufferings of mankind in generall, and of each part of nature apt to suffer, but not of euery particular in each of them, or which each meeteth withall. ] You are where you would be, when you and the Apostle goe hand in hand, as you make your selfe beleeue, though you come nothing neere the Apostles speech o sense. Then since it sufficeth for the truth of the Apostles words, that Christ felt feare, sorrow, shame, paine, and death which are common to all men; and there was no neede, that Christ should haue all the same causes of feare, sorrow sh me, and paine, which euery man hath, or may haue; what reason had you out of the Apostle to con∣clude so confidently, that Christ must suffer the very same sorowes and paines of hell, which sometimes in this life befall some men through vehement remorse of sinne, and faintnesse of faith? For they are not generall to all Ages and Persons; and if they were, yet proceede they from the guiltinesse of our owne consciences, and the not feeling of Gods grace for the time, that we may see our owne vnworthinesse; neither of which could haue place in Christ. [ Generall termes, you say, should be vnderstood ac∣cording to the possibilitie and probabilitie of the matter. ] Be those the raines of your Rea∣sons, that you will vtter matters neither probable, nor possible, and then require to haue your speech recalled to possibilitie and probabilitie? Doe other men vse so to speake or write, that when they haue ouer lashed themselues, they flie to probabilities and possibilities, such as they best like? You must looke, good Sir, to your Proposi∣tions and Conclusions, that they be sound and good, concording with the grounds of Faith, and Rules of holy Scripture, and then you shall not neede to make such idle reseruations. Now in your Conceits, which I repeated and refuted, what probabili∣tie, or possibilitie doe you dreame of? that Christ was touched and plunged deeper then any other man into feares, Passions, and Agonies of reiection, confusion, de∣speration, and damnation, though at last with much a doe he wrastled from them all? Such Probabilities keepe to your selfe, no wise Christian will admit them, except he see them prooued with stronger Reasons, and cleerer Testimonies, then such loose possibilities and probabilities, as you bring. Your waterish stuffe in the rest of this page is not woorth the speaking to. You wander about to salue the smallest, and cleane skip ouer the greatest points, that are obiected against you. That Defenc. pag. 87. Christ had not his eies put out as Sampson had, nor was swal∣lowed vp by a Whale, as Ionas was; nor was cast into a burning fornace as Sydrac and his fel∣lowes were, nor was stoned to death as Naboth and Steuen were: These I say were iust and full reproofes of your licencious inference, that Christ of necessitie must suffer what∣soeuer his members suffered. I opposed other instances besides these, touching the soule of man, from which Christ hath holpen many, though he neuer had experi∣ence of th same; as from caecitie and obstinacie of heart, from infideli ie, and all manner of Iniquitie, from frensie, furie, follie, and such like vexations and afflictions of diuels. Wherein if you giue Christ no power nor abilitie to heare and helpe at his good pleasure, you take both his honor and office from him. If you confesse, which the Scriptures auouch, that he hath healed many, which were possessed and oppres∣sed by the diuell, then you must either recall your inuincible Reason, as a palpable follie, or else you must subiect the Body and Soule os Christ not only to diuels, which you dare doe; but to all manner of Imp etie and iniquitie, since there is no sinne so great, which Christ will not forgiue vpon true repentance, saue wilfull Blasphemie a∣gainst his Spirit. [You speake of Paines, not of sinnes.] And is it no paine to be pos∣sessed with the diuell in body or mind, as we read of many in the Gospell? diseases, burning, , and such like, which Christ neuer suffered, are they no paines? frensie, furie, lunacie, are they not rather painfull and greeuous punishments of sinne, then sinne? your Proposition which could not be refuted by the witte of Man, was this; Christ succoureth vs not, but wherein he had experience of our Temptations and In∣firmities, This speaketh of Temptations and Infirmities; now how farre these words doe st etch, can you not tell? but you will amend the matter, and cleere both the Apostle, and your owne Conclusion. Defenc. pag 87 37 & pag 8. 1. 1. Thus this Scripture, is cleered, and my Reason iustified: Christ succoureth vs not in any extreamer kind of paine, then he himselfe had experience of. But he succoureth vs in the feeling of the terrors of God, he releaseth vs of the paines & sorrowes vn easurable that rise thereof. Therefore him selfe had experience of them. ] You should doe well to tell vs, how this Scripture is cleered? the place prooueth, that Christ had a Similitude with hi Bretheren in generall, that is, as well in flesh and bloud subiect to death, as other suf∣ and temptations. These three the Apostle reckneth and calleth katapanta, all the parts of Resemblance, which Christ had with the weaknesse and wretchednesse of our condition and Nature. Your selfe confesse those three; to wit, Defenc. pag. 8 . li. 6. Infirmities, Temptations, and afflictions, to be all the things wherein Christ was like vs; for his man∣hood in substance was the same that ours is, and so more then like. As for en , by which you would haue to be signified Ibid. li. 28. All the matter, and euery kinde of paine, Wherein Christ succoureth vs; besides the manifest falsenesse of that construc∣tion, which I haue sufficiently reprooued, you depart, as your manner is from all Interpreters new and old to a singular sense, that no man liketh but your selfe. The G ke Scho s collected by Occumenius, thus expound it. in 2. cap. ad Heb. . in that he suffered, signifieth, For as mvch as he . And Theodorct. The Apostle saith, Theodoret. n 2. ca. ad Heb. Whereas by experience Christ learned the weakenesse of Mans Nature, he h lpeth those that are impugned. And Theophylact. Theophylact. in 2. cap. ad Hebre s. That which the Apostle saith is this. Because as a Man Christ vnderstandeth all by ex∣perience, and knoweth what affliction and is, therefore he can helpe, that is, he is the readier to streteh forth his hand, and with mercie to aide the oppressed. From these perhaps you will derogate the knowledge of the Greeke tongue, though they were all naturall Grecians, as you do from Saint Austen; but that will doe you little good, and lesse honestie. For the skilfullest interpreters, that are of our Age and Religion, and w l learned in the Greeke tongue, do exactly agr with them against you, in his obseruations vpon the new Testa ent sai h. . . in 2. ca. ad Hebre s. , id est THERE∣FORE Christ suffered, and was tempted, he is able to them, that are tempted. In 2. ca . ad Hebrees. Caluine, In 2. ca . ad Hebrees. Beza, In 2. ca. ad Hebrees. Piscator, In 2. ca. ad Hebrees. Marlorate, In 2. ca. ad Hebrees. in his Translati∣on, and others with one consent expresse en ho not by WHEREIN, as you doe; but by ex eo quod, hoc quod, ex quô, by that which Christ suffered, (or becaus he suf ered) and was tempted, he is able, (or ready) to succour the tempted. The Translation expoundeth it by for as much as. And though you would the mat∣ and the together, least you should be taken tardie with a violent wresting of the Scriptures, yet the simpl can see great di nce betweene these two Inter∣pretations: WHEREIN Christ suffered and was tempted, (therein and in nothing e se) he is able to succour vs; which is your erroneous exposition of the Apostles : and by this that Christ suffered, (or because he suffered. ) and was tempted he is able (that is ready) to helpe them that are tempted; which is the Generall Resolution of all these late Expositors. And so your cl g of the Scriptures is the crossing and miscon∣sturing of them, against the full accord of new and old Interpreters. As for your reason; that is iustified with a itnesse, as error is by wilfull ig∣norance. The Defenders in framing Arguments. For if a man would rake vp all the reasons, that euer thwarted A or truth, he shall hardly finde any more or worse aults in any then this hath. To a Neg ma or being a plaine comparison, you put an Negatiue conclusion, that is a simple position; all three propositions haue one and the same subiect; and the predi∣cate in the Conclusion is no where found in the premis es. But your Arte is like your trueth, and therefore I maruell at neither. The forme of your reason being so out of frame, let vs see how the matter of it can be iustified. The maior of your first argu∣ment, which ( ou ) Trea pa. 46 li. 31. could neuer be refu ed by the witte of man, was this. Christ suc∣coureth , but wherein he had experience of our temptations and infirmities: that is, Christ helpeth no man in any thing, which he him before hath not felt. This false and l d assertion you are gone from; and now you substitute an other of the same here by way of comparison. Christ Defenc. pag. 87. 38. succ ureth vs not in any extreamer kinde of , then he had experience of. Before it was the selfe same paine, but now it must be as extreame a paine, though not the same. Neither of these hath any founda∣tion in the sacred Scriptures, nor any coherence with the question, which I proposed. Besides, this later, which is new coined, is a bold intrusion vpon things vnknowne, a false comparison of Christs succouring and suffering, and no way helpeth the Con∣clusion, that is sowed to it. For first how prooue you that former, o this later proposition? (you will say) must be like in all things Omit, that th se wordes are but that any such came simply from me, truely I doe not remember; they made nothing to my matter, who proposed the death of Christ by the shedding of his blo d to be the full redemption of mankinde, without the death of the soule, and paines of the damned. And by that time we both are considered, you are as likely a man to fitten, or misconceiue, as I to forget, and mistake mine owne doctrine. Next we see, that your pla e out of Ambrose is alo fully to the same effect. ] Both Cy∣rill . 24. and Ambrose speake to one effect, but neither of them one word to your pur∣pos . Christ taking our nature, tooke also our naturall affections of feare and sorow. So sayd Cyrill, so sayth Ambrose. What then? ergo Christ doubted, and feared reie∣ction and damnation. Be those naturall, or sinfull feares in vs? If sinfull, Christ had nothing to do with them. He was like vs in all things, sinne excepted. Naturall they are not, because they are neither necessary nor common to all, though they be conse∣quents of our sin ull corruption, when faith faileth vs. There is a feare, as Damascene teacheth, which is natural and innocent, and not subiect to sinne. This the Lord admit∣t d . or suffered, when he would; not as we doe, by constraint. There is another feare, , that proceedeth from infidelitie, and the betraying (or selfe-yeelding) of our thoughts. This the Lord admitted not. You confound both these and by one which s a naturall infirmity, would proue the other, which is a sin∣full infidelitie to be in Christes person. But awake out of this drowsie dreame, and you shall see them not onely distinct, but as farre distant the one from the other, as iniquity is from the integrity of mans nature. That Christ layed aside for the time the delight of his eternall Deity, and would be a ed with the tediousnesse of our infirmitie, Ambrose sayth; but that it parted away from him, is your false translation, not Ambros s intention. That Christ did not dissemble our naturall affections of griefe and sorow, but would feele them for our sake; and in respect of our danger, Ambrose confesseth: but that Christ exempted himselfe from no∣thing Defen ag. 8. li. 33. in his passion that we haue experience of, as touching paines and sorrowes; this is your medly, it is no part of Ambroses meaning. The causes of Christes sorrow are in that place repeated by Ambrose; you haue the cunning to skippe them, and to surmise others in their steads, of which Ambrose neuer dreampt, as the feare and terror of re∣ie tion, maled ction, and damnation, which Ambrose abhorreth. . Pro me doluit, quod doleret. Christ sorowed for me, who had nothing which he might sor w for himselfe . Doles igitur Domine non tua. sed mea vulnera, non tuam mortem, sed nostram infirmitatem. Thou grieuest therefore Lord, sayth Ambrose, not at thy wounds, but at mine, not at thine owne death, but at our weaknesse. The occasions and respects of griefe and sorow are there set downe by Ambrose, which you make light of; and therefore you abuse the words of Ambrose, not so much against me, as against himselfe. But these places and particulars I haue handled before, that may suffice till we come to Christes agony. Defen . pag. li 1. To this v ry purpose also, many others before rehearsed do affirme most fully. ] He that knew not your vaine and vaunting humour, would thinke that so many names of an∣cient Fathers, as N ianzene, Fulgentius, Bernard, Tertullian and Ierome, should not be impanelled but to some purpose; but the Reader hath by this time so good expe∣rience of your mistakings and wrestings, that he will easily suppose you would make your most aduantage as well of their words, as of their names, if you had any sure holde in them. Howbeit, these places are already discussed, and therefore as you re∣ferre me to the Pages, where you cited them, so I send you to the places, where I exa∣mined and answered them. Where the Reader shall soone see how you can play with places that make nothing for you, by dreaming, that ancient Fathers thought as you do, because they speake of humane infirmitie and sorow in Christes soule. D fen . pa. 89. l. 4. You greatly abu e them who take t em otherwise: namely, as if they meant that by the flesh and blou shed of Christ meerely and alone without the merit of his soules and mindes proper suffering, our whole ransome were payed. The chiefe merit of Christes obedience and patience, I referre to the soule of Christ, since the body of it selfe hath neither will nor sense, much lesse vertue or merit; and the sufferings of Christes soule by affections of feare and sorow I haue often affirmed, I neuer d ed. The death of Christs soule I vtterly disclaime to haue beene any part of our redemption, and so doe the ancient Fathers before me with one consent. That you keepe close, as it were confession, and beare men in hand, that I vpholde the meere sufferings of Christes flesh alone without any communion of his soule or minde. What tricks you containe in those termes of the soules proper suffering, I little regard; when you proue that which you pretend, by more then saying, I will take the paines to refute it with more then denying. Defenc. pag. 89 li. 7. As for our comparing the paines of Christes suffering, with the paines euen of the repro∣bate in this life, I s e not that you or any man liuing can finde fault therewith: onely set aside their sinfull suffering, which alwayes I testifie that Christ was most free from. It is well, that not the Scriptures, but you, compare the paines of Christes sufferings with the reprobate; whereby the Reader may perceiue, that the first foundation of your new faith is your owne fansie; and the best bulwarke you haue for it, is the presumption of your owne braine, whereto you leane, without, if not against the Scriptures. Then Christ yet at last shall be alwayes and altogether free from all sinfull suffering; and then how might his soule or mind apprehend any doubt or feare of Gods fauour to∣wards him, or any the least distrust or staggering of his saluation or our redemption? his faith and hope standing sure and vnshaken, as also the full perswasion of Gods loue towards his person, and acceptation of his obedience, and wholly possessing his heart, what feare or sorow common to him with the reprobate can you imagine in the soule or spirit of Christ? Tell vs what Christ apprehended or concei∣ued, that should torment his minde with equall anguish, as it doth the reprobate. Your generall phrases of Gods proper wrath, and of the extreamest spirituall punish∣ments, are but hiues to hide your poisoned honie in; expresse particularly your con∣ceits, that we may know whether they sauour of trueth and faith, or of errour and in∣fidelitie. Defenc. pag. 89. li 11. Yea, I doubt not but we may compare Christes sufferings in his agonies, euen with those of the in . Neither doe I doubt of your boldnesse in this and all other ca∣ s, but if you will speake of the Christian faith, you must shew vs what Scripture tea∣cheth you to compare Christes sufferings in the Soule, with the reprobate or with the damned. They be great aduentures to vndertake of your owne head to torment the soule of Christ with diuels in like maner as the damned are; or to giue him the same of Gods wrath vpon himselfe that the reprobate and damned haue. For either of which, if you can shew any Prophet, Euangelist, or Apostle, that sayd so before you, we will holde you excused; Tertull ad∣uersus Hermogenem. If it be not written, feare the curse appointed for those that augment or diminish the word of God. For my part, I haue learned to say with S. Austen: Aug. contra literas Petilia. li. 3. ca. 9. In any thing touching our faith, if an Angell om teach otherwise then we haue receiued in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospell, let him be accursed. For Hilarius d Patris & filij essentia. of Gods matters there is no speech (or doctrine) left vs besides the word of God. So that if the Scriptures make these comparisons and resemblances, we easily admit them; if you take vpon you to deuise them, as new points of faith, we as heartily de∣test them. And if I be not deceiued, you will hardly make either of these compari∣sons good by the sacred Scriptures. For you were euen now very busie with certaine places of the Apostle, which to my iudgement proue the plaine contrarie. Christ Hebr. 2. must like his brethren in all things; and consequently in all his sufferings. But nei∣ther the nor the damned are Christes brethren. His sufferings therefore were not like theirs. And how could Christes sufferings be glorious, if they were like the reprobate or the damned? Haue the reprobate or the damned any glory in their , as Christ had in his? Father, sayd he, the houre is come, glorifie thy Sonne; speaking of the houre of his pas on. By his sufferings then Christ was glorified, and declared to be the Sonne of God; which if you attribute to the reprobate and the damned, you must new alter the whole course of God, counsels and iudgements. Desenc. pag. 89. li. 16. Touching the vehemencie of the paine, Christ suffered as terly and as sharply, (yea I may say in nature the very same) as the damned doe. ] It must be the selfe same in euery point, afore it can be as sharpe and as bitter as theirs. Had the damned but one kinde of paine, the comparison were the sooner examined; but they haue exceeding many both outward and inward, and all these must be common to Christ with the damned, before Christes paines in sharpnesse and vehemencie can be equall with theirs. The griefe of reiection, confusion and desperation, they inwardly feele, the worme of conscience, the horror of darknesse, the paine of fire breedeth them intole∣rable torments. Yea, what one thing doth the Scripture specifie of the paines of hell, which with any religion you may attribute to Christ? Your generall refuge of Gods wrath will doe you no good; not onely the Scriptures, but your selfe now at last ac∣knowledge the faithfull feele a taste of Gods infinite wrath, who yet I trust feele not the sharpen sse nor bitternesse of eternall damnation. If then Gods wrath in some sort be common to all the suff rings of men, iust and vniust, in this life and the next, what sequence hath your supposall, that because Christ felt Gods wrath in some mea∣sure, he therefore felt the very sharpn sse of hell paines? Defenc. pag. 9. li 20. If you say the extreamest paines of punishment can not be where sinne is not, that is true: neither indeed can the least paines be where there is no sinne. ] You be likely to vnder∣stand weighty matters, that so much mistake ordinary points of speech. That Christs su ings must be void of all sinne, inferreth not only the integritie of his nature, and puritie o his actions, but the sincerity of his affections; which could not be distem∣pered in im by any excesse of feare or sorow, but as in minde he did apprehend the trueth and not erre, by doubting of Gods fauour towards him; so in feare and sorow admitted by him, there could be no want of grace, no fainting of Faith, no decrease of hope, but he must conceaue and discerne both Gods counsels and deeds rightly, without mista ing either the purpose of the punisher, or the measure of the paine in the purgation of our sinnes. For he can not lie, who gaue this Testimonie, that Iohn. 18. Ie∣si kn that la come vnto him, and that Iohn 13. the Father gaue all things into his hands efore his assion, which prooueth as well his voluntarie submission, as his full power to moderat all his owne sufferings, which he could stay, but would tast for the preseruing of his Fathers Iustice. Defenc. pag. 89. . 3 . You graunt his body suf ered truely punishments for sinne. Therefore his Soule might suffer al o euen those of the extream st degree. ] If you ment to deale plainly, you would distinguish the nature of the punishment, the measure of the paine, and the purpose of The n e, meas re, and pur ose of Ch ists suffe∣ring . the Inflictour; in all which Christ differed much from the damned. For, first you no way prooue, that any kinde of paine mentioned in the Scriptures to be laid on the damned, was found in Christs Soule or Body. Secondly, the paines of the damned passe the Patience of all Men and Angels, and much more the weakenesse and frailtie of mortall flesh. Lastly, the purpose of God in laying the burden of oursinn es vpon his owne Sonne, was not to dishonor him, or to forsake him, or to execute vengeance on him prepared for the wicked, but to take recompence from him for all our sinnes in such sort, as better pleased the holinesse and Iustice of God, then if eternall dam∣nation had beene inflicted on vs. So that I see no one point, wherein the damned agree with Christ by the verdict of the holy Scriptures: onely he felt sharpe and bit∣t r pain s for the Triall of his obedience and patience; and so doe all the Sonnes of God before, or when they depart this life, though I willingly graunt, that the sense of Christs paines in many respects were farre greeuouser, then any the Godly can feele with submission and deuotion to God. Defenc. pag. 89. li 37. Your selfe also graunteth, that Christ both might and did suffer the extreamest paines that mig t be without his owne sinne. ] Then the more to blame you, that content not your selfe therewith, but runne to the Reprobate and to the damned to drawe Christs Soule within the compasse of their confusion and destruction. I neuer sought to di∣minish or el uate Christs sufferings, so farre as the Scriptures gaue any witnesse thereo : but to auouch, as you doe, that he suffered the true paines of the damned, as I then saw no Scripture to warrant it, so I yet heare no reason to vphold it, besides your presumptuous will. Howbeit I restrained the sufferings of Christ to the state of this life, where he suffered; and excepted not onely all stain s of sinne, and wants of grace, but added holinesse and righteousnesse to all his sufferings which must be vo∣luntarie, religious, and meritorious, that they might be the more pretious in Gods sight; and this can agree to no sufferings of the Reprobate, or of the damned. You would faine torment and afflict the Soule of Christ with Gods immediare hand, but your proofe thereof is so weake and idle, and your inconstancie therein so plaine and sensible, that you doe but play with both hands to see, which will soonest deceaue the Reader. For sometimes it shall be Gods owne and immediate hand, and his most pro∣per Act; sometimes it shall be the displeasure of God against our sinnes conceaued and discerned by the Spirit of Christ that bred such torment and affliction of Soule; and which of these two you will rather incline to, you cannot yet resolue. Defenc. pag. 90. li. 1. It was possible for Christ to conceaue and feele in his mind farre greater sorrowes and paines for our s nne from Gods wrath, then he could eele meerely in his Body outwardly. ] It euer hath been the last refuge of all heresie to flie from the truth testified in the Scrip∣tures to the power of God, or possibilitie. Tertullian being so answered by Praxeas replieth in this sort. Tertullianu aduersus Prax∣eam. Plainly nothing is hard to God; but if we vse this sentence so ab∣ruptly in our owne presumptions, we may fame any thing of God, as if he had done it, be∣cause he could doe it. But though God can doe all things, yet we must not beleeue that, which he neuer did, but we must examine, whether he hath done it. That God tormenteth Soules in hell with his immediate hand, is a point stifly presumed by you, but as strange to the Scriptures, as the rest of your new found deuices: and why you should doubt of the literall sense of Christs words, Depart you cursed into euerlasting fire, prepared for the diuell and his Angels, there is no cause, but that you doe not thinke, God is able to subiect sinnefull spirits to externall meanes of punishment. And therefore you bring in Gods immediate hand as only meete to ouer-master Soules and diuels, and giue him no power to punish them by any Creature ordained for that purpose. Now whether it be Faith, or Infidelitie to lude all those places as iguratiue speeches, where euerlasting fire is threatned and mentioned in the Scriptures, I haue formerly said, what I thought sufficient, thither I remit such as be desirous to read. Like∣wise that God with his immediate hand tormented the Soule of Christ at the Time of his Passion with the same degree and kind of paine, which the damned feele; this is an other of your Positions, for which you haue as much Scripture, as you haue for the creating of another world. What Christ disc rned of Gods wrath to be laid on his person, I would gladly here you expresse, otherwise then in generall and doubtfull speeches, which vnder a shew of some truth couer a number of your rroneous conceits. For first it is certaine, that Christ conceaued truely as well of Gods Anger against our sinnes, as of Gods fauour towards his owne Person, which infinitely exc eded the displeasure, that Gods holi∣nesse had against vs, that were sinfull Creatures. Himselfe saith: Iohn. 8. I know (my Father) and if I should say I know him not, I should be a liar like vnto you; but I know him. The same Euangelis saith of Christs sufferings: I sus Iohn. 18. knowing all things, that should come vp in him. And this knowledge, if it swarued from the truth, was not an ignorance, but an error in Christ beleeuing a lie insteede of Truth; which God forbid we should suppose of him, that not onely said, Iohn 8. I tell you the Truth, but Iohn. 14. I am the Truth. Christ th n most certainly knew, that God was highly offended with our sinnes, but better pleased with his Person; and that Gods loue towards him would accept his volun∣tari submission and Sacrifice, as a sufficient recompence, and Satisfaction for the sinnes of the world. Againe, he certainly knew, that Gods displeasure against our sin, in loue would not, in Iustice could not extend to the dissolution, r iection, or d struc∣tion of his Person, but that God would temper the punishment of our sinnes in his Body, where he bare them; that neither his obedience, nor patience should be wea∣r ed, or ouerwhelmed. And to that ende the Scripture plainly testifieth, that Iesus Iohn. 13. knew, the Father had giuen all things into his hands; and so whatsoeuer Christ suffered was a triall of his obedience, to which he most willingly submitted himselfe, that nei∣ther the burden of our sinn s might seeme a sport to him, nor his case common to him with the desperate and damned persons. Christ then neither did nor could ap∣prehend or discerne any wrath of God kindled against his person, as the reprobate feare, and the damned find; neither any purpose in God to punish sinne farther than by the death of his bodie to purge it and abolish it; nor the measure of paine deter∣mined to be sharper then his humane patience could without repining or refusing endure. Wherefore though I willingly grant as much paine in Christes sufferings, as his patience could sustaine without declining or disobeying, yet see I no point, wherein the sufferings of Christ, either apprehended or inflicted, did concord with the paines of the damned. As for the terrour of Gods anger against sinne (which wrought in Christ submission, not confusion) and sorow for sinne conceiued, for that God was thereby iustly displeased; these and all such religious FEARES, sorowes, & tremblings, I easily yeeld to the soule of Christ, which were sacrifices in Gods sight of inestimable price, and very painfull, though very faithfull submissions and passions of the inward man. The farther proofe of these, I referre to the place where I shall speake of Christes agonie; and in the meane time assure the Ch istian Reader, that neither this Pra er nor all his compartners shall euer be able by the sacred Scriptures to make any proofe of any farther or other sufferings then I haue specified. Whether the paines of bodie or soule in Christ were greater or sharper, I take it to be a needl sse and fruitlesse question. The paines of Christes body were proporti∣oned The paines a well of Christes s ule as of his bodie were e∣quall to the strength of Chr stes pa∣tience. to the strength of his patience, and so were his feares and sorowes; and in ei∣ther, the soule was the part that felt the smart, and discerned the cause. And if we ba∣lance these things by the consequents of nature, since the paines from the body doe in this life by their vehemency separate soule and body farre sooner and oftner then sorowes and feares of minde, (except in present and ouerwhelming euils, which coole, quench, and ouerthrow the spirits with more speed, though with lesse paines) then the sharpnesse of Christes bodily paines, hauing no release nor ease, but perfect sense and continuance, did pinch as neere, not as the paines of the damned, but as the passions or affections of Christes soule hauing fath and hope to support them, and comfort and ioy proposed to mitigate them. And euen in the damned, both men and diu ls, whence you would seeme to fetch your president for Christes sufferings; whether thinke you are the sharper, the paines which they now feele, before the day of iudgement, or the violence of fire, which shall then exceed all the paines they now suffer? For both the diuels and the damned haue as much griefe of reiection, confu∣sion, and desperation; and as mighty terrors and inward torments of minde, as they are capable of; and yet neither of them haue their sharpest punishments. Of the di∣uels the Scriptures say; Iude epist. vers. 6. They are reserued in euerlasting chaines vnder darkenesse vnto the iudgement of the great day. And the spirits themselues could say to Christ; Ma th. 8. Art thou come to torment vs before the time? Of the wicked Peter sayth; 2. Pet 2. God knoweth (how) to reserue the vn ust vnto the day of iudgement to be punished. And Rom. 2. thou (sayth Paul to euery one of them) according to thine hardnesse, and impenitent heart heapest vp wrath to thy selfe against the day of wrath, and reuelation of the iust iudgement of God. By which it is plaine, that the terrors and torments of minde presently felt by the deuill and the damned, are farre lesse then the vengeance of externall and eternall fire reser∣ued, and then augmented on all the reprobate, both men and angels. Defenc. pag. 0. li. 4. The greatest (paines) are no more sinne, then the least. Therefore by your owne graunt Christ might and did feele and endure the gr atest sorrowes of the minde and soule, as well as the l sser in the bodie. ] Paines, if they be onely paines and nothing els, are not sinne, and therefore the suffering of hell fire is no sinne; but the terriblest punishment of sinne that men or angels shall feele: yet terrours and torments of minde are increased by doubt, feare, or despaire of Gods goodnesse towards vs, which are sinnes in this life, where grace and mercie are proposed, and could not be in Christ without intole∣rable infidelitie, after so plaine and plentifull assurances of Gods loue and fauour to∣wards him. Take therefore from Christ all doubt and distrust of Gods anger and displeasure towards his person, and then it is euident, that neither his apprehension of Gods wrath was the same that the damned and desperate feele, no any way so sharpe, as if Christ had conceiued God to be displeased with him, or purposed to de∣stroy him, as the wicked are perswaded of Gods indignation against themselues. Christes sufferings then were wrath to the sense and feeling of mans nature, but his Christs Faith did not faile in the sharpest of his paine . faith in the sharpest of his paines beheld the setled and assured loue of God towards his person, and he not only called God his Father in all his afflictions, but out of his owne power he gaue the thiefe that confessed him on the crosse, the inheritance of Gods kingdome that present day together with himselfe. So that he was more then perswaded, or resolued of Gods fauour and faithfulnesse, who tooke vpon him in the midst of his sufferings to giue the kingdome of heauen to such as acknowledged and beleeued in him; though the chastisement of our sinnes in his body and soule were by Gods iustice and his owne consent very sharpe and bitter vnto him, that his loue to vs and obedience to his Father might appeare the more fully, not in peace, ease, and dalliance, but in sorrow, paine and grieuance: by which ardent and constant loue is tried, as golde in the fire. Whereby it appeareth, that all your talke of Gods wrath against Christ, equall with the damned or reprobate, hath no trueth nor sense in it, but is a meere and flat falsity and impiety: only the generall words, that Christ suffered Gods wrath and displeasure against our sinnes, may be tolerated, because the Scriptures vse to call the bitternesse of affliction in whom soeuer the wrath of God, by reason it riseth not simply out of Gods fauour and bountie, but is permixed with his Iustice, that the transitorie and tolerable smart of our sinnes may euen in this life, when we feele it and faint vnder it, commend vnto vs the wonderfull grace of God, that hath for Christs sake released vs of those euerlasting and vnspeakable Torments, which our sinnes iustly deserued, the Reprobate fully feare, and the damned by ex∣perience most dreadfully doe feele. Defenc. pag. 90. li. 8. You bring a Reason against this, that God spiritually punisheth no man but for his owne vncleannesse which is a thing meerely vntrue. ] Out of two Pages in my Sermons against the death of Christs Soule you piked two words, where I call the death of the Soule spirituall punishment, and because, to auoyde tediousnesse, I repeat not in euery line the same words; you neglect, that purposely in that Section I entreate of the death of the Soule; that eighteene times in those two Pages I name the life and death of the Soule, that ouer right those very words, which you bring, I set this Note in the Mar∣gine, the Death of Christs Soule could neither proceede from God, nor be acceptable vnto God, as the summe of that which I intended to prooue in that place: that my Con∣clusion immediatly vrged vpon these words is this, Serm. pag. 103. li. 1. Christ then might not suffer the inward or euerlasting death of the Soule: All this I say you neglect, and ouer-skip ma∣ny sound and sure reasons in those two sides against the death of Christs Soule, and carpe at two poore words, where I vse spirituall punishment for the death of the Soule. But take the words in their right sense for the death of the Soule, whereof I reason in that place, and then see what you, and all your Adherents can say against them. Eter∣nall or spirituall death, which seuereth the Soule from all grace and glory, God lay∣eth on none for an others fault; because God neuer reiecteth or condemneth any Man but vpon his owne desert. Punish one for another by affliction of Bodie or Mind he may, because he can restore and recompence, when he seeth his Time; though no Man (Christ Iesus excepted) can want sinne, whiles here he liueth, which God may iustly punish when, and in what respect he will. Defenc. pag. 90. li. 13. But I pray you shew me this mysterie how it is, that God cannot punish spiritually where there is no sinne inherent, but can and may corporally where there is none. ] Though there lie no Children of Adam, in whom there was not sinne either naturally cleauing to t em, or voluntarily committed by them, yet Infants after Baptisme, by which Ori∣ginall sinne and corruption in them is pardoned, are said by better Diuines, then you or I, to haue no sinne, and to be often punished corporally for other mens faultes. Saint Austen asserteth both. August. E∣pist. 28. Quis nonit, quid paruulis, de quorum cruciatibus d ritia maiorum contunditur, aut exercetur fides, aut misericordia probatur, Quis inquam nouit, quid ipsis paruulis in secreto indic orum suorum bonae compensationis reseruat Deus? quo∣niam quanquam nihil rectè fecerint, tamen nec peccantes aliquid ista perpessi sunt. Who can tell, what good Recompence God reserueth in the secrecie of his Iudgements for those Infants, by whose paines (or Torments) the hardnesse of their Parents or friends is repressed or their Faith exercised, or their pittie prooued? because though the Children did no good Acts, yet neither suffered they those things for any sinne of theirs. Neither doth the Church in vaine recommend those Infants to be honored as Martyrs, which were slaine by Herode, when he sought to kill the Lord Iesus Christ. Zanchius sayth the like. Of Zanchius i tractitionibus Theologicis de 2. praecepto. pa. 340. the punishments pertay∣ning to this present life, by which we are visited of the Lord, either in our outward goods or in our bodies, it is a cleere case that God verie often doth visite the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the children. But in the death of the soule, which is the spirituall punishment that I ment, God himselfe sayth; Ezech. 18. The soule that sinneth, euen that shall die; the sonne shall not beare the iniquitie of the father, but the wickednesse of the wicked shall be vpon himselfe. Saint Austen maketh the difference, that I spake of. August. ∣pist. 75. Neque enim haec corporalis est poena, qualegimus quosdam contemptores Dei cum suis omnibus qui eiusdem impietatis par∣ticipes non fuerant, pariter infectos. Tunc quidem ad terrorem viuentium mortalia corpora perimebantur, quando que vtique moritura: spir tualis autem p na animas obligat, de qui∣bus dictum est, anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur. This is no corpor all punishment, in which we reade some despisers of God haue beene wrapped with all theirs, that were not parta∣kers of the same iniquitie: for then to the terror of the liuing mortall bodies were slaine, which at one time or an other must haue died. But a spiritual punishment bind th soules of whom it is said the soule that sinneth, that soule shall die. Neither shall you euer be able to shew, that one soule was slaine for an others fault (as mens bodies often haue beene) except they both did communicate in sinne, which was the cause of their common de∣struction. Defenc pag. 90. li. 16. All the rest of your assertions, Pag. 101. 102. 103. 105. 266. 94. are of this suite. ] I like your wit, that you can make short worke, and when you can not answer, to saie the things be of like sute. But refell the reasons brought in these pages against the death of the soule, and you will finde a warmer suite, then you are ware of. I need not repeate them, if it please the Reader to peruse them, let him iudge in Gods name, whether it were weakenesse in you, or in them, that made you ouerslip them. Defene. pag. 90. li. 17. By this one reason I weakened all yours, but you could pass that ouer a swearing vnto it not a word. ] By what authoritie must euerie trifle of yours be tediously discus ed, when you leape ouer sixe leaues at a iumpe, least you should entangle your selfe with more then you could well discharge? It was belike some worthie reason, that I durst not so much as offer a word about it; let vs heare it in Gods name. [ Ibid. li. 18. If Christs body hanging on the crosse, and held by death in the graue, was punished by God, where yet hee found no sinne, and which he still intirely loued, and was neuer separated from; then so he might and did punish properly Christes soule also, and yet neuer deuide his Godhead, nor his loue from it. The one standeth with Gods iustice, and with the nature of man in Christ, as well as the other. ] A wanton colt, when he winceth with his heeles, thinketh he can batter walles, and beate downe trees with a blow; when yet the skittish thing doth but hurt it selfe. Is this the reason which weakened all, that I said in so manie sides a∣gainst the death of the soule? for of that I speake in all those pages, which you quote. Neede you a paire of spectacles so see the difference betweene the death of the soule, and the death of the bodie, that you so falsely, idlely, and foolishly match them to∣gether? A verie drone would soone discerne, that the death of the bodie innocent∣ly, obediently, and patiently suffered could no way separate Christ from the fauour and loue of God, nor hinder the worke of our redemption, though it depriued hi of life, sense, and motion in the bodie for the time, which are the good blessings of God, when they are vsed to his glorie; and yet the death of the soule, (which leaueth neither action, affection, nor communion of grace, trueth, or faith in the soule) seuereth both Soule and body quite from God, and maketh them hatefull vnto God, and altogether vnapt to reconcile others vnto God, when they themselues are dis∣ioyned and parted from God. And therefore notwithstanding your Crakes, that you can blow mountaines afore you with your breath; and your craft, that shift the death of the Soule, (whereof I speake in all those places) into a proper spirituall punishment of your owne framing; you haue not auoyded any one Reason there, nor offer so much as to come toward the matter in question, but roue after your wonted manner with generall phrases proper to your selfe, and then thinke that no man seeth you. [there are other punishments in the Soule besides death.] but none, that can recon∣cile vs vnto God. For Rom 5. We were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne. 1. Cor. 15. I declare vnto you (saith Paul) the Gospell, which I preached vnto you, and whereby you are saued. For first of all I deliuered vnto you, that Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scrip∣tures. Then you and whosoeuer else, that preach or beleeue Remission of sinnes by any thing else, but by the death of Christ, you preach not the Gospell, which the Apostle deliuered, neither can you looke for saluation in Christ, that leaue the maine ground thereof, which is the death, that he tasted for all, and through which he de∣stroyed him, that had the power of death, euen the diuell. So that to step to any other spirituall punishments for the satisfaction of our sinnes and reconciliation to God, then to that which the Scriptures call the death of Christ and the death of the Crosse, is to renounce all, that God hath ordained or reuealed for our Saluation, and to create you new Sauiours after your owne conceits. You must therefore be directly and plainly brought to this point, whether Christ suffered for vs the death of the Soule by the Scriptures, and not such giggers of proper punishments, nor straines of improper speeches, as you and your friends hunt after; but fairely and fully accor∣ding to the direction of the sacred Scriptures, which must be heard, and preferred before all your fansies, as well touching the death of the soule, as the trueth of our re∣demption by the bloud of Christ Iesus. Wherein though I exclude not the sense and affections of his soule, which felt the paine, knew the cause, and beheld the counsell of God in all those sufferings vndertaken for man, through the tender loue that he bare to man, yet none of those feares, sorrowes, nor paines, which the soule discerned and receiued, did any whit diminish the power of Gods spirit and grace in him, nor the perfection of his faith, hope, and loue, whereby the soule cleaued fast to God without any separation; and consequently the innocence, obedience, and patience of Christes soule in his sufferings both outward and inward, did confirme and mani∣fest the life of his soule. But of this more in due place. Defenc. pa 90. li. 27. Then you addresse your selfe against another, euen one of the chiefest reasons of mine, which I make from the strange and incomparable agonies of Christ in the time of his passion. ] You make no reasons from Christes agonie; but assuming that for a shew, which you do not vnderstand, you inferre what you list, by your rash, presumptuous and manifest contradictions both to your selfe and to the Scriptures. [ Ibid. li. 30. These inuaded him, as we reade, principally at three times; First, in the foretaste of his passion, Ioh. 12. secondly, in the Garden a little before his apprehension. thirdly, in his very extreame passion it selfe on the crosse. ] The Scripture mentioneth one agonie, and you multiplie that to three. In the twelfth of Iohn when some of the Grecians that came to worship on the feast of Easter, were desirous to see Christ (of whom they had heard much) and made their desire knowen to Philip, and he to Andrew, and they both to Iesus, Iesus answered them, Iohn 12. The houre was come (euen at hand) that the Sonne of man should be glorified; by his death. This therefore was not a time to shew himselfe, when his (heart or) soule was troubled with other matters, euen with the meditation and preparation of his death. Now except you be so wise, that you will make euery affection in Christ an agonie, there is no cause to conceiue this to be an agonie. He often times thought and spake of his death before, where no man besides you doth dreame of agonies; and this ve∣rie word is in other cases ascribed aswell to Christ, as to others, where no colour of an agonie doth appeare. When he tolde his Disciples, that one of them should betray him, Iohn 13. , he was troubled in spirit; and meaning to raise Lazarus from death, when he saw Mary the sister of Lazarus, and the Iewes that were with her, to weepe; Iohn 11. he groned in spirit, and troubled himselfe, insomuch that he wept, which yet was no agonie, but a touch of humane compassion, shewing the loue he bare vnto them. The complaint on the crosse, besides the words, had no shew of an agonie; and what sense they beare, we shall after examine. Verily, he that would not suffer his owne Disciples to beholde his agonie in the Garden, would neuer in the eyes or eares of his enemies with his owne deeds or words verifie their reproches and taunts against himselfe, as if he were forsaken of God, which was the thing they vpbraided him with. And therfore you may deuise not three, but threescore agonies, if you will: The Scripture expresseth one, and that you neither rightly conceiue, nor rightly vse. Defenc. pag. 90. li. 35. To all (that duely consider) it appeareth so cleere as the Sunne at noone day, that the paynes of his passion, which plainly now he felt and feared (because he knew he was to feele them further vnto death) were the proper and direct cause of those agontes. But we assume, that such strange and lamentable things and behauiour in Christ were not the effects one lie and meerely of his bodilie paines and death. Therefore Christ felt and endured more then his me re bodilie paines and death, by the testimonie of the Scriptures, which thinge you denie. ] Your cleare Sun is the darke cloud of your owne imaginations; your proper & direct causes are the light and false coniectures of your owne braine; your conclusion is a childish digression not onely from the thinges questioned by me, but from the verie matters proposed by you: onlie in the vpshot you hold your wonted course, to strengthen your cause with a lie, when trewth will not stand you in steed. To beginne where you end: you are not ignorant, that I defend no such thing as meere bodily paines, your selfe haue directly confessed the contrarie, as I haue formerly shewed. I say indeed, Christ suffered no death, but only the death of the body; that you turne to a manifest vntrewth, and say, I denie that Christ felt any more, then meere bodilie paines. To what purpose then is your conclusion, that Christ endured more then bodily paines? What gaine you by that, so long as Christ suffered none other death, but the death of the body? Christes feare and sorrow, which the Scriptures expresse in the Garden, were more then meere bodily paines, and those though he felt, you shall neuer thence conclude, that he felt the paines of hell or of the damned. Defenc. pag. 91. Your assumption, as you say, I graunt and acknowledge; (and so your labour is the lesse) but the proposition I gaine say in my whole discourse, denying that the paines of Christes passion, or the naturall feare of them was the proper and direct cause of those agonies, or that the Scriptures implie so much. ] If you looke well to my wordes, they containe two things; first, that the Serm pag. 17. li. 13. right cause of Christes agonie in the Garden is not 14. determinate∣ly and 15. certainely reuealed in the Scriptures; secondly, that the suffering of hell paines at that present was the least probable cause thereof, if not altogether intolerable. let vs now see how you impugne either of these. Defenc. pag. 91. li. 22. 14. 27. [ this your assertion I simply deny: and then my pro∣position standeth firme, that his paines inflicted on him by way of proper punishment and venge∣ance for sinne were the proper and maine cause thereof. ] This is the cleerenes of your Sun-shining at noone day: you deny my assertion, and then your proposition standeth firme, ergo the Scriptures doe certainly specifie the proper and direct causes of Christes agonie, and those were the paines of the Damned, which you call the proper venge∣ance for sinne. Then if you list to denie any thing, the contrary is presently prooued, and concluded by you as cleere as the Sunne at noone day. such proofes and conclusions, which are nothing but strange and violent Imaginations, your booke is full of, and these twentie leaues and more, which here you spend in examining Christs agonie, haue nothing els in them but such meere falshoods and confusions. Before we speake of the firmenesse of your proposition, I would gladly know which of these three propositions, which here you haue varied to shew the settlednes of your conceits, is that, which you offer to be examined. In the first you say, Defenc. pag. 90. li. 37. the paines of Christs passion, which plainly now he felt, and feared to feele further vnto death: in the second you say Pa. 91. li. 7. those paines or the naturall feare of them: in the third you say, Ibid. li. 26. his paines inflicted on him by way of proper punishment and vengeance for sinne, these were the proper and direct cause of hose agonies. These and those, these or those, these alone and not those, are childish and foolish contrarieti s with any wise man saue with you; and yet all these are cleare and firme, because you haue the witt to denie mine assertion. Touching your proposition, that the Reader may conceiue, how you clutter things together to holde on your accustomed carriage, he must marke, that Christes ago∣nie had many parts and circumstances; some inward, some outward, some affections, The parts of Christs agony. some actions, some apprehensions; and all these had their causes efficient and adiu∣uant, neere or remote, sole or concurrent according to their differences. The Scrip∣tures expresly note in that agony, which Christ had and shewed in the Garden, the in∣ward affections of sorrow, feare, admiration, submission, contention of mind in Christ. My soule (saith he) Matth. 26. , is on euery side sorowfull (or compassed round with sorow) euen vnto death. And he began, sayth Matthew, , to be full of sorow, and much grieued. For so the Apostle vseth the word , what sense soeuer it beare with prophane writers, whereof we shall not need to dispute. Phil. 2. v. 26. I thought it ne∣cessary to send vnto you Epaphroditus my fellow souldier and your messenger, for he was very desirous of you all, , and very pensiue (or much grieued) because you heard he was sicke. S. Marke sayth, Christ in the Garden beganne Mar. 16. v. 33 , to be afrayd, or astonied; and full of heauinesse or griefe. signifieth feare and admiration, which so fixeth the minde for the time, that a man neither speaketh nor vseth the vi∣gor of his senses. As for submission of mind, Christes Matth. 26. falling flat with his face Mark. 14. on the ground, when he powred foorth his prayers to God, sufficiently sheweth as much in∣ward humiliation of the soule in Gods presence, as this outward gesture of his bodie declared or required. His ardent zeale in prayer, and vehement contention of minde S. Luke noteth, when he sayth: An Luc. 22. Angell appeared to him to strengthen him (with a message from God, Christ then , falling into an agonie, prayed more earnestly (or feruently) and his sweat was like drops of bloud trickling downe to the ground. Of this agonie you haue often spoken, and here you spend no small time about it, but I scant beleeue you know what an agonie meaneth, much lesse what was the true cause of this agonie. Though an agonie be sometimes abusiuely taken for feare, yet properly it is a firmed Etymologicon ex Orione. , of him that is readie to descend into any combate, or conflict with another; as Orion a most ancient Grecian obser∣ueth. Damascene confesleth, that , standing What an ago∣nie is. in (doubt or) feare to miss of that we vndertake, we are agonized. Galene the chiefe of Physicians, and well skilled in the perturbations and commotions of the bodie, that come from the bloud or spirits, noteth of what affections an agonie is compounded; ' F are, sayth he, doth pr sently driue the bloud and spirits inward towards their fountaine, Galenus d ausis comat n. li. 2. and contracteth them together by cooling the vttermost parts of the bodie; and anger doth (as suddenly) heat them, diffund and send them foorth: , and that which (in Greeke) is called an agonie, is compounded of them both, and hath inequall motions, according to the predominant affection. Aristotle a great Philosopher in the knowledge of naturall things, not only sheweth, that there may be an agonie without feare, as when we attempt things honest and commend∣able, though di cult, Arist Rhe∣toricorum li. 1. cap. 9. , for which men (striue and) are a∣gpmozed without feare; but also that sweating in an agonie commeth rather from in∣dignation and zeale, than from feare. Idem Proble∣mat. sect. 2. quest. 26. An agonie, sayth he, is not the passing of the (na∣turall) heat from the higher parts of the bodie vnto the lower, as in feare, but it is rather an increase of heat, as in anger and indignation. And he that is in an agonie, is not troubled with feare or colde, but with expectation of the euent. Wherein Theophrastus not much be∣hinde him, agreeth with him: Theophrastus de Sudoribus. 12. . An agonie is not the remouing of the naturall heat, but the increasing thereof, as in anger. And heat doth drie the outmost parts of the bodie. I speake not this to bind Christes sweate in the Garden wholy to naturall causes, but to shew that neither Diuinitie, Philosophy, nor Physicke doe permit that feare or sorow, which coole the blood, and quench the spirits, should be the cause of this bloudie sweate, but that rather as the Euangelist expresseth, it came from strength and contention of zeale, whiles Christ most feruently prayed for that, which he was very desirous, and in present expectation to obtaine. An Angell appeared from hea∣uen Luc. 22. 43. , strengthning him (saith the Scripture) no question with a message from God. For Angels otherwise were not in this case to entermeddle. And then Christ vers. 44. entring into an Agonie, (that is, into a vehement contention of mind to pre∣uaile against that, which resisted or hindred him) he prayed more feruently. From this feruencie of zeale and contention of minde came that bloudie sweate, which the Euangelist mentioneth; which whether we make to be according to Nature, or aboue Nature, it could not proceede from feare or sorrow, as some men imagine. For feare doth driue the bloud inward and coole it, and so can not thinne it, and expell it by the outmost parts and pores of the Body. The Physitian that wrote the Booke de vtilitate Respirationis amongst Galens works, saith. Li. de vtilita∣ e Respirationi Galen. attri∣but. om. 7. Contingit Poros ex multo aut fer∣uido spiritu vs{que} adeo dilatari, vt etiam exeat sanguis per eos, iat{que} sudor sanguineus. It sometimes happeneth, that abundant or feruent spirits doe so dilate the pores of the bo∣die, that bloud passeth by them, and so the sweate may be bloudie. If we leane not to the course of Nature for the cause of Christs bloudie sweate, then Hilaries Rule is very sound. Hilarius d Trinitate. li 10. It is no Infirmitie, which power did aboue the custo e of Nature. No man then may dare impute Christs sweate to weakenesse, because it is against Nature to sweat bloud. Beda followeth him in the Beda in Luc. cap. 22. same words: Rupertus in larger. Rupertus de victoria verbi Dei. li. 12. ca. 21. This is vnwonted, this is aboue nature, the flesh whole, the skinne not cut, for bloude to runne out of all the body, and to fall on the earth as it were sweate. Lyra receaueth the same. According to the Iudge∣ment of diuers Lyra in Luc. ca. 22. this was supernaturally done, that bloud should come foorth in steede of sweate; that so Christ euen then might begin to shed his bloud for our saluation. Then nei∣ther in Diuine nor humane learning is there any necessitie, that the feare of your hell paines should be the cause of this sweate, which Augustine, Prosper and Bernard ascribe vnto Christs wil and power for a mysticall signification, as I haue shewed in my Serm. pag. 38. & 39. Sermons. Thus see we by the words of the holy Ghost, that in the Garden Christs Soule was affected with feare, and afflicted with sorrow; his prayer prooueth his submis∣sion, and intention of minde, after comfort sent him from heauen by an Angell; and his bloudie sweate, if we attribute it to nature, must come from zeale; if we re∣ferre it to Christs power aboue Nature, might haue many causes to vs vnknowne in particular, though we can ghesse at the generall. Of all these circumstances, acti∣ons, and affections, there can no one direct cause be designed in speciall, except in large termes we will say, the worke of our Redemption was the cause of them all; but neither pains, nor suffrings can precisely be determined to be the proper ground of them all, since after comfort from heauen, he fell to most feruent prayer, and therein to his bloudie sweat: much lesse can you conclude, that hell paines were the right and true cause thereof. So that I haue more reason to reiect your maior propo∣sition as apparently false, than you haue right to pronounce it firme, because you can denie mine assertion by flinging off all the Fathers, as vnworthy to haue their iudge∣ments regarded, outfacing the Scriptures with phrases and figures to bring them to your bent. But in the kinds of paines which Christ suffered in the Garden, we doubt as much as in the causes of his agonie. You must therefore declare, what maner of paines you meane in your proposition, before we shall fully vnderstand you. Defenc. pag. 91. li. 16. You meane it seemeth, that Christ suffered paines in his soule, by reason of the strength and zeale of his holy affections: and that those were the proper and maine causes of that his most wofull and miraculous agonie and complaint. Therefore not only extraordinarie paines inflicted vpon him by way of proper punishment, as my proposition intendeth. ] You seeke no∣thing but by confusion to couer and colour your absurd and false doctrines, and that maketh you huddle and heape things together without all distinction or exposition. Christes agonie in the Garden was before any paines inflicted on his bodie or soule, other than feare or sorrow, which were painfull affections rising from diuers occasi∣ons and causes, as we shall afterward see. His complaint on the Crosse was in the midst and extreamest of his paines now inherent, and afflicting both soule and body. You couple Christes agonie in the Garden with his complaint on the Crosse, and yoke them together as proceeding both from one direct and particular cause, which breedeth more doubt in my answer, that should containe both in one, than trueth in your argument, that obiecteth both at once. That the Reader may therefore per∣ceiue whe eof we reason, and so the better obserue the difference betwixt our asserti∣ons, let meadmonish him, that as euill to mans sense or reason, dependeth on time ei∣ther past, present, or to come; so the impression, that is thereby made in the soule of Euill past, pre∣sent, or to come, worketh sorow, paine, and feare in the sou e of man. man is either orrow, paine, or feare. Not that these wordes are not sometimes confoun∣ded, and their caus s conioined, as sorow and feare haue paine in them, that is a sense of uill past or approching, as well in others as in our selues; and the continuance of paine may be feared, euen whiles the present greeuance is suffered; but that we can expr sse no truth, nor admitt no speach of these things yf we keepe not their names distinguished, as their impressions and passions are. somtimes we make but two, as ti∣mor and dolor, feare and griefe; and then we comprise the third, which is sorrow for any good th ng past, or lost in us or others, vnder griefe; which is the offence of mind, that euill either pres nt in sense, or fresh in memory bringeth with it. SORROVV then Sorrow. I call the grieuous remembrance of our owne euils suffered, or of their euils past or approching, whom we loue. FEARE is the doubt & dislike of future euill to our selues Feare. or others; as also the declining of imminent euill, and shrinking at the sight thereof. Both th se are painfull affections and impressions of euill, which according to their degrees and causes do often so farre oppresse and burden the soule in this life that they speedily part the soule from the bodie: and both consist in the apprehension and esti∣mation, that the soule maketh of euill foreseene or suffered. for some men feare that, which others doe not, and some regard not that, which others exceedingly grieue at. and so feare and sorrow require not onlie the cogitation and cognition, but the iudge∣ment & c nsure of the soule; which PAINE doth not. For paine dependeth neither Paine. on the action, nor imagination of the soule, but is an absolute sense of present and inhe∣rent euill, that naturally offendeth the soule. for example, in the paines of the bodie, the soule naturally feeleth all offence rising within the bodie, or violently offred vnto the bodi , though she knewe not whence, or how that paine commeth. Therefore I make paine as it is distinct from feare and sorrow, and riseth from neither of them, to be a naturall and absolute passion and sense of euill present and inherent in soule or bodie. 1. Iohn 4. feare hath painfulnesse, saith Saint Iohn; and sorrow not only 2. Cor. 2. swalloweth vp men, but 2. Cor. 7. causeth death, as Paule writeth, and experience teacheth; yea Prou. 13. hope differred afflicteth the soule, saieth Salomon. So that all our affections may haue griefe in them, loue and ioy not excepted, when they are disappointed: and sorrow & feare may be mitigated, but not separated from griefe and dislike; yet in neither of them is the euill present & inherent, nor the sense and feeling thereof absolute or meerely passiue, but according as the mind conceaueth and esteemeth of the causes and obiects thereof, so the griefe of feare and sorow increaseth or decreaseth. Now touching Christes agonie in the Garden, the Scripture auoucheth, that feare and sorrow possessed and grieued his mind, but that an absolute or inherent paine was inflicted on Christes soule by the immediat hand of god, either in the Garden, or on the Crosse, this is a late and lew de deuice of yours, it hath no ground nor proofe in the Scriptures. And yf by paines you meane this absolute kind of torment impressed on Christes soule by Gods owne hand, as you would haue it; I vtterly denie that any such paines presently felt were parts or causes of Christs agonie in the Garden, and so your proposition, that you fained to be firme, hath not one true word in it. Defenc. pag. 91. li. 27. Let vs trie your proofes for it, and mine against it. ] you meane no such matter as you pretend. For first you tooke hold of Christs feare and sorrow, which were painefull affections; and when you haue thereby gotten the name of paine into Christes ago∣nie, you slide from his affections, were they neuer so painefull, and shuffle in your ab∣solute torments of Christes soule from the immediat hand of god, vnder the name of proper punishment and vengeance for sinne, to be the true causes of his agonie. yf you thinck I mistake you, looke back to your iustified reason so lately iustled in, and to the fathers, which you brought to confirme the same, and see whether I wrong you or no. your assumption and illation there, were these. Christ Defenc. pag. 8. li. 2. succoureth vs in the feeling of the terrors of god, and releaseth vs of the sorrowes vnmeasureable that rise thereof. therefore Christ himselfe had experience of them. Terrors are feares of thinges vnwoonted, which make vs tremble, and sorrowes are expresly named by you; both which were affecti∣ons in Christ, as they are in vs. you cited out of Cyrill, that Ibid. li. 11. vnlesse Christ had feared and sorrowed (at his passion,) wee had not beene quit from feare and sorrow; and out of Ambrose, that Christ li. 38. in his agonie with the sorrow of his soule (did) extinguish the sorow of our soules. As also, that he caried about him our feares and our affections. Defenc. pag. 48. li. 17. minus mihi contulerat, nisimeum suscepisset affectum. Christ had done lesse for me, if he had not admit∣ted MINE AFFECTIONS. Now when the affections of feare and sorow are con∣fessed in Christes agonie, you reiect that as absurd, and will heare of no paines, but of the torments of the damned from Gods immediat hand on the soule of Christ; which though you neither do nor can prooue, yet you hope with prating and wrangling to seeme to say somewhat. Defenc. pag. 89. li. 28. Before we come to proofs, we must know, that this your Resolution, as you call it, is first most vaine; also directly contrary to your selfe; and then altogether vn rue, and presumed by wide coniecture, as God willing I will presently shew. ] Performe but one of these chal∣lenges to be true, and take all the rest as granted, for your small paines therein bestow∣ed: but your dreames are so violent, that when you sticke in the mire, you thinke you flie in the aire. You will shew vs your owne erroneous and presumptuous follie; and other shew of any matter worth the medling with, you do make none. Defenc. pag. 91. li. 32. First I heartily intreat the Christian Reader to marke well and to consider how your L. doth contriue three notable equiuocations in these few words; Christ suffered in his soule the wrath of God: which you seeme to grant, but in trueth you doe not. And if we adde also the paines of hel, then he opposeth a fourth fallacy against vs. And these three or foure are the only pillars of his doctrine. I make no pillars of my doctrine, but the manifest words of the Holy Ghost teaching vs by the Scriptures the price and maner of our redemption; which lest any man should thinke I diuert, and wrest to my priuate or secret conceits, as you doe, I shew the ancient and true Church of Christ did so belee e them and ex∣pound them before me. The pillars of your doctrine are phrases, follies, and falsi∣ties, which if you did not hide with generall and ambiguous words, the considerate Reader without intreatie would soone marke your mysteries: but because you are so kinde as heartily to pray the Reader to marke how you play the man, I desire him like∣wise to obserue, how shamefully you come short of your great brags, and euen betray your cause to him that well considereth it. Defenc. pag. 91. li. 37. For the three former, your first equiuocation is in the word, Suffered: and about it wee deale in this place. Et pag. 92. li. 19. Now your next equiuocation is in this, He suffered in soule. Your next, in Gods wrath. Both which I haue plainly shewed before. As also your fourth fallacie, which may be called Fallacia accidentis. ] To the three last notable equiuocations, as he calleth them, here is all that this Defensor speaketh in this place, where he would haue thee, Christian Reader, so considerately to marke some maruellous matters. And thus shalt thou often be troubled with his vaine tatling, when thou most expectest either his proofs or his promises. He sendeth thee backe to peruse his former pages, where thou shalt finde as little to the purpose, as here thou doest, though words he wanted not to couer his conceits. Is there be any thing in those pages proued by him, which I haue not in the same places confuted, I am content to hazzard the perill of thy cen∣sure. Howbeit, I thinke thou mayest perceiue by my carriage, that I desire to auoid and preuent all ambiguities, as much as in me lieth. I speake as plainly as my simple abilitie will suffer me; I distinguish thinges as euidently, as either the matter permit∣teth, or the trewth requireth. And therefore he, that in all his defence hath yet vtte∣red not one distinct and cleere sentence touching his cause, but clowded and cloaked with proper and meere, and such like shifts, and shadowes neuer expounded by him∣selfe, and knowen to no man, but himselfe, hath small reason, (though as much in this as in the rest) to say that fallacies are the Pillars of my doctrine. But if thou beleeue Pedlers praising their owne wares; then maiest thou credit this booke-maker craking of his cleere and Sunne-shine proofes, which he himselfe neither expresseth, nor vn∣derstandeth. The equiuocation of the word SVFFERING which in this place his mastershipp will deale withall, will giue thee a tast, what thou shalt looke for in the rest. Defenc. pag. 92. li, 1. The common and ordinarie phrase vnderstandeth herein, Christes feeling of paines inflic∣ted on him by way of PROPER punishment and satisfaction for sinne, which he vndertooke for vs. Onely this in the ordinarie and vsuall manner of speach is signified by Christes suffering, or his passion: and so we alwaies vnderstand by it. ] This is one of your enlightned and purified expositions, which is as faire and bright, as the darknes of Egypt. Doe men vsually & ordinarily describe Christs passion to be nothing els, but the feeling of paines inflictedon him by way of proper punishment? who vseth these wordes by way of proper punishment, besides your selfe and your adherents, who vnder that colour would se∣cretly conuey the paines of the damned into the soule of Christ? for what is the pro∣per punishment of sinne? that which all sinners not Redeemed by Christ must endure, or that which all men being sinners doe endure, or that which none endured but Christ alone, because it was proper to the dignitie of his person, with that punishment, which god laied on him by the hands and mouthes of men, to satisfie the iustice of God for our sinnes, and vtterly to abolish the guilt and wages of our sinne? Proper may be either to the damned, whose sinnes are neuer pardoned; or proper to sinne in all mankinde, euer since the first man forsooke his Creator; or proper to Christes person, and not common to him with the damned. Which of all these senses do you containe in the word Proper? You spake euen now of equiuocations, and made a grieuous complaint to your Reader, that I meant to circumuent you with ambigui∣ties; and what is this but to turne your Readers eyes aside on me, whiles you play your part with the maine worke of Christes passion for mans Redemption? how of∣ten haue I chalenged in you this shifting with proper and improper, when and where pleased you? Christes sufferings in all mens speeches, saue yours, were farre larger than his passion. He suffered afliction all the time of his life, yea the whole course of his life was a continuall suffering of reproches, disdaines, dispites: besides the natu∣rall infirmities of our flesh, as hunger, cold, wearines, weeping and such like, which in his person were all sufferings, and yet no man calleth his life his passion: his passion we take to be the manner of his death, and so all his sufferings from the Garden to the graue, imposed on him by the hands, mouthes, or harts of men betraying, forsaking, or pursuing him, were parts of his passion. The false accusing and vniust condemning him, the mocking, reproching, and reuiling him to be wicked and forsaken of God, were parts of his passion, and yet these were no inherent nor sensible paines, of which you would seeme to speake, when you exclude his affections of feare and griefe of minde, as no parts of his passion. Defenc. pag. 91. li. 6. You cunningly take another rare sense of this word, as it signifieth the affections of the mind in Christ wholy bent to holines, and obedience of god. ] you are a learned Squire, that doe not vnderstand, the soule suffereth as well by her affections, as by her senses; and that in Christ the harts and tongues of the Iewes concurred to his passion, as well as their hands. The affections and perturbations of the soule are vsually and properly called by the Greeke fathers , and by the Latine, passiones, passions or sufferings of the minde. The Apostles applie the word , SVFFERINGS, both in Christ and in vs, as euenly, and as often to feare, sorowes, rebukes, reproches, losses, and such like griefs of minde, as to stripes and other violences profered to the body. Manifest proofes thereof are euery where occurrent in the Scriptures. Heb. 10 v. 32 Remember the former dayes (sayth the Apostle to the H brewes) wherein you sustained , a great conflict of sufferings; partly whiles ye were made a spectacle with re∣proches and troubles, partly whiles you did communicate with them that were so vsed. , for you had a ioynt feeling of my bands, and receiued with ioy the spoiling of your goods. Yet had they Hebr. 12. not as yet resisted vnto bloud by striuing against sinne. So Peter: 1. Pet. 4. Wherein you communicate , with the sufferings of Christ, reioyce, that in the re elation of his glorie you may be glad and ioyfull. If you be reproched for the name of Christ, blessed are you, and the spirit of glorie resteth on you. And againe: 1. Pet. 2. This is thanks with God, if a man for conscience to God endure sorrowes, , suffering vniustly. Pauls afflictions, which he calleth his infirmities, (euen as he sayth: 2. Cor 13. Christ was crucified through infirmitie ) are reckened in many places by himselfe, a∣mongst which are 2. Cor. 6. Reproch, infamy, want, sorow, feare of & 11. danger, & 11. care, affection and & 11. zeale for others & 11. weakened or & 11. offended; whereby it may be seene, what was meant by the words of Christ touching Pauls sufferings, Acts 9. I will shew him how many (or how great) things he shall suffer for my name; and by his owne, I reioyce Coloss. 1. , in my sufferings for you. Yea not only feare and sorow of minde, which are the painfnll affections of our nature, but euen corporall affections, though naturall, were suffe∣rings in Christ. Damascene writing of the naturall and innocent, yet painfull passi∣ons and sufferings, which Christ tooke vnto him, sayth: Damascen. orthodoxae fi∣dei. li. 3. ca. 20. , naturall and innocent passions (or sufferings) are those what soeuer, which entred into mans life by the condemnation of the first transgression; as hunger, thirst, wearinesse, labour, wee∣ping, vexation, declination of death, feare, agonie, and such like, which are naturally in all men. These all Christ tooke vnto him, that he might sanctifie all. And how can it be otherwise, since the soule feeleth paine and griefe, as well by her vnderstanding and will, as by her senses, and that in other mens dangers and troubles, where loue and pittie preuaile with vs, no lesse then in our owne. August. de ciuitate Dei. li. 14. ca. 6. what is feare and sorrow (sayth Austen) but the will dissenting from those things which displease vs? and ge∣nerally according to the varietie of things which are desired or shunned, as the will is pleased or offended, so is it changed a d turned into these or those affections. Then as nature teacheth vs to feare our owne dangers foreseene by sense or vnderstanding, and to sorrow for our present miseries or losses; so loue teacheth vs to do the like in other mens harmes either present or approching, whose persons the more we embrace, their perils and ouerthrowes the more we lament. Now he that is De ciuitate D i. li. 12. a. 16. affected, suffereth, sayth Austen. Neither are the violences offered to the bodie called paines, but because the soule by nature disliketh them, howsoeuer by faith she may be content to endure them for Gods cause; and so the impressions of feare and sorrow, in that they are painfull, they are sufferings of the soule, though charitie perswade them in other mens troubles, or necessitie impose them in our owne cases, or pietie raise them in respect of God. Psal. 51. A broken heart and contrite spirit, is it not a suffering, because it is a sacrifice vnto God? Philip. 2. Work your saluation, sayth the Apostle, with feare and trembling. Are these no suffe∣rings, because they tend to saluation? Matth. 5. Blessed are you when men reproch you and pur∣sue you, and speake all euill against you falsly for my sake. Reioice and be glad, for great is your reward in heauen; so pursued they the Prophets before you. This is a great blessednes, and yet a great suffering of minde, to be reuiled and slandered; and therefore holi∣nesse in Christ, as in the Saints, did not exclude, but rather commend and aduance Christes sufferings. D fenc. pag. 92. li. 12. Speake plainly I beseech you, and deceiue vs not. Call not this his soules suffering, but his oules holines and righteousues. ] I call that SVFFERING in Christ, which was paine∣full and grieuous vnto him; though withall it were righteous and holy. Matth. 11. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for Righteousnes. Shall it be no persecution, or no suffering, All Christes sufferings were rig teous and holy. by reason the cause is righteous and holy, for which the godly do suffer, and their pa∣tience and submission to god in their troubles are dueties of holines? all sufferings in Christ were most righteous and holy, for in them he shewed not only voluntarie pati∣ence, and obedience, but innocence also. Doth this make his stripes, woundes, or death to be no sufferings because he 1. Pet 3. Suffered the iust for the vniust? Deceaue not your selfe, and I see no man els, that goeth about to beguile you. I speake not of those workes of piety and charitie, which Christ performed to God and man with ioy and delight; I speake of those infirmities, temptations, and affections, which were grieuous and painfull vnto him, though the suffering and enduring thereof were most religious and righteous in him. And you, that seuer his holinesse and righ∣teousnesse from his sufferings, as if he were defiled and accursed with them, lewdlie abuse both the word of God, and faith of Christ, which containe no such thing. Defenc. pag. 92. li. 10. Christes exact and perfect keeping of Gods iust law, and his sufferings, are two parts of Christes mediation greatly differing, and ought not both in trueth be called his passion or satis∣faction for sinne. ] His passion I call the things suffered at or about the time of his death; because not the instant of breathing out his soule, but the whole order and ma∣ner of comming to his death after his last supper, is by the Scriptures inclosed in the name of his death, and by all sober and aduised writers called his Passion or suffering of death. His whole life besides was full of sufferings, and euen those naturall infir∣mities of hunger, thirst, wearinesse, and such like, were voluntarie sufferings in him, because he had power enough in himselfe to represse or exclude those punishments in licted for sinne on our nature; and consequently the infirmities and affections of minde, that were gri tious, were likewise voluntarie sufferings in him, and pertained to the humilitie and obedience, to which he submitted himselfe for the fuller satisfa∣ction of our sinnes, as well by his life as death. That our whole life is a suffering for our sinne in Adam, S. Austen exactly noteth: August. in Psal. 37. Non enim in illum non est vindicat m; a t frustra dixerat Deus, morte morieris: aut aliquid patimur in ista vita, nisi ex illa morte, quam meruimus primo peccato. Neither did God not reuenge Adam, nor sayd in vaine: Thou shalt die the death; neither do we suffer any thing in this life, but from that death which we deserued by the first sinne. And making an example of hunger, sayth; August. ibid. Ista fames, naturalis quidam morbus est, quia natura nobis facta est poena ex vindicta. Primo homin quod erat poena, natura nobis est. This hunger (of the bodie) is a disease of nature, because the punishment inflicted (on Adam) to reuenge (his sin) is our nature. That which was pu∣nishment to the first man, is become nature to vs. Christ then in partaking our nature, did partake with our punishment, and his submitting himselfe to that, what was it but a continuall suffering of our punishment, by feeling our naturall infirmities both of soule and bodie, though still without sinne, and all naturall necessitie, as in vs; that his obedience might be the more euident and acceptable vnto God. So that it is no equiuocation in me, to call feare and sorrow of minde in Christ, sufferings for sinne, notwithstanding they were innocent and obedient in him, and so parts of his humane holinesse and righteousnesse directly tending to satisfaction for our sinfull disobedi∣ence. The full price and payment whereof was death, the close of mans life, which as it was the last, so was it the greatest and weightiest part of his obedience, and re∣compence to Gods Iustice for our sinnes: but it is an idle vagation in you, when you can neither refute nor resist the trueth, to make an appeale against ambiguities, when you your selfe can neither proue, nor dare plainly expresse, that you intend. Defenc. pag. 92. li. 21. Sir I hope you will not thinke to beat downe all afore you with nothing but cunning, yet vaine deceit, countenanced out with cruell and hatefull words. ] You lacke an Ostler to bring you to bed, you haue trauelled sore, as a man may see by your foming at mouth. If I say any thing, that I doe not particularize and prooue to be the receiued and pub∣like doctrine of Christes Church agreeing with the Scriptures for many hundred yeeres, before your deuice of hell paines in Christes soule was heard of amongst Chri∣stians, let me lose in Gods name both my labour and my credit with the Reader: but if you, that stand iangling about proper punishment and meere vengeance for sinne, and will not one word further, crie out in your passions, as sicke men do in their dreames, that you are ouerborne with cunning and countenance, they are not all wise men, that haue parts in playes, nor all true men, that talke of losing by the high wayes. Defenc. pag. 92. li. 24. Further you are in this your Resolution directly contrary to your selfe, as before I haue briefly yet sufficiently shewed. ] So saith he, that neither agreeth with the trewth, no with himselfe. Ignorance in you is no praeiudice to me, much l sse malitious follie, that pronounce before you vnderstand; and take nothing right, though it be neuer so plainly deliuered. In the place where you chalenged my contrarietie, I put in a full discharge thereof, and here you repeat the very same, though you would seeme freshly to find out some solemne matter. Defenc. pag. 92. li. 26. Againe you censure your selfe verie sharply, for your resolutenesse in this cause (where you say) It is curiositie to examine, presumption to determine, impossibilitie to conclude cer∣tainly, what was the true cause thereof. ] To affirme euerie thing and confirme nothing, is growen now such a trade with you, that you haue neither care, nor conscience what you say. Could you certainly conclude, what was the true cause of Christs agonie, you The precise and particula cause of Christes ago∣nie is not reuea∣led, though the g nerall occasi∣ons may be con iectured. were free from this censure; but in that you bring nothing besides your owne conceits no way grounded or supported by any euidence of the sacred Scriptures, my speech is verified in you, that since it is impossible out of the Scriptures to conclude any cer∣taine (that is particuler and praecise) cause of this agonie, which hath so many parts and secrets not reuealed vnto vs; it is presumption in you to determine, that the present suffering of hell paines from the immediate hand of god, was the cause there∣of; and to call it in question, argueth itching curiositie to search for that, which is con∣cealed from vs. Why then doe I conclude resolutely, that the cause of Christes ago∣nie i Defenc. pag. 91. li 12. could not proceed, but from his submission to God, or compassion to men or both? ] Doe I conclude any CERTAINE or precise cause in particuler, that make so manie diuersi∣ties of generall causes, that might be, as submission to God, or compassion on men, or both? They say bruite beastes doe bewray themselues to want all reason, by want of numbe∣ring. Take heede least if you see no distance betwixt THREE generall heads or oc∣casions of Christes feares and sorrowes, and ONE certaine and precise cause thereof, men thincke there lieth somewhat els in you vnder a mans skinne. For what els should I say to the grossenes of his conceits, that hath not learned to vnderstand the difference betwixt three generall disiunctiues, and one speciall and certaine a firma∣tiue? My resolutenes if your Braines were not buzzed with more pride then skill, is a∣gainst your paines of the damned to be suffered in the Soule of Christ, since neither damnation nor confusion could take hold of him; but they that will not willfully blind themselues, as you doe, with your presumptuous fansies, must beleeue, that pi∣etie to god, and charitie to men, or both led Christ to these feares and sorowes, which the Scriptures mention in his agonie; though wee cannot precisely pronounce, what particular respects mooued eche afsection in him. D fenc. pag. 92. li. 29. Thirdly where you make but two causes, submission to God, and compassion to men, els where but one, religious feare; but before you verie precisely made six: if you agree no better with your selfe, I haue small hope you will agree with vs. ] To looke for learning, wisdome, or sobrietie from him that hath none, is to looke in vaine. Some would seeme rich by often looking on that little, which is left, when all is spent: and you would seeme lear∣ned by oft n telling vs one tale, though it containe nothing but lies and toies. That I make but one cause, to witte Religious feare, in the 23 Page of my Sermons, looke there who list, he shall find you a fabler. In the fift cause that might be of Christs ago∣nie, which was the deprecation of Gods wrath, I yeelded to some mens speeches so farre, (for quietnes sake,) that it ight be said, Christ feared, that is, Serm. pag. 22 li. 2 . shunned euer∣lasting death: and that the sight of gods wrath Serm. pag. 21. li. 19. tempered and made ready for the finnes of men, which the Scripture calleth a cupp, Pa. 22. li 35. might for a time somewhat astonish the hu∣mane nature of Christ; yet so, that the sight of our sinnes, and the wages thereof Pa. 23. li. 2. im∣pressed nothing (that is no feare) in the soule of Christ, but a religious feare to sorow for the one, and pray against the other. Here are expresly named religious feare, sorow and (zealous) praier; occasioned by the sight of the cuppe of Gods wrath prepared for our sinnes. How then doth this exclude the rest of the causes, which are there pre∣cedent or consequent? or how come you to cast away Christes sorow for sinne, and praier against the desert of our euill deedes, (whereof the first rose from the submissi∣on, that Christ made vnto Gods wrath prouoked, and the second from the compassi∣on, that Christ had towards men endangered) and to leaue but one, where I name three? Are you so well skilled in the Scriptures, that you doe not know, a Religious feare of God compriseth the whole seruice of God; and therefore might much more containe the holines of Christs affections, when he submitted himselfe to the will and hand of God for our sakes? What rudenes then, or rashnes, or both is this, when I note diuers partes or effects of one thing, or vse diuers words to describe one and the same matter, for you to quote out contrarieties by Arithmetick, because the wordes be different, and neuer to weigh the sense in which they accord? So trifle you with the two generall causes, as if they could not containe the six spe∣ciall that, I say, might be of Christs agonie, when yet those six are but remembrances of some respects, that Christ might haue in his feare and sorow; and those two com∣prehend all six as parts, or consequents of Christs submission to God and compassion on men. Neither doe I pretend or professe, that euery of these six was the whole and entire cause of his agony; (It is your dottage so to dreame, and no piece of my mind.) These six, and many moe reasons and occasions Christe might haue at that time to feare and sorow, wherin I doe not determine, which was the full and true cause of that agonie; but how many respects might lead him to feare and sorrow at that present, which I doe not conclude as certaine, but propose as possible, and farre more proba∣ble, then your reall paines of the damned supposed at that instant actually to torment the soule of Christ. Leaue therefore your one, two, and six, to Tilers to tell their pin∣nes, or Wittalls to number their Geese; and shew that either I determine any precise or particuler cause ef Christs agonie, thereby to deserue mine owne censure, as you doe; or that those six, which I mention, may not be referred to those two generalls, which I note, that so at least you may make me disagree with my selfe. Defenc pag. 92. li. 32. Last of all this your resolution, making Christs piety and pittie to be the onely proper and maine cause of all his wofull passion, is vtterly false and vntrew, hauing no ground but meere coniectures. ] Your memorie is as brickle, as your reason is feeble. Those six causes of Christes agonie, and not of all his wofull passion, as you lightly leape you know not whither, I did no otherwise propose, then that they Serm. pag. 17. li. 28. 29. might be, & euery one of them more likely, and more godly, then your deuice of hell paines. As for the onlie cause of that ago∣nie, I medled with no such matter, my words are euide t to the contrarie: Ibid. li. 30. Others at their leasures may thinke on more, which I shalbe content to h are; but that piety, or charity, or both must be the Rootes of Christs feare and sorow, and not infidelitie and distrust of Gods fauour towards his person or function, nor the Reall and inherent sense of Hell paines common to him with the damned as you doe peremptorilie, but pestilently dreame; in that I said I was resolute, and so I yet remaine. And you shall sooner proue your selfe to be the man in the Moone, then Christes soule to haue beene tormen∣ted with any reall paines inflicted on him by the immediate hand of God, which po∣sition of yours hath impietie for the ground, and follie for the proofe; howsoeuer you thinck to face it out with your insolent verbositie. Defenc pag. 92. li. 37. Your first cause is submission to the maiestie of God-sitting in iudgment, when Christ was thus astonished and agonized therewith: ] I pray thee Christian Reader to remember in all these causes, what was my purpose and promise euen now specified, not to con∣clude The first cause concurring to Christs agoni . these as necessarie and entire causes of Christes agonie, but to shew them possible, and more likely and Godlie, then his Pagent of Hell paines inflicted on the soule of Christ. The reason, that led me to set downe this as one of the causes, that MIGHT BE of Christes agonie, (for so I alwaies meane, though perhaps in course of speach I alwaies adde not so much,) were the wordes of our Sauiour. Iohn 1 . Now is the Iudgment of this worlde, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I were lifte vp from the earth, will draw all men vnto me. This said hee signifiyng what death he should die. The iudgment, which here our Sauiour noteth, was not at that instant, when he spake these words, but at an houre to come, when Satan the Prince of this worlde should be Iohn 16. iudged, that is eiected and cast out from Reuel. 12. accusing the Saints, and the Reuel. 12. saluation of God and power of his Christ established in heauen. So much the words of Christ imported, when he said, Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out; and not, now alreadie is he cast out. This Iudgment then was Redemptorie, not condemnatori , wherein the sonne of God in our flesh was admitted to make satisfaction for the sinnes of all, that should beleeue in him; and to pay the price that should appease the iustice of God prouoked by our misdeeds, and so to reconcile vs to the fauour of God by the bloud of his Crosse, that there might be no more place for Satan to accuse vs any longer Reuel. 12. night and day before God as otherwise he did. The issue of this iudgment Christ before ex∣pressed, when he said, and I, if I were exalted (to the Crosse) will draw all men vnto me; And after, when rising from his feruent praier, he said; Marke 14. Behold the sonne of man is de∣liuered into the hands of sinners. As also to the Iewes, that came to apprehend him. Luke 22. This is your verie hower and the power of darkenes; as likewise to Peter, when he Iohn 18. drew his sword, and smote the high Priests seruant, and cutt of his right eare; put vp thy sword into thy sneath, Iohn 18. shall I not drinke of the cup (saith Christ) which the Father hath giuen me? The fruit of this Iudgment is euerie where specified in the Scriptures. 1. Pet. 2. Christ bare our sinnes in his bodie on the Tree, by whose stripes ye were healed, that being deliuered from sinne, wee should liue to righteousnes. What need you then so curiously question, Against whom or in what cause sate God in iudgment now when Christ was thus astonished, and agonized? God sate in iudgment to receaue satisfaction for the sinnes of his elect at the hands of his owne Sonne by his humilitie and obedience vnto death. Defenc. pag. 93. li. 3. Of necessitte it must be one of these three wayes. First, Gods maiestie and great iustice now at this time might sit in iudgment against vs, and so consequently, yea chiefly against Christ himselfe as our Ransomepaier & Suertie in our steed. li. 16. Secondly, God might be consi∣dered now as iudging Satan the Prince of this world. Pa. 94. li. 40. Thirdly, Gods matestie & iustice may be considered sitting in iudgment meerely against sinfullmen. ] You be copious where you neede not, and carelesse, where most cause is you should be circumspect, to make an idle shew of small skill, you bring here a TRIPLE iudgment of God; First, against vs and Christ our suertie; Secondly, against Satan; Thirdly, against sinnefull men, which were either elect or reprobate: as though one and the same iudgment of God for mans Redemption did not concerne all three: to witt, Christ as the Redeemer, Gods iudgement for our redemp∣tion concerneth Christ, men, and Satan. Satan as the accuser, the Elect as the ransomed, leauing the reprobate in their sinnes through their vnbeliefe vnto the dreadfull day of vengeance. In that the Redeemer was by this iudgment receaued and allowed to make satisfaction for the sinnes of his elect, Satan was excluded from all place and power to accuse them for sinne, or to raigne ouer them by sinne, and the purgation of their sinnes, which should beleeue in Christ, being made by the Person of the Sauiour, they were reconciled to God by the death of Christ and discharged from the wrath to come; the anger of god remaining on such, as by faith obeied not the sonne of God. Saue therfore your fruitlesse paines in the rest, and shew why the beholding of Gods power and iustice now sitting in iudgment to redeeme the world, and to receaue recompence from the person of Christ for the sinnes of men, might not breed a religious feare and trembling in the humane nature of Christ. Defenc. pag. 93. li.. If you meane that thus Christ with submission beholding his Father in iudgement at this time was cast into this agonie, it is the verie trewth, and the same which we maintaine. ] You take this for a shew to build your fansies on, but as your maner is you abuse trewthes to serue your turnes. Let it stand for good, that Christ now beheld his Fa∣ther Christ might be∣holde the power of his Fathers wrath against sinne, and yet not feare the vengeance due to the wicked. sitting in iudgment to require recompence for the sinnes of the faithfull; what followeth? that God awarded the selfe same vengeance against the person of Christ, that we had deserued, and should haue suffered, if we had not beene redeemed? This is a false, hereticall, and blasphemous conclusion no way coherent to the premisses, and no way consonant to the Scriptures. For then finall destruction, desperation, confusion and euerlasting damnation of soule and bodie to hell fire, which without question were the wages of our sinnes, as we may see by their example, that are not clensed from sinne by the bloud of Christ, must without reseruation or remedie haue lighted on the person of Christ. If that vengeance of sinne, which was due to vs, could by no iustice be inflicted on the person of the sonne of God, no not, if he had borne the sinnes of the whole world; how then could the doubt or feare of his punish∣ment on himselfe cast him into this agony? you will release him of the circumstance, but tie him to the substance of the selfe same pains, which the damned endure. When you sitt in iudgement on Christ, shew your wicked and witles conceits, as much as you list; but the father, to whom of right it appertained, sitting in iudgment to receaue from the person of his sonne, who was most willing thereto, ne did, ne could by iustice determine any thing against his owne sonne, that should either derogate from the person of Christ, or abrogate the loue which God professed and pro∣nounced so often from heauen towards him. God might haue condemned vs, that most iustly deserued it; but to adiudge the same condemnation to his owne Sonne, was simply impossible to the Iustice, holines, trueth and loue of God. For so the vnion of Christes person must either be dissolued, which god hath faithfully sworne, and mightily wrought, or els the second person in Trinitie must haue tasted of the same vengeance with the damned and with the Diuells, which is a blasphemie that the Di∣uell neuer drempt, nor durst to broche. Defenc pag. 93. li. 8. This not, but that Christ had recall paines inflicted from the Father, as from the against vs in him, who were thus acquited by him. Not denying is a slender proofe of that which you should with most infallible certaintie conclude you did a . If Christes manhood might and did righteously and iustly seare and tremble at the glorie, power and maiestie of God sitting now in iudgement to pro∣portion the price that should be payed for mans ransome, how doth that , the reall paines of the damned were inflicted on the soule of Christ at that instant, except in madde mens conceits, which respect more their pangs than their proofs, and pre∣ferre their willes before the wisdome of Gods spirit, or witnesse of mans reason. All iudgement against sinne, you will say, tendeth vnto condemnation. ] No iudgement against the Sonne of God could proceed vnto damnation for what or whose sinnes soeuer. And therefore to me, and to all that obserue the words of the Holy Ghost, it is a clee∣rer case than the Sunne-shining at noone day, that we are reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, and healed by his stripes, who bare our sinnes in his bodie on the tree, and whose was shed for many sor remission of sinnes. Your infliction of hell paines on the soule of Christ is no such trifle, that it may be lightly taken vp for your pleasure, or humo∣rously surmised vpon your vaine coniectures; you must euidently and ineuitablely prooue it, before any wise or sober Christian will or should beleeue it. Ch istes feare and agonie, you thinke, could haue no other cause. ] Of all others this can neuer be con∣cluded to haue beene the cause, since there is no witnesse nor word thereof in all the Scriptures. That euerlasting damnation was due to our sinnes, we haue no doubt, but that any such iudgement could be decreed or executed against the Sonne of God, or against any part of his person, we lesse doubt. Wherefore it is most manifest to all that list not to mixe their desperate deuices with Gods eternall trueth, that no such iudgement could be giuen against the person of Christ, as we should haue , or as the damned feele; but the Esa. 53. chastisement of our peace was layd vpon him, and Heb. 5. though he were the Sonne, yet by the things which he suffered, he learned obedience. [ It is no iudge∣ment, you will say, where nothing is condemned. ] In the finall iudgement of God against the wicked, both their sinnes and their persons shall be condemned; that is, their per∣sons shalbe euerlastingly reiected and adiudged to perpetuall torments of bodie and soule in hell fire for their sinnes, which God iustly hateth and punisheth. In the 1. Pet. 4. iudgement, which beginneth at the house of God, sinne is condemned in their flesh, as it was in Christes, but their persons are beloued in Christ, and so cleansed from sinne by him that sanctifieth himselfe for their sakes, and whose bloud clenseth them from all their sinnes. The paterne of which iudgement was precedent in Christ their head, to whose Rom. 8. image the whole bodie must be conformed, that 2. Tim. 2. suffering with him, they may raigne with him, and being 1. Pet. 4. condemned as touching men in the flesh, they may liue as tou∣ching God in the spirit. There must be the same minde in vs, that was in Christ, euen as there is the same condemnation in our flesh that was in his. For in Christ and all his members, sinne was condemned in the flesh, that their spirits might liue to God, and their bodies be raised againe to be partakers of the same blisse with their spirits. The Scriptures therefore doe not appoint the iudgement of hell or of the damned vnto Christ and his members, but only the destruction of their flesh ioyned with the salua∣tion of their spirits. What need had Christ (you will aske) to feare this iudgement? ] As Christ had lesse need to feare the iudgement seat of God, than all his members, so had he more will, care and power to giue God his due, than all the rest of his brethren. And therefore approching to God for sinners and with sinne, as he vndertooke their persons and cause, that is, to present them to God, and to profer satisfaction for their sinnes; so he taught vs all our duties, which is, to approch the throne of Maiestie with all reue∣rence and feare, when we beholde his passing glorie, and our exceeding infirmitie, and in faith of his goodnesse, and feare of his greatnesse, to tremble and shake before him. This Christian submission which God requireth of all men, Christ did most of all performe, when he presented vs and our cause to God; and therefore prostrate flat on the earth, he humbled himselfe with greater feare and trembling (but without dis∣trust or doubt of Gods fauour) than euer man before or since did. This feare and trembling with all submission and deuotion yeelded by the humane nature of Christ to the diuine Maiestie of God, you no way like; but in a selfe conceit will haue it to be the feare of desperate and damned persons, and Christes soule to be actually tor∣mented with the same paines that are the sharpest in hell: and all this you gather vp∣on none other ground, but for that Christ exceedingly feared and sorrowed in the Garden. But if no man guided by Gods spirit may heare the words, doe the works, or receiue the messengers of God, but with feare and trembling, as a seruice and due∣tie belonging to the Creatour from the weakenesse of the creature; how much more might the humane nature of Christ now offering vs all, that were sinfull, to the pre∣sence of God with infinite desire and most ardent prayer to make recompence in his owne person for our offences; and so through his loue and sauour with God, to re∣concile vs to God; how much more I say might Christ in our cause and in our names shew all possible feare and trembling to so great Maiestie so mightily displeased with vs? And therefore in either respect both of his owne religious humilitie, and our sin∣full infirmity, he might performe this seruice and submission vnto the throne of Gods heauenly presence. Defenc. pag. 93. li. 32. Your testimonies touching men sinfull, make nothing to the purpose at all: for these could not by reason of their sinnes endure the verie presence of Gods Maiestie, being in any measure reuealed vnto them: but Christ in himselfe being free from all sinne, could be in no such case. ] Your exceptions are more friuolous, and no way fit your fansies: for what if consci∣ence of sinne breed an amazed feare in men, when the glorious presence of God is in any measure reuealed vnto them, doth that exclude the religious affection & submis∣sion of feare and trembling, which mans weakenesse in this life oweth to the diuine Maiesty? Esa. 66. Him will I respect (saith God) that is poore in spirit, and trembleth at my words. Not only Gods glory reuealed, but his word denounced requireth submission and reuerent trembling. Phil. 2. Worke your saluation (sayth the Apostle) with feare and tremb∣ling; not meaning men should alwayes be amazed, or that God still reuealed his glo∣rious presence, but that our infirmitie remembred, and his Maiestie considered, we should do all things commanded by him with feare and trembling. Of the Corinthi∣ans Paul testifieth, that they receiued Tite 2. Cor. 7. with feare and trembling. Such reuerence the faithfull yeeld to the words and works of God, that they tremble at the presence of his messengers. And lest you should thinke, that only conscience of sinne, and the brightnesse of Gods presence impresse this affection, the Apostle requireth seruants to obey their Ephes. 6. carnall masters with feare and trembling: and witnesseth of himselfe, when he preached the Gospell to the Corinthians, he 1. Cor. 2. was amongst them in feare and much trembling. So that not onely guilt of sinne maketh men to feare and flie the sight of God, as in Adam, when he first transgressed; and in Peter, before he was called (whose words you abuse, to elude the rest, which is brought against you) but in all our actions, dueties and affections we are willed by the holy Ghost, to haue a religious and reuerent respect with feare & trembling to the word, will and presence of God. Heb. 12. Let vs haue grace, thereby to serue and please God with reuerence and feare. Where we are taught, that not sinne, but grace maketh men to serue and please God with reuerence and feare, which before are called feare and trembling, during the time of our conuer∣sing heere on earth. Though then Christ did neither flie, nor feare the presence of God for any conscience of sinne, yet his humane nature consisting of our flesh, and compassed as yet with our infirmitie, knew well what religious and reuerent submissi∣on with feare and trembling was due from the creature to the creator; and specially, when he presented vs that were sinfull to the throne of Grace: for whom he humbled himselfe vnder the mightie hand of God, to abolish our pride, and approched Gods presence with vnspeakable care and sorow, feare and trembling, to recompence our heauie dulnesse and carelesse neglect both of Gods anger and our owne danger. Which Christ obserued in his owne Disciples, that otherwise deerely loued him, and were often called on by him to watch and pray, and yet were they in their deepest s eepe, when he was in his greatest agonie. Defenc. pag. 93. li 37. No better is that of the Angels (meere creatures) vailing their faces at the glorious presence of God the Creator of all: but Christ the Mediator was not a meere creature, but al∣wayes personally vnited with greater power than the Angels were; and alwayes sustained by it. ] As if the manhood of Christ did not hunger and thirst, waxed wearie, and wept, though it were alwayes vnited to his Godhead. The greater his power, by which he might haue refused and repelled all infirmitie, the greater his humilitie and obedi∣ence, that would subiect himselfe of his owne good will to these afflictions and affe∣ctions of mans weaknesse. By suffering of death, as likewise in all our infirmities, he made himselfe Heb. 2. lower than the Angels; yet what doth that hinder, but the manhood of Christ, which was made of a woman, and therefore a creature, though personally ioyned with the Creator by the great goodnesse and grace of God, might in the dayes of his flesh most willingly submit it selfé with religious feare and trembling, since that either shewed the thankefulnesse of the creature to the creatour for so great honour and fauour, as to be receiued into the coniunction and communion of the Godhead, or declared his loue and likenesse tó vs, that in our cause would lay downe his power and right for the time, and be like affected with vs, that so he might commend vs vn∣to God? You can be content, that the Defenc. pag. 94. li. 5. Godhead should purposely hide it selfe as it were, and withdraw his wonted comfort, that the manhood of Christ might be subiect to the paines of the damned, which you call full punishment for vs; but you can not heare, that the Godhead should guide the manhood of Christ to humble it selfe in our cause with a most religious and reuerent feare and trembling, to giue God his due, and thereby to teach all his members to doe the like. But if the Apostle speake most truely, that the Rom. 8. v. 26 spirit it selfe maketh requests for vs with sighs which cannot be expressed; why should not the manhood of Christ much more performe the part that is proper to his office, to pray for transgressours, with all affection and submission belonging to God either from our nature, or from our condition? In sinne Christ might not communicate with vs; but since sorow for sinne, and most humble submission to the power of God displeased with sinne, are rather in Christes person recompences for sinne (which we could not make) than infections of sinne; why should you by pretence of Christes power make those religious offices impossible to him, whom notwithstanding you will haue amazed and confounded in all the powers and parts of soule and bodie with the terrour and feare of your hell paines? Is your zeale so great for Christes power, that you will not haue him trouble himselfe with any religious submission of minde to the throne of Gods glorie, by his example to teach vs to tremble at the greatnesse thereof; and yet you spare not to load him with vnspeakable terrours and feares of Gods indignation, and his owne confusion? Such deuotion doth well be∣seeme your hellish inuentions, but it no way sorteth with Christian religion. Defenc pag. 93. li. 11. If Austen and others sentences (in the 350. and 34. Pages of your Sermons) be thus vnderstood, that the complaint on the Crosse, was not Christs in respect of himselfe, but in respect of his Church, for whom then and there he answered before God comming now to execute Iudgement for their sinne, so are they well, and rightly vnderstoode: otherwise there is not truth in them, namely as you seeme to vse them. ] Your twisting Christs Ago∣nie in the Garden and his complaint on the Crosse in one thread, that the one may seeme the cause of the other; sheweth your humorous conceit preferring your rash apprehension before the Iudgement of all the auncient Fathers. I seuer them, be∣cause in the first Christ shewed feare and sorow; in the second on the Crosle, he suf∣fered reall and actuall paine of Body and Soule, which of his Agonie you cannot prooue, though you presume it neuer so proudly in spite of all the Fathers cited by me, of whom you pronounce with as much disdaine as a crauling Creature can, there is no truth in them, if they be not of your mind. But leaue this pride, that puf∣feth you vp with such vanitie, and pricketh you forward to so much falsitie; Atha∣nasius, Cyprian, Hilarie, Ierom, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Augustine, Leo, and the rest shall goe with all wise men for religious and aduised Interpreters, when such an huff-cap, as you are, shall be thought fitter to learne, hen to teach. Of their expo∣sitions, when we come to that circumstance of Christes passion, God willing we will say more; in the meane time I might not bury your brauing them, ( that there is no truth in them ) least with my silence I should smooth your insolence. Defenc. pag. 93. li. 6. In respect as God proceeded against Satan and for this cause, that Christ should be cast into these dreadfull feares, sorrowes and bloudy agonies, what man of Iudgement will Imagine? what colour of likelihood is there in it? ] That Satan was presently cast out from hindering mans saluation, and should in the ende be troden vnder foote; that Christ obtained by his prayer for vs: but what spoyle he should make in the Church of Christ by heresie, iniquitie and Tyrannie, when our Sauiour beheld, who could not be ignorant thereof, why should not that mooue the manhood of Christ both grecuously to sorrow for the weakenesse and dulnesse, falles and offen∣ces of his members, as also with most vehement and inflamed zeale, euen vnto the sweating of bloud, to pray against the power and rage of Satan, to haue it cut short and fully subiected, as all other enemies, vnder his and our feete? And who of any sense will thinke it strange, that Christ approching the brunt of his passion should performe that to all, which he professed to Peter and the rest. Luke. 22. Behold Satan hath desired you to winnow you as wheate, but I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not: because he was the first that should haue most neede? Christ was able without pray∣er, if we respect his diuine power, to vphold Peter and all the rest against the worst, that Satan could doe vnto them; Iohn 17. Whiles I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name, those that thou gauest me, haue I kept, and none of them is lost: But this was the time of his submission and humiliation euen vnto death, and therefore soreseeing himselfe and all his members by Gods iust iudgement to be so farre de∣liuered into Satans hands, that they should be sifted with all manner of tentations and trials; as he most humbly submitted himselfe, and his members thereto, so he most affectionately and with greater vehemencie, then euer man did or could pray, desired the feeblenesse and folly of his elect to be forgiuen them, and the old and cruell serpents head to be bruized, and conquered, that he might haue no power, but to bite their heeles. These I say, and many moe occasions and reasons might leade our Sauiour to that prayer so full of compassion and affection to vs, that euen feruencie might open the pores of his body, and straine forth his bloud, to shew that he bent all the powers of Body and Soule in making his prayers vnto God. As for ioy and triumph, which this conquest ouer Satan did and doth bring, I make no doubt thereof; but we now speake of the prayer, wherewith Christ obtai∣ned it, and of the triall, wherein both head and members were to be conformed, and consummate with affliction, and that for the time was as sharp, as the fruite thereof in the end would be sweete; that not onely Christ was first to Luke. 24. suffer those things, (which the Scriptures mention) and so to enter into his glory, but 2. Timoth. 3. as many, as will liue godly in Christ Iesus, shall suffer persecution. For this is the iudgement of God beginning at his owne house, and euen at his owne Sonne, Acts. 14. We must through many afflictions enter into the kingdome of God. In speaking against these things you shew as much iudgement, as you doe in the rest of your conceits, which haue your bare word for their best warrant, and your vnlearned humour for their chiefest helpe. Defenc. pag. 94. li. Thirdly, if you meane (that God sate in Iudgement) here against the sinnes of the elect, Christ knew the eternall and sure decree of God, which had turned the cup of vengeance alreadie from them vpon himselfe, as being their Suertie: so that this commeth to our assertion. ] Christ knew, that the second person in Trinitie by whom his man∣hoode was now assumed, had before all worlds consented to beare the burden or punishment of our sinnes in his Body, and by himselfe to make the purgation of them, and that the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost had eternally decreed this to be the meane and of mans Redemption; but as for the Cup of vengeance to be tur∣ned on , if thereby you intended the vengeance due to our sinnes, and inflic∣ted Christ and his members must of one and the same Cuppe. on the damned, which is your designe throughout your Defence, then neither had God made any such decree, neither did Christ know any such conuersion of the Cup from vs vpon himselfe: he rather knew the contrary. To Iames and Iohn the Sonnes of Zebedee, that asked to sit, the one at his right hand, the other at his left, he answered; Marke. 10. Can yee drinke of the Cup that I shall drinke of? and they saying, they could, he replied; Ye shall drinke indeede of the cup, that I shall drinke of. If Christ had the Cup of vengeance common to him with the desperate and damned, then Iames and Iohn, and consequently all his Disciples and members dranke of the same Cup, for they all dranke of his cup. And Paul missed much of his reckning, when he said; Phil. 3. I counted all things losse, and doe iudge them to be dong, that I may know the fellowship of Christs afflictions, and be made conformable to his death. Can you per∣swade any man of common sense, that Paul was so desirous to suffer the death of the Soule, and the paines of the damned, that he iudged all things vile in compari∣son thereof? for so he was affected to the fellowship of Christs sufferings, which was an other manner of Cup, then you conceiue, or else Paul erred very grossely in his Account. Defenc. pag. 94. li. 16. Touching the Reprobates doe you thinke, that Christ here so vehemently wished them better, whom he knew God hated: or that for pittie of them he fell into this Agonie and sorowfull prayers? Such a Iester besides your selfe, a man shall hardly iump with all. Of Christs Agonie in the Garden as there were sundry parts, so there were sundry causes. You take euery particular by the Pole, and examine that, as if it were offe∣red to be the sole and entire cause of the whole Agonie. But leaue this wide wan∣dering, and litle vnderstanding, and trie whether Christ were not so much affected to his owne Nation, that he greatly sorowed for their reiection. [ Ibid. li. 19. Christ saith a litle before he would not so much as pray for them. ] He would not pray to crosse Gods Counsell towards the whole Nation, but onely for such as should beleeue in him: yet he pittied them, and praied pardon euen for those, that put him to death: Luke. 23. Fa∣ther forgiue them, for they know not what to doe. Defenc pag 94. li. 20. It is certaine Christ rather would haue greatly reioyced to see the due execution of Gods most holy and deserued Iustice, which is a speciall part of his high glory. ] Your cer∣tainties are like Spiders webs, euery touch will teare them. If Christ of your cer∣taine knowledge would haue so greatly reioyced to see the destruction of the Iewes, how came it to passe, that beholding Ierusalem he wept for it? If the remembrance of their desolation moued him to teares, would the present sight of their destruction haue bred in him such great ioy, as you talke of? Haue you so vtterly forgotten, what he saith of himselfe at this time of his appearance in his humilitie? Iohn. 12. I came not to Iudge the world, but to saue the world. There is a time when he shall come to Iudge the quicke and the dead; but now Iohn 3. God sent not his Sonne to condemne the world, but that the world through him might be saued. Ela. 42. A bruized Reede (saith the Prophet) shall he not breake, and smoking flaxe shall he not quench. So farre was he at this time from doing or delighting in any violence, how certaine soeuer you make your selfe of his ioyfulnesse to see destruction executed on that Nation. The words of Dauid that Psal. 58. the Righteous shall retoyce when he seeth the vengeance, licence no man to desire vengeance, but to expect Gods time, whose will we pray may be done; and concerne those enemies onely, that with impl cable malice seeke the vtter ruine of the godly. In which case the deliuerance of the faithfull being ioyned with vengeance on the wicked, God will haue his me cies towards vs magnified, though it be mixed with the destruction of the wicked. Otherwise Christ hath commanded vs to Matth. 5. loue our enemies, to blesse them which curse vs, to pray for them, which persecute vs, so that we may be the children of our Father which is in heauen. But you haue found a Foxe, or a ferne brake, because it was said, Let this Cup passe from me, and not from them. What if I answere you with Ierom? Christ said not, . in Mat Cap. 26. Let the cup passe from me, but this cuppe passe, that is, of the people of the lewes, which can haue no excuse of ignor nce, if they killme, since they haue the Law and the Prophets, which daily feretell of me. This Christ requesteth not, as fearing to suffer, but in towards the former People, that he might not drinke the by them. And with Ambrose? . 10 . 22 & There∣fore Christ said, take this cuppe from me: not because the Sonne of God seared death, but for that he would not haue them though cuill to ; his pe pernici∣ous (to them,) which should be healthfull to all. And with ? . n . tract. 35. For those then, whom he would not haue perish by his Passion, he said; Father, if it be possible let this cuppe passe from me, that both the world might be saued, and the not perish in his Passion. And with ca. . Bede who exactly followeth Ieroms words? You will reply, there is no truth in them; but the more you vse such answeres, the more pride and lesse wit you shew, to thinke that all men absurd besides your selfe, when you can seant speake one word touching vour new found faith, without a sensible absurditie. Defenc pag. 94. li. 31. Your next supposed cause, towards men containeth three causes here: First, for the of the Iewes: Secondly for the dispersion of his Church: Thirdly, his zealous griefe generally for the sins of the world. All these alwaies in Christ, and The second cause to Christs agonte. caused no alwaies heauines in him: yet no more then a godly & heauenly mind could and would digest and beare. It is well that of your at last you see these six cau∣ses may be reuoked and referred to the two gene roots, whence I said Christs ago∣nie might proceed; and so no reason, but a meere desire to , did lead you to de∣monstrate my disagreements by one, two, six; which vpon your better aduise your selfe can reconciie within the space of a lease. For as these three are contained in Christes compassion towards men, or rather did procced from the astection of his loue to man so the rest are as easily reduced to Christs submission yeld d in pictie vn∣to God, or to the same profession of charitie towards man, or to both. Touching the e three, you grant, they were alwaies in Christ nd caused no doubt alwaies an hea ines in him; but moderate, such as a godly minde might cheerefully digest. First then, how come you so sodainly to fling of your former Resolution made not fifteene lines be∣fore, that certainly Christ would haue greatly to see the execution of Gods deserued iustice on the Iewes? would Christ both certainly and greatly haue reioiced to see the destruction of that people and citie, and yet the foresight therof caused no doubt al∣wayes heauines in him? These are not your contrarieties, but concordance; wherein you rightly agree with your selfe, that neuer vsein your assertions to make one piece agree with an other. How much Christ might grieue at those things, we shall present∣ly examine; but that he grieued more at this time now in the garden for these respects, then at any other time before, you doe not grant, because you see no reason for it. Of Christs affections neither I can yeeld nor you may aske the reason; they were volun∣tarie, and rose within him, when his will gaue place vnto them. He saw Ierusalem often, and knew of her desolation from the beginning. Why wept he then but once ouer her? why did he not the like for other Cities, wherein the Iewes dwelt, can you tell? he was often tempted by the Pharisees, and still saw the hardnes of their harts. Why did he then but once (that the Scripture reporteth) behold them with Mar. 3. anger and griefe for their obstinacie? his passion he alwaies remembred, and often fore told; why then was he troubled with the thought thereof, but once that we read? Athana∣sius giueth this answere. Athanasius de incarnat. Christi. Now is my soule troubled, this now was, when he himselfe would. Damascene . . ca 23. insisteth on the same words, and maketh the rule generall, that li. 3. ca 20. (affections and infirmities) in Christ neuer preuented his will, because nothing in him was forced, but all voluntarie. , &c. he hungrea, when he would; he when he would; he feared when hewould; and died when he would. Saint Austen obserueth the same. . in . 49. Turbaris tu nolens, Turbatus est Christus, quia . Thou art troubled against thy will; Christ was troubled, because he would. He hungred, it is true, but because he would; he slept, it is true, but because he would; he sorrowed, it is true, but because he would; he died, it is true, but because he would. In illius potestate erat sic vel sic , velnen affici. it was in his power to be so or so affected, or not affected. The rea∣son which he giueth, is sound; and the Scripture, on which he buildeth, is plaine. Ibidem. Qui enim posset nisi ipse turbare; vbi summa potestas est, secundum volunt tis turbatur . Who could trouble him besides himselfe? where power is, there is troubled according to the of the will. And so the Scripture noteth. Iohn 11. he groned in spirite, , and troubled (or affected) him selfe. If this Rule be true, which hath the grounds of faith, and the words or the holie Ghost for a foundation, then your assertion is false, and against the faith, that tkese were alwaies in Christ, and alwaies caused an he in him. For you imply a con∣tinuall necessitie of sorrow and griefe in the Soule of Christ, where the Scriptures and Fathers teach vs, that nothing could griefe or sorrow on him, but when he himselfe would. And that Iesus sometimes reicyced, and Luc. 10. v. 21. exulted in Spirit, gi∣uing thankes to his Father for hiding (the mysteries of his kingdome) from the wise and prudent, and reuealing them to seelie ones, the is euident. You therefore, as your manner is, graunt that which is false, and deny that which is true. For what if Christ often, though not alwaies, sorrowed for these three aforesaid, is that any proofe, that Passion approching, where he sawe lewes should call for the ven∣geance of his bloud to be on them, and their children; and was now by most earnest & ardent prayer to obtaine remission of sinnes, direction of his spirit, and protection from Satan for his whole Church, (the Time and place now requiring it,) he should not with greater sorrow behold the one, and with more zeale in∣treat the other? But Desenc. pa. 94. li. 37. I strangely deceiue my selfe you say, if I thinke that any or ali of these did so farre exceede in him, as to procure his most dreadfull and bloudy Agony. When I heare you speake some truth, or see you vnderstand any thing right, I will more regard your word, then now I doe. That these things might be the causes thereof, shall plainly appeare to the sober and aduised Reader, when we come to the discussing of them; Howbeit I doe not say, that euery one of these sixe was the whole cause of his Agonie; as you childishly carpe; or that these sixe were the sole causes of his Agonie; but these respects were such, as might most exceedingly grieue, and most inwardly affect the Soule of Christ, making now way by prayer to procure the course of mans Redemption to be actually and effectually decreed and pronounced at his instance; which he would after perfect with patience. Nei∣ther are there greater workes in mans redemption, then these that were now in hand, with which if you thinke it not likely, nor possible, the Soule of our Sauiour should be mightily affected, your erroneous Imagination is farre stranger then my positi∣on of pietie and possibilitie. for as if you aske me, what the Angell that came from heauen, said to Christ in the Garden, I must openly professe, I take vpon me no such knowledge, but leaue Gods secrets to himselfe and his Sonne; so what occa∣sions besides these might at that instant affect the Soule of Christ, I dare not de∣termine, though you be so desperate, that you nothing doubt, Christ then felt in Soule from the immediate hand of God the selfe same paines, which the damned doe in hell; Notwithstanding the Scriptures insinuate no such suspition, much lesse auouch any such Doctrine for mans redemption. Defenc pag. 95 li. 1. For the Reiection of the Iewes what reason bring you. Christ wept ouer their Cittie: ergo, now at his Passion he was driuen into his dreadfull Agonie for this cause. ] You must make your owne match, or else you will quickly marre all. Where I professed it impossible certainly to conclude the true cause of Christs Agonie, your wisedome ta∣keth a part of my words, and clappeth on a Conclusion to them of your owne stam∣ping, and then you say the Argument is nought: and so nimble you be at nothing, that where I repeate sixe causes, that might be concurrent therein, you will haue me inferre, that euery one of them was the whole and sole cause thereof. But your mastership is to warme to be wise, and to selfe-willed to be sound, you doe not so much as see, or care, why I tooke this in for one of the causes, that might meete in this Agonie. The reuerent Sermo. pag. 19. li. 4. regard I had to the Iudgements of Ambrose, Ierom, Augustine, and Bede, who obserued this before me as one of the causes, that might be of Christs sorrow in the Garden, made me number this amongst the rest, how∣soeuer you spurne them away like foote-bals, and thinke with a wilde gallop to winne the Goale. But soft Sir, first their opinions lie in your way, which wise men will respect before your emptie wordes, and lasie likelihoods, that haue no salt in them, besides the sharpnesse of your humour. Secondly, my reasons to my purpose are auaileable enough, though you mishape them with a senselesse error of your own, as if euerie of these six were the single and sole cause of this agonie. There can no one particular cause be assigned of Christes feare, sorrow, and zeale in the Garden; but since himselfe is a witnesse, that his Soule was on euery side pressed with sorrow, my proofes which you cannot auoide, inferre, that amongst others this might be one cause of his sorrow. And so much those Fathers professe, as I haue formerly shewed; and you cannot decline them but with impudent flurting at them, that Defenc. pag. 95. li. 15. this verily cannot stand with any reason. But of our Reasons let the Reader Iudge. Christ wept at the sight of Ierusalem, when he remembred her de∣solation by the hands of the Romanes. What griefe then was it to him in all rea∣son, to foresee the reiection of that people from the sauour of God by their rash and wicked desire to haue his bloud on them and their children, at the time of his arraignment before Pilate? If Moses and Paul so vehemently at the fall of their bretheren according to the flesh, that for their sakes the one wished to be wiped out of the Booke of God, the other most sacredly protested the great heauinesse and continuall anguish, that he felt in hart for them; how much more then did it grieue the Sauiour of the world, who farre exceeded both the other in compassion and mercie, to see himselfe, that came to blesse them, and saue them, to be the ruine and stone of offence, that should stumble them, and their children, striking them with perpetuall blindnesse, and bruizing them with euerlasting perdition, through their vnbeliefe. To this what answere you? Defenc. pag. 95. li. 28. It prooueth that Christ surely had very great pittie and commiseration of them, but nothing else in the world. ] I professed to prooue no more. Why then should not this be one of the causes, that mooued Christ to sorrow in the Garden, where he confes ed his Soule was on euery side heauie? Ibid. li. 30. Christ might haue farre greater pittie of them, then Moses or Paul had, and yet he was able to carrie his affection farre more pa∣tiently and quietly then they were able. ] Doth any man besides you say, that Christ was impatient in his Agonie, but that as he was fully able to restraine all violence and vehemence of affection in himselfe, when he would; so was he likewise able to shew the inward touch and motion of mercie towards that people, by what signes he would, and by farre greater then Moses and Paul were able, and yet without all distemper or impatience, as you interpret his Agonie to be. Ibid. li. 34. Also Christ knew exactly Gods counsell and purpose for their reiection, which those holy men were not so par∣ticularly sure of. Wherefore Christ might better stay the vehemencie and breaking out of this affection, which in such a case must needes tend against the knowen will of God. ] Moses and Paul were sure enough of that, which they were sorie for, though the euidence of their knowledge was not comparable to Christs in any thing. And I pray you what letteth, but the clearer Christs knowledge was of the horrible venge∣ance of God, that should light on the Iewes for their wicked despising and mur∣dering of him, the greater might his sorrow be for them, so long as he sorowed not, that God would be righteous, but that they would be both impious in the fact, and incredulous in the Gospell of repentance, and so prouoke the Iustice of God to that extreame reuenge. Neither is that any way to impugne Gods knowen will, to be sorie that men will be so mad, as to heape vp vengeance on their owne heads: God rather alloweth that affection in vs here on earth, where we are not compas∣sed or confirmed with glorie, as our Sauiour then was not with his, that as Lament. 3. he doth not punish with his hart (or willingly,) so we should not wish, or before hand reioyce at the destruction of our enemies, whom we should loue, and for whom we should pray, euen when they persecute vs, as he taught vs by his owne example in praying, Luke. 22. Father forgiue them, they know not what they doe; and inspired Steuen with the same minde to say at the time, when they stoned him, Acts. 7. Lord lay not this sinne to their charge. So that your exceptions are rather preiudiciall to your owne positions, then to mine, which are no way weakned with these pretences, but rather strengthned. Defenc pag. 95. li. 16. Christs expresse compassion towards the Iewes (Luk. 19. Matth. 24.) a litle before he prepared him to his passion, plainly sheweth that now in the Garden and so still forward, he gaue him selfe wholy to other thoughts and matters, namely such as concerned his great worke in hand. ] Out of your learning you allow Christs compassion towards the walles and buildings of the temple, and the stones of the cittie, for he sheweth in both places, which you cite, that a Matth. 24. 2. Luc. 19 44. stone shall not be left vppon a stone, either in the Matth. 24. 2. Temple or Luc. 19 44. Citty, which concerned the Iewes temporall state and safety; but touching the reiection of that whole nation for these fifteene hundred yeares (as we find to this day) from Christ sorrowed that his death should be the ruine of the Iewes. the knowledge and grace of God, whereby their soules might be saued, which Christ most clearely foresaw would befall them for their putting him to death so barba∣rously, tumultuously, and contemptuously, that in the higth of your skill, you count not a matter worthy Christs cogitation or compassion. Such chipps you hew to helpe vp the building of your new made hell, that the Sauiour of the world vpon your word must be mindfull of the walles and houses in which the Iewes dwelt, and forgetfull of their Saluation, of whom, and for whom he was borne, and to whom he was first sent, if they would haue receaued him: as if the sonne of God knew not how to pro∣portion his sorow for them according to the dangers, that were imminent ouer them. But in all wise mens eies, if he so much pittied the ruine of their citie and desolation of their Land, that he wept for it, what sorow and griefe shall we think he inwardly tooke to see the perpetuall destruction of so many thousands, and all their posterities so many hundred yeares through their owne madnes in thirsting for his bloud? and why should this be excluded from the greate worke of mans Redemption, which he had then in hand, when he was in his agonie, since not only the future paines were fore∣seene by him, but all things incident and consequent were plainly to him foreknowen; Amongst which was the vtter abandoning of Gods former people for their infidelitie to the doctrine, and for their crueltie to the person of their and our Lord and Sauiour. Defenc. pag. 95. li. 7. A litle before when he throughly intended and expressed his affection touching that matter, yet thereby he fell into no such agonie, but onelie wept and mourned for them. ] Christ knew his times and places for all his affections and actions farre better then such a guest, as you are, could direct him. His affections before men he did moderate with all sobrietie and grauitie, they neuer saw in his face nor heard from his mouth an vn∣decent gesture or speech. For his vehement and most feruent affections, (which yet proceeded from no kind of impatience nor distemper of mind, as you imagine, but from the fire and flame of his most sacred humilitie, and zeale to God, and loue and pietie to man) he chose the time neerest his passion, and the place secret not only from others, but euen, from his owne Disciples. Had the people openly seene him in these feares praiers and sweats they would haue iudged him either Mar. 3. v. 21. madd, or Iohn 7. possessed with a diuell, as they did, when no signes of a troubled mind appeared. Christ there∣fore in his heauenly wisedome would haue no witnesses of his most feruent affections, as it seemeth by the course of the Scriptures, but God and his elect Angels, in so∣much that he willed the rest of his disciples to sitt where he appointed them, and tooke Peter, Iames, and Iohn, that had seen his glorie in the mountaine, and went on-ward with them to his purposed place, but left them a stones cast of, when he went to his passionate praiers: where for the darknesse of the night they could distinguish nothing; besides their incredible heauinesse to sleepe whiles their master was in his greatest agonie, which prooueth they neither heard, nor saw what befell him. How childishly then do you reason; Christ, when he spake of the destruction of the citie, fell not into an agonie before the people: therefore the griefe of their reiection could be no part of the sorow, which he assumed in the Garden. As this is most friuolous, so the rest is most captious. For what if his sorow for the Iewes were not the cause of his bloudie sweate; or of that part of his piaier, Father if it be possible, let this cup passe from me? Is that a reason, this was not respected by Christ at that time, because he had The different affections in Christes agony had different causes. diuers other assaults and seas of sorow, touching himselfe, and others, as well as touching the Iewes? what hobling is this, to aske one entire cause for so many different affections and actions, as Christ shewed in his agonie; where the Scriptures note not only feare and sorow on euery side, but extreame humilitie, and ardent zeale with such feruencie of spirit in praier, that the sweat brake from him like droppes of bloud? who, that sought trueth, or reade but the words of the Euangelists, would thus cauill with matters of such moment? Christ was in these passions and praiers by the space of an houre (for so himselfe said to Peter, Matth. 26. What could ye not watch with me one houre and he praied more intentiuely or more feruently after he was strength∣ned by an Angell, then before. Shall we thinke he said nothing all that while in his praiers, but only these words O my father if it be possible, let this cupe passe from me? This he repeated thrise, as the Scripture obserueth, but his praiers were longer, and ex∣tended to other things, except we thinke Christ was an houre repeating three lines. Besides the Scriptures note a change in his praiers. For after the Angel from heauen appeared to him, and strengthened him, Luc. 22. , then entering into an ago∣nie, he praied more earnestly, than before, so that his sweat trickled downe to the ground like droppes of bloud. You say there must be one entire cause of all these passions. So you say, but which way doe you, or can you goe about to prooue it, saue by the liquor of your owne lips, which is weaker then water to glew these things together. Defenc. pag. 95 li. 21. The worke of Christ at this time wrought by him is by a proper and peculiar name iustly called his passion, not his compassion. Which I would haue you to note. ] A man may soon note the worthinesse of your arguments, that when neither by truth nor reason you can preuaile you fall to collude with the names of passion and compassion. As if Christes passion did not sometimes import the whole historie of his death and sufferings, wherein are confessions, reprehensions, predictions, praiers and promises of Christ, as well as paines endured. And did it note noe more but paines, are not the passions and affections of feare and sorow, as painfull many times to the soule, as the stripes and wounds of the bodie? Such trifles you take for triple engins, when your conceits must be concluded; all other mens arguments haue no shape of any reason with you; so deepely you are in loue with your selfe and your owne inuentions, be they neuer so ill-fauoured or mishapen. Defenc. pag. 96. li. 2. Lastly those holymen (it seemeth) hauing their thoughts wholly defixed on their vehe∣ment pittie towards the Iewes, earnestly and constantly wished that the cuppe of Gods eternall wrath might come vpon themselues, that the Iewes who deserued it, might scape. But Christ in his passion contrariewise desired that cuppe, which he tasted to be to bitter, and to violent for him, might passe away from himselfe. ] If your suppositions of Moses and Paule were graunted you, which yet are no way true, they make the stronger against you, though you dissemble the sight thereof. For if pittie towards the Iewes so farre preuailed with those two being the seruants of Christ, that they yeelded their soules to eternall torments, as you imagine, to saue their Brethren; how great reason then hath it, that the Messias himselfe, in whom was the fullnesse of all mercie, might be mooued with such inward compassion for that whole nation, that he most earnestly and frequently praied in the Garden to haue this cuppe (that is, this maner of death, whereby the Iewes should perish) to passe from him, as Origen, Ierom, Ambrose and Bede expound those wordes? and though your hellish humour be so hoat, and so haughtie, that you pro∣nounce of euerie thing, there is no semblance of reason in this; yet the considerate Reader will find in those mens iudgments, whom I haue named and produced, more sap and pith then in your hell paines. For seeing the affection of mercy hath beene so mightie in men, that they were more then perplexed with this griefe, what bring you but babling to shew that Christ might not feruently pray, if so it pleased God, not to make his death the meane of their vtter ouerthrowe; and when he saw their pertinacie and infidelitie to be such, that his praier did not preuaile for them, to be troubled and agonized in mind for their wofull and willfull destruction? Christ praid for himselfe, not for them. ] But these learned Fathers tell you, he praied not against his owne death simply, but respecting them, by whose hands it should come, and whose eternall ruine it should be. Your cup of hell paines, which you dreame Christ then tasted to be too bitter and too violent for him, is a false and fond conceit of yours, hauing neither trueth, sense, nor likelihood in it, and yet forsooth both Scriptures and fathers must giue place to your deuices, and semblances. This I speake, if your assertion of Moses and Paul were admitted; howbeit indeed you are not able to prooue one word of all that you affirme in this case. You take certaine verie obscure and much questioned words of Moses and Paul for your ground-worke, and at your pleasure without all proofe you build thereon a whole world of falshood and confusion. Out of which, and the like darke and doubtfull places because the most of your hellish doctrine is drawen, I thinke it needfull to let the Reader see, how far and what those wordes inferre, which you so much striue to abuse. When the children of Israel had made them a Calfe of golde, and feasted and plai∣ed Moses prayer for the people examined. before it, as the God that brought them out of Egypt, the Lord was wroth and said to Moses; Deuter. 9. v. 13. I haue seene this people, and beholde it is a stifnecked people; 14. let me a∣lone, that I may destroy them, and put out their name from vnder heauen, and I will make of thee a mightie nation, and greater than they be. For this sinne, when Moses prayed that the whole nation might not be destroyed, he sayd to God; Exod. 32. v. 31. This people hath sinned a great sinne. 32. And now if thou wilt take away their sinne: and if not, wipe me out of the Booke which thou hast written. To whom God answered; Vers 33. Whosoeuer hath sinned against me, I will put him out of my booke. The first thing here to be considered is, what God threa∣tened to the people, and promised to Moses; the next, what Moses did, or could de∣sire for them. God did not threaten presently to execute damnation on all the peo∣ple, there were many thousand children amongst them, that knew not what idolatrie meant, but he would temporally destroy that whole nation, and raise Moses to a grea∣ter number than they were. Neither may we thinke, that God then would make a new number of predestinate, and assure the kingdome of heauen to all Moses ofspring without reiecting of any one of them, but that he would giue the land of Canaan, whereof he spake to their fathers, vnto Moses and his posteritie. Against this, Moses pleadeth two things vnto God; HIS GLORIE, lest the Egyptians should blas∣pheme, and say, Exod. 32. v. 12. he brought them out in malice to slay them in the mountaines, and to con∣sume them from the face of the earth: and HIS PROMISE, when he Vers. 13. sware by him∣selfe to Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, to multiplie their seed as the starres of heauen, and to giue them all the land ( of Canaan) to inherit for euer. So that Moses intreateth God to regard his owne glorie and trueth, and not in that sort to reuenge the peoples sinnes, by rooting them and their seed from the earth. And touching Gods offer vnto him, he so farre preferred his care of Gods glorie and mercie towards the Israelites, before his owne dignitie safetie, and posteritie, that he desired God, if the people were destroi∣ed from the earth, to rase out him also and his posteritie, that he might not see the ru∣ine of his nation, and heare the reproch of Gods name. Moses doth not meddle in this place with Gods eternall and secret predestination, which he knew was immu∣table, and wherof the Egyptians neither had, neither could haue any knowledge; and therefore so to conceiue Moses words, as if God should euerlastingly damne him, if he presently damned the people, is a construction full of presumption and impietie. Moses did not say, So thou wilt spare them, condemne me; but if thou wilt not for∣beare them, destroy me (and mine) also. Wherein you may make Moses so madde, (which God forbid) that he would goe to the diuell for companie; but you can not shew by his words, that he desired his euerlasting damnation might be their eternall saluation. Moses was too well learned in Gods mysteries, to thinke that he could be the Sauiour of that people, or that his soule was a meet price for their redemption; he refuseth all his personall honour, which was great in Gods sight, his present life, and future hope for all his ofspring in the land of Promise, rather than he would see the destruction of that whole multitude committed to his charge. This I take to be the true meaning of Moses words, and the booke there, of which he speaketh, to be Gods decree, to haue him (during their abode in the desert) to be the leader and of his people, and his seed after him to inherit with the rest of the Is∣raelites. The words of Paul, Rom. 9. v. 3. I did (or could) wish my selfe separated from Christ for my bre∣thren according to the flesh, somewhat differ from the words of Moses, and may receiue Pauls wish for the Iewes con∣sidered. euen by Grammar a double sense; the first actuall and absolute, the second potentiall or conditionall. It is euident to euery man but meanly acquainted with the Greeke tongue, that the verbe is the praeterimperfect tense Indicatiue, and regularlie signifieth, I did wish, in times past; and since neither is added to it, nor before or after it in the same sentence, there is no necessitie to make it Potentiall, as if he had sayd, I could, or would wish. Since then the wordes naturally serue the first sense, I did wish myselfe from Christ for my brethren the Iewes, and many learned and an∣cient Interpreters and Expositors haue so rendred both the words and the meaning of the Apostle in that place; I do not see what argument can thence be fra∣med The time was when he so wished. to support any of those more than strange conceits, which here you would esta∣blish. The translation sayth; . , Wishing I was. The Com∣mentaries vnder Ieroms name; . i ca. 9. ad R m. Optabam aliquando, cùm Christum, non modo . I did o wish, when I persecuted Christ, I would not now so . So Ambrose; . os. in 9 Rom. Optabam inq it, non opto. I did wish it, sayth Paul, I doe not presently wish. So Primasius; 9. ad R m. Optabam non nunc optarem. I did wish it somtimes, I would not now wish it. And Sedulius; 9. ad R m. Optabam, inquit, non opto. I did, I doe not wish it. Against this exposition can nothing be brought, that is not easily answered. Paul taketh Christ and the Ho∣lie Ghost as witnesses to his owne conscience, that his heauinesse was great, and the griefe of his heart continuall for his brethren the Iewes, in regard of the good which he wish∣ed them in Christ, and his desire to haue them saued. And how farre this zeale and affection for his people did carie him before to runne headlong against Christ, and to do his vttermost to be a cast-away from Christ for their sakes, themselues did discerne by his sharpe and eager persute of Christes Church. He therefore euer was, and yet is a zealous well-willer to his owne Nation, though he were now called to be the Tea∣cher of the Gentils. Those that referre this speech to the time when Paul wrote to the Romans, must first haue leaue to supply the text with a Potentiall particle in Greeke called , and If Paul the time when he wrote, is wordes w re conditionall. then to adde certaine conditions vnto , which is if, & must be vnderstood correspon∣dent vnto to make the difference betwixt the Indicatiue and Optatiue Moods. For when a man sayth he could or would wish this or that, he meaneth, If there were not some stoppes to hinder his desire. And so the Apostles words, if they be, Potentiall, they import some necessarie respects, that stayed him from actuall so much. They then which would haue the Apostle to speake Optatiuely; I could wish my selfe to be seuered from Christ for my brethren; doe vnderstand; so as it were pleasing to God, possible for me, and profitable to them. For no man of any sense or iudgement doth hence conclude as this Defender doth, that it was possible; Paul was too great a Di∣uine to thinke, that Gods eternall counsell and election could be changed for any mans priuate desires or wishes; but he declared, as they suppose, how willing he was to renounce all the honour, hope, and happinesse, that Christ had called him vnto, so it might be for Gods glorie, and their good that were his kinsmen after the flesh. What is meant by separation from Christ, and whether Paul wished an euerlasting depri∣nation of all blisse or no, the best Interpreters do not agree. Nicolaus Hemmingius a learned professor of true religion, commenting vpon Pauls Epistles, sayth: Hemmingius in ca. 9. ep. ad Rom. What shall we say of this affection in Paul? Hoc teneamus principium, quòd nihil absurdi, nihil impij, nihil contra salutem animae suae, nihil contra dilectionem Christi, spiritu enim Christi agebatur Paulus. Hoc stabilito principio, necesse est hanc separationem a Chri∣sto non intelligendam esse de internâ separatione ae Christo & aeternâ; sed de externâ tantum & temporali, quâ perire in carne, vt saluentur alij in spiritu. Let vs holde this for a maine principle, that Paul wished no absurd, no wicked thing, nothing against the saluation of his owne soule, nor against the loue of Christ: for Paul was (in this) guided with the spirit of Christ. This foundation lying fast, we must necessarily vnderstand this separa ion from Christ (which Paul wished) not of any internall or eternall separation from Christ, but only of an ex∣ternall and temporall, whereby he wisheth to perish in the flesh, that others might be saued in the spirit. This is another of Ieroms Expositions in his questions to Algasia: Hieron. ad Algasiam. quaest. 9. Wee shall finde the same affection in Moses and Paul towards the flocke committed vnto them. A good shepheard layeth downe his life for his sheepe, which is all one with this (of Paul) I wish∣ed to be separate from Christ; and with that (of Moses) Wipe mee out of the booke which thou hast written. And withall see how great the Apostles loue was to Christ, that he desired to die for Christ, and to perish alone, so all sorts of men might beleeue in him. Perire autem non in perpetuum sed imprasentiarum. Perish Paul would not euer lastingly, but for this pre∣sent life. He would therefore perish in the flesh, that others might be saued in the spirit; and lose his owne bloud to preserue their soules. Haymo likewise; Haymo in 9. ca. ad Rom. Hoc loquebatur de occisio∣ne corporis sui, cùm nullo modo optaret mentis affectu separaria Christo. This (Paul) spake of the killing of his bodie, when by no meanes he wished the affection of his minde to be seuered from Christ. Photius and Oecumenius in their Greeke Scholies haue another interpretation, which In Comment. lingu . fol. 700. Budeus a man of no small iudgement in the Greeke tongue doth follow: Photius apud Oecumenium in 9. cap. epist. ad Rom. . Paul doth not say, he would be made a separate from Christ, that is, now to be diuided from Christ, (that were most detestable) but (he could wish) to haue beene (still) a separate from Christ, that is, as yet to haue continued an alien, and not to that present time to haue cleaned vnto Christ. In effect Paul sayth, I would haue wished mine owne selfe not yet to haue come to Christ, but to How the Grae∣cians expound Pauls words. this day to haue remained separate from him, if this might haue holpen your entrance and faith in Christ. This in effect Benedictus Aretius a learned Expositor of our time, doth embrace: Paul Aretius in 9. cap. epist. ad Romanos. desireth himselfe for (his kinsmen) the Iewes to be anathema from Christ, that is, for a time to be a stranger from Christ, that in the meane while his nation might haue place in Christ, and himselfe at last be saued (with them.) The words may like∣wise be taken for an imperfect speech, as though he had sayd; I could wish this, if it were law∣full for me (salua pietate) by the rules of pietie; I would doe it for Christes glory, who could not want meanes to restore me againe from this (anathema or) curse. Chrysostoms exposition best pleaseth Peter Martyr and Zanchius, as if Paul had beene content for Christs glory and the Saluation of the Iewes, not to haue beene seuered from the loue and fauour of Christ, but if it were possible thereby to do them good, from the blisse and happinesse, that Christ would bestow on him. How∣beit they both make it simply impossible, and that euen to Pauls knowledge, that this should, or could be. Peter Mar∣tyr in 9. cap. Epist. ad Ro∣manos. Neque mirari debemus Paulum hoc optasse, cum non posset fieri, (illum enim dubium non est ad praedestinatos pertinuisse) voluntas enim nostra saepe rapitur ad ea quae sieri non possunt. Neither ought we to maruaile, (saith Peter Mar∣tyr) that Paul wished that which could not be: (for he no doubt was of the number of the Elect) since our will is often caried to things impossible. de tribus . li. 5. cap. 3. . 2. In the word Anathema, (separated from Christ) I consider (saith Zanchius) two very diuerse and distinct things, towitte, separation from the loue (and fauour) of Christ, and priuation from the fruite of Christs loue, which fruite is blessednesse it selfe, or a blessed and euerlasting life in heauen with Christ. That Paul wished to be seuered from Christ, meaning, from the loue and fa∣uour of Christ, and to become execrable vnto Christ for the safetie of his bretheren, Dari nullo modo potest, aut debet, this in no wise may, or ought to be graunted. For this is repug∣nant to that, which he said before in the ende of the eight Chapter, yea to the Principall cause, which led him to his desire. The ground whereof was not so much his affection to his bretheren, as his loue chiefly to Christ. And comparing Moses words and wish with Pauls, he saith. Ibidem. I doe not doubt, but as Paul did no way desire to be seuered from Christ, that is, from his communion and fauour: so Moses by no meanes did aske, that God would rather strike him out of the number of his friends, then destroy the people. Neque enim hoc potuit salua pietate expetere, aut petere, for neither could he desire, nor aske this with any pietie; but as Paul wished him selfe alone rather, if it were possible, to be depriu d of eternall happinesse, then all the Israelites to be reiected from grace, and thereby the name of Christ and glory of God to be endangered by blasphemous minds and mouthes. Ibidem. Neither is it any impediment, which is opposed touching the immutabilitie of Gods elec∣tion and his Iustice, against which Moses seemeth to tend, when he desireth that God would destroy him being an Innocent, and ordained to saluation. For Moses Prayer is to be vnder∣stoode with this Condition, if it be possible, and yet he knew, it was not possible. There is a fift Exposition of this place, which thinketh that Paul led with a fer∣uent This exposition may not simply be receiued. loue and zeale to haue the Iewes partakers of Christ, did not remember or re∣spect either the Counsell or Iustice of God to be immutable, which yet are, but brake forth into a vehement affection, as desiring to exchange his eternall damna∣tion for their Saluation. These leaue out all manner of Conditions, not because there were not many, and must be many, before the wish can be religious and pleasing to God, but for that the Apostle wholy defixed on his care for the Iewes, did not in that Passion consider the rest. But by their leaues, that are the leaders to this expo∣sition, well this may be conceaued of some short and suddaine motion rising from mans infirmitie; but this can neuer be imagined of the Apostle aduisedly and iudi∣cially writing to the Romans, and weighing all his words with the wisedome of Gods spirit, which if they take from the Apostle in that part of this Epistle, where he calleth Christ and the holy Ghost to witnesse, that he speaketh the truth, I see not why they may not derogate all Authoritie from the rest of his writings, when after so great deliberation, and vehement protestation they make him forget the chiefest grounds of Christian Religion earnestly vrged by himselfe in the selfe same Epistle, and euen in the next wordes before, written in the later ende of the eight Chapter. It is therefore a dangerous position to say, the Apostle was amazed or astonished in his writings, or so caried away with his affections, that he knew not what he wrote in those Scriptures, which are Canonicall. For it openeth a gap to all impieties and heresies, to thinke that Paul led with Christs spirit, did not re∣member nor respect, that Gods eternall election could not be changed, nor the chosen vessels of Christ be euerlastingly condemned for the loue and zeale, which they bare to Christ, nor any man or Angell admitted to be the Redeemer and deli∣uerer of the Reprobate from the iust and deserued wrath of God prouided for them. All which pestilent errors are consequent to this supposition, that the Apo∣stles speech was absolutely without condition; and must be graunted to be pos∣sible, before his desire or wish could simply take place. It is therefore resolued euen by them who first deuised this exposition, that Pauls wish in this place was wholy impossible, as well in respect of God, who would not change his eternall counsels and decrees; as of the Apostle, who being a chosen vessell could not perish; and likewise of the Iewes, whose deserued destruction so often denounced by our Sa∣uiour, as where he said, Matth. 21. The kingdome of God shall be taken from you, and to Ieru∣salem, Luke 19. They shall not leaue in thee a stone vpon a stone, because thou knewest not the day of thy visitation, and many such threats; could not be auerted. Only this Defender to shew his discretion, out of these darke places, which admit many senses, collect∣eth that to be possible; which by the verdict of the holy Scriptures and of all Inter∣preters new and old is auouched to be simply impossible; and thence he maketh his notable obseruations, which indeede are nothing else but grosse and palpable errors. Defenc. pag. 96. li. 25. From thence I obserue foure notable points. First, That if God omnipotent, and one∣ly soueraigne Lord will, he may inflict damnation and the paines of hell vpon meere men, not for themselues, but for others, nor for their owne sinnes, but for the imputed sinnes of other men: much rather then might he doe this to Christ, whom God sent indeede and or∣dained for that purpose. Flatly contrarie to your Assertion. ] To make your Obserua∣tion Note. the nearer to the patterne, which you follow, you must say, that God, if he will, may inflict eternall damnation (for temporall damnation to hell the Scripture know∣eth none,) on his elect, (so were Moses and Paul;) for their loue to Christ and their Foure notable errors falsely grounded on the facts of Moses & Paul where∣of the first. bretheren, for that was the cause of their wish. And then you haue made a worthy Corollarie, that indeede contrarieth my Assertion, and not mine onely, but also the expresse words of the holy Ghost, the maine grounds of the Christian Faith, and the resolution of all writers first and last, that haue spoken of these places. To Moses Petition Gods answere was, that he would not wipe an Innocent out of his booke, but, Exod. 32. verse 33. Whosoeuer hath sinned against me, said God, I will put him out of my booke. So that God himselfe did not onely refuse Moses Prayer in that part, but declared it to be repugnant to his Iustice to condemne the guiltlesse with the guiltie. The Apostle, the next words before these, by which you would make it possible that he might perish for others, professed; that Rom. 8. v. 38. neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor things pre∣sent, nor things to come, nor heigth, nor deapth, nor any other creature was able to separate him from the loue of God in Christ. And therefore generally demandeth, Ibid. v. 35. Who shall separate vs from the loue of Christ? No creature is able, as he exactly auoucheth; and as for the Creator, Verse. 33. It is God that iustifieth, (and therefore cannot be contrarie to himselfe) Verse. 34. who shall condemne, where God in Christ doth acquite? [ God you thinke may change his mind. ] His eternall counsell decreed, reuealed, and assured in Christ, God neither will correct, because he is wise, and before all worlds foresaw all that might mooue him to the contrarie, neither can alter, because he is truth, and so can neither repent, nor change, as men doe. The Rom. 11. Gifts and calling of God are without repentance. 2. Tim. 2. The foundation of God standeth sure, and hath this seale, the Lord knoweth who are his. Iames. 1. With him is no varying nor turning; And therefore our Sauiour excep∣teth it as a thing not possible, that the elect should perish, when he saith; that false Prophets and great wonders in the later daies should deceaue, Matth. 24. If that were possible, the very Elect. By his power, you will say, God may doe it, though he will not.] Gods power was most absolute ouer all creatures to dispose them at his pleasure, before he de∣termined and setled his will in Christ Iesus, what to doe with them; since which the holy Ghost teacheth vs in plaine words, it is impossible that God should lie, hauing made his promise to all his elect in Christ, and bound it with an Othe; not because he is become weaker then he was, but because he hath fastned his counsell, and re∣uealed his truth in his Sonne, which he neither will, nor can change; not for want of power, but because of his truth, which is constant and immutable. Heb. 6. v. 17. 18. God willing (saith the Apostle) more abundantly to shew the stablenesse of his counsell, bound him∣selfe with an othe, that by two immutable things (his promise and his othe) wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might haue strong comfort. So that howsoeuer you in your irreligious sophistrie doe say, God Omnipotent may inflict damnation vpon men for others, If you meane vpon his Elect, such as Moses and Paul were, whose exam∣ples and words you would seeme to follow, you defend an open and exact Impossibi∣litie Note. and heresie; speaking of damnation as the Scriptures doe, and as you doe in this place, where you say, those holy men (Moses and Paul) Defenc. pag. 96. li. 5. Earnestly and con∣stantly wished Gods eternall wrath might come vpon themselues, that the Iewes might scape it. Will you flie from the elect to the reprobate, and say that God may inflict damnation on them for other mens sinnes? Then are you cleane gone from your examples of Moses and Paul, for they were no reprobates; and as farre from all re∣gard of Gods Iustice, who eternally condemneth no man but for sinne permanent and inherent, as in all the reprobate? For though God doe saue without merite for his mercies sake, yet he condemneth no man eternally but for sinne; and that either committed, or inherited. Genes. 18. Be it farre from thee (saith Abraham to God) to slay the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be euen as the wicked, be it farre from thee. Shall not the Iudge of the world doe iudgement? If it be simply impossible for Gods elect to perish, as our Sauiour witnesseth, what hainous and horrrible falsitie and impietie is it to say, The Sonne of God might be damned for sinners? And though you shift sides and say, Defenc pag. 96. li. 29. Much rather then ma God doe this to Christ, yet if you hold either to your former examples, whence you deduce this; or to your words in this very sentence, whence you draw this com∣parison, you must say, much rather then may God inflict damnation and his eternall wrath on Christ; which whether it may not rightly be called one of your hellish mysteries, I leaue to all Christian men to iudge. Such wicked obseruations when you make from so weake and false foundations, the Reader may soone see, what a notable Di∣uine you are, and how likely to teach the truth, that pretend Gods power against his will for the vtter ruine os all Religion. Christ you say was ordained for that purpose. ] Christ was not ordained to be damned for vs. What to be damned for others, or rather to beare the chastisment of our peace, that we might be healed with his stripes? The Prophet Esay saith he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruized for our iniquities. But you are the first supplanter of all Patriarkes and Prophets, that say Christ was damned for our sinnes. You will come in with your temporall and substantiall damnation, to which you subiect the Soule of Christ: But Sir if you beleeue and teach the same truth, which the holy Ghost doth in the word of God; Why swarue you so much from the words and grounds of the Sacred Scriptures? Why doth nothing please you in mans Redemption but hell and damnation inflicted on Christ, where you neuer learned any such lesson out of the Prophets or Apostles? And here your abused and vnaduised examples, which you pretend for this purpose, import no such thing, but rather the cleane con∣trarie. For if it were not possible for Moses and Paul euerlastingly to perish, because they were elected in Christ; how infinitely more impossible was it, that Christ should perish, in whom all are elected? And how Christ could perish but either by the dis∣solution of his person, or else by the ioynt condemnation of the second person in the most glorious Trinitie to the fire of hell, I doe not see; since these are such blasphe∣mies, as hell neuer hatched the like. Defenc. pag. 96. li. 31. That which there you mention, is the ordinarie and common rule: The Soule that sin∣neth it shall die: but in Christ this was extraordinarie and singular that the iust died for the vni st. ] The wordes which I cited, are sufficient to reprooue the first of your foure notable obseruations as starke false. For there God sweareth by himselfe, that the Ezech. 18. Soule which sinneth that shall die: and consequently, the Sonne shall not beare the iniquitie of the Father, neither shall the Father beare the iniquitie of the Sonne; much lesse shall Moses and Paul beare the iniquitie of the whole people, as you dreame they might. And so much Gods answere to Moses importeth; Exod. 32. whosoeuer hath sinned against me, I will wipe him, (and none other) out of my Booke. As for Christ, since he was God as well as man, his person could not be tied to the Lawes and Rules ap∣pointed for men, but what he himselfe would admit in his owne person, to that by willing obedience he submitted himselfe; namely in his Manhood to die the death of the Crosse for our sinnes according to the Scriptures, but not to be damned for vs, nor to die the death of the Soule mentioned in the Scriptures; to whose Doctrine we must stand, and not to your deuices, when we speake of Gods iudgements against sinne, or of the purgation of our Soules. Wherefore that God himselfe by his owne body would be the Price of our Redemption, was indeed a thing proper and singular to the person of Christ, wherein neither Moses nor Paul could be partakers with him, or examples of him: and therefore your fitting their prayers to his Passion, to make your hel paines thereby possible, is a thing far fet, & no way pertinent to this purpose. Defenc. pag. 96. li 22. I take it plaine enough that these sinned not in their desire, and I suppose you take it so too, in that you alleadge them, and ground your Reasons of comparison vpon them. ] They sinned not, because their desires were conditionall & submitted to Gods good plea∣sure with reseruation of their dueties; otherwise if they thought that possible, which they desired, as you doe, by their destruction, (who were the chosen vessels of mer∣cie) to excuse the reprobate from damnation deserued by obstinacie and infidelitie, they not only erred from the truth, but sinned in praying to haue their wils take place before and against the will of God. But Moses in loue to Gods glory, and care for his charge, desired to be partaker of such temporall vengeance, as should befall the whole people of God; and Pauls words, that are potentiall, must be conditionall; otherwise he needed not to haue said, I could wish, but I doe wish. The which because he doth not, but onely shew his desire, were it possible and pleasing to God, therefore he may be well excused from sinne, though you condemne this in him, and that in Mo∣ses as a Defenc. pag. 95. li. 33. Distemper. Touching my alleadging their griefe for Gods people, I doe not vse to venture on such desperate conclusions as you doe. To my purpose it was sufficient, that they both were Rom. 9. grieued at hart with great and continuall heauinesse for their Nation, which are the vndoubted and vnquestioned words of Paul, and causes of Moses Prayer: farder I did not goe, but from that care and sorrow of theirs, I ob∣serued it both lawfull and likely for the Messias, as he was man, to be inwardly and deepely troubled in his affection with the present and perpetuall ruine of that people for his death by taking his bloud vpon them and their children. And this standeth sound and good, whatsoeuer become of your newe and notable collections, which shew your small Iudgement, and lesse truth in points of Diuinitie. Defenc. pag. 96. li. 34. Secondly, we see here that there may be possibly a death of the Soule, a curse, and se∣paration from God, which is in it selfe neither siane, nor conioyned with sinne necessarily: but meerely a suffering of punishment from God for the sinnes of others imputed. Contra∣rie to you also pag. 73. & 310. yea generally euery where. ] You remember belike the olde rule, Ex impossibili sequitur quodlibet, from an impossibilitie supposed any thing will The second er∣r r draw n from their ex∣ample. follow: and seeing your selfe destitute of all proofes for your new Doctrine, you will needs make lotteries of impossibilities, and thence draw what you like best. For ta∣king a plaine impossibilitie for your maine ground, you thereupon frame vs foure obseruations as impossible, as the first supposition. And this absurd wandring from all truth and faith you would haue the Reader Note, as a speciall demonstration of your discretion and vnderstanding in matters of Religion. Suppose as you doe, that God through his omnipotent power may turne heauen into hell, and reuerse all that he hath decreed and prouided for the different rewards of pietie and impiety, and you may soone prooue what falsitie you will by flying from Gods counsell and truth to his power and might: But Christian religion teacheth not whatsoeuer is possible to Gods power, but what is ordained by his will, and reuealed by his word. Otherwise what heresie can you name touching Gods works in his creation or re∣demption of the world, that defendeth impossibilities to Gods power, setting aside all respect of his will and truth? This therefore is the high way to vphold all falsi∣ties and impieties, to oppose Gods power against his will and word, and to beleeue he hath done, whatsoeuer his almightie power is able to doe. Concerning the death of the Soule, though here be no place to speake largely of it▪ it is double by the confession of all Diuines, and euen of the Scriptures them∣selues. For as the places are diuerse, where men doe abide, here and else where, in this life and the next; so the life, which the Soule enioyeth, is proportioned to the place, where she continueth; God in his wisdome and goodnesse hauing so pro∣uided, that whiles she gouerneth the body here on earth, she should be partaker of him by the grace of his spirit, and hereafter in the kingdome of heauen she should haue the full fruition of him by the manifest reuelation and communion of his glo∣rie. Likewise the death of the Soule preuaileth in this life by sinne, which is the na∣turall depriuing, or voluntarie renouncing of all grace, and in the world to come by damnation, which is the iust reiecting of all the wicked from any fellowship with God in his glorie, and the fastning them to euerlasting torments in hell fire. Gods actions in either of which are most iust and holy; for he withdraweth and denieth his grace, when it is refused; and excludeth them from all accesse to his blessednesse, that heere on earth despised both him and it, adiudging them to the iust desert of their sinnes in euerlasting flames: But neither of these can possibly take hold of man without sinne committed, or inherited. And therefore your imagining a death of the Soule without sinne, is a supposing of things impossible, since neither Moses Prayer nor Pauls wish in that sense, which you follow, were possible, as all Diuines both new and old confesse. Chrysost. . 16. in ca. 9. ad Ro . Paul wished (saith Chysostome) to be separate from Christ, , if it were Paul wished if it were p ssible and lawfull. possible. And againe, Therefore am I grieued (saith Paul) , and if it were (lawfull or possible) to be separated and estranged, not from the loue of Christ, ( , farre be that from me to wish, because he did this for loue ) but from that fruition and glorie, I could admitt it, that my Lord should not be blasphemed. Photius, as he is collected by Oecu∣menius, Ibidem. thus expresseth Pauls wish. ca. 15. in 9 ca. . ad Ro∣manos. Paul saith, , that if it were possi∣ble by my destruction for Christ to be glorified, and the Iewes to be saued, I would not refuse it. I could wish it, sayth he, , if it might be, if it were lawfull, if that choise were giuen me; I would preferre the glory of Christ, and the saluation of manie before mine owne. The new writers that take Anathema for a separation from Christ, as Chrysostome doth, adde the same conditions which he doth, confessing it neuer the lesse to be simply impossible. The iudgements of Peter Martyr and Zanchius we saw before. Aretius repeating this exposition amongst others, saith. Or els Aretius in ca. 9. epist. ad Ro∣manos. separated from Christ, that is euerlastingly damned, if that were possible, that with the losse of one soule the saluation of manie thousands might be redeemed. The affection of those that speake lo∣uingly, proceedeth often to things impossible. For of it selfe neither was it possible, that the Apostle with his destruction should redeeme the vnbeleeuing Iewes, and it had beene wicked so to thinke, since the merit of Chr st alone is propitiatorie; neither was this lawfull for the Apostle to offer himselfe to be a Red mptorie sacrifice for the saluation of others; but the A∣postles affection is to be considered wishing impossibilities vpon an honest desire. Piscator in his Scholies vpon that Chapter to the Romans. Piscatoris Scholia in ca. 9. ad Rom. I did wish, for, I could wish: Nempe si lic ret sulua pietate, meaning, if it were lawfull so to doe without breach of pietie. Beza. Bezae Anno∣tationes in 9. ca. ad Rom. This is very much to be obserued, that Paul doth not say, he did so wish at any time, but he was so affected, that willingly he could be content to redeeme the destruction of his nation with his owne, nempe sisieri sic potuisset, meaning if that might possibly be. And therefore it is a needelesse disputation, that manie here vndertake, whether this wish were lawfull or vnlawfull. If Paul ref ained thus to wish, because it was neither lawfull, nor possible actually to obtaine it, how senselesse and truethlesse are your foure obseruations grounded vpon the possibilitie and pietie of this wish; whereas all men of any iudgement or vnder∣standing conclude the cleane contrarie? but such is your cariage that except you may crosse the resolutions of all men, you thinke your selfe no bodie. Be famous therefore in your follie, that bring impossibilities and impieties for the chiefe foundation of your late sprung faith; your Reader I trust will require some better proofe, before he giue you allowance in matters of such moment as these be. Defenc. pag. 97. li. 1. Thirdly that extraordinarily there is greater loue among meere men, then only to die bodily one for another, though vsually and ordinarily a greater cannot be found among men: which is it that Christ meaneth: but how much more then may the loue of Christ toward his elect be farre greater: contrarie to your assertion pag: 107. 108.] Your doctrine is all extra∣ordinarie, The Defend r sayth the Scrip∣tures re ordi∣narily true, that is, sometimes false. that no ordinarie rules of the Scriptures can stand with it. Howbeit in this you chalenge Christ, and not mee, who saith: Iohn 15. No man hath greater loue, then to lay downe his life for his friend. That is ordinarily true, you say but extraordinarily false. Then extraordinarily by your supposition Christ sometimes speaketh an vntrueth, though it be not ordinarie with him so to doe: which honor you yeeld to the rest of the Scriptures. For when you can not otherwise auoid them; those, you answeare, are the Defenc. pag. 96. li. 32. ordinarie and common rules of the Scripture; But your doctrine consisteth of ex∣traordinarie Rules, which are no where found but in your owne braine. You haue heard Chrysostome, Photius, and Zanchius auouch (who are the chiefe commenders of the exposition, which you would seeme to follow) that Paul neither did, nor might preferre the loue of his Countriemen before his owne saluation, and communion with Christ; but that his principall respect in this wish was his loue to the glorie of Christ, which he more esteemed then his owne soule. So that nothing did hinder Paul to preferre Gods glory before the safety of his owne soule, and yet Christes rule to stand true, that no man hath greater loue, then to lay downe his life for his friend. Nei∣ther was it the death of the Soule that Paul wished, since he would by no meanes, as these old and new writers obserue, be seuered from the loue and fauour of Christ, but from the ioy and honour that is laid vp for the saints of God. Peter Martyr is of the same opinion with them. Pet. Martyr in ca. 9. epist. ad Romanos. Neither doth Paul in this place say, he wished to be separated from the loue of God, (nullo enim modo voluisset ab illo amando desistere: for by no meanes would Paul haue ceased from louing God) only he wisheth to be excluded from the blessednesse and fruition of God. And this euerie one of vs ought to be willing vnto, euen lesse to regard his owne (eternall) happinesse then the glorie of God. Now he that still loueth god, and is beloued of him, by no meanes can suffer the death or curse of the soule mentioned in the Scriptures. 1. Cor. 16. if any man loue not the Lord Iesus Christ, let him be Anathema maran∣Atha, that is accursed in the highest degree. then could not the same curse befall him, that loued Christ dearer then his owne soule; but the words of our Sauiour must needes be verified in him, Ma th. 10. he that looseth his soule for my sake, shall find (or saue) it. So that neither of your suppositions are true, either that Paul preferred the loue of men before the safety of his owne soule, or that for their sakes he was content to die the death of the soule mentioned in the Scriptures, which is a separation as well from the loue and trueth of God, as from the glorie and felicitie of God. And your com∣parison, for which you intend all this, and wherewith you would crosse my assertion, is most vntrue, that Christes loue to his elect led him to die the death of the soule, or to forgoe the fauour and fellowship of God for their sakes. For the coniunction of Christs manhoode to his Godhead, being personall, was farre greater and nearer then the knitting of Paul or Moses vnto God; and if that vnion were broken, all the workes and sufferings of Christs manhoode were no way able to bring vs to God. Christ could not be content to be separated from God for vs. Wherefore it were a thing extreamly impious in the manhood of Christ, and no lesse dangerous to our saluation, for him to be content to be vtterly seuered from the vni∣on and communion of the diuine nature, with which he was personally ioined; and though your imagination of Moses and Paul be false enough, and altogether impossible, yet to dreame the like of Christ, is the higth of all impietie. Neither doth that diminish his loue to vs, since there was no need thereof for vs, his other suffrings being sufficient in the iust and exact iudgement of God; and the loue, that led the second person in Trinitie to lay aside for the time the full and perfect fruition of his glorie, and equalitie with God his Father, and in our flesh to emptie and humble him∣selfe, not only to the infirmities of our nature, and miseries of our life, but euen to the shame and paine of our death on the Crosse, farre exceeded all the loues, that men or Angels could shew vnto vs. For there is more distance betweene the glorie and Maiesty of God, and the sense and shame of our miserie and mortality, then betwixt the saluation or damnation of men or Angels. Wherefore Christs loue to vs may not be diminished, or made inferiour to the loue of creatures, though he were not damned for our sakes, since that ineuitablely and irreuocablely would haue fastned vs to a greater condemnation, and no way saued vs; whereas now his vnspeakable fellowship with God hath recalled vs all from the damnation due to vs, to be partakers of the loue and grace, that eternally and infinitely he possessed with God. Defenc. pag. 97. li. 6. Fourthly, we see here these holy men, without feeling any paines inflicted by Gods wrath, but only through an earnest and mighty compassion of loue had their minds drawen so wholy to thinke on this speciall thing aboue their reach, that during the time they turne not themselues to any other cogitation. li. 17. This you acknowledge may be in men, and yet you will not scoffe at them as cast into a Traunce by it, nor reproche them with infernall confusion. How much lesse ought you so to deale with Christ. ] Your fourth obseruation is like the rest, that is, voide of all reason and trueth. For though you take vpon you to be bold with Moses and his praier, which yet you cannot shew li. 14. was directly against his owne saluation, as you auouch; what proofe haue you that Paul aduisedly and considerately writing to the The fourth er∣rour pretended from the former examples. Romans, was amazed, and had no remembrance that Gods election was immutable, and certainly reserued for him and the rest of Gods chosen in the heauens? will you tell vs, that the Scriptures were written by men amazed, and forgetting the first prin∣ciples of religion euen in their writings? you may do wel to make that your fift obser∣uation rightly matching your doctrine & deuotion: but I weene few wise men wil al∣low this or that audacious enterprise in you. I did in those words of mine which you bring, describe what astonishment by nature was; to wit, feare & admiration so mixed, that for the time both sense & speach are suddenly inter upted, whiles the soule most earnestly beholding, or declining that, which she not or endureth not, neglecteth the sense or speach of her bodie, as regarding or attending greater things, that presently or fearefully oppresse her. What is this to Moses or Paul? if they were astonished with feare, then neither could they speake, nor write; how els they should be caried besides themselues, I doe not see, nor you doe not say. Moses had often accesse to god, and so feared not to speake, or pray vnto him; and at the first kindling of Gods wrath against the people, for making the Golden Calfe, Moses carefully and mindfully proposed in his Exod. 32. vers. 11. praiers to God both the reproch, which the 12. Aegyptians would breath forth against gods holie name, and the 13. oath made by God to Abraham Isaac and Iacob, to giue their seed the land of Canaan for an euerlasting inheritance. And the Scripture saieth that vppon that praier, before Moses went downe from the mount, Exod. 32. vers. 14. The Lord changed his mind from the euill, which he threatned to doe vnto his people. Lesse cause then had Moses afterward to be amazed, hauing alreadie diuerted and pacified the brunt of Gods anger against the multitude, and praying now for the quite abolishing of this sinne, out of Gods remembrance, and the continuance of his fauour, and presence to goe before his people. Augustine thinketh Moses was well aduised in his praier, and knew Gods mercy to be such, that he would rather spare the wicked, then destroy the godly; of which goodnesse in God Abraham pre∣sumed, when he made request for Sodom. August. in Psal. 77. God (sayth Austen) so spared that nation, that he kindled not his whole wrath vtterly to roote them out, and make an end of them, which appeareth plainly in Gods speach, and Moses praier for their sinnes; where God said, I will rase them (from the earth) and make thee a great people. But Moses interposeth himselfe, paratior deleri pro ipsis, quàm ipsos, readier to be cut off, than they should, apud miseri∣cordem se id agere, qui quoniam nullo modo deleret ipsum, etiam illis ipsis parceret propter ip∣sum, knowing he should preuaile with him that was mercifull, who would by no meanes destroy him, but rather spare them for his sake. So that Moses by the iudgement of S. Augu∣stine was not amazed in his prayer, as you falsly presume, but remembred himselfe well enough, and put his life into Gods hands, as more willing to be slaine, than the whole multitude should, and knowing that God would rather spare them in mercie, who were trespassers, than slay him, that was innocent. For Paul you haue lesse reason, since he doth not actually wish it, but sayeth, hee could wish it, if it were lawfull and possible; meaning, he could be content to put bo∣die and soule into Gods hands, to doe there with what pleased him, so the trueth of Christ might be receiued and acknowledged of the Iewes. His maner of speech, which must be conditionall, except you grant it to respect the time past, proueth that he was well aduised in referring all to Gods will, and reseruing as well Gods counsell, as his word reuealed, without touch or impeach. And therefore that the Apostle so writing was amazed, I see no ground, besides the gulfe of your owne inuentions. I am farre therefore from scof ing at them, as if they were in a traunce, in whom I see no such amazednesse as you imagine; much lesse may you take vpon you for your plea∣sure, to put the sonne of God into the same distemper, as you call it, with others; since both his wordes and deedes recorded by the Euangelists, declare him to haue beene not onlie full of grace and trueth, but mindfull of the least circumstance, that pertained to his passion, and of purpose to direct his sayings and doings to all those issues, which the Scriptures forespake of his sufferings. Defenc pag. 97. li. 20. Specially you should acknowledge that his maruelous perplexity might well be a meanes, that his suddaine wishes against his owne constant purpose and Gods will were yet no sinnes. ] That Christ might be somewhat astonished in the Garden, I doe not deme, because that was an affection incident to our nature, and specially for that the Scripture appli∣eth the wordes, , Mar. 14. he began to be afraid and astonished, vnto him; but that this astonishment continued all the time of his passion, or of his praiers in the Garden, and that it proceeded from the sense of hell paines inflicted on him, these are your voluntarie fansies voide of all foundation in the word of God, and wholly depending on your priuate conceits. For were it an astonishment, as it was suddaine so it must be short; and though for the time it might suspend sense and memorie, yet when Christ began to pray, he resumed not only the power of speach, which in a maze men want, but of vnderstanding also, since praier without faith is a sinnefull temptati∣on of God, and faith requireth as well knowledge, what we aske, as perswasion of Gods goodnesse, that he will graunt our desires. So that both the turning of Christs tongue to speake, and the directing of his hart in praier, doe prooue sufficiently, that Christ speedily recouered both sense & memorie, if we grant, he was on the suddaine somewhat astonished; the cause whereof you boldly conceaue to be what you list, as your maner is without any care to make proofe thereof. But as your obseruations were most absurd and false, so are your collections, that Christ by his paines (then felt and feared) had Defenc. pag. 97. li. 23. infinitly more cause to be in his mind amazed, then either Moses or Paul; since the Scriptures mention no paines then felt of him in his mind, besides the affections of feare and sorow, which though they be painfull to mans nature, yet differre they farre from the paines of the damned, to which you seeke in this place to fasten the soule of Christ. Defenc. pag. 97. li. 26. As for the Fathers which you cite, if they meane as they seeme to doe, that now at his passion among other causes of sorow there wanted not this, euen his great pittie towards his forlorne countriemen, then we ioine with them. If they meane, as you would haue them, that this was the maine and chiefe cause of his extreame sorow and amazednesse, therein Ivtterly leaue them. ] You haue a long while in most lauish maner vntowardly pretended, that Defenc. pag. 94. li. 20. Certainly Christ would haue greatly reioiced to see the due execution of Gods most holie and deserued iustice vpon the Iewes; and now with a suddaine retraite you ioine with Ambrose, Ierom, Augustine and Bede, that this among other causes of sorow wanted not in the Garden. Then as here you be more soberlie minded then before, or he at least that made this collection for you; so this often crossing your selfe, argueth that either you haue not yet recouered your witts, to vnderstand what you write, or that your helpers being in diuers places, and not seeing the one what the other wrote, you haue vnhandsomely patched their notes together without marking, wherein they contradicted each other. But this we take to be the nearest the trueth, since I doe not vrge this cause to exclude all others, which by any due circumstance of the Scriptures might concurre to greeue him in the Garden; onely I noted that those learned and auncient fathers coniecturing the causes of Christs sorrow at that instant, neuer drempt of your hell paines, which you haue lately coyned out of the hollownesse of your owne hart; but obserued other causes, that might afflict his mind, which you in your Treatise reiected with great skorne, howsoeuer some of your friends haue since drawen you to be otherwise minded. As for your leaning them, it is little to the purpose, they will remaine wise and godly expositors, when such a blind guide as you are, will be lightly regarded withall your fantasticall Nouelties. Defenc. pag. 97. li. 31. Howbeit this here note in the, that these Fathers auouch Christ feared not his (bodily) death or passion: for thereof only they speake here questionles. You contrariwise say that Christ feared (bodily) death, for thereof also you discourse, and had more cause as you thinke so to doe then any of his members. First then they questionlesse gainsay your new plot of mans re∣demption by the paines of hell. For they speak of the death, which Christ died for our sins accordingto the Scriptures, which if they tooke to be only bodily, as you graunt; they knew nothing neither of the death of the Soule, nor of the second death of the damned, which you auouch Christ must suffer, before he could redeeme vs; and so they, or you are cleane besides the Christian faith. Againe, they doe not simply say, he feared not death, for then should they crosse other fathers (and euen themselues) af∣firming, that Christ had a naturall feare of death, but the feare thereof was not the cause of this Agonie, that is, he feared it not so much, as to be thus afflicted at the re∣membrance of it. Otherwise Ambrose himselfe saith. Ambros. in Luc. li. 10. de tristitia & do∣lore Christi. Debuit ergo Dolorem susci∣pere, vt vinceret tristitiam, non excluderet, & nos disceremus in Christo, quemadmodum futurae mortis mestitiam vinceremus. Christ was therefore to admit sorrow, that he might conquere it, not exclude it, and we in Christ might learne to ouercome the feare of death ap∣proching. So Cyrill. Cyril. The sau∣ri li. 10 ca. 3. Quando formidasse mortem videtur, vt homo dicebat: Pater transeat à me Calix iste. When Christ seemed to f are death, as a Man he said, Father let this Cup passe from me. For though as a man he abhorred death, yet as a man he refused not to performe the will of his Father, and of himselfe, being the word (or Sonne) of God. Morti ergo, quam vt homo formidabat, seipsum pro nobis vt Deus tradidit. To death then, which as a man he feared, he deliuered himselfe for vs as God. And Athanasius. Athana. Ora tio 4. contra Aria. As by Death Christ abolished Death, , and all humane miseries by suffering them as a man, so by vsuall feare he tooke away our feare, and made Men no longer to feare death. And Damascene. Damascen. orthodoxae fidei li. 3. ca. 18. As a Man (Christ) would haue the Cup to passe. . These wrrds proceeded from a naturall feare. And Theo∣phylact. Theophyl. in 26. ca Matthaei. . It is incident to the nature of man to feare death, for death entered besides (or against) Nature, and therefore nature flieth death. Idem. in Luc. cap. 22. The common feare of mans nature Christ cured, con∣suming (or dispersing) it in him selfe, and making it obedient to the will of God. This your ignorance apprehendeth as a contradiction in them, but were you quietly minded, or better acquainted with their positions, and reasons, you would soone see, that these may stand together, that Christ might haue a naturall feare of death incident to man, and yet that feare not to be the whole cause of this agonie. Defenc. pag. 97. li. 37. Thirdly, touching his regard of his Church generally the same answere serueth, as it is giuen to the last point before.] You meane that among other causes of his sorrow this wanted not, which is as much as I auouched. And the more dearely he loued his The third cause concurring to Christs agonie. Disciples that followed him, and the whole Church, that should after beleeue in him, the more inwardly he might sorrow for their infirmities, and earnestly pray for their safeties, being no way ignorant of satans eger and watchfull malice against them. Since then after his resurrection and ascension he should in glory appeare to the face of God for them, what let was there, but he might now in the daies of his flesh, ap∣proching to his passion for their deliuerance, in most humble and ardent manner mediate aswell for their redemption as preseruation; and in this loue & zeale towards them, for whom he gaue himselfe, powre out both abundant teares, and bloudie sweats to shew the height of his desire and care to prouide and purchase their pro∣tection and saluation? His supplications for vs were a necessarie part of our recon∣ciliation to God, as well as his sufferings for vs; and the Prophet expressing the one, adioyneth the other as no lesse requisite then the former, in saying; Esa. 53. he bare the sinne of many, and prayed for the Trespassers. And no doubt he chose this place and time be∣fore his apprehension with inflamed and vehement affection of prayer to direct the course, and strengthen the force of all his sufferings, that receauing comfort and courage from aboue, he might wade through the worke of our redemption with greater assurance and confidence in the eyes of all his enemies, to whom he would shew neither feare nor sorrow, but silent and constant patience. Defenc. pag. 98. li. 1. If you vrge that these Fathers are so resolute for these causes, as their words pretend, then you your selfe abuse them more than euer I did or meane to doe, where you say, it is curio∣sitie to examine, presumption to determine, impossibilitie to conclude, (as these doe) what was the true cause of Christes agonie. ] A wise answere forsooth, and woorthy the vigor of your wit; to say their words are so resolute, that I condemne them more than you, when they with all inoderation temper their speech, and by the generalitie or diuer∣sitie of occasions, that might engender feare to Christ in the Garden, shew they meane nothing lesse than to conclude any direct or particular cause of that agonie. Ambro∣ses words are; Ambros. in Luc. lib. 10. de tristitia & do∣lore Christi. Nec illud distat a vero. Neither is that dissonant from the trueth. And againe; Ambros. in Luc. lib. 10. de tristitia & do∣lore Christi. Et fortasse ideo tristis est. And perhaps he was therefore sorowfull. And so Au∣gustine; August. in Psal. 87. Non incongruè nos dicere aestimo. I thinke we speake not without some reason. The rest admonish in generall, that Christ sorowed not for himselfe, but for vs. Doth this conclude any speciall and certaine cause of that agonie? But when you can not otherwise decline them, you thinke it enough to shift them off with such a iest as this is. Indeed they touch your free holde somewhat neerely, when they say, Christ so∣rowed not for any sufferings of his owne: this you impugne for life; and if their as∣sertion in this be true, they turne your hell paines cleane out of Christes passion. For if Christ suffered, as you dreame, the death of the damned, he had good cause to feare and grieue at that which he felt; but with one consent Hilarie, Ambrose, Ierome, and Bede reiect that as false, that Christ did (thus) feare and grieue for any sufferings of his owne. Whether therefore you or I most abuse these Fathers, let the Reader iudge. And howsoeuer your helpers haue somewhat haltered your headlong hu∣mours, not long since, as I haue sormerly shewed, you flung off these Fathers in this very case as Trea. pa. 67. fond, absurd and voide of likelihood, reason, and sense; which whether it be an abuse to so graue and godly writers, I leaue the Reader to censure as he seeth cause. Defenc pag. 98. li. 6. Fourthly, you alleage his inward sorow and zealous griefe for the sinnes of the world to be the maine and chiefe cause of this agonie. Surely euen to rehearse these your arguments is refutation of them enough. ] Your pe uish peruerting of my reasons, and clapping a The fourth cause concur∣ring to Christs agonie. conclusion vnto them against my expresse purpose and premonition, is indeed as soone refuted as rehearsed; but referre them to that for which I bring them, and then your bragges are more than boyish. I plainly professed in my Sermons, that since the Scriptures expressed no particular cause of Christes agonie in the Garden, it was im∣possible certainly to conclude any direct or determinate cause thereof. What follie then is it in you to suppose, that I goe about to inferre that, which precisely I forwar∣ned was impossible to be concluded? Of the causes, which I produced, I professed no more, but that they were consonant to the rules of pietie, and might concurre in Christes agonie, which you do grant after your nice maner by confessing these wan∣ted not; and when you haue yeelded as much as I vrged, then you runne backe to your sillie shift, and say they were not the maine or chiefe causes of that agonie; your hell paines are left out, which must haue a place, as you thinke, in that perplexitie of Christs in the Garden. But sir first prooue your hell paines were then and there in∣flicted on Christs soule, and then you shall haue leaue to couple that to the causes of Christs agonie. Till you so doe, in vaine you denie the rest for want of this. It suffi∣ceth me to shew religious and zealous respects of pietie and charitie, which might mooue Christ to those affections, and other proofe of voluntarie actions and inward affections can none be brought. And yet you may remember, sir Defensor, though you dissemble it, that when you trample so readily, but yet so rudely on my reasons, you wrong the ancient fathers, whence I collected them, more then you doe mee. Hilarie and Ambrose doe peremptorily teach, that Christs sorow in the Garden was not for himselfe, nor his owne sufferings, but for our sinnes and woundes. And though you refute me with breathing out more absurdities then sentences in this your defence, yet the sober Reader will not suffer you so soone to deface their iudge∣ments and opinions, whom I follow. But we shall heare some doubtie dispute to mainetaine this matter. Defenc. pag. 98. li. 9. All these are proper parts of his holinesse and righteousnesse, as I haue said, but no proper parts or causes of his bloody and most dreadfull agonie, that is of his sacrifice satisfying for sin. Onely his paines were, which then he f lt and feared. ] All these were religious respects of feare and sorow, which wanted not in Christs agonie, as you grant; now whether they were painfull or no, a man would thinke should be no great doubt, but with one that hath lost both witte and sense. Saint Iohn saith, 1. Iohn 4. Feare hath painfullnesse. August. de ver is Domini secundum Io∣hannem, Ser∣mone 42. Sunt duo tortores animae, timor et dolor. There are two tormentors of the soule, feare and sorow, saith Austen. And who that hath but his fiue witts, doth not feele, that feare and so∣row are afflictions and vexations of the soule? Wherfore your excluding them from the sacrifice for sinne, because they are no paines, is a learned peece of worke which neuer a Morter-maker in England would stumble at besides you. Let shame, if not sense, teach you that feare and sorow are very painfull afflictions of the soule, and ra∣ther comprised then exempted in Christs sufferings by that text of Scripture, which you pretend; and therefore necessarie respects and pertinences to the sacrifice for sin. Psal. 51. The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, saith Dauid. Why then should not the afflicti∣on of Christs spirit with feare and sorow be properly a part of his sacrifice and suffering for sin? They were proper parts, you say, of his holinesse. ] And might they not also, when they grew vehement & grieuous, be parts of his sufferings? You would seeme skilfull after your vnlearned maner in the soules-suffering. Is there any suffring more proper to the soule then feare & sorow from her owne cogitations, apprehensions, & affecti∣ons? from the immediate hand of God, you thinke, is more proper. That in some cases may be possible, though in Christes you can prooue no such thing; but that is most proper, which the soule neuer wanteth, and hath of her owne nature. And there∣fore so farre is it from being exempted from the sacrifice of sinne, that in vs there is none other sacrifice for sinne but repentance which is all one with godly sorow, brin∣ging with it 2. Cor. 7. ver. 11. c re, f are, desire, zeale and such like effects of true detestation of sinne, as the Apostle describeth. Repentance for himselfe Christ could haue none, because Inward and sorow for ur must be ound in Christes sacri∣fice for them. he neuer sinned, but as our transgressions displeased the holinesse, and prouoked the wrath of God against vs; so when our Lord and Sauiour came to make full satis∣faction for our sinnes, he did not onely appease the iustice of God by enduring his hand, but contented the holinesse of God by inward and infinite sorow for our sakes and sinnes, which we were not able to yeeld vnto God. To haue accepted the punish∣ment, which Gods iustice awarded, and to haue neglected the offence and dis∣pleasure, which gods holinesse conceaued against sinne, had beene not to pacifie, but to prouoke God, in not regarding the cause which mooued him to take vengeance on sinne. It is therefore most agreeable to the rules of pietie, that the inward sorow for our sinnes, which the sonne of God impressed on his humane soule, when he pre∣pared himselfe to make purgation of them, did no lesse affect and afflict him, then the outward paines receaued in his body; and why you should exclude this from his agonie, there is no reason, but that you are most in loue with that, which hath least proofe or likeliehood to be the cause of this agonie. This being exactly noted by Hilarie, Ambrose, Cyrill and other auncient and lear∣ned Fathers, I did rightly to obserue it, how lightly soeuer your insolent conceit estee∣meth it. de . li. 10. Igitur cum & tristitia de nobis est, & oratio pro nobis est, non possunt non omnia propter nos gesta esse intelligi, cum omnia pro nobis quibus timebatur, orata sunt. Since then both (Christes) sorow was concerning vs, and his praier for vs, all the rest must needes be vn∣derstood for our sakes, for so much as all his praiers were powred forth for vs, for whom he feared. So Ambrose Ambros. de fide ad Grati∣anum. li. 2. c. 3. mihi compatitur, mihi tristis est, mihi dolet. Ergo pro me et in doluit, qui prose nihilhabuit, quod doleret. Doles igitur Domine Iesu non tua, sed mea vul∣nera, non tuam mortem, sed meam infirmitatem. Christ is affected for me, he is heauie for me, he soroweth for me. He sorroweth then in me and for me, who had nothing in himselfe to sorrow for. Thou sorrowedst Lord Iesu, not for thine owne woundes, but for mine; not for thine owne death, but for my weakenesse. And Cyrill: Cyril. de recta fide ad Reginas li. 2. ca de San∣ct fication & Christi. That Christ might make our praiers acceptable (to God,) himselfe beginneth the matter, euen opening his fathers eares to the nature of man, and making them most readie to the praiers of such, as were in any per ll for his cause. Therefore in him, , as in a se∣cond (root or) first fruits of mankinde, we were praying with strong cries, and not without teares, that the power of death might be abolished, and the life (restored or) strengthened, which was at first bestowed on our nature. And Bede: Bed in Luc c . 22. If Christ were sorowfull to vs, that is, for our sakes, it must needs be, that he was comforted (by the Angell) for vs, and to our vse. For what should he aske with that agonie for himselfe, who here on earth gaue heauenly things with power? Then neither Christes sorow in the Garden, nor his prayer with that agonie after he was comforted by the Angell, were for himselfe or his owne suf∣ferings, much lesse for hell paines deuised and inflicted by you on the soule of Christ, but his extreame sorrow and affectionate prayer might well be for our sinnes, whose cause he vndertooke, and for our sakes, whose persons he then presented vnto God with most vehement contention of spirit, and of all the powers of soule and body. Defenc. pag. 98. li. 12. Neither in respect of these your supposed causes could Christ say, Saue me from this houre, nor, Let this cuppe passe from me: as in respect of his infinite paines, he might. ] The houre and cuppe which Christ speaketh of, are by himselfe referred not to any paines What cup Christ dranke of. suffered in the Garden, as you pretend, much lesse to the paines of hell inflicted by Gods immediate hand on Christes soule, as you would haue it; but to the time and maner of his sufferings from the hands of the Iewes. Of the houre, after all his pray∣ers ended in the Garden, and his last returne to his Disciples, he sayth: Mar. 14. v. 41 Sleepe hence forth, and take your rest, , the houre is come, beholde the Sonne of man is giuen into the hands of sinners. Here is that houre that Christ so much spake of, euen the time that he should be deliuered into the handes of sinners to suffer a cruell and shamefull death at their hands. And so he told them, that came to take him, Luc. 22. v. 53 This is your verie houre, and the power of darkenesse. And this he called the Cuppe, which his father gaue him to drinke. For when Peter drew his sword to defend his Master from the hands of the Iewes, Iesus said vnto him, Ioh. 18. v. 11. put vp thy sword into thy sheath: shall I not drinke of the cuppe, which my Father hath giuen me? Peter neither did, nor coulde hinder the cuppe, which you imagine Christ dranke in the garden from the immedi∣ate hand of God, he ment plainly to resist the Iewes, that they should not apprehend Christ. That enterprise of Peter when Christ would represse, and submit himselfe to his fathers will and counsell for his death, he said as we saw before, shall I not drinke of the cup, which my Father hath giuen me? So that the Scriptures mention the houre & cup of Christs suffering on the Crosse from the rage of the people & malice of the rulers; of your inuisible cuppe containing the death of the damned, they say nothing. Defenc. pag. 98. li. 16. His holy and righteous affections were at all houres and seasons in him without measure holy, yet now at his death did not so expresly breake out and shew themselues, as they did at diuers times before. ] You receaue a iust reward of your error, that whiles you labour to impugne the trueth, your lucke is not to light on one true sentence to your pur∣pose. That extreame feare and sorrow were at all houres and seasons in him, which yet were holy and righteous affections in Christ, is a notable vntrueth; and that they did not breake out so expresly in the garden, as at diuers times before, is another as false as the former; and but that it is no newes in you to fasten on fancies, a man would maruell to see so many falshoods couched so closely together. Christes quiet and constant affections of pietie to God, and mercy to men, were alwaies in him, but these were not at all houres and seasons painfull vnto him: comming now to make What feare and sorrow Christ was to yeel to God when e offered the ran∣some of our sinnes. satisfaction for our sinnes, as the head for the members, and the Redeemer for his prisoners, Christ was to yeeld vnto God as much feare of his iustice prouoked, and sorrow for his holinesse displeased by our sinnes, as his humane nature could admit, without losse of those gifts, or decay of those graces, which the fulnesse of the holie Ghost had rooted and established in him. Wherefore damnation and desperation excepted, and all dubitation excluded as well of his person, as of his function, hee might yeeld to God for vs, and as part of our ransome, the lowest degree of submis∣sion, and deepest impression of feare and sorrow, that mans nature could feele with∣out doubting or distrusting the fauour and goodnesse of God towards him or his. Wherein he did not onely religiously giue vnto God, that which was due vnto the holinesse and Iustice of God, but he set vs a patterne how we should approch to God, when we finde our selues loaden with sinne, euen in all feare and trembling of so great power and maiestie, and with inward griefe and groanes of heart for displea∣sing so admirable holinesse, that we may receaue comfort from God, when we doe not spare truely to acknowledge his goodnesse, and earnestly to lament our owne wickednesse. These verie painefull, but yet very holy impressions of feare and sor∣row with teares and sighes vnspeakeable, Christ shewed and sanctified in his owne person, as an acceptable sacrifice to God, not for any blemish of his owne, who was the cleane and vndefiled lambe of God, but for our haynous and enormous sinnes, the excesse whereof could neuer be matched or purged but by the infinite dignitie and humilitie of him, that owing nothing paid all, and forced to none of these free∣ly offered his obedience to the honour and glorie of his father. Defenc. p g. 98. li. 21. It standeth not with his pi tie, to wish that his strong and vehement affections of holi∣nesse should passe from him or be weakned in him. for my part I can see no sense nor sappe in these assertions. You see sense and sappe in that which hath neither trueth, proofe, nor vse in the word of God: and in the plaine principles of pietie (so vnsauerie is your palate) you finde no taste. Those words, Let this cuppe passe from me, most men re∣ferre to the death of the crosse, which Christ was after to suffer. Will you thence inferre, that the feare and sorrow, which he felt in the garden before his apprehen∣sion, were not grieuous, because they were religious? And what if Christ spake of the present impressions of feare and sorrow, which he wished to be mitigated with comfort from God, as they were within a while by the sending of an Angell from heauen; did he therefore wish the holinesse of his obedience and humilitie to be changed, because he praied the burden thereof might be eased? Psal. 51. Restore to me, (saith Dauid) the ioy of thy saluation. Doth that prooue Dauid praied against the godlinesse of sorrow for sinne, because he would haue the sharpenesse of it turned into ioy? no more is it consequent, when Christ weakened himselfe with exceeding susception of feare and sorrow, though both religious, that he wished the holinesse of either might cease, when he would haue the painefulnesse of either as waged? A damned or desperate feare and sorrow you would better digest in the soule of Christ, though Christian pietie doe detest it; but a vehement affection of godly feare or sorrow you endure not, because it hath no concurrence with your hell paines. Defenc. pag. 98. li. 24. Where you ascribe to this his deepe sorrow of zeale for mens sinnes, his sweating bloud in his agonie aboue Nature after a strange and maruelous manner, I dare say you deliuer strange maruailes in Diuinitie. ] Christ sweating bloud, if it were naturall, I doe not ascribe to feare or sorrow, but rather to vehement intention of prayer, which the Euangelist mentioneth in that place: if it were aboue nature, as . . 28 & 29. Hilarie, Augustine, Prosper, Bede, and Bernard doe thinke, there can be no reason required of his volun∣tarie affections, besides his will, the cause whereof is secret to vs, though some anci∣ent writers coniecture at the significations of it. But why it should not be maruelous, haue you any reason? for admit your owne conceite were true, which as yet is no way iustifiable by the sacred Scriptures, euer read you there, that any man before or be∣sides Christ had sweate like droppes of bloud falling from him, for all their com∣plaints, Christs sweat was not onely proper to Christ. as you pretend of hellish feare, sorrowes, and paines? It must then be mar∣uelous, which no man else, but onely Christ, did euer performe, whatsoeuer the cause thereof were; and in your fansie most maruelous, since you dreame, that all the mem∣bers of Christ suffer the like paines as due to mankind for sin, and yet you can produce none of them, that euer did sweate bloud but Christ alone. And where you make the paines of hell to take hold of Christs Soule till the time of his death, yet did he not after this, shew any such thing but onely in the Garden. How could it then be but maruelous, that so violent a cause continuing and increasing, as you imagine; the effect, which in your fansie was this bloudie sweate, should cease, and not appeare, but when Christ would? but whether of vs deliuereth strangest maruailes in Diui∣nitie, you that hold, the death of the damned and the true paines of hell were here inflicted on Christs Soule by Gods immediate hand, and must likewise by your sup∣posall on all Christes members: or I, that teach Christ as our head, in the worke of our redemption, for the satisfaction of our sin offered as much sacred feare of Gods power, and inward sorrow for our displeasing the holinesse of God, as mans nature without despairing or doubting was capable of; let all the faithfull iudge, and exa∣mine euery man his owne conscience, in which of these twaine he is like vnto Christ. For they must be conformed to his sufferings, before they shall be partakers of his glorie. If then none shall raigne with Christ, but such as haue suffered with Christ, which must be hell paines as you defend; I leaue it to each mans secret cogitation, that shall light on this question, how many thousands of good and godly men must giue ouer all hope of saluation, since with sighs and sorrowes vnspeakable stirred in them by the holy Ghost for their offending and displeasing the goodnesse of God, they are and ought dayly to be acquainted; but with the true paines of hell, & death of the damned in this li e, few Christians haue any communion. And if any through distrust of Gods mercies, and assault of their owne sinnes, be terrified with despera∣tion or dubitation, let them assure themselues in either of those they be most vnlike vnto Christ, whose faith stood euer fast, and fully resolued of Gods fauour, both to∣wards his person and function; which was the purgation of our sinnes, and the re∣conciliation of God with man. Defenc. pag. 98. li. 28. The fift cause, you say, might be the Cup of Gods wrath tempered and made readie for the of men: hich you interpret to be eternall malediction. ] You are no good Th fift cause con urring to Christs agonie. reporter of my words, in auouching that I interpret the Cup of Gods wrath tempe∣red for the sinnes of men, to be eternall malediction. My words are. Sermo. pa. 21. li 22. In this Cup are all maner of plagues & punishments for sinne, as well spirituall as corpor all; eternall as temporall. And before I came to declare, what Christ might behold, and by prayer decline in the mixture of this Cup; I expresly forewarned, that Sermo. pa. 21. li. 27. diucrse men haue diuersly ex∣pounded those words of Christ, (let this Cup passe from me; li. 36. and in this varietie of iudge∣ments I meant to refuse none, that any way agreed with the rules of truth. So that I here re∣peate the opinions of others, and onely shew in what sort and sense they must be re∣strained and referred, before they can be concorded with the truth of the Scriptures. But let vs heare what you impugne, and how? Defenc. pag. 98. li. 30. You say Christ knowing what our sinnes deserued, might intentiuely pray to haue that Cup passe from him, which was prepared for vs. For vs, whom meane you? the elect or the reprobate? what malediction? the whole and absolute paines thereof onely, or the eternitie of the continuance thereof also? ] Wrangling is your best refuge, when you know not otherwise how to right your selfe. Is this so hard a question with you, what was the desert and wages of our sinnes by Gods iustice, had we not beene redeemed and sa∣ued from the wrath to come by Christ Iesus? Is it so strange Diuinitie, to separate nature from grace, and iustice from mercie in the elect, that they may discerne, what they were, and should haue been in them selues without the fauour of God in Christ, who freed vs, when we were seruants to sinne; quickned vs, when we were dead in sinne; and saued vs, when we were iustly wrapped in the same condemnation with others for sinne? Doe not all these words, Redemption, Remission, Reconciliation, and Saluation in Christ prooue, that of our selues, and in our selues we were prisoners subiected to sinne, and condemned as enemies, to God without Christ, in whom we are freed, pardoned reconciled and saued? Your eares are very curious, that can not abide to heare what was deserued by our sinnes, and prepared for our sins, had God dealt with vs in iustice, not in mercie for his Sonnes sake. It is healthfull and needfull for vs to remember & acknowledge, what our naturall desert and condition was with∣out Gods heauenly commiseration on vs, and election of vs in Christ his Sonne. Defenc. pag. 9 . li. 35. If you meane the Elect, Christ knew that he must not onely see and contemplate, but feele and suffer all the whole paines of that punishment, which our sinnes deserued, and this was prepared for himselfe our ransome payer, and not for vs. ] Christ was not onely to suffer that, which in his person should be sufficient in the righteous iudgement of God to appease his anger, and purge our sinnes, but he was farder to see and behold from what he deliuered vs, euen from the wrath to come. How should the price and orce of his death be knowen vnto him, if he were ignorant what dreadfull and terrible vengeance was reserued and prepared for sinne, if he did not redeeme vs? Where∣fore he was not onely to feele that, which should free vs, but exactly to view & know the rest, that was due to our sinnes, if he did not auert it. And where you proclaime with open mouth, that Christ must feele and suffer all the whole paines, which our sinnes deserued; it is a pestilent and euident impietie. For either you must defend, that our sinnes deserued not the losse of Gods kingdome, and the perpetuall paines of hell fire in bodie and soule; or else you must confesse, that Christ suffered the same. You spake euen now of strange maruailes in Diuinitie. These monsters be past maruailes, which you prooue onely by your selfe, and by your owne surly conceite. [ this was prepared for him, and not for vs, ] Was hell fire prepared for Christ? he was ordained to be our Sauiour by the sacrifice of himselfe on the Crosse, that by his death full of shame and paine he might redeeme the transgressions that were in the former Testa∣ment; but that hell fire or euerlasting death, which is the desert of our sinnes, was prepared for him, is a Doctrine fit for no man, but for him that hath made a ship∣wracke of his faith to land his fansies on shore. [Damnation you will say, was not prepared for vs, but rather Saluation:] meane you without Christ, or in Christ? in Christ, I haue no doubt but we were before all worlds appointed to be heires of Sal∣uation, when in our selues we should deserue farre otherwise. But here shewing the meanes of mans redemption, I speake of man not yet redeemed, and therefore l ∣ing as yet in the desert and danger of damnation, i Christ did not deliuer him. In which sense the Apostle not onely saith, Ephes. 2. We were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others, but Rom. 5. by the offence of one, (death came) on all men vnto condemnation. Which speech the auncient Fathers doe euery where follow. August. Epi∣sto a. 89. Qui per generationem illi con∣d mnation obligati sunt, per regenerationem ab eadem condemnatione soluuntur. They which by birth are obliged (or fast tied) to that condemnation, are by regeneration deliue∣red from that condemnation. And so Idem. Epi∣stola. 105. merito namque peccati vniuersa massa damnata est. By the desert of sinne the whole masse (of mankind) was condemned. If the Christian faith permit vs to say, that we were condemned before we were redeemed, since we could not be redeemed but from condemnation, how much more lawfull is it for me to say that euerlasting death was deserued by vs, and prepared for vs without Christ; since the reward of sinne was first prouided for the diuell and his angels before man fell through his inticements, and was neuer since vnprepared? Defenc. pag. 9 . li. . The truth is, he could not by any meanes pray against that, or decline that, onely vnlesse he were for the time in some astonishment and perturbation of his senses, which by the infi∣nitenesse of that paine he well might be, yea he could not but be, as is afore shewed to haue hapned in Moses and Paul. ] There is as much truth in this, as in the rest of your de∣uices. Here are errors as thicke as hops, shuffled in vpon your bare word, the proofe whereof you bring after at leasure about latter Lammas. 1. That Christ felt infinite pain s of hell, which you before named all the whole paines, which our sinnes deserued. 2. That by the infinitenesse of that paine he could not but be in some astonishment, and pertur∣bation of his senses; which though here you mitigate with (some) yet afterward you straine it aboue the extreamest degree of astonishment that might be. Your words are. Defenc. pag. 128. li 26. Therefore no maruaile though this astonishment (in Christ) were farre greater, then is to be seene in any man, that euer was or shall be. Wherein you keepe the Sauiour of the world as long, and as often, as pleaseth yourselfe. 3. That against these paines he could not by any meanes pray, onely vnlesse he were thus astonished: 4. That Paul in his Epistle to the Romanes expressing his affection for the Iewes, was likewise astonished and amazed, as not knowing what he said. Defenc. pag. 99 li. 8. This is the very point of our Defence: affirme this, and you affirme with vs all that we hold and professe. ] When I am out of my wits, I may chaunce to hold these conceits with you, otherwise so long as God giueth me grace to be soberly minded and well aduised, I will see other manner of warrant for all these weafes and straies then you yet shew, before I affirme them or professe them. Defenc pag. 99. li. 9. Otherwise if you meane, that Christ praied intentiuely to haue the whole and intire cup of eternall malediction and death passe from him, which both the elect deserue and the repro∣bate sustaine, that as it is p ssing strange doctrine, so is it simply impossible. For he could not intentiuely pray against that, nor feare that, which he perfitly knew concerned him not at all, and by no meanes could euer possibly come n are him. ] I premonished the Reader, that I would there repeate the diuers iudgements of diuers men, and so farre admitte them, as they might accord with the Christian faith. To this opinion of some men that Christ was in his agonie stroken with a feare of eternall death, and so might pray a∣gainst it; I gaue two expositions, how those words might be tolerated in Christian Religion without apparent impietie. The one, that Sermo. pag. 23. li. 21. Christ had no neede to pray for himselfe, (against that cuppe of eternall death) but ONLIE FOR VS, who then suffe∣red with him & in him. The other, that if we would conioine Christs person with ours, feare must there be taken for a shunning and declining of that cup, which he Ibid. pag. 24. li. 10. religiously disliked. For Ibid. pag. 23. li. 29. touching himselfe, albeit the innocencie of his cause, the holinesse of his life, the merite of his obedience, the abundance of his spirite, the loue of his father, and vnity of his person did most sufficiently guard him from all danger and doubt of eternall death: yet to shew the perfection of his humility, he would not suffer his humane nature to require it on right but prostrate on the earth besought his father, that cuppe might passe from him, and was heard in that he shunned or auoided. I repeate the selfe same words, which then I vsed, to lett the Reader see that I shift not hands, nor change not mindes as there is no cause I should; but that this Broker neglecting my manifest limitations to other mens opinions, and euident speache, as also suppressing my purpose, would haue the world beleeue that I graunt Christ doubted and feared eternall death to come on his owne person. Which in the maze that you put him in, sir defensor, might well be, since you auouch hee knew not what he praied, or els he sinned in praying against the resolute and knowen will of God; but by my positions it is impossible, that any distrustfull feare of hell, or eternall death should fall on the soule of Christ for the reasons there shortly, but sufficiently collected by me. And this is your idle course throughout your Booke, to catch at a word and neuer to regard what goeth before or after, be it neuer so plaine and perspicuous to recall your misconstruing my speach. Omitte then your wanton rouing, or malitious swaruing from my meaning and saying, and refute either of these limitations, if you can. And first least any man thinke, I limite other mens words without iust cause, I ment herein the words of the Catechisme, which you would faine pull into your packe, as also of some other writers, whose sayings so long as they might be salued with any good construction, I thought not fitte to repell as intolerable in Christs Church. The Catechisme saieth. Nowels Cate∣chisme Greeke and Latine pag. 281. Christum non communi modo morte in hominum conspectu mulctatum, sed et aeternae mortis horrore perfusum fuisse, horribiles formidines at{que} acerbissi∣mos animi dolores pro nobis perpessum et perfunctum esse. Peccatoribus enim, quorum hic quasi personam Christ us sustinuit, non praesentis modo, sed & futurae etiam aeternaeque mor∣tis dolores atque cruciatus debentur. Christ not onely died our common death in the sight of men, but was also perfused (The Translator of the Catechisme into Greeke allowed as well as the Latin saith, agonized) with the horror of eternall death, & suffe∣red and felt for vs horrible feares, and most bitter sorowes of mind. For to sinners, whose per∣son in some sort Christ here sustained, were due the sorowes and torments not of this present death onely, but also of future and eternall death. Of the paines of the damned really in∣flicted in the garden on Christs soule by the immediate hand of God, and of Christs extreame astonishment for the present Torments therof, the writer of the Catechisme knew nothing; (these deuices of yours are later then the making of that Booke;) but he speaketh of Christes fearing the infinite wrath of God against our sinnes, which he apprehended in the Garden, and in respect thereof fell into this horrible feare. These wordes of the Cat chisme, if we referre to the feare Christ had for his members then ioined in one bodie with him, whose cause he vndertooke with more desire and care then his owne, since he emptied and loaded himselfe to purchase their aduancement and ease; they might be receaued and approoued as sufferable in the Christian faith: but if we so tooke them, as if Christ had any doubt or distrustfull feare of his owne sal∣uation, they were not agreeable to the trueth. Your selfe sir wrangler speake against this later sen e of the wordes, as much as I doe. For you say, Defenc. pag. 99. li. 11. & 12. It is passing strange doc∣trine, and simply impossible, that Christ should feare the cup of eternall malediction, which he perfectly knew concerned him not at all, and by no meanes could euer possibly come neere him. But the Catechisme saith Christ was perfused (or perplexed) with the horror of eternall death. And as our head knit with vs into one and the same body, he might tremble at eternall death hanging ouer our heads, and most dreadfully persuing our sinnes in vs, if he made not satisfaction for vs. You would shift the word eternall out of the text, and tell vs a tale of the substance thereof, which you will imagine how Christ shall suffer by a new deuice of yours, though the Catechisme speake nothing thereof: but if you expound the Catechisme, and not correct it, or confute it, you must shew vs how Christ might feele or feare EVERLASTING OR FVTVRE DEATH due to sinners. For those are the words of the Catechisme; who not content to say EVER∣LASTING, addeth thereto FVTVRE death, which of force must follow after this present death separating the soule from the bodie, except you haue the skill in Gram∣mar to make future goe before present. How Christ in coniunction with vs, and compassion on vs, might feare euerlasting death for vs, as imminent ouer vs, and yet speake in his owne name, I will in place conuenient more largely declare, when I come to Christes complaint on the crosse; till which time I pray the Reader to haue pati∣ence, least I should be forced often to prooue and repeat one and the same thing. Touching the other limitation, that Christ might feare, that is, war ly and religi∣ously shunne the cuppe of eternall malediction, and intentiuely pray against it, as well in respect of himselfe as of vs: you blunder out a proposition which in Christes cause is not so true as you take it to be. Pa. 99. li. 13. He could not (you say) intentiuely pray against Christs man∣hood pr ied for that with all which his person by rig t might haue chalen∣ ed. that, which he perfectly knew could by no meanes come neere him. By this rule Christ should pray for nothing touching himselfe: for Christ perfectly knew all that God had most certainly decreed towards him; and chiefly Gods resolute and reuealed counsels for his glory. What need then was there Christ should pray for any such thing, since he perfectly knew what should come to passe, and by the power of his person was fully able to dispose of heauen and hell, life and death both present and eternall. His owne words are: Whatsoeuer things the Father doth, the same things Iohn 5. doth the Sonne also: for likewise as the Father raiseth vp the dead, and quickeneth them, so the Sonne quickeneth whom he will. The Father iudgeth no man, but hath committed all iudgement to the Sonne; that all men should honour the Sonne, as they honour the Father; and hath giuen him power also to execute iudgement, in that he is the Sonne of man. Christ perfectly knew, that E a. 42. & 49 he should be giuen for a light of the Gentils. Did he not therefore aske it according to Dauids prophesie; Psal 2. Aske of me, and I will giue thee the Gentils for thine inheritance? Christ neither had, nor could haue any doubt of his glorification. Did he not therefore pray: Iohn 17. Now Father glorifie me with thine owne selfe, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was? Was not Christ most assured, that he should Esa. 53. diuide the spoiles of the mightie, and be a Hose. 13. death vnto death, and a destruction vnto hell? and yet Dauid applieth these prayers vnto him; Psal. 22. Deliuer my soule from the sword, my desolate (soule) from the power of the dogge. Saue me from the lions mouth, and heare mee from the hornes of the vnicorne. Though therefore by the right of his power he might ha e sayd in all things, as he did in some, Matth. 8. I will, be thou cleane; and againe, Iohn 17. Father I will, that they which thou hast giuen me, be with me euen where I am, that they may behold my glory; yet to demonstrate the wonderfull vertue of his obedience and humilitie, he suffered his humane nature humbly to pray for that, which his person could of it selfe performe, and in all things referred himselfe to his Fathers will, though he also sayd to his Father; All thine are mine, and I am glorified in them, and all things that the Father hath, are mine. Then might Christ in the Garden pray, that the cuppe of eter∣nall malediction deserued by our sinnes might passe from him and his, though he submitted himselfe and his members to drinke of the cuppe of Gods wrath so much as should please his heauenly Father; which he was assured in regard of his prayer should be no more than he and his should well endure. Defenc. pag. 99 li. 16. All this is nothing else in effect then your first cause, his submission to Gods maiestie sitting in iudgement. wherefore you might haue lessened your number, and so your an∣swer to this might haue beene the same, which is made to your foremost. ] Your con∣ceite is not so currant, that I should pare my number for your pleasure. Christ himselfe saith, Matth. 22. On these two Commandements, (thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy minde; and thy neighbour as thy selfe) hangeth the whole Law and the Prophets. Were therefore then the tenne Commandements, which God gaue to Moses, superfluous, because they might be reuoked to two generall contents? speciall parts and duties are profitablie deliue∣red, so long as they be any way distinguished, notwithstanding they may be com∣prised in fewer, but more generall branches. The worke of our Redemption was the summe of all that Christ did, said, or suffered heere on earth. shall we therefore reiect the rest of the Gospell, because the substance thereof may be expressed in a word or twaine? [these you will say, are not distinct in matter but in wordes. ] Who told you so? The trembling at Gods glorie, when it was reuealed to mans infirmitie; the honou∣ring Feare & sorow necessarie in the sacrifice for sinne. of his sanctitie with godly sorrow, which was despised with our iniquitie, the mitigating of his anger with humble and earnest praier, which was prouoked with our contempts, were they not three different effects euen in Christ himselfe, and so might stirre vp three religious affections of feare, sorrow and prayer? Why then should they be confounded in Christ, whose humane nature might yeeld all three to God, as well in respect of pietie to God, and of charitie to men, as in regard of his office for the satisfaction of our sinnes? for he might not approch the presence of God as a Priest with our person and cause, who were sinnefull, though he were inno∣cent and holy, to make intercession and sacrifice for our sinnes, but he must giue God his due glorie, haue compassion on our miserie, and mediate for our safetie. As therefore I see no cause to exclude these affections and actions from the satisfaction for sin, so I see greater reason to include them in the sacrifice for sin, except we make Christ a Priest onely by his SVFFERINGS & leaue him neither any honor of OFFE∣RING nor right of PRAYING for vs in the purgation of our sins, which were a strange kind of Priesthood, & no way answerable to the Leuiticall in that, wherin the apostle compareth them. For in the Law the Priest was to present the sacrifice to God, and to pray for the trespasser; which if you thinke needlesse in the true sacrifice, that should propitiate the sinnes of the world, you must correct the Apostle, that maketh the Law a figure of the Gospell, though the person of the Priest, and the price of the sacrifice farre excell all that was vnder the Law. Defenc. pag. 99. li. 20. Furthermore, you knit in within this, foure other seuer all causes of Christes agonie, as you recken them pa. 27. First, his taking of our infirmities in his flesh to cure them. Second∣ly, his breaking the knot betwixt bodily death and hell, which none but hee was able to doe. Thirdly, Gods anger which might be executed on his bodie, but was mitigated by him. Fourthly, the desire he had to continue the feeling and enioying of Gods presence with his bo∣die. ] As there is no one thing in the Scriptures, that receiueth and hath more diuers opinions of it, than Christes agonie in the Garden; so I proposed as many as had any coherence with trueth, and left the Reader to make his choise, which he liked best. Howbeit, I did not pag. 27. recken foure seuerall causes of Christes agonie, as you mistake, but of the Serm. pag. 27. li. 23. feare which Christ had and shewed of (his bodily) death. His agony had other parts and affections besides feare and astonishment, as sorow, zeale, submissiue and intentiue prayer, and a bloudie sweat: the obiects and ends whereof might be as dif∣ferent as the things themselues. For example; Christes feare in the Garden might haue many respects and causes as well as his sorow. He might feare the glory of God now sitting in iudgement to receiue recompense for the sinnes of his elect. For as Christ himselfe, who best knew it, confirmeth it by saying, Iohn 12. Christes man∣hood might feare the glo∣rie of Gods iudgement. Now (at hand) is the iudgement of this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast ont: so wee must not thinke so mightie and weightie matters, as the iudgement of the world, and the casting out of Satan the accuser of his brethren, and the admitting the Redeemer to present him∣selfe here on earth for our cause to the face of God in iudgement, were decreed and setled by God without some reuelation of his glorie and maiestie meet for those per∣sons and purposes. For this is a rule which may euery where be obserued in the Scrip∣tures, that when God is described as a Iudge, he is sayd to sit in a Throne, and all the host of heauen to stand before him, to resemble the glory of his iudgement: as we finde in Daniel. 7. vers. 9, 10. Esa. 6. vers. 1, 2. 1. Kings. 22. vers. 19. Wherefore Dauid sayth, Psal. 9. v. 7. The Lord hath prepared his throne for iudgement. This Michaiah and Esay the Prophets say they SAW, which whether it were by sight, as Steuen Act. 7 v. 55. looked stedfastly into heauen, and (with his eyes) saw the glory of God, and Iesus standing at the right hand of God; or in spirit, as Ezechiel waking, and Ezech. 8. sitting in his house with the Elders of Iudah before him, was by a diuine vision brought to Ierusalem, to see all the abominations there committed; I dare not determine. Christ himselfe sayth, I saw Satan fall downe from heauen like lightning. Which way soeuer Gods glory in iudgement was reuealed vn∣to Christ, and beheld of Christ in the Garden, it was able for the time of his humilitie to impresse a religious feare and trembling into his humane nature, since Christ came now by iudgement to haue the burden of our sinnes taken from vs, and layed vpon him, that he might make satisfaction for them. Another thing that Christ might iustly, and yet religiously feare in the Garden, offering now to ransome man from the wrath of God, was the POWER of Gods wrath, H might feare p wer of Go s wrath our sinne whi h h was to eare. which is fully infinite, and so farre exceedeth the strength and reach of mans nature, that our earthly infirmitie, to which Christ submitted himselfe for our sakes, can not comprehend the greatnesse thereof, nor thinke on the power thereof without feare and trembling. Psal. 90. v. 11 Who knoweth (saith Dauid to God) the power of thy wrath? for accor∣ding to thy feare, (that is, as thou art feared,) so is thine anger. Contempt and carelesse∣nesse kindle and increase the wrath of God against vs, feare and submission asswage it. And when I name feare, I meane not a dreadfull distrust of Gods purpose towards vs, which is desperation, but a perswasion and confession of his power ouer vs, whereby we feare to displease him, and tremble before him withall submission, when we haue displeased him. This feare Christ teacheth his disciples, when he saith, I will shew you, Luc. 12. whom you shall feare; feare him, which after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell; ye I say, feare him: not meaning, they should firmely beleeue, God would euerlastingly condemne them, but that thinking on his power preuailing here and in hell, they should beware to prouoke him, and with all humilitie prostrate themselues before him, when they had offended him, to preuent his anger. [Christ (you will say) needed not thus to feare, since he was no sinner.] For himselfe he needed not, because he was innocent and obedient in all thinges to the vttermost: but since he was at this time now to beare the burthen of our sinnes in his body, and to haue the chasticement of our peace laid vpon him, he might, and did iustly feare the power of Gods wrath pro∣uoked with our sinnes; which though he were assured could not rage on him vnto condemnation, yet God had infinite meanes to presse and punish the humane nature of Christ aboue that it was able to beare. And therefore except Christ would con∣temne the wrath of his father, which were impious, he was withall possible feare and trembling to deprecate his fathers anger against our sinnes, knowing that God would at his most ardent and most suppliant praier both pardon vs, and proportion that paine according to the weaknesse of our flesh which he bare about him, that nei∣ther his obedience, nor patience should be ouerwhelmed nor endangered, but onely prooued and tried, that in all things Christ might shew himselfe a patterne of perfe∣ction, as well by patience in affliction, as by innocencie of life. And this feare the more vehement in Christ, the more pleasing to God, since it proceeded neither from infidelitie nor distrust, but from pietie confessing the greatnesse and iustnesse of Gods anger against our wickednesse and vnwoorthinesse, and from charitie putting his holy and harmelesse person in the gappe betweene vs and God, least the wrath∣full displeasure of God lighting on vs should vtterly consume vs. A third cause concurring with the rest of Christes feares in the Garden, against Christ might feare the sting of death as hor∣rible to mans nature. which he praied, might be the naturall abhorring of death, which his manhood then had and shewed in priuate, because he neither despised that punishment of God laide vpon our sinne; which indeed is and ought to be displeasant to mans nature; in that it was inflicted on vs for disobedience; neither would he suffer his soule or flesh to struggle and striue with death (as ours doe when sense and life beginnes to faile) in the eies of his persecutors, to whom by the present and quiet breathing out of his soule in their sight, he would declare himselfe to be the disposer and ruler of death; and so more then a man, though as a man hee were content to die for our sakes. And this kinde of feare verie learned and well redde Diuines agree might be the cause of Christes prayer in the garden, to haue the Cuppe passe from him; not that he was then amazed, and in that astonishment praied against the knowen will of God, as you imagine, and on that foundation build your conceit of hell paines to be then suffered in the soule of Christ, which you thinke excluded both reason and memorie from Christ: but that he therein accorded with his fathers will, who would haue that Cuppe hatefull and horrible by nature, though faith and obedience should ouerrule the feare and sting of death in our flesh, and Gods will be preferred before the naturall dislike, which he would haue vs to feele of death. Zanchius de tribus part. 2. li. 3. cap 9. As touching Christes diuine Nature (saith Zanchius) there was alwaies one and the same will of the Father and the Sonne concerning his death and passion. Yea as Christ was man, he was al∣waies obedient to his Father, and therefore he saide; I alwaies doe the things, which please him. What meaning then hath, Quod deprecatur mortem & calicem, that he praieth to be freed from death, and from the Cuppe? Naturaliter, quâ homo, expauescebat, & exhor∣rescebat, fugiebatque mortem, Naturally as a man Christ feared, abhorred, and shunned death, & his naturall horror of death he called his will, when he said, Not my will be done, to witte, this naturall will which I haue as a man. Yet neither doth this will of Christ resist his Fathers will. for the Father would haue Christ to be like vs in all things sinne excepted, and to that end would haue him made Man. Therefore when Christ did naturally shunne and desire to escape death, he did not contradict his Fathers will, because the Father would haue this (naturall) horror and feare (of death) to be in Christ, as a punishment of our sinnes. Wherefore it is altogether false, that Christes will in this was diuers from his Fathers will. For we haue concluded, that this naturall horror of death, which Christ cal∣led his will, was not repugnant to the will of his Father, whereby he would haue Christ sub∣iect to this horror. If in respect of the same end the Father had beene willing Christ should die, and Christ had beene vnwilling, or had neuer so little refused, then their willes had beene indeed repugnant. But in reference to the same end, that is to our saluation, Christ alwaies had the same will that his Father had. For in regard of our saluation Christs will was euer the same, and constant: but in respect of his humane Nature he neuer put off this affection, wherein he was like vs, and whereby we naturally flie death. By the iudgement of this learned writer the varietie of willes in Christ, the one naturally shunning death, as in a man like vs, the other accepting and desiring it for our saluation, was no contrarietie either in it selfe, or to the will of God; but God himselfe would haue the sting of our common and vsuall death to be grieuous vnto him, because it was the punish∣ment of our sinne in Adam, and yet obedience to counteruaile that naturall detesta∣tion of death, when God for his glorie calleth vs to that triall, as he did his Sonne in that case. The like limitations of Christes prayer in the Garden (if it were possible let this cup passe from me) other ancient writers deliuered before Zanchius, who obserue this ex∣presse condition out of Christes prayer, That if it were possible to stand with Gods will and our saluation, then Christ prayed the cuppe might passe from him, and not otherwise. Orig. in Math. tract. 35. Christ taking vnto him (sayth Origen) the nature of mans flesh, retained all the properties thereof: according to which he prayed in this place, the cuppe might passe from him. It is the propertie of euery faithfull man first to be vnwilling to suffer any paine, specially that tendeth to death, because he is a man, and hath flesh; but if God so will, then to be con∣tent euen against that will of his owne, because he is faithfull. There is also another Exposi∣tion of this place, which is this: If it be possible, that all those good things may come to effect without my passion, which otherwise shall come by my death, then let this passion passe from me, that both the world may be saued, and the Iewes not perish by putting me to death. So Bede: Be a in 14. ca. . If death may die without my death in the flesh, let this cuppe (sayth Christ) passe from me, but because this will not otherwise be, thy will be done, not mine. And Euthymius: Euthymius in Matth. cap. 26. As a man Christ sayd, If it be possible, that is, so farre as is possible. And in saying, Yet not as I will, but as thou wilt; he teacheth, that we must follow the will of God, though nature re∣claime. So that the preferring of Gods will before the desire of his owne nature, and the limiting of his prayer with this condition, If it were possible (not to Gods power, but to Gods purpose) to saue the world without his death, then he desired the cuppe might passe from him; prooue apparently, that Christ was not onely well aduised in that prayer, but he meant to teach vs, that neither the power of his enemies did op∣presse his weaknesse, nor his owne loue leade him to a needlesse death; it was rather Gods determined and irreuocable counsell and will, that he must die, or we must pe∣rish. By which we learne not Christes inconstancie, as of a man amazed, but an excel∣lent mysterie of Christian religion, that no sacrifice could take away sinne, but onely The intent of Christs prayer in the garden. the death of Christ on the crosse, which he for our sakes earnestly desired, though by his thrise declining it, if we might possibly be otherwise saued, he shewed how pain∣full and grieuous that suffering would be vnto him. We are therefore by the one to collect, how intolerable that cuppe would be to his flesh; and by the other, to be∣holde his ardent loue to vs, and willing obedience to his Father: which things, if in your conceit they conclude Christ to haue beene therein amazed, I shall coniecture, that your wits are not to this houre yet well recouered; since greater pietie and cha∣ritie could not be shewed in that infirmitie, wherewith Christ was then compassed, and acerbitie of paines to come, which he did not dissemble. Now let vs heare how you impugne this. Defenc. pag. 99. li. 26. The first of these (foure) maketh in my minde much for vs. For vnderstanding that Christ tooke all the infirmities and passions whereto mens nature is subiect, to the end he might cure all and euerie kinde of them in vs; then it followeth, that he wanted not the paines and immediate sufferings of paines inflicted by Gods owne hand in his soule. ] It is but your mind that maketh so much for you, your collection is otherwise as wide from reason and trueth, as any may be. For what if Christ taking our nature vnto him tooke therewith all our infirmities and affections, (which you cunningly call passions, a word indiffe∣rent to affections and sufferings) doth that inferre that he tooke vnto him the paines of the damned, because mans nature through the hardnesse of his impenitent hart is subiect after this life by Gods iust iudgement to euerlasting damnation for sinne? are your eyes so ill matches that you cannot discerne betwixt naturall affections cleauing to all men from their birth, and the reall suffering of hell paines inflicted, as you de∣fend, by Gods immediate hand on the soules of the faithfull here in this life, which in deed are reserued for the wicked in another world, & are somtimes feared of the god∣ly here on earth, when the conscience of their sin through want of faith calleth Gods fauor in question with their owne harts? first proue, that all the godly haue the pains of the damned inflicted here in this life on their soules by the immediat hand of God; (for nature is not proper nor priuate to this or that man, but common and constant to all men) and next, that notwithstanding your hell paines thus suffered, they are in constant and perfect faith and assurance of Gods fauour and his heauenly kingdome; and then you haue some pretence for your purpose, which now is none. For touching the first I appeale not onely to the Scriptures, which teach no such thing; but to the consciences and experiences of all the faithfull, whether this can haue any trueth in it, that the true paines of the damned are really inflicted on all their soules here on earth by Gods immediate hand. And secondly, when they feele any feare of Gods wrath, or doubt of Gods fauour; whether that come not through the failing and shrincking of their faith, which, pressed often with the number of their sinnes, feareth least God will visite their offences with a mercielesse iudgement, because they haue so greatly prouoked him. The feare of hell may iustly make them quake and tremble, which they acknowledge they haue worthily deserued, and the same terrour doth often, though not alwaies, pursue the wicked vnto desperation: but other torments of hell actually inflicted by Gods owne hand on the soules of all the faithfull, as the Scrip∣tures deliuer none, so you shall not be able to prooue any common to all mankind, though God want not power to punish where and as pleaseth him. If therefore you speake of naturall affections, they were common to Christ with vs, but in vs excessiue vpon euery occasion, which in him were moderate, till they were inflamed with piety or charitie, and then they burned more in him then in vs, by reason of his abundant giftes and graces farre passing ours. But if you talke of some secret speculations pri∣uate to your selfe, and some others of your sort, that dreame perchaunce of hell paines both night and day according to your owne fansies, then no words of mine, nor of any auncient father come neere those deuices of yours, which are knowen to no man either by reading or feeling, but to such conceiters as you are, if happely you doe not belie, or deceaue your owne hearts. Defenc. pag. 99. li. 37. This your authors here doe fully affirme; Cyrill, Ambrose and others, as before we haue obserued. ] Mine authors there are easily redde, and if any such thinge be there men∣tioned, or thence to be concluded, I am content you shall be thought to speake some trueth, which is almost a maruaile in you, you wrie all things so absurdly to your senselesse fansies. Of your fourth argument, and of these authors I haue largely deli∣uered, what I take to be true, euen in the place, where you produced them to this purpose. And so I leaue this as lately refuted, lest I lengthen the volume to much. Defenc. pag. 100. li. 1. It is most vnreasonable, which here you doe, (if you doe as you seeme) to vnderstand them of meere bodilie death, and of the infirmities meerelie of his flesh. ] Shew that they name, or intend any other death, then the death of Christes body on the crosse, or els your o∣therwise conceauing them without any words of theirs is a plaine peruerting them, to pull them to your part. Of infirmities when they speake, they meane naturall, such as were no derogations to faith, nor hope, nor to any other the graces of Gods spirite in Christ, and in them all Christ was like vnto vs, whether they were infirmities of body or soule. Whether feare and sorow be infirmities meerely of the flesh, is a doubt fit for Feare may be intellectiu or sensitiue. your discussing; they may be sensitiue or intellectiue according to their obiects; and in Christ, since they were caused by things rather foreseene then felt, or at least by dangers and doubts weighed and considered by the spirit of Christe, I know no rea∣son why you ascribe them meerely to the flesh. As for the contrarieties, which you would take hold of, that Christ as a man did abhorre and feare death, and yet not so∣much as to fall into that agony or bloudy sweate for feare of his sufferings; with such a slacke and shallow Reader, as you are, they may beare a shew of repugnancie; but to any man, that marketh or vnderstandeth what is said, it accordeth full well, that Christ might haue a naturall feare of death, which is common to all the godly; and yet no such perplexed feare for any sufferings of his, as to sweate bloud for paine therof. And this maketh more against you, then you wil seeme to acknowledge. For if Christ had no such afflicting feare in regard of his owne suffring or passion, but only in respect of vs and our danger, then certainly by the censure of Ambrose, Ierom, and Bede, Christ suffered no paines of hell, nor of the damned, since they would bread another maner of agony, then this life could endure. And howsoeuer the view of death fast clasped with hell, till Christ did breake the knotte thereof, might seeme terrible to Christes humane consideration; yet for somuch, as he was secured from the one by the innocency, vnity, and dignity of his person, though he submitted himselfe to the death of his body; this feare was both righteous and religious, and as farre from the paines of the damned, as any sufferings of the soule in this life might be. Defenc. pag. 100. li. 10. He would not, he could not so feare and be affrighted, yea and piteously astonished with such sorrow oppressing him, as to sweate drops of bloud onely for feare of his bodily death; Nei∣ther would he pray at all, much lesse so vehemently, and so often times as he did, against that which he perfectly knew was Gods will, and his owne most willing purpose to vndergoe. ] It is more then folly to mistake, misplace, and misapplie euerie thing after this sort as you doe; and then to collect you know not what, nor why, from your owne vnwise and rash presumptions. What if Christ had more cause of sorrow in the Garden, then his bodily death? ergo he felt the paines of the damned inflicted on his Soule by Gods immediate hand. Tie this argument to the manger, litter is fitter for it, then an an∣swere. Such blockish and brutish sequences were the first morter that plastred your hell paines to Christs passion. The worke of our redemption, which Christ now vn∣dertooke to haue pronounced and setled by the righteous iudgement of God, and his Elect to be freed, and pardoned of all their sinnes by the sufferings of his person, The worke of our redemption was cause enough to pro∣uoke Christs bloudy sweate. and to be restored to Gods fauour by his mediation, as also satan to be reiected from preuailing against them, or so much as accusing them; was a matter of the greatest moment in all Christian Religion. What maruaile then, if the manhood of Christ, when it approched so waightie a worke, as by prayer first to obtaine and confirme all this, that after he might the more cheerefully and constantly accomplish his obe∣dience vnto death; What maruaile I say, if the glory of Gods iudgement, and power of his wrath, the number of our sinnes, and neglect of our owne state; the sharpe and eger malice of satan made Christ with all possible feare of the great might and maiestie of the Iudge, all passionate sorrow for the crimes and contempts of the pri∣soners, all earnest and zealous intention of prayer against the impugner and impedi∣ment of mans deliuerance, to agonize himselfe euen vnto a bloudie sweate? If in our prayers the spirit of Christ stirre vp Rom. 8. sighes vnspeakeable, when we remember what danger we were in; what sorrow, cries, and teares may we iustly thinke, the fountaine of mercie and pietie would powre forth in our behalfe, when our saluation was now in question before the Iudge of all the world, and how burned that fire and flame of Christs loue and care for vs, till he was comforted and assured from heauen, that God would not by our wickednesse or vnworthinesse be stayed from performing his mer∣cies towards vs, in Christ his Sonne, nor from accepting Christs obedience and sacri∣fice as the full ransome for all our transgressions notwithstanding all the resistance that sinne or satan could make in the righteous iudgement of God? This, you will say, God long before had purposed and promised vnto his Sonne.] Christ was most earnestly to aske what God had faithfully promised to graunt. And that made Christ the more earnestly pray for it, since God had from the begin∣ning determined, as well to haue it asked by his Sonne, as graunted by himselfe. And therefore Christs supplications for vs in the daies of his flesh, and at the hower of his passion now approching, were as needefull as his sufferings, forsomuch as pietie and charitie are perceiued rather by the Soule, then by the flesh; and God would ne∣uer haue accepted the outward murdering of Christs body without the inward and acceptable sacrifice of his voluntarie obedience, patience and loue euen vnto death which were the points, that were chieflly pretious in Gods sight. Defenc pag. 100. li. 19. Or else Cyrill meaneth no more, but that Christ naturally misliked and , (euen as all flesh doth,) all bodilie paine and death. This we alway yeelde, and it maketh nothing a∣gainst vs. ] It maketh lesse for you, that Christ had and lawfully might haue, as you graunt, a naturall misliking and shunning of all bodily paine and death: and conse∣quently knowing the sharpnesse of the paine, that was prepared for him on the crosse, might without breach of pietie, or repugnance to Gods knowen will desire to haue that Cup passe from him, if it were possible for man by Gods good pleasure to be other∣wise redeemed and saued. And this reseruation of Gods will in his prayer, FATHER Luke 2. IF THOV VVILT, take away this Cup from me, which was the possibilitie ment by Christ, and his present preferring Gods will before the instinct of nature liking ease, in presently saying, Neuerthelesse not my will but thy will be done; doth exquisitely proue that Christ was not astonished in his prayer, nor past remembrance of Gods knowen will, as you dangerously surmise: and no cause you should conclude he felt hell paines in this agonie, because the Scripture concealeth the sense of his feruent suppli∣cation, when after comfort receiued from heauen he fell into an agonie of most ear∣nest and ardent prayer, in which his sweate was like drops of bloud. And therefore your foolish and wicked imagination, that Christ in his agoni was so amazed, that he knew not what he prayed, nor discerned when he impugned the will of God, is with∣out all leading or likelihood of the word of God, and grounded onely vpon your wilfull and hastie humour, when the Scriptures, and fathers precisely conclude the contrarie. Defenc. . 100. li. 27. Therefore I conclude, he thus feared not his bodily death, but it was the paines of the se∣cond death which he felt and so feared. ] This conclusion may well be yours, it rightly resembleth the Maker. Christ feared somewhat, and not his bodily d ath; ergo he felt the second death, which the Scripture sayth is the lake Re el. 21. that burneth with fire and brim∣stone. So many gappes in one conclusion would no man make besides you. For first, how prooue you, that feare was the cause of his bloudie sweat? If it were naturall; feare, whi h quencheth the spirits, & cooleth the bloud, could not procure a bloudie sweat. If it were supernaturall and mysticall, (as Hilarie, Austen, Prosper, Bede and Bernard obserue) then can you conclude no cause thereof, but must leaue it as a secret and wonderfull effect of Christes power and will knowen to God, and vnknowen to man. Secondly, if we grant eare might be the cause thereof; the feare of Gods pow∣er infinitly able to punish the sinne of man on the person of Christ without the paines of the damned, might iustly strike the Manhoode of Christ with any terrour that mans nature was capable of, without the losse of grace and faith. For feare doth not alwayes apprehend what danger is toward, but onely that some danger aboue our reach or strength is imminent ouer vs. Thirdly, if feare of what you will, were the cause of this agonie, it is no way consequent, that that which Christ feared, was really inflicted on him; since feare is of future, not of present eui l; and the Apostle beareth witnesse in this case, that Christ was heard (or freed) Heb. 5. from that he feared. Fourthly, how many things Christ would or did obtaine of his Father for vs by his sufferings, so many things might concurre as causes of this inflamed prayer, whence by order of the Euangelists narration, this bloudie sweate. So that there being four maine exceptions against your collection, whereof you shall neuer auoid any one, you soaring aloft and stooping to nothing but your owne dreames, light iust on your hell paines, not because the Scriptures make any such mention, but because that best plea∣seth your humour. And this is the very closet of your cause, and pride of your proofes touching hell paines suffered in the Soule of Christ: Neword, ne letter of Scripture to warrant it, but as you wrested Pauls wish to foure notable vntruths, so you sweep vp Christs sweate to make perfect your Pageant, that from things obscure, vnknowen and doubted with all men, as touching the precise and particular cause thereof, you may resolue what you list, and ti your Conclusions with cart-ropes of vanitie and falsitie. Defen pag. 100. . 28. But you say, (pag. 26. you should put 25.) the sorrow and feare of death, which it pleased our Sauiour to feele in o r nature came not for want of strength, but of purpose to quench and abolish those affections in vs. I say it came from both. ] And I say you doe not onely rashly crosse Saint Austen in that Negatiue, but you know not what you say. For the question is not, whether feare and sorrow be infirmities, which is your wise con∣ceite; but whether Christ admitted them by his power and will, or by constraint and necessitie, which Saint Austen there calleth infirmitie, and I named want of strength. His words a man would thinke are so resolute, that without better ground then you haue any, a sober Diuine would not so proudlie confront them. August. in Iohannem tract. 60. Non est dubitandum, non um infirmitate, sed turbatum. It is by no meanes to be doubted, that Christ was troubled, not for any weaknesse of minde, but of (his owne) power. What saith your wisedome to this? Austen meaneth not onely by infirmitie, but also by his owne will and power. ] Coherent and different things may be thus coupled toge∣ther, because both may be true; and diuerse respects may reconcile contraries: but in one and the same sentence and sense to harle priuations and positions whereof the one excludeth the other, as you doe, is to make no construction, but a contradicti∣on in Saint Austens words. As if a man should say, this answere of yours is not onely foolish, but also wise; not onely vnlearned, but also learned; we e it not ridiculous? And yet you knit Saint Austens words together in that sort, where if the one be true, the other is false. For if Christ were troubled by infirmitie and necessitie, then was he not by his power and will, as Austen auoucheth he was. Wherefore you hit Saint Au∣stens meaning as rightly, as if a man should post to London Bridge with his backe to∣wards it. [ or else you confute him your selfe. ] as how? because I say with Austen, Christ admitteth these affections and infirmities of mans nature, not for want of power to re∣pres e them, but by volun arie obedience and humilitie, that in him they might be meritorious. Then how these affections preuailed on Christs Soule, is the Question; whether by necessitie, Christ not being able to resist them, or moderate them, which is the weaknesse of mans nature; or by his owne submission, when he would, as he would, and to what ende he would. August. in Iohannem tract. 49. Thou art troubled, saith Austen, against thy will; Christ was troubled because he would. In illius potestate erat sic vel sic ffici, vel non affici. It was in his power to be affected thus, or thus, or not to be affected. Where there is soueraigne power, there infirmitie is go∣uerned according to the direction of the will. He must be ruler and commaunder of na∣ture by his power, that was not troubled with any affections or infirmities but ac∣cording to the liking of his owne will. So was it in Christ. August. ibi∣dem tract. 60. Non rgo est aliquo cogente turbatus. Affectum quippe humanum, quando oportuisse iudicauit, in seipso potestate com∣mouit. Christ was not troubled by the compulsion of any. For when he thought it needfull, he did stirre in himselfe by his owne power humane affections. If to raise feare and sorrow within himselfe, when he would, were power aboue nature, and no humane infirmi∣tie; as also to appoint how farre they should preuaile in him; what was it then by the power of these affections in him, to represse and temper all our infirmities and affec∣tions, and to endue vs with heauenly grace and courage to resist and restraine the ex∣cesse of those affections in our weake natures? was it power, or infirmitie in Christ thus to worke, either in himselfe, or in vs? It was power no doubt in Christ to li∣mit the time, degree and force of those affections, which his will would admit; and in all these things the lesse necessitie of nature vrged him; the more acceptable was his obedience vnto God, that would voluntarily subiect himselfe to our miseries, paines and afflictions. I then neither doe, nor neede denie, that our naturall infirmi∣ties were common to Christ with vs, but those were voluntarily receiued in him August. de trinitate li. 4. cap. 3. quia voluit, quando voluit, quomodo voluit; because he would, when he would, and as he would, euen as Austen saith of his death. And though it be most true, which the Apostle writeth of Christ; 2. Cor. 13. He was crucified through (or as touching his) infirmitie which was the flesh of man in him; yet Saint Austens exposition of those words is right good, where he saith, Ibid. lib. 13. cap. 14. de qua infirmitate ait Apostolus, quod infirmum est dei, fortius est homi∣nibus; euen of that (wherein Christ was crucified) the Apostle also saith, the weaknesse of God is stronger then men. What seemed weaknesse in Christ, and is so cal∣led in the Scriptures in comparison of his diuine power, euen that farre passeth the power and strength of men; and therefore the same Apostle calleth 1. Cor. 1. Christ cruci∣fied the wisedome, and power of God. Defenc. pag. 101., li. 9. Faine you would wipe away that Argument of ours, which sticketh neerer to you then you will seeme. In malefactours there is a quiet and contented suffering of most exquisite and extraordinarie torments often times, which they endure onely by naturall strength and courage of mind. How much more likely is it then, that Christ the very Rock of all strength and fountaine of patience would not thus seeme affrighted and astonished, for his meere bodily death, and that before it came vnto him? ] Your brablement is more tedi∣ous to me, then your Argument troublesome. You spend here a whole leafe to shew that Malefactors and Martyrs o ten suffer most horrible torments very quietly and altogether without any such agonie, as Christ shewed in the Garden. How maketh that against me, who teach out of Hilarie, Ambrose, Ierom and Bede, that Christ was not thus agonized for any sufferings of his owne, much lesse for feare of a bo∣dily death; though he would be like vs in hauing a naturall horror of death, as Atha∣nasius, Austen, Cyrill and Damascene affirme? What wandering and trifling is this, to be loquent in things superfluous, and silent in matters most serious? The whole worke and waight of our redemption was now before Christs eyes and apprehension in more exact and liuely manner, (he now appearing before the iudgement seate of God) then we in this body can discerne or describe. For as all things needfull shall be present and patent to vs, when we are brought to Gods Tribunall, where no truth of things without vs, or within vs, which concerne vs, shall be couered or concealed from vs; so Christ presenting himselfe before the iudgement of God to haue Man redeemed by the ransome, which he would yeeld for him, and satan eiected from preuayling against his members by his mediation, did perfectly and fully behold both the detestation, that Gods holinesse had of all our sinnes, and the power of his wrath prouoked by our defection and rebellion; as also the dreadfull vengeance prepared and ordained for sinne, and our dull and carelesse contempt of our owne miserie, to∣gether with the watchfulnesse and egernesse of the Aduersarie; the brunt and burden of all which he must receaue, and auert from vs by that kind of satisfaction and re∣compence, which the iustice of God should then require at his hands. None of those things might be hid from Christs present and perfect view, when he came now to performe that, which the iudgement of God should thinke a iust price and full re∣compence for the sinnes of men. The due consideration, contemplation, intuition and apprehension whereof being in Christ more cleare, then we can conceaue, might worthily make the Manhood of Christ not onely feare and tremble, but in his pray∣ers to God to stirre and inflame all the powers and parts of body and Soule, as farre as mans nature and spirit were able, with all submission, intention and deprecation possible to powre forth themselues before God. These you push away not as false, but as parts of Christs holinesse; as if any feare or sorrow could be in Christ, which were not religious and holy; and substitute other sufferings of the damned; as the second death, and the true paines of hell from the immediate hand of God, deuiced by your selfe without any direction of the Scriptures; and those you dreame Christ not onely feared, but really felt in the Garden, otherwise he could not sorrow and sweate as he did. And because you would seeme to say somewhat, though little to the purpose, and lesse against me, who auouch no such thing; you heape vp heere malefactours, mur∣derers and theeues, besides martyrs, who neuer sweate bloud for any bodily tor∣ments inflicted on them. Grant all this, though there be differences, which yet you see not, what inferre you? That Christ did not thus sweate for his bodily death. What then? Ergo he suffered in the Garden the death of the damned, and the true paines of hell? This conclusion hangeth to the premisses with hay-ropes, you winde it which way you will, and then you say, I would faine wipe it off. But to me that nei∣ther say, nor said any such thing, that Christ was thus agonized onely for feare of his meere bodily death, these be rather wildgoose-races, then sober mens reasons im∣pugning any thing that I did or doe defend. And yet your comparisons be not so currant, as you conceaue them. For though murderers or malefactors for obstinacie or stupiditie, and martyrs for constancy may despise the torments, which they suffer, so long as strength of desperate malice in the one, or of heauenly grace in the other resisteth or endureth the paine; yet when nature is subdued and conquered by paine, that the soule must yeeld to death and depart, then can no man expresse, nor euer could any man declare, what conflicts of feare and horror the soule hath with death and in death. Onely Christ, who on the Crosse did voluntarily and instantly breath out his soule with all quietnesse contrarie to the course of mans nature, might before hand shew in himselfe, if it pleased him, the anguish and agonie, which naturally the soule hath in her strugling with death, and fainting vnder death, and which God had impressed on mans nature at the time of the departure of the soule from the bodie, in remembrance and resemblance of Gods displeasure against sinne, when by his mightie power he seuered the soule and spirit of man asunder, to giue way to death for the reuenge of the first mans disobe∣dience in all his ofspring. I speake not this, as if there were none other causes, that might be of Christes agonie, but to shew that your comparisons, which you take to be so strong, are woorse then weake, since the soules both of Martyrs and Male∣factors haue a naturall terror and horror of death impressed in them by Gods power and will, though whiles strength and memorie dure, they may be so confirmed in their good or euill purposes, that they doe not yeeld so long, as they can make resi∣stance. This naturall horror of death, which mans soule hath impressed in her by Gods owne doing, if Christ would admit in the Garden priuately before his Father, as obedient to his ordinance, not openly before his enemies, to whom he would shew nothing but patience and constance aboue all malefactors and martyrs, what force haue your examples to refute this, since Christ voluntarily shewed that in the Garden, which the soules of all men naturally doe, when the feare or force of death falleth on them? Petri Mar∣tyris loci com∣munes class. 2. loco. 1. sect. 51. Omnes pij statuunt in morte ir diuinae sensum esse, ideoque sua natura dolorem & horrorem incutit. quod & Christus ipse, dum or aret in horto, & alij multi sancti viri declarauerunt. All the godly (saith Peter Martyr) resolue there is a sense of Gods wrath in (bodily) death, and therefore by the nature thereof it striketh a feare and terrour (into vs) which Christ himselfe, when he prayed in the Garden, and many other holy men haue declared. To let you farther see, that your Malefactors and Martyrs doe not prooue, that Christ might not shew himselfe afrayd of death in the Garden, though in patience and constancie he exceeded all mankinde, when he came to the present feeling of his paines, you shall heare the iudgement of S. Austen affirming, that Christ by this vo∣luntarie Christ would be like the weake to comfort the weake. feare would of mercie conforme himselfe to his weake members for their comfort, lest they should despaire when they feele the feare of death oppressing them. August. in Iohannem tract. 60. Firmissimi quidem Christiani, si qui sunt, qui nequaquam morte imminente tur∣bantur. Sed numquid Christo fortiores? Quis hoc insanissimus dixerit? Quid est ergo, quod ille turbatus est, nisi quia infirmos in suo corpore, hoc est, in sua Ecclesia su infirmita∣tis voluntaria similitudine consolatus est, &c. They are indeed most setled Christians, if there be any such, which are not troubled when death approcheth: But are they stronger than Christ? Who will so say, though he were neuer so madde? What is it then that Christ was troubled (therewith) but because by the voluntarie shew of his weaknesse he did comfort those that were weake in his bodie, which is his Church: that if any of his were troubled with the approching of death, they should in spirit beholde him, lest thinking themselues by this (fearefulnesse) to be reprobates, they should be swallowed vp with a woorse death of despera∣tion? And elswhere with admiration of Christes goodnesse for this verie cause; Idem in Io∣hannem tract. 52. O Lord (sayth he) God aboue vs, Man for vs, I acknowledge thy mercy; for in that thou being so great, wouldest of thy loue be voluntarily troubled (by Ibidem. taking the affection of thy members) thou doest comfort many in thy bodie (the Church) which are necessarily trou∣bled with this their infirmitie, lest by despairing they should perish. So that neither of these wayes Martyrs nor Malefactours are stronger than Christ, though he feared death, which you imagine they do not: but Christ either in respect of his Fathers ordinance against sinne shewed that conflict with death in himselfe, which the soules of all men haue naturally, be they Martyrs or Malefactors, before they depart their bodies; or els of mercie towards vs he would voluntarily assume our weaknesse in the Garden, lest we should despaire, when we feele the stroke and terrour of death, as by his ex∣ample on the crosse he ledde vs to immooueable patience and confidence in all our afflictions. Some Malefactors (you say) despise death, & often smile in their torments.] Being hardened in their sinnes, and obstinate against God, they may haue either stupefacti∣on of sense by Satans meanes, to encourage others to the like wickednesse by their contempt of death; or els obduration in their mischiefe, till the time of repentance be past; but their soules, that so stifly contemne Gods iudgements, haue another maner of terror before they forsake their bodies, when indeed it is too late for want of sense and memorie to call for grace. And the Martyrs themselues, as all good Christians that are resolued not only quietly to suffer, but to desire death, that they may be with Christ, are by Gods grace preserued in that minde so long as vnderstanding and faith preuaile; but when the powers of the soule are ouerwhelmed by the violent paines and pangues of death, she is by Gods ordinance in all mankinde, and euen in the All feele the sting of death which Christ expressed be∣fore aied. faithfull suffered to feele the touch and sting of bodily death, which is fully knowen to none, but to God that ordained it, and to herselfe that feeleth it; though this ago∣nie of death be shortened or succoured, as pleaseth God of his mercie to dispose in euery man: and in Gods elect this anguish, though it be very sharpe for the time, turneth to their good and his glorie; God supporting and comforting the soules of his Saints with hope of a better life. Your reasons therefore are all idle and imperti∣nent, which you draw from the patience of Martyrs, or stifnesse of Malefactors. For admitting all that to be true, which Martyrs by grace, and Malefactors of pertinacie performe in their torments, whiles strength and memorie serue them, yet haue they both their conflicts with death, when they can neither speake nor expresse what they feele, and malefactors a most fearefull confusion, when repentance being past, which they neglected, their soules are now suffered to see the terrours and torments of hell, into which they shall presently depart. And this naturall anguish of death, which as∣saulteth all men, when the soule feeleth the strangenesse and bitternesse of her di∣uorce from the bodie, Christ might purposely uffer to arise in himselfe in the Gar∣den, that tasting it with perfect sense and memorie, he might sustaine it with greater patience and obedience (though it were very painfull) than all mankinde besides. Defenc. pag. 101. li. 20. All your answeare is, malefactours are no fit comparison for the sonne of God: for they are desperate not hauing any feare or care of God, till they feele the force of his wrath in hell fire. What an answeare is this? ] The answeare is itter and fuller, then your wit serueth you to vnderstand, or your learning to refute. For this ignorant or desperate contempt of Gods iudgment, which you alleage in malefactors, Christ might not follow; since he rightly discerned, and religiously feared Gods displeasure against sinne euen in the death inflicted on the body of man. So that Christ shewed an humble regard of Gods punishment with due feare and sorow, which impenitent Theeues and murde∣rers neglect till it be to late; and yet when he came to the very suffering of death on the Crosse, his silence and patience farre exceeded both malefactours and martyrs. The cause of your error is this, that you ascribe that to weaknesse of heart and want of strength in Christ, which he of humilitie to God & mercie to his members voluntari∣ly admitted in himselfe to comfort and strengthen the weake, which are not able to i∣mitate his perfection of patience on the crosse. Leo de Pas∣sione Domini serm. 7. In our basenesse (saith Leo) Christe was despised, he sorowed in our heauinesse, and was crucified in our paine. For of mercy he tooke vnto him the passion of our mortality to this end, that he might heale it, and his power admitted it, that he might conquere it. All thinges in him were full of mysteries and full of miracles. Bernard serm. Agnosco planè in duce belli trepidationem, agnosco agroti vo∣cem in medico, agnosco infirmantem gallinam cum pullis: confidero charitatem, stupeo mi∣serationem, 1. de S. . expauesco dignationem: I plainly see (saith Bernard citing Christes praier in the garden) in the captaine of the field the feare of weakelings, I see in the Physician the voice of the sicke, I see the hen weake with cherishing her yong ones: I consider the loue (of Christ) I am euen amazed at his mercy, and I tremble to see what he voutchsafed (for vs.) Defenc. pag. 102 li. 1 . To leaue these and come to the patience of Martyrs in their sufferings. It is admirable what ioy, what peace, what triumphe they shew in the middest of a thousand most strange and bucherly torments, noe lesse, if not greater in outward shew then the sufferings of our Sauiour Christe. ] It is farre more admirable in our sauiour Christ, that he would be weake for As Christ would be weake to cō∣fort the weake in the Garden, so was be stron∣ger than the strongest on the Crosse. their sakes, that were weake, when it pleased him before his passion, and strong for their example, whom he would make strong, when he came to the heigth of his suffe∣rings; and by either as wel weakenesse as strength, teach vs in both to depend on him, and not to exalt our selues against him or afore him, as you doe Martyrs with your manifold termes and torments. And haue not Martyrs thinke you, before they depart this life, as great conflicts with the paines and horror of death, as Christ had any, though the wisdome of God reserue the naturall sting of death till the soule fecle her bodily senses and powers ouerwhelmed, and her selfe violently forced to forsake her seat, in which case she would vtterly faint, if she were not supported by the secret good∣nesse of God, and taken from that conflict in her bodie by the hands of Angels to be brought with ioy to the presence of God? Cyprianus de Passione Do∣mini. That feare of Christes (in the garden saith Cyprian) expressed the common affection of mans infirmitie; and the generalitie of all men that liue in the flesh, to be vrged with this sorow, and that the dissolution of the soule and the body cannot want this griefe. Martyrs you suppose want this griefe, or willingly endure it, but you are deceiued in either of these as in all things els. August in Io∣hannem tract. 123. Si nulla esset mortis, vel parua molestia, non esset tam magna martyrum gloria. If there were no paine, or but small pain in death, the glory of martyrs would not be so great, saith Austen. And againe. de ciui∣tate . li. 13. ca. 11. Tam mo∣l sta (mors) est, vt nulla explicari locutione possit, nec vlla ratione vitari. So pairfull is death, that it can by no wordes be expressed, nor by no meanes auoided. Bernard. de & . Quid horribilius morte? in morte tam dulce carnis & animae vinculum amarissimo secandum erit diuortio. What is more horrible (saith Bernard) then death? in death the vnion of body and soule, which is so sweete, shalbe seuered with a most bitter diuorce. But martyrs you thincke are willing to endure it; they find as much vnwillingnesse in nature, as they fiind readinesse in faith, or desire in hope; saue that in them necessity worketh obedience. August. de . . serm 32. mortem horret non opinio sed natura. It is nature (saith Austen) not opinion, that abhorreth death. Quis enim vult mori? prorsus nemo, & it a nemo, vt beato Petro diceretur, alter te cinget & feret Ibidem ser∣mone. 33. quo tu non vis. Who will die by his will? vtterly no man, and so certainely no man, that it was said (by Christ) to Peter, another shall gird thee and lead thee whither thou wouldest not, when he went euen to martyrdome. Death therefore by Gods ordinance hath in it a sting repugnant to mans nature, which all men, euen martyrs themselues do feele, & when the paine is so great, that it passeth both their strength and their patience, the force thereof seuereth their soules from their bodies; albeit in Gods Elect all things turne to their good, this agonie of death not excepted, in which God supporteth them whiles they haue sense, that they despaire not, and after some conflict with death, taketh their soules from them, now ioyfull that they are deliuered, and shall be presented to the Throne of Grace. This Christ alone of all men was able exactly to know and feele in himselfe before and without the pangues of death; not that he was weaker than Martyrs, but that all the godly might assure themselues he tasted euen the sharpenesse of death, to which they are subiect, and is able and willing to sustaine vs, and saue vs in the naturall conflict and horrour of death, as he did him∣selfe. Defenc. pag. 103. h. 2. All this other godly men do also suffer and feele, which they take passing ioyfully and qui∣etly. ] Who told you that there is ioy and rest in the pangues of death? Haue the gates Iob. 38. of death beene opened to you? or hath any of the dead certified you, what there is in euering the soule from the bodie? Did God punish Adams disobedience with ioy Martyrs ioy death, but not in death. and ease? or doth nature abhorre pleasure? True it is, the godly ought not to be dis∣mayed with the feare of death, since it is God that woundeth and healeth, killeth and quickeneth, bringeth to hell and bringeth backe againe; but they must acknowledge death to be Gods punishment on Adams sinne, and the straightest gate, that leadeth to heauen. de . This punishment (sayth Cyprian) was layd on all Adams ofspring without ex∣ception, that the difficultie of the last passage (out of this life) should be feared. Hanc nemo anxietatem euasit, & nemo egrediente anima sine amaritudine expirauit. This griefe n man hath euer escaped, nor any euer breathed out his soule without bitternesse. And Mar∣tyrs no doubt doe, or should priuately in their prayers to God, see the sharpenesse of death in respect of their strength, and confesse the iustnesse of this punishment layed on all men for sinne; and so with all religious feare and most earnest prayer to God for his assistance and defence against the terrour of death, approch their endes; though the cause for which they die should comfort them, and make them cheerefull in the eyes of all their aduersaries, when they haue first giuen God his due, and repo∣sed themselues on his heauenly protection. Euen so did Christ teach vs by his ex∣ample, who to his Father in the Garden confessed the naturall horror of death, which he would feele, and felt for our sakes; and after to his persecutours shewed no such thing, but readily met them, willingly offered himselfe to them, and patiently endu∣red whatsoeuer paine they heaped on him. Cyprianus de Passione Do∣mini. Latens in humanitate omnipotentiate Di∣scipulis pauidum, coram per secutoribus terribilem exhibebat. Omnipotencie couered in mans nature, sho ed thee fearefull to thy Disciples, and terrible to thy persecutours, sayth Cypri∣an of Christ. When Christ was carried bound to the President, hee was not suppliant to the Sergeants, yea, he despised: he greatnesse of Herod and Pilate, & de impietate & malitia sua∣uitas pietas{que} Christi triumphat, and the mildnesse and godlinesse of Christ triumphed ouer the malice and wickednesse (of his persecuters.) Defenc. pag. 102. li 26. You answere, if death be not fearefull to the seruants of Christ, they are the more bound to their Lord and Master, who was the first that by death disarmed death, and seuered death and hell. What is this to our reason? ] Enough, and more than enough, if your captious head would conceiue it right. For Christ tooke from death all destroying power ouer the Elect, and from them all amazed and confounding feare, which others finde in death; and so not only by his example taught them to resort to God with prayer for comfort against the terrour of death, but by his agonie enabled them to goe securely and quietly to their deaths, notwithstanding the horror thereof; since he will helpe them in the midst of that miserie, and receiue them with glorie, when others thinke them swallowed vp with death. Defenc. pag. 103. li. 10. By breaking the knot betwixt death & hell, he could not be so wofully affected & affli∣cted aboue measure as he was, if he did not suffer by them somwhat extraordinarily. Vnto Christ might feele somewhat extraordinary, yet not the pains of hell. this you haue nothing to answer. ] Are the pains of hell & the death of the damned come now to SOMEWHAT EXTRAORDINARIE? Heere may the Reader see the ve∣rie depth of all your new doctrine. It was SOMEWHAT, that Christ SVFFERED or FEARED in the Garden: ergo it was the second death and the pains of the dam∣ned. All your idle and erroneous illations and amplifications of martyrs and male∣factors end now in SOMEWHAT, if you could tell what; and because you knowe not what it was, you will imagine what you list. I doe not doubt, but it was some∣what extraordinarie, that mooued Christ to this feare, sorow, and intentiue Prayer after comfort receaued from heauen by an Angell; although I dare not determine, what it was, which the Scriptures doe not expresse; much lesse presume it to be the second death, as you doe against the Scriptures, or frame a new hell of the damned, for Christes soule to pay our ransome, thereby to crosse the whole course of the word of God teaching and assuring vs the bloud of Christ was the price of our Redemption. I see many things extraordinarie, or rather nothing wholy ordinarie in the son of God, specially at the time of our redemption, which he alone for the innocencie and excel∣lency of his person, and power could, and did throughly performe. Yea euen in his agonie though some thinges might be common to him with man, yet none of those thinges could be sustained by any man, as they were by him. And therefore your somwhat betraieth your presumption, when thence you inferre what you best like, be∣cause the Scripture hath not acquainted you with euery secret affection or action, that was required in mans saluation. Defenc. pag. 103. li 22. It was not therefore that only, but some other death farre more dreadfull and intolerable, which made Christ man, (being also God) in such wise to tremble and quake. ] I hope you doe not meane, that Christes godhead trembled at your other death, or was subiect to any humane feares or miseries, nor that your other death was so dreadfull, that his diuine power could not keepe him from trembling and quaking at it. It was no small part of Christes obedience and humilitie to lay aside his strength, when he suffered for our sinnes, and not by power to resist, repulse or ease the paines, which his passi∣on should bring; but with exact sense to feele it, and with woonderfull patience to indure it. Neither was it no part of Christes purpose by his sorrow and feare in the Garden to giue vs to vnderstand, that he would vse no power, which he might ea∣sily haue done, to diminish the vehemency or sense of the paines prepared for him; least his so sauing himselfe from smart by his secret power should delude Gods Iu∣stice, impaire his loue to vs, and put vs in despaire of following his example; since we had no power to succour ourselues, as we might imagine of him, had he not by naturall and euident signes of true feare and sorow confirmed vnto vs, that he felt his afflictions, as much as we doe ours, and will helpe our infirmitie, and ease our miserie, though he would not spare himselfe. So that hence a good Christian would collect Christes submission to the weakest degree of mans infirmitie, and his com∣munion with vs in tasting the sharpest of our sorowes, and not exaggerate his power to make him capable of the second death, Reuel. 21. which is the lake burning with fire and brimstone, as the Scriptures affirme; and consequent, not antecedent to the first death, as you dreame in Christes case, besides that the Reuel. 14. smoke of their torments (which are cast into this lake) ascendeth euermore, and they haue no rest night nor day. Defenc. pag. 103. li. 25. Indeed Christ had farre greater cause (as you say) to feare euen his bodily death, then any of his members haue. For it was therefore because death approched vnto him clasped fast with hell, so that he could not by the ordinance of God meddle with the one, but he must feele the other. ] My wordes enlarged and peruerted by you may seeme to make some mu∣sicke for you, but of themselues they are true, and no way touch your vntuned and hie strained cratchets. That Christ must and did breake the knot betwixt death and hell, which otherwise were fast clasped together, and by receauing the one in his owne person did free all his members from the other, is no question neither with me, nor I thinke with any Christian man. The iust vengeance deserued and prepared for sinne, which was temporall and eternall death, the Redeemer must throughly know least he should ransome vs he could not tell from what. Wherefore not your new found hell, but the wages of our sinne, which was eternall death, vsually called hell in the Scriptures, might not be hidde from the e es of Christ; but euen the iust and full reward of our iniquities was to be presented to the sight and spirit of the Redee∣mer, that in the presence of God he might behold the waight of our sinne, the greatnesse and iustnesse of Gods anger against it, and accordingly conceaue how deare the price, and how sharpe the paine must be, that should quitte vs from this debt, and yet how pretious his person, and infinite his obedience was, that by one death should excuse vs from the other. Whether these things were reuealed and shewed to Christ by sight, as the terrors and torments of hell might be; or by vision, or in spirit, I dare not pronounce; I meddle not so farre with Gods secrets: God hath waies enough to propose the Iudgemets of the next world to men here liuing, when and how pleaseth him; but of none of these might Christ be ignorant, least we make him a Sauiour at peraduentures, as not knowing all things, that directly belonged to his office, and sacrifice, and to the causes & effects of our Redemption. That ther∣fore Christ must haue a perfect knowledge and liuely sight and view of all these things pertaining to the waight and burden of mans deliuerance, chiefly now when he appeared in Gods iudgement, (where nothing is couered) to performe the fame, I may safely grant; but that he felt or suffered eternall death, or the paines of the damned, or the full wages of our sinnes, this you shall neuer prooue, how much so∣euer you presume with licentious but irreligious words to couer it, and conuey it in∣to the Creed of Christians. Defenc. pag. 103. li. 29. He did not contemplate and looke on them a farre of, nor had to do with one more then the other, but by suffering one he felt both, and by enduring one he endured both. ] Your speaches are false, absurd, and impious, howsoeuer you will qualifie them, when you come to the point, with the substances, but not with the circumstances of eternall death and damnation. First, shew that the Scripture teacheth any such thing of Christ The Defender forgeth apace new parts of the Christian faith. as that he suffered the second death, or the paines of the damned. Next, that your de∣uice of this new second death, which dureth but for a moment, and proceedeth from Gods owne hand agreeth with the word of God. And Thirdly, that God did thus torment the soule of his sonne with his immediate hand, either in the garden, or on the crosse. All these things are your owne dreames plainly plastered to the Christian faith with figures and phrases of your owne coining; and yet you thinke you haue wrong, if you be not suffered to change the whole Creede, and outface the Scriptures with your idle fansies. That Christ should and did suffer a bodily death on the crosse, the Prophets did forshew, the Euangelists doe witnesse, and the Apostles doe con∣firme. That he died the second death in the garden before the first, or that this death came to him by fitts, and dured but the turning of an hand, and was inflicted on his soule by Gods immediate hand, as the other death was on his body by the Iewes, what Prophet, what Euangelist, what Apostle did euer teach or write? And how hang your owne words with your owne conceits? by suffering the one, Christ felt both, (you say) and by enduring the one he endured both. ] Then in the Garden, when as yet he suffe∣red not the death of the body, he felt not your second death; and Gods immediate hand did cease, if by the one, which the Iewes inflicted he endured both. If you fly to Christes fearing and apprehending the second death by the first; then are you farre from his suffering and enduring it; and this apprehension, which was not erroneous in Christ, as it is in you, might offer him a feare of Gods power, which is more infinite, then the manhoode of Christ could comprehend, and so might be terrible to him, as it is to all the godly when they finde or feele Gods anger against sinne; but it could breed no perswasion, or distrust, that God would destroy him for our sinnes, since he perfectly knew God would saue vs by his sufferings. Defenc. pag. 104. li. Also you forget my argument: that Christ alwayes charged his Disciples not to take their bodily death heauily for righteousnesse sake. ergo he himselfe would neuer be so dismáyed with the feare of it. ] As I did not professe in my conclusion to refute all your follies, which were both trifling and tedious, so if I had purposed any such thing, I should haue skipped this, as an argument rather of your ignorance and vanitie, than of any force or veritie. For first, where did I defend in my Sermons, that Christes bodilie death was the cause of this agonie? recken my sixe causes on your fingers ends, if your memorie be so fickle, that refuting them you can not tell what they are, and see whether Christes bodily death be any of them or no; if it be none, how doth this ar∣gument conclude any thing against me, who shew so many things, which might con∣curre in Christes feare, besides his bodily death? Wherefore your conclusion, if it were good, is no way preiudiciall to me, nor beneficiall to your hell paines. For though Christ feared somewhat els, there is a large leape betweene somewhat els, and the death of the damned. But what was it that Christ willed his Disciples to feare? Christ teacheth all his to feare Gods power, as himselfe did in the garden. Gods purpose meaning to condemne Christians to hell, or his power, that was able to destroy soule and bodie in hell? Did Christ teach in these words a desperation of Gods fauour, or submission vnder the mighty hand of God, and a religious feare not to displease him? To feare religiously, not distrustfully Gods power, since they were persuaded of Gods goodnesse whom Christ calleth his friends, and so not to prouoke him, considering the mightinesse of his arme, is the summe of Christes doctrine in that place; as God himselfe by the Prophet Esay taught all the faithfull, saying; Esa. 8. Sanctifie the Lord of hosts, and let him be your fear and let him be your dread. A deepe impression of this feare commended to all the Elect, whiles heere they liue, Christ himselfe might haue and shew in the Garden, and be farre from doubting his owne saluation and our redemption. So that Christes words doe no way touch your new deuice of hell paines, except by contradicting it. For where Christ sayd, Luke 12. v. 4. I speake to you my friends, vers. 5. I will forwarne you whom you shall feare, , feare him that hath power, AFTER HE HATH KILLED, to cast into hell: you contrarie to Christes words auouch, that God first cast Christes soule into hell in the Garden, and after killed his bodie on the crosse, where Gods course is, as Christ obserueth, after he hath killed, to cast into hell, or Ge∣henna, where the paines of the damned are. And so where Christ maketh the second death of the damned to come after the death of the bodie, you make in Christ and all his members the second death to go before the first, which is a grosse ouersight as well against order as against trueth; saue that your conceits haue neither order, weight nor measure. Defenc. pag. 104. li. 11. Here you haue a notable saying in the margent, which must not be forgotten, we must preferre Christs sufferings before all Martyrs, not for his paines, but for his Patience. Not for his paines, but for his Patience? A rare distinction: If you could make vs beleeue, that the greatest patience is tried and discerned, where the smallest paines are, then you said somewhat. ] The margin will prooue you fit to play with a feather, and willing to embrace a bable before a better thing. Doe my words there import or intend, that Christs paines were lesse then the paines of Martyrs? Hauing said before as much as I thought good, touching the comparison of Christs paines with other mens, I obserued here that Christs patience in suffering farre passed theirs, whatsoeuer we re∣solued of his paines. My words were. Sermo. pa. 7. li. 10. Longer torments others haue endured, but ne∣uer greater for the time, nor with like patience. This, as your manner is, you ouerskip, and where I refuse a needlesse contention, what kinds of paines are sharpest here on earth, but auouch Christs patience far exceeded the tolerance of Martyrs, whatso∣euer Christs patience was greater than any mans whatsoeuer his paines were. his paines did; you neither remember what I before auouched, nor what these words inferre, but make your selfe merie with your owne folly. We must preferre, I said, Christs sufferings before all Martyrs, not for his paines, (the exact degree where∣of I know not) but for his patience. Doth this hinder, but that Christs paines were equall to any Martyrs sufferings, though I tooke not vpon me to make them sharper, then all the paines, that euer were felt on earth? My words before were plaine enough, greater torments for the time others neuer endured: And if such a Wyer-drawer, as you are; would goe to cafling, which is the sharpest kind of paine, it pertained not much to the purpose, there could be. no question, but Christs patience in his extreame paines did farre excell all mens. Indeede you little regard his patience, for you put him in a maze all confounded and all astonished, where neither obedience nor pati∣ence could haue any place: and as for paines you will none other, but the paines of the damned, which passe the patience of men and Angels. Wherefore that I would make men beleeue, the greatest patience is tried in the smallest paines, is a buzzardly deuice of your owne, and howsoeuer I would not contend, whether Christs paines were the sharpest that euer were suffered on earth, yet I before resolued his paines to be as great, as any mans euer were in this mortall body, and his patience to be farre greater and painfuller to him. The reasons whereof I gaue before in my Sermons, though your course be to leape ouer what you list, and to meddle with no more then you may entertaine with a wrest or a iest. The eminence of Christs patience aboue all Martyrs I shewed to consist in these two points; in exacter sense, and perfecter obedience at the time of his sufferings, then any man euer had, or could haue. For in others the more violent the tortures, the sooner they ouerwhelme the sense, and hasten death; but in Christ (whatsoeuer you dreame to the contrarie) there was no confusion, nor corruption of sense; rather when his paines were sharpest, and himselfe weakest; then was his sense as tender, if not tenderer then at any time before. Againe in others, euen in Martyrs, when paine doth passe their strength, the Soule struggleth and striueth to repell or auoyde the paine, which when she cannot conquere, nor resist, she departeth the body. In Christ it was otherwise; when the sharpnesse of paine most fiercely assaulted him, then did his obedience and patience rise to the highest degree. So that nothing in him refu∣sed or declined the bitternesse of his paines, nor so much as repined or shrunke at it, but to the vttermost he put himselfe with all submission and patience aduisedly, obe∣diently, and quietly to beare, and endure the greatest rage and excesse of his into∣lerable torments, which no mans strength or nature can performe. And this I trust toucheth the triall and proofe of Christs patience, and not the inward habite, as you call it; not so much as vnderstanding, that my words concerne the vse, and not the gift of Christs patience. And if I would enterpret my words, as you did Saint Au∣stens a little before, when they contained contraries, not consequents, as mine doe, and so say, Christs sufferings must be preferred before all Martyrs, not for paines (only,) but for patience also, since there could be no vse of patience in Christ without paines: then by your owne interpretation, which in things consequent is very requisite, you haue flowen faire, and seased on a Butterflie. Defenc. pag. 104. li. 28. By this also we may see how vaine your next coniecture is, that he feared in his Agony corporall castigation aboue his strength. For why may not Martyrs and others feare as much crùeltie and extraordinarie torments at the hands of men, as Christ had cause to doe? ] You haue an habite of vnderstanding nothing besides that, which no man vnderstandeth besides your selfe. When I tell you that another thing Sermo. pag. 24. li. 18. which Christ might iustly feare and earnestly pray against, (though his soule were neuer so safe, from the paines of the damned) was the power of Gods wrath to be executed on his bodie: li. 22. for God was armed with infinit vengeance to afflict and punish the bodie about that the humane flesh of Christ was able to endure: You answer, why may not martyrs feare as much at mens andes. Wisely forsooth, and as much to the purpose as chalke to make cheese. Why should not Martyrs feare the power of men against their bodies, as much as Christ feared the power of God against his body? If you see not the cause, aske one of the children that dwelleth at next house to you, if they haue learned to know God from men, and they will readily tell you; though my wordes were full enough, but that your head was so emptie, as not to see what I said. God I said, was armed with infinite vengeance to afflict the body aboue that the humane flesh of Christ was able to endure. Are men so ar∣med as God is, euen in this life? I troe not, and therefore are not so to be feared. Defenc. pag 104 li. 32. Why should the feare of any whatsoeuer meere bodily paines, ouercome Christes pati∣ence? ] Euen therefore because it was humane, and weake in respect of God, and farre vnable to beare that, which God could impose. [ Are not martyrs as far vnable? ] Yes farre lesse able, whether it be the hand of God, or of man, which they must feele. [Why then are not they as much afraid?] Of Gods power they are, when and where∣soeuer shewed vnto them, or duely considered by them. As Moses when God Exo. 19. v. 16. light∣ned and thundred on mount Sinai before the deliuering of the Law, Heb. 12. v. 21 Why Christ fea∣red more than martyrs do. feared and trem∣bled by the Apostles report, as well as the rest of the people. And as for the rage of men, Martyrs first know, that Gods wrath towards them is appeased by Christ Iesus, and therefore they shall feele no more but the hands of men. Secondly, that as the crueltie of humane tortures increaseth, so God either assisteth his seruants by dimi∣nishing the bitternesse of their paines, or suffereth their strength or sense to be ouer∣whelmed by the furie of their torments, in which case the soule though impatient of such paine doth not sinne, because the violence is greater then mans strength can en∣dure, and thereby driueth the soule from the bodie. With Christ it was otherwise. For where he was to beare our sinnes in his bodie, and had power sufficient in him∣lefe to decline or frustrate all that men could doe vnto him, when he would; he was to see that Gods hand might ioyne with the Iewes rage for the punishments of our sinnes in his flesh; and that the sharper the anguish, which he should feele, the exacter the sense thereof which he must haue, and yet must still continue the perfe∣ction of his obedience and patience; since no violence of torments, were they ne∣uer so intolerable, might ouerwhelme his sense, or force his soule from his body, but he must expect the time appointed by his Father, when he should in full sense and memorie breath out his soule at an instant, as I haue formerly shewed. He might therefore feare as well the violence, as the continuance of his paines (farre more then Martyrs neede) if he did not deprecate the power of Gods wrath deserued by our sinnes, to be eased euen in his body, where he bare our sinnes. For God was and is able to aggrauate bodily paines farre aboue the strength of mans nature in vs or in Christ, without meanes, or by meanes whatsoeuer. So that Christ desiring this cup, which he now beheld (for THIS doth demonstrate somewhat conceaued in the cup, which he declined) should passe from him, might haue this meaning, that the cuppe should passe from him, and not oppresse his patience, because his flesh was but weake to beare that hea ie burden in his body, which our sinnes prouoked; and was heard, as the Apostle noteth of this praier in the garden, and eased of that he seared. Christ knew all thinges, you will say, that should befall him.] Then he also knew, what his praier would auert of that punishment which our sinnes deserued: and since it is euident, that greater torments both of soule and body were due to vs fo our sin, as we find by the damned, who are in the same desert with vs, though not partakers of the same mercie with vs: why should not Christ by his praier, which he knew God would heare, decline what he disliked in the cup of Gods wrath mixed for the sinnes of men, and yet submit and commit himselfe, after praier made, wholy to the will of God his father? Defenc. pag. 105. li. 1. If you meane that he felt greater (paines) concurring in and with the bodily punishment inflicted by the wrathfull hand of God armed with infinite vengeance, then you say well, and we acknowledge it. ] If I will mistake fearing for suffering, and bodily for ghostly pains, and the crosse for hell, and make Gods immediate hand a pretence for all these deui∣ces, as you doe, then I say well, as you suppose; but if I make the power of God able to afflict for sinne the Bodie or Soule of man aboue all humane strength without the paines of the damned; and Christ iustly to feare the power of Gods wrath, if he did not by earnest and humble prayer pacifie Gods indignation for as much as exceeded the weaknesse and patience of his manhood, then my coniectures are vaine, though they neuer so well agree with the rules of religion and pietie. But in this you doe, as all Sectaries are wont to acknowledge no sinceritie, but in their owne secrets. August. con∣tra . li. 11 cap. 2. Tues ergo regula veritatis? quicquid contra te facit non est verum? Are you then the rule of truth? and whatsoeuer is against you, is that not true? Defenc. pag. 105. li. 4. Your other cause is, for that by death his Body should want awhile the feeling of Gods presence. But did not Christ perfectly know that this was Gods decree and certaine appoint∣ment, yea his owne most free will and purpose? ] He that once hath vndertaken to wrench the Scriptures from their right sense, will neuer sticke to wrangle with all the world, as long as braine, or breath will giue him leaue. Often enough if that would serue, you haue beene told, that I produced not those foure points, on which you last insisted, as causes of Christs agonie, but as respects of his fearing, disliking, and shunning bodily death; against which you say nothing, but that he could not, he would not so feare it, as to sweate bloud for it. Which sillinesse, if not sottishnesse, still to impugne that, which I doe not affirme, and to post ouer the rest as pertinent to Christs perfection and holinesse, and so no part of his sufferings, is the best ground of your defence: but take any of these foure points, which you so much mislike, and referre them rightly to the end, for which I brought them, or any of the former fiue causes concurring to Christs agonie, and speake directly and truely to any one of them, and you shall be excused for all the rest. But being not able to refute one of them in sound and vpright reasoning. All your shift is, to misapply the respects of Christs declining death, as if I made them causes of his agonie; and to single the causes, which I auouch might all meete in Christs feare and sorrow in the Garden, as sole and singular efficients of his whole agonie. With this childish Art you haue almost waded by them, not denying, as indeede you cannot, that they were then be∣fore Christs eyes, when he feared and sorrowed in the Garden, but that either they were no new things to him, or else parts of his righteousnesse and holinesse. Both which Answeres are very idle. For your hell paines, if that were part of his Passion, were no more newes to his foresight then the rest; and all Christs sufferings euen of your hell paines (if that conceite had any truth in it) were parts of his obedience and patience, as well as his suffering of feare and sorrow, or of bodily death. Wherefore these be but straines and starts to make your Reader beleeue you haue somewhat to say, when indeed your oppositions are so sleight, that they bewray how gladly you would, and how hardly you can distresse any of these causes, which I said might con∣curre in Christs Agonie. They all were weightie and godly respects impressing no small degrees of feare, sorrow, care and zeale on the Soule of Christ, and directly pertinent to the worke of our redemption now in hand. And where you shift them of as parts of Christs habituall holinesse alwaies resting in him, know you good Sir, that I speake not in this case of the permanent gifts of grace alwaies inherent in Christs Soule, but of the painfull impressions, which those respects did therefore now pre∣sently and sensiblie make on the Soule of Christ more then at other times, because they came now to execution, which before were but in cogitation, & by religious and humble praier, he was now to settle the whole course, force, & effects of his sufferings. Defenc. pag. 105. li. 10. Call you this greater perfection in him than in other men, to pray expressely against the knowne will of his Father, yea against his owne? ] That Christ praied against the knowen will of his Father, is an irreligious and dangerous dreame of yours. This Toy you trump in euery where, as if it were some choise Answere, and yet this emptie reason maketh as much against you, as against me, if there were any waight in it. For if Christ did suffer the paines of the damned according to your deuice, was it not his Fathers knowen will he should so doe, yea and his owne also? How then doe the paines of hell excuse him from praying against his Fathers knowen will? [ he was so amazed therewith, you will say, that he knew not what he did. ] Christ must then be wholy depri∣ued of all vnderstanding, if he neither remembred his Fathers will, nor his owne, nor our saluation, for whose sake he was content to suffer. And how then came he so suddainly in the very next syllable to remember himselfe, and his Fathers will? [ He was now freed, you will say, from that astonishment. ] How fell he then thrice into it? [he had so many touches of hell paines, which must needs confound all the powers and parts of his body.] Then all the time of his apprehension, examination, con∣demnation and crucifixion he felt no such thing, since the Gospels beare witnesse, that he wisely, religiously, constantly, carefully, and euery way admirably behaued himselfe in eche word and deede after to the instant of his death; and remembred all things that were written of him. Is not here a fine mockerie, which is the fortresse of all your hidden mysteries; that to prooue your hell paines, you must bring Christ into three such fits and pangs of confusion and obliuion, that he knew not what he said, or did; & presently with the speaking of (YET) to restore him againe to his per∣fect sense and memorie, and so to free him from all your new deuised Passions? be∣sides your selues, no writer old nor new did euer find in Christs prayer, that he knew not what he said; and the condition added before his prayer, Luke. 22. Father, if thou wilt, take away this Cup from me; and the submission following with the same breath, yet not my will, but thine be done, doe plainely prooue that Christ had exact remembrance and regard of his fathers will, besides that the Apostle affirmeth of this prayer, that Christ Heb. 5. was heard, in that he feared. So that if this be all the Scripture you can produce for your hell paines, I protest before God and his whole Church, I will sooner beleeue that you were out of your wits in writing this, then that Christ was forgetfull in pray∣ing that, which he spake in the Garden. Defenc. pag. 105. li. 10. Againe could this thing in any reason be such an horrible griefe vnto him; to haue his flesh lie dead for a day and a few howers, would the thought of this make him sweat bloud for griefe, and to neede an Angell from heauen to comfort him, and to pray three times vehemently, this cup might passe from him? verily it is vnreasonable to thinkeso. Who hath bewitched you thus openly and vsually to fasten on vntrueths? I alleaged six causes that might in Christes agonie, you haue piked out of my wordes foure more then euer I ment to be reasons of his bloudie sweate, and are nine of these now puft away with a breath, and nothing left by your swelling and insulting eloquence, but the deadnesse of Christs body, whiles the soule wanted? this it is for a man to trust to his tongue, when his teeth be gone; and to bleate, when he cannot bite. If the cause were not Gods, it might be thought a pastime thus to faine and face; but in so serious questi∣ons to vse such idle and false imputations and friuolous refutations, is a griefe to any good mans eares and a corrosiue to his conscience. Of Christes agony, and the causes that might occasion his feare, his sorow, and his zeale in the garden I haue said so much that I am wearie with repeating, though you be neuer weary with resuming the selfe same childish and erroneous mistaking. The reason of my speach is plaine and euident, howsoeuer you take the course rather to misreport it, then refute it. For if the soules of Gods saincts doe by nature vnwillingly leaue their bodies to which they are vnited, though by them they are often molested and burdened; (otherwise death were no punishment of sinne, but a signe of Gods far our which is nothing so) how farre iuster cause then was there, Christ should naturally dislike death not only because it was a subuersion of nature created, & quickned by God, and an effect of Gods dis∣pleasure against sinne imposed on all men; but also for that it should during the time depriue him of life, sense and action with great slaunder and infamie, and cheefely should exclude for a season his bodie from that blessed communion and fruition of his diuine grace and glorie, which formerly it felt, though the personall vnion should not be dis olued? now the more Christ liked and loued that adherence to God, which he liuing enioied, the more grieuous was the want thereof, which death tooke from him for the time, though it were after restored with greater glory. This I did not put for the cause of his agonie, as you idlely amplifie, but noted it as a respect, that might worthily lead Christ to dislike or abhorre death in respect of his perfection and com∣munion with God aboue all men and Angels, saue for the will of his father, and the good of man, which ouerruled this dislike in him. Defenc pag. 105 li 22. You say excellent well, but by your practise in all matters so farre as I see, you neuer meane to obserue it: in Gods cause let Gods booke teach vs, what to beleeue, and what to professe. shew me then where you read in Gods word any or all these to be effectuall causes of this strange or my part I shall neuer beleeue you. ] If I did professe to bind mens faiths to these causes of Christes agonie, as you doe to your new redemption by the paines of the damned, I would shew you where I redde them in the word of God, or els I would leaue ch beleeuer to his libertie: but I forwarned all men, that the Scriptures directly and particularly speaking nothing of the causes of Christes agonie, the safest rule that I could find, or they could follow, was not to depart from any knowen and receaued grounds of Religion and principles of pietie for the causes thereof. For since the Scriptures keep silence, and our Sauiour himselfe would not shew it to all his Disciples, but chose three from the rest to goe with him, and tooke the darke time of the night, and left those three (whose eies were so heauie that they could not for eare sleepe) about a stones cast before he would pray, because he would not haue th m to all that he said, or did in that place, I see no reason why any man should be ouer curious in searching that, which the word of God hath not precisely reuea∣led, specially seeing no demonstratiue cause can be giuen of secret affections and vo∣luntarie actions, such as these were in Christ. And your audacious and presumptu∣ous boldnesse is the more chalengeable, for that you not onely take vpon you to giue the right and exact cause therof out of your owne braine, but you light on such a cause, as hath no foundation in any part of the Scripture, nor any coherence with the maine positions of the Christian faith vnfalliblely deliuered in the word of God. Wherfore I haue not transgressed my directions, when I teach what iust and waighty respects of feare, sorow & zeale our Lord & Sauior had in the worke of our redemp∣tion; which might be the causes of that earnest prayer & agonie, and withall shewed the iudgements and opinions of diuers ancient and learned Fathers concerning the same; but you as insolent in your conclusions, as in your conceits, take vpon you to specifie the full and true cause thereof, for which you haue no shew of Scriptures, nor touch of reason. And such is the cause which you yeeld, that thereby you crosse the chiefe streames of faith and trueth most currant in the sacred Scriptures, and with all learned and religious antiquitie. The same rule then binding you, which bindeth me, shew you, what Prophet, Euangelist, or Apostle euer taught or thought the paines of the damned to be inflicted on Christes soule in the Garden by Gods im∣mediate hand, and that without the paines of hell we could not be ; or els my not beleeuing you will not excuse your enterprise; you must answere to God, and to all the faithfull, for innouating the very roots and branches of their redemp∣tion by the bloud and death of Christ Iesus, which you auouch to be vnsufficient for the ransome of our sinnes, except your hell be thereto added, when the Holy Ghost, who should best know the trueth, being the spirit of trueth, hath expressed no such thing in all the Scriptures. Defenc pag. 105. li. 32. Your sixt and last maine cause is, that Christ by this his bloudie sweate and praiers did nothing but voluntarily performe that bloudie offering and Priesthood in the Law. This we simply grant. ] If you should truely repeat and conceiue any part The ago∣nie. of my writings, you should put your selfe to more paines, than you are willing to take, iustly to refute it. Wherefore your course is either to misrecite, or to misconstrue all that you bring. In the oblations of the Law, which prefigured the death of Christ, I obserued, that not only the Sacrifice was slaine by the shedding of bloud, but that the person of the Priest was sanctified, as well as the sinner presented by the Priest to God with earnest and humble prayer to make atonement for the trespasse. And since the trueth must haue some resemblance with the figure, Christ might in the Garden per∣forme some points requisite to his Priesthood, as the sanctifying of himselfe with his owne bloud, and presenting his bodie to be the redemption and remission of our sinnes, with most instant and intentiue prayer for the transgressours. This if you sim∣ply graunt, as in wordes you say you doe, tell vs now which way you will conclude Christes suffering of hell paines in the Garden from his bloudie sweat? [ It hindereth not our assertion. Much lesse doeth it further it: but yet if there might be a cause of Christes voluntarie sprinckling himselfe with his owne bloud, and dedicating it to Gods pleasure for mans redemption besides and without your hellish torments, you will come shorter than you recken, to make good your conclusion. Defenc. pag. 106. The Scriptures which you cite, prooue indeed that Christ now executed his office of Priesthood, but will you diuide and exempt his death on the Crosse from his Priesthood? ] Who besides your selfe restraineth Christes euerlasting Priesthood either to the garden or to the crosse? But it was one thing for Christ with feruent and submissiue prayer to present and submit his bodie, which was his Sacrifice, to the will of his Fa∣ther, as he did in the garden; and another thing, to receiue and admit the violent and wicked hands of the Iewes executing their rage on his bodie with all reproch and crueltie, as he did on the crosse. Now what had his Priesthood to do with the paines of hell, since he was to present and performe the bloudie sacrifice of his bodie prefi∣gured in the Law, which he did in the garden, and on the crosse? And forsomuch as you grant, that Christes bloudy sweat, and his vehement prayers in the garden were pertinents to his Priesthood prefigured in the Law, which indeed is Hebr. 5. confirmed by the Apostle, as you can shew no figure of suffering hell paines or the second death in the sacrifices of the Law, no more doth either of these performed in the garden concerne any secret death of the soule, which Christ there suffered from the imme∣diate hand of God. Defenc. pag. 106. li. 14. Why say you not aswell, that his death and bloudshed on the Crosse shewed in him no paines nor infirmitie, but onely that voluntarily he made himselfe there the true Priest, and performed the prefigured bloudie and deadlie sacrifice for the sinnes of the world? As good reason altogether you haue to say so, as to affirme it of his agonie, ] No by your leaue: for Christ did not actually offer two sacrifices; the one ghostly, suffering the paines of hell in the garden, as you imagine; the other bodily and bloudy, yeelding himselfe to the death of the crosse. Heb. . 14 With one oblation he hath made perfect for euer them, which are sanctified; vers. . and we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Iesus Christ once (made). This sacrifice was presented and submitted to Gods will in the garden, but finished and consummated on the Crosse, which could not be without paines and infirmitie belonging vnto death. In the garden, where no Scripture saith Christ died, I admit not the second death nor the paines of the damned, which are thereto consequent. And where you say, I refuse all paines and infirmitie in Christes agonie, it is one of your wonted trueths, which in another were an open lie. I admit not the paines of the damned, or of the second death, til you shew where the scripture teacheth, that Christ suffered two deaths; the first on the Crosse, and the second in the garden, and that a∣fore the first. Otherwise painefull affections of feare and sorow, which were humane infirmities, though voluntarily and religiously receaued by Christ into his soule, I e∣uerie where acknowledge, and with Cyprian make them entrances to his oblation for the sinnes of the world. de . vt fieret voluntas Patris, & sacrificium carnis a timore & , suberant victime desolatori carbones, quos obedientiae liquefactus adeps extinxit. t e will of the Father might be donne, saith Cyprian and Christ begin the sacrifice of his flesh with feare and sorow, consuming coales (of feare and sorow in the gar∣dē) were pu vnder the sacrifice, which the sweet fatnesse of his obedience m lting did quench. So that Christ beganne the sacrifice of his body in the garden, offering that to be dis∣posed at his fathers will for the life of the world, and his entring to it was with feare and sorow, the painfulnesse whereof his obedience abolished, and so without all feare went to the rest of his suffrings before and on the crosse, where he perfected and end∣ed his oblation, despising all torments and punishments, that the wicked could de∣uice for him. ibidem. vt sanaret in irmos, timuit vt faceret securos. Christ sorowed to heale our weakenesse, and feared to make vs secure. I beheld workes (o Lord saith he) and admire thee fastened to the crosse betweene two condemned (Theeues) now to be neither fearefull nor sorrowfull; but a conquerer of thy punishments. Defenc. pag. 105. li., 6. You meane voluntarie in such sense that Christmas not also vrged thereunto by any vio∣lence of paines and feare procuring it in him naturally. ] I meane by voluntarie, that Christ had power enough to resist and represse the vehemency and painefulnesse of these af∣fections his affe∣ctions as e saw cause. in him selfe; and therefore against or without his will they could not trouble him. For did not preuaile or exceed in him, as they do in vs against our wils, but he must be willing to submit himselfe to each affection of feare & sorow, before they could take hold of him, or be grieuous to him. Our nature though he tooke in substance, yet the corruption and distemper of our sinfull nature he did not take; and therfore as before our fall the innocency and rectitude, that was in man, could guide and gouerne as well the rising, as the inflaming of his affections; so much more Christ, who besides sincerity from sinne, and libertie from corruption, had the grace and power of Gods spirite aboue measure in his humane nature, could so restraine and represse in himselfe all affections of feare and sorow, that till he was willing, and thought it fitte, they neither did mooue, nor molest his humane flesh, or spirit. And when he suffered mans nature in him to feele the same affections, that are in vs, they were holy and righteous in him, declaring his obedience to his Fathers will, and not disordered as we find in the corruption of our flesh. And where you adde that Christ was vrged (to his bloudie sweat) by violence of paines or feare procuring it in him naturally; you speake not only against the trueth, but euen against your selfe. For within one leafe after you grant, . 107. li. 16 it was aboue the course of nature; led thereunto by Hilaries wordes, that it was H lar. de Tri∣nitate li. 10. non secundum naturae consuetudinem, not according to the accustomed course of nature. And indeed how could it be naturall, since feare cannot by nature cause a bloudy sweate? and of all the men that you imagine did euer suffer the paines of hell, you neuer read in the Scriptures or else where, that any of them did sweate bloud. Now if it were naturall to paine, yea to your supposed paines of hell in this life to sweate bloud, as many as you vrge suffered the same, yea all the members of Christ, to whom in these sufferings you make him like, must needs at one ime or other sweate bloud as well as Christ. Wherefore it is certaine that either you fitten and faine th se sufferings in other men, or else Christ was not vrged NATVRALLY to this sweate by any eares or paines of hell, that oppressed him in the Garden. Defenc. pag. 10. li. 2. Of this (Exposition) with all the rest you pronounce, that they are sound and well agree∣ing with Christian pietie. Yet is it contrarie to your Resolution also, yea it is contrarie to the Scripture expressing his feare and vehement sorrowes, and discomfort to haue caused his Agonie. ] Your words are of so small waight, that a man would skant spare you Oyster∣shels vpon your credit. You know not the difference betwixt the occasion of Christs sorrow and sweate in the Garden, and the exposition of his complaint on the crosse. What I say of the one, You more then negligently apply to the other. As for my Resolution Pag. 290. prooue it contrarie to this position (for exposition it is none, since it concerneth the cause of Christs sweate, and not the sense of his words;) and you shall after many failes and follies prooue somewhat. Otherwise if these things in the Garden concerned Christs priesthood, which is mine Assertion in this place, I hope his Priesthood prooueth both his submission to God, to whom he yeelded himselfe obedient and suppliant, and his compassion on man, for whose sake he refu∣sed not to make a bloudie and deadly offering of his owne bodie, which is my Reso∣lution in the Page, that you name for a contradiction to this. But the Scriptures are against it. ] That were worth the hearing, if you had any in store; but if your ignorance be such, that you bring the parts of Christs agonie for the causes thereof; and your insolence such, that you will pronounce what the Scrip∣tures shall say or meane without any farder proofe, you may soone make them con∣trarie to themselues, as you doe in the maine matter and merit of our redemption by the death and bloud of . That Christ in the Garden began to be afraid, and said of himselfe, he was on euery side sorrowfull, and after comfort receaued by an An∣gell from heauen fell into an agonie of intentiue prayer, in which his sweate was like drops of bloud, this the Scriptures report. What was the direct and particular cause of this feare and sorrow, or for what, after the vision of an Angell from heauen, Christ prayed so earnestly, that his sweate was like bloud, this is the Question in this place. Wherein like some late risen Apostle, you take vpon you to decide, what best sor∣teth with your error, and proclaime that to be expresse Scripture. But where doth the Scripture expresse, that Christs feare, sorrow, and discomfort caused his Agonie? If they were parts of his agonie, as well as his bloudie sweate, then must there be a cause as well of these, as of the other; and they caused not his bloudie sweate. Now the cause of neither is directly mentioned in the Scriptures. The Scripture Comfort by an Angell and in∣tenti e prayer went before Christs bloudie sweate. speaketh of Christs prostration and prayer, of his triple Petition that the Cup might passe from him, of his Disciples heauinesse and neglect to watch with him, of their danger and tentation, of the weaknesse of flesh, as well as of his sorrow or feare. Doth it therefore expresse these to be the causes of his agonie? and how doth the Gospell declare discomfort to haue caused that agonie? because it saith, there appeared to him an Angell from heauen , strengthning (or comforting) him? the An∣gell was not able to inspire any spirituall strength into Christ, that is proper to the spirit of God; neither did the Angell performe the part of an honest neighbour, to perswade Christ with words to be content and patient; these kinds of strength∣ning and comforting are not tolerable in this place; but by his message from God (for he was Gods messenger comming from heauen,) he declared in all likelihoode, that Christs prayers were heard in that he feared. For so much the Apostle noteth of Christs prayers in the Garden, which in all coherence was the comfort the Angell brought with him, when he appeared to him in the Garden. Now this comfort would rather asswage his sorrow and feare, then increase it. Yea how could any comfort brought by the Angel cause this agonie? you dreame perhaps Christ would not receaue that comfort, but notwithstanding the Angels comfortable message con∣tinued his former agonie, or fell into a worse then before, wherein he sweate bloud. If your dreames be expresse Scripture, then here is all the Scripture you haue, euen your presuming besides the Scripture, or rather against the Scripture. For since the Euangelist affirmeth, Luke. 22. an Angell from heauen, that is from God, appeared comforting him, that is with a comfortable message to him; in all reason his feare and sorrow did now cease; and he fell vpon this comfort receaued as I thinke, not repelled as you imagine, to an agonie, not of feare and sorrow, much lesse of hell paines; but of more vehement prayer, then before, and in that zealous and inflamed prayer, in which he powred forth not onely the strength of his Soule, but the very spirits of his body for desire to preuaile for man against sinne and satan, his sweate was like bloud. Defenc. pag. 107. li 1. The words next before in the text are; Luk. 22. 43. 44. AN ANGEL CAME TO GIVE HIM SOME COMFORT, that is, lest he should be ouerwhelmed quite in his sorow & discomfort; but still he was in his agonic, and sweat like drops of bloud trickling downe to the ground, and presently sayth, MY SOVLE IS FVLL OF SORROVVLS EVEN VNTO THE DEATH. • The Tempter in the wildernesse, that sought by pretence of Gods power and protection to procure Christes ouerthrow, had more regard not to be taken tar∣dy with corrupting the Scriptures, than you haue in this place: for he cited the words as they lay, without addition or interposition of his owne, which you do not; butta∣king some parts of the text for a shew, you most vntruly and most pestilently corrupt both the text and the trueth of the Gospell. You cite out of S. Luke ca. 22. vers. 43, 44; these words in a different letter, as the words in the text next before Christes blou∣die sweat; An Angell came to giue him some comfort, &c. Are these the Euangelists words? Was your haste so great, or your care so little, that you could not, or would not so much as looke in your booke for the right words of the text? S. Luke sayeth, Luk. 22. v. 43 There appeared vnto him an Angell from heauen strengthening him, or com∣forting him; no doubt with a message from God, which what it was, we do not know, except we applie the Apostles words to this purpose, where he sayth: (Christ) Heb 5. v. 7. in the dayes of did offer vp prayers and supplications with strong crying and teares, to him that was able to saue him from death, AND WAS HEARD IN THAT WHICH HE FEARED. This if we take to be the comfort which the Angell brought from heauen, the Apostle might well intend it. For that Christes prayers were heard, and so much declared to him by an Angell from heauen, could not be but very comfor∣table to him. If we list not to beleeue this was the Angels message of comfort, then we must confesse, that the comfort which the Angell brought, is vnknowen to man, as the certaine cause of Christes bloudie sweat. But whatsoeuer we suppose of the Angels message, there is some difference be∣twixt S. Lukes words, and those which you cite, as the words next before the text. [not in matter you will say. I speake of the words which you may not alter, when you pro∣fesse to cite the text whatsoeuer the matter be. [You keepe the meaning of the Euan∣gelist, you thinke. Such a meaning, as you your selfe make of the Euangelist: for you translate (which is strengthening him ) to giue him some comfort. Where by the diminutiue ( some ) you would implie, that it was not sufficient to remooue his feare; and that intent you betray in the next line, citing againe your owne words in stead of S. Lukes, and apparently corrupting his text: for comming to cite the 44 verse, , and falling into an agonie he prayd more earnestly (or intentiuely:) in stead of these words, professing to cite the text, you say, But still he was in his agonie. And as for the words, he prayed more earnestly, which are The corrupteth S. uke. immediate before Christes sweating bloud, you shutte them cleane out, as not fit∣ting your turne, lest the Reader should thinke his vehement prayer after comfort re∣ceiued was the cause of this agonie; for that the Euangelist placeth it next before in the text. Your wordes then, hee was in his agonie, are no good translation; and that which is added, but still he was in his agonie, is a violent corruption; for genómenos there doeth not signifie his being, or continuing that which he was before; but his becom∣ming that which he was not before. For example, Gal. 4. v. 4. God sent his Sonne genómenon made of a woman, and genómenon made vnder the law. Doth the word genómenos heere signifie, that Christ was man before he was conceiued of his mother, or rather, that he was made of his mother, which before he was not? and so, made vnder the law, doth not import, that Christ was subiect to the law before he was man, but that being al∣together free from the law he would become subiect to the law, which before he was not. Likewise Ioh. 1. v. 14. ho logos sarx egeneto, the word was made flesh, which before it was not. This difference of the word from the Greeke Scholiast obserueth com∣menting vpon S. Pauls words, I could wish to be separated from Christ for my brethren. Photius apud in . 9. Epist. a . . Paul doth not say, (he could be content) to become a curse, which is NOVV PRESENTLY to be seuered from Christ, but to be (or haue beene) a curse, that is, to haue yet continued seuered from Christ. So that , to be m de or to become, is , from the present time, and , to be, is still to continue. Wherefore genóm nos enagonia, is falling (at that present vpon comfort receiued by the Angell) into an ago∣nie, and not as you corruptly translate. still he was in his agonie. An agonie (you will say) you vse for all Christes affections and actions in the gar∣den.] But so doth not S. Luke; he referreth the word to Christes more ardent pray∣ers, and to his bloudie sweat. If we speake abusiuely, an agonie may be taken for feare, as I haue formerly shewed; or if defectiuely we name one part for the whole, which How some vse the word Ago∣nie. some men vse to auoid length of speech, and the number of particulars; then Christs agonie may stand to note all his affections, actions and supplications in the gar∣den: but if we speake properly, as there is no cause nor proofe S. Luke should heere do otherwise, then Christes agonie both by the proprietie of the Greeke word, and by the circumstances of the text, was that vehement contention of minde, wherewith Christ prayed more feruently than before, being now strengthened or com∣forted by the Angels appearing and message, and euen powred forth his spirit to God with so zealous affection, that his sweat was like bloud. This you would crosse by your corrupt translation, in saying, BVT STILL he was in his agonie, though the words of the Euangelist doe not import, that he continued still any former agonie, but vpon the strength and comfort receiued by the Angell, he fell into an agonie of most vehement desire to preuaile in the worke of our redemption, and to remooue all impediments, for which he vsed so strong cries and teares, that his sweat was co∣loured like bloud. All these things you venture to determine by your owne authoritie, as if the Scrip∣tures were vnder your command, and little thinke, that wise and godly Readers will censure your licentious intrusion on the Scriptures as it deserueth. Neither can you cease for ought that I see: for as you affirme that which our Sauiour assumed vpon the Angels message, to haue possessed him before at his entrance into the garden; so the words which he spake before any prayer in the garden, and much more before the appearing of the Angel, you make consequent to his bloudie sweat. Your hand∣some and holie translation and exposition is, Defenc. pag. 107. li 3. but still hee was in his agonie, and sweat like droppes of bloud trickling to the ground: and presently sayth, My soule is full of sorrowes to death. Where you commit two notable falsifications euen of the Scripture it selfe. The D fender addeth to Saint Luke that which he neuer wrote, and leaueth out that which he wrote. For first these words, My soule is full of sorrowes euen to death, are not in S. Lukes Go∣spell, whence you would seeme to cite them, as presently sayd after Christes bloudie sweat. Next you peruert both the other Euangelists, in which these words are writ∣ten: for both Matthew and Marke, which witnesse the speaking of those words, pre∣cisely record, that they were spoken to Christes three Disciples before he departed at first from them to pray in secret, and before he began to expresse any desire, that the cuppe might passe from him. Reade the texts, they keepe almost the same wordes. When Christ had sayd to the rest of his Disciples, Mar. 14. v. 32 Sit you here till I haue prayed, 33. he tooke Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and he began to be afrayd, and in great heauinesse; 34. and sayd vnto them: My soule is very heauy vnto death: tary here and watch. 35. So he went for∣ward a little, and fell downe on the ground, and prayed that if it were possible, that houre might passe from him. You turne all vpside downward, and tell vs out of S. Luke, that still Christ was in his agonie and sweat like droppes of bloud, and presently sayth, My soule is full of sorrowes euen to death. With such additions, translations, and corruptions a∣gainst the circumstances described in the Scriptures, some doubt may chance to creepe at a creuie into some mens consciences touching the cause of Christes agonie, but your pains of the damned are not one iot the neerer for all your inuerting & per∣uerting the Euangelists words to your will. For what if Christ did sweat bloud at first, which the Gospell referreth to the last, doth that giue entrance to the second death and torments of the damned? Are not the paines of this life able to make men sweat bloud, but you must runne to hell for the lake that burneth there with fire and brim∣stone, before mans body may colour his sweat with the shew of bloud? Is it harder for Christ to resolue his bloud into sweat by zeale without paines, or with bodilie paines, whiles he was liuing, than when he was dead to send out of his side, first Ioh. 13 v. 34. bloud, and then water, so distinctly and miraculously the one after the other, that S. Iohn confirmeth it with his owne vers. 35. sight, lest so strange a thing should not be beleeued? Defenc. pag. 106. li. 35. Though it be against the common course of our nature for any paines or feare to sweate bloud: yet the diuine power with and through paines and feares might wring out of his body that trickling bloudy sweate. As it is plaine that it did by the wordes next before in the text, an Angell came to giue him some comfort. ] Your head was troubled about some waigh∣ty worke, when one sentence wrang from you such contrarieties and falsities. But the Pag. 105. li. 38. Page before, you tooke speciall exception against me, if I did not thinke, that Christ was vrged to his bloudy sweate (for thereof you speake in that place) by violence of paines, or feare procuring it in him NATVRALLY; here you say, it is against the common course of our nature for any paines or feare to sweat bloud. Could it be naturally procured in Christ, and yet against the common course of our nature? againe if it be against the common course of our nature for any paines or feare to sweate bloud, by what reason or au∣thority doe you conclude hell paines out of Christes bloudy sweate? for if no paines or feare can by the course of our nature procure a bloudy sweate, how know you that Christ did sweate bloud for paines or for feare? for hell paines, you will say, he might. ] Not by any course of our nature. For then all his members which at one time or other feele the like, which Christ felt, should sweate bloud, as Christ did. But that I trust is sensiblely false. [ The diuine power might wring it out of his body.] So it may raise Children to Abraham out of stones. Doth that inferre, that men are made of stones? and might not the diuine power wring this sweate (for that is your phrase) out of Christes bodie as well without hell paines, as with them? is it hard for God to make a man sweat bloud without the paines of the damned? [ It is plaine that it did by the words next before in the text. ] Doth the text name hell paines, or the feare of hell? what will you not aduenture, that thus presume to outface the Scriptures? the text nameth many thinges before, and you like your crafts-master will make your choise, though the Scripture doe not expresse, what was the cause thereof. [ The words next before the text are an Angell came to giue him comfort. ] Then comfort belike cast him into this bloudy sweate, if the wordes next before declare the cause thereof; which were very strange, that a man by comfort should be cast into a bloudy sweate. Why may not I rather say that the vision of an Angell put him rather into this sweate, then the comfort, which was brought him, since Daniel was Dan. 8. v. 27. stroken sicke and astonished with a vision, as diuers others of Gods saints haue beene? yet I thinke neither of these to be the cause of that sweate, but as I say in my Sermons, it might be voluntary either for significati∣on, as Austen, Prosper, Bede, and Bernard do thinke; or for sanctification and conse∣cration of his person and sacrifice answeareable to the manner of the legall oblation prefiguring this as the trueth; or for vehement contention of spirit in praier, which indeed is the next thing mentioned before his sweate, and shewed his desire and zeale to be more then humane for the Redeeming and reconciling of man to God by the shedding of his bloud. Defenc. pag. 106. li. 27. You conclude that Christes agony demonstrating Christs Priesthood must not rise from the terror of his owne death; and yet a little before you openly confesse and graunt, that his a∣gony did rise from the feare of his death. ] The effect of Christes Priest-hood performed in the garden must in no wise concerne himselfe. For he was not a Priest to make in∣tercession, or to offer sacrifice for himselfe, but for vs. And therefore his praiers then vttered in his agonie with strong cries and teares, if they pertained to his Priesthood, they were made for vs, and not for himselfe; and declared his voluntarie profering and presenting his body and bloud to Gods pleasure, to be the sacrifice for mans Redemption, and his feruent supplications to haue it accepted as the full Ransome for his elect, that the accuser and supplanter of his Church might be remooued from Gods presence, and wholy subiected vnder Christes feete. Now if this desire and of∣fer for vs must not only be voluntarie, but inflamed with wonderfull vehemencie, then would not Christ sweat bloud for any terror of his owne death, but for his infi∣nite feruency to preuaile and obtaine his petition for vs. You permix Christes feare, and his feruent zeale together, and call the whole action his agonie, though it con∣taine both feare conceaued at first, when he approched Gods presence in iudgement for sinne, and comfort receaued at last by message brought from Heauen, and out of this confusion you collect what you list, and say what you please to no purpose. That Christ might haue a naturall feare of death, I then said, and yet see no cause to recall it; but that I said Christ did sweate bloud for feare of his bodily death, this is one of your painted faces with which you would outface the trueth. Howbeit this persisting in your ignorant folly without remembring or regarding what is said on the other side, argueth ridiculous negligence, or malitious diligence: of which be∣cause I haue already spoken, I will say no more. Defenc. pag. 106. li. 33. Why should Hilarie deny, that Christes bloudy sweat came of infirmity? or Austen, that Christes feare and perturbation was of infirmity? ] Because they had learned iudgments, and sober considerations in these matters, which you want. They beheld Christes power, which no force of hell or Satan could impeach, but where and when himselfe would permit. They saw the innocencie and integrity of Christes humane nature, which could not be tossed nor troubled with inward affections, but when and how farre he was content to admit them. They knew the infinite loue of God to his son, for whose sake we were all beloued and adopted; and that the father was so farre from tormenting the soule of his sonne with his immediate hand, that Iohn 17. he gaue him power ouer all flesh, and Iohn 13. gaue all things into his hands euen before his death, and against the time of his agony in the garden. Wherefore as the Iohn 14. Prince of this world had nought in him, and for that cause neither sinne nor corruption were found in him; and Iohn 10. no man tooke his soule from him, but he laid it downe of himselfe; so neither necessity nor infirmitie of our nature could oppresse or possesse him, but he must first giue place to it by his will, and guide it by power, that in all as well sufferings, as doings, he might be obe∣dient, and yet righteous. And had they heard such a ghest, as you are, tell them a tale of Gods Defenc. pag. 106. li. 38. diuine power wringing out of Christes body a bloudy sweat, they would haue rung you another manner of Peale. For what is wringing, but violent forcing? and what is violence, but inuoluntary constraint, which is any thing rather then obedi∣ence? and so where the Apostle professeth of Christ, that he was obedient euen vnto death, you haue spied out that Christes bloudy sweat was WRVNG from him, and so no part of his willing and free submission and obedience vnto God. Defenc. pag. 107. li. 12. Where they say, Nec infirmitas quod potestas gessit, that prooueth the cleane con∣trarie: for ideo & infirmitas quia potestas gessit. For the working of his power in him argueth the suffering of his infirmity. The power of God is perfited in infirmity. ] If you would ascribe neither Religion, nor learning to two such Pillars of Christes Church, as Hilarie and Austen were, you should at least leaue them common in sight and vn∣derstanding of their owne wordes. It is enough for a man of your sise to lacke learning, trueth, and sense. They were very learned and wise, or els the whole Church, that hath hitherto esteemed and receaued them for such, was much decea∣ued. But you, that haue found a new faith in the Scriptures, no maruaile if you catch the fathers with contrarieties, which others neuer drempt of. The ground of their wordes is the cleare rule of reason, nature, and trueth, confirmed in heauen, earth and hell: that contraries in one and the same subiect, time, and respect doe exclude one another. As if any thing be cold, it is not hoate; if it be drie, it is not moist; if it be straight, it is not crooked; and so if it be weake, it is not strong. Hence they conclude, if there could be in Christ no compulsion to feare and sorow, then was there election; if no necessity, then liberty; and consequently if no preualence of corruption against his fullnesse of trueth and grace, then it was not infirmity, that sub∣iected him to these violent and painfull affections, but it was his will and power, that raised and restrained them in him selfe. Against this what saith our master of new maximes? [ nay it was therefore infirmitie, because power did it. ] This indeed crosteth their sayings, but withall it crosseth all trueth, if you take their wordes, as they spake them. [But you meane, as your marginer noteth therefore there was infirmity, because x Defenc pag. 107. ad mar∣ginem. li. 3. there was power. ] He can neuer shoot amisse, that neuer offreth to any marke. Where was there infirmity, & where was there power? in the person of Christ? belike Hilary and Austen did not know, that Christ was God and man, and had in his person both the infinite power of God, and the voluntarie weaknesse of man, that being compared with his Godhead might well be called infirmity: as the Apostle sai th, Christ was crucisied concerning (his) infirmity, that is, in the weaknesse of his flesh, but yet that vo∣luntary weaknesse of God, or in God the sonne, was stronger then all the power of men or of Diuels, whom his manhood spoiled, and caried captiues, with an open triumphe. This is not their meaning to say, that Christ had no infirme part in his per∣son, compared with his diuine power, that is no manhood, but only his Godhead; and therefore your reply to that purpose is as senselesse, as it is needlesse. Where Christes diuine power did punish, there his humane infirmity did suffer. ] This is your wresting of their wordes against their meaning, to bring them to your compasse, but this is no part of their speech. That weaknesse is patient, where power is agent, this may be; but what is that to their words, which are very true without your puni∣shing power? Hilarie sayth, Hilar. de Tri∣nitate. li. 10. To sweat bloud is against nature, and so not a weaknesse in nature. Since then it was aboue nature to sweat bloud, he ascribeth it to Christes will and power performing that in his bodie, which nature could not do. Ibidem. Quis ro∣go furor est, repudiata doctrinae Apostolicae fide, mutare sensum religionis, & totum hoc ad imbecillitatem & contumeliam rapere naturae, quod & volunt as est, & sacramentum, quod & potest as est, & siducia, & triumphus? What madnesse is this (here you, Sir Defender, how he requiteth you for peruerting the trueth of his words) by refusing the faith of the Apostles doctrine, to change the sense of religion, and to impute all that to the imbccillitie and contumelie of (Christes) nature, which was (his) will, and a mysterie, yea power, consi∣dence and victory? And againe, lest you should thinke he wanted reason for his speech: Ibidem. Quarogo side naturaliter infirmus fuisse defenditur, cui naturale fuit omnem human arum infirmitatum inhibere naturam? Forte stulta at{que} impia peruersitate hinc infirmae in o na∣turae presumitur assertio, quia trist is sit anima eius vs{que} ad mortem. With what faith, I aske, is (Christ) assirmed to be naturally weake, to whom it was naturall to heale all mans infirmi∣ties? Happely by a foolish and wicked peeuishnesse he is therefore presumed to be of a weake nature, because his soule was sorrowfull vnto death. This ground of his speech is short, but sure, except you will deride Christ, and say, Luke 4. Physician heale thy selfe; or blaspheme him with the Pharises, and say as they sayd; Matth. 27. He saued others, he can not saue himselfe. It was then in Christ not want of power to represse these passions, or repell these in∣firmities, that subiected himselfe vnto them, it was his owne willing obedience, that would taste them, and power that did guide them, lest they should breake into the distemper and excesse of our corrupt nature. The power of God, you say, is perfected in infirmitie. ] Those words I trust were not spoken of Christ; and howsoeuer in some sort they may be verified of Christ, yet is there no comparison betwixt our naturall infirmitie, and his fulnesse of trueth and grace. Esa. 11. The spirit of counsell and trueth rested on him Iohn 3. without measure: wee wholly want it, till Gods power in some degree confirme our infirmitie. Againe, infirmitie in these words doth signifie outward afflictions and miseries: for so the Apostle there expoundeth it: 2. Cotin. 12. vers. 10. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproches, in necessities, in per∣secutions; for when I am (outwardly) weake, then I am (inwardly) strong. So that those words can not rightly be referred to inward infirmitie; and might they, yet Christes gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost were not only farre aboue Pauls, but in the great∣est degree that any creature might haue them, and greater than all the gifts of men and angels. How then doth it follow, that Christ was weake, because Paul was weake? Yea, if Pauls weaknesse were perfected by Christes power, as Paul himselfe confesseth in that place; Ibid. vers 9. Very gladly will I reioyce in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me; then from those words Christes power is prooued, and not his infirmitie. But take it which way you will, though this be the trueth which I haue tolde; these wordes doe nothing hinder Hilaries and Austens confession, that Christes infirmitie was voluntarie, where ours is necessarie; and so infirmitie in him was not for want of strength, but for merit of righteousnesse, and was both receiued and directed by his will and power. And where you are so often on the hoigh to impaire S. Austens cre∣dit with yours, you shall do well to get you some more vnderstanding in him, before you rush so rashly against him, left if it come to the ballance, whether you or S. Austen be in an errour, you finde few friends so fauourable, that will forsake him to follow you. His resolution, which you may put off with pride, but you shall neuer refute with reason, is this: August. de ciuitate Dei. li. 14. ca. 9. Habemus ergo has affectiones ex huma a conditionis infirmitate, non autem it a Dominus Iesus, cuius & infirmit as fuit ex potestate. etiam ipse Dominus in forma serui agere vitam dignat us humanam, sed nullum habens omnin pecca∣tum, adhibuit eas, vbi adhibendas esse iudicauit. Cùm ergo cius in Euangelio ista referun∣tur, quod Lazarum suscitaturus lachrymas fuderit, quòd propin quante passione tr stis fue∣rit anima eius vs{que} ad mortem, non falsò vti{que} ista referuntur. Verum ille hos motus certa dispensationis gratia, ita cùm voluit, suscepit animo humano, vt cùm voluit, factus est homo. We haue these affections (of feare and sorow &c.) by the infirmitie of mans condition, but the Lord Iesus had them not so, whose infirmitie was of his owne power. Wherefore the Lord, when he vouchsafed to leade an humane life in the forme of a seruant, but vtterly void of all sinne, admitted those affections, when he saw it fit to admit them. And in the Gaspell, when those things are reported of him, as that he wept when he was about to raise Lazarus, and that his Passion approching, his soule was sorrowfull vnto death; these things are not falselie written of him, but he admitted these motions in his humane minde for certaine purposes, euen when he would, as when he would he was made man. Defene. pag. 107. li. 20. 18. I iudge their very meaning to be, that here appeared not Christs infirmitie onely in suf∣fering, but his diuine power also in punishing, and this they speake fully for vs, and against you. ] If you make them speake that they neuer ment, they may chance to speake with you; but leaue them to expresse their owne minds, and then they neither speake, nor meane with you. But what is the reason, they so soone speake with you, where not fiue lines before you controled their speech, as repugnant to the truth? haue you now by your glozes made them lyers like your selfe? you should at least be more constant, if not more prudent, then first to chalenge in their speech a contrarietie to the truth, and then to claime a conformity to their sense. They ment no such thing, as you make shew of, but they speake of Christs power, which stirred and gouerned his affections, as he thought good, that they might declare him a true man, and yet be parts of his obedience, and submission to his Father, though withall they were religious and vo∣luntarie. For as he emptied and humbled himselfe, so he weakned and troubled him∣selfe, when he saw time; not for want of power, but of purpose so disposing and de∣spensing his affections, that by his vertue he might moderate them in his owne per∣son, and cure them in ours. Defenc. pag. 107. li. 28. Those other mysticall and figuratiue sayings of Austen, Bede and Bernard, how shall we admit them without better warrant? that Christs bloudshed was to signifie, that Mar∣tyrs doe shed their bloud, what reason haue we so to thinke? or that his bloudshed should sig∣nifie the purging of his Disciples harts from sinne, yea or of all his Church in the whole world? It did not signifie this, but it did it indeede. ] If their opinions of Christs bloudy Christs bloudie sweate might hau significa∣tion as well as the water that anne out of his side. sweate, be not to be admitted, because they bring no warrant besides themselues for it, how should we admit your loose dreames and dangerous fansies of a new found hell inflicted on the Soule of Christ in the Garden by the immediate hand of God, which is not onely strange, but repugnant to the Scriptures? theirs is possible, and agreeable to the rules of faith; yours is not. Why Christ sent out of his side, after his body was dead, first bloud, and then water, can any man giue the reason? Saint Au∣sten saith, August. in Io∣han. tract. 15. De latere pendentis in cruce, lancea , sacramenta ecclesiae profluxe∣runt. Out of Christs side pearced with a speare, as he hanged on the crosse, the Sacraments of the Church issued forth. What warrant had he so to say? the Scripture doth not vouch so much; and yet the Church of God hath euer since regarded, and receaued that speech of his. So for Christs bloudy sweate, finding no reason deliuered in the Scripture, he descended to the signification, which might be thereof, that Christ by sweating bloud in his whole naturall body, foreshewed the martyrdomes of his my∣sticall body, the Church. You aske for a Reason.] The resemblance is euident, and the performance consequent; greater reasons then which cannot be giuen of signi∣fications. You like it not.] No maruaile; nothing pleaseth you besides the wringing out of this sweate by the diuine power punishing. You haue neither proofe, nor truth for your second death to be suffered at this time, and in this place; and yet you would haue your absurd conceits preferred before Saint Austens iudgement. It was aboue the course of nature, you grant; and since it was not naturall, it must be miracu∣lous, if not mysticall. Now if it were a miracle, there may no reason be required of it, but it must be left to the power and will of the doer. To what end Christ did it, if you like neither Austens, Prospers, Bedes nor Bernards iudgements in this case, know you any man so vnwise, as to like yours? You say, it did not signifie the purging of the earth from sinne, it did it indeede. ] Did the bloudie sweate of Christ in the Garden purge indeed all his Church in the whole world from sinne? what needed then his death and passion afterward on the Crosse? what needed his body be giuen for them, and his bloud to be (violently) shed for remission of sinnes, if this sweate did indeed purge all our sinnes? but you speake in this, as you doe in all other things, without caring what you say, so you bring somewhat to continue your cauilling. This sweate the Apostle calleth Heb. 5. teares, and ioyneth them with Christs vehement prayers in the garden, which he saith were heard. Then Christs feruent desire to preuaile in the worke of our redemption against all the hinderances thereof, might in all reason mooue him to pray with teares, respec∣ting our miserie, and yet indignitie, for whom he prayed; and so be the cause of this bloudie sweate: and your hell paines must giue place, till you find some better proofe for them, then your bare auouching, that this sweate might rise from the very paines of the damned, which is your single supposall with farre lesse warrant, then any thing that Austen, Prosper, Bede or Bernard said. And as for your binding all their signifi∣cations and your imaginations in a bundell together; when you first prooue, that the Scriptures affirme any such thing, as the second death, or the paines of the dam∣ned to be suffered by Christ, then we will talke what might rise from your hell paines; in the meane time know you Sir wanderer, that if the rest might be the causes of this bloudie and voluntarie sweate, then you may put vp your pen, and lay your vnquiet head to rest. Defenc. pag. 107. li 31. Hitherto we haue made it manifest that in truth you haue nothing in all these words a∣gainst our Doctrine, that paines and sorrowes were the true and proper cause of Christs dreadfull agonie; nor to prooue that his meere bodily paines or death was the whole cause. Now we are to shew the like in his most wofull complaint on the crosse: where he saith, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. ] And I haue made it more manifest, that you haue lesse for your doctrine of the second death and the paines of the damned to be suffered in the Soule of Christ, whiles he prayed in the Garden. For what rea∣sons be these; Christ feared and sorowed in the Garden, and he prayed so intentiue∣ly that his sweate was like bloud: ergo, he suffered the second death and the paines of the damned: except a man were disposed to run madde with reason? [He feared somewhat else besides a meere bodily death.] What then? how many degrees and causes of feare and sorow haue I shewed, that might conioyne in Christ now seeing in Gods presence and iudgement the waight of our redemption, and the number of our sinnes, together with the vengeance prouoked by them, and the power of Gods anger displeased with them, and yet no point nor part of the second death to be suffered by him? if there might be any cause besides yours, then yours can neuer be certainly concluded from the Scripture, which is the thing I first affirmed to the Reader. You aske me where I reade mine in the word of God, and I aske you the like. The Text saith, Christ feared and sorrowed, but the cause of Christs feare or sorrow is not there declared. Then no cause being expresly mentioned, neither mine nor your, I lea e it to the censure of the Christian Reader, which of vs two ta∣keth the surest course: I, that no cause but concording with the maine grounds of the Scriptures, and such as you confesse wanted not in Christ at that present, and whereto the learned and Catholicke Fathers giue full consent and approbation; or you, that wade alone by your selfe in your owne conceits, such as haue no foun∣dation in the word of God, and are repugnant to the Principles of Christian Reli∣gion confirmed by the Scriptures, and confessed by the greatest pillars of Christs Church, next after the Apostles. And where you promise to shew the like in Christs complaint on the Crosse, I easily beleeue, you will performe the one, as well as you did the other, by your owne fansies without all regard of truth or proofe. Defenc. pag. 107. li. 37. You will a ke me here what kind of forsaking may this be. ] Loose not your labour, I will aske you no such thing. What haue I to doe with your vntidie deuices wyno∣ing words as men doe chaffe to and fro without any manner or offer of proofe? The question I did and doe aske, is; not what you parle out of your owne platforme, but how you can prooue by the word of God, that forsaking in this complaint of Christs was either damnation, or the second death, which your Reader perceaueth now to be your purpose, though you long dissembled it. Your interlacing those words with qualified phrases serueth but to saue you from apparent heresie and blasphemie. It maketh no manner of proofe, that those words must so be vnderstoode, or that the paines of the damned may thence by any colour be concluded. [ Ibid. li. 3 . I plainly shewed you before, if you had regarded it. ] And I more plainly opposed those things against it, which you neither did, nor can answere: and doe you thinke, that neglecting what you list, I must be forced laboriously to disprooue all your deuices, before you shew what dependence they haue with the Sacred Scriptures, or with the prima∣tiue faith of Christes Church? my grounds excluding your exposition and conclu∣sion, are to be seene in my Sermons pag. 32. 33. and are such, as you shall neuer de∣feate. The first is, that dereliction and forsaking doe no where throughout the Scrip∣tures import damnation, or the second death, which is your drift in this place; but are alwaies applied to the iudgements of this life. The second, that in the wicked castawaies it argueth reprobation from grace, and desperation of glory, which if any man imagine of Christ, it is rather furious blasphemie, then erroneous follie. Thirdly, that in the godly the word vsed by Christ noteth either destitution of help, or diminution of comfort in time of trouble; but neither in Dauid, who first spake them; nor in Christ doe they with any shew conclude the true paines of the damned. Fourthly, that no construction must be made of this word, that may decrease in Christ the fulnesse of truth and grace, which neuer wanted in his Soule, or draw him within the compasse of erroneous mistrusting or mistaking Gods fauour & counsell towards him. These grounds standing good, which you shall neuer be able to remooue, your warbling with those words to make them pliable to your will, is but time and paines lost; wind them which way you can, by example of any Scripture you shall neuer wrest them to that height, which you desire. But because you are so far in loue with your owne fansies, and my leasure now serueth me better then it did before, let vs heare what kinde of forsaking you would faine fasten to Christes complaint on the Crosse. Defenc. pag. 108. li. 1. Christ being now in the feeling of infinite paines inflicted on him sundry waies, and that directly from Gods proper wrath for our sinnes, he felt his whole humane Nature for the time left all comfortlesse and alone, without any ioyous assistance of his Deitie. ] Doe you enforce all this from the word for saking, or would you adde it to those words, which Christ spake? either way your ignorance or impudence is cleare and mani∣fest. For if you dare adde so many circumstances of so great importance to those words, you are not a tolerable expounder, but a notable peruerter of Christs words. If you would conclude so much from the word, you shew your selfe most ridiculous against all the rules of Diuine Doctrine, and humane sense to deduce all those se∣quels from that one word. For neither infinite paines, nor from Gods proper wrath, nor in Christs whole humane Nature, nor all comfortlesse are necessarie consequents to that word; and yet graunt all these, so farre as any truth or experience conuinceth them to be felt in this life, they no way amount to the second death, or to the true paines of the damned, which is the thing you should and would inferre from this complaint. Defenc. pag. 108. li. 7. I meane his Godhead as it were withdrawing and hiding it selfe from him, for that season of his Passion gaue him no sense nor feeling of ease, comfort, or ioy. ] Your owne mouth testifieth against you, that you doe not expound, but corrupt the Scriptures to serue your conceits. Begin with the last. Doth not the Apostle in plaine words say, that Christ Heb. 12. for the ioy set before him endured the Crosse? Who could set any ioy before him in that case, but God alone? then apparantly did his Godhead set be∣fore him assurance of ioy, and that euerlasting in the highest degree, which was so great, that it led him with patience to endure the Crosse. [He had no present feeling thereof, you will say.] So you must say, or else in exact words you shew your selfe to contradict the spirit of God. But if God did propose it, and Christ did most certainly know it, and expect it; had faith and hope in him no present sense nor feeling? had not Christ farre certainer and fuller knowledge and sight of Gods presence, fauour, and promises, then any faith or hope in vs can haue? Rom. 5. If then we reioyce vnder the hope of glory, did not he? did not he know, that he Luke 24. was to suffer those things, and (so) to en∣ter into his glory; when he called them fooles, and slow of hart, that beleeued not all that the Prophets haue spoken by the spirit, 1. Peter 1. forewitnessing the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow? Did the spirit of God by Dauid beare false witnesse, when he said of Christ, and in Christs person; I Acts 2. beheld the Lord alwaies before me at my right hand, that I should not be shaken; therefore did mine hart reioyce, and my toong was glad, and my flesh shall rest in hope? Ease from paine he felt none; ne would he feele, till by death he determined his sufferings, but comfort in his afflictions he could not want, because he was not onely patient and obedient to the will of God, and so not void of comfort, when he had done the will of God, to receiue his promises; but euen in the midst of his sharpest paines he saw the counsell of God for his glori∣fication, and our redemption; and beheld God as his Father most highly pleased with him, though iustly displeased with our sinnes, the smart whereof he must feele in his flesh. That therefore Christes whole humane Nature on the Crosse was all comfortlesse and alone, is false doctrine, and repugnant not onely to the words of Dauid, that Christ Psal. 16. beheld God alwaies at his right hand, that he should not be mooued; but euen to the manifest assertion of Christ himselfe, who said to his Disciples, Iohn 16. the houre is come, that you shall be scattered, and leaue me alone; but I am not alone, for the Father is with me. Now if God were alwaies present with Christ, that he should not be shaken, God was alwaies well pleased with him. Yea God was ioyned to him, not ingrace alone, as he is with vs, but in nature and person, as he is with no man else nor Angel. If then we haue comfort from Gods grace and spirit in our afflictions, how much more did consolations abound in Christ, euen as sufferings did? for since God is 2. Cor. 1. the God of all comfort; who comforteth vs in all our troubles, that as the sufferings of Christ abound in vs, so our consolation (should) abound through Christ; how is it possible, Christ should comfort vs, if he were himselfe all comfortlesse in his paines? shall we deriue that from him, which he had not? or rather is it impietie so much as to thinke, that any inward comfort wanted vnto Christ, who was personally vnited to God, and on whom the Esa. 11. Spirit of God rested, (that is alwaies continued with all fulnesse of grace and truth) Esa. 11. euen the spirit of wisedome, and vnder standing, the spirit of counsell and strength, the spi∣rit of knowledge, and of the feare of the Lord? If this spirit neuer departed from him, he could want neither peace nor ioy in the holy Ghost, and so no comfort incident to mans nature afflicted, as he then was, and would be; yea that was the least degree of his comfort, which was common to him with vs, who yet deriue all our comfort from him: he had the nearest, surest, highest, and plentifullest spring of comfort in his owne person, that any creature was capable of. To make therefore his whole manhood all comfortlesse without any inward peace or ioy from Gods spirit, is a detestable doctrine, subuerting the communion of both Natures in Christ, and so dissoluing the vnion of his person, if neither part of his humane nature had any sense or feeling of his Godhead. Defenc. pag. 108. li. 5. I say not he wanted now all assistance of his deitie. ] If he wanted peace and comfort in the holy Ghost, if he had no longer any certaine knowledge, nor vnderstanding of his fathers will, and if he felt inwardly in his humane soule no perswasion, apprehen∣sion, nor expectation of his fathers presence, fauour, and promises; tell me what as∣sistance he had of his Godhead, when all these things failed in him? [ioious assistance Christ found no ioy in his p ine, but comfort in his hope. he had none.] Is it fit for such a wrangler, as you are, first to dishonour the sufferings of Christ with the leauen of your fansies, and then to sprinkle them with the holy wa∣ter of your Phrases? how often hath it beene told you, that for obedience to the will of his father, the sonne of God would vse no power to repell his paines, nor to dimi∣nish his sense thereof, but only patience, whereby we might be assured, that he felt his afflictions on the Crosse with quicker sense and greater paines, then we are able with any patience to endure? And is this all that now you would say, that Christ found no ioy in his paines? what Cow-keeper doth not know, that paine is paine, and not ioy? but was Christes paine such that it excluded his soule from the remembrance or sense of all Gods graces so richly powred on him, and promises so faithfully made vn∣to him? you were best come in with your mooueable fittes of astonishment, and tell vs that in one and the same sentence, when Christ said, My God, my God, he was in full and perfect assurance and assistance of Gods fauour, whom els he could not call his God, if he felt no comfort in him, that is the God of all comfort; and when he pro∣nounced the next syllable, why, he presently fell into a sudden pangue, where he was forsaken, and left all comfortlesse and alone according to your deuices. And if any man be so wise, to let you lead him through such thornes, as to graunt in Christ on the Crosse sometimes hope of glorie, and sometimes feare of confusion, sometimes comfort and suddainly distrust of his saluation, sometimes Gods fauour and full as∣sistance, as in affliction, and by and by the second death and the paines of the dam∣ned; he may dally with faith and infidelity, with heauen and hell, with Christ and Beliall as you doe. But if it were not possible for Christ crucified, being the wisdome and power of God, to be tossed and tumbled with such contrarie blasts, then hath the forsaking, which he complained of, an other manner of sense, then you imagine. And whatsoeuer meaning you ascribe vnto it, you may not with a word, that admit∣teth diuers interpretations, impugne the plaine and open wordes and deeds of our Sauiour, in which is no question. As when the high Priest asked him, Mar. 14. art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed? Iesus said I am; and ye shall see the sonne of man sit at the right hand of power, and come in the cloudes of heauen. And when the Theefe, that was crucified with him, said vnto him; Luc. 22. Lord remember me, when thou comest into thy kingdome; he answeared, Verily I say vnto thee, to day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. As also breath∣ing out his soule, he said, Ibidem. Father into thine hands I commend my spirit. If to be the sonne of God, and to sit at Gods right hand in glory, if to dispose of Paradise at his plea∣sure, and to commit his spirit into his Fathers hands, be no signes nor proofes of comfort and ioy, then let your exposition beare some shew: but if these be more then arguments of most excellent honour and glory, not onely reserued for him, and con∣firmed vnto him, but assumed and professed by him, euen when he was condemned and crucified; who that had any care of trueth, or respect to reason, would auouche, that Christs Defenc. pag. 108. li 9. godhead gaue him for that season of his passion no sense nor feeling of comfort and ioy neither in spirit, soule, nor body? Defenc. pag. 108. li. 16. This was that extreame humiliation and exin nition of nature, wherein God spared not his sonne, and wherein Christ spared not himselfe: ] If you may sit iudge not only ouer Prophets and Apostles, but ouer Christ himselfe, you will soone appoint him to suffer, what pleaseth you; but when you come to make proofe thereof, you betray the vio∣lence of your spirits, that must haue all thinges giue way to your wills, and the weake∣nesse of your iudgements, that discerne not humility from infidelity, nor religious patience from hellish astonishment. Philip. 2. Exinanition and humiliation the Apostle nameth in Christ, but either voluntary, and either in comparison of his diuine glory and ma∣iesty; wherein being equall with his father, he tooke on him the forme of a seruant, and Christ emptied himselfe of glo∣ry not of grac . humbled himselfe, becomming obedient to the death of the crosse, The Apostle neither saith nor meaneth, that Christ emptied himselfe of all grace or comfort in his whole humane nature, but laid aside the vse and shew of his diuine power and honour, whiles for loue to vs he performed the worke of our redemption in the shape of a ser∣uant, and became obedient vnto the death of the crosse, which was painefull and shamefull, but not astonished with the paines of the damned, nor subiected to the second death. This is your yarne, which you would faine weaue into the Apostles words, but truth and falshood haue no fellowship; no more haue your dreames and the Apostles doc∣trine. As much it maketh for you, that God spared not his owne sonne, but gaue him for vs all, whence you may as well conclude, that God adiudged his sonne to euerlasting destruction and damnation, for that were indeed not to spare him, as that he inflicted on him the true paines of hell, least he should seeme to spare him. The Apostles wordes expound themselues; God spared not his sonne, but gaue him for vs; This gi∣uing him into the hands of sinners for our sakes was Gods not sparing him, otherwise that God spared him in nothing, which either his power was able to impose, or our sinnes did deserue, this is doctrine for him that meaneth to be an Apostata from all faith and trueth, to set the father at as great enmity with his sonne, as our sinnes did deserue, or could prouoke. The higth of Christs not sparing himselfe was, as the Apostle teacheth, his obedience vnto the death of the Crosse; if you will haue Christs obedience stretch to the second death of the damned, you must get you some new Scriptures; these that are already written, witnesse no such thing. How be t you will lacke no Scripture. For rather then you will acknowledge your want in that behalfe, you will make euery Chapter throughout the Bible to speake of your dreames. For euen . pag. . heere you quote Deutero: 10: 17 and Luc: 16: 17; in the first of which places the Scripture saith: Deut. 10. 17. The Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mightie, and terrible, which accepteth no persons, nor taketh rewards. What is this to Christes sufferings or to the paines of the damned? was it after noone, or after midnight, when you quoted these places, you knew not why nor wherefore? So play you with Luc: 16: 17. where it is said, Luc. 16. 17. It is more easie that heauen and earth should passe away, then that one tittle of the Law should fall. Will you hence inferre, which is the thing that you should prooue; ergo Christ was forsaken of all outward and in∣ward comfort and ioy? besides you no man hath the grace to make such faire and cleare demonstrations of your doctrine. Defenc pag. 108. li. 21. This forsaking or dereliction beseemeth the time, place, person and cause of Christ our ransome payer, and purchaser of saluation with the price of his owne most direfull paines: not any other farre fet, or hardly applied, and strangely deuised by the braines of men. As i trueth all those other senses hereof are which you rather embrace. ] Somewhat it was you mustered foure places of Scripture so wisely chosen, and well becomming your cause, before you would offer to determine the matter; and now puft vp with pure pride, and prickt on with singular disdaine, you censure the whole Church of Christ, and the chiefe lights and leaders thereof (I still except the Apostles) as peruerters of the Scriptures, traducing their expositions, as farre fet, hardly applied, and strangely deuised by the braines of men. But if you so much despise their learning, religion, and iudge∣ments, who were Gods blessed instruments to maintaine his trueth against all heresies, and his Church against all Schismaticks, and thinke your braines to be more than the braines of a man; take heed lest your Reader begin to suspect you haue the braines of some other kinde. If Athanasius, Hilarie, Chrysostome, Basil, Cyrill, Epipha∣nius, Ierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Origen, Tertullian and Leo may not be thought, in the verdict of any wise or sober man, as likely to vnderstand the sense of Christes words on the crosse, as your humorous and presumptuous, shall I say braine, which you so much abase in others, or head without braine; then I must confesse my fault, who loue not to leane to mine owne wit in cases of faith, but rather preferre the reli∣gious and laborious inquiries of others, chiefly of learned and ancient Fathers, where it concerneth matters of saluation, and the grounds of Christian religion, which they carefully receiued, and faithfully deliuered to Gods people so many hundred yeeres before we were borne. And what ma uell you be so bolde with the braines of men, as you terme it, when you take vpon you to ouerrule the words of the Holy Ghost? For where in the sacred Scriptures the bloud of Christ shed for vs, is recorded to be the true price of our redemption, you controlling as well the Apostles as the Fathers, tell vs here that Christ Pa. 108. li. 23. purchased our saluation with the price of his most direfull paines; where by direfull paines you meane hell paines, that your speech in this case may be as new as your faith. Belike then in your conceit Peter, Paul, and Iohn, though Christes Apostles, were neuer well Catechised nor instructed in their faith, since they affirme, 1. Pet. 1. we were redeemed by the precious bloud of Christ, and Ephes. 1. we haue redemption in Christ through his bloud, and Christ Reuel. 5. by (his) bloud redeemed vs vnto God; which les∣son you like not, and therefore you say our saluation was purchased with the price of Christes direfull paines, that is, of hell paines suffered in the soule of Christ; which hath no bloud, vnlesse you can as easily deuise new bloud for Christes soule, as you haue done a new hell for Christs sufferings. Till you so do, giue me and other Christi∣ans leaue to thinke, that the second death which you dreame of, did neither beseeme the time, place, person nor cause of Christ our Redeemer, and therefore his words on the crosse could haue no such reference, as you haue riddled in this place. Defenc. pag. 108. li. 27. Your expositions are sixe in number; the first is, that when Christ on the crosse cried out, My God my God why hast thou forsaken me, by this word ME he should meane his Church: for which you haue no reason in the world, but the bare names of Austen, Leo, Athanasius. ] The moe the senses may be of these words, and euery of them agreeing with Christi∣an pietie, as I professed of them, the lesse soundnesse is in your conclusion, that would inferre vpon a strange and needlesse sense of these words your paines of the damned to be then suffered in the soule of Christ. And in denying your direfull exposition of Christes words, I haue all the Fathers of Christes Church for 1400 yeeres of the same opinion with me. And if your chiefe and capitall proofes were such newes to them, what thinke you was the rest of your new faith? [ They are sixe in number, you say, and they all can not stand together.] You are nimble in trifles, and in substance no bodie. Nor I, nor any man liuing may take vpon vs to determine, which shall be the meaning of Christes words, when the words themselues admit and allow manie senses. In this very case the persons and the parts forsaken; the graces and degrees wherein, and how farre that dereliction might extend, receiue diuers opinions; and though they be different, they are not repugnant the one to the other. And yet it is no newes in many places of holy Scripture, by reason of the different or repugnant significations of the words, circumstances of the sentence and degrees of extension and intension in many things, to finde contrarie iudgements of men euen of the same words and things in holy writ. Neither doe diuers expositions disgrace the word of God, so long as they containe nothing repugnant to the text it selfe in that or any other place; but shew rather the depth of Gods wisedome, which incloseth many things in few words, and often passeth the reach and search of mans wit. But you, that carpe at euery thing besides your owne conceits, would faine make your Reader beleeue, that siue fingers and one hand, ten toes and two feet can not stand together. For the matter it selfe, as dereliction is confessed on all sides, because it is menti∣oned in the words of Christ, so it may be questioned; of what persons, to what part, and in what things Christ conceined and intended that for saking of which he spake. For as God is sayd in the Scriptures to be present with vs diuers wayes and to diuers effects, namely when he lightneth, strengtheneth, and inwardly guideth vs with the grace of his spirit, or outwardly blesseth our wayes, and heareth and helpeth vs in time of trouble; so when he withdraweth or with holdeth any of these things from vs, whether it be his helpe, his blessing, or his grace; he is sayd to depart, and to for∣sake vs. Now if we take forsaking in Christes words for the losing or lacking of Gods What forsaking could not be found in Christ. fauour, grace, or spirit; it was not possible that any such forsaking should at any time be found in Christ our head, though the members of Christ do all well deserue to be depriued of all these things, and were depriued of them, till by Christ they were re∣stored. Since then this kinde of forsaking could neuer be verified of Christes person, but only of his members, and he suffered for vs, Ephes. 2. 16. to reconcile vs to God by his Crosse; these words of Christ on the Crosse some learned Fathers haue expounded to con∣taine the reconciliation of man to God, who for sin had before forsaken vs, and was now pacified by Christes bloud, and an entrance giuen vs to the Father by vertue of Christes oblation and petition for vs. Wherefore in their iudgements, as Christ then suffered for vs, so he prayed in these words for vs, and the neere coniunction of Christ with vs, as the head with his members, made him couer vs, and present vs to God vnder his owne name, who was then and there no Redeemer of himselfe, but of vs. Examples of this speech they haue many and good: as where Christ sayd to Paul, Acts 9. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me; that is, my members? And againe; I am Iesus whom thou persecutest; that is, whose members thou pursuest. And in one Matth. 25. Chapter, where Christ foresheweth the separation that he will make betweene the sheepe and the goats, he calleth his brethren and seruants by the name of himselfe no lesse than two and thirtie times, saying: Ibid. vers. 35. I was hungrie, and ye gaue ME meat; I thirsted, and ye gaue ME drinke; I was a stranger, and ye lodged ME; vers. 36. I was naked, and ye clothed ME; I was sicke, and ye visited ME: and so forth to the number that I na∣med. And when the good maruelled how euer they affourded any of these things to him, he answereth them; vers 40. Verily I say vnto you, in as much as ye did it vnto one of the least of my brethren, ye did it vnto me. So that this exposition of Christes speech concern∣eth directly the worke that Christ had then in hand for vs, and wanteth not Christes warrant for the vse of his owne words; and this sense of that his prayer presenting and commending vs to God, that were forsaken of God, was of no lesse waight for vs than the rest of his sufferings. Defenc. pag. 108. li. 0. Shew me their reasons, presse not their authorities. ] So sayth he, that hath neither reason nor authoritie, and yet presseth his fansie vpon the whole Church against all reason and authoritie. Their reasons I haue shewed to stand on a better foundation than your direfull and infernall paines, or your astonished confusion and destitution of all inward and outward ioy and comfort. And could you with halfe that sound∣nesse make good your hellish exposition, you should not shew so great pride as you now doe. For I vtterly denie, that your exposition hath any ground in the word of God, but resteth onely on your single and sillie surmises in fauour of your owne fan∣sies. And since you demand of all the Fathers a reason of all their expositions, how come you against all reason and trueth to conclude the paines of the damned to be suffered in Christes soule by pretence of this dereliction, when as the word thorow∣out Dereliction in the Scriptures neuer implieth the paines of the damned. the Scriptures neuer implieth the present state or paines of the damned? What defence can you haue for your desperate aduenture to plunge Christes soule into the second death, which the Scripture calleth the Lake burning with fire and brimstone, since you want all, as well diuine, as humane reason and authoritie? Defenc. pag. 1. 8. li. 31. Your selfe reiect them when you list, though when you list againe, they must be your best, yea your only reason. ] A lie is a good shift with you, or els you would often lie in the mire. I do no where refuse the faith professed and preached in the primitiue Church of Christ by the learned and ancient Pastours and Guiders thereof; I openly con∣fesse Wherein wee should follow the Fathers. to God and this Realme, I should neuer sleepe quietly, if I saw my selfe to be of another faith than they were. In other things not pertinent to our saluation and re∣demption, where they themselues tooke libertie, either to dissent ech from other in some questions, or sometimes vpon better aduice to correct or moderate their for∣mer opinions, I thinke my selfe not burdened in conscience, if I with modestie make choise, what I like best. Neither doe I account it any disgrace, to make their faith de∣duced and confirmed by the word of God my best or only reason, since all hereticks haue subuerted themselues and their followers, whiles they would shew their inuen∣tions, and with plausible reasons fasten their fansies on the sacred Scriptures, not contenting themselues with those sober and sound interpretations of hard places, which the Church of Christ with long experience and great diligence had examined and tried. And howsoeuer for want of knowledge in the Hebrew tongue they might sometimes come short, yet this was their generall care in all their expositions and ap∣plications, neuer to swarue from the Canons of the Christian faith, I speake of those, whom the Church accepted and allowed for truely Catholike. Yet to their interpre∣tations I binde no mans conscience, farther than euident trueth shall appeare to be in them; onely I wish others, and euen you, Sir Inuentour, not ouerhastily to despise their iudgements, which the Church of God hath so many hundred yeeres reueren∣ced and followed. Howbeit, this is a bar sufficient to your bold deuices, that where you would deriue your hell paines from Christes complaint. on the Crosse, I bring you fiue or six expositions of those wordes out of the auntient and catholike fathers, whereof you shall neuer be able to refute one, which no way touch your hellish tor∣ments, and thereby teach you, if you be capable either of verity or sobriety, that your conclusion more then halteth in the highest mysteries of christian Religion. Def. pag. 108 li. 33. li. 38. If these Fathers be vnderstood, as before I haue shewed Cyprians meaning to be, then they agree iust with our minde herein: for then doubtlesse it was for the infinite paines, which now he felt in our stead, that he so cried out, My God my God why hast thou for sakenmee. ] After you haue plaied your part with reuelling at their expositions, will you now flat∣ter them afresh, & ioyne hands with them, so they will be of your minde? In vaine do you striue to bring them to that which they neuer intended, but euer detested. What kinde of dereliction Cyprian confesseth to haue beene in Christ, is euident by his words: Cyprianus de passione Christi. Quod pro eis voluisti intelligi, qui deseri à Dea propter peccata meruerant, quo∣rum reconciliationis causam agebas, in qua alle gator subtilis pro seruis seruilem non dedigna∣ris accipere personam, ET IN TANTVM infirmis compatcris, vt nec crucifigi, nec mori, nec crubescas, nec for ides, altitudinem tuam derelinquens ad tempus, gloriae tuae maiest ∣tem euacuans, vt redeant dispersi, & respirent derelicti. The words of thy complaint on the Crosse (sayth Cyprian to Christ) thou wouldest haue to be vnderstood for , who had deserued by their sinnes to be for saken of God; whose cause, to reconcile them, then vndertookest; and as a most skillfull Patron for seruants thou didest not disdaine to take the person of a seruant, and SO FARRE thou didst compassionate the weake, that thou wast nei∣ther afraid, nor ashamed to be crucified and to dy, leauing for a time thine owne higth, and emptying the maiesty of thy glory, that the dispersed might returne, and the forsaken might take breath, (or comfort). The forsaking, which Cyprian here describeth in Christ, consisteth in leauing of his diuine power and glory for a time, and in abasing himselfe SO FARRE, as to dy the death of the Crosse for their sakes, but no farder. And these wordes he saith Christ would haue vnderstoode to be a cause of their Reconciliation to God, who had deserued for their sinnes to be forsaken of God, and therefore he addeth presently . I consider thee Lord, on that crosse, where thou seemedst without helpe (or forsaken), how with an Emperiall power thou didst send the theefe before to thy kingdome by assuming of whom it is manifest how much thou hadst preuailed for those, that were for∣saken. You would faine so wrest Cyprians wordes, that he should say Christ vnder∣tooke our cause and no more, but he withall affirmeth, that Christ tooke vpon him our person, and that his carefull complaint were the wordes of his beloued. If the wordes were spoken as well in our person, as in our cause, then we were indeed forsaken, and Christ by laying downe his glorie for a time, and obeying his fathers will, did by those wordes declare, that he reconciled vs to God, when we were forsaken, and in signe thereof with full power made the theefe partaker of his kingdome, that had deserued, and was condemned to die the death of a for lorne and forsaken malefactour. Defenc. pag. 109. li. 2. If you thincke they ment that Christ spake this by some strange metonimy, naming him∣selfe, but meaning his Church, that can haue no good sense. ] I shall not need to tell you The first sense of com∣plaint on the Crosse. what I thinke, let them speake themselues, what they ment, and when you haue heard their meaning out of their owne wordes, you shall see how much you abused Cyprian to make him speake that he neuerment. It is plaine enough which Athanasius saith. Athana ius de incarnatione Christi. Christ spake those wordes in our person, for he was neuer forsaken of God. and Austen is as euident. August epist. 120. why disdaine we to heare the voice of the body by the mouth of the head? to me, that is to my body, my church, and my litle ones. So was it said, why hast thou forsaken me; euen as it was said he that receaueth you receaueth me. No doubt we were in those wordes, and the head did speake for his body. And likewise Leo Leo Serm. 16. de P ss. Dom. Christ spake those wordes in the voice of his Redeemed. Neither are they alone in this opinion. Theodoret satith Theodoret. i Psalm 21. be∣cause Christ was the head of mans nature, he speaketh for the whole nature of man. So Bede a in Psal. 21. Quare dereliquistime, idestmeos? ideo scilicet quia longè te fecerunt peccata esse à salute mea, id est meorum. Hec verbaplane innuunt caput non in persona sua hic loqui. Quomodo enim derelictus, vellonge à salute factus posset esse ille? Why hast thou forsaken me, that is mine? because sinne did put thee farre from sauing me, that is mine. These words do plainly prooue, that the head doth not here speake in his owne person. For how could he possiblely be forsaken, or remooued from saluation? And Euthymius in Psal. 21. The Lord taketh vnto him the person of mans nature, as lincked to him; and saith, why hast thou forsaken me (now) a man, that is the whole nature of man? And Damascene. Orthodoxe fi∣dei. li. 3. ca. 24. Christ was neuer forsaken of his owne Godhead, but we were those that were forsaken and despised. Wherefore appropriating our person, he praied in that sort. And expressing what it is to appropriate, or assume an o∣thers person, he saith. As when a man doth put on an others person of piety or charitic, and in his steed vseth speach for him , which agreeth not vnto himselfe. If then we take dereliction for the want of Gods fauour, spirit, and grace, as these Fathers doe; it is euident Christ could not so be forsaken; and consequently these wordes in that sense, which is proper to the Children of Gods wrath, could not agree to the person of Christ, though it were true in his members, that they by nature were forsaken and destitute of grace, till he reconciled them to God, and diffused his spirite into their harts to make them partake s of his holinesse. And as for the strangenesse of the metonimy, count you that strange, which Christ vseth in one Chapter more then thirty times, and find you no strangenesse in your conceits, which are no where throughout the Scriptures either expressed, or so much as coherent with the continuall speach and plaine rules of the Scriptures? Defenc. pag. 109. li. 5. That can haue no good sense. For how can it be that we were forsaken of God, when Christ was on the Crosse? Nay euen then and there we were purchased vnto God, not forsa∣ken by God. Doth any man vse, when he would make reasons for his opinion, to refu e himselfe, as you doe, we were purchased you say on the Crosse vnto God; you must adde, by the bloud of his sonne, which was also God, for that Saint Paul in the pl ce, which you cite, nameth as the true and right price of this purchase. God purchased (his Church) with his owne bloud, and not by the direfull paines of hell, as your braine hath lately broched. Now if we were purchased on the Crosse, then till we were pur∣chased, we were enstranged from God, and so forsaken of him. And what hindreth this complaint or prayer of Christs to beare witnesse, that we were now reconciled and purchased vnto God, which before were forsaken and separated from God? For those words doe not imply, that we still continued forsaken, but that formerly with∣out Christ we were vtterly forsaken, and now by him restored to fauour. And the goodnesse of this sense, I doe not thinke but any man of meane capacitie will soone conceaue, and iudge it more fruitfull for vs to know, that by Christs mediation and oblation on the crosse we are now no longer strangers vnto God, nor forsaken of him, as before we were for our sinnes; then that Christ suffered the direfull and in∣fernall paines and death of the damned in his Soule, before we could be freed from our sinnes. For of the first there can be no question, and of the second, you neither haue, nor euer shall be able to bring one line or letter of holy Scripture. Defenc pag. 109. li. 7. Againe your owne rule is, which I like well, that no figure is to be admitted in Scriptures where there is no ill nor hurtfull sense following litterally. But I ha e shewed a little before a plaine, easie and Christian sense hereof taking it litterally. ] The rule is most needfull to preserue the right sense of the Scripture. For if euery man may elude with figures that, which liketh not his humour, we shall haue little truth left in the word of God. But euen by that rule your sense of Christs complaint is quite ouerthrowen, because your exposition plainly fastneth desperation for the time to the Soule of Christ. For all hope hath ioy and comfort in it. Rom. 12. Reioycing in hope, saith the Apostle. If then Christ neuer forsaken of hope and comfort. Christ for that season of his Passion were all comfortlesse, as you pretend, and had no sense nor feeling of any comfort or ioy, he had no hope; for hope bringeth ioy and com∣fort. And what is no hope, but despaire? that therefore the litterall sense of these words neither is, nor can be true, taking dereliction for the inward forsaking of Gods grace and spirit, as well the Scriptures, as the Fathers, whom I haue produced, doe with one voice confirme. Saint Austen may serue to shew the reason, that led him and the rest so to thinke. August. in Psal. 43. Ille caput nostrum, vocem de cruce non dixit suam, sed nostram. non enim vnquam dereliquit eum Deus, sed propter nos dixit hoc, Deus, Deus meus vt quid me dereliquisti. Christ our head vttered not his owne words, but ours. For God neuer at any time forsooke him. But for vs he said, My God my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Defenc. pag. 109. li. 19. Finally this first sense is contrarie to your second and third following: also to your fift and sixt senses. If either of these be taken as the true meaning of this place, it cannot possibly stand with the rest. ] I did not professe to discusse the likeliest sense of those words; It sufficed me to let you see the weaknesse of your cause in deriuing your hell paines from Christs complaint on the crosse, by this that twelue auncient and learned Fa∣thers did diuersly sift and examine those words, and yet none of them euer lighted on your second death, or on the forsaking, which you labour to establish in the soule of Christ. Now if the words doe tolerably beare so many interpretations, what assu∣rance had you thence to conclude your hellish confusion, which you imagine in the Sauiour of the world? yea graunt the expositions were contrarie, which indeed are somewhat different, according as the word of dereliction is applied and intended, that maketh the more against you, and hindereth not me. For still I vrge the words, which you stand on, do necessarily inferre no such sense, as you would fasten to them. The thing, that I presse, is this, that there are many other senses of these words ap∣prooued and preferred by the consent of the best writers old and new; and yours of all others, as it hath no consent of Christs Church, ne was euer heard of before our age, so hath it no foundation in the Sacred Scriptures. You would disgrace the Fa∣thers as iuuentors of strange and new senses, but you little remember all this while, that of all others yours is the latest, absurdest, and least likely sense of that complaint. And yet if you wrest it to the lowest step of dereliction, that this life knoweth, or the Scripture here , it may amount to desperation, but neuer to reall and actu∣all damnation. Defenc. pag. 109. li. 23. Your second sense what is it? euen this that Christs humane Nature was left helplesse to the rage of the Iewes, which is a kind of forsaking. This seemeth to come neerest indeede to your liking, but as I said thi is directly contrarie to your first sense, and to the rest fol∣lowing. ] They that giue diuerse senses of any places in Scripture, doe not meane they The second sense of Christes complaint on the crosse. shall be wholy like, or the same; for then they were not diuerse; but according to the varietie of significations, and circumstances offered by the words, they varie their ex∣positions. So here, if we take dereliction for losse of grace, then that sense of the word could not agree to Christ, but to the reprobate without Christ, or to the rest before they be engraffed into Christ, and consequently me in Christs words must signifie my Members, that were one body with him. If we take it for lacke of helpe in time of trou∣ble, then it might well agree vnto the person of Christ, who was forsaken, that is left in his affliction, and not deliuered from it, till he died, that we might euer after be restored, and reconciled to the fauour of God. Which commeth neerest to my li∣king, I neuer acquainted you; the places which you quote, prooue no such thing; they onely shew, that this exposition hath sufficient foundation in other places of Scripture, where the word forsaking is vsed to the like intent. Howbeit there is no cause that I, or you should mislike this exposition; and the trifles, which you obiect against it, will confirme as much. Defenc. pag. 109. li. 29. There is surely no reason, nor shew of Reason, that Christ should here so mournfully and so ncomfortably complaine, that God had forsaken him, if it were onely, but for such dis∣tresses as the godly also doe equally suffer at the hands of euill men. ] Had you but perused the places, by which you conclude my liking of this Exposition, you should haue seene Reason, and reason enough for Christ to be thus affected in his extreame miseries, as well as his Church is in the like, or lesse. Had the Church of God no reason to say in the Prophet Esay. Esa. 49. The Lord hath forsaken me? or did God want reason in his an∣swere, when he said; Esa. 54. ver. 7. for a while I forsooke thee, for a moment in (mine) anger I hid my face from thee? If then God had Reason to say to his Church, Ibid. ver. 6. the Lord hath called thee a woman forsaken, and afflicted in spirit, could Christ want reason in his intolerable paines on the Crosse to complaine, that he was now a long time left in them without helpe or ease? as for the equall sufferings of the godly at the hands of men, on which you would take aduantage. I haue shewed the difference before. When paines in others grow sharpest, then sense decaieth, and'death approcheth; in the paines whereof men cannot expresse how much nature misliketh and abhorreth the paine. In Christ it was otherwise: his bodie being in exquisite paines on euery side, and in euery part from Christs patience was at the high∣est proof before he complained on the crosse. top to toe, and hanging in that plight now three houres on the crosse, when the paine was greatest, and himselfe weakest, his sense was quickest, which could not be ouer∣whelmed in him, as it is in vs; but he endured most horrible anguish all that time, and therefore when his patience was at the highest proofe, he had more than reason to complaine, that he had long beene left in that extremitie without assistance or deli∣uerance; and he that doubteth thereof, sheweth that his fansie doth ouerrule his rea∣son, and his will doth vndermine his wit. Defenc. pag. 109. li. 35. Note this well, that no godly nor martyr did euer ascribe thi forsaking of them∣selues to God in the time of their martyrdomes. ] But note this better, that you auouch a notable alsehood euen against the expresse witnesse of the Holy Ghost. When the Angel of God Iudg. 6. v. 13. appeared to Gedeon, and sayd vnto , The Lord is with thee thou va∣liant man; Gedeon answered, A my Lord, if the Lord be with vs, why then is all this come vpon vs? did not the Lord bring vs out of Egypt? but now the Lord hath forsaken vs, and deliuered vs into the hands of the Midianites. So the godly by the mouth of Ieremie; Ier. 14. v. 8. 9. O the hope of Israel, the thereof in the time of trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the land, and as a strong man that can not belpe? thy name is called vpon vs, forsake vs not. And speaking of the captiuitie of Gods people, sayth, Lament. . vers. 5. 20. Our necks are vnder per∣secution, we are wearie and haue no rest. Wherefore doest thou forget vs for euer, and forsake vs so long time? Yea the godly in farre lesse afflictions than was Christ on the crosse, haue vsed farre more grieuous complaints. Psal. 89. Thou hast reiected and abhorred thine an∣einted, thou hast broken the couenant of thy seruant, and profaned his crowne to the ground. Lord how long wilt thou hide thy selfe, for euer? shall thy wrath burne like fire? Now if mar∣tyrs doe not confesse before their enemies and persecuters, that God hath forsaken them, what is that to this purpose, so long as they in their prayers to God desire him not to forsake them; and their flesh in their torments strugleth and striueth, as nei∣ther willing nor able to beare the burden? Againe Christs praiers made with so loud a voice in the eares of all his aduersaries, had an other meaning, then to acknowledge, as they obiected vnto him, that he was indeed forsaken of God; which was to hasten now the time of his death for an end God shewed by the present that he had not forsaken his sonne. of his paines, and to besecch his father, that had all this while forborne to shew any open signe of liking and loue towards him being so much afflicted and reproched by the Iewes, now when he should leaue this life, to let them all see how much God re∣garded and glorified the person of his Sonne: both which God accordingly perfor∣med: for straightwayes with a second prayer Christ commending his spirit into his Fathers hands, did voluntarily, but miraculously breathe out his soule; and Matth. 27. vers. 51. BE∣HOLDE (sayth the Scripture, that is, immediatly, and to all their admirations) the vaile of the Temple did rent in twaine, the earth did quake, the stones did cleaue, 52. and the graues did open; which things were so fearefull and wonderful, that when Vers. 54. the Centuri∣on, and they that were with him watching Iesus, saw the earth Quake, and the things that were donne, they greatly feared, and said, truely this man was the sonne of God. Here is the intent and effect of Christes complaint on the crosse expressed, that when he had now three howres endured most extreame paines in all parts of his body, and heard the insolent and pestilent reproches of his persuers obiecting to him, that he did false∣ly call himselfe the sonne of God, since in his greatest necessity God did neither deli∣uer him, nor any way regard him; he at the time appointed by his father, made his complaint to God with a loude voice, that they all might heare him, that he was now a long time forsaken, that is LEFT in this anguish and ignominie without any shew of his fathers loue towards him. Whereupon presently Christ before Iohn 18. Knowing all that should come vnto him, and so knowing what should be the issue of this his praier to his no small comfort was permitted to breath out his soule with greate power, and the temple, the earth, the Rockes renting, shaking and cleauing asunder gaue manifest testi∣mony to those that watched him, that he was the son of God, for so much as all these thinges were done at his petition, to declare that God had not forsaken his sonne, though he suffered him to dy that death on the crosse for causes then to them vn∣knowen. And so this praier, which you would haue to be a most mournefull and vn∣comfortable complaint of inward forsaking in soule and spirit, was an effectuall and powerful praier prouoking God his father to demonstrate by most maruailous signes and wonders the exceeding loue and honour, that he bare to the tormented and despised person of his sonne. This Athanasius obserued before me. Loe (saith he) Athanasius contra oratio 4. vpon Christes speach, why hast thou forsaken me, the father shewed himselfe to be euen then in Christ, as euer before. For the earth knowing her Lord to speake, straightway trembled, and the vaile rent in twaine, and the Sunne did hide himselfe, and the Rocks claue insunder, and the Graues were opened, and the dead in them rose. And that which was (no les e) mar∣uailous, the standers by, which before denied him, seeing what came to passe, confessed him truely to be the sonne of God. This Bernard saith was the dereliction, that Christ ment in his complaint. Bernardus d verbis Esai Serm. 5. Quasi qu dam ibi derelictio fuit, vbi nulla fuit in tanta necessitate vir∣tut is exhibitio, nulla maiestatis ostensio. There was (on the Crosse) a kind of forsaking (of Christ,) where there was in so great necessity no demonstrance of his power, no declarance of his maiesty. Defenc. pag. 110. li.. It is a great shame to imagine that Christ was lesse able to endure such a dereliction, or that he would thus complaine and mourne for it onely. ] It is a greater shame and sinne first to mistake, and then to disgrace the wordes of Christ. What rule either of reason or pietie could hinder our Sauior (when his time drew neere, that he would die, and ease himselfe of his exceeding paines on the crosse,) earnestly to call to God, euen now to declare, which he had all this while refrained, what account he made of that person, whom the Iewes and Gentils so much despised and oppressed? was it any shame for the manhood of Christ to say, my God, my God, why hast thou (so long) forsaken me; with∣out any publike signe or shew, that thou louest and fauourest me, whom this nation had so much wronged and blasphemed? or is it of late become so shamefull a thing with you, that Christ should complaine he was forsaken and left in the hands of his persuers without help or ease? both old and new writers euen of the best learned, that haue been in Christs Church, haue thought it no shame for Christ in that very respect so to speake. Hieronym. in Matth ca. 27. Maruaile not (saith Ierom) at Christes complaint of being forsaken, when thou seest the scandall of his crosse. . de fide li. 2. ca. 3. He speaketh as a man, saith Ambrose (which was no shame for him to doe) because being in danger we thinke our selues forsaken of God. The same wordes in Mar. ca. 14. Bede, in ca. 27. Rabanus, and in ca. 27. Aquinas repeat and follow. Theodoret saith; Christ . in . 21. calleth that a dereliction, which was a permission of the diuinity, that the humanity should suffer. Christe would endure (saieth Austen) this vnto death in the sight of his ene∣mies, that they might take him as one forsaken. Lyra. Mat. ca 27. Dixit derclictum a deo , quia dimittebat cum in manibus occidentium. Christ saith he was forsaken of God his father, because he was left in the hands of those that slew him. And so our new writers. August epist. 120 in Mat. ca. 27. Hic questus est se in manibus impiorum adomnem ipsorvm libidinem a patre derelictum. Christ heere complained (saith Bucer) that he was forsaken of his father (or left) in the of the wicked to endure all their rage. Bullinger. Bullingerus in Matth. ca. 27. Derelinquere siue deserere in est permittere. To forsake or leaue (in Christes wordes on the Crosse) is to permit. So that this was Christs meaning, why doest thou suffer me to be thus afflicted? why doest thou permit these things to mine enemies? when wilt thou deliuer me? Munster: Munsterus in Psalm. 21. haec Christi ver∣banon impatientiam aliquam, aut diffiden̄tiam prae se ferunt &c: these words of Christ, (My God my God why hast thou forsaken mee?) shew no impatience, or diffidence, but declare that he was a true man, and that he had truely suffered. And what if, as some learned Fathers conceaue, Christ did not grieuously com∣plaine in those wordes, that he was forsaken, but thereby led his enemies to looke and search in the Psalmes & Prophets for the cause, why the messias should be so forsaken & deliuered into the hands of sinners, as they saw he was? August. epist. 120. Christ doth not say (saith Au∣sten) my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me, sed causum commonuit requirendam, cum addidit, vt quid dereliquisti me, id est propter quid, quam ob causam? but he admonished the cause to be searched, when he added, why hast thou forsaken me, that is to what end, and for what cause? for truely there was a cause, and that no small cause, why God would not deliuer Christ from the handes of the Iewes, but leaue him in the power of his persecutors, till he died. Leo likewise. Leo de Passi∣one 17. Therefore Christ cried with a loud voice, why hast thou forsaken me, that he might make it knowen to all, for what cause he ought not to be deliuered, nor defended, sed sae∣uientium manibus derelinqui, but to be left in the hands of his pursuers, which was to be made the Sauiour of the world, and the Redeemer of all men, non per miseriam, sed per misericordi∣am, non amissione auxilij, sed definitione moriendi; not by any miserable necessitie, but of mer∣cie; not for lacke of helpe, but of purpose to die (for vs). Whether then Christs meaning in those wordes (if we apply them to his owne person) were to hasten the time of his death, which he knew was at hand, and should bring him case of his excessiue How many mea∣nings words on the haue. paines, or to mooue his father to demonstrate by those signes, which followed, what fauour and affection he bare to the person of his sonne, though for our sakes he suffered him thus to be vsed: or to teach his persecutors, that there was a cause, which they knew not, why himselfe being their messias should die this death on the crosse, or last whether his manhood conformed it selfe to the desires and grones of his church and members, whom the Prophets teach in this wise to pray, when they were oppres∣sed with any great calamity or misery: none of these waies I say are the wordes of Christ on the crosse chalengeable, but they stand well with the piety, patience, confi∣dence and expectance, that were in Christ, and haue better foundation in the sacred Scriptures then your paines of the damned, or your second death to be then and there suffered in the soule of Christ. Defenc. pag. 110. li. 7. The bare names againe of Austen, Ambrose, Ierom doe here likewise no good, this is but a weake kind of reasoning for so learned a Diuine as you are. ] I like better this kind of weakenesse in matters of faith to haue the consent of the learned and auncient fathers for that I teach, then your kind of strength, which is to be so stiffe in your priuate con∣ceits, that you will delude the Scriptures with your figures, and deride the fathers as seely fooles not vnderstanding the first principles of Religion, rather then you will forgoe the least of your fansies. If you light on any Reader of the same mind let him know, that the choice wilbe hard for him to make, whether all the fathers in Christes Church did erre in the chiefe grounds of their faith, or he himselfe be out of the trueth. If Christian Religion were not since Christes time before our age, this is a greater forsaking of Christ, then any was on the Crosse. For then hath God forgotten all his purposes and promises so often mentioned in the Prophets, and confirmed to Christ; if there were neuer Church of Christ since the Apostles death till our dayes. And he that is of that humour, it skilleth not greatly of what side he be, for certainly he can be no member of Christs Church, that reiecteth all persons, places, and ages before his birth, as none of Christs. I wish no wise nor sober Reader so farre to ven∣ture his soule. If then to the Primatiue Church of Christ next after the Apostles we yeeld but ordinary knowledge of the Christian faith, we may not take from so many learned fathers and Pastours, as God hath for so many hundred yeares adorned his Church withall, the common vnderstanding of their Catechisme and Creed, how we were saued, and what is the price of our Redemption, specially the Scriptures going so cleare with them, and they teaching so closely and soundly the trueth there ex∣pressed. Defenc. pag. 110. li. 9. These very sentences of the fathers I can easily admit, if they import no more, then that those outward afflictions on the Crosse were SOME CAVSES (AND THAT NO SMAL) of his complaint, alwaies remembring that some greater cause also did concurre and was con∣ioined with them. ] Then by your owne confession haue the fathers spoken trueth, and there was small or no cause, giuen you, to make so light regard of them. As for your other greater cause, when you prooue by Scripture, as you intend, that Christs soule on the crosse suffered the second death, and the paines of the damned, you shall haue a speciall reseruation, that your fansies may be conioined with Christs praiers: other∣wise your reasons be like your resolutions, they haue neither proofe nor strength be∣sides your owne priuate and presumptuous perswasions. Defenc. pag. 110. li. 14. Your third sense if I conceiue it aright, is; that his being left to bodily death caused him thus to mourne, which is but as the last before. And yet you seeme to meane not only that, but also because his flesh now should want all feeling of his heauenly comfort for that while that it should remaine dead. A maruailous exquisite and farre fet cause. ] The sense is neither mine, nor so farre fet as you would make it. I tooke it out of Tertullian, Hilarie, and The third sense of Christs com∣plaint on the crosse. Epiphanius, whose wordes I produced to that purpose; and howsoeuer you gibe at it after your scornefull maner, I suppose it will prooue sounder then your hellish death, which you haue so learnedly deuised out of their words. The difference betwixt this and the former sense is not great. For there the fathers ment Christ was forsaken, that is not deliuered from the rage of his persecutors, whiles he liued; and these doe adde, that he was left vnto death, presuming death to be the greatest and most grieuous of all outward afflictions, which in this life befall the nature of man. Defenc. pag. 110. li. 19. Yet me thinks as this crosseth your other expositions here, so it is flat contrarie to the Scripture also. ] If the expositions were contrary each to other, so long as they be sun∣drie mens, and repeated onely by me to shew how many senses haue beene deli∣uered in the Church of Christ by learned and auncient Fathers touching that com∣plaint or praier of Christ, which you would faine abuse to hatch your hell-paines; what els note you by their contratiety, but the diuersity of mens iudgements vpon these words; all which conioined in this against you, that Christes complaint on the crosse may diuersly be conceaued according to the different acceptions of forsaking, and yet your paines of the damned haue no place in that variety or contrariety of en∣ses? But this third sense you say, is flat contrarie to the Scripture. ] That were worth the hearing indeed, if your foolish conceits were not farre more likely to crosse both themselues & the Scriptures, then iustly to controle the iudgements of so learned fa∣thers. But what is this great ouersight, that is so much repugnant to the Scripture? the Scripture Ibid. li. 21. giueth after a sort to Christes dead flesh this LIVELY AFFECTION, my flesh shall rest in hope. ] The soule of Christ, which was replenished with life, trueth, and grace, as being personally vnited vnto God, and of whose fullnesse we all haue recea∣ued, you affirme died on the Crosse, and none other death then the second death: and Christs flesh lying dead in the graue you imagine not only to haue life, but to be a li∣uing spirit. For you giue vnto it the liuely affection of hope; which nothing hath, that is not a liuing and reasonable soule, or more. You doe it, you will say but after a sort. ] That sort is absurd inough, of figuratiue speaches in the Scriptures to make positiue doctrines. For if you defend, that the dead flesh of Christ in the graue had indeed any liuely affection of hope in part or in whole, it is a brutish heresie denying that Christ was truely dead, and that his body was truely flesh; since a liuely hope impo teth not only life, but vnderstanding and faith. If you graunt these speaches to be figuratiue, then doe you betray your folly, to thwart the fathers assertions with figuratiue florish∣es, as if they were proper; and to pronounce their sayings flat contrary to the Scriptures, because you can pike out a word, that in outward shew soundeth somewhat strangely. Hope in these wordes of Dauid is either applied to the soule of Christ in respect of the resurrection of his body, which he beleeued and hoped for as most assured; or if we apply it to the body, it noteth safety from corruption, and promise made by God of speedie resurrection, which was the thing wherewith Christs bodie might be in∣uested. But we shall haue mainer proofe for this matter. Defenc. pag. 110. li. 24. Is it likely, is it possible, that he should so dolefully mourne that either he should bodily dy, or that his body should want the sense of his diuine presence so little a while, when as in HIS MINDHE SPEAKETH SO TRIVMPHANTLY of his CONSTANT and CON∣TINVALLIOY IN GOD: yea not excluding euen his body though dead from participa∣ting in some sort therein: as we read in the former place at large? I Act 2. 26 27. BEHEID the Lord al∣waies The Defender contradi∣cteth his owne doctrine. before me, for he is at my right hand, that I should not b shaken. Therefore did mine heart reioice, and my tongue was glad, and moreouer my flesh shall rest in hope. Now can a man in this EXCEEDING GENERALL and CONSTANTIOY so vncomfortably mourne in that sense as you vrge, My God, my God why forsakest thou my flesh? it cannot be. ] I would not thinke it likely, nor possible, if I did not see it before mine eies, that such a pert Proctour should so proudly despise all auncient writers and fathers, that fauour not his faction, and yet so palpably confound himselfe and his whole cause with ouer∣much prating. For (Christian Reader I pray thee) take no more but his owne confes∣sion or assertion in this place, by which he thought to ouerbeare all that stood in his way, and obserue both how desperatly he contradicteth himselfe, and how sensibly he subuerteth his whole doctrine and his deuice of this new found hell. But the lease before he told vs peremptorily, that Pa. 108. li. 8. Christes Godhead as it were withdrawing and hi∣ding it selfe from him for that season of his passion gaue him NO SENSE, NOR FEELING OF COMFORT OR IOY in spirit, soule, or body. Now suddainly whiles he eagerly hunteth after his hell paines, he not onely falleth ouer head and eares into the myre of contradictions, but he clearely confesseth before hand, that all which himselfe will say touching the second death of Christes soule on the crosse, is apparantly false doc∣trine, and euidently repugnant to the sacred Scriptures. Thou wilt maruaile much at this, and so doe I; but that Liars are often so earnest to serue their turnes and not the trueth, that they forget their former tales, whiles they inuent newer. As here for example. He that would before allow to Christ on the crosse NO SENSE NOR FEELING OF COMFORT OR IOY, in spirit, soule or body; Now vrgeth, to promote another purpose, Christs EXCEEDING GENERALL AND CONSTANT IOY euen at the same time, when he spake these wordes, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me: and not content with this, he addeth, that Christ euen then IN HIS MIND SPAKE TRIVMPHANTLY OF HIS CONSTANT and CONTINVALL IOY in GOD; and prooueth it by the words of the holy Ghost, where Dauid being a Prophet spake concerning Christ on the Crosse, that he Acts 2. beheld the Lord alwaies before him at his right hand, that he should not be shaken. And therefore did Christs hart reioyce, and his tongue was glad. Vnderstand you, sit faith-maker, the difference or repugnance be∣tweene NO SENSE NOR FEELING OF COMFORTOR IOY, in spirit, soule, or bo∣dy, A most shame∣full contradi∣ction. and EXCEEDING GENERALL, CONSTANT, and TRIVMPHANT IOY in GOD in the mind of Christ? can you read this, and not thinke you reele, as your rea∣sons doe to and fro? can you salue this sore without sweating? or make vp this breach without blushing? and I pray you since the ground of these wordes is true, in that it is the holy Ghosts, and you may not flie from your owne inference, which you presse so violently against the fathers to beate downe their exposition, how could Christs Soule on the crosse IN THIS EXCEEDING GENERALL, CONTINV∣ALL, CONSTANT, and TRIVMPHANT IOY OF MIND suffer also the paines of the damned and the second death, wherein IS NO SENSE NOR FEELING OF ANY COMFORT OR IOY IN body, soule, or spirit? Can you hang these gymmoes together, that the one shall not crie shamefull and intolerable falsehood against the other? the best excuse, that I can make for your, to saue you from ebriety or frensie, is that these things were posted ouer to you from diuers, that saw not each others fan∣sies, and so without due perusing or remembring, where they crossed ech other, you patched their papers together with more hast then good speed. How beit surely I take it to be a iust iudgement of God, when you are diuided from the trueth, to di∣uide either your tongues from your harts, or your harts from themselues, that all men may learne to take heed how they dally with the Christian faith, or delude the Scrip∣tures. I thanke God I hate you not so much, but for your owne sake I could wish, you had beene silenter, or circumspecter. And see how euill you lucke, or at least your cause is. For heere haue you spoken enough to confute all that you formerly haue said, and afterward will say, and yet you haue brought nothing to infringe that which I said. For a naturall seare and mislike of death, as also griefe and sharpnesse of paine in the body may well stand with a continuall and constant comfort in God; yea where grace is present and preuaileth, the 2 Cor. 4. perishing of the outward man bringeth the renewing of the inward man, and bitter affliction maketh vs seeke after God, and call vpon him the more earnestly for his assistance; in which case it is most true, that Gods 2. Cor. 12. power is perfected in our infirmity. For, when I am weake (saith the Apostle, in body,) then I am strong, in spirit. And if Paul could 2. Cor. 12. delight in reproches, persecutions and anguishes for Christes sake, and yet feele the smart of them, could not Christ retaine comfort in his afflictions, though his flesh were pressed with extreame paine? Many thinges more may be strongly alleaged against this opinion. ] With such strength as you haue already shewed, whereneither words nor matter shall hang together.[ Defenc. pag. 110 li. 37. As first: that seeing he perfectly knew that as his flesh should now quietly rest, so his soule should enioy perfect glory and comfort more then before it did. ] That doth not quench the de∣testation, Was there no comfort in all this? which mans nature hath of death euen by Gods ordinance; though it com∣fort and courage the soule in hope of future blisse to indure the paine and horrour of death. S. Austen saith, August. epi∣stola 120. Nemo vnquam carnem suam odio habuit, et praeterea non vult ani∣ma vel ad tempus abeius etiam insirmitate descedere, quamuis se sine infirmitate in aeter∣num recepturamesse confidat. Tantam habet vim, carnis & animae dulce consortium. No man euer hated his owne flesh, and therefore the soule is not willing to depart euen from the weakenesse of the body for a time, though she beleeue, that she shall receiue her flesh againe for euer without infirmity. Of so great is the sweet betwixt the soule and the body. And so againe tract. in 123. This affection of mans weakenesse, whereby no man is willing to die, is so naturall, that age could not take it from blessed Peter, to whom it was said (by Christ,) when old, thou shalt be led whither thou wouldest not. And to comfort us our himselfe (assumed and) shewed this (affection) in himselfe, when he said, Father if it be possible, let this cup passe from me. So that these respects made Christ the more comfor∣table in death, but by no meanes did vtterly quench the naturall dislike, that Christes manhood had, and lawfully might haue of death, knowing it to be the punishment of sinne, and dissolution of our creation, though by Gods goodnesse it be now made a pass ge in his to a better life. Your next reason is of the same stamp. The resurrec∣tion of the body maketh no man willing to die, if he could with Gods liking decline death, but obedience ouerruleth the naturall instinct, that God hath impressed in vs to abhorre death. And where you take it for a mighty'pillar in your building, that Christ Pa. 111. li. 6. would not so extreamly mourne and complaine only for this cause, as my fansie im∣porteth, you build but on sand, which will haue the greater fall. For I shew you many more causes and senses of those words, then this only; all which you kindly skippe, and pretend this only which I neuer professed, calling it my fansie, that I cited out of auncient and reuerend writers. Defenc. pag. 111. li. 8 Further he knew perfectly, that this was the very appointment of God for the obtaining of his most desired purchase of our health, for the more aduancing of Gods glorie, and for the aduancing of his very manhood. Finally, it was his owne most free and fore-determined will: would he then so mournefully grieue and complaine thereat? It hath no reason nor likelihood in it. ] You runne your selfe out of breath, and quite besides the way. You shall not need to perswade me, that Christ was resolued and willing to die; I perfectly beleeue it, and easily confesse it: but how? as he himselfe declared, the spirit was willing, the flesh was weake. The minde of Christ apprehended and persued all these things which you mention, but that excludeth not the naturall dislike which Gods will is all men should haue of death. This imperfection of mans nature, since it pleased Christ to taste, as well as the rest of our infirmities and affections, you may by no respects nor rewards, make the weakenesse of Christes flesh, to which he submitted himselfe, the Weaknesse ap∣pered in Christs flesh, but wil∣lingnesse in his spirit. same or equall with the willingnesse of his spirit, which had and shewed the abun∣dance of all grace. Wherefore I maintaine both in Christ, a voluntarie sense of the weaknesse of our flesh, and an heauenly strength of the inward man, which expressed, but ouerballanced the naturall desire of the outward man in Christ. And still you harpe on that one string, which is vtterly out of tune, that he would not do it So ex∣treamly and So mournefully. This extremitie is only your fansie; for I say Christ did it meekely, obediently, and faithfully, assuring himselfe, that his Father, who all this while had tried his patience, would at his prayer not onely end his paine, but make heauen and earth to witnesse, what account God made of him, though for a season he left him in their hands to be made a sacrifice for our sinnes. Defenc. pag. 111. li. 15. Lazarus when he was returned from the ioyes of heauen to take againe his rotten car∣case, yet he grieued not at it, nor ought he so to haue done. ] When you sincke in reasons, you ascend to reuelations. Who tolde you, that the soule of Lazarus was in the ioyes of heauen, when Christ raised his bodie from the graue? Christ placeth the soule of the other Lazarus, that died at the rich mans doore, in Abrahams bosome to be com∣forted; and doe you take vpon you to place this Lazarus, that was brother to Marie and Martha, in the very ioyes of heauen? Where was his soule those foure dayes, you will aske? It is not for you to aske, nor for me to answere. The things after this life, and out of this world, it is not lawfull for me or you farder to enquire, then the Scripture reuealeth. That such as are raised from the dead should be able by experience to re∣port the ioies of heauen or the paines of hell, or the secrets of Gods kingdome; is a thing not permitted by God, as we find by Abrahams answeare to the rich man pray∣ing that Lazarus might be sent to his fathers house. God hath places and Angels e∣nough to keepe the soules of such, as he meaneth shalbe returned to this life, though it be neither in hell nor in heauen. From hell no man is released, and from heauen no man is dismissed that hath once seene God face to face. When 1. Cor. 13. that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be abolished, sayth the Apostle. And will you ad∣uenture to abolish perfection after it is come, and to bring men backe to this mortall life, that haue seene God in the fulnesse of his glory, whom no man liuing can see, depriuing them of that vision, perfection, and brightnesse, which the ioyes of hea∣uen haue in them? It is an enterprise meet for such an encounterer as you are. Paul liuing was taken vp into 2. Cor. the third heauen, euen into Paradise, where he which he might not vtter. Was Paul then in the ioyes of heauen? I trow not. For he sayth; Lest I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of reuelations, there was giuen vnto me a sting in the flesh, euen the messenger of Satan, to uffit me. If the a∣bundance of reuelation would so exalt Paul when he was but taken vp into Paradise, that he needed the messenger of Satan to humble him, how would the ioyes of hea∣uen, and cleercnesse of Gods face beheld in his glory, exalt men that should af∣terward liue againe in this wretched world? And therefore this is like the rest, euen a bolde assertion of things vnknowen; whereas God wanteth no meanes nor places extraordinarie to detaine the soules of such as shall in his counsell returne to this life, without knowing the secrets or possessing the ioyes of heauen. Defenc. pag. 111. li. 22. If your Fathers proue any thing towards your meaning, it is this, because that he com∣plained of his bodily dying. Howbeit, they say not, that he thus complained only and meerely The Defender the Fathers proue my meaning. for that. Neither do I thinke will you plainly holde this, NEITHER DO VVE DENIE THE OTHER.] If the Fathers meaning be, which you now consesse, that Christ on the crosse complained because of his bodily dying, then proue they as much as I produced them sor: and your admitting this exposition of theirs sheweth, that all this while you idlely sought to subuert their assertion with your strong allegation (as you sup∣posed) to no purpose, since now you denie it not. And where you pretend, they say not ONLY and meerely for that, you come too late with your exception: For since Christ made no complaint on the crosse but this, My God, my God, why hast thou forsa∣ken me; if in that he complained because of his bodily dying, as you do not denie; then all proofe for your hell paines out of those words is quite excluded, aswell by their opi∣nion, as by your owne confession. And your making Christs complaint on the crosse to be Pa. 111. li. 22 improbable, yea vnlawfull, conuinceth you by your owne mouth, that within the compasse of fiue lines you are contrary to your selfe, and charge Christ with vn∣lawfull mourning, which amounteth to as much as sinfull. As for mine opinion, what respects Christ might haue in that complaint of his, I haue before deliuered, so that your so grieuing and so mourning only and meerely for that, is but a sillie refuge, when you can not otherwise resist the trueth. Defenc. pag. 111. li. 32. & 28. These Fathers had no purpose here to exclude the suffering of Christes soule, but only to denie that his Godhead suffered. They stroue here with heretikes, whose controuersies were farre from our question. ] Indeed the heretikes against whom they wrote, tooke great holde of these places on which you build your hell paines; and because they were Heretikes al∣wayes vrged the same places whi h the De∣sender doth. somewhat darke and doubtfull, they stumbled many weake Christians with them euen as you doe. Their purpose I know was to proue Christ no God in nature, be∣cause he feared and sorowed in the Garden, and complained on the Crosse, as if he were for∣saken; which things they thought vnfit for him that was God. The Fathers to repell their heresie, and to open this obscuritie, insist plainly on these points, that the Me∣diatour must be God as well as man, and that the Godhead of Christ incarnate was impassible, and could not suffer any violence or change; but his manhood might and did suffer somethings in soule, as feare and sorow; and somethings in bodie, as paines and death. But generally when they speake of death, they neuer intend as you doc, the death of Christes soule as well as of his bodie, but they meane plainly the death of the Crosse described by the Euangelists, which is farre from the second death or the death of the damned. Defenc. pag. 111. li. 36. The very same doth Hilarie also, where he sayth, that this in Christ was Corporis vox, The outcrie of his bodie, he plainly meaneth it of his whole manhood, the opposition being be∣tweene it and his Godhead, as the Scripture often doth. ] If your authoritie be such, that you may take bodie for soule, and life for death, where you will, you may soone make a shew, that the Fathers intend nothing against your doctrine: but if you must proue it as well as say it, then is it the most riotous and most ridiculous course that can be, to take one contrarie for another: for so you may proue darknesse to be light, vice to be vertue, falshood to be trueth, and infidelitie to be faith. What the Fathers taught touching the death of Christes soule, when we come to the place we shall plainly see by their owne asserting, and not by your peruerting; in the meane time you were best bring stronger proofes than these, that you will take the bodie for the soule, if you meane to conclude any thing out of the Fathers for your croslegged doctrine. Trea. pag. 9. The Scripture often doth the like, you say, as you haue shewed in your Treatise.] There you haue childishly abused a number of Scriptures, and yet no way prooued, that any where the bodie signifieth the soule, or standeth for the soule. That the soule is a consequent to the bodie, and the bodie likewise a consequent to the soule, where∣soeuer The s ule is a c nsequent to , but no part of it. the Scripture speaketh of men liuing heere on earth, is a sure and safe rule; be∣cause no man heere liueth, that doeth not consist of soule and bodie: yet that is no proofe, that what is attributed to the bodie, must be verified of the soule, much lesse that the one must be taken for the other. Looke but to your owne examples, where bodie is named: Rom. 6. Let not sinne reigne in your mortall bodies, sayth the Apostle. If here you will comprehend the soule vnder the name of the bodie, you must grant in exact words, that the soule is mortall, which is an open heresie destroying the summe and effect of the Christian faith. Againe: 1. Cor. 6. Euery sinne that a man doth, is without the body, but the fornicato-sinneth against his owne bodie. If in this place the bodie conclude the soule, then euery sinne (saue fornication) is without soule and body, and consequent∣ly no sinne; which is a doctrine a man would thinke meet for no Diuine. The third instance which you bring, hath not so grosse sequels, but as plaine falshoods: Hebr. 10. Sacri∣fice and burnt offerings thou wouldest not, but a bodie h st thou ordained me; whereof the sacrifices offered by the Law were Ibid. vers. 1. shadowes. Now did the bodies of beasts slaine, or their bloud shed, prefigure the Soule of Christ, or the death of his bodie? These be the places, on which you build your vnsound obseruation, that the Scripture doth often take the bodie for the soule, which are so sensibly false, that they need no Re∣futer. But we reason of death, which seuereth the soule from the bodie, and therein to say the bodie must be taken for the soule, is a very sincke of sottish absurdities and falsities. For what can be more repugnant to trueth and sense, than to take a dead bodie for a liuing soule, and when they are so farre seuered by nature, to say they must agree in name, and the one be called the other? Peruse now the Fathers, which you would faine wrest to your purpose, and see whether they doe not flatly contradict your deuice, that the body in their speaches must be taken for the whole man, and so the death of Christes body for the death, as well of soule, as of the body. Epiphanius is the first, that you would frustrate with your deuices, and the first that shall conuince your falshood. He saith the manhood of Christ spake these words, Now seeing the deity together with the soule moouing to for∣sake his sacred body. What death call you that, where the soule moueth and forsaketh the body? then in that complaint of Christs the thing forsaken was his body alone by the iudgement of Epiphanius, and the deity Epiph. contra . 69. together with the soule did mooue , to forsake that sacred body. Which way doth this prooue the soule or the whole manhood of Christ to be forsaken, when Epiphanius expresly saith, the deity with the soule did mooue to forsake the body? Hilarie is the next, whom you would infect with your fansie, but finding no words in him meet for your matter, you are forced shamefully to misconster the body for the soule, and the death of the one for the death of the other, which is all the hold you haue in Hilarie, though you lustily would beare out the rest with the copy of your countenance. Notwith∣standing Hilarie doth not only preuent, but also refute your mistaking. For in plaine words he saith . 10. Querela derelicti morientis infirmit as est, traditio spirit us morientis ex∣cessio est, The complaint (of Christ) that he was forsaken was the infirmity of one dying, the yeelding vp his spirit was his departure hence, when he died. And againe, Tradens spiritum mortuus est; Christ died by deliuering vp his spirit. Sepultus est Christus, quia & mortuus est, mortuus autem est, quia & moriturus locutus est, Deus, Deus meus, quare me dereli∣quisti. Christ was buried because he was dead; and ready to die, he said, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. So that Christes death, when he spake those words, was not past nor present, but then to come, as Hilarie noteth by the future tence, and was the deliuering vp of his spirit into his fathers hands. I trust you dare not defend, that Christ in or after the deliuering vp of his spirit, suffered the paines of hell or the second death, and yet saith Hilarie those words Christ spake of his death, that was to come. Tertullian is the last, whose words though you mightily mistake & mistranslate, yet make they nothing for you, but against you directly. Writing against Praxeas, that denied the Father and the Sonne to be two distinct persons, and taught that the Fa∣ther became sonne to himselfe, . ca. 2. and was made man and crucisied, after many proofes to shew the person of the sonne to be different from the person of the father, he citeth those words of Christ on the crosse, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me; and saith, Ibid. ca. 30. h c vox carnis & animae, idest hominis, non sermonis, nec spiritus, id est Dei propte∣rea emissa est, vt impassibilem Deum ostenderet, qui sic filium dereliquit, dum hominem eius tr didit in mortem. Caeterum non reliquit Pater Filium, in cuius manibus Filius spiri∣tum suum posuit. Denique posuit, & statim obijt. Spiritu enim manente in carne, caro omnino mori non potest. Ita relinqui a Patre fuit mori filio. This voice of the flesh and soule, that is of the man, not of the word, nor of the spirit, that is not of God, was therefore spoken to shew that God is impassible, who so left his sonne, whiles he deliuered his manhood to death. Yet the Father did not (altogether) forsake the sonne, into whose hands the sonne breathed out his spirit. For he breathed it out, and straigh way died. Whiles the spirit remained in the flesh, the flesh could not die at all. So that to be forsaken of the Father, was in the sonne to die. Here are the words of Tertullian in order as they stand. Where it is euident, that he affirmeth no death nor forsaking in Christ, but only that, when the spirit left the body. His words are plaine. The Father forsocke not the sonne, into whose hands the sonne depo∣sed his spirit. For he laid it downe, and died. So to be forsaken of the Father was (this) for the sonne to die, by laying downe his spirit or soule, as before he prooueth Christ did. Then suffered Christ no death of the soule, since he died not, till he breathed out his spirit into his fathers hands; and other forsaking the sonne felt none, then so to die by the separation of his soule from his body. Now touching the voice of the soule and the flesh, whereof Tertullian speaketh; What forsaking of. either he maketh three parts in man, as the Apostle doth Thess: 1: 5. verse: 23. the spirit, the soule, and the body, and then the soule noteth the operations of life and sense, which were to cease for the time by death; or els he affirmeth this voice came from both soule and body, because the soule was to be separated from her body by death, as well as the body to be left dead; both which are a kind of forsaking. Other death he nameth none here, then to die by breathing out the spirit. And so long as the spirit abideth in the flesh, the flesh he saith cannot die at all. Christ therefore endured no death whiles his spirit did abide in his body, and consequently no death of the soule; and when he breathed out his spirit he straightway died, which was the forsa∣king, that he complained of in those words. So that all your collections heere out of Tertullian are your additions to Tertullian, and not so much as one of them to be found or fet from his text. He speaketh not a word that Christ Defenc. pag. suffered in both these parts from his father, nor that this (death or forsaking) li. 15. was ment of the flesh and of the 1 12. li. 20. soule, as you falsly translate him. And as for Tertullians confirming that li. 26. heresie of Christes being no true naturall man, except Christ suffered li. 23. the stroke of Gods hand in his soule, as the proper vengcance of sinne, this is your blinde deuice absurdly foisted into Tertullian, without any word or letter sounding that way. Defenc. pag. 112. li. 31. This dereliction of which he speaketh, is more the separation of the soule and bodie: euen the separation of the deitie from the whole manhood, which is the death of the soule. I speake nothing here but the Fathers words, yea the Scriptures. ] Your setting vnto Tertul∣lian Tertullian na∣meth no death but of Christes bodie. your owne sense, is an impudent attempt, and the weakest argument that can be, when you tell vs he meaneth so, though he speake not one word touching the death of the soule, but as exactly as he can or should, nameth the death of the bodie, by this that he sayth: Denique (spiritum) posuit, & statim obijt. Spiritu enim manente in carne caro omnino mori non potest. Christ layd downe his (spirit) and straightway died. For whiles the spirit remained in the flesh, the flesh could not die at all. What was it to lay downe his spirit into his fathers hands, as the Scripture speaketh of Christ on the crosse, but to die the death of the body? Those very words Tertullian here citeth and vseth, and thereby prooueth the Father had not inwardly forsaken the sonne, since the sonne by the manifest words of himselfe reported in the Euangelist, commended and yeelded his spirit to his fathers hands. So that against the death of the soule, Tertullians words are pregnant:) for how did the soule die, that was commended into Gods hands?) and other death Tertullian nameth nor meaneth none, but only this. Denique (spiritum) posuit, & statim obijt. Christ laied downe (his spirit into his fathers hands) and straightway died. As for your speaking nothing heere but the fathers and the Scrip∣tures words, beware you take not vp the Diuels trade, to keepe their words, and per∣uert their sense. It is no great mastery to abuse mens words, yea the word of God, which all Hereticks haue euer drawen to their owne false and wicked purposes. Defenc. pag. 112. li. 34. Your owne place of Epiphanius saith, that now his deity departed from his manhood. So saith your owne Hilarie also. Corporis vox contestata recedentis a se Dei dissidium. So saith Ambrose, clamauit homo diuinitat is separatione moriturus. The man Christ did crie being about to die by the separation of his Godhead. You alleage three places to this purpose, and either corrupt, or peruert all three most apparantly. piphanius saith, that Christs deity TOGETHER WITH THE SOVLE departed from his sacred body, which is as plaine a description of bodily death, as may be vttered. You leaue out the words, TOGETHER WITH THE SOVLE, as crossing your course, and turne the body in∣to the soule, meaning by this corruption to load Epiphanius with a sense cleane con∣trarie to his owne. Hilaries words spoken of Christes body, you enlarge to the whole manhood of Christ, and thence conclude directly against Hilaries meaning and words, that the deity departed from both, where as Hilarie professeth of Christ; Hilarius de Trinitate li. 10. Derelinqui se ad mortem questus est, sed TVNC confessorem suum secum in Regno Para∣disi recepit. Christ complained that he was (forsaken or) left vnto death, but EVEN THEN he receiued the Thiefe that consessed him, into the kingdome of Paradise iointly with himselfe. Ambroses words are Ambros in Luc. li. 10. de commendatione spiritus in Patris. Clamauit homo diuinitatis sep ratione moriturus. The man Christ cried (not then dead in soule, when he cried as you would haue it, but) ready to die, or that after should die, when he yeelded his spirit into his fathers hands. The very next sentence before sheweth that this departing was of the diuinity from the body, to leaue that vnto death. Ibidem. Euidens manifestatio contestantis Dei secessionem diuinitatis & corporis. A manifest speach of God witnessing the departure of his diuinity from his bodie. So that by no meanes Ambrose euer imagined that Christes soule died, but as he expres∣seth himselfe in the same Chapter; Ibidem. Caro moritur, vt resurgat, spiritus Patri commenda∣tur, vt pax fuerit in Caelo. The flesh dieth, that it might rise againe; the spirit is commended to (God) the father, that peace might be established in the heauens. Thus shortly haue you taken the paines to produce three Fathers for the death of Christes soule, and haue as shamefully peruerted and inuerted euery one of them, which is no newes with you; and yet all that you can conclude out of them may amount to a pestilent heresie, if you will, that the vnion of Christes person was dissolued for the time of his death, but it can neuer inferre any thing pertinent to your purpose. Defenc. pag. 113. li. 4. Here the Fathers do s ew indeed that Christ died, but more than a meere bodily death; euen the death of the soule also. ] Heere the Fathers are exquisitly belied and falsified, otherwise that Christes soule died, they offer neither word nor syllable sounding that way. And though you can not speake trueth in so false a cause, yet you should learne to spe ke coherently. You grant they auouch here, that Christ died the death of the bodie, and more, euen the death of the soule also; whereas it is euident by the words of the holy ghost, as also by your owne positions, that Christ neither did nor could die these two deaths at one time. For by the manifest witnesse of the Euangelist, Christ Luc. 22. his spirit into his Fathers , and so died. Then most certeinly the soule of Christ was accepted and receiued into the hands of God, which I trow is life, and not death, when the bodie was left to death. Wherefore if their words concerne his bo∣dily death, they by no meanes admix the death of the soule, since they all affirme a the Scripture doth, that Christ committed his soule to his Fathers hands, and so died; of which death they say he spake in those words, Why hast thou left me, that is, to die, as they expound it. Now if you affixe any death to the soule of Christ, I hope you will free him from it, before he commended his soule into his Fathers hands. And so the one must be ended, before the other could enter; and consequently, if they spake of the latter, their words haue no intent to implie the other. But what dispute we of their meaning, when their words are so manifest, that you can not hale them to your hell-paines, but by shamefull corrupting of their sentences, and wilfull misconstru∣ing the bodie for the soule? Defenc. pag. 113. li. 6. What is the separation of the deitie from his soule els but the death of his soule? ] Which of these Fathers doth auouch the separation of Christes deitie from his soule? Is it so small a mote in your eye, that Christes deitie was separated from his humane soule, that you may loosely and lightly surmise it by disordering and altering other mens words? At this speech of Ambrose you could not so grosly haue stumbled, had you but read the Master of the Sentences, who long since in one whole distinction of his third booke examined those words, and answered as the trueth is, that separation in that place was taken for want of protection, and withholding Christes power, whiles the bodie died. Sententiarum li. 3. dist. 21. Separauit se , subtraxu protectionem. Separauit se foris, vt non esset ad defensionem, sed non defuit ad vnionem. Si non ibi cohibuisset potenti∣am, sedexercuisset, non Christus. The deitie seuered it selfe, because it withdrew protection. It separated it selfe outwardly not to defend, but if failed not inwardly to continue the vnion. If it had not refrained, but exercised power, Christ could not haue died. Theodo∣ret calleth this dereliction, In Psal. 21. The permission of the deitie, that the humanitie might suffer. And Isychius sayth, in . li. 5. ca. 16. Diuinit as abijsse dicitur, cohibens propriam virtutem ex humanita∣te, vt daret spacium Passioni. Christs deitie is sayd to depart by withholding his owne power from his humanitie, that he might giue time to his Passion. Otherwise it is a certaine truth which ulgentius teacheth: Ad lib. 3. Licet in Christi morte carnem morie tem fuisset anima de∣sertura, diuinit as tamen Christi nec ab anima, nec à carne posset separari suscepta. Though in Christes death the soule were to forsake the bodie dying, yet the deitie of Christ could not be seuered from the soule, nor from the bodie once assumed. Defenc. pag. 113. li. 7. Howbeit note, I pray, that neither the Fathers nor I do meane any separating of the vni∣on of both natures in Christ, nor the separating of any holinesse or habituall grace of God from his soule, nor the separating of Gods loue from him, but the separation of all comfortable fee∣ling and assistance of the Godhead. This separation is meant and may be called the death of the soule. ] If you separate none of these, what then is it that you separate from the soule of Christ to proue it dead? [ All comfortable feeling and assistance of the Godhead. ] He knew himselfe to be personally God and man, he saw his soule full of all truth and grace, he was assured, the loue of God towards him could neither faile nor change; he knew that his obedience and sacrifice were acceptable to his Father, and should be the redemption of the world, and he was most certaine, that the third day he should rise againe into immortall and celestiall glory, hauing men, diuels and angels, euen all things in heauen and earth subiect to his manhood. Were all these no comforts? or was there no assistance of the Godhead in these? Nay take but your owne words a little before, that Christ on the crosse, euen when he complained of his forsaking, was in Pag. 110. li. 28. exceeding generall and constant ioy, and had as Dauid foreprophesied of him, 34. con∣stant and continuall ioy in God; was there no feeling of all this triumph and ioy so excee∣ding, constant, and continuall? May a man be so franticke, as to confesse that Christ felt all this, and yet to say he had no comfortable feeling? [ This may be called the death of the soule. ] To him that calleth light darknesse, good euill, faith feare, ioy discomfort, this may seeme death; which by all the rules of the sacred Scriptures is called the life of the soule heere on earth; but by no man that vnderstandeth or careth what he sayth, can this be called or defended to be the death of the soule. Defenc. pag. 113. . As it is life to the soule to feele and to enioy the glory of God, Psal: 16. 21. so it is death to feele the want and absence thereof vtterly. ] Hauing abused the Fathers at your pleasure you offer now the like, if not worse, to the Scriptures. The sixteenth Psalme vers: 11 not 21 as you quote it, sheweth vs, that there is a way to life reuealed here on earth, but the fulnesse of ioy is in Gods presence, when we shall behold his face, as the Angels doe in heauen. The way to life is grace, wherewith Christ was replenished from his mothers wombe, and in greater measure then all his members. For he had the full∣nesse thereof in this life, where the perfectest men haue but a measure thereof, and we Iohn 1. all haue receaued of his fulnesse. The plenty of pleasure, which is at Gods right hand, is euerlasting glory both of soule and body, into which Christ entred after his Resur∣rection. How doth this prooue, that Christs soule was dead during the time of his Pa sion? if a man would seeke out a place to confirme the contrarie, he cannot light on a better. For these words pertaining directly to Christ on the crosse conclude, that euen in the midst of his sufferings Psal 16. v. 11 the waies of life were made knowen to him by God, and that after his rising againe, God would Replenish him with the ioy of his coun∣tenance, which was euerlasting glory in the heauens. The one he possessed, the other was promised, more then which the soule of man cannot enioy in this life. Now ex∣cept this be your rage rather then your reason, that all mens soules are dead, till they come to behold God face to face in the heauens; I see not what you can hence collect touching the death of Christs soule. The contrarie may be soundly concluded out of this place. For the wayes of life were made knowen to him here on earth, and by him to all men liuing, since he prosessed himselfe to be the Iohn 14. Way, and the Truth, and the Life; and the promises of God to him as farre exceeded all honour and glory re∣serued for men, as it was possible for the head to excell his members. Defenc pag. 113 li. 1 . This heauenly life Christ tasted a while in his transsiguration, this death he felt besides his bodily death on the Crosse. If Christ neuer tasted an heauenly life but in his transfi∣guration, then all the time of his conuersing heere on earth he felt your hellish death, and not in his passion only: but what madnesse is this to affirme either of Christ, or of his members, that their soules are dead, till they come to behold Gods face in the glory of his Kingdome? If these be your best proofes for the death of Christs soule, heed you be not estr nged from the life of God through the ignorant wilfullnesse or your heart, that thus confound heauen and earth, life and death, to maintaine your fansies against both Fathers and Scriptures. But of the death of Christs soule we shall haue better occasion afterward to speake, when we come to handle it at large, where I will by Gods grace let the Reader see, how resolutely and absolutely the Fathers ioy∣ning with the Scriptures repell the death of Christs soule as a pestilent point of false doctrine; vnlesse we take it as a figuratiue kind of speach, which is nothing to the principles of our faith, nor to the true price of our Redemption, since we must not conuert the truth of Christ to figures and phrases. Defenc pag. 11. li . Your fourth exposition for any thing I see may be granted, for it seemeth to be the same in effect that we hold. ] If the fourth exposition be granted, then two of your chiefe of on the . grounds, on which you raise your hell paines suffered in the soule of Christ, vtterly sincke. For then Christ spake these words of his members, not of his owne person, and it was no such dolefull and vncomfortable mourning and his owne soule as you suppose, but a praier full of power, fauour, and grace; whereby the sonne of God auerted from vs the separation, that was betwixt God & vs, and made peace in heauen and earth, reconciling man to God, that before was forsaken of him. [ Pag. 113 li. 2 . Was it remooued from vs? then surely it was laid on some body els. Now that must needes be vpon himselfe. ] You fall to rouing in steed of reasoning. Euerlasting death and hell fire it selfe were remooued from vs. On whom then were they laid? Desperation, confusion, reiection were likewise remooued from vs. Were they therefore laid on Christ? of sinne, and corruption in the graue shalbe likewise remooued from vs. Were these also laid on Christes person, or did he suffer the very same, that we should? keepe such reasons for your hellish mysteries, they haue no force in true religion, nor I think with any sober or well aduised reasoner. The punishments of this life imposed on all mankind Christ suffered for vs, and by them freed vs from euerlasting damnation and destruction, which were the due wages of our sinnes. He therefore paied a price for vs, which was the shedding of his bloud vnto death on the Crosse, and by that ransomed vs from the captiuitie and miserie, that otherwise were appointed for sinne. Defenc. pag. 113. li. 30. Where you obiect Athanasius, that he could not be forsaken of his Father, who was al∣waies in his Father, it is meerely wrested. Athanasius speaketh against Arius also, that Christs deity could not be for saken of his Father, and so was not inferiour to his Father. ] What talke you of wresting, that neuer yet conceaued any Fathers words rightly, no more then you doe that of Athanasius, which I brought? You catch at a piece, and runne your way, as though you were cleerely acquited; but returne to the text, and looke on the rest with shame enough. Who was he, that spake those words, Why hast thou forsaken me? I trust he was the sonne of God, though now incarnate, who before his incarnation was equall with his father in the forme of God. Els Peter was much deceaued, when he said vnto him, that stood there in presence, Thou art the sonne of the liuing God; and Christ himselfe was more then deceaued, when he answered, Matth 16. Blessed art thou, for flesh and bloud hath not reuealed it vnto thee; but my Father which is in heauen. Then speaketh not Athanasius of Christs diuine nature, but of his person, which was Athanasius contra serm. 4. ALWAIES in his father, that is before he spake those words and after. And euen when he spake those words, the father declared, saith Athanasius, by the miracles presently following, that he was THEN ALSO in his sonne (incarnate,) as euer before. Doth not this directly conclude, that Athanasius intended God was in the speaker of those words, euen when he spake them, and that at no time the father forsooke the person incarnate, no not when he spake those words, since God to shew that he had not forsaken him, who then spake vnto him, made heauen and earth to witnesse, how much he esteemed the person, that so complained? Defenc pag. 113. li. 35. Touching Christs humanity Athanasius denieth not, but God might for sake it: for so the Scripture saith. ] The question is not for the word, but for the sense. You finding the word of forsaking to be vsed in the Scripture, put what sense you list to it, and thence would prooue the death of Christs soule with as strange positions, as the maine error it selfe. For you grant Christs manhood was not forsaken neither of Gods FA OVR, nor GRACE, nor of continuall and constant ioy in God, much lesse of What contrarie∣ties the Defen∣der is driuen to. the fulnesse of Gods spirit, which rested on him; and yet you say, he died the death of the soule for want of comsort. As if there were no comfort neither in the grace, nor in the fauour of God, nor in the ioies of his spirit, nor in the hope of his promises, all which were most assured to him to the highest degree, that any creature was capa∣ble of. Did you meane, that he had no ease of his paines, nor end of reproches, whiles he liued, as also no deliuerance from the hands of his persecutors, nor protection from death, all these might be borne with, since the Scriptures giue manifest testimo∣ny, that these things he suffered till he died; but these things, that are true, will not serue your turne, you vrge his soule died: because he had no heauenly life, such as he tasted in his transfiguration, where Matth. 17. his face did shine as the , and the clothes were as white as the light, which prooueth his soule to be no more dead in his passion, then it was all his life long besids, and that will no man in his right wits auouch of Christ, or of his Saints here in earth. Defenc pag. 114. li. 1. & 4. Your fift exposition is Leos conceit, without warrant, farre fetcht, hardly applied. Origen is also here as weake. ] Pricke on in your pride, despising all the world besids your selfe, and skorning euery mans opinion, that hitteth not right with your fansie; though The fift sense of Christes com∣plaint on the crosse. few men speake or write so absurdly, and falsly as you doe. Leos exposition vtterly subuerteth your hellish assertion, and that maketh you fling it away with such disdaine as you doe. Otherwise it hath more vicinity with the circumstances of the text, then yours by many degrees. For there is nothing in Leos interpretation, which accor∣deth not with the Christian faith, and hath his foundation in the very words of the sacred Scriptures; in both which your hellish and harrish application faileth. He saith; Leo de Pass. Dom. serm. 16. Vox ista doctrina est, non querela; those words were an instruction, not a lamentation. And his reason is past your refuting. Cum in Christo Dei & hominis vna sit persona, nec potuerit ab eo relinqui, à quo non poterat separari, pro nobis trepidis & infirmis interrogat, cur caro pati metuens ex audita non fuerit. Since in Christ there was but one person of God and man, & he could not be for saken of him, from whom he could not be seuered, he ASKETH for our sakes, that are fearefull and weake, why flesh fearing to suffer was not heard. Which of these things can you refell with all the witte in your head? the coniunction and communion of both natures in one person of Christ you were not best meddle with, lest you sowe damnable heresies as thicke, as you haue done notable absurdities. He saith further, Cur for quare, and non exandities for relictus. Aske the Boyes in Pauls schoole, what difference betwixt cur and quare, both signifying WHY, and being both interrogatiues, as Leo rightly obserueth, concurring with that of Saint Austen, who said, as we haue heard before, August. epist. 120. Causam commonuit requirendam, cum addidit, vt quid dereliquistime. Christ warned (them) to search for the cause, when he added, WHY HAST THOV FORSAKEN ME? His exposition of the word forsaking, he taketh out of the very Psalme, whence Christ cited the rest. For so Dauid ioined them together. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? and art so farrc from saui g (or deliuering) me. I crie by day, and thou hearest not. So that not to heare, and not to deliuer, is the for a∣king which Dauid ment in that place, and which in all likelihood our Sauiour inten∣ded, (as Saint Austen thinketh) if he spake of his owne person. August. Ibid. Quare me dereliquisti, tanquam diceret, relinquendo me, hoc est, non me exaudiendo, longè factus es à salute mea, praesenti scilicet salute huius vitae. Why hast thou forsaken me, as if he should haue said, lea∣uing me, that is, not hearing me, thou art farre from sauing me, to wit from the present safety of this life. So saith Leo. De Passione serm. 16. In ipso tantae victoriae exaltatus triumpho, causam & rationem, qua sit relictus, id est, non exauditus, inquirit. Christ exalted in the triumph of so great a victory, inquireth the cause & reason why he is forsaken, that is, not heard. The reason ther∣of he giueth soberly, learnedly, and truely, howsoeuer your humour like it not. Idem de Pass. Dom. serm. 17. That the Lord should be deliuered to his passion, it was as well his Fathers will, as is owne; vt non solum Pater relinqueret, sed etiam ipse se quadam ratione desereret; That not only the father might leaue him, but that after a sort he should forsake himselfe, not by any fearefull shrincking, but by a voluntary cession. For the power of Christ crucisied conteined it selfe from those wicked ones, and to performe his secret disposition, he would not vse any manifest power. He that came by his passion to destroy death, and the author of death, how should he saue sinners if he would haue resisted his pursuers? And touching that kind of forsaking, which you dreame of, he saith; Ibidem. Iud orum hoc fuerit, vt Iesum crederent a Deo relictum, in quem tanto scelere saeuire potuissent, qui sacrilega illusione dicebant, alios saluos fecit, seipsum non potest saluum facere. Let vs leaue this to the Iewes, to thinke Christ forsaken of God, on whom they could execute their rage with such wickednesse; who sacriligiously deriding him saied, he saued others, he cannot saue himselfe. He was then forsaken of his father, when he was deliuered into the hands of the wicked, that is, he was not defended from them; yea he would forsake himselfe, that is, he would vse no manifest power against them, but willingly yeelded himselfe into their hands to suffer what they would. This is the for∣saking, saith Leo, which the Scripture alloweth. That other sort of forsaking, that God indeed had left him & would not help him in his good time, that is rather the perfidi∣ousnesse of the Iewes, which obiected so much vnto him, then the faith of Christians. Origen, you say, is here as weake; ] and why? because you say the word? you take vp∣on you like a Iudge to set downe your vnwise censure on euery mans words, you take not the paines to refute them by any colour or shew of reason. Origen saith, that Orig n Matth. . 35. Christ was forsaken of his Father, when he tooke vnto him the forme of a seruant, and came to the death of the crosse, which amongest men seemed most shamefull. Then maiest thou plainly vnderstand, what he ment, when he sayd, why hast thou forsaken me; comparing that glory, which he had with his Father, to this shame, which he despised enduring the Crosse. Tell vs not what you will mislike, but what you can refute in this saying. And since you require the reasons of all other mens speaches, and thinke your selfe priuiledged to speake without all reason, what say you, which was the greater abasing or forsaking, for God to lay aside the power and glory of his maiesty and to take vnto him the shape of a seruant, and therein to die the shamefull death of the crosse; or for man to want comfort in his affliction? which was the greater emptying, or humbling himselfe in Christ? If Origen in this point be weake, the Apostle is as weake, who nameth this as the greatest Phil. 2. EXINANITION, that Christ endured; saying, he being in the forme of God (that is equall with God) emptied himselfe, and tooke on him the forme of a seruant, and humbled himselfe, and became obedient to the death, euen the death of the Crosse. Origen goeth right with the Apostles words, and saith this was the greatest dereliction, or hu∣miliation that Christ suffered; and before you can with any reason controle this speach you must correct the Apostles text, and in steed of the death of the Crosse, put in the death of the damned, which is a mystery the apostle neuer heard, nor spake of. Origen therefore concludeth. Origen. v supra. Vnde non estimes more humano Saluatorem ista propter , quae comprehenderat eum in cruce. Wherefore thinke not our Sauiour spake this after the m ner of men for the calamity, which apprehended him on the crosse. For so if take it, thou shalt not seeke for things worthy his diuine voice. Defenc. pag. 114. li. 6. Also these senses be contrary to all the rest here obserued. ] If they were, what is that to the goodnesse of your cause? Is it such newes, that diuers men should make senses of some places in holy Scriptures? If there be so abundant and different mea∣nings of these wordes, then your conclusion of hell-paines out of that complaint is more than crackt. What warrant haue you, but your owne will, to make any such construction of Christes words? And the word forsaking hauing so many degrees, respects, and diuersities, as wee see by these learned Fathers, you must proclaime your selfe more than a Patriarke, euen a Pope, that must haue, and will haue the sense of holy Scripture shut vp in the closet of your owne brest, before your inference of hell∣paines suffered in the soule of Christ will be consequent to these words. Defenc pag. 114. li. 7. Your sixth and last sense is likewise contrary to the rest, and as improbable in it selfe (or more) than the former: That Christ should here cite the beginning of that Psalme, onely to shew the Iewes, that their wrongs towards him were prophesied of before. This alreadie I The sixt sense of Christs com∣plaint on the crosse. fully answered, which you refute not. ] What should I refute a brainsicke Presumer of his owne ignorant conceit, and a proud despiser of all other mens words and reasons? This, you say, you haue alreadie fullie answered in your Treatise.] If you had sayd foolely, I might the sooner haue beleeued you: for what is there in that answere, but extreame pride and follie? All your answere is, Trea. pa. 66. li 31. Which sense is most absurd. What patch can not presently giue this answere to any thing? But more fully, you say, Ibid pag. 67. li. 7. This is too fond to be spoken. Such liquor doth rellish well your lippes. All mens sayings are fond to a foole, saue his owne, which are most foolish of all. I brought you the iudge∣ments of Ierom and Chrysostom, and all the answere you vouchsafed vnto them, is that which I now repeat; which whether it sauour of any sobrietie, I relinquish to the Reader. [But you adde a reason thereof in your Treatise.] Such as would make a man sicke to heare an idle companion prate so boldly and loosely. Your reason for∣sooth is, for so you will haue it called; [ Ibid. pag. 66. li. 32. As if when they had mocked and reuiled him at noone or before, he would then three whole houres after tell them of such an answere in the Prophet. ] As if you stood by and kept the Register, when they left mocking and de∣riding Christ on the crosse. That he was crucified about mid-noone, and spake these words about the ninth houre, which was three of the clocke after noone, the Scrip∣ture doth witnesse, but how long they continued their scorning and scoffing at him, no Scripture doth limit. Saint Matthew nameth the high Matth. 27. vers 41. Priests with the Scribes, El∣ders and Pharises, the . that were crucified with him, and such as . passed by reui∣led him, wagging their eads, and . saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three dayes, saue thy selfe. If thou be the Sonne of God, come downe from the crosse. S. Luke addeth, That Luc. 22. v. 35. the people which stood and beheld, mocked him, as well as the Rulers, and the souldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vineger. How long this con∣tinued from all sorts standing and passing by, if you take vpon you to tell, you must consult with Balaams beast; for no man can tell you, vnlesse you finde by the starres how long that sturre dured. For my part I thinke, as they were neuer satisfied with his torments, so neuer left they taking all occasions to deride him, as we may perceiue by the very speaking of these words; vpon which some sayd, Let be, Let vs see if Eli∣as will come and saue him. Now if the very passengers did not refraine their tongues from on him, shal we thinke the standers by did so quickly leaue with mouth to , heart to disdaine him, and condemne him as forsaken of God, in the midst of so many shames and miseries? And the poison of their hearts accounting him to be wicked and reiected of God, was the thing which Christ respected, as well as the of their tongues. But what if their mocks did cease at twelue of the clocke, as you presume with out all good ground, might not Christ therefore in this their words and hatefull thoughts three houres after, when now he was to giue vp the ghost, though whiles life did last, he was content with all quietnesse and silence to endure them? Was it so fond and absurd as you talke of, to them with the beginning of that Psalme, that all these things which he had suffered, and they had vsed towards him, were foreprophesied of the Messias and Sauiour of the world? Who but a man destitute of wit or sense would giue such entertainment to two so learned and ancient Fathers for so saying? Defenc. pag. 114. li. 16. Your authorities are bare arguments. Ierom bringeth no reason, but his owne word. I see not what he sayth to your purpose at all. ] Your absurdities and contra∣rieties hatcht out of your owne head are farre worse arguments. Ieroms bare word is as good as your bare will, or bold face, in any place in Christendome. Howbeit, Ie∣rom is not alone in this minde: S. Austen sayth, August. epist. 120. Psalmum, cuius prophetiam ad se demonstrans, cius primum versum exclamauit, cum pend ret in ligno. To shew the prophesie of that Psalme to perteine to him, the Lord repeated the first verse thereof with a loud voice as he hung on the crosse. [You see not how Chrysostome maketh to this purpose. Christ spake these wordes, sayth Chrysostome, that thereby the Iewes might learne he honoured his Father to the last breath, and that (his Father) was no x . in Matth. . . to him. Therefore he spake the Prophets words, confirming the ancient Scripture, that they might perceiue him to be of the same will with his Father. Had he beene forsaken his Father, and conuicted thereof by his owne confession, as you interpret Christs words, he had declared by his speech, his Father to be an aduersarie to him, since to is no signe of loue, but of dislike. But he spake these words of the Prophet, to proue that his Father was not opposite to him, but of the same will with him. What els can Chrysostome meane by this, but that the Prophet by this Psalme foreshewed the Sonne of God and Sauiour of the world should speake these words on the crosse, and thereby not only affirme, that God was his God, and not his aduersarie, but ratifie the ancient Scripture, euen that whole Psalme, as forespoken of him; whereby the Iewes might plainely learne, that nothing befell him, which the Prophet in that Psalme did not before declare should befall the true Messias and Sauiour of the world. Defenc. pag. 114. li. . Finally, these kindes of dereliction which you mention besides, pag. 32, 33, 38, &c. are nothing sitter than the former. ] You sit like a supreame Iudge ouer Fathers and Scrip∣tures, and cassiere all besides your owne conceits, vpon the warrant of your owne will, without any farther trouble or proofe. It is vrged in those pages which you passe ouer, that forsaking thorowout the Scriptures neuer signifieth the state or paines of the damned. You care not for that, your will must haue way, and your word must stand. It is there also auouched, that whensoeuer the godly complaine in the Scrip∣tures, as they often doe, that they are forsaken; they meane of helpe in time of need, and of deliuerance in the day of trouble. Nor Scriptures nor Fathers haue any pow∣er to preuaile against your pleasure, you will haue forsaking in Christes words to note the paines of the damned, though there be no example thereof in any diuine or hu∣mane writings. You are belike some Praetor or some Pilate, that what you haue writ∣ten, you haue written, and other reason you will yeeld none. Defenc pag. 114. li. 22. Six or seuen diuers yea contrary senses you haue brought of a few words, and of them all you say, they are all godly expositions, and all these interpretations are sound, and stand well with the rules of Christian pietie. How sound and fit they are, it hath beene scene. ] And what haue you found in any of them dissonant from the rules of Christian pietie, for which I commended them? They fit not your fansie, I know it well; but they swarue neither from the faith of Christ, nor from the word of God. For where all good Ex∣positions The true rules how to expound the Scriptures. should haue these foure conditions; the right vse of the words, the circum∣stances of the place, the coherence with other Scriptures, and concordance with the maine grounds of pietie and charitie, which by no pretence of any speech in Scrip∣ture may be impugned; these expositions of the ancient Fathers transgresse in none of them. And where the Iewes falsely, wickedly, and blasphemously obiected to Christ, that he was forsaken of God, you out of the abundance of your wit and faith, will haue Christ on the crosse publikely and plainly to confesse and confirme their sa∣crilegious obiections, and to iustifie their impietie for trueth, by acknowledging with a loud voice, that he was forsaken of God. A worse exposition than which, the diuell himselfe could not deuise. For whatsoeuer was inwardly betweene him and his Fa∣ther, he would neuer so openly ratifie their impious and slanderous cogitations and imputations with his owne mouth, nor leaue such a confession presently before his death in the eares and hearts of all his enemies, as that he found himselfe to be truely and inwardly forsaken of God; but rather calling that a forsaking, which they mis∣construed to be so, he complained that God had so long with such patience left him in their hands without any shew as yet of loue and fauour towards him, which made his enemies thinke God had indeed forsaken him. Defenc pag. 114. li. 26. Verily you haue a good head, if you can reconcile all these, and make them stand toge∣ther. ] Doth any man, that hath so much as a head, require to haue all expositions re∣conciled, before they may be tolerated? When they are diuers, the Reader may make his choise what he best liketh; but there is no cause nor reason to reiect all that can not be reconciled. Neither did I tell you, they might all stand together; but I sayd they stood well with the rules of Christian pietie. And since they had in them no contradiction to the text, nor to the faith, I saw no ground to depriue the Reader of them, much lesse to reiect or disdaine the authours of them, as you do. And yet tru∣ly it were no such hard matter, as you imagine, to make the substance of them stand together. For why might not Christ on the crosse, as the head and Sauiour of his bo∣die, in his owne name make his complaint, or inquire the cause why both he and his were so long and in this wise forsaken; as namely, the head to be left to the paine, shame and death of the crosse, and his members to the poison of sinne, and rage of Satan: and therefore pray that his members might be freed and restored to Gods fa∣uour, and himselfe be eased of his anguish with deposing his spirit into his Fathers hands, and honoured with the signes of his Fathers loue and liking towards him, when he should depart this life, that all his enemies might know there was a great and good cause, euen the glory of God and mans saluation, why he was thus martyred and mocked on the crosse? Here are the effects of those sixe or seuen causes layd to∣gether; what so great repugnancie finde you betwixtthem, that because they are manie, therefore your hell-paines should be the likelier to be the true meaning of these words? Defenc. pag. 114. li. 27. A very badde opinion of the holy Scriptures you seeme to haue, if you thinke they may be handled by Interpretations and Expositions thus, that a man may take them in sixe or seuen diuers senses, and all sustisiable. ] I honour them more in not reiecting the manifolde expositions of considerate and godly Interpreters, than you do in fastening them to the leauen of your sower humour, and affixing such senses to them, as shall contradict the maine grounds of faith and religion deliuered in them. And who but you, did euer hinder Expositors olde or new, to labour in them, and scant to reach to the depth of them; since, as you seeme to be affected, no man may offer diuersly to interpret them for feare of hauing a badde opinion of them? But such is your stiffe and proud presumption, all things that like not you, are vaine and friuolous; and your fansies, be they neuer so vnreasonable or irreligious, must be weighty and holy. Defenc. pag. 114. li. 34. Now it resteth, that I gather some reasons from the expresse Scripture, to shew you that indeed very paines, and the vehemencte of sorrowes, namely, which he now susteined by way of yeelding satisfaction and sacrifice for sinne, were the principall and only proper cause of his most dreadfull agonies and complaint. Which trucly though it need no reason for proofe of it (the matter being so cleere in it selfe) yet your vnreasonablenesse is such, that it draweth somewhat from me about it. Your Art of carping hath fayed but ill-fauouredly with you; you will now proceed to your trade of prouing, and that by expresse Scripture: wherein you shew your selfe to be right your selfe, that is, take all your owne fansies for expresse Scripture, and though your conceits be such, that are more worthy to be derided than answered; yet the matter, you say, is so cleere in it selfe, that it needeth no reason for proofe of it. The expresse Scriptures on which you so much stand, are the name of the Agonie, the Houre, and the Cuppe, with this one sentence, My soule is on euery side heauy vnto death. About these you brabble, going neither backeward nor forward, but heaping vp a few generall phrases of mightie sorowes and excessiue paines, you iterate the very same that you often sayd before, and adde not so much as a piece of a reason, that should stumble a man of any vnderstanding. And touching your hell paines, or the second death, you lay that on soaking till your proouing be ouerpast, and then we shall heare of it at Lands end, when you are lightned of your burden. Defenc. pag. 115. li 3. First no Christian doubteth ( I suppose ) much lesse denieth that Christs most wofull ago∣nies and complaining, belonged properly and directly to his Passion and sacrifice: and that they expressed a part thereof, yea as I thinke not the least part, but his whole sacrifice consisted in afflictions. The prince of our saluation was consecrated through afflictions. Therefore, afflictions, sorrowes and paines were the cause of his agonies and complaint: not his religious The Defenders maner of rea∣soning is as illo∣gical as his mat∣ter is false. feare, not his piette or pitie. ] Somewhat it was, this gecre was Drawen from you; it commeth not so vnwillingly, but it commeth as vntowardly from you. First to the forme, and then to the matter of your argument. Your conclusion is a strange kind of creature, it hath to much, and yet it hath too little. For before you can exclude religious feare, pittie and pietie from the cause of Christs agonie or complaint, you must adde ( onely ) to your inference, and say, Afflictions, sorrowes, and paines, were the onely cause of Christs agonies and complaint. Otherwise with one part you exclude another, as if a man would say, that your head is not part of your bodie, because your heele is; which would put all your reasons in daunger to be drawen out of your heele, and not out of your head. And yet as defectiue as your conclusion is one way, it is as exces∣siue another way. For these words ( were the cause ) are stollen into this conclusion, of which there was no mention in your premisses; and so your precedent propositions are of one countrey, and your conclusion of another, they haue not so much as en∣tercourse eche with other; where by the rules of reason and Art, there should be no∣thing in your conclusion, which is not exactly specified in your premisses. Your maior beginneth with ( belonged to ) your minor proceedeth to ( consisted in ) and your conclusion huddleth ( was the cause of ) which are rather like forkes to skatrer, then rakes to gather the parts of your syllogisme together. If to hale in your conclu∣sion, you will amend your assumption, as you must; and say, that afflictions were the onely cause of Christs sacrifice, we shall more wonder at this monster, then at the for∣mer. For besides the falsenesse of it, in that it is vtterly repugnant to all truth, since the causes of Christs sacrifice, were sinne in vs, needing it, Loue in Christ proferring it, and Iustice in God requiring it; how come the parts of any thing to be the causes thereof? Afflictions suffered were parts of Christs sacrifice, and not the causes. And therefore you must pray the Printer to stampe you a new conclusion before any part of this argument will haue passage. The premisses be as good, as the conclusion. For they haue neither any certainety nor veritie in them. [ Christs agonies and complaint belonged directly, you say, to his Pas∣sion and Sacrifice. ] Belonged, what is that? as an Antecedent, Adiunct, or Consequent? as a necessary, or a voluntarie pertinent? It will be long before you draw any good conclusion from this belonging. Againe, Christs agony, if you take it for all that Christ did or suffered in the Garden, how diuers and how different parts had it, as inward affections of feare and sorrow, desire, and zeale; humble, often, and intentiue prayer, besides the comfort of an Angell, and sweate like blood, and sundry other things which I haue mentioned before? all these belonged directly to Christs action in the Garden. Wherefore hereafter, afore you professe such cleerenesse in your reasons, either vsesuch words as the Scripture doth, or foretell vs how farre you extend, and what you intend by the words which you bring. Your minor is worse where you say [ but Christs whole Sacrifice consisted in afflictions. ] For where is the puritie of the Sacri∣fice, which must be vnspotted; the dignitie, which must counteruaile the offence; the voluntarie presenting thereof to God, that it might be accepted as meritorious, and not inflicted as ignominious? yea, where is the Sanctification of this Sacrifice, which required not onely prayer, but pietie and charitie, as also humilitie to commend it to God? All these things were in Christs Sacrifice, as chiefe and maine respects; which you haue blotted out with expressely falsifying the Scriptures, to make roome onely for hell paines. For though we haue no doubt, but God in his secret wisedome and iustice did Hebr. 2. consecrate the prince of our saluation through afflictions, yet the Scripture sayth not wholy, or onely through afflictions, as if neither sanctitie, nor submission, nor pietie, nor pitie, nor obedience, nor willingnesse, nor any thing else were requisite, but on∣ly to suffer affliction. The Scripture fairely intendeth, that God, who had tried the obedience of his Sonne in all kind of holinesse and righteousnesse, would now trie him by affliction, that the perfection of his graces and gifts might be sacred, and shewed to the vttermost in these things, wherein it is hardest for the nature of man quietly and willingly to endure the hand of God. Therefore God would also con∣secrate the prince of our saluation by affliction, but not onely by that, as if nothing else were needefull in the author of our saluation, but onely affliction; which asser∣tion hath in it an heape of huge absurdities and impieties. This is your drawing of ex∣presse Scriptures to serue your vnlearned and vnsetled fansies, that where you would professe to be strongest, there euery child may perceiue you to be weakest. Defenc. pag. 115. li. 11. If you say these were afflictions in him, I answere, they properly belonged to his holinesse as parts thereof, and were not immediatly, directly, nor properly in him as the wages and price of sinne. ] You be soone wearie of your proofes, that you since come to your answeres, and there in steede of trueth you runne for refuge to your wonted termes, of immedi∣ately, directly and properly, as the wages and price of sinne. But leaue your termes for an∣other time, and shew vs some proofe besides your owne preface, that either the sacri∣fice for sinne might haue nothing in it but onely afflictions, or that the religious feare of Gods power and wrath against sinne, and hartie sorrow for displeasing God with our sinnes, are no afflictions, or no necessarie parts of Christs sacrifice for sinne. For if you faile in those, your great promises of cleere cases & expresse Scriptures, are idle and emptie florishes. Your replying, that these properly belonged to his holinesse, as parts thereof, is meere trifling. For Christs affections and submission in all his sufferings, were parts of his holinesse, neither could any paines make any impressions on his soule, were they neuer so grieuous, which were not also religious. And so much the very words, which you bring in fauour of your cause, confirme. For God did conse∣crate him through afflictions to be the prince of our saluation. What is consecration by God, but holinesse deriued from God, and accepted of God? if then Christ were consecra∣ted by his asflictions, they wrought no impressions, nor af ections in his soule, but such as were SACRED and religious. Yf you doubt, whether the parts of holinesse may be painefull and greeuous vnto the soule of man, looke either on repentance, compassion, zeale or charity in vs, and see whether as well in our owne causes as in other mens, they may not be painefull and greeuous to the mind, euen when they be also faithfull & religious. Repentance doth or should worke in vs an inward, earnest, and harty sorrow, that we haue dis∣pleased and prouoked God with our sinnes. I aske whether penitent sorow be not painfull, because it is religious and faithfull? Were it not painfull, it were no sorow, much lesse repentance, or an acceptable sacrifice to God. Psal. 51. A troubled spirit is a sacri∣fice to God, a broken hart thou (God) wilt not despise. When we do voluntarily afflict our owne soules, because we haue displeased him, he is pleased in mercy 1. Corin. 11. vers. 31. not to iudge vs, since we iudge our selues. Saint Iames saith, Iam. 4. v. 9. Clense your hands ye sinners, and purge your harts ye wauering minds; be afflicted (inwardly in soule) and sorow and weepe; he mean∣eth in respect of their continuall and manifold sinnes. Is this asfliction and sorow not greeuous to men, because it is religious? [It is no punishment of sinne, you will say. Saint Austen saith it is, whose iudgement I farre preferre before yours. Psal. 90. Iniqui∣tas i August. in Psalm. 58. omnis magnaue sit, puniatur necesse est; aut ab ipso homine poenitente, aut a Deo indicante. Nam & quem poenitet panit seipsum. Prorsus aut , aut . Vis non puniat, puni tu. All iniquity, be it little or great, of necessity must be punished, either by man repenting, or by God reuenging. For he that repenteth, punisheth himselfe. Certainly then either thou must punish it, or God will punish it. Wilt thou not haue him to punish? punish it thy selfe. Then in vs sorow for sinne is a voluntary, but a holy punishment of sinne, and is in all the godly both grieuous and religious, and the more grieuous the more reli∣gious. Since then voluntary sorow for sinne committed, which is repentance, is an higher and acceptabler sacrifice to God then vengeance, shall we thinke, that our Sauiour, who was to yeeld God his due for vs in all things agreeable to his person, Inward and vo∣luntarie sorrow of the soule is a sacrifice to God. did omit this excellent sacrifice of inward and infinite sorow, for that our sinnes so much displeaseth the holin sse of God, and that it was not grieuous to him, because it was religious in him? It work th both in vs; and why should either want in him, who was farre better able to p rforme both, then we are? the like I say of the feare of Gods wrath when we haue prouoked it. We ought not only to reuerence that most excellent maiesty, but when we haue sinned, to feare and tremble before that power, which can doe with vs what he will. And though we hope in his mercy, yet that doth not breed any neglect of his power, which if we doe not feare, when we haue prouo∣ked, we doe despice. And therefore Moses giueth this for a rule of true deuotion and submission vnder the mighty hand of God; Who knoweth the power of thy wrath? for according to thy feare, (that is as thou art feared) so is thine anger. The lighter ac∣count we make of his anger, the heauier shall his hand be to vs. The more we feare it without distrust, the lesse we shall feele it. For submission and sorow doe mitigate the wrath of God, which carelessenesse and contempt do aggrauate. Since then no man knew the power of Gods wrath against sinne so perfectly, as Christ did; and yet the infinitenesse of Gods power did passe the reach of Christs humane soule to compre∣hend, why might not the manhoode of Christ yeld greater feare and trembling to the power of Gods wrath against our sinne, for which he was to satisfie, then all men li∣uing were able to do, and yet together with the fearefull impression thereof retaine a religious submission thereto? In compassion, when we feare for other mens dangers, or grieue for other mens harmes, is not this affection painfull to vs, because it proceedeth from mercy, and is aff iction, thogh it be a vert e. pity in vs? are you so hard harted, as well as hie minded, sir defendour, that you were neuer touched nor troubled with the sense of other mens miseries? Iob. 30. Did I not weepe saith Iob, with him that was in trouble? Was not my soule in heauinesse for the poore? When the Apostle willeth vs to Rom. 12. mourne with them, that mourne; Doth he meane we should make a pastime of it, because it is an affection of mercy and charity? Doth not daily experience teach vs, how much the miseries of those, whom we dearly loue do bite & pinch vs? Can we forget Dauids 2. Sam. 19. ver. 1. & 4. affection aud affliction for Absolon? Doth not the Scripture describe all naturall mothers in those words.? Matt. 2. v. 18. In Rama was a voice heard; mourning and weeping, and great Lamentation: Rachel weeping for her children, & would not be comforted, because they were not. In godly zeale and care we shall find the like. 2. Cor. 11. Who is weake, saith the Apostle, and I am not (as) weake? who is offended, and I burne not? yea the Psal. 69. zeale of thine house hath consumed me, saith Dauid. Then are feare and sorow proceeding either from piety or charity no whit the lesse grieuous, because The highest de∣grees of religi∣ous feare and sorow were in Christ. they are religious, but rather the more inwardly we are touched with either, the more acceptable is that affection to God, specially when it concerneth his owne power or honor. And consequently as the highest degrees of religious feare and sorow were in Christ at the time of his propitiating the holinesse and iustice of God for our sinns, so were they in him as sharpe and painfull, as any his afflictions, which otherwise he felt in his body. Defenc. pag. 115. li. 15. That these should or could afflict Christ so much aboue his strength and patience, is more then strange. Easily they might aboue his strength, since he would vse no strength, but weakened himselfe of purpose to feele the smart and burden of our sinnes; but not a∣boue his patience, since he did not repine at any of these, but requested by praier to haue the punishment of our sinne proportioned to the weaknesse of his humane flesh, considering the infinite power of Gods wrath most iustly prouoked by our sinnes. Defenc. pag. 115. li. 17. It were no vertue but sinne in any, to giue way to our affections (though about good things) immoderately beyond our patience and strength of nature. ] It is no sinne, but vertue, to presse both our strength and patience to the vttermost for Gods glory in things com∣manded by him. As in louing God, Bernardus de diligendo Deo. modus est sine modo diligere, the measure is to loue him without measure; so in all the dueties which God requireth, the most that we can doe is not too much. Feare and sorrow then, which are, as the Apostle speaketh, 2. Corin. 7. vers. 10. , according to God, or for God, that is, obedient to Gods will, are neuer im∣moderate, neither bring they danger of life, or defect of grace, as worldly feare and sorow do. But how commeth your disc etion to charge Christes affections with im∣moderation? For your hell-paines you are content to plunge his bodie, and chiefly his soule into astonished and all comfortlesse confusion; and for submission to God, and confession and apprehension of the iustnesse and greatnesse of his anger against our sinnes, you will not giue him leaue being our Agent and Intercessour in his owne per∣son to present that to God, which is due from vs and for vs; euen inward sorrow for Gods iust displeasure, and an humble feare of his mightie power, thereby to honour the one and preuent the other, when he now addressed himselfe to make full satisfa∣ction for our sinnes. Defenc. pag. 115. li. 19. Though they somewhat molest the minde, yet in trueth they are most pleasing and de∣lightfull to good men, not tedious, much lesse painfull vnto death. ] The Apostle himselfe answereth this obiection, and telleth you, that Heb. 11. no chastisement FOR THE PRE∣SENT seemeth to be ioyous, but grieuous; yet AFTERVVARD it bringeth the quiet fruit of righteousnesse to them that are thereby exercised. Our Sauiour by this example teacheth the same: Verily, Iohn 16. Verily I say vnto you, ye shall weepe and lament, but your so∣row shall be turned into ioy. A woman when she trauelleth hath sorrow because her houre is come; but as soone as she is deliuered of the childe, she remembreth no more the anguish, for ioy that a man is borne into the world. To say that paine is pleasure, and sorrow is de∣lightfull, fighteth against Nature, Scripture, and euen against common sense; but God doth diuersly comfort the affliction of his Saints with ending, easing, or other∣wise recompensing them, whereby the faithfull 2. Cor. 4. faint not, though their outward man pe∣rish, because our light affliction, which is for a moment, worketh to vs a farre exceeding and euerlasting weight of glorie. Though then our Sauiour was on euery side pressed with sundry sorowes, which would not end but in his death, yet that doth not proue them to be either irreligious, or vtterly comfortlesse, since Heb. 12. for the ioy that was set before him, he endured the crosse, and despised the shame; and Reuel. 3. ouercomming sitteth with his Father in his throne. By which confession of our Sauiours we must learne, that he vsed no power to repell or rebate his paines, but that he had as sensible and tender feeling of all his sufferings in the weaknesse of his flesh, which he with obedience and patience subiected to that burden, as any man could haue, and rather more, in that he willingly layd aside his strength, whiles he suffered for sinne. Defenc. pag. 115. li. 21. You do very ill to make these parts of Christs holinesse proper parts of his satisfaction, and the maine causes of his agonie and complaint. And woorse you doe, if you ascribe them not to any paines in him at all. ] And what doe you to acknowledge no cause in Christ of his complaint or agonie, neither religious, nor naturall, but only the paines of hell; and to seuer the inward sacrifice of an afflicted spirit from the outward sacrifice of his bo∣die, for the purgation of our sinnes, since he wanted in no point that was required or accepted of God, but yeelded that to him, which was due from vs, in farre more ex∣cellent and perfect maner than we can comprehend? It is therefore voluntary blind∣nesse and deafenesse in you, to shut eyes and eares at all sorts of religious sorowes and feares, when you reade that Christ feared and sorowed in the Garden, and so to pitch on the paines of the damned, which haue no witnesse in holy writ, that nothing can remoue you or content you, but your owne conceit. Defenc. pag. 115. li. 25. Secondly, the summe of these fore-noted texts must be considered, namely, that Christ expresly wished sundry times in his dreadfull astonishment, suddenly euen against Gods knowen will in one respect: and here are expressed (with his strange astonishment) his migh∣tie sorowes, and feare of them partly felt, and partly further to come. ] After a large promise of cleere proofs and expresse Scriptures for so great and weighty matters as these are, you trole out your owne false and absurd conceits no way gathered from the Scrip∣tures, but violently vrged on them with more rage than reason, and now so often re∣futed, that a man would be wearic, if not ashamed, to spend so much time in these idle repetitions of the selfe-same misapprehensions and misconstructions of some words of the Euangelist. The summe of all these fore-noted texts is, that the Euangelists say, Christ professed his soule was heauie vnto death; that the Apostle addeth, he was heard in that he feared, that himselfe on the crosse sayd, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. All these places are already handled and cleered, and no paines of the damned or of the second death found any thing neere to any of these words. What meaneth then this importunitie to obtrude them againe as fresh and new proofes, without any farder paines bestowed on them, then bar ly the rep ating of? only two poisened rootes you haue added to them out of your owne store, the one is the dread∣full and strange astonishment during all the time of Christs praier in the Garden; the o∣ther is the sundry suddaine wishes of Christ in that astonishment euen against Gods knowen will, which things, as your maner is, you proue by your owne authority painting them out with dreadfull, strange, and mighty words, when your proofes be weake and child∣ish. That Christ praied suddainly and sundry times against the knowen will of God, is a false and wicked position, and as directly repugnant to the Scriptures, as any thing may be. Saint Luke saith his praier was Luc. 22. v. 42 Father, if thou wilt, take away this cup from me; And the Apostle saith, he was heard, in that he feared. So that not only you auouch this thing against expresse Scripture, but you bring the sonne of God within the com∣passe of vnaduised and faithlesse praiers, which you excuse with as false and lewd a de∣uice, because he was past sense and memory what he did: whereas he well remembred, mentioned, and reserued his fathers will in his praiers, and warned his Apostles to Matth. 26. watch and pray, that they entred not into temptation; and constantly continued his praiers, till he was Luc. 22. comforted by an Angell from heauen, and Heb. 5. heard in that he eared. As for his astonishment, neither doe the words vsed by the Euangelist Saint Mark import any such strange and dreadsull want of sense and memory, as you imagine; neither doe the consequents declare any such continuance, as you pretend; but in both these you prescribe your owne will ro be the rule of your faith. First the word signifieth either admiration alone, or ls a mixtion thereof with some feare vpon any suddaine or strange sight. When the Creeple, that lay at the beauty∣full gate of the temple asking almes, was healed by Peter and Iohn; the people see∣ing him walking, and leaping, and praising God, were filled with admiration and astonishment, and flocked to Salomons porch , euèn amazed. This affection in them Peter expresseth in the next verse after this sort. Acts 3. v. 12. Ye men of Israell, saith he, , why wonder you at this? , or why looke you so steadfastly on vs? so that stedfast beholding, and inward admiring are the force of this word in that place. When Christ returned from the mountaine, where he was transfigured, to his nine Disciples, that were disputing with the Scribes; Mar. 9. v. 15. All the people as soone as they saw him, were amazed, and came to him, and saluted him. In neither of these places can we imagine, the people were stroken with such great feare, that should take their senses from them; and in this last it is expressely written; they ranne and saluted him: which argueth, that importeth a sudden admiration sometimes without feare, and sometimes permixed with feare for the sight of some strange or vnknowen thing. So the people when they saw him cast out vncleane spirits with his word, Mar. 1. v. 27. , were all amazed, and asked one of another, What thing is this? What new doctrine is this? And the women that went earely to Christes sepulchre, and Mar. 16. v. 5. & saw a yong man sitting clothed in a long white robe, , they were afrayd, and he sayd to them, 6. , Be not afraid. In none of which places the word signifieth any hellish paine, or confusion; but either admiration, or such sudden feare ioyned with some wondering, as a strange or vnknowen sight breedeth; though we feare no hurt towards our selues. And of these very words of Christes sorow, and feare or astonishment vsed by the Euangelists, S. Ierom saith; Hieronym. in Matth. ca. 26. Caepit contristari: aliud est enim contristari, aliud incipere contristari. Christ began to be sorowfull: for it is one thing to be sorowfull, and another thing to begin to be sorowfull. And so Origen: Origen. in Matth. tract. 35. Capit pauere vel tristari, nihil amplius tristitiae vel pauoris patiens nisi principium tantum. Christ began to be afrayd or to be sorrowfull, suffering no more but onely the beginning of feare or sorrow. And consider, sayth he, Ibidem. the Euangelist sayth not he was afrayd, or he was loaden with so∣row, but he beganne to be afrayd and sorowfull. There is great difference betwixt sorow, and the beginning of sorow. And so he expoundeth Christes words; My soule is heauie vnto death; that is, Heauinesse is begunne in me, so that I am not altogether without some taste thereof. The continuance thereof the Scripture noteth not to be such that either bereaued him of memorie, or hindred his prayers: for both he persisted in earnest and humble Christ did not pray in asto∣nishment. prayer, wherein he was heard, and carefully warned his Apostles that were with him, to watch and pray, that they entred not into temptation. Now prayer requireth not vn∣derstanding and memory alone, but faith also. Of euery man that would pray, Saint Iames sayth, Iames 1. Let him aske in faith, and wauer not: for he that wauereth is like the waue of the sea tost with the winde. Neither let that man thinke he shall receiue any thing of the Lord. And where by these tastes and touches of feare and sorow you would insinu∣ate your hell paines partly felt, and partly further to come; S. Austen telleth you that August. 83. qu st. qu st. 33. cognitu facile est, nullum metum esse nisi futuri & imminentis mali; it is easie to know there is no feare but of future and imminent euill. As also: Ibidem. Nihil erat inter omnia genera mortis illo genere execrabilius, & formidolosius. Amongst all kindes of death there was none more execrable and formidable than that kinde of death on the crosse, which Christ died. So that what Christ feared, was to come, and not present; as also he might haue a na∣turall mislike and feare of that kinde of death, respecting as well the paine, which would be intolerable, as the exactnesse of patience required more in him than in all men liuing, because he might admit no declining nor disliking the sharpnesse thereof in the weakenesse of his flesh, were it neuer so grieuous. This I speake of his bodilie paines, besides the feare and sorow that his soule might apprehend for the weightie worke of mans redemption then in hand. Defenc. pag. 115. li. 31. You skip this kind of feare, when you recken but foure kinds: for this was neither a reli∣gious care, nor doubtfull feare, nor desperate, nor damned feare, but a right naturall feare in Christ. ] As though the ground of all these were not a naturall feare and dislike of hell paines. For why doe the faithfull decline them, the weake conflict with them, the desperate sinke vnder them, and the damned lie confounded in them, but because nature abhorreth and shunneth all kind of paine, and consequently the greatest, which is hell, with the greatest detestation that may be? You after your surly sort presume, that Christ really felt in the Garden the paines of the damned; I admitting no such deuice, did yet sufficiently comprise all kinds of feare concerning hell in that diuision of mine, since if they were presently felt of Christ, as they are of the damned, his feare of them must then needs be a damned feare, or rather paine, because he had, as you defend, a present sense of them, as the damned haue. And therefore if you misse no more in your conclusions, then I did in my partition, your reasons would passe with∣out any iust reproofe. Defenc. pag. 116. Dauid wanted sometime the present feeling of Gods comfortable spirit, and mourned dolefully for the want of it, albeit yet he was not destitute of his spirit inde de: which also himselfe knew well enough. And thus did Christ euen in his greatest plunge of woe: for then he called God his God resolutely. ] The example of Dauid maketh nothing for your hell paines to be suffered in the soule of Christ, but very much against them, and yet be∣tweene Dauids case in that Psalme and Christs, there is no comparison. For Dauid then was not pressed with any outward affliction, but stroken with an inward doubt of Gods fauour towards him, whom he had so greatly offended with adultery and homicide, and so long dallied with before repentance. Christ contrariwise was neuer pressed with any doubt or distrust of Gods fauour towards himselfe, but the weake∣nesse of his flesh was burdened with extreame and intolerable paynes. What affini∣tie then had Dauids feare of reiection with Christs sense of affliction? and yet were they like, what gaine you by that? Dauid was truely penitent, when he made that psalme; and true repentance I hope putteth not men into the paines of hell. Againe, Dauid you confesse was not then destitute of Gods spirit, which also himselfe knew well enough. But the spirit of God is life to the soule of man, and quickeneth it. Ergo Da∣uid, though he wanted the full peace and ioy of conscience, which he calleth saluati∣on, yet he liued in soule, and was farre from the second death. How much more then was Christs soule free from all these things, in whom was the fulnesse of Gods spirit with all his gifts and graces any way needfull for the Sauiour of the world, though glory were differred, and ioy diminished for the time by excesse of paine? To wish ease of paine, or to grieue at the sharpenesse therof, is naturall vnto man, and therefore may well be graunted to haue bene in Christ; as also to lacke the fulnesse of ioy and com∣fort, till his sufferings were ouer past. But he neuer wanted the ioy of saluation, nor assurance thereof, and therefore he doubled his inuocation on the crosse, saying not onely, My God, my God, but Father forgiue them, and Father into thine hands I commend my spirit: and in the Garden he resolutely pronounced as often, if not oftner, Mat. 26. vers. 39 42. O my Father. Which words doe most apparantly prooue, that Christ had neuer any other perswasion, suspition, or feare, but that God was his God, and his Father, and therefore most certainly bare towards him a fatherly loue and affection; though he knew it was his Fathers will, he should inwardly and outwardly grieue a while for our sinnes, and so receiue ease by death, ioy by Paradise, and glory by his speedy and heauenly resur∣rection. Defenc. pag. 116 li. 14. Thirdly adde hereunto Christs owne expresse wordes, when in this season he prayeth that this houre, and this cup might passe from him. That which this houre and this cup doe signifie, the same is the proper and principall cause of this agonie: but what can be ment by this houre, vnlesse the paines of his suffering set and appointed by God for him to be are at his determined time from Gods iustice for sinne? What is this cup, but the bitter taste of the same paines, aforsaid? this I hope was not his holinesse and sanctification, which so troubled and molested him, nor his piety, nor his pity. ] If you permit our Sauiour to be the interpreter of his owne wordes, as he was the speaker, then neither this hower, nor this cup import any thing suffered in the garden. After his agony past, and praiers ended in the garden, Christ said to his Disciples, b Sleepe henceforth, and take your rest, behold THE HOWER draweth neere, and the Sonne of man is giuen into the hands of sinners. And so to the Iewes, that came to approhend him, this is your very hower and the power of darknesse. And when Peter would with force haue defended him, he said; Put vp thy sword into thy sheath, shall I not drinke of the cup which my Father hath giuen mee? So that this ower and this cup were to come, when his agony was ended; and were they not, why may not this howre and this cup conteine in them as well his painfull affections o sorow and feare, as his other sufferings? Was not the Cuppe mixed that he dranke; and the houre long enough to comprise all that he suffered? But what maketh either of those for your hell paines? Was there no Cuppe for him to drinke, nor time for him to suf∣fer, except your hellish torments were interposed? His sufferings then are confessed, though no feare nor sorow might besiege him, but such as was ioyned with obedience and patience; and in the midst of his afflictions he neither neglected submission to God, nor compassion to men. You with the one would exclude the other; and I see no words nor cause, but both might be ioyned in one houre and one Cup, whatsoe∣uer you pretend to the contrary. Defenc. pag. 110. li. 23. Nay finally he himselfe expresseth the true cause, euen his excessiue paines, his ouera∣bounding sorowes and anguish; saying, My soule is full of paines, or full of sorowes euen vnto death. Heere he nameth the cause. ] You are a man of much intelligence, that out of Christs words would conclude his sorow to be the cause of it selfe. For where by Christs agonie, if it be largely taken, you must meane his feare, and his sorow confes∣sed in that speach, My soule is heauy (or sorowfull) vnto death; You make no more a∣doe but auouch, that Christ here nameth sorow to be the cause of his agony, that is of his sorow. For if by his agony you meane his bloudy sweat, from these words to that part of his action in the garden you shall neuer make any consequent. The Euangelist expressely saith, There appeared an Angel from heauen comforting him, and then falling in∣to an agonie he praied more earnestly, and in that vehement praier his sweat was like drops of bloud. He was comforted before this last praier, and therein rather with the inten∣tion of spirits for zeale, then with the remission of them for feare, he did sweat, as the Scripture noteth. Now whereof receaued he comfort, but of his sorow? and what is comfort but a depulsion or mitigation of sorow? what sense then can it haue, to say, that after Christs sorow was eased and comforted from heauen, his sorow decreasing, his agony of sorow so much encreased, that he sweat bloud for very sorow? how hang these contraries together, which you would hale out of Christs owne words? In the former part of his action in the garden, wherein he praied the cup might passe from him, he said his soule was heauy (or sorowfull) vnto death. We enquire the cause of this sorow. You answere, that Christs owne words expresse and name sorow to be the cause therof. What is this, but to collude with Christs words in making his sorow to be the cause of his sorow, which in a more generall and confused word you call his a∣gonie? but with vs the cause of his sorow is in question; to that you neither can, nor doe say any thing out of Christes words; out of your owne conceit you presume, that Christs Pa. 116. li. 31. excessiue paines (then felt,) and the intire want of feeling of Gods comfort, and no∣thing els was the proper and principall cause of that sorow. But these be your additions and expositions, they be no part of Christs words, nor meaning. And by what authority, to aduantage your error, doe you not only contr le the translation vsed by all the Latin Fathers; Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilarius, erom, Ambrose, Austen, Fulgentius, Bede and others, but euen corrupt the words of our Sauiour rende∣red by the Euangelists Matthew and Marke? Tristis est enima mea vsque ad mortem, My soule is heauie (sadde or sorowfull) vnto death, say all the Latine Fathers saue Ter∣tullian, who sayth, Tertullian. de carne Christi. Anxia est anima mea vsque ad mortem, My soule is vnto death. The Euangelists words are, My soule is heauie (or on euery side heauy and sorowfull) vnto death. You translate it, Pa. 116. li. 25. My soule is full of paines, meaning by paines present inherent and absolute paines, such as your hell-paines are; where the words import no such thing: for neither tristitia in Latine, nor in Greeke, either in prophane or diuine Writers, note any such actuall and absolute im∣pression of paine, as you would haue, but an affection troubling the minde, and rising vpon opinion of euill past or instant. Of sorow Saint Austen sayth right well: Au ust. in Psal 42. Dolor animae tristitia dicitur, molestia quae fit in corpore, Dolor dici potest, tristitia non potest, The griefe of the soule is called (heauinesse or) sorow, the griefe of the bodie is called paine, not sorrow. in Greeke with prophane Writers is ; which Cicero translateth, Tuscul. quaest libro 4. Opinio recens mali praesentis, A fresh opinion of present or in∣sta t euill. The Scriptures in like sort vse the same word, opposing it to the affection of ioy, and expressing by it not any actuall or absolute paine, but griefe and sadnesse of minde, which wee call sorow. Ioh. 6. v. 20. The world shall reioyce, and you shall be sorrowfull, , but your SOROVV shall be turned to ioy. So Paul: 2. Cor. 2. I would not come againe to you , in heauinesse: for if I made you sor , who is he that should make me gl d, but the same that was made SORY by me. And this very thing I wrote vnto you, lest when I came, I should haue SOROVV of them of whom I should haue ioy. When the rest of the seruants saw what the euill seruant, that was pardoned of his master the great debt of 10000 talents, did to his fellow that ought him an hundred pence, Matth 18. vers. 1. , they were very sory. And when Christ sayd to his Disciples, One of you shall betray me, Matth. 26. vers. 22. , they were exceeding sorowfull, and b ganne euery on to say, Master is it I? As also when e tolde them of his departure and their trou∣bles; he added, ohn 16. Because I haue spoken these things vnto you, , sorow hath filled your hearts. And generally thorowout the New Testament doeth no where signifi actuall and absolute pa ne, but griefe and sorow of minde. And there∣fore your wresting of our Sauiours words with a false translation in saying, My soule is full of paines, intending thereby the paines of the damned inflicted by Gods immedi∣a e hand, is a false and lewd corruption. Defenc pag. 116. li. 34. Here we will remember againe, what is taught by authoritie in England. The rather for that you take on as a man impatient, because I doe affirme, that our doctrine (not yours) hath the publi e authoritie for it. You call it an egregiou lie, an insolent and impudent speach, well becomming n alchouse, &c. and yet in the very next page in plaine termes you graunt the same to be taught in our h milie of Christs Passion. ] The way to mend a lie, is not to double it, and riple it, but to see your error, that you may acknowledge the trueth. I I had then cau e to dislike the egregious lie, which I iustly challenged, I haue now more, wh n to saue your elfe from some impudencie, you hew more then stupidity. You would needes in your treatise amongst other vntrueths auouch, that your doctrine the Treatis. pa. 89 li. 13. publike authorised doctrine of England, deliuered in the booke of homilies. I told you then, which yet is true, that this as well as others, was an insolent and impudent speach. You aske Defenc. 7. . 30. who is that egregious lier now? Defenc. 7. . 35. you hope you are cleare from it. ] Euen he that was before, and you are cleare from it, as Iudas was from betraying Christ, by aying is it I master? to cleare your selfe, you now say, your exposition of those words, My God, my God, why host thou forsaken me, is found in the booke of Ho∣milies, and that I my selfe in plaine wordes confesse so much. Then are you the verier lyer to say, this is your doctrine which I impugned, or that our maine question was about the exposition of those words. Christs complaint on the crosse, I sayd, did not proo e your hell-paines, nor the second death to be suffered in Christs soule, which way soeuer you expounded it, so you followed any example of Scripture vsing that word. To reprobation or desperation, if your conscience did thereto stretch, you might applie this word by some examples of Scriptures, but not to reall and actuall damnation, no not in the most wicked castawayes that uer were. The sundry senses, which I gaue out o the Fathers, shew the w aknesse of your illation from those words, they directly touch not the maine point of doctrine, questioned betwixt vs; and a∣mongst the e senses this was one, which the booke of Homilies seemeth to follow. The direct cause of Christs feare, sorrow, and bloodie sweate, since the Scripture con∣cealed it, I sayd could not be certainly concluded thence; what is that to Christes complaint on the crosse, whose words though they may be extended to expresse his paines, y t your doctrine is no whit the truer for all that, nor the more confirmed by the lawes of this Realme. So that the lie by your leaue doth lye where it did, only you haue furnished the former lie with two or three fresher, and as your vse is, you correct matters amisse by making them worse then they were. Defenc. pag. 117. li. 6. Here I am sure you thinke not that our Homilie maketh Christes pietie or pitie, nor yet his meere bodily paine to force him thus farre. Nor in these words next following there, O that mankind s ould put the euerlasting sonne of God in such paines for the grieuousnesse of our sinnes. ] Are you sure what I thinke? well fare your wisedome yet, that when you should prooue your doctrine to be receaued and authorized by the publike lawes of this Realme, you are sure, I am of your mind. This is not onely a childish fainting, but foolish dallying, to cleere your selfe from a notorious lie by assuring your sel e what I thinke. If you will needes know what I thinke, first it is euident to him that readeth these homili s, that the whole summ and meane of our redemption being the e purposely deliuered, neither of these homilies speaketh one word of your hell∣paines, nor of the second death to be suffered in the soule of Christ. Againe it is as euident, that the suffering of a shamefull and painfull death in Christs body is there taught to be the only sacrifice for our sinnes. The wordes are. 1. Sermon of the Passi∣on. pa. 5. There is none other thing, that can be named vnder heauen, to saue our soules, but this only worke of Christs pre∣tious offering of his body on the Altar of the Crosse. What paines Christ suffered on the Crosse, whether the paines of the damned, or of his body bruised and broken on the Crosse, the booke it selfe doth plainly witnesse. c Christ being the sonne of God, and 2. Ser on of the Passi∣on. pa. 9. perfect God hims lfe, who neuer committed sinne, was compelled to come downe from heauen, and to giue his BODY TO BE BRVISED, AND BROKEN ON THE CROSSE for our sinnes. Was not this a manifest token of Gods great wrath and displeasure towards sin, that he could be pacisied by none other meanes, but ONLIE BY THE SWEET AND PRETIOVS BLOVD of his deare sonne? If you teach this, that the bruising and brea∣king of Christs body on the Crosse, and the shedding of his pretious bloud was the ONLIE MEANE to pacifie Gods wrath against sinne, then I did you wrong to call your speach impudent; but if this be the new doctrine which I defend, and you impugne, then doe you deserue not only the termes which I gaue, but worse, so openly and obstinately to resist, deface, and belie publicke authority. Defenc. pag. 117. li. 12. Adde her unto the full and large declaration hereof in the authorised Catechisme. Christ suff red not only a common death in the sight of men, but also was throughly touched with the horror of eternall death, &c. When he did take vpon him and beare both the guiltines and iust paine of mankind damned and lost, he was afflicted with so grieuous feare, trouble, and sorow of mind or soule, that he cried out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. ] I make good difference betwixt the Booke of Homilies confirmed as well by the publicke authority of Prince and Parliament, Anno Reginae 13. ca: 12; as by the generall subscription of the vpper and neather house in the conuocation Anno 1571 to In the 35. ar∣ticle of Ho∣milies. containe godlie, wholesome and necessarie doctrine; and the Catechisme then licenced to be taught in Schooles to yong scholers, but without any such autoritie as the for∣mer is. Shew the like approbation. and you shall freely call it the publike autorized doc∣trine of England; till you doe so, giue me leaue to tell you, that the one is indeede by publicke authority receaued and ratified, euen as the articles are; the other was by priuate discretion permitted and tolerated to be taught in Grammar schooles, but publicke authority of the whole Realme you may chalenge none vnto it. And there∣fore I take my selfe in matters of faith not bound vnto it, farder then it accordeth with the manifest trueth deliuered in the acred Scriptures. Againe your selfe do more impugne the Catechisme, then I doe. For if your owne wordes be true that Christ, when he vttered those Defenc. pag. 110. li. 28. & 34. words, spake in his mind of his constant and continuall ioy in God, and was in exceeding generall, and constant ioy. What place leaue you for any of those wordes, which you cite out of the Catechisme, to haue any trueth in them, since they speake of exceeding and horrible feares and sorrows, which I thinke are contrarie to your triumphant, generall, and constant ioy? And although I thinke it no reason, that a thing priuatly permitted, should abrogate the full and maine consent of the learned and auntient Fathers, as you would haue it to doe; and therefore make it free, when the Carechisme swatueth from their sense and interpretation, to be of another mind; yet I condemne nothing in it as wicked, but wish that so e few places had been more cleerly and more particularl e deliuered and expressed, to a∣uoid such cauillers, as you and some others are. But you with open mouth rei ct e∣uen those places, which now you produce, as passing strange doctrine, and simply impossi∣ble. For where the Catechisme here in these words, which you alleage, saith Christ was Aeternae mortis horrore perfusus, perfused (or wholy touched) with an horror (which is a trembling feare) of eternall death; you not only reason against it, that Defenc. pag. 9 li. 13. Christ could not feare that, which he perfectly knew concerned him not at all, and by no meanes could euer possibly come neere him; but you make it li. 12. passing strange doctrine, and simply impossible, that Christ should feare, or pray against the whole and intire cup of eternall death. And yet the Catechisme saith, he trembled and was ouercast with the horror of it. You mis ike that the Catechisme saith, except you may peruert it to your pleasure; and in steed of fearing eternall death, you say Christ suffered the second death, which is die death of the damned; and so refusing the Catechisme for saying so much, you say more, and thinke the Catechisme is of your mind. But sir, tell vs, how Christ could be stroken with the HORROR OF ETERNALL DEATH, for those a e the wordes of the Catechisme, and not how he suffered your new made hell, which the Catechisme neuer speaketh of. I haue deliuered two senses to salue the Catechisme, which you impugne. The first, that Christ in respect of his members, to whom that death was due, might in loue and pietie towards them, inwardly tremble at the pu∣nishment deserued by them, since mercie maketh vs truely feele the very smart of o∣ther mens harmes and dangers, and where we hartily loue, no lesse then if they were imminent ouer our owne heads. The second, that Christ fearing the power of Gods wrath against sinne, which is infinite, may in a sort be sayd to tremble at the effects thereof, by reason he trembled at the cause thereof. And in this sense the considera∣tion, and apprehension of Gods infinite power and displeasure against sinne might br ede those horrible feares and sorrowes, which the Catcchisme talketh of. Other∣wise I must be plaine, the Catechisme sayth more, then can be prooued by any Scrip∣ture, or any learned and auncient Father; and more then you your selfe allow or like, saue that you would out of his vehement speaches make some aduantage to your cause, though in substance you wholy dissent from the maker thereof. For he spea∣keth of feare and sorrow, you of re al solute suffering; he of eternall death due to sin, you of a new found hell from the immediate hand of God, which is no part of the Catcchisers meaning, since he plainely nameth future and euerlasting death due to sin∣ners, and not a present and temporall hell, which is not the full wages of sinne, nor of the damned. The like I say for the notes added by the Printer or correctour to the great Bible, whose text is authorized to be read in the Church, but not the notes to be of equall credit or authoritie with the text. And if you may turne of the whole a ay of auncient and Catholike Fathers, because they diflent from your conceits, how much lesse am I bound to correctours or Printers, adding often times to other mens workes and la∣bours, what pleaseth themselues? Though the note be not such, but that it may re∣ceiue the former construction, and be tolerated wel enough. Wherefore I meane euen the same giddy spirit (which before I did) buzzing in the eares of the people his owne fancies against the Scriptures, against the Fathers, and against the doctrine of this Realme confirmed by publike authoritie of Prince and Parliament. The recolle∣cting of your former reason so lately and largely answered, I omit as tedious trifling; and since you say no more then is before refuted, what should I trouble my selfe and the Reader with repeating the same things so often iterated? Defenc pag. 118. li. 10. You haue yet heere and there some exceptions against this our doctrine, which are not to be cleane neglected. First you say I extend Christs agonie to farre: because I will haue is proceede from the intolerable sorrowes and horrors of Gods siery wrath equall to ell. I shew not there the cause of Christs agonie and feare, I shewed it of purpose in the beginning. Why did you not refuse that? ] You extend it so farre according to my wordes, yea your maine purpose is to make that the cause of Christs agonie in the garden and on the crosse; onely you would vse some cunning in the carriage of it, first to make sorrowes and feares the cause thereof, and at the next step to aske what sorrowes and feares could those be, but the intolerable sorowes and horrors of Gods fierie wrath equall to hell. And to this end you quote both the Catechisme, and the notes in the great Bible here, to shew the cause of Christs agonie to be these horrible sorrowes and torments, as the Catechisme sayth, of future and euerlasting death. Why then are you so nice, when you fully intend it, in shew to denie it? [ why did you not refuse that in the beginning? ] The causes, that might concurre in Christs agonie, I shewed in my sermons out of the auncient Fathers agreeing with the Scriptures; why should I repeate it againe in my conclusion, you bringing nothing against it, but a few voluntarie and emptie words, which I know no man so vnwise as to regard without better proofe? [ pa: 118. li. 32 There is no o∣ther sorrow in the world to be found, which can be imagined to be the cause possibly. ] You erre as well in aggrauating Christs agonie aboue that the text auoucheth, as in assig∣ning a false cause thereof out of your owne fansie. Feare and sorrow the Scripture af∣firmeth in Christ, if we so interprete the words, as you doe; but such feare, and such sorow, as cannot be found in the world, except the feares & sorowes of the second death, this is your bold assertion no way mentioned, nor purposed in the Scriptures, nor grounded on any sound reason or experience. For where the paines of some kinds of bodily deaths be often greater then mans nature can endure, and therefore violently part the soule from the body; what did hinder the paines of Christs body on the crosse, to be such, that they pressed his patience to the highest degree, since he would not strengthen his flesh to sustaine the paines of hell, as you pretend, but layd downe all power, that he might feele the smart and anguish of his bodily torments as tender∣ly, as any man could? Now what paines in others ouerwhelme the senses, and hasten death, as passing the strength of mans nature, why might not euen the same bodily paines in Christ so presse his humane weakenesse; that he felt himselfe able with pati∣ence to support no more, and so prayed on the crosse for an end thereof; and foresaw so much in the Garden, which made him earnest, if it were possible, to decline it? What can be sayd against this sharpenesse and bitternesse of bodily paine, since in all Martyrs and malefactours their deaths declare, that paine in the end doth so pre∣uaile, that the rage thereof is vtterly intolerable to mans nature, and therefore sunde∣reth the soule from the body with extreme violence, as exceeding all human pati∣ence and strength? Defenc. pag. 118. li. 34. My other words also, which here you cruelly condemne, shall stand well enough, that Christ as touching the vehemencie of paine, was as sharpely touched, as the reprobates themselues, yea, if it may be, more extraordinarily; though you labour with might and maine to make them amount to heresie and open blasphemie. ] My words were more moderate, then your dangerous comparisons deserued. Conclus. pa. 290. li 35. I prayed you in so waightie matters, as might amount to heresie and open blasphemie, not to play with generall termes, such as you neither vnderstood your selfe, nor any man else could conceiue your meaning. You would needs tell vs, that Christ in soule was as sharpely touched, and with as great vehemencie of paine, euen as the reprobates themselues, and more if it might be. I asked you not where you found this written in the word of God, which is the rule of our faith; an vnwritten cre de must needs haue vnwritten conclusions; nor how you prooued it, for your owne will is your best warrant for your new faith: but what you ment thereby. The terrors of the reprobates in this life, which we might collect by the Scriptures, were Ibid. pa. 291. remorse of sinne, reiection from Gods fauour, desperation of mercie here, and of all ioy and blisle in the world to come, and a dreadfull expectation of horrible confusion, and euerla∣sting fire. Ibidem. I thought you durst not, I hoped you would not offer so much as the mention of the least of these to be found in the sonne of God. What wrong did I here vnto you, were it not with too much sparing you? and how plainly did I prouoke you to expresse your selfe, but that your cunning is such, that then you did, and yet you doe forbeare to vnfold your generall and ambiguous speaches. You persist still in your old song, and say that touching the vehemencie of paine, this is true. As though remorse, reiection, desperation, and expectation of euerlasting confusion, and fire were NO PAINES to the soules of the reprobates. Why play you with the name of paine to and fro after this sort? Why role you sometimes to feares, sometime to sorrowes, sometime to paines, as the causes of Christs agonie; and those sometime apprehended by the mind of Christ, sometime really inflicted by Gods immediate hand? what Christ did, or might apprehend, you neuer declare; you thinke it enough to tell vs, his Defenc. pag. 52. li. 35. vnder∣standing chiefly conceiued the furie of that hand, which principally strooke those blowes vpon his humane nature: and thus with Metaphors you delude vs, when you should distinct∣ly deliuer, what Christ conceiued of those afflictions, which he suffered from the counsell and power of God determining them for mans redemption. Yea besides ap∣prehension and conception of mind, you bring in your hell paines at your pleasure, as an inherent and absolute torment really inflicted on the soule of Christ by Gods immediate hand, as it is on all the damned after this life for the vengeance of their sinnes; and when you are asked the proofe of these things, you affourd vs figures and phrases to stuffe out your wallet. Defenc. pag. 119. li. 1. Why doe you not bend your odious outcries and accusations against the authoritie before truely cited, which maintaineth the same so fully and amply, as I deliuer it? ] The Cate∣chisme hath some generall words, that Christ conflicted with all the powers of hell, not as suffering them, but as resisting them, and that he endured horrible feares and griefes of mind to satisfie the iudgement of God, and to pacifie his wrath. These words if you will stretch to what please you, they may seeme to haue some seedes of your error, though not the buds and branches thereof: but as they be generall, so if we reuoke them to the grounds of the sacred Scriptures, which was no doubt the writers and the allowers meaning, then may we extend them no farder, then we haue warrant in the word of God to iustifie them. The feares and horrors, which you would conuert to the reall suffering of the temporall hell, the Catechisme referreth to the feare and horror of euer∣lasting death; which you confesse Christ Defenc pag. 99. most perfectly knew concerned him not at all, and by no meanes could euer possibly come neere him. How then doe you concurre with the authoritie, which you cite, saue that you peruert some generall words there vsed by misapplying them to your fansie? Otherwise feares and sorrowes, to satisfie and paci∣fie the wrath of God against our sinnes, Christ might haue, and yet be farre from the paines of the damned, and the second death, yea from the terrors and confusion of the wicked; since he knowing the iustnesse and greatnesse of Gods anger against sinne, and how impossible it was for him with patience to support the power thereof, either in soule, or in body, might giue God his due by inward and euident sor∣row for sinne, and feare of Gods power, by which the fiercenesse of Gods indigna∣tion against sinne was rebated and calmed, and so much paine proportioned to the weakenesse of Christs flesh, as should not exceede the patience of his humane nature. But this doth no way further your hell paines suffered in the soule of Christ, since these religious feares and sorowes, which mitigate the wrath of God, though they be painefull in themselues, yet haue they no communion with the feares and sorrowes of the reprobate, much lesse of the damned. Defenc pag. 119. li. 5. What reason haue you against our assertion? Verily only this you oppose, because all the sorowes of the reprobate are but sinfull guiltinesse of conscience, or feares of iudgement fore∣seene, which is executed onely in the next life; you meane onely in the definite and locall hell. Which is no refutation of my assertion, that Christ was as sharpely touched with paine, as the very reprobate. ] When men affirme strange and new positions in Christian religion, they must not aske what reason can be brought against them, but they must shew where that they teach is written in the word of God, or ineuitably concluded from that which is written: for Rom. 10. faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. So that if you take vpon you to be a Coiner of new Creeds, we must not beleeue you, till by reason we can refute you, but you ought Prou. 30. not to adde to the word of God, lest you be found a liar. Shew then, where these comparisons and positions are written; if not, feare the plagues appointed for such as adde their lies to the Trueth of God. And yet to exclude all comparison betweene Christ and the reprobate in this case, what better reason can be brought, than that Christes feares and sorowes had no soci tie nor affi∣nitie with the feares and terrours of the reprobate? for no rule of reason alloweth you to compare things together, that haue no likenesse betwixt themselues. You make Christ and the reprobate, yea and the damned, equall in paine, and Christes paines superiour to the sharpest of theirs, and yet when all is sayd, there is no kinde of like∣nesse betwixt their paines. Defenc pag. 119. li. 11. Though the wicked in this world did neuer suffer any reall effect of Gods burning wrath working actuall vengeance on their soules for sinne, but only some guiltie remorse or feare, and nothing els, yet this letteth not but that Christ whom God ordained extraordinarily and alone to be in this life a whole and absolute burnt sacrifice for all sinne, did feele and suffer the same truely, properly, and perfectly. ] You were of opinion in your Treatise, and set it downe resolutely for one of your new-made Maximes, That the Trea. pa. 77. li. 5. paines and sufferings of Gods wrath did ALVVAYES ACCOMPANIE THEM that are separated from the grace and loue of God. And euen there you also affirmed, li. 9. Christ suffered the horror of Gods seuere iustice LIKE THEM, who be separated indeed from the grace and loue of God. If you stand to these words, you must confesse that Christ suffered the horror of reiection, confusion, and desperation, LIKE to the reprobate, which is euen as the reprobate doe suffer it; and then ineuitably you fasten on the soule of Christ a plaine persuasion, and inward feeling, that he was for the time reiected, confounded, and seue∣red from God, as the reprobate be, which whether it will amount to open impietie, I leaue to the Christian Reader to iudge. Your cunning in two leaues after, with as touching the vehemencie of paine, is a giddie deuice, when you haue made their horrors like, then to restraine it to the sharpnesse of paine: for thereby you doe not intend to make their horrours vnlike, which before you pronounced to be like, but that their horrours being LIKE, their paines can not be vnlike. Since then paine and griefe of minde is a necessarie consequent to horror, as it is to feare and sorow, you doe not recall, but confirme your former imp etic, That Christ hauing the same horrour of Gods iustice and wrath, which the reprobate haue, must needs haue the same paine; forsomuch as that horrour is not without paine answerable to it in the soule of man despairing the goodnesse of God, and beholding nothing in God but his terrible and fierie indignation against sinne. That the wicked haue ALVVAYFS these hor∣rors accompanying them in this life, is a great and grosse vntrueth; the 73 Psalme doth auouch the cleane contrarie: Psal. 73. ver. Loe these are the wicked, yet prosper they alway. So that they for the most part liue here in pleasure and abundance, neither are they plagued with (other) men, but Luke 16. receiue their good things in this life, saue when the wisdome and iustice of God is pleased to make some of them examples vnto others: for then these inward terrours of minde raised with remorse of sinne, and feare of iudgement to come, doe desperately, finally, and vtterly ouerwhelme them. This now you begin to see, which before was not within your thoughts, and therefore you now affirme, that though the wicked did suffer no such thing as you before sayd they ALVVAYES suffered, yet this doth not hinder, but Christ did feele and suffer the same. What doth not hinder, is not the question, but what doth helpe you to proue that Christ did suffer your new-made hell from the immediat hand of God in the garden, or on the crosse. I hope you bring it not for an argument, that the wicked do not suffer it in this life; ergo Christ did suffer it. That were very strange both Logicke and Diuinitie. Defenc. pag. 119. li. 18. Second: how I haue alwayes expresly excluded from Christ all sinfull adherents and con∣sequents in paines and feares which are in the wicked, and doe resemble his to theirs onely in sharpnesse and vehemencie of paine, I haue often declared before. ] In generall words you would seeme to exclude them, but by your positions and comparisons you conclude the contrary: for if you exempt from Christ all feare and doubt of his Fathers loue towards him, and confesse he had perfect and full assurance of all Gods promises in the midst of his paines; tell vs then how the horrours of the reprobate could inuade his soule? Shew vs how the fulnesse of trueth and grace alwayes dwelling in him, he could be so confounded and amazed, as to feele or thinke himselfe forsaken of God, when he neither was, nor could be s uered from the loue, life, fauour or spirit of God? Absolute and inherent paine not deriued from feare or sorow, but only discerned by the naturall powers and faculties of the soule, if you put in the mind of Christ, it must neither exc ed his patience, nor euert his obedience: for if you make him faile or saint in either of these, you presently close him within the compasse of impatience and disobedience, which are more than sinfull consequents. Now that the true paines emency of hell paines passe the pati∣ence of men and angels. o hell or of the damned may be suffered of men or angels, or of Christ himselfe with patience, you must looke to proue, before you take libertie to affirme. You may suppose what you list, but afore any Christian man may giue credit to your dreames, he must see them soundly prou d, not by your owne headie and hastie positions, but by the vndoubted word of Trueth, which onely is the meet measure to direct things in and after this life. And for feares and sorowes, which sometimes beset the godly by the weakenesse of their faith, and remembrance of their sinnes, and subuert the wicked in the middest of their peace and pleasure, when their destruction draweth neere; neither of these can be either in the Elect or Reprobate in this life without so e sinfull defects in Gods seruants, and desperate impieties in his enemies: for these feares and sorowes doe shake the faith and hope of such as should beleeue and trust in Gods promises and mercies; and in the wicked they worke an vtter relapsing and recuiling from all affiance and expectance, that God will be gracious vnto them. In Christ then these were more sinfull than in any other, if after so cleere and constant promises and oaths secretly decreed, formerly reuealed, and lastly proclaimed by God from heauen, the Sonne of God should stagger, and wauer in the full and im∣moueable persuasion and resolution of Gods most gracious purpose and promise, faith and fauour towards him. Wherefore his apprehension of Gods wrath against our sinnes must be such as might not call the loue that God bare towards him in any question; but he might well beholde the iustnesse and greatnesse of Gods displea∣sure against our vncleannesse, and knowing full well the power of Gods wrath to ex∣ceed infinitely the strength of his humane nature, with sorow and feare due to so great, and yet so str ngth indignation against our sinnes, he might assuage and pacifie the fiercenesse of that anger, which we had prouoked; and by most humble confession and submission quench the flame thereof, which otherwise would burne to euerla∣sting destruction of all resisters and neglecters of Gods holinesse and righteousnesse. Defenc. pa . 119. li. 21. Thirdly the case is cleere enough that the reprobate many times in this life doe not only feare the iudgement to come, but also doe feele some reall and actuall impression of Gods bur∣ning wrath, and euen of hell torments, though not being yet in the locall hell. ] Is it cleere e∣nough, that the paines of the damned are sometimes executed here in this life on the reprobate, and that by Gods immediate hand? what Scripture haue you for it? that horrible feares and terrors doe sometimes besiege them, and that the Diuell doth now & then possesse and torment some of them, who are out of Gods protection, the Scripture witnesseth, as well by rules, as by examples: but that the paines of the dam∣ned are no greater, then are felt in this life, or that this mortall flesh is able to endure the true torments of hell, vnder which the Diuels themselues doe sinke, what rule or reason leadeth you to that presumptuous error? Cain was afflicted with the terror of his owne conscience, Saul was vexed with an euill spirit sent from the Lord, and into Iudas the diuell entring draue him with desperation to confesse his sinne, and to hang himsel e. Other examples of men possessed and tormented by Diuels, are many in the Gospell. Which of these whom you name, did not eat, sleepe, and manage o∣ther affaires of this life, as time did permit them, notwithstanding their inward tor∣ments of mind? Saul was eased with musicke, when the euill spirit of God vexed him, and liued as king of Israel in that case almost forty yeeres. Cain liued a long time after he was cast from Gods presence, and begat children on his wife. Can men haue leasure or list to doe or desire any of these things in the true torments of hell? You will make an easie hell, if the torments there be no greater, but that men may eat, sleepe, beget children and delight themselues with melody. The greatest feare that euer afflicted Saul for ought that we read, was when he that appeared in sh w of Sa∣muel, sayd to Saul, 1. Sam. 2 . To morow shalt thou and thy s nes be with me, and the L rd shall giue the host of the: Israelites into the hands of the Philistines: for then be feli straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, and at first refused to eat, but after at the perswasion of the witch and his seruants, he Ibid. ver. 23. 25. arose from the earth, and did Heb. 10. eat. Prate of this so long as you will, no wise man will wander so farre from the trueth, as to thinke they haue such leasure, and ease in the paines of hell. Defenc. pag. 119. li. 25. For proofe whereof that which before I alleged out of Iob and others, that euen the godly heere want not experience of the sorowes of hell sometimes, you passe ouer answearing nothing thereunto. Which being so in the godly, it must needes be in Cain, Iudas, and the reprobates, farre more direfull and intollerable sometimes. ] Such proofes doe well become such a cause. The godly are sometimes afraid of Gods displeasure, and are persued with the tentations and snares of Satan. Ergo they feele the very torments of the damned. What shew of reason is in this which is worth the answearing? and yet how often haue I repelled this peeuish presumption; and obserued, that if desperation which is the greatest torment of this life, be but a Heb. 10. fearefull looking for of iudgement and violent fire, which shall deuoure the aduersaries, The difference is great betwixt the expectance, and the experience of that terrible iudgement, at which the Diuel himselfe trembleth. Which may soone be gathered, though not so soone be measured. For the destruc∣tion and confusion of the damned may better be feared then knowen, forsomuch as the Scripture threatneth that, as the full wages of wickednesse, and highest degree of Gods displeasure against sinne. But you are vnansweared you say.] Some weighty reasons belike, that require so exactly an answeare. Euery trifle with you must haue a speciall answeare, when you skip leaues by the dosen, and speake to no more then you mistake, or misconster. But let vs heare your proofes, which want answeare, as you pretend. Treat. pa. 46. The members of Christ doe wrastle with the power of darknesse, and endure the fierie darts of the diuell. ] A learned reason, and like the maker. Doth the Apostle there speake of hell torments, or of the temptations to sinne, busily offered by Satan to all the godly? if your conceit of hell paines be true, we must wrestle, not with the pow∣ers of darknesse, but with God himselfe, by whose immediate hand, as you imagine, the paines of hell are inflicted on all mens soules. As wisely you quote, that the members of Christ endure the fierie darts of the diuell, where the Apostle willeth them to take the shield of faith, wherewith they may quench all the fierie darts of the Diuell. Whence if your corruption and misconstruction of the text were true, may be draw∣en a good argument against your hell paines to be suffered in the soule of Christ. For the shield of faith (as the Apostle noteth) quencheth all the fierie darts of the Diuel, which you presume to be the fierie paines of hell. Christ then, who wanted no perfection of faith, endured none of these fiery darts of the Diuel, since they are all quenched by faith. Choose now, whether by your owne reason you will charge Christ with in∣fidelity, or discharge him from enduring your fierie darts of the Diuel, which you suppose to be the paines of hell, except you play with this place to no purpose. How∣beit in these words the fierie darts of the Diuel are not the torments of hel, but either dangerous tentations, which quenching our faith consume and wast our consciences, as fire doth where it taketh hold; or els sinnes, which inflame our harts with wicked and worldly desires, making them burne with vnlawfull and vngodly lusts. Treat. pa. 46 li. 2. Iob crieth out, The arrowes of the almighty are in me, the venom whereof doth drinke vp my spirit, and the terrors of God sight against me. ] Out of these metaphors, wereby Iob describeth the vehemency of that disease, wherewith the Diuel strooke him Iob. 2. from the sole of the foot vnto the crowne, You shall neuer conclude any thing for the paines of hell. Metaphors make no direct conclusions in doctrine, but serue to resemble, or amplifie the things, to which they are applied. Then as venemous arrowes doe not only teare and wound the flesh, but the poison added doth inflame the whole body, and consume the vital spirits; so Iob complaineth, that his disease did not only rot, but burne his flesh, and wast his spirits, so that the paine thereof was intolerable. By the terrors of God, he meaneth the terrible and bitter affliction sent from God, and not the paines of hell, as you fondly conceaue. For that these wordes are applied to the greeuousnesse of his disease, appeareth both by Iobs speach and wish. Iob. 6. ver. 12 Is my strength, saith he, the strength of stones? is my flesh of brasse, that it can endure the rage of this dis∣ease? Wherefore he wisheth, Iob. 6 ver. 9. that God would destroy him (with this sicknesse) and cut him of (by death,) vers. 10. then should I yet haue comfort, though I burne with sorow, let him not spare. vers. 11. What is mine end, that I should prolong my life? Iob wisheth not here destruction of body and soule, that were more madnesse; but he desireth an end of his life, that he might haue rest and comfort. Then doth he not meane the terrors of conscience, which bring with them a most vncomfortable end, but the terrors of his Ibid. ver. 21. fearefull plague, which death would ease, & not augment. Not that I thinke Iob wanted dange∣rous tentations in his greeuous afflictions; but that this may be referred either to the greatnesse of his plague, or to the vnquietnesse of his mind, though he alwaies trusted in God, and was forced with extreamity of paine to desire ease. He may also meane, as he after saith, Iob. 7. v. 14. Thou fearest me with dreames, and astonishest me with visions; but none of these three terros were the paines of hell, neither did Iob desperately rage in his mind, but felt violent torments in his flesh, as he himselfe confesseth. Iob. 7. ver. 5. My flesh is clothed with wormes, and filthinesse of the dust, my skinne is rent, and become horrible. And touching the terrour of God, that word in the sacred Scripture doth not neces∣sarily import the paines of hell, nor the conflict of conscience with doubt or despaire of Gods fauor, but the greatnesse of his power, and righteousnesse of his iudgements, which we must confesse with feare and trembling. Psal. 88. From my youth (sayth the Psal∣mist to God) I suffer thy terrours. Shall we thinke, that he was all his life long in the paines of hell, or that he liued in perpetuall affliction, which continually humbled him, and made him afrayd of the mighty hand of God? Prou. 28. Blessed is the man (sayth Sa∣lomon) that is alwayes afrayed (of God): where he doth not account the paines of hell to be blessed, but he meaneth as the Apostle doth, that we should worke our sal∣uation Phil. 2. with feare and trembling. And so the Saints at the sight of Gods presence are afrayd, not with an hellish paine, or perfidious feare, but with a quaking and tremb∣ling at so great Maiestie, knowing that power and Iob. 25. terrour is with him, though they trust in his mercie. Treat. pa. 46. The like terrors doth Ionas seeme to feele in the fishes belly, when he cryed to the Lord out of the bottome of hell. ] You doe well to say it seemeth, for indeede neither haue the words any such force, neither had Ionas any such meaning. The word Sheol noteth the graue as well as hell as I haue else where sufficiently prooued; and in this case the Whales bellie may resemble the graue by the very direction of our Sauiour. Matth. 12. As Ionas (sayth he) was three dayes and three nights in the Whales belly; so shall the sonne of man be three dayes and three nights in the hart of the earth. Where Christ expresseth his buri∣all, and not his discent to hell, by the Whalles belly, in which Ionas lay. And Ionas himselfe sheweth by his prayer, that he ment the present danger of death, wherein he was, and not the paines of hell, of which he speaketh not. For besides the discription of his danger, when he saith, Ionas 2. The flouds compassed me about, all thy surges and all thy waues passed ouer me, the weeds were wrapt about mine head, and I went downe to the bottome of the mountaines: His praier declareth his faith in the beginning, middle, and ending thereof. I cried in mine affliction vnto the Lord, and he heard me; I sayd, I am cast out of thy sight. (not to be amongst the liuing any more) yet will I looke againe toward thine holy temple. Thou hast brought vp my life from the pit, ó Lord my God. Ibid. ver. 7. When my soule fainted, I remembred the Lord, and my praier came vnto thee into thine holy temple. So that Ionas sainted with feare of death, but not with the paines of the damned, who I troe do not pray in their paines, much lesse trust in God, or are heard of him, as Ionas was. Trea. pa. 46. Dauid wanted not the like in his manifold and fearefull agonies many times. ] Though I exempt neither Dauid, nor any of Gods saints here on earth, from 2. Cor. 7. feares within, and sights without, and troubles on euery side, as the Apostle speaketh of himselfe, yet is there no proofe, that Dauid euer suffered the paines of the damned; his words conuince no such thing. Sheol which you would now turne to signifie hell, though in the words of Dauid applied to Christ by Peter in the acts you stiffely refuse it, standeth indifferent to note the pit prouided for the body, which is the graue; or prepared for the soule, which is hell. So that out of a word admitting this double signification, you can neuer inferre which sense you please, but by some other sound and sufficient circumstances. Againe, there are but two places, which cleerly confesse, that Dauid was compassed or ouertaken with the snares, dangers, or troubles of Sheol, the 18 Psalme, and the 116. In the first of which it is more then euident, as well by the occa∣sion of the Psalme, as by the variation and coniunction of other words, that Dauid ment the danger of death, which often beset him vnder the persuit of Saul, and other his enemies, as the manifest words of holy writte do witnesse. For this is the inscripti∣on of the Psalme. 2. Sam. 22. Dauid spake vnto the Lord the words of this song in the day, that the Lord deliuered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul. So that the snares and ropes of death, which he speaketh of in that Psalme, were apparantly the manifold dangers of life, which his enemies, and chiefly Saul put him in. Secondly, the titles, that he there ascribeth vnto God, proue that in his persecutions Dauid ne∣uer doubted of Gods goodnesse towards him, but in all his troubles held that for his chiefe hope and help. Psal. 18. v. 1. I will loue thee deerly (saith he) ô Lord my strength. 2. The Lord is my Rocke, and my fortresse, and my deliuerer, my God, my Rocke, in him will I trust; my shield, the horne of my saluation, and my refuge; 3. I will call vpon the Lord, which is worthy to be praised, so shall I be safe from mine enemies. Thirdly, the words there declaring his dangers, and yet at last the destruction of his enemies, argue as much. For he saith, Ibid. vers. 4. The ropes of death compassed me, the floudes of vngodlinesse (that is of the vngodly) made me afraid. The 5. ropes of Sheol enuironed me, the snares of death ouertooke me. And so for the persons of his enemies he saith, Ibid. vers. 18. They preuented me in the day of my trouble, but the Lord was my stay; the Lord rewarded me according to my righteousnesse, because I kept the waies of the Lord. His seuering his enemies from God, and iustifying himselfe, not in the sight of God, but in respect of them, proueth all his intention in that Psalme to be touching his enemies, whom by Gods aide and might hee vers. 37. persued and consumed, wounding them, that they fell vnder his feet, and whose necks were giuen him, that he might destroy them that hated him. vers. 41. They cried vnto the Lord (sayth he) but there was none to deliuer them. This no way concerneth the diuell nor his tentations, much lesse any paines of hell from the immediate hand of God; but most euidently the plots of men that were his enemies, and sought his destruction. The other Psalme maketh the like profession vpon the like occasion, and affirmeth, that God heard Dauid, and inclined his eare vnto him, when the Psal. 116. snares of death compassed him, when the straights of Sheol found him out, when troubles and griefe tooke hold on him. In other places, where Dauid saith, that his life or Soule was deliuered and saued from Psal. 30. & Sheol, and euen from the 86. lowest Sheol; it is indifferent, which sense wee fol∣low, since no doubt he did ascribe the euerlasting Saluation of his Soule from Hell vnto Gods goodnes and mercie, no lesse then he did the preseruation of his life from the Graue. And therefore I shall not neede to discusse any of those places, which admit both constructions, and yet bring not your hell-paines into this life any whit the sooner. Againe when Dauid speaketh of feares, ropes & snares of hell, if it were graunted, that Dauid intended as well the inward assaultes of Satan to subuert his soule, as the outward perils of his life to shorten his daies, it helpeth not your cause. For the gates euen of hell, (that is the power thereof) preuaile in this life against all that are not of Christs true church, and often compasse and besiege the faithfull; and 1. Pet. 5. the roaring lion, (that) goeth about seeking whom he may deuoure, is neither idle, nor vna∣ble to take hold of mens soules by sundrie sinnes, tentations, deceits, and snares, (if he be not stedfastly resisted by faith) and to make them the children of hell, not by the present suffering thereof, but by preparing, and obliging them to the wrath to come. Of the Scribes and Pharises Christ saith, Matth. 23. vers. 15. You compasse sea and land to make one Proselyte, (that is a nouice of your profession) and when he is gotten you make him, filium gehennae, the child of hell double to your selues. Shall we hence conclude, that the Scribes, and Pharises, and all their Proselytes were heere on earth in the true paines of hell, and of the damned, because our Sauiour, who can not erre, pronounceth them THE CHILDREN OF HELL? or shall wee rather accept Christes owne Expositi∣on, where he saith, Ibid ver. 33. O Serpents, generation of Vipers how should you escape the (future damnation or) iudgment of hell? Lastly as the name of God is added figuratiuely to ma∣nie things, to signifie the beautie and excellencie thereof in their kindes, as the Psal. 36. hilles of God, and the 80. Ceders of God, for faire and goodlie hills and trees; so the name of hell is vsed in detestation for that, which is fearefull and intolerable, as the sorowes of hell and straights of hell and such like. Whereby it is euident, that you may dreame of Dauid, as you doe of others, that he felt in this life the paines of hell or of the dam∣ned, but if you sett your selfe to prooue it, you must bring stronger stuffe then such wordes, as besides their diuers significations, haue manie figuratiue translations and applications, which will not serue you to conclude any thing for your hell paines suf∣fered in this life. These are the mightie proofes, that were vnanswered, which indeed I neglected, as prouing nothing, and so would yet haue donne, had not you so mouthly called for an answeare, as if the things had beene verie materiall, which in truth are weake and faint. Defenc. pag. 119. li. 31. The confession and behauior of the reprobate do sundry times in this life testifie so much. ] What is their confession in things, which they know not? euen as much as your asser∣tion. That they are somtimes inwardly and fearefully either tormented by satan, or by their owne consciences, I easily admit; but what is the feare of hell either in the elect, or in the reprobate, to the true paines thereof, which the wicked after this life shall feele? that they feele an horror confounding them, I neuer denied; as also the godly may feele a terror pursuing them; but if you determine this to be all the torment the wicked shal find in hell, you were best take heed of deluding Gods iudgments against sinne, and playing with fiery words in steed of euerlasting fire. It is another manner of torment, that there abideth the damned, then this guilt of conscience, remorse of sinne, and a fearefull expectation of iudgement and fire; in which the wicked some∣times lead their liues with horror and confusion; and yet it is open blasphemy to as∣cribe any of these horrors or feares of the reprobate vnto Christ, since they vtterly quench all persuasion of Gods fauour, loue, and patience towards them, which if we affirme of him, we wrap him within their reprobation. Defenc pag. 119. li. 32. The Diuels are many times out of the locall hell, as when they are in this world. But Diuels are neuer released of hell sorrowes. Therefore the true sorrowes of hell are euen in this world: and then possibly may be inflicted on wicked men as they are on Diuels which are some∣times out of the locall hell. ] We speake of men here liuing on earth, and you runne to Diuels ranging in the aire, or compassing the earth, for proofe of your hell-paines. Which is as much, as if you did plainely confesse, you can find no Scripture to prooue that mortall men in this life may endure the torments of hell. For the example of Diuels inferreth no more the paines of hell to be suffered of men in this life, then the presence of elect Angels here on earth doth prooue, that men in this life may enioy the perfection of Gods heauenly ioies and glory; since the angels of God whitherso∣euer they goe, or wheresoeuer they are, cannot be depriued or diminished of that inward power and light, blessednesse and glory in which they are confirmed for euer. With Angels elect or reprobate men after this life shall haue a resemblance and con∣uenience; the faithfull (saith Christ) shall be Matth. 22. as the Angels of God in heauen, and the cursed are cast Matth. 25. into euerlasting fire, prepared for the diuell and his angels: But in this life, except we will waxe mad, we must make no equiualence betwixt their estates and ours. So that from the diuels condition to mans in this life there is no consequent, more then the imitation and communion of his wickednesse in the reprobate, whose children they are because they fulfill his desires, and an expectation and feare of his punishment. Otherwise as the earth is neither heauen nor hell, no more is mans life on earth matchable with the ioyes of the good, or paines of the bad Angels; which haue the place of their abode determined, and assigned them in heauen or in hell, saue when they are sent, or loosed by God, to attend the execution of his will. And yet if the place of hell had no greater nor other paines then the diuels alwayes carrie with them and in them, why should they so much feare to be Luc. 8. v. 31. sent into the deepe, or Iudae epla. v. 6. be reserued vnto the iugdement of the great day, and Peter 2. ca. 2. kept vnto damnation? feare they with∣out cause, or are they kept and reserued to no more, nor worse paines then already they feele? That is no reseruation, where there is nothing but a continuation of the very same that was besore. It is certaine therefore, howsoeuer you presume the con∣trarie, that the place of hell hath greater paines euen for the diuels, then they feele any heere on earth, or before the last day, and howsoeuer their inward confusion and de∣speration doe horribly persue them in all places since their fall, yet a more fearefull torment abideth them in hell, and especially when the last iudgement commeth, which is the set time that shall torment them by addicting and fastning them to eter∣nall and intolerable fire. Yet the sorrowes of hell are in the world. ] By such logicke you may prooue the paines of hell to be in heauen, and the ioyes of heauen to be in hell; and so make a full con∣fusion of all things, which well becommeth your newe found faith. For the Scrip∣tures beare witnesse, that Satan not only Luc. 10. fell from heauen, but made his Reuel. 12. battell (or rebellion) in heauen, and after his fall Iob 1. stoode among the children of God, and euen with 1. King. 22. the host of heauen. Reuel. 12. There was a battaile in heauen, (saith Iohn) Michael and his An∣gels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought, and his Angels. But they preuailed not, neither was their place found any more in heauen. And the great Dragon, called the diuell, was cast into the earth. Therefore reioyce ye heauens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea: for the diuell is come downe vnto you with great wrath knowing that his time is short. 1. King. 22. I saw the Lord sit on his throne, (saith Michaiah the Prophet) and all the host of heauen stoode about him on his right hand, and on his left hand. Then there came foorth a (lying) spirit, and stoode before the Lord, of whom the booke of Iob testifieth, that Iob 1. v. 6. when the children of God came, and stoode before the Lord, Satan came also among them. Certaine it is, that Satan and his angels sinned euen in heauen, and were cast out of heauen after their defection from God, carrying alwayes with them, and within them, the losse of their originall brightnesse, and the chaines of inward and fearefull darknesse, whereby they find themselues reiected from Gods sauour, de∣spoyled of their former light and glory, and reserued for the iudgement of the great day, at which they tremble, as well as at the place of their perpetuall imprisonment, where their torments are, and shalbe increased, though they be neuer freed from that horrible confusion, in which they lie. And therefore they scare the place prouided for them, and besought Christ neither Luc. 8. to send them into the deepe (and bottomlesse pit) nor to Matth. 8. torment them besore their time. Neither was there onely transgression, re∣probation, and confusion in the place of heauen, where the Angels sinned, and whence they were cast, but of the blessed Angels S. Iohn saith, that one of them Reuel. 20. came downe from heauen, hauing the key of the bottomlesse pit, and a great chaine in his hand, who tooke the Dragon, which is the diuell, and bound him, and cast him into the bot∣tomlesse pit, and shut him vp, and sealed vpon him. And were it doubtfull of Angels, how they could retaine the measure of their brightnesse and blessednesse in the place of hell; yet heare we Dauid confesse of God himselfe, and of his spirit; If I ascend to hea∣uen, thou art there; if I get downe to hell, thou art there. So that the very fountaine of all holinesse and happinesse is in heauen, earth, and hell, and yet the states of these three places are not confounded, because the perfection of all goodnesse is present in euery of them. The goodnesse and glory of God is not so fastned vnto places, that either Paradise or heauen did priuilege men or Angels from sinne, as heauen did not the di∣uels, nor hell it selfe can hinder the happinesse of the blessed Angels, when they are sent with power from God to execute his pleasure. And yet this doth not confound the distinction of places, or states in heauen or hell, but that heauen is now the place, where the brightnesse of Gods glory is reuealed to his Saints, besides their internall and continuall vision of God, which maketh them most happie, and neuer leaueth them, whethersoeuer they goe. And therefore the Angels that sinned, were cast thence, that they should not defile the place of Gods presence with their wickednesse; and hell is likewise the prepared mansion for the diuels, where vengeance from God is powred on them, and greater shall be, when after iudgement they shall be closed in perpetuall prison, though till that day some of them be suffered to beare rule in the aire, and to worke in the children of disobedience, for the triall of the saints and farder setting forth os Gods most glorious wisedome, power, and rightcousnesse. Defenc. pag. 119. li. 7. Lastly the true ioyes of heauen may be out of the locall heauen, as when the glorious An∣gels haue bene and tarried some while here on earth with men. Yet did they neuer for a mo∣ment want the toyes and glory of heauen. ] From Angels endued with inward and heauenly light, power, holinesse, and happinesse, and by grace euerlastingly confirmed therein, no argument can be drawen to our weake, sinfull, and variable condition; neither doe we dispute of Gods power, what he can doe, but of his will and ordinance, whereby he hath appointed heauen to be his seat, that is the place, where his glory is , and eternall and perfect blessednesse bestowed on all the inhabitants thereof, be they men or Angels. And though the Angels, whethersoeuer they goe, or whatsoeuer they doe, retaine the cleere sight of God, and the perfection of their all happinesse, yet that is no proofe, that we liuing here in mortall and miserable flesh can haue that on earth, which they haue. For example, take some parts or con∣sequents of that heauenly ioy and blisse which the Angels being heere on earth keep immutable, and you shall soone see, how grossely you erre in communicating their glory to men yet dwelling in houses of clay. The Angels of God here on earth can neither erre, sinne, nor die; they can feele no necessity, infirmity, nor miserie; they need not eat, sleepe, nor rest; they are indued with light, that cannot be obscured; with holinesse, that cannot be defiled; with ioy, that cannot be diminished; with power, that cannot be resisted by men or Diuels. Can these things be attributed to mortall men here on earth without open and palpable heresie? Wherefore it is an erroneous and presumptuous inference, that Defenc pa. 120. . 2. If Angels may enioy heauen really being in the world, that men heere liuing may doe the like. Defenc. pag. 120. 3. It is possible for Gods goodnesse to communicate some reall foretasie thereof vnto some blessed men also. ] A taste of glory, which neither continueth nor satisfieth, can not be called heauen, which is the perfect and perpetuall fulnesse of all kinde of blisse, and want of all kinde of miserie. S. Peter teacheth vs that God 1. Pet. 1. begetieth (vs) into a liue∣ly hope, to an inheritance incorruptible, vndefiled, and vnchangeable, reserued in the heauens for vs, who are by the power of God kept by faith vnto saluation, readie to le shewed in the last time. If the taste of glory, which you talke of, be not immortall, immutable, & vnde∣filed with any defect or miserie, it may not be called heauen, nor be sayd to be the in∣heritance reserued for vs in heauen. And therefore though some blessed men haue had a sight of some glory, which you call a taste thereof, as Moses, Esay, Steuen, and others; yet that doth not proue them to haue beene really in the ioyes of heauen. How osten is it written of the Israelites, that they saw the glory of the Lord; and yet they were ouerthrowen in the wildernesse? Exodus 24. ver. 16. 17. The glory of the Lord (saith Moses) abode vpon mount Sinai, and the sight of the glory of the Lord was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountaine in the eies of the children of Israel. So when Aaron offered his first offe∣ring for his Priesthood, and blessed the people; Leu t. 9. v. 23 The glorie of the Lord appeared to all the people: of whom God saith, Numb. 14. vers. 22. All these men, which haue seene my glory, & my miracles, which I did in Egypt, and in the wildernesse, and haue tempted me these ten times, certainly they shall not see the land, whereof I sware to their Fathers. When Salomon had builded and consecrated the temple with praier and sacrifice, The glory of the Lord house so that the Priests could not enter into the house of the Lord, because the glory Lord had filled the Lords house. And when all the children of Israel saw the fire, and the glory of the Lord come downe vpon the house, they bowed themselues with their faces to the earth vpon the pauement, and worshipped, and praised the Lord. I trust the King, the Priests, and the People were not all in the ioies of heauen; and yet they all with their eies saw the glory of God there presented before them; and such as were religious and obedi∣ent, saw it to their exceeding ioy. Defenc. pag. 120. li. 5. That God doth indeed reueale some reall tast of his heauenly ioies to his children euen in this life, I haue already shewed, but am not answeared. ] You slide from some blessed men to all the children of God; to whom, you affirme, God doth reueale indeed some reall tast of his heauenly ioies euen in this life. What you meane by a reall tast, we must learne from your owne mouth; by such doubtfull phrases, which you may after wrangle about, you vse to deliuer your doctrine. If you meane ioy in the holy Ghost, whiles by hope we expect the promises of God at his determined time, that indeed is com∣mon to all the children of God in their measure; but that teacheth a maine difference betwixt the things heere enioined, and reserued for vs in heauen; and quite crosseth the new heauen, which you would establish. For we learne by the Scriptures, that our Coloss. 3. Life is hid in Christ, and when Christ, who is our life, shall appeare, then shall we also ap∣peare with him in glory. 1 Iohn 3. Now we are the sonnes of God, but yet it doth not appeare, what we shalbe: and we know, that when he shall appeare, we shalbe like him: for we shall see him, as he is. Our knowledge, loue, and ioy of God and in God, beginne heere by the preaching of the Gospell, and the working of his spirit; but the Scripture neuer calleth those the ioies of ueauen, though they shall there continue, yet so augmented, and accompa∣nied with heauenly brightnesse and glory, that they shall not be the same, they were. For as our naturall vnderstanding and sense, and corporall life and flesh shall not be a∣bolished in heauen, but abide and be glorified, and yet no man is so senselesse, as to thinke or say, the glory of our creation is the glory of our resurrection: so our know∣ledge, loue, and ioy, which heere are weake, and wanting all perfection, as being mixed with ignorance and error, lust and vnlawfull desires, feare and griefe, and often obscured, and almost ouerwhelmed with infirmity, iniquity, and misery, no wise man will defend to be the ioies of Gods heauenly kingdome where is no want, nor defect of any good, nor feare, nor doubt of any euill inward, or outward; but as God shall then be all in all, so shall we be filled with the sight and fruition of God; our loue and ioy increasing according to our knowledge, which then shalbe the manifest vision of God face to face, who is the vnceasing and vnsearchable fountaine of all goodnesse and blessednesse. The Treatis. pa. 80 proofe, on which you stand as yet not answered, is a place of the Apostle to the Corinths, applied by many men to the preaching of the Gospel, & then it maketh nothing for your purpose; but if it be referred to the ioyes of heauen, as you would haue it, it maketh quite against you. For 1. Cor. 2. eye hath not seene, saith the Apostle, neither eare hath heard, neither hath mans heart conceaued, the things which God hath prepared for them, that loue him. If those be the ioyes of heauen, which the Apostle there meaneth, then is it euident, that men are not capable of them, whiles they are compassed with sinne and infirmitie, but God hath reserued them in the heauens for vs, when we shall come to his presence, though in the meane time 1. 2. he hath reuealed to vs by his spirit, that such things are kept in store for vs, which then shall appeare, that is, be apparent∣ly and perfectly bestowed on vs, and we euerlastingly inuested with them. The Re∣uelation which the Apostle here speaketh of, is the reuelation of knowledge, whereby these things are promised and assured vnto vs, not the reuelation of glory, whereby we shall see that, which we now hope for; and enioy that, which we now expect. This doctrine, howsoeuer you would delude it with your reall tasts, is plainely de∣liuered in the Scriptures. When Moses besought God to shew him his glory, God answered; Exod. 33. ver. 20. Thou CANST NOT SEE my face, and liue; for there shall no man see mee, and liue. Where God doth not meane, that men shall not see him in heauen, when they come to be Matth. 22. as the Angels of God, who Mat. 18. v. 10. alwayes behold the face of God in heauen; his owne sonne hath sayd, Matt 5. blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; and his A∣postle likewise, 2. Cor. 13. Now we see through a glasse darkely; then (shall we see) face to face: But he meaneth, that no man liuing in this mortall flesh can see his face. Otherwise it is the cleere resolution of the Scriptures, that we 1. Iohn 3. shall see him as he is, that is, not by faith, as now we doe; nor by some created shew of his glory, as Moses, Elias, Esai and o∣ther the Prophets and Patriarkes did see him for the confirmation of their callings, or consolation of their miseries, but as the Apostle speaketh face to face. Vpon these words of S. Iohn, we shall see him as he is, S. Austen learnedly and truely sayth. August. in . Iohan. Tract. 101. Ista visio non est huius vitae sed futurae, non temporalis sed aeterna. Hunc totius laboris sui fructum Ecclesia nunc parturit desiderando, tunc paritura cernendo. This vision (of God as he is) is not in this life, but in the life to come; not temporall, but eternall. This fruite of her whole labour the Church now trauelleth with by desiring it, but then shall attaine by beholding it. Now if the sight of God himselfe face to face, that is of his substance and glory in plaine, full and perfect manner and measure, be the same with the darke and enigma∣ticall beholding his graces and promises by the glasse of faith, then haue you some reason to say the ioyes of heauen may be had in this life; but if in the manner, measure, obiects and effects of our sight of God in this life and the next there be so great diffe∣rence, then you deceiue both your selfe and your Reader to affirme, we haue the ioyes of heauen heere in this life, when not onely our sinne, our ignorance, our miserie, muta∣bilitie and mortalitie, but euen our faith and hope do clearely prooue, that we haue not that, which we desire, nor as yet enioy that, which we expect, and beleeue wee shall haue. August. epist. 112. Non corda munda suae substantiae contemplatione fraudauit, cum haec magna & summa merces Deum colentibus & diligentibus promittatur, dicente ipso Domino, quando corporalibus oculis visibiliter apparebat, & inuisibilem se contuenaū mundis cordibus promit∣tebat: qui diligit me, diligitur a Patre meo, & ego diligam eum, & ostendā meipsum illi. God hath not defrauded cleane harts of the sight of his substance, since that is promised to those which serue and loue God, as the great and chiefe reward; the Lord saying, when he appeared visible to the eyes of their bodies, & promised himselfe inuisible to be seene of cleane hearts; he that lo∣ueth me shalbe loued of my Father; and I will loue him, and will shew mine owne selfe vnto him. Defenc. pag. 120 li. 7. The transfiguration of Christ on the mount declareth, that some reall part of heauenly glory may be heere on earth, which you your selfe somewhere confesse cleane against your selfe. ] You would needes tell vs in you Treatise, that heauen was some foretaste of the infinite ioy prepared for the godly, which you attempted to prooue by the Apostles words com∣mon to all the children of God, and thereupon concluded; thus you pa. 80. li. 23. see that as there is heauen in this life in some measure, euen so there may be hell. I replied that if you Conclu. pag. 337. . 34. af∣firmed of heauen, as you did of hell, that the VERY SAME IOYES which are in heauen, or EQVALL with them, are heere sometimes found (in vs liuing) on earth, it was a wic∣ked error flatly repugning to the trueth of Gods promises, and to the very nature of our Christi∣an faith and hope. We reasoned not of Christs manhoode, which Colos. 1. in all things had the preeminence aboue and afore all the sonnes of God,, but OF THE CODLY, whom you expressely named, and of whom I accordingly replied, and to whom those words of the Apostle cited by you for proofe of your purpose doe precisely pertaine. For of Christ they are most false, that his eye neuer saw, nor his eare neuer heard, nor his hart neuer conceiued the things, which God hath prepared for them, that loue him. Now when you should prooue that mortall men, and no more then men, though the mem∣bers of Christ, liuing heere on the earth haue THE VERY SAME IOYES, which are in heauen, or EQVALL with them; you run to Christes transfiguration on the mountaine, and by that you would inferre, that there was heauen euen in this life in some measure. But first where can you shew, that Christes transfiguration on the mountaine is called heauen in the Scriptures. Next, what deriuation can you make from Christs power, knowledge, and glory, to ours heere on earth? Christs soule had many parts and degrees of heauenly perfection in this life, which ours haue not; he was free from sinne and error, which abound in vs; he was full of trueth and grace, which want in vs, saue what we receiue from his fulnesse; he was the way, the light, and the life, that leadeth, lightneth and quickeneth euery man comming into the world; yea the crosse of Christ was the wisdome and power of God. These and many other maine differences the Scriptures expresse betwixt Christ and vs; so that from his perfection and preeminence to our weakenesse, wickednesse, and wretchednesse in this world no comparison can be made, nor any consequent, but that beleeuing in him, louing him, and obeying his commandements, as we are heere regenerate and renewed by his spirit, so we shalbe conformed to his image, to raigne with him in the next life, if we suffer with him in this life. Christs transfiguration then is not called heauen in any Scripture, neither had it the perfection or condition of heauen; since heauen is not a transitory taste of mutable ioy or glory, but a full and euerlasting possession of all power, honour, and blisse communicable from God, and proporti∣onable to the receauer. But if Christ had the reall fruition of heauen in his flesh heere on earth, how much more in his soule, which was alwaies full of trueth and grace, light, and life; and hauing so reall a tast as you speake of, and so immeasurable a fulnesse of life and grace, as the Scriptures speake; I greatly maruaile how you come really to place hell and heauen in one soule together, and specially in the soule of Christ, on which you inflict the very substance of hell paines, when yet the abundance and continuance of heauenly ioy could not want in him. As for my somewhere confessing cleane against my selfe, that Christ transfigured in the mount tasted of that heauenly glory prepared for him; I see not how that crosseth any thing auouched by me in the 337. and 338. page by you noted. You shall do well when you challenge contrarieties, not to let the report rest on your crackt credit, but produce the words, that your Reader may be iudge of both. You are sharp enough to catch hold of any thing, if there were any cause. I called indeed Christs transfiguration on the mount a taste of that heauenly ioy prepared for him, I called it not heauen. A taste of things neither abideth, nor sufficeth, which heauen fully doth; & therefore it is rather a con∣tradiction, then a confession of your conceit. For if you thinke that Christs heauenly glory may be defectiue or mutable, as his transfiguration was, you broch a wicked and impious error. Christs transfiguration did not exempt him from feare, sorrow, shame and death following, which if you imagine of his glorification in heauen, it is a right hellish impiety. And whatsoeuer we affirme of Christ touching his preeminence aboue all the children of men as that he was free from sinne, and full of grace, and had the perfect knowledge of Gods trueth and will aboue men and Angels, I hope you will not deriue it to his members heere liuing in the flesh, least you leaue no ground of Christian religion vnshaken. Defenc. pag. 120. li. 10. Onely this you haue to obiect touching men, that faith and hope is the euidence of things not seene: neither are our greatest ioyes the same, nor equall to them which we shall possesse in the next world. ] I haue also to obiect, that it is not lawfull for you nor for any man li∣uing to determine of Gods kingdome without his warrant, nor to auouch that to be heauen, which the Scriptures doe not. Take heed, it is no pastime to play with hea∣uen and hell, as you do, without better aslurance than you haue. Know you not what that learned Father sayth? Tertullianus de praescrip ad∣uersus haereti∣cos. Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet. It is not lawfull for vs (that be Christians) to deuise any thing of our owne heads: But Cyril. de fide ad Reginas. li 2. it is necessarie for vs (as Cyril sayth) to follow the diuine Scriptures, and in nothing to depart from their prae∣scription. [ Defenc pag. 120 li. 14. I answere our reasons before do proue more than only hope in the faithfull some∣times. ] And I replie that none of your reasons do any way proue the ioyes of heauen. Gods answere to Moses must stoppe your mouth, and the presumption of all such as you are; Exod. 33. Thou canst not see my face, for there shall no man see me, and liue. Moses saw as much as in this mortall life any man compassed with sinne is able to see. He saw posteriora Dei, the backe parts of God; for so God sayd vnto him: Exo. 33. v. 22 I will couer thee with mine hand, whiles I passe by. 23. After I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see mine hinder parts: but my face shalt thou not see. Whereupon S. Austen sayth very aduised∣ly: August. de Symbolo a Ca∣teth menos. li ca. 3. Ipsa sunt illa posteriora Dei, Christus Dei. Those hinder parts of God, were the Christ of God. Which exposition Christ confirmeth, when he sayth: Iohn 8. Your Father Abra∣ham reioyced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. Other shewes of Gods glorie some others had, as Elias in the Caue, the People in the Wildernesse, Salomon in his Temple, and Iohn Baptist in Iordan, when he saw the Holy Ghost descend like a Doue, and abide on Christ; but none of those was the sight of Gods face, which no (mortall) man can see, and liue. And that is the true and essentiall ioy of heau n, to which all other degrees of perfection and happinesse are consequent. August. d ciuitate Dei. li. 16. a. 9. Videns Deum, quod erit in sine praemium omnium sanctorum. The sight of God (sayth Austen) shall in the end be the reward of all his saints. Which doctrine he learned from S. Paul and S. Iohn the Apostles of Christ, and they from their Master. 1. Cor. 13. Then (we shall see him) face to face, and then shall I know, sayth S. Paul, euen as I am knowen. When Christ shall appeare, sayth S. Iohn, 1. Iohn 3. we shall be like to him, for we shall see him as he is. And so our Sauiour: Iohn 14. I will loue him (that loueth me) and shew mine owne selfe vnto him. Defen . 120. li. 15. Secondly, it is true the Apostle sayth, that here we walke by faith, and liue by hope; yet some rare exceptions do not ouerthrow this generall course. ] The Scriptures are true with you, saue where you list to make exceptions of your doctrine as not conteined in them, nor agreeing with them. No man in this life, Christ Iesus only excepted, had euer any such vision of God, or possession and fruition of his heauenly kingdome, that he did not walke by faith, and liue by hope. Paul was 2. Cor. 12. taken vp into the third hea∣uen, and heard words not lawfull (or not possible) for man to vtter. Did he then cease to walke by faith, who after and alwayes prosessed of himselfe; 1 Cor. 13. Now I know in part, but then I shall know as I am knowen? And including himselfe with the rest; 2. Co . 5. We walke by faith, not by sight: And xactly speaking of himselfe; Galat. . That I now liue in the fl sh; I liue by the f ith of the Sonne of God; Phil. 3. that I may know him, and the vertue of his resurrection, and fellowship of his afflictions, not as though I had alreadie attained to it, but I endeuour my selfe to that which is before, and follow hard towards the marke, for the price of the high cal∣ling of God in Iesus Christ. If you dare defend, that Paul in Paradise did see God face to face, then may you say, that at that time he walked not by faith, but by sight; but if that be a plaine errour, then Paul as yet attained not the sight of Gods face, nor the crowne of righteousnesse layed vp for him, which should be giuen him by the iust Iudge at that day; and consequently neither faith nor hope ceased in Paul, notwith∣standing his being in the third heauen. The like I say of S. Iohn, who Reu l. 4. saw a dore open in heauen, and was willed to come vp thither, and of all the Saints that either talked with God, or had any manifest reuelation of his glory, whiles here they liued. The transfiguring of Christ in the mount, was to him not only a ioyfull hope, but a reall taste of his very heaue ly ioyes. ] That transfiguration of Christ, whether it were for himselfe or for the confirmation of his Disciples, the Scriptures doe not precisely determine. When a voice came from heauen to Christ in the audience of all the people, Christ answered; This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes. S. Peter, who was one of those Disciples that saw him transfigured, writeth thus of it: 2. Pet. 1. We followed not de∣ceiuable fables, but with our eyes we saw his Maiestie: for he receiued of God the Father ho∣nour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my be∣loued Sonne, in whom I am well pleased. This voice, which was greater glory than his transfiguration, came in respect of them, to confirme them in their faith and obedi∣ence to the Sonne of God then incarnate; and yet to assure their eyes by sight, as well as their ares by that voice, he was transfigured before them: but this transfiguration did not fr e Christ from feare, sorrow, shame, violence, and death, which followed; and therefore this was not heauen to him, nor all the glory prepared for him, but an outward shew thereof, to establish rather his Disciples, then himselfe. For his soule within him had here on earth greater glorie continually then a transitorie change of his body, as namely the personall vnion with God, which no creature, man, nor An∣gell, in earth or heauen, had or hath besides him; the fulnesse of Gods spirit resting on him, by which he knew all the counsell and will of God, and all the secrets of mens hearts; power ouer all flesh, and command ouer all creatures, which neither Saint nor Angell in heauen hath. In the glory of his body Moses and Steuen did here on earth in part communicate with him. 2. Cor. 3. Moses face did shine when he knew it not. The children of Israel could not behold the face of Mo∣ses for the glorie of his countenance, which so glittered, that the children of Israel were a∣frayd to come neere him, & he forced to put a vaile vpon his face, when they spake with him; and yet Moses Exod. 34. ver. 29. wist not that the skin of his face shone bright. And likewise Acts 6. all that sate in the councell, where Steuen was conuented & condemned, looking stedfastly on him saw his face as the face of an Angell, that is, bright and glorious, though Steuen knew it not no more than Moses, for ought that the Scripture noteth of him; saue that in the end Steuen Acts 7. looking stedfastly into heauen saw the glory of God, and Iesus standing at the right hand of God. But the inward and continuall glorie of Christes soule heere on earth was proper to him, no man nor angell matching him therein. How come you then to attribute heauen vnto Christ for the momentarie transfiguration of his bo∣die, and to neglect and ouerskippe the constant and continuall ioy and glory of his soule, which far better deserued the name of heauen, than the change of his bodie? Defenc. pag. 21. li. 2. We grant the ioyes of heauen here are nothing equall to those hereafter: only we say the very same in nature may be and are by the effectuall working of Gods gratious spirit in his e∣lect reuealed in some measure and sometime euen in this world. Neither is this, as your cha∣rity speaketh, any lewd or wicked error. ] My charity serueth me, and my duty bindeth me to tell you, that if you, of your owne head without the word of God, will make an heauen, or defend that to be heauen, which is imperfect, mutable, and often defiled not with misery and death only, but with weakenesse and wickednesse also, you main∣taine an euident and pestilent error. The graces of God are heauenly, aswell because they are giuen from heauen, and direct to heauen, as also they assure men of heauen; but the measure of grace or ioy, which we haue heere on earth, is not the heauen, which we are willed to beleeue and expect, where our reward is, and where an in∣corruptible, vndefiled, and immutable inheritance is reserued for vs, and whence we looke for our Sauiour. Your distinction, that our ioy is the very same in nature, though not in measure, which is in heauen, is not only false, but a void and idle refuge. For the ioy of hea∣uen The name of Nature in the graces of God and ioyes of heauen is a vaine distin∣ction. is the plaine vision of Gods face, which bringeth with it a present, perfect, perpe∣tuall, and plenary possession of all light, power, loue, holinesse, and happinesse deriueable f m God; which in this weake, fraile, sinnefull and wretched life no man hath, nor can haue. And therefore though there be the knowledge, loue and ioy of God, both in this life and in the next; yet the differences are so many, and so great, that no man of any reason or vnderstanding will make the one to be the other for some agree∣ments in some points, whereas in the whole there is not only a substantiall difference betwixt them, which is the sight of Gods face, but so many parts, effects, and conse∣quēts in the one, which are not in the other, that it is more then folly to make the one by pretence of nature to be the same with the other. All ioy in nature is the same, if by nature we meane the generall definition therof; for ioy is the impression or inward sense of good present, or instant; yea hope is in nature all one with ioy, since in hope there is ioy, as in feare there is paine, and in hope we reioice: yet no considerate di∣uine will confound hope and ioy together, because they differ but in time, much lesse make the ioies in this life, which are defectiue, mutable, and permixed with our infir∣mity, misery, and iniquity, the very same in nature with the ioies of heauen, which are abundant, constant, and sincere in all parts and effects, of brightnesse, mightfulnesse, righteousnesse, and blessednesse, which men can possibly comprehend, when they come to the presence of God. The sight of God by his creatures, by his iudgments, by his word, and by himselfe, is the same in the generall nature of knowledge; yet are there as great differences betwixt them, as betwixt darkenesse and light. The A∣postle saith, Rom. 1. The inuisible thinges of God, that is his eternall power and godhead, are seene by the creation of the world, considered in his workes, and that which may be knowen of God, is manifest in them. Shall we then say, the heathen haue the very same knowledge of God by his workes, which the Angels in heauen haue by the sight of himselfe? the Diuels know him also by his workes, by his word, and his iudgements. Ionas 2. Thou belee∣uest, saith Iames, That there is one God, thou doest well. The Diuels also beleeue t, and tremble. Yea they know Christ to be the sonne of God. Luc. 4. I know who thou art, said the Diuell to Christ, euen the holy one of God. Shall we then thinke that the Diuels faith is the very same in nature with our Christian faith? of many castawaies, which fall away from the grace of God, and receaue it in vaine, the Apostle saith. Heb. 6. They were once lightened, and tasted of the heauenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and tast∣ed of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. Shall we auouch these reprobates were in heauen in this life, because they had once the very same graces in nature, which the elect haue? If our knowledge doe differ in this life and the next, Our loue and ioy do follow our know∣ledge. then doth our ioy likewise differ. From our knowledge of God riseth our loue of God, and our ioy in God. For we can neither haue loue, nor ioy of that, which we know not: but as our knowledge increaseth, so doth our loue and ioy. And therefore when we see God infallibly, as he is, then shall we loue him vnfainedly, as we ought, and reioice in him vnspeakeably, euen as much, as we are capable of, not by the strength of our nature, but by the working of his power. Till then as our knowledge is darke, and in part, so our loue is weake, and our ioy is faint; but then shall these very thinges not only rise to an higher degree, and be of another nature, but be re∣plenished with all parts of light, power, and blisse, without which we may defend no∣thing to be heauen indeed, howsoeuer wee may vse figuratiue speaches to comfort, or encourage the godly. As then worke and wages, labour and rest, sowing and rea∣ping, running and obtaining, striuing and crowning, abroade and at home, doe dif∣fer euen in nature, so faith and sight, hope and haning, promising, and performing, that is, our state in earth and heauen, doth likewise differ; though it be one and the same thing, which is now promised, beleeued, and hoped for, and which hereafter shalbe receaued, attained, and enioyed. Defenc. pag. 121. li. 7. Now then if more then hope only euen heauenly ioies may be on earth, surely it followeth, that likewise more then feare, euen hellish paines themselues may be in men on earth also. ] If the ioies of heauen be not only constant in nature, but perfect in measure, and con∣sist in the sight of Gods face, which no man shall see, and liue; then certainly the ioies of heauen are not in this life imparted to any mortall and sinnefull man. And though that might be, which yet God expressely denieth shalbe; yet the other is no con ∣quent, that the paines of the damned may be likewise in this weake and fainting flesh; because ioy is an affection, that preserueth this life; and paine, if it be violent and a∣boue our strength, presently seuereth the soule from the body. Take an example of this fire, which we see and know. If it be not possible without a miracle from the mighty hand of God for flesh to abide, or life to dure in the paine of burning and fla∣ming fire; how lesse possible is it for the wicked, on whom God sheweth no such wonders, to liue and continue in the paines of the damned, whiles they are heere fastened to the flesh? Chrysost. ad Theodorum lapsum e∣p st. 5. Hic quidem non simul contingit vehementia poenarum, & earum diuturnitas. Altera enim cum altera pugnat, propter conditionem corruptibilis huius cor∣poris non ferentisea. In this life (saith Chrysostome) the violence of paines, and the conti∣nuance thereof cannot stand together. The one fighteth with the other, by reason of this cor∣ruptible body, which cannot beare both. And againe Idem ad Po∣pulum Anti∣och homil. 49. Name fire, or sword, or any thing that is more grieuous then these, yet these are scant a shadow to those torments. Defenc. pag. 121. li. 16. And if hell paines in this world may be in any, much rather may they be in Christ, whom God purposely sent through paines and afflictions (the extreamest that might be) to be conse∣crated the Prince of our saluation. ] If the true paines of hell might be in others here liuing, yet in Christs soule they might not be, since his soule had alwaies greater in∣ward ioyes of the holy Ghost, which you call heauen, then any man here liuing on earth could haue, except your learning serue you, to put both the ioyes of heauen and the paines of hell at one and the same time in the soule of Christ. As for your proofe, when you shew that the paines of hell are sacred and holy, then bring them to consecrate the Prince of our saluation. Till then, refraine this apparent collusion, to make Christ both obedient and astonished, patient and ouerwhelmed in the paines of hell; and learne that God tried the obedience and patience of his Sonne by the things which he suffered, and so consecrated or consummated him to be the Prince of our saluation; who must be conformed to his image to suffer with him, not the pains of hell, but the miseries and afflictions of this life, with all obedience to the will and counsell of God, if we will reigne with him. Defenc pag. 121. li. 14. & 19. If you say yet thus it will follow, that the extreamest paines of hell are not to be found in this world, as the hiest ioyes of heauen are not likewise by my confession: I answere I know not, neither meane I to determine the measure and depth of sorowes, which Christ in his Passion suffered. ] Either you change mindes with the windes, or he that wrote this, wrote not that which went before. In the 52 page of this booke li. 25. you prated apace, that Christ suffered a sense of Gods wrath EQVALL to hell it selfe, and ALL THE TOR∣MENTS thereof. And in the 15 page li. 16. you solemnly concluded, whence it must follow, that the paines of Christs suffering were the same in nature and ALTOGETHER AS SHARPE, and as painfull as they are in hell it selfe. Now you know no such thing, nor meane to determine it. It were good you tooke vpon you to know lesse of your hellish mysteries, till you were more assured of them, or better learned in them. This floting vp & downe like the waues of the sea, shew that either diuers mens pens haue beene in your papers, or that vnquiet buzzes are in your owne braines, who some∣times can not nor will not, and yet somtimes can and will determine, and pronounce the paines of hell suffered by Christ to be EQVALL to hell and all the torments thereof, and AS SHARPE as the sharpest in hell. But your Reader, if he be wise, will see you more constant in your owne conceits, before he giue any credit to them; and lesse maruell that men fallen from the trueth thus reele to and fro. Defenc. pag. 121. li. 22. Only grant this plainly, that Christ suffered in his soule the true effects of Gods proper iustice and wrath, and we seeke no more. ] Tell me first, what you meane by the effects of Gods proper iustice and wrath, and then from what Scripture you deriue it, and you shall soone see what I grant. Only say you no more than you haue expresse war∣rant of the holie Ghost to beleeue, and I aske no more. With the name of Gods pro∣per wrath you haue plaied a long time, and a number haue deceaued them selues. For as it is most true, that God would haue laid none of these things, which Christ suffered, on his owne sonne, but displeased and angrie with our sinnes; for which he was to satisfie the Iustice of God, least our iniquitie should seeme a matter of dal∣liance, and easily uerpast: so it is as true, that God neither was, nor could be wroth and offended with the person of his owne sonne, in whom he was well pleased, and for whose sake he was reconciled to vs; but that the chastisement of our peace being imposed on him, who for the innocencie and excellencie of his person was able to to∣lerate and mitigate the wrath of God prouoked by our sinnes, he made the purga∣tion of them by that kind of satisfaction, which was conuenient both to the dignitie and safetie of his person, and argued apparantly the loue of God towards him, and his loue towards vs; whiles he put him selfe in the gappe, by his owne smart to auert and appease the iust wrath kindled against vs. Now what this chastisement was, wee may neither of vs, nor any man els seeke farder, then the holie Ghost hath deliue∣red, that 1. Cor. 15. Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures, and Philip 2. became obedient to the death, euen the death of the crosse; which is plainly described by the Euangelists, and should not be questioned by any, that is not more wedded to his conceits than to the word of God. Defenc. pag. 121. li. 31. Though Christ suffered all (which he did suffer) here in this world, ye for any thing I can see, there is cause why Christ should be an extraordinarie person in the case of suffering for sin in this life, and that therefore as touching sorow and paine, he might feele more than euer any els hath or could feele for the time. ] He was an extraordinarie person indeed, as being the true and only Sonne of God, that is, both God and man in one person, bearing the burden of our sinnes in his bodie, but appropriating or accounting the same to the dignitie of his person, that by his death he might abolish him that had rule of death, and restore vs to life by his humilitie and obedience, which was so precious and glorious in the sight of God, that he accepted it as a full sacrifice and satisfaction for all our sinnes, and made him the authour of eternali saluation to all that obey him: but that he must be God aswel as man, to be able to suffer the paines of hell & the second death, that is a new deuice of yours, not conuerting the Godhead of Christ to the in∣finitenesse of his merits, but abusing it to the infinitenesse of his paines, to make place for your new-found hell from the immediate hand of God, where Scripture menti∣oneth no such thing in the worke of our redemption, but plainly and fairely teacheth vs, that we are Rom. 5. reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, who Coloss. 1. by the bloud of his Crosse procured perfect peace in heauen and in earth, and restored vs to the fauour of God, through death in the bodie of his flesh, in which he Rom. 8. condemned sinne, that we might be Heb. 10. sanctified by the offering of his bodie once made on the altar of the Crosse. And this doctrine so euidently and frequently deliuered by the Holy Ghost in the sacred Scriptures, is so sufficient, that I see no cause, nor need of your hell paines, besides no warrant nor witnesse of them; except we dreame, that the spirit of God did not well vnderstand, or could not aptly expresse your hellish mysteries, which he alwaies ouer∣passeth with silence, when hee speaketh of the purgation of our sinnes, and our re∣demption by the precious bloud of the Lambe vnspotted and vndefiled. If therefore it be not lawfull in the highest points of faith to adde ought to the word of God, nor to thinke that the spirit of Trueth faileth or defecteth in his instruction vnto trueth, I do not see with what dutie to God you and others may be so bolde with the Sonne of God, as to subiect his soule to the second death, and to the paines of the damned, when the Scriptures offer vs no such part or point of our beliefe. Defenc. pag. 121. li. 36. You seeme to grant vnto Christ all naturall sorrow and feare, neither doe we seeke any more: but you trust the paine of the damned is more than a naturall oppressing and afflicting of the heart with humane feare and sorow. For sooth it is not. It is no more than a very naturall humane feare and sorow. It proceedeth immediately and principally from God himselfe, who is the Nature of Natures. Also mans nature is apt to receiue such sorow and feare from him. Thus the very paines of the damned are meerely naturall. ] If you make vs many such conclusions, you will proue your selfe a meere Naturall. For if all things be meerely naturall to man, that God either bestoweth or inflicteth on man, then grace and glo∣rie are meerely naturall to man, yea heauen it selfe is as naturall to man as hell, and the Holy Ghost himselfe shall become meerely naturall to man; for God doth giue, and we Rom. 8. receiue the spirit of adoption, whereby we crie Abba Father: yea the second person in Trinitie is inseparably ioyned to mans nature, and as well the ather as the Sonne 1. Ioh. 4. abide and 2. Cor. 6. dwell in all the Saints. So that the coniunction, communion, and inhabi∣tation of the godhead in man is meerly naturall vnto man by your doctrine; and not only God, but the Diuell is as naturall to man, and so are those things, which are most vnnaturall, and most repugnant to mans nature. For man doth, and suffereth them, by and from God, or the Diuel. As corruption and incorruption, mortality and im∣mortality, righteousnesse & vnrighteousnesse, saluation and destruction, eternall life and eternall death, are meerly naturall to man by your learned discourse, which if you persist to defend, take heed least men doubt, whether frensie be naturall to you or no. Natural I called, not whatsoeuer is any way incident to men in this life or the next, but that which is generall, & necessary to all men, in that they are men. Wherfore I make neither hell, nor heauen naturall vnto men, since the one God giueth by his power and grace aboue our nature, for our nature is not to be, as the Angels of God; and in the other by iustice and wrath God worketh against our nature. For that fire should euerlastingly burne, and flesh euerlastingly dure therein, and soules be extreamely tormented therewith, are to my vnderstanding farre beyond nature, except you be∣ eaue God of his almighty power and will, which the Scriptures confesse in him, and call him by the name of nature, which is no more, but the condition and operation, that he hath assigned in this world to euery creature. If you would needs know, whence I tooke the word naturall, read either Fulgentius or Damascene, and you shall soone see, what they and I meane by nature. Tulgenti ad Trasimundum li. tertio. Because Christ, saith Fulgentius, tooke vpon him to be a true man, ideo cunct as naturae humanae infirmitates ver as quidem, sedvo∣luntarias sustinuit, therefore he sustained all the infirmities of mans nature, truely but vo∣luntarily, and so Damascene. Damas. li. 3. ca. 20. We confesse that Christ vndertooke all naturall and sin∣lesse passions. Naturall and sinlesse passions are those, which entered into mans life by the condemnation of (Adams) transgression; as hunger, thirst, wearinesse, labour, weeping, shunning of death, feare, agonie, and such like, which are naturally in all men. So that what is gene all and necessarie to all men in this life, is naturall to man, which I trust nei∣ther hell nor heauen is, though by iustice or mercie all men after this life shall feele the one, or enioy the other. Def nc pag. 122. li. 6. Supernaturall I graunt they are, if we meane this, that they are aboue our natures state to beare or to comprehend them. ] If your rule be true, that men naturally receiue the paines of h ll, why should not mans nature as well beare them, or comp ehend them, as receiue them; except you meane the bearing of them with patience, or compre∣hending the end of them? what punishment men receiu , that they beare. Gala 5. He that troubleth you, shall be are his condemnation, whosoeuer he be. And againe, Gala 6. euery man shall be re his own burden. And so elsewhere. Ephes. 3. I bow my knees vnto the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that he will grant you, that ye may be strengthened by his spirit in the inward man, that ye may be able to COMPREHEND with all Saints, what is the breadth & length, and depth and height, and to know the loue of Christ, which passeth (the) knowledge (of man.) And if men shall feele the paines of hell, why shall they not comprehend that, which they feele? They shall apprehend no end nor ease thereof, but feeling is a comprehension of the paine, though it shall be so great, that they cannot endure it with any patience. And yet since you striue for the paines of hell in the soule of Christ, aduise you whe∣ther Christ shall comprehend them, or want patience in them, and not see an end of them. For if he did suffer them, he did beare them, and comprehend them, except you make him impatient in his paines, and the paines euerlasting in him. Defenc. 122. li. 10. The next is as vaine, where you thinke it not tolerable, that I say Christ in plaine wordes prayed contrary to his Fathers knowen will; I pray haue patience: I say no harme, nor I meane Chris s prayer was not con∣trary to Gods knowen will. no ill. ] A plaine patterne of vanitie if a man would seeke for, he shall neede goe no farder, then these eight pages spent in excusing your bold and sawcie assertion, that is, Trea. pa. 59. li. 4. It is manifest in plaine words, Christ prayed contrary to Gods knowen will. And the conse∣quents, which you hang to it, are worse then the words themselues; that Ibid. pa. 58. li. 11. he plainely corrected his will by Gods will, and in correcting it was contrarie, yea he knew it to be so; and Ibid. pa. 59. li. 6. vnlesse it were in astonishment, Ibid. pa. 59. li. 8. he could not haue wanted sinne. For none of all these po∣sitions haue any trueth in them, or proofe for them, besides your wilfull mistaking and wresting the Scripture. The wo ds of our Sauiour, as I haue shewed before, haue foure expositions with the auncient Fathers, euery one confirming, that there was no contradiction indeede betweene the will of God & the prayer of Christ. The first that Christ praied vpon a condition, if man might possibly be otherwise saued, and the Iewes not perish by his passion, which Origen, Ierom & Bede do follow. They put a speciall Emphasis in the words, THIS CVP, which should be the vtter desolation and re∣iection of the Iewes. The next limiteth the word PASSE to POSSIBLE, as if Christ had said, let this cup passe from me, as much as is possible; by which he desireth a modera∣tion of the punishment prouoked by our sinnes, and yet referr th it to his Fathers will. This Euthymius embraceth. A third is, that Christ confessed a naturall dislike of death and paine in the weaknesse of his flesh, though his spirit did readily submit it selfe to the diuine will of his Father, and of himselfe, euen touching the death of the crosse. This sense Chysostome, Damascene and others doe bring. The fourth, that Christ here assumed and declared the weaknesse of his members, who being no more then men, should feare death; but he by suffering that affection to rise in himselfe, and repressing it, did by his grace cure it in his, when, and as he seeth time and cause. This Hilarie, Cyrill, and Austen doe like. So that Christes wordes being euery way free from plaine and manifest contradicting Gods knowen will, as you would make them to ad∣uance your hell paines by them, who but you would ship out such wine-shaken stuffe, that Christ Treat. pa. 53. li. 32. was astonished, forgetfull, and all confounded in his whole humanitie both in all the powers of his soule, and senses of his body, that he knew not what he said, or did; or els he could not haue wanted sinne? Defenc. pa . 122. li 19. Neuer skoffe at it, nor reproch it, nor wrest it. We ought not to be ashamed to acknow∣ledge the weakenesse of humane nature in Christ; which Christ was not ashamed of for our sakes to vndergo . ] It is you that are ashamed of humane weaknesse in the flesh of Christ; and therefore you deuise the torments of diuels in the soule of Christ, and the paines of the damned, because you thinke it a shame for him, to haue his flesh afrayd of paine and death. Right your selfe therefore by your owne rule, and then you may well be ashamed of these monsters deuised by you, whiles you shun to acknowledge mans weakenesse voluntarily receiued in the flesh of Christ, as well to prooue the trueth of his owne manhood, as the comfort and cure the infirmitie of our nature. But why doe you not first prooue it, and after presume it? this pretending it to be plaine, before any such thing doth appeare, is no more but dreaming of a noble conquest, when you haue receiued a shamefull foyle. Defenc. pag. 122. li. 22. &. Did not Christ in plaine words pray, that if it were possible this houre might passe from him, and before, saue me rom this houre? doth he not then pray in plaine wordes contrary to Gods know ill? ] Who but a man confounded in all the powers of his sense and vn∣d rstanding, hauing so many expositions brought him out of learned and auncient Christ prayed with condition and reseruation of Gods will. Fathers, would in a rage rei ct them all without any regard, and leaning onely to the wilfuln sse of h s owne imagination, conclude with such confidence his owne vnto∣ward conceits to be the true meaning of the sacred Scriptures? If Fathers be but sa∣thers with you, doe you not heere three Euangelists, Matthew, Marke and Luke eui∣dently & exquisitely witnesse, that Christ prayed with reseruation and submission to the will of God? how then prayed he contrary to the knowen will of God? [ Treatis pa. 85. li. 12. In cor∣recting it, it was contrarie: yea and he knew it to be so. ] It is a signe you swell with no small liking of your selfe, that little care to crosse all writers old and new, without any cause, but onely or the good opinion you haue of your selfe. M. Beza, from whom you would seeme to borrow some points of your hell paines, though you leaue him, when you list, as not worthy to teach you any thing, directly and tru ly refureth your error. Beza iu annot. Obs ruandum est hac particula non corrigi superiorem pe ionem, (ita enim fuisset in Christo vitium) sed explicari, qua conditione id peteret. We must marke by this speach, (yet not as I will) the former prayer is not CORRECTED, (for so it h bene a fault in Christ) but it is declared with what condition Christ desired it. So that your correcting Christs prayer by the plaine confession of M. Beza chargeth Christ with corruption of sinne, yea and Christes knowing it so to be, as you affirme, that is, to be contrarie to Gods will, noteth a manifest and aduised contradiction in Christ to the will of God his Father; which whether it be sinne or no, let any that is but halfe a diuine i dge. S. Iohn, you say, reporteth Christ to haue sayd absolutely, Iohn 12. Father saue me from this houre. ] First Hilari s rule is of necessitie to be retained in expounding the Scriptures. Hilarius de trinitate li. 10. Prestant sibi m tuam Euangelia plenitudinem; dum alia ex alijs, quia omnia vnius spiritus predicatio sunt, intelliguntur. The Gospels make vp eche others fulnesse, whiles o e is vnderstood by an∣other; all being the preaching of one spirit. Since then it is expressed in three Euangelists, that Christs prayer, for auoiding this cup and this houre, was conditionall; his words in S. Iohn to the like purpose, must haue the like construction, though they doe not exactly specifie so much. Againe your owne confession importeth no lesse, where you say; Defenc. pag. 126. li. 7. who knoweth not, that all good prayers and d sires for temporall things must be conditi∣onall, that is with reseruation of Gods will alwayes implied, though not alwayes expressed? Christ pra ers then, to escape this houre, must haue that condition vnderstoode, though it be not mentioned in the words, since his prayers were not onely good, but hea d of God, and the ground of all our prayers in the time of trouble. Thirdly, the best Greeke expositours that we haue, as Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and Theophylact, haue conceaued the force and order of Christs speach to be such, as if that part, which you auouch to be repugnant to the rest, were excluded and denied by the words an∣tecedent and consequent, and so to haue rather the power of a negation, then an af∣firmation. Lastly, many new writers acknowledge the wordes, though they were af∣firmatiue, may receiue an other sense: as if Christ did not desire to be free from suffe∣ring, but to be kept from fainting, vnder the burden of his passion. So Bucer. Bucerus in Iohan. ca. 12. Patrem Christus or auit, vt liberaret eū à supplicio, non ne illud perferret, sed vt forti r perferret. Christ besought his Father to saue him from (the houre of) punishment, not that he might not suffer it, but that he might suffer it patiently, (or without fainting.) So Aretius. Aretius in Iohan. ca. 12. There may be an other sense of this place, which is, that Christ doth not intreate to escape death, but prayeth his Fathers aide against the horror thereof. So that to be saued from this houre, is to be pre∣serued in it, that it preuailed not against him. The wordes then of our Sauiour in S. Iohn admitting so many limitations and constructions, who but a wilfull neglecter of all learning and trueth, would so peremtorily by pretence of them conclude, that manifestly in plaine wordes, Christ prayed contrary to Gods knowen will? Defenc. pag. 122. li. 22. If this could not be possible in Christs manhoode without sinne, then I were a wretch to af∣firme so much of him; especially still to affirme it. But if it be possible by any meanes, through the meere instinct of mans nature (as it is Gods creature and free from all sinne) thus to speake and to wish suddainly, and suddainly to controle it againe, as Christ did, then what mind beare you, and how may we iudge of this your striuing, which is not to cleare Christ from all sinne in his agony? ] A goodly clearing from sinne you make in Christ, that in a maze he prayed he knew not what. You suddainly take Christs memorie from him, and suddainly re∣store it againe with the twinckling of an eye; and thus you play with Christs sense and memorie, as men doe with tennis balles. But vnderstand you sir, howsoeuer you please your selfe with amazing Christ after this manner, the Scriptures allow no such thing, nor any circumstances of the text, where the wordes seeme most plainely repugnant as you say, to Gods knowen will, as in the 12. of Iohn. Read that Chapter who will, where are no wordes nor signes of any maze, but a perpetuall course of most excel∣len speach; in the midst whereof he confessed, that his soule was (then) troubled with the remembrance of his death. And as doubting what to desire, through the dislike that mans nature in him had of death, he yet resolueth to desire not his owne safetie from death, but the increase of his Fathers glory by his death. What signe or proofe of amazement is in this? why take you this pestilent libertie to put Christ into a sud∣daine maze, when pleaseth you; and as suddainly, least all the world should crie shame on you, to cleare him from it, though the cause of his maze, if there were any, still continued? you say, if it were not by some meanes possible, you were a wretch to affirme it: but you must not deuise what meanes please you, to waue the Sonne of God to and fro with suddaine and often desires, which needed correcting and controlling, and then to warfe them with want of memorie. My striuing is not against any wordes in the text, or any thing that may be iustly deduced from the Scriptures, but against your forgetfull and faithlesse prayers, which you purposely impute to Christ, because you would hemme him either within sinne, or astonishment; and then excuse him with losse of sense, and lacke of memorie. This is the maine plot, that heere you vn∣dertake, not by proouing, that it was so; but by pronouncing, that you will haue it so; and therefore you still answere in steede of arguing, knowing that your proofes be as weake, as your proiects strong. For first you Defenc. pag. 122. li. 37. answere, Christ knew (his Fathers will) but at this instant he thought not on it. And why thought he not on it? you pa. 123. li. . answere a∣gaine, his paines and sorrowes were so great, and so infinite, that it was no maruaile hee thought not on it: but fall once to proouing, and you shall see how much you faile of your purpose. Defenc. pag. 123. li. 9. First he was now astonished, as the text saith, and you acknowledge that he might be. ] First in the twelfth of Iohn, where you make Christes prayer more absolute than in any other place, there is no mention nor signification of any astonishment; but on the contrary, the tenor of Christes speech and doctrine is not onely coherent, but full of eminent power and grace. Againe, the word , which you take hold on, signifieth either admiration alone, as I haue formerly shewed, or feare mixed with some wondering. Phauorinus sayth: Phauor. Di∣ctionarium in verbo . ; Thambe sa, properly is to feare and flie at the sight of God. So that the word neither in the Scriptures, nor in any Grammar, signifieth your hellish astonishment for intole∣rable paines and torments, but suddenly to stand defixed, or somewhat afrayd at an vnwoonted sight. Thirdly, the circumstances and consequents in the text, declare that Christes astonishment or feare was not such, that it tooke from him either sense or memorie. For where all vehement amazing for the time depriueth a man of moti∣on, sense, and speech, Christ felt vtterly none of these. The very place of S. Marke, which you quote for the word ekthamb thai, proueth the rest which I affirme. For Christ after he Matth. 14. began ( ) to be afrayd, presently sayd vnto his three disciples, My soule is very heauy vnto death: tary heere and watch. So he went forward a little, and fell downe on the ground, and prayd, that if it were possible, that houre might passe from him. Then he came, and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, Couldest not thou watch one houre? Watch ye, and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. What signes or words are here of astonishment continuing? astonishment stoppeth speech and motion, as well as sense. Rhetoricorum ad Her nnium li. 4. Omnes stupidi timore obmutuerunt; They all amazed with feare were mute, sayth the heathen Oratour. And so the Poet; Plautus in Epidi o. Quid stas stupida? quid taces? Thou amazed thing, why flandest thou still? why art thou tongue-tied? Yea Galen himselfe giueth eui∣dent testimonie, that men amazed with feare, neither speake nor doe any thing, but stand still with their eyes open: Galenus in Aphorismos Hippocratis. li. 7. apho. 14. Ama∣zednesse is, when men neither speake nor do any thing, but abide silent with their eyes open, like to men astonished with feare. So that if Christ were astonished with feare or amazed, he could neither haue done nor sayd any of those things which the Gospell reporteth he did and sayd: and therefore vnlesse you can alter the rules of nature, as you doe of Scripture, Christ was in no such astonishment as you dreame of; neither did his me∣mory faile him in speaking those words: for then how could he not haue remem red that they were spoken amisse, and needed correction as you conceiue them. Your selfe acknowledge that he might be. ] It helpeth not you, I sayd, if we should so interpret the word which S. Marke vseth, that Christ began to be afrayd, or somewhat astonished: for if In verbo . be , to admire some (sudden or strange) sight, as Phanorinus auoucheth, then might our Sauiour approching Gods presence now sitting in iudgement to redeeme the world, easily finde cause both of admirati∣on and feare, and yet be free and farre from suffering your hell paines. And where you say my words are vtterly vntrue, that Defenc. pag. 123. li. 13. many things might astonish our Sauior for the time, besides such paines; they are truer than any thing you haue yet spoken, or will speake of his astonishment. For whether we respect the sight of his eyes, or the ap∣prehension of his minde, he might either way beholde many things woorthie of that feare or astonishment which the Scripture describeth in him. Zan hius de Incar Christi li. 2. quaest. 11. Thesi 2 de sci∣entia Christi. pa. 302. If with the eyes of his bodie cleered with diuine light, Christ being in earth, sayth Zanchius, could see the things in heauen; and being in heauen, doth see what he will in earth, as he saw and heard Steuen saying, Lord Iesu receiue my spirit; he saw and spake to Paul persuing him in his Church, how much more can (and could) the soule of Christ see particular things in the word, which is his Godhead? So that either the eyes of Christ, or the minde of Christ might be∣holde or consider the glory of Gods iudgement, whereof he spake when he sayd, Iohn 12. Now (euen at hand) is the iudgement of this world; or the greatnesse of mans sinne, or power of Gods wrath, or the vengeance deserued, from which he was to ransome man, and for which he was to satisfie God; all these things might in more likelihood in some sort astonish the humane soule of Christ, than the paines of the damned pre∣sently then inflicted on him with Gods immediate hand, as you imagine, but are no way able to proue, saue by your owne conceit. And therefore your second obseruation, that these infinite incomprehensible and incomparable paines, which you meane, asto∣nished, is but the froth of your fansie; for you shall neuer be able to iustifie any such thing by the text or historie of the Euangelists. Defenc p g. 123. li. 20. Thirdly adde heereunto that which you rightly grant, that it is true, a mighty feare may so affect a man for the time, that it shall hinder the senses from recouering themselues, and stoppe the faculties from informing one another. Likewise afterward, astonishment draweth the mind so wholy to thinke on some speciall thing aboue our reach, that during the time we turne not our selues to any other cogitation. ] You take this to be true that I said, and so do I, but this vtterly subuerted your former position, which now you recant, that Treat. pa. 53. li. 32. Christ could not but be astonished, forgetfull, and all confounded in his whole humanity, bot in all the powers of his soule, and senses of his body. If Christ according to your desperate doctrine were all consounded in his whole humanity, were not his vnderstanding and memory con∣foūded aswel as other parts of his humane nature? If he were all confounded in all powers of his soule, and senses of his body, as your wicked error imagineth, are not vnderstanding and memory powers of the soule? and did not I charge you iustly and truely with casting Christ into an infernall confusion for the time, since in hell it selfe they can be no more but all confounded in their whole manhoods, both in all the powers of their soules, and senses of their body? Tell what confusion in hell is, or can be more, then all in all, and I will yeeld, I did you wrong. If you cannot, then bethinke your selfe how lewdly and loosely you aduentured, all to confound Christ in all the powers of his soule and senses of his body; in which case whether you leaue sense, memory or vn∣derstanding vnconfounded in Chist, I leaue to the censure of the discreet Reader. Defenc. pag. 124. li. 1. I say, as you say, he now on the suddaine might turne neither sense nor memory to any other obiect, and so not thinke on any thing els, but onlie on this terrible and mighty sorow and feare. Your helpers haue aduised you to recall that forgetfulnesse, and all confusion in all the powers of Christs soule, & senses of his body, which before you sounded out with such waine loades of wordes, as was maruailous; and now you be come to say, as I say, that there was no confusion in the powers of Christs soule, nor in the senses of his body, but an intenti e cogitation on some fearefull or sorowfull thing, which for the time so detained the powers of the soule, as on a matter most importing and nea∣rest touching the state of himselfe either in soule or in body, that he did conuert them to no other obiect. If you say thus with me, then must you say farder with me, that as soone as Christ beganne to vse speach, or conuert his cogitation to praier, this asto∣nishment was eased; and howsoeuer feare was not altogether dispelled, yet he could no longer be said to be amazed, or to seeke what to doe. For praier to God without the mind intending, and attending it, is sinne; which might not be in Christ: and that Christ did attend his praiers, is most euident. For he both added a condition to them, and presently declared, what he ment by that condition, to witte, that he desired the bitternesse of this cup to passe, as much as Gods gratious will towards him should like, and not as the sense of mans nature in him would affect. So that here is nothing in Christes praier arguing any forgetfulnesse, or not remembring, but an euident confirmation rather of that which you would so faine denie or auoid if you could tell how; that Christ did religiously and carefully conuert his cogitations in his praiers, both to deprecate his Fathers wrath as farre as might be, and yet to giue full assent to his Fathers wil. And therefore the difference, which Origen, Ierom, Bede, and others make betw ene the beginning, and continuing of these affections of feare and sorow in Christ, howsoeuer with a false shew you impugne it, hath better ground in it, then any thing you say against it. Defenc. pag. 124. li. 8. Natures verie instinct is in such dolours to wish and desire ease: and the more vehemently it is pinched, the more earn stly it desireth: and this is Gods owne gift and workemanship in nature, and simply thus to desire is in this respect truely to be reckned Gods owne expresse will. ] Haue you now found, that Christ did not manifestly in plaine words pray contrary to his Fathers knowen will; But that expressing the sense of mans nature in himselfe, as tou∣ching the paines, which should assault him on the Crosse, he desired that cup, that is, the sharpnesse of that paine might passe, as much as was possible to stand with Gods good pleasure. And yet least he should seeme in nature more to respect his owne inart, then his Fathers will, he presently declareth himselfe, that he ment no farder to be eased, then might stand with Gods counsell and will foredetermining these thinges. So that without your hell paines then inflicted on Christes soule by Gods immediate hand, and without your confused and forgetfull astonishment, the praiers of our Sauiour in the Garden did both answeare Gods ordinance in the frame of our flesh, which is not brasse, as Iob speaketh, and yet preferre the will of God for the conseruation of his iustice, before the liking of his sense, or desire of his nature. Which if you acknowledge, then are your assertions false and wicked, that Christ in plaine wordes praied contrary to Gods knowen will and this could not haue wanted sinne; had he not been astonished, when he so praied. For the praiers are facred and sound with∣out any maze or obliuion of his Fathers will, and his owne purpose; but rather ex∣pressely remembring both, and preferring that, which indeed should be preferred, when and as it ought. Defenc. pag. 124 li. 22. It was contrary in the outward wordes, and in the particular affection of his mind now wanting this remembrance, but it was fully and wholly according to Gods wil in the generall disposition of his mind and whole man. ] You would faine vphold a contrariety to Gods will in the prai rs of Christ, and though they be neither in trueth nor in sense repug∣nant to Gods will, yet you say, there is a repugnancy in the particular affection of his mind, As appeareth by his adding, Not my will, but thy will be done. Howbeit you heard be∣fore out of Zanchius a very learned and very sufficient Diuine, Zambius de tri us El him parte 2. li. 3. ca 9. R spon∣sio. 2. Quare falsum om∣nino est, in Christo diuersam voluntatem a Patris fuisse. It is vtterly false, that there was in Christ a will diuers from his Fathers will. The naturall dislike, that man hath of paine and death, which is the rule of Gods creation, Christ calleth his will, because it was the weakenesse of mans flesh in him, as he forewarned, when he said, The spirit is prompt, but the flesh is weake, to abide the paine and horror of death; but this naturall affection when he had confessed to be in himselfe, both to shew himselfe to be a true man, and naturally affected as we are, and also to foreshew, that his death should be very painefull and greeuous vnto him, he wholly and fully submitted it to his fathers will, which indeed was his will and desire, (euen as he was man) as well as his Fathers. His owne wordes are, Luc. 22. Desiring I haue desired (that is, I haue earnestly desired) to eat this Pass ouer with you before I suffer. And againe, Luc. 12. I must be baptised with a baptisme; and how am I grieued till it be ended? He desired the time and f uit of his death; he might not desire death in it selfe, because it was not only the dissolution of nature, but the touch of Gods wrath against the sinne of man, and therefore no way to be desired, but in regard of consequent effects. Neither was there any contrariety in the particular affection of Christs mind to Gods will, as you auouch. It is a dangerous deuice of yours to make Christes will agreeable to Gods in the generall disposition of his mind, but repugnant in his particular affection; which you would excuse with a greater error of Now wanting this remembrance; But Gods will was as Christes was, that Christ in his humane nature should haue an vtter dislike and horror of death, which yet for the loue of man, and obedience to God, he should submit to that will of God, whereby he would haue the punishment of our sinnes tedious and gr euous to the Redeemer, least it should seeme a sport to ransome vs from the wrath of God. Both these wills were in God the Father, and the sense of the one, and the submission to the other, in the humane nature of Christ; so that in either part Christs will was conformable to the will of God, though his naturall dislike of death and paine yeelded and submitted it selfe to the will of Gods iustice, by which he required and exacted the punishment of our sinne in the manhood of Christ. Defenc. pa . 124. li. 30 If you abhorre this n me, yet see what Chrysostom taught. These wordes (NOT AS I VVILL, BVT AS THOV VVILT,) do signifie two willes, saith he, one of the Father, another of the Sonne, contrary one to the other. ] Thinke you, as Chrysostom doth, and then you shall easily be suffered to speake, as Chrysostom speaketh. For as power and weakenesse are contrary, so were the two wills in Christ, declaring his two natures; the one despising and conquering death, which was his diuine will answeareable to his Fathers; the other fearing & shunning death, which shewed him to be a true man. As then Christ had two contrary natures, yet knit and vnited in one person; so had he two contrary wills touching death, yet both agreeing and concurring in one end. And so much Chrysostom would haue taught you, if you had read on the very same place, which you quote for your error. Johan Chry∣sostomus in a∣dem ratione apud Theod ∣retum Dia∣logo 3. If this were spoken, saith he, of Christs diuinity, then were it a contradiction indeed, and many absurdities would thence follow; but if it were spoken of his flesh, then was there a good reason for those wordes, and nothing in them that might ius ly be blamed. For that the flesh would not willingly die, this is not to be condemned, it is proper to mans nature. And Christ shewed (in himselfe) all the properties of mans nature, without sinne, and that very abundantly, to stop the mouthes of Heretickes. When then he saith, if it be possible, let this cup passe from me, and not as I will, but as thou wilt; he declareth nothing els, but that he was compassed with true flesh, which feared death. For to feare and shunne death, and to be astonished (or perplexed) therewith, is proper to flesh. Now therefore (that is at this time, when he spake these wordes) he permitted his fl sh a∣lone, and naked to her proper action, that shewing the infirmity thereof he might confirme the trueth of (his humane) nature; and sometimes he couereth it, because he was not a bare man. Graunt you by these words, that Christ declared nothing els, but that he was a true man, and naturally feared and shunned death, which is the dissolution of nature, as we do, and you shall haue leaue to call this affection different or repugnant in power and strength, but not in purpose or petition, to the will of his diuine nature. Defenc pag. 124. li. 33. I grant M. Beza vseth some termes differing from ours, yet his sense is the selfe same with ours. He sayd Christ corrected not his speech, as if he had before spoken amisse; I say, he did correct his speech, making it being good to be better. ] You can not, by your leaue, thus winde out from your lewd assertion, that Christs prayer could not haue wanted sinne, had he beene in perfect remembrance without astonishment. If Christes prayer were good without the latter addition, which you call a correction; ergo it was not repug∣nant to the knowen will of God, much lesse sinne in it selfe, but that Christ now wan∣ted remembrance by reason of his infinite and incomprehensible paines. You would faine daube vp these dangerous conceits and conclusions, but your morter is vntempered. If Christes desire were good, as now you grant, before this correction (and how could any thing be but good, which proceeded from him?) then which way inferred you your hell paines out of that prayer? where is the ground of your conclusion, that Christ sinned in that prayer, if he were not astonished, because it was in plaine words contrarie to Gods knowen will? Is any thing good, that is contrarie to Gods knowen will? Faine you would, and yet you know not how to keepe this geere vp∣right. Defenc. pag. 125. li. 7. Neither is this particular contrariety to Gods will any sinne, namely, when by Gods owne ordinance we know not what Gods speciall will is, so that we alwayes remaine apt and readie there unto when we know it. ] Is this all the GOODNESSE you grant in the former part of Christes prayer, that it was no sinne, because Christ wanted remembrance? doth Chrysostome teach you any such doctrine? It may be pardoned by your rule for want of memorie; but that is no commendation of any goodnesse in it. And yet if we venture to pray without faith, it is sinne so to tempt God. Neither can we be ex∣cused by want of iudgement or memorie; we may omit somewhat for want of vnder∣standing, but if we commit ought vpon opinion or credulitie that it is good and law∣full for vs, when indeed it is not so, that doth not excuse our ignorance or forgetful∣nesse. It is the lesse sinne, but sinne it is, and farre from goodnesse. If therefore this be all the goodnesse you ascribe to Christes prayer, you expresly contradict Chryso∣stome, who maketh it proper and lawfull for mans nature in the best remembrance to dislike and shun death, so we still submit our selues to Gods will, as Christ did, not to like that which is against nature, but patiently to suffer that which is according to Gods will and counsell towards vs. Defenc. pag. 125. li. So did Dauid desire the life of his childe, it was contrarie to Gods will one way, as the e∣uent shewed; for the childe died: yet he prayed well and rightly according to Gods will in na∣tures affection, seeing he knew not Gods secret will to the contrarie, ] Dauid had p etie and charitie to leade him to pray for his childes life, though the Prophet denounced vn∣to him that the childe should die. Gods threats doe differ from his iudgements in this, that his iudgements are irreuocable when they are once executed, and his wrath is placable, when he threatneth; since he neuer particularly threatneth, but when we are impenitent. God willed Ionas to preach, that after Ionah. 3. fortie dayes Nineueh should be ouerthrowen; and yet was God neither inconstant in his will, nor the Prophet false in his message, when vpon repentance God spared them. The Kings Proclamation was good diuinitie: Ibidem. Let euery man turne from his euill way, and who can tell, whether God will turne from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? So sayd Dauid: 2. Sam. 12. Who can tell (whe∣ther) God will haue mercie on me, that the childe may liue? Gods secret will as we cannot know, so doe we not resist, so long as we seeke by repentance to preuent or auert his plagues: but what is this to Christs case? was he ignorant of Gods will, which he so often foretold his Disciples; what, where, and of whom he should suffer, as also the cause, why; Matth. 20. to giue his life a redemption for manie? Defenc. pag. 125. li. 16. Christs sudden not remembring Gods particular will, (by reason of his fearefull astonish∣ment) was all one, as if he had not know n it at all. ] It is apparently false, that Christ did not remember Gods particular will touching his death; for he added if it were possible, Christes prayer not repug ant to the will of God. before his praier; and st ll submitted his will to the will of God, which if he had not remembred, hee could not haue done. The fearefull astonishment of which you dreame, as if it still continued euen in his praiers, is a needlesse in ention of such, as seeke to make some pretence for their hell paines. Christs praiers were earnest, and often repeated, and as the Apostle noteth, he was heard in them, and therefore they were not repugnant to the will of God; howsoeuer he desired the cup, that is, the sharpnesse thereof to be mitigated, and proportioned to his strength and pati∣ence, which accordingly God his Father performed. Defenc. pag. 125. li. 25. You say I am captious against Christ in not supplying one Euangelist with another. For so Christs desire will appeare to be but conditionall, therefore not contrarie to Gods will; yes neuerthelesse as touching the desire it selfe, and his particular present inclination compared to Gods particular determination herein. ] If Christes prayer in the garden were heard, as the Apostle saith it was, then is it euident it was no way repugnant to the will of God: for God doth not vse to grant petitions made contrarie to his will. And then we must so interprete the sense of Christs praier, that it might take effect in his sufferings, as I thinke it did. And though we should suppose, it tooke not effect, yet since he him∣selfe did so condition his desire of nature, that he subiected it to the will of God; which way can you proue it contrary to Gods knowen will? Christs particular present inclination compared to Gods particular determination herein, you say, was contrary to it. ] I denie that vtterly. For Christs particular and present inclination of mans nature to dislike paine and death was Gods generall ordinance in all men, and Gods speciall will in the manhood of Christ at that instant: and Christes determination was the same with Gods, since he submitted the one to the other, and resolued, as we find in his praier, with obedience willingly to vndergoe that shamefull and painfull death, which Gods iustice purposed for the sinnes of men. Yea God hath not only ordai∣ned, that the Crosse should be greeuous vnto vs, as it was to the manhood of Christ, but he misliketh, when it is otherwise; that is, if we despise his correction, because it is made tolerable by his fatherly goodnesse respecting our weakenesse. Ierem. 5. Thou hast striken them, but they haue not sorowed, saith the Prophet; meaning they despised the hand of God, because it was tempered with mercy, and plagued them not vnto des∣truction. Then is it Gods will, that affliction should grieue vs, and he hath not on∣ly so created vs, but it is his purpose, when he smiteth to haue vs feele it, and to haue vs mourne vnder the Crosse, but yet without distrust of his goodnesse, or dislike of his counsell, though it pinch vs neuer so neere in the sense of our nature. What contra∣riety then to Gods will had Christs inclination of nature shunning death, and the sharpenesse thereof, so farre as was possible, and did stand with Gods pleasure; since his resolution was the same with Gods will, most obediently to suffer it, though it seemed neuer so sharp to his flesh, which was Gods will it should? as for Balaams bad desire, I leaue it to you to comment thereon at your leasure; his wicked auarice secretly seeking after gaine, though pretending Gods name, ought not in Christes case to be so much as mentioned. Defenc. pag. 125. li. 2. When we perfectly know and remember Gods certaine will, euery light affection and so∣daine wishing to the contrary, howsoeuer conditionally, is no lesse then manifest sin inst God. ] Is it sinne in Martyrs, that their flesh by sense of nature endureth not quietly the rage of fire without feare and griefe, or is it rather a godly conflict betwixt the eadinesse of the spirit, and the weakenesse of the flesh, to feele the one, and to follow the other in regard of duty to God and his blessed will, which hath prouided not pleasure, but paine to make triall of patience? In desires and delights the sense of the flesh is to be declined, least it bait the minde, and wax vnruly; but in feare and paine Gods sacred will is, that the flesh should be flesh, and not senselesse, nor carelesse, that the spirit may be prooued, and the 1. Pet. 1. triall of our faith in affliction, being much more pretio then gold, may be found to the praise of God. It is therefore no sinne, 1. Pet. 1. for a season (if need re∣quire) to be in heauinesse through manifold tentations: Neither did Christ tell his Disci∣ples, that they should not weepe, lament, nor sorow in their miseries, since nothing could befall them without the direct and expresse will of God, with whom the Matth. 10. haires of (their) heads are numbred; But he promis th, their Iohn 16. sorow shalbe turned to ioy: Wherefore Christs present and particular inclination in nature to dislike the bitter∣nesse of paine and death, was not contrary to Gods disposition, but answeareable to it; so long as in obedience he alwaies referred himselfe to the will of God, and his petition being conditionall, so farre as might stand with Gods good will, was no way touched with any shew of sinne, much lesse in plaine wordes repugnant to Gods knowen will, though our Sauiour were in perfect remembrance, as the Scripture de∣clareth he was, and aduisedly considered, and regarded the will of God in euery part of his praier. Defenc. pag. 126. li. 11. The very nature of all conditionall desires is such, that it includeth euermore a possibility (at least) of being contrary to his will, whom we desire. ] This generall obseruation of yours is not true, and though it were, it maketh nothing to this purpose. The Saints haue often prayed in full persuasion of faith yet with a condition, not as doubting, but as humbling themselues in his presence, before whom or of whom they spake. When God had sayd to Iacob: Genes. 28. Loe I am with thee, and will keepe thee, whither soeuer thou goest, and will bring thee againe into this land; Iacob vowed, saying; if God will be with me, and will keepe me in the iourney, which I goe, so that I come againe into my fathers house in safetie, then shall the Lord be my God. Shall we say, because God addeth a conditio∣nall to his vow, that either he doubted of Gods promise made vnto him that verie night, or that it was possible to be contrarie to Gods will? I trust not. So Moses confessed to God; Exod. 33. See, thou hast said vnto me, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found fauour in my sight: Now therefore I pray thee, if I haue found fauour in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that I may know thee. Was Moses vnfaithfull to the mouth of God, because he maketh that a condition, which God vttered as an affirmatiue; or was there any possibilitie of the contrarie to that which God had once pronounced? Likewise the Apostles vnder conditions expresse most certaine assertions; as Paul: 2. Thes . 1. If it be a iust thing with God to recompense trouble to them which trouble you; and to you which are troubled, rest with vs, when the Lord Iesus sh ll shew himselfe from heauen; Meaning, there can be no doubt, but it is iust, though he made it conditionall. But we need not this rule for the praiers of Christ in the garden. Christ knew it was possi∣ble for Gods power to saue him from death, and yet to make him the Sauiour of the world; but as Gods counsell decreed and reuealed now stood, he knew it was not possible, the whole cup should passe from him, but that he must drinke thereof. Both these Christ affirmeth in the garden. Matth. 26. vers. 53. Thinkest thou, (saith he to Peter) that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will giue me more then twelue Legions of Angels? how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, that it must be so? And at the second time of his returne to praier; Ibid. vers 42. O my Father, if this cup cannot paesse away from me, but that I must drinke it, (that is thereof) thy will be donne. So that by the first frame of Christs praiers, Ibid. ver. 39. O my Father, IF IT BE POSSIBLE, let this cup passe from me; If we vnderstand either Christs purpose to make it appeare, that his death reuealed in the Scriptures was now by Gods counsell necessarily required for our redemption, and that it was no want of power, nor neglect of his safetie, that put him into the hands of his enemies, but his owne good will obeying the wisedome of his Father for our saluation; or els that he desired the sharpenesse of the Cuppe might passe from him, so farre as was possible, that it might not ouerpresse his strength and patience; in either of these two senses the words stand well, and haue no touch of declining or disliking the counsell and determination of God to ransome and reconcile the world to himselfe by the death of his Sonne. If with Chrysostom, Cyril, Damascene, and others, we like to make it the voice of mans weake flesh in Christ, but still subiected to the will of God, there is no repugnance to the will of God, which is alwayes preferred, though there be a de∣clining of his hand, if it were possible to stand with his will. For so long as obedience ouerruleth the sense of nature, and nature sheweth nothing but that which is ingraf∣fed in it by Gods power and will, I doe not see what aduantage you can take, Sir De∣fender, at this third sense of Christes words, though we grant the flesh of man to be so created, that it shrinketh at the weight of Gods hand, and would decline it, if it might stand with Gods will. Els were it not lawfull to pray that affliction might be ended or eased, if we might desire nothing that were possible to be contrary to Gods will, since we know not his particular will touching our temporall troubles, but by the euent. Defenc. pag. 126. li. 16. Thus Dauids and Christs were not onely possible to be contrarie, but contrarie in deede as the sequell shewed. ] You may as well inferre, that God himselfe had contrary willes, when he repented, that he made man, when he threatned destruction to Nini eh, and death to King Ezechiah, and yet vpon their prayers spared both, howbeit, it were blasphemie to say, that God hath willes indeede contrary one to the other, as the se∣quell sheweth. He hath an absolute will working and perfourming in heauen and earth whatsoeuer pleaseth him, which cannot be resisted, nor frustrated by any means. He hath a conditionall will, by iustice threatning and punishing vs, when we are sin∣full and carelesse, and by mercy sparing vs, when we repent and turne vnto him. And this will in him though it worke contrary effects in vs, yet it is in him on and the same will, wherewith he giueth his owne, as he best liketh, pardoneth the penitent, and re∣uengeth the obstinate; the one agr eing with his mercie, the other with his iustice. So Christ had two willes, the one proportioned to Gods creation, whereby the flesh shrinketh and shunneth paine, the other measured by Gods determination, which de∣clared his obedience; and in either of these he accorded with the will of God, who ment not onely to strike, but to haue the stroke felt with paine and griefe to mans na∣ture in Christ. Defenc. pag. 126. li. 17. Howbeit both their desires were neuerthelesse holy, made in faith, assured to receiue (as conditionall desires may be) directed aright, prepared sufficiently: yet only for this cause, see∣ing Dauid simply knew not Gods contrarie will, Christ knew it not at this instant. ] Dauid repented his sin (with which God was displeased) the more earnestly & instantly, be∣cause he saw the dislike, which God had of his fact, was the cause of death denounced to his child. So that Dauids desire to please and pacifie God with most humble and inward submission, the rather if it were possible, to auert the wrath of God threatned to his child for his offence, had in it pietie, charitie, humilitie, and other good points of godly repentance; and his prayer for his child was pardonable, because he knew not Gods certaine resolution to the contrarie, though he heard the Prophet in Gods name denounce, 2. Sam. 12. the child should surely die: which Dauid tooke to be conditionall, as other Gods threats are oftentimes, the rather to reduce sinners to more zealous and hartie conuersion vnto God. But in Christes prayers no such thing can be preten∣ded. His not remembring, what he knew most assuredly, and beleeued most stedfast∣ly, could not make his prayers to be prepared sufficiently, directed aright, and assured to receiue. For neither preparation, direction, faith, nor assurance could be in the soule of Christ without vnderstanding and memorie; since neither forgetfulnesse, nor ig∣norance of that, which we should know, doe warrant our prayers to be holy, much lesse to be perfect, and such as are assured to be heard. And if all these conditions of faithfull and Godly prayer were found in Christs petition in the Garden, as you con∣fesse, shew vs how they could be indeed contrary to Gods knowen will. I haue no doubt of all Christes prayers and speaches, but they were well aduised, rightly prepa∣red, and throughly assured to be heard, that is perfectly holy, as he intended them; but Christes not remembring the will of God reuealed to him, could not performe or effect these things in his prayer, but rather contrariwise his full knowledge, and pre∣sent remembrance of Gods will, with exact obedience and submission thereunto. Otherwise not remembring that, which he well knew, might excuse from sinne, if hee were so amazed, that vnderstanding and memorie failed him; but it could not make him assured to receiue, since God doth graunt their desires to such, as dewly remem∣ber, and not in such as in part, or wholy forget his will. Againe, not remembring the trueth of Gods will reuealed is not faith in any man, since faith is the sure and full per∣swasion of Gods will and promises toward vs, which if we remember not, how may we be said to be fully assured, and firmely perswaded of them? Wherefore you make out this matter with emptie words, as your manner is, least you should be taken tardie with a plaine error; and haue peeced together very vntowardly diuers mens places, the head not agreeing with the h eles, since you first defended, that Christ was forgetfull, and all confounded in all the powers of his soule and senses of his bodie, or else he had sinned in praying against Gods knowen will; and now you anouch his prayers were made in faith, sufficiently prepared, directed aright, and assured to receiue; yet onely sor this cause, seeing he did not remember at that instant, when he prayed, Gods will so plainly re∣uealed vnto him, and so often foretold by himselfe. And yet the wordes themselues, which Christ vsed in his prayer, are directly referred to Gods will; and whatsoeuer Christ feared, or felt according to your conceit, he was right sure was inflicted on him by Gods immediate hand, and consequently by Gods will, whose hand doth not worke without his will, and yet seeing, and feeling it to be Gods hand, and so Gods will, you make him not remember, that it was Gods will. What else is this, but to make forg tfulnesse to be faith, and error to be assurance, and confusion to be suffi∣cient preparation of the mind vnto prayer, which are more then monsters in Chri∣stian religion, and from which our Lord and master must be as free, as from sinne? Defenc. pag. 126. li. 26. All in vaine then doe you charge me, that I stretch the Scriptures beyond their wordes and trueth, when in my discourse I shew that Christ in the Garden was astonished and grie∣uously perplexed, the text hauing onely he began to be astonished and grieuously perplexed. ] You tooke vpon you in your Treatise, without all proofe, against the plaine wordes, and plainer circumstances of the text to pronounce, that Christ in the Garden Treat. pa. 55. fell amazed and sorgetfull of himselfe, and Ibid. pa. 53. could not be but astonished, ouerwhelmed, and all confounded in his whole humanitie, both in all the powers of his soule and senses of his bodie, and vnlesse this had beene in him, he had sinned in deede. The ground of all this geere you made the words of S. Marke, , he began to be afraid and in great heauinesse. I obserued out of Ierom, that it is one thing to begin to be heauie (or sorrowfull) as the text saith, another thing to haue the Passion of heauinesse (or sorrow) to ouerwhelme the mind, as you would haue it. In this you say, I charge you all in vaine; and why so? because the Scripture doeth sometime vse the word ( to beginne ) where the continuance followeth. Had Ierom made no farder reason, then that Christ began to be afraid; and so auouched, that nothing beginning might proceede or continue, the places of Scripture heere heaped by you might haue made some shew; but Ierom giueth a good reason of his words, that the passion of feare and sorrow might not be excessiue and dominant in the mind of Christ, because it is the sinfull corruption of our nature to be so ouerswayed with immoderate and suddaine affections, in which he could not communicate with vs. This reason you skip, and bend your selfe to proue, the Scripture vseth the wordes (he began) where the action had continuance. As though any man doubted thereof, but as well good, as bad actions must haue their beginnings, before they can haue any proceeding, or continuing; but doth that word prooue, that euery thing once begun is brought to an end, or that euery affection ri∣sing in mans nature groweth to the highest degree? if the word stand indifferent to signifie the beginning of euery action or affection, either interrupted before the end, or proceeding and continuing to the end and height thereof; then make those words nothing for your extreme confusion of feare & sorow growing to the greatest height, that might be, as you imagine. And that the word naturally signifieth a beginning in the Scriptures, without any necessitie that the action or affection should continue, though some might proceede and increase, where the Scripture testifieth so much, there can be no question. In the fourteenth of Luke, Christ shewing by a familiar example of a builder, how ridiculous and odious it is to begin a good thing, and not to performe it, repeateth the common mocke that followeth such vaine enterprises: This man began to build, but could not make an end. So sayth the Apostle to the Galathians: Galat. 3. Are you so vnwise, that beginning in the spirit, you will end in the fl sh? S. Matthew describeth how Peter walking on the water towards Christ, and beholding a mightie winde, was stroken with feare, Matth. 14. , and beginning to sincke, cried; Lord saue me. And Iesus straightway stretched out his hand, and stayed him. So in many other pla∣ces: Philip. 1. I am persuaded of this, that he which hath begun a good worke in you, will performe it to the day of Christ. When the tenne Disciples heard Iames and Iohn desire, that one of them might sit at Christes right hand, and the other at his left in glorie, Marc. 10. , they began to disdaine ames and Iohn; but Christ presently called his Disciples vnto him, and by his speech repressed ambition on the one side, and indignation on the other. So Peter, when those that stood by him in the high Priests hall, charged him by his tongue to be one of Christs followers, Matth. 26. , he be∣gan to curse and sweare, he knew not the man. And immediatly the cocke crew, and Peter remembring the words of Iesus, went out, and wept bitterly, repenting his fault. An hun∣dred examples might be brought, where the word is in the like sort vsed to signifie the beginning of any thing, as well without continuance as with, when the Scripture expresseth so much; but these are so cleere, that they admit no contradiction. And therefore Ieroms obseruation is verie true, and grounded on better reason than your refutation. Defenc. pag. 127. li. 2. As Christ was indeed astonished, so he did at first but begin to be thus, & then afterward grew to the full. ] That he began to be afrayd, the Euangelist sayth; that he afterward grew to the full, no Euangelist writeth any such thing; except you take vpon you to be the fift Euangelist, boldly and falsely to auouch that which the other foure doe not mention. And as you enlarge the circumstances of the Euangelists, so doe you re∣straine the significations of their words as pleaseth you: for by all Inter∣preters, and euen by such as were the first deuisers of Christes forgetfulnesse, is ren∣dered expauescere, to be afrayd, and not to be astonished. Caluine doth thus xpresse the words o S. Marke: Caepit expauescere, & moerore aff ci. Caluin. har∣monia in Mar∣ci. ca. 14. Christ began to be afrayed, and affected with griese. As in S. Matthew he translateth the word , affici moe∣stitudine, to be touched with heauinesse; and timor & moestitia, feare and heauinesse are all the words, that by any warrant of sacred Scriptures Caluin could finde. Beza in his Latine translation keepeth the same word; Caepit expauescere, Christ began to be afrayd and so doth the Geneuian translation of the Bible into English; He began to be afraid, and in great heauinesse. Others more indifferent I shall not neede to repeate. You take a course by your selfe, that as you differ from all men in opinion, so you will in trans∣lation of the words. For you will haue to be Defenc. pag. 123. astonished with feare though the rest content themselues to say, he began to be afraid. Defenc. pag. 127. li. 6. The Text following doth inuincibly shew, that he did fully come to the extreamitie of astonishment, and began not onely. For did he but begin, when he swet clotted bloud trick∣ling from his body to the ground? also when an Angell was sent from heauen to refresh him and comfort him: did he then but begin to be heauy? ] Your fansies follow so fast without the Text, that they run headlong against the Text. That Christ was afraid, I doe not deny; that he came to the extremitie of astonishment, the Scriptures denie; howso∣euer you whiske it after your whifling maner, that you may seeme a man tried in all toyes. The extremitie of astonishment is neither to do nor speake any thing, but to be silent, and as it were without sense, as I haue formerly shewed. Your selfe doth so de∣scribe it: for you say, Christ was astonished, that is, ouerwhelmed, and all confounded in all the powers of his soule, and senses of his bodie. A man in this case hath no right vse of reason, vnderstanding, memory, speach, sight, or hearing for the time. Was Christ so? doe your impertinent pushes prooue any such thing? doe they not rather prooue the contrary? did not Christ speake, when he praied? did he not rebuke his Disciples for their sleepinesse, and admonish them to watch and pray, that they entered not into temptation? did he not fall to more earnest and vehement praier, when his sweat be∣ganne to looke like bloud, which you in your learned conceit call clotted bloud? The strong cries and teares, which you mention, doe they not plainly reprooue your suppo∣sed astonishment, and cleerely confirme, that Christ had all the powers of his soule, and senses of his body in their full vse, when he thus conuerted them with such zeale and contention of mind to this great worke of our redemption? what Sadler or Shoe∣maker would conclude this to be the fulnesse of astonishment, which by so manifest circumstances cited by your selfe is irrefragablely refuted? and on you run, as if you would ouerbeare all the world with such witles words, and flaunting follies, which only serue to bewray the weakenesse of your owne conceites. Feare and sorow I ad∣mit in the soule of Christ, and religious of either kind in the highest degree, that mans nature is capable of. A naturall feare of death in the flesh of Christ I likewise acknow∣ledge, but I make not these things which you meane, the effects thereof. What I re∣ceiue, and what I refuse in our Sauiours agonie, I haue so largely deliuered, that I must not spend paper to repeate all againe. Neither doth Ierom meane, that Christ had a touch of feare, and no farder, as you most fondly misconster him, and his wordes, where he saith, Christ began to be afraid; but he meaneth, Christ so farre ad∣mitted the pearcing and painefull affection of feare (for a time required in so great a cause) that it neither possessed him wholy, nor continually, to beare dominion ouer him, or to worke any corruption in him, which is vsuall in our affections. You make your selfe merie with the beginning, and neuer consider, that Ierom thereby exclu∣deth the heigth of our inordinate affections of feare and sorow, such as you bring in when you all confound Christ in his whole humanitie, both in all the powers of his soule, and senses of his bodie. Defenc. pag. 127. li 33. As for Ierom, if he denie this, I must craue leaue to dissent from him. ] And from you, if you affirme that, all wise and Christian Readers must dissent without your leaue. For it is not onely false, and directly repugnant to the text, but it is extremely wicked and impious to bring that confusion, which you mention, and forgetfulnesse into all the powers of Christs soule, and senses of his body. [ Ibid. li. 27. I thinke all to little sufficiently to ex∣presse our Lords sufferings for vs. ] You must then thinke the doctrine & pen of the holy Ghost to be most vnsufficient, that continually & clearely proposeth the sufferings of the son of God for our saluation without any such presumptuous and irreligious spea∣ches. And howsoeuer you commend your deuotion in Ibid. li. 31. labouring to shew, how Christ loued vs, and to what basenesse of our nature he submitted himselfe for our sake; learne first to content your selfe with that, which the wisedome and iustice of God required of his sonnes humane nature, and the trueth of God witnesseth in the Scriptures, and so shall you honour the sufferings of Christ, as you ought to doe, and not deuise new helles and new damnations for him, to please your violent fansi s. And as new is your deuotion, as strange; if the whole Church of Christ before your time ne er knew, nor heard, how Christ loued his, and to what he submitted himselfe for their sakes; but haue all this while erred in beleeuing & following the direction of Gods spirit in the word of trueth and life, since they wanted all knowledge of your hellish torments and confusion, which you haue lately inuented for the soule of Christ, as the more prin∣cipall part of our redemption, and without which, the death of the Crosse, to which he was obedient, was nothing worth. Defenc. pag. 127. li. 38. Nay God forbid we should reioyce in any thing so much, neither can we praise and mag∣nifie him for any thing so highly, as we may and ought for this extreme abasing of Christ for vs. ] There was neuer no hereticke, that could not cast a shew of pietie vpon his erro∣neous pretences. Satan doth transforme himselfe into an Angel of light, and falshood alwayes seeketh to put on the vizard of trueth. Is it not thankes worthie, that the sonne of God would leaue the vse and honour of his diuine glory, wherein hce was equall to his Father, and take vnto him the shape of a seruant with all the basenesse and weaknesse of our flesh, and with the shame and paine of his death on the crosse, make satisfaction for our sinnes, and by his blood redeeme vs to God, which is the emptying of himselfe expressed by the Apostle in the place abused and misapplied by you; but you must teach all this is skant worth thankes, if Christ did not suffer in soule the second death, which is the lake burning with fire and brimstone, and euen the very paines of the damned, that you might be indeede beholding vnto him? And what if another as wise as you, will say, that all which Christ suffered heere on earth, was not worth thankes, except he suffered in hell amongst the diuels, where indeede are the paines of the damned, which you haue lately deriued to the earth vpon your authori∣tie; shall this impietie also goe for good religion, because the more Christ suffered for vs, the more we are and ought to be beholding vnto him? we shall doe well to thinke, that we can neuer giue thankes sufficient for the least of his mercies; and not take vpon vs to determine, what recompence God must exact of his sonne for our sinnes, except he will be vniust, which is a most pestilent presumption and intrusion vpon the secret counsels and iudgements of God; but rather learne to lament our owne vnworthinesse and wickednesse, and not delight or dwell in sinne, which God so hated and abhorred, that nothing could appease his wrath against our vncleannesse, but onely the death and bloud of his owne Sonne. Defenc. pag. 128. li. 2. Remember your owne wordes out of Austen, that there is in some men INSIPIENS HONORIFICENTIA, a fond intent of honoring Christ. If there be any such, surely this is one point thereof, which you maintaine. ] You applie Fathers, as you doe Scriptures; and call S. Austen foole, as well as all the rest of the learned and auncient pillars of Christs Church, because they reject your hellish confusion, by which you ouerwhelme all the powers of Christs soule and senses of his bodie, rather then you will yeeld him vnderstanding and remembrance in his prayers. S. Austen saith indeed of the Mani∣chees, that were loath to confesse, Christ truely died a bodily death on the crosse, for feare of bringing him within the curse of a corporall death, since the death of mans bodie first proceeded from Gods curse against sinne; and therefore defended, that Christ seemed there to die in outward shew, but indeede did not die on the crosse; S. Austen, I say, affirmeth, that they with a foolish pretence of honour vnto Christ, denied the loue of Christ towards vs, and the trueth of Christ, who professed, that he should and would lay downe his life a ransome for many. What is this to the paines of the damned, or to the death of the soule, of which S. Austen saith, August. epist. 99. who dare auouch it? and yet ment not so foolishly to honour Christ, as thereby to denie or impugne the trueth of Christian religion? Defenc. pag. 128. li. 5. Master Caluine a worthy minister of Christ, and a pillar of the Church is bold and saith; we confesse indeede such is the basenesse and follie of Christes crosse, that proude men cannot away with it. ] If master Caluine meane, as the Apostle doth, that the heathen not knowing the wisedome & power of God in the crosse of Christ, counted it meere fol y for him, that was God, to become man, and in the bodie of his flesh to endure so vile and shamefull a death; I account him no Christian, that is not of that mind with ma∣ster Caluine: but if he call them all proud, that did not like his new deuice of Christs suffering hell on the crosse, which you haue stretched and drawen to many degrees and points aboue master Caluine, then let him looke, whether it be pride to beleeue the plaine and faire doctrine of trueth deliuered in the Scriptures, as all the Fathers of Christes Church did, or for men to adde thereunto their owne deuices, as you and some others haue done. For my part, as I loue and honour master Caluines name, and like well his resolutions, where he contented himselfe in the grounds of doctrine and discipline to ioyne with the auncient and primatiue Church of Christ; so when he leaueth them vpon some liking of his priuate deuices, I must leaue him. I so ho∣nour him, that I will not for loue to him dishonour all antiquitie, as if Christ had ne∣uer any Church, nor faithfull or learned minister therein before master Caluine. And were it worth the while, I could easily shew many great and maine differences betwixt master Caluines conceit of hell suffered in the soule of Christ, and yours; but because it hath occasioned and hatched your amplified error of an other hell from the imme∣diate hand of God, I will not trouble my selfe, nor the Reader with sifting or censu∣ring that, which I am not bound to beleeue, no more then I am yours; till it be pro∣ued by more substantiall grounds, then master Caluins good liking of it. Defenc. pag. 128. li. 10. In another place, where I shewed from the more to the lesse, how Christ might haue (for the sodaine) the powers of his mind astonished, and yet no decay in him of faith, nor obedience nor patience: Like as there is not in a man a sleepe, or amazed with a blow on the head, here∣upon you aske me scoffingly, was Christ a sleepe, or in a swoune? ] Your answere was indeed drawen from the lesse, to the more; that is, from the lesser vanity and falsity, to the greater; and therefore my question, which you call a skoffe, was a sound refutation of such ignorant misapplying of things impertinent & vncoherent. For what if a man in his sleepe, or in a swoune, retaine habituall faith, obedience, and patience; doth that prooue, that Christ awaked and well aduised might pray, he knew not what, and yet haue actuall faith, obedience, and patience? If a man should babble in his sleepe, or grone in a swoune, before he recouer sense or vnderstanding, would you cal that faith or praier, though the habite of faith were then in him? no more doth that example prooue any actuall faith, obedience, or patience in Christ at the time of his often and earnest praiers in the garden, if all that while you make him all confounded in all the powers of his soule, and so astonished, that he could not, or did not remember his Fathers oft reuealed, and oft repeated will, nor his owne person nor office, who came vnto this houre of purpose to performe his Fathers will. And therefore you must get you some better patterns for the vse and acts of faith, obedience, and patience in Christes astonishment, then sleeping or swouning, or els ech Christian Reader will soone perceaue you to be worse then a sleep, when you dreame of a Defenc pag. 128. li. 26. farre greater astonishment in Christ at the time of praiers, then is to be se ne in any man els, that euer was or shall be: And yet you defend, there might be actuall faith, obedience, and patience in Christ, because men in sleep, or in a swoune retaine the habits, or gifts of those vertues. Defenc. pag. 128. li. 21. As you grant that amazednesse and astonishment commeth naturally from sorowes and feares: so I thinke in Christ both the one and the other was in the extreamest and most violent degree that might be. ] Then must you also thinke, that Christ had not the free vse of speach, memory, and vnderstanding, nor of sense nor motion for the time, that he was in that amazednesse. For it is euident, as I haue shewed out of Galen a sufficient witnesse of naturall effects and defects, that men throughly amazed with feare, nei∣ther speake nor doe any thing: yea no man is so very a stranger to nature, but he know∣eth, that astonishment in the highest degree hindreth both sense, and motion outward and inward. And therfore when you put our Sauiour into the Ibid. li. 26. extreamest and most vi∣olent degree of amazednesse, that might be, and into farre greater astonishment, then is to be seene in any man els, that euer was or shalbe; I report me to the Christian Reader, that hath read or seene any thing, whether by this bold and violent imagination of yours you doe not take from Christ the vse of bodily sense, motion, and speach; and euen of vnderstanding, and memory. The Scripture noteth of the ghest, which wanted his wedding garment, that when he was chalenged for it, he Matth. 22. was speachlesse. When Saul heard the threats of him, that appeared in the person of Samuel, He 1. Sam. 28. sodainely fell all along on the earth, as sore afraid, because of the words. When Saint Iohn saw the sight of the sonne of God in his glory R u. 1. v. 17. He fell at his feet, as dead for very feare. So that feare may so farre amaze men, as to take from them speach, strength, and all vse of life, that they may lie euen as dead for the time; which whether it agr e to our Sauiour in the garden, I make any man iudge, that euer read or heard that part of the Gospell. Defenc. pag. 128. li. 35. For my life I cannot answere, this that followeth. The suffering of hell paines, which as∣tonish and confound all the powers of the soule, and senses of the body, neither was nor could be meritorious with God. I deny (this) assumption. Not only all Christs paines were meritori∣ous, but euen all his infirmities also: his wearinesse, his hunger, his sleep, and so his astonish∣ment and amazednesse. ] The sleightnesse of your answere doth prooue that, which I said, to be tru r, then you are ware of. For though diminution of strength, as in wearinesse; affliction of nature, as in hunger; and ligation of sense, as in sleepe; yea if you will, priuation of life, as in death; were meritorious in Christ, because the person, that was God and man, submitted himselfe to these infirmities of our nature, which no way peruerted nor hindered the inward powers or actions of Christes humane soule, yet that is no proofe, that such impressions, as depriue the soule of Christ of her proper and essentiall operations by confounding Reason, vnderstanding, will and memo∣ry, should be meritorious, because they all confound the very instruments of grace in the soule of Christ, which are requisite vnto merit. For though the person in Christ, which by nature did owe no obedience by reason it had an equality with God, was the chiefe fountaine of all Christs merits, which could not haue infinite price and va∣lew, but that he was infinite, and no way bound, who wrought them by his humane nature; yet the instruments of merit in Christs manhood were his soule, and his body; and chiefly his soule by her vnderstanding and will alwaies p rfectly knowing, abso∣lutely liking, and constantly performing by the presence and power of Gods spirit those things, which were most pleasing to God. So that the paines and infirmities, which you suppose in Christ, if they did confound and astonish all the powers of Christs soule and senses of his body (For so are the words of your assertion, and my assumption) they neither were, nor could be meritorious. In sleepe the senses of Christs body rested, which he could haue strengthened by power without sleepe, but that he wil∣lingly submitted himselfe to those infirmities of our nature for obedience to his Fa∣thers will; yet euen then was the soule of Christ left free to diuine cogitations and vi∣sions, which could not want in the soule of Christ hauing the full and perpetuall pos∣session and fruition of Gods grace and trueth, though he would want the power and glory prouided for him, till Gods appointed time. Christs sleepe then had no agree∣ment with your late deuised confusion of all the powers of Christes soule; yea the praiers, speaches, and actions of Christ in the garden, if you then confound in him all vnderstanding, will, and memory, which are the powers of Christs soule, must by your doctrine be full of vanity, and rather distractions, th n religious and humane actions, as not proceeding from the direction of grace, apprehension of mind, and submission of will, but from a confusion of all these, which no Christian man can tell what to make of. And therefore you must either recall the confufion of all the powers of Christs soule; which you say was the extreamest and most violent, that might be, or worse consequents will follow vpon these desperate and false amplifications, then you yet see. For take once from Christes soule his humane vnderstanding and will, and place nothing but confusion in his whole humanity, or as your words are, all confusion in his whole humanity, both in all the powers of his soule and senses of his body, and tell me what patience, obedience, or sanctity could be left, where neither vnderstanding, will, not memory were, but all confounded in the extreamest manner that might be. Defenc. pag. 129. li. If it seeme a hard phrase, which in my former Treatise I vsed, saying. Christ at this instant became forgetfull of that which before he knew; my meaning is (and so still I speake now) he remembred not, he considered not. Which many times we vse to name forgetting, but indeed strictly and properly it is not remembring. ] If you looke well to it, you haue harder phrases both in your defence and Treatise, then Christ to be forgetfull of himselfe. Which if you reuoke not, or plainly excuse not, rather by your folly not vnderstand∣ing the force of them, then standing to iustifie them, they will prooue open impiety. I haue so often repeated them, that I am weary of so vnsauery words. And as fo proofes, that Christ should be thus all confounded in all the powers and senses of body and soule, you be so vsed to wilfull assertions depending only on your secret conceits, that you doe not thinke your selfe bound to prooue that you say, or to say no more in Christian Religion, then you can prooue. For what one signe or step of this great and generall confusion in the soule of Christ doe the Scriptures mention, that you should thus racke it to the extreamest & highest degree, that euer was, shall, or might be? They be well holpen vp, that haue such an heady presumer and affirmer, as you are, to fashion their faiths after your vnaduised and inconsiderate fansies: But God send you his grace to wax soberer, which is all the harme I wish you, though I like none of your pangs to be the principles of my faith. Defenc. pag. 129. li. 17. Where you would wring out a contrariety in my words, as if I had said that Christ being in the depth of his astonishment, did then perfectly know that the dominion of death should not hold him: you doe me wrong, I say not so. In that place I argue from your supposition. ] I haue no desire to charge you with impudency, but you wax sometimes so intolerable in your brags and shifts, that I must either betray the trueth, or tell you in plaine termes that you doe face a great deale more then you can any way fasten by iust proofe. Let this example stand in steed of many. If I heere doe you wrong, as you pretend, and you reasoned only from my supposition, let me beare the shame of it with all Christi∣an Readers; but if it be plainely and expressely otherwise, then I pray you Sir who is the shifter and outfacer? Looke on the Page of your Treatise quoted by me, viz. Pa. 59, and see whether they be not your owne words (which I cited) in your answere to an obiection, and iustified by you out of the 10 of Marke verse 34. To an argument that Trea. pa. 59. li. 16. Christ might pray, that his bodily death might not haue dominion ouer him, you an∣swere, This is absurd to say that he praied in such feare and terror of mind against that which he perfectly knew should neuer come to him: namely that the dominion of death should hold him. Doe you confesse of yourselfe, that you speake absurdly, or doe you meane it of the obiectors, against whom you bring this as a reason; that since Christ Mar. 10. 34. perfectly knew the dominion of death could not hold him, You thinke it very absurd to say he feared that? And in the page precedent doe you not againe and againe auouch the same ex∣actnesse of knowledge in Christ at the time of his praiers? these are your owne words tripled and quadruplied to that end. Trea. pa 58. li. 30. Thirdly, this prooueth that Christ knew it was Gods determinate will, in that he tearmeth it an houre, that is a time set of God for his suffe∣ring. Fourthly, because he so mightily feared it, therefore doubtlesse he knew that he was ap∣pointed to suffer it. Thus it is manifest in plaine words he praied contrary to Gods knowen will. And least you should not be constant in your manifest contradiction, doe you not in∣sist on the same words in your defence? Defenc. pag. 99. li. 13. He could not intentiuely pray against that, nor feare that, which he perfectly knew concerned him not at all. Where you giue to Christ in that extreame astonishment, which you dreame of, intentiue praier, and perfect know∣ledge of Gods will in some things, which againe in other things you deny vnto him. So that by your leaue you gainsay your selfe, and your denying it is as vnshame fast, as your doubling it. Defenc. pag. 129. li. 26. To conclude this matter without colour of reason, you wrest a plaine text, which other∣wise (as it lieth) maketh strongly against you. They are our Sauiour Christes owne words: Now is my soule troubled, and what shall I say? Father saue me from this houre: but there∣fore came I vnto this houre. You say these words doe import a deliberation of two parts. But you speake against all reason, considering the nature and frame of the very words. A delibe∣ration must needs be set interrogatiuely in both clauses. New the text is not so. ] Of this place I haue spoken enough before, were it not that you challenge me with such hate∣full termes of wresting a plaine text without colour of reason, because I therein follow the iudgement of Chrysostom and Epiphanius, who a man would thinke had not only colour of reason, but substance of learning to discerne the force of that speech. First the words, as well by the nature of the petition, and your owne confession, in that it is for a temporall thing; as by the supplie of the rest of the Euangelists must be condi∣tionall, and haue a secret reseruation of Gods will, as in the like case the other Euan∣gelists do expresse; and namely S. Marke, who sayth; Marke 14. Christ prayed, if it were p ssi∣ble, that houre might passe from him. And so whether they be deliberatiue or positiue, they make nothing for your purpose, since not with resolution, but with condition, If it pleased God, Christ desired to be saued from that houre. But I wrest a plaine text, because I auouch, that the words import a deliberation of two parts, which you say must needs be set interrogatiuely in both clauses. Whence commeth this new Art of Oratory, that euery deliberation must be interrogatiue? As though a man might not doubt or deliberate either by int rrogation, condition, or simple subiection of the pa ts in que∣stion. When Christ asked the chiefe Priests and Scribes, Marke 11. whence the baptisme of Iohn was? from heauen or of men? they thought within themselues: If we say from heauen, he will say, Why then did ye not b leeue him? But if we say from men, we eare the people. So the foure Lepers that sate at the entring in of the gate of Samaria, (when the dearth was there in El zeus time) disputed with themselues; 2. Kings 7. Why sit we heare till we die? if wee say, we will enter into the Cittie, the famine is in the Cittie, and we shall die there. And if we sit heere, we die also. Now therefore come, let vs fall into the campe of the Aramites: if they saue our liues, we shall liue; if they kill vs, we are but dead. As heere they reason with a condition, so might they haue said to the same effect by way of proposing and answering to themselues: what shall we doe to saue our liues? we will enter the city, there is the famine; we will sit still, heere is likewise death. Let vs goe to the Ara∣mites: they will kill vs, then we are but dead; they will saue vs, then gaine we our liues. Is it not all one in this deliberation, whether we propose the parts by interro∣gation, condition, or proposition? In the words of our Sauiour likewise, Now is my soule troubled; and what shall I say? The answere to that patheticall question, What shall I say, might haue beene made either by interrogation; Shall I say, Father saue me from this houre? or by condition; If I say, Father saue me from this houre: or by simple supposition; I will, or I would say, Father saue me from this houre; but there∣fore came I vnto this houre. Which way soeuer we propose the former words, Father saue me from this houre; Christes answere by way of full resolution and conclusion, But therefore came I into this houre, doth conuince, that the former words, Father saue me from this houre, are by himselfe remoued, or denied as no part of his finall determi∣nation, though it were, or might be a part proposed in his deliberation. For either Christ must positiuely determine cleane contraries in one sentence, which were open inconstancie, and no way imaginable in the Sonne of God; or this latter must re∣moue the former being repugnant to the maine consent of his will, and intent of his comming. For therefore came he into this houre of mans redemption, because he would not be saued from it with mans destruction. And thus much the best and most skil∣full Interpreters haue collected to be the force of the wordes following, to which Christ addeth the coniunction aduersatiue, , which in their iudgement suppo∣seth heere a negatiue precedent. So Chrysostom conceiueth our Sauiours words, I do not say, saue me from this houre; And why? Because the words following with an ad∣uersatiue repugnance to the former words, doe proue not the first, but the last to be Christs full purpose. Defenc. pag. 129. li. 38. Chrysostom & Epiphanius doe descant about it; trying how the text may beare such a meaning: but it can not stand being so euidently against the course of the text. ] Indeed Chrysostom and Epiphanius are not comparable to you, neither in learning nor iudgement; you make vs such new positions and principles both of reason and faith, that their Diuinitie is stale to yours: but with all learned and wise men, the yongest of the twaine will be trusted for the true sense of a text farre before such Dreamers and Deuisers as you are. The course of the text is euidently against it, you say. What course of the text? The words vsed by our Sauiour are with it: But therefore came I into this houre. What sense or meaning can this sentence haue, but that Christ purposely com∣ming into this houre had no resolution to be deliuered from this houre? which be∣ing true, the former words, Father saue me from this houre, may shew the desire or doubt of nature inclining to that petition, but the present refusall thereof followeth expressing Christes will and purpose in putting himselfe into that houre. These words then, But therefore came I into thi houre, are in effect, not so, for therefore came I into this houre. Which the best Interpreters olde and new haue obserued in the force of Christes words. Chrysost. in Joha nem. homil. 66. Therefore came I into this houre, as if Christ had sayd (sayth Chry∣sostom) though we be moued and troubled, yet we flee not death. For I say not (thus as my resolution) Father deliuer me from this houre, but Father glorifie thy name. And Epi∣phanius: Epipha. li. 2. Heres. 69. What shall I say? Father; speaking by way of preparation and dubitation. , This, sayth Christ, I will say, but therefore came I into this houre. For he came not against his will, but willingly. Theophylact: Theophylact. in 12. cap. Jo∣hannis. For this cause, sayth Christ, came I into this houre, that I might suffer death for all. He teacheth vs very plainly by this, that though we be troubled and perplexed with it, yet we should not flie death for the truth. For I, sayth he, am troubled being a true man, and permit (mans) nature to shew it selfe, yet do I not say to my Father, that he should saue me from this houre, but what say I, Father glorifie thy name. The later Writers, of no meane iudgement, allow the same sense. Erasmus thus rendreth the summe of Christes words: Erasm. para∣phra. in cap. 12. Johannis. I finde my soule troubled for the day of my death now approching. And what shall I say? For the loue of mine owne life, shall I neglect the life of the world? By no meanes. I will applie my selfe to the will of my Father. Mans weak∣nesse troubled with feare of death, may say vnto him, Father, if it be possible, saue me from this instant danger of death. But Loue desirous of mans saluation, shall presently adde, Nay ra∣rather, if it be expedient, let death, which I desired, come, for somuch as wittingly and wil∣lingly by the leading of the spirit I haue offered my selfe to die. These words Bullinger in ca. Joh. 12. Bullinger ci∣teth, and calleth an excellent explication of that text. Gualter in like maner: Gualteru homilia 118. in 12. ca. Jo∣hannis. This is as if Christ had sayd, Let no man thinke me as a cowardly captaine, to exhort others to pa∣tience and constance, being my selfe safe from danger. For death approcheth me, and that so cruell and bitter, that the very remembrance thereof troubleth my soule. What then shall I say, when amongst men there is no hope? To thee ô Father I turne, saue me from the houre of this terrible death. But what do I say? Euen therefore came I into this houre. What other thing then shall I aske, ô Father, but that thou shouldest glori ie thy name? Doe all these learned Interpreters wrest this text, and speake they against all reason without con∣sidering the nature and frame of the wordes, or doe they out of the very frame and force of the wordes deduce Christes resolution to be this, Father glorifie thy name, notwithstanding my former words, since I came of purpose into this houre, not to be freed from it? [The first words Defenc. pag. 129. li. 36. pretend a plaine resolution, or at least a great inclining towards resolution. ] If a plaine resolution, then Christ contradicteth himselfe with a plainer resolution in the end, which to affirme of the Sonne of God, aduise you, whe∣ther it be blasphemous or no. As for an inclination, since Christ made no idle deli∣beration, but spake out of his naturall humane affection abhorring death, that maketh wholly with my speech, affirming, that howsoeuer the sense of nature in Christ did in∣cline to auoid death, in this debating with himselfe, yet he presently refused it by saying, But therefore came I into this houre, and fully resigned it, when he sayd, Father glorifie thy name: which resolution of his, God ratified with his owne voice from hea∣uen, I haue glorified it and will glorifie it. Defenc. pag. 130. li. 10. Hence I reasoned effectually before, but no where you answere it. If Christs such suffe∣ings in his soule were ordained of God for him, then certainly indeed he did suffer the same. ] Certainly indeed a man shall scant meet with such another, that disdaineth all mens reasons and interpretations besides his owne, and when he commeth to conclude any thing, can hardly discerne an Owle from an Eagle. Here is a profound argument made for your hell paines, that Christes soule was troubled with the foresight and remembrance of his death on the Crosse: ergo God ordained, that certainly and indeed he should suffer in his soule the paines of the damned. Children in their cradles, if they could prattle, would easily match the goodnesse of this reason; and other an∣swer, as it needeth none, so it shall haue none for me, how effectuall soeuer this fansie seemeth vnto you. Defenc. pag. 130 li. 17. Further you except, that this was feare of eternall death, which caused in Christ this a∣gonie, and from his feare he was deliuered. To say (as you do) that it was eternall death and eu rlasting malediction, which Christ here thus wofully and distressefully feared, is the stran∣gest speech in Diutnity that euer I heard. ] You cunningly dissemble, as your maner is, that Pag. 22. which you quote, I professed to refuse no mans opinion, that Se m pag. 22. li. 2. agreed any way with the rules of trueth; and thereupon layed downe three things, which Christ might in the Cup of Gods wrath, and by his prayer accordingly decline them: to wit, , corporall aboue his strength, and the separation of his soule from hi bod e by de th. The feare of eternall death, which is vrged by some of good learning, and euen by the Catechisme, on which you would seeme to stand so much, if we admi ted in Christ himselfe, I sayd must be taken for a Religious dislike and shun∣ning of hell, Sermo. pag. 23. li. 4. not for any distrust of his owne saluation, or doubt of Gods displeasure against himselfe, which we could not imagine in Christ, without euident want of grace and losse of faith, and these we might not attribute to Christs person, no not for an instant. Where then I alleage so many reasons Pa. 23. li. 32. guarding Christs person most sufficiently fro all dan∣ger and do bt of eternall death; thence you collect, that I auouch, Christ thus ofully and distressefully feared euerlasting damnation, which is a strange and false∣hood, though familiar with you, as if without such grosse stuffe you could not out your pamphlet. The Catechisme we heard before, saying, that Christ was Ae∣ternae mortis horrore persusus, wholly touched with the horror of death. M. Caluin sayth as much, Caluin. in li. 2. ca. 16. sect. 10. Vnde eum oportuit cum Inf rorum copi s, mortis horrore, qu si consertis manibus luctari. Wherefore Christ was to wrestle h nd in with all the power of h ll, and with the horrour of ETERNALL death. Others might be brought in like sort, but these suffice to discharge me, that I did not imagine these things of mine owne head, but found them in men of good learning and iudgement, which yet I did not receiue, except we did expound their words to import in Christ a religious feare declining euerlasting death in him elfe, or affectionately sorowing, when he conside ed what was due to vs for ou sinnes. Wherefore if you make so strang of these words, stirre against your authorized Catechisme and Master Caluin who first vsed them. Defenc. p g. 130. li. 20. You cannot helpe your selfe in making Christes eare of this death to be onely a religious feare, and a feare for others, these imaginations I haue remoued before. Then you perceiue well enough, in what sense I admit their words, but to aduantage your selfe, you dis∣pence with a slaunderous lie. Your remoouing is like the roling of paper to make pipes withall, you play still on one string, and that so much out of tune, that euery man is wearie with hearing it, besides your selfe. li. 29. These affections, you say, were not likelie in him at all, much lesse to be the causes of such effects. ] As though Christ had none other causes of sorow, but onely this. And what vnlikelihood, that these should be in Christ at this season, sauing that your fansie leadeth you to what you list? [ These are not feare properly, they ought rather to be called a religious care, and pitt e, which differ greatly from the nature of feare properly taken. ] Did I professe that Christ feared euerlasting death properly? did I not rather excuse or qualifie the vehemencie of their wordes, who put in Christ an horror of eternall death? you reason now against the Catechisme, which you make shew to maintaine, and not against me. For other feare of euerlasting death in Christ then improper I acknowledge none. [ You thinke the nature of enlabeia will not ad∣mit any proper feare, ] Then doe you conuince your selfe to be a notable deluder and abuser of the trueth. For you are not ignorant what I say, but you peruert it of pur∣pose to miscarie your Reader, and countenance your cause. [ li. 38. What say you, did Christ doubt eternall damnation, and therefore feared it? ] you lacke a woodden dagger to be∣come your part better; haue I any such wordes or sense? I shew the generall signifi∣cation of labeia to be Conclus. pa. 305. li. 25. a carefull and diligent regard to beware or decline that, which we mislike or doubt, and that as well in priuate and publike affaires, as in Religion: and you ap∣plie this, as if I had sayd, Christ feared and doubted eternall damnation. Whereas I neither mention eternall damnation in all that section, nor so much as name Christ within fourtie lines of those wordes, which shew how largely enlabeia is taken. [ You speake so darkly that I know not how to take you. ] You double so continually that I can∣not tell what to make of you: I haue in the same page, 305. whence you tooke these wordes, distinctly shewed what parts of Gods wrath, Christ might be said to feare or suffer, and in what sense, and yet you complaine of darknesse, when you shun the light, and watch for a word applied to another purpose, pretending you must needes stum∣ble at that straw. And therefore neuer come in with any after close, what my meaning may be, if my wordes be not plaine, reprooue them; if they be, refute them, except you receiue them. This you say commeth neerest to the signification of the Greeke word. I graunt it doth tou∣ching eulabeia, but in Ma ke the word doth import properly feare, and that in extremitie. ] It is happie yet that when you cannot chuse, you will graunt that, which is fully proo∣ued to your face. In your vnlearned Treatise you would needs make as vnlearned an obseruation, that Treatis. pag. 74. li. 22. this very word not onely in other Authors, but in the Scripture is vsed for a perplexed feare: And when your ignorance is conuinced, (for enlab ia is not onely lesse then , which is feare in the Greeke tongue; but contrarie to it, because it is the De placitis Philoso. li. 7. in zenone. declining of euill with reason and circumspection, as Diogenes Laertius writeth) you graunt that which you cannot gainesay. With as much skill you auouch, that ektham∣bei thai doth import properly feare and that in extremitie; whereas properly it noteth admiration at any strange or suddaine sight. Whether feare be ioyned with it or no, which sometime is according to the cause and circumstance of the place. [ Defenc. pag. 131. li. 8. My reason that Eulabeia heere signifieth feare properly, yea a perplexed feare, and not onely a religious deuotion, as you say, is grounded not so much on the nature of the word, as on the circumstan∣ces of the place, and the other wordes of the text. ] Christ did as well naturally feare that, which he suffered, as that which he shunned; though he were heard in that onely, which he religiously shunned, and not in the rest, which he suffered. And therefore the other wordes of the text doe not inferre, that enlabeia contained all, that Christ feared; but onely that, which he religiously feared, and from which hee was freed. And where you [ Defenc. pag. 131. li 23. graunt the Apostle may intend this also by the nature of the word, that Christ notwitstanding all this dreadfull feare, yet declined not a iot from a most reuerend re∣gard of obedience to God, which still he kept firme and safe: ] You thinke with your mix∣tures to worke some maruailes. For that one and the same word in one and the same place should haue two repugnant or different significations, and the Apostle there intend them both, this is newes to all men saue to you, to whom no manner of absurdities are new. And where you would knit a dreadfull feare of euill from God, and a reuerend regard of obedience to God, both together in one word, you make Christ at one instant to decline that, which he did desire, and to desire that, which he did decline. For what he did feare, that he did decline, and what he so reuerently re∣garded, that he as much desired, which was obedience to God; and so by one and the same word you conceaue not onely contrary minds, but contrary matters in Christ. [ li. 29. To like effect this word signifieth in that place of the Acts 23. vers. 10. as the circumstan∣ces also will confirme. ] We should soone haue heard of those circumstances, if any such had beene, but if you omit them as weake, I neede not entertaine them as worthy of answere. I see no such circumstances, as you speake of, much lesse any such significa∣tion of the word, as you haue framed vs out of the Apostle. Euery caution decli∣ning any thing, feareth somewhat, which it would preuent, and so eulabeia, when it signifieth to be warie of any euill, hath a feare of that euill, lest it should happen, and therefore seeketh the best meanes to decline it. Defenc. pag. 131. li. 32. Where you argue Christ was deliuered from his feare of hell torments; ergo he suffered them not, I denie your sequell. This prooueth directly the contrarie. He feared the death of the soule, ergo he did suffer it. ] My sequell I thinke hath ground sufficient in nature and Scripture to make it good. When the Saints so often prayed to God to deliuer them from the dangers, which they feared, or found comming towards them, did they meane they would suffer them first to the full, and after bee losed from them; or else that they would bee freed from them, and not suffer them? I know there is a de∣liuerance out of the midst of troubles; and so you may defend that Christ was deliue∣red from hell fire, because he did not suffer it eternally: But since feare by the rules of nature is of future, and not of present euill, if Christ were heard from his feare; that is, deliuered from that which he feared, then certainly he did not suffer it. But th nce you inferre directly the contrary, for li. 36. that feare is of that, which is to come, as (you say) I well obserue. ] Surely your sequels be like rotten rindes, they fall a sunder as soone, as they be touched. Did I auouch, that feare was of that onely, which neces∣sarily must come, or of that, which possibly might come to our selues, or to others? Is there any man of common sense, that euer affirmed as you doe, that whatsoeuer a man feareth, must befall him? for that is your direct proofe, of which you speake, that all things feared must necessarily come to passe. Otherwise if men may feare that which is imminent, and yet be freed from it, how will it follow, that Christ really suffered, what he feared? Defenc. pag. 132. li. 2. Such a manner and measure of feare, as this manifestly was, could not be but a very suffering. ] Of what? of feare, or of the thing feared? feare is an affection or passion of the mind foreseeing euill, that is possible, and afflicting it selfe for the approching, or possibilitie thereof. But he that maketh no difference betwixt the feare of future euill, and the sense of present euill, confoundeth all things. Men may feare they know not what, yea they may feare, where no feare is, that is, without iust cause; but this is the weaknesse, or guiltinesse of mans mind persuing it selfe by fearing that, which they need not, or should not feare. Defenc. pag. 132. li. 5. My soule is (saith Christ) full of (actuall) sorowes euen vnto death. ] When you adde anything to the wordes of our Sauiour, you should take care to put nothing to them, but that which is sensible and true, since he was full of wisdome and trueth. Now this that you adde in helpe of your conceits, is neither. For sorrowes are passions, not actions of the mind; and therefore to say actuall sorrowes, hath no sense in it. If by actuall you meane present, then you exclude all future sorrowes against the plaine wordes of our Sauiour, who noteth his should continue vnto death. As for present torments inflicted on the soule of Christ by the immediate hand of God the word perilypos, doth no way reach to them, nor expresse any such thing. You may be there∣fore suffered to say, li. 6. there is in this no doubtfull word; for that which you adde, is so absurd and senselesse, that no wise man will iudge it doubtfull. ( li. 7. your comparisons of fearing captiuitie, death, loosing a purse &c. are deuices vnsit for diuinitie. ] I match them not with Christs sufferings good sir, but by them I shew how lewtering your Logick is, in saying a man suffereth, that he feareth; which is so farre from trueth, that euerie child may soone confute it, and well deride it. [ Defenc. pag. 132. li. 12. God you say, might well heare Christ two waies; Frst, by sufficient sustaining him in it; Secondly, by deliuering him out of it in due time. ] Adde this interpretation then to the wordes of Christs prayers in the Garden, and what is become of your maine position, Christ prayed in plaine words contrarie to Gods knowen will? For since God did sustaine Christ in that he suffered, and in the end deliuered him with honour and glory, the cup by your constuction may bee said in both these respects to haue passed from him, and so in either sense God heard him, and deliuered him from it. But else where you are in greater earnest, that Christ could not intentiuely pray against that, nor feare that, which he most perfectly knew could by no meanes euer possibly come ne re him, namely that the dominion of death should hold him. If there you were in sadnesse, then now you doe iest or worse, to tell vs that God might well heare Christ in that he neuer did or could pray for. That the death of the soule or body should haue dominion ouer him, was simply impossible, and Christ knew so much, as your owne words yeeld. Then neither did he, nor could he pray, by your positions, for any such thing, and consequently God did not heare him in those things for which he praied not. And so your two waies of hearing and deliuering Christ, your selfe, by your owne doctrine, ouerthrow, rather as iests, then iust deli∣uerances. And then doth my sequell persue you more strongly then before, that Christ must be freed from suffering that he feared, not by suffering it, since he neuer doubted and so neuer praied by your diuinity to be sustained in it, nor after suffering to be freed from it. Defenc. pag. 132. li. 15. In another place you seeme to obserue a point both strange and very contrary to your selfe in saying feare is more intolerable in Christ then doubting; when you haue so often and so ear∣nestly affirmed, that Christ feared, & for feare became astonished. ] To him that neuer read leafe nor line of holy Scripture, this may make some iolly shew; but to him that can distinguish white from blacke, it will appeare to be rather an ignorant conceit in you, then a repugnant speach in me. A naturall feare of euill is incident to all mens natures by Gods ordinance in his first creating vs, and so common to Christs manhood with all men, be they good or bad. For therefore did God threaten death to Adam if he disobeyed, that both the loue of God enioied, and feare of euill (if he transgressed,) might restraine him from sinne. A religious feare of Gods greatnesse, and (in cause of committing or suffering for sinne) the trembling at the power of his wrath, is proper to the godly, wherein Christ might and did communicate with them, as being to beare the punishment of our sinne, though he were free from all sinne. A distrustfull feare, which quencheth faith and excludeth hope, is common to all the wicked, and therein Christ might not concurre with them, least he conioined with them in si ne. The first was tolerable, the second was commendable in Christ, the third was neither. Of this third kind of feare I speake, when I say, feare is more in Christ then doubting. But perhaps you could not discerne so much, because my speach was dar e. I am content to be tried by the Reader, whether any man might mistake my words euen there, where you stumble at them, but he that would wilfully peruert them. My words stand thus. In that perfect persuasion, knowledge, and assurance of Gods euer∣lasting Sermo. pa. 118. li. 22. purpose, fauour, and loue towards him, that he should be the Sauiour of the world, if doubting be not tolerable, how enexcusable is feare and terror, as if he were for saken of God? Do I heere speake of all kinds of feares, or of that only, whereby Christ should feare, least Gods purpose, promise, and loue towards him might faile? my illation in that very page is this. The soule of Christ must therefore be farre from fearing or doubting least Ibid. li. 32. God would change his mind, recall his word, frustrate his promise, and violate his o th: for these are blasphemies against God, in the highest degree. He must be more then blind, which doth not see what kind of feare I exclude from Christ: but you did cunningly to peruert my words, when you could not resist my reasons. For all your apprehen∣sions of Gods proper wrath and fierie indignation, which you so much proclaime, if you direct them to the person of Christ, as if he conceaued, feared, or doubted any change or decrease of Gods fauour and loue towards him, or his sacrifice, then are they these verie feares, which heere I banish from Christ as vtterly blasphemous. It was therefore some skill to shift of these words with a slanderous and false crimination least they should make you breath, before you were disburdened of them, if you toke them rightly. Defenc. pag. 132. li. 19. You seeke a weake aduantage in that I said eisaekonstheis may seeme to shew, that Christ was heard being in that, which he was saued from. You see I chalenge no certaine but a seem∣ing reason from that word. ] In the maine ground of our saluation and redemption, which are most certaine in the Scriptures, to impugne the doctrine there deliuered with seeming reasons, is the guise of him that would seeme a good Christian, but is none. Indeed you haue beset your selfe in your defence with store of seemings; as I could specifie the places and points, if it were to this purpose; and I thinke your whole defence hath nothing in it but your seemings, you vse therein so few either au∣thorities or reasons, other then your owne conceits and assertions. But vpon these seemings you set pestilent positions, slanderous imputations, and false conclusions, as euen here you both resolue, that Christ was in your hell paines; and you presume so to translate the word eisakonstheis, he was heard being in it, as if that were the true force of the Apostles words. [ But your selfe maketh a stranger conclusion; ergo the actiue Treat pag. 63. li. 26. referred to God; importeth that God being in the same pains did heare him. ] Yet such a con∣clusion, as your collection cannot auoid. For where Christ was heard, God did heare; the passiue in Christ noteth the actiue to be truely affirmed of God, that he did heare Christ. If then that word, as you boldly with your seeming reason and false translati∣on affirme, import being in the paines of hell, it must so signifie as well in the actiue referred to God, as in the passiue applied to Christ. If you be now ashamed to heare of these vnseeming and vnsauery reasons; blot them out of your owne booke, and be∣stow your time better hereafter. Defenc. pag. 132. li. 24. Lastly, you say, but in the garden Christ neuer praied with strong cries and teares to be saued from death, that we read in the Scriptures. I hope you do not read in the Scriptures expressely at all, that thus he praied in the garden: You may soundly gather it from the Scrip∣tures I grant. My words are not, that the Scriptures expressely name Christs teares in the garden; but that none other place nor time of Christs praier mentioned in the Euangelists, doe admit teares but the garden. For there the place being priuate, and his praiers so vehement, that his sweat was like bloud, both olde and new writers haue collected, that the Apostles words were verified in the garden, yea the sweat of Christ Bernard calleth teares, where he saith: Bernardus in Ramis Palma∣rum Serm. 3. Christ falling into an agony, prayed the third time where he seemed to weepe, not only with his eyes, but with all the parts of his bodie, that the whole bodie of his Church might be purged with the teares of his whole body. Zin∣glius confesseth as much. Zinglius in Historiam Passio. Non lachrymas modo oculis sed & sanguinis guttas è corpore exprimit seria & deuota oratio, vt in trepidatione Christi est cernere. Serious & deuote praier doth not onely draw teares from the eyes, but a bloudie sweate from the bodie, as we see in Christes Agonie. And surely the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrewes must either not collect this from the Scripture, but report it besides the Scripture, which is somewhat dangerous; os else by the sweate of Christes face, trickling downe to the ground, he col∣lected, that in that in: entiue and vehement prayer, teares ran downe as fast as sweate, and ioyntly with sweate: and other sound gathering it from the Scriptures there is none. And this collection if you graunt, that the Apostle from the vehemencie of Christs prayer obserued the cause of the one to be the cause of the other, since it was not possible the face should runne with sweate through the feruencie of prayer, and not the eyes with teares; then graunt you, that it may soundly be gathered from the Scriptures, that zeale of prayer, and not heate of paine was the cause of Christs bloudy sweate. Defenc. pag. 132. li. 34. The Apostle in all reason may be vnderstoode to haue respect to all the woefull times and cries of our Sauiour, as on the crosse, and in the 12. of Iohn. ] There is no reason to extend the Apostles wordes to Christs praier in the 12. of Iohn: for there the Scripture doth not mention either strong cries or teares, which are the Apostles words. On the crosse he vsed a loud voice, but teares he shed none, neither was the sense of his prayer there to be freed from death, but rather to hasten his death, to which he had now wholy sub∣mitted himself according to his Fathers will. And therefore your stretching the Apo∣stles wordes to all those times, to make Christs agonie, if you could tell how, to con∣tinue on the crosse, wanteth all reason. His paine most increased on the crosse, and his sorow rising thence could not decrease; but neither his astonishment, nor that which the Scripture calleth his agonie, accompanied with his bloodie sweate, conti∣nued on the crosse. You thinke it vnreasonable to say, that Christ on the crosse had persistance in ioy, and beheld God alwayes fauourable and faithfull vnto him, Defenc. pag. 132. li. 38. without intermission or obscuration; though his flesh, in which sinne was condemned, and his body where he bare our sinnes, were subiected to most shamefull and cruell torments f om the hands of the wicked: what vncoherence is there in those wordes, or what disagreement from the Scriptures? I saw the Lord alwayes before me, said Dauid con∣cerning Christ. For he is at my right hand, that I should not be moued. If this beholding of God were Sermon. p . 116 li. 25. alwayes, then was there no intermission; if before his face, then was there no obscuration. These are my words, which why you should dislike, or how you can re∣fute, I doe not see. You can touch nothing, which you one way or other turne not out of his right course. Firmenesse of faith, and assurance of hope I giue vnto Christ on the Cros e, and either of those bring with them inward ioy of mind, how much so∣euer our outward state be troubled, or our flesh afflicted. Neither are these such con∣traries as cannot stand together, since they are both in diuers parts, and for diuers re∣spects. S. Peter saith, 1. Peter 1. we reioyce in the faith of saluation, though for a season wee are in heauinesse through manifold temptations. S. Iames saith, my Iames 1. brethren count it an exceeding ioy, when ye fall into diuers tentations. S. Paul saith, Rom. 5. we reioyce vnder the hope of the glory of God, neither so onely, but also we reioyce in tribulation; knowing that tribulation brin∣geth foorth p tience, (experience, and hope) which maketh not ashamed. Then as it is no absurditie, that the spirit should be readie, and the flesh weake, nor that the inward man should be renewed, when the outward man per sheth; no more is it any repug∣nancie, that Christ should haue ioy in the holy Ghost and in hope, when he found and felt exceeding affliction in his flesh; and as the Apostle teacheth, Hebr. 12. for the ioy set be∣fore him, endured the crosse and despised the shame (thereof.) If then there be ioy in hope, how could Christ want ioy, if he wanted not hope? and hope if you take from him, you leaue him in despaire, which is the losse of hope; which whether you will adde to the rest of your vnsound faith, I leaue it to your choice. Notwithstanding your selfe in this very booke allow to Christ on the crosse, and in his agonie by reason of the ve∣ry same wordes, (which I cite page 116.) not onely Defenc. pag. 110. li. 28. & 34. constant and continuall ioy in God, but exceeding and generall ioy, with which whether your hell and perpetuall extreme agonie as well on the Crosse as in the Garden may stand, I referre it to the sober and wise Reader. Defenc. pag. 133. li. 3. & 1. How vaine is this consequent, how false are these sayings, and contrarie to the Scripture in the circumstances that his astonishment must continue eighteene houres, from his entering into the garden to the ending of his life the next day at three of the clocke afternoone. ] Indeed it is most absurd, and openly repugnant to the Scriptures and to all the circumstances thereof, to defend that Christs agonie, which you say was the cause of his astonish∣ment, or his astonishment, which was the effect thereof, continued on the Crosse; and yet such is your error, that you make Christs spirituall paines on the crosse to be grea∣ter then in the Garden, and his astonishment to be lesse, because you doe not find, that on the crosse, where his paine was present and most sharpe, he prayed ought against the knowen will of God, as you auouch he did in the Garden. Your supposing and presuming without all warrant of holie Scripture that God with his immediate hand inflicted the paines of the damned on the soule of Christ, Defenc. pag. 133. li. 9. 10. sometimes more & sometimes lesse, and sometimes more suddainly then at other times, and sometimes staying it, and this va∣riablenesse of Gods hand to be the true cause of Christs astonishment; is a saucie, sense∣lesse, and shifting imagination, aggrauating, easing, and iterating Gods hand at your pleasure; and yet such is the folly and f lshood of your doctrine, that without this desperate deuice euery child would crie shame on you. For where on the Crosse by your owne confession Christes meere spirituall paines most increased, euen there his astonishment was none at all; and though you teach it not possible for Christ not to sinke, and Treat. pag. 54. li. 28. not to be confounded vnder the burden, yet when he Ibid. pag. 63. li. 15. came to the greatest of his passion, then was he freest from all confusion, and so your hell paines by your leaue were not the cause of Christes astonishment, if any such thing were in him. Defenc. pag. 133. li. 16. I confesse his extreame astonishment did euer quickly passe from him, yet the sense aud tast of that cup might continue longer, in such a manner and measure as he was better able by his deitie to sustaine it. Now what ill is there in these conceits, I pray you, what follie is there in them? ] As much as may be. For when you haue sought heauen and earth, sea and land to bring Christs soule within the compasse of your hell-paines, and therewith to astonish and confound all the powers of his soule, and senses of his bodie; suddainely with the speaking of, (yet) you free him from it, and still returne and remooue it, as often as you list. And when you are vrged, that hell paines continuing and increa∣siing on the crosse by your doctrine, there was no manner of astonishment or confu∣sion in Christs reason or remembrance; you say the tast of the cup might continue. So that when the paines were lesse, then Christ did drinke the cup, and when they were great∣est, then he did but tast the cup. Thus play you the Tapster with Christs torments, and set vp the rest of your cause on this absurd conceit of Drinking and tasting the cup; which is not only dissonant from all trueth, but repugnant to all sense. For if your hell paines were the true cause of Christs astonishment, then the cause continuing, the effect could not cease; and the cause increasing, the effect could not diminish. Where you fly for help to Christs deity, the better to enable him to sustaine the paines of the damned without astonishment, you forget that if Christ would haue vsed any diuine power to resist or represse his paine, he might easily haue suffered none. And weake you make Christs godhead, if vsing it to that end, he could not saue himselfe from confusion and forgetfullnesse; as also you put a conflict betwixt the Father and the Sonne, if he could not enable his manhood against astonishment, as well at one time as at another. Therefore this abusing Gods immediate hand to take memory from Christ, when you list, and thus pretending Christs deity to keep him in the paines of hell, and yet to free him from forgetfulnesse, shew right on what foundati∣on you b ild the whole plat of your doctrine, euen on your owne fansies, without all direction or instruction from the sacred Scriptures, which haue not one word more or lesse, touching these deuices of yours in so waighty causes of our redemption. Defenc. pag. 134. li. 1. How you seeme to auouch, that Christ was by God for saken in body, but not in soule, le them declare that can. I am sure no man can in trueth maintaine it. ] It is more easily main∣tained then refuted. To be forsaken, is to be depriued of all sense and fruition of the power and life, that is in God, and commeth from God. Thus Christs body was for∣saken for the time, & left to death, which is contrary to life, wherewith God quickned man heere on earth. But the soule of Christ was neuer forsaken of hi life which was the grace and spirit of God, whereby the soule is quickened. As for wresting Ambro e, as I did Hilarie, shew first wherein, and then spare not to speake it. Otherwise your censure hath so much partiality, and so little probability, that your Reader after so many failes will not now depend on your single say. Defenc. pag. 134. li. 5. After this you are bold, and aske if any dare doubt of your doctrine? yea surely I dar not but doubt of it. ] What dare you not doe, who dare deuice a new faith without all pre∣cedence of the holy Scriptures, and take vpon you to guide and rule Gods immediat hand, as seemeth best to your liking. In our conformity to Christs sufferings I ob∣serued two things out of the word of God: one, that we haue fellowship with Christs afflictions and follow his steps; the other that we must reioice in communicating with his sufferings. Neither of which can generally and iustly be verified of your hel∣lish confusion and torments. For must we be all confounded in all the powers of our soules and senses of our bodies, and must we forget Gods knowen will through asto∣nishment, and pray against it, before we can follow Christs steps? this must be your doctrine, as also that we must reioice in this shrincking from the will of God, and praying against it, because the holy Ghost willeth vs to reioice, when we communi∣cate with Christs sufferings. [ li. 15. Some are conformable in some measure with Christ euen in these his sufferings. ] Not only some may, but all must be conformed to Christ their head to suffer with him, before they shall raigne with him. So that as Christ said to Iames and Iohn, Matth. 20. Ye shall drinke indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptisme, that I am baptized with, So he performeth to all true beleeuers. Whosoeuer, saith he, Luke 14. bea∣reth not his crosse, and commeth after me, cannot be my Disciple. And where to my allega∣tion, that we must reioice in the fellowship of Christs afflictions, you answeare; Defenc. pag. 134. li. 17. We ought to turne them to ioy and gladnesse, though not properly to be glad in them, This is but an euasion. I commend not affliction, because it is greeuous to nature, but for the vse and reward thereof, and partaking therein with Christ. And if we are therein to reioyce, as you now confesse, li. 22. euen when we are most bruized & pierced in our soules with the terrors of God, Then I hope our Sauiour Christ in the midst of all his sufferings had the same ioy, which we must haue; and consequently I had reason and trueth on my side, when I said Pag. 132. li. 36. Christ on the Crosse had alwaies persistance in ioy, which you then im∣pugned, and now doe grant against your will. And if your credit were ought worth, I say not in this so much as you doe. For you ascribe to Christ on the crosse, Pag. 110. li. 28. & 34. constant and continuall ioy in God, yea exceeding and generall ioy, and yet you thinke it much that I should affirme, that the Scriptures attribute to Christ persistance of ioy on the crosse how bitter or greeuous soeuer the shame and paine thereof were vnto his flesh. Defenc. pag. 134. li. 24. You frame an obiection to your selfe, which you neither doe nor can answere: Christs soule might feele the torments of hell for the time without any distrust or doubting of his sal∣uation or our redemption. ] I answered you, which you shall neuer auoid, first that the true paines of hell by the sacred Scriptures, are not temporall, but eternall. You tell vs you haue shewed Defenc. pag. 134. li. 33. Eternall continuance in hell paines is not of the essence or nature of hell torm nts. So haue you said page: 12. though page: 53. as you often quote it, there is no such thing: but euen there also haue I shewed, that this you say out of your owne braine, the Scriptures affirme no such thing. Secondly, I answered you, that the hor∣ror of the paines of the damn d did admit no ioy; for in hell I hope there is no ioy. Christ then by your owne doctrine hauing constant, continual, exceeding, & generall ioy, was neither in the true paines, nor in the true terrors of hell, vnlesse in defence of your deuices you will now make your new heauen, and your new hell to be all one. For ioy in the holy Ghost you directly make to be the substance of heauenly bli ie. Now if in Christ and all his members you put at one and the same time, the true terrors of hell, and the true ioy of the holy Ghost, what misse you of mixing heauen and hell at one instant in Christ and all the faithfull. A third replie I gaue in that very place to this obiection, which you say, I neither doe, nor can answere; and that was, Serm. pag. 135. li. 3. since it is no where witnessed in the Scriptures, that Christ suffered the paines of hell, why striue you to establish a meere conceit of men, neither written, nor spoken before our age? All these are no answeres with you, and only because you haue deuiced a new hell from the imme∣diate hand of God, with which you delude, as your maner is, all that the Scriptures speake of the paines of the damned. But glory not in your deuice; to inuent a new faith, it is as much sinne, as to renounce the true Christian faith, which indeed is auncient, and in substance as old as the Scriptures, since they serue to testifie from the beginning Gods blessed will and promise of saluation vnto man through the death of Christ, which God first named the Serpents biting the heele of the womans eed. Defenc. pag. 135. li. After this you set v hemently against my last argument that Christ suffered not in some sort the death of the soule; first if we should speake strictly after the manner of death in the bo∣die, then no man is so mad or foolish as to say that any mans soule can die at all, that is, want life and sense as a dead bodie doth. ] You be come now to the vpshot of all your defence and doctrin, whether the Scriptures do any where teach, that Christ died the death of the soule, or the second death for our redmption: and here shall we find nothing but an heape of words broched out of your braines, and so tempered with your conceits, that when you haue all said, you say nothing with any substance or shew of holy Scrip∣ture. You disclaime, that the soule is at any time deuoide of life and sense, as dead bodies are, as if that were ought to your purpose; but yet the death of the soule hath a resemblance and concordance with the death of the bodie, as spirituall things may haue with corporall. And therefore as the bodie being once dead wanteth all sense and motion, which are the parts or effects of life from the soule quickning the bodie, so the soule being dead to God, who is her life, hath no sense nor motion of Gods grace in this life, nor sight nor hope of glory in the life to come, but destitute of the one here on earth, which is grace, hath no desire nor feeling of God, and in the next world de∣priued of all possibilitie of glory, is subiected to eternall and intolerable miserie from the presence of God. Defenc. pag. 135. li. 24. Such a death as immortall soules are subiect vnto is Gods separation from them, & this is two fold; the first death, and the second death, as the Scripture speaketh. The first is the sepa∣ration of them from Gods grace, which is in this life by sinne raigning in them ]. The soule loa∣den with sinne in this life, is not vtterly dead, so long as it retaineth any sense or motion of Gods grace. So that sorow for sinne ioyned with any desire of true repentance is a plaine signe of life in the soule, though sorrow for sinne without hope be plaine de∣spaire and death of the soule. And therefore the soule of man finding the danger of sinne, and desiring to be deliuered from it, yet liueth whiles she apprehendeth, affe∣cteth, or seeketh the grace of God; but if she want all sense of God by faith, and mo∣tion to God by hope and desire, she is wholy dead to God, that is void of the life of God, which is deriued from God vnto the soules of men. As for the second death of the soule, the Scriptures indeed speake thereof, but you erre groslely in this second death, the execution whereof alwayes followeth the first death as well of the bodie as of the soule, though the guiltinesse and condemnation thereof by a mans owne con∣science may be found heere in this life. And therefore the second death by the open and euident wordes of the holy Ghost is called the Reuel. 20. lake of fire, or the 19. & 21. lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is not in this life. And consequently your next collecti∣on, that the second death is Gods leauing them in the feeling of the most sharpe and most ve∣hement paines inflicted by Gods iustice for sinne, is as false, as it is defectiue, not agreeing in one word with the tenor of the sacred Scriptures, which you pretend to follow. Defenc. pag. 1 5. li. 30. This last kind of death is so called and named in many places of Scripture. ] The second death is expresly named, but in foure places of the Scripture. The first, Reuel. 2. v. 11 Be thou faithfull to death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life. He that ouercommeth (the first death) shall not be hurt of the second death. The second, Reuel. 20. v. 6 blessed and holy is he, that hath part in first resurrection (of the soule vnto the life of grace) on such THE SECOND DEATH hath no power. The third, Ibid. v. 14. Death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, THIS IS THE SECOND DEATH. The fourth, Reuel. 21. v. 8 The fearefull & vnbeleeuing, the abomina∣ble and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liers shall haue their part in the lake, that burneth with fire and brimstone, WHICH IS THE SECOND DEATH. Saue in these places the second death is neuer expresly named in the Scrip∣tures; and in these most apparantly the second death followeth after the death of the bodie, and is euerlasting. And neither on Christ, who is the first resurrection vnto grace, and the second resurrection vnto glorie; nor on any of his members hath the second death any power by the plaine words of Saint Iohn. So that all your platforme is quite ouerthrowen by the direct words of the Apostle, freeing Christ and all his elect euen in this life from all power of the second death. And therefore you set your selfe in this section euidently to confront the holy Ghost, when you seeke to proue that Christ suffered the second death of the soule, as the Scripture speaketh. And besides the Scriptures, if you talke of second deaths, you may as well tell vs tales of a new world, as of an other word without the witnesse of Gods spirit. But you haue found out many places of Scripture, where this last kinde of death is so called and named. ] Eight you quote by the side in your margine, but take not the paines to discusse one of them, onely you pronounce after your stately manner, that those places of Scripture prooue that, which you meane to bee the death of the soule. Now what if not one of them speake any such thing? is not your Reader sure to find you a true man of your word, when you quote eight places, and not one of them to your purpose? but this is your perpetuall course, to mistake and misuse Scriptures at your pleasure, and then to say you haue soundly prooued it. On the contrary I affirme that none of these places in∣tend any such thing, as you imagine of your terrestiall and temporall hell, but they exactly conclude against you, that damnation is eternall, and no death of the soule, which is not euerlasting, is expressed or intended in any of those Scriptures; or in any other, that you or your friends are able to picke out. And though it may suffice me as well to say nay, as you to say yea, yet for the Readers better resolution I will not bee grieued to run through all these places, as much as shalbe needfull. The first is, Ezech. 18. ver. 4. the soule that inneth, it shall die. These words may signifie either sub∣traction of grace in this life, which is consequent to sinne in the wicked, or exclusion Eight places of Scripture abu∣sed for the tem∣porall death of Christs soul . from glory in the next world, which is the iust and full wages of sinne. But that euery soule, which sinneth, hath felt, or shall feele in this life your temporall hell or the pains of the damned, this is a grosse error to be fathered on those words, and repugnant not onely to the trueth of this text, but euen to the sense and experience of all the Godly, and such as your selfe dare not auouch, since you qualifie your conceit in that behalfe with these words, that Defenc. pag. 134. li. 15. some in some measure are conformed with Christ in these his suf∣ferings. But if God by Ezechiel ment your earthly hell, then absolutely all men, chil∣dren not excepted, must feele in this life paines equall with the damned, for so much as they haue sinned, and deserued euerlasting damnation. The second is the commination, that God made to Adam, Genes. 2. ver. 17. Whensoeuer thou atest thereof, thou shalt die the death, (or) surely thou shalt die. Here are all sorts of deaths threatned, but not to be executed either on all men, nor in this present life; God re∣seruing to himselfe power and libertie to dispose of all mens soules according to his determinate counsell, though they should all be guiltie and liable to all kinds of death by vertue of those words vpon the transgression of the first man. This exposition the Apostle giueth when he saith, Rom. 5. The offence of one (came) on all men to condemnation, which is the verifying of these words, that all men died in Adam, to wit, were subiect to death, not onely by dying the death of the bodie, which is appointed for all men, but to the guiltinesse of euerlasting death not executed on all, though deserued by all. The third, which is the Rom. 6. Apostles conclusion, is either generally ment of all kinds of death, which came in by sinne, as the rewards and punishments thereof, and then it is nothing to your intention; or else it expresseth the full wages of sinne to be euer∣lasting death by opposition to eternall life mentioned in the next wordes following. For eternall life is the gift of God, as (eternall) death is the wages, (that is bothe the de∣sert and repayment) of sinne. Take which you will, either the generall or speciall con∣struction of death, it is no way pertinent to your purpose. Lesse is the fourth, that the Apostles were the 2. Cor. 2. vers. 16. sauour of death vnto death in them, that perished, as they were the sauour of life vnto life in them, that were saued. For the preaching of the Gospell, which the Apostle meaneth in that place, doeth not pro∣claime a terrestiall or temporall heauen to them that beleeue in Christ, but life eter∣nall; and consequently neither doth it denounce a temporall death to them, which refuse Christ, but euerlasting death. And therefore there can be nothing more absurd then to conuert these places to the proofe of your temporall hell; for so you should doe the reprobate a very good turne, if you could shew, that the death threatned them for not beleeuing in Christ, were to dure but for a time, or in this life only, where your new found hell hath power and place, and no where else. With like successe you note for your fifth, that the 2 Cor. 3. vers. 7. ministration of death was glori∣ous, the Apostle so calling the law, because it denounced death not temporall, but eter∣nall to all transgessours. So that if the full wages of sinne be eternall death by the word of God, then did the law not denounce a temporall death due to all men by course of nature, be they good or bad, (though euen that at first entered as a part of the pu∣nishment of sinne) but euerlasting death, which is the second death, is reserued, as S. Iohn writeth, for all sorts of sinners and liers. Saint Iames is the sixth, who sayth, Iames 5. He that conuerteth a sinner (erring from the trueth) shall saue a soule from death. If a man conuerted shall be saued from your tem∣porall hell, which you here would intend by the death of the soule, then much more the Conuerter and he that neuer erred from the trueth shall be free from your hell; and consequently Christ was most free, who was trueth it selfe, and neuer erred. But as trueth is the way to euerlasting life, and freeth men from all bondage of sinne and Satan, so errour and infidelitie haue another maner of death than your terrestiall hell, which you make common to Christ and some of his members; and he that is conuer∣ted from errour or sinne shall be saued from euerlasting perdition, which indeed is the death of the soule depriuing it of all blisse and ioy for euer. The seuenth and eigth you take out of Saint Iohn, who sayth, 1. Ioh. 5. vers. 16, 17. There is sinne vnto death, for which we must not pray: But whosoeuer is borne of God, sinneth not that sinne; and so neither Christ, who was the true Sonne of God, nor any of his chosen, who are the children of God by adoption, can sinne that sinne, nor die that death, because he that is begotten of God, liueth by God, who is eternall life to all that know him, and cleaue vnto him without separation. If then the sinnes of the Elect be not vnto death, but such as we in pietie may, and in charitie must pray for; consequently the death of the soule here meant by Saint Iohn, is such as is not incident to any of the sonnes of God, and so not the temporall hell, which you communicate to Christ and his members. Heere are your eight places of Scriptures proouing (as you pretend) the second death of the soule, which you ascribe to Christ, in euery one of which, saue the first and second, there can be no question, but euerlasting damnation is intended, and in those two the guiltinesse of eternall death, which is due to sinne, may be comprised in the name of death; which the Apostle iustifieth, when he sayth, Rom. 5. v. 12. The offence of one (came) on all men vnto condemnation, which is in effect that he sayd before, Death went ouer all men, forasmuch as all men haue sinned. But that any of these intend your temporall hell brought into this life not by snares and feares working on the soules of men, but by substance and essence; and not eternall death in hell fire with the Diuell and his Angels, you nor all your adherents shall euer be able by any ground of holy Scripture to make it appeare. And therefore your presuming it vpon the bare shew of places concluding no such thing, is a pestilent intrusion vpon the word of God, whiles you sticke not to couple your conceits, which are false and erroneous, with his vndoubted and vndefiled trueth. Defenc. pag. 135. li. 31. First ordinarily and commonly it belongeth only to the damned, wherewithall are the or∣dinarie accidents and concomitants desperation, induration, vtter darknesse &c. with perpe∣tuitie of punishment, and that locally in HELL.] Generally and truely the Scriptures neuer vse the name of the second death, but for the lake burning with euerlasting fire, into which the Diuell and all the Reprobate shall be cast, and whatsoeuer you o∣therwise pretend, is your owne absurd deuice without the Scriptures, and against the Scriptures, to keepe your doctrine from open derision and detestation. And since your selfe acknowledge, that this is the ordinarie and vsuall doctrine of the Scrip∣tures, it shalbe needfull for your Reader to hold you to that, till you fully proue your extraordinarie deuice by the same Scriptures, by which the other is euidenly confir∣med, and so much openly confessed by you. Defenc. pag. 135. li. 36. In this sense the Fathers generally do take it, where they denie that Christ suffered the death of the soule: and so do we. ] If your cause haue so little holde in the Scriptures, it hath lesse in the Fathers, who in the necessarie worke of our redemption thought it sacriledge to say any thing that was not apparently proued by the Scriptures. And as you light not on a true word, when you come to deliuer vs the mysteries of your new hell, so this is patently false, that the Fathers generally take the death of the soule for eternall damnation only, when they denie that Christ died the death of the soule. They speake as the Scriptures leade them, and confessing two deaths of the soule as the Scriptures doe, which are sinne excluding all grace, and the wages of sinne euen euerlasting damnation; they generally denie that Christ died any death of the soule, and haue for confirmation of their doctrine therein, the whole course of the sacred Scriptures concurring with them. Defenc. pag. 135. li. 37. Secondly, the death of the soule, or the second death, may be extraordinarily and singu∣larly considered, namely to imply no more but simply the very nature and essence of it. ] You broach two apparent and euident vntrueths, which you make the whole foundation of your presumptuous errour. First, that either Christ or his Elect in this life did or do suffer the very nature and essence of the second death. Next, that the Scriptures do singularly and extraordinarily reserue that kinde of second death for Christ and his members. Shew either of these by the word of God, before you make them grounds of your doctrine, or els any meane Reader may soone conceiue you meane to teach no trueth confirmed in the Scriptures, but a bolde and false deuice of your owne, which you would extraordinarily intrude vpon the word of God. Defenc. pag. 136. li. 5. This is a death to the soule, as before we haue shewed: according to this sense the Scrip∣tures and Fathers before noted may rightly be vnderstood not to denie it in Christ. ] When you glaunced before at the death of Christes soule, you prayed vs to haue patience, When the De∣fender shou d proue the death of Christs soule, he sayeth bee h th proued it already. till you came to the place, where we should receiue a reasonable satisfaction; and now you are come to the place, where you should make iust and full proofe thereof, you send vs backe againe, and say you haue shewed it before. What meaneth this dou∣bling and deceiuing of your Reader, but that you would seeme to haue many proofs, when indeed you haue none? and therefore you post vs to and fro, to seeke for that we shall neuer finde. In the 113. Page of this Defence, you went about by your mi∣serable misconstruing of certaine wordes vsed by some of the Fathers to enforce a shew of a death on the soule of Christ; but against the haire, as there I haue proued: and therefore stand not on your former vnfortunate aduentures, but either heere make proofe by the Scriptures, that Christ died the death of the soule, or leaue pra∣ting and publishing it so confidently as you and your adherents do for the chiefe part of mans redemption. [ The Scriptures and Fathers, you say, before noted, may rightly be vnderstood not to denie it in Christ. ] Is this all you haue to say for the death of Christes soule, that the Scriptures and Fathers may be vnderstood not to denie it? The Scriptures must affirme it, before you can make it any point of Christian religion, or part of our reconciliation to God. Rom. 10. Faith (is) by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and not by not denying. If that be your course, to put any thing to the Creed which you list to say the Scriptures doe not denie, you may quickly haue a large Creed, containing all things which the Scriptures, abused with your figures and wrested to your fansies, shall not in expresse words, as you thinke, denie. Defenc. pag. 136. li. 9. Moreouer, let it be obserued: that if we had no proofes at all in Scripture for this point, yet our question is fully proued and confirmed by those other sufficient and pregnant proofs al∣leaged and iustified before. ] Your palpable and pregnant follies are sufficiently seene before: your proofs were none but bald and false presumptions, conceiued by your selfe, though otherwise voide of all reason and authoritie: with such props you haue hitherto supported your Defence, and now you be come to the maine issue, whether the Scriptures or Fathers doe teach, that Christ for our redemption died the death of the soule, or the death of the damned, which is the second death, you would passe it ouer as a matter of no moment, and here tell vs if you had no such proofe (as indeed you haue none) yet you haue played your part before, which was to set a good face on an euill cause, and to proue iust nothing. Defenc. pag 136. li. 13. For it is to be noted, that no man setteth the question in these tearmes that Christ died in his soule, neither doe we at all vse them very much in speaking of this matter. ] The Scrip∣tures themselues set that for the question. First of all, I 1. Cor. 15. deliuered vnto you (sayeth Paul) that which I receiued, how that Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures. Since then Rom. 5. we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne; and Christ is the Hebr: 9. Me∣diatour of the New Testament, through death for the redemption of the transgressions in the former Testament; and where a Testament is, there must be the death of him that made the Testament. The question riseth of it selfe what death the Sonne of God died for our sinnes, by the witnesse of holy Scripture. And hitherto for these fifteene hundred yeeres and vpward the Christian world, both of learned and vnlearned, hath beleeued that the Sonne of God by the death of his bodie on the tree ransomed our sinnes, re∣conciled vs to God, and vtterly destroyed the kingdome of Satan; and that he nei∣ther did nor could suffer any other kinde of death, as the death of the soule, or the So that the reference of the Apostles words standeth thus; he offered vp praiers and sup∣plications with strong cries and teares to him that was able to saue him from (all touch of death) and was heard (in that he prayed for,) and though he were the sonne, and god was able to keepe him vntouched of death, that is, to make him the Sauiour of the world with∣out tasting any kind of death, yet such was Gods counsell and his owne liking, that he learned (or perfourmed) the obedience of a sonne by the things which he suffe∣red. Whereby the Apostle teacheth vs, it was neither want of power in God, that Christ died, for God was able to haue saued the world by him without his death, nei∣ther was it lacke of fauour towards his sonne, for God HEARD him in that he asked; but to manifest in his person the perfect submission of a sonne to his father, God would haue him obedient to death, euen vnto the death of the crosse; and so make him the author of eternall saluation to all that obey him, As he obeied God his Father. Those words then, Christ offered praiers to him that was able to keep him from death, prooue not death to be the cause of Christs feare, nor the scaping therefrom to be the scope of Christes strong cries and teares; but the Apostle thereby noteth that Christ neither doubted of his Fathers power nor loue, when he praied so earnestly vnto him, but was assured of both, and enioyed both in such sort as might best stand with the honor and wisedome of God the father, and of Christ his sonne. And therefore all your collections and illations built on that false ground do fall of themselues, as hauing nothing to support them but your idle and vaine supposals. Defenc. pag. 137. li. 6. Your owne selfe doe fully grant and affirme it with me; yea you affirme farder then we doe, or then the trueth is or possibly can be, you say Christ he re thus feared eternall death, and euerlasting damnation. ] I must take no corne to haue you wrest and wring my words to a contrary sense, when you offer that course to the Apostles words. The place which you quote for proofe of my meaning will conuince you to be a malitious falsifier. My words a man would thinke are plaine enough, and my exposition of that speach vsed by some men, is such that no man of any intelligence or conscience would so grosly peruert it. Thus I say pag: 23. Serm. pag. 23. li. 4. Distrust of his owne saluation or doubt of Gods displeasure against himselfe, we cannot so much as imagine in Christ, without euident want of grace, and losse of faith, which we may not attribute to Christs person no not for an instant. And againe, Ibid. li. 17. I refraine to speake, what wrong it is to put either doubtfuln sse, or forget∣fulnesse of these things in part of Christs humane nature. And to the question thereon de∣manded, li. 20. Why then did he pray, that the cup might passe from him? ] I answere, he had no need to pray for himselfe, but only for vs, who then suffered with him, and in him. What learning I cannot say, but what lewdnesse is this, to father that on me, which I fully forsake; and still to presse me with that, which I so often preuent and repell? I did not intend in my Sermons to note any by name, nor sharply to censure their sayings; but repeating as much as I saw, I gaue the best construction or mittigation to their words, that any trueth would endure. Where then some men (whom by your impor∣tunity you haue vrged me to name) as the Catechisme of master Nowel, which you would seeme so much to reuerence, in plaine words auoucheth, that Christ was Pag. 280. mortis horrore perfusus; perfused or plunged with the horror of et rnall death; And master Caluin saith, Institutione li. 2. ca. 16. sect. 10. Oportuit cum inferorum copijs mortis horrore quasi consertis manibus luctari; Christ was to wr si ith the powers of hell and with the horror of eternall death, as it were hand to hand; Their words, suppressing their names, I there taught might be tolerated, if we tooke horror for a religious feare only trembling at the terror of hell, and praying against it, or did attribute that trembling and feare of eternall death to Christ in respect and compassion of vs, that were his members, and whom he ioined and reckened in his sufferings for vs, as one person or body with him. Which moderation of mine you euery where conceale, and make your Reader beleeue, that I fully grant and affirme that, which I expressely denie. And not content therewith, you enterlace my words with your lewd additions, as if I said, Christ thus feared eternall death; You meane with strong cries and teares, and with a bloudy sweat; where I referred his earnest cries and teares to one purpose, and his feare to another; yeelding to Christ a religious feare to decline the force of hell, and a carefull praier against the power of hell by the example of Dauid; who describing the passion of Christ in the 22 Psalme, saith expressely of his person and in his person, Psal. 22. They pearced mine hands, and my feete, they part my garments among them, and cast lots on my vesture. But be not thou farre of, O Lord my strength, hast thee to help me. Deliuer my soule from the sword; my deso ate (soule) from the power of the Dogge, sau me from the Lions mouth, and answere me (or protect me) from the hornes of the Vnicorne; praying in this place not against any man, but against Satan the author and vpholder of all mischiefe. Defenc. pag. 137. li. 10. Christ could not possibly feare in such wofull maner that, which he perfectly knew should neuer come nere him: but he perfectly knew that eternall death and the cup of Gods euerlast∣ing malediction should neuer touch him. Therefore he could not by any meanes pray in such sort against it. ] You refute your selfe, and not any thing which I affirmed. That Christ praied against the power and rage of hell and Satan, is plaine by Dauids words, that he praied in such wofull maner, are not my words, but yours. And yet this propo∣sition, that Christ praied for nothing, which he perfectly knew was Gods almighty and vnchangeable decree, is not true. For Christ was most assured and most certainly knew of all thinges, whatsoeuer were decreed and appointed by God for himselfe; and yet he praied for many things, not as doubting of them, but as confessing whence he must, and did receaue them. He perfectly knew he should be glorified with the glory which he had with his Father before the world was; and yet Iohn 17. he praied for it. In the former words of Dauid Christ perfectly knew, that God would saue and deliuer his soule from the Lions mouth, from the power of the Dogge, and from the hornes of the Vnicorne, and yet he earnestly praieth for it. Christes praiers then doe not proue that he feared the contrary to his petition, but that he was assured to obtaine, and by praier professed whence it came whatsoeuer he had, euen from his Father. The next assertion, which you make, is a direct contradiction to your selfe, and not to me. For if Christ in those vehement praiers had such exact and perfect knowledge of Gods counsell and loue, as heere you auouche, then was Christ in no such confusion and forgetfulnesse, as you put him in at the time of his agony to saue him from sinne. And where not foure leaues before, you made a shamefull shift to rescue your selfe from a plaine contradiction, and bobbed your Reader with a manifest fitten, that I did you wrong, Defenc. pag. 129. You did argue from my supposition, that Christ was not astonished at the time of his praiers in the garden, but in his perfect memory (which I seemed to affirme, and you denied ) a man may heere perceiue, that you want witte to see what hangeth together in your owne tale, or that your memory is very short to relapse so soone to the cleere crossing of your selfe againe. For heere you positiuely, frequently, and earnestly affirme that in his praiers Christ 11. perfectly knew and saw Defenc. pag. 137. li. 18. what was ordeined by God for him, and 12. that the cup of Gods eternall malediction should neuer touch him. ] So brickle are your braines, that you egerly and openly say and vnsay in the space of foure leaues; and reuerse your owne positions, wherein the Reader if he be wise, will see you more 13. constant, before he credit you. Defenc. pag. 137. li. 17. Againe that which he feared and so pittifully praied against, was that which he knew was by God ordeined for him. Yea feare is alwaies of that which is to come, but eternall death was not by God orde ned for him, that was not to come vpon him (which Christ In the mar∣g ne. knew right well.) Therefore it was not eternall death which he so feared. ] Your reasons be like rotten re ters that when you would push forward, recuyle on your head. Out of the Apostles text the 5. to the Hebrewes, you draw a maior directly against the Apostles words. For he saith, Christ was heard in that he FEARED, (supposing that as yet to be the sense of the last word;) you say, he was not heard, but knew that which he feared to be ordei∣ned of God for him, and not to be auoided. So skilfull you are, that out of the Scrip∣tures, you frame as ertions expressely repugnant to the Scriptures, and yet you fansie them to be inuincible arguments. Wherefore the Apostle denieth your first pro∣position, That what soeuer Christ praied against, was ordeined of God for him, And if his authority be not currant with you, Christ himselfe assureth you, it is false. His owne words are, against which I hope you will not open your mouth; 11. Father I know tho he arest me alwaies. If Christ were alwaies heard in his praiers, then that which he praid against, was not ordeined of God for him. For God did not alter or innouate the thinges ordeined for his sonne; neither would Christ haue so strongly praied against them, if he had knowen them to be ordained of God for him. So that heere you are as sound as in the rest, broching still your owne fansies without any warrant besides your owne, which is grounded on false and absurd positions, you taking no care what you say, no heede what you should prooue. For who besides you would flaunt this out for a foundation of his cause, pag. ; 7. li. 19. feare is alw ies of that which is to come? Where if you meane certainly and infalliblely to come, (as you must, otherwise it prooueth nothing) the proposition is generally true nei∣ther in the wicked, nor in the godlie, and least of all in Christ himselfe. The wic∣ked doe feare manie things, that fall not on them, yea they often feare, as Dauid saith, Psal. 53. where no feare is. The godly by fearing before hand, what may come; do of∣ten preuent the comming of it. Mary was Luc. 1. afraid at the sight of the Angell, that sa∣luted her, and yet brought he a greate blessing to her. Peter walking on the water, was Mat. 14. afraid, when he saw a mighty wind, and began to sincke, but Christ presently reached forth his hand, and rebuked him for doubting. The Disciples were Luc. 24. abash∣ed and afraid at the suddaine presence of there master in the middest of them, and yet no euill was towards them. So that feare may grow as well from appearance, and opinion, when no hurt is imminent, as from the certainty of euil present, or comming. Christ taught all his Disciples to feare him, euen God; Luc. 12. who after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell. Shall we thence inferre by your diuinitie, that God will cast all the faithfull into hell, because he hath power so to doe, which they must feare? Philip. 2▪. Fi∣nish your saluation with feare and trembling, saith the Apostle. Shall we therefore neuer be saued, because we must alwayes tremble and feare vnder the mightie hand of God? Vnder the same hand of God migh Christ feare and tremble, not doubting of his sal∣uation, nor distrusting his Fathers loue, but knowing that the hand of God was Al∣mightie, and able to impose farre greater paine on his bodie then his humane flesh was able to beare. It is therefore due to Gods power from all the faithfull, and was like∣wise from Christes manhoode, for men to be afrayd of the strength of Gods hand, when he ariseth to punish sinne, though when and how he will doe it, we may not, or cannot determine. And if we should graunt, that Christs flesh euen thus feared the power of Gods hand, that was able to keepe him from death, and to inflict what paine pleased him, you are no whit the nearer to your new found hell, or to your se∣cond death of Christs soule, which you labour to deriue from these words of the Apo∣stle to the Hebrewes. But to let the reader see, how rashly & rudely you conclude, what you list, out of the Apostles words without any sure ground. The word, which all this while you haue ta∣ken to import a coufused and perplexed feare in Christ, hath no such signification in the Greeke tongue; and in this place of the Apostle, by the iudgement of the an∣cient and best learned interpreters of all ages, that are not infected with this new fan∣sie, is taken for reuerence, or a religious feare of God. Of which signification there can be no question with any man, that is meanely learned. And albeit some fauouring your fansie, haue sough farre and neere for examples, where might signifie a painefull and amazing feare, yet find they none, neither in prophane nor sacred wri∣ters, but only a carefull feare to decline euill, or a religious feare honoring God, to be the true force of that word. How prophane men vse the word, (with that I haue else∣where sayd) this may suffice. Diogenes Laertius deliuering the decrees and opini∣ons of the best philosophers, saith of them: they affirme, de . . i. 7. . ; that ( ) carefulnesse is contrary to feare, as being an honest and reasonable declination of euill: ( ) and that a wise man is ne er amazed with feare, but wary to decline euill. Saint Ierom confes∣seth as much among Christians. li 3 5. pist d. . He that feareth, hath pai e, and is not perfect. According to which signification of feare, seruants haue the spirit of bondage in feare. There is another kind of feare named by the Philosophers, , and with vs it may be called , though this doe not fully match the force of the word. The Prophet (Dauid) knew t e of the perfect, when he said, nothing wanteth to them that feare the Lord. Of Simeon, that tooke Christ in his armes, when he was brought to the Temple, by his mother, Saint Luke saith, he was a iust man, , and one that religiously feared God. So of those . 2. that buried Steuen the Martyr, he saith; 8. , certaine m n F ARING GOD caried Steuen to bee buried. And in the twelfth of this Epistle, the same Apostle vseth the very word which he applied before to Christ, for the common duetie of all the godly. Hebr. 12. Let vs haue grace, by which we may serue and please God with reuerence, , and a religious feare. Which is M. . in 12. ca. epistol ad Hebreos. Bezaes owne interpretation of that place, howsoeuer he swarue from it in the form r words of the same Epistle. Neither doth the Syriack translation any thing helpe him, since the word dechalta, which in the fift Chapter is affirmed of Christ, in the 12. Chapter of the same Epistle, and indiuers other places of the new Testament is by the same translator referred to al Christians, as expressing a generall duty belonging to God. And therfore there is no need, why any man should translate the one otherwise then he doth the other; specially the whole Greeke and Latin Church, concurring in one and the same signification and expositi∣on of the word; which is a better precedent to follow, then any one mans translation. And where some others would take aduantage of the Greeke preposition as signifi th for, as well as from. signifying alwayes from, and not for; it is an euident ouersight in them, abusing their skill to maintaine their will, more then trueth enforceth. For in the new Testa∣ment, and with the Septuagint noteth vsually as well for, as from. In the 14. of Saint Matthewes Gospell, when the disciples saw Christ walking on the waters at the fourth watch of the night, and approching the ship wherein they were; they cryed Matth. 14. vers. 26. for feare. The souldiers likewise, that kept the Sepulchre, when they saw the Angell, that rolled away the stone, and sate on it, they were Matth. 28. vers. . astonished for feare, and became as dead men. Zacheus by reason of his low stature could not see Iesus, Luc. 19. v. 3. for the multitude, or presse that was about him. The Apostles that cast thei net into the sea at Christs commandement, could not draw it, for the number Ioh 21. v. 6. of fishes, that were in the net. Paul reporting the maner of his conuersion, how he was stroken to the ground with a great light, that suddenly shined on him from hea∣uen, sayth; When I could not see Acts 22. ver. because of the glory of that light, I was led by the hand to Damascus. The S ptuagint in many places vse the same proposition in the same sense; Israels eyes were dimme Gen. 48. v. 14 for age. My bones (sayth Iob) are drie Iob. 30. v. 30 for heat. You shall crie Esa. 65. v. 14. , for griefe of heart, and houle for affliction of spirit, sayth Esay of the Iewes reiected. Where the Septuagint doe make equiualent to with an accusati e, which noteth the cause of any thing. Infinite are the examples, that might be brought out of sacred and prophane writers for farder proofe hereof, but these are enough to shew, that Chrysostom, Photius, Oecumenius, Theophylactus, and other Graecians commen∣ting on those words of the Apostle, did not forget the propriety of their owne ton∣gue, when they expounded this text as declaring, that Christ was heard for the reue∣rend respect of God to his sonne, or for the religious submission of the sonne to his Father: and the Latin Fathers Ierom, Ambrose, Primasius, Sedulius, Bede, Haymo and others following the same translation did not erre of ignorance, but duely consi∣dered the nature and force of the Apostles words. Where then you haue made vs a stout conclusion, that Christ thus fearing could feare nothing but the death of the soule, or the second death, you cannot iustly prooue by any words heere vsed, that Christ had any feare, much lesse such a feare as you imagine; though I may safely grant a feare, and such a feare, as the Scriptures describe or expresse of Christ, and you nothing the neerer to your presumptuous conceit. Now if we giue eare to the auncient Fathers discussing this place, your deuice hath neither strength nor stay in these words. Ambros. in 5. ca. epistolae ad Hebreos. Beatus Paulus hic dicit preces cum et suppli∣cationes fundere non timore mortis, sed nostrae causa salutis. Vnde & in alio loco dicit san∣guinem Christi melius clamasse pro nobis quam sanguinem Abel. Blessed Paul heere saith, (as Ambrose writeth) that Christ offered praiers and supplications, not for any feare of (his owne) death, but for the cause of our saluation. Wherevpon in another place (Paul) saith, the bloud of Christ cried better things for vs, then the bloud of Abel. And againe, Ibidem. Totum quicquid egit Christus in carne, preces sunt & supplicationes propeccatis humani generi . All whatsoeuer Christ did in the flesh, were praiers and supplications for the sinnes of man∣kind. So saith Primasius. in ad He reos. All that Christ did in the flesh, were praiers and supplications for the sinnes of mankind: and the sacred shedding of his bloud was a strong crie, in which he was heard of God his Father: for his reuerence] That is, for his voluntary obedience, and most perfect charity. Ibidem. Christ heere is sayd to haue powred forth prayers and supplications, not for feare of death, but rather in the our saluation. And we must note, that reuerence, as Cassiodorus sayth, is taken sometimes for loue, and sometimes for feare: but here it is put for the exceeding loue wherewith the Sonne of God embraced vs, and for the perfect obedi∣ence, whereby he was subiect to his Father euen vnto death. So Sedulius: in 5. ca. ad Hebreos. Christ prayed with teares] not soed for feare of death, but for our saluation, and was heard] of God the Fa∣ther, when the Angel did comfort him. For his reuerence] either his with his fathers, or his fathers towards him. Haymo treadeth in the same steps with Primasius. in 5. ca. ad Hebr os. The Apostle speaketh this of Christ meaning plainly to expresse, what our hie Priest id in his Priesthood. What is, in the daies of his fl sh?] as long as he dw lt in this mortall body, he offered vp praiers and supplications with strong cries and teares to God his father. All that Christ did in the flesh, were and supplications for the sinnes of mankind, and the sacred shedding of his bloud was a strong crie, herein he was heard of God his Father for his reuerence, that is for his voluntary and most perfect charity. God heard him in raising him vp the third day, as the Psalmist saith, thou wilt not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. If then the A∣postles purpose were to note (as these Fathers affirme) that Christ all the time of his conuersing heere with men shewed himselfe our hie Priest with strong cries and teares for vs to God, that was able to saue him and his members from death, or to raise him againe from death as conquerer thereof, and was heard for his religious obedi∣ence and loue to God and man; what shew hath the death of Christes soule in these words, or what sequence from them? Neither is there any part of this exposition; that wanteth good warrant from the Scriptures, and likewise allowance from the fathers. For b sides that Christ said to Paul as yet a persecutor, Acts 9. Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me, not in person but in members; the Apostle setteth these things downe for assu ed points of doctrine, that Rom. 6. our old man was crucified with Christ, and we . 2. buried with him; and raised vp, and quicke∣ned together with him, and . 2. made sit together in heauenly (places) in Christ Iesus. , de ad li. 2. We were in him as in a second first fruits (or new restoring) of our nature, praying with a strong crie and not without teares desiring the impery of death to be abolished, and the life, which was at first giuen to our nature to be restored. But here of I haue spoken so much before, that I may spare my paines, in this place. Only if we follow the , which the Syriak interpreter proposeth agreeable to the greeke and latin Fathers, that Christ, Testamentum ca. 5. ad Hebreos. when he was compassed with flesh offered praiers and petitions with a vehement crie and teares to him, that was able to raise him (or quicken him) from death, and was heard: We need none other subuersion of all your syllogismes. For then the thing which Christ so earnestly desired with strong cries and teares, was the resurrection of himselfe and of all his members after the death of the body into a perpetuall and celestiall life. Defenc. pag. 137. li. 22. When in the garden Christ praied against that cup, which he feared; that it might passe from him, there he yeeldeth and submitteth himselfe presently to the vndergoing of it. But it were, I know not what, to saie, that Christ did euer yeeld and submit himselfe to vndergoe eternall death, or to tast the cup of gods eternall malediction. Therefore it was not this, that he feared and heere praid against. ] You are somwhat idle headed to make such a stur for that, which I am farder from, then you are. At the sharpenesse of Christs bodily death, which he would not frustrate nor mitigate, and in the paines whereof he was to yeeld more perfect obedience and patience, then all mankind besides was able to doe, the weaknesse of his humane flesh might naturally somewhat stagger: and the power of Gods hand against sinne, which might be laied on his oule or body, he might vehe∣mently but righteously feare, and with strong cries and teares deprecate the force thereof, and in neither of these is there any vicinity with the second death, or with the death of the soule; and so neglecting what you should prooue, you vainly push a∣gainst that, which I doe not vphold. And yet if we admit these cries and teares to be powred forth, not for himselfe, but for vs, then might he most wofully bewaile our deserued destruction, which was no lesse then euerlasting damnation of body and soule; if he did not ransome and release vs from it. To his fathers will Christ submit∣ted himselfe in the garden, but what he disliked in that cup which he named, and how much thereof he tasted, is knowen neither to you, nor to me, nor to any man liuing. That it was very sharp, we may iustly collect by his naturall dislike thereof, but what degrees or sorts of paines were adherent to his passion, is not for you or me to deter∣mine. What he might suffer with piety, patience, and obedience to his father, is a∣boue mans reach to define, but the second death or the death of the soule, if we fol∣low the leading of the Scriptures, and not fall to deuising a new hell, and a new death of the soule to support our fansies, are things, that by no colour of Scripture can be confirmed, howsoeuer you straine and stretch the word of God to find them there. Defenc. pag. 137. li. 28. And yet it was, I grant, the death of the soule, or the second death, that is, simply the thereof, Gods withdrawing himselfe from him in the paines and torments thereof. ] Your grant is the ground of your doctrine, besides that which you haue nothing els to beare the burden of your deuices. But what a iest is this, when you should iustly prooue, and fully conclude your assertions, to fall to granting of them, whereas your graunt with me, and with any man that is wise, is not worth a grey goose quill. How∣beit these are the best buttresses of your cause, euen your owne violent conceits, that force the Scriptures to your liking. But Sir, remember you are neither Prophet, nor Apostle, and so your granting of these nouelties, may shew your owne gyddinesse, it cannot preiudice the true and vndoubted rules of the Christian faith. [ Hence it follow∣eth in incibly that Christ indeed suffered, (sith thus he feared) more then the meere bodily death, euen the death of the soule. For he could not I say thus feare, but he must needes know that it was to come, or might come vnto him. If he but knew that it might come vnto him, then it certainly did come vnto him at one time or another in his passion before he left the world. ] Here is the prime and pride of your obseruations out of this place of the A∣postle to the Hebrewes; and except a man were out of his witts, he would not reuell in this sort with such waterish and witlesse resumptions. Palpable vntrueths you call inuincible certainties, and trifles wherewith children will not be deceiued, you ob∣trude to the whole Church of Christ, as fortresses of their faith. Christ feared, ergo he suffered; more then a bodily death, ergo the death of the soule. What he knew might come, that certainly did come. These be such bables, that boyes in the street will deride them, and yet you conceaue and propose them as Sapientiall and soueraigne collections. But he that wilfully wandreth, thinketh no way straighter, then that he traceth, and dreamers are often delighted with empty shadowes; now if we take your owne translation, the Apostle telleth vs, that Christ was heard in that he feared, ergo he did not suffer it, and though it might come, yet because he was freed from it, certainly it came not; and many things might come more then the death of the body, and yet not the death of the soule. If then you haue no stronger meanes to conclude the death of Christs soule, then these, the simplest Reader will soone perceiue, that your reasons be as frigent, as your humours be feruent; and though there be fire in your mind, yet there is water in your mouth, for you truly conceaue, or iustly conclude nothing. Defenc. pag. 138. li. 3. Sec. to the Hebrewes. Christ abolished through death him, that had the power of death, that is, the Diuell, and so deliuered all them, which for feare of death were all their life time subiect to bondage. Heere I see no reason in the world but that the Apostle by the often repea∣ting of death, and by the naturall referring of it in one place (as it were) to the other, doth vnderstand and signifie one and the same death altogether. But it is the death of the soule which the Diuell hath power and execution of, also the death of the soule sinnefull men were held in feare of all their life long. It followeth then (I suppose) that euen through the death of the soule, Christ abolished the Diuell, and deliuered his children. ] I know not whether your eies be open, or your braines sound that you see nothing, but what pleaseth your selfe. And what if they be either so dimme or so dull, that you see not the truth, is that a reason that your ignorance or wilfulnesse must be the loadstone of our creed? with such peeuish and priuate presumption would you preuaile against Scriptures, Fathers, and the whole church of Christ, that what you doe not, or will not see, we must relinquish as false and erroneous? to let you see (if you be not blinded with pre∣ferring your fansies before the trueth of Christ,) that this is a lazie, loose, and lewd argument, which heere you make; take your owne maior or first proposition, that Christ suffered the selfe same death, which he abolished, whereof the Diuell had power and execution and whereof we were in feare (being not redeemed) all our life long; and set this for the second proposition or assumption; but it is most euident, that the Diuell had power and execution of eternall death, and to the feare of euer∣lasting Destruction were we subiect all the time of our life, before we were deliuered by Christ: ergo Christ suffered eternall death and damnation in hell. For he abolish∣ed that from the faithfull; and thereof the Diuell had power and execution, as also we were in feare and danger of that without the Redeemer. What say you to this conclusion grounded on your owne collection and proposition? see you the falsenesse and wickednesse thereof? and yet if your assertion be true, that Christ must redeeme vs with the same kind of death, whereof we were in feare and bondage without him, and abolish the Diuell with that verie death, whereof he had power and execution, the one is as strong as the other. But who besides you would warble thus in so waighty matters? True it is, that the name of death compriseth all the kinds of death, I meane of bo∣die, of soule, of both for euer; and this chaine of death is inseparable and ineuitable, where Christ doth not breake it. By the malice of the diuell perswading sinne, which is the losse of grace, and death of the soule in this life, came into the world the death of the bodie; that hence both body and soule might be haled to hell; though first the soule, and after the bodie, when at the last day it shall rise from the corruption of the graue to euerlasting destruction. To thinke that Christ submitted himselfe to all these sorts of death, corporall, spirituall and eternall, is most hellish blasphemie; for so he should not haue redeemed vs, but destroyed himselfe, bodie and soule foreuer. To say that Christ deliuered vs not from all these lincks of death, from spirituall death (whiles here we liue) from eternall death, after this life, and at the generall resurrection, from the power of the graue, where our bodies rot in the meane time, is heathenish impie∣tie and heresie denying the whole force and fruit of our redemption by Christ. Since then he cleered vs from all, and yet suffered not all sorts of death, it is manifest (which is the Apostles meaning in the wordes by you cited) that by one kind of death, which in Christ was corporall, he freed vs from all power of death, heere and heereafter in bodie and soule; not preseruing our bodies, that they should not turne to dust, but restoring them after death, which is the farre more marueilous and mightie worke of God. And this is euery where so plainly witnessed in the Scriptures, and plentifully confessed by the learned and auncient fathers, that none but he that is blinder then a bat, would professe he seeth no such thing. Christ Matth 20. gaue his life a ransome for many, and Coloss. 2. by the bloud of his crosse pacified things in heauen and in earth. Hebr. 9. By the sacrifice of his bodie once (made) we are sanctified, and 1. Peter 1. healed by his stripes; who bare our sinnes in his bodie on the tree. If then the bloud of Christ clense vs from all sinne, by which the diuell and death had power ouer vs; It is most certaine, that Christ abolished sinne and Satan by suffe∣ring his bloud to be shed vnto death for the remission of sinnes, & raising himself, that is the Temple of his bodie from death into a glorious and blessed life, by which the power and kingdome of Satan, were vtterly ouerthrowen. Defenc. pag. 137. li. 15. Against this you haue no reason at all, but wordes and wrestings, and vaine oftentation of Fathers, none of them all denying our sense. ] The reason of all reasons is against it; which is, that no man, nor Angell may adde, or alter any thing in the Christian faith, with∣out the sure warrant of the sacred Scriptures. Rom. 10. Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. It is reason enough for me, and for all he faithfull, that there is no such thing deliuered in the word of God. You talke of words and wrestings, as knowing them best, and vsing them most; and herein I am content to stand to the iudgement of the wise and indifferent Reader, whether you haue brought ought yet for the death of Christes soule, or his suffering the second death, but your owne speaches and surmises, abusing the wordes of the holy Ghost to your owne fansies without either cause or colour. And touching the vaine ostentation of Fathers; who, as you vaunt, deny not your sense, I brought ancient & learned writers not ignorant of the Christian faith, as being the pillars of their times, that with great perspicuitie and vehemence denied, as I doe, the death of Christs soule; and affirmed with me the death, which Christ suffered in the body of his flesh, to be a most sufficient ransome for the sinnes of the whole world. Augustins words were; August. epist. 99. The same flesh in which only Christ died, rose againe by the quick∣ning of the spirit. For that Christ was dead in soule, that is in his humane spirit, who dare , since the death of the soule (in this life) is none else but sinne, from which he was al∣together free? This you say denieth not your sense: and why? because you auouch the death of Christs soule, which Austen asketh who dare auouch? to say that Christ suffered the death of the soule, is with Austen an impudent and wicked presumpti∣on, and no part of the Christian faith, or of mans redemption. Austen by the death of the soule ment sinne, you will say, which you meane not. You say by your leaue, that Christ Trea. pa. 42. li. 20. became defiled and hatefull to God by our sinnes; And so if pollution of sinne be the death of the soule, that kind of death you ascribe to Christ, though not for his owne sinnes, yet for ours, then made his, no lesse by guilt then by punishment, as you teach directly against the assertion of Saint Austen, who saith: August con∣tra Fa stum li. 14. ca. 4. Christ tooke our pu∣nishment without (our) guilt, that thereby he might release our guilt, and end our punishment. But you vnderstand not Austen, when he saith, there is no death of the soule (here) but sinne; he doth not thence exclude the consequents and adherents to sinne in this life, but noteth, that onely sinne doth kill the soule, because it doth separate vs from God, who is the life of the soule; and the light and grace of God departing from the soule by sinne, the soule dieth, that is looseth all her sense of God, and motion to God, by which she liueth vnto God. This with Austen, and this indeede by the word of God, is the death of the soule, which if you attribute to Christ, you incurre open and exquisite infidelitie. For your meaning therefore it maketh no great matter, if you will offer to correct our Creede you must speake as the Scriptures speake, and not deliuer s your priuate dreames for the publike doctrine of Christs Church. With like neglect you skip the rest auouched by Saint Austen, that Christ died onely in his flesh, which rose againe by the quickning of the spirit. Wherein least you should vse your accustomed euasion, that the flesh of Christ compriseth as well his soule, as his bodie, Saint Austen hath wisely preuented you, in saying, the same flesh onely died, Which rose againe. Where if your learning serue you to say, that Christes soule rose againe the third day, you shall make vs a new resurrection of soules, after this life, as the Scripture doth of bodies, which were a meete deuice for such a diuine, as you are. How beit Saint Austen naming Christs soule a part from his flesh, and affirming of Christs soule, that no man (in his right wits) dare auouch Christs soule died, but onely that flesh, which rose againe; it is as cleere, as mans speech may be, that he vt∣terly refuseth the death of Christs soule, as an irreligious and vnchristian position, and directly teacheth this as a ground confessed in Christian religion, that Christ died in his bodie alone, which rose againe the third day, and not in his soule, which no Christian man durst auouch was euer dead. Of all the elect he saith likewise, that they who August. d li. 13. ca. 15. pertaine to the grace of Christ, so farre die, as Christ died for them, Carnis tantum morte, non spiritus; the death of the flesh onely, and not of the spirit. If this make not against you, nothing that I say, maketh against you, for I can vse none other, nor plainer words, th n Austen and the rest of the Fathers doe in teaching, that Christ died the death of the bodie onely, and not of the soule; and that by his death which was onely corporall, he destroyed the dominion of sinne, and the strength of eue lasting death. August. . 162. There is a first death, (saith Austen) and there is a second. The first death hath wo parts; one, whereby the sinfull soule by transgressing departeth from her creator; the other whereby she is excluded from her bodie through the iudgement of God for a punishment. The second death is the euerlasting torment of the bodie and soule: either of these deaths had euery man obliged vnto them, but the immortall and righteous sonne of God came to die for vs, in whose flesh because there could be no sinne, hee suffered the punishment of sinne, without the guilt thereof. Wherefore he admitted for vs the second part of the irst death, that is the death of the bodie onely, by which he tooke from vs the dominion of sinne, and the p ine of eternall punishment. Say as Saint Austen here saith, and our controuersies are ended. If he denie not your sense, you may the sooner accept this confession of the Catholike and Christian faith, from which no man yet swarued these fifteene hundred yeer s. But then you must teare both your Treatise and your defence in pieces. For by this, as by infinite other places in Austen, it is euident; first, that Christ tooke not vnto him the guilt of our sinne: secondly, that hee died the death of the bodie onely: thirdly, that by that his corporall death he destroyed sinne, hell, and Satan: fourthly, that the death of the soule he could not die, because he could haue no sinne; and lastly, that he was farre from the second death, which is the eternall damnation of bodie and soule. Ac∣knowledge these, which neuer Christian man yet refused, and we shall soone resolue all other questions. If you haue of late gotten you a faith besides this, and against this generall Creede of all Christendome, looke well to your new deuices; you may sooner be excluded from the faith, then your fansies be included in the faith. Defenc. pag. 137. li. 17. Thirdly, it seem th also that Peter teacheth the same, saying, Christ in his suffering was donne to death in the flesh, but made aliue by the spirit. Where death may be very well refer∣red both to the soule and bodie of Christ, because the text heere speaketh (as I iudge) of the whole and entire sufferings of Christ. ] Be these the demonstrations you bring vs out of the Scriptures for the death of Christes soule, that these words of Peter MAY BE referred both to the soule and bodie of Christ, IT SEEMETH SO and YOV IVDG SO? To you that hunt after your conceits in euery syllable of the scriptures, that is any thing doutfull, may things SEEME, that are not, and if you may be iudge, what sense eche place may beare, we shall quickely haue a new doctrine and discipline in the Church of God, framed to your fansies, though no way deduced by iust proofe from the word of God. But heere Christian Reader thou mayest see the foundation of this new redemption by the death of Christs soule, and his suffering the second death; H. I. so iudgeth; and to him it so seemeth. Indeede it is common with you and your consorts to set downe euery thing for the vndoubted word of God, what you once conceite may seeme to be within the compasse of any text. But I hope the wise and Godly Reader will looke better about him, then to take your maying, your seeming, your iudging, for the ground of his faith against the plaine and expresse pla∣ces of the Scriptures, and against the continuall and generall vnderstanding of the whole Church of Christ. Yet let vs heare the reason of your seeming, since other proofe for your purpose you bring none, neither heere, nor else where. Christ, as Peter teacheth, was 1 Peter 3. mortified (or put to death) in the flesh, but quickned in (or by) the spirit. What conclude you out of these words? D fenc. pag. 137. li. 2 . The word flesh, it seemeth, cannot heere in this place be vnderstood to signifie only the bodie of Christ. If that cannot be, then was S. Austen much deceiued, who out of these very words cōcluded, that Christ died in Epist. 99. flesh alone, and not in soule; & addeth a better reason out of Peters words, then you bring any; since Christ was in that part mortified, in which hee was afterwardes quickned; & of the soule of Christ as none durst auouch, it was euer mortified, so neuer being dead, there was no cause it should be quickned; and therefore neither of these attri utes agreed to the soule of Christ, but to his flesh onely. [ Defenc. pag. 137. li. 28. My reason is, because wheresoeuer in the Scripture the flesh and the spirit are noted oppositely together in Christ, there the flesh signifieth alwayes the whole humanity, euen both parts thereof, the soule also, and not only the bodie. ] First that rule hath no ground nor truth; and if it were addmitted, it proueth no such thing, as you would enforce. For in a case farre plainer, the name of Christ wheresoeuer it is applied to Christ liuing, I meane, saying, suffering, or do∣ing any thing, there without all question the whole humanitie is comprised in that name, since Christes bodie without his soule could neither say, suffer, nor doe any thing. And yet were it mad diuinitie to attribute euery action and passion affirmed of Christ in the Scriptures, as well to his soule, as to his bodie. That Christ sate, that he hungred, that he did eate, that he slept, and was circumcised, buffited, whip∣ped, and a number such like are auouched in the Scriptures of Christ liuing, that is of his whole umanitie, (for without bodie and soule he could doe, nor suffer none of these things:) And yet I trust you will not therefore conclude, that Christs soule did , , eate, or sit, or that it was circumcised, buffited, and whipped, as well as his body. So that the word may containe the whole man, as doubtles the name of Christs doth, and yet the things ascribed to the person doe not alwayes properly agree to both parts alike. For so we shall make the soule to haue flesh and bones as well as the bodie hath, which we e to make it no soule, but a bodie. Wherefore your illation is as weake as your obseruation is false, and you farre from inferring your purpose. I know the soule doth partake in all these and such like actions, and passions with the bodie. For the force to doe, and since to feele, is from the soule; and so in the death of the bodie, the soule is partaker with the bodie, not to lie dead and senselesse as the bodie doth, but to feele the paine of death, and suffer the separation from the bodie, the effects of death appeare in the bodie: But that the soule doth die, when the whole compound of bodie and soule dieth, is no consequent, neither in Philoso∣phie, nor Diuinitie. [ Defenc. pag. 137. li. 20. The text heere speaketh (as I iudge) of the whole and intire suffe∣rings of Christ. ] The text heere speaketh of death bereauing life, which was after re- stored when Christes bodie was againe quickned by the power of his spirit; the rest of Christes sufferings during the whole time of his life are not comprised in the name of death; otherwise Peter must haue sayd, Christ was alwayes dead, since his affecti∣ons with circumcision, if not before, which is no part of Peters speach, nor meaning; yea rather it is repugnant to both, since Peter saith, Christ 1. Peter. 3. suffered once f r sinnes, when he was put to death, and not euer and alwayes, whiles he liued on arth. Defenc pag. 137. li. 35. Against this obseruation what pretended you? some Scriptures palpably abused. first Matthew, where Christ speaketh of his Disciples, that their spirit (their inward regenerate man) was ready to watch, b t their flesh (their corrupt Nature) was weake and sluggish. is this to Christs flesh and spirit? ] If my authoritie were as good as yours, and my learning as great I could say as you doe, I iudge it so; but if I shew not better reason for me to a firme, those wordes Christ ment of himselfe, then you doe or can, that he ment them not of himselfe, I am content your consistorian seeming shall goe be∣fore my laborious proouing, my vse is not to relie too much on mine owne iudge∣ment, as you doe, though I thanke God, I can examine both your and other mens interpretations, but when I finde a thing maturely and rightly considered and con∣co ded by the learned and auncient Fathers in matters of faith, or exposition of the Scriptures, I goe not easily from them. Tertullian saith, Tertullianus de suga in per∣secutione. Christ himselfe professed his soule was vnto death, his flesh weake, that he might shew to thee, there were in himselfe both the substa ces of man by the propertie of heauinesse in the soule, and weakenesse in the flesh. Athanasius likewise. Athanasius de Passione & Cru e . A little afore his death Christ cried, the spirit was willing, but the fles weak , that our aduersarie (the diuell) encountring him as a man, might feele his diuine power. Theophilus Alexandrinus. epistola Pas∣chali prima con∣tra Appollina∣ristas. If Christ tooke onely the flesh of man, (and not the soule of man) why in his Passion did he say, the spirit is prompt, but the flesh weake. Ambrose, Ambros. ls. 4. in . ca. 4. If Christes body had beene spirituall; he would not haue said; the spi∣rit is prompt, but the flesh is weake. Heare the voice of either in Christ, as well of weake flesh, as of a readie spirit. The auncient writer among the works of Saint Austen. De Salutari∣bus documentis. ca. 64. The trueth it selfe, our Lord Iesus Christ saith of himselfe, the spirit is prompt, but the flesh weake. Cyrill. Cyrill. The∣sauri. li. 10. ca. 3. Though Christ abhorred death as a man, yet as a man he refused not to doe the will of his Father, and his owne as God; and therefore he said the spirit is prompt, but the flesh is weake. Vigilius. Vigilius con∣tra . li. 5. ca. 4. What is that, wherein he suffered and tried weakenesse, but mans nature, whereof he said at the time of his passion, the spirit is prompt, but the flesh weake? tasting of which infirmitie he learned to helpe the weake. Seuerianus. Seuerianus contra Nona∣tum citatur a . contra . hem. My soule (saith Christ) is he auic vnto death. And interpreting to what his Passions pertained, the spi∣rit, saith he, is ready, but the flesh weake. Remigius. in . . 26. . a Tho. in . In these words Christ sheweth, that he tooke true flesh of the Virgine, and that he had a true soule; Wherefore he now saith, that his spirit is ready to suffer, but that his weake flesh feareth the paine of his Passion. Euthymius. in . My God, my God, (said Christ) why hast thou for saken me, that is, why hast thou left me in this feare, knowing (my) spirit is ready, but (my) flesh weake. What thinke you had I no more reason to say, as I saide, then you haue to denie it? where also you may note, that all these learned Fathers refuse your lame obseruation, as well as I doe; and so you had neede seeke some better authoritie then your owne, or perhaps some one, that you with this rule seruing to none other end, but to helpe forward your hell fansie. pag. 139. li. 1. Thinke you that Christs soule was willing to suffer as God had appointed, but that his flesh resisted? ve ily so you seeme heere to vnderstand, and it is as likely, as your applying of flesh and spirit to Christ in your pag. 104.] Put on your visard before you take in hand to controle the iudgement of so many Fathers. Your pride is greater then your wit in this and most things that passe your pen. Is it such newes to you for me, or for them to say, that Christes flesh was weake, that is, not so ready to suffer, as was his soule? seeth your mastership no difference betwixt weakenesse and resistance, specially when in comparison of the readinesse of the spirit, the flesh is said to be weaker, that is, lesse ready to suffer then the soule? doth not the Apostle applie the same word vnto Christ when he saith, Christ was 2. Cor. 13. crucified through weakenesse? and long before, the Prophet said of Christ; Esa. 53. He is a man full of sorrowes, and one that hath experience in infirmites. So that your cholor was kindled without cause, when you strooke such an heat with my saying, that Christs flesh was weake; the Prophet foretold he should be a man full of sorrowes, and well acquainted with infirmities. The vntrue conceit which you challenge in the 104. Page of my Sermons touching Christes flesh, where I sayd, it must haue force to cleanse and quicken, when you im∣pug e, I will defend; in the meane time it may serue, I savd nothing, but what our Sa iour sayd before me; Iob. 6. vers. 56. 54. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in me, and I in him, he hath eternall life, and I will raise him vp at the last day. If you could take any hold, I doubt not the sharpenesse of your teeth, but your foolish conceits are cari∣ed like clouds in the aire, they rest not, before they vanish. Defenc pag. 139. li. 5. Then Luke; where both spirit and flesh are not intended of Christ (as our obseruation requireth) but only the flesh. ] Your obseruation is made to fitte S. Peters words to your fansie. For there are not many places in Scripture, where spirit and flesh are expressed and intended of the two natures of Christ, though in other places some words adioy∣ned doe prooue him to be God, as well as man. In that of S. Luke, Christ doth not denie himselfe to be a diuine spirit, for then he were no God, since God is a Iohn 4. spirit; nor to haue an humane spirit, for then he were no man; but that which they saw with their eies, he affirmed was flesh and bloud, and not any apparition in the shape of a man. And the words following, Luke 24. as ye see me to haue, containe and note the other part of his humane nature, which was his soule and spirit, and consequently inferre, that he was a man, and had an humane spirit, though compassed with flesh and bones, as we haue. Defenc. pag. 139. li. 7. Then the Romans: where I affirme that flesh signifieth the whole manhood of Christ, ac∣cording to the which he came from Dauid, euen as well as Salomon or Nathan did, who were Dauids sonnes in their intire and perfect nature. ] Whether Christs body without a soule, which was but a Carcasse, be alwaies in the Scriptures intended by the name of Christs flesh, this is not the question; there is but one place in the new Testament, where Christs flesh importeth his dead body, as when Peter saith, Christes Acts 2. flesh saw no cor∣ruption; but whether whatsoeuer is attributed to Christs flesh with comparison or mention of his diuine nature, doe properly agree as well to his soule as to his body, this is the thing in question betwixt you and me. That the man Christ was borne of the Virgin, and died on the Crosse, there is no doubt, but that his soule was made of the seed of Dauid, and circumcised, & crucified as well as his body, this is your error; and for this you haue no shew in the word of God, and therefore you seeke by rules of your owne making to draw it in by the heeles, when you cannot by the head. It is but a shift to saue your selfe, when you tell your Reader, that Christs whole manhood came from Dauid, as well as Salomon, or Nathan did; The point is whether Christes soule were made of the seed of Dauid, as well as his body was. That I denie, and haue the Apostle for my warrant, that men are only the Heb. 12. Fathers of our bodies, and God is the immediate Father of (our) spirits. Which if it be true in all men, then Salomon and Nathan were the sonnes of Dauid, not because their soules were made of the seed of Dauid, but only their bodies; and yet since they drew as much from their father, as children by Gods ordinance do or may do, therefore were they the sonnes of Da∣uid. In Christ it is most sure, which the Apostle saith, that according to the fl sh he was made of the seed of Dauid. This by no meanes can be verified of his soule, howsoeuer you would slubber it vp by calling his whole manhood the sonne of Dauid, which I doe not denie. Not that his soule was made of the seed of Dauid, as was his body that is an open and an odious error; but that his flesh made of the seed of Dauid which was the Virgins body, was also quickened with a soule from God in due time, that came not out of Dauids loines. Euen so the whole man in Christ died on the Crosse, not that his soule was depriued of life, or left dead, as was his body; but that the coniunction of soule and body, which maketh the whole man, was dissolued by death, his flesh lying in the graue without corruption, and his soule remaining in the hands of God, to which it was commended. Defenc. pag. 139. So likewise Christ was kinne to the lewes according to his whole humanity, as well as Paul was. ] When you can shew kindred in spirits, as well as in flesh, that is deriued from parents, then say that Paul and Christ were kin to the Iewes according to their whole humanity; till you proue that, howsoeuer vse of speach may be endured which must be interpreted according to the truth, you can neuer conclude there is consan∣guinity betweene soules, as there is betweene bodies. And spight of your heart, if you will not maintaine vntrueths to vphold your credit, as your maner is, the Apostle teacheth you how to vnderstand those words, that as we haue fathers of our bodies, from whom our spirits come not, but immediatly from God; so kindred and con∣sanguinity, which commeth by the parents, goeth by flesh and bloud receiued from them, and not by soules infused from God. S. Iohn leadeth you to the same rule, that men are borne of bloud, and of the will of the flesh, and so by flesh and bloud commeth kindred; God giuing soules to quicken their bodies. Wherefore the Scriptures, when they expresse kindred, they note it by flesh and bone. As when Laban said to Iacob, Thou art my Gene. 29. bone, and my flesh; So Iudah of Ioseph, Gene. 37. he is our brother, and our flesh. So Abimelech to his mothers brethren, Iudic. 9. I am your bone and your flesh. And vsu∣aly where kindred is claimed or yeelded, the Scriptures expresse it by 2. Sam. 5. 19 flesh and bones, as Adam said to Eue, Gen. 2. This now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. So that howsoeuer you dreame or talke of the consanguinity of soules, it is like the rest of your nouelties which haue no handfast but in your head; and the exception taken by me will stand good, doe you and your adherents what you can, that in these attributes to the manhood of Christ you shall neuer prooue they properly pertaine to both parts, but to the whole conioyned, or to one part seuerally respected. Defenc. pag. 139. li. 21. Further, that which you bring out of the Corinthians compared with this in Peter, doth most cleerely open and confirme the same. He was crucified touching his infirmitie, but liueth by the power of God. His soule had infirmities of suffering in it, aswell as his bodie: therefore his soule also is vnderstood here that it was crucified and died, that is, according to the conditi∣on thereof. ] You proue not what you promise, but pronounce what you please, which if any man will suffer you to doe, we shall soone haue a new Church, a new Faith, and all things new. Afore you pretended rules at least, though void of reason and trueth; now you bend against all rules of learning, Logicke, Grammar, and Diuinitie. For I pray you in Grammar what is , and here vsed by the Apostle? Are the parts heere noted, that were crucified and raised to life, or the cause from which first death was suffered, and after life was recouered by our Sauiour? A man would thinke, that were by or through weaknesse, euen as is by or through the power of God. Christ then was crucified, not by the immediate hand of God, but by the Iewes, who could not crucifie his soule, as they did his bodie. If you know not who crucified Christ, reade the Gospell afresh, or hearken to S. Peter, who sayd to the Iewes; Act. 2. Iesus of Nazaret haue ye taken by the hands of the wicked, and crucified and slaine: and proclaimed openly to the Rulers of the people, and Elders of Israel, Act. 4. Be it knowen to you all and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Iesus Christ of Nazaret, whom ye haue crucified, whom God raised againe from the dead, by him this Creeple standeth whole before you. The Iewes then 1. Cor. 2. crucified the Lord of glorie, who could not kill the soule but onely the bodie. Therefore they crucified onely his bo∣die; and other crucifiers of Christ the Scripture nameth none. How come you then against all learning and trueth to collect that Christs soule was crucified? Defenc. pag. 139. li. 25. His infirmitie the text heere nameth metonimically vnderstanding in Christ that in which his infirmities were. ] When the plaine text will not serue your turne, you fasten what you list with figures to it, and then by as good Logicke, you change a part into the whole, and conclude like a Doter in Diuinitie (for you skorne all degrees, as you doe all rules of Schoole) that Christs soule was nailed to the crosse (for that is crucifying) and died as well as his body. These be woonderous leapes in my small vnderstanding, and such as few men but you could light on so readily. In st d of the Apostles speech, that Christ was crucified through infirmitie, (or by reason of infirmitie voluntarily imbraced, whiles he submitted himselfe to his Fathers will) to clap in this conclusion, that Christ was crucified and died as well in soule, as in bo∣dy. Had you liued in former ages, what heresies could not you haue deduced from the text it selfe, if not by Grammaticall or Logicall inference yet by metonymicall and metaphoricall excurrence. Sampsons riddle was, out of the strong came sweet∣nesse, and we may say, out of the weake commeth bitternesse. Defenc. pag. 139. li. 37. Other reasons also I noted seruing well heereunto, but I omit to rehearse them againe. For it seemeth your selfe agreeth with vs in them, holding expresly that the spirit heere in Peter is the Deitie of Christ according to Austins iudgement. Now this being granted and acknowledged, how can it be likely but that the other opposite part of the flesh must needes im∣port his whole and entire Manhood. Pag. 140. li. 11. Now this being so, then it followeth by the text, that Christ in his Passion was done to death both in soule and body. ] Your other reasons tended after your maner to shew, that spirit in Peters words did not signifie the soule of Christ; to which I said nothing, because I therein agreed with you. Where then you conclude ouer-hastily, that therefore it signifieth the Deitie of the second person in Trinitie, the text enforceth no such thing; as that the second person in Trinitie did in the daies of Noe preach by his owne Godhead, and not by his spirit. Gene. 6. The Lorde said, my spirit shall not alway strine with man, his daies shall be 120. yeeres. Which whe∣ther we take to be the wordes of the Father, or the Sonne, by the spirit there is ment the holy Ghost, which proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne, and is called the spirit of them both, and did by the tongue of Noe the Preacher of righteousnesse witnesse the iudgement of God to come by the floud vpon the wicked and disobedi∣ent world. By this power of his which is his spirit, God quickned the humane flesh of Christ, when it was crucified and dead in the graue, and by the same spirit shall he restore and quicken all the bodies of the faithfull after they be turned to dust. And although I haue no doubt but the workes of the Trinitie towards all creatures are vn∣deuided, and the power of the Father is the power of the Sonne, yet when the Scrip∣tures doe testifie, that Christes humane flesh was quickned by the spirit we must vn∣derstand the holy Ghost: God the Father raising his Sonne, and the Sonne raising himselfe by the spirit of sanctification, which is the power of the Father and of the Sonne. So speaketh the Apostle to the Romanes. Rom. 1. Christ made of the seede of Dauid as touching the flesh, and declared to be the Sonne of God, with power through the spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead. Where his flesh made of the seede of Dauid prooueth him to be a true man, and the mightie declaration of him to be the Sonne of God sheweth his Diuine nature and glorie, which most appeared by the woonderfull works and gifts of the spirit of sanctification, powred out on all his af∣ter he was once ri en from the dead. Least you thinke this my deuice to defeate your obseruation, heare what the lear∣ned and auncient Fathers say thereof. Chrysostome vpon those wordes of Paule, Christ was declared to be the Sonne of God with power through the spirit of sanctification. ] Chryso t. in epistolam ad Romanos ho- l. 1. The fourth argument (of Christs Diuinitie) is drawen (saith he) from the spirit, which he gaue to those that beleeued in him, and by which he sanctified them all. Wherefore Paule saith, through the spirit of sanctification. For onely God was able to giue those kindes of giftes. Ierom. Through the spirit of sanctification. ] Paul Hieron. in ca. 1. epistola ad Romanos. noteth heere the holie Ghost the Creator. Ambrose, Paul Ambros inca. primum ad Romanos. calling Christ the Sonne of God, sheweth God to be his father, and adding the spirit of sanctification, noteth the mistery of the Tri∣nity. Augustine. that Paul saith, August. in expositio. in∣choata epistolae ad Rom. Through the spirit of sanctification, he meaneth, be∣cause they receaued the gift of the spirit after Christs resurrection. Theodoret, the Apo∣stle heere teacheth, Theodoretus in ca. 1. epist. ad Rom. that he, who was called the Sonne of Dauid according to the flesh was declared to be the sonne of God by the power, which was shewed from the holy Ghost after our Lord Iesus was risen from the dead. Oecumenius, Oecumenius in ca. 1. epist. ad Rom. through the spirit of san∣ctification.] He meaneth by the holy Ghost, which Christ gaue to the beleeuers in him. Theodulus Theodulus in cap. 1. . ad Romanos. through the spirit of sanctification, that is, by the holy spirit, which Christ gaue to those that beleeued in him. Theophylactus Theophylact. in ca. 1. epist. ad Romanos. by the spirit of sanctification, that is, by the spirit, with which he maketh the beleeuers holy. Haymo Haymo in ca. 1. epistolae ad Romanos. the spirit of sanctification is heere taken for the holy Ghost, who giueth sanctity to men and Angels, who also fashio∣ned, quickened and sanctified Christs manhood in the Virgins womb, of the seed of the Virgin, without the seed of man. The new writers with one consent, as Erasmus, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Musculus, Gualter, Hemmingius, Aretius, and Caluine himselfe follow the same inter∣pretation, so that your obseruation against and after all their iudgements is misbe∣gotte and borne out of time; and brought in of purpose to paue the way for your new found fansies, which haue no ground, but in your new made notes as much cros∣sing probabilitie, as authoritie. Yea the obseruation wrongeth the distinction of the persons in the most blessed Trinitie, and dishonoreth rather the Deitie of the Sonne of God then aduanceth it; whiles the Sonne of God, and the spirit of holinesse, be∣ing both expresly named, you take them both for one person; and make the Sonne of God in his diuine nature to be lesse then the possessor, or giuer of life and righte∣ousnesse, eueu a receauer of both. For in all these places where you say the name of spirit is vsed to signifie Christs Godhead, the power and worke of the holy Ghost is there intended and expressed, as that Christ was Rom. 1. declared to be the Sonne of God by the spirit of sanctification; and was 1. Tim. 3. God manifested in the flesh, iustified by the spirit, as also 1. Pet. 3. mortified in the flesh, but quickned by the spirit. The spirit of sanctification is the title of the holy Ghost sanctifying as well the Manhood of Christ, as his members; and the giuing thereof declareth the Sonne to be true God, whose spirit this is as well as the Fathers, and by whom the Sonne worketh as well as the Father. And where it is written, that Christ was Iustified and quickned by the spirit, if there you reade in the spi∣rit, meaning in the Deitie of Christ, then Christes Godhead receaued life and righte∣ousnesse, which by your leaue is a speech ne allowed ne frequented in the Scrip∣tures. For though the second person in Trinitie by his internall and eternall genera∣tion receaued all, that he hath, from the Father, who begat him, yet of this generati∣on, which is secret, substantiall, and eternall, the Apostles speake not, when they say Christ was quickned and iustified; but the one sheweth that Christes body, which was put to death was raised againe to life by the power of his spirit: the other noteth that he was God manifested in the flesh and iustified, that is, prooued and confirmed so to be by the mightie workes and graces of Gods spirit shewed as well in his owne person, as in all his members. For that is the intent of the Apostles wordes, not that his di∣uine glorie was onely praised or acknowledged of men, but that the world beleeued, the Angels admired, the spirit iustified, that is most mightily and cleerely witnessed him to be God manifested in the flesh. Then hath your obseruation his full discharge, since there is no one place, where these wordes the spirit and flesh are applied to Christ to note his two natures, though his Godhead be testified and plainely prooued in most of the same places by more pregnant wordes then spirit, which is com∣mon to Angels, soules, and windes; and onely sheweth, that it is no palpable or sen∣sible body; where the name of spirit alone in the Scriptures standing for the third per∣son in Trinity noteth the power and grace of the holy Ghost, by which these things were wrought for Christs manhood. And in that place of Peter, on which you most depend, if you follow the Syriac translation to which your owne adherents so often appeale, the Apostles words are, Christ was dead in body, but liu d in spirit, which con∣uinceth first, that flesh is there taken for the body of Christ contrary to your obser∣uation, and that Christ still liued in spirit, which euerteth your maine conclusion in∣tended from this place for the death of Christs soule. But were it, as you suppose, that flesh and spirit were ascribed to Christ to declare his two natures, the one to be corporall and humane, the other to be spirituall and diuine; how doth it follow, that euery thing affirmed of his manhood must proper∣ly agree both to body and soule? by what Logicke conclude you that? you may as well auouch that Christs soule is truely corporall or carnall, because it is comprised vnder the name of flesh, as that other attributes of the body are verified in the soule. Which if you thinke absurd, though the name of flesh by a figure of speach import the whole man, because the Scripture speaketh not of a dead, but of a liuing man: then is there lesse cause, that ech action or passion affirmed of the flesh should exactly or properly be referred to the soule, since the common vse of speach intending the whole by a part is figuratiue; and in figuratiue speaches, as where the soule or the flesh are taken for the whole man, the attributes cannot be properly restrained to ech part, no more then the names are. And euen out of those places by which you would collect death to be common to the body and soule of Christ, the auncient fathers conclude death to be proper to the body of Christ, and not common to the soule; as Austin out of Saint Peter. August. 99. Quid est enim, quòd viuificatus est spiritu, nisi qu d eadem caro, qua sola fuer at mortificat us, viuificante spiritu resurrexit? What other meaning hath this that Christ was quickned by the spirit, but that the same flesh, in which onely he was put to death, rose a∣gaine by the quickning of the spirit? And Cyrill. Cyrill de recta fide ad li. 2. Was it not a worke of infirmitie to endure the crosse? I confesse (saith Paul) hee was weake in the flesh, but he reuiued againe by the power of God. And how was he weake? by suffering his owne bodie to taste death for vs, and restoring to life againe that very temple (of his bodie) not doing this by the weakenessc of his flesh, but by the power of God. Christ Ibid m. died for vs, not as a man like one of vs, but as a God in flesh, giuing his owne bodie a ransome for the life of all. Wherefore his Disciple (Peter) saith wisely and warily, that he suffered in the flesh. But of the fathers iudgement in this case more shalbe said afterward. Defenc. pag. 139. li. 12. Heere you obiect, thus I note all the attributes of the bodie common to the soule. Nay for sooth that I doe not; ] Forsooth the ground of your conclusion inferreth so much what euer your meaning is, or may be. For this you vrge, that wheresoeuer the flesh of Christ is taken for the whole manhood of Christ, the thing affirmed of Christs flesh must be common to soule and bodie; and thence you conclude, that since Christ suf∣fered death in his flesh by Saint Peters wordes, he must by the Scriptures e sayd to haue died as well in the soule as in the bodie. You regard no more but death to bee common to both, which of all others is not common to both, because they are seured by death; but vpon this collection it followeth, if your rule bee not false, that since through out the Scrtptures, where mention is made of Christes liuing flesh, or of his actions, or passions, the whole manhood of Christ is there vnderstoode, then conse∣quently all those thinges so affirmed of Christ must be common to both the parts of Christs humane nature, that is as well to his soule, as to his bodie. To pretend your meaning against your speach, when you see how absurd your saying is, is a childish va∣nitie; if your obseruation and illation be true, this that I obiect, followeth; if those be not true, then faile you of your first purpose, that death must be common to both parts of Christes manhood. Besides the falsitie of your collection appeareth by this, that when things are attributed to Christ liuing, which are proper to the soule or bodie, and yet are ascribed to Christs person, this kind of speach is figuratiue, either because the whole is taken fot a part, or because either part hath some concurrence or refe∣rence to the actions and passions auouched of Christ. But thence you may not inferre, that all such things most properly agree to either part in Christ; that is such palpable ignorance, that you seeme not to conceiue, what a man is, or whereof he consisteth. For so you may conc ude, that the soule eateth, drinketh, sleepeth, sitteth, falleth, and such like, as well as the bodie, because these things are affirmed of the person, that is of the whole man, though indeed performed by meanes of the bodie. More follie it is to vrge the same in death, which seuereth the soule from the bodie, and so leaueth nothing common to bodie and soule, but the generall attributes of a Creature, as to be locall, finite, and such like. For where death is the priuation of life, and the soule is the life of her bodie, what reason or sense can it haue, because man di∣eth, to say the losse of life must be common to the soule, which is the cause of life, as well as to the bodie, which is but the vessell, or vehicle of life. True it is, the soule by death is driuen to depart from her bodie, but so long, as she is present, there is life, and she must first be gone before death, which is the lacke of life, can seaze on the bo∣die. To draw this consequent then from reason, that the soule must die, when man dieth, is the part of him that vnderstandeth not what reason meaneth; except by the dying of the soule he note the departing of the soule from the bodie, in which sense the Scriptures sometimes applie the name of death to the soule, as wee shall after∣wardes see. Defenc. pag. 140. li. 14. This attribute of dying vnderstood in such sort and manner as the bodie properly dieth, that is to become without life and sense, I make not common to the soule. ] The whole man consisting of bodie and soule, is most properly said to die, that is to be dissolued, the soule departing from the bodie; the bodie is properly said to bee dead, that is to bee void of life and sense. and if we say, the bodie dieth, as speach is often guided rather by vse then by rule, we meane the bodie beginneth to lacke sense and life, and to bee possessed by death. And though the soule cannot be void of life and sense in such sort as the bodie is, because she is the life of the bodie, yet when the soule is dead, shee is vtterly void of her life, which is God, and hath no more sense or feeling of him, then the bodie lying dead hath of the soule. How then doth it follow, that because Christ died in the flesh, or in his manhood, that his soule must be dead after her manner of dying, as well as his bodie after his sort of death? [ where the whole dieth, either part, you will say, must die. ] But Peter doth not say, Christ died in his whole manhood, that is your lame and blind conceit, but that Christ died in the flesh. And yet the whole man∣hood may die, and not both parts, because the whole is a thing conioyned of parts, and so dissolued, where they are seuered, though both parts doe not die. [ the whole, you meane for euery part. ] Your meaning is, not the matter, but Peters words are the thing that I stand on. Now what doe they inferre, when he saith, Christ died in the flesh? you say the whole, and euery part thereof, because the spirit heere opposite to the flesh importeth the whole dietie, and therefore the flesh must comprise the whole humanitie.] This is that bold and false obseruation, that hath deceiued you and your leaders. For besides all other exceptions h eretofore taken, which are enough; the words of Paul in the same case, which is also one of your examples, Christ was Rom. 1. made of the seed of Dauid according to the flesh, do they inferre that Christes whole manhood, and euery part thereof, as well soule as bodie, was made of the seede of Dauid? If you and your instructors see the falsenesse of this collection, with what face vrge you so earnestly the same illation from Peters words? but your wills, not Peters words, are the foundation of your faith; and so you can make a shew to wrangle, you little care for trueth or substance. Defenc pag. 140. li 25. This if you do not acknowledge, the shame of absurditie and contrarietie, which in your fansie you accuse me of, that Christs soule died and died not, will sit neerer to you than to me. ] Is this enough to say the word? You may soone write, if you make it suff cient to say what you list; but your absurdities and contrarieties are not so easily declined, as you would sleightly ouerslippe them. Looke backe to your former footing, and see how shamefully you shun your owne assertions. Examining the place of Peter after your learned maner, and labouring, as you thought, with impregnable force to prooue, when Peter yth, Christmas mortified in the fl sh, but qnickened in (or by) the spirit, that the spirit could not there be taken for Christs humane soule; you Tre pa. 78. li. . butted both these as absurd and most false, that Christ was made aliue either in his humane soule, or by the same. I replied, that you refuted your owne position. Fo if in the former words of Peter, his meaning were to say, that Christes soule and bodie, as you conceaue him, were done to death; then of necessitie Christ must be quickned and restored to life, as well in his humane Soule, as in his Bodie. And this is so farre from being absurd and false, as you proclaimed it, that it is openly blasphemous otherwise to saie or thinke, that Christ was neuer made aliue in his humane soule, if once it were dead, as you collected out of Peters words. What course now take you to colour these in∣congruities. You ment it was absurd to say, that Christes soule was quickned, as was his bodie. Of the maner of death you speake there not a word, but onely seeke to prooue, that spirit in that place can not be taken for Christes soule, because it is most absurd and false, (as you say) that Christ was made aliue in his humane soule. How you will iangle or iuggle touching your intent, is not to this purpose; you must answere for the sense, which you would patch to Peters words. The death, which Christ suffered in his flesh by Peters assertion, was it the death of the body alone, or of both body and soule? if of the body only; then is your commentane, which corrupteth Peters words, absurd, false, and wicked. Did Peter intend to teach, that Christ died in both parts of his manhood, that is in soule as well as in bodie? then is it a necessarie trueth, and point of piety to confesse and affirme, that Chist was made aliue in his humane soule, which you say is absurd and false. Which way will your wisedome winde out of this grinne? you ment it is absurd for the soule to be quickened, as the body is. You ment as best serued your turne, but what ment Peter? if he affirmed the soule of Christ died, as you interprete him, must not his words auouch that Christes soule was made aliue, except you resolue, that Christs soule once dead was neuer quickned againe? and though you set a bold face on these contradictions, and say you are farre from them, yet ech meane Reader may soone perceaue how farre you were ouershot in them, though heere you would outface them. And where you now say, that in such a sense you doe not denie, but Christ may be said to be quickned in the spirit, what is this but to grant that now, which before you called absurd and most false. D c. pag. 140. li. 37. I hope it is cleere to reasonable men, that Christes soule according to the Scriptures phrase may be said in some sort to haue tasted & suffered death, that is the extreamest feelings of Gods wrath for sinne, and the most vehement paines of the damned, but in a singuler ma∣ner and extraordinarie vvay. And to the same reasonable men I referre it, whether you haue brought one word or syllable out of holy Scripture concluding that Christ died the death of the soule, or the second death. The Scripture phrase you haue peruerted and distorted to your meaning, but the words are farre from inferring any such thing euen in the iudgement of the meanest. Your mittigations, In some sort, in a singular manner, and extraordinarie way, What argue they but your wresting of the Scriptures from their right sense, since no such thing is there affirmed, yea the death of the soule, and the second death in the Scriptures are such, as you dare not auouch of Christ, but with these limitations, which are no where mentioned in the Scriptures, but are ho∣uels to shroud your absurd and false doctrine from the tempest of the word of God conuincing you of impiety and heresie, if you did not thus delude the force of them? But in vaine doe you seeke for these vnsound refuges, when you be once driuen from your footing in the word of God. For you must not only prooue by the Scriptures, which you neither haue done, nor can doe, that Christ suffered the death of the soule, and the second death, as you say he did; but you must shew also where these excepti∣ons are written of Christ, otherwise they are but shifts declining the maine and gene∣rall trueth of the Scriptures touching the death of the soule, and the second death; which can no more agree to Christ then sinne and damnation; which you may as well defend, IN A SORT, in a singular manner, and extraordinary way to be found in Christ, as the other. And therefore dally not with the word of God, and faith of Christ, your singular manner will not saue you from abusing the one, and defacing the other, ex∣cept you can shew, where your assertion as well as your exceptions be written in the booke of God. As for the most vehement paines of the damned, when you take the paines to prooue any thing otherwise then by the meale of your owne mouth, you shalbe answered. The paines of the damned expressed in the Scriptures are reiection, confusion, worme of conscience, and torment of hell fire, which if by your cunning conueyance you cast vppon the soule of Christ you shall cough me a singular and ex∣traordinary miscreant. Defenc. pag. 141. li. 6. Now besides the matter you gird at me in diuers places, as where I say, the death of the soule is such paines and sufferings of Gods wrath as alwayes accompanie them that are separa∣ted from the grace and loue of God. ] This geere deserued more then girding; other men vse to blush at such falsehoods, but shamefastnesse and you are parted. When you had thus grossely thwarted the trueth, as to say, that the paines of Gods wrath, which here you make the most Treatis. pag. 77. li. 5. vehement paines of the damned, doe alwayes accompanie them that are separated from the grace and loue of God; your Printer or Corrector ashamed of that more then childish ouersight, would not take vpon him to altar your text, and so to a∣mend your error, but with a marginall note bridled your wordes, making an additi∣on cleane contrarie to your text. For where you said, alwayes, he said, ordinarily, which is not alwayes, and so he giueth you the lie; and yet himselfe is as farre from the trueth as you are. For neither alwayes, nor ordinarily, much lesse alwayes ordinarily, (which is as much as alwayes sometimes ) doe the most vehement paines of the damned accom∣panie them that are strangers to the grace and loue of God; and therefore this Labo∣rinth is like your other riddles in religion, neither Writer, Reader, nor Corrector can tell what to make of them, nor how to temper them with any trueth. But now you will make amends for all. Defenc. pag. 141. li. 10. Forsooth it is true, they are alwayes wicked whom these paines do accompanie ordinarily. ] It is the first time I heard you speake towards a trueth, but this is cleane kam to that you said before. Your former speach was, these paines doe alwayes accompanie the wic∣ked, and now you turne the cake in the pan, as if that side were not burnt, and tell vs, they are alwayes wicked, whom those paines doe accompanie ordinarily. Forsooth this is not How handsom∣ly the defender shifteth hands. that, you said before; and if you be ashamed of your follie and falsehood, I am not a∣gainst repentance. But it were plaine dealing to confesse the fault, and not to bring in an ape for an owle, and say it is the same Creature. And yet forsooth whether this po∣sition be true or not, is without the compasse of your skill. For first what is ordinarie with you? once a weeke, once a moneth, or once in seuen yeeres? you haue gotten a word, that you may winde at your will, and limite as you like best; and yet without all proofe you resolue, that these paines doe ordinarily accompanie the wicked: experi∣ence I trust you will take none vpon you, for then by your owne rule you must be al∣wayes wicked; to sift other mens souls, what paines they feele, though they be wic∣ked, I win you haue no way, but by report or con ecture, which are both vncertaine. Warrant in the word you haue none; that such paines doe alwayes or ordinarily ac∣company the wicked, the contrarie may rather be thence collected. For when the wic∣ked shall say, 1. Thess. 5. Peace and safetie, then shall suddaine destruction come vpon them. Peace and safetie in the paines of hell I suppose they haue nor cause, nor will to say. In Peace then & safety, not in the pains of the damned, are many, if not most of the wicked till destru∣ction come vpon them, which is not alwaies, nor ordinary, since they can be destroyed but once, and vntill that time their ease and abundance make them forget God. Defenc. pag. 141. li. 18. Againe you pretend to haue much against me where I say, the feeling of the sorrwes of Gods wrath due to sinne in a broken and contrite heart is indeede the onely true and perfectly accepted sacrifie to God. True so I said, and againe I say it. What see you annsse in it? Then vnhappie men are the godl e (say you) which are at any time free from the paines of the dam∣ned, to what purpose is this? I speake of Christs sacrifice. Thus your triumphs before the victo∣rie come to nothing but blasts of vanitie. ] If I mistooke your meaning, you are the more beholding to me; the sense, which you now expresse, is worse then that I charged you with; and yet I tooke your words, as they lay, which because they were namely ap∣plied neither to Christ nor to vs by you, I pressed you with the lesser absurditie of the twaine. Why your words might not be referred to the faithfull, I saw no cause; Da∣uid confessing that the Psal. 51. v. 17. sacrifices of God (he meaneth esteemed and required of God) are a troubled spirit, and a contrite and broken heart causeth the sacrifice of righteousnesse to be accepted. I strained your words no farder then Dauids, but sayd you mi construed the wordes of the holy Ghost; if you tooke a broken and contrite heart repen∣ting his former sinnes for the paines of hell suffered in the soule. You now say, you ment this of Christ, that his broken and contrite heart feeling the most vehe∣ment paines of the damned was the onely true, and perfectly accepted sacrifice to God, and aske me what I see amisse in this? I will soone tell you. Where I would haue charged you with a single error against the Godly, by reason your wordes are in∣distinct and doubtfull, you loade your selfe with a double iniurie against God and his Sonne. For first the sacrifice of Christes bodie, by which we are sanctified, as saith the Apostle, is excluded from being a true and perfectly accepted sacrifice, if the paines of hell in his soule be onely the true sacrifice. Secondly a false sacrifice deuised by your selfe, and neuer offered by Christ, is obtruded by you vnto God as the onely true sacrifice, which he must perfectly accept: and so where before you blazed an vn∣trueth, you be now come to bolster it vp with impietie. For where no Scripture doth witnesse, that Christ suffered any such sorrowes and paines of hell, as you surmise, you now openly professe, that all sorrowes and sacrifices besides this were neither true nor acceptable vnto God, and that this your deuice surpas eth all the merits and obedi∣ence of Christ whatsoeuer. Defenc. pag. 141. li. 30. Where Austen seemeth to denie that Christes soule might die, he denieth that Christ suffered any paines of damation locally in hell after his death, as it seemeth some held about his time, whom heere he laboureth to confute. ] If your ignorance were not euery where pa∣tent, some man perhaps would stumble at your report: but you are growen to such a trade of outfacing, that almost you can doe nothing else. That any such opinion was held in Austens time, as you talke of, and that he laboured there to confute the same, is a maske of your making to hide your owne blemishes; Austen refelleth that as a fable in exact words, when he saith, Quis audeat dicere, who dare say so? Now if some had so held, he must haue said, some doe say so; but who dare say so, is as much as no man dareth say so. If no man durst so to say, then no man was so wicked or irreligious in Austens time as to dare say, that Christs soule died, which now is become the greatest pillar of your pater noster. As for suffering in hell locally, it is a fiction of yours faste∣ned to S. Austen, he hath no such words, and therefore no such meaning. Defenc. pag 141. li. 37. He had no necessary cause o speake of the second sense thereof, how the soule may be sayd to suffer death extraordinarily for sinne imputed onely, neither doth he speake against that in Christ. ] S. Austen a man would thinke had cause to know how we w re r d by Christ, and surely if he were ignorant thereof, you would not iudge him worthy to be a Curate in your Conuenticles: but shew that he, who taught so much, and wrote so much (as his works declare) euer spake word of your new-found redemption by the paines of hell suffered in the soule of Christ; or by the second death. Against it he often speaketh, when he so soundly and sincerely collecteth out of the Scriptures, that Christ died for vs the death of the body onely, and not the death of the soule. And this how could it be a true or tolerable assertion, if the Scriptures did auouch, or the church in his time had professed the death of Christs soule to be the chiefest part of our redemption for sinne, and reconciliation to God? Wherefore neuer dreame he had no necessarie cause to speake of your sense; if your sense had beene a part of the Christian faith, would any man in his right wits haue asked, as Austen doth; Who dare auouch it? He discusseth the place of S. Peter, and when he commeth to those words, Christ was quickened in the spirit, or by the spirit, he resolueth this cannot be spoken of Christs humane soule, because that, which was afterwards quickened, was first mortified, and therefore we could not say, that Christs humane spirit or soule was restored to life, except we first yeelded, that it was before subiected to death. Now that Christs soule was euer dead, who durst auouch it? The reason, why Christs soule could neuer die, he rendreth thus, for that the Scriptures acknowledge no death of the soule in any but sin and damnation, to neither of which the soule of Christ could be subiect. August. epist. 99. Certè anima Christi nullo mortificata peccato, vel damnatione punita est, quibus duabus causis mors animae intelligi potest. Surely the soule of Christ was neither dead with a∣ny sin, nor punished with damnation, which are the two waies how the death of the soule may be possibly vnderstood. This collection of S. Austins out of the Scriptures touching the death of the soule is most sound, and cannot be shaken with all your shewes and shifts, talke of ordinarie and extraordinarie as long as you will. That standing good, which yet we see immooueable for all your battery, it followeth ineuitably, that Christ ne did ne could die the death of the soule, ne may any man defend it, without apparent fal∣sity and impiety. What proofes you haue profered against S. Austins conclusion, let the Reader iudge, I must confesse my selfe very blind, if he see any; for I see none, and therefore not only S. Austins words, but his reasons out of holy Scripture stand firme, and hold you fast to the grinding stone, being no way as yet counteruailed or controled, but with your vaine speaches and most vnlearned euasions. Defenc pag. 142. li. 2. Nay according to Austins owne definition of the soules dying it will easily appeare, that Christes soule may be said to haue suffered some kind of death. Mors est spiritus, deseri a Deo. The death of the soule saith he, is Gods for saking of it, but the Scripture saith, God did for∣sake him for a season: yea the Fathers also agree fully therevnto. Therefore by Anstins defi∣nition largely and rightly taken, Christ may be said in some sense to haue died in soule. ] From your shifts you returne againe to your proofes, and neither barrell is better herring. The maior you thinke, is Austins, the minor is Christs owne words, and what, trow you, should hinder the cōclusion. This reason hath but three of your won∣ted flowers, I must not say faults, the maior is larger then Austen euer ment, and the minor no way matcheth it, except you quite alter the words of Christ, and the con∣clusion commeth nothing neere to your purpose. Examine them in order. Not eue∣ry forsaking of the soule is death, for the godly often in the Scriptures complaine (as I haue shewed) that they are forsaken of God, when yet their soules liue: but as life is repugnant to death, and God is the life of the soule, so till God haue vtterly forsaken the soule, she is not dead. Whiles she retaineth any fellowship of grace with God, who is her life, she is not dead, because she partaketh with life. As then death is the vtter priuation of life, so God must vtterly forsake the soule, before she can be pro∣nounced to be dead; and that kind of forsaking is indeed the death of the soule in this life. So that your maior, if euer you will come neere S. Austins meaning, must be the death of the soule is Gods vtter for saking of the same. And that thus you must conster S. Austins words, appeareth euery where by his In Psal. 70. in Iohan. tract. 47. de verbis Apost. Serm. 30. comparison with the death of the bodie, which is not dead, till the soule be vtterly departed from it. For as the body which hath in it any power or presence of the soule, is not dead but liuing, so the soule, that hath any communion with God who is her life, can not be truely sayd to be dead, but as yet to haue life. Were you no Diuine, but a plaine Sophister, reason teacheth you so to vnderstand S. Austins words: for where life and death be priuatiues, as well in the soule, as in the bodie, the one hath no place, till the other be vtterly quenched. He is not blinde, that hath any sight; nor deafe that hath any hearing; the priuation vtterly excludeth the habite; neither is the soule dead, that hath any force or effect of life in her, and consequently not euerie forsaking, but onely an vtter forsaking of God is the death of the soule heere in this life. Your minor then should be, that Christes Soule was vtterly forsaken of God, which are not the words of Christ on the crosse, nor any way consonant to them: yea the ve∣rie entrance to that speech, when Christ saide, My God, my God, doth prooue the quite contrarie. Matth. 22. God is not the God of the dead, but of the liuiug. Then directly by the plaine wordes of Scripture, when Christ said, My God, my God, his soule confes∣sing God to be his God, was liuing, and consequently the wordes following, why hast thou forsaken me, doe net prooue the death of the soule, vnlesse you make the Sonne of God so vnwise as not to vnderstand, what he said, or so amazed, that he marked not his owne speech; which with you perchance is no absurditie, but with me it is a wicked and vnchristian impietie. Christes wordes therefore import, that he found a kinde of forsaking, but not that his soule was forsaken of the trueth, grace, or spirit of God, these be blasphemies to auouch, and no points of pietic; nor that he was vtter∣ly or altogither forsaken, which onely is the death of the soule. And against this wre∣sting of Christes wordes from their right sense, how many testimonies of scriptures and Fathers haue I sormerly brought? all which you trippe ouer with a light foote, and make as though you felt them not. You haue beene told, Galat 3. the iust shall liue by saith. So that if Christ wanted not faith, he could not choose but liue in soule. A∣gaine, 1. Iohn 4. God is , and he that dwelleth in loue dwelieth in God. Christ then must either haue life, or want loue, for the loue of God is the life of the soule. Farder, the Spirit of God is the Rom. 8. spirit of life, that quickneth the soule; yea then thereof is life and peace. Then must you take from Christ the spirit of God with all the gifts and graces thereof, before you can depriue the soule of Christ from life. What an hellish heape of blasphemies are here before you can affirm, that Christs soule was dead according to the Scriptures, & according to Austins meaning, who herein ioineth with the Scrip∣tures. Christ then ly ing in soule with perfect obedience and patience, and assuredly knowing God to be his God, & his Father, complaineth that he was left or forsaken, that is, either not deliuered from his troubles & afflictions, but left in sinners hands, to do their pleasure with him; or deuested of his power, and left through weaknesse vnto death, which should for a season seuer his soule from his bodie; or lastly lest in this shame of the crosse, & anguish of body, without any open or sensible shew or signe of Gods fauour towards him, or care for him. All these kindes of forsaking the lear∣ned and ancient Fathers acknowledge in Christ on the crosse, and other forsaking of the soule they admit none, howsoeuer you falsly pretend their full agreement. Come now to your conclusion, if you could euince that Christes soule was vtterly forsaken of God, and depriued of life, which you can neuer; and to offer it, will con∣uince you of hainous and wilfull heresie and blasphemie: yet can you conclude no more, but the death of the soule in this life, which is either ignorance or contempt of God; Hell paines you cannot inferre, nor the torments of the damned, which are the second death; and so your great flourish out of Austen for the death of Christes soule is but a aw. And the Reader may see, with what vnderstanding and con∣science you read and alleage the Fathers, that where you acknowledge Defenc. pag. 142. li. 12. they doe denie this phrase generally, that Christ died in soule, yet you boldly and lewdly affirme the next line before, they li. 11. grant the thing in effect; as if they denied that in wordes, which indeed they knew to be a part of the Christian faith, and were like you, who shift and lie for life to support your owne Deuices. But in all these shewes of yours the adui∣sed Reader shall finde nothing but a carelesse and senselesse resolution to saie anie thing, rather then to admit a trueth, or to relent from the least of your conceits: whereof he may haue a full proofe in your words next following. Defenc pag. 142. li. 16. Let this be the answer touching all your Fathers and Councels, which you bring abun∣dantly (heere and there) about this point of the soules death. ] A short answer indeede, if it had either trueth or sense in it. It is right a colts tricke when he will not or can not endure the loade, to cast the whole packe off at once. That they generally deny the death of Christes soule, you grant; and with a brazen face, and barren head you adde, they meane otherwise; they deny not the thing, but onely the phrase. What is this, but to supp vp the trueth with a sadde countenance, and to belch foorth your shame with open mouth? had you examined their places, your shifts, sleights, and vntrueths would haue loaden a carrect; you haue better now prouided for your selfe, with be∣lying them all at once, you haue incurred but one inconuenience. But like is your Defence to your cause, it entred first with aduantage of phrases, and so it will end with a wind-mill of wordes. Well, that the Christian Reader may perceaue, how auncient and vniuersally consented and confirmed by the church of Christ this truth hath beene, which I teach, that Christ died no death for our redemption, but the death of the body onely; to those Fathers, which you say are abundantly brought by me already, I will adde others, that though there be no care nor conscience in you, yet all men, in whom there is any sense, may see your deuice of the death of Christes soule and of hell paines, and the most vehement torments of the damned suffered by him, to be not onely a falsitie repugnant to the Scriptures, but a noueltie against the maine consent and confession of all antiquitie. If their testimonies be long and many, thou wilt b are with me Christian Reader, I hope; the expence of a little paper to me, or paine to thee is not so deare, as the cause it selfe both for thy direction, and for my discharge. First then thou shalt heare, that Christ died in bodie alone, which is my assertion: and withall that Christ died not in soule, which is their conceit, contra∣dicted by all the Fathers; and in the end we will shortly view whether these Fathers crosse their new found redemption in words, o matter. The places I thinke good to repeate in Latine or Grecke, as much as shall need, (which otherwise I refraine of pur∣pose to decrease the volume least it should be too great) that the Reader should nci∣ther distrust my translating, nor make long search for the wordes themselues in ech Writer, if happily he desire to see them. Tertullian prouing the resurrection of our bodies by Christs example, saith, Tertull. de Resurrect. car∣mis. ca. 48. Sine dubio, si mortuum, sisepultum audis secundum scripturas, NON ALIAS QVAM IN CARNF, aequ resuscitatum in carne conced ipsum enim quod idit in mortem, quod ia∣cuit i sepulchro, hoc & resurrexit, non tam Christus in carne, quàm caro Christi. Without Christ died no death of the soule by the iudgement of all the Fathers. question, if thou heare that CHRIST DIED that he was buried, according to the Scrip∣tures NONE OTHERWISE THEN in the flesh, thou wilt grant that he was likewise raised in the flesh. For that very thing which fell by death, which lay in the graue, that surely rose, not so much Christ in the flesh as the flesh of Christ. And in the same place: Dominus Ibidem. quanquam animam circumferret trepidantem vs{que} ad mortem, sed non cadentem PER MORTEM. The Lord though he caried about a soule fearing vnto death, YET NOT FALLING BY DEATH. Origen, Origen. li. 5. in ca. 5. epist. ad Romanos. By sinne (saith Paul) came death, that death no doubt, whereof the Prophet saith, the soule that sinneth, the same shall die, whereof a man may iustly call this bodily death a shadow. For whither soeuer that pierceth, of force this followeth as a shadow doth the bodie. If a man obiect, that our Sauiour did no sinne, neither was there in him the death of the soule by reason of any sinne, and yet he sustained a corporall death: we will answere him; that where Christ owed this death to none, nor was obnoxious to it, yet for ur saluation of his owne accord, and by no necessitie he vndertooke this (so aboue called) sha∣dow (of death.) Ibidem. This common death then he did vndergoe, but that death of sinne, which raigned ouer all others, he did not admit. Athanasius: Athanas. con∣tra Arianos oratione 3. ? What els was that which was crucified, but the bodie (of Christ?) And againe: Christs Ibidem. re∣surrection could not be without death. ? And how could death haue had place in him, if he had not had a mortall bodie? And againe: Idem de in∣carnat. verb . Death of it selfe could not appeare but in the bodie; and therefore Christ put on a bodie, that finding death in his bodie he might abolish it. Ambrose; Ambros. de fide ad Grati∣anum. li. 3. ca. 5. Who is he that would haue vs partakers of his flesh and bloud? Surely the Sonne of God. Quomodo nisi per carnem par∣ticeps factus est noster, aut PER QVAM, NISI CORPORIS MORTEM, mortis vincula dissoluit? IN QVO NISI IN CORPORE, expia t peccata populi? IN QVO PASSVS EST, NISI IN CORPORE? Sicut & supra diximus, Christo se∣cundum carnem passo. How was he made our Partner but by flesh; and by what death, other than the death of his bodie, did he dissolue the bands of death? WHEREIN, BVT IN HIS BODIE, did he expiate the sinnes of the people? WHEREIN, BVT IN HIS BODIE, did he suffer? As wee sayd before, Christ suffered in the flesh. Chrysostom: . . . . . We died a double death, therefore we must looke for a double resurrection. Christ died but one kind of death, therefore herose but one kind of resurrection. Adam died body and soule; he died to sinne, and to nature. In what day soeuer ye eat of the tree, said God, ye shall die the death. That very day Adam did not die (in which he did eat) but he then died to sinne, and long after to nature. The first is the death of the soule, the other is the death of the body. For the death of the soule is sinne or euerlasting punishment. To vs men there is a double death, and therefore we must haue a double resurrection. To Christ there was but one kinde of death, for he sinned not, and that one kinde of death was for vs. He owed no kind of death, for he was not subiect to sinne, and so not to death. Therefore he as free from sinne rose but one . We as g e of sinne, die a double death, and so must haue a double resurrecti∣on. This Sermon, whence these words are taken, thought it be not amongst Chryso∣stomes printed Volumes, yet besides that it was published in print by FRONTO DVC VS, it is found in the written Greeke copie of Chrysostom lying in New Colledge Librarie in Oxford, whence these words are taken little differing from the printed copie. Out of Augustine though much be sayd, and much more might be; yet thinke I not meet to omit some places as well for the cleerenesse as the rarenesse of them, some of them being sufficiently witnessed vnto vs by others, though they be not found at this day among his printed works. And first of those that are found: August. de . 4 ca. 3. Vtrique rei no∣s , id est, & animae & corpori medicina & resurrectione opus crat. Mors animae impiet as est, & mors corporis corruptibilitas. Sicut enim anima Dco deserente, sic corpus anima de∣serente n ur, vnde ill sit insipiens, hoc exanime. Huic ergo DVPLAE MORTI NOSTRAE Sal or impendit SIMPLAM SVAM, & adf ciendam vtram{que} resuscitatio∣nem nostram in Sacramento & exemplo praeposuit & proposuit VNAM SVAM. Neque enim fuit peccator aut imp , vt et tanquam spiritu mortuo in interiori homine renouari opus esset: sed Indutus carne mortali, EA SOLA MORIENS, EA SOLA RESVRGENS, EA SOLA NOBIS ad vtrum{que} concinuit, cùm in ea fieret interioris hominis sacramen∣tum, exemplum. Either part of vs, that is, both soule and body, needed curing and raising. The death of the soule is impictie, and the death of the bodie corruptibilitie. As the soule dieth when God for saketh her, so the bodie dieth when the soule for saketh it, whereupon the one is soolish, the other senselesse. To this double death of ours, our Sauiour applied his single death, and to make a double resurrection in vs, he preferred and proposed his one kind of death for a Sacrament, and for a Precedent: for he was no sinner or wicked person, that he should need any renewing, as one dead in spirit, but putting on mortall flesh, and dying in that ALONE, and rising in that ALONE, he fitted that ALONE to both our (deaths) placing therein a Sacrament for our inward man, and an example for our outward. So a∣gaine: Idem contra A∣rianum. ca. 16. ca. 18. Sensit mortem (Christus) sicut omnes sentiunt, qui mori nte carne mentibus vi∣uunt, &c. Credo mortuum esse filium Dei, illa quae secundum naturam generalis est cunctis, non illa, quae specialis est malis. Christ selt death, as all feele it, who dying in the flesh liue in their spirits. I beleeue the Sonne of God died that death, which by Nature is common to all, not that which is proper to euill men. The words which the second Councell of Hispa∣lis doth cite out of S. Austins writing against Maximinus, are woorth the hearing, though they be not now in his printed works, as many other things are not, which Bede and others alleage out of him: Concilium Hi∣spalens. 2. ca. 13. ex August. ad∣uersus Maxi∣minum. Vbi resurgit nisi in eo, quod potuit cadere? Vbi re∣surrexit nisi in eo vbi mortuus? Quaere mortem in verbo, nunquam esse potuit. QVAERE MORT M IN ANIMA, NVNQVAM IBI FVIT. Quaere mortem in carne, planè ibi fuit. Et paulò pòst, Quid miraris? Nec mortua est anima, nec verbum mortuum est. CARO TANTVM MORTVA EST. Where was Christ raised, but in that which might fall? Wherein did he rise, but in that wherein he died? Seeke for death in (his) deitie, it could neuer be there. Seeke for death in his SOVLE, IT NEVER VVAS THERE. Seeke for death in his flesh, there was it indeed. And a little after, Why doest thou maruell? Neither was Christes soule dead, nor his Godhead; ONLY HIS FLESH DIED. Nei∣ther want the same words in effect in his printed Sermons: In Iohannem tractat. 47. Hoc suscitabatur quod m ur. Nam verbum non est mortuum, anima illa non est mortua. That was raised (in Christ) which died. The Deitie died not, yea his soule died not. Ibidem. Quid fecit mors nisi cor∣pus ab anima separauit? in morte sola caro est a Iudaeis occisa. What did death in Christ more than seuer his bodie from his soule? in death his flesh only was killed of the Iewes. The councell it selfe adding of their own saith. Concilium Hi∣spalens. 2. ca. 13 Prophetia quo{que} in psalmis passionem Christi in carne sola sic asserit. Foderunt manus meas & pedes meos, dinumer auerunt omnia . Vbi non deitatis, sed tantum crucifixi corporis iniuria intelligitur. Sola in Christo materia carnis mortis fragilitate defuncta spem resurrectionis expectabat. The prophesie in the Psalmes auouch the passion of Christ in the flesh only, when it saith they pearced my hands and my feet, and numbred all my bones. Where not the iniurie of his deity but of his body is perc aued in Christ the matter only of his flesh yeelding to the srailty of death expected resur∣rection. Petrus quoque Apostolus Christi supplicium sic praedicat in solo corpore consumma∣tum: Ibidem. qui peccata (inquit) nostra pertulit in corpore suo super lignum. Peter also the Apostle preacheth the passion of Christ to haue beene performed ONLY IN HIS BODY, when he saith Christ bare our sinnes in his body on the tree. And againe Ibidem. Sola caro crucis exitium sensit, sola caro lanceam pertulit, sola sanguine & aqua manauit. Ipsa sola mortua, ipsa sola in sepulchro posita ipsa sola tertio dic resuscitata. Only the flesh of Christ tasted the sharpnesse of the Crosse, only the flesh endured the speare; only the flesh yeelded forth bloud and water. That only died, that only lay in the graue, that ONLY ROSE AGAINE. And assuring themselues this to be the Christian faith confirmed in the old and new testament, they say, Ibidem. Ecce pronunciata est passio corporis Christi ex lege & Prophetis. Cuius quidem fidei verit as tam est efficax, vt eam nec tyranni sua potuerint crudelitate confundere, nec haereti∣corum subdola circum to pessumdare, n c hypocritarum diminuere fallax simulatio. The passion of the body of Christ is prooued by the law and the Prophets. The trueth of which faith is so forcible, that neither tyrants with their rucltie could confound it, nor Heretickes with their crafty deuices euert it, nor Hypocrites with their false dissembling diminish it. Theodoret. Theodoret. Dialogo. 3. ; how could the soule (of our Sauiour) hauing an immortall nature, and not touched with the least spot of sinne, be possibly taken with the hooke of death? Cyril. Cyril. de recta fide ad R . li. 1. . If we conceaue Christ to be God incarnate, and suffe∣ring in his owne flesh, the death of his flesh alone sufficeth for the redemption of the world. Fulgentius. Fulgentius a I . li. 3. ca. 7. Quis ignoret Christum nec in diuinitate sed IN SOLO CORPORE MOR∣TVVM & sepultum. Who can be ignorant, that Christ was dead and buried, not in his deity, but in his body only. Cum sola caro moreretur, & resuscitaretur in Christo, filius Dei dicitur mortuus. Idem Christus secundum solam carnem mortuus, secundum solam animam ad in∣sernum descendit. When the flesh onely died, and was raised againe in Christ, the Sonne of God is said to haue died. The same Christ died in his flesh onely, and descended into hell in his soule ONELY. Idem. ca. 5. Moriente carne non solum Dietas, sed nec anima Christi potest ostendi commortua, The flesh dying, not onely the dietie, but the soule of Christ cannot be shewed to haue bene also dead. The same Father and fifteene other Bishops of Africa make this confession of their faith. . Mors silij Dei quam sola carne suscepit, vtramque in nobis mor∣tem, animae scilicet carnis{que} destruxit. The death of the Sonne of God, which he SVFFERED IN HIS FLESH ALONE, destroyed in vs both our deaths, to wit the death of soule & body. This confession Gregory followed when he said, Gregorius in . li. 4. . . Solumpro nobis mortem carnis susce∣pit. Christ vndertooke for vs the only death of the flesh. And againe, comming to vs, who were i the death of spirit and flesh, Christ brought his owne death to vs, and loosed both our deaths. His s le death applied to our double death, and dying vanquished our double death. Vi∣gius . Secundum proprietatem naturae, sola car mort m s t, sola caro sepulturae . Ergo dominum iacuisse in sepulchro, s d in sola carne, & Dominum d . According to the propriety of nature, onely the (of Christ) death, onely the sh was buried. Therefore we say the Lord lay in the gr ue, but in flesh alone, and descended into hell, but in SOVIE A ONE. Bede treadeth iust in their steps. in ca. 10. . Hoc quod m atur. Nam verbum non potuit, anima illa mortua it. Caro tantum mortua est, & resurrexit tertia . That was raised, which died, the Godhead could not die; his soule was not dead, onely his flesh died and r se againe. And againe, Idem Homi∣ 4. in . Veniens adnos, qui in morte carnis & spiritus eramus, vnam suam, id est, car∣nis mortem pertulit; & duas nostras absoluit: simplam suam nostrae dupl co t, & dulpam nostram subegit. Christ comming to vs that were in death of bodie and spirit, suffered onely one death, that is the death of the flesh, and freed both our deaths: ee applied his one death to our double death, and vanquished them both. Albinus. . Quid significat morte morieris? duplicem mortem ominis designat, animae videlicit & corp s. Animae mors est, dum prop∣t r peccatum quodlib t animam d t Deus. Corporis rs est dum propter necessitatem quamlibet corpus descritur b anima. Et hanc dupl m Christus sua destruxit. Nam est ad tempus, anima vero nunquam, qui nunquam peccauit. What is ment y this t ou shal e the death? it noteth a double death in man, to wit, of soule and body. The death of the soule is when for any sinne God forsaketh it, the death of the is w en for any necessitie the bodie is depriued of the soule. This double death of , Christ destroyed with his single death; for hee died onely in for a time, but in soule he neuer died, who neuer sinned. This continued without change to Bernards time, who saith of Christ, . Ex dua s nostris, cum a ra nobis in cu , reputare∣tur, sus ns p am & nes ns culpam, dum spon é & TANTVM N CORPORE MORITVR, & vitam nobis & prom ur. Of our two deaths, where one was the desert of , the other the d e of punishment, Christs taking our punishment but from sinne, dieth willingly and ONELY IN , hee me h or vs life and . I haue bene the longer good Reader in alleaging these fathers, to assure thee that I deliuer no doctrine touching our redemption; but uch as the whole Church of Christ in the best & purest times professed to be principles of the Christian faith; and that in so euident and pertinent manner, that I know not how to lighten or strengthen their wordes. Thou hearest them with one voice affirme, that Christ died not A DOV∣BLE, but A SINGLE death for vs; which they likewise a ch was the death of HIS BODY ONLY, AND NOT OF HIS SOVL ; and TH DEATH OF THE SOVLE HE DIED NOT. The death of the soule they truely deriue from the Scriptures to be either sinne, or damnation: sinne, by which men are depriued of all grace, and so of the life of God: and damnation, which is a perpetuall reiection from all blisse, addicting the wicked to eternall and intollerable miserie in the torments of hell fire. Which of these things will this dreamer denie? will he say, that Christ died moe deaths then ONE, and as well the death of the soule, as of the bodie? So he must say, if he will vphold his new redemption by the death of Christs soule, and so he doth say: but whether there in he crosse not the full consent of Christs whole Church, I leaue it to thy censure. Will he shift, as hee hath hitherto done, with the name of flesh, that it compriseth as well the soule as the bodie, and therefore by the death of Christs flesh onely, the Fathers doe not exclude the death of Christs soule, but the death of his Godhead? they prooue indeed against the Arians, that the Sonne of God could not die in his Diuine nature, but onely in his humane flesh. And this, as we now see, is one of their maine reasons: The soule of Christ died not, nor coulde die; much lesse then his Godhead. And therefore the most of them do expresse that argument, vtterly denying that Christes soule died any kinde of death, but onely his flesh. Besides a number of them not onely expres e by circumstances and conse∣quents of burying and rising againe, what the rest meane by the flesh, but they vse the word , which can not be taken for the soule, and with like zeale and truth auouch, that Christ died in his body onely. So that these three stand for cleere and sounde conclusions with all these Fathers: First, that Christ died BVT ONE KIND of death. Secondly, that HE DIED ONELY IN HIS FLESH, OR BODY; and thirdly, that THE DEATH OF THE SOVLE HE NEITHER DID, NOR COVLD DIE. Will hee shu e with the name of death, and say they ment not his kind of death? that will nothing relieue him. For first if Christ died but one kinde of death; and of his bodily death no Christian may so much as doubt, then by maine consequent out of their wordes, Christ died no death of the soule, let him take it how and which way he will. Againe, if Christ DIED ONELY IN BODY, as they likewise wit∣nesse, then apparantly he died not any death of the soule, neither in your sense Sir Defenser nor in theirs. Lastly, what death of the soule can you shew mentioned in the Scriptures without the compasse of their diuision, that is, which is not sinne, or damnation? Of sinne the Apostles wordes are plaine. Rom. 7. Sinne seduced me, and slew ; , and I died; as likewise that hes. 2. Coloss. 2. we were dead in (our) sinnes. This death men li ing may die, as the Apostle saith of wanton widowes, . Tim. 5. lyuing she is dead; and of all the Gentils phes. 4. walking in the vanitie of their minde, they are strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnesse of their heart, who being past feeling haue giuen themselues to worke all vncleanesse euen with greedinesse. Where the hardnesse of mans heart, voide of all feeling or of God, and so running on in all wickednesse, is by the Apostle defined to be the death of the soule which is a de∣priuing or anging from the life of God. The second death, as I before haue shewed, is the la e burning with fire and brimstone, into which the diuell and all the wicked shall be cast. Shew now a third death of the soule not in your extraordinarie fansie and folly, but in the word of God; to which these Fathers proportion their speeches. If there be no such thing there, then directly, earnestly, and truely do these Fathers auouch, that Christ d ed no death of the soule. Of Fathers it may be your Mastership maketh small account, and will not sticke in the high perswasion of your great and deepe learning to reiect them all, as ignorant of the principles of their faith, and so fitter to be taught then to teach: but that proud peeuishnesse (to giue it no worse words) I leaue to the sober to censure: for an vpshot the Reader shall haue a cleere conclusion out of the sacred Scriptures, that the soule of Christ neuer was, nor could be dead; and consequently that these learned and an∣cient Fathers deliuered sound and true doctrine touching the soule of Christ, and The soule of Christ liuing by gra e, could no way be dead. fully build their as ertions on the maine foundations of the Diuine Scriptures. It is euident by nature, sense, and trueth, that priuatiues can not concurre at one and the same time, in one and the same subiect. For the one expelleth the other, and so can not be found both together. Yea since the one of them cleerely remooueth the other, they can no more stand together, then may contradiction. For that which liueth, is not dead; and that which is dead, liueth not. I meane alwaies the same time, and the same part. But the soule of Christ by the manifest and manifold testimonies of holie Scripture did alwaies liue in the fulnesse of faith, of hope, of loue, of grace, of trueth, of spi∣rit. It is euident therefore that the soule of Christ neuer died, nor could die. Which of these assertions will you encounter? that Christes soule may be aliue and dead both at one time? You would seeme the leafe before, to shunne the shame of Defenc. pag. 140. li. 25. this ab∣surditie, that Christes soule died and died not: will you now come plainely and grossely to it by auouching that Christes soule was at one and the same time LIVING AND NOT LIVING, DEAD AND NOT DEAD, that is both ALIVE AND DEAD? If you doe, there is no man in England that hath either eies or eares to see or heare, but he will reprooue you for a manifest beliar of his sense, as well as of Christs soule. Will you smoothly set yourselfe to one side, and say that Christs soule was not aliue? so many parts of life, as I haue named in the soule of Christ, so many pregnant proofes are there in holy Scripture that Christes soule was not onely liuing, but as full of life as of grace during the whole time of his passion. Neither is there any one of those things named by mee concerning the life of Christes soule, which you can take from Christ without apparent blasphemie. For if you depriue him of saith, hope, loue, grace, tru th, or the spirit of God; you leaue him in Infidelitie, desperation, hatred of God, reprobation, falshood, and make him no way the Sonne of God, since they onely are the sonnes of God, who are ledde by the spirit of God. Now what shamefull and impious enormities these are, you can easily coniecture. So that of force you must confesse the soule of Christ to be liuing, and endued with all these parts and powers of the life of God, or else you must professe your selfe to be nothing lesse then a Chri∣stian. And euen the praiers which he made and obedience which he shewed in all and euerie his conflicts and agonies, prooue his soule not onely to liue, but to rest assuredly on the fauour and loue of God towards him, which are no fruites nor ef∣fects of the death of the soule, but exactly the conrrarie. Yet paine you thinke Christ might all this while suffer, and that most extreame; which you call the death of the soule.] Your calling sweete sower, good badde; light darknesse, and life death; changeth not the natures of the things, but conuinc th your owne ignorant and wilfull headinesse. You must call things in Christ, not as pleaseth your fansie, but as the word of God directeth; and by witnesse thereof shall you ne∣uer be able to proue, that Christs soule was dead; since thence so many sure demon∣strations may be brought, that Christs soule was alwaies Iohn 1. full of truth and grace, and of the Holy Ghost, not only in a greater abundance then either man or Angel hath, or can haue, but aboue all measure. And in this state if we should imagine with you, that Iohn 3. Christs soule suffred the greatest sense of torments that any creature can feele, yet this doth not inferre Christs soule to be dead, but expressely the contrary, since all paine, The soule of Christ in her greatest paines did most shew the life of pa∣tience and obe∣dience to God. yea if it were possible, paine equall with hell it selfe suffered in this life with obedience and patience, (such as all Christs sufferings were, except you will wrappe him as well within sinning as suffering) doth conuince the soule of Christ to be rather liuing then dead; as the martyrs of Christ had their soules then most liuing in their greatest tor∣ments, when force of intolerable paine excluded their spirits from their bodies. And therefore I doe not a little maruaile how lightly you leape to determine and defend the death of Christs soule, since all paine endured with patience, obedience, and con∣fidence, prooueth the soule to be most aliue to God-ward, euen when she departeth, as not able to sustaine the fury and violence of the torment encreasing. And heerein appeareth your notable error in calling that the death of Christs soule, which the Scripture calleth his obedience and victory. For he was Phil. 2. obedient to the death, euen the death of the Crosse; that is, in all his sufferings vnto the end: he Reuel. 3. ouercame, and sate with his Father in his Throne, as we ouercomming shall sit with Christ in his Throne. And other conquest in our conflicts there is none, then constant resisting all temptations, and patient enduring all afflictions, which Christ did before vs, and we must after him by his example, both which are most uident ignes & effects of the life and strength of the soule. To beleeue, and loue God, to hope in him, and call on him in pro pe∣rity, declareth the soule to be , but in ad ty and extrea ty to continue and those dueties of piety; are as for ible powers and parts of the life of the soule, as the Scripture maketh any. Wherefore it is a grosse ouersight in you to call that the death of the soule, which the Scripture maketh the life of the soule, and to pronounce Christs soule to be dead in those respects, which the word of God teacheth to be the chiefest proofes of the life of the soule. If you slide from the sense of absolute and inherent paine to the feare and horror of dereliction and desperation in the soule of Christ (for you role at your pleasure from one to another, and are constant in nothing, but in generall and doubtfull spea∣ches, as were the first authors of this conceit;) and make that the death of the soule; No temptations without despa∣ration kill the soule. then know you that these temptations kill not the soule, till they plant infidelity and desperation in the soule of man from which I trust you will cleere Christ, or els I m st aske what difference betwixt you and a Turke. For the Iewes were not so wicked, as to take from Christ his trust in God, they said of him, as he hung on the Crosse, Matth. 27. he trusteth in God, but they thought God had failed him in suffering him to come to that cursed kind of death, wherein they knew not the wisedome or power of God. But no Christian can be excused by ignorance, if he diminish the faith, hope, loue, patience or obedience of Christ in all his sufferings; and those not decreasing, it was no way pos∣sible for the soule of Christ to be but liuing, yea full of life & grace, how great soeuer the paines were, which he endured, or the temptations which he resisted. So that both fathers and Scriptures persue you narrowly to this straight, that Christes soule must either alwaies liue, and so your doctrine is vtterly false, which auoucheth the death of Christs soule to be the ground of our redemption; or if it died, it must die with sinne, since without sinne there is no death of the soule; and all paines and tor∣ments, that are possible in this life, if they be suffered with obedience and patience, doe rather demonstrate the life, then confirme the death of the soule, euen in the person of Christ Iesus. Defenc. pag. 142. li. 24. But our authorised Catechisme published by master Nowel and the homily sheweth that Christ suffered farre more sharpely then meere bodily death, euen the infinite paines of Gods wrath in his soule: which I pointed you vnto before, but you fairely leape it ouer. ] You belie the one, and confute the other; and then charge me with leaping them both ouer. The homily which indeed is authorised, hath no such thing, as you report; the Cate∣chisme, which is only approoued to be taught to children in schooles, hath more then you any way like or receaue, and yet not that, which you now defend. The so∣row and paine, which the Catechisme supposeth in Christs soule, was the feare and horror of eternall death; that you not only refuse in plaine words, but refell with many reasons, as you thinke. The like you doe for Christs descent to hell, which the Cate∣chisme confesseth to be, not the presence of Christs soule in Paradise, but an effectuall force thereof in hell, whereby the soules of the faithlesse saw their damnation to be iust, and the Diuel himselfe perceaued all his power to be destroyed and ouerthrowen. If you regard the Catechisme so highly as you pretend, why slippe you from it in these or other points at your pleasure? why obtrude you that to others as authorised, which your selfe doe not admit? indeed some men haue of late yeeres inclined to vehement and violent temptations offered to the soule of Christ in his sufferings, and some to feares and horrors euen of eternall death, as master Caluin, and the Catechisme, which you cite; but if you may be suffered to shrincke from them at your liking, neuer blame me, if I doe not preferre them before all these fathers. Howbeit to speake vprightly with∣out wronging them, I doe not see, that either the Catechisme or master Caluin doe expressely defend the death of Christs soule, or the second death, but only the feare and horror, not of a temporall hell, as you haue distilled their infusion, but of eternall death; which you with might and maine reiect. And surely if they did contradict the confession of all these fathers, I would adhere to the primatiue church of Christ in matters of faith, rather then to the deuices of late writers dissenting from themselues and others. But touching the death of Christes soule I see no cause to depart from them, since they define no such thing, and therefore they a e idlely alleadged by you euen as the rest are by you proudly neglected. And till you leaue this contemning of ancient Fathers, and straining of later writers beyond their meaning, I for my part thinke you worthie of no charge in the church of Christ, neither of that you had, wherein you sowed as much cockle as corne, nor of that you may haue, except you change your mind; and learne to teach nothing to the people of God, but what is warranted by the word of God. Defenc. pag. 142. li. 36. `You say I should haue donne well to haue laied downe for a shew, which is written in Easy he laied downe his soule vnto death; Verily if I had, it would haue made some shew. ] I said indeed the Prophet Esay would make a better shew for the death of Christ soule, then the Poet Terence, whom only you produced for proofe thereof: but such was then and still is your presumption, that on your bare word you will pronounce, what best pleaseth your fansie. Howbeit the words of Esay are but a shew for the death of Christes soule, since they exactly declare his bodily death to be the redemption of mankind. For when the soule in the Hebrew tongue, and in the old Testament is said to die, either by the soule are ment the vegetatiue and sensitiue powers of the soule, whereby the spirit of man is vnited to his body, and which are quenched by death; or by death is ment the distraction of the soule from the body, which violence of death is common as well to the soule thrust from her body, as to the body left with∣out a soule. That signification of the word soule the Apostle sheweth, when he prai∣eth, the 1. Thess. 5. whole spirit, and soule, and body of the faithfull may be kept bla lesse vnto the comming of Christ, and saith Hebr. 4. The word of God pearceth to the diuiding a sunder of the soule, and the spirit: And this sense of the word death the Scriptures expresse, when they of∣ten mention, that the soules of the godly doe, or would die. When Iosephs brethren would haue slaine him, Ruben said vnto them; Genes. 37. vers. 21. Let vs not strike him in the soule, that is, let vs not kill him. So Balaam seeing the glory of Gods people, said, Numb. 23. vers. 10. Let my soule die the death of the Righteous, and mine end be like his: that is, Let my soule depart in peace as the Righteous doe. And least any thinke, that Balaam spake he knew not what, Sampson willing to end his life with reuenge of the dishonour done to God by the Philistines insulting at his bonds and blindnesse, when he pulled the house on his and their heades, said, Iud . 16. vers. 30. Let my soule die with the Philistines. So Elias wearie of his life, 1. Kings. 19. vers. 4. desired for his soule to die, saying Lord take my soule; he ment from his body. So Moses comparing a rape with murder, saith. Deuter. 22. vers. 26. This is as if a man should fall vpon his fel∣low, and kill him in the soule. And so Ieremie to Ierusalem, Iere 2. v 34. In thy bosome is found the bloud of the soules of the poore innocents. Infinite places are there in the Scripture to like effect. All which declare, that the soule of man feeleth the death of the body by her departing from it; and that the Prophet Esay, when he said of Christ, He Esa. 53. v. 12, powred forth his soule vnto death, Had no meaning but to describe Christs bodily death, in which the soule is powred out from the body, that is, wholy separated from it. The very phrase of powring forth the soule, which must needes be from the body, sheweth that the Prophet directly described the death of Christs body, by which the soule is emptied and powred out of the body, as out of a vessel replenished with it. So that heere you haue as much hold for the death of Christs soule, as you had before, which is vtterly none. Defenc. pag. 143. li. 1. You earnestly affirme that this word signifieth soule or spirit in a proper sense. Also how resolute are you forbidding to diuert from the natiue and proper significations of words, but when the letter impugneth the grounds of Christian faith and charity. ] In the Page; 167. which you quote, I neither spake of this place, nor of this word; and therefore your considering cappe was not on, when you so much mistooke my words. I know Ne∣phesh is applied as well to beasts, who haue no soules, as to bodies once liuing, but then dead. And therefore of Nephesh I affirmed no such thing: of S. Lukes words repeating Dauids, and exactly distinguishing the soule from the flesh in Christ, I did indeed auouch, and still doe, that we must not rashly depart from the proper signifi∣cations of that and other words in the Scripture, except the letter breed some incon∣uenience to faith or good-maners. But what is that to this place, where though the word Nephesh be granted properly to import the soule, yet the rest sheweth it to be referred to the death of the body, because the soule is powred forth of the body by the death thereof, where before it was conteined and inclosed. Defenc. pag. 143. li. 15. The rather if we note that which followeth: he was counted with sinners; that is he was punished by God as sinners are punished, and not by the Iewes only counted among Theeues. ] You take vpon you to controle both the Prophet and the Euangelist; who refer this misiudging of Chri t to men, & not to God. Esay saith, Esa. 53. v. 4. We did iudge him as plagued, and smitten of God, but he was wounded for our transgressions. And S. Marke, when the Iewes had crucified Christ amidst two theeues, saith; Mark. 15. vers. 28. Thus the Scripture was fulsilled, which saith he was counted among the wicked: Thereby noting their errour, not Christs desert. Besides it is somewhat saucily said, that Christ was accounted wicked in the righteous iudgement of God, & not by the malitious error of the Iewes. Such plea∣sure you take against both Scriptures and Fathers to auouch what you list, yea though it draw with it an iniurious slander to the sonne of God. The words of the Prophet, he vers. 9. made his graue with the wicked, compared with those that solow, though he did no wic∣kednesse; clearely conuince, that Christ was an innocent, though he were counted and vsed with malefactours; and that the Prophet neuer ment to correct Gods iudge∣ment as corrupt, but to shew the wisedome and goodnesse of God, deliuering his Sonne to be esteemed and vsed as wicked by the wicked, and not by himselfe. How∣beit there is no necessity to referre these words to the person of God the Father, but they more fittely expresse the humility of Christ himselfe, who made his graue, that is, was content to die in the midst of two Theeues, and to be buried as they were, consi∣dering the coherence with the words precedent; which out of all question must be vnderstood of Christ himselfe. For thus they stand. vers. 8. He was cut out of the land of the liuing, he was plagued for the transgression of my people. vers. 9. He made his graue with the wicked Where no reason forceth any change of persons; and so the same person of Christ, who was cut from the land of the liuing, made his graue with the wicked. Defenc. pag. 143. li. 11. But chiefly considering withall, that also before he made his soule a sinne offering. There∣fore you must needs graunt, that Gods word maketh Christs soule to be sacrificed for our sinne. And we desire no other death of the soule. ] It is maruaile you doe not out of this place inferre, that Christs soule was made sinne, for the words are, when he shall make his soule sinne. But an offering for sinne is the vsuall signification of that word in the Scriptures, and therefore you did well in confessing so much, to saue me that labour. Christ then made his soule an offering for sinne; what deduce you out of those words? [ we desire no other death of the soule. ] In faith you be a sillie sacrificer, that know not a dead soule A dead soule is no sacrifice for sinne. to be no sacrifice for sinne. A dead soule is void of all things, which should please God; and so can be no sacrifice accepted for sinne. Psal. 51. A troubled spirit (sorrowing for sinne) is a sacrifice to God, saith Dauid. But doth repentance kill or quicken the soule? God Acts 11. giueth repentance vnto life, that is, he raiseth the soule first dead in sinne, by repen∣tance vnto life. 2. Cor 7. Worldly sorrow causeth death, but Godly sorrow causeth repentance vnto saluation. Now saluation is not the death, but life of the soule. Hebr. 11. Without faith it is impos∣sible to please God. And the sacrifice, that shall abolish sinne, must needs please God. It must then not want faith, by which the righteous liue. Wherefore by your leaue I make the cleane contrarie conclusion out of those wordes. The soule of Christ was a sacri∣fice for sinne; but a dead soule is no sacrfice for sinne; the soule of Christ therefore was not dead. [Without death, you will say, there is no redemption for sinne.] Without bloud, which noteth the death of the bodie, there is no redemption for sinne; but the soule, I trust, hath no bloud to be shed. And so much the bodies of beasts offe∣red, did prefigure, I meane the death of the bodie but not of the soule. Willing obedience, constant patience, and assured confidence in the soule of Christ sub∣mitting it selfe to the counsell and will of his Father, was the spirituall and inward sacrifice, which Christ ioyned with the externall and bloudie sacrifice of his bodie. For hauing two parts, as all men ha e, a soule and a bodie; neither part might be with∣drawen from this sacrifice; but his bodie must be yeelded vnto death, and his soule must yeeld her selfe pure, vndefiled, and void of all spot, yet feeling and enduring withall meekenesse and humblenesse of heart, the paine of death separating her from her bodie. And graunt the soule were heere taken for life, what so great impro∣per or vnused speach is that, since the soule is truely and properly the life of the body. Defenc. pag. 143. li. 16. We denie not but this phrase, Animam ponere, is to lay downe the life, and in diuers pla∣c s signifieth no more then simply to die, both concerning Christ and other men: yet this is no necessarie reason that heere in I say the soule should be taken figuratiuely for the life onely; the rather seeing heere the text precisely setteth downe the great worke of our redemption, and to take it as we doe literally, impugneth no ground at all of faith or charitie. ] The words to lay downe or power forth the soule import as you confesse, not the death of the soule, but the death of the bodie. And since in the words of Esai, Christ powred forth his soule vnto death, there can by no learning bee more concluded out of that place, but that Christ willingly layd downe his soule to depart from that bodie, which is no way the death of the soule, as you fansie, but a plaine description of the death of Christs body. And where for your pleasure you will take it litterally, that is no proofe for the death of Christs soule, because the word soule may bee properly taken, when it is powred forth of the bodie by death; but it noteth a willing submission to death, where other∣wise our soules are taken from vs, or we loose them whether we will or no, when we are left or put to death against our wils. Defenc. pag. 143. li. 27. Austen hath not a word against vs, in that great place which you cite, his whole argument being to an other purpose. ] Austins wordes in that place be pregnant against you for all your dissembling. August. in Io∣hannem tractat. 47. Quid fecit passio, quid fecit mors, nisi corpus ab anima separauit? What did (Christs) passion, what did death, but separate (his) bodie from his soule? If the death and passion of Christ did nothing but separate Christs soule from his body; then neither Christs death nor passion preuailed to the death of his soule. And if his soule were not touched by death, then was it neuer dead: and so much Saint Austen witnesseth in the very same tractate. Ibidem. Verbum non est mortuum, anima illa non est mor∣tua. The word died not, the soule (of Christ) died not. And therefore the death of Christ, which the Scriptures euery where note, was the breathing of his soule out of his body, & not the separating of his soule from God, as you would haue it. Austins purpose in that place you little conceiue, if you make him haue but one purpose. As occasion ser∣ued he taught many things pertinent & incident to his text, which was large, euen from the 10. verse vnto the 20. of that Iohn 10. Chapter: And these words, I lay downe my soule for my sheepe, being part of his text, he had iust occasion to treate, what death Christ died for his sheepe, which was neither the death of his diety, nor the death of his soule, but only the separating of his soule from his bodie, if this make not against you, you haue good lucke, that nothing will reach you: his words refute the foolish error, which you would establish, that by the Scriptures Christ may be said to haue died the death of the soule, as well as the death of the bodie, which Austen expressely contradicteth, auouching the one, and denying the other, in as plaine speach, as any wise man can require. Defenc. pag. 143. li. 34. All your other discourse heere against me is almost nothing but reuilings and reproches and bitter skoffes. Yet you say you haue not learned nor vsed to giue reuiling speaches. Haue you not learned it? is it then naturall vnto you? N y you meane these are fatherly warnings and admonitions. If your fatherly admonitions are such, what are your Lordly rebukes? If these be your bishoply blessings, what are your cursings? ] What my discourse is against H your defen∣dour som what pleasurable. you, mu t bee left neither to your censure nor mine, but to the Readers. If I called your conclusions bold and foolish, shewing neither learning nor wit; but sauouring onely of the vanitie of your owne conceits, the trueth forced me so to doe, which I might not betray. When you reiected the iudgements and expositions of the fathers one after an other, as Trea. pa. 69. li. 67. 68. fond and absurd, void of sense, reason, and likelihood; yea most ab∣surd, and too fond to be spoken; and trampled on their names & credits, as you would on nutshels, affirming Ibid. pa. 95. 96. It is onely the Fathers abusiue speaking and altering the vsuall and an∣cient sense of words, that bred this error; their vnapt and perillous translating, that confir∣med the same; and that is a thing too rife with the Fathers, yea with some of the auncient est of them, to alter and change the Authentike vse of wordes, whereby it is easie for errors and grosse mistakings to creepe in; is, or ought any good man to be so patient, or rather neg∣ligent as to heare a parrat thus prate against the whole Church of Christ in her best times next after the Apostles, and not onely to spare his folly, but to reuerence his pride? For my part I must confesse, I tooke my selfe bound in duety to yeeld him no more regard, then he deserued, that thus sought to blaze his errors with contempt of all men saue of himselfe. If therefore your absurd positions and proofes, S. Treatiser, did not iustly prouoke these replies, which I made, in the opinion of any wise and Christian Reader, I crie your mercie; but if you thinke me to blame for not taking you to be some Patriarke of Vtopia, because you can scoffe and mocke as well at Bi∣shops, as at fathers, Salomon aduiseth me to answere some men according to their me∣rits, Prou. 26. least they seeme wise in their owne eyes. Your Mockes I remit to your selfe, I am as readie to bear them for the trueth, as you to giue them. Howbeit you wanted co∣lours in your coate, when you made such pastime with the blessing of Bishops; and pepper in your porrage, when I taking learned for skilfull, (which is not strange to any saue to you, whose skill is void of all good learning) you would needs make your selfe such mirth, that railing must be naturall to me, because I was not learned or expert therein. I wish these were the worst of your toyes, and then my sufferance should quiet the whole. Defenc. pag. 144. li. 8. Finally that is not true, where you say, the flesh doth often signifie the soule in vs. ] Is it ig∣norance or malice which driueth you to this waywardnesse, to auouch you know not, or care not what, so you seeme to crosse that I say? better learned then you, or I, ob∣serued that before me, which you affirme to be false. Austen saith, August. d & Symbolo a. 10. Anima cum car∣nalia bona adhuc appetit, caro nominatur. The soule, so long as it affecteth fleshly things, is called flesh. And Ambrose. Ambros. in 6. c . . ad Ro∣manos. Caro aliquando corpus intelligitur, velipsa anima sequens corporea vitia. The flesh is sometimes vnderstoode to be the bodie of m , or the soule it selfe addicted to corporall vices. And Ierom. H . in 5. ca. pist. ad Galat. Anima inter carnem spiritumque consistens, quando se tradiderit carni, caro dicitur. The soule consisting betweene the fles and the spirit, when it yeeldeth it selfe to the flesh, is called flesh. And least you clamour against these Fa∣thers, as your Treatise doth, that they change the authentike vse of words, heare what Zanchius a man of good iudgement, though a late writer, saith thereof. Zanchij tra∣ctat. Theologic de peccato origi∣nali Thes. 6. Flesh and bloud reuealed not this vnto thee, saith Christ to Peter. The mind of man he calleth flesh and bloud: why so? because it is wholy corrupted by the flesh, so that it sauoureth nothing but flesh. How thinke you Sir, is it true or false which I sayd, that the soule is often called flesh because of her corruption, as well as the bodie? Defenc. pag. 144. li. 12. Heere I desire the Reader to change a worde or two in my former Treatise: for alwaies to set vsually, and for a Man to set Christ. Because since I finde that flesh and spirit together applied to men doe once ( 2. Corinth. 7. vers. 1. ) signifie meerely the body and soule. Which then I thought euery where did signifie in vs our corrupt and regenerate man. Which ouer∣sight the Bishop spieth not, but in this place confirmeth. The Bishop, that professed hee found fewe true sentences in your Treatise, had neither will nor leasure to traduce them all; but obseruing your errors in doctrine, remitted this and many other ouer∣sights as not preiudicing the maine point in question. As for his confirming it, that is one of your vsuall verities, who by the defending of falshood haue gotten you such an habite, that you can scant see or speake a trueth, when it toucheth but the skirts of your cause. And how come you now to put so great a difference betwixt alwaies and vsually, where before you did interpret alwaies to be ordinarily? but now you finde flesh and spirit together applied to men once to signifie meerely the body and soule. Meane you in all the Scriptures, or in the new Testament onely? You call it the Treatis. pag. 136. li. 8. perpetuall vse of the Scripture, and so must include the old Testament as well as the new, except you will barre the old from being part of the Scripture. What then shall become of that, which Moses so often ascribeth to God, when he saith? Numb. 16. & 27. O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh. Praieth he for the spirits of men, or of beastes? If you will straighten your wordes to the new Testament, how insolent a bragger, and negligent a Reader of the Scripture are you; that first said it was alwaies so, and now correcting your error say you finde it once otherwise, where a childe might easily haue found it oftner. The Apostle decreed the Offender at Corinth to be 1. Co . 5. deliuered vnto Sathan, for the destructi∣on of the flesh, that the spirit might be saued in the day of the Lord. And to the Hebrewes he telleth vs, Heb. 12. We had fathers of our flesh, which corrected vs, and we reuerenced them. Should we not much more be subiect to the Father of spirits? In both which places the spi∣rit of force must signifie the substance of mans soule. Defenc. pag. 144. li. 19. Finally to make an end with your Fathers and Councels, I haue shewed before that your large claime prooueth a very short gaine. For in substance and full effect they are euidently and generally against you and for vs. If thou thinke Christian Reader, that I charge this man vniustly with impudent facing, behold but these wordes, and say what thou thinkest of them. He that hath not brought, nor can not bring one euident or per∣tinent word out of any Father for the death of Christes soule; he yelleth out with open throat , that generally and euidently they are in substance and full effect for him and against me. It is no time heere to repeat, what is past; by that which is said, thou maist easily iudge, on which side the Fathers stand with full confession of the trueth and their faith. Bragging is boies play, where all performance wanteth. li. 24. [ As for their denying that Christ died in his soule, I haue answered before. ] With senselesse and shame∣full shifts, that Christes soule died not as the body did, that he died not the ordinary death of the soule expressed in the Scriptures, but an extraordinary newly deuised by your selfe; and more then this in summe and substance you haue not said one word. li. 25. [ Further where you bring them in many places saying by his bloud onely he redeemed vs, and he suffered onely in his body, they are abused by you woonderfully, not in their wordes but in their meaning. ] You would faine change dying into suffering, and haue your Reader imagine, that I say Christes soule suffered nothing at all; but these are now so stale tricks of yours, that euery man reiecteth them as fast as I doe. From death you to sufferings, from sufferings to proper sufferings of the soule, to which you àdde as a supplussage, the paines of the damned from the immediate hand of God. And so where you finde any Father affirme that Christ GRIEVED, FEARED OR SORROWED in soule, which are the naturall passions of mans soule common to good and badde, you looke no farder, but presently pronounce that Father maketh euidently with you. But awake out of this ignorant l thargie, there be many steps betweene their words and your wiles, which you will neuer tread ouer with any the least shew of truth or proofe. If I haue not abused their wordes in alleaging them, as you confesse, and I assure my selfe, I haue not, but where the Printer perchance hath made some fault, which no man can auoid, (as pag. 81. August. de Trinitate li. 11. the Printer hath set for lib. 13. and some such) then haue I lesse abused their meaning; whereof I make eue∣rie Reader iudge, and so referre my collecting to their censuring, which is no abuse. Defenc. pag. 144. li. 28. They striuing against Arians and such other heretikes, who would haue Christs Deitie to take part in his sufferings for our redemption; the godly auncient writers doe heereupon say, he suffered and satisfied for vs onely in his body, not excluding the proper and immediate suf∣ferings of his spirit. Let the Authors themselues be viewed, if you thinke 1 affirme of them falsely. ] Against whom they write, is not so much, as what they write, and how they confute those heretikes, whom they vndertake. The positions, which they establish out of the Scriptures against such heresies, are most to be regarded; by their proofes you shall see their purpose. To confound those misbeleeuers, that would haue the Godhead of Christ suffer in his flesh, or together with his flesh, the Fathers do sound∣ly oppose, first that the Godhead is inuiolable, impassible, immutable, and such like properties of the Godhead. Secondly that the soule of Christ was subiect to no kind of death, neither of sinne nor damnation, which are not the death of the body, as you wilfully, but most absurdly would wrest it: and therefore the Godhead was much more free, not onely from this death of the bodie, but from all touch of any kinde of death. Thirdly, to shew what it was in Christ that died, since neither the Deitie nor the soule of Christ could die any kinde of death, they prooue that that which died, was a mortall bodie, buried and raised againe the third day according to the Scriptures. Which accidents and attributes belonging onely to the body of Christ; It is most certaine by the sacred Scriptures that onely the body of Christ was yeelded to death for the redemption of our sinnes. These be the chiefest of their reasons, though they haue many others tending to the same issue, which whether they truely and effectual∣ly exclude the death of Christes soule from the worke of our redemption, I leaue it to their iudgement, that shall peruse the former places by me cited; or view the Fa∣thers themselues in their full discourses. And yet a number of these Fathers in the places by me alleaged doe not refute the Arians, but handle professedly other points of our redemption & saluation: as Tertullian in his booke of the Resurrection of the flesh, Chrysostom in his Homily of drunkennesse & of the resurrection, Augustine in his 99. Epistle, & those Chapters of his fourth Booke de Trinitate, which I produ∣ced; Gregorie vpon Iob, Bernard in his Sermons to the Souldiers of the Temple, Bede in his Homilies, and Albinus in his questions: these I say doe not there take in hand to refell the Arians, but to deliuer what kinde of death Christ died to free vs from all deaths; And resolue, as we may read, that by one kinde of death, which was the death of Ch istes bodie onely, both our deaths of body and soule were vtterly abolished. And whether this be true or false, which I auouch, I wish no better triall then the present view of their sayings, whom now you stroke as auncient and godlie writers, but not long since you stript as fond, absurd, the peruerters of Authentike words, and occasioners of grosse errors. Defenc. pag. 145. li. 1. Tertullian and Cyrill will giue a taste heereof for all the rest. ] You will giue a fresh taste of your vnlearned mistaking them, otherwise their places as they make nothing for your pretences, so were they obiected and answered before. [ li. 2. In Tertullians wordes, Christes flesh, is expresly opposed to his Deitie, not to his soule; so that euidently he meaneth thereby his whole manhood. ] If you meane that Tertullian still conceaued Christes fl sh to be humane flesh, that is not amisse, but wide from your matter: But if you would obserue, that Tertullian in that tractate speaking of Christes flesh, doth not distinguish it from Christes soule, or maketh common to Christes soule whatsoeuer he there a firmeth of Christes flesh, it is a palpable and pestilent vntrueth. When he saith, H c vox carnis & animae, id est hominis. This was the voice of his flesh, and of his soule; that is of his Manhood; doth he not in exact wordes distinguish Christes flesh from his soule? Againe where he saith, Tertullianus aduersus Pra∣xeam. Denique (spiritum) posuit & statim obijt: spi∣ritu enim manente in carne, caro omnino mori non potest: Christ laid downe (his spirit) and straight way died; for his spirit abiding in his flesh, the flesh could not die at all: can there be any doubt, but the name of Christs flesh here doth not containe his humane spirit or soule, though you auouch the contrarie? Of the attributes of Christes flesh he saith, & Ibidem. videtur, & contrectatur per carnem. Christ is seene, and handled by the flesh; which I hope he is not by his soule. Though therefore he often interpret carnem, id est homi∣nem; flesh, that is man, shewing he speaketh of Christ, who had both body and soule, yet that doth no way prooue, that what hee affirmeth of Christes flesh must be common to both parts of Christes manhoode; which simple shift when you haue once taken vp, you can neuer make an end of it. Defenc. pag. 145. li. 5. If he had ment to exclude any part or facultie of the soule from suffering, as he doth his Godhead, he had consirmed that heresie against which he striueth, as before I noted. ] You keepe close to your owne notes, though they want both trueth and iudgement. To make Christes soule as impassible as his Godhead, was to make him no man; for mans soule is mutable, & subiect to affections and passions, which God is not. But what is this to the death of Christes soule, if it were an humane soule and not equall with his Deitie? or what heresie doth this confirme, if Tertullian deny Christs soule to be mortall, which he ascribeth to the flesh of Christ? You talke much of heresi s, but take heed, you leape not head and eares into them, whiles you deuise new deaths, and new hels for the soule of Christ without and against the rules of the sacred Scriptures. Defenc. pag. 145. li. 7. It seemes he yeeldeth the name of death to this suffering of Christes whole manhood; in saying, quod vnctum est, mortuum ostendit: that died, which receaued the annointing. For I hope his spirit was anointed with the holy Ghost, as well as his flesh. ] You doe we l to ad e seeming to this saying: for to him that vnderstandeth little, it may so seeme, when in trueth it is nothing lesse. Tertullian interpreting the name Christ, which is as much as Anointed, saith; Christ died, not as he was the word, and Sonne of God, but as he was Anointed, that is in his humane flesh, which was anointed as well as his hu∣mane spirit. Doth he say, all that was anointed, died, as you most falsly would en∣force his speech? It sufficeth then that he died, not as he was God, who can no way be subiect to death, but as he was man hauing one part mortall, which was his bodie; and he died that death, which is common to all, I meane the separating of the soule from the body; not that which is speciall to the wicked, as rei ction from the fauour and grace of God. Tertullians owne words next before are these. Tertullianus aduersus Pra∣xeam. Cum duae substan∣tiae censeantur in Christo Iesu, diuina & humana, cons et autem immortalem esse diuina , cum mortalem quae humana sit, apparet, quatenus eum mortuum dicat, id est carnem, & hominem, & silium hominis, non quâ spiritum, & sermonem, & filium Dei. D do ∣que Christus mortuus est, id est vnctus; id quod vnctum est, mortuum ostendit: c r∣nem. Where there are two substances in Christ Iesus, a diuine and n humane, and it is c r∣taine, that the diuine is immortall, and the humane mortall; it is plaine wherein the Apo∣stle pronounced Christ to be dead, that is, as he was flesh and man, and the Sonne of man, not as he was a spirit, and the word, and Sonne of God. In saying then Christ, that is the An∣ointed, was dead, he sheweth that which was Annointed, euen his flesh to haue beene dead. Will you teach out of these wordes, that Christes soule was certainely mortall, be∣cause it was not his diuine substance, and that he died in soule, because he died in his humane nature, as a man, which Tertullian expoundeth to be his flesh; and likewise his death to be the laying downe of his soule, or breathing out of his spirit as the Euangelist describeth it? Defenc. pag. 145. li 14. My false translating of him, which you note, is not worth the noting, but you doe worse in false placing those his last rehearsed words for aduantage: in Tertulli n they are vsed more generally comming long before. ] Your mistranslating can not be defended, and my mis∣placing, as you call it, is no way preiudiciall either to the truth, or the authors intent. What should hinder me to alleage diuers sentences out of any Writer occurrent in one and the same Treatise, and tending all to declare his meaning, and to d ct your misconstruction of him? I vse to set Ibidem by the side, to shew that it is a new sen∣tence; which if the Printer omit, what wrong is done to the Reader, so long as I adde or alter nothing, as you do? He that will rightly conceiue anothers sense, must com∣pare his words vttered in the same discourse, and belonging to the same matter. You say they are vsed more generally in their owne place, this were somewhat, if your say∣ing were any thing worth; but if they be diuers proofes of one thing, though in place one before another, they all haue one intention, and must haue one construction. Your maner is to make what you list of euery mans wordes, my course is to shew by the wordes precedent and consequent, that I take the right sense of each Writer, not vpon the aduantage of one word wrested from the rest; but out of the whole context, to manifest the true meaning of ech mans speach. If therfore Tertullian had said, Haec mors est carnis & animae, this is the death of soule and flesh, as he saith, Haec vox est carnis & animae, this is the voice of soule and flesh, It had been worth the obiecting; and yet I must tell you, that Tertullian being of opinion, that the soule was traduced with the seed of the body, when he diuideth a man into flesh, soule, and spirit, as heere he doth, by naming all three parts; it may well be doubted, whether he spake of the substance of the soule, which is a spirit; or of the powers of sense and speach, which faile by death and are often comprised in the name of the soule. But it is cleare by Tertullians owne words, that Christs humane spirit was not dead or forsaken, since he there vrgeth, it was committed to the fathers hands, and consequently was not forsaken, nor left to death, as the rest of Christs manhood was. Tertullianus aduersus Pra∣xeam. Caeterum non reliquit pater filium, in cuius manibus filius spiritum suum posuit. Deni{que} posuit & statim obijt: spiritu enim manente in carne, caro omnio mori non potest. But the Father did not forsake the Sonne, into whose hands the sonne laid downe his spirit. For he laid it downe, and presently died: the spirit re∣maining in the flesh the flesh could not die at all. The Father then left the flesh of his sonne vnto death, but he tooke Christs spirit into his hands, and so for the sonne to be for∣saken, was nothing els but for his flesh to be left to death. This is Tertullians owne exposition of himselfe, howsoeuer you would dally and deceaue both your selfe and your Reader by generall or speciall, before or after. Defenc. pag. 145. li. 24. Cyrill also euen in that booke which you cite for you sheweth that he excludeth but Christs deity though he mention only his suffering in flesh. Christ then is God, impassible as God, passi∣ble according to the fl sh. ] You put a whole But to Cyrills sense, more then you find in his text, and yet the words passible and impassible, are not the things, we striue for. Impassible is that, which by no possibility can admit any mutation or alteration, by force or affection, which is proper to God alone. So no part of Christs manhood was impassible. But though his soule were passible with diuers affections and impres∣sions, how will it follow from these or any other words in Cyrill, that Christs soule died? Cyrill hath in many words shewed, which I before haue cited, that Christs soule was subiect to all humane and naturall passions or affections but without sinne or corruption; in this sense what doth it helpe you to haue the soule of Christ passi∣ble by nature, and not impassible as his godhead is? but you loue to loyter, that thus still repeat one lesson, not only besides your booke, but against your booke. Defenc. pag 145. li 30. In a word so doe all the rest, as before is partly noted. ] A totall summe is as soone made of lies, as of trueths. All the answer you giue is, they spake against other Hereticks, not against you; but this is the danger, that if such points, as they prooue against o∣ther Hereticks, make against you, you had need beware of the coniunction and com∣munion between you and other Hereticks. Against li. 31. Nestorius they affirme, you say, the vnion of Christs natures. ] Why skippe you Sermo. fo. 331. Athanasius, Epiphanius, Ambrose, and Augustine, that neuer heard of Nestorius? who teach directly, that Christs suffering of death mentioned in the Scriptures, was the suffering thereof in his mortall bodie, which died and rose againe; and by the death of this body was the ransome for vs all payd. Ambros. in Luc ca 4. de ductu Christi in desertum. What pray (saith Ambrose) could there be (for death and Satan) but his bodie? You say his soule. August. in Psal. 148. Accepit ex te vnde moreretur pro te. Non posset mori nisi card. Non posset mori nisi mortale corpus. Christ tooke of thee (sayth Austen) wherein he might die for thee. There could die (in him) nothing but flesh. There could die (in him) nothing but his mortall bodie. These and many such places yon cleanly skippe, and tell in a word they are all for you. [ li. 32. They preserue the properties of ech. They therefore holde not his only bodily sufferings. ] Nay they therefore holde not the death of Christes soule, since that is no necessarie propertie of mans nature assumed by Christ. Their reasons likewise and expositions of the Scriptures, which you peruert, exclude your conceit of the death of Christes soule most apparently. . The Deitie could not suffer (death, say they) because it was no bodie. Then onely the bodie could suffer that death which Christ died. And since the soule is no bodie, that also must be free frō the death which Christ died. These positions likewise of the Christian faith, that the Son of God was wounded, crucified, dead, and rose againe for vs all, they expound to be expresly meant of his bodie wounded, crucified, dead, and raised the third day; so that where you would cauill, that the name of Christes flesh importeth his soule as well as his body, they directly refell you, and pronounce all these things to be veri∣fied of his body, and not of his soule or deity, since nothing in him could suffer death but his body. And the Scriptures that Christ by the grace of God tasted death for all, and by death conquered him that had power ouer death, and such like, they exactly referre to the death of his body; which argueth all your doctrine of the death of Christs soule to be meerely superfluous, if not wholy pernicious. Defenc. pag. 145. li. 33. Is this then your great boast of all the Fathers and councels? nay are they well vsed at your hands, to be thus drawen clean from their purpose to an opinion which they neuer thought of? is this good dealing towards Gods people to tell them, that the Fathers generally teach the only bodily sufferings of Christ and denie our assertion of his soules peculiar suffering, which they iustifie and con irme indeed? ] Intrueth good Reader if I were not too well acquainted with this mans vnshamefastnesse, I should thinke I rather heard a plaier on the stage, then a Pen-man in the Church. Is it possible for a man of any learning or vnderstan∣ding thus in print and open view of the whole Realme to rage, revell, & rush on with lying, craking and facing, when he speaketh not one true word? for first, Sir flincher, is this the point heere or any where proposed by me, whether Christs sufferings were only bodily? did I promise or produce any Fathers to that end? is it not the death of the soule, and the paines of the damned, which I impugned in Christs sufferings? haue I not most truely performed, which I euer professed, that the whole Church of Christ for so many hundred yeeres neuer thought, neuer heard of the death of Christs soule in the worke of our redemption, but rested their faith on the death of Christs body as a most sufficient price both for the soules and bodies of the faithfull? What cunning then is this, first to shift your hands of that, you can no way prooue, though you still doe and must professe it, and then to clamour at me for drawing the Fathers cleane from their intent and meaning? is this the way to credit your new Creed, by such deuices and stratagemes to intertaine the people of God, least they should see how farre you be slid from the ancient & primatiue Church of Christ? take a while but the thought of a sober man, and this pangue will soone be ouerpast. Did you not vndertake to prooue the death of Christs soule, by Scriptures, which indeed I first and most required; and haue you so donne? looke backe to your miserable mis∣takings and palpable peruertings of the words of the holy Ghost, and tell vs what one syllable you haue brought sounding that way? are your secrets such that they be no where reuealed in the word of God? must all faith come from thence, and is your faith exempted, that it shall haue no foundation there? are men and Angels accursed, that preach any other Gospell then was deliuered and written by Christs Apostles; and shall you be excused for deuising a new kind of redemption by the death of Christs soule no where witnessed in the Scriptures? you see how easie it were to be e∣loquent against you in a iust and true cause; but words must not winne the field. What I impugned, my sermons will shew; what I haue prooued, I will not proclaime. If I haue failed in that I endeuoured, the labour is mine, the liberty is the Readers to iudge. Let the indifferent read it, they shall find somewhat to direct them: let the contentious skanne it, they shall see somewhat to harle their hast, and perhaps to re∣straine their stifnesse. What euer it be, I leaue it to others, since the discourser hasteth towards an end, and so doe I. Defenc. pag. 146. li. 2 This is the profit that comes by ordinarie flaunting with Fathers, which many do frequent in these dayes. Thinke they, if the Scriptures alone suffice not for things in religion, that the Fathers will suffice? or if the Scriptures may be wrested by subtle heads, that yet the Fathers can not. ] Is it not enough for your selfe to be a despiser of all antiquitie and sobrietie, but you must insult at them that beare more regard to either than you do? If to flaunt with Fathers be so great a fault, which yet respecteth their iudgements that haue beene liked and allowed from age to age in the Church of Christ, what is it to fliske with pride and follie grounded on nothing but on selfe-loue and singularitie? It were to be wished, that euen some of the best writers of our age, as they thinke them∣selues, had had more respect to the auncient Fathers, then they shew; we should haue wanted a number of nouelties in the Church of God, which now wee are troubled withall, as well in Doctrine as in discipline. This course of concurring with the lights of Gods Church before our time in matters of faith, though you mislike, other man∣ner of men then you are, or euer will be, haue allowed and followed, as August. con∣tra I num. li. 1. Augustine, Theodor. diol. 2. & 3. Theodorete, Leo epist. 97. . Leonem. Leo, Cassi. de in∣carnat Domini li. 7 ca. 5. Cassianus, Gelas. de dua∣bus in Christo nat ris. Gelasius, Vigilius li. 5. cap. 6. Vigilius, and the two Hispalensi concilium 2. ca. 13. councels of Hispa∣lis, and others; not doubting the sufficiencie of the Scriptures, but shewing the corre∣spondencie of beleeuing and interpreting the Scriptures in all ages to haue bene the same, which they imbraced and vrged. And in all euennesse of reason, were it better to feede the people with our priuate conceits pretended out of Scripture; or to let such, as be of iudgement, vnderstand, that we frame no faith but such as in the best times hath bene collected and receiued from the grounds of holy Scripture, by the wisest and greatest men in the Church of God? your only example turning and win∣ding the words of the holy Ghost to your owne conceits, will shew, how needfull it is not to permit euery prater to raigne ouer the Scriptures with figures and phrases at his pleasure, and thence to fetch what faith he list. If you so much reuerence the Scrip∣tures, as you report, which were to be wished you would, why deuise you doctrine not expressed in the Scriptures? Why teach you that touching mans redemption, which is no where written in the word of God? Indeed the Scriptures are plaine in this point of all others, what death Christ died for vs, if you did not peruert them a∣gainst the histories of the Euangelists and testimonies of the Apostles. Omit the de∣scription of his death so farely witnessed by the foure Euangelists, what exacter words can we haue then the Apostles, that Christ Coloss. 1. pacisied things in earth, and things in heauen by the bloud of his crosse, and reconciled vs, which were strangers and enemies, in the bodie of his flesh through death. Beleeue what you reade, and what you reade not in the word of God, beleeue not, and this matter is ended: but by Synecdoches without cause you put to the Scriptures, not what you read in them, but what you like best, and by Metaphores and Metonimies, you will take bodie for substance, and flesh for soule. And so where the Apostle auoucheth, that we were reconciled to God, through death in the bodie of (Christs) flesh, you tell vs, we could not be redeemed without the death of Christs soule, and the essence of the paines of the damned suffered by suddaine tou∣ches from the immediate hand of God after an extraordinarie manner. If you teach no doctrine but deliuered in the Scriptures, aband on these deuices not expressed in the Scriptures. If you content your selfe with the all sufficient word of God in mat∣ters of faith, you must relinquish the death of Christs soule and paines of the damned as no part of our redemption, since there is no such thing contained in the word of God. To me and others that beleeue, the words of Paul are sufficient, declaring this to be the very ground of the Gospell, which hee receiued and deliuered, that Christ 1. Cor. 15. died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that hee arose the third day according to the Scriptures. Whence by a full and faire coherence I col∣lect, that whatsoeuer died in Christ according to the Scriptures, that was buried and raised the third day according to the Scriptures. But it is more then manifest by the Scriptures, that the soule of Christ was neither buried, nor raised from death the third day, but onely his bodie. It is therefore as plaine to me by the all sufficient word of God, that the soule of Christ died not for our sinnes according to the Scripture. Your Defenc. pag. 146. li 23. section touching materiall fire in hell, I haue sifted at large before, I shall not neede to say any more of it. Your hemming in all the world on your side, Defenc pag. 147. li. 25. not some, nor the most, or best, but euen all, and euery one, both Churches and writers in the world, who are Protestants; & leauing none to vphold the doctrine which I deliuer, but Papists, Iesuites, and Friars, is, as I told you before, and must tell you againe, an egregious lie, so loud and leud, that all the belles in London, if they should iarre together, could not yeeld a more offensiue sound. That euery new writer speaketh of some feares, sor∣rowes, temptations, or painefull sufferings in the soule of Christ, neuer was, nor is, by me denied, neither doe I in my Sermons take vpon me to determine, what feares, temptations, paines and sorrowes Christ might and did suffer in his soule: onely I added, that we must beware, we diminish not his faith, hope, loue, confidence, obedience, patience, and other gifts and graces of the spirit of God in the soule of Christ, which the Scripture cleerely maketh to be without want, defect, or measure in him. Shun∣ning those sands, I left euery man to his libertie to speake or write of Christes feares and sorrowes, as farre as any circumstance of holy Scripture did duely enforce: but the death of the soule, the paines of hell, and of the damned, and the second death if any sought to fasten on the soule of Christ, whosoeuer they were, they did it by their owne surmises, they had no warrant for any of those in the word of God, except they tooke the paines of hell figuratiuely for great and intolerable, such as sometimes the Godly in their humane weakenesse thinke and complaine they feele or feare, though they come nothing neere the true paines of hell, which cannot be endured in this mortall life and flesh by the euidence of nature and Scripture. This being my constant course, as my Sermons printed doe apparently witnesse, what folly, what madnesse is this, so egerly and often to chalenge me for contradicting the whole world, when it is but your immoderate greedinesse or giddinesse to thinke, that e∣verie man, who writeth any thing of the feares or sufferings of Christs soule, doth presently teach as you doe, the death of Christs soule and the substance of the most vehe∣ment paines of the damned, yea the second death to be a necessary part of our redemtion, which Christ must suffer, before he could ransome vs? To censure mens priuate opi∣nions I take no pleasure, some men otherwise very learned and laborious, haue dip∣ped too deepe in that die, as your selfe proue and pronounce by reiecting and resel∣ling the horror of e n death, in the soule of Christ; though Master Caluin say, Christ CONFLICTED therewith; and the Catechisme auouch, Christ was there∣withall P VSED. If you may thus renounce and refute the first deuise and spred∣ders (as you thinke them) of your proper and spirituall temptations and torments in the soule of Christ; giue others leaue to receaue them no farder, then they concurre with the Scriptures, and with the primatiue church of God. I find diuers men speake diuersly, but very few and these late, that light on the death of Christs soule, and suddaine touches of the essentiall paines of the damned from the immediate hand of God, which is your fresh and new deuice: yea many that are caried away with the ge∣nerall termes of Gods wrath and horror of his dreadfull iudgements against sin, no way like the death of Christs soule, and by speciall words debarre all mention of the second death in the sufferings of Christ; and those as well English, as others. How false and soolish your vaunt is, of all and euerie church and writer in the world, that are Protestants, to be of your minde, will soone appeare to any that will reade and waigh the workes and wordes of Zuinglius, Musculus, Martyr, Bullinger, Areti∣us, new teach the sufferings of Christs soule without the paines of hell. Zanchius, and of sundry others as sound in faith, as ripe in iudgement, as diligent in reading, and sufficient in all kinde of learning, as the best you can name either broching or bowing towards your late conceits; who though they teach, that Christ suffered in soule and body, as I doe, yet they assigne farre other sufferings in the soule of Christ, then your essentiall paines of the damned. I may not stand to make new discourses touching new writers; a place or two shall serue for all, and so an end of this matter. Bullinger vpon those words of Esay Christ layd downe (or made) his soule a sacrifice sor sinne, saith. in . 3. To make his soule a sacrifice for sinne, is to offer himselfe to be a sacrifice to Purge sinnes. And he saith Christs soule, and not his flesh, not that the flesh of Christ was not offered for vs, but that whole Christ, body and soule, offered himselfe to God, and that willingly, from his heart, and of his owne accord; and whole Christ was the expiation of our sinnes, licet interim ne{que} diuinit as sit passa, ne{que} anima mortua, sed caro; de quare beati Patres Vigilius & Fulgentius contra Haereticos religiose disputarunt; Though during that time neither his diuinty suffered, NOR HIS SOVLE DIED: but his flesh: whereof the blessed fathers Vigilius and Fulgentius haue religiously discoursed against Heretickes. Zanchius, whose learned workes are to me in steed of many writers, that are caried with faction and affection to vphold, whatsoeuer some other men say, though he could not for his often and great labours get time to finish his purposed treatise of mans redemption in that exact manner, that he hath donne the rest, yet commen∣ting on S. Paules Epistles, as occasion was offered, he fully deliuereth the matter and manner of our redemption to be the only sacrifice of Christs body and bloud; other propitiatory sacrifice for sinne then that he acknowledgeth none, though he ascribe to the soule as well her sufferings, as her sacrifice. Zanchius in ca. 2. epist. ad Philip. v. 8. All things prepared, which were requisite to offer the sacrifice for our sinnes, behold the Priest with his sacrifice, Christ with his body, the body I say of (him that was) God, who through voluntary obedience to his Fa∣ther, and most ardent loue to vs, offered himselfe to God for a most sweet smell. And where did he offer himselfe? on the altar of the Crosse: he suffered, and died, and that on the crosse. Ibidem. Patitur in anima summam tristitiam, timorem, ignominiam; in corpore summos dolores, in singulis membris atrocissima flagella. Ibidem. In ligno moritur, vt mors per lignum ingressa in mun∣dum per lignum tolleretur è mundo. He suffered in soule most exceeding heauinesse, feare, and shame; In his bodie most bitter paines, in euerie member most grieuous scourges. On the tree he died, that as death came into the world by a tree, so it might be taken out of the world by a tree. Idem in ca. 1. ad Ephes. v. 7. To that point, how we are redeemed, the Apostle saith, by his bloud, that is by sacrifice, which consisted of the offering of his body deliuered to death, and his bloud shed . fuit proprius modus, this was the proper manner, (or onely way) how we must be redeemed from the captiuitie of sinne and death. This Ibidem. sacrifice which is often signified by the name of (Christe ) bloud alone, is that price of which the Prophets before, and after the Apostles say, we were redeemed (by it.) For Ibidem. we are redeemed, and haue remission of sinnes in Christ by his onely bloud. Idem de tri∣bus . 1. cap. 5. test. 9. This is euen he, who by the onely sacrifice of his bodie should effectually clense the sinnes of the world. And so againe. The Apostle Idem in ca. 1. ep. ad Coloss. vers. 22. expresseth the materiall cause of our reconciliation, or the thing wherewith the Father reconciled vs to himselfe, to , by the oblation of the true and humane body of Christ deliuered to death for our sinnes. This he meaneth, when he saith in the body of his flesh through death. For this body, which was truely flesh, and an humane body; not simply, but as it died, is the matter of our reconciliation, by that was reconciliation made. He Ibidem. ioineth the body with bloud, because both are the price of our reconciliation, and by both were our sinnes clensed. The Apostle then Ibidem. signifieth reconciliation was by the oblation of the body of Christ, as by the true sacrifice sor sinne. Zanchius speaketh not precisely, you will say, against the death of Christes soule.] In plainely and fully deliuering the matter and meane of our redemption to be the ONELY SACRIFICE of the body and bloud of Christ offered on the crosse to death; he excludeth all other ransomes for our sins, & so maketh the death of Christs soule not onely to be superfluous to mans saluation, but no meane of our redempti∣on. For in his iudgement, Zanchius de tribus Elohim part. 1. li. 5. ca. 1 10. Christ is the propitiatorie sacrifice for sinne, not simply, but as he died for vs with the shedding of his bloud; and Ibidem. this ONELY SACRIFICE (the shedding of Christes bloud vnto death) God chose from euerlasting for the expiation of our sinnes, and promised the same from the creation of the world, and shadowed it with re∣semblances. And touching the death of the soule, if you teach as Zanchius doth, you will presently finde it is open blasphemie to ascribe to Christ any death of the soule. Zanch tra∣ctat, theologic de peccato origi∣nali. ca. 4. thes. 3 A triple death (saith he) God threatned to Adam for disobedience; a spirituall death, which was the separation of grace, of the holy Ghost, and of originall righteousnesse from the soule and body of Adam, of which death in the Scriptures there is often mention made. This death Adam died as soone as he did eate. The second was a corporall death, whereby the soule is seuered from the bodie. To this Adam was presently (vpon his eating) made subiect; though he did not straightwayes actually die. The third is euerlasting death, which is knowen to all, & of this death Adam was forthwith made guiltie. This triple death was the punishment of his disobedience. And vpon like occasion comparing the death of the soule and of the bodie, he saith. Ibidem in ca. 2. epist. ad ephes. vers. 5. There is a triple death; spirituall, (of the spirit or soule) corpo∣rall, knowen to all men; and the third is that eternall death pertaining to bodie and soule, wherewith all the wicked shall be punished in hell. These all God threatned to Adam, when he said, what hower soeuer thou shalt eate, &c. thou shalt die the death. For he straightway died in spirit (or soule); he incurred also the death of the bodie, because he became mortall; and was made guiltie of eternall death. Ibid. We haue rightly said death to bee the priuation of life, and so of all the actions of life consisting in the separation of bodie and soule. The like we must say of the spirituall life and death. The spirituall life is a certaine spirituall and diuine force, whereby we are mooued to spirituall and diuine actions by the presence of the holy Ghost dwel∣ling in vs. The holy Ghost regenerating vs in this spirituall life is as it were the soule thereof. And holy and spirituall thoughts, holy desires, holy actions both inward and outward are the operations of this spirituall life. What then is the death of the spirit? euen the priuation of the spirituall life, and consequently of all spirituall and good actions in a man destitute of the pre∣sence of the holy Ghost, which should quicken him, comming from sinne, and for sinne. Ibidem. What strength hath a man dead in bodie to the actions of this life? so neither can he, that is dead in spirit (or soule), do any workes of the spirituall life. Heere is a full and true description of the death of the spirit or soule of man, which if you and your friends dare attribute to Christ; then doth Zanchius fauour the death of Christs soule: but if euery peece hereof applied to Christ be euident heresie and infidelitie, then did Zanchius no way defend the death of Christes soule to be any part of our redemption; and as for the second death, he acknowledgeth none, but that which is eternall, and inflicted in hell on all the wicked. Much more might be brought to like effect, shewing the true and onely meane and matter of our redemption and reconciliation to be the only body and bloud of Christ yeelded vnto death for the ransome of our sinnes; but I should make a new volume, if I should stand thereon. It may suffice in the iudgement of any reasonable man to re∣fute the slaunderous mouth of this most insolent prater, that I professe, I mislike no∣thing the writings and resolutions of all these learned Protestants, for as much as I haue seene and read of them, (which is as much as I could get) touching our redemp∣tion by the death of Christ; but teach the same that they taught, and in my priuate moderation could beare the words of many others, (those onely excepted who elude the plainenesse of the Scriptures, with the finenesse of their new deuices), were it not, that such hoblers, as this is, vpon such occasions will neuer leaue their fresh inuenting new meanes and causes of our redemption, till they be they know not where. Taking it therefore to be no euill way, when men of great wits and gifts begin to turne to their owne deuices, to see what the learned and auncient lights of Christes Church belee∣ued and deriued from the sacred Scriptures in those very points of trueth and our sal∣uation; I haue chosen rather to shew thee, Christian Reader, the generall and conti∣nuall consent of religious and reuerend antiquitie; then to muster mens names of latter times, and by disgracing or comparing their labours or learnings, to set any man, or Church in fire. If so many learned and auncient fathers displease happilie some in respect of their priuate contrarie conceits, I haue done my duety to declare the trueth, and shewed my desire of peace, whiles I neuer ment, nor can yet bee drawen to impeach any mans name or credit, howsoeuer I thinke, that some of them swarue from the exact rule and sense of holy Scriptures in some few points, as well of doctrine as of discipline. THE SECOND PART. WHAT IS MEANT BY THIS IN THE CREED, THAT Christ descended to HADES, or Hell. I Shall not need (good Christian Reader) to spend much time or paines in this question. An article of the Creed since it is, That Christ descended into Hell; and the same deriued from the Scriptures, confessed by all Antiquitie, and confirmed by authoritie of this whole Realme, as well in the booke of Com∣mon prayer, as in the Articles of Religion ratified by Prince and Parliament, it is not for an English man directly to dispute against it; howsoeuer, retaining the words, many doubt or denie the sense thereof. I may be the shorter, for that the Refuter insisteth onely on foure reasons against the descent of Christ to the place of the damned, which our English Creed calleth Hell; and the rest, which he bringeth, is like his former labor, that is, is nothing but a bolde pronouncing of his owne conceits, and a false miscon∣struing of other mens sayings. His first reason is. Defenc. pag 149. li. 7. If there be a good and sound generall reason in Christian faith, that Christes soule lea∣uing his bodie, ascended vp to heauen, and there remained till his resurrection; and if there be no speciall reason of authoritie to the contrariè, that his soule now descended, th n surely euerie good Christian ought to beleeue, that his soule ascended to heauen, and descended not locally into hell. But both these former parts are most true. ] Not one of these parts is true, and were they (as they are not) most true; yet conclude they not your purpose. That Christes soule leauing his bodie ascended vp to heauen, is more than any Scripture ex∣presly auoucheth. The order of our Creed leadeth vs to beleeue, that Christ rose the third day from the dead before he ascended to heauen. That he was in Paradise the same day that he died, his owne words to the penitent thiefe, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, may proue, if we admit them to be spoken of Christes soule and not of his Deitie, as Saint Austen and others expound them: but that Christes soule departing from his bodie, and returning to the same againe, diuerted no whither, nor spoiled powers and principalities, nor made an open shew of them, triumphing ouer them, for this there is neither good reason in the Christian faith, nor warrant in the word of God, but onely your couragious assuming any thing that may seeme to support your cause. On the other side, what reasons there are, generall or speciall, for Christes de∣scent to hell, though you make light of them, the Church of Christ from the begin∣ning hath receiued and professed them, not from the mouthes of men, but from the witnesse of holy Scripture, howsoeuer you turne and winde the words of the Holie Ghost to fit them to your appetite. And what so great need is there of speciall rea∣sons of authoritie to the contrarie? Will not generall testimonies of the Scriptures serue to proue a trueth, except the speciall circumstances of time, and place, and ma∣ner be therewithall expressed. Ibid. li. 16. The analogie of faith requireth, that the head should be there where the members were, and where they remaine till their resurrection, that there he tarie till his resurrection. It see∣meth also these texts will prooue it; Where I am, there also shall my seruant be. I will, that where I am, there they also shall be with me. ] Did you speake of the perpetuall abode of the head and members in one and the same place of ioy and blisse at Gods appoin∣ted time, Your words had some dependance on Christes promise, saying; Iohn 12. Where I am, there also shall my seruants be: but this speech of Christes is restrained to a certaine time, in which it shall be verified, as appeareth by that he sayd, Iohn 14. I goe to prepare you a place, I will come againe, and receiue you vnto my selfe, that where I am, there also you may be. At his next comming he will take vs vnto himselfe, and then shall we be euer with the Lord. This is the time, when his promise shall be performed. And though the Saints dissolued are now with Christ, that is, not only receiued to rest and ioy in Christ, but also where the glory of Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father continually shineth to them, and on them with full assurance of euerlasting glory prepared for them; yet no analogie of faith, nor any words by you brought, do proue all the Saints to haue their bodies now in heauen, because Christ hath his there; or that the soules of the iust were after the speaking of these words, alwayes here on earth, where Christ was; or that all the Saints rose with him, as some did; or that when, and where Christ appeared after his resurrection, all his Saints must or did appeare with him. Much lesse is there any sequele from either, that all the soules of the righteous must or did accompanie Christes soule going to Paradise, and comming thence; so that he could not descend to Hell to triumph ouer Satan and all the power of darkenesse, but the spirits of the iust deceased must leaue Paradise, and go thither with him. Defenc. pag. 149. li. 20. I see not but that he promiseth heere his seruants euen a locall accompanying of him af∣ter this life, and that also generally whither soeuer he went. ] Then was Peter a slender Diuine, who hearing these words from his Masters mouth, did after openly pro∣claime, That Act. 2. v. 34. Dauid was not ascended into heauen. If it be so firme a promise, as you pretend, then Dauid, as well as the rest, must locally accompanie Christ whithersoe∣uer he went, and consequently ascend to heauen with him; which Peter vtterly deni∣eth. And all the Fathers of Christs church had little vnderstanding of Christs words, when they generally denied, that the soules of the Saints are yet in the same place of glory where Christ is. If you belee e not my report of them, peruse their owne words following. Irenaeus, Irenaeus li. 5. ca. 31. It is manifest, that the soules of Christs Disciples shall goe to an in∣uisible place appointed them of God, and there shall remaine vntill the resurrection; and after receauing their bodies, and rising perfectly, that is, corporally, as Christ did rise, shall so come to the sight (or vision) of God. Iustine the martyr. Ius . 75. The soules of the righteous are caried to Paradise, where they inioy the company and sight of Angels, and Archangels, and the vi∣sion of Christ our Sauiour: and are kept in places fitte for them till the day of resurrection and recompensation. Tertullian, Tertullianus aduersus Mar∣cionem. li. 4. It is apparent to any wise man, that there is a place deter∣mined, which is Abrahams bosome, for the receauing of the soules of his sonnes. That region, I meane Abrahams bosome, though not heauenly, sublimiorem tamen inferis, yet higher then the places below, shall giue comfort to the soules of the righteous, vntill the end of things with the fulnesse of reward bring the resurrection of all men. Idem de a i∣ma. ca. 55. Heauen is open to no man so long as the earth remaineth: together with the passing away of the world, shall the kingdom of heauen be opened. Origen, Origen▪ in Le∣ t. homil. 7. The Saints departing hence do not presently obtaine the full rewards of their labours, but they expect vs, though staying, though slacking. For they haue not perfect ioy, so long as they grieue at our errors, and lament our sins. For these, saith Paul, haue not yet receaued the promise, God prouiding for vs a better thing, that they without vs should not be perfect. Hilarie Hilarius in Psal. 2. The day of iudgement is the repay of euerlasting happinesse or punishment. But the time of death till then, hath euery one vnder his lawes, whiles either Abraham or torment reserue ech man vnto iudgement. Ambrose, Ambros. de bo o mortis. ca. 10. Till the fulnesse of time come, the soules (departed) expect their due reward; for some paine, for some glory is prouided. Chrysostom, Chrysost. in 1. Epistolam ad Corinth. homil. 39. Though the soule were a thousand times immortall, as she is, those admira∣ble good things she shall not enioy without her flesh. Ibidem. If the body rise not againe, the soule re∣maineth vncrowned, and without that heauenly blisse. Augustine, August. in Psal. 36. After this short life thou shalt not as yet be where the Saints shalbe, to whom it shalbe said, Come ye blessed of my Father, receaue the Kingdome prepared for you from the beginning of the world; th shalt not as yet be there, who knoweth it not? but thou maiest be there, where the poore Lazar was seene afarre of by the proud rich man. In that rest shalt thou securely expect the day of iudge∣ment, when thou shalt receaue thy body, and be changed to be equall to an Angel. Theodoret, Th dor. in 11. ca. Epist. ad Hebreos. The Saints haue not yet receaued their crownes. For the God of all expecteth the conflicts of others, that the race being ended, he may together pronounce all, that overcame, to be con∣querers, and so reward them. Oecumenius, O cume. in 11. ca Epist. ad Hebreos. All the fore said Saints haue not yet receaued the good things promised to the iust, God prouiding better for vs. Least they should haue more then we, in that they were crowned before vs, he hath therefore appointed one certaine time, that we should be crowned with them. Andreas Caesariensis, Andrea C ∣sari. in . ca. 18. It is the iudgement of many godly fathers, that euery good man (after this life) hath a place itte for him, by which he may coniecture the glory prepared for him. Theophylact. Theophylact. in 11. ca. epist. ad Hebreos. The Saints as yet haue attained no∣thing of the heauenly promises. (God) hath appointed one time to crowne all. Bernard, Bernard. in Sanct. serm. 3. you perceaue there are three states of the soule; the first in (this) corruptible body, the second without the body, the third in perfect blessednesse. The first in the Tabernacles, the second in the Courts, the third in the house of God. Into that most happy house of God the soules (of the Saints) shall not enter without vs, nor without their bodies. Neither doe I find any Scriptures, that allow the Saints deceased the same place of glory, where Christ now is at the right hand of God in the highest heauens, till the last day come. What Abrahams bosome is, whither Lazarus soule was caried by the Angels, or where it is, I dare not define. Only the Scripture faith, it was a place of Luke 16. How many hea∣uens the Scrip∣tures make. comfort after death, and Luke 16. How many hea∣uens the Scrip∣tures make. vpvvards farre of from Hell; a Luke 16. How many hea∣uens the Scrip∣tures make. great gulfe being set be∣tweene that and hell. Of Paradise, where Christ promised the penitent Thiefe should be with him, the very day that he died, I read what Paul writeth, how he was taken vp into the 2. Co 12. ver. 2. third heauen, and into 2. Co 12. ver. 4. Paradise; Whence we may rightly collect, that Paradise is in the third heauen. Now what number of heauens the Scripture deliue∣reth, is not so certaine as some men suppose. We find the whole region of the aire to be called Heauen, as where Christ nameth the Matt. 8. & 13 byrds of heauen, and the Matth 26. Marke 14. clouds of heauen. Againe that place of the firmament, where the Sunne, the Moone, and the starres are, is called heauen. Genes. 1. Let there be lights, said God, in the firmament of heauen to separate the day from the night. And I Genes. 22. will multiply thy seed, as the starres of heauen. The third heauen, if I be not deceaued, the Scripture maketh to be the originall and proper habitation of Angels, where they were first placed, and whence they fell, that are now called Diuels. Iudae epist. vers. 6. The Angels which kept not their originall, saith Iude, but left THEIR PROPER HABITATION, hath Godreserued in euer lasting chaines vnder darkenesse vnto the iudgement of the great day. In this celestiall Paradise, which at first was the proper mansion of Angels, as the Scripture obserueth, there was not only place for sinne, and danger of falling, as we find by experience of the reprobate angels, but after this was left an higher degree of perfection, and a greater increase of glory; as we perceaue in the elect Angels, who were confirmed in good∣nesse, and aduanced to the presence of Gods throne, there to behold the face of God in the proper place of his sanctity and maiesty. Of this third heauen the booke of Iob saith; God Iob. 15. found no stedfastnesse in his Saints, yea the heauens are not cleane in his sight, since there he found sinne in those transgressing Angels which left their proper habi∣tation, and pressed with pride and disobedience to the throne of God. This fault and fall the Prophet resembleth, when he saith, Esa 14. How art thou fallen from heauen, ô Lucifer? Thou saidst in thine heart, I will ascend aboue the higth of the clouds, and I wilbe like the most high. * The last or highest heauen the Scripture nameth the Seat, throne, or habi∣tation of God: which is not only holy, as whereinto Reuel. 21. no vncleane thing shall enter, but is aboue all other heauens, and often called the heauen of heauens. In this is the presence of Gods throne, that is, a perpetuall and plaine reuelation of his diuine glory and maiesty, which the elect Angels alwaies behold. And heere is not only the fulnesse of Psal . ioy, as in the presence of God, but the stability, security, and satiety of euerlasting life, and blisse to men and Angels, without any defect, doubt, or danger of failing or de∣creasing. In this they want nothing, and besides this they desire nothing, since in him, who is all in all, they find all things worthy loue, delight, and ioy. Looke downe Esa. 63. from heauen, saith Esay to God, and behold from the dwelling place of thine holinesse and glory. And Ieremie, I m. 25. The Lord shall crie from aboue, and giue out his voice from his holy habitation. . gs 8. Behold the heauens, and the heauens of heauens containe thee not, saith Salo∣mon. Psal. 148. Praise the Lord from the heauens, saith the Psalmist, praise him in the highest. Praise him all his Angels, praise him all his armies. Praise him heauens of heauens. To this place when Christ ascended with his body, the Apostle saith of him, that 7. he was made higher then the heauens, and Ephes. 4. ascended aboue all the heauens, and . 1. sitteth t the right hand of maiesty in the high places. Now A. de . li. ca. 1. two we call both, not all; but of three we first vse this word ll. And the Greeke tongue hath a speciall number for two, which is the duall; the plurall is applied to moe. Besides Moses saith in the beginning (before the G . . 1. light or firmament were created) God made eth hashamai m, the heauens and the earth; where by the name of heauen; the best interpreters vnderstand the place appointed for the habitation of Angels and the reuelation of Gods glory. Now the word hashamai m in Hebrew being not the singular number must haue diuers ma s in it, as well as the aire and haue diuers regions and sphaeres to make the name of agree to either of them. So that when Christ is said to haue ascended a the heauens; nature, reason, and Grammar, besides Scripture seeme to teach vs, that he ascended aboue that part of the third heauen, where the Apostle noteth Paradise to be. And consequently, if the soules of the righteous deceased be in Para∣dise, they are not as yet in the highest heauens, where Christ sitteth in the glory of God his Father, ( in whose house are many mansions ) and whether they shalbe admitted at the last day, when Christ shall come againe to take them vnto himselfe, and to haue them for euer with him in the possession and communion of his kingdome and glory, that they may be like the Angels. To this difference of place and glorie before and after the day of iudgement, the Scriptures incline as well as the Fathers, if I mistake them not; which I referre to the iudgement of the wise and learned. S. Iohn saw the soules of the Martyrs Reuel. 6. Vnder the altar, where they were willed to rest vntill (the number of) their fellow seruants were ful∣filled. But when crownes of glorie are giuen them, as in the last day, they shall Reuel. 7. stand in the presence of the throne of God, and before the Lambe, and he that sitteth on the throne, will dwell among them. 2. Tim. 4. Henceforth, saith Paul, is laied vp for me the crowne of righteous∣nesse, which the Lord, the iust iudge, shall giue me at that day: and not to me only, but vnto all that loue his appearing. 1. Pet. 1. Blessed be God, saith Peter, who hath be gotten vs again vnto liue∣ly hope to an inheritance immortall & vnd filed, which fadeth not away, reserued in heauen for you, which is prepared to be shewed in the last time. 1. Iohn 3. Now are we the Sonnes of God, saith Iohn, but yet it doth not appeere what; we shall be & we know, that when he shall appecre, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, that is aswell the glorie of his Godhead, as of his manhood. Then as Paul saith to all the faithfull, Coloss 3. Your life is hidde with Christ in God; When Christ, which is our life, shall appeare, then shall ye also appeare with him in glory: And he shal say; M. atth. 25. Come ye blessed of my Father, receaue the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world; and not, retaine the kingdome already possessed by you. It were easie out of new writers to shew the same; Master Cal m shall su ce for al, who vseth not ouersoone to concurie with the fathers, when they diuert from the Scriptures. Cal us in . The soules of the saints after death are in peace, saith he, because they are esca∣ped from the power of the enemy. But when heauenly Ierusalem shalbe aduanced to her glory, and the true Salomon, Christ the king of peace, shall sitte aloft in his iudgement seat, then shall the true Israelites raigne with their KING. This they may easily perceiue by the Scrip∣tures, whosoeuer haue learned to giue eare to God, and heare his voice. This also haue they deliuered to vs by hand, who haue sparingly and reuerently handled the mysteries of God. For Tertullian saith. why should we not admit Abrahams bosome to be called a temporall receptacle of the soules of the faithfull? And Chrysostom, Chrysost. . 28. in Epi∣stolam ad . Vnderstand what and how great a thing it is for Abraham to sitte, and for the Apostle Paul (to expect) vntill he be perfected, that then they may receaue their reward. For vntill we come, the Father hath fore∣told thē, he wil not giue them their reward. Art thou grieued because thou shalt not yet receaue it? what should A doe, who ouercame so long since, and yet sitteth without his crowne? what Noe? and the rest of those times? for behold they expected thee, and expect others af∣ter thee. They preuented vs in their conflicts, but they shall not preuent vs in their crownes, because there is onetime appointed to crowne all together. Augustine in many places descri∣beth August. de . 12. ca. 9. & li. 13. ca. . & ad I . ca. 108. secret receptacles, in which the soules of the godly are kept vntill they receaue their crowne and glory. Bernard in two homilies made at the feast of all Saints, where he handleth this question of purpose, teacheth that the soules of the Saints departed from their bodies, do stand as yet in the outward courts of the Lord, being admitted to rest, but not to glory. Into that most blessed ouse, saith he, they shall not enter neither without vs, nor without their bo∣dies. Those that place soules in (some part of) heauen, so they giue them not the glory of the re∣surrection, (to be shewed on them at the time of the resurrection and not before) they differ nothing from the former opinion. And in his institutions. Caluinus . li. 3. ca. 25. § 6. Since the Scripture euery where biddeth vs depend vpon the expectation of Christs comming, and differreth the crowne of glory that time, let vs be content with the boundes, which God hath appointed vs; that the soules of the godly hauing ended their warfare (of this life) depart into an happy rest, where with a blessed ioy they looke for the fruition of the promised glory; and so all things stand suspended till Christ our redeemer appeare. Then none of these writers, old nor new, so conceaued, or so expounded Christes wordes, as you doe, that all his Saints doe locally accompany him and generally, wheresoeuer he abideth, or whithersoeuer he goeth. Defenc. pag. 149. li. 23. The Fathers all with one voice (I may truely affirme) teach and beleeue euen that Christ after death went no whither, but where his faithfull and holy seruants were: yea and there re∣mained till his resurrection. To which consent of men some where you ascribe exceeding much. ] Your assertions all the Fathers with one consent refuse, to which agreement of learned and auncient writers I confesse I yeeld very much, when there is no expresse Scripture against it, alleaged and vrged by some of themselues; as in all the cases where I forsake them, there is: but what is that to your nouelties, who neither in the first, nor second question yeeld any thing to their iudgements and censures; put them altogether? That the soules of the faithfull before the comming of Christ were in Abrahams bo∣some our Sauiour first deliuered, and no father, that I know, departeth from it; but where Abrahams bosome was, whether in earth or elsewhere, and whether it were a skirt of hell or no, till Christ transferred them thence to Paradise; of this some fa∣thers diuersely thinke, and diuersely speake. And but that Saint Austin learnedly dis∣cusseth and resolueth this point, that Abrahams bosome could be August. . 99. no member, nor part of hell, since this was a secret habitation of rest and happinesse, which the Scripture ne∣uer affirmeth of hell, but calleth it a place of torment; it would be hard for you, or any of your crue to say where Abrahams bosome was. That Christ after death went to the place, where the faithfull were in expectation and desire of his comming to re∣deeine the world; the Fathers affirme; but that he went no whither else, or that hec went not to the place of the damned as well to discharge and release his members thence, that is from all feare and daunger thereof, as to destroy the power of the di∣uell ouer all his, and to triumph ouer the force and furie of Satan in his owne person, that euery knee of things vnder the earth should bow to him, as well as of things in heauen and earth, in this you vtterly mistake the consent of the Fathers, which you so much talke of; and shew that you neuer came neere the reading of them, howsoeuer you presume to affirme what you list, of them. And least I should carie the Reader without cause to rest on my word, as you would haue him doe on yours, he shall heare the Fathers speake their owne mindes, and so the better iudge of your abusing them. Ireneus. Ireneus li. 5. ca. 31. Dauid said prophesying this of Christ, thou hast deliuered my soule from the nethermost hell. Cyprian. Cyprian de pass Christi. ant. car∣m ie do∣ resurrecti∣o When in Christs presence hell was broken open & captiuitie made captiue, his conquering soule being presented to his fathers sight, returned without delay to his bodie. Lactantius, or as some thinke Venantius. o The darkenesse fled at the brightnesse of Christ, & the grosse mist of eternall night vanished. Hinc tumulū repetens post tari ra, carne resumpta, belliger ad coelos ampla trophea refers. Then after thy being in hell, thou going to thy graue, & resuming thy bodie, as a warrier thou bar st to heauen a CONQVEST (ouer hell.) Athanasius. Athanasius de humanitate Christi contra A nos. ; who euer went to hell besides the sonne, which rose from the dead? Idem contra A ian oratio 4. at the sight of whom , the keepers of hell gates shr ncke for feare. Yea Idem de vir∣gin tate. HADES, HELL (or the Diuell) at the sight of him , was afraid and amazed saying: Who is this, that descendeth (hither) with so great pow∣er and authoritie? Who is this, that teareth open the brazen gates of hell, & breaketh the bars of Adamant? Who is this, that being crucisied is not conquered by me who am death? Who is this, that looseth their bandes, whom I conquered? Who is this, that by his owne death destroy∣eth me, that am death? Eusebius. Eusebius de demonstratione Euangelica li. 10. ca. 8. To him only were the gates of death opened, & him only the keepers of hell gates seeing, shranke for feare; and the chiefe ruler of death, (the diuell) knowing him alone to be his Lord, rose out of his loftie throne, and spake to him fearefully with supplication & intreatie. Eusebius called Emisenus. Eusebi mil. 6. de pas. at. The Lord descending darkenesse trem∣bled at the suddaine sight of vnknowen light, A praefulgidum fidus caelorū Tartareae caliginis profunda viderunt, And the deepes of hellish darkenesse saw the most bright starre of heauen. Deposito quid corpore imas at{que} abdit as Tartari sedes filius hominis penetrauit: the Sonne of man laying aside his body pearced the lowest and secret seates of Tartarus, (or of the dunge∣on of hell.) Hilarie. Hilar. de Tri∣nitate li. 3. The powers of heauen doe incessantly glorifie the Sonne of God sor con∣quering death, & breaking the gates of hell. Idem li 4. In hell he killed death. Gregorie Nazianzene. Nazianzen, in Christo pa∣tiente. Going to the gates of hell all couered with darknesse, thou shalt pearce hell with a sharpe speare; and shalt deliuer all, thou alone being free, and shalt besides haue the victory ouer thine enemies; , valiantly SVBDVING HELL, the SERPENT, and DEATH. Chry ostome. Chrysost. de resurrect. sermo. 7. tom . 3. Descendente in tenebrosam inferorū caliginē Domino ettam illic tun dubio dies splendidissimus fuit, vbi seruator illuxit, tenuit in illo noctis horrore in∣uiolabilem Maiestatis suae splendorem. The Lord descending into the darke m st of hell, euen there no doubt then was a most cleere day, where our Sauiour shined. In that horror of night he held the brightnesse of his Maiestie inuiolable. Ierom. Hiero. in Psal∣nium. 34. Pro vita populi mortuus, non es de∣relictus in Tartaro. Dying for the life of thy people, thou wast not left in hell. And againe, I em in ca. 12. li. I b. Christ d stroyed and brake open the closed places of hell, and put the diuell, that had power o∣uer death. from his kingdome and Dominion. Augustine. August. epist. 99. If the holy Scripture had sayd, that Christ after death came to Abrahams bosome, not naming hell and the sorrowes thereof, I maruaile if any man would haue durst to affirme, that Christ descended into hell. But because euident testimonies (of the Scripture) mention hell and the sorowes (thereof), no cause is oc∣current, why our Sauior should be beleeued to haue come thither, but to saue from those paines. And againe. Idem. in Psal∣mum 85. There is a lower hell, hither the dead go, whence God would deliuer our soules by sending his sonne thither. For I dem. therefore Christ came euen vnto hell, that we should not a∣bide in hell. Ruffinus. Ruffinus in expositione Sym∣boli. Eousque ille miserando descendit vsquequo tu peccando deiect s es. Christ descended of mercie to the very place, whither thou wast deiected by sinne. Fulgentius. Fulgentius ad Tra mundum li 3. It remained to the full effect of our redemption, that the man, which God tooke vnto him without sin should descend euen thither, whither man separated from God fell by desert of sin, that is to hell, where the soule of a sinner vseth to be tormented; and to the graue, where the flesh of a sinner vseth to be corrupted: yet so, that neither Christs flesh might rot in the graue, nor his soule be ormented with the sorrowes of h ll. Cyrill. Cyrill in Le∣uitioum li. 9. The powers, Principalities and rulers of the world, which the Apostle numbreth, none other could conquere and carie into the desart of hell but only he, who said, be of good hope, I haue ouercome the world. Therefore it was necessary that our Lord & Sauiour should not only be borne a man amongst men, but also descend to hell, that he might carie into the wildernesse of hell the goate, that was to be led a∣way; and returning thence, this worke perfourmed, might ascend to his father. Caesarius Arelatensis. Casa. Arela∣tens. bo 3. de Paschate. Aeterna nox inferorum Christo descendente resplenduit, attonitae mentis ob∣stupuere Tortores. The euerlasting darkenesse of hell was made bright with Christs descending thither: the tormentors inwardly stroken were amazed. Prudentius. Prudens. hymno. 9. Tartarum benig∣nus intrat, fracta cedit Ianua, fertur horruisse mundus noctis aeternae chaos. Christ mildely entred hell, breaking open the gates: the world shooke at (the opening of) Chaos of euerla∣sting darkenesse. Arator Apostolica. li. 1. Arator. Infernum Dominus cum destructurus adiret, Sol ruit in Tene∣bras, arua tremunt concussa locis, saxa crepant: tartara moesta gemunt, quia vincula cunta quiescunt. Mors ibi quid faceret, quo vitae portitor ibat? When the Lord went to hell to de∣stroy it, the Sunne was darkned, the earth shooke, the rockes claue in sunder. Hell mourned to see her bands loosed. But what could death doe there, whither the bringer of life came? Petrus Chrysologus, Mortem suscepisse & vicisse, intrasse inferos & redijsse venisse in iura Petr. Chryso∣log. in Symb ∣lum serm. 60. Tartari, & Tartari iura soluisse, non est fragilit as sed potestas. To suffer death and to con∣quere it, to goe to hell and to returne, to come within the lawes of the dungeon of hell, nd to dissolue the lawes therof, is not weakenesse but power. And thus he maketh Christ to speake after his resurrection to his Disciples. Ego ex mortuis sum vinus: ex infernis sum supern s. Ego sum, quem mors fugit, inferna tremuerunt, Tartarus Deum confessus est. Idem serm. 81. I am aliue from the dead, and come vp from those below. I am he whom death fled from, hell trembled at, and the dungeon of hell confessed to be God. Maximus, This day (of Christes Maxim. serm. 4. de die sancto Pasch. inter homilias Eu∣seb. Emiseni. resurrection) which the Lord hath made penetrat omnia, vniuersa continet: coelum, terram, Tartarum{que} complectitur, pearceth all places, conteineth all, compriseth heauen, earth, and the dungeon of hell. For that Christ the (true) day lightned heauen, earth, and the deepe of hell, the Scripture witnesseth. There should be no end of alleaging, if I should cite all, that speake to this pur∣pose. These be auncient and sufficient to prooue this refuter a fabler, in affirming that the Fathers with one voice auouch Christ went no whither but where his faith∣full and holy seruants were, whom the Fathers did not thinke to be in the torments of hell, nor in the place of the damned; and to shew that I teach none other sense of the Creed, then all these Fathers, and infinit others did before me. Neither can they be shifted off, as this Trifler vseth to decline them, who name Hades, that they ment the world of soules, which might be as well in heauen, or paradise, as in hell: since they speake of Christes descent after death to that place, where there was euerlasting darknesse, and amazednesse of diuels, bondage and punishment of sinners, deliue∣rance from destruction, an happie and mightie conquest ouer enemies, with such like circumstances, which by no meanes can agree either to Paradise or heauen, or to any other place but onely to hell, where these things are found, and no where else. And if new writers may be regarded, I could bring as many or moe of them of great learning and good iudgement confessing and allowing this exposition of the Creede which I follow, (that Christ descended into Hell to destroy Satans power and force ouer his, and to free them all from comming thither) as concurrent and conso∣nant with the sacred Scriptures; and namely refelling your fansie, that Christ went no whither but where his faithfull and holy seruants were. The very Catechisme which you would seeme so much to respect, as if it were the publicke and authorised doc∣trine of this Realme, maketh it needfull to beleeue, that Catechism. Nowelli Gra∣colat. pag. 292. as Christs body was (laid) in the bowels of the earth, so his soule separated from his body descended ad inferos, to the places (or spirits) below, (that is, to hell) and with all the force and efficacie of his death so pear∣ced vnto the dead, at{que} inferos adeo ipsos, and euen to the spirits in hell, that the soules of the vnfaithfull perceaued the condemnation of their infidelity to be most sharp and iust, ipse{que} in∣ferorum princeps Satan; and Satan himselfe the Prince of hell saw all the power of his tyran∣nie, and of darcknesse to be weakned, broken, and destroied: and contrariwise, the dead; who whiles they liued, beleeued in Christ, vnderstood the worke of their redemption to be perfor∣med, and felt the fruite and force thereof with a most sweet and certaine comfort. The Cate∣chisme treating of Christs descent to hell mentioned in the Creed, deliuereth this to be the sense thereof, that Christes soule separated from his body descendit ad inferos, descended vnto hell. And least we should doubt what he meaneth by inferi, he putteth inferos as a degree lower & farder then the dead, in saying Penetrauit ad mortuos, at{que} inferos adeo ipsos, Christ pearced vnto the dead, and which more is, euen to hell it selfe and maketh Satan to be Princeps inferorum, the Prince of hell; Who is no chiefe ruler either in heauen or Paradise, but onlie in hell. Againe he resolueth, that together with the soule of Christ came the power & force of Christs death as well to the faithfull, which were saued by him, as to the rest iustly condemned for their vnbeliefe; and that the Diuell himselfe saw all the power of darckenesse afflicted and oppressed by Christ. More then this I do not teach; & so much the catechisme auoucheth to be part of the Christian faith, and the meaning of that article in the Creed, Christ descended into hell. Peter Martyr likewise in the confession of his faith, and expos tion of the Creed, sayth; Petri Mar∣tyris in 12. Ar∣ticulos fidei ex∣posit. §. 20. As touching Christes soule; as soone as it departed from the bodie, it rested not idle, but descended ad inferos, vnto hell. And surely the one and the other societic both of godly soules, and of the damned, found the presence of Christes soule. For the soules of the faithfull were cheered with great comfort, and gaue God thanks sor deliuering them by the hand of this Mediatour, and performing that which so long before he had promised. Other soules also adiudged to euerlasting damnation, animae Christi aduentum persenserunt, percei∣ued the comming of Christes soule. Zanchius shewing the different interpretations of those words of the Apostle, Zanchius in 2 cap. epistol ad Coloss. vers. 15. Christ spoiled powers and principalities, and made an open shew of them, triumphing ouer them in himselfe, (that is, in his owne person; sayth,) Other Interpreters hold, that these enemies were v nquished and conquered on the crosse by Christ; but the triumph was p rformed, when Christ in his soule entred the kingdome of Hell as a glo∣rious victorer. For so they interpret the Article, He descended into Hell. And because the word deigmatizein doth signifie to carie one in an open shew, as the Romans were woont in the eyes of men to leade their enemies once ouerthrowen, with their han s bound behinde them to their perpetuall shame; and the soule of Christ separated from his bodie might really doe this to the diuels, bringing them out of their infernall kingdome, and carying them along the aire in the sight of all the Angels and blessed soules: therefore nothing hindereth vs to in∣terpret that which Paul heere writeth, as the words sound, euen of a reall triumph (ouer the diuels) in the sight of God onlie, and of the blessed spirits: specially since the Fathers for the most part so expound them, & ex nostris, non pauci, ne{que} vulgares, and of our Expositors not a few, and those no meane men. Aretius in his Problemes purposely treating of Christes descent to hell, first alleageth, that Aretij Pro∣ble. loco. 16. de descensu Chri∣st ad inferos. Tota Ecclesia vbi{que} terrarum hodie illum Articulum & agnoscit, & diuer sum à sepultura recitat, the whole Church throughout the world at this date acknowledgeth that article, and reciteth it as different from (Christs) bu∣riall. And to that obiection, that some Creeds had not this clause, he answereth; Ibidem. The Church finding the descent (of Christ) to hell to be plainly deliuered in the Scriptures, with great aduise admitted this Article into the Creed. Otherwise how could it be that with so full consent of all nations, and all tongues, this clause should be so constantly, and so consentingly re∣ceaued? Repeating therefore many other senses he refuseth them euery one, and con∣cludeth. Ibid m. Quare mea est sententia, Christum descendisse ad inferos, postquam tradidisset spiritum in manus Dei patris in cruce, &c. Wherfore mine opinion is that Christ descended into hell after he yeelded his soule on the Crosse to the hands of God his Father. Ibidem. And hell in this question we put to be a certaine place appointed for the damned, euen for Satan and his members. Ibidem. To the words of Christ vttered to the thiefe, this daie shalt thou be with me in Paradise, I answere; they hinder not this cause. For Christ was in Paradise with the thiefe according to his diuinity, in the graue according to his body, in hell according to his soule. Howbeit there is no certaintie, how long Christ staied in hell: not long it seemeth; so that he might in soule that verie day returne from hell, and after a glorious sort enter Paradise with the thiefe. Neither hath that any more strength, that Christ commended his soule into his Fathers handes. For the soule of Christ was still in his Fathers hands, though he descended into hell. This descent was voide of forrow and shame to Christ. Where they say, there was no need of this descent, they run backe to the beginning: for how should it be needlesse, which the Scripture pronounceth Christ did, and we confesse in our Creed? We iudge it therefore needfull; first for the reprobate, that they might know he was now come, of whose comming they had so often heard, but neglected it with great contempt. Againe, Satan was perfectly to know, that this Christ whom he had tempted in the desart, and deliuered to death by the fraud of the Iewes, was the very Messias and the seed promised to the woman. Hoc inquam expediebat etiam Demonibus in imo Tartaro innotescere; This I say was expedient euen for the diuels in the deepe of hell to know. Thirdly it was expedient for the elect, that Satan might see he should haue no right no not on their bodies, since Christ heereafter would raise them to life. Hemmingius. Nicolaus Hē∣mingius in 2. ca. epistol ad Coloss. As Christ by his death conflicted with the enemy on the gib∣bet of the crosse, and ouercame him; so by his glorious descent to hell, resurrection, and ascen∣sion to heauen he executed the triumph, erecting as a monument of his victorie the ensigne of his crosse. Mollerus writing on the 16. Psalme. Henricus Mollerus in Psal. 16. Touching Christes descent to hell; We (saith he) vnderstand that Article of our faith in the Creede simply and without allego∣rie: and beleeue that Christ truely descended to the lower parts of the earth, as Paul speaketh, Ephes. 4. It is enough for vs to beleeue, which Austen affirmeth in his Epistle to Darda∣nus; Christ therefor descended, that he might helpe those, which were to be holpen. For Christ by his death destroied the powers of hell and the tyrannie of the diuell, as is said, Osee, 13. O death, I will be thy death; and thy destruction, O hell. And this his victory he would in a certaine maner shew vnto the diuell, that he might strike perpetuall terrors into the di∣uell, and take from vs all feare of (Satans) tyrannie. Let it suffice vs to know this, and omit curious questions and disputations (heereabouts.) Pomeranus on these words of the 16. Psalme, Thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hell; Iohannes Po∣meranus in Psal. 16. Heere hast thou (saith he) that Article of our faith, Christ descended into hell. If thou aske what he did there, I answer; He then deliuered not the Fathers onely, but all the faith∣full from the beginning of the world to the end thereof; not out of Lymbus, but out of the lowest nether most hell, to which we all were condemned; and in which we all were as in death by the sentence of God. There euerlasting fire did abide to vs all, that being deliuered to death by the sinne of Adam, we might in the last iudgement be deliuered to punishment and perpetuall sire. Christ therefore descended euen thither vnto death and hell to this end, least thou shouldest d scend thither, that as he had redeemed vs from death, so he might de∣liuer vs from hell. Westmerus in his expositions of the Psalmes followeth worde for Bartholomeus Westmerus in Psal. 16. word the confession of Pomerane. Wolfgangus Musculus, Christ therefore was to die, not that he should simply be dead, but that by his death he might conquer death and Musculus in Psal. 16. ouercome him that had the rule ouer death: and so he was to descend to hell; not that his soule should be subiect to any infernall power, but that subduing the gates of hell he might deliuer our souls from that tyrannie. Of the article of Christs descent to hel, I am not ignorant how diuersly learned men doe thinke. It is somewhat obscure indeed and subiect to many disputations, but yet no godly man vpon that occasion will resist or offer force to the Apostles words, (thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell) but will desire of God the vnderstanding ther∣of, and in the meane time with a single faith cleaue to the word of trueth, although he can not cleerely perceaue the maner how that was performed. Of this Article see Aust n Epistle 99. Vrbanus Regius, The Church deliuereth vs out of the Scriptures that Christ after he was Vrbanus Regius in Catechismo minore. dead on the crosse, descended also to hell to suppresse Satan and hell, (to the which we were condemned by the iust iudgement of God) and to spoile and destroy the kingdome of death. Zacharias Scilterus: The descent of Christ to hell (whereof mention is made in the A∣postles Scilterus de R gno Christi Thesi. 38. Creede after the death and buriall of Christ) is to be vnderstood simply according to the letter and without allegorie of the ostension and declaration of Christes victorie no lesse glorious then terrible, (as Luther writeth to Philip Melancthon) indeed made to the diuels in hell or in the place of the damned, and of Christes expugning, disarming, spoy∣ling and captiuating the power of Satan, and of his destroying hell and euerting the whole kingdome of Satan, and of his deliuering vs from the power of death and eternall damnation; and out of the iawes of hell. Dauid Chytreus. The Article of the Creede let vs retaine Dauid. Chytra∣us in Symbolum. simply as the words sound; and let vs resolue, that the Sonne of God truely descended to hell to deliuer vs from hell, to which we were condemned for sinne in Adam; and from the power and tyrannie of the diuell, by which we were held captiue. Of which effect and fruit of Christs descent the Fathers speake; (as) Ierom, Christ descended to hell that we might ascend to heauen. And Fulgentius, The man which God assumed, descended thither, whither man separated from God by defert of sinne fell, that is to hell, where the soule of a sinner vsed to be tormented. And Augustine. Dying for thee, I descended to hell to bring thee to Paradise; Tartara adij, vt tu in caelo regnares; I went to the place of the damned, that thou mightest raigne in heauen. Georgius Mylius in his explication of the Augustane confession. Mylius in Au∣gustanae confes∣sionis explica∣tione articulo 3. de Christo. The true and proper sense of this Article is, that no metaphoricall, but a reall descent of Christ to hell must be vnderstood, whereby he descended to the lower parts of the earth, Eph. 4. vers. 9. Et ipsas Damnatorum sedes adijt; and went to the very place of the damned. The second point is, that this Article is no part of his passion and humiliation, but of his victorie and triumph. I omit infinite others, not onely priuate writers, but Vniuersities, Ci∣ties, and Countries, that haue publikely approoued the same doctrine, admitting and allowing the Augustane confession exhibited by the States of Germanie to Charles the Emperour, which thus they declare in their booke of Concord. With one consent Concordia elec∣toru r nei ū & ordinū Im∣perij & theolo∣gerum qui Au∣gustanum con∣fessionem am∣plectuntur ar∣ticulo 9. de de∣scensu Christi ad inferos. we aduise this matter not to be disputed, but this Article (of Christs descent to hell) to be most simply beleeued and taught. It ought to suffice vs, if we know, that Christ descended into hell, destroied hell to all beleeuers, and by him (or his descent thither) we were ta∣ken out of the power of death and Satan, from euerlasting damnation, and euen out of the iawes of hell. The maner how this was done, let vs not curiously search, but re∣ferre the (exact) knowledge heereof to an other worlde, where not onely this mysterie, but many others simply beleeued of vs in this life, shall be reuealed, which passe the reach of our blinde reason. And where some would so moderate this Article, as if it ment no more but that the force and effect of Christes death was manifested as well to the damned to exclude them from all hope, as to the faithfull to encrease their comfort; Luther sharpely, but truely, thus refuteth that fansie. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell. Lutherus in Psal. 16. The sense (heere∣of) is most plaine, so plentifully and diligently deliuered by the Apostles. But euen here haue men presuming all things of their wittes, begun to dispute, whether Christ were in hell as touching his soule, and the substance thereof, and what this meaneth, that he was in hell. And a great number haue dared to contradict the spirit (of God) that Christs soule was not in hell but by effect: being for sooth handsome glozers of the word of God; Thou wilt not leaue my soule, that is, the effect of my soule, in hell: Christ descended to hell, that is, he effected somewhat in hell: but despising these friuolous and impious trifles, let vs simply vnderstand the wordes of the Prophet, as they are simply spoken; and if we can not vnderstand them, let vs faithfully beleeue them. Greater is the authoritie of this Scripture, then the capacitie of all mens wittes, as Augustine saith. For the soule of Christ according to her substance truely descended to hell. To like purpose might exceeding many new writers be brought, all confessing the descent of Christes soule to the very place of the damned and of the diuels, that the trueth, force and glory of his humane soule might appeere as well to the reprobate angels and spirits vnder earth, as to the elect aboue the earth; God making the humane nature of his Sonne this recompence, that as he was despised and reproched by Satan in his instruments, so he should be adored and feared euen of all the powers of darckenesse, and wholy despose of them and their kingdome: but these may suffice the sober Reader to let him see, that I deliuer none other sense of that Article, then hath beene formerly receaued in the church of Christ with full con∣sent, and to this day is continued in the same by many great and graue Diuines, whose iudgements I need not be ashamed to follow; though I confesse I depend not on their wordes farder then they conforme their writings to the word of God, which in this case I take to be plaine enough howsoeuer some quarrell be made to the di∣uers significations of Sheol and Hades, which is as easily done in other Articles of the Creed, as in this; if it were the part of a Christian to wrangle with euerie worde, that hath sundry senses or vses in the holy Scriptures. Defenc. pag. 149. li. 29. To (my) purpose other Scriptures doe make very much, as where Christ saith, Father, into thine hands I commend my soule; and to Idem. pa. 95. 150. li. 18. the thiefe that hung by him, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. ] You bring Scriptures rather for shew then substance; since they inferre no such thing as you would enforce on them. The soules of the Saints liuing and dead are in the hands of God, and chiefly Christs soule, when it de∣scended to hell, not only to be brought thence, but euen there by gods hand assisting to destroy the strength of Satans kingdome, and to triumph ouer all the powers and Principalities of darkenesse. If those wordes did alwaies import a present possession and fruition of heauenly glorie, then could Dauid with no truth haue spoken them Psal. 3 . of himselfe so long before his death, when as yet no part of Gods promises to him touching his kingdome were perfourmed. But the soules of the faithfull are alwaies in the hand of God, whiles heere they are protected by him, and after this life recea∣ued in rest, though they come not, as yet to be inuested with the fulnesse of heauenly glory. Yea the words properly pertaining to our Sauiours person, and condition after death, Psal 15. `Thou wilt not leaue (or forsake) my soule in hell, doe shew that Christs soule was then in Gods hands, and compassed round with the power and glory of God, when hell and Satan trembled at his presence, and were both vanquished and spoiled by him. Your adding, that this sentence may be fitly applied to Christ, prooueth nothing. For though I haue no doubt but Christs soule was with farre greater honour and fa∣uour, ioy and blisse receaued into the hands of God, to whom it was committed, then the soules of all his Saints: yet that doth not prooue his present entraunce after death into the glory of heauen, and continuance in the same, except you will say that at his resurrection, and till his Ascension his soule was out of his Fathers hands, because du∣ring that time it was on earth, and not in heauen; which were a strange position in di∣uinity. Sapient. 3. The soules of the righteous (were) in the hands of God long before Christs com∣ming, as the wise man witnesseth; and yet were they not in the glory of heauen, but in Abrahams bosome, as our Sauiour teacheth. And so the wise man expoundeth Lucae 16. himselfe, adding; Sap. 3 vers. 3. & 7. No torment shall touch them, they are in peace, and in the time of their visitation they shall shine: reseruing them to a time appointed, when glory shalbe reuea∣led on them, though in the meane whiles their spirits were kept in rest and ioy vnder the mighty hand of God. The Thieues being in Paradise with Christ, the same day that he died, concludeth How Christ was in Para∣di e th day of his death. no such thing, as you conceaue. For first no words, there or els where, euince that Christ spake this of his humane nature. Saint Austen resolueth, August epist. 57 ad Darda∣num. The sense is much ea∣sier and freer from all ambiguities, if Christ be vnderstood to haue said, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise; not of his manhood but of his godhead. And in his 111. Tractate vpō Iohn, vpholding the same exposition, addeth; In Iohannem tract. 111. He that said to the thiefe painfully hanging, yet healthfully confessing, (this d y shalt thou be with me in Paradise) according to his manhood had his soule that da e in h ll & his flesh the graue, but according to his god∣head vndoubtedlie he was in Paradise. Titus Bishop of Bostra in Arabia, somewhat elder then Austen, sheweth how these words may be verified of either of Christs natures. Titus Bostro∣rum Episcopus in ca. 23. Lucae. How was this promise of our Lord made to the thiefe, this day shalt thou be with me in Pa∣radise performed? Christ tak n d wne from the crosse was in hell according to his soule, and neuerthelesse by the power of his diuinity brought the Thiefe into Paradise. Happily he first caried the beleeuing Thiefe to Paradise, before he descended to hell. Damascen is of Aus∣tens mind. Damasc. in homilia de san∣cto sublato. The same (Christ) is adored in heauen as God together with the Father and with the holy Ghost, and he as man lay in the Sepulchre with his body, and abode in hell with his soule, and gaue entrance to the thiefe into Paradise, his diuinity, which cannot be com∣prehended in any place, euery where accompanying him. And so is Euthymius. Euthymius in 23. ca. Lucae. How said Christ, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise? because as God, who filleth all places, he was euery where at one instant; in the sepulchre, & in hell, and in Paradise, and in heauen. But admit the words to be ment of Christs humane soule, what reason call you this? Christs soule was in Paradise that very day that he died: ergo neither that day, nor any day els before his resurrection, his soul did or could descend to hell. You must amend these reasons before any man will yeeld you to haue reason or sense. Christ might that very day, that he went to Paradise, subdue and subiect all power in hell vnto hims lfe, he might doe it the next day, he might doe it the third day, when he rose from the dead: the time is not the thing we striue for, which we must leaue to God; but the reall and actuall performance of the Apostles words, He spoiled powers and principali∣ties, Co'off 2. and made an open shew of them, triumphing ouer them in himselfe; which in other words Peter expressed, when he said, Christs Acts 2. soule was not left (or forsaken) in hell: but Acts 2. God raised him p, loosing the sorowes of death (or hell) that Philip. 2. euery knee of things vnder earth should ow vnto him, as well as of things in heauen and earth, and that eue∣rie tongue (euen of the damned and Diuels, for there are none other vnder earth) should confesse (either willingly or constrainedly) Iesus Christ to be Lord vnto the glo∣ry of God the Father. This conquest ouer hell and Satan being acknowledged, whereby all power in heauen and earth (and consequently in hell conteined in the earth) was yeelded vnto Christs manhood after his death, and before or at his resur∣rection, we shall not need to be curious about the time and manner thereof. The compilers of the centuries at Magdeburge doe well admonish. Centur. 1. l. 1. ca. 10. de pass Christi. Descendisse Christum in infernum, articulus sidei est, verum quanam ratione ibi omnia sunt gesta, non est ex∣presse traditum. That Christ descended to hell is an article of the faith, but in what sort all things there were donne, is not expressely deliuered. Happilie it is enough for vs to h ld the generall, and a more exact declaration of this mysterie wee shall heare in another life. Defenc. pag. 150. li 21. The eternall and generall ordinance of God is shewed (Luc. 16.) to be such, that none can goe out of heauen downe to hell, nor come from hell vp to heauen. ] You boldly presume af∣ter your maner, that Abrahams bosome was heauen, of which many learned men do make great doubt. For if the soules of the righteous were in heauen before Christes death and bi th, then were they Luc. 20. equall vnto the elect Angels before the resurrecti∣on, which Christ saith shall be when they are the Luc. 20. children of the resurrection, and so not before. And how were the wordes of our Sauiour true, which he spake in his life time; Iohn 3. No man ascendeth vp to heauen, but he that descended from heauen, the Sonne of man which is in heauen; If all the Saints deceased were in heauen? or how had he the Coloss. 1. preeminence in all things, if all the Patriarks and Prophets were there before him? againe the words of Abraham reach no farder then vnto men; they restraine not An∣gels from descending and ascending, and much lesse the sonne of God. If none with∣out exception could goe fro heauen to hel, as you would construe Abrahams speach, how fell the Diuell and his Angels from heauen to hell? how did Saint Iohn see Reuel. 20. an Angel come downe from heauen, hauing the key of the bottomlesse pitte, & binding & shut∣ting vp Satan in that pitte? if Angels may passe from the one place to the other, how much more might Christ, who is the Lord & head of Angels, and hath the Reuel. 1. keies of hell and death? But since the Scriptures anouch Christes soule was not left in hell, there are plainer and expr sser words for the being of his soule in hell, then in Abrahams bosome; & so if there be no returne thence, no not for Christ himselfe, then by your lame and lewd collection you condemne Christs soule to perpetuall prison in hell. And how commeth it to pas e by your diuinity, that Abraham must receaue Christs soule into his bosome, who was the Redeemer and Sauiour of Abraham? is your skill so great that you forget Christ to be the sonne of God, and so meeter to receaue A∣brahams soule into his protection, then to be receaued of Abraham? but what will you not say and suppose to continue the credit of your conceits in the eies of the sim∣ple, though no wise man, vnlesse wedded to your deuices, will any thing be mooued with these weake suggestions? Defenc. pag. 1 . li. 19 As touching Austens diuers opinion and yours, see before page 29 and your page 360.] Could you find any diuersity worth the marking between Austens opinion and mine touching Christs words on the crosse to the thi fe, your modesty would serue you to make the most of it; but if I repeat diuers opinions of learned writers, and leaue the Reader to his Christian liberty, which he best liketh; what offence take you at that, except it be that I follow not your trade, which is to despise all the world besides your selfe? Indeed in your 29 Page you say, I reiect Austens exposition of Christes words to the Thiefe, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise; which Austen vnderstandeth of the thiefes soule and Christs diuine presence in Paradise; but you keepe your wont to tell ta es for trueth, and to wast words when you want good matter. For I doe not reiect Austens exposition, but only adde, as now I doe, since there is no Scripture to fasten Christs soule to hell for the whole time of his death, Christs soule might after death at diuers times be in Paradise and in hell. Wherein I leaue the Reader to his discreti∣on, which of those two expositions he will embrace. Neither did I in this anouch more then Austen himselfe els where is content to yeeld. For reasoning against Feli∣cianus the Arrian, he saith August. con∣tra Felicianum ca. 15. Seddicet aliquis, deitatis hanc, non animae Christi credimus vocem. But some will say we beleeue this (to day shalt thou be with me in Paradise) was the voice of Christs deity, and not of his soule. To which part then of the thiefe doe we take this promise was made? this day, saith Christ to the thiefe, shalt thou be with me in Paradise, whose body the common death had inclosed vntill the resurrection to come. It was then the soule of the thiefe to which Christ promised and performed this: Whereupon he concludeth Si igitur mortuo corpore ad Paradisum anima mox vocatur, quemquamne adhuc tam impi∣um credimus, qui dicere audeat, quoniam anima seruatoris nostritriduo illo corporeae mortis apud inferos custodiae mancipetur? If then the body (of the thiefe) dying, (his) soule were presently called to Paradise, shall we thinke any man so wicked as to dare say; that the soule of our Sauiour during the three dayes, that his bodie lay dead, was held in the custodie of hell? So that though S. Austen acknowledge the other sense of Christes diuine presence in Paradise to be multo expeditior, & ab ijs omnibus ambiguitatibus liber, farre the easier and freer from all obiections; yet he doth not endure, that any man should so fasten the soule of Christ to hell for the time of his death, that Christ might not thence depart and be in Paradise, when pleased him, as well as the Thiefe, but must stay in hell, as if he were kept in custodie. Defenc. pag. 15 . li. 27. How you will doe to maintaine that Christ went indeed to them, but presently left them that he might goe to hell, I know not. In this I doubt you walke without your guide. ] If I did vse any such wordes, that Christ must presently post from heauen to hell, as if Christ needed no long time to descend to hell. he were like to be benighted afore he came thither, you might busie your braines with lacke of time and want of guides; but if Angels present themselues heere from heauen in a moment and time almost insensible, what should hinder the soule of Christ endued with greater power and might then any Angel, to goe at what time, and with what speed he would to doe that which the Scriptures testifie he did? If then the Prophets and Apostles beare witnesse, that his soule was in hell, and there not left, but ascending vpward ledde captiuitie ca tiue, and spoiled powers and principalities; why play you the iade in iesting at an Article of the Christian faith, as if the way were long and tedious betweene Paradise and hell, so that Christ must haue some time and helpe to dispatch so great a iourney? The Apostle teacheth, that the resurrection of the dead shall be in a 1 Cor. 15. vers. 52. moment and in the 1 Cor. 15. vers. 52. twinckling of an eie. If so generall and strange a worke (as to haue all their soules out of Paradise and hell ioyned to their bodies, and their persons aliue caught vp to the iudgement seate of Christ in the aire) shall be wrought in all the sonnes of men elect and reprobate at an instant; what incredible thing is this, except to an infidell, that he which made heauen and earth with a word, should in as short time, as he saw cause, shew his humane soule to the powers of dark∣nesse in the midst of their kingdome, and take all strength and rule from them, and lead them captiue at his pleasure? And therefore neuer calculate so curiously the di∣stance or passage from Paradise to hell; if these things were not marueilous in mans eies, they were not meet workes for the Sonne of God; but examine soberly, whether the Scripture auouch any such presence of Christes soule in hell, and conquest ouer hell. And if that appeare, teach men to leaue the rest to the mightie hand of God; which brought the soule of his Sonne thither, in what time and maner he thought good, and might best make for his glory. Defenc. pag. 150. li 30. I adde that which is cleere and certaine: yea that which your selfe rightly beleeueth and professeth with vs, though against the opinion of the Fathers, that the soules of the holie Pa∣triarks dead before Christ were not beneath, but aboue; Not in Limbo, but with God in peace, ioy and blisse, euen in Paradise that is heauen. ] Your certainties be your owne ouerhastie coniectures, neither well vnderstanding your selfe, nor others. In the pla∣ces, which you quote out of my Sermons, I say as Christ himselfe deliuered that the iust deceased were in Abrahams bosome, which the wise man calleth the hand of Of Abrahams bosome. God: And that Abrahams bosome was vpward farre aboue hell, as appeareth by the wordes of our Sauiour; more I durst not determine. Neither did I make Abrahams bosome to be Paradise or Heauen, I had no warrant so to doe; but the place whither the soule of the thiefe was caried the day of his death, Christ calleth Paradise, which the Apostle seemeth to make a part of the third heauen. And heere were the soules of the righteous after Christes death, except you thinke that Paradise was prouided only for the penitent thiefe, which S. Austen counteth a great Epist. 9 . absurditie. Thus much I said, and still say; as also that the faithfull departing this life, Reu l 14. rest from their labours, and 2. Cor 5. dwell with the Lord, in places prepasred and appointed for them, though as yet they haue not their house, which is eternall in the heauens, nor are clothed with life swal∣lowing vp mortalitie. But that the soules of the Patriarks were in heauen, that is in the glorie of gods kingdome, before the death and comming of Christ, I haue no such wordes in any of the pages which you produce. I vse not of things vnknowen to giue hastie iudgement, I leaue it to God, who hath many places of abode in his house, and desire not to search into his secrets vnreuealed in this life. Defenc. pag. 150. li. 37. Hence I conclude that Christes soule after his death ascended indeed, and descended not downward beneath vs heere. I heare your conclusion, but I see no premises from which you may iustly inferre so much. For though the soule of Christ might ascend after death, if we respect situation of place, in comparison of the earth; yet because the Scriptures reckon no ascending but into the glorie of heauen, (otherwise the di∣uels that Ephes. 2. rule in the aire, should ascend, and the damned that come to iudgement, shall ascend); the Christian faith doth not say that Christ ascended before he descen∣ded. And the apostle exactly obseruing the relation and application of those two wordes vnto Christ, saith his descending was the first of the twaine, that was perfor∣med. Ephes 4. This saith he, that (Christ) ascended, what is it but that he first descended into the lower parts of the earth? Otherwise if you be disposed to play with the ascending and descending of Christes person, bodie, or soule before or after death, you may finde vs many descents and ascents besides the two that are mentioned in our Creed. The Nicene Creed saith of his person, that for vs and our saluation he descended from heauen, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the virgine Marie; and of himselfe he saith; Iohn 6. I am the liuing bread, which descended from heauen. Then after his death his soule ascended as you say, and so must descend againe before his body could be re∣stored to life. Now the apostle saith; Christ Ephes. 4. descended into the lower parts of the earth, and likewise must thence ascend before his resurrection. And lastly after forty daies he ascended body and soule aboue all the heauens. Heere are sixe descents and ascents, if you list to controle the Creed; but the Christian faith following the apo∣stle, noteth onely two, his descending to hell; or to the lower parts of the earth, and his ascending aboue all heauens; which were two materiall parts of our saluation after he tooke flesh, and profitable for vs to know. And though you stifly stand on this, that Christes soule descended not downeward beneath vs heere; Yet against the Creed, and the apostles wordes, that Christ descended to hell, and to the lower parts of the earth, no wise man will admit either your opinion or assertion, howsoeuer you thinke you can make a florish with Dauids words, who saith he was Psal. 139. fashioned beneath in the earth: of which we will speake when we come to examine the force of the apostles wordes. Defenc. pag. 151. li. 1. Only except there be some speciall reason of good authoritie to the contrary, which is the second point of importance heere to be considered. Touching which thus I say, without ex∣presse and euident Scripture there is in the world no sound nor meet authoritie to disprooue our former reason or conclusion. ] Your reasons raked out of the Scripture are such, that no man need to regard; they are miserable mistakings and palpable misapplyings of the Scriptures intending no such thing as you imagine; and for the contrarie they are plaine enough, and such as haue been receaued and reuerenced by all Christendom without exception, till you and some others in our age started vp with figures and phrases to mince and manage the Scriptures to your pleasure. They are eely diuines that doe not know, the names of heauon and hell; of life and death of flesh and sp it, of Christ and of God, may be diuersly taken, and diuersly vsed euen by example of holy Scriptures; but it is the high way to all heresie and infidelity to turne and wind euery word occurrent in the Scriptures after euery signification, that may be found thereof in the old or new Testament, without respect to the maine grounds of the Christian faith, and to make Rabbins and Pagans to be the best interpreters of words vsed by the holy Ghost to expresse the mysteries of Christs kingdome. And how come you now to be so strickt in this second question, that without expresse and euident Scrip∣ture, against which you cannot so much wrangle, you will yeeld to nothing; who were so licentious in the former, that without all Scripture, and against the Scripture, you maintained a new kind of redemption by the death of Christs soule, and his su ering the second death; which if you stand to the word of God, is eternall damnation of body and soule in hell fire? you shew your selfe more then a Patriarke in the Church thus to coine new articles of the Creed without all warrant of the word, and to cast out the old, though confessed and continued since Christs time, because you find some words to haue diuers senses, at least with Iewish and heathen writers, though not with Christians. Austen himselfe auoucheth well and faithfully, supposing there were no expresse, nor plaine Scripture for Christes descending, the (sayth he) it were maruellous boldnesse, that any should dare say he went downe to hell. ] But the same Austen in the same place telleth you, that Epistola 9. euidentia testimonia & infernum commemorant, & dolores; euident testimones (of Scriptures) mention both hell and the sorowes thereof, to which Christ came. And for full proofe heereof, he sayth eu n in the same Epistle, Ibidem epistola 99. Defenc. pag. 151. li. 12. We can not contradict either the prophesie, which sayd, Thou wil not leaue my so le in hell; which les y man should d e otherwise interpret, Peter expoundeth in the Acts of the Apostles; nor the words of the same Peter, where he affirmeth, that (Christ) loosed the sorowes of hell, in which it was impossible he should be held. Who then but an Infidell, will denie that Christ was in hell? All that you haue to say against this, is that Iewes and Pagans, to wit, wicked Rabbins, enemies to Christ, and Poets ignorant of all trueth, vsed the words Sheol and Hades otherwise than the whole Church of Christ without exception, till our age, receiued and belee∣ued them from S. Peters mouth, and S. Lukes pen, that signifieth the foule, and hades importeth hell: put you from this shi t, and you fall ull within the compasse of S. Austens challenge, that is, of plaine infidelitie; and the e be simple Sidemen to cleere you from that crime. q Now I assume this and by Gods helpe shall make it manifest, that there is in all the Scrip∣ture no one place whereby it may be prooued by any shew of reason, that Christes soule after this life went locally downward from hence, or diuersly from the so les of ll good men decea∣sed. ] Though the opinion you h e of your lfe be great; yet when you come to condemne the whole Church of God s ignor t of the Christian faith, or altering the same; you should vse some more modestie than to say, they had not one plat all the Scripture, nor any shew of reason to beleeue as they did. You pre ume much of your Rabbins and Pagans, preferring thei enuio s and friuolous i aginations before the iudgement and faith of the whole Ch ch of Chr st yet take good heed lest the bet∣ter and elder sort euen of your owne Deponents receiue you not; and so you test conuicted in the ares of all good m n to be rather an insolent affecter of nouelties, than any regarder of sobrietie or pietie. Defenc. pag. 151. li. 18. Only there are two or thr places sonsibly wrested to this p rpose. First, that (Ephes. 4.) where Christ is sayd to h e come downe into the lowest parts of the earth. ] If that place be wrested from his right sense, the Church of Christ from the beginning must be charged with that wresting. Ireneu citeth tho e very words of the Apostle, that Christ descended to the lower parts of the earth, and maketh them equiualent with the words of Dauid touching Christ, Th hast deliuered my soule from the nethermost hell, saying: Irenaus li. . cap. 31. Ho & Da id in c m prophet s d xit; so much Da id in his prophesi spake of him. Tertullian alleaging the very same wordes of the Apostle, concludeth; Habes t Tert llianus de anima. cap. 55. regionem Infer m subterraneam credere; by this thou art to beleeue that the region (or place) of hell is vnder the earth. Cyprian: Cyprian. de Vnctione Chris∣m . Descendens ad inferos captiuam ab antiquo captiuitatem reduxit. Christ descending to hell brought backe the captiuitie, that of old was captiuated. Arnobius: Arnobius in Psal. 137. Postea vidit inferos, & longe factus est, non solum à c lis sed & ab ipsa Terra in abyssi profunda descendens &c: after (his crosse) he visited hell, and became farre off not only from heauen, but euen from the earth it selfe, descending into the depth of the bottomlesse pit. Chrysostom: Chrysost. in 4. ca. ad Ephes. Christ descended to the lower parts of the earth, after which there are none other. And he ascended aboue all, higher than which there is nothing. Ambrose vpon that place of aul: Ambros. i 4. ca. epistolae ad Ephes. After death (Christ) descended to hell, whence ri∣sing the third day, he ascended aboue all the heauens afore all men. Ierom out of those words of the Apostle, Christ descended to the lower parts of the earth, first concludeth: Hieron. in 4. ca. epistol ad Ephesios. Infernum sub terra esse nemo iam ambigat; Let no man now doubt but hell is vnder the earth. And expounding the rest, he sayth: Qui descendit cum anima in infernum, ipse cum anima & corpore ascendit in coelum. He that descended to hell in soule, ascended to hea∣uen with bodie and soule. Primasius vpon the same words of Paul maketh the like col∣lection: Primasius in 4. ca. ad Ephes. Ergo sub terra est infernus. Qui descendit cum anima in infernum, ipse cum anima & corpore ascendit ad coelos. Therefore hell is vnder the earth. And he that in soule descended to hell, ascended to heauen in soule and bodie. Photius: Photius apud Oecumenium in 4. ca. ad Ephes. To the lower parts of the earth, after which place there is no lower; he meaneth hell. Dorotheus: Dorotheus de sancto Eps te Doct. 22. What is, He led captiuitie captiue? By Adams transgression the enemie made vs all captiues, and had vs in subiection. Christ then tooke vs againe out of the enemies hand, and conquered him that made vs captiu . Erepti sumus igitur ab inferis ob Christi humanitatem. We were then taken from hell by Christes humanity. Theophylact: Theophyl. i 4. ca. ad Ephes. At quem in locum descendit? In infernum, &c. To what place did Christ descend? To hell, which he calleth the lowest parts of the carth after the common opinion of men. Haymo: Haym in 4. ca. ad Ephes. First Christ descended to the lower parts of the arth into hell, and after he ascended to heauen. He descended to hell in his soule alone, and then he ascended aboue all the heauens in body and soule. It must be noted by this that he sayth, Christ, descended to the lower parts of the earth: he sheweth hell to be vnder the earth, whence it is called Infernus, because it is lower than the earth, or vnder the earth. Zanchius repeating diuers Expositions of this place, addeth in the end: Tan h. in 4. ca. ad Ephes. vers. . The Fa∣thers for the most part are of this opinion, that Christ in his soule came to the place of the damned, to signifie not in words, but with his presence, that the iustice of God was satisfied by his death and bloudshed, and that Satan had no longer power ouer his Elect, whom he held captiue: that himselfe was made Lord ouer all, and all power ouer heauen and earth giuen him; and a Name aboue all Names, that in the name of Iesu euery knee of things celestiall, terrestriall, and infernall should bow: neither that he came thither only to signifie this in such sort as is sayd, but also that he might c ie all the diuels with him in a triumph: as it is Co∣loss. 2. He spoiled powers, and principalities, and made an open shew of them, leading them (as captiues) in a triumph by the vertue of his crosse, by which he had purged sinnes, and ap∣peased the iustice of God. Could he not haue done this, without any such descent of his soule? He could, but he would be so farre humbled, that his soule should descend into that most darke and wretched place, though not there to suffer any thing, but to beginne thence his tri∣umph ouer the power of the Diuell. And this opinion of the Fathers I dare not condemne, since it is not repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, and hath likely reasons. The consent of the Fa∣thers when it is not contrary to the holy Scriptures hath great weight with me. There is as much difference betwixt this mans modestie and yours, as there is betweene his learning and yours. He durst not condemne the iudgement of the Fathers, because it had probable grounds, and was no way contrary to the Scriptures: you auouch they had no shew of reason from any place of Scripture. But your reward will be ac∣cording: for where he is with all, and euen by your selfe reputed a sound and learned Writer; no man will take you but for an vnsound and vnlearned Boaster. Defenc. pag. . li. 21. I haue largely and plainly shewed (Treat. pag. 140. ) that this place speaketh not a whit neither of hell, nor of Christes soule descending locally, neither before his death nor after. I noteth only Christes sensible and apparent humiliation to the last and lowest point, that is, to the graue; according to the Hebrew phrase, which the Apostles frequented in their Greeke writings very much. You haue shewed it, as your maner is, with your seeming & saying that so you iudge: but other proofs you offer none besides phrases and figures, where∣in you take vpon you to be very copious. I say then, Thus I say, It seemes to me, and Thus do I iudge; these be your best demonstrations, the rest is idle and vaine talke. Three senses you make of these wordes, but not one of them otherwise than by your owne authoritie. Treat. pag. 144. Some thinke, you say, that this Greeke phrase (to the lower parts of the earth) is only a figure of speech, a kinde of hypallage, for the earth which is the lower part of the world. ] If euery mans thoughts may stand for sound and true Expositions of the Scripture, we shall haue many moe deuices than the world hath yet heard of; but how proue you this in erting of the Apostles words by your supposed figures to be the true meaning of the holy Ghost? Whatsoeuer pleaseth not your humour in the words of God, if you may chop and change with figures of speech, you will lea lit∣tle the e, that shall not taste of your turnsall. Treat. pag. 145. Others doe thank that it may be taken, as al ding to that metaphoricall Hebrew phrase tachtijoth erets, the lower parts of the earth, where Dauid meaneth his Mothers wombe. And then wh re Dauid meaneth only Christs taking our flesh. The Christian faith was neuer framed out of phrases or figures of speach vnknowen to the people, and passing their vnderstanding: neither did the Apostles so deliuer matters of doctrine, as purposely oluing them in euery darcke and doubtfull phrase, that might be gathered out of Moses or of the Prophets: this is the way to leaue nothing certaine in the booke of God, though the wordes be neuer so plaine, as long as any phrase or figure may per∣uert it. If Dauid once by a metaphoricall kind of resemblance called the lowest part of his Mothers body, where he was fashioned and framed, tachijot arets, the bottom of the earth; that is, of his mother being earth, or compared with the earth, which is the common mother of vs all, whence our bodies first came, and whither they must re∣turne; or noted the strangenesse and secretnesse of his conception and formation in his mothers wombe by the bowels of the earth, where mettals and minerals lie and grow in like manner: What is this to the Apostles words, who dallieth not heere with obscure phrases and metaphors, as Dauid did for ciuilities sake calling his mothers wombe the bowels of the earth, but expoundeth the words of Dauid cited immedi∣ately before, that Christ ascending vp on hi , led captiuity captiue, and gaue gifts vnto men? That then which the apostle immediately addeth by way of a Parenthesis, must tend wholy to the declaration and exposition of these words of Dauid, that Christ ascen∣ding led captiuity captiue: the later words, that he gaue gifts to men, he presently and largely sheweth how they were performed after Christs ascending to heauen. And since Christs conception, though it be an Article of our faith, yet was wrought by the holy Ghost, not as Dauids was, neither was Christs body fashioned by degrees; first in seed, then in bloud, after in flesh, as Dauid confesseth his was, but after a more strange and wonderfull manner, as the Fathers both Greeke and Latin teach; and du∣ring the time of his conception, Christ did not lead captiuity captiue; his mothers wombe can no way pertaine to the Apostles purpose in this place, howsoeuer you or some others would faine shew their deuices in making the Apostle hunt after strange and obscure metaphors out of Dauids words once vsed for good manners sake. Treat. pag. 141. It seemes to me a very plaine Hebraisme, expressing tachijoth erets: which words are no where found for hell; for the graue they are found. Like to this is erets tachtith (Ezechiel. 31 ) where the seuerall circumstances doe plainly teach that the graue only is there ment, and the condition of death, the same sense manifestly hath another Hebrew phrase very like to this: Sheol tachijah (psal: 86 ) and Sheol tachath: (Esa: 14 ) where though many thinke hell is signified; yet surely the circumstances doe conuince that the graue only is there ment. this do I iudge, that the descēding of Christ to the lower parts of the earth may be taken tru∣ly, plainly, & as is agreeable to the Hebrew phrase, whence surely this Greeke phrase ariseth, namely for Christs humiliation vnto the graue. Heere is your third exposition of the A∣postles words, which you call a plaine demonstration, that this place speaketh neuer a word of hell, nor of Christs descending thither, but only of his graue: and if these proud and vaine bragges may goe for proofes, you will prooue any thing; but you must come backe for all this hast, and learne that trueth is not so lightly put from her holdfast, as you suppose. For setting aside your hypallages and metaphors, which are nothing to the meaning of the Apostle in this place, the ground which heere you lay, that erets tachtith, the lowest earth, and Sheol tachtijah, the lower Sheol are no where vsed for hell, but euery where for the graue, is false and full of rash resolution, directly re∣pugnant to the trueth of the Scriptures, and the circumstances of those places, to which you appeale. And least the Reader should thinke I speake altogether out of mine owne head peremptorily and presumptuously, as you doe; he shall heare the iudgement of some of the eldest Rabbins, and others well learned in the Hebrew tongue touching these phrases, and then we will examine the circumstanccs of the texts themselues. And because I would make but one labour of manie; and the mea∣ning of Sheoltachtijah; the lower sheol and erets tachtith the lower earth cannot well be discerned vntill we see what sheol naturally and truely signifieth, I will fir t examine the signification of sheol at which you and others so much stumble and then grow to consider of the places where those words are vsed and their circumstances. Sheol properly signifieth the pitts or places vnder earth where the bodies or soules of the dead are receaued to corruption or destruction, so called for that they are neuer satisfied but alwaies expect more, euer since man was adiudged to death for sin: and though in the great conceit of your owne skill you tell me, that my Defenc. pag. 152. li. 14. not considering (or not caring for) the vse and manner of the Hebrew tongue causeth my mistaking as in these places, so likewise in all, or most of the rest, and causeth mine error in this maine question; Yet I hope I shall let the Reader see in the end, that proud ignorance leadeth you so rashly to resolue as you doe both of the words and places in question, and likewise of my positions. Mercer a man of no meane skill in the hebrew tongue, as appeareth by his paines therein taken, in his additions to Pagnines Lexicon perused and pub∣lished by Ceallere and Betrame, two learned hebricians of our age, obserueth that Mercerus in Pagnini the∣sauro in Rali∣ shaal. hoc nomine generaliter locasubterranea tendendo centrum versus appellantur, the places vnder the earth euen to the (middle or) center thereof are generally called by this name (Sheol) as by another name of the same signification, it is elswhere called Erets tachtith, the lower or lowest earth (Ezechiel. 31:) and often with an adiect sheôl tachtijah for explanations sake. Proprie insernum dixeris ita vt locum significes. Hinc cum verbo descendendi passi iungitur. Properly you may call it hell or the place below, for which cause it is euery where ioined with a Verb of descending. Forstere in his hebrew Dictionary repeating what o∣thers thought of the sense of the word Sheol, as that some tooke it for the pit, others for the graue, some for death it selfe, some for the state of the dead; plurimi vero inferum, id est locum damnatorum; and the most tooke it for hell, euen the very place of the damned; ad∣deth in the end. . I am of this opinion, that I thinke it importeth in the Scripture most often the place where the dead are vnder the earth, so called for that it cannot be satisfied, as Lac∣tantius in certaine verses of his seemeth to render that Etymologie of the word. Inferus insa∣tiabiliter ca a guttura pandit. Hell opcneth wide his vnsatiable throat. Et aliter verti commodè non potest quàm nomine infernus, and cannot be otherwise conueniently translated then by the name of Infernus (hell or the places below) Deuter. 32) A fire is kindled in my wrath, and hath burned to the nethermost hell. So doth Ezechiel vse another word of the same signification, ca. 31. Thou shalt be cast downe erets tachtith to the lower earth. Pagnine vnknowen to no man that is learned, for his labours in the hebrew tongue, saith, Sheôl Pagnini the∣saurus in ver∣ sh al. sepulchrum, infernus, Gehenna. Sheol signifieth the graue, hell, Gehenna. Munstere Mun ieri di∣ctionarium He∣braicum in Ra∣d e shaal. Sheolidem quod sepulchrum, fonea, infernus. Sheol is as much as the graue, the pit, and hell. Auenarius. A enarji Ie∣ icon in verbo Sh l. Sheol sepulchrum, item infernus id est locus inferior sub terra. St de impijs dicitur, significat perditionem. Sheol is the graue; also hell, that is the lower place vnder the earth. When it is spoken of the wicked, it signifieth perdition. Lauater: Lauaterus in 15. caput Pro∣uerbiorum. Sheol non tantum significat locum damnatorū, sed etiam foue m vel sepulchrum. Sheol doth not only signisie the place of the damned, but also the pit or graue. And before them all Lyra well learned in the Hebrew tongue, if not a Iew borne, sayd. Lyra in ca. 5. Esai . Acci∣pitur vers. 11 infernus in Scriptura dupliciter; infernus (which is the Latin translation of Sheôl) is taken two wa es in the Scripture; one for the pit, where the Carcasses of the dead are put, the other, for the place whither the soules of the damned descend. The trueth of their iudgements, that Sheol signifieth the places vnder the earth, where the bodies and soules of the dead are receaued will appeare by the very confession of the Rabbins themselues, as well as by the direction of the Scriptures. Touching the situation of Sheol Rabbi Abraham saith. Rabbi Ab a. in ca. 2. Ion . Sheol m kom aamakhephec bashamaijm shehu marom. Sheol is a deepe place opposed to heauen, which is on hie. And againe I m in Psal. 139. Sheol is the lowest place of the whole earth opposite to heauen. Rabbi Leui. Rabbi Leui in ca. 26. Iob. Sheol hi mattah bemuchalat vehi markez. Sheol is absolutely below, & is the center (of the earth.) And that with them it importeth hell I meane Gehenna, the place appointed to tor∣ment the soules of the wicked, there can be no question. Rabbi Iehosuas the sonne of Leui deliuering the names of hel, that are occurrent in the Scripture, saith, In bro ru∣bin cap. Osio passin. there be seuen names of Gehenna, and these they are. Sheol, Abadon, destruction, Bor Shachath, the pit of perdition. Bor Sheon the lake of ruine or roaring, Tith haiauen, the bottom of the myre, Zal-maueth, the shadow of death, Erets tachtith the lower earth. In the expositi∣on of the 11 Psalme there are repeated as Midras e∣bium in Psal. 11. places of abode for the wicked in Gehenna, Sheol, Abadon, Erets tachtith. Dauid Kimchi commenting on these wordes of the 9. Psalme, sinners shall be turned to Sheol, saith. Rabbi Dauid Kimchi in Psal. 9. Vuederash lishola hu gehinnam, and in derash, Sheol is Gehenna. Elias the Leuite in his Caldaie Lexicon sayth: Elias in Me∣thur. geman verbo Sheol. Veiesh Sheol Methurgemim gehinnam. Sheol with the (Translators or) Interpreters is Gehenna. The Caldaie paraphrase expressing those wordes of Dauid, The shape (or beautie) of the wicked) shall consume in Sheol, but God will redeeme my soule from the hand of She∣ol, thus rendereth them: Chaldea pa∣raphrasis in Psal. 49. vers. 15 & 16. Their bodies shall wax olde in Gehenna, but the Lord will re∣deeme my soule from gehenna. Rabbi Salomon likewise expoundeth Sheol in that place by abb. Salo∣mon in Psal. 49. Gehinnam. So in the sixth Psalme it is sayd, Whosoeuer is not circumcised, Midras tehi∣lim in Psal. 6. iored Gehinnam, goeth to Gehenna, as Esay threateneth; Sheôl hath enlarged it selfe. Rabbi Moses Hadarsan vpon the first of Genesis: Rabbi Moses Hadarsan in 1 ca. Genes. Gehenna is sayd to be deepe, as it is in the ninth of the Prouerbs. In the deepe of sheôl are the ghests (of an harlot). The He∣brew glosse vpon those wordes of God vttered by Moses, A fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burne to the nethermost Sheol, sayth; In libro Tan∣chuma. In my wrath, that is, in the midst of Gehenna, as it afterward followeth, and shall burne to the lowest sheôl. Rabbi Io∣den expounding the wordes of Dauid, Thou hast deliuered my soule from the ne∣thermost Sheol, sayth; Rabbi Ioden in Midras tehi∣lim Psal 85. The way of Adulterers leadeth to the deepe of hell, and therefore he sayth, Thou hast deliuered my soule from the nethermost sheôl. With whom Rabbi Se∣lomo concordeth: Gl ssa Rabbi Selom. Ibidem. The way of Adulterers is to be in the deepe of hell, and thence hast thou delinered me, sayd Dauid, when Nathan sayd vnto me, The Lord also hath taken a∣way thy sinne. And lest we should doubt what they meane by Gehinnam, Elias the Leuite sayth,; Elias in Thes∣bi verbo Ge∣hinnam. Kareü Rabbothenu mekom ônesh hareshaim achar motham gehinnam. Our Rabbins call the place of punishment for the wicked after their deaths, Gehenna. Neither want these Iewes that auouch Sheol, and specially the nether most Sheol to be below in the deepe of the earth, to be opposite to heauen, & to be the place of pu∣nishment for the wicked after their deaths, warrant in the sacred Scriptures to vphold these assertions. For though Sheol extend to any place vnder earth, that by Gods ordi∣nance requireth or receaueth the bodies or soules of the dead, & in that respect to the godly it can be no more then the graue, & the losse of all things in this life consequent to the graue; & in that sense we must interprete Sheol, when it is applied to the bodies or persons of the Saints, whose soules are in rest and blisse with God, & not vnder the earth, where Sheol is: yet the ful force of that word whē it is threatned to any, or affir∣med of the wicked, noteth the pit of destructiō for their soules, aswel as of corruption for their bodies, & the consequents of either; & the nethermost Sheol expressely de∣signeth the place of torment appointed for sinners, that die out of Gods fauour, & re∣ceaue the iust reward of their vnrighteousnesse. Prou. 15. The way of life, saith Salomon, is aboue to him that knoweth to decline from Sheol, that is below. Where first it is euident, that as vers. 24. heauen is aboue, in which is true and eternall life; so Sheol, which is the pit of death for bodie and soule, is below vs, which must needes be in the earth vnder vs. This partition of celestiall, terrestriall and infernall persons and places the Apostle warran∣teth by this authoritie, when he saith. Phil p. 2. Euery knee of things , in heauen, on the earth: and vnder the earth (should (and) shall) bow at the name of Iesus. And since the whole world is by the word of God in the creation, con∣seruation, and alteration thereof sufficiently deuided into heauen and earth; the place of hell must of necessitie be either out of the whole world created by God, and so no where; or in heauen, which is an impious absurditie and monstrous contrarie e; or else it must be within the compasse of the earth: and not being vpon the earth where men liue, it must needes be vnder the earth, whither the wicked descend when they die. This distribution also Saint Iohn ratifieth, when he saith, Apoca. 5. None in heauen, nor on earth, , nor vnder the earth, was able to open the booke. Wherefore the booke of Iob to expresse the infinitenesse of Gods perfection and wisedome, vseth these foure comparisons. Iob 11. The heauens are high, what canst thou doe (there)? It is deeper then Sheol; how canst thou know it? the measure thereof is longer then the earth, and broder then the sea. Where if we bee not wilfully bl nd, wee cannot choose but see, that Sheol is not onely deepe, but the deepest place in the world; euen as hea∣uen is the highest. To compare the wisedome of God with the graue, which is sixe foote deepe, or not so much, were most ridiculous, since we commonly digge to that depth and deeper vpon diuers occasions. And therefore Sheol is the deepest place in the earth, to which no man liuing euer pearced, to make report of the deepenesse of it. Moses confirmeth the same when he saith; Deut. 32. sire shall burne to the lower Sheol, and shall eate through the earth, and inflame the foundations of the hils. As the situation of Sheol is below vnder the earth, that is in the bottome of the earth, so is it a place threatned to the soules, not onely to the bodies of the wicked, though at length it shall receaue both. Dauid putting a difference betwixt himselfe and the wicked, saith, Psal 49. Like sheepe shall they be laid in Sheol, but God will red eme my soule from the hand of Sheol. Dauid neuer drempt that his soule should bee in the graue, nor that the soules of the wicked should there be laid: much lesse that his bo∣die should be freed from the graue, more then the bodies of such as knew no God at all. Sheol then here, as in sundry other parts of Scripture, signifieth somewhat, from which the godly shalbe saued, and whereto the wicked shalbe euerlastingly adiudged. But that is not the graue, which is common to all men, good and bad. It was there∣fore the Sheol of soules from which Dauid hoped to be deliuered, and which the wic∣ked shall not auoyd: And so are his very words. The Lord will deliuer my soule from Psal. 49. v. 15. the power of Sheol. Againe the full reward of wickednesse is not the graue whereto the godly come as well as the godlesse. But Sheol is threatned in the Scriptures as the full and finall wages of all impietie, neither is there any other note or name sor hell, except metaphoricall throughout the Old Testament. Wherefore when Dauid saith, Psal. 9 v. 17. sin∣ners shall be turned to Sheol, and all nations that forget God; he doth not threaten them with that, which is generall to all Gods children, but with that, which is peculiar to all Gods enemies, which must needes be hell, and not the graue. And so much Caluine himselfe, who otherwise ouermuch vrgeth the right sense of Sheol to be the graue, confesleth to be the true meaning of this place." The Hebrew word Sheôlah (to Sheol) in 9. v 1 . which was ambiguous, I doubted not to translate by the name of hell. For though it displease me not, that others translate it the graue, yet it is certaine, that somewhat heere is noted by the Prophet besides the common death. Otherwise he should say nothing of the wicked, that should not indifferently agree to all the faithfull. Obserue this rule, which indeed is true, that when the Scriptures threaten the wicked with Sheol, they meane not the graue, which is common to all the godly; but that Sheol, which is appointed for the wicked, from which the faithfull shall be freed, and you may spare all your figures and phrases, wherewith you loade both your selfe and your Reader in this place to no purpose. For there is a Sheol, as Salomon noteth, that shall Prou. 1. v. 12. swallow men aliue and whole, which cannot be the graue, where there lyeth but one part of man and that after his death. And since the Scripture in exact tearmes maketh a lower Sheol, which cannot be but in comparison of an higher, with what face can you elude the lower Sheol to be nothing but the graue, whereas one and the same thing cannot bee by any meanes both lower and higher in respect of it selfe? And therefore howsoeuer you could shuffle with the name of Sheol, without addition against both learning and trueth; yet to auouch the lower Sheol to be onely the graue, is onely a point of your accustomed impudencie, which regardeth neither reason nor sense, so long as you may ourface all with your pri∣uate and witlesse fansie. Come now to the place of Esaie the fourteenth, where you so prem rily pro∣nounce, that whatsoeuer others thinke, the circumstances doe conuince the graue onely is there ment; and see your owne follie, if pride haue not so closed your eyes, that you can discerne nothing besides your owne dreames. In the wordes of Esaie are sundrie cir∣cumstances, which plainely prooue Sheol there not to be taken for the graue onely. The first is the situation of Sheol, which the Prophet there saith is below. Esai. 14. v. 9. Sheol from below is stirred to meete thee; not meaning the dead should be then raised to life, but the Ghostes below should be mooued and affected with the suddaine fall of that mightie tyrant. It is also there opposed to heauen, as the lowest place to the highest; for where through pride the king of Babylon said in his heart, vers. 13. I will ascend to heauen, and exalt my throne aboue the starres of God; the Prophet replieth, vers. 15. thou shalt be thrust downe to Sheol, to the sides of the lake. Secondly there are in that place attributed to them in Sheol remembrance, admirance, irrision, and speach, which by no meanes can agree to dead carcasses in the graue, but to spirits and soules in hell; neither had the dead bodie of the king of Babylon any sense, sorrow, or shame for his foule fall, which their insulting in hell against him purposed to impresse. Thirdly the cruelty, tyranny, pride, and rage of the king of Babylon against Gods people were greater then to bee requited onely with the graue, as were all other men euen the Iewes themselues that were the Seruants of God & their most religious Kings. It was therefore no way fitting for the iustice of God against his enemies, nor for his loue to his owne, to menace the oppressors & murderers of his people with no more, but only with the graue. For since God by the same prophet threatned the king of Asshur with Tophet for smiting his people, saying; Esai. 30. v. 33. Tophet is prepared of old, it is euen prepared for the king, he (to wit God) hath made it deepe and wide, the burning thereof is fire, and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a riuer of brimstone, doth kindle it: how should the graue onely be sufficient to reuenge the outrages of the king of Babylon against the Saints of God, whose citie he vtterly destroyed, and kept them groning in most miserable seruitude? Lastly where you so confidently pronounce the graue onely is there ment, a man may soone see, how little care you take in setling your sentence, since of all other things there spe∣cified, the graue is namely excepted by the Prophet, as no part of Gods threats against that proud tyrant. These are his words. Esai. 14. vers. 20. &. 19. Thou shalt not be ioyned with them in the graue, because thou hast destroied thine owne land, and slaine thy people: thou art cast out of the graue, like an abominable branch, as a carcasse troden vnder feete. So that heere you are taken tardie with a plain and presumptuous contradiction to the words of the Prophet, that where he threatneth, the king of Babel for his cruell oppression shall not be partaker of a graue after his death, but be cast out as an hatefull care asse to be troden vnder foote, you in your wisedome affirme the g ue is onely heere ment, whatsoeuer others thinke, yea though the Prophet himselfe expresly say no. With such principles you proppe vp your idle fansies in the Hebrew tongue, whiles you would seeme learned in giuing the Prophet the lie to his face. But heere you will say is mention of wormes, that should spredde vnder him, and co er him, and of lying downe to sleepe. ] This is all the shew, that can be made out of six∣teene verses in that Chapter describing the destruction of the king of Babylon and his issue, and yet these wordes neither doe nor must inferre the graue, which he should lacke, but the putrifying of his body, though vnburied; and his lying down to death, yet not in the graue. Neither is it to be doubted, but when his soule descended to Sheol below, his bodie was dead; the one doth not exclude, but rather include the other, except men descend aliue to hell, as we read of some in the Scriptures; other∣wise the soule is first seuered from the body, before she goe to her owne place, which for the wicked is the lower Sheol. Thus much you might haue learned out of old and new interpreters, but that you scorne to be directed by any man farder then your owne fancie doth lead you. Of this place of Esaie Ierom thus writeth. Hiero. in 14. ca. Esaiae. He that through pride said, I will ascend to heauen, and be like the most high, is thrust downe; non solum ad infernum, sed ad inferorum vltimum, ot onely to hell, but to the lowest steppe of hell. So the deepe of the lake doth sig∣nifie, for which in the Gospell we read vtter darkenesse, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. And withall we learne, that hell is vnder the earth, the Scripture saying vnto the bottome of the l ke. Haymo on the same words. Haymo in 14. ca. Esaiae. Hence we learne, that hell is vnder the earth, whose inhabitants in this place are designed by the name of hell. Hell is troubled to meet thee, because the angell, who is President ouer infernall paines, hath stirred vp, to meete thee, the Giants, that is the mightie princes of the earth, whom before thou didst heau ly oppresse. Lyra very skilfull in the Hebrue tongue, as appeareth by his often citing the Rab∣bins, vpon the same place saith. Lyra in 14. ca. Esaiae. Heere is the insultation of the dead, and first against the soule (of the king of Babylon,) secondly as touching the buriall of his bodie. Concer∣ning the first we must know, the Iewes & Catholike write s expound this place of Nab codo∣nosors soule descending to the paines of the damned. But it must be referred to Balthasar his Nephew, and so it is said. HELL.] That is the diuell the ruler of hell. VND R THEE] because hell is said to be in the deepe of the earth. IS TROVBLED.] because the diuels were busie about the receauing and leading of his soule. Bullingere likewise. Bullingerus in 14 ca Esaiae. The Pro∣phet goeth on to describe the wretchednesse of Balthasar the wicked king of Babylon. When therefore he was thrust through the body in many places by the souldiers, that brake into his palace, his soule went straight to hell. Where two things are to be obserued; first that the soule of man doth not die with his body; next that hell is appointed as a certaine place for the wicked, which heere is auouched to be beneath vs. Oecolampadius. Oecolampa∣dius in 14. Esai . Thou art descen∣ded to hell, and thy glory and mirth with thee. And as the body is deuoured of wormes, so the soule is tormented with the wormes of an euill conscience. These are the treasures of rich and mightie men, which oppresse others in this life; they cary nothing hence, but a wretched con∣science into the Gehenna sire, where their worme doth not die, nor the fire quench. Pellican. Pallicanus in 14. Esaiae. The dead Princes in hell answer one another, deriding ech the other, vpbrayding violences, exercising wrath and indignation, raging with impatience and iniuries, wormes meate, and most wretched with the perpetuall gnawing of conscience, euen as in the kingdome of the bles∣sed (Saints) they congratulate one another, and reioyce ech at others rewards and honors. Gualter. Gualterus in 14. ca. Esaiae. The summe of all that shall be said (by the Prophet) is this, that the Medes should kill the king of Babylon, and his soule be cast downe to hell, among other tyrants to suf∣fer euerlasting torments. This place hath an euident testimonie teaching vs, that soules do not die with their bodies, but are spirits immortall, and gathered into a place appointed for them; the wicked to hell, where vtter darkenesse is, and eternall weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mollerus. Mollerus in ca. 14. Esai . In these verses is described the state of the dead, which depart this life in their sinnes without repentance, as it is in the storie of the rich glutton (Lucae 16.) for as he was caried to hell, so this tyrant, and all others, that die in their sinnes, descend to hell. Wigandus vpon these wordes, W gandus in 14. ca Esai . Hell below is stirred to meete thee. The Prophet saith, that other Tyrants in hell meet the Babylonian tyrant, and insult at him, qui iam in i∣mum Tartarum detractus, sibi iat similis, who being brought downe to the deepest hell, is now become like to them. As these learned interpreters rightly obserue the circumstances of Esaies words, so depart they not from the propriety of the Hebrew phrase, which . Munster confesseth generally to be this. Munster an∣notation s in ca. 4. Euangel. The wicked descend lishol tachtith, to the lower sheol, that is, to Gehenna, where their fire quencheth not for euer. The words of Ezechiel 31 & 32, haue as many and the same circumstances to re∣sute your follie, as the wordes of Esay haue, and make proofe sufficient, that those words doe not import only the Graue, as you falsely presume. First Rabbi Iehosuas and Midras Tehilim of good authority amongst the Iews, auouch (as I haue shewed) erets tachtith, the lower carth, to be the description and appellation of Hell in the Scriptures. Next, Mercer and Forster, and other famous Hebricians obserue, as also your selfe doe yeeld, that erets tachtith hath manifestly the same sense and signification with Sheol Tachath in the foureteenth of Esay, of which there is now no doubt but hell is thereby implied. Thirdly, Ezechiel purposely noteth, and so nameth the same place, where all the vncircumcised and wicked, that from the beginning were barbarous and bloudie enemies to the people of God, were gathered and receiued after this life, whereof many thousand were drowned, and otherwise depriued of their graues (except the name of graue be figuratiuely taken for death) when yet Ezechiel pointed out the place, where they were at the time that he spake these words, euen in the lower earth. Fourthly, Ezechiel giueth them sight, speech and affections, as Esay did, in saying; Ez h. 32. vers. 30. They are now ashamed of their strength, by which they became terrors to the liuing, and vers. 31. see and 21. speake ech to others, insulting and vpbraiding one another, euen as Esay before described them. Lastly, the selfe same phrase is found in Dauid threatning this vengeance to those who sought his soule to destroy it, that they should go P l 63. vers. 9. & 10. betachtijot h arets, to the lower parts of the earth, and yet their carcasses be left as a P l 63. vers. 10. porti n to the foxes, that is, to be deuoured of wild and ra ening beasts. What the Iewes conceaued by the lower earth appeareth by the prayer of King Manass s, which though it be not canonicall, yet it is of credit enough to expound that speach, wherein he besought God, Oratio Regi Manassis. not to be angrie with him for euer nor to condemne (him) into the lower parts of the earth. And the Hebrue translation of S. Matthews Gospel, which S. Ierom testifieth was long before his time, expresseth the words of our Sauiour tou∣ching his Church, the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it, by Hebraicum Euangelium Matth. ca. 16. sha re tachijoth, the lower gates. So that the same reasons serue to limit Ezechiels words, that serued for Esaies, and you haue none other obiections against them, but the selfe same that were before, which are very firuolous to inferre any such thing as you resolue, that only the graue is ment by Ezechiels words. Yea the name of graue or sepulchre, which there is sometimes vsed, though not alone, inferreth as well eternall as corporall death in the wicked, the one being alwaies consequent to the other in them. And so much Mercerus a man of good iudgement admonisheth, Spul hri nomine scriptura exitium Merc rus in 15. ca. Prou. vers. 24. & mortem aeternam intelligit, ex externa morte internam accipiens. By the name of (graue or) sepulchre the Scripture vnderstandeth destruction and eternall death, noting the inward death by the outward. And as for interpreters new and old, they likewise concurre in the exposition of E∣zechiels words, and of Dauids, that hell is ment by crets tachtith, the lower earch, and tachtijoth arets, the lower part of the earth, no lesse then it was by She l tachath, the low∣er sheol in Esaias speach. Ierom. Hi ro. in ca. 31. Ezechielis. to the lower earth, hoc est ad infernum, that is, to hell, ad cos qui desc ndunt in Lacum, haud dubium, quin inferna significet, to those that descend to the lake, it cannot be doubted, but he meaneth hell. Lyra. Lyra in ca. 31. Ezechielis. To the lowest earth, that is, to hell as touching the soule, which the Doctors say is in the deepe of the earth. Munster. Munsterusi in annotation bus 32. cap. Ezech. If thou aske where are the Assyrians buried? (Ezechiel) answereth in the sides of the lake, and in the lower parts of the earth, by which the Prophet signifieth the damnation of body and soule. Oecolampadius vpon Ezechiels words, There is Asshur and all his multitude: Oecolampad. in ca. 32. Ezech. in Gehenna, in the place of the damned, amongst the vncircumcised Assyrians; round about his graue or pit, that is, in the midst of hell. For with this figure (of speech) the Prophets vse to describe the damnation of the (wicked or) accursed, who together with their soules are punished with euerlasting death. Pellican: Pellicanus in ca. 31. Ezech. Ad terram vltimam, hoc est ad infernum. To the lowest earth, that is, to hell. Idem in ca. 32 And they are sayd to be buried in pits (round about them) because they are gathcred in hell to the fellowship of their forefathers, and such as were like them; Ibidem. who by their eenesse and crueltie against mankinde, which they sought to oppresse, deserued reproch with the liuing in all ages, and in hell euerlasting punishment and fire. Lauater. Ibidem Lauaterus ho∣mil. 133. in Ezech. non solum Rox d Tartara pr cipitatus fuit, not only the king was cast downe to hell, but his wicked counsellors, souldiers, and helpers. Ibidem. By the vncircumcised he vnder∣standeth the d ed, meaning the king should perish body and soule. Ibidem. Out of this place of the Prophet (Ezechiel) we vnderstand first, that there is an hell, or place appointed to punish the wicked; next that it is bene h vs, thirdly, who shall be cast thither. The like is obser∣ued out of Dauids words, by Ierom. Hieron. in Psal. 62. They shall goe into the lower parts of the earth. ] In inferno damnabuntur, they shalbe condemned to hell. Haymo. Haymo in Psal. 62. Into the lower parts of the earth, that is, into hell. Euthymius, Euthymius in Psal. 62. After death they shall descend to hell. Lyra. Lyra in Psal. 62. Into the lower parts, that is, to Gehenna, which is in the lower parts of the earth. So Pel∣lican. Pellicanus in Psal. 62. They that seeke me to death, shall fall on destruction, and be rather thrust downe to hell. Pomerane, Pomeranus in Psal. 63. These things shew that all the endeuours of such, as be enemies to godli∣nesse, shalbe frustrate, and they shall descend to hell to euerlasting death. Westhmerus in Psal. 63. Westhmerus fol∣loweth Pomerane word for word. Bucer, Dauid Pomeranus in Psal. 63. denounceth destruction to his enemies seeking his so le to death, as that they should be cast downe to hell, which he meaneth by the lower parts of the earth. The verse ensuing fortelleth the reiection of their carca es to be meat for Foxes. Bucer in Psal. 63. Felinus insisteth on the very same words. Mollerus, Felinus in Psal. 63. They shall goe to the lowest parts of the earth, that is, they shall vtterly perish, and descend to hell, and their carcasses be cast abroad in the fields to be torne and de oured of wild Beasts. Hauing now found by the circumstances of the Scriptures themselues, as also by the iudgement of so many Iewish Rabbins, Christian writers, old and new expositors that your heaping vp of Hebrew phrases is but the vaine broching of your owne fan∣sies, and consequently that there is no cause for you to controle the full consent of so many learned Fathers, as haue applied the Apostles wordes to Christs descent to the lower parts of the earth, that is to hell, which the Scriptures place vnder the earth. Let vs see, which of these two senses, yours or mine, best fitteth the apostles purpose: Of yours I may safely say, it hath no coherence with the wordes, nor intent of the A∣postle. For these two verses, the ninth and the tenth, interposed wi h a parenthesis, apparantly pertaine to the verifying of Dauids wordes cited immediately before in the eight verse, that Christ ascending on high, lead captiuitie captiue. Before Christes ascending, by way of relation the Apostle putteth Christes descending; and because descending and ascending must haue contrary extreames, from which and to which the motion is made, therefore to the highest heauens, aboue which Christ ascended, Paul opposeth the lowest parts of the earth, to which Christ first descended. The end of his descending is comprised in Dauids wordes, to leade Captiuitie Captiue, which must be from the place of their chiefest strength; euen as the end of his ascending af∣ter hee had led captiuitie Captiue, was to giue gifts to men. Now these two are the greatest blessings that Christ in this life bestoweth on his Church, and in order follow one the other, as Dauid first, and after him the Apostle setteth them. For we were first to be Luk. 1. deliuered from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate vs, I meane the ene∣mies of our soules, as Zacharie filled with the holy Ghost did prophesie we should, before we could serue him without feare in holinesse and righteousnesse, as wee ought to doe, ll the dayes of our life. Deliuerance from the power of our enemies we had none, but by Christs conquering them, and leading them Captiue. And full conquest ouer them Christ had none, but by rising from the dead, and treading vnder his feet all their power and strength, not onely against himselfe, but against all his. And no place fitter to dissolue and breake all their force and might then in the chiefe castle of their king∣dome, which is hell seated in the lower parts of the earth. So that this exposition of the learned and auncient Fathers, which I before abundantly deliuered in their owne word s, is so farre from any iust challenge, that it orderly and plainely lightneth and iustifieth the wordes of Dauid, which the Apostle there taketh vpon him to illu∣strate. Now in your exposition there is no such thing. For first the graue is not in the lower parts of the earth, nor opposite to the height of heauen, whither Christ a∣scended, according to the Apostles wordes. Next Christ descending to his graue, was rather lead captiue of death, then shewed any conquest ouer death. Thirdly be∣fore Christ, many rose from the graue, as well aunciently raised by Elias and Elizeus, as then newly by Christ himselfe. But this conquest, which Dauid heere celebrateth, was not ouer the graue onely, but ouer hell, Satan, sinne, death, and all the power and feare of the enemie, which Christ led Captiue, leauing none vnconquered, and made an open shew of them, triumphing ouer them in his owne person; as the same Apostle else∣where deliuereth. Therefore this place must stand for good, till you or your friends bring better helpes to vnioynt it, then your and their idle phrasiologie gainsaying the whole Church of Christ for your priuate nouelties and vanities. Defenc. pag. 151. li. 32. Where you expound the text and say, he descended to the lowest, and ascended to the highest, that he might fill all places with the presence of his manhood, you speake both incon∣ueniently and farre from the Apostles meaning. Pag. 152. li. 32. You adde to it (with his presence) very de∣ceitfully in a differing letter like the text, and together with the text. What censure this de∣serueth the godly doe know. ] What censure deserue you, that cannot speake three lines without an open iniurie, or manifest folly? You first confesse I expound the text, and then you charge me with adding to the text; as if any man could possibly ex∣pound any place of Scripture, and adde nothing to the wordes. Then were plaine reading of the text, the best expounding of it; and so should all exposition be super∣fluous and iniurious, as most of your expositions are. And who, besides you, so deepe∣ly doteth, as to charge an expositour with saying somewhat besides the text? but I adde it in a different letter like the text and together with the text. ] I cannot expound any place of Scripture, but I must insert the wordes of the text which I expound, and ioyne them together with mine owne. The text I cite not three lines before ex∣actly as it lieth in the apostles writings, and set by the side the quotation of the place, Ephes. 4. with a direction to the wordes alleaged by me out of the apostle. I then rea∣son from the true meaning of the apostles wordes, who saith, that Christ first descen∣ded to the lower parts of the earth, and ascending on high lead captiuitie captiue. Whence did Christ lead captiuitie captiue, but from the lower parts of the earth? If that were the purpose of his descending, the lower parts of the earth were the place, whence he lead captiuitie (euen all his & our enemies) captiue. And so I made the conclusion of mine owne, and not a fresh allegation, as you absurdly mistake, of the Apostles words; Christ then descended into the lower parts of the earth, and thence lead captiuitie captiue; that he might fill all (places with his presence.) Where if your eies were not more then dimme, you might soone see, I quoted no text, as I did before, but declared by mine owne wordes inserted, what I gathered out of the apostles speech, as the wordes interposed in an other letter, and with two lines inclosed, (but that the Printer did sometimes forget my markes and directions) doe plainly wit∣nesse. And to what purpose I pray you Sir in common reason were it for me to repeat a place faire and full as I doe, and within two lines after to cite the same againe with sixe wordes added, which were not in the former; except it were an exposition and no citation of the Apostles words? Wherefore your wisedome might presently haue perceaued, that the halfe circle which standeth after (places) did in my coppie stand after ( presence ) and that the Printer by haste or neglect brought it neerer then hee should. And those very wordes (places with his presence) you finde twice in the same section in an ordinarie letter, and cite them your selfe as an exposition and not an addition to the Apostles words. But my speech, you say, is both inconuenient and farre from the Apostles meaning. ] Of that you are no fitte iudge, you must reade more, and more indifferently then you doe, before you will come neere the Apostles meaning. Your exposition, that Christ first descended into the lower parts of the earth, and (then) ascended farre aboue all heauens, onely to fill all his Church with the gifts of his spirit, which by his ascending hee promised to doe; is farre from the Apostles wordes and mea∣ning. For in these wordes (to fill all) the apostle compriseth as well the benefits of Christs descending as of his ascend ing. And euen by his ascending we are assured of other and greater gifts, then those which are powred on his church heere on earth for the support of his Saints in this life. Christes comming to iudgement, his raising our bodies from corruption, and conforming them to be like his glorious body, and bringing vs into the kingdome of his Father, where perfect, eternall, and celestiall ioy, blisse, and glory shall be reuealed on vs; these be waightier and excellenter gifts then the graces of this life; and yet by Christes ascending into heauen we haue a ma∣nifest interest in all these. So that though it be true, that Christ departing from vs, prouided sufficiently for vs, whilcs heere we liue, by the gifts and graces of his spirit; yet the kingdome of Christ, which cxtendeth to things, places, and persons celesti∣all, terrestriall; and infernall, is farre larger, then that part, which you mention, which commeth nothing neere to the fulnesse of the Apostles wordes or sense. Since then by descending to the lowest, and ascending to the highest, the apostle noteth all the places in the world, the earth not excepted, from which Christ both descended, and ascended after he had finished the worke of our redemption, and by his presence in euerie place was acknowledged, his power and dominion ouer all things in euery of these places, hell it selfe being not able to make any resistance to his person or plea∣sure: the sensc which I giuc to the apostlcs words, that Christ descended & ascended to fill all places with the maiestie of his presence, and might of his word, better decla∣reth the greatnesse and largenesse of Christes kingdome now sitting in heauen, then doth the guiding of his church in the miseries and infirmities of this life, though I do not denie, but that is a woorthy part of his excellent and supereminent power. And for that application of the apostles wordes, which perhaps you finde not in your Note bookc, and so suspcct it to be the more inconuenient, Athanasius a man of more iudgement, then I or you, or any that you follow, for ought that I know, first led me to it. Athanasius de Incarnatione Christs. Christ performed the condemnation of si ne on the earth, the abolition of the curse on the crosse, the redemption of corruption in the graue, and the dissolution of death in hell, Omnia loca permeans going to euerie place, that he might euery where worke mans saluati∣on. And againc, Athanas. de Incarnatione verbi. De . As then Christ our Sauiour , filled all (places) on all sides with his presence, so he filled all with the knowledge of himselfe. Man compassed on euerie side and euery where, that is in heauen in hell, in man, in earth, may be∣hold the Diuinitie of the Sonne of God vnfolded (by his Manhood.) Defenc. pag. 152. li. 18. Third: you make much of that which doth you not a pinnes worth of good: where it is as∣ked, who shall descend into the deepe? that is to bring Christ againe from the dead. If the deepe here did signifie Hell, (which yet certainely it doth not, but suppose it doth) how will that follow (which you presume) that Christ dying descended into the deepe. The text saith no such To w t dee e Christ descen∣ded. thing. [You be a deinty diuine, that thinke the Apostle here wandreth in his question, & e eth in his answere, abruptly & impertinently clapping things vncoherent toge∣ther. If the Apostle did not referre the former questions to Christ, how then in his an∣swere doth head, this is to bring Christ down (from heauen), & to bring Christ backe from the dead? Will your wisedome then learne, that the question must fit the answere, & the one be pinned at least to the other. But Christ, you say, is not named in either of those questions, who (shal or) can ascend to heauen? who (shal or) can descend to the deepe? ] What thcn? are there not besides the answers, which name Christ, & so ie the former questi∣on to the person of Christ; two manifest reasonsto restrain these questionsvnto Christ? First that the co snes of faith there mentioned by the Apostle, which dependeth only & wholy on Christ, may moue no such questions, nor doubt no such things. For he that doubteth, whether Christ dying descended to the deepe, or rising ascended to heauen; vtterly frustrateth the faith, that is in Christ. The perswasion then of faith, which must be farre from moouing any such questions of Christ, prooueth those que∣stions to pertaine to Christ. Secondly the questions themselues exactly comprise the person of Christ, and consequently, though he be not there named, yet is he there nely intended, as appeareth by the answere. For these interrogatiues, who can ascend to heauen, or who can descend to the deepe; are equiualent to these generall Negatiues, none can ascend to heauen, and none can descend to the deepe, as is plaine by the perpetuall vse of the Scripture. 1. Cor. 4. What hast thou which thou hast not receaued? Psal. 34. who is like to thee O Lord? Esa. 53. his generation who shall declare? Iohn. 8. which of you reproueth me of sinne? Rom 8. Who shall accuse the elect of God? Who shall separate vs from the loue of Christ? And a thousand like examples doe exquisitely proue these interrogatiues to be resolute and absolute Negatiues. And so Iob expoundeth them. Iob. 14. Who can make cleane of vncleane? not one. If NONE can ascend to heauen, or descend to the deepe, then NOT CHRIST; and so much the Apostle expresseth, when he saith, that Christ is exclu∣ded from descending, and ascending by those questions; and in that respect all, that will be faithful must forbeare them. Then notwithstanding your exception not worth a straw, these are two maine grounds of the Christian faith, that Christ dying descen∣ded to the decpe, and rising ascended to heauen, and hee that but doubteth in his heart of either of these, by the apostles verdict emptieth and reuerseth Christs death and resurrection. And did not this latter question, ( who can descend to the deepe ) per∣taine directly vnto Christ, who onely of all men that euer were descended to the deepe of Hell, and returned againe with safetie and glory: we might not onely iustly doubt, whoe er (besides Christ) descended to the deepe of the earth, but our faith teacheth vs plainely o den e, that euer man (Christ cxcepted) did descend to the deepe (suppo∣sing now that to signifie hell, as you doe) and yet doth not our faith frustrate the death of Christ, but therein rather commend it, and exalt it, that neuer man was able to doe, as he did, that is dying, and descending to subiect hell vnder his power; and to deliuer all his from thence. So that if the deepe heere doe signifie hell, then is heere a plaine resolution of the Apostle, that Christ dying descended to hell. Now least you should take any pride in your pe ting answere, not worth a tagge of of a blew point, the Reader shall see, that all interpreters, old and new, and euen those, on whom you would seeme most to relie, haue with one consent comprised the per∣son of Christ in these two questions, and yeelded the Apostles answcre to be very ex∣trauagant, which God forbid, vnlesse Christ were comprised as well in the questions, as in the answeres. Oecumenius. Oecumenius in 10. ca. Roma. The Apostle referreth these things to Christ. That is, wauer not, neither say in thy mind, how did Christ descend from heauen? or did Christ being dead rise from the deepe, that is from the lowest places? cast all such thoughts out of thy mind. Theophylact. Theophylact. inca. 10. Roma. Stagger not, (saith the apostle) neither doubtingly cast this in thy mind, how Christ descended from heauen, or how after death he rose from the deepe, id est, ex ab∣ditissimo & profundissimo loco, that is, from the deepest and most hidden place. Erasmus. Erasmi anno∣tationes in 10. c. Roma. Who shall ascend to heauen? that being spoken of the Law, Paul interpreteth and appli∣eth to Christ. For that is, saith he, to draw Christ from heauen. Or who shall descend into the deepe? that is, who will beleeue the things that are spoken of hell, except he see them? this is, sayth Paul, to draw Christ backe from the dead, as though he did not descend to hell, or they desired, that in their sight he would againe descend to hell. Peter Martyr thus setteth the Apostles questions. Petr. Martyr. in 10. ca. ad Roma. Who shall ascend to heauen to see whether God bee reconciled to vs by Christ? or who shall descend downe into the deepe to see euerlasting death weakned and abolished by him, that is by Christ? Bucere. Buceri inter∣pretat. 10. ca. Roma. The Apostle acknowledgeth in this questi∣on the deniall of Christ, and that he draweth Christ downe from heauen, which admitteth this doubt. It is euident that the deepe is taken pro inferis, for hell, and in this sense the Apo∣stle seemeth to haue vsed this word the deepe, for hee addeth, that is to bring Christ backe from the dead, to wit, to account his descent to hell to be void, and his victorie ouer death and Gehenna. Hyperi s. Hy erius in 10. ca. Roma. Say not, who shall descend into the deepe? thou art eased of this trouble by Christs resurrection from the dead, and from hell. Gualtere. Gualterus i 10 ca. Roma. Who shall descend to the deepe, to see whether death be disarmed, hell gates broken open, the Diuels kingdome subuerted and we truely redeemed from all these? do not they denie death to haue beene con∣quered by the merit and resurrection of Christ, and therefore would haue him againe to die, and to returne to hell, to doe that once more, which he hath alreadie performed? Piscator. Pis at. analy. 1. 0. ca Roma. The heart of him that beleeueth, doth not descend by his thoughts to the deepe, to trie whe∣ther victorie be obtained against eternall death. For if he doubt of this, he must also doubt whether Christ were dead, & ad inferos descender it, and descended to hell. Beza. Beza annot. in ap. 10. Roma. Because the law proposed heauen but vnder an impossible condition, and threatned the deepe, that is destruction, for the offence, to which we are all subiect, whosoeuer cleaueth to the righ∣teousnesse of the law, of force is compelled to crie out, who shall ascend to heauen, or descena in∣to the deepe, to take me hence, and lead me thither. But contrariwise faith suggesteth, that Christ is he, which ascended to heauen to carrie vs th ther with him, and descended into the depth of death, to abolish him that had power of death. Take which of these expositions you will, it is euident in euery one of them, that by the Christian faith both these im∣possible actions, as man thinketh, of ascending to heauen, and descending to the deepe, were performed for vs in the person of Christ, and therefore now to doubt of either, is to weaken & eneruate the power of Christ, who most perfectly hath accom∣plished both, to saue vs from one, and bring vs to the other. And heere also by the deepe, those whom you would seeme to follow, vnderstand destruction, and eternall death, as all the rest doe, from which Christ hath freed vs by descending, and destroy∣ing them for vs. Defenc. pag. 2. li 27. This I say the dead heere importeth the generall condition and state of all the dead as it is opposed to the state of the liuing. Yea it is not vnlikely that the former word Abyss the deepe is vsed also heere by the Apostle to signifie (not hell but) euen this condition and state of death, which is a gulfe bottomlesse neuer satisfied and vnrecouerable: like as Sheôl in He∣brew doth likewise properly signifie. ] You shew your selfe by your saying to haue little care what you say, that not onely you crosse all Expositors without exception, but euen the Scriptures themselues without any respect of trueth, or touch of conscience. For where the Apostle proposeth this last point, Who shall descend to the deepe, and re∣turne againe, as possible onely to Christ, and to none else; by your vntidie tale; that the deepe heere signifieth the generall condition of the dead opposed to the liuing, you make the apostle a weake reasoner, or rather a plaine lyer. For could Paul at this time be ignorant, that Elias and Elizeus raised some from the generall condition of the dead, that Christ restored three from death, & Peter did the like for Tabitha? Is there not plaine testimonie giuen in the Scriptures, that through faith Hebr. 11. the women receaued their dead raised to life? If this were not onely possible, but so vsuall, as the Scriptures declare, how could Paul make this actiō of descending to the deepe possible but on∣ly to Christ? wherefore I say you must be better aduised, or else you shew yourselfe in an open and impudent falshood to ruffle and reuell with the holy Ghost testifying that many haue gone to the condition of the dead opposed to the lyuing, and yet bin restored to life againe. And consequently in spite of your heart, Abyssus (the bottomles deepe) must not onely keepe his signification perpetuall in the new Te∣stament, which is the place appointed for the diuels, but descending thither with re∣turne must import an impossible condition to all men, aue onely to Christ; which in the generall condition and state of the dead is nothing so. Besides that the condem∣ned to hell are truely dead, and so called in the Scriptures, is vnknowne to none of any learning saue to you. Reuel. 20. Death and hell, saith Saint Iohn, deliuered vp their dead. And if the second death b the truest and terriblest death, that is, wherein both soule and body are for euer dead, then hell is most properly the place of the dead, since all there are adiudged to euerlasting death; where in the condition of death opposed to the liuing heere on earth, the soules of the Saints doe liue with God, and taste nei∣ther torment nor death. Touching the word Abyssus the bottomlesse pit, with which you play at your pleasure, this may suf ce, that throughout the Scriptures the word is neuer vsed for the graue. For the depth of the sea, and bottom of earth it is vsed in the old Testament, and metaphorically for the deepe counsels of God, and desperate troubles of men; but in the new Testament it is onely vsed for the bottomlesse pitte, whither Diuels are afraid to goe, as appeareth by their petition to Christ, not to be commanded to depart Luc. 8. into the bottomlesse deep, and where they are Reuel. 20. lockt and kept, when pleaseth God. Defenc. pag. 152 li. 37. This meaning the Syriacke translator (an auncient writer of no small credit) seemeth to haue, sith he turneth it abyssum sepulchri, the deepe of the graue. ] The Syriacke translation I reuerence for antiquity, but you bring the Latin trāslator of the Syriacke, that is par∣tiall by your leaue, & rendreth the Syriacke word according to his owne suppositi∣on. For though the man were very learned, that made the Latin translation, yet in this and some other things he yeelded ouer much to the priuate affections of some men with whom he liued & conuersed. The words in Syriacke are, who shall descend lat e∣huma dashiul, to the deep of sheiul? Where sheiul in Syriacke hath the same deriuation and signification that Sheôl hath in Hebrew, and therefore standeth as indifferent to the She l of soules, which is hell, as of bodies, which is the graue. Againe Tehuma in Syriacke being all one whith tehoma in Chalday, and thence taken, as they both are frō tehom in Hebrew, and throughout the Scriptures tehom the deepe being neuer applied to the graue, but to the great and vnsearchable deepes of the sea, of the earth, and of hell, it hath neither sense nor truth, that Luke . Tehuma in this place should be applied to the six foot depth of a graue. Lastly, Tehuma without addition is vsed by the Sayriack Translator for the deepe of hell, to which the Diuels desired not to be sent. And sheiul alone is also put by him to signifie the place of torment, where the rich Gluttons soule was punished after death. The Arabicke Translator keepeth the same sense, which the Syriack doth, saying, who is he that descended ILEY AFFA LGIAHIM to the lower places of hell GIAHIM being vsed by the same Translator in S. Lukes Gospell to expresse the place, where the Rich mans soule after death was tormented. So that the Syriacke & Arabicke Translators fully refute your conceit of the graue, besides the sound and sufficient reason alleadged formerly by me, to which Translators must confirme their words, that the Apostles speach heere cannot be construed of the graue, without a manifest and inexcusable falsehood. For where then the sense of these words must be, None euer descended to the graue that returned, saue Christ, this is so false, that children will not endure it to be thought Apostolike: & therefore will you, nill you, the bot∣tomlesse deepe here in this place of the apostle must signifie that deepe: to which ne∣uer man descended and returned, but only Christ. Which if it be not hell, we desire to know of you and your friends, what place you can plot vs out to fitte these words. Defenc. pag. 153. li. 15. & 16. The Apostle may (also) insinuate in this word a seeking to the deepest and fardest parts of the sea, to learne somewhere (if it might be) among all the creatures how to fulfill & keepe the law. For so Moses (whom here he doth cite) expressely signifieth then so the Apostle also signi∣fieth The true sense of Pauls and Moses words. the very same. ] You thought the Sextens would deride you, if you should rest on this resolution, that euery day they digge bottomlesse pits to burie men in, when they themselues so easily get out of them; and therefore you now put forth to sea, and goe a diuing to see whether you can catch cockles in the deepe or no, to learne of them how the law of God may be fulfilled. A pattern of your profound learning if a man would seeke, he shall need goe no farder then this Page and the next, where he shall find how ignorantly, absurdly, and vntruely you roue at the matter and meaning of Moses and Paul, and misse them both as wide as the sea is broad. For Moses speak∣eth no word of the depth of the sea, much lesse of seeking to all creatures, how the law of God might be fulfilled. Neither doth the Apostle exactly cite the wordes of Moses, as you imagine, but somewhat altereth them, that he may fitte them to Christ with greater effect and comfort, then Moses could vnto the law. Moses speach is faire and plaine. The Iewes, to whom he deliuered the law written, could not pretend the knowledge of Gods will to be hidde in heauen, nor farre remooued from them beyond the seas, that they should wish some would Deuter. 30. vers. 12. goe vp to heauen to bring it them, or vers. 13. ouer the sea to fetch it, but the vers. 14. word (saith Moses to the people) is very neere vn∣to thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart for to doe it: That is, written before thine eies, that thou mightest read it, and pronounced in thine eares, that thou maiest remem∣ber it, if thou wilt take heed to obserue it. I take heauen and earth to record, vers. 19. I haue set before thee life and death, blessing and cursing. Moses doth not say the performing of the law was not in heauen, nor beyond the sea: but the knowledg of the law. Other∣wise you make Moses teach, that the fulfilling of the law was in their mouthes & hearts, which is an open error, and repugnant to the trueth of the Gospell. For Galat. 2. if righteous∣nesse (might be) by the law, then Christ died without cause. As you come nothing neere to Moses meaning, so you swarue farder from Pauls. The right way to decline death threatned to the breakers of the law, and to obteine life promised to the obseruers thereof, is not to looke to the law, which we cannot obserue, but to Christ, who hath destroied death, and purchased life for vs. And therefore after Chri s resurrection and ascension to aske who shall ascend to heauen, to procure vs life, or who shall de∣scend into the deepe to destroy death for vs, is to frustrate, through infidelity, that which Christ hath done for vs. If we conf sse with our mouths, and beleeue with our h arts that God hath raised vp Iesus from the dead, to be Lord ouer all, that is, to giue life, and saue from death, whom he will, we shalbe saued; this is the Apostles purpose. As for merit-mongers, of whom you say the Apostle speaketh these words, it is an idle and drowsie conceit of yours. These words doe no waies fitte presumers on their merits, for they thinke they shall ascend to heauen by their workes, they aske not who shall ascend: and in the bottom of the sea what merits can you deuise, or to what creatures there should Pharises seeke, how to fulfill the law? what bables be these to be wrea∣thed into the Apostles words? or who but you would place all the creatures of God, either in heauen or in the bottom of the sea? If you cannot write as a diuine, speake yet as a man of common sense or vnderstanding. And all these senses, you say the A∣postle may insinuate in this word. I thinke as soone all as one, but that the deepe in one, and the same sentence should signifie the graue, the bottom of the sea, and the whole state of the dead, is a flower of your field, it groweth in no wise mans garden. Defenc. pag 154. li. 6. I may not omit to shew how you deale here againe with the Text. You alleage it, e de∣scended into the deepe. But (he) is cunningly added, neither are these words meant of him. ] The Defender cannot d scerne a con lusion from a quota∣tion. Your eyes be not paires, that perceiue not the difference betwixt a quotation and a conclusion gathered out of the Apostles words. In the 220 page, with which you ca∣uill, the letter ( b ) pointing to Rom. 10. in the margine is set after he, and next before Rom. 10. descended to the deepe. So that any sober man might soone see, I alleaged not this word he, as out of the text, but inferred it as the true meaning of the Apostle. And whether I haue better reason to say these words are meant of Christ, as all Interpreters new and olde doe, than you haue to say, they are meant of a Phar aicall Merit-mon∣ger, that seeketh to learne of fishes in the deepe of the sea, how to fulfill the Law; let the Reader iudge, now he hath heard vs both. h Pag. 154. li. 13. [ The like pra se you v againe in the Psalme. There is no word to expr sse (beneath) which you put into the text of your owne head. ] Were there no word importing so much, yet so long as the word added is ex∣presly ratified by many places of Scripture, as appeareth Esay 14. vers. 9. and Prouerbs 15. vers. 24. in plaine words, that Sheol is beneath; and the addition is in another let∣ter different from the rest before and after; your Mastership might haue taken it for an explication inserted, and not for any part of the text cited. But you neuer suppose, that the Printer may sometimes mistake or mis-set my directions; and that maketh you so fast to fome at mouth with my falsifying the word of God of purpose and for aduan∣tage; where you rather lie of purpose or for aduantage, since I doe not offer there to build any thing on that word, nor so much as mention it in my collection there, which if I would haue done, Scriptures enough besides this would warrant my asser∣tion. And what if you whet your teeth against the trueth, and the word there, of it selfe will beare this addition without any corruption, is not your time well spent, to play the Bedlom in this sort, and in the end to betray your owne ignorance and ma∣lice? The Septuagint translate the word, , if I descend, or go downe to Sheôl, whom the Greeke Fathers follow. The West Church kept the same word, as is eui∣dent by all the Latine Fathers. The Chaldaie paraphrase sayth, Veêmuc lishjol, If I de∣presse (or humble) my selfe downe to Sheol, where the word is mac, to be depressed downe or humbled low. Ierom sayth, If I lie downe in Sheól. New Writers well skil∣led in the Hebrew tongue, as Pellican, Pomerane, and others continue the word of descending, and many that change it, retaine the same sense: as Vatablus; Vatabli an∣ tationes in Psal. 139. He ra∣ismus prosietiam descendam ad Ima, it is an Hebrew phrase importing thus much, If I doe descend to the parts beneath. Westhmerus expoundeth it; W sthmerus in Psal. 139. Si descendam in infima loca terrae. If I descend to the lowest places of the earth. Mollerus: Melle us n Psal. 1 9. Si ettam descendam ad Ima. If I should descend to the places beneath. Dauid Kimchi obserueth, that this word is not only to spread, but withall it hath in it the force of In S er ha∣sharashim. lematta, below, beneath. Au∣gust us stinianus translated the Arabick with the word of descending. If all these haue falsified the word of God in so translating and expounding this place, then haue I mistaken in following their iudgements; but that I falsified of purpose or for an aduan∣tage, that is the meale of your mouth not vnlike the rest of your griest. Howbeit, it is e ident the Hebrew word hath in it, as Kimchi noteth, the signification of sub & infra, and in that respect importeth a bed, where a man lieth downe in a lower positi∣on than he had before. For which cause I might lawfully render the word as I did, If I lie downe, or lodge (beneath) in sheól. Since Sheol by the Scriptures is a place whi∣ther a man must descend, though indeed to preuent all challenge, I was content to ex∣presse the force of the word in another letter. Defenc pag. 154. li. 27. Our second and most principall reason is this; If there be not one place of Scripture to proue that Christs soule was in hell, then you ought to denie that opinion: but you haue not in∣deed any one place that proueth it; therefore it ought to be denied. ] You shew your Lo∣g , where little need is, keepe it, if you be wi e, till it may stand you in more steed. Euery Child knoweth, or at least hath heard, that faith must depend on the word of God. Wherefore if it be no where written, we meane not to beleeue it. But if when the words be plaine you will wrest them with figures and phrases to another purpose, then giue vs leaue if your proofes be not sound and good, to tell you that our faith re∣lieth on the singlenesse and plainnesse of the word of God, so receaued and beleeued since Christ had a Church on earth. And though you can make shewes with diuers acceptions, and figuratiue senses of words, yet that is no reason to reuerse the trueth written. For giue me the like liberty without regard of faith and trueth, and I can shift of any word whatsoeuer in the Scriptures, yea the chiefest and mainest grounds of Religion I can elude with different significations of the same word in other places of Scriptures. This therefore, if you take not heed, is a vaine ostentation of phrasiologie, wherewith you thinke to make euery thing of any thing with your figuratiue and phrasitiue fansies. Defenc. pag. 154. li. 31. Against this argument you say you haue one place, Acts 2. 27. euen onely one where you thinke it is plaine, that Christ saith, God would not leaue his soule in hell. ] That we haue, or say wee haue but one place to prooue Christes descent to hell, is a tale of your telling, who seldome speake trueth; but that you shall neuer with all the wittes and shifts you haue, euert the vigour of this place, that I say, and you shall see by Gods grace I will p orme it. But omit your Prefaces and goe to your proofes, and then it will soone be seene where trueth is. Defenc. pag. 155. li. 4. The Hebrew word controuersed is Sheól, the Greeke Hades. Now must the word Sheól and Hades needs signifie hell, being applied to soules departed hence? so indeed you auouch more confidently then truly: and h reupon it seemeth you pawne the triall of this question. ] You be so fine in your phrases, that you can not frame your lippes to trueth. I auouch indeed you can prooue no such thing, and so I suppose it will fall out. But in neither of these two pages which you quote, doe I pawne the question on that issue, and in the 312. by you cited in your margine, I speake not a word of Sheol or Hades; so well couched are your conceits, that you cite things neither written nor ment. Pag. 155. li. 12. Wee hope then when this proofe (which you aske for against your opinion) is shewed, you will cor∣rect your opinion in this point. ] Your proofes I feare will be so wide from the purpose, that they will rather confirme, then conuince mine assertion of Sheól; but neuer make so deintie to bring foorth your choisest stuffe, it will be some great onset, that you make so many offers to it, before you begin. Defenc. pag. 155. li. 17. Let it be considered which the Psalmist hath of this matter: What man liueth and shall not see death? shall he deliuer his soule from the hand of Sheol? Heere now the soule attribu∣ted to euery man liuing must be properly taken, as well as in the former place. Now then it is apparant, that heere the soules of all men liuing, both good and badde (after death) are ap∣pointed to Sheol. For there is none that can possibly escape it, saith the text. Therefore in the Scripture sheôl and Hades applied to departed soules is not alwaies hell, but the condition or place as well where the iust mens soules are after death, as that where the damned are. ] Heere is the Cannon that must craze the Creede, and beate downe the walles of Christes Church; but your deuices doe not deceaue mine expectation. Set aside the wordes of the Psalmist, which you violently draw to fit your dreames; there is not one true nor likely word in all this reason. First you say, The soule attributed to euery liuing man must be properly taken (you meane for his immortall spirit) as well as in the former place, where without question the soule of Christ, as after death, was seuered from his bodie. This is a foolish and false position openly impugned by the Scrip∣tures: for the soule attributed to euery man liuing by the Scriptures importeth not only his life, which by death is dissolued and brought to Sheol, but also his senses, desires, and euen corporall affections and passions. Of this can no man doubt, that ha h read any part of the Scriptures. The soule is there sayd to Psal. 107. hunger and Prou. 25. thirst, to Psal. 78. lust, to Num 21. loath meats, to Luc. 12. Matth. 6. eat and drinke, to Ierem. 13. weepe, to Can . 5. melt, to suffer all vio∣lence, to be Deut. 19. & 27. strooken or Ierem. 4. Luc. 2. pierced with the sword. These things are attributed to the soules of men liuing, by which not the substance of the soule, but the affections and passions of the bodie, that are common to vs with beasts, are intended. Much more then, when the soule is sayd to haue Genes. 9. bloud, to Iob. 36. die, or not to be deliuered from the power of so ol, are these things applied to the life of men, which are most false of their soules once seuered from their bodies. So that no man is able to deliuer his soule from the hand of Sheol, but he must see death, as the words next before do import; but that Sheol after death shall possesse the soules of all men, there is no such thing in the Prophets words by you produced. The hand or power of Sheol, which endeth this life, sundreth the soule from the bodie, that power of Sheol shall no man escape, because it is appointed for all to die, or as it is in your allegation, to see death: but what becommeth of their soules after death, whether they be in Sheol or in Paradise, this place expresseth not. And therefore your interlacing those wordes ( after death ) of your owne authority besides the text, sheweth that you affirme so much, but the Psalmist sayth no such thing. And because the Reader shall plainly see, how lamely and loosely you conclude, and cleane contrarie to the direct words of the holy Ghost euen in the Psalmes, he shall heare the words of Dauid himselfe, whether his soule af∣ter death should be subiected to the power of Sheol or no. Speaking of the foolish, he sayth; Psal. 48. Like sheepe they lie in Sheôl, death deuoureth them: but God will deliuer my soule from the hand (or power) of sheol: for he will receiue me. Where first is a manifest contradiction to your maine collection out of the former place, that Pag. 155. li. 29. the soules of all men good & bad (after death) are appointed to Sh l. Secondly here is a full confirmati∣tion of mine assertion; that whose soules God receaueth, they are not in Sheól. But God receaueth the soules of his Saints: their soules therefore are not in Sheól. Neither is this confession to bee found in the Psalmes alone, Salomon a∣uoucheth the same. Prou. 23. Thou shalt smite (thy child) with the rod, and shald deliuer his soule from Sheol. Then are not the soules of all men in Sheol after death, since the soule of a childe well nurtered and in time chastened shalbe deliuered from Sheol. And so shall the soules of all men, that after death liue with God. Prou. 15. The way of life is on high for him that vnderstandeth to d line from Sheol belowe. Life is on high, Sheol is below; the Saints then whose soules liue with God, are freed from Sheol which is below. To be in both places at once, is impossible for one and the same part of man. Then such as you graunt are in any part of heauen, can by no meanes remaine in Sheol. But the soules of the righteous are in a blessed rest with God, and as Christ promised the thiefe, that was crucified with him at least in Paradise. They be therefore not in Sheol. And as for the mirth, that you make with me and Saint Augustine, that Pag. 156. li. 9. O then this point of faith is grounded on Austin, it is his collection, (not the text without him) that serues your turne; you and your friends will ne∣uer be able to ouermatch Saint Austins obseruation, that he neuer found in any place of Scripture Inferi (which is the word that is vsed in Latin for sheol) to be taken in any good sense and much lesse to make good proofe by the word of God, that the conditi∣on or place, in which the soules of the Saints are after death, is called sheol or hades, since as I haue sufficiently shewed, Sheol is opposite to heauen, and to euery part thereof, as the lowest and woorst place of abode to the highest and best, which things if you canne glew together you shall quit your selfe to bee your craftes master. Defenc. pag. 156. li. 22. But first you must note, that we goe not about to prooue sheol or hades to be heauen. We neuer thought it, the more is your iniurie, when you haue nothing to reproou , yet with bitter reproches to disgrace me as you doe, and that euen for this your owne meere conceit. ] What time of the day is it, I pray you Sir, that you awake so lately out of your deepe and drowsie maze, or sleepe (choose which you will) that you now begin in sadnesse to disclaime, that you euer said or ment Sheol was or could be heauen, or any part there∣of? Is it so many moneths agone, that positiuely and publikely you affirmed Defenc. pag. 155. li. 4. Sheol and Hades in the Scriptures to BE THE PLACE, where the iust mens soules are after death? Were the sections of your booke framed so farre a sunder, and so verie stran∣gers ech to other, that you forget it was a resolute position of yours, or of some of your friends for you euen in the verie last section, and but in the other side of the leafe that THE CONDITION OR PLACE, WHERE IVST MENS SOVLES ARE AFTER DEATH, was SHEOL and HADES? and that which argueth your notable stupidity or folly, reiecting so violently the inuention of Limbus, which sup∣posed the soules of the righteous deceased before Christ to be in Sheol and Hades, as well as the soules of the damned, you now come to tell vs that Sheòl and Hades Ibid. li. 35. is the place as wel where the iust mens soules are after death, as that where the damned are. You talke of wittie reasons to solace your selfe withall, if you could tell how; in trueth this stuffe better deserueth to be tawed with tearmes, then to be refuted with rea∣son, since it hath neither ground nor proofe nor so much as concordance with it selfe. Defenc. pag. 156. li. 28. Consider a word of like vse in Latin. Defuncti signifying the dead, may be applied gene∣rally to the soules deceased. Yet I hope notwithstanding Limbus may be easily auoided. Are defuncti none other but the damned onely in hell? li. 38. the word is properly generall signifying them that are gone hence, certainly so doth hades and sheol. All these (the Latin, the Gre and the Hebrew) words are indifferent and common in themselues signifying indeed no posi∣tiue thing properly, but a meere priuation of this life. ] You shall doe well to consider, that you know not what you say, but as a man out of trueth and tune you fall from one absurdity to another, and trole out positions, that are meere priuations of all sense and vnderstanding: that such words, as onely note the priuation of this life, or lea∣uing this world, are common to all deceased and departed hence, this Children know: We striue not for that: and so defuncti importing such as haue ended the course of this life, and are gone from hence, may serue as well for those that are with Christ in rest and blisse, as for the rest that are in the paines and torments of hell: but what is this to Sheol or hades, or to the place where the one, or the other are? Is the PLACE, where soules departing hence are receaued, no POSITIVE THING with you, but a MEERE PRIVATION? who euer said so, that was not meerely depriued of his witts? the places where soules after this life are disposed, are Paradise or as you say heauen, and hell. Are heauen and hell, and the states of soules there, no positiue things, but meere priuations of this life? if this be the best way you haue to a∣ oid Limbus, in faith my reason will soone conuince you to want more then witte. You speake not of places, you will say, but of conditions. If you did so, your error were gro e enough, but by your leaue, looke on your owne words, you speake of the Pag. 155. li. 34. PLACE WHERE IVST MENS SOVLES ARE AFTER DEATH, as well as of the condition; and would you now shift your hands of both, and say you ment a meere priuation of this life? you would faine conuey your selfe to your old castel of comfort, which are empty words and phrases best fitting your wrangling humour; but we must pray you to conuince the Creed, and expound the Scriptures with more then meere priuations, and idle obseruations, or els to let them stand in their former trueth and strength. Who knoweth not, that such as haue ended this life may be cal∣led defuncti or mortui the deceased or dead, in that their bodies lie now in corruption, though their soules be in peace and rest with God? but what is that to the place or state in which they are after death, which the Scripture maketh to be positiue, though such a phrase-founder as you are, would haue it nothing els but priuatiue? Of Enoch and Elias, who were translated hence with their bodies liuing, it cannot be said, they are dead, because no part of them was or is subiected to death, and yet are they gone from hence to a more blessed and happie life. But Sheol in the Scriptures, as we haue se e by the common and constant consent of Iewish and Christian Grammarians and expositors, is a place vnder earth opposed to heauen, as the lowest to the highest, a d the word of God doth exactly confirme that assertion of theirs. Deut. 1 . Moses, Iob. 1. Iob, Psal. 5. Dani , P ou. 15. and 14. Esay teach, that Sheol is q below. Now aboue and beneath are posi∣tions of places, and not differences of priuations. And so likewise Io , Dauid, Esaie, and A , vse Sheol or the place mo opposite to . 9. 9. 14. Amos 9. heauen. Now if heauen be a po∣ place and state, so is Sheol, though either of them import a priuation of this earthly life; Gods ordinance being such, that this life shall end or change, efore men goe to heauen or hell. It is then a weake and waterish collection, that because both the graue and hell, which in the Scriptures are comprised in the name of Sheol, haue in them the priuation of this life, therefore Sheol properly noteth a me re priuation of this life, and nothing els, vnlesse you nourish this secret error in your bosome, that the soules deceased sleepe, and so haue neither positiue nor sensible ioy or paine, but a meere want of this world. Defenc. pag. 157. li. 6. In effect they are all one with Thanatos death, but that Thanatos belongeth properly to bodies, Hades and sheol sometimes to bodies, somtimes to soules of men indifferently. ] You may as well assume vnto your selfe to make new Lexicons, as new Creeds. Life and death being opposites, the force of death is properly the priuation of l e. Howbeit, the continuance and necessary consequents of death are vsually comprised in this name: that sheol and hades are likewise nothing properly but the m e p tion of this life, this is your new made signification of these wordes, warranted by your selfe against the maine resolution of all sorts of writers, Hebrew, Gr ke and Latine; and euen against the Scriptures themselues. For if sheol be nothing but a meere pri∣uation of this life, how doth the Scripture auouch of Core, Dathan, and their compa∣nie, that the earth opening her mouth, Numb. 16. They descended aliue to Sh l? How doth S. Iohn make Hades consequent after Thanatos, and say Hades followed after him? after a meere priuation of this life can you deuise a second priuation th of to follow the first? you take it to be for your credite to crosse the whole world with wordes; but you may doe well to spare the holy Ghost for feare of a rclaps. And whence com∣meth this new skill, that Thanatos belongeth properly to bodies? hath not the soule of man a life of grace and blisse, which is the life of God, or will you call that impro∣perly life? Then the Angels haue properly no life, and God himselfe, who is all life and that most properly, shall by your learning improperly liue. If the soule haue tru∣ly and properly her life, then the priuation thereof, as in all the wicked, is truely and properly death. I meane not want of sense, which she can not lacke, but lo of grace, by which she liueth. And were your false position true, that onely the body did liue, and on ly might die, and there were no death of the soule; the state of a dead bodie doth it containe nothing positiue? what is corruption and dust, to which the bodie must returne; are they meerely priuatiue? And as for the soules of the righteous, which you say are in Hades Sh ol and death; forget you what our Sauiour teacheth, God is ot the God of the dead, but of the liuing? that is, they are not properly dead, that liue with God. Defenc. pag. 157 li. 22. In the 49. Psalme, where all expresse circumstances doe shew that the Prophet spea∣keth of this death, not of hell, yet Dauid heere saith; Notwithstanding God shall deliuer my soule from the power of sheôl, (that is death or the state of death) when he shall receaue me most mightily. So Tremelius turneth it noting heere Dauids hope of the resurrection, which I thinke he hath well vnderstood in this place. ] You promised to Ibid. li. 13. shew euen by the Scrip∣tures, that Sheol and Hades are more then once vsed for the generall condition of death, wherein euen iust mens soules are held, or the mansion of soules departed as well good as bad; and now you turne vs ouer to Tremelius translation, as if euery word that Tremelius said, were Scripture, whosoeuer saith nay. But first you falsifie Tremelius translation, for he doth not turne Sheol there, by death or the state of death▪ as you set it downe, but he translateth Sheol in the 15. verse by Infernus, hell, and in the 16. which you cite, by sepulchrum the graue. And by his generall obseruation ouerthroweth your idle spe∣culation of Sheol to be meerely and properly priuatiue. His wordes are. Scholi Tre∣m lij in Psal. 49. vers. 15. num 22. Vox He∣braica (Sheol) stationem quamlibet mortuorum in vniuersum notat, ideoque modo ad se∣pulchrum, modo ad Infernum Synecdochicè, modo ad vtramque simul accommodanda est. The Hebrew word (Sheol) noteth in generall euerie station (not state) of the dead, (that is of so much as is dead in men) and therefore it must be applied sometimes to the graue, som∣times to hell, by Synecdoche (as to parts thereof) and sometimes to both ioyntly. Then Sheôl properly hath nothing to doe with the generall state of the dead common to good and badde, but Sheol is euery station or place vnder earth, as the graue and hell, where any part of man subiected to death is receaued. If this be Tremelius meaning, as his words import none other, then he agreeth with the rest of the Iewes and Chri∣stian Hebraicians, who auouch the same: otherwise he is deceaued, as Mercere plainly prooueth against him, and you, and all that be so minded, Mercerus in 42. ca, Genes. Errant qui Sheôl propriè locum animarum tam bonorum quam malorum esse putant, cum Sheol propriè sit LOCVS SVBTERRANEVS generaliter, (&) general us quam Sepulchrum. THEY ERRE, that thinke Sheol properly to be the place of soules as well good as badde, since Sheol properly is any place vnder the earth in generall, and more generall then the graue. This he confirmeth by the witnesse of Aben Ezra vpon the 37. of Genesis, that Mercerus in 37. ca. Gen. ex Aben Ezra in undem loc m. the proper and right signification of Sheôl is to signifie all places vnder earth, and not the pit or graue alone; Whereupon it is euery where opposed to heauen, which is the highest of all. Tremelius there∣fore maketh nothing for your conceit of Sheôl; and if he did, you are both deceaued, as I haue formerly shewed by the testimonies of many Rabbins and learned Christi∣ans, whose iudgements ouerswaie Tremelius, since neither he nor you haue any iust proofe against them, but your owne wresting the Scripture to your priuate purposes. Howbeit I see no such thing in Tremelius as you pretend, and therefore doe not charge him with any such fault. For your owne collection, if you ioyne it with Tremelius translation, you hatch as grosse an error touching the soules of iust men after this life, as hath beene heard of a∣mongst Christians. For if the soules of the godly shall not be deliuered from Sheol; or, as Tremelius translateth it, from the graue till the resurrection; and as you ob∣serue, the soule must here be taken properly, that is, for the immortall spirit which is in man; and is therefore in Sheol, because it shall not be deliuered thence till the resur∣rection; then are the spirits of al iust men deceased, as yet in their graues vnder earth, and there shall remaine till their bodies rise, which is fit doctrine for such a diuine as you are. You might as well conclude out of Tremelius wordes, that all the iust are damned in hell, till the resurrection. For hee thus expoundeth Dauids meaning, Christ is my deliuerer, à corruptione sepulchri, & inferni damna one, from the corruption of the g e, and damnation of hell. And so by your logike, in the meane time the soules of the iust are subiected to both. To labour much to reconcile wrested expositions of this or that w ter, I haue no leasure; yet Tremelius may meane, that the soules of the iust are not yet wholy freed from the power of the graue, not that they are in the graue, as you absurdly and falsely conceiue and conclude, but that their bodies lie yet in the graue, which is an impediment to the perfection of their celestiall glory. Other∣wise against you, and all that out of this place surmise, that iust mens soules shall not be deliuered out of Sheol till the resurrection, the sense and words of Dauid in this are pregnant enough. For Dauid putting a difference in th se two verses betwixt him∣selfe and the wicked, and that with an aduersatiue coniunction; since the soules of the wicked are in Sheol presently vpon their deaths, if Dauids must be there also, what distinction doe his wordes make betweene himselfe and those others, of whom he spake before? Againe he saith, God will deliuer his soule from Sheol, ki, cúm or quia, when he shall receiue me, or because he will receiue me. Take which you will, it is plaine by the Scriptures, and by these very words of Dauid, that so soon as God receiueth the soule of man, it is deliuered from Sheol. But hee receiueth the soules of his Saints instantly vpon their deaths; they are therefore presently deliuered out of Sheol, and stay not there by any force of Dauids wordes vntill the resurrection. Lord Iesus, sayd Steuen euen as he was stoned, Acts 7. receiue my spirit. Luke 16. The begger died, saith the Gospell, and was caried by the Angels into Abrahams bosome. Luke 23. This day shalt thou be with mee in Paradise, said Christ to the theefe. Iohn 5. He that beleeueth in him, that sent me, saith Christ, , is already passed from death to life. If the faithfull passe so soone to life, they bee as soone deliuered from Sheol by Dauids owne confession, against which I will heare neither you, nor any man liuing. Defenc pag. 157. li. 34. Againe that Psalme sheweth it also, where it is thus written, My soule is filled with sor∣rowes, and my li e draweth neere to Sheol: by his life he meaneth his soule, the proper cause and fountaine of life in him, which also in e first part of the sentence hee nameth. By these rouing and licentious glozes builded on the sands of your owne saying, you thinke you may prooue what you will, and all shall be expresse Scripture, if you say the word. Life you will haue to be soule, drawing neere to be abiding in, The graue to be the gene∣rall condition of soules deceased: and to warrant all this your selfe is the soothsayer. li. 36. By his life he meaneth his soule, which also in the first part of the sentence hee nameth as the manner of phrase in the Psalme is, in the second part to speake of the same things that are in the former. ] Many verses in the Psalmes doe illustrate the selfe same generall with diuers parts, adiuncts, and consequents; but that the words be of all one force or sig∣nification in euery such verse, this is an other of your new found methodes, which is nothing else but a meere confusion of all things. For will you see with your manner of phrase, as you fin ly furbish it, what consequents hang on these kind of collections. This life, of which Dauid speaketh, continueth not in Sheol, because it is vtterly ex∣stinguished by Sheol: ergo the soule likewise is mortall, and wholy perisheth in Sheol; for so doth the life mentioned by Dauid, which you say is all one with the soule. A∣gaine if both these parts import one sense, then the iust in Sheol are filled with sorrowes; for so are the former wordes of Dauid. And if that be true, how much hath the spirit of God deceiued vs, who bad S. Iohn write, Reuel. 14. blessed are the dead, which hereafter die in the Lord: euen so saith the spirit: for they rest from their labours. But that was the spi∣rit of trueth; and therefore the spirit of error in you sucketh these absurdities out of the Psalmes by your misconstruction of them. Defenc. pag. 15 . li. 4. Indeede I denie not but life may signifie heere the whole person of man, and so may nephesh the soule also very well: and then Sheol and Hades signifie not peculiarly and distinctly the graue, which is only for the car casse, but the condition of the whole man after he hath no being in this world. And per aduenture so it is vnderstood heere in th se places, in which sense Sheol and Hades are farre from signifying hell, yea or heauen either, yea or onely and meerely the graue: but it signisieth destruction out of this world, and not being heere any more as afore∣time to the whole person, that is both to the bodie and to the soule. ] The idle deuices of this wild-gooseracer who would spend either time or paines to tracke, when he reeleth to and fro, like a man pot-shotten, with it may be, and per aduenture it is so; and closeth vp all in the end with a dangerous destruction, which he maketh to be iust nothing. Boyes meanely Catechised can soone conceiue, that death or the graue bringeth with it an end of all earthly things, from which the wicked are loth to depart, as hauing no farder nor better hope after this life; and therefore to them death is a destruction in∣deed, that is a ceasing of all their pleasures, and an encreasing of all their paines. To Sheol is no de∣struction to the godlie. the godly, who put not their hearts to the things of this world, but desire to bee dis∣solued and to bee with Christ, and in comparison of his presence account all earthly things to be base, and burdenous, death is a gaine, and no destruction; because they renounced the loue of all these worldly thinges before hand, and sought for the permanent citie, whose founder is God. Wherefore to them this bodie is a burden, this life is a warefare, and this world is a desert, full of snares and pits; Wherein they wander as pilgrimes and strangers. If then to lay aside these troubles and trifles, and to be freed from all labours and dangers, and to come home to the countrcy and citie which God hath prouided for the faithfull, be in any wise mans sense a destruction, then haue you some reason to call the generall condition of death, as well to the iust as to the wicked, a destruction: but if that thought and speech be void of all religion and reason, then doe you houer in the midst betweene heauen and hell, and huddle salua∣tion and damnation in one generall condition or state, as you call it, and when you sce what inconuenience will follow thereof, you make it nothing but a meere priuation, or an end of things past. And this you would applie as well to the person of Christ, whose soule you say was in no Sheol but this; & as to al his members, whose soules shall not be freed from this destruction and Sheol till the day of resurrection. Did you speake of the nature of death in it selfe, or as it taketh hold on the wicked, I would allow the word destruction; which if it be well vnderstood, is more then a m re priuation: but when you presume to peruert the Scriptures with peraduentures, and to sow to them what sense you list, as may best fit your monstrous fancies; l t no man be offen∣ded, if I often thinke it fit to reiect your conceits with rounder words, then to any lear∣ned or sober writer I would willingly giue. That the graue then, by which death is meant, hath in it or bringeth with it a lacke What Sheol is to the wicked, and what to the godly. or losse of all earthly things, and that common to good and bad; this, as it is not de∣nied, so is it no special signification of Sheol, as you out of your new found notes ob∣serue; but the generall consequent of Sheol or the graue in all men iust or wicked, as also corruption & returning to dust is, from whence they were taken. To the wicked, that wedde their soules to these earthly vanities, and neglect God & his promises, the Prophets often threaten Sheol, that is the place and state, where all these thinges shal want or perish to them; but with the sheol of their bodies, which is the graue, is ioyned the sheol of their souls, which is hell, though they not regarding or not beleeuing the later, are most often threatned with the former, which they euery day saw before their eies, & so was like st to moue them most. To the godly the remembrance of Sh ol was somtimes grieuous either because it was ioyned with an vntimely death to thē∣selues, or with the dishonour of Gods name, or with the danger of his Church, or sig∣nification of his dislike of their liues and courses; which circumstances haue often troubled the Saints at the sight or foreshew of death. These things you stampe and straine with your distempered and vnlearned fansies, and then you produce a meere priuation, which you call a destruction of the whole man in Sheol. Now what if Iob called the graue, Iob 30. an house appointed for euery man liuing; or said the Iob 17. graue must be an habitation to him, as well as to others; doth he meane that the whole man, bodie and soule, shall dwell in the graue; or ome to corruption as is presently added? Iob. 17. I shal say to corruption, thou art my Father, & to the worme, Thou art my mother & my sister? Are you so good a Carpenter, that with a meere priuation you can make an habitation, and to furnish your house bring soules from heauen, or the whole man to dwell with corruption and wormes? A seely reason like the rest you interpose, Defenc. pag. 158. li. 28. That seeing Iob speaketh of Sh ol as his continuall habitation to the worldes end, it can not be went onely of the graue for his bodie, which endured but a very short time, and had no being at all after it was turned to verie How the gra is an habitation to the godly earth and wormes. ] Much lesse may it be ment of his soule, that turneth neither to earth nor wormes; and least of all of his whole person, since in the whole euery part is cōtained, & if it be true of neither part, how can it be verified of the whole? but such is your folly, that with your idle fansies you call the maine grounds of Christian faith in question, and offer doubt how God can raise his Saints out of their graues, when as their bodies being long before turned to earth and ashes haue no being at all. Sir if you speake in earnest, these be wicked quarrels, and shew that you woulde faine shake heauen and earth to vphold your new found Sheol. Otherwise all the godly know, that God hath their ashes in sight before him, and will not mistake one earth for another, though their dust were scattered ouer all the world. And so long as he that will raise them by his mightie power, hath in so certaine number and mea∣sure the whole and euery the least dust, that came of their bodies, they lie in their graues till the time of resurrection, and their maker will not misse an haire of their head, nor a mote of their ashes; which if it be strange to you, dispute against him that created heauen and earth of nothing, and not against me, that beleeue the resurrecti∣on of mens bodies and flesh many thousand yeeres after they be turned to dust, and as you wickedly surmise, haue no being at all after they are turned to earth and wormes. Defenc. pag. 8. . 33. In greatest reason this is that which Iacob meaneth when he saith, he will goe downe mourning to his Sonne in Sheol. His body he thought was deuoured and digested in the bel∣ es of wilde beasts. Therefore he will goe to the soule of his sonne in sheól to enioy the society of his deere So e. ] It is no maruell you be so stiffe-necked in rules of Discipline, when you e thus ad-headed in points of doctrine. I pray you Sir where did Ia∣cob thin that osephs soule was after death, or that his owne should be? in hell? in Abrahams boso ? or in some place lately deuised by your selfe to containe iust mens soules? Or are soules by your Diuinitie without all place, that the father might en∣ioy the socie e of his deare sonnes soule, and yet in no place? you may doe well to de∣clare vs these doubts, for I assure you, vnlesse you plead dottage, these discourses will amount to plaine impietie. In hell there is no great enioying one of an other, I trow. In heauen you meane it not, for then you must confesse heauen to be Sheól, which you say you neuer thought. In the graue I hope soules doe not lodge: then must you find vs a place, whither Iacob would descend to enioy the society of his deere sonnes soule. Will you call it a meere priuation and destruction, which are the graffes that you haue newly planted? you must first tell vs what ioy there is in priuation and destruction. Next whether this priuation and destruction be any where, and so in some place; or no where, and so a right creature of yours, as being a priuation of all witte and trueth. Thirdly if Iosephs soule were neither in ioy nor rest, what comfort Iacob could take to finde his deere sonnes soule in such a plight. And lastly whether the Patr arks had no promises of rest and receit with God after this life, but that they were to seeke for the soules of their parents and children in your priuatiue Sheol which is neither hell, heauen, nor Abrahams bosome. For if it be one of these, then is it not onely positiue, but also locall, that is somewhere, and hath a state and condi∣tion agreeable to the mercies of God, and the desire of the Saints. But why persue I your follies so farre, as if they were not peeuish pangues of your vnsetled braines? Ia∣cobs words without your iests are plaine enough to ech good Christian; in saying he would goe mourning to she l, that is, to his graue, assuring himselfe after death to haue his soule receaued into that place of rest, into which he did not doubt but the soule of his innocent childe was formerly admitted by the goodnesse of his God. And if any man like Rabbi Selomoes exposition, that êl in this place may signifie, ouer or for, as it often doth; then Iacobs wordes are more easie, that he will descend to Sheol mourning for his sonne. Howbeit Iacob knew well enough, that Iosephs bodie though deuour d and digested in the bodies of wilde beasts must returne to earth, as to the place by the tenor and trueth of Gods iudgement appointed for all men; Genes. 3. Thou art dust and to d st shalt thou returne (that is) to the earth out of which thou wast taken, and to which Iacob would descend mourning all the daies of his life for the losse of his sonne, not meaning in Sheol to haue ioy with the soule of his sonne; as you peruert his speech and sense; for then he would haue gone to Sheol not mourning, but re∣ioycing. Defenc. pag. 159. li. 15. Againe to follow our purpose: good Ezechiah also looked for Sheol to be his habi∣tation likewise after this life. li. 26. This cannot bee vnderstood of his carcasse, rotting and wasting away to nothing in the graue and therefore endureth not as the word (Dori my m nsion) signifieth. Therefore he meaneth it of his soules abiding els where. li. 35. Againe Ezechiah was a godly man; therefore hell was not fit for him; and he seemeth to insinu∣ate that in the Land of the dead he might see (the Lord) whither he was to goe: and that must needes bee in the place of blessed soules, euen that which heere is noted by the word Sh l. ] You stumble still at the same stone, that none of those thinges can be ment of the graue, because the body rotteth and wasteth to nothing in the graue. You must leaue these falshoods, if you will but seeme to be a Diuine. The bo∣dies of the Saints can not bee raised from their graues, if they be wasted wholy to nothing in their graues. And if you follow this argument well, whatsoeuer your name be, that by this meanes vndermine the resurrection of the dead, your wordes will broach an open heresie, though you slily vrge them to establish your new found Sheol. Wherefore I omit this desperate cauill as fighting rather against the faith, then against the name of Sheol, wherein mens bodies after death, though turned to dust, yet not to nothing, doe still remaine. Your next reason that the graue can not be called Dôr an habitation or a continuance, is idle and vtterly mistaken by you, as all the rest is. For Dôr is the time of mans life heere on earth, as well as a place of abode. And what should hinder Ezechiah to say, the time of my life is ended, or the place of mine abode heere on earth is remooued or passed away? Must it needes follow, that he shall haue a time to liue in Sheol, or a place for his soule to abide there, as you absurdly vrge; or that this habitation may not be said to be in the graue, where his body lieth knowen to God, though vnknowen to man? These be miserable shifts to hale in your priuatiue, positiue, generall, speciall, station, state, place without place, of your first found Sheôl. For where before you auouched that Sheol signified indeed Pag. 157. li. 2. no positiue thing properly, but a meere priuation of this life, you be now come vpon confidence of these rather riots then reasons, to resolue in plaine tearmes, that the place of blessed soules, where they see God, is Pag. 160. li. 2. euen that which heere is noted by the word Sheol. The place of blessed soules, where God is seene, I hope is first speciall to the godly; not generall to good and bad. Next it is positiue, and not meerely priuatiue. Thirdly it is peculiar to the soules of iust men, not im∣parted as yet to their whole persons. Fourthly it is not destruction, it is saluation. And lastly it is heauen, or Paradise a part of the third heauen, which you neuer thought to be Sheol. These many contrarieties you haue contriued in lesse then two leaues, hauing none other ground for all this, but onely that the dead bodies of men turned to ashes, and wasted to nothing, as you defend, can not be said to be any where, and so not in Sheol; and since there is somewhat of iust men in Sheol, as the Scrip∣tures witnesse, it must needes be the soule; and this erroneous and perfidious positi∣on, that the body of man hath no being at al after it is turned to dust, is the sole foun∣dation of your late made Sheol for iust mens soules. Defenc. pag. 160. li. 3. It is a most vaine reason, that you giue that Sheol heere is taken for hell, because death to the wicked is the passage to hell, which death Ezechiah was not neeere vnto. ] I doubt not but you wilbe as bold with me, as you are with others, to corrupt or peruert euery word you light on, so you may seeme to say somewhat. My words were, that death in his owne nature was a passage to hell, as we find yet by proofe in all the wicked, though the faithfull be freed from it by the mercies of God in Christ. And therefore Ezechiah in the bitternesse of his soule might well call death the gates of hell, euen as our Sauiour said, The gates of hell should not preuaile against (his Church) though they should persue it on earth, calling sinne, error, and persecution the gates of hell, albeit in the godly they worke not so much, but in the wicked only. And in death de∣nounced by Esaie to Ezechiah, the king did not so much feare the passage out of this life as the suddaine change of Gods fauour towards him, who not long before with a mightie hand from heauen, and by a miraculous slaughter of his enemies, saued him and his city from the rage of Senacherib, and on the suddaine Esa. 38. about that very time, as the Scripture noteth, strake him with sicknesse, and sent him word to putt his house in order, for he should die. which message the king feared was a signe of Gods displeasure against him, as iudging him vnworthy to enioy so great a deliuerance. And this might make Ezechiah, otherwise a good king, to tremble at that, which in Gods secret counsell he was not neere vnto, though in the feare and g iefe of his own hart, he might feele in some fort the bitternes of death in that short pangue. Defenc pag 160. li. 12. Another obiection of yours is as weake, where you say; Sheol heere must be the graue, because it is said afterward, sheol doth not confesse thee, death cannot praise thee: for it is e∣uident that Ezechiah meaneth not absolut ly, there is no praising of God in sh l, but onely be vnderstandeth the outward frequenting of the Temple, and publishing of Gods goodnesse to others. If you can shift of one circumstance, or make a shew with some ambiguity, you thinke your selfe safe; neither care nor conscience leadeth you to looke to the rest, that is written either in the same or in other places of the sacred Scriptures. This comparison made betwixt the liuing and the dead, that the liuing confesle and praise God, which the dead cannot doe, belongeth in the liuing to the whole man, that is, chiefly to the soule, the maker and directer of our praiers, but associated with the body, whose parts and affections she guideth and composeth, euen as she doth the tongue to serue so good an action. In the dead this ioint deuotion of body and soule, with heart and voice, ceaseth by reason the body seuered from the soule by dea h c n not concurre with the soule in any speach, action, or affection whatsoeuer. So uch then, as is dead in the iust, is vtterly made vnprofitable by death to performe any such duty to God. For that which is dead, is depriued as of life, so of all sense and moti n answerable to that life, which is lost. But an vtter want of praising God is in sh l, as Ezechiah declared, the place therefore where the soules of the iust deceased are, is not Sheol by the scriptures, since they doe not cease to confesse and praise God. In Sheol, you say, there is no such praysing of God as on earth.] In Sheol, I say, there is no praysing of God at all. Now let vs see, to which of these two the Scrip∣tures accord. You thought with a wrench, as your manner is, to decline the force of trueth, and make way to your fansie, but the Scriptures hold you faster then so. In the very same verse the next words are Esa. 38. v. 13. They that goe downe to the pit, cannot hope (on, in, or) for thy trueth. Whosoeuer confesseth or praiseth God, must hope in the trueth of God. They can therefore no way confesle or praise God. Now the soules of the iust no question confesse and praise God. They are not therefore in the pit, which the Scriptures call Sheol. And so much you might plainly haue perceaued by the words of Salomon, if trueth had been in greater request with you, then your owne deuices. Ecclesi stes 9. vers. 5 & The liuing saith Salomon, know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing at all. . There is neither knowledge, n r wisedome in Sheol, whither thou goest. And of Da∣uid likewise, Psal. 8. Shall thy wonderous works be knowen in the darcke? and thy righteousnesse in the land of obliuion? If the soules of the iust and blessed be in that place, which the Scripture calleth hSeol, as you stifly maintaine, then haue they no wisedome, know∣ledge, nor memorie at all, no not of Gods righteousnesse and trueth. But that were to prop vp error with open heresie, and as before you gaue a good push to denie the Resurrection of the flesh, by saying their bodies wasted to dust had no being at all, so by this you fairely abolish the immortality of the soule, and by consequent l e euer∣lasting. For if the bodie be nothing after it returneth to dust, and the soule after this life remaining in Sheol (as you say) can haue neither wisedome, nor knowledge, nor memory of Gods righteousnesse and trueth, as the Scriptures say, you must hold a new creation of other bodies and other soules, before either soules or bodies can be partakers of life euerlasting. This is your world of soules, for which you make so much worke, and whither you striue to bring the soule of Christ, defending that his soule was in your Sheol, where the Scripture saith is neither wisedome, knowledge, nor memorie. And so handsom∣ly you haue set vp the sides of your Sheol, that by your Resolution it is Pag. 157. li. 2. indeed no posi∣tiue, thing properly, but a meere priuation of this life: Pag. 155. li. 34. and yet it is the condition or place as well where the iust mens soules are after death, as that where the da ned are: And lastly, Pag 159. li 38. it is the land of the dead, where they see him (euen the Lord) which must needs be the place of blessed soules: These many variations you haue made vs, and all these be properly Sheol in the Scriptures, and yet Sheol is neither hell nor heauen, but somewhere, no where, if you could tell what to make of it. And the proofe of all this is as pretious, as the place it selfe. For since the iust goe to Sheol as well as the wicked, and there re∣maine til the resurrection, the bodies of the Saints Pag. 159. li. 27. waste away to nothing in the graue, Pag. 158. li. 30. neither haue any being at all, & consequently their soules must haue their Pag. 159. li. habitation, mansion, and abode in Sheol, which is in the land of the dead (soules,) where they see God, and yet this condition and place common to them with the wicked, who can neither see God, nor haue any bleslednesse. Much to blame shall I be, if I correct not mine opinion vpon such pregnancies as these be. The figuratiue senses of Sheôl, as when men liuing thinke, or complaine, they are in Sheôl, or other things besides man are said to goe to Sheôl, I purposely let passe, the corruption of all earthly things returning to dust for the sinne of man, as man doth. And the feare and force of destruction persuing man in this life, if he seeke not to God for helpe, are figuratiue significations of Sheôl in the Scriptures, but deriued by resemblance from the proper significations thereof, as likewise the consoquents de∣pending on the higher Sheôl appointed for the bodies, or on the lower prepared for the soules, that are dead, are sometimes intended by that word, and comprised in it, as adherents and accessories vnto it: These I say I omit, because we reason heere of the proper signification of Sheôl, which con th places vnder earth prouided for sinners, to which the bodies depriued of life, and soules forsaken of grace, descend as to the mansions assigned them by the iust iudgement of God for euer. That the soules of the Righteous are in Sheôl till the Resurrection, the more you labour to confirme, the lesse cause I find to beleeue, since you therein w der most vnwise∣ly not only with meere vn tainties, and many contrarities, but euen to open and most desperate falshoods. Defenc. pag. 161. li 3. To the verie same purpose the Se gint vse Hades. For it is well and truely acknow∣ledged by you, that both Sheol and Hades are iust all one. ] I neuer doubted but Hades in Greek was vsed by the Septuagint to expresse Sheol in Hebrew, and with them did note as well the graue, where the bodies of men lie silent and dead, as the place of punishment, whither the soules of the wicked descend: but in the new Testament where our Sauiour often and openly reuealed the place and paines of the damned, there the Euangelists and Apostles distinguishing the death of the body from the destruction of the soule, and counting the one to be but a sleepe to the godly; They separate Hades from Thanatos, and vse them diuersly, referring hades to signifie the place of torment, whither the wicked are condemned, which is hell, and expressing by Thanatos the dissolution of soule and body, saue when they speake of the death of the soule, either on earth, which is the losse of all grace, or in hell which is an exclu∣sion from all glo ie, and a subiection to perpetuall and intolerable misery; in which case they doe not forbeare the word Thanatos, death. The Greeke fathers exactly follow this signification of hades for hell, which they learned from the Euangelists and Apostles. Your fitting of Dauids phrases to your owne deuices is a dangerous and deceitfull course. For you make what you will of his words, and then conclude your owne conceits out of them. Wherein if any man aske for proofes, your friends must replie with Pythagoras Scholars, , he said the word. And you so intangle your selfe with termes, that you do not see your owne positions contradicted & con∣futed by your owne allegations. For where before you were peremptory that Sheol was properly a meere priuation of this life; now by misconstruing some speaches in the Scriptures you will haue life not only to be in hades, which you make all one with Sheol and death, but there to continue and abide. And when against your owne positions, and against the grounds of all reason, you haue vouched life to be in hades which you say is death, then you turne round and would inferre, that since life can∣not be in death, life there must be the soule, and so the soule must be in hades. And thus you daunce the Morrisco, that life is in hades, and life is not in hades, not knowing or not caring what you say, so you may still steppe forward, though it be ouer the shoes. The words of Dauid, My life drew neere to Sheol, my soule had almost dwelt in silence, Psal. 88. as likewise of E hu in the booke of Iob, speaking of one that is visited with sicknesse by the hand of God, and in great danger of death, so that Iob. 33. his soule drew neere to cor∣ruption, and his life to the s ers, are not spoken of dead men that are in hades, as you misconceaue, but of men yet liuing, and hauing both soule and body vnited toge∣ther. And this phrase of drawing neere to Sheol or Hades, and almost dwelling there, noteth onely the danger of death approching, and readie to make an end of life, by seuering the soule from the bodie. Neither are these the wordes of the Septuagint, his life (is) in Hades, (this in me you would call a falsification of the text,) since the verbe precedent , his life drew neere; must be repeated, and not the verbe (is) added at your pleasure. And where the speech in Greeke his life (drew neere) in Hades, is somewhat defectiue, it must be supplied, as the former verbe requireth, , and his life (drew neere to those) in Hades, and not with a new verbe of your deuising; specially since the Hebrew keepeth lamed prefixed be∣fore both the wordes, corruption and slayers which noteth a motion towards either, not a being in either. And yet if the Septuagint did swarue from the originall sense, as by this supplie they doe not; their authoritie is not sufficient to establish any point of doctrine not deliuered in the Authentike words of the holy Ghost. They were Iewes liuing in very corrupt times, and ignorant of the true mysteries of Christ, to which all faith must be proportioned; and therefore their wordes being not canonicall must be leuelled by the text, which they translate, or else refused as vnsound. The phrase of dwelling, in things that be contrary each to other, and so exstinguish ech the other, is as much as to bee vtterly oppressed without recouerie: though the soule may also be sayd to dwell in silence (which is the word that Dauid vseth) when it is parted from the bodie, and hath neither action, motion, nor speech, but in silent and secret maner; where as by her bodie she performeth all these things euen sensibly to the eyes and ares of others. Defenc. pag. 161. li. 17. Againe it sufficeth for our purpose, that Hades and Sheol are often vsed euen indiffe∣rently for death, and as being in effect the same. Which also sometime wee may likewise con∣ceaue of the Latine Inferi, which is by the translatours and other writers vsed for Sheol and Hades, though (I denie not) very dangerously and corruptly indeede. ] That, which is most corrupt and ambiguous, best sufficeth your purpose, who seeke nothing but a confusion in Scriptures, Translatours, and Expositours, that you may say what you list: otherwise it doth you little good, that sometimes Sheol and Hades are vsed for death, since with the Septuagint Hades importeth the place and state of so much, as is dead, either in the wicked, as of bodie and soule; or in the godly, as of bodie alone. And so much doth the Latine word Inferi signifie with the old translator, euen places in the earth below for the dead bodies or soules; though the Latine Fathers most vsu∣ally take it for the receits of soules below the earth, to which they supposed all descen∣ded till Christs comming. How the Greeke doth sometimes render the word Sheol in Hebrew, either by Hades or Thanatos, is little to the purpose; much lesse, that Sheol and Maueth are sometimes ioyned together in the Canonicall writers, either be∣cause they agree in neuer being satisfied, or for that they are ioyned together, and the one is the way to the other. For it is death, that bringeth the good to their graues, though their soules be in rest; & the wicked to hell, when as yet their bodies be in the dust. Your determining, what is meant in ech place of Scripture, is of as much force with mee, as a feather in the aire, that flieth euery way; you can no more leaue talking, then water can running, where it hath an issue; but you are as lame in your proofes, as you be lauish in your words; you will say any thing, and prooue nothing. Defenc. pag. 161. li. 30. That death cra eth more then either hell or the gra e strictly taken, is vouched and proued after your maner, that is by your owne authoritie; and hath no shew of trueth, except you suppose, that the soules of the righteous are dead, against out Sauiours assertion, who saith of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, that they are not dead, meaning in soule, which should not alway want her body; and hath therefore a day prefixed, when shee shall receaue her flesh raised out of the graue. With like boldnesse you vouch, which is the maine question, that Christ pag. 161. li., 7. reioyced, because God would deliuer his soule from (Shcol) the condition of death, after he was in it; setling your conclusion, as you doe your religion vpon your owne fantasticall misconstering the Scriptures. With the same discretion you adde, that in this sense Defenc. pag. 162. li 3. the reprobate and the elect after death are said to be together; and for proofe thereof you bring the diuels wordes ap∣pearing in Samuels shape vnto Saul, as if the diuell were lately become a teacher of trueth, because he can lie; or it were in you to pronounce, whether, or which of Sauls sonnes were elect. pag 162. li. 8. Saint Austins meaning you are as neere, as the North Pole is to the South: Austin neuer thought of your world of soules (good and bad) in one common condition, much lesse that the Saints in heauen might be said to be in Sheol. Hee speaketh of the condition of their bodies, on which death seaseth; not of their soules, which passe from death to life, and are by no diuinitie called dead, since they liue with God, and are farder from death, then when they were liuing heere on earth. Defenc. pag. 162. Not that there is any positiue thing common to the elect and r probates after death (which you obserue well) but onely that they alike remaine in death. ] I assure my selfe, that my obseruation in that behalfe is consonant to the word of God, and is indeede the trueth, as you now confesse: but then your world of soules and common condition of the dead must come to bare wordes, and meere priuations; or else to a manifest and confessed falshood. If Sheol and Hades in the Scriptures be nothing but wordes, or priuations importing that men are departed this life; then happie are the wicked, that haue none other Sheol or Hades, but onely the want of this mortall and miserable life; and Atheists all this while were true beleeuers, if Moses and the Prophets threat∣ned nothing after death but a lacke of life. And vnhappie are the godly, pag. 160. li. 2. if the place of blessed soules, noted (as you say) by the word Sheôl, bee nothing else but an emptie name and a meere priuation. It were good you did a little consider with your friends, how these things agree with the Christian faith, that the STATE, CONDITION, AND PLACE of iust mens soules departed this life (for these three you containe in the name of Sheol and hades) should haue nothing in them positiue, but all priuatiue. The place of their soules I suppose to bee Paradise; and when you are in your good moodes, you make it not onely to be heauen, but aboue all the heauens, euen where Christ is at the right hand of the throne of maiestie. Their state is blessed with rest and ioy. Hath heauenly rest and blisse no positiue thing in it, but onely a priuation of this life? these be strange conceits; and yet if you will needes haue one common condition, state, and place, to good and bad, you must come to worse consequents then these. There is indeed one common condition, state, and place of the dead bodies of iust and vniust, that is, to come to corruption in their graues; but touching their soules no man besides you was euer so vnwise, as to auouch that there was one condi∣tion, state, and place of the dead; howsoeuer, now and then, some men light on ge∣nerall wordes touching the dead, that require a sober and heedefull interpreter. And by what authoritie doe you call the condition and state of blessed soules a meere pri∣uation, or a priuation at all; since to them their state is an exchange for a better life, in respect whereof this life is but a shadow of death, and the vale of miserie? Vse we to say, that men are depriued of their burdens, when they are eased of them? or de∣priued of their bondage, when they are freed from it? or that the hauen depriueth Sea-men of stormes? No more may wee rightly say, that the condition or state of blessed soules is any priuation, but rather a permutation of a short and wretched life (so iustly tempered for the desert of our sinnes) with a perpetuall and happie life gi∣uen vs by Gods mercies. The wicked, that are excluded from all sense and hope of bli e or ease, may bee sayd to bee depriued of this life which they loued aboue all things: but the Saints, that were otherwise minded, and are prouided of a farre bet∣ter life, may not be said to be depriued, but rather deliuered of the manifold troubles and afflictions of this life. But such is your conceited disposition, that if you may not haue a doctrine and discipline by your selfe, you loath the way of other Christian be∣leeuers. Defenc. pag. 162. li. 13. Thus the old Latin translator vseth Infernum, as commonly for Hades, so sometimes for Thanatos death, and sometimes Mors, death, for Hades. Epiphanius readeth the text, Acts 2. 24. indifferently Thanatou, or Hadou, as reckning them in effect all one. ] In your last pamphlet you were at defiance with all the Fathers, Greeke and Latin, Treat. pag. 96. li. 21. for abu∣sing the wordes HADES AND INFERI to signifie Hell properly and particularly, that is, the place of the damned, or a place vnder earth, a part thereof, which the latter wri∣ters haue since named Limbus: you now are taught another lesson by some of your friends, whose fingers are in this second part of your defence, that it is more for your credit rather to peruert the meaning of ech Father, then wholy to reiect their wri∣tings. And therefore you, or they turne quite about; and now without all question the Greeke and Latin Fathers (you say) meant by Hades and Inferi, not as they did before, hell or a part thereof; but your priuatiue world of soules, and that you take vpon you to iustifie with a round and readie course, as if it were no more masterie for you to misconstrue their sayings, then the Scriptures. Notwithstanding by processe it will appeare, how much your helpers haue beguiled you, and brought you into a fooles Paradise, vpon sight of one place, with which you might wrangle, to thinke that all their testimonies were as soone auoided, or wrested to your purpose. The place of the Acts 2. 24. which the old Translator rendreth by the name of Infernus, and Epiphanius citeth sometimes with Hadou, sometimes with Thanatou, I omit till we come to the speciall handling thereof; in the meane while let vs here how well you prooue your proiect of the rest of the Fathers. Defenc. pag. 162. li. 16. Iustine the Martyr long before saith, Christ noted the follie of those men, that thought him not to be Christ, but that he should die and remaine in Hades as a common man. He mea∣neth not heere as a wicked man in hell, but as auy common man (whether good or bad) dying abideth in death. ] Could you finde no wiser men to ground your reason on, then such as Christ himselfe noteth of error and folly? maketh it any matter to the trueth, what cogitations fooles caried in their brests? I pray you Sir why might not these vnchristi∣an fooles thinke, that all mens soules good and badde, went after death to the place called Hades vnder the earth, as well as wiser men, who were of that opinion? were you so neere of their counsell, as to know their thoughts? not onely Iewes and Pa∣gans, but euen Christians were of that perswasion, as appeareth by many of the Fa∣thers; much more then might fooles be of that minde, and therefore except you haue som better stuffe, we may note this allegation of folly, and so let it passe. But if you would needes know, in what sense Iustine himselfe vseth the word Hades, and what maner of place for soules after death he tooke it to be; reade his answere to the 75. question touching Christian religion. Iustin. quest. & r sponsio: ad Orthodox. r sponsio. 75. After the soule is departed from the body, straightwaies there is a separation of the iust from the vniust. For they are caried by An∣gels into places meete for them; the soules of the iust to Paradise, where is the fellowship and sight of Angels and Archangels, with a kinde of beholding of Christ our Sauiour. , but the soules of the vniust (are caried) to places in Hades as it is said of Nabuchod nosor king of Babylon. Esa. 14. , Hades below was stirred to meete thee. So likewise he citeth and alloweth Platoes words. When death draweth neere, Idem in co∣ ort. ad Grae∣co . the tales that are told, , of things in Hades, how he that heere dealeth vniustly, shall there be punished, and were laughed at, then trouble the soule, least they prooue true. Defenc pag. 162. li. 24. Ir us saith. Heerein Christ, (legem mortuorum seruauit,) did as other doe that di , and conuersed three daies, vbi erant mortui (sancti) where the dead (Saints) were. And this he calleth locum inuisibilem; the vnseene world. What meaneth thi but Hades as we take it? yea a little before he expresly calleth it Paradise. Neuerthelesse I gr nt, that he thought this vnseene world was indeed beneath in the earth. Wherein his proofes doe vtterly faile him, as you your selfe doe fully grant, and professe in this point as well as we. ] In time you may learne some skill to alter and counterfait the Fathers writings; but as yet your cunning faileth you. You doe not marke, or will not see, that Irenaeus in this Chapter expresly confuteth a number of your positions, and subuerteth the whole frame of your meere priuatiue Sheol; and not Irenaeus, but your sense put to Irenae∣us his words against his manifest meaning, is all the hold you haue in thisplace. Ire∣naeus condemneth two of your assertions as erroneous; the one that Christes soule after death went vpward to heauen, and descended not downeward to the lower parts of the earth. The next, that the soules of the Saints, as soone as they die, ascend to the highest heauens. Ir us li. 5. ca. 31. Haeretici, simulatque mortui fuer t, dic t se super∣gredicaelos. Hereticks, as soone as they be dead, say they ascend aboue the heauens. They will not vnderstand, that if this were so as they say, the Lord himselfe surely would not haue made his resurrection on the third day, sed super crucem expirans confestim vtique abi sset sursum relinquens corpus terrae; but giuing vp the ghost on the crosse, would no doubt haue straightwaies gone vpward, leauing his bodie to the earth. But now he staied three daies where the dead were. As he refelleth your imaginations, so he nothing relieueth your assertions, though you touch nothing of his, which you turne not awrie with corrupting his sense or his sentence. Christ kept the law of the dead saith Irenaeus; that is say you, he did but as others that die, and conuersed three d es where the dead (Saints) were. The lawe of the dead, which Irenaeus heere speaketh of, is to expect the resurrection of their bodies till the time prefixed by God. His wordes are. As then our Master Iren us vt supra. non stati ∣lans abi ; did not straight (after death) ascend vp, but staied the time, appointed for his resurrection by the Father; so we ought to endure the time of our resurrection prefixed by God, and so to be assumed, as many as the Lord shall count woorthy. You make a new law of your owne for the dead, which Irenaeus neuer thought of, and the i sible place appointed for their soules vntill the resurrection, if you will haue it to be the same which Irenaeus saith Christ had, must be the lower parts of the earth, which I trust is not Paradise. Li. 5. ca. 31. If therefore (saith he) the Lord obserued the law of the dead, and staying vntill the third day in the lower parts of the earth, then rose in his flesh, and so ascended to his father, how should they not be confounded, who say, their inward man leauing the body heere in supercelestem ascendere locum, ascendeth to the highest place of heauen. Touching the place, where Christs soule seuered from his bodie was; as the tran∣scriber or printer before you mistooke the word sanctorum in Irenaeus for sanctus, so you the second time corrupt the same in saying, Christ conuersed three daies where the dead (Saints) were, in steed of, Vbi erant mortui, where the dead were. This place is twise before alleadged by Irenaeus, where the word sanctus is referred to God, and not to the dead. Iren . li. 3. ca. 23. Commemoratus est dominus sanctus Israel mortuorum suorum (qui) dormie∣rant in terra sepultionis. The Lord the holy one of Israêl remembred his dead, which slept in the earth of their buriall, and descended to them. So in his 4 booke and 39 chapter he re∣peateth it againe. Idem li. 4. ca. 34. Recommemoratus est dominus sanctus Israel mortuorum suorum qui pr dormierunt in terra defossionis. The Lord the holy one of Israel remembred his dead, which before (his comming) had slept in the earth digged to lay them in, (that is in their Graues.) Iustine Martyr citeth the Greeke words to like effect. Iustinus in dial cu Triphone. The Lord God out of Israel remembred his dead, that slept , in their graues. This being the true tenor, or translation of this sentence, it is euident that the transcriber or printer of Ire∣neus mistooke Sanctorum for Sanctus, and you more wilfully presume to put the word Sanctus to the former period; of purpose to imply that Christ went no whither but where the souls of his (Saints) were. But you vtterlie peruert Ireneus meaning. for Christs going to them doth not exclude his goinge els whither, and in those gene∣rall words Christ conuersed three dayes with the dead, are comprised not only the graue and place of buriall, where the Lords dead were; but as appeareth by Ireneus proofes following, the Iren us li. 5. ca. 31. Heart and lower parts of the earth, & euen the nethermost Infernum, hell, where others were, which were no Saints, and the souls of the Saints were not; except you mind to establish Limbus out of these words. Now what hath your priuatiue Sheól and Hades to do with these words? heere are places described in the earth and vnder the earth, where if you set the soules of the Saints vntill the day of resurrection, you empty Paradise, and quite deny the Saints deceased to be in any part of heauen, since heauen is aboue and not vnder the earth. And though you say Ireneus proofes doe faile him for his purpose, they are plaine and full: as that Christ was Matth. 12. in the heart of the earth, and Ephes. 4. descended to the lower parts of the earth, and that of Dauid applied by him to Christ: Psal. 85. Thou hast deliuered my soule from the nethermost hell. There is therfore nothing in these words of Ireneus, that fauoreth your new found hades, though the souls of Christs disciples after death be granted Ireneus li. 5. ca. 31. to go to an muisible place prepared for them by God, which whether it be Paradise, or heauen, or a place vnder earth (for thi∣ther aith Ireneus Christ descended, but he doth not say that the souls of his Disciples shall thither goe till the resurrection, as you falsly collect) it cannot be your hades, which is a meere priuation of this life, and hath no positiue thing in it; much les e a certaine and defined place for the soules of his Saints. And where you presume, as your manner is, that Ireneus a little before calleth this inuisible place expresly Para∣dise, if that were so, you must then confesse your hades is not common to good and bad, and hath in it not only an heauenly place, but an happie state, which I trust you will not allow to the wicked: and so hades and heauen to be all one with you, which thing you so much disclaime. But by your leaue it is not so, your friends and you are ouerbold with Ireneus to make him say what you list. Six and twenty Chapters be∣fore this he saith, the elders, which were the Apostles Disciples, deliuered that li. 5. ca. 5. such as were translated, (that is, remooued hence with their bodies without dying, as Enoch and Elias) were translated thither euen to Paradise, and there remaine they which were translated euen to the end; shewing now a beginning of incorruption. Defenc. pag. 162. li. 32. Againe he further sheweth that in the Scripture he taketh hades to be al one with death or the dominion of death, where he readeth the text thus, Vbi est mors aculeus tuus? Vbi est mors victoria tua? Death where is thy sting? Death where is thy victory? ] You shew your Iren us wrote in Greeke. selfe to be well read in the fathers, that cannot tell whether Ireneus wrote in Greeke or in Latin, and therefore in steed of a most Hier. de scrip∣tor. ecclesiast. in Irenaeo. learned and most eloquent writer, as Ierom calleth him, you bring vs the authority of an vnknowen and obscure interpreter. Were there no more, but the very place euen now cited, and abused by your selfe, the parts whereof are found in Ireneus thrice after three seuerall interpretations, as for example, in li. 3. ca. 23. Terra sepultionis, in li. 4. ca. 39. terra defossionis, in li. 5. ca. 31. terra stipulationis; it were enough to shew the Author neuer wrote in Latine, that varieth so much from him∣selfe, and that the translator was verie seely; but there are other arguments infinite: the Greeke wordes expressing the conceits of heretikes, aboue 120, euery where be retained; the stile throughout exactly resembling the Greeke phrase, the mani∣fold citations thereof by the Greeke Fathers, as 18. whole Chapters by Epiphanius, 22. peeces and parts thereof by Eusebius, and 14. by Theodoret, besides Polycarpe his instructor and teacher euen in his youth, who was altogether a Grecian. But we shall not need to seeke reasons for it, since Ierom so many hundred yeeres agoe, when the originall was extant, numbreth Ireneus amongst the Greek writers. Hierony. in pro li. 18. Commenta io∣rum in Esaiam. We shall seeme (saith he) to crosse the opinions of many auncient writers; of the Latins, Tertullian, Victorinus, Lactantius: of the Greekes,: o omit the rest, I will make mention onely of Ireneus Bishop of Lions. And againe I em in c. 36. Ezechielis. To name the Greeke writers, and to ioine the first and last to∣gether, Ireneus and Apollinarius. Ireneus then writing in Greeke, and citing the Apos∣tles words likewise in Greek, you cannot proue by the rude and late translation of his works, which we haue, how he read the Apostles text. Gregorie Bishop of Rome more then 600 yeeres after Christ, saith. Greg. R gist. l b. 9. c. 50. Scripta beati Irenei iamdiu est, quòd solicite quaesiuimus, sed hactenus ex is inueniri aliquid non potuit. The writings of blessed Ireneus we haue long and carefully sought for, but hitherto nothing of his can be found: he meaneth in Latin, for before and after euerie Greek diuine, as Basil, Cyril, Theodoret, Occu∣menius, Aretas, Anastasius, Damascen, Procopius, Nicetas, cite Irenaeus workes and words. The Latin translation of the Apostles words, 1 Corinth: 15 : Death where is thy sting, death where is thy victory, I shall haue fitter occasion by and by to examine. Defenc. pag. 163 li. 7. Tertullian doth likewise. For speaking of Inferi, which he taketh for the same that hades is, he noteth it as the place, quo vniuersa humanitas trahitur; whither all mankind must goe, and therefore of Christes going thither he saith. Because he was a man (therefore) hee died according to the Scriptures, and was buried according to the same, also heere he satisfied the common law (of nature) by following the forme of mens dying (and going) to the world of the dead. ] If you should not peruert both Tertullians wordes and sense, neither would make for your purpose. And though you gain not much by corrupting the coherence of his wordes, yet are you so vsed to haue all to your liking, that you cannot hold your hand from disordering other mens speeches. Tertullian. de anima ca. 55. Christ (saith Tertullian) being God, because he (was) also man, (and) died according to the Scriptures, and (was) buried accor∣ding to the same; euen in this satisfied the law (by) performing the course of an humane death, (apud Inferos) in the places below. In steed of ( Legi, the law) you say the common law (of nature); apud Inferos, you translate (going) to the world of the dead. These bee your fansies added to Tertullians wordes, and no parts of his purpose. In the meane while you dissemble, and therein abuse both your selfe and your Reader, that euen in that Chapter, and the sentence before, Tertullian describeth Inferi to be a place vn∣der the earth, whither the soules of good and bad descend after death, the good to a kind of refreshing, which is plainely Limbus so much refused by your selfe, the bad to punishment. His wordes in the fiue and fiftie Chapter, which you quote, prece∣dent to those which you cite are these. Ibidem. Nobis inferi non nuda cauositas, nec sub diualis aliqua mundi sentina creduntur, sed in fossa Terrae & in alto vastitas, & in ipsis visceribus eius abstrusa profunditas. Siquidem Christum in corde Terrae triduum mort is legimus ex∣punctum, id est in recessu intimo & interno, & in ipsa Terr operto, & intra ipsam cauato, & inferioribus adhuc abyssis superstructo. We beleeue Inferi to be no bare hollownesse, nor a∣ny sincke vnder the world, but in the gulfe of the earth; and in the depth of vastitie, and in the very bowels of the earth an abstruse profunditie. For we reade that Christ was the three dayes of his death in the heart of the earth, that is in an inward place within the midst there∣of; and couered with the earth, and hollowed within the same, and seated ouer mighty deepes below. If this be your world of the dead, let any man of vnderstanding iudge, whether this be not a plaine & euident description of that, which the latter writers called Lim∣bus, and whether there can be any fuller delineation of it, then a place vnder the earth, and in the midst thereof, euen hollowed in the bowels of the earth, and couered with the same, hauing vnder it mighty deepes. And that in it there is as well rest for the good, as tor∣ments for the wicked. And the continuation of the very same sentence, which you guilefully bring for your world of dead, and the conclusion of both are deliuered by Tertullian in these words, ( Ibidem. ca. 55. if Christ did performe the course of an humanc death in places below) neither did ascend into the higth of the heauens, before he descended into the lower parts of the earth, there to make the Patriarkes and Prophets partakers of him selfe, habes regionem inferûm subterrane am credere, thou must beleeue the (place or) region of inferi to be vnder the earth. If you draw these words to your world of the dead, then are the soules of the iust neither in heauen nor in Paradise, but vnder the earth, euen in the heart or midst thereof, and there shall remaine vntill the resurrection, for so Tertulli∣an resolueth of his inferi. Defenc pag. 163. li. 35. Which yet is farder most cleerely to be seene. Lazarus apud inferos in sinu Abrahae refri∣gerium consecutus, Lazarus in the world of the dead enioieth comfort in Abrahams bosome, contrariewise the rich man is in the torments of fire, both of them there receauing their diuers rewards. How cleere is this that he maketh hades and inferos euen in Luke also to be nothing but the common state and world of the dead? ] It is farre cleerer, that you neuer read Tertullian with indifferent care to trie the trueth of his meaning and words, but only to abuse the Reader with a seelie shew not of his writings but of your wrestings. For there can be no directer speach to prooue, that inferi are neither heauen nor Paradise but places vnder the earth, and in the midst thereof, where bad and good, excepting onely Martyrs, are kept in rest or paine till the generall day of iudgement, then is found in these bookes of Tertullian, from which you would gather your world of the dead. For euen in the fiue and fiftie Chapter of his booke De Anima, whence you first beganne to weaue your world of the dead, he positiuely auoucheth, Tertullian s de anima ca. 55. Nulli patet caelum; terra adhuc salua, ne dixerim clausa. Heauen is opened to no man, so long as the earth is continued, that I say not closed (ouer them). Together with the end of the world shall the kingdome of heauen be opened. And touching Paradise he admitteth no soules to be there, but onely Martyrs. And therefore to this obiection. Ibidem. But thou wilt say (the dead are) in Paradise, whether the Patriarkes and Prophets, that rose with our Lord, pas∣sed euen then (ab Inferis) from the places below: he answereth: How then was the region of Paradise; which is vnder the Altar, reuealed to Iohn in the spirit, to haue none other soules in it besides Martyrs? how did Perpetua the most valiant Martyr the day before her suffe∣ring, when Paradise was reuealed to her, see there onely her fellow martyrs, but because the glittering s ord, that keepeth the gate of Paradise, yeeldeth to none saue to such as die in Christ, that is, as Martyrs for Christ? Tota Paradisi clauis tuus sanguis est. The only key to open Paradise, is thine owne bloud (shed in Martyrdome). So that in as plaine words, as Tertullian vseth any, Inferi are neither heauen nor Paradise, but Regio subterranea, a place (or Region) vnder earth, and in the heart of the earth; where some soules are in rest, as he thinketh, and some in torments, which if you can turne to your generall and priuatiue Hades, you shall worke wonders. That other position of his, constituimus omnem animam apud Inferos sequestrari in diem Domini; we resolue that euery soule is kept in Inferi till the day of the Lord (or of iudgement), as it is priuate to himselfe, and sauo∣ring of Montanisme, so it is different from the rest of the Fathers, who confesse not onely Martyrs, as he doth, but all good Christians after this life to bee receiued into Paradise. This error if you be disposed, you may mainetaine with Tertullian, but you shall neuer thence establish your world of soules, which you seeke for. Defenc. pag. 164. li. 3. Whereupon the learned Iunius noteth thus. Inferos Latini Patres (vt Graeci Haden) pro omni loco aut statu mortuorum dixerunt promiscué. The Latine Fathers vse Inferi (as the Greeke doe Hades) for euery place and state of the dead indifferently. ] That Iunius was very learned, I doe not denie, but that learned men may be partiall, and many times addicted to their priuate collections and opihions, I would God we had not so much experience as wee haue. If Iunius meane, that Hades or Inferi were taken for euery place and state of the dead, vnder the earth, before Christes comming, Iunius wordes are very true; that many of the Fathers tooke Hades & Inferi for the place of al the dead, which they thought to be vnder the earth before Christs comming; but that they cal∣led heauen or Paradise, which are places for the Saints deceased in Christ, by the name of Inferi; or that they tooke Inferi for the state of the blessed soules since Christes re∣surrection, this I say neither Iunius was, nor any man liuing is able to prooue. And for Tertullians meaning, his wordes are so plaine, that neither Iunius, nor whosoeuer might or may ouerrule them. I repeated them before, the effect is this. Tertullianus de anima ca. 55. Inferi, saith he, are beleeued of vs to be a vastitie in the depth of the earth; and an hidde profunditie in the bowels thereof; for we reade that Christ was the three dayes of his death in the heart of the earth, that is in the inward and middlemost receit thereof couered in the earth, and hol∣lowed (or compassed on euery side) with the earth, and seated vpon the lower gulfes. If these words be not plaine enough, he addeth, Ibidem. Habes Regionem Inferûm subterraneam credere; thou must beleeue the Region of Inferi to be vnder the earth. I shall not need many wordes to shew that Iunius obseruation out of Tertullian is not true, except you adde euery place and state of the dead vnder the earth, thereby to exclude the place and state of the blessed in heauen and in Paradise; I leaue it to the Iudgement of any man, that hath learning or vnderstanding, whether these words of Tertullian do not define and describe a certaine place vnder the earth, and within the earth, in which he thought the soules of all men (Patriarkes and Prophets not exempted) were before Christes com∣ming, and should bee till the resurrection, saue such as rose with Christ, or suffered Martyrdome for Christ, (for that is his exception afterward, as I haue shewed:) the good in rest, the badde in punishment. To that end he saith. Idem de A∣nima. cap. 58. Omnes ergo animae penes inferos, inquis. Velis ac nolis, & supplicia iam ILLIC, & REFRIGERIA; habes pau∣perem & diuitem. Cur enim non putes animam & puniri & foueri in Inferis interim sub ex∣pectatione vtrius{que} iudicij? All soules then you suppose, are in Inferi. Will you, ill you, you haue THERE alreadie both punishment and comfort, the poore man and the rich. For why should you not thinke the soule to bee punished and cherished in Inferis, in the places below, meane while vnder an expectation of either iudgement? These wordes you can alleage, and neglecting how plainly Tertullian hath taught besore, that Inferi are places in the heart of the earth, and a region vnder the earth, you wilfully change condition for regi∣ on, and state for place, skipping cleane, that all this is vnder earth, and then you say this is your world of the dead, whereof part are in heauen by your owne positions, and part in hell. But this is too sensible a subuerting of Tertullians words, vnfit ei∣ther for Iunius to beginne, or for you to follow. If Tertullians words were as true as they be plaine, neither side might refuse his opinion. Neither was Tertullian alone in this perswasion, that all departing this life before Christes death went to places below in the earth. Ireneus affirmeth almost as much. Irenaeus li. 4. c . 45. Ea propter Dominum in ca, quae sunt sub terra descendisse euangelizantem & illis aduen∣tum suum. Therefore the Lord descended to the places vnder the earth to preach (or pub∣lish) euen to them his comming. And againe, Christ conuersed three dayes, Irenaeus li. 5. ca. 31. where the dead were, yea where the soules of the dead were, and was in the heart of the earth, and stayed till the third day in the lower parts of the earth, where I trust you will not defend Hea∣uen or Paradise to be. Ierom is more plaine in this point: Hieron. in 3. ca. Ecclesiastis. Salomon speaketh thus, sayth he, because before the comming of Christ, omnia ad inferos pariter ducerentur, all were caried alike to the places below. Wherefore Iacob sayth, He shall descend ad inferos, to the lower places. Et Iob pios & impios in inferno queritur retentari. And Iob complaineth that the godly and the wicked are detained in inferno, in the gulfe below. And lest you make what you list of the words Inferi & Infernus, as Iunius and some other learned men by their leaues haue done, you shall heare what Ierom himselfe sayth of them both: Idem in Ose. ca. 13. Inter mortem & inferos hoc interest, betweene death and inferi this is the difference. Death is that whereby the soule is separated from the bodie. Infernus locus, in quo animae includuntur siue in refrigerio, siue in poenis. Infernus is the place in which the soules are shut vp, either in refreshing or in punishment. Now where this place was, and how long the soules of the iust stayed there, he doth not dissemble. Idem in Os . ca. 14. We learne (by Esay) sayth he, that Infernus is vnder the earth. And Hiero in Epi∣stol. ad Ephes. ca. 4. that Infernus is in the lower part of the earth, the Psalmist witnesseth, saying: The earth opened and swallowed Dathan, and couered the con∣gregation of Abiram. For Idem in Ion . ca. 2. as the heart is in the midst of the liuing creature, so Infernus is sayd to be in the midst of the earth. And vpon these words of Salomon, There is nei∣ther thought, knowledge, nor wisdome in Infernus whither thou goest, he sayth. Idem in ca. 9. Ecclesiastis. Nota vt Samuelem quo{que} verè in Inferno credas fuisse, & ante aduentum Christi, quamuis sanctos, omnes Inferm lege detentos. Porro quod sancti post resurrectionem Domini nequaquam tene∣antur Inferno testatur Apostolus dicens, melius est dissolui & esse cum Christo. Qui autem cum Christo est, vti{que} non tenetur in Inferno. Note, that thou mayest beleeue Samuel also was truely in Infernus; and that before Christes comming, all, though saints, were detained vnder the law of Infernus. But that the saints after the Lords resurrection are no longer in Infernus, the Apostle witnesseth, saying: It is better to be dissolued, and to be with Christ. Now he that is with Christ, certainly is not held in Infernus. I would not repeat so much of this, which I do not acknowledge to be vndoubtedly true, were it not that you and some othe s take aduantage of these sayings, (which yet you reiect as vtterly false) to establish hence your new world of soules, and that after Christs resurrection, directly repugnant to their assertions, out of whose words you would seeme to deriue your o∣pinion. For you hold, that to this hower the soules of the iust are in hades and infernus and so shalbe till the resurrection; since infernus and hades, as you beare men in hand, import no more with the Latin and Greek fathers but the condition and state of the dead in generall, whether they be in hell or in heauen. Well this may be your con∣ceit, but no father Greek, or Latin, euer made mention of any such thing, as you would gather out of their words. That all mens soules before Christs comming, good and bad, were in places vnder the earth, the good in ease and comfort, the rest in paines and torments, this some of the fathers both Greek and Latin auouch; but that the iust still remaine now after Christs resurrection either in hades or Infernus, I find no man that auoucheth any such thing, saue only Tertullian. The first I must confesse I doe not beleeue, neither did Saint Austen before me, who learnedly and truely concluded, that Abrahams bosome mentioned by our Sauiour in the Gospell could be no part nor member of Infernus or hell; since the Scripture saith, there is a great and mighty gulfe set betweene them, so that the one can haue no accesse to the other, and the iust were aboue in comfort, whiles the wicked were below in hades, a place of torment, punished with flames of fire. But since the resurrection of Christ, no father (I still except Tertullian) affirmeth the soules of the iust to be in hades or in∣fernus; but in Paradise, which Tertullian yeelded to none but to Martyrs, being himselfe infected with the error of Montanus, when he wrote his booke De anima, as shall most plainly appeare, though you neuer so stifly denie it. Howbeit his opinion in that was priuate, and different from the rest. For Ierom saith. Hiero. in Epi∣taphio Nepo∣tiani. Ante Christum A∣braham apud Inferos post Christum latro in Paradiso. Before Christ Abraham was in places below: after Christ the Thiefe was in Paradise. Now the thiefe was iustly punished for his offences, and so no Martyr. Idem in Za∣charia. ca. 9. And againe. The munition, to which God exh rteth the Prisoners of hope, we ought to vnderstand none other but the habitation of Paradise, to which the Thiefe first entred with the Lord. For Idem tomo 3. ad Dardanum de terra viuen∣tium. this is the Land of the liuing (in which the good things of the Lord are prepared for meeke and holy men,) to which before the com∣ming of our Lord and Sauiour in the flesh, neither Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Iacob, nor the Prophets, nor other iust men could attaine. But euen by Tertullian himselfe it is euident, that your collection out of him is vtterly false. For he excepteth martyrs out of Inferi, and placeth them in Paradise, who yet I trust are in the condition of the dead. And so by no meanes doe inferi signifie with Tertullian the place or state of good and bad indifferently, that are dead, but onely such as were, or are in places vnder the earth, who are properly and truely called inferi in respect of vs and not those that are aboue vs in heauen or Paradise, where on euery side we now confesse the Saints are, though their bodies lie yet in the dust vnder earth. And because Chrysostome is quoted as one of the Patrons of these pretences, I am content to let you see, that Chrysostome is abused as well as the rest. For howso∣euer Chrysostome be vehement and sometimes figuratiue in his speeches, yet shall you not be able to prooue, that he euer vseth Hades after Christes death and resur∣rection for the place of iust mens soules. Before that time (some of the Greeke Fa∣thers supposing the soules of the iust to be kept vnder the earth) you may perchance finde heere and there a sentence where the iust are said to be in Hades: but you shall neuer be able to euince, that after Christes resurrection Hades is either the common condition or place of soules departed good and bad, as you and some others would seeme to obserue out of the Greeke Fathers. I speake of no more then I haue read in Greeke, but for so much as is extant of theirs, and I could get, I dare assure the Rea∣der he shall finde my saying to be true. As for the Homilie of Chrysostome, which you cite, it can doe you no great good. The Greeke to my knowledge is not Prin∣ted, and therefore you can conclude nothing for Hades, since the Grecians haue and vse many words for Inferi besides Hades. Cyril of Ierusalem expressing in Greeke that Article of the Creed, descendit ad inferos, saith, Cyrillus Hie∣rosolymit. ca∣techesi. 4. . Christ descended to the places below (or vnder the earth) to redeeme thence the iust. But graunt the worde Hades be vsed in that place of Chryso∣stome, what prooue you more then that Chrysostom was of opinion the soules of the iust before Christes comming were not in heauen or Paradise, but in Hades vnder the earth? neither shall we need for witnesse thereof to goe any farder then the same Ho∣milie, which you produce for your purpose. His wordes euen there are these. Chrysost. tom, 2 homil. de di∣uite ex Luc. 16. Si∣mulque consider andum, quod Abraham apud inferos erat. Nondum enim Christus resur∣rexerat, qui illum in Paradisum duceret. Antequam Christus moreretur, nemo in Paradi∣sum conscenderat nisi Latro. And withall we must consider, that Abraham was yet ( ) apud inferos, with those that were vnder the earth. For Christ was not yet risen; who should bring him into Paradise. Before Christ died, no man ascended to Paradise but the thiefe. No man could enter into Paradise, which Christ had shut. The thiefe was the first, that entred with Christ. The crosse of Christ (is) the key of Paradise, the crosse of Christ opened Para∣dise. Ibidem. Abraham is yet vnder the generall condition of death; though his soule be in Paradise: but Abraham is no longer in Hades, where he was before Christs comming by Chrysostoms opinion. Hades therefore is neither Paradise, nor the generall state of the dead after Christes death and resurrection; which cannot be strange to him that with any moderate paines peruseth Chrysostom. Chrysost. ser∣mo. 5. in 5. seria ssion. Nec mors tollere, nec infernus potuit hanc (animam) tenere; qua iubente tremens eti∣am vinctas animas, quas tenebat, amisit. Ibidem. Christo moriente d tione Tartarus perdidit quos tenebat, abiecit infernus ius potestatis antiquae. Neither could death take nor nfermis (or Hades) hold Christs soule, at whose cōmandement, hel (or Hades) trembling let go the soules which he held bound. Christ dying hell lost out of his dition (or custodie) whom before it held. Infernus (or Hades) threw of the right of his former power. And after his eloquent manner speaking in the person of Christ, hee saith amongst other things. Idem serm. 3. de Resurrect. tomo. 3. I should haue left vngratefull (men) to euerlasting punishment; but mercie, I confesse, preuailed with mee. I sent not an Angel, but I my selfe came downe for thee. I suffered my selfe to bee slaine, & sic ad istos Inseros veni; and so came to these lower places. Goe out now you that are bound; rise vp yee that are wretched; breath your selues yee prisoners. Behold I shine on you as light vnwoonted, behold I breake all your cordes and chaines. Ecce Tarteareas sedes, no∣ctemque profundam faetidumque chaos extermino. Beholde, I abolish (to you these) infer∣nall seats, (this) darke mist, and stincking chaos. Here is Chrysostomes hades, which I trust is not the generall state nor place of all mens soules vnder Christ: specially since Chrysostom in plaine speech sayth, Christ abolished and ended all these things to them that were in hell or hades. If you stand on the Greeke word, as not expressed in Chrysostoms Latine copies; out of these Latine translations your Leaders by their leaues gathered their obseruations (for these parts of Chrysostom are not yet printed in Greeke) and therefore rightly may they berefuted by the same. But though it be no small defect, that we want as yet the most of Chrysostoms works in Greeke, ne∣uerthelesse by part you shall perceiue what he meaneth by the word Hades whereso∣euer it is occurrent in his writings. In his homilie of the resurrection (which I before cited, lying in the New Colledge Librarie in Oxford) he hath these words: Chrysost. ad∣uersus Ebrios & de Resur∣rectione. . The Lord came on his crosse, and payed a death for (man) who was held of the diuell, that he might free him from the bands of hades. Where the bands of hades are those wherein man was deteined of the diuell. And elsewhere speaking of the crosse of Christ: Chrysost. in Matth. 6. om. 55. ; If (the crosse of Christ) brake vp the gates of hades; and set wide open the arches of heauen; and renewed the entrance into Paradise; what maruell is it, if it ouer came dead∣ly poisons and cruell beasts. And so againe, (God by Christ) I m tractat. 7. de gloriati∣one in tribula∣tione. abolished the curse, , and brake in pieces the gates of hades, and opened Paradise. And shewing a generall consent of all nations in this vse of the word, hee sayth; Idem in 2. ad Corinth. homi∣lia 9. The Grecians, Barbarians, Poets and Philosophers, and all sorts of men consent with vs in this, though not after the same maner, , and say, that there are certaine iudgements (or punishments) in hades. Which Theodoret like∣wise confesseth to betrue: Theodoret. sermo. 11. de sine & iudi∣cio. These speeches, sayth he, are sit for Philosophie ( ) , to send the soules, that haue liued here well, to heauen, and those that haue followed the contrary, downe to hades. And of Plato he sayth, Ibidem. . In many places he affirmeth tortures in hades. And least I should be thought to be lead with a desire to contradict without cause, or vpon some conceit to oppose my selfe against such learned men, as haue leaned that way supposing hades with the Greek Fathers to import the place and state of good & bad after death, I am not vnwilling, good Christian Reader, if it be not tedi∣ous or troublesome to thee, to set downe part (for the whole would make a new vo∣lume) of that which in reading I haue obserued touching the vse of the word hades with auncient writers that were Christians, who vse not hades either for the place or state of the godly now deceased in Christ, nor for the generall or common condition of both elect and reprobate since Christs resurrection, but as we saw before in Iustine the martyr, Chrysostome and Theodoret precisely for a place opposite to Paradise, and heauen; where the wicked after this life find the due wages of their sinnes, which is e∣ternall dar knesse and death, where the dwelling and dominion of Diuels is; and whence the Saints dead and liuing from the beginning of the world to the end there∣of we e and are redeemed and deliuered by Christ. Iosephus a Iew, and yet a fauour r of Christian Religion, as appeareth by his testimo∣nie, giuen of Christ, and one that liued euen in the Apostles time, as being a chiefe leader of the Iewes in the battaile against the Romans, and taken by Ve pasian, to whom he foretold by the gift of p ophesie, whiles Nero yet liued, that he should be Emperour, in his oration to dissuade them, that would haue killed themselues and him before he should yeeld to the Romans; I sephus de ca tiuitate Iu∣ aica li. 3. ca. 25. Know you not, saith he, that such as goe out of this life by the law (or course) of nature, and rep y the debt, which they r ceaued of God, when he that gaue it, is willing to receaue it, haue immortall glory, an house and of∣spring setled, and their soules cleansed and fauoured of God, inhabit the holiest place of hea∣uen: and I sephus de ca tiuitate Iu∣ aica li. 3. ca. 25. whose hands waxe mad against themselues, , THEIR SOVL S HADES, that is, darke, RECEIVETH. Ignatius the third bishop of Antioch after the Apostles, sayth of Christ: . , . He descended alone to Hades (Hell) and threw downe the rampier, that had stood from the beginning; and brake vp the partition wall thereof; which kept men from heauen. To the state of the dead Christs soule did not descend alone, the thiefs soule was with him; neither had the rampier of bodily death continued vnbroken from the beginning, since many before Christs suffering rose from the generall condition of the dead; but hell it was, to which he alone, of all men that euer returned, went, and brake the strength and force thereof, which till that time was vntouched. Theophilus the sixt bishop of Antioch, about 170 yeeres after Christ, alleageth against Autolycus a maligner of Christian religion the verses of Sybilla, to prooue that the Gentiles did sacrifice to diuels: . . You made sacrifices to diuels in hades. Clemens Alexandri∣nus not long after labouring to proue that Peters words, Christ preached to the spirits in prison, pertained to the wicked, not to the godly, giueth this reason: Cl ens Stro∣ma li. . ; who being well aduised, will thinke the soules of the iust and of sinners, to be in one cond mnation? Whence he concludeth, that none heard Christs voice there, but . ; such as were placed in hades; and had yeelded them∣selues w ttingly to destruction. And for proofe thereof alleageth these words as out of the Scripture: Cl ens Stro∣ma li. . . Hades sayd to destruction, We saw not his shape, but we heard his voice. I cite not these places to approoue euery allegation or opinion that is occurrent, but to shew in what sense the auncient Greeke writers, that were Christians, vsed the worde Hades, not for the common condition and state of soules iust and vniust, which Clemens heere disa oweth; but for the place where the wicked were detained, that wilfully wrought their owne destruction. Eusebius speaking in the person of Christ, saith . . I see my de∣scent to Hades approch and the rebellion (against me) of the contrarie powers that are ene∣mies to God; He saith Eusebius went thither, Ibidem. , for the sal∣uation of the soules that were in Hades, and descended to breake the brasen gates, ; & to dismis those that before were prisoners of hades. And out of Plato he alleageth this for a trueth Idem Euan∣geli ae preparat. lib. 13. quod Plato non per omni recte senserit de ani∣ma. , that the soules of the wicked immediately after death departing hence, endure the punishment in Hades, of their doings heere. Athanasius a man of no meane iudgement, in whose confession or Creede al∣lowed in the Booke of Common Prayer, we finde it a part of the Christian faith, that Christ descended to Hades, declareth in infinite places what he meaneth by the word Hades. Athanas. in illud omnia mi∣ i tradita sunt à Patre. After man had sinned, saith he, and was fallen, by his fall death preuailed from Adam vntill Christ; the earth was accursed, . Hades was opened; Paradise was closed, Heauen was offended: but after all things were deliu red to Christ, the whole was reformed and persited, the earth in steede of a curse was blessed, paradise was opened, , Hades shranke for feare, the gates of heauen were left open. Ibidem. He suffering for vs recouered vs, and hungring refreshed vs; . And descending to hades brought vs backe. Idem contra Arianos ora∣tion 2. For if the Lord had not beene made man, we had neuer risen from the dead as redeemed from our sinnes, but had remained vnder the earth as dead, neither had we euer beene lifted vp to heauen, , but had lien in hades. Againe, Idem de in∣ca natione Christi. he that examined (mans) disobedience; and gaue iudgement, inflicted a double punishment, saying to that which was earthly, Earth thou art, and to earth shalt thou returne; and to the soule, Thou shalt die the death; and so man was distracted into two parts, and condemned to abide (after death) in two places. If you can shew an other place, whither man was condemned, well may you say man was deuided into three parts, and that being recouered out of two places, he remaineth bound and chained in the third. , but if you can shew none other place besid s the graue and hades (hell) out of which man was perfectly freed by Christ, how say you then, that God is not yet reconciled to man? Ibidem. This appeareth not onely in vs, but in the death of Christ; the body comming to the graue, , and the soule descending to Hades, being places that are seuered with a great distance; the graue receauing his body, (for there it was present) and hades his spirit (or soule.) els how did (Christ) present the shape of his owne soule to the soules detained in bandes, , (that) hee might breake in sunder the bandes of the soules detained in hades? So likewise speaking of Christes persuing the diuell by his life and death, hee else where saith. Athanas. in passionem & crucem Domi∣ni. The diuell was fallen from heauen, hee was cast from the earth, hee was persued in the aire, euery where conque∣red, and euery where straightned, , he determined to keepe Hades (hell) for this place was yet left him. Ibidem. But the Lord a true Sauiour would not leane his worke vnfinished, , nor leaue those that were in hades as yeelded to the enemie. The diuell there∣fore Ibidem. , thinking to kill one lost all, and hoping to carie one to Hades (hell) was himselfe cast out of hades (hell.) Ibidem. . Hades (hell) is abrogated, death no more preuailing, but all being raised to life, nei∣ther can the diuell stand vp any more against vs, but is fallen, and indeed creepeth on his brest and bellie. And therefore of the Saints he saith, Ibidem. : and in fine they saw Hades (hell) spoiled. Epiphanius in sundrie places expresseth the parts and purpose of Christs descen∣ding to hell, or hades. Epiphanius in haer m A aleosi, He was crucified, buried, , Hee descended to the places vnder earth in his diuinitie and in his soule, he tooke captiuitie captiue, and rose againe the third day. What here he calleth places vnder the earth, whither Christes soule went after his death, that elswhere he calleth Hades. Idem in li 2. h resi 69. con∣tra Ariomani∣tas. The Godhead of Christ would performe all things that perteined to the mysterie of his passion; , and would descend together with his soule to the infernall places to worke the saluation there of such as were before dead, I meane the holy Patriarcks: , &c. that he might performe the things he would against hades in the forme of a man euen in ha∣des, that the chiefe Ruler HADES and death thinking to lay hands on a man, and not knowing his Deitie vnited to his sacred soule, Hades himselfe might rather be surprised, and death dissolued; and that fulfilled which was spoken, Thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hades. Basil: Basil. homilia quod Deus non est author ma∣lorum. Death is not altogether euill, except you speake of the death of a sinner, : because their departure hence is the beginning of their punish∣ments in hades; againe, the eu s that are in hades haue not God for their cause, but our selues, the head and root of sinne is in vs, and in our willes. And againe: Ibidem. Dathan and A∣biram were swallowed vp of earth, the gulfes and clefts thereof opening vnder them. Heere were not they the better for this kinde of punishment: : for how should they be so, that went to hades (to hell) but they made the rest the wiser by their ex∣ample. And writing on the 48 Psalme: I m in Psal. 4 . Because (man) turned himselfe from the word of God and became a beast; the enemie caught him as a sheepe without a shepheard, , and put him in hades (hell); but when he sayth, God will redeeme my soule from the power of hades, I idem. he doth plainly prophesie, , the de∣scent of the Lord to hades, who would redeeme the Prophets soule with others not to abide there. Nazianzene in his second Oration against Iulian the Ren gate: Nazianzen. in Iu ianum oratione 2. . Stop thou thy secrets and wayes that leade to hell (hades), I will declare the plaine wayes which leade to heauen. And of Christ he sayth; Idem oratio. 1. d si io. Christ died, but he restored to life, and with his death abolished death. He was buried, but he rose againe. He descended to hell (hades), but he brought backe soules, and ascen∣ded to heauen. Macarius: Macarius homil. 11. When thou hearest that Christ deliuered soules , out of hell (hades) and darkene se, and, that the Lord descended to hades, and did an admirable worke; thinke not these thin to be farre from thine owne soule. And thus he maketh Christ to speake to death and to the diuell; &c. Ibi . I command thee hades and darkenesse and death restore the soules inclosed. And so the wick powers trembling, refund man that was inclosed. Cyrill of Alexandria: In olde times (before Christ) the soules of men departing from their bodies were sent to fill the receptacles of death in dennes vnder the earth. But after Christ commended his o ne soule to his Father, he renewed the same way for vs: ; And now we goe not to bades from any place, but we follow him rather in this, and committing our soules to a faithfull Creatour, we rest in excellent hope. Yet of Christ he a firmeth, The soule which was coupled and vnited to the word descended into hades; and vsing the power and force of the Godhead , shewed it sel e to the spirits (or soules) there. For we must not say that the Godhead of the onely begotten, which is a nature vncapable of . death, and no wa conquerable by it, ; was brought backe from the d es vnder the earth. Cyrill of Ierusalem like wise in his Catechismes vpon those words of the Psalme, If ascend to heauen, thou art there; if I goe downe to hades, t u art pre ent sayth; &c. If t ere e ing higher than the heauens, and hades be lower than the earth, he that com∣pre eth the owest, doth also touch the earth. And to those that were baptized, he sayth; . When thou renouncest Satan, thou hast vtterly abrogated the couenant had with him, &c. euen the olde couenant ith hades (hell) and the Paradise of God is opened to thee. In the Homilies which Leo the Emperour made for the exercise of his st le and confession of his faith; it is said Leo Impera∣tor hom. 2. in sanctam Re∣surrectionem. . Christ is risen bringing Hades prisoner with him, and proclaiming li∣libertie to the capitues. He that held others bound, is now in bonds himselfe. , Christ is come from hades with the ensigne of his triumph; Ibidem. the sowre and hea∣uie lookes of those that are vtterly ouerthrowen, , as of Hades, death, and the hatefull diuels. Damascene. Dam sc. or∣thod xae fidei li. 3. cap. 22. , &c. The soule deisied descended to Hades, that as to those on earth the Sonne of righteousnesse was risen, so to those that sate vnder the earth in darkenesse and in the shadow, light might shine. Eiusdem ho∣mil. de Sabbato sancto. The brazen gates were torne, the iron barres were broken, , and the keeper of Hades (hell) did shake for feare, and the foundations of the world were laid open. Cydonius. Cydonius de morte contem∣nend . . That there is in hades (hell) vengeance for all sinnes heere committed, not onely the consent of all wise men, but also the equalitie of the Diuine iustice confirmeth and strengthmeth this opinion. Aeneas Gazeus. A ae Gazei Theophr sius. He that in a priuate life committeth small sinnes, and lamenteth (them) escapeth the punish∣ments that are in Hades (hell.) Gregentius. Christ Grege tij disputat. cum Herbano Iu∣daeo. tooke a rodde out of the earth, which was his pretious crosse, & stretching his right hand, strake all his enemies, & conquered them; , that is Hades, death, sin, and that wil e serpent. Theophylact. Theophrast. in 16. ca. Lucae. The rich man dying is not caried by the angels, , but is thr wen downe to Hades. For he that minded neuer any high or heauenly thing, , was woorthy of the lowest place. In saying then he was buried, the Lord secretly signifieth, that his soule had the place, that was lowest and darke. And though hee there shew the opinion of some, that thought hades to be rather the condition of the soule after death then a place, yet he himselfe resolueth the cōtrary. Ibidem. . What is hades? Some say it is a place of darkenesse vnder the earth, others say Hades is the change of the soule from sensible to obscure and vnseene. And though the wordes of our Sauiour de∣termine that doubt, who maketh the rich man call it , this place of torment, yet Theophylact himselfe reasoning there against Origen out of Abrahams wordes, saith; Ibidem. As it is then vnpossible for any of the iust to passe to the place of sinners, so Abraham teacheth vs it is impossible , to passe from the place of punishment to the place of the righ∣teous. And since their names doe not appeare that were of this opinion, and being latter in age, deserue not the same credite for their iudgements that the auncient and lear∣ned Fathers doe, I omit these petite masters, whom no man knoweth, as fansing some∣what, if they could prooue it, and will goe forward with the maine consent, as of all Greeke diuines that are extant; so of the best and eldest commentators and expoun∣ders of Greeke words, to shew that Hades is a place of darkenesse vnder earth for soules, where now none but wicked are contained, and there punished. Eustathius Archbi∣shop of Thessalonica, a man of no meane skill in the Greeke tongue, as appeareth by his commenting vpon Homere, saith. Eus athius in 1. I ados. Haïdes (which is Hades) is , a darke place vnder earth, vnseene, and appointed for soules. Phauorinus Bishop of Nuceria in his commentaries of the Greeke tongue, saith likewise: hauorini Dictionarium in verbo . , Hades is a place vnder the earth, secret and hidde; which hee also calleth, Id m de ver∣bo . , a place without light, and filled with eternall darkenesse. The great Etymologist of the Greeke tongue concurreth with them. Etymo ogicon m ga in verb . . Hades is a place void of light, and full of euerlasting darkenesse and mists. I shall not neede with many wordes to vrge the properties and conditions of the place, which these Greeke Fathers call Hades. It is apparent to any who will p ruse them, that they auouch it to be a place of darkenesse, opposed to heauen and Paradise, and vnder the earth, where Diuels are keepers and tormentors of soules, and where the wicked after this life are kept prisoners, and suffer punishments according to their deserts, & which Christ destroyed and spoiled by his descent thither, deliuering thence, that is from the feare, power, and danger thereof, all such as before or after did or should beleeue in him. And though some of these writers did happily thinke the soules of the godly decea∣sed before Christes death were kept in a part thereof, in hope of their deliuerance thence; yet with one consent they witnesse it to be nothing lesse then heauen or Para∣dise, or the state of the dead common to good and bad after Christs resurrection; as likewise they teach, that Christ deliuered thence, not onely such of his elect as were dead before that time, but all the faithfull, aswell then liuing, as yet vnborne. And therefore a deliuerance thence doth not exactly conclude a locall detention and in∣clusion there, but a quiting and disloluing of all the right, interest, and challenge; that hell or Satan had for sinne vnto the seruants and members of Christ, whensoeuer they liued or died. Onely Tertullian is opposite to them all, who dreampt that the soules of all the faithfull, saue Martyrs, were kept in places vnder the earth, which he calleth inferi, till the generall resurrection; wherein, as in many other points deliuered in his booke de Anima, he goeth a priuate way by himselfe without and against the maine resolution of the rest of the Fathers. De enc. pa. 164. li. 17. He doth not montanize in this (as you obiect) but consenteth with Irenaeus before and with others after him, as shall appeare, who were no Montanists. ] Your mistaking Irenaeus here, as you did before, little helpeth your market; and others, when you bring them, shall haue an answere fitting them. In the meane while where you be so zealous to saue Tertullian from Montanisme; he must haue a better proctor then you are to vp∣hold his cause, or els it will soone fall to the ground. That none but Martyrs are in Paradise, and all other the faithfull departing this life are in prisons and places vnder the earth till the day of iudgement, this is not onely repugnant to the Scriptures and the rest of the Fathers, but a plaine branch of Montanus heresie, which Tertullian de∣riueth from no grounds of holy Scripture, whence all trueth must be fet; but from cer∣taine Reuelations & Prophesies different from the Scriptures, which Montanus and others published as made by the holy Ghost after the writing of the Scriptures; and which Tertullian in his writings coloureth with the name and pretence of the Para∣ te; calling the true Christians, that refused his new found doctrine, Psychicos natu∣rall men, and not ledde by the latter direction of the spirit, as Montanus and others were; whom in exacting chastitie, abstinence, and Martyrdome more strictly then the Church of Christ did, he followed. And therefore not onely his doctrine in this place allowing Paradise to none besides martyrs, but his alleaging Montanus verie words, and pretending the Paraclete for his conceit no where written in the Scrip∣tures, declare him expresly in this to be a Montanist. For plainer proofe whereof, first Tertullian speaking of himselfe, when he forsooke the rest of the Christians to cleaue to the reuelations of Montanus and his adherents, saith, . Et nos quidem postea agnitio Paracleti at{que} defensio disiunxit a Psychicis. The agni∣sing of the Paraclet (in the prophesies of Montanus) and defending thereof did afterward disioine vs from the carnall men. So he termed the Church of Christ for refusing the new prophesies of Montanus, as appeareth euidently by his booke De ieiunio aduersus psyc cos, of fasting against the car all men, which Saint Ierom saith was written . speciali∣ter aduersum ecclesiam, particularly against the Church. Where he likewise taxeth the Christians for resisting the Paraclet, or new prophesies of Montanus, couering them vnder the name of the Paraclet, and interpreting the one by the other. . Hiparaeleto controuer siam faciunt, propter hoc nouae prophetiae recusantur, non quod alium Deum praedi∣cent Montanus. Priscilla & Maximilla, sed quod plane doceant saepius ieiunare quā nubere. These arnall men quarrell with the Paraclet, and therefore are the new prophesies refused, not that Montanus. Priscilla, & Maximilla preach another God, but that they plainly teach oft∣ner to fast then to marrie. Now for these very points, that none are in Paradise but only martvrs, and that the soules euen of the Patriarks and Prophets and all other godlie Christians are apud inferos, in places vnder the earth, and so shalbe till the fulnesse of the resurrection, Tertullian vrgeth in his booke De anima and in this chapter the autho∣rity of his paraclet, which was the founder of Montanus new prophesies. Tertullia de anima ca. 55. Agnosce differentiam Ethnici & fidelis in morte, si pro Deo occumbas, vt p racletus mo et, non in mollibus febribus & in lectulis, sed in an. Acknowledge the difference of an Ethnicke and a beleeuer euen in their deaths, if thou die for Gods cause, as the Paraclet warneth, not in casie agues and soft beddes, but in Martyrdomes. And that these were the very words of Montanus new prophesie, may easily be perceaued by Tertullian himselfe, who wri∣ting against all flight in persecution (which booke was De Script ri∣bus Ecclesiasticis in Tertulliano. specially written against the Church, by Ieroms owne confession) citeth them as the words of the spirit, to witte in the new prophesies of Montanus. Tertull. de fuga in perse∣cutione. Spiritum si consulas &c, omnes pene ad martyriuns exhortatur, non ad fugam, vt & illius commem ur: publicaris inquit; onum libi est. Qui enim non publicatur in hominibus, publicatur in Domino. Sic & a bi. Nolite in lectulis & febribus m llibus optare exire, sed in Martyrijs. If thou take counsell of the spirit, he ex∣horteth all very neere to Martyrdome, not to flight; as to remember you of that speach. Art thou made a publike example, saith he, it is good for thee. He that is not made a publike xam∣ple amgōst men, shalbe made one with God. And so in another place desire not to depart this life in beds & easie agues but in Martyrdomes. These words Tertullian alleageth as euident∣ly written by the spirit, which since they be no where found in any part of the new or old Testament, & disagree both in words & matter from the stile & truth of the sacred Scriptures, they sauour of another spirit, & must of force be referred to the prophesies of Montanus, who in this very point was condemned by the church of Christ, against which, as Ierom auoucheth, Tertuilian wrote this book in fauor of Montanus heresie. And so much also that learned obseruer Rhenanus affirmeth vpon this place. Rhena s in li. de suga in persecutione numero. 9. Verba sunt Prophetiae Paracleti Montanici, These are the words of the prophesie of Montanus spirit. Your friends therefore, who lent you their paines, were not well aduised in excusing Tertullian in this matter from Montanisme, since not onely the error of Montanus is heere defended, but the verie words of his new reuelation are heere alleadged. Defenc. pag. 164. li. 23. Also in that obiection of certaine Heretickes, whom he confuteth, not the true Christi∣ans, as you misconceaue. They argued thus (as you doe). In hoc Christus inferos adijt, ne nos adiremus. Christ therefore went to hell, to the end we should neuer come there. He answereth them, that it is false, that Christ went to inferos in that sense, that is, to hell. For then what difference is there between the wicked heathen and the godly Christians, if one and the same prison after death were for them both? taking it for a thing generally graunted in the Church that it were a WICKED AND HERETICALL THING to thinke, he went where the damned were, that is, into hell. ] Ignorance maketh you not onely blind and bold, but presumptuous and sawcie to acquite from heresie, and condemne for heresie, whom pleaseth you. And therefore I must not thinke it strange to be chalenged by you, for a wicked and hereticall opinion, since you grosly belie the whole Church of Christ, and dippe them in the same vate of wicked and heretical things with me. You wilfully wrest and misconstrue Tertullians words smoothing him in a manifest error against the whole Church of Christ, and roling them vp with wicked heresie, that were the greatest lights of Christian religion next after the Apostles. Tertullians resoluti∣ons in this very Chapter are plaine enough to him, that is not more then blind. Tertull. de Anima. ca. 55. Habes de Paradiso anobie libellum, quo constituimus omnem animam apud inferos seques∣trari in diem Domini. Thou hast a book of ours written touching Paradise, wherein we deter∣mine all soules to be kept sequestred (apud inferos) in infernall places till the day of the Lord. And in the sentence next before that which you cite, he sayth with like confidence. Tertull. de Anima. ca. 55. Habes & regionem inferûm subterraneam credere, & illos cubito pellere qui satis superbè y Ibidem. non putent animas fideliū inferis dignas: serui super Dominū, & Discipuli super Magistrū, aspernati si forte in Abrahae sinu expectandae resurrectionis solatium carpere. Thou hast to beleeue, that the region of inferi is vnder the earth, and to push them from their opinions, who proudly enough will not thinke the soules of the faithfull to be fitte for infernall (or Iower) pla∣ces: seruants aboue their Lord, and Scholers aboue their Masters, in that they skorne per∣haps to haue the comfort of expecting the resurrection in Abrahams bosome. Heere Tertul∣lian positiuely declareth that he taketh inferi for a place or Region vnder the earth, and that such as thought not the soules of the faithfull fitte for that place till the resurrec∣tion, did proudly presume to be aboue their Lord and Master, and skorne Abrahams bosome, where the rest of the Patriarks & Prophets are kept, (as he dreameth) and so shalbe till the day of iudgement. Now whose opinion I pray you was this, that the soules of the faithfull after Christs resurrection went to Paradise, and not to places vnder the earth? was it not the maine confession of Christs Church? Tertullian then purposely refuting that opinion, what els doth he but traduce the generall persua∣sion of the faithfull in fauour of his new prophesie, which reserued Paradise onely for Martyrs, and in that respect abandoned all the soules of the godly dying in their beds to places vnder the earth, there to be kept till Christes comming. But examine the words, which he reiecteth, and see if they sauour of heresie or Christianity. For thereby we shall best iudge, whether they were Hereticks or Chris∣tians, whom he there impugned. His words are, Te tull. de Anima. ca. 5 . Sed in hoc, inquiunt, Christus inseros , ne nos adiremus. But to this rd, say they, Christ went to (inferi) the places b low, that we should not come thither. If these wordes imply heresie, then was Saint Austen a manifest hereticke, for he affirmed as much in effect, as this commeth vnto. A ust in Psal. 85. Ideo (Christus) peruenit vs , ad infernum, ne nos maneremus in inferno. Therefore Christ came euen vnto hell, that we should not remaine in hell. Men that come thither, abide there. If therefore Christ freed vs by his descent thither from remaining there, he freed vs from comming thither. And Ambrose was likewise an hereticke in saying, . descendens ad inferos genus humanum liberauit. Christ descending to hell deliucred mankind; that is, aswell from comming thither, as tarrying there. So Hilarie, Hilar. de tri∣ itate li. 2. Crux, Mors, Inferi, nos∣tra salus est, Christes Crosse, death, descent to (inferi) the places below, is our saluation. So Athanasius. A hanas. in illud omnia mi∣hi tradita sunt a Patre. . Christ descending to hades brought vs back , (that we should not goe thither). So Ierom, Hier. in Ose ca. 13. Liberauit omnes Dominus, quando eius anima descendit ad infernum: The Lord deliuered all (his from thence) when his soule descended to hell. So Fulgentius, Fulgent. ad Tr simundum li. 3. Hoc ideo factum est, vt per descendentem ad infernum animam iusti, dolores soluerentur inferni: Ibidem. solutis doloribus inferni, omnes sideles ad i sdem doloribus liberauit. This was therefore done that by the soule of the iust descending to hell the sorrows of hell might be loosed, (and) the sorrows of hell being loosed, he deliuered all the faith∣full from them. Our deliuery thence, who were neuer there, must needs be the keeping vs from comming thither. If then Christ by his d scending thither deliuered vs and all his elect th nce, it followeth he saued them from comming to that place, and that by his descent thither. And this speach Austen prooueth to be right and true in this very case by many examples, from which he thus concludeth. August. in al. 5. In his omnibus non e∣rant, sed quia talibus meritis agebantur, vt nisi subuentum esset, ibi essent, inde se recte di∣cunt liberari, quo per liberatores suos non sunt permissi perduci. In all these (mischiefes) men were not, but because their deserts were such, that they should haue been in them, had they not been holpen (from them) they rightly say they were THENCE DELIVERED, whi∣ther they were not suffered to come, by such as deliuered them. If then they were Hereticks that vpheld this position, the best learned of the fathers in Christs Church were plainely within the compasse of heresie; and whether it be safer to forsake Tertullian in his priuate conceit of Montanisme, or to muster so many religious and Catholike writers for hereticks, let the Reader iudge. And what if you take your selfe by the nose before you be ware, and plunge your selfe into this wicked heresie (as you call it) farre deeper then others by alleaging and yet refusing Tertullians fansies in this place, doe you not well to be so liberall of your termes, when you must beare the greatest waight of them? I cleare my selfe in saying and proouing, that these were Tertullians priuate conceits con onant to Montanus new prophesies, and repugnant to the Church of Christ; and therefore vnlesse these fathers were hereticks I am none: but you are caught like a Come with your loude ctowing, and cannot shift thence but with your owne shame. For you say, it was the obiection of Defenc. pag. 164. li. 23. certaine hereticks. Now if your selfe defend that, which Tertullian there impugneth, then are you an heretick by your owne confession. First then, that Christ dying went ad inferos, that is, ad inferiora terrarum, to the lower parts of the earth, Ter∣tullian exactly auoucheth. His words of Christ, in this very Chapter are, De Anima. ca. 55. Forma hu∣manae mortis apud inferos functus, nec ante ascendit in sublimior a caelorum, quam descendit in inferior a terrarum. He performed the manner of an humane death in the places below, neither did he ascend to the higher parts of the heauens, before he descended to the lower parts of the earth. This Tertullian bringeth as graunted on all sides: for he refuseth not that, which himselfe affirmeth. The obiection then of the heretiks, as you name them, was this; Ne nos adiremus, that we should not come thither; that is, ad regionem inferúm subterra∣neam, to the region of inferi vnder the earth, which is Tertullians inferi whither he thought all must come. Now make your choise, wise Sir, whether you wilbe one of the Hereticks, as you say, whom Tertullian refuteth, or hold this grosse error with Tertullian, that all the Saints saue Martyrs, after this life are in places vnder the earth, there to remaine till the day of resurrection. But this you euery where seeme to disclaime as being that Limbus, which you so much auoide. Then are you one of those hereticks, whose obiection this is, and that which argueth you to be a witt-all, aswell as an heretick of your owne calling, you haue not so much sense as to see, that you yeeld your selfe to be an heretick for defending the trueth. Tertullian saith, Defenc. pag. 164. li. 28. it is false that Christ went to inferos, that is to hell. ] You that right∣ly vnderstand not one word in this place of Tertullian, talke as if you were authorized not onely to contradict your owne Author, but to pronounce them all heretikes, that gainesay your absurd and ignorant follie. Tertullian in this place resolueth, that Christ dying went ad Inferos, that is ad Regionem Inferúm subterraneam; to the Region of Inferi vnder earth, for so he expoundeth himselfe; and concludeth, that all the faith∣full after death (saue Martyrs) shall goe to the same Region vnder earth, and there stay till the generall refurrection. This conclusion you denie as well as I doe, and say they were Heretikes, that made that obiection. But awake out of this maze or mad∣nesse, and see that Tertullian to strengthen the priuate opinions of Montanus in ad∣uauncing Martyrs and none else to Paradise, impugneth the profession of the whole Church, that Christes descending to Inferi, that is to the Region vnder the earth, freed all the faithfull from comming thither. With like stupiditie you seuer the reason of this position from the position it selfe, and make that a refutation of the ob∣iection as you call it, which is a confirmation thereof. For they which opposed the former wordes, Christ, therefore went ad inferos, to the places below, least we should come thither: brought this for a reason of their assertion. Tertull. de anima. ca. 55. Caeterum quod discrimen Ethni∣corum & Christianorum, si carcer mortu s idem? For what difference is there betweene Eth∣nicks and Christians, if they haue one and the same prison after death? You say this is Ter∣tullians answere to them; but your head is so heauie, that you doe not perceaue this maketh for them, not against them; and so rather confirmeth then answereth their ob∣iection. They, who made the former obiection, that Christ went to the places below, least we should come thither, neuer excepted infidels but Christians from comming to those places. If Tertullian were of the same mind, he did rather confesse, then refell their obiection. But his answere to these words commeth after, which you did not reade, or not marke. Tertull. de anima ca. 55. Agnosce differentiam Ethnici & fidelis in morte, si pro Deo occum∣bas vt Paracletus monet, non in mollibus f bribus & Lectulis, sed in Martyri s. See the dif∣ference betwixt an Ethnick & a beleeuer, if thou die for Gods cause, as the Paraclete warneth, not in easie feauers and (soft) beddes, but in Martyrdomes. Where following not onely the fansies, but the very phrases of Montanus prophesies, as I haue formerly shewed, he maketh no difference (as touching the place) betweene Ethnicks and Christians after death, except they be Martyrs: and thereby fastneth all the faithfull, that die in their beddes, or of any sickenesse, (be it neuer so grieuous) to Inferi, the Region vn∣der the earth, which error was alwayes condemned by the Church of Christ. Defenc. pag. 164. li. 37. Thus also is Augustine well vnderstood, where he denieth that the Patria kes were apud nferos in hell, namely the place of the damned, because they were in Abrahams bosome. Which yet Epistola 57. & de ciui ate 20. 15. elsewhere he graunteth vnto, that they might bee apud inferos in the world of the dead, and namely where the godlie dead should be. So that thus if you had but distinguished these and other Fathers like words, as you ought to haue done, there needed no such follie of contra∣diction to be imputed vnto them, as Pag. 188. 200. 204. you doe lay to their charge in this point, al ogether vn∣deseruedly. ] Indeed if I would follow your example in drawing the Fathers wordes from their plaine and true meaning, and force them to a sense which they neuer thought, yea which they directly rerute; I might easily make the fathers say, what pleased me, as you doe. But this with me, and with all that be wise, is the peruerting, not the producing of Fathers. And therefore I did them lesse wrong to shew, where they differed amongst themselues in some secret points not fully reuealed to men in this life, then to falsifie them, and abuse them after this manner. Neither said I any worse of them, then they say of themselues, that these things are vncertaine, and no man might be offended, if they were not able to bring any setled (or assured) expositions (or re∣solutions) in these points, which Austin openly In Psal. 85. professed of himselfe, as I told you in that Serm. pag. 189. place which you cite. But let vs heare how you medicine these matters, and by that we shall sound the depth of your skill. If I would take Inferos in some places for hell, in other places for the world of the dead, and namely where the godly dead should be, all were safe you thinke: Saint Austin did no way disagree from him in those places, which I cited, which were Epistola 99. 57. de Genesi ad literam li. 12. ca. 33. de ciuitate Dei li. 20. ca. 15. To him that catcheth but af∣ter a word, and neuer looketh what is precedent or consequent, this may seeme plai∣ster of Paris to amend this breach; but he that readeth three lines on either side, shall soone perceaue how foolishly and grossely you make Saint Austin to crosse himselfe, and yet euidently to subuert your whole building. Beginne with that place, which you quote last in your margine, and see how well you reconcile S. Austins words to make for your assertions. August. de ciuitate Dei li. 20. ca. 15. Si enim non absurde credi videtur, antiquos etiam sanctos, qui venturi Christi tenuerunt fidem, locis quidem à torment is impiorū remo issimis, sed apud Inferos fuisse, donec eos inde sanguis Christi, & ad ea locadesce sus erueret; pro∣fecto deinceps boni fideles effuso illo pretio iam redempti, PROR SVS INFEROS N SCI∣VNT, donec etiam receptis corporibus, bona recipiant quae merentur. If it seeme wit out absurditie to be beleeued, that the Saints of the old Testament, which kept the faith of Christ to come, were in places most remote from the torments of the wicked, and yet apud inferos in infernall (or lower) places, vntill the bloud of Christ, and his descent thither did deliuer them thence; certainly after that time the god y beleeuers now red med with that price (of his bloud) shed, neuer know (or trie) any inferi, to the time that recouering their bodies they re∣ceaue the good things deserued by them, (or prepared for them). If here we take Inferi for the world of the dead, as you would haue vs, doe not your eares glow to heare so vehe∣ment and violent a gunne shot against all your deuices, and namely against your world of the dead, that certainely after the time, that Christ dscended to Inferi, the godly belee∣uers PROR SVS INFEROS NESCIVNT, neuer come to any Inferi? Where if you put your world of the dead for Inferi, & say the godly dying neuer come to be dead, or to the place where the godly dead should be, the world of the liuing will thinke you out of your wits, that so tempestuously tumble out falsehoodes and contradictions. And what will you doe with that position of Austins so often repeated, and vrged as the ground of his resolution, that he neuer found Inferi in the Scriptures taken in any good signification? August. pist. 99. Ne ipsos quidem Inferos vspiam Scripturarum in bono appell tos po∣tui inuenire; I neuer could find in any part of the Scriptures Inferos vsed in any good sense. And so againe. Idem de Ge∣nesi ad lite∣ am li. 12. ca. 33 Illud me nondum inuenisse confiteor, Inferos appellatos vbi iustorū animae requiescunt. I confesse I haue not yet sound that the place where the soule of the righteous do rest, is called inferi. The like he saith in his fiftie seuen pistle. You will expound In∣feri in Austin for the place, where the godly dead should be: Austen himselfe vtterly disauoweth it, and expressely saith, he neuer could find the word taken in the Sc ip∣tures for any good, and therefore neuer did vse it in any such sense. Call you this the clearing, or the crossing of Saint Austins words? Euen so another of your maine masts is ouerthrowen by Saint Austin, though you in your rancor or rage make it a Defenc. pag. 164. li. 33. wicked and hereticall thing to thinke, Christ went where the damned were, that is into hell, which yet S. Austen beleeued & professed in those ve∣ry places, which you vndertake to reconcile. August. epist. 57. Quaeri solet, si non nisi paenalia rectè intel∣liguntur Inferna, quo modo animam Domini Christi piè credamus fuisse in inferno? Sed bené respondetur ideo descendisse, vt quibus oportuit subueniret. Some vse to demaund, if Inferna be rightly taken for none other but for the places of punishments (after this life) how may we safely beleeue, that the soule of the Lord Christ was (in Inferno) in hell? but it is wel answered, he descended (thither) to succour those, that were to be succoured. And so else∣where. Idem de Ge∣nesi. ad liter. li. 12. ca. 33. Christi quidem animam venisse vsque ad ea loca, in quibus peccatores cruciantur, vt eos solueret a tormentis, quos esse soluendos, occuli à nobis sua iustitiâ iudicabat, non im∣merito creditur. That Christs soule came euen to those places, in which sinners are tormented to deliuer them from torments, whom his iustice vnknowne to vs thought fit to deliuer, is be∣lieued not without good cause. Austen acknowledgeth the Church belieued it in his time; howsoeuer your tongue ouerrunneth your teeth to make it a wicked & hereticall thing so to thinke. Ambrose confesseth the same. Ambros. de mysterio Pas∣chae ca. 4. Expers peccati Christus cum ad Tartari ima descenderet, vinctas peccato animas mortis dominatione destructa é f ucibus Diaboli reuocauit ad vitam. Christ free from sinne, when he descended to the lowest pit of hell, recalled to life out of the diuels iawes the soules that were bound with sinne, destroying the Dominion of death. And so doth Ierom. Infernus locus suppliciorum at{que} cruciatuum est, Hiero. in E∣saiae ca. 14. in quo videtur diues purpuratus; ad quem descendit & dominus, vt vinctos de Carcere di∣n itteret. Infernus is the place of punishments and torments, in which the rich man clothed with purple was seene, and to which the Lord descended to dimisse such, as were bound, out of prison. These I trust were no Heretikes, but if need were, and I would vse that aduan∣tage against you, which you insisting on Tertullians error seeke against me, they would doe little lesse then prooue you to be a refuser and peruerter of the faith receiued in the Church of Christ, and professed not by them onely, but by all those Fathers, whom I Supra pa. 544. formerly cited as concurring in this cause with them. But I smile at your follie, and remit your reproches to the Readers impartiall Censure. Defenc. pag. 165. li. 10. Athanasius also saying, where humane soules were held by death, there Christ brought his humane soule; meaneth nothing else, but that his soule came vnder the same condition of death, as other humane soules did: not that he went to the place of the damned. Neither must he be vnderstood after your partiall translation, when you say ex orco, out of hell, himselfe saith ex Hadou, out of the power of death. ] You set your selfe to outface all the places, which I brought out of the Fathers for Christs descent to hell; and as you played your part in wrenching & wrying the words of Tertullian & Austin from their rightsense, so you continue in all the rest with like successe, thinking it enough for you to say the word, though it be neuer so false, and farre from the Fathers meaning. As first in Athanasius wordes; what double punishment was that I pray, which God threatned to Adam for sinne, in saying Athanas. de incarnatione Christi. to the earthly part, earth thou art, & to earth shalt thou returne; and to the soule, thou shalt die the death; for those are Athanasius words; and what be the Ibidem. two places, to which man after his dissolution was condemned? Did God threaten nothing to Adam but the dissolution of bodie and soule, or did he threaten the death of the soule also after this life, which properly noteth hell, besides the death of the bodie? I trust you be not so senselesse as to say, that God for sinne threatened no more to Adam and his posteritie but onely a bodily death; for so could none of Adams off-spring by that sentence be adiudged to hell, which yet we find daily performed by Gods iustice. Then the death of mans soule threatened by God for sinne, and meant by Athanasius in those words, which you would elude, was the place of perpetuall torments, where the soule of man was truly held in death, and not the condition of the soule seue∣red from the bodie without respect of any consequent miserie. Therefore your maine foundation is euidently false, that Athanasius by the death of mans soule meaneth no∣thing els, but the soules being apart from the bodie without regard of punishment fol∣lowing: but in expresse words he noteth the place, Ibidem. Vbi tencbatur anima humana in morte, where the soule of man was held (captiue) in death; which spite of your heart must needes be hell. Againe according to the double death threatned for sinne, Athana∣sius saith, Homo in duas partes discerpitur, & vt ad duo loca discedat, condemnatur. Man Ibidem. (dying) is distracted in two parts, and CONDEMNED TO TWO PLACES. Now in your diuinitie is any man condemned to heauen, or to Paradise? you must find vs then two places of condemnation, whither either part of man dissolued was adiudged, as his bodie to the graue, his soule to hades. So saith Athanasius in expresse words. If you Ibidem. can shew me another place of condemnation, well you may say, that a man is diuided , (into three places), and that being reuoked out of two places he remaineth bound in the third; but if you can shew none other place (of condemnation) , besides the graue and Hades, from which man is perfectly freed, Christ deliuering vs, how say you then, that God is not reconciled vnto mankind? If then Hades bee a place of condem∣nation or sinne, where the soule of man was bound, till it was freed by Christ, certainely Hades with Athanasius is neither Paradise nor heauen, but one∣ly hell. Againe if by death raigning in the soule of man, Athanasius intended nothing but the condition of death common to good and bad, and euen to Christ himselfe, how could h say of Christ, that he was then and there Ibidem. inuiolus a morte, not sub ect to death, or that he brake , the bands of the soules detained in hades? Hath heauen or Paradise any bands, that must be broken? And as for you last conceit, that Defenc. pag. 165. li. 23. Hades being enemie and opposite to the immortalitie and resurrection of mens persons, cannot by any means be hell for in hell shalbe immortality & resurrection, as well as in heauen; it is so like to the rest of your diuinitic, that I doc not ouer much maruaile at it. If hades be enemie and opposite to immortalitie, as you confesse out of Athanasius, then Hades is neither heauen nor Paradise, for they are both places of immortalitie; there is no death, but life in either of them. And though you cunningly shift handes, and change mens persons for mens soul s, of which Athanasius speaketh, when he sayth, , where mans soule was held in death, there Christ presented his humane soule to breake the chaines of death, euen in hades; yet that im∣mortality is as well in hell as in heauen, is a phrase of your owne framing to put all trueth and faith out of ioint, The Scriptures teach most truely, that God alone hath 1. Tim. 6. im∣mortality. It then you haue found vs a new immortalitie in hell, you haue found vs a new God also. And what is immortalitie, but without all death? since then in h ll there is nothing but death, & that eternall as well of soule as of body, your deuices are very del cate, in euerlasting death to finde no death. But dally not thus with the grounds of Religion, least God doe not dally with you: if by your assertion the deli∣uerance from death, and immortalitie which Christ brought to his elect, be none o∣ther then such as men in hell shall haue; pray God your braines be not as much cra∣zed, as your faith is. And as for your interpreting Athanasius words, and gessing at his meaning, when we vse madde men to giue aduise, we will send for you to make comments vpon their counsels. Where you make Athanasius say, Defenc. pag. 165. li. 32. Christ was held in this death till e spoiled and conquered it, which (you conclude) cannot be hell out of question; You speake not one true word. Athanasius hath no such words, that Christ was held in death. Of mans soule he saith, De In arnat. Christi. , that was held in death, but of Christ in that very sentence he auoucheth the cleane contrary, saying, , be could not be held in death. Secondly that hades was spoiled of all his power, right, and claime, to or ouer all Christs elect, and we deliuered thence; Athanasius, as well as the rest, beareth plen∣tifull witnesse. But that Christ spoiled heauen or Paradise, where the soules of the Saints were seuered from their bodies, & brought vs thence, is not onely a false fable, but a pestilent error. Christ raising his body from the graue (by Athanasius iudge∣ment) gaue vs hope of the resurrection of our bodies, and bringing backe his soule from hades, as not onely vntouched of any death there, but also loosing the bands , of soules surprised by hades, he made vs partakers of his im∣mortality, which the strength of hades could not touch. In illud om∣nia ihi tra∣dita sunt a Patre. Descending to hades Christ brought vs backe, saith Athanasius of himselfe, and of all Christs members as then not borne. Christ did not bring all the faithful of the old Testament from the condition of death, much lesse brought he the rest thence, that were not either dead or borne. We die still, and so the condition of death is common to vs after Christs resurrection as it was to the fathers before Christs death and birth; but hell hath now no right to vs, nor power ouer vs, since Christ our head conquered and spoiled Satan of all inte∣rest and chalenge to any of his members. And where you pretend, that hades is spoi∣led, because our soules shalbe ioined againe to our bodies at the resurrection; know you good Sir, that the separation of the soule from the bodie was to dure by Gods or∣dinance but for a time, as well in the wicked as in the godly, that is vntil the generall iudgement. And you that defend a resurrection and immortality as well of the wic∣ked in hell, as of the Saints in Paradise, what reason can you giue, why the condition of the soule separated from the body is more conquered by Christ for his members, then by Satan for his partners? for that separation shall cease in both; and consequent∣ly the force of death seuering the soule from the body is spoiled aswell for the repro∣bate, as for the elect. Yea the continuing of the godly soules asunder from their o∣dies till the last day is rather a furnishing and storing of your hades, then a conquering and spoiling of it. And therefore mocke not with these matters, they be of more im∣portance, then that they may be thus idlely caried. Defenc pag. 165. li. 35. Hilarie verily hath this meaning also saying, this is the law of humane necessity, that their bodies goe downe to the graue, their soules to the world of the dead, ad inferos. Which descent the Lord did not refuse that he might prooue himselfe in euery point to be true man. And Pag. 166. li. 5. this (for his soule to come vnder the power of death) was indeed the law of hu∣mane necessity (after the like phrase as Iustine, Irenaeus, and Tertullian also speake) but not to goe to hell. ] Your head is so fraighted with falseshoods, that trueth can take no place there; and so little is your skill, though your pride be great, that you doe not know, for ought that I see, how necessity of death came into mans nature. Whiles man was free from sinne, he was free from death. Rom. 5. By sinne came death. When man lost his innocencie, he lost his liberty, and fell both within the seruitude of sinne, and necessity of death. Now death being the wages of sinne reacheth aswell to the soule after this life, as to the body to be depriued of this life. Rom. 5. v. 18. By one offence (came guilti∣nesse) on all men vnto condemnation. The law then of humane necessity for sinne (with∣out Christ Iesus in whom we recouer liberty) is for the body to goe to corruption, and for the soule to descend to destruction, and not onely to be seuered from the bo∣dy, as you would faine mistake the words of Hilarie. It is no part of humane necessity for the soule seuered from the body to ascend to heauen or to Paradise; that is the ho∣nour and fauour of our Redemption purchased by Christ our Sauiour, but necessity of death in vs, which is the reward of sinne, draweth the whole man body and soule vnto condemnation. This you might haue found to be Hilaries meaning by the words precedent, which occasioned this conclusion. Si descendero in infernum, ades. If I goe downe to hell, thou art there; Which Hilarie sheweth to be verified in Christ, by the words that you bring; meaning, that as men by sinne Hilar. in Psal. 138. came to this necessitie, that their bodies lying in the graue, their soules descended to hell: So Christ the redeemer of man, refused not euen this descent to hell, ad consummationem veri hominis, to consummate true man, or to recouer and restore both parts of man, to witte, body and soule, where∣of a true man consisteth. That Christ should descend to places vnseene and vnknowen to prooue himselfe a true man, what sense can this haue, since no man liuing was pre∣sent to see the proofe thereof? and he that doubted, whether Christ liuing were a true man, would much more doubt, whether Christ rising in that glorious bodie, which neuer man saw before, no the like, were a true man or no. I thinke therefore by your leaue, that as Christ died, not to prooue himselfe a true man, but to ransome our sinnes, so he descended to the places below, not to make proofe to vs, that he was a true man, but to worke our saluation and consummation, as elswhere the same Father saith; Crux, mors, inferi, nostra salus est. Christs crosse, death, and descent to inferi, are parts of our saluation. And of Christ he voucheth, mortem in inferno perimens, he killed death in hell. And yet if with you we should take consummation for demonstration, which is farre fet; and say Christ re used not that descent to shew himselfe a true man, it nothing hurteth me, since that burden of necessity lay on all men, for desert of sinne, till they were deliuered by Christ, to haue their bodies goe to the graue, and their soules to the place of punishment: both which Christ refused not, though he were in the one without any corruption, in the other without any condemnation, but as conquerour of both. Of Iustine, Irenaeus & Tertullian we haue spoken before, we shall not need to iterate your ouersights; Iustine speaketh of no law at all, Irenaeus noteth the law of the dead to be this, that they must stay a time dead before their resurrection; and Tertullian nameth the law either threatning Adam, if he sinned; or the Law of Moses punishing sinne committed by men; either of which stretcheth farder then the separation of the soule from the body. As for Defenc. pag. 166. li. 17. the law of our nature, which you say is to die, and no more; you talke thereof, as if you were rather a prophane Philosopher, then anie piece of a Diuine, since this law was laid on our nature for sinne, and forceth as well our soules to hell, if we be not thence redeemed by Christ, as our bodies to the graue. That in death the whole man is dissolued, the soule separated from the body, and the bo∣die left voide of sense and life, what is this to your purpose? will this conclude, that the soule in heauen or in paradise, being not onely in rest, but in ioy, feeleth still the sting of death, which she felt at her parting from her body, before she tasted the life to come? Will you continue the power and sense of death euen in heauen, because the soule assured of Gods goodnesse and promise expecteth her body to be partaker of the same blisse with her, and to receaue the crowne of righteousnesse laide vp in store for all, that loue Christes comming? or if you be so venturous in fauour of your owne conceits, that you will mingle darkenesse with light, death with life, and the feare of hell with the ioy of heauen, thinke you to finde any man so vnwise, as to tread your steppes in these vnchristian deuices? Defenc. pag. 166. li. 30. Chrysostome and Basil likewise (with the rest of the Greekes) may be noted, how they yeeld Hades to the soules of the godly and iust men deceased remaining in ioyes. ] If you speake of the time afore Christes comming, and take Hades for places vnder the earth, you may chance to finde some such thing in Chrysostome and Basil; but that either of them after Christs resurrection yeeldeth Hades to the soules of the blessed, is a manifest vntrueth. And since I haue handled these places before, I shall not need to repeate them againe. Defenc. pag. 166. li. 33. Also Ambrose is to be considered, who right according to all the rest, saith; Soules de∣parted from their bodies did goe to Hades, that is to an inuisible place, which in Latin we call Infernum. ] Could you alleage the Fathers wordes rightly, you might happely some∣times vnderstand them; but alwaies peruerting them as you doe, what maruell if al∣waies you misse their meaning? Ambrose doth not there deliuer either his owne opi∣nion, or the perswasion of any Christians, but speaketh of Heathen Philosophers, who knew nothing of our saluation by Christ, and of them saith. Ambros. de bono mortis. ca. 10. Satis fuerat dixisse illis, quod liberatae animae de corporibus peterent, idest locum, qui non videtur, quem locum Latine infernum dicimus. It had beene enough for them (being Pagans) to haue said, that the soules seuered from (their) bodies went to Aides, that is to a place vnseene, which in Latine we call Infernus (hell). If you be a Pagan, we looke for none other confession at your handes; he that is ignorant of the faith, must needs be ignorant of the trueth; but if you be a Christian, you may not say as the Pagans did, that the soules of the godly, who are with Christ, goe to Hades or Infernus. Ambrose himselfe will tell you so much. Ambros. de Tobia. ca. 19. In Inferno semper est, qui non ascendit ad Christum. He that ascendeth not to Christ, is alwaies in hell. As for Christes descending he saith, Idem. in Psal. 45. Dominus in Infernum descendit, vt & illi, qui in Infernis erant, a perpetuis vinculis soluerentur. The Lord de∣scended to hell, that they which were in places below, might be loosed from perpetuall chaines. You haue found out the death of the soule in heauen, can you finde vs there perpetuall chaines also? Defenc. pag. 166. li. 36. And Ierom: Infernus is a place where the soules are included either in rest or paines. ] It is no newes for him that hath no sense of trueth, to haue no shame of falshood. If Ie om were not plaine enough, that he hath no such wordes or meaning, as to bestow the soules of the saints in Inferno after Christs resurrection, you might be borne with; but when expresly he voucheth and prooueth the contrarie, what can be in you but precise impudence to outface your Reader with Ieroms name against Ieroms most manifest assertion? Hiero. in Ec∣clesia. ca. 9. Porro quòd sancti post resurrectionem Christine nequaquam teneantur in Inferno, testatur Apostolus dicens: Melius est dissolui & esse cum Christo. Qui autem cum Christo est, vtique non tenetur in Inferno. That the Saints, saith Ierom, are not after Christes resurrection detained in Infernus, the Apostle witnesseth, saying: it is better to be dissolued, and to be with Christ. Now he that is with Christ, surely is not held in Infernus. And againe. Idem in Epi∣taphio Nepoti∣ani. Quid simile Infernus, & regna caelorum? what likenesse (or neerenesse) hath Infernus to the kingdome of heauen? and this the situation of Infernus euery where vrged by Ierom will prooue. Idem in Esai ca. 14. Simul discimus, quod infernus sub terra sit, dicente scriptura, vsque ad fundamenta Laci. Withall, saith he, we learne, that Infernus is vnder the earth, the Scripture saying, euen vnto the bottom of the lake. And againe. Idem in epist. ad Ephes. ca. 4. Inferiora terrarum infernus accipitur, ad quem Dominus noster saluatorque descendit. The lower parts of the earth are taken for Infernus, to which our Lord and Sauiour descended. Ibidem. Quod autem Infernus in inferiore parte terrae sit, Psalmista testatur. And that Infernus is in the lower part of the earth, the Psalmist testi ieth saying; The earth opened, and swallowed Dathan, and couered the congregation of Abiram. And in an other place we reade, let death come vpon them, and let them descend aliue to Infernus. If you will place the soules of the Saints deceased in Christ below in the earth, then may you haue some hold in Ierom, that they are yet in Infernus; but if that be repugnant to the Scriptures, to the Fa∣thers, to Ieroms expresse words, and euen to your owne positions; why vse you, or rather so openly abuse you Ieroms speech against so maine and manifest a trueth, not distinguishing the time whereof he spake, but confounding the old and new Testa∣ment together, to giue place to your lame collections? Defenc. pag. 166. li. 37. Ruffinus vpon Descendit ad Inferna, giueth this sense, Descendit in mortem, He submit∣ted vnto death. ] If death had none other sense nor force, but the death of the bodie, your saying were somewhat, but since death for sinne raigneth aswell in hell ouer the Soule, as in the graue ouer the body, the name of death doth not exclude Christes descent to hell; and so much Ruffinus words will easily conuince. Ruffinus in Symbolum Apostol. Eousque ille mi∣serando descendit; vsque quo tu peccando deiectus es. So farre Christ of mercy descended, how farre thou by sinning wast de ected. Now if we by sinning were in danger of none other but a bodily death, then Christ descended onely to the graue; but if the de∣sert of our sinne tied vs as guiltie to the torments of hell, then Christ by Ruffinus con∣fession so farre descended, how farre we were by Gods iustice deiected, that is to the place of condemnation for sinne. And therefore Ruffinus doth not onely knit these speaches together in the person of Christ, as expounding one the other. Ibidem. Eduxisti de Inferno animam meam, & de abysso terrae erum adduxisti me; thou hast brought my soule from Infernus, ( and ) hast brought me backe againe from the deepe of the earth: But of the diuell he saith, Ibidem. Qui mortis habebat imperium, disruptis Inferni claustris, velut de profundo tractus traditur: he that had Rule of death, (was) drawen as it were out of the deepe, the cloysters of Infernus being broken open. The place where the diuell was, and whence he was drawen, when he was spoyled and triumphed by Christ, was not the separation of the Soule from the Body, which the diuel hath not, but it was the deepe of hell, which here is called Infernus. Defenc. pag. 167. li. 1. So that it is certaine by all the Fathers generally, First, that Hades and Sheol are ta∣ken for the state of death common to the Soules of good and bad. Secondly, Christ went not into hell the place of the damned, as you hold, but to the habitation of the blessed deceased. ] If I haue not conuinced both these collections to be false by the manifest Testimo∣nies of the Fathers, (for out of them you gather these obseruations) then I desire no mans consent to any thing that I haue sayd: but if you grosly mistake and misuse all the Fathers names and speeches; then I trust the Reader will better consider what credit is to be giuen to your certainties; and giue me leaue to be shorter in slipping ouer your idle, presumptuous, vaine crafts and false collections; which are almost all that is behinde. A taste whereof if he will take, let him heare these bragges of yours following. Defenc. pag. 167. li. 22. Thus your vaine boasting of all the Fathers is but a bubble; So that if you consent (as you say) to be tried by all the Fathers, Greeke and Latine; they quite ouerthrow you notwith∣standing your great words. If your vaine and shamelesse boasting were not by this time well knowen, I would giue some fresh assault to these bulwarks of falsitie and insolen∣ ; but the proofs being euident and precedent, which I leaue to the Readers indif∣ferent iudgement, I will ouerskip this, and a great deale more of the same kind, as the bubbles or your vanitie; and if ought be said to any purpose, I will refute that; other∣w e I will bestow no more paper and incke on your wandring and wilde conceits. Defenc. pag. 167. li. 2 . Only Austen doubtingly and waueringly differeth from all the rest; for thus he saith, I confesse I haue not yet found, that Inferi are named, where the iust mens soules are at peace. ] You might haue done well to haue learned of Austen this sober and modest course, not by vaunting and outfacing, but by plaine and faire confessing, to shew the ground of your opinion, as Austen doth of his. Wherein he differeth not from all the rest, as you confidently, yet most iniuriously report of him: but in this hee exactly and re∣solutely consenteth with them all (Tertullians errour still excepted) that after Christs resurrection; August. de ciuitate Dei li. 20. ca. 1 . Deinceps boni fideles prorsus Inferos nesciunt, Good Christians (dying) come not to Inferi at all. And as for the former opinion, that the godly deceased be∣fore Christes death went ad Inferos, to places below in the earth, though not to torments, which is the stone that still you stumble at, and make it the very heart of all your defence, deceitfully applying that to the time since Christes resurrection, which the Fathers euer intended and expressed to pertaine to the time before Christes com∣ming; S. Austen though he yeeld so farre to former writers, as to say, Ibidem. If it may seeme t be beleeued without absurditie, yet he euery where professeth, he could finde no such vse of the word Inferi in any place of the sacred Scriptures; and that Abrahams bo∣some, where the Saints did rest before Christs death, was a part or skirt of hell, he vt∣terly refuseth that, as no way consonant to the wordes of Christ in the Gospell. And therefore when he proposeth the other opinion with a condition, if it may be beleeued without absurditie; euen there he retaineth his owne resolution, that Abrahams bo∣some was in locis à tormentis impiorum remotissimis; in places most remote from the tor∣ments of the wicked; and to beleeue otherwise were an absurditie, as he concludeth in his 99. Epistle. Against Austin you obiect: Defenc pag. 160 li. 3. First, that surely the auncients named the places for all de∣ceased good and badde, Inferos: as they named the world, (where both wicked and good doe liue) Superos. Secondly, that Austen, (if hee had well marked it) might haue found euen this, (which he saith he found not) in the Latin translation of the Scripture. 88. What man is there that shall deliuer his soule from the hand of inferi, that is death? Pag. 16 . li. 3. Where the soule be∣ing take properly for the soule, then Inferi is found applied to iust mens soules deceased, as well as to the wicked: which Augustine might haue obserued. Were you masking, this might make mirth; but being in earnest, it is more then idle. What if Arnobius in respect of hell being in the earth beneath vs, call vs that liue on earth, superos; those aboue; is that a proofe that the godly deceased are called inferi? who knoweth not, that infra & supra are differences of place, which in diuers respects may be diuersly varied? To those that are in heauen, we are Inferi, that is beneath them, and in that reference to heauen, which is aboue vs, Augustine himselfe doubteth not to call the earth Infer∣num. August. in Psa . 85. Ad hoc infernum missus est (filius Dei) nascendo, ad illud (inferius) moriendo. To this (earth) below was the Sonne of God sent, when he was borne, to that other place be∣neath (vs) when he died. But if no speciall comparison of place bee expressed, then Superi & Inferi, the Saints aboue, and the spirits beneath, are generally so called in regard of vs, who dwell on earth, and speake on earth, & are by position of place in the mid∣dest, that is lower then the highest, and higher then the lowest. And because vnder vs there are none liuing but those in hell, therefore Inferi, whom the Apostle calleth , are spirits vnder the earth, whether men or diuels. As for that other ob∣iection out of the Psalmes, it is not onely a bubble soone blowen away, but a bable not worth the bringing. The translation of Tremelius and Iunius, to whom you most appeale for these matters, hath In Psal. 98. eripiat seipsum à sepulchro; shall he saue himselfe from the graue? that is, can hee keepe himselfe that he shall not die? and where you take hold on the word soule, as if that must be either in the graue, which is absurd, or in the hand of Inferi, which is that you would haue; your hastie head doth not perceiue, that take the word SOVLE, which way you will, either for the life of man, which is an vsuall speech in the Scriptures, or for the soule properly; neither of them doth steede you a rush. For no man can preserue his life from the graue, that he shall not die; neither can any man withstand the hand or power of death, that it shall not seuer the soule from the bodie; since that is the ordinance of God against all men. Saint Austen giueth you a third sense, taking the soule there for the soule separate from the bodie, which is more then euer you would be able to prooue, and yet that maketh no∣thing to your purpose. August, in Psal. 88. The rest of the faithfull, saith he, shall rise from the dead, and liue for euer, and not see death; and yet can they not deliuer their owne soules from the handes of hell. He which deliuered his owne soule from the hands of hell, he hath deliuered the soules of his faithfull, they cannot deliuer themselues. This S. Austen could obserue, though he regarded none of your vaine supposals. And where you say, Defenc. pag. 168. li. Austen himselfe elsewhere graunteth the iust in peace might bee in infernus after death You might haue obserued the difference betwixt a condition and a position, which you doe not; and therefore you wrong him the more in saying, that he graunteth any such thing. He saith, August de ciuitate De li. 20. ca. 15. Si non absurde credi videtur, if it seeme to be beleeued without an absurditie; not affirming it might be beleeued without an ab∣sur ditie, but respecting it with a conditionall, least he should shew himselfe ouer per∣emptorie in condemning others, that were of that opinion. Otherwise his owne as∣sertion and conclusion are earnest enough. Epistola 99. Non vti{que} sinus ille Abrahae aliqua pars in∣ferorum esse credenda est. The bosome of Abraham is not to be beleeued to be any part of in∣feri. Ibidem. In his ipsis tanti Magistri verbis, satis (vt opinor) apparet, non esse quandam partem & quasi membrum inferorum tantae illius felicitatis sinum. In these very wordes of so great a teacher (as Christ) it appeareth sufficiently, (as I thinke) that the bosome of so great feli∣citie is not any part or member of hell. In Christs descent to hell Saint Austen is more re∣solute. Of that he pronounceth. Satis constat, it is cleare enough. Yea he putteth more waight vnto it, and saith; For neither can the Prophesie be contradicted, which sayd, thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell; nor Peters words by which he affirmeth, Christ loosed the sor∣rowes of hell, wherein it was not possible he should be held. And so concludeth, who Ibidem. then but an infidell will denie, Christ was in hell? And againe. Ibidem. Euidentia testimonia & insernum commemorant, & dolores. Euident testimonies (of the Scriptures) mention both hell, and the paines thereof. These be no coniecturall inclinations, they bee iudiciall asserti∣ons, whatsoeuer you say to the contrarie. Defenc. pag. 168. li. 13. Fulgentius denieth not inferos to the godly deceased, nor that Christ was locally only with them in inferis. So that in saying he was where the wicked are tormented, he meaneth that in respect of the common place, which in the whole he calleth infernum. ] Heere is a hole, where through your wit is wholy runne, and not your wit alone, but your religion, learning, and conscience are runne after. Plainer wordes then those of Fulgentius, I neither doe, nor can speake any. (Christus) Fulgentius ad Trasimundum li. 3. illuc vs{que} descendit, quous{que} homo separatus à Deo peccati merito cecidisset, id est ad infernum, vbi solebat anima peccatoris torqueri. Christ descended euen thither, whither man seuered from God by desert of sinne was fallen, that is to infernus, where the soule of a sinner vseth to bee tormented. What doth your wisedome answere to this? He meaneth that in respect of the common place, which in the whole hee calleth inf rnum. ] Is there any one place common to the Saints in heauen, and to the damned in hell? You haue learned belike of Parmenides the riddle-maker, that all is one; and because the world is but one, that heauen and hell make one common place. Whether fell man, I pray you, by the desert of sinne, to heauen or to hell? not to hea∣uen, I hope; for then man sinning should approch to Gods Throne; who, Fulgen∣tius saith, was seuered from God. to hell then he fell: ergo Christ descended to hell by Fulgentius assertion, and that place, where the soules of sinners are wont to be tormen∣mented, he calleth Infernum; which if you can prooue to bee heauen, you shall doe greater wonders, then M. Hugh Broughton can doe. For he maketh but a great ditch betwixt heauen and hell. You fill vp that ditch of M. Broughtons digging, and say both hell and heauen are one place common to Saints and Diuels. For Infernus is the singular number, and by the rules of Grammer, if any rules will hold you, must note but one place, in which if both the blessed and the damned are, then heauen and hell are both but one place. Againe you farre passe M. Broughtons skill, in that he saith, they are much deceaued, who thinke hell to be below in the earth, though Saint Paul distri∣bute all reasonable creatures subiected to Christs kingdome, into things Phil. 2. in heauen, on earth, and vnder the earth. You change the whole site of the world, and say heauen is below. For where insernus is deriued from infra, which is below, if heauen bee called infernus, then surely heauen is below; and then must the Apostle recall his error in saying, Colos. 3. seeke the things which are aboue, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God; he should haue sayd by your doctrine, seeke the things which are below; where the soules of the wicked are tormented; for that is heauen with you. But if at your next exercise you should pray for your Auditorie to come to infernus, where the wicked are punished, I winne they would thinke you more madde, then M. Broughton is. How∣be it with this one answere you giue the lie aswell to Prophets, as Apostles. For where Dauid saith to God, Psal. 30. Thou hast brought my soule out of infernus, that cannot be by your rules, since heauen and hell make but one place, and the earth being in the midst of them must needes be one place with both extreames, and haue the same name with both. So that Dauids soule wheresoeuer it was, was not out of Infernus. Againe where he saith in the person of Christ, Psal. 16. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in infernus; that is false by your doctrine, who teach that Christ and all his Saints deceased are yet in a common place with the damned, the whole being called Infernus. And where before you were very angry, That I said you made ascending to be descending, and heauen to be hell; to decline the force of Fulgentius wordes, you fairely answere, that Christs descending to infernus, where the soules of sinners are tormented, was his going to heauen, because they both are but one place common to good and bad, and the whole hath one name, which is Infernus. A speciall spleene you beare against S. Austin, & disgrace him you would, if you could tell how, that you might be freed from the waight of his iudgement in matters of faith: but you want both wit & learning for such an enterprise, & therefore you resist his opi∣nion with more lies then lines. Defenc. pag. . . 7. Austins differing from you, you say is to little purpose. ] and why? [ li. 1 . First because it is contrary to all the auncient Fathers before him, with him and since him. ] Heere are three lies in one line, all the Fathers before him, with him, and since him do not dissent from him, & with you not one of them consenteth. [ li 20. Second∣ly we must not esteeme his saying by the Latin word inferi, but by the Originall Sheol & hades, which are more against him, as before I haue shewed. ] Though he did folow the Latin tran∣slation then receiued in the Church where he liued; yet neither the Hebrew, nor the Greeke words are against him. For you shal neuer shew that Sheol or Hades through∣out the Scripture are taken for any good condition or receptacle of the dead, which is Austins a rtion of the word Inferi; much lesse that either of those wordes, Sheol or Hades, doe any where in the Scriptures import the place or state of the blessed soules, which is your error, and which you haue no way prooued, though you haue spent much paper & paines to make some shew for it. [ 22. Thirdly it is waueringly deliuered and with doubt in himselfe, yea contrary to himselfe, as I haue shewed. ] Heere are three lies more in another line, besides those that swarmed in the midst. Austin doth deliuer his opinion constantly, consonantly to himselfe; and you haue shewed no such thing as you pretend; but the contrary is euident to him that will but either peruse what I haue sayd, or will but reuiew the manner of his setting downe that opinion vpon the eighty fiue Psalme, where he saieth, al m etiam opinionem dicam, I will set downe another opi∣nion, or the opinion of others. Defenc pag. 108. li. 24. Fourthly, he seeketh to maintaine it erroneously: for he giueth this reason and end of Christs going to hell; (the place of the damned) that he might deliuer some of the damned out of hell torments; which most strange conceit of his your selfe conf e rightly. ] The end of Christs descending to hell is by the Fathers confessed to be double; the one to de∣stroy death, and the Ruler thereof, euen the diuell; the other, to deliuer all his Elect from the power, danger, and feare of hell. The Scriptures doe not conc le, that Christ by his death and resurrection wrought these things. Hebr. . By death (Christ) de royed him, that had the rule of death, euen the diuell, and deliuered all them, which for f re of death were all their l fe long subiect to bondage. Rising againe, he Acts 2. loosed the sorrowes of death, Coloss. 2. spoiled Principalities and powers, and made an open snew of them, triumphing ouer them in his owne person. Had Christ died and not risen, we had 1. Cor. 15. vers. 18. perished, as Paul con∣fesseth. The conquering then of hell and Satan, and the deliuering of vs from the power and are of either, though this were purchased by Christes obedience vnto death, yet was it e ected and performed by his resurrection from the dead. And so much the Councell of Alexandria in their letters to Nestorius professe, which the generall Councell of Ephesus repeated and allowed, and the fift generall E 5 Synode Constantino ol. s ssio. 6. Coun∣c ll Inter Acta Conc ij . of Constantinople afterwards confirmed: . Christ rose to life the third day, hauing spoiled hades (hell). So Ierom: Hiero. in Psal. 15. Propterea illuc (in infernum) descendit, vt Electos suos exinde eijceret, & Diabolum ligaret. Christ de∣scended to hell for this cause, that he might cl ere his Elect thence, and binde the diuell. This end of Christes de cending to hell and hades to deliuer not only the dead, but the liuing from thence, the Fathers Greeke and Latine euery where confesse. The Christians in Tertullian say, as I haue formerly proued notwithstanding your idle ex∣ceptions; Tertull. de Anima. ca. 55. In hoc Christus inferòs adijt, ne nos adiremus. Christ to this end went to hell, that we should not come thither. Athanasins: Christ descending to hades, Athanas. in illud omnia mi∣ i tradita sunt. , brought vs backe. Idem de Sa∣lutari aduen∣t Ch sti. Nostram detentionem relaxans, loosing our detention (there). He speaketh of himselfe and others then liuing, which we e not in hades; but must haue gone thither, if Christ had not freed them from comming there. For of the soules departed he sayth: Ibidem. In the soule of (him that was) God, the power of death was loosed, his raising from hades was performed; , and declared to the soules (deceased). Hilarie: Hi ar. de Tri∣nitate. li. 2. Christes dèscent to hell salus nostra est, is our sal ation. So Na∣zianzen: Nazianz. in Christo pati∣ente. . Thou wilt deliuer all, (from hades) being only free thy selfe. As Ierom likewise sayth: H ro in Os ae ca. 13. Liberauit omnes Dominus, quando anima eius descendit in infernum; The Lord deliuered all, when his soule descended into hell: meaning all Christes Elect both liuing and dead. So Fulgentius expresseth this point: Fulgentius ad Trasimundum li. 3. As dying for vs, Christ made vs all to die with him, so loosing the sorrowes of hell, omnes fideles ab ijsdem doloribus liberauit, he deliuered all the faithfull from the same (feares and) sor∣rowes. Which Ambrose calleth mankinde. Ambros. in cap. 3. Epistola ad Galat. Descendens ad inferos genus humanum li∣berauit. Christ descending to hell deliuered (thence) mankind. With these S. Austen a∣greeth, and sayth: August. in Psal. 85. Ideo ille vsque ad infernum peruenit, ne nos maneremus in infern . Therefore Christ went euen vnto hell, that we should not remaine in hell. Austen knowing this end of Christes descending to hell, why should he not say, Christ went thither to deliuer those, Idem episto∣la. 99. quos esse soluendos occultá nobis suá iustitia iudicabat, whom in his iustice secret to vs he thought fit to be deliuered? Since then there are so sufficient causes ac∣knowledged by the Fathers and by Austen himselfe of Christes descent to hell, which you can not refute; what reason hath it, that his maine opinion of Christes spoiling hades and hell, approued by so many Fathers and by Councels prouinciall and ge∣nerall, should be false, though in the maner thereof he did somewhat varie from the rest? which yet I neither do, nor need grant, if we take his owne exposition elswhere; that Idem in Psal. 85. there they were not, but because such were their deserts, that there they had beene, vnlesse they had beene holpen, they are rightly sayd to be deliuered from thence, whither they were not suffered to come by Christ their deliuerer. Defenc. pag. 169 li. 2. As for Austens opposing against this our sense of Hades, saying, In Grac â linguâ origo nominis, quo appellantur Inferi, ex eo quod nihil suaue habeant reson re perhibetur: it shew∣eth his mistaking more, yea the very ground of all his mistaking, as I thinke. ] Though Austens skill in the Greeke tongue was not so great, that he could readily August. in proaemio li. 3. de Trinitat . reade and vnderstand the writings of the Grecians, as himselfe confesseth; yet wanting that, he kept himselfe to the best and most approoued translation of the Latine; and gat so much knowledge at length, that he could compare the originall Greeke with the translation, and see the difference betwixt them, as is euident in many Epist. 59. 78. 89 de Trinit. li. 1. ca. 6 quest. s per Exodum . 3. 28. 32. & sapius alibi. places of his works. The deriuation, which you so much depraue, was made by many Grecians as well as by Saint Austen, and therefore he may the better be excused in ioyning with them. Eustathius the learned expounder of Homer, saith that many deriued Hades without contraction, and did not subscribe vnder the first letter, as you haue it, : but Eustathius in 1. Liados fol. 13. affirme hades to be deriued from hêdo by a kind of antiphrasis, because no man delighteth or reioiceth therein: & so Hesychius the great Grammarian witnesseth, that Ades in the Greeke tongue doth signifie Hesychij Dictionar. in verbo . , vnsweete or vnpleasant: and Hades hath his h of aspiration from the Atticke, and not from the common Greeke tongue, as Eusta∣thius noteth. So that there is no cause why you should so much reuell at Saint Au∣stens ignorance in the Greeke tongue, as you doe, he followed whom he liked, and yet notwithstanding he wanted the perfection of the Grecke tongue, hee goeth righter to the nature and force of Infer and Hades, then you and your pa ners with your glut of Greeke. For Austen saith two things of Inferi, which you would faine impugne, if you could tell how: the one is. August. de Genesi ad lite∣ram li. 12. ca. 34. Inferi eo quod infra sunt, La∣tine appellantur, Inferi are in Latine so called, because they are below: The other: Sicut secundum corpus inferiora sunt omnia grauiora, ita secundum spiritum inferiora sunt omnia tristiora. As all bodily thinges, the lower their (naturall) place, the waigh∣tier they are; so all spirituall thinges the lower, the gri uouser they are. You against all reason, and learning contradict both these: for you say that heauen is infer∣nus, which by force of the word must needes be below; and you bring death, which is a most grieuous thing, into heauen; though it be the highest place and state, that men can or shall haue. Besides you sticke not to alter your authors, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Ambrose, whom you bring for your pretence; and where they talke of an innisible place or prison, you turne their wordes to an inuisible state common to good and bad. Irenaeus in that place saith nothing of Hades; Ambrose saith, the heathen were of opinion, that soules loosed from their bodies went to aides, a place not seene, which the Latines call infernus. Tertullian saith, Tertull de anima ca. 58. Carcerem illum, quod Euangelium demonstrat, inferos intelligimus. That prison which the Gospell mentioneth, we vnderstand to be in∣feri. What is this to heauen or paradise, or to the state of blessed soules departed this life? Defenc. pag. 169. li. 17. (Hades) signifieth sometimes darknesse, or a place of darknesse, not that the state of all the dead generally was thought to be in darknesse, but because death tooke them out of this cheerefull worldes light, and couered them (as it were) with darknesse and obliuion from the worlds sight and knowledge. ] You would faine shift off the description of Hades made by Greeke Fathers, which by no meanes can agree to heauen or paradise; but your shifts are all of one sort, that is deuoid of learning, trueth, and sense. The Greeke wri∣ters of all ages that were Christians, acknowledge Hades to be full of fearefull and eternall darknesse. As Nazianzene. N zianzen. in Christo pa∣tiente. , Christ comming to the house of Hades all full of mist and darknesse. And Chrysostome. Chrysost. de R surrect. s m. 7. The Lord de∣scending into the darke mist of Hades. Eustathius. Fustath. in 1. lit dos. . Hades is a darke place vnder earth. Nicetas Choniates. Nicetas Cho∣niat. in Bal. . The darke and dreadfull tab nacles of Hades. Nicephorus Gregoras . Gregoras hist. R ma. li. 8. We walked in grosse darkenesse, as they say of those, that destend to Hades. Phauorinus. Phauorinus in verbo . . Hades is a plac voide of light, and full of eternall darkenesse. These and the like testimonies when you cannot auoid; you answer, that the soules of the godly are taken out of this cheerefull worlds light, and couered as it were with darkenesse and obliuion, from the worlds sight, and knowledg : as if this world were cheerefull light, and the light of heauen must for your pleasure be counted darknesse, or the sight of Christ and his Saints might be called (as it were) obliuion, that we should take more ioy and com∣fort in the faces of mortall men, then of the Lord Iesus. This conceit would well be∣come him, that had no heauen but this world; otherwise to change the natures and names of earthly and heauenly things vpside downe, and to di grace eternall blisse with the not of darknesse and obliuion, preferring temporall ease or honor before it, as cheerefull light; this is fit for a Pagan, but not for a Christian. Defenc. pag. 170. li. 27. I come from the auncients to the later learned writers: that we may not neglect their iudgement in this q stion, li 31. who were obserued before, yet because you let them go without saluting them, they shall be noted once more, that I may presse you with them. As you haue handled the auncients, so doe you the later writers: you doe not, or will not vn∣derstand them, but keepe on your peruerting of these, as you did of the other. I could easily haue saluted them, if leasure had then serued to me to discusse all your vnto∣ward assertions and allegations, which because it did not, you will once more presse me with them: Well then let vs heare them. Defenc. pag. 170. li. 35. Bucere saith, the Scripture no where speaketh or hades of infernum, but as being common as well to the blessed as to the damned. ] When you alleage but little, you should alleage Had s with writers is the graue or hell. it right, & not adde what pleaseth you, to other mens words. In this place which you bring out of Bucere, he maketh no mention of hades at all, that is your interlacing; & by Infernus he meaneth the g aue, which is common to good & bad. His own words are. Bucerus in 27 Matth. vers. Quid hîc sit ad infernum descendere, aliud quam recondi corpus sub terra. What is heere descending to infernus, but the body to be couered vnder earth. The reason whereof he giueth; Ibidem. Sheôl enim pro quo in Scripturis n s fere infernus legimus, sepulchr significat. Sheol, for which in the Scriptures we read almost euery where infernus, signifieth the graue. And so he there interpreteth himselfe. Ibidem. Sanctos qui in inferno erant, id est dormiebant corpore in puluere terrae. The Saints which were in infernus, that is, which slept with their bodies in the dust of the earth. And therefore that which followeth and is by you cited, Defenc. pag. 171. li. 1. By this which we confesse that the Lord descended to infernus, we must vnderstand that the Lord ioined himselfe in spirit to the spirits of the Saints deceased; that I say is added as a consequent to Christs death, and not as the proper signification of the phrase. For it were more then absurd by your leaue, that one and the same word, which he saith signifieth the graue, should properly note the burying of the body in earth below, and the ascending of the spirit to heauen on high, though in all the Saints the one is performed as well as the other. And where Bucere seemeth to impugne the sense, which the fathers gaue of this Article; as his reasons be none, so his words in no wise mans iudgement can ouersway theirs. Defenc. pag. 171. li. 3. Peter martyr, that Christ descended to inferos (or hades) signifieth nothing els, but that he did vnder goe the same state, as other soules doe that depart this life. ] Why stoppe you there? are you bleere eied, that you cannot see what presently followeth; or short winded, that you can read no farder? the very next words will plainly shew with what sincerity and fidelity you be conuersant in old and new writers. Peter Martyrs words are these. Petri Marty∣ris loci com. in Exposition Symboli. Eundem subijt statum, quem reliquae animae à corpore seiunctae experiun∣tur, quae aut in Sanctorum societatem coaptantur, aut cum damnatorum spiritibus in aeter∣num exitium detruduntur. Et vero vna at{que} altera tum piorum spirituum, tum eorum qui damnati essent, societas, animae Christi praesentiam persensit. The soule of Christ did vnder∣goe the same state, (by going to the same place) which the rest of the soules seuered from the body doe trie, that are either admitted into the fellowship of the saints, or cast into euerlast∣ing destruction with the spirits of the damned. For both the one and the other society, aswell of godly soules, as of those that were damned, perceaued the presence of Christs soule. The soule then of Christ by Peter Martyrs iudgement cleane contrary to Bucers, went as∣well to the place of the damned; as to the seats of the blessed, and either society per∣ceaued the presence of his soule seuered from his body. Defenc. pag. 171. li. 6. Mollerus, (touching Sheol, Hades, and infernum ascribed to Christ) saith they do signi∣sie but that Christ died: and to be no more then if he should say in the Psalme, therefore I re∣ioice because I know, that although I die, yet I shall rise to life againe. ] Of Sheol Mollerus saith, Saepe pro sepulchro dic tur, it is often taken for the graue, which no man denieth. Of hades and infernus he speaketh not a word. And albeit he be of opinion, that Christs descent to hell, sat is certò euinci non potest ex hoc loco, cannot cleerely and fully be euinced out of this place of the Psalme, by reason (as he thinketh) the words may be wrested to diuers senses; yet touching Christs descent to hel he saith; Mollerus in Psal. 16. We vnderstand that Ar∣ticle of the Creed simply and without allegory, and we beleeue that Christ truely descended to the lower parts of the earth, as Paul speaketh Ephes. 4. and his victory he would shew to the Diuels after a speciall manner, to strike perpetuall terrors into them, and to free vs from the feare of their tyranny. Defenc. pag. 171. li. 10. Bullinger (speaking of Christ and indifferently of the godly,) sheweth that to goe to in∣fernus is to goe to Abrahams bosome, that is into heauen, not into hell. And that inferi and hades doe mak difference onely betweene the liuing and the dead, and nothing els. Bullinger bringeth foure senses of that Article of the Creed, Christ descended to Inferna. The first, that is all one with, he was buried; which exposition he saith others mislike. The second is Austens, who in his Epistle to Dardanus writeth; Bulling. serm. 7. de Symbolo Apostol. The Lord descended to Tartarus, but felt there no torment. The third, to which he more inclineth, Longe simpli∣cius videbimur hunc articulum intelligere si senserimus virtutem mortis Christi dimanasse etiam ad defunctos, & his profuisse. We shall seeme farre more simply to vnderstand this ar∣ticle, if we thinke that the force of Christs death pearced euen to the dead, and profited them. The fourth is, Vel certe per inferos & inferna intelligimus, non locum certè destinatum impijs, sed defunctos fideles. Or els by inferi & inferna we vnderstand not the place of punish∣ment appointed for the wicked, but the faithfull deceased. Here are all foure senses. He li∣keth best, that the vertue and force of Christs death descended and was shewed both to the blessed and to the damned; as Saint Peter Ibidem. telleth vs, that the Lord went in spirit and preached to the spirits, that were inobedient and kept in prison. Nimirum innotuit & his iust a damnationis ex morte Christi sententia. For euen to the damned appeared the sentence of their condemnation to be iust by the death of Christ. This he confesseth Christ did in spirit. If by Christs spirit he ment Christs soule, he expressely refuteh your conceits. If he mean, the force of Christs diuine spirit descended, he hath Athanasius, Cyril, and others opposite against him. Athanasius saith: Athanas. de salu ri aduen∣t Christi. ; How could the word (or Sonne of God) descend to Hades? And againe: Ibid. de In∣carnat. Christi. ; How could he descend with his Godhead open and vncouered? Ibidem. . Neither could hades endure the accesse of his Godhead vncouered. And so Cyrill: Cyrill. de fide ad Thesdosium. . Neither in any wise may we say, that the Godhead of the only begotten was brought from (hades or) the dennes vnder the earth: for that was not worthy of woondering, if the Sonne of God were not left in hades. Exactly they teach, that the Deitie of Christ, or his diuine spirit could by no meanes be sayd to descend to hades, or to returne from thence, but it must be verified of his humane soule, which reuealed it selfe, and the vertue of his death as well to the damned, as to the blessed. Defenc pag. 167. li. 13. Lauater saith Hades in Gre ke is a generall word for the condition of the dead both in torments and in peace. ] Lauater saith of hades as he doth of Sheól, that Lauater. bo∣ il. 133. in 31. cap. Ezechiel. Non solum locum Damnatorum, sed S pulchrum vel statum mortuorum passim in Scripturis signisi∣cat, it signisieth not onely the place of the damned, but also the graue or state of the dead. And so doth Hades with the septuagint, who alwaies render Sheôl by that word. Now the graue or state of the dead (the one being an exposition of the other) reach∣eth not to the Soules of the godly (which are not in their graues) but to their bodies; and hath in it corruption, silence, obliuion and priuation of all things in this life, from which the graue excludeth them, be they neuer so blessed. And so that rest, which Lauatere nameth, is not the ioy of heauen; but rest from the labours of this life, which our bodies attaine in the graue, specially when the Soule enioyeth her eter∣nall and happie rest; which the wicked want, that are adiudged to the place of tor∣ments. Defenc. pag. 171. li. 15. Tremellius saith: This Hebrew word Sheôl doth signifie any station or state of the dead in generall in very many places of Scripture, and hell it may sometime signifie, but by a figure Synecdoche. Tremellius hath been once afore alleadged and answered. He doth not say that Sheol signifieth Heauen or Paradise, but the Stations of the dead he maketh to be Sepulchrum or infernum, the graue for dead bodies, or Hell for the dead Soules; to both which Sheol is a common name, and sometimes importeth the one, some∣times the other, and sometimes both. When both are intended, the word hath his full force; when onely one, the figure Synecdoche is vsed as he thinketh. But what is this to your purpose? shew that euer Tremellius translateth Sheol by Heauen or Pa∣radise, and then you sa mewhat, though I be not bound to Tremellius authoritie, farder then he maketh faire and cleere proofe of his assertion. Otherwise this is a plaine con ction of your falsehoode, if you pretend by mistaking Tremellius words, that Sheol signi eth as well Heauen, as Hell and the graue; and when you be asked for an example of that signification in the Scriptures, you can produce no one place in the whole Bible, where Tremellius himselfe hath so translated Sheol. Of nius I haue formerly spoken; he was very learned, but he tooke holde of Tertullians errour repugnant to all the Fathers, as I haue shewed before. He likewise mistooke Chryso∣stom: for Chrysostom supposeth Abraham to be in hades before Christes resurrecti∣on, but not after. Irenaeus sayth the soules of Christes Disciples haue an inuisible place defined them of God, but he expresseth neither name nor site thereof. What proofe make any of these, that heauen or paradise is called infernus or hades? or that there is a state of the dead in one place common to good and bad, as you defend out of Fulgentius? Defenc. pag. 171. li. 25. The rather this sens of hades we are to acknowledge, because it hath beene the ancient phrase and common vs of speech before Christianitie, which sufficiently shewed before out of Homer, Plato, and others. ] The heathen writers fitted their phrases to their heathen errors; and therefore except you be disposed to reuiue their prophane fansies of In∣fernus and Hades, which they thought common to good and bad, you haue no rea∣son to follow their phrase either in Hades or Inferi. What hath heauen or paradise to do with Plutoes kingdome vnder earth, where the Pagan Poets and Philosophers placed both torments for the wicked and pleasant fields for the godly? And there∣fore your idle and fruitlesse discourse of almost three whole leaues tending onely to smooth vp the vnchristian follies and phrases of Pagans, I omit as not woorth the an∣swering; and as you referre them to the iudgement of the learned and wise Reader, so do I; not doubting but if he be learned or wise, he will not suffer you to expound the Scriptures by fabulous Poets, or erroneous Philosophers, altogether strangers to the Christian religion; but will keepe you rather to the rules and directions of the holy Ghost, whose sense is the safest and surest way to measure matters of faith. Only I will touch two or three of your foolish ouersights and bolde presumptions, lest my silence should breed you confidence in your conceits. Defenc. pag. 172. li. 22. The holy Apostles doe teach the heauenly trueth, with the very words and Grammar of the heathen men: whereunto that serueth which is written of them; we euery man heare them speake in our owne tongues and languages, wherein we were borne. ] Why speake you of Grammar, which is common to all professions, and skip the signification and mea∣ning of these words, which are proper to Christians? who though they vse many words abused by Pagans to ignorant and false apprehensions, yet retaine they such sense of those words, as the trueth of God prescribeth, and not as Pagans and Idola∣ters imagined. And to whom did the Apostles speake in this Acts 2. place which you cite, to prophane and heathen men, or to Iewes, that were well acquainted with Moses and the Prophets, though they were borne in diuers places of the world, and vnderstood the languages of many other nations? the Scripture saith euen of this multitude then assembled to heare the Apostles speake with diuers tongues; Acts 2. v. 5. There were dwelling at Ierusalem Iewes, men Religious, (or fearing God) of euerie nation vnder heauen. Els to what end did Peter alleage to them the Prophets Ioel and Dauid, if they knew the writings of neither? but that whole Sermon of Peters prooueth, that they were fami∣liarly conuersant in the Scriptures; and therefore the Apostles speaking strange lan∣guages so tempered their wordes and sense, as men trained vp in Moses might wel vnderstand their meaning. And when the Apostles spake or wrot in other tongues besides the Hebrew, trow you they retained the same sense and vnderstanding in e∣uery word, that the Pagans did, who knew nothing of Christ? how many words are there, which the writings of the Euangelists and Apostles turne from their generall and vsuall signification amongst the heathen, to expresse things proper to Christian religion? shall Euangelium, fides, spiritus, ecclesia, episcopus, diaconus, presbyter, martyr, diabolus, and many such import no more with Christians then they did with Pagans? who euer was so blind, that euer read any thing? Hades then the apostles might & did vse for a place vnder earth, where the wicked after this life were tormented; so far they agreed with the vse of the word formerly receaued: but where vnbeleeuers thought the soules of the godly were likewise in the same place vnder the earth, tho gh in more rest or in some pleasures, such as naturall men could deuice; the Apostles and Euangelists instructed no doubt by their Master, and by his example correcting that error, named the place, where the soules of the faithfull were receaued after death, Luke 23. Paradise, and an 2. Cor. 5. heauenly habitation. And where the Iewes vsed Sheol fo all that was vnder the earth, were it the graue for dead bodies, or hell for wicked soul s; the new Testament distinguishing hades from death, and making the one a consequent to the other in the wicked, prooueth hades there to be taken onlie for the Luke 16. place of torment after this life. Defenc. pag. 172. li. 36. I thought that those few all gations which I brought out of Plato, Homer and Plutark for the Greeke, & of the Latins for the Latin would haue sufficed to cause you not to deny so cleare and manifest a trueth. Pag. 173. li. 7. That hades with them did signifie the world of soules without any limitation (in the very word it selfe) either of state or place. ] Had the Pagans any hades, which they thought was in no place? or were the soules of good and bad in no state? doe not the verie rules of Grammar expressed in euery Lexicon, require necessarily, that euerie where vsed by Greek writers in verse and in prose after , and , as and and such like, should be supplied with or some such word importing a place or house before it can be excused from false Greek? how then are you so ignorant or impudent (choose which you will) as to say that hades is the world of soules without limitation of place or state? haue you for∣gotten what Eustathius saith of the very word it selfe? Eustath. in 1. Iliados : Hades is a darke place vnder the earth. And Phauorinus? Phauori. in verbo . . Hades is a Region without light. Or what Lucian reporteth of all the people, who were Grecians, that persuaded by Homer, Hesiode & the rest of the Poets, tooke Hades to be Lucia. de luctu. , a place vnder the earth, deepe, great, and dark? If the word then of it selfe import a place vnder the earth, and that deepe and darke, what trueth is there in your words, or what force in your allegations; which prooue no∣thing against any thing that I said; nor for your new made world of soules without li∣mitation of place or state? Defenc. pag. 173. li. 15. The common Epithet of hades is hades pandocheus, hades receauing all both good and bad. ] And what then? was hades therefore either not vnder the earth, or not a place of darkenesse, because all men good and bad after death by the Pagans opinion, went to hades? if hades withall your prophane writers (saue once in a speciall conceit of Socrates) were below in the earth, and a dwelling in darknesse; then doth the word it selfe beare in it a limitation of place below vnder the earth, not aboue in heauen, and a state in darkenesse, not in light. Against this speaketh not one of your authors, whom heere you huddle most idlely, not regarding what I admit or reiect. That which I say, they confesse with one consent, as I haue Conclus. pa. 369. 371. elsewhere shewed; & if those testimo∣nies were not sufficient, you might haue ten times as many. But to make short worke Clemens Alexandrinus shall let you see, how peeuishly you impugne my assertion. He alleageth out of Diphilus an auncient comicall Poet, as followeth; Clemens mateo . li. 5. ex Diphilo. . In hades we resolue there are two waies, on for the iust, the other for the wicked. Howbeit the earth doth couer them both. Your selfe is a witnesse against your selfe, that to this place (Hades) Defenc. pag. 173. li. 19. come not the wicked onely, but the noblest and best also. Now where this place was in their opinion to which all come after death, if you doubt, Homer telleth you, it was Homer. Odys∣scae li. 24. . In the house of hades vnder the dennes (or darke∣nesse) of the earth. Theognis saith in like words, Theognidis gnomae. . They goe to the house of hades vnder the dennes (or closets) of the earth. Mimnermus saith Mimnermus de ita quod brcuis sit. . He goeth to hades vnder the earth. Euripides. E ipides in . . Vnder the earth to hades there being. Sophocles. Sophocles in ace Flagell. . They come to the closets of the God below. Aristophanes. Ariscoph. Rani . I will goe with speed to hades below. So that your great Masters of the Greeke tongue, if euer you saw them or read thē, exactly resolue against you, that your hades pandoche∣us, whither all goe both good and bad, is vnder the earth, and so can no way be pro∣portioned to heauen or paradise, which are farre aboue the starres of heauen, and are habitations of light and blisse; where your hades of the blessed, in the opinion of Pa∣gans and Christians, was a place of darkenesse, though mixed with ease and comfort as they supposed. And touching the Latin Inferi, of which you seeme to make such account by pretence of Ciceroes words, but without all cause; I replie with the words of Lactantius, whom the Christians called their Cicero. I actant. de falsa religion. li. 2. ca. 2. Nihil terra inferius, & hu∣milius, nisi mors & inferi. Nothing is lower and baser then the earth, but death and inferi. And because Hen: Iac: is become of late so deuoute a Patrone of Ciceroes, that he may not suffer his Paganish errors to be reprooued; and is angrie that any man taketh his beedleship from him, let him read but the next chapter of Lactantius against Cicero by name, and he shall see what honour is to be yeelded to heathen Idolaters against the trueth. Defenc. pag. 173. li 27. Homer describeth, Tartarus to be so much beneath hades as heauen is from the earth. ] What if Hades or hell be exceeding deepe; is that a proofe that the top thereof is no part of Hades, because the bottome is farre beneath it? Are not the parts of heauen Tartarus a part of hades with the Poets. infinitely one aboue another, and yet all are heauen? In my fathers house, saith our Sa∣uiour, are many mansions; and yet they all are but one house. Though then the Poet faine that Hades hath in it deepe pits; yet all is contained in the generall name of Hades, specially since both Pagans and Christians confesse, that men are punished in Hades, and not vnder Hades. Iustine the Martyr alleageth out of Philemon. Iustinus de Mornar hta D . . There is iudgement in Hades. Theodoretus saith of Plato: Theodoret. s rmo. 11. de fine & iud. cio. . Many times hee affirmeth places of punishment in Hades. Cydonius saith generally. Cydonius de morte contem∣nenda. ; that there is venge∣ance in Hades for offences heere committed; not onely the consent of all wise men; but the e∣quitie of Gods iustice approoueth this opinion. The Gospell calleth Hades Luke 16. a place of tor∣ments. Your selfe all this while haue maintained Hades to be a place as well of rest as of punishment; that is of both at least. And would you now with a Poeticall fiction or comparison strike out all, that you and others haue said, and appoint punishments not in, but vnder Hades? Poets haue their speciall fansies of Tartarus, and therein agree not one with another. Hesiode saith; Hesiod. in Theogoni . . The dungeon of Tartarus is so farre vnder the earth, as heauen is aboue the earth. Virgil saith, Virgil. Aeneid. 6. Tartarus ipse bis patet in praeceps tantum. Tartarus is twice as deepe, as heauen is high. And though Homer were blind, yet he neuer intended to make Tartarus no part, but the lowest parte of Hades. And therefore he placed it deepe vnder the higher hades, where dead bodies are, which Hesiode called the earth. For Hades is common as well to the bodies buried, as to the soules receiued vnder the earth. And therfore your citing Sophocles and Aeschylus vsing Hades for the graue, where our bodies rest, is an answere to that which you bring out of Homer, and an heaping vp of matter no way pertinent to your purpose. For thinke you that the graue hath no limitation of place? why then are you so copious in things not doubted, & wholy speechles e in that which you should prooue? With as little skill (you say) Defenc. pag. 174. li. 3. in the wordes of Orpheus are to bee con∣strued together and not separately, as I reade them; but why, can you tell? What shall become of the coniunction , betweene them, if the construction must bee aither aides as you set it? the interpreter, a man well learned, doth render it thus in Latine. O Rex caeli & inferni, O King of heauen and of hell. And the coniunction is often copulatiue with the Poets, and standeth for , as your Lexicons will teach you. Be∣sides Orpheus purpose is to confesse him, whom diuels doe tremble at, and Angels doe feare, as his wordes presently following doe declare. And therefore his meaning was rather to celebrate the Lord of all, that is of heauen and hell; sea & land; then of part. Defenc pag. 174 li. 13. & 15. You expressely collect and confesse (page 371.) that within Plutoes kingdome vnder the earth, which they call Hades, as well the places and pleasures for the good, as the prisons and punishments for the bad, are in their cōceit prepared & setled. ] That the Pagans so thought, I doe not denie, yet they neuer called Hades heauen, as you doe, but confessed hea∣uen to be on hie ouer their heads; where the Gods immortall were as they supposed, not vnder the earth where hades was. And can you be so sottish as to say I contradict my selfe, because I vouch they limited hades to a place euen vnder the earth, and to darknesse in respect of the light of the Sunne, which we heere enioy? Againe (you confesse) Pag. 174. li. 18. Hades with them was the Ruler or place of soules, were they in rest o paine. ] Were you euer prentice to learne to lie, or haue you this facilitie by nature? You can not touch a place which you doe not falsifie. I said, with them (speaking of Infidels) Conclu pag. 337. li. 9. Hades was the Ruler or place of soules, that were beneath vnder the earth, were they in rest, or in paine. How is this repugnant either to my selfe, or to the trueth? ( Defenc. pag. 174. li. 20. You make a strange answer, that Christian Religion will assure, this place must needs bee hell. What that place where some good mens soules deceased are in rest? Is this hell? Is it hell in Christian Religion? who then will henceforth care for hell, if some soules haue rest and pleasures in hell? ] Know you not who rideth you, when you breake your spurres on a bench, and thinke you be on horse-backe? That hades is beneath vnder the earth, as the Pagans confessed, and must needs be hell, (since Christian religion acknow∣ledgeth no place vnder the earth for soules deceased, besides hell) I auouched: what then? what fault findeth your mastership therewith? are any there in rest, you aske? The Pagans so drempt; and therefore I say, with them it was so; that is, they suppo∣sed it to be so; but Christian Religion, I replied, assureth vs, there is no place vnder the earth for soules, but only hel. Where are now your quicke & thicke punctilioes & easie hell that you so plea withall? The Pagans were of that minde, if you list to be one of them, you may hope for rest in hell: but Christian religion, to which I appea∣led, assureth vs that it is a place of torment. Cannot your heauy head discerne, when I report and refute Pagans opinions, and when I propose points of Christian reli∣gion? Defenc. pag. 174. li. 24. But you say also, that those heathen Greeks did thinke this place of soules was vnder the earth. It is true they thought so indeed: and it was their error. ] Then haue you all this while out-faced the trueth, when you deriued from them a world of soules without limitation of place; and your exposition of the Creed according to their sense must needs inferre, that Christes soule after death descended vnder the earth, for there is hades by the maine consent of the heathen Greekes, as you now confesse. And if you place heauen or paradise (where the soules of the righteous now are) vnder the earth to vphold your Greeke conceits; you shall deserue a garland in your new made hades, but I dare promise you no rest in your heauen vnder earth, except you restore it to the place where God set it, that is aboue vs, and not beneath vs. That Hades was the proper name of a person, and secondly of the place, Pag. 175. li. 2. this is not materiall, nor to any purpose: Pag. 174. li. 34. yet it is questionlesse vtterly vntrue. ] Is it vtterly vn∣true, that the Pagan Poets (for of them I speake) tooke Hades chiefly for the ruler of the dead, and in that respect called his kingdome vnder the earth, also Hades? I omit what Diodorus Siculus reporteth as well of antiquitie as of the Poets, that they tooke Diodorus Siculus li. 5. Hades (the third sonne of Saturnus) to be the inuentor of graues and funerals, which was the cause that he was thought to be the God of the dead, Ibidem. Anti∣quitie attributing to him the beginning and care of these things. To goe beyond the sur∣mises of the Grecians, who tooke their learning and antiquities from the Aegyp∣tians, as appeareth by Orpheus & Homers iourneyes thither to increase their know∣ledge: the wise men amongst the Chaldeans, called with them Magi, who were farre more ancient then the Aegyptians as Aristotle and others witnesse, taught two chiefe authors of all things; Diogen Laerti in Pro mio. , A good God, and a bad spirit, & the good was called Zeus or Oromasdes; the other was named Hades or Aremanios. And to this giue testimonie Theopompus, Eudoxus, Hernippus, ancient writers among the Grecians, besides A∣ristotle, who concurreth with them; and Plutarke, who saith, Plutarch. de Iside & Osi∣ride. , this is the opinion of the most and the wisest. Yea Zoroastres himselfe was of that opinion, who liued some thousands of yeeres before the battell of Troy, as Plutarke writeth, and is taken for Cham the sonne of Noah by our Historiographers. Plinij natural. hist. li. 3. ca. 10. Plinie maketh him elder then Moses by many thousands of yeeres. Shew me now as auncient testimonies, that the place was called Hades, as I shew you, that the person was so named, and I will yeeld. If you can not, prate not so presumptuously, that questionlesse this is vtterly vntrue. To my assertion, there is no one place in trueth common to all soules departed this life, but some are in heauen, and some are in hell, you answer: Defenc pag 175. li. 17. yet neuerthelesse As they are some where within the compasse of the created world, so are they in a common place. The whole created world is hades with the defender. This As doth so haunt you, that you can doe nothing without it. As they are in the created world, so they are in one common place. Then hell and heauen with you make but one place, and consequently Christ sitting at the right hand of God, is with all the elect angels in the same place with the diuell and the damned; and we liuing heere on earth since we are in the created world, are both in the same place with Christ, & also in the same place with the damned. Such new Cosmographie well becommeth your new Diuinitie; without such misshapen Asses you are not able to open your mouth. But if this be your best defence for your new found Hades, your Reader I trust will be better aduised, before he will be in the same place or minde with you. The Scrip∣tures teach vs to distinguish places according to their names giuen them by God him∣selfe, as heauen, earth and hell, and not to make all one common place, or world of soules which you haue newly created. Pag. 175. li. 22. We stand not so much on this, that by hades must be vnderstood any one place common to all the dead, but the state and condition of death among the dead. ] All this while you haue beene prouing, that hades is an inuisible place, and so doth Ambrosse expound it, aïdes is a place not seene, which we call Hell; now you can not tell how to bring hea∣uen and hell (which are so farre distant asunder) to be one common place, you would faine reduce them to one common state or condition of death, when the Scriptures euery where make them opposite, ascribing light and life to the one, and darkenesse and death to the other. But you haue found one common condition of death in both, which is to want their bodies.] What say you then to Elias, who was caried vp to heauen or to Paradise aliue, and neuer died? Are he and the rest, who rose from their graues with Christ, in the common condition of death? What say you to Core, Da∣than Abiram, and their company, who descended aliue to hades; are they free from the condition of death in hades, because they haue their bodies? Meere priuations are no conditions or states. And therefore to want their bodies for a time either in heauen or in hell, maketh no common estate to both, no more than that they are all soules, and contained in some certaine limitation of place, which nothing touch their condition or state: otherwise the damned in hell and the blessed in heauen shall al∣wayes haue one common state and condition, because they shall eternally be fastned to their places, and shall haue their soules vnited to their bodies; and shall remember things past, and such like; which yet do not performe one common estate or condi∣tion to both, since they shall haue so many contraries to make them differ, euen as now they haue; though degrees of ioy and paine shall then increase. The Pagans Defenc pag. 176. li. 5. esteemed indeed a part of his dominion to be hell properly, but a part also to be the region of the happie. ] This is like the rest of your trueths. Did the Pagans know or acknowledge none other heauen but hades? Did euer man so write or speake, that had read but one leafe of prose or Poetrie? neuer read you what Cicero citeth out of Ennius? Cicero Tus∣cul st. li. 1. Romulus in caelo cum Dijs agit aeuum. Romulus enioyeth eternitie with the Gods in heauen. And addeth of his owne: Ibidem. Quid totum propè coelum, nonne humano genere completum est? The whole heauen is it not almost replenished with mankind? Homer and the rest of the Greeke Poets were not ignorant hereof, nor silent herein. Of Hercu∣les Homer sayth; : He doth solace himselfe with the immortall Gods. And what was ouranos with them, if hades were their heauen? Ar∣ristotle sayth: Arist. de mundo. . The highest place of the world, being the seat or habitation of God, is called heauen. To this heauen the Poets admitted the sons of their Gods, obscurely lighting on that rule of true religion, the sons of God shal inherit the kingdome of God: but the Philosophers plainly affirme of iustice and pietie, Cicero in Somnio S ∣pionis. ea vita via est in coelum: such a life is the way to heauen. And for al the helpers, encreasers, and preseruers of their countrey, Ibidem. certum esse in coelo ac d fini∣tum locum, vbi beati aeuo sempiterno fruantur; there is a set and certaine place in heauen where they shall enioy euerlasting blessednesse. The Greeke Poets then were not igno∣rant of heauen aboue, when they sent most men departing this life to Hades beneath; but they had heard somewhat of that diuine sentence, which adiudged mankind for sinne to death both of body and Soule, and thereupon, as there manner is to multi∣ply their owne fansies and fables, they placed all mortall men in Hades below; and yet allowed the better sort of men some ease and comfort; though they neuer brought them to heauen, except they thought them the sonnes of some God. What is this to the true heauen; which is the glorious seate of God, and the euerlasting habitation of his Angels and Saints? Why yoke you Gods trueth with Poeticall fables and hu∣mane fansies, as if the one were not onely a meet paterne for the other, but the same place with the other? How commeth hades to be al one with the created world, and so not only men liuing are in hades, but Saints and Angels, yea Christ himselfe is still in hades, since neither he nor they are without the compasse of the created world? So large is your predicament of hades, that the whole world is scant wide enough for it. After this you reade vs a lecture of more than two leaues, how Defenc. pag. 176. li. 23. the Apostles taught the trueth of the Gospell with the very words of the heathens; and as you make rules for their speech at your pleasure, so you take paines to bring no authour, for all that you say, besides your selfe. I haue heard so many of your trifling and wandering discour∣ses, that I am starke wearie with reading them; and if it haue no better weight than your word, you may keepe your winde, and saue your labour. Who doubteth, but the Holy Ghost might and did correct as well the words as errours of the heathens, and reduced both their eares and hearts to the vnderstanding and imbracing of the Gospell? Wherefore such words as Infidels abused and defiled with their wicked imaginations, the Apostles of Christ restrained and applied to expresse the trueth, thereby teaching the heathen to keepe their words and leaue their errours, and not framing the Gospel to the prophane sense or vse of their speech. What conclude you hence for hades? That the Apostles retained the erroneous sense of that word, and made it worse than the Pagans did? For the heathen vsed that word for places vnder the earth, where soules after this life were kept; and you would haue the Apostles vse it for Heauen and Paradise, where the soules of the righteous are, as well as for hell where the damned are. Leaue therefore your idle vagaries; the Apostles vsed the word hades for the places vnder the earth, where soules were detained, as the heathen did: but in this they redressed the Pagans conceits, that they as naturall men drea∣med of bodily pleasures in hades, which the Scriptures make a place of torment with perpetuall fire. Put this correction to the Poets opinion of hades, as touching the condition of soules thither adiudged, and I see no danger in the vse of hades for hell, since the Pagans by that word intended the places vnder earth, where the wicked af∣ter this life were punished. Defenc. pag. 177. li. 4. A Philosopher will rarely and sometime perhaps note the aire by Tartarus; yet vsually and in a manner alwayes they ment hell by it. Yet Peter not Canonizing their dreames of hell, notwithstanding signifieth hell indeed by that worde of theirs according to the common vse thereof. ] Though the Poets vse not Tartarus, as often as they doe Hades, for the receite of soules after death; yet it is false, which you say, that in a manner alwayes they ment (the dungeon of) hell by it; It is an vsuall phrase among the Poets for the place, where soules were bestowed after death, as Hades is. Pindarus expressing the inconstancie of mans life saith: Apud Plutar. de consolations ad Apollonium. . Thou must goe to the deepe of darke Tartarus by ineuitable necessity. Moschus wisheth he might goe thither to heare Bion sing there. Moschus in Epitap. Bionis. . O if I might goe downe to Tartarus, as did Orpheus, Vlysses, or Hercules. Hesiode sheweth, how the de∣stenies, as soone as any man was wounded or slaine, seased on him, and sent his soule Hesiod, in scu∣to Herculis , to cold Tartarus. Anacreon giuing a reason, why though he be old, he is loth to die, saith. Anacreontis Carmina. , I sigh often, fearing Tartarus; for the chamber of Hades is grieuous. So Theognis and others vse Tartarus for Hades without any distinction betwixt them. And where you say, Peter signifieth hell indeed by that word, you may meete with many that will tell you, Saint Peter there calleth the aire a∣bout Tartarus taken for the aire ouer vs. & aboue the earth by that name, as well as the places vnder the earth; and that in respect of the light, which the reprobate Angels did before enioy in heauen, this world may iustly be called darkenesse. Zanchius saith. Zanchius de operibus Dei li. 4. ca. 4. By this name Peter vnder∣stood not the place onely, which is vnder the earth, sed imprimis ipsum aerem but chiefly this aire; & the whole space beneath this moone. For in this regiō are the diuels kept captiues as the Apostle teacheth, calling the diuell the Prince of this aire. Saint Austin saith as much. August. de Genesi ad lite∣ram li. 11. ca. 26 Let vs not doubt but the sinfull Angels were cast into this aeriall mist about the earth, as into a prison, (according to the Apostles faith), kept to be punished in iudgement. In ca. 2. epist. 2. Petri. Aretius, Hipe∣rius, Beza and others are of the same mind. So that this signification of Tartarus was not taken from the heathen, as you presume, but is a comparison with their former In Epistolam Iudae. state, when they were Angels of light, and adorned with brightnesse within and without, who now are throwen from their hight and plunged into outward and in∣ward darknesse. Defenc. pag. 178. li. 28. The very naturall Etymologie of the word according to the Grammar doth properly sig∣nifie VNSEENE or not seene any more in this world: topos aides an vnseene place as Plato calleth it. Where note it cannot bee referred to the estate of Angels, but of them that had once a visible and ordinarie being and conuersation heere in this world. ] You hang this geere together with hookes. Hades you say is properly, not seene any more in this world; yet it is tópos áides, an vnseene place, as Plato calleth it. You haue gotten you three star∣ting holes vnder the couert of Hades, the place vnseene, the person not seene any more in this world, the state inuisible: but you hide your selfe so vnhandsomely in them, that when you thinke your selfe most inuisible, all the world may see your open follie. Was the place of Hades euer seene in this world? I trust not. Then Hades is topos aides a place, which neuer man liuing saw; for a man must bee dead before he can come to that place. You graunt the Grammaticall Etymologie of the word Hades is to signifie a place vnseene, as Plato calleth it. How come you then to applie this to the person or state, not seene any more in this world, by which you would exclude Angels from being in hades? It is euident that the Poets made Hades a person, and supplie hadou very often with domous or such like, as , to the housen of Hades; and call him Euripides in Aicestide. , Hades the God with the blacke lockes of haire. Was this ruler of the places below, which is the diuell, euer aliue with vs in this world? If he neuer had no visible state in this life, and yet is properly and originally called Hades, as I haue shewed before, then Hades is that, which was neuer seene in this world; and doth agree as well to Angels (for all your noting ) as to diuels, if it import no more, but that which is vnseene of vs. But who warranteth this interpretation besides your selfe? Let aïdes stand for vnseene; how prooue you, as you conceiue, that it in∣ferreth a state once seene in this world, and now by death vnseene? I say, vnseene ap∣plied to hades, is neuer seene of any man liuing, and not as you wrest it, now no longer seene. And so your Etymologie maketh nothing for you. And what if hades deriued from aïdes signifie that place where nothing can be seene for lacke of light, doe you not finely strip your Reader with an vnseene sleite, as you thinke; but indeed with a sensi∣ble deluding of the trueth? peruse your masters of the Greeke tongue, and tell mee whether the do not take hades for the place, where nothing can be seene by reason of darkenesse. Sophocles calleth it Sopho. in Oc∣di . , blacke Hades. Euripides calleih it Euritides in Aic-stide. ; the house without sunne light. Theognis calleth it Theognid s gnomae. the blacke gates. Homer saith, Homeri iad. 15. : Hades had for his share the darke mist (to dwell in). Plutarch sayth of Hades, Plutarch. de apud D lthos. , hee is darke, and master of the blacke night. The great and learned Etymologist of the Greeke tongue, whom your Lexicons refuse not in most words to follow, giueth this exposition. Etymologicon mega in verbo . , áides is that (place) wherein we see nothing. For Hades is an house of darkenesse. The place then, wherein nothing can bee seene for darkenesse, is properly by the masters of the Greeke tongue, and by the right Etymologic of the word, called Hades; and all your expositions and applications be forced and framed to your owne fansies without any iust cause or rea∣son, but onely to serue your owne humours. (The Apostles Defenc pag. 180. li. 30. tooke the word Gehenna from the Hebrewes, and vsed it properly for hell. Therefore they need not alter hades for that purpose; for which they had another proper word. Christ speaking to the Iewes vsed the word Gehenna for hell fire, which they best vnderstood; and Saint Iames writing to the Iewes dispersed saith, The tongue is in∣flamed of Gehenna. But the rest of the Apostles, that instructed the Gentiles, neuer Gehenna not v∣sed in speaking to the Gentiles. vsed that word, which the heathen at that time did not vnderstand; but where occasi∣on so required, they retained the word hades, and applied it to the place of torment, and to the ruler thereof, which things were not strange to the Gentiles. Since then the Euangelist and Apostles neuer ment to confirme or continue the erroneous fansies of the Pagans, and yet vsed their words; it is euident they vnderstood so much by these wordes, as was not repugnant to the Christian faith. Now hades with the Pagans was a place vnder the earth, where the wicked after this life were punished. This was agree∣able to the trueth, and for that cause the Apostles retained that sense and force of the word. That the soules of the iust were also kept vnder the earth in rest and ease; this was the error of the heathen; though both Iewes and Christians lighted afterwardes on that fansie. This the Apostles doe not ratifie in vsing the word hades, for that it was not consonant to the grounds of true religion, from which they neuer ment to depart by vsing any wordes accustomed among the heathen. And as the Gentiles, before they beleeued, vsed hades for the chiefe ruler of those Infernall places, so doth Saint Iohn not refuse to attribute that name to the diuell in his Reuelation. And so without your conceits or discourses we haue shortly and plainely the cause and course why and how the Canonicall writers concurred with the Grecians in vsing the word hades, and yet corrected their error. Howbeit I thinke the Apostles had chiefe respect to the Septuagint, who translating the Hebrew into Greeke (then rife in many lear∣ned mens handes) and expressing there the sense of Sheôl, vsed Hades, for the death of the bodie in the graue, and for the death of the soule in hell: after whose example the sacred writers of the new Testament speaking of the wicked, or ioyning death with hades, note what hades is besides the death of the bodie, which they intend by Thanatos. And therefore though Hades in the old Testament import the places of death for bodie and soule, I meane the graue, and hell; yet throughout the new Testa∣ment that word being alwayes opposed to heauen, applied to the wicked, or connexed with other wordes that signifie the death of the bodie, it must of force be taken for the power and place that killeth the soules of all men approching it, except onely Christs, to whom all powers and principalities in heauen and earth and hell were and are submitted and subiected. Defenc. pag. 181. li. 17. Hitherto wee haue tried the nature and vse of Hades, and haue found it to bee not properly hell, as you auouch; no, not when it is applied to soules of men deceased. And there∣fore also that it cannot be so vnderstood in Acts 2.27. where it is applied to Christs soule after he was dead: which yet is the onely place you haue to pretend. ] Hitherto you haue prated, what pleased you, and proued nothing; and notwithstanding your vaine euasions meere priuations, inuincible conditions, and plaine visible contradictions, Hades is found by the full consent of Christian and heathen writers to bee a place vnder the earth and in darkenesse; where the soules of the dead adiudged to that place were and are detained vnder the Dominion of the Diuell, though the Pagans in their wande∣ring from their trueth, imagined him to be a God, and dreampt of earthly pleasures there, to comfort their deiected spirits against the terror of death. And since Christs soule was not left in hades after death, as appeareth, Acts 2.31. what haue you, or any man liuing to say, why Christs descent to Hades, that is (as the Gospell expoundeth this word) to the Lucae. 16. place of torment, (of which it was impossible for him to be held, or to bee therewith touched,) should not bee iustly grounded on this place? [ wee may Defenc. pag. 181. li. 27. simply take hades for the inuisible state or place of the deceased. ] If for the place, then for heauen, where you say Christes soule was after death. And would Christ so greatly reioice that his soule should not be left in heauen? [ Ibidem li. 31. Otherwise we may take it simply for deaths force and power, supplying also the same wordes eis ton topon, or tên chôran hadou, in that place where the power and strength of death preuaileth and holdeth the de∣ceased How the defen∣der wauereth about Hades. soules from their bodies. ] You haue so many senses, that you haue neuer a good. First you tooke hades for a state or place, and then you supplied it, as indeed you must, with topon or choran, a place or region. And so your sense went round like a wheele. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in the place of place, or state which is not seene; that is not in heauen. Now you renew your strength to take better hold; and saie, Thou wilt not leaue my soule to the place of deaths power. Where we must note, that heauen (for there was Christes soule, as you grant) is by you appointed to be the place of deaths power, and so you haue brought vs the strength and power of death and dark∣nesse preuailing in heauen, and euen on Christes soule. [ Ibidem li. 35. This is the world of the dead implying nothing else but an estate opposite to our visible state in this world. ] Are the pla∣ces or states of heauen and hell nothing, but an opposition to our visible estate in this world? There are bodies both in heauen and in hell by the consent of the best Di∣uines, new and old. How then is their state opposite to our visible state? Moses and Elias were seene talking with Christ in the mount. What place will you appoint for them since they were visible? And if the world of the dead be nothing else but an estate opposite to our visible estate, then Christ after his resurrection relapsed often to hades, & to the world of the dead; for he was inuisible to all men as long as he staied on earth, but when and where he was pleased to shew himselfe. And if that be true which you your selfe doe say, that l in very deed hades hath properly but a priuatiue Defenc. pag. 17.8 li. 35. sense, and not any thing positiue in it, then your additions of place and region be repug∣nant to the nature of hades, except you can bring vs a place and region of meere pri∣uations, in which is nothing positiue; and consequently your varieties and exposi∣tions of hades be meere illusions, and haue nothing in them but lies and mockeries. For hades is a place below in the earth, and darke by condition, as wherein nothing is seene, as both Christians and Pagans affirme. Hades therefore is no mecre priua∣tion. If the soule of Christ then after death were in hades, it was not at the same time in heauen, for heauen is opposite throughout the Scriptures to hades; and your owne common and inuisible place of both is a priuate and palpable errour of your owne. Defenc. pag. 182. li. 1. li. 10. Last of all we may take Hades heere by a prosopopaea conceauing it to be (as it were) some person of vnresistable power taking away & withholding from hence all mens soules departed. This last way is not the vnlikeliest. ] You haue created vs new places of meere priuations, which neuer were, now you take vpon you to create some new persons of vnresistable power; and all this you confesse is your conceauing and drawing Saint Lukes wordes whither you list. But what hath the Christian faith to doe with these monstrous and impious conceits of yours? For euen here, where you speake of Christ, you conceaue as it were, some person of vnresistable power, which you call hades, that did and doth take his and all mens soules from hence. Had hades any power ouer Christ, which he could not resist? Will you beginne to play the Manichee in conceauing a power of euill vnresistable to the Sonne of God? and why runne you hunting after strange sen∣ses and significations of the word hades, when you haue the same Canonicall writer whose wordes you would interpret, expounding this very word in the Gospel, which he likewise wrote, as well as he did the Acts of the Apostles? The Luk. 16. vers. 23. place of torment, where the rich man was punished after death, Saint Luke in his Gospell expresly cal∣leth , hades. Would you wish any better expositor of Saint Lukes wordes, then Saint Luke himselfe, who telleth you that he calleth the place of torment for the wic∣ked after this life by the name of Hades? Put his owne exposition to his owne words, and you may soone see the trueth; if you haue not sworne to resist it. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in hades, that is the place of torment for the wicked. Against this exposi∣tion, though it be Saint Lukes, you bend your wittes; and though you feare no sha∣dowes, as you told vs euen now, hauing hades for your helper, yet you catch after shadowes, and cannot see the light of trueth, you beate your braines so much about figures and phrases, which haue no warrant but in your slender conceit and slipperie tongue. Howbeit let vs heere them, since you rest so assured of them. Defenc. pag. 182. li. 13. You obiect we must not make a figuratiue sense but where manifest need is. Heere is no need of a figuratiue sense: therefore heere ought to be no sigure to be supposed. I answer: First we graunt your conclusion. Whether of the two former waies we take hades, there is simply no figure at all therein. ] If you take hades for the place, where soules after this life are kept in darknesse and destruction vnder the earth, you make no figure indeed by the verdict of holy Scriptures; else, take it how you will, it is a figure, or a meere fiction of yours, which is woorse then a figure. For since hades by your confession is originally the place, where nothing is seene, if you take hades either for the state of soules in that place, or for the power, or person of him who is ruler of that place, you do neither of these without a figure. As for the priuation of this life, which must vsually be precedent before a man can goe to that place, because it is a place for the dead and not for the liuing, (some onely excepted, who descended to hades aliue); That is a passage to the place or state of hades, it is not the place or state of it selfe, since either of these is positiue and not meerely priuatiue, and expresseth the condition of soules receaued in that place, and not onely the want of this life. As for one common place or state of all soules deceased, this is your vnwise fansie, which hath no ground either in diuinity or humane learning, by reason you take the forsaking and lacking of this life, for a state or place of men departed, in which no man staieth; but is presently ca∣ried by angels good or badde, to the places of receit, where they remaine in ioy or paine, according to the difference of their mansions, which are either heauen or hell. Defenc. pag. 182. li. 18. Then your owne sense of hell in this place is cleane ouerthrowen by your selfe. For when∣soeuer Hades or Sheól doe signifie hell, it is indeed by a figure Synecdoche, where the whole is set for a part, which I haue prooued at large before, and particularly by Tremellius a suffi∣cient man for his Hebrew skill. ] Of Sheol Tremellius speaketh, of Hades he saith no∣thing; and his rule concerneth the vse of that word in the old Testament, where Sheol importeth both the graue and hell, he speaketh not of the new Testament, where ha∣des is distinguished in manifest wordes from Thanatos, death; and is by Saint Iohn made consequent after death. Since then hades in Saint Lukes wordes is a different thing from the death of Christes flesh, which was not left in corruption, and a place appointed for the soules adiudged to torments after this life, as appeareth by his Gospell; I make no figure in these wordes, Thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell, for all your large brags and weake proofes. And yet when I spake of no figuratiue sense, I thereby excluded all metaphoricall significations of the word hades, and not Synec∣doche which admitteth the sense to be proper as well in a part as in the whole. Defenc. pag 182. li. 24. Thirdly it seemeth conuenient, and also likelie to take hades heere by a Prosopopaea after our third sense before noted. Which kinde of figure supposeth as it were a person of that thing which otherwise the word properly signifieth. ] He that careth for no trueth, may new cast the Scriptures into what sense he will by emptie figures. To take the place for the persons possessing it, is not vnusuall in the Scriptures. And so S. Iohn saith, Reuel. 20. Hades (shall be) cast into the lake of fire, meaning the diuell and his angels, and not your em∣phaticall power of death. But this is nothing to Saint Lukes words, thou wilt not leaue my soule in hades, since it can haue no sense, that Christes soule should not be left in the diuell. The rest of the places, which heere you repeate, and apply them with seeming to your senses, we shall haue occasion after to rippe vp: there we shall speake farder of them. In the meane space you will prooue without figures, that in the words of Saint Luke expressing Dauids sentence, pag. 182. li. 38. there ought of necessitie to be vnderstoode a figuratiue sense. & pag. 183. li. 1. For take them literally (as I doe) and they impugne the grounds of faith and charitie, which is sufficient to cause a figuratiue sense in the Scriptures. ] I mar∣uell all this while, that hauing so sound exceptions against the literall sense, as you talke of, you spend so much time in trifles, and let the maine matters alone. This is woorth the hearing if you can performe what you promise: otherwise a mountaine doth hatch a mouse, which the prouerbe telleth you will mooue laughter. But how doth the sense, which I giue, impugne faith and charitie? Defenc. pag. 183. li. 5. Verily this your sense implyeth by the way and consequently, that a good and sinnelesse man (yea the best that euer was) woorthie of Paradise and the highest heauens, yet after death did goe to hell. And further that being in heauen, yet staied not there (as you say) but immediately came out againe to goe to hell. Againe that an humane soule being in the depth of hell, yet should feele no paines; and that being locally in hell, it should come out thence also: What can be more against the generall rules of the Scriptures then these things? ] You haue laboured heard, and caught a herring. With much a doe you haue found at length, that Christ was a good man; he is more beholding to you now then afore, when you told vs, he was all defiled, accursed, and hatefull to God for and with our sinnes. Your leasure did not serue you to thinke, that he was also the true and eternall Sonne of God; and therefore no force of death or hell could preuaile on his body or soule, farder then he was willing for the declaration of his humilitie, and manifestation of his power and glorie. Is it against your faith and charitie, that Phil. 2. all knees of those in heauen and earth, and hell, should stoupe and bow to the humane na∣ture of the sonne of God? Is your Creed so crazed, that you can not beleeue that Christ rising Coloss. 2. spoiled Principalities and powers, and made an open shew of them; trium∣phing ouer them in his owne person? Is grace so farre gone from you, that you may not endure to heare that Christ Ephes. 4. descended first into the lower parts of the earth, and then ascended (againe) on hie, and ledde captiuitie captiue, and gaue gifts to men, whereof de∣liuerance and freedome from all power and danger of hell and Satan were not the last nor least? But he was a man you say, though a good man, and therefore you thinke he must be subiected to the same straights, that other mortall and sinnefull men are, to feele paines in hell, and not to come out from thence. ] This, which you call faith, is in∣fidelitie against the Sonne of God, whiles you seeke to tie him with the same chaines of darknesse and weakenesse, wherewith wicked and sinnefull men are tied, that are adiudged to euerlasting damnation. To be condemned to hell is for misbeleeuers and misliuers; to destroy the power and strength of hell was meete only for the man∣hood of the Sonne of God. That he felt no paines there, and returned thence, were the smallest parts of his glorious triumph ouer hell and Satan. It was impossible as Peter teacheth, that the paines of death or hell should take hold on him, and his soule could not be left there. As for comming out of heauen to goe to hell to subdue and destroy the same, what more inconuenience is in that, then in comming from heauen to the graue, there to take vp his body, when he restored it to life? that wicked men condemned to hell cannot come thence, nor find ease there, I find it testified in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus; that the Sonne of God in his humane soule could not goe thither without abiding there for euer, and suffering the paines of hell as well as others; I find no such grounds in all the Scriptures. He saith of himselfe, Reuel. 1. I haue the keies of hell and of death; that is all power and command ouer them. He had power then not onely to free himselfe from your faithlesse doubts and dangers in hell, but to free all his elect from thence, and to 1. Co . 15. subiect all things, and enemies (and so the strength and rage of hell and Satan) vnder his feet. If the trueth of God bind you to beleene, that an Angell comming downe from heauen, cast the Dwell into the bottomlesse pit, and there bound him, and loosed him, as he was prescribed; doth not your faith serue you to confesse, that all power in heauen and in earth, and much more in hell, was giuen vnto Christ; and that as well ouer rebellious Diuels, as obedient Angels, who adored him when he was brought into the world, and serued him the time that he was in the world, and are not stronger then his humane nature, but re∣ceaue power from him as being personally God and Man? these be the grounds not of faith, but of ignorance, which faile vnder your feete, and shew that you build on Sand, which hath no force, when it commeth to be sifted. From the grounds of faith, which are none, you come to the circumstances of the place it selfe, and say, they are all against me; but I that hitherto haue tried you so false conceited in euery thing, will not trust you to be true-tonged in this, whatsoeuer you pretend. Sermo. pag. 169. li. 10. These wordes (of Dauid) thou wilt not leaue my soule in hades, nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption; I said, conteined a speciall prerogatiue verified in none, but in the true Messias and Sauiour of the world. To this you replie, [ Defenc. pag. 183. li. 25. I denie it, heere is no such prerogatiue mentioned. ] It is all one skill in you to denic trueths, and affirme false∣hoodes: you cannot doe the one without the other. And heere your fansies thrung so fast one on another, that they thrust ech other out of doores. [The maine scope of Saint Peters purpose in this place you doe not, or will not vnderstand, and on that er∣ror you build the rest of your reasons, which are all erroneous like the roote whence they come. Saint Peter, you say, Defenc. pag. 18. li. 37. & 17. intending onely in all this speach to shew the Iewes, that this Iesus whom they had slame was not now dead, but risen againe, plainely graunteth all this matter of Dauid, as well as of Christ. ] Heere are two monstrous falseshoods, on which all the rest of your running reasons are setled. It had been to small purpose for Peter to prooue to the Iewes, that Christ by them slaine was raised from the graue and resto∣red to life, if there he had rested, or intended that onely as you stifly auouch: what could he by this haue inferred more touching Christ, then any man might likewise of Laza∣rus, whom Christ raised from the graue? This therefore was not Peters scope, he had an higher and farder reach in that long Sermon of his, which he throughly expresseth afterward, and that was: Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a suertie, that God Act. 2. v. 36. hath made him both LORD AND CHRIST, this Iesus (I say) whom ye haue crucified. To conclude this, Peter doth not reason so weakely, as you imagine; Christs soule is ioined againe to his body, though they crucified him; ergo, Christ is the true Messias and Sauiour of the world. This were like one of your reasons, which haue nor head nor taile. But Peter endued with the holy Ghost, reasoned verie truely and suffici∣ently, and in effect thus. The prophesie of Dauid which neuer was nor could be ful∣filled in any, no not in Dauid himselfe, but onely in the Messias, that his soule should not be left in hades, nor his flesh see corruption, is fulfilled in Christ, whom you cru∣cified: he is risen Lord of all his enemies in his owne person, the sorrowes of death being losed before him; he is ascended vp to heauen, as Dauid likewise foretold of him, and there sitteth at the right hand of God, vntill all his enemies in the rest of his members be made his footstoole; and thence hath he shed forth this, which you now see and heare, euen the promise of the holy Ghost receaued of the Father for all his. Know ye therefore for a suertie, that God hath made him both Lord ouer all in hea∣uen, earth, and hell; and Christ, euen the annointed Sauiour of all his elect. Against this illation neither all the miscreants in earth, nor all the Diuels in hell can open their mouths. Where first we may see, that Peter resteth more on the manner and power of Christs resurrection, then simply on this, that his soule was reunited to his body, from which by death it was seuered. Secondly, he bringeth the words of Dauid to shew, that either part of the Messias submitted to death for the time, was to returne againe to life with greater glory; the flesh free from all corruption, the soule superiour to all destruction. Thirdly, that these things neither were, nor could be verified in Da∣uid, since Dauid saw corruption, as his sepulchre prooued remaining to that day, and Dauid was not as then ascended to heauen, much lesse made Lord ouer all his enemies. Defenc. pag. 183. li. 25. Heere is no such prerogatiue mentioned. ] If this were common to Christ with Dauid and others of the faithfull, how could Peter hence conclude, that this was not spoken of Dauid but onely of the Messias? Againe if this were no prerogatiue, what need was there, that Dauid should be a Prophet by speciall reuelation to know this much? and that which Dauid knew, was not onely this that Christ should rise to life againe, but the words are, that Act. 2. v. 30. God would raise vp Christ (after death) to set him on his throne; that is, to giue him an euerlasting kingdome, euen all power in heauen and earth, subiec∣ting all his enemies vnder his feet. So that simply to rise from death was no preroga∣tiue, nor proper to Christ; but to rise Lord ouer all, death and hell not excepted, this was peculiar to Christ, and not common to him with Dauid; and therefore must needes be a speciall priuiledge to the manhood of Christ, which is expressed chiefly in these words, Thou wilt not forsake my soule in hades, but bring me thence conquerer of all mine enemies. Defenc pag. 183. li. 35. You adde, no flesh (dead) was euer free from corruption but onely Christes, what then? ergo his soule was in hell? ] Why winch you, where no man toucheth you? doth any man say Christes soule was in hell, because his flesh saw no corruption, or rather that Dauids wordes are as plaine and peculiar to Christ in the one, that Christes soule was not forsaken in hell; as in the other, that God would not suffer his flesh to see corruption? and both being affirmed of Christ by way of speciall prerogatiue, why should not both be likewise performed in Christ? [ li. 38. were not some being dead raised to life againe, be∣fore their flesh putrified? ] The promise of God to Christ, that his flesh should not see Christes flesh could not pu∣trifie. corruption, doth not onely assure a speedie resurrection, but an impossibilitie, that any corruption could preuaile against his flesh: since the returne of his flesh to dust, to which all others are iudged, would bee the dissolution of his person, for the time, which by no meanes might befall him, his Godhead being vnited vnto flesh, and not vnto dust. In these words therefore of Dauid, the soule and bodie of Christ were appointed to be superiour to all contrarie powers, that is the soule to hell, the flesh to the graue; and from both was Christ to rise as subduer of both, that he might sit on his heauenly Throne, as Lord ouer all, not by promise onely as before, but by proofe also, as appeared in his resurrection. And yet so many dayes, as Christ did, lyeth no man in his graue without some taint of corruption, which in Christ was vtter∣ly none. Defenc pag. 184. li 7. It is a strange absurditie, still to abuse your Reader, calling this word hell, which indeede is nothing but death in effect. Againe to presume that we take it for Paradise, or heauen, or hell: when wee referre it alwayes to the generall state of the dead, and no farder immediately. ] Then when you expound the wordes of the Creede Christ descended to hades, your meaning is nothing in effect, but that Christ died, which was before deliuered in plai∣ned and shorter wordes; and so your exposition is an idle and obscure repetition. A∣gaine, hades in the new Testament is neuer taken for the death of the bodie, since it is annexed to bodily death, as a consequent after it: and so your acception of it is re∣pugnant to the trueth of the Scriptures. And where you will at no time haue Hades taken for Paradise, Heauen, or Hell, as here you pretend; when you thereby note the place of soules deceased, meane you they are neither in Heauen, Paradise, nor Hell? are you not a wise man to talke so much of an inuisible place; and when you come to the point, you will haue it no place at all? but you referre it alwayes to the generall state of the dead, and no farder immediately. ] An inuisible place you referre immediately to no place, and thus when you will be frantike or foolish, words shall loose their proper and plaine signification, and containe no more then pleaseth you. Shew vs a place, where soules deceased are besides Paradise, Heauen, and Hell; and wee will graunt, you may exclude these three by some pretence, when you spake of the place of hades: but if you cannot, then topos aides, a place vnseene, which you haue so much bowled at, will be a place in spite of your heart, and that immediately; and consequently will bee Paradise, Heauen, or Hell, whatsoeuer you presume or dreame to the con∣trarie. Defenc. pag. 184 li. 17. Christ had another inestimable cause to reioyce that he was raised to life againe, namely that he might fulfill his whole worke for our saluation, which before his resurrection and ascension he could not accomplish. ] When I told you, that Christ after death was to con∣quere Hell, and to free vs thence; you would needes defend, that Christ on the Crosse perfited our redemption, and wrought our saluation; and now you say, which I take to bee the truer, though you meane not to bee constant therein, that be∣fore his resurrection and ascension hee could not accomplish the worke of our salua∣tion. Defenc. pag. 184 li. 27. The text saith, God raised him vp, loosing the sorrowes of death; because it was impossi∣ble for him to be holden fast of it. Will you conclude from hence: ergo there were present sor∣rowes How Christ loosed the sor∣rowes of death. in the place where Christ was? there is no strength in this reason. ] There is more strength in it, then either you will acknowledge, or can answere. The sorrowes of bo∣dily death are all dissolued by the separating of the soule from the bodie. Then after death there are no sorrowes of bodily death. But God raised vp Christ, loosing the sorrowes of (Hades or) death. The sorrowes of death (by Peters wordes) were then loosed, when Christ was raised, because it was not possible for him to be held there∣of. So that this pertaineth nothing to the sorrowes, which he felt dying; they ended all with death; but the sorrowes of an other death, euen of death in hell, were loosed when he was raised, because it was not possible for that kind of death to take hold on him. Your two or three things, wherewith you would shift of the Apostles wordes, doe you no good. That God li 32. loosed death from him, are not the Apostles wordes; you make a gloze vpon your owne wordes, and not vpon the Apostles. Such libertie you take to change the text to serue your turne. The next is farder of from the reference of Peters words. God loosed the sorrowes of death (or Hades) at Christs rising, that is say you, because his death had beene most painefull, before his Soule was seuered from his body. So Peter talketh of Christs rising, and you wrest it to Christs dying on the Crosse. And here your hebraisme will not steede you. For God did not loose the sorrowfull death of Christ on the Crosse at his rising, but at his dying. And there∣fore you are wider of, then you were before. Thus then it followeth euen by the Text, that there were sorrowes in Hades, where Christ was, but they could not take hold of him. The sorrowes of Hades must needes be the sorrowes in Hades: otherwise if they were not in Hades, they were not the sorowes of Hades. As the ioyes of heauen are in heauen; so the sorrowes of Hades must be in Hades, where Christ was, and not where Christ was not. Defenc. pag. 185. li. 4. The very text implieth, that Christ was holden in this, which was loosed from him. ] Saint Austen saith you fitten. Snares may be broken and loosed, ne tencant, non quia tenuerunt, not because they haue taken hold, but that they should not take hold. [( ) you say is to be holden fast. ] Your Greekish conceits crossing Saint Austins iudgement, taste more of will then of skill. Kratcisthai hath many significations, amongst others it What Kratci∣sthai signifie signifieth to touch, to take, to hold; and in the the new Testament it is specially obser∣ued by those, that are learned, that it signifieth, prehendere or tenere, to take, or to hold. The Maries that went to Christes Sepulchre, meeting him as they came thence, Mat. 28. v , touched his feete, and worshipped him. When Simons mo∣ther in law was sicke of a feuer, Christ Mar. 1. , taking her by the hand, lift her vp. The rulers daughter of the Synagogue, Christ likewise, Matth. 9. tooke her by the hand, and the maid arose. Your Lexicons will tell you, that standeth often for to touch. Now if you may choose, what signification you will haue in euery word, you are no Reader, but an ouer ruler of the Scriptures. Howbeit we now see Saint Austin hath better warrant in the Scriptures for his tenere, then you were ware of. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hades. Defenc. p 185. li. 1 I say he was now in the same, wherein he was not left nor forsaken. ] I say the same, and by your owne saying conuince you, that if S. Luke by Hades heere signifie hell, as he doth in his Gospell; Christes soule was in hell (by your owne illation), in which it was not left nor forsaken. [ li. 12. But hee was in no sorrowes at all now. ] Then is Saint Austins assertion confessed by your selfe, the sorowes of death were loosed at Christes rising, not that they had taken hold on him, but that they should not take any hold of him, or so much as touch him. [ If he were in them, I thinke he should haue felt them. ] The Scripture saith his soule was not left , in (the place of) Hades: it speaketh not there of the sorrowes of Hades, as if Christ were not for∣saken in them. But God, as Peter saith, loosed them, when he raised Christ; that is, hee made Christ the subduer and dissoluer of them at his resurrection. [ li. 27. You mightily vrge that it is Austins collection, from this text. I perceaue your argument is from Austin, and not from Peter, as you pretend. ] It is better to imitate Austen and his collections, then to rest on your idle braine, as you doe; and when you haue cleane mistaken both the scope and wordes of the text, to range after butterflies. Howbeit if it had pleased you to looke better into the 169. and 170. Page of my Sermons, you should haue sound moe reasons there then Austins collections. But your answeres and disproofes a man may soone perceaue come out of the bottome of your pocket, for there is nei∣ther trueth nor learning in them. Defenc. pag. 185. li. 35. Austen missed in his translation of these wordes. Thus he readeth, solutis doloribus In∣ferni, quia impossibile erat teneri cum in illis: God raised vp Christ loosing the sorrowes of hell, because it was impossible he should be held in them. But the text hath loosing the sorowes of death, seeing it was impossible he should be holden fast, or strongly holden of it. Seeing there∣fore he fayled in expressing the text, no maruaile if his collection from it were wide. ] He that neuer saw water but the Themes, will thinke there is none other Sea. You neuer looke neither to the diuerse readings, nor significations of wordes in the new Testa∣ment, and that maketh you so hastely to pronounce, that Ibidem li. 33. Austins collection hath no ground nor reason in the text, but is wholly disprooued by it. Austen followed the auncient and receiued translation of the Church in his time, and missed not so much, as you imagine. For that Text hath two readings, some bookes hauing Thanátou death, Many Greeke copies haue the sorrowes of Hades. some hauing Hadou, which the old translator calleth infernum, the places below, or hell. Peruse the new Testament in Greeke of the larger volume printed by Robert Steuen at Paris Anno 1550. and see whether he put not Hadou ouer right this place in the margine, as standing yet in many copies. The Greeke Bible printed at Frankford, Anno 1596. consesseth the like varietie of reading. Athanasius vseth sometimes Athanas. in passion. & cru∣cem Domini. , hee loosed the sorrowes of Hades; and someties Athanas. in passion. & cru∣cem Domini. , the sorrowes of death. So doth Epiphanius: Peter saith, It was impossible (Christ) should be held Epipha. in Anchorat. , of it, that is of hades. And against the Arians. It is sayd by the Apostle, it was impossible that he should be held Idem heres. 69. contra. A∣riomanitas. of hades. The Syriack translation reuerenced for antiquitie and fidelitie, keepeth the word Sheiul twice in the foure and twentieth verse of this Chapter, and saith. Syriacatranst. Act. 2. v. 24. But God raised him vp and loosed the sorrowes deshiul (of Shool which Saint Luke calleth hades) because it was impossible he should be detained bashiul, (in Sheol or hades). The Arabicke translator doth the like. He retaineth in the same verse the word . hawwito twice, saying as Iunius rendreth it, God raised him vp, and scattered the sorrowes of perditien, because it was not possible that he should be cōquered of perdition. Where Iunius plainly yeeldeth, that this word in Arabicke answereth the Greeke word f hadou, not thanátou which appeareth also in the 6 verse of the same chap. Thou wilt not leaue my soule ph hawwito in perdition Which Saint Luke calleth hades: and in the 10 Christ was not left in perdition. So that Austen had some reason more then you knew, to follow the first translator concurring with many Greeke copies, that then were, and yet are extant, and with the Syricke and Arabicke translations, who followed the same copies with the Latin church. This text is cited in Ireneus: whom God raised, s lutis deloribus inferorum, quia non erat possible teneri eum ab eis, loosing the sorrowes of hell, because it was not possible for him to be held of them. Cyprian thus expresseth it. Impossibile quippe erat sanctam illam animam teneri ab inferis. It was impossible for that sacred soule to be held of hell. Fulgentius citeth it, Solutis inferni doloribus, the sorrowes of hell being loosed. Bede taketh both for one in this place. k Solutosper Dominum dicit dolores inferni, siue mortis. Peter saith the sorows of hell, or death were dissolued by Christ. Since then both are found in many Greeke copies, and neither can be reiected as false; the name of death (if you retaine it) must be so expounded, as it may not impugne the force of hades: and death, hauing a double power place, and subiect; as the death of the body heere on earth, and the death of the soule in hell heereafter; this later death and hell doe rightly match to∣gether, the sorrowes of which were losed by Christ, because it was impossible for him to be taken or touched by them. You quarrell also with the translation, which Austen followed, for saying, in illis in them; though that be the right intent of the text; and you sticke not to straine Peters words to what higth you list. So that you keepe the words, and alter the sense; and Austen keepeth the sense, though he vary somewhat from the words. For that was loosed, of which it was impossible Christ should be held, and euen therefore was it to be loosed, because he could not be held therein. But the sorrowes of death or hell were loosed. It was therefore impossible Christ should be held of them; I meane of the sorrowes of either. The sense then is rightly and aptly taken, though the plurall be put in stood of the singular; and Caluin himselfe in respect of the sense retaineth that change, though the words doe somewhat differ from the text. In this sense Peter saith, Christ rose, the sorowes of death being loosed, a quibus impossibile erat ipsum tenert, of which (sorrowes) it was impossible he should be held. Now if you or any man els can find vs those sorrowes after Christs bodily death, we are readie to heare you, for they were loosed, when Christ was raised: but if you cannot, as in vaine you haue profered to doe, then must the words be expounded, that though the soule of Christ after death were in hades, euen in the place of torment, where it was not left nor forsaken; yet the sorowes thereof could not touch him, but he loosed and scattered them, when he was raised to immortality, and heauenly power and glory. persuaded of this point, heare him againe in the same Epistle. Ibidem. Quamobrem teneamus firmissimè, quod fides habet fundatissima authoritate sirmata, quia Christus mortuus est se∣cundum Scripturas, & quia sepultus est, & quia resurrexit tertia die secundum Scripturas & cetera quae de illo testatissima veritate conscripta sunt. In quibus etiam hoc est, quod apud inferos fuit, solutis eorum doloribus, quibus eum erat impossibile teneri. Wherefore let vs most firmely hold that, which our faith hath being confirmed by most grounded authority, as that Christ died according to the Scriptures, and was buried, and rose the third day accor∣ding to the Scriptures, and the rest of those things, which are written of him in trueth most cleerely testified. Amongst which this is also one point, that he was in hell, and loosed the sor∣rowes thereof, of which it was impossible he should be held. This is such a resolution, that if you were soberly minded, and not phantastically conceited, as well in doctrine as in Discipline, you would beware how you crossed the faith of the whole Church with∣out more pregnant and euident matter, then you haue any; and not thinke it enough to shift with Poeticall fansies, metaphoricall senses, and palpable contrarieties, and falsities, such as few men would fall into besides your selfe. And as for the exposition of Peters wordes, which Austen leaueth indifferent, if it dislike any man; that con∣cerneth the place of Peters first Epistle the third Chapter, beginning at the 18. verse, How Christ in spirit went, and preached vnto the spirits in prison, who were disobedient in the daies of Noe: Which was the question proposed to him by Euodius, to whom he wrote his 99. Epistle. And of that he saith. Ibidem epi∣stola 99. Consider yet, least happely all that which Peter speaketh of spirits closed in prison, which beleeued not in the daies of Noe, omnino ad inferos non pertineat, sed ad illa potius tempora, quorum formam ad haec tempora transtu∣lit: pertaine not at all to hell, but to those times, which Peter compareth with these times. And after large discoursing how that comparison might stand, he concludeth with your words. This exposition of Peters words, if it dislike any, or doe not satisfie, quaerat ea In fine epi∣stolae 99. secundum Inferos intelligere, let him seeke (in Gods Name) how to fit the things (there written) to them in hell. So that his exposition subiected to other mens liking, did not concerne hell at all, nor Christs preaching there, but the preaching of repentance in the daies of Noah by the spirit of Christ; and if any man liked not that exposition of Peters words, he might seeke how to make Peters words agree with things done in hell, if he could tell how to performe it. Defenc. pag. 186. li. 16. Moe circumstances of this text (Acts 2.) do make affirmatiuely for vs: first Peter plain∣ly graunteth all this matter of Dauid, as wel as of Christ. ] But that I am well acquainted with your pertinacie, I should muze at this insolencie. Peter doth exactly proue, that this prophesie was neuer verified in Dauid, because Dauids flesh saw corruption, as was euident by his Acts 2. v. 29. Sepulchre remaining with them to that day. Since then it was not true of Dauids person, that he saw no corruption; he spake this as a Ibid. ver. 30. Prophet, know∣ing that God had sworne to raise vp Christ concerning the flesh, to set him vpon his throne. You may doe well to leaue this outfacing Scriptures and Fathers, it may seeme a shift for a time, but it will end with your shame. [ Defenc pag. 186. li. 24. By the whole text it is euident Peter had no reason nor purpose to speake to the Iewes of Christes soule being in hell. ] If you may be iudge, Peter shall say nothing, but what hitteth your hand right. It is more then plain How Christ must rise from the dead. by the whole purport of Peters speech, that he ment to prooue Christ to be raised vp as Lord of all his enemies, and Sauiour of all that obey him. To rise simply from death, was not sufficient to shew the eternitie and soueraigntie of Christs kingdome; but he must be raised as the only Lord, that should sit on Dauids throne, and haue all things in heauen, earth, and hell, subiected vnto him. From our enemies if hee could not deliuer vs, he could be no Sauiour of ours: he must therefore tread them all vnder his feete, when he rose from death, before we could hope to be freed from them by his force. And to this end Peter expresly maketh mention, that God scattered the sorrowes of death and hell before him, when he raised him vp, that all the faithfull might be assured, as Christ conquered and destroied the diuell in his owne person, when he rose from the graue, so he could and would doe the like for all his members by freeing them from the power of Hades, and conforming them to his death and resurrection. This God had promised to his people by his Prophet, saying: Oseae 13. I will The Iewes were promised their Messias should conquer hell. redeeme them from the hand of hell, I will deliuer them from death. O death, I will be thy death. O hell, I will be thy destruction. Repentance is hid from mine eies. This Dauid foretold the Messias should performe, in that his soule should not be forsaken (that is, left destitute of power or honour) no not in hell. Of this deliuerance from their enemies, and from the handes of all that hated them, Lucae 1. spake the Prophets, that were from the be∣ginning of the worlde. This was the oath, that God sware to Abraham, that they being de∣liuered out of the handes of their enimies, should serue him without feare, of sinne, death, or hell. This the Iewes beleeued, and expected in the Messias; and therefore neither were they, (I meane the elect among them) so Defenc. pag. 186. li 33. ignorant, vnbeleeuing, and stubborne, as you pretend, three thousand being conuerted with this one Sermon: neither was this so strange and vncouth a thing, as you imagine, being so often promised and pro∣phesied vnto them: Neither did Peter intend onely Christes resurrection, as you suppose, his chiefe scope being to shew them the strength and height of Christs hea∣uenly kingdome. And where you flourish, that this was Defenc pag. 186. li. 35. not subiect to sense, and without all example of the like in the whole law, and namely no figure foreshewing any such thing: these be obiecti∣ons meeter for perfidious Iewes, then for those that would seeme to be beleeuers. How many points of faith are not subiect to sense? Christes sitting at the right hande of God in glorie, will you not beleeue, because it is not subiect to sense, and without an example of the like, and no figure foreshadowing any such matter? Of Christes ascending to heauen, and his returne to iudge the quicke and the dead, haue you any exam∣ples or figures in the whole law? and yet it is no such hard matter to proportion our deliuerance from hell and Satan to the bondage of Israell in Egypt, and the ouerwhel∣ming of Pharoh and all his host in the bottom of the redde sea. The like might be said of Sampsons death, who being weake and bound slew all his enemies; of Dauid, and Goliah, of Daniell in the Lyons denne without harme, of Ionas lying in the Whales bellie, and such like, which though in all things they match not Christs con∣quest ouer Satan, and the destruction of him and his kingdome, as no figures can do, yet are they resemblances of that which you so much dissemble. Howbeit, as I said, of Christes birth, buriall, descending to Hades, rising, ascending, sitting in heauen, and comming to iudge, the law did not yeeld any expresse and visible figures, as it did of his death and sacrifice. Defenc. pag. 187. li. 9. We haue seene that Hades hath no such meaning in the Acts; which yet is the only place whereon you build. This were sufficient to end this argument: but yet it shall be good to trie whether any where hades properly signifieth hell. Verily it doth so signifie no where at all in the Scriptures. Yet I graunt it is and ought to be translated hell in two places, Matth. 16. v. 18. Luk. 16. v. 23. not that the word it selfe doth necessarily signifie hell, but because the circum∣stances heere doe require that meaning as the fittest and best for these particular purposes. ] We haue seene you beate your braines about Hades to make it any thing rather then tha tindeed it is both by the generall opinion of all Pagan Poets, and by the constant assertion of all the Greeke Fathers. We haue also seene you turne & winde your selfe, you know not whither; sometimes to haue it the place for soules departed this world, sometimes the state of such soules; sometimes the power of death, and sometimes the priuation of this life; and so to crosse and controle your owne conceits, that you could not tell where to set foote without falling. Now as he that is blinde, maketh no dif∣ference betwixt day and night, no more doth your wilfull, yet witlesse imagination perceaue any distance betwixt trueth and falshood. And hauing held your owne so well, that no shifting or shuffling can make you ashamed, you will now proceed to a farder triall of other texts of Scriptures, to see whether you can outface them with your fansies and figures, as you haue done them that be already ouerpast. I make no doubt, but if you may sit sole Iudge in your owne cause, you will quickly pronounce How hades is v∣sed in the new Testament. for your selfe; but if you must prooue as well as pronounce, you will make as many errors in your proceedings, as there be holes in a sieue. Howbeit you grant, that in two places of the new Testament Hades is and ought to be translated hell, not for that the word of it self doth so necessarily signifie, but because the circumstances require that meaning. Which is as much as if you said, there are two places in the new Testament, where hades is & must be taken for hel; neither can you with all your sleights & shifts auoid the same; the circumstances of the text so euidently demonstrate, the Euangelists tooke hades for hell. This by your leaue is some preiudice to your cause, and a bridle to your boldnesse, that the holy Ghost doth twice in the Gospels by your owne con∣fession vse hades for hell: and why he doth not vse it in that sense in other places, there is no impediment, but your proud will and waste wordes. Saint Luke is so cleere, as no exception can be taken to it, that Luke. 16. Hades is the place of torment after this life; and not one common place for all in paine and rest, with nothing but a ditch be∣twixt them. So likewise Christ promised, Matth. 16. the gates of hades should not preuaile against his Church; where if you defend, that the godly shall not haue their soules separated from their bodies by death, and yet hell may preuaile against their soules, you main∣taine two as manifest lies, as a man may vtter. Spite of your hart therefore, Hades must signifie hell in the 16. of Saint Matthewes Gospell; and so it doth in all other places of the new Testament, though the circumstances of ech place be not so preg∣nant as these are. And though in the old Testament Zuinglius & Mollerus obserue, The gates of Sheol, and Hades with the Septuagint, may signifie the danger of death approching, when it is referred to the godly, yet Hades in the new Testament neuer signifieth the death of the body, but it is a thing distinguished from it, and conse∣quent to it, as Saint Iohn in plaine words doth witnesse. his name, that sate on the pale horse, was Death, and Hades followed after him (or close to him.) Defenc. pag. 188. li. 3. The worthie Master Bucer noteth well saying; Diues non simpliciter scribitur esse in hade, sed in gehenna quia in torment is & flammis. The rich is not said to be simply in hades, but also in hell: because he is said to be in fierie torments. ] Master Bucere I honor for his learning and Religion, yet not so, that all his words are Gospell, or that I receaue him afore or against all the Fathers. And by his leaue in this place his wordes are out of square. He saith, The Rich man is not simply written to be in Hades; but if mine eyes were matches, when I read Saint Lukes Gospell last, it cannot be more simply writ∣ten then it is there. Luke. 16. , And in Hades, lifting vp his eyes. Now what place Hades is, the Euangelist expresseth, when he saith; being in torments. Had Hades beene vsed alone without explication, men might and would haue questioned this, as they doe other places, where Hades is vsed alone. But Luke noting afterward, what manner of place Hades is, euen a place of Torment, he prooueth exactly that Hades alone without any addition ioyned to it is vsed for hell in the new Testament. [Will you Pag. ibid. 8. conclude from this, as you doe about Abyssus? In the Reuelation and in Luke Abyssus is vsed to signifie Hell. Therefore it signifieth Hell in the Romanes, or therefore eue∣ry where properly it signifieth Hell. ] If Abyslus be the bottomelesse pit properly, and Abyssus in the new Testament is hell. hell be so called both in the Gospell and in the Reuelation; and no reason can be gi∣uen, why either the graue, or the Sea should properly be called bottomelesse; then since figures are not to be brought into the Scriptures but vpon necessitie, you must shew vs more necessitie, then hitherto you haue done, why hell may not be vnder∣stood in that place, or else we must cleaue to the naturall sense of the word, and leaue your figures, till you can better fasten them. That Abyssus may metaphorically be ap∣plied to other things, I neuer denied; but in Saint Pauls words to the Romans you must shew vs a pit, that properly is bottomlesse and opposite to heauen; and to which Christ descended, before you can exclude hell as not ment by the Apostle in that place. But of this I haue spoken before, whither I referre you for fuller answere Ibid. li. 11. death sometimes is the 2 death, ergo, it is so Acts 2. 24.] The sorrowes of the first death end with this life, and in the graue there is neither sorrow nor sense. But the sorrowes of that death, which Peter ment, were loosed at Christs rising to life. Those were there∣fore the sorrowes of another death, which must be the second death, which were loo∣sed and scattered with Christs resurrection. Againe the text hath there a double rea∣ding; death or hades. Then that death must be vnderstood, which is in hades, and not the sorrowes and paines, which are in this life; since hades by your owne confession is a state opposite to the world. Thirdly, the loosing of the sorrows of that death which Peter there intended, prooueth Christ to be Lord of all. But a simple rising vnto life againe prooueth no such thing. That therefore was neither pertinent nor sufficient for Peters purpose. Defenc. pag. 108. li. 16. Next let vs consider, and thou Capernaum; which art lift vp to heauen, shalt be brought downe to hades, to destruction. I say hades heere is not hell; but the destruction of Capernaum the city. Christ threatneth the city it selfe with destruction, and razing out from the face of the earth, which he meaneth by hades. The inhabitants the wicked people thereof he threat∣neth with damnation in hell. ] A graue and wise construction. Christ threatneth the stones and timber of the city with hades for not hearing his word, and regarding his miracles. In the 20 verse of this very chapter, where it is said, Matth. 11. vers. 20. Christ began to vpbraid the cities (whereof Capernaum was one) because they repented not; of whom spake Christ of the men, or of the wals of those cities? it may be you will find out repentance for stones; but our Sauiour nameth the place for the persons, which is as vsuall in the Scriptures, as any thing may be. Matth. 23. vers 37. Ierusalem, Ierusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest those, that be sent vnto thee. Christ speaketh not there of the housen, but of the Inhabitants. So doth he heere; for neither were the stones of this city capable of re∣pentance, nor exalted vp to heauen, nor intelligent of Christs words or works, nor punishable at the day of iudgement; all which things Christ heere ascribeth to Caper∣naum. Then if the stones of Capernaum were not exalted to heauen, they were not threatned by Christ, to be depressed downe to hades. And so hades heere was not threatned to the place, but to the persons. Now the persons by your owne confessi∣on, and by the righteous iudgement of Christ, were threatned with damnation in hell. Hades then in these words of Christ doth exactly signifie hell, and implieth as much as followeth in the next verse; It shalbe easier for the land of Sodom in the day of iudge∣ment, then for thee; Which is likewise spoken to the city, though ment of the vnbe∣leeuers there. Now if we make the former words interrogatiue, as some Greek copies haue them, and the Latin translator putteth them, And thou Capernaum wilt thou be exalted to heauen? You must giue will to stones, as well as sense, before these wordes can agree to the city it selfe. The Gospell of Saint Matthew translated into the He∣brew tongue long before Saint Ieroms time, (if it were not written in Hebrew by the Euangelist himselfe, as Ierom thinketh,) thus expresseth the words of our Sauiour. Hiero. de scriptur. Eccles. in Matt eo. Matth Euan∣gel. hebraicum. And thou Capernaum, wilt thou be exalted to heauen? adh Gehinnom têredi, thou shalt descend to Gehenna. And if that which you haue said all this while, haue any trueth in it, that hades is the priuation of this life or power of death; had the stones of Caper∣naum euer any life, that they might be depriued of it, and come vnder the power of death? Defenc pag 188. li. 30. It is not so often applied to other things; notwithstanding we may find it applied to other things, as where Plato (which you stumble at) sayth in hades were birds, beasts, trees, flowers fruits. I deny not but they had toyish cōceits, but wise mē may see how their meaning was these vnreasonable creatures being once brought to destruction, they yeelded hades to them also. ] Is it not enough to draw the Scriptures to Platoes fabulous conceits, but you must grosly falsifie Plato to fit your new made hades? Where Plato saith, there were Plato in Phe∣d ne ad finem. trees flowers, fruits, and beasts in hades, doth he not there also say, there were Plato in Phe∣d ne ad finem. men that liued long, and without sickenesse, and temples, in which the Gods dwell familiarly, and that Plato in Phe∣d ne ad finem. to see these things, is the sight of the blessed? Was this ment of destruction, as you expound The Defender abuseth Plato and Piutarch to haue a Sheol for all things. your hades; or was it a Pagans imagination of an earthly heauen farre aboue vs, in which he described all things heere found with vs, but in greater perfection and ex∣cellencie, then here on earth? thus wrest you not only the words of our Sauiour from their right sense, but you force other writers directly against their words and meaning that you may seeme in them to haue some shew for your licentious exposition of the Scriptures; as heere you plainely peruert Plato, to make a preface to your mistaking destruction in steede of perfection. The like wrong you offer to Plutarke, whose name you abuse without either word or syllable sounding towards your intent, as if you ment to ouerthrow the whole world to enlarge your hades. Defenc pag. 18. li. 5. Thus it seemeth Moses also vseth Sheol, when he saith men, women, children and cattell aliue, yea houses and riches went to Sheol. ] If Moses had sayd so, calling that vast and deepe gulfe of the earth, into which the tents and stuffe of Corah and his companie The defender proueth Moses and Dauid to haue a Sheol for sheepe and cattell. fell, Sheol; yet vnlesse you can prooue, that the citie of Capernaum was in like sort swallowed vp (housen and implements aswell as men) in the same deepe gulfe of the earth, Moses Sheol maketh nothing for the ruine and destruction of cities, where the buildings thereof fall to the ground, and lie on the ground, as in decayes they doc. But though you were both with Plato and Plutarke, thinking it no sinne to father your fansies on them, you may not doe the like with Moses without more blame then you will willingly beare. Moses hath no such wordes, that houses and riches went to Sheol, but they were swallowed vp in the cleft of the earth, as well as the rest; yet no∣thing went to Sheol, saue what was liuing, because the Scripture saith, they descended aliue to Sheol. Now if you can proue tents and houshold-stuffe to be aliue, you may chance to say somewhat, though not much, for your destroying Hades; but if that be false and absurd, then haue you no words in Moses to proue that riches went to Sheol or Hades. The words of Moses are plaine enough, and exclude as well your cattell, as your cofers from Hades. Nnmb. 16. vers. 30. If the earth open her mouth, and swallow them; and all that they haue, and they descend aliue to Sheol, you shall know that these men haue prouoked the Lord. Themselues descended aliue to Sheol, the rest was swallowed vp by the earth. vers 31. For the ground brake vnder them, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them, vers. 32. and their housen, (or families) and euery man that belonged to Corah, and all (their) sub∣stance. vers. 33. And they descended, and all (the men) that pertained to them, aliue to Sheol. Who pertained to them, the Scripture expresseth before, namely their wiues, their children, and their families. All their goods were swallowed vp in the gulfe of the earth, but of the men that were liuing and belonging to them, and not of their cattell, the Scripture saith; they descended aliue to Sheol. That they had any cattell at this time saue for sacrifices, it cannot be prooued: they did eate no flesh of beasts, nor 6. bread; Deut. 29. v. 5. garments they changed not, on foote they tra∣uelled, seruants they had to do their 11 workes and to beare their burdens: and yet were it granted, they had some cattell for carriage; they kept them not in their tents, which were swallowed vp in the cleft of the earth. These are Moses wordes to the people; Numb 16. vers. 26. Depart, I pray you from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, least you perish in all their sinnes. For their tents, with all that was in them, fell into the earth, and the persons descended aliue to Sheol. Now that they descended aliue to hell, not on∣ly the auncient Fathers, Cyprianus in resurrect. Christi. Cyprian, Hiero. in 4. ca. ad Ephes. Ierom, Basil. homil. quod Deus non est author ma∣lorum. Basil, August. in Psal. 54. Austin, Epiphanius in Anchorato. Epiphanius and others teach, but our new writers therein agree with them; as namely Pellican in Numerorum ca. 16. vers. 32. Aretius in his problemes de inferno loc. 162. Bullingere in 28. cap. Mat. de morte aeterna. Gualtere. homil. 89. in Esaiam. & homilia 158. in Lucam. Lauatere in ca. 15. Prouerb. vers. 24. So that you must seeke farder for your Sheol and Hades of vnreasonable beasts; since to descend aliue to Sheol, is the terrible iudgement of God against seditious rebels, and not against sheepe or oxen. Defenc. pag. 189. li. 13. After this maner also those sheepe in Sheol (which you turne to the worst) may be vnder∣stoode. ] If you can prooue there be sheepe in Sheol, we will giue eare to it; but if you tell vs nothing besides your seeming and saying, you shew your selfe to be like a sheepe out of Sheol. And here the Reader may see, how certaine a leader he shall haue of you: for in the halfe of this one side you deliuer six or seuen expositions & resolutions with no better warrant, then Pag. 189. It seemeth, & this may be; and yet with these you patch vp your predicament of Hades to containe all things, euen stones, cattell, and sheepe. But hath this any seeming worth the speaking of, that because Dauid saith of the wicked, like sheepe they lie in Sheol; you should conclude, ergo there be sheep in Sheol? you need not feare my turning of this to the worst, I cannot well turne it to worse, then it is. The wise man saith, Ecclesiast. 4. be not like a Lion in thine owne house. Doth that inferre euery man to haue Lions in his house? Psal. 28. Thy children, saith the Psalmist, shalbe like oliue plants round about thy ta∣ble. Hath euery good man therefore Oliue plants about his table? The wicked be in Sheol like sheepe; that is, either Matth. 22. bound hand and foote, and cast into vtter darkenesse, as sheepe are bound by all foure, when they are prepared for the slaughter; or voide of reason and vnable to helpe themselues like sheepe. That the word Sheol standeth next to sheepe in the Hebrew, and the verbe commeth after, Like sheepe in Sheol shall they be put; is the occasion, but no iustification of your error; since the verbe ( they shall be laid or put) hath no sense at all, except you repeate Sheol with the preposition after it, and say; they shalbe laid in Sheol like sheepe. So that vnlesse you will bee more then like a sheepe, you must leaue this kind of collecting. Your quoting of the Prophet Abacuk, and of the Prouerbes to shew that all things are in Hades, because neither Hades nor death can bee satisfied, is much like your sheepe in Sheol. Doe proud men couet chaulke and chibols, because in the same verse The defenders most absurd proofes for his Sheol of all things. it is said, they can be no more satisfied, then death and Sheol? I winne not; but ra∣ther as death and Sheol cannot be satisfied with bodies, and soules of men, which are things by them desired and receiued, no more can the proud oppressour be satisfied with the spoiles of many countries, but seeketh Abac. 2. v. 5. to gather vnto him all nations, and to heape vnto him all people, euen as death and Sheol doe. The place of the Prouerbes, which you bring, ioyneth with Sheol Prou. 30. v. 16. a barren wombe; and the earth, which cannot bee satisfied with water. And thence you can no more conclude, that all kind of creatures are in Sheol, then that they are in a womans wombe, which is barren. And but that I see men loose their wits, aswell as their senses in Hades, I should much maruaile, what were become of yours all this while, that speake not onely so impertinently and vnto∣wardly, but so absurdly and ridiculously, that men will stoppe their eares for very shame, if you will not stoppe your mouth. Defenc. pag. 189. li. 25. Yet we must comeneerer. You alleage two friuilous proofes of sheols signifying hell: viz. when it hath opposition to beauen, and situation as the lowest. For the situation of hell it is a secret, which Gods word hath not reuealed at all. Neither ought we to determine, as you very rashly doe, if hell be any where, there can be no doubt, but it must be in the lower parts of the earth. ] You, that haue ranged so farre both from the trueth, and from the matter in question, had need at length come somewhat neerer. The proofes produced by me, that Sheol, when it is opposed to heauen, or described to be in the lowest parts of the earth, im∣porteth hell, are not so friuolous as your follie maketh them, they are grounded on better and surer rules of holy Scriptures, then are your toyes of birds, and beastes in Hades. And first touching the place of hell below in the earth, which you labour to crosse as much as you can; though I before haue shewed the constant opinion of old and new writers, yet can I be content to reason it farder with you, because you and your friends are deuising new hels and heauens, euen as you are hammering of a new Hades. That hell is Luk 16. v. 28. a place of torment, the Gospel is euident. Being a place, it must be either in heauen aboue vs, or in earth beneath vs, except you will coyne vs a new Creede and say, God is creator of heauen, & earth, and of hell also, which is neither in heauen nor in earth. But you may not controle the Creede, except you will also cor∣rect the Scriptures. For that diuision of the created world into heauen and earth is wit∣nessed in infinite Esa. 37. Iere. 2. places of holy Scripture to be most sufficient. Hell then, since it is Gene. 2. v. 1. 4. & 14 v. 19 22. somewhere, must be within the earth vnder vs, except you will make it a part of hea∣uen ouer vs; and then must men ascend to hell, as they doe to heauen, and no longer Psal. 115. 121 124. descend. But the Scriptures are plaine, that hell is beneath vs, if they make mention at all of any hell, which perhaps you will call in question, as well as you doe the rest. Those, whom the Apostle calleth Philip. 2. , which stoupe to the power of Christs kingdome, and confesse him to be their Lord; who are they, but reprobate and con∣demned men and Angels? and where is the place of the punishment, but vnder the earth, since dead bodies can neither yeeld subiection, nor make confession vnto Christ? you selfe graunt, Defenc. pag. 189. li. 11. 12 Abyssus in the Scripture doth signifie a vast and deepe gulfe in the earth; and Abyssus is a place, whither the Diuels feare Luke 8. to be sent, & where they are Reuel. 20. chained and bound, when pleaseth God. Now euidently by the Scriptures from this Abyssus to the earth is an Reuel. 9 v. 2. 11. v. 7 17. v. 8. ascent no descent. And therefore the dungeon for di∣uels, which is hell, is vnder vs that are in earth, not aboue vs. The very name of Ge∣henna, vsed by our Sauior for hell, & confessed by you to be the most proper name of hell, doth it not conuince hell to be Gehennam ignis, a vale of fire? and where are there vales, but in earth? hell is called Ge-hinnon saith Peter Martyr, Petri Marty∣ris loci comm ∣nes Clas. 3. ca. 16. numero 12. because a vale being a low and deepe place doth resemble hell, quod infra terram esse creditur, which is beleeued to be vnder the earth. The pit & lake also, which are words vsed bythe holy Ghost to expresse hell, as ( Psal. 55. the pit of perdition, and Reuel. 20. lake burning with fire and brimstone ) doe confirme the same, since there are no pits nor lakes, but in the earth. By Moses God saith, Deut. 32. A fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burne to the lower Sheol, and inflame the foundations of the Mountaines. A man would thinke these wordes were plaine enough to prooue the lower Sheol to bee vnder the foundations of the hils, and that there burneth the fire of Gods wrath, with which the wicked are punished after this life. Of the Supra pa. 556. 561. 562. lower earth I haue spoken before, and prooued it to be equiualent with hell in the iudgement of the best Hebraicians and Diuines of our times. And if the lower earth be hell; then is hell without question in the lower parts of the earth. Bullingere saith. Bullinger. in Mat. cap. 28. de morte aeterna. As touching the place of punishment, where the soules and bodies of the wicked are tormented; the Scrip∣ture simply pronounceth, saying; the wicked descend to hell: vnde constat inferos esse infra nos Gualterus in homil. 158. in Lucam. in terris constitutos, whereby it is certaine, that hell is beneath vs, that abide heere on earth. We must throughly maintaine against scoffing Epicures, saith Gualtere, that there is a cer∣taine place prepared for the wicked, into which their soules straight after death, and their bo∣dies after the resurrection are receiued. Of which (place) Moses speaketh when he writeth, that Core, Dathan and Abiram were swallowed vp with the gaping of the earth, and descen∣ded aliue with all theirs to hell. But hauing treated thereof in sundrie places before, I will end with a verse of Sibyllaes prophesie (alleaged and allowed for a Christian trueth by Lactant. de diuino praemio li. 7. ca. 20. Lactantius, August. de ci∣uitaete Dei li. 18. ca. 23. Austin, and Prosper de promiss & predicat Dei part. 2. promiss. 28. Prosper ) where speaking of the last iudgement, and the signes and consequents of that day, she saith. . The earth gaping, (or cleauing in sunder) shall then shew (or lay open) the very Tartarean Chaos (or dungeon) of hell. Defenc. pag. 189. li. 31. You know the Apostle mentioneth the Aire, and that on high, as being the place of di∣uels. Notwithstanding farre be it from me to affirme, that hell certainely is not beneath. Yet your pretended Scriptures are meerely forced to prooue it. ] Your are lighted iust on Ma∣ster Broughtons argument, whose folly hath filled many sheetes afore, and now all his Religion, learning and reasons are emptied in the fourth part of one poore prin∣ted sheete of the lesser size of paper. Onely in this he shewed some witte, that he foresaw of such brainesicke stuffe, the least would be the best. But doe you vnderstand (for he is not worthy an answere, who can frame himselfe to nothing but to rage and riddles) that, which the Psalmist saith of the elect Angels; God shall giue his Psal. 91. An∣gels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all thy waies? or which the Apostle saith, Heb. 1. They are all ministring spirits sent foorth for their sakes, which shall be heires of Saluation? Doth this prooue there are no Angels in heauen? I troe not. Their office is here to attend and defend the faithfull, and yet heauen is the place of their habitation, whither they repaire with vnspeakeable celeritie, when their speciall seruice is finished. So the di∣uels haue hell appointed for the place of their condemnation, and thither they cary, and there they torment the wicked, as also they are commaunded to the deepe, and chained there at Gods becke; notwithstanding some of them are by Gods wisedome and patience permitted to wander in the ayre, and compasse the earth, to tempt the wicked, to trie the godly, to shew their power vpon the creatures, and bewray their malice against the Church of God. Wherefore the ayre and earth are the places of their seeing and assaulting vs, but hell is their home, to be remanded thither vpon any the least occasion, when pleaseth God. The griefe, terror, and torment of their in∣ward confusion, obscuration, malediction, and condemnation they alwaies beare a∣bout them, and within them; being no way freed or eased of that, wheresoeuer they goe; but they are often spared from the place of torment, which is the deepe, that they feare and shun, and yet know they must all thither at last to be terribly and eter∣nally plagued and punished there for all their hatefull impieties and villanies. They therefore (during the time of our warfare & conflict with them,) gouerne the Ephes. 6. & darkenes of this world, and 2. Rule in the Ayre, yet not all, nor onely there; they haue their chiefe, their powers and principalities, and their kingdome is not diuided against it selfe: yet the strength and terror of their kingdome is in hell, which they neither doe, will, nor can forsake, how fearefull soeuer the place be to themselues, as well for the present paines there, as for remembrance it shall be in the ende of the world their perpetuall prison, when their torments shall be exceedingly increased, and they not suffered to start from thence. The Scriptures which I brought you say are meerely forced to prooue Hell to be be∣neath. ] And why? because Sheol in the Scriptures by your conceite doth no where signifie hell? that Pa . 190. li. 5. Sheól is a vast and deepe gulfe in the earth, the bottome whereof we know not, your selfe admit. Then if the wicked dead or aliue descend to this vast deepe and vnknowen gulfe in the earth, whither go they I pray you; to the graue, or to hell? To goe aliue to the graue were somewhat strange, and yet the graue is no deepe nor vnknowen gulfe: but to descend aliue or dead to the bottom of the earth were more stranger, if hell be not ment by that gulfe in the earth. And if no more be ment by descending aliue to Sheol, then to fall aliue into a cleft of the earth & there to die: the terrible iudgement of God executed on Core and his companie for their rebellion, in the sight of all Israell, is vtterly cluded, since to fall into a deepe well or Cole-pit, and there to die, is as great a punishment as they suffered, and is a descending aliue to Sheol, as theirs was. And where is the fire of Gods wrath, Deuter. 32. inflaming the foundations of the hils, and burning to the bottome of Sheol? is that also in your gulfe of the earth; and not in hell, which Moses saith is the lower Sheol? And how can dead men, whose carkasses either lie on the earth Esa. 14. v. 19. vnburied, as the King of Babylon did, or are layed in their graues, descend to Vers. . Sheol beneath, or to Ezech. 32. vers 24. the lower earth; if neither of these import hell, but a vast and deepe gulfe in the earth, whither dead bodies neuer come? this for the Situation of Sheol; what say you now to the opposition of Sheol, to heauen? Defenc. pag. 189. li. 7. Euery opposition betweene Shammaijm the heauens or skies and Sheol doth not signifie the opposition betweene heauen and hell. Shammaijm thus placed signifieth the skies, not the very place of Gods heauenly glory in the presence of God, which in English we call heauen. ] When Sheol is opposed is opposed in the Scriptures to Shammaijm, the ground of the opposi∣tion Why the hea∣uens are com∣pared with hell in the Scrip∣tures. is either the heigth of the one, and the depth of the other; or the glory and fe∣licitie in the one, and destruction and miserie in the other. In those three places, Iob 11. vers. 8. Psal. 139. vers. 8. Amos 9. vers. 2. the perfection, presence, and power of God are expressed to be higher then Shammaijm, and deeper then Sheol. Now doth your religion serue you to restraine any of these three to the skies and the graue, and not to make them superior to the highest heauen, and deeper then the lowest Sheol? Shammaijm, you say, is the skie, as well as the heauen of the blessed. Shammaijm is the ayre also, where birds flie; as well as the skies. Doe you therefore thinke it a meete comparison for the presence or power of God, to say that, if you clime to the top of an high steeple, which standeth in the ayre, the hand of God can reach you there? as though it were enough for the perfection, presence, and power of God to reach to the skies, and you were skant resolued, whether you should graunt it to stretch any farder. But though you cauill with Hades, quarrell not with God. His perfection, pre∣sence and power are infinite aboue the highest heauen, and beneath the deepest Sheol; yea these comparisons do not match him, but leade vs to those places, where the most wonderfull workes of God are, to which no man liuing can ascend or descend; much lesse can we search or attaine to the heigth or depth of him or his perfection, pre∣sence, or power. And this is so plainely comprised in those places, that none but an irreligious and impious conceiter will doubt thereof. Iob. 11. Canst thou by searching sinke out God, or trace the Al ghtic to his perfection? saith the booke of Iob. the heauens are high (where his glory dwelleth) what canst thou doe? it is deeper then Sheol, how canst thou know it? Shall it sui ce in this place to say, the cloudes are high, the starres are higher, all which we see with our eyes, and can obserue their course: or must we cast our thoughts on the highest heauen, wherein we neither see nor know any thing, but what God reuealeth by his word, and which is the chiefest place of his perfection? So Dauid. Whither shall I flie from thy presence? If I ascend into heauen, thou art there: Psal 139. if get downe to Sheol below, thou art there also. If I take the wings of the morning and d d in the furd ct parts of the Sea (there) thy right hand shall hold me. Ascending to the highest, descending to the lowest, and going to the fardest, we passe through all pla∣ces. If God be then in the highest, in the lowest, and in the midst; whither can we flee from him, who is euery where? all places being here contained, the highest heauens are not omitted. The Prophet Amos hath the like both purpose and partition, where God assureth Israel, they cannot decline his hand, whither soeuer they could or would goe; whether Amos 9. to heauen on high, to Sheol below, to the bredth of the moun∣taines, or to the depth of the Sea. If out of his diuision you exclude hell or heauen, as places whither Gods hand can not reach, doe you not with your impertinent So∣phistrie broch vs a manifest heresie? wherefore Shammaijm here is any or euery part of heauen, euen as the earth is diuided by bredth and depth, into the hils, the Seas, and Sheol vnderneath, which is here conuinced to be in the earth, because God saith; though they digge into Sheol; teaching vs that the lowest Sheol is in the earth, which onely can be digged, and not either in water or aire, which can not be digged. As for the 14 of Esay, from which Christ deriued his threatning to Capernaum as resembling the pride and deseruing the punishment of the king of Babel; the words there are so direct for Shammaijm to be the highest heauen, euen the place of Gods throne, that you thought best to skippe it ouer with a false translation, and not to trou∣ble your selfe any farder. The pride of the King of Babylon, is there thus expressed. Esa. 14. v. 13. Thou saidst in thine heart, I will ascend to heauen, and will exalt my Throne aboue the starres of God. 14. I will ascend aboue the higth of the clouds, and wilbe like the most highest. 15. But thou shall be drawen downe to Sheol; euen to the sides (or lowest parts) of the pit. Shammaijm comprising three regions at least; the clouds, the starres, the place of Gods throne; the king of Babylon in his proud ambition said, he would ascend aboue the higth of the clouds, aboue the starres of God, and would exalt his throne like to the most highest. I hope Shammaijm here, to which the king of Babylon would ascend, was nei∣ther the clouds nor the starres (they both are by name excluded:) and consequently not the skies, as you fasly translate the Prophets words; but it was the resemblance of Gods throne, and the place of his glory, to which that proud tyrant aspired. Neither ment he there to be one of Gods Saints, as you would childishly chalenge your op∣ponent, but what place of glory others get at Gods hands by obedience and humility he would in his arrogant heart assume vnto himselfe with rebellion and emulation of Gods greatnesse; euen as Adam and Eue neuer ment to be Saints, when they accep∣ted the Diuels offer, Genes. 3. ye shalbe as Gods, but desired no longer to be subiect to God, and sought to get a similitude, if not an equality with God. So did the King of Babel affect to be like the most highest; though he were fardest from it of all others. For the Prophet doth not in these words expresse, what the king of Babylon was indeed, but what his arrogant spirit conceaued in thinking there was no God greater then him∣selfe. This monstrous pride of his being the higth of all impiety and blasphemie, what reward in your conscience was it worthy to haue? a plaine no being any longer a∣mongst the liuing? which you say Daniel affirmeth of Pag. 189. li. 22. the Messias; or a iudgement proportionable to his wickednesse, that is to be cast downe to the bottom of hell, for exalting himselfe to the top of heauen? Your spinning of cobwebbes about Pag. 190. li. 21. an inglorious destruction, is no way sufficient for this offence, except you meane destruction of body and soule in hell, with the sight and shame of his folly: and so if you ioine the vtter and eternall destruction of his person and his pride, you agnise Sheol to be hell, as I doe; and haue not the witte to see, that when a man is taken hence to that terrible and intolerable vengeance, all worldlie things first faile him, and the remembrance of his forme: plenty and glory augmenteth the griefe of his present penurie and misery. Els how auoide you contra∣diction as well to the trueth, as to your selfe in your two signification of Sheol? Sheol opposed to Shammaijm, you say Pag. 190. li. 4 5. signifieth not hell the place of torments, but a vast and deepe guise onely, or pit in the earth, the bottome where of we know not. If you deriue this vast and deepe gulfe in the earth, from the warrant of holy Scripture, I must aske you; first, how many of these gulses the scripture admitteth to be in the earth? & next, what vse there is of them? The Scripture mentioneth the lower Sheol indeed, so called in respect of the higher, which is the graue, common to the bodies of good and bad. Other Sheols in the earth the Scripture knoweth none. Now for whom is this lower gulfe in the earth prouided? for men? or for oxen and sheepe? which you were pla∣cing there euen now by warrant pretended from Moses and the Psalmist, but that you fouly mistooke the words of both. When God openeth the earth to swallow vp men, and all that belongeth to them, as he did to the rebels in the wildernesse, he hath roome enough in the earth to couer and close that, which doth not descend to Sheol, without your vast and deepe gulfe. If you confesse this vast and deepe gulfe in the earth, to serue for wicked men after death, then come you neerer to the Scriptures, but as neere to hell. For Dauid saying vnto God;" Thou hast deliuered my soule from Psal. 86. the lower Sheol; declareth the lower Sheol to be a receptacle for the soules of such, as God doth not shew mercy vnto. Salomō saith of such as haunted harlots, Prouerb. 9. Her guests are in the depth of Sheól. Moses telleth you, Deut. 32. The sire of Gods wrath burneth to the lower Sheól. In the lower Sheol then are the soules of the wicked, and fire there burning for them. If your vast and deepe gulfe in the earth be all one with this, we know the place to be hell and the vse thereof the punishment of the wicked. If it differ from this, you must tell vs by the word of God, wherefore it serueth. For that a vast and deepe gulfe in the earth should be nothing els, but an abolishing of Pag. 190. li. 9. any visible creatures hence or that this should be the most proper sense of Sheol, and your vast and deepe gulfe a resemblance thereof, this hath neither top nor toe. If Sheol be properly nothing but a priuation, how can it be a vast and deepe gulfe in the earth, or what proportion or similitude hath the one with the other? These are therefore nothing but your fic∣tions imagined of your owne braine to delude the Scriptures, and to auoide the lower Sheol indeed, which is the place of torment for the damned. How Capernaum was exalted to heauen, whether in her owne proud conceit after the example of the king of Babylon, of whom Esaie speaketh; or whether Christ ment, that by reason of his often preaching and working miracles amongst them, the kingdome of God was in the midst of them, but not receaued nor regarded by them, which some thinke to be the meaning of this place: I stand indifferent, so long as we keepe Sheol opposite to heauen, I meane not to the clouds, nor to the skies, as you would shift the matter, but to the place aboue, where the way of life is, and the bright∣nesse of Gods glorie, that thereby we may conceaue in the lower sheol darknesse and death for euer, euen as in the higher sheol, both are for the time. Prouerb 15. The way of life, saith Salomon, is on high; (neither in the clouds nor starres, but in the seat of the bles∣sed, euen in heauen) to him that declineth Sheol below. Where speaking of eternall life, (since bodily life is heere on earth) he warneth vs, that eternall death is in sheol below. The rest of your stuffe is not woorth the sticking at. For what if God by Ie∣remie threatned Babylon, that though Ier. 51. v. 58. her walles were thicke, and her gates high, the one should be broken, and the other burned: and though she should mount vp to heauen by raising her walles neuer so high, yet her destroyers should come from God: Doth this being spoken of the walles and gates, which should be razed, prooue that her walles and gates should descend to Sheol? Where hath the prophet any such words of the walles, gates, or buildings of Babylon? And for you to expound Sheol by what you list, is a larger commission, then I know any you haue. I haue no doubt, but walles and gates cannot reach vnto the clouds, much lesse to the starres, and therefore hea∣uen applied to them standeth for that which riseth on high in the aire; but that the pride of the king of Babel, lifted it selfe aboue the clouds and starres; I haue prooued by the plaine report of the Prophet, against which no exception can be taken. Defenc. pag. 191. li. 13. Next let vs view the Corinthians. O death where is thy victorie, ô hades, ô destruction, or ô power of death, where is thy sting? Heere it is referred to the destruction of the whole and intire persons of men taken away by death out of this world. ] What is now be∣come of your world of soules, which you so often vrged as properly signified by ha∣des? What is become of your vast and deepe gulfe in the earth; which sheol and hades did import, as yon told vs but euen now? Nay, what is become of your destruction of stones, and their descending to Hades. which you said was threatned to Capernaum? Are all these out of date, and in euerie new place must you be forced to frame vs a new Hades? You will rest somewhere at last, if it be possible for your vnquiet head to haue or like any rest. Well now then hades is the li 19. destruction of the whole person of man taken out of this world by death. And why should not hades heere be taken for hell? [ The whole scope and drift of the Apostle heere, is to speake of the resurrection of the bodie, and you graunt it.] What then? The Saints receauing their bodies endued with im∣mortalitie, may they not reioice in their deliuerance from corruption, and insult, as hauing then the full victorie, ouer hell and death? li. 24. Our full deliuerance from hell and from Satan is obtained in this life, as it is written, we being deliuered from our enemies, and from the handes of all that hate vs. ] We are so deliuered from their hands or power, (which is all one) that we shall not need to feare them; but we are not yet actually freed from their snares, since we daily must pray, not to be ledde (or left) into temptati∣on; neither are all our enemies yet fully destroied; since as the Apostle saith; 1. Cor. 15. vers. 26. the last enemie, that shall be destroied, is death. If all Christes enemies were put vnder his and our feete, he should no longer raigne as Redeemer and Sauiour of his Church; vers. 25. for he must raigne till he hath put all his enemies vnder his feete, and then shall vers. 24. deliuer vp the kingdome to God, euen the Father, which is not before the end. And yet were all things granted which you intend, it helpeth you not one whit: for may not the saints giue thankes for all euen then, when all is fully finished, though part be before per∣fourmed? And may they not iustly reioice against all the power of Satan, I meane sinne, hell, and death, when the last enemie is in sight conquered, though they be for∣merly freed from sinne, and fully deliuered from the danger and feare of hell? Defenc. pag. 191. li. 31. Your speech is very bad and scandalous, where you say the bodies of the Saints lying in their graues, are in the diuels walke. Pag. 189. li. 31. For then the graues, where bodies lie senselesse, are a part of hell properly taken. ] You told vs euen now, that the aire on high was the place of diuels, & thinke you much that vpon occasion I should say the graues vnder the earth are within Satans walke? The booke of Iob saith, Iob. 1. Satan compasseth the earth, and walketh in it. And Peter confirmeth the same, saying, He 1. Peter. 5. walketh about, seeking whom he may deuoure. So that the diuels walke (for all your saying) is farre larger then hell. And if our Lord and master most truely said of the woman, which was crooked, and could not lift vp herselfe in any wise, that Luke 13. Satan had bound that daughter of Abraham, lo, eighteene yeeres; may not the dead bodies of Abrahams children be in Satans walk, as well as their liuing bodies be in Satans bands? And you, that be so curious in other mens speeches, doe you looke to your owne? Doe not you defend, that the soules of the blessed in heauen may be said Pag. 168. to be in inferno, and 166. vnder the power of death, where∣of the Diuell hath the rule by the Apostles doctrine? [ Pa. 191. li. 28. we being heere truely iustified by Gods grace are fully freed, and deliuered from all the power of our enemies. ] Are we so fully freed, that we can neither sinne, nor die? or are sinne and death no parts of Satans power? When I speake of a full conquest ouer hell and death, in both parts of man, soule and bodie, which is not performed before the bodie rise to glorie; you turne it, as if I pro∣fessed our redemption from hell to be imperfect till the last day. And when I menti∣on with Saint Paul the redemption of our bodies from corruption, which shall not be before the resurrection; you would inferre thereupon, if you could tell how, that the bodies of the Saints Pag 192. li. 1. remaine subiect to the power of hell, to the curse of the law, and to the claime of Satan. Thus you runne on, like a riotous spaniel, chalenging vpon euery foote, but finding nothing. With like wit and trueth you inferre vpon my wordes, where I say the death of the body was inflicted on mankind as part of the wages of sinne, that therefore Pag. 192. li. 3. the godly must pay a part of their owne redemption and satisfaction for sinne; and then Christ was not our onely and absolute redeemer. But which way doth this follow, can you tell? punishment for sinne is in our persons neither redemption, nor satisfaction for sinne; in Christs person it was both. Know you not the difference be∣twixt Christs person and ours? li. 9. But I say pa. 216. that the bodies of the dead Saints are in the possession of hell, and in the handfact of hell. ] In wresting and wrangling is all your grace. Where some auncient writers seeme to say, that Christ deliuered Serm. pag. 216. some of the Saints out of the present possession of hell; all the defence (I said) that could any way be made out of the Scriptures to ex∣cuse this, was to take hell improperly for the sting and wound of bodily death, which Satan the ruler of hell procured to man by sinne. For sinne, death, and corruption are the workes of the Diuell, which Christ came to dissolue. Wisdom. 1. 2. God made not death, as the wiseman obserueth, but created man without corruption; and through the enuie of the Diuell came death into the world. This then being one of the wounds, which Satan through sinne gaue vnto our first father and all his ofspring, this is not perfectly cu∣red, but with the resurrection of our bodies to eternall life, though the poyson of this wound bee in the meane time allayed, and the danger secured. And thus, whiles I seeke to mitigate other mens wordes, and to extenuate the name and power of hell, vnderstanding thereby nothing but the dissolution of mans life, and corruption of mans bodie, which Satan occasioned by sinne; you make the Reader beleeue, I take the name of hell properly for the power and right, that hell hath ouer the bodies of the wicked, and teach, that the Saints are not deliuered from hell, till their bodies rise from death, which when you list you can find to bee refuted elswhere by me; and therefore to be no part of my meaning heere. How death is an enemie, which must be destroyed, aswell as sinne and hell, we neede not your commentarie; except it were stoared with better Diuinitie. It hindreth the Saints. you graunt, Pag. 192. li. 22. from enioying their appointed felicitie, yet as a peaceable and quiet stop. Ascribe you this peace and quietnesse to their bodies voide of life and sense, or to their soules staied from the full fruition of eternall glorie by that meanes? And troe The Saint in heauen most eanestly desire their bodies. you, the soules of the Saints be well and quietly content to lacke their appointed fe∣licitie? not at all to desire it, or not earnestly to pray for it; were plainly to loath it, and not obediently to expect it. Wherefore they exceedingly affect, and instantly pray for the destruction of this enemie, that keepeth their bodies in dishonour and corruption, and hindereth their spirits from enioying that glorie, which shalbe reuca∣led in the last time; which appeareth by their vehement prayer in the Reuelation; Reuelat. 6. how long, O Lord, holy and true, doest thou not iudge, and auenge our bloud on them, that dwell on the earth? Where they in heauen seeke not reuenge on them, for whom they prayed in earth, but they expresse their continuall and ardent desire for that day, when they shall be wholy conformed to Christ their head. And when they are willed to rest for a season, they gladly submit themselues to the will and wisedome of God; but meane while they hate death, as an hinderer of that blisse and ioy, which they so much loue and long for; and shall no doubt reioyce exceedingly, when this last enemie is swallowed vp in victorie, as the rest were before. But let death be an enemie which way you will, how doth this conclude, that Hades here (1. Corinth. 15.) in no sort sig∣nifieth hell? Defenc. pag. 192. li. 28. The very text seemeth thus to expound it selfe, saying, where is thy sting O Hades? the sting of death is sinne. Where the later seemeth a direct exposition of the former, noting these two wordes, (Hades and death) as Synonymas for one thing, being applied to men. ] When you talke of the text of holy Scripture, you should not leaue the wordes, that are ex∣tant in all our printed copies, retained and alleaged by the best and most of the Greeke Fathers, as likewise of our new writers; and cleane to the single conceite of some one man taking vpon him to correct all the printed copies, that euer he saw, and of his owne authoritie to alter the Originall. I doe not therefore by your, and his leaue admit this for Saint Pauls text; since it is his priuate change of the wordes in the Greeke against all the copies, that are either manu-scripts or printed at this day. His owne confession is this. Bezae annot at. in Corinth. 1 . vers. 55. Contrario ordine legunt hunc locum, non modo Graeci omnes co∣dices, quos inspeximus sed etiam Syrus & Arabs interpretes. Not onely all the Greeke copies, that we haue seene, but the Syriack & Arabick Interpreters read this place in a contrarie or∣der; that is, they put these words ( ô Hades where is thy victorie? ) in the last place, which you set in the first; and the other words ( ô death where is thy sting? ) they set first, which you will haue to be last. Thus then stand the Apostles wordes, cleane contra∣rie to that which you bring. ; O death where is thy sting? O Hades wher is thy victorie? And in this order doe In 13. ca Oseae Luther, In 1. Cor. 15. Erasmus, In 1. Cor. 15. Zuinglius, In 1. Cor. 15. Peter Martyr, In 1. Cor. 15. Caluine, In 1. Cor. 15. Bullingere, In 1. Cor. 15. Gualtere, In 1. Cor. 15. Aretius, In 1. Cor. 15. Hemmin∣gius, In 1. Cor. 15. Hyperius, In 1. Cor. 15. Osiander, In 1. Cor. 15. Marlorate, and I know not how many more, both keepe and cite that text in Latin, vbi tuus, mors, aculeus? vbi tua, Inferne, victoria? Where is thy sting, O death? where is thy victorie, O hell? And touching the Greeke co∣pies and Fathers, that are auncient, and obserue the same order of the wordes for the Apostles text, we haue Origin. li. 5. in ca. 5. ad Roma. Origen, Athanas. de. incar. verbi Dei & in pass. & cruerm Domini & contra omn s qui negent ser∣uat. sumps sse primitia, x na∣tura nosira. Athanasius, Nazianz. de san pasch ate. Nazianzene, Nyssenus de 40 Martyribus oratione 2. Nyssene, Epiphanius heresi 66. contra Manichees. Epiphani∣us, x Chrysostome, x Oecumenius; and though the translatours of x Theodoret and x Theophylact retaine the wordes of the old Latin Bible in this place for the text, yet there is no likelihood that these two in their own tongue varied from the rest, specially Theophylact who in his commenting on this place maketh an exact difference betwixt death and Hades, for that Hades containeth soules, and deadbodies, where the Latin in both places hath death, and no more. The Latin Fathers, you will say, doe all follow the old Latin translator, and he pla∣ceth the word, sting, last as you do.] There is no one place in the new Testament, that hath receiued more varietie of translating and ordering then this. Tertull. de re∣surrectione carnis. Tertullian citeth it thrice in one booke after this sort. Vbi est, mors, aculeus tuus? vbi est, mors, aculeus? Where is thy sting, ó death? Where is thy strife, ô death? reading for , strife for victorie. Cyprianus ad Quirinum li. 3. ca. 5 . Cyprian citeth it in the same order and words, as Tertullian doth. Ambros. in 1. Corinth. 15. Ambrose returneth neerer to the Greeke, and saith; vbiest, mors, stimulus tuus? vbi est, mors, victoria tua? ô death, where is thy sting? ô death, where is thy victorie? euen as the interpreter of Hiero li. 5. ca. 13. Ireneaus doth, though he inuert that order in an Idem. l. 3. ca 8. other place, and In 1 Corin. 15. follow the Septuagint, which Hiero. in Osca ca. 13. Ierom, and other of the Latin Fathers also doe. And least you should thinke, as you doe, that the old translator, who very scrupulously keepeth the word Infernum for Hades through out the Bible, did heere translate it by death, you shall see that Eusebius lighted on a Greeke copie, where the word Thana∣tos, death, was twice repeated, and the parts changed as they stand in the Latine. Eusebius de demonstrat. E∣uang li 4. ca 12. ; ô death where is thy victorie? ô death where is thy sting? Elsewhere the same Author keepeth the word, death, twice; but al∣tereth the order. Ibidem li. 10. ca. 1. ; ô death, where is thy sting? ô death where is thy victorie? In this diuersitie of reading and relating the Apo∣stles wordes, it is eche mans duetie not to runne which way he will, though perhaps he may bring some one president for his purpose, but to hold that for the true and Au∣thenticke text, to which most copies and writers agree. And therefore since your ex∣position of hades & death to be Synonymas, dependeth vpon your priuate changing the order of the apostles words, I see no need to make any answere to it, specially when as the Latin translator might, and no doubt did light on such a copie, as Eusebius did, which had the word, Thanatos, death, twice in that place. Otherwise it could not be that he, who was ouer diligent in all other places, would be so negligent in this. A farder answere to the frame of your wordes, as you haue placed them, if any man for his satisfaction would receiue; the name of death, which compriseth both tempo∣rall and eternall death, and by sinne ga the victorie of our first parents, (but that the elect by Christ haue againe recouered the victorie ouer all sorts of death) giueth an∣sweare enough. For sinne, which the Apostle heere calleth the sting of death, did not onely sting Adam and his ofspring with the death of the body, but also with the death of the soule: (the wages of sinne being death in all parts of man, and in all places of his abode); and therefore sinne of his owne nature and force, till it be par∣doned by Christ, is the sting no lesse of hell, as in all the wicked; then of bodily death, as in all the Saints. And heere by the way the Reader may obserue, that for aduantage you are content to make bodily death in the Saints the sting of sinne, which I trust is as much, as the punishment of sinne, since it stingeth vnto death. Defenc pag 193. li. 2. The graue of the wicked is not to be named or reckned hell properly. ] Whom doth the Apostle make to speake in that place; the godly, who haue the victorie ouer sinne, hell, and death; or the wicked, ouer whom those three get the conquest, since the wicked doe not rise from death to life, as the Saints doe; but their bodides rising out of one pit fall into a farre worse, which is the bottomlesse pit of eternall death & damnation? Defenc pag. 193 li. 7. Hades is aduersary to the resurrection. But hell heere would not be aduersary to the re∣surrection. Therefore hades heere is not hell, no not to the wicked. ] Doth the Apostle dis∣pute heere of the resurrection of the wicked to death euerlasting, or of the Saints to celestiall blisse and glory? though it be true, that the bodies of the reprobate shall rise vp from the earth where they rested; and be cast with their soules into euerlasting fire; yet the Apostle heere debateth and prooueth the raising vp of Christs members to beare the image of the heauenly Adam, and to haue death swallowed vp in victory. Looke on the Apostles reasons and comparisons in this whole chapter, and if any one of them naturall or theologicall, agree to the resurrection of the wicked, then let the Reader thinke you haue some vnderstanding of this place, which now is vtterly none. 1. Cor 15. vers. 7. If Christ be not risen, your faith is in vaine (saith Paul) and you are yet in your sinnes. vers. 22. As in Adam all died, so in Christ all shalbe quickened: vers. 23. euery one in his order. Christs as the first fruits, then those that are Christs, at his comming. 41. There is one glory of the Sunne, another of the Moone, and another of the Starres. 42. So also (shalbe) the resurrection of the dead. The body is sowen in corruption, 43. dishonor, and weakenesse, it shall rise in incorruption, in glo∣ry, in power. 54. When this corruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortalitie, then shalbe performed that, which is written, Death is swallowed vp in victo∣ry, (and the Saints shall haue iust cause to say) 55. ô death, where is thy sting? ô hades (hell) where is thy victory? 57. Thanks be to God, which hath giuen vs victory through our Lord Iesus Christ. How farre are these things from all communion of the wicked? though hell at that day shalbe increased and aduanced, (as you call it) with the bodies of all the wicked, yet may the godly Saints (of whom the Apostle speaketh) most iust∣ly reioice against hell and death, as being now swallowed vp in victory, that is, vtter∣ly defeated of all force to kill the body any more, or to stay the soule any longer by meanes of death from her crowne of glory. For the victory which God will giue vs through Christ our Lord against hell and death, is not yet full, till our soules and bo∣dies be brought to eternall blisse. And were it possible (which is not) that the soules of the Saints could for euer enioie the rest and blisse, which now they haue without their bodies; euen in this want of one halfe, Satan should still haue some victory ouer them, that is, ouer their bodies, though not ouer their soules. Wherefore the victory is then full, when both parts of man are freed from all things, that hinder their hea∣uenly inheritance. And this the best interpreters confesse. Peter Martyr, Peter Mar∣tyr in 1. Corint. 15. Interim vi∣deas ordine quodam nostros i micos recenseri: insernum siue gehennam, mortem, peccatum & legem. In the meane while thou must see our enemies (heere) numbred in order: hell or gehenna, death, sinne, and the law. Christ hath gotten the victory ouer all these, and the fruit of that victory redoundeth to vs. Bullinger, Bullingerus 1. Corinit. 5. The Apostle declareth, that the victory ouer sinne death and hell is gotten by the might and merits, not of the saints, but of Christ, to whom the saints must yeeld all glory, praise, and thanks. And this explanation hath very ex∣cellent degrees. First hell to wit, the excrlasting punishment whereby the dead are condem∣ned to the second death: the second is sinne, which is the force of death and hell. For by sinne came death. The third is the law, the strength of sinne. The law being then taken away, the force of sinne decaieth; sinne being abolished, the power of death ceaseth; death being disar∣med hell is ouerthrowen. Hyperius, Hyperius in 1. Corinth. 15. If death shall then haue no more rule, it followeth that neither hell shall preuaile against the godly. For this must be vnderstood of them, since the wicked shall not be deliuered from the power of hell. In these words, ô death where is thy sting? ô hell where is thy victory? either God, as conquerer; or the saints, as giuing the praise of the conquest to God, in a sort reproch death and hell, with the losse of their power and strength. And very aptly is death put first, and then hell. For men die before they be cast into hell, in which the wicked tast the second or eternall death. Moe might be brought; but with wise men there can be no question, that the Saints at the last day being then fully freed from all their enemies, may giue thanks to God for the victory purchased by Christ a∣gainst them all, hell and Satan not excepted. Defenc. pag. 193. li. 16. Also we are to note that the Apostle heere plainely alludeth to that of Hoseah. O Sheol, o kingdome of death, I wilbe thy destruction, not ô hell. The Prophet speaketh this to comfort Israel in their captiuity against their continuall destruction, and raizings out of this world. ] You will soone brest other men, that will beard the Apostle in this matter so boldly as you doe. Indeed you and some others thinke it a glory to take part with the Iewes con∣tradicting all that the Euangelists & Apostles alleage out of the law and the Prophets touching Christ and his kingdome; and you vouchsafe to yeeld to the holy Ghost speaking in them, no more skill or vnderstanding of the old Testament, but to allude to it, and as it were to play with it, when the true literall sense of most places, as you thinke, is farre from that, which they intend. But this Iudaizing, whiles you would seeme, more then others, to smatch of a little Hebrew, I for my part detest; and pro∣fesse to the world, I take that euery where to be the true and direct meaning of Moses and the Prophets, which Christ and his Apostles collect from their words. And therefore Ierom saith of this very place, as I say of all others. Hiero. in 13. ca. Os ae. That which the Apostle referreth to the resurrection of the Lord, nos aliter interpretari nec possumui, nec audemus, we neither can, nor dare interprete otherwise. Yea so well learned you are in the circum∣stances of the Prophets speach, that you pronounce, [ Pag. 193. li. 19. The Prophet speaketh this to comfort Israel in their captiuity, shewing that now the Lord would stay his iudgment that way and death should now destroy them no more; Whereas Israel was then in no captiuity, as appeareth by the 16 verse of the same chapter; Samaria shalbe desolute: And God had no meaning to tell the people, he would now stay his hand, and they should be destroied no more, because in the two next verses he threatneth, They should be vers. 15. spoiled, dried, and vers. 16. desolate, they should fall by the sword, their infants should be dashed in pieces, and their wo∣men with child should be rip . Wherefore except you will haue the holy Ghost to speake contradictions, as your manner is, you must acknowledge, that amidst the fearefull troubles, destructions, and desolations then and afore denounced by the Prophet a∣gainst the whole kingdome of Israel, God doth comfort his elect amongst them, that whatsoeuer became of their bodies in this affliction approching, he had his time, when he would vtterly destroy the power of all their enemies, not onely freeing them by death from tyrants and persecutors, but sauing them from death and hell by his annointed Messias, who should be a death to death, and a destruction to hell. And as this was the greatest comfort and onely hope, that Gods children in their miseries could expect or desire; so the Apostle keepeth right the Prophets meaning, and sheweth the time, when all this shalbe performed; that is, when all teares shalbe wiped from the eies of Gods elect; and all their enemies sinne, death, and hell troden vnder their feete. In this comfort and promise, as hell was the chiefest enemy, so, of all others, that must be conteined within the limits of Gods assurance, and their deliuerance. In vaine are all other promises of grace, whiles that enemy standeth vnuanquished. And therefore as we most needed, so God most promised, and Christ most performed the destructi∣on of hell aboue and afore the death of the body, which you so much talke of, and from which you giue to the reprobate a resurrection, as well as to the godly, which is but a cold comfort to him, that duely considereth it. Defenc. pag. 193. li. 31. Next we come to the Reuelation. First I haue the keyes of Hades (that is of destructi∣on or of the kingdome of death) and of death. Or we may take them as two words for o and the same thing. That is both of them for death. What shew of reason haue you to bring in here Christs power ouer the damned soules in hell? because there is mention else where of the key of hell; therefore the key of Hades here is the same. What colour of reason is there in this? Euen so much as you can not resist. For if it be certaine, which the Scrip∣ture confirmeth, that Christ hath the keyes of both, that is as well of hell as of death; and gate them both by submitting himselfe to death; And Hades in the new Testa∣ment How Hades is vsed in the Re∣uelation. is taken for hell, as hitherto we haue seene; and euen with Saint Iohn the wri∣ter of this Reuelation it is a different thing from death; what can Hades be here but hell? That Christ by his obedience vnto death had all power in heauen, and earth, and hell giuen him, the Apostle is very plaine. Philip. 2. Christ became obedient to the death, euen the death of the Crosse. Wherefore (or for which cause) God highly exalted him, and gaue him a Name aboue euery name, that at the name of Iesus euery knee of those in heauen, on earth, and vnder the earth should bow, and euery tongue confesse, that Iesus is the Lord. As he himselfe also witnessed, when he said, after his resurrection, Matth. 28. all power in heauen and earth (that is, in all places and ouer all things created) is giuen vnto me. Since then with∣out question Christ had the keyes as well of death and hell, as of heauen; and so that sense of his words is most true; let vs see which of our expositions hath best rea∣son. When Iohn for feare fell as dead at Christs feete, would Christ to comfort Iohn in that plight, say no more but that he Pag. 193. li. 36. himselfe was once dead, and now aliue, and had power to die no more, as you expound Christs words? how could this strengthen or restore Iohn, that was euen dead for feare? or did Christ rather encourage Iohn not to feare without cause, seeing he himselfe not onely was risen from the dead, but had all power ouer death and hell, that is the keyes of both to dispose of ech mans life and Soule at his pleasure? when therefore Christ, that had all power of life and death, Saluation and damnation laid his right hand on Iohn to protect him, and bad him not feare, but write the things, which he saw; had not Iohn iust cause to cast away all feare, and cheerefully to obey the voice of him, that was so able and ready to rescue him from all feare and danger whatsoeuer? Christs power ouer death, you will say, was enough to preserue Iohns life, and therefore mention of the key of hell was superfluous. Iohn was to see, and write the things, that were, and after should be in heauen, earth and hell, as is euident in his Re∣uelations: yea the opening and shutting of the bottomelesse pit, the chaining of Satan there, the comming of the Locusts and the beast from thence, and the lake of fire and brimstone euerlastingly burning there, and who should be throwen into it, were to be reuealed vnto him. Lest therefore the sight of these things should amaze Iohn, or the reporting of them should want credit with vs, Christ did professe, which is most true, that he had the keyes, that is all power euen ouer these secret and fearefull places; so that Iohn should neither shrinke at the vision, nor we distrust the Relation of them. And though my reason of mentioning here the keyes of hell be such, as you shall ne∣uer counteruaile; yet doe I not runne proudly and peremptorily, as you doe, in mine owne conceits; I haue the iudgement of the best Interpreters, old and new, that haue intermedled with the opening of these reuelations. Andreas Arch Bishop of the same Caesaria, that Saint Basil was, and within 600. yeeres after Christ, though you skorn∣fully reiect him, as you doe that venerable writer Bede; expounding these words of Christ, . I haue the keyes of death and of Hades: saith; , that is of the death of the Body, and of the Soule. Primasius expoundeth them thus. . I haue the keyes of death and hell, idest, Diaboli, & totius corporis eius, that is ouer the di∣uell, and all his body, (or societie.) The exposition of the Apocalyps extant in Saint Au∣stens works; thus. In Apocalyp. homil. 2 inter era August. Tom. 9. I haue the keyes of death and Hell; because he that beleeueth, and is baptised, is deliuered from death and from hell. Haymo thus. Haymo in 1. Apoc. By the name of the keyes is shewed (Christs) eternall power; by death the diuell is vnderstood, by whose enuy death came into the world. And by hell, his members that shall come to the torments of hell. Lyra. Lyra in 1. Apoc. I haue the keyes of death and of hell; that is power to deliuer thence the iust, which Christ did in his Resurrection; and to inclose there the wicked, which he shall chiefly doe in the last iudge∣ment. Of our new writers, Bullingere. Bulling. in Apocalyp. con one. 6. Christ then hath the keyes of death and hell, be∣cause whom he will, he deliuereth from the perpetuall damnation of death; and whom he will, he suffereth iustly to remaine in that perill of damnation. Christ hath the supreme gouernment of the house or kingdome of God; to quicken whom he will, and to draw them from hell and damnation; and whom he will damne, with his iust iudgement to destroy. For he hath most full power ouer death and hell. He conquered and disabled both, as it is Osee. 13. and 1. Corinth. 15. Aretius. Aretij proble∣mata de claui∣bus Lcclesiae, lo∣cus. 61. He that resembled the Sonne of Man in the Apocalyps, said; I haue the keyes of hell, and death, hoc est in damnatos, damnandos, & damnatorum loca; that is ouer those that are damned; or shall be damned; and ouer the places of the damned. Chytreus. Chytreus in 1. ca. Apoc. Christ deliuereth his Church from the captiuitie of death and hell, & casteth the wicked in∣to the Dungeon of hell and of eternall death. For he hath the keyes, that is most full power ouer death and hell. Sebastian Meyer whom Marlorate followeth. Meyer in ca. 1. Apoc. I haue the keyes of death and hell, that is power to pardon sinnes, which being abolished, both death and hell are depriued of their strength. Osiander. Osiander in 1. ca Apoc. I haue the keyes of death and hell, that is, it is in my hand to kill, and quicken; to damne and sauc. These men had both learning and rea∣son to say, as they did; neither will any pick them ouer the pearch, as you doe Andreas Caesariensis and Bede, but he that hath neither. Defenc pag. 194. li. 3. Againe one sitteth on a pale horse, whose name was death and Hades (destruction, the world of the dead, or the kingdome of death) followed after him. This in no wise can be hell: because the Text addeth, power was giuen them to slay with the sword; and with famine, and with death, and with wild beasts. Hell slayeth none in that sort, these are not the weapons of hell. ] You lacke three Gennets to set your three poppets on horsebacke. If by these three, destruction, the world of the dead, the kingdome of death, you meane in Pag 181. li. 38. Pag. 192. li. 38. effect nothing but death, as you vse to expound your selfe, that is expressed before, and Saint Iohn saith, Hades followed after him. Doth any thing follow after it selfe? Againe, will you bring your world of the dead, that is, all the Soules in heauen and hell, to ride on Hades followeth aster death. horse-backe, and that in the shew and shape of one person? you would make good dumb shewes, you haue such pretie fansies, to make death goe first alone, and his kingdome to come after him. But though you play with Saint Iohns visions, you haue no warrant to mistake Saint Iohns words, and to muster your owne errors vnder his colours. Saint Iohn doth not say, that power was giuen to death and Hades to kill with the sword, with famine, and with death, as you dreame; but Saint Iohn hauing represen∣ted the sword, or warre by the red horse verse 4. and famine by the blacke horse, verse 5. and all sorts of diseases and pestilences by the pale horse, verse 8. he saith, power was giuen to them, that is, to the riders on these three horses to kill the fourth of the earth with warre, hunger, and sicknesse. And because these three come not one after another, but when God is greatly prouoked with the haynous sinnes, and impenitent harts of men; therefore Hades, hell, is said to come after the third, in respect that the rebellions of men against God are ripe for hell, when no plagues can conuert them from their wicked waies. This the auncient Expositor in Austens works obserueth. Hell followeth after. Homil. 6. in Apoc. Idest, expectat deuorationem multarum animarum: that is, it expecteth to deuoure many soules (slaine with these plagues.) Bede saith. B da in 6. ca. Apoc. It may simply be vnderstoode, that such as are spiritually dead, eternall punishment doth there follow. Lyra saith the meaning is, Lyra in 6. ca. Apoc. post cursum vitae praesent is statim captus est ad poenam gehennae. After the course of this present life, (the wicked) is straight way caried to the torments of Gehenna. Bullingere saith. Bulling. ho∣mil. 31. in ca. 6. Apoc. If thou vnderstand this wholy of the place of the damned, they are surely throwen headlong to hell, as many as being here consumed with diseases, die without faith and repentance. Right∣ly therefore doth hell follow after death. Marlorate. Marlorat. i ca. 6. Apoc. And Hades followeth after (death;) This seemeth to be added to terrifie hypocrites, that they may certainly know Gehenna is pre∣pared for them, except they repent in time. Osiander. Osiand. in ca. 6. Apoc. Hades followed after death, that i , the Images of some Insernall punishments followed. It was permitted to death to take a∣way not onely by the sword, and famine, but by the pestilence, and , is, and to de∣liuer a great part of them to be tormented in hell. For hell followeth the death not of the god∣ly, but of the wicked; which repent not their contempt, and persuing of the Gospell. Th se after their corporall death descend directly to hell. Full wisely you adde, where I say, God sometimes vseth the diuell to slay the bo∣dies of wicked men, whose soules are presently caried to hell; that this is not the tor∣ments Pag. 194. li. 13. of hell in the place of the damned; as if hell had not gates preuailing here on earth against the wicked, and snares here laid to catch them, that shall be damned; and the diuell did not walke about deuouring the soules of the reprobate, and in many of them, both soules and bodies. Wherefore if this be your best skill in points of Di∣uinitie, you may goe to your old occupation, which is filling your paper with phra∣ses, when you lacke matter: The Scriptures need not your sound of wordes, without any sense, to declare their meaning. Shew first substantially, where the Scriptures vse these idle variations of yours, and then we will after argue how well they sitte the cir∣cumstances of ech place; otherwise it is madnesse to admit your imaginations for the meaning of the holy Ghost. As you now confesse you neuer esteemed your old obiection (though you earnestly vrged it) of the fourth part of the o Pag. 194. li. 24. hell at once, because it is no new thing in the Scriptures to take a or an vncertaine: so when you haue throughly reuised all th se lle and trifling con∣iectures now made against the vse of the word Hades for hell, you may as , all as one. Defenc. pag. 194. li. 24. The last place is death and Hades (that is the dominion or power of death) were cast in∣to hell. I said it was absurd to say hell was cast into hell: You answer, it is more , the world of soules was cast into hell. Where you doe but dallie with words. For that terme, the world of soules. ] Then yet at last you be wearie of one of your whitlesse phra∣ses; you may as well recall the rest, as this. Howbeit your head was so busied with this reuocation, that you remembred not Saint Iohns words, which you tooke vpon you to alleage, and on which you grounded the sorce of your fond obiection. Pag. 195. li. 3. [ It soun∣deth, senselesse your eares. (you proclaime) many sort to say, that hell shall be cast into hell. But it is more senselesse & truethlesse in mine, that you plainly falsifie S. Iohns The Defender Saint Iohns words, & on that errou groundeth all reasons. wordes and then refute your owne follie. Saint Iohn hath no such words, that death and hades were cast into hell; though you cite them in S. Iohns name, and quote Reuel. 20. vers. 14. for them; his wordes are, Reuel 20. vers. 14. Death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. Where if we take death and hades for those, that are the Rulers and gouernours of death and Hades, as the Scripture often by the name of the place intend the persons; then is there no absurditie, but an euident veritie in this, that the d ll and his Angels shall be cast into perpetuall fire, or into the lake of fire. And so you sport your selfe all this while with your owne falsitie and vanitie. And yet haue you not auoided that, which you would so same decline, that it is more absurd to say, Your world of s les wast cast into hell; for then the soules of all Gods Saints must be cast into hell fire; which blasphemic how your backe will beare, I doe not know. But you renounce that exposition of Hades, and say You vse not that terme. Then blush at your former pre∣sumption, and later obliuion, that hauing told vs, this was the true and authentike and familiar of you now deny that euer you vsed that terme. Looke in your woorthie Treatise, pag. 97. and tell me whether those wordes be there or no. Treat. pag. 97. li. 6. The masters of the Greek tongue doe vse hades in proper sense onely in generall for the state of the dead the world of the dead, THE WORID OF SOVLLS departed, indifferently and indefinitely meaning aswell these in eternall ioies, as those in paines. And ouer right these wordes in the Margine you say; In Margine Ibidem. The true and authentike and familiar sense of Hades. I leaue you now to your owne deuotion, whether you will recant, or continue this proper, true, and authentike exposition, that Hades, (meaning indifferently and indefi∣nitely as well th se in eternall ioyes, as those in paines ) was cast into hell. Defenc. pag 194. li 38. There is no absurditie to say, that at the last day the power, kingdome and dominion of death shall be cast into hell, that is eternally abolished. ] We aske for trueth and sense, and you giue vs emptie wordes and phrases. You tosse these termes, as Souldiers do pikes, and then you say, there is no absurditie in them. You haue beene squaring & round∣ing of Hades, sometimes for the vnseene place of soules, sometimes for the meere priua∣tion of this life, sometimes for the world of the dead in generall, which compriseth the soules & bodies of all that be dead, be they good or bad; somtimes also for the power, dominion, and kingdome of death, which you enlarge aswel to heauen, where the Saints are; as to hell, where the damned are; Now which of all these shall be cast into hell? not the place: for then not onely hell shall be cast into hell, which you say soundeth senselesle in your eares, but heauen also, which is most senselesse in mine: not the world of the dead; for so should the bodies and soules of all the Saints be throwen in∣to hell fire, which I trust you dare not endure. Perhaps your meere priuations shall be euerlastingly punished in hell, the danger is not great for them, since nothing can be no where, nor feele no paine, and so not in hell. But after many deuices and adui∣ces, you say, the power and dominion of death shall be cast into hell. That shall vtterly cease at the resurrection, when all soules are ioyned to their bodies againe. How then shall that, which wholy and finally ceaseth, be cast into hell? You meane it shall bee Pag. 195. li. 1. eternally abolished. This is an erection of a new hell; and no part of the old. Happy were the damned, both men and spirits, if they might be cast into this new hell of yours, that is vtterly and eternally be abolished. But these be mockeries in themselues, and falsities against the Christian faith. That which is cast into the lake of fire, shall there euerlastingly burne, and not consume, but dure in perpetuall torment. Shall your dominion of bodily death euerlastingly burne in hell? And shall it also feele the force of that fire? You must then make Hades a person; for besides persons no∣thing shalbe cast into hell fire. And if it be a person, it must be a diuell, or a man; ex∣cept you will find out a place for it amongst your sheepe and cattell, that you sent aliue to Hell. But such childish and peeuish deuices are not worth the refuting. The Rea∣der may see, what it is for men to forsake the learned and sound expositions and asser∣tions of auncient Fathers, and betake themselues to their fresh and new fansies, of which thy cannot tell what to make, nor how to speake. Defenc. pag. 195. li. 4. Though you meane the containing to be put for the contained, hell for the diuels of hell, as one Andreas and Bede likewise vnderstand it; yet neither you, nor they (it seemeth) doe consider, that this place assigneth them to hell, at the last day, who yet then are not in hell. li. 7. But the Diuels are in hell alreadie. Therefore the diuels cannot be vnderstood heere by Hades. ] Can a man be so sottish, vnlesse hee were besides himselfe, as not to find, that all this while he refuteth his owne falsifications of Saint Iohns wordes, and not any po∣sition of mine, nor of these two learned writers, whom he disdaineth as not conside∣ring where the diuels are before the day of iudgement? They doe not say the diuels shall then be cast into hell; this is your coltish conceit, from which you will not de∣part; but into the lake of fire prepared (as our Sauiour pronounceth,) for the diuell and his Angels. And how come you now in your heate so hastily to determine, where hell is, which not long since you called rashnesse in me? you told vs ere while, Pag. 189. li. 31. The A∣postle mentioneth the aire on high, as being the place of Diuels. Put to this that, which heere you say; the Diuels are in hell alreadie; you meane the place of hell, or else you The defender maketh three hels instead of one. say nothing against Andreas and Bede, whom you would confute, as not considering where the Diuels are. Doe not you then determine, that hell is in the aire on high, and so not onely condemne your selfe of rashnesse by your owne verdict, but gainesay the Scriptures, who testifie that the diuels desired Christ Luke 8. not to commaund them into the deepe? Yea by this resolution of yours the face of the earth, where wee liue, is hell; since the diuels are heere also, and Iob 1. compasse the earth and walke therein. So that if we let you alone, in steed of one hell you will make vs three; the aire, the earth, the deepe, since in all these three it cannot bee denied but the Diuels are. And yet for all your tripping so light on the toe, the diuels may and shalbe at the last day cast into hell, that is affixed to the place and torments there, from which they shall not stirre, as now they doe, whiles the iustice of God doth suffer them to vphold and encrease their king∣dome here on earth. And where you vouch of your hades, that it shall at the last day of iudgement be throwen into hell, that is eternally be abolished; as you conceaue and deriue your Hades, that day shall enlarge it more then euer before, and so continue it so reuer. For all visible creatures in heauen and earth (saue men) shall after that day haue no more any being at all; yea the first heauen, and the first earth (shall) passe away, and there (shall be) no more any sea; which will greatly enrich your generall Hades, that containeth the Pag. 183. li. 25. 29. destruction of vnreasonable things; and the perishing of visi∣ble creatures from hence, as the proper Etymologie thereof admitteth. Nay if the Pag 178. li 28. very na∣turall Etymologie of the word according to Grammar doe properly signifie, NOT SEENE ANY MORE IN THIS WORLD, as you affirme it doth; then all, both good and bad, be they in heauen or hell, shall after the day of iudgement be properly and euer∣lastingly in Hades. For they shall neuer be seene any more in this world, whose 1. Cor. 7. fi∣gure passeth away without returning, and giueth place for euer to the world to come. And this your Hades, which you would cast into hell there to bee for euer abolished, shall by the naturall Etymologie, and proper signification thereof, confessed and vrged by your selfe, not only continue in hell and in heauen, but comprise them both, seeing the Citizens of either shall not be seene any more in this world. Defenc. pag. 195. li. 16. Lastly heere is shewed the most generall and vniuersall rendring vp of all the dead what∣soeuer to iudgement. But hell plainly hath not all the dead. Therefore death and Hades doe not heere properly signifie the diuell and Hell. ] When you say, heere is shewed the vniuersall rendring vp of all the dead whatsoeuer to iudgement, If you meane this of death & hades, that they rendred vp all the dead, that came to iudgement; you vouch a manifest vn∣trueth repugnant to the very wordes of Saint Iohn going next before, for thus his wordes stand. Reuel. 20. v. 13. And the sea gaue vp her dead, which were in her, and death and Hades deliuered vp the dead, which were in them. So that all the dead were not rendred to iudge∣ment by death and Hades, the Sea had part by Saint Iohns owne speech; and there∣fore death and Hades heere doe not signifie the Dominion of death, which reacheth to the sea, aswell as to the earth. Againe Saint Iohn in the twelfth verse, Reuel. 20. v. 12. saw the dead both great and small stand before God. And in the thirteenth he addeth, the 13. Sea also gaue vp her dead, and death and hell deliuered vp the dead which were in them. Hee saw then some dead stand before God, which neither the Sea, nor hades deliuered. And since Paul telleth vs, that the 1 Thess. 4. v. 16. dead in Christ shall rise first; and God will bring them, which sleepe in Iesus, with him (to iudgement); what hindreth, but the dead in the twelfth of Saint Iohn may be the elect, and the rest be deliuered vp from the deepe of the Sea, and of Hades, as is mentioned in the thirteenth verse? If you like not this, shew vs a reason, why the earth is here ouerskipt, in which are the most of the dead bo∣dies both of good & bad, (vnlesse it were because no doubt was of the earth in refun∣ding her dead) and we will make you a playner explication of these parts, which now seeme somewhat doubtfull. Howbeit death and Hades cannot stand for one and the selfe same thing, as you would haue them, since the holy Ghost applieth the plurall number to them, and maketh them places (not phrases) to containe the dead in them; by saying, death and Hades gaue vp the dead, which were in them. Words haue no dead in them, but places haue; which because S. Iohn maketh to bee plurall, death and Hades cannot here be taken for one thing. Neither were those writers, whom you reiect, so inconsiderate as not easily to wipe away the force of your faint reasons. Bede vpon these words, the Sea, death, and hell, gaue vp their dead, saith, Beda in cap. 20. Apocalyp. Iohn signifieth the bodies shalbe gathered from the earth, and their soules from their (seuerall) places. The good vnder the name of death, which suffered onelie the dissolution of their bodies, and no (farder) punishment: the euill he designeth by the name of hell. Andreas Caesariensis taketh the Sea for the earth, as Bede doth; either because they thought the earth should then be plaine like the sea, as Sibylla prophesied, August. de Ci∣uitate Dei. lib. 18. cap. . ide Lactant. de di∣uino praemio li. 7. cap. 1 . E∣qu ntur campis montes, hills and vales shall then be all euen; or because heauen and earth were before said to be Reuel. 20. verse 11. fled away from his face, that sate on the throne, and their place no more to be found; or for that at the mutation of the world the earth shall melt, and burne all ouer like a sea of fire: and of the rest he saith. Andreas C ∣sarien. in 20. cap. Ap c. Death is the separation of the soule from the body. Hades is a place to vs vnseene, that is, darke and vnknowen, which receaueth the (dead) soules departing hence. And those soules are dead which cary with them dead works. For the soules of the iust, as the wise man saith, are in the hands of God, and no tor∣ment shall touch them. (Dead) soules I read with the interpreter, and not our soules, as the Printer in Greeke hath mistaken the word for , not onely because the interpreter had first the copie before him, and tooke more care to render it right then the Printer, but also for that the Author in the very next words declareth, what he ment by dead soules before: of which there is no mention precedent, if that word be not kept, where the translator putteth it. Saint Austen taketh the sea for this world, and shewing how those that liue on earth may be called dead euen by warrant of holy Scripture, and this life be counted no better then a death; addeth August. d ciuitate Dei lib. 20. ca. 15. Nec frustra fortasse non satis fuit vt diceret mors, aut infernus, sed vtrum{que} dictum est. Neither happily without cause was it not enough to say death or hell, but both are named, death for the good, who might suffer onely death, and not also hell: and hell for the wicked; which are punished in hell. And of the next words, death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, he saith. Ibidem. His nominibus significans Diabolum, quoniam mortis est author, & infernarum poenarum; vniuersam{que} si∣mul Daemonum societatem. By these names Saint Iohn signifieth the diuell, because he is the Author (or first occasioner) of death and hell-paines, withall the whole multitude of diuels. Primasius as he was S. Austens scholar, so doth he writing vpon the reuelation retaine S. Austens sense and Primas. in 20. cap. Apo∣calyp. sentences, as they are alleaged next before. Aretas writing on the same words, Aretas in Apocalyps. cap. 65. S. Iohn, saith he, meaneth those that haue done things worthy of this pu∣nishment, , making vp the people of the second death. [ Death and hades gaue vp their dead. ] By death saith Haymo Haymo in Apocalyp. c. 2 . we may simply vnderstand the death of the flesh, by hell the places of darkensse. [ Death and hades ] that is, all the mem∣bers of the Diuell with their head [ were cast into the lake of fire ] that is, into the deepe dam∣nation of hell. And rightly are all the reprobate figured by hell, either because abiding there they make but one house with hell, in which they abide; or els for that imitating the wor s of the Diuell, they are neuer satisfied with euill, as hell neuer saith, it sufficeth. The new wri∣ters doe not dissent, if it were worth the time to repeat manie of them. Bullinger. Bullinger. homil. 90. in Apoc. Death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. Hades (hell) heere doth signifie not the place of punishment, but those that are or were in hell: whose soules were hitherto deteined in hell, or such as are appointed for hell. Death also signifieth those, that are dead in sinne, and which from a spirituall and temporall death, directly passe to eternall death. Aretas and Primasius are of the same opinion with vs. Chytreus. Chytreus in 2 . ca. Apo. de extremo Iu∣dicio. Death shall restore all the bodies slaine by him; and hell shall refund the soules of the wicked to be ioined to their bodies. Ibidem nu∣mero 7. de poe∣ is Impiorum. Hades in Greeke is deriued from & , that is, not to see, or a place lacking light, which in the 22 of Mat∣thew is called vtter darkenesse, where the wicked depriued of the sight, light, comfort, and life of God not onely suffer perpetuall night (or darknesse) but great and vnspeakeable paines and torments of soule and body. The Latines call it infernus, because the place of the damned is thought to be somewhere in the earth beneath vs, as it is said in the 16 of Numbers, they descended aliue to hell, and the earth couered them. Thus haue we for your pleasure runne ouer all the places of the new Testament, Why hades doth signifie hell in the new Testa∣ment. where hades is vsed; and for ought we see, or you say, find the plaine and perpetuall vse of hades to signifie hell; and not any such priuations, destructions, conditions, and dominions of bodily death, as you dreame of. And as for the circumstances of the pla∣ces, they all concurre exactly and directly with this signification of hades, which I obserue; notwithstanding your Cabbinet of conceits, that hades shall designe you know not what, where, nor when. The reasons of my obseruations are manifest. For where throughout the old Testament with the Septuagint hades doth alwaies import the pit for dead bodies or soules: that is, the graue common to good and bad, or hell peculiar to the soules of the reprobate, with the consequents of either; and the writers of the new purposely distinguish death from hades, and mention death ex∣pressely, that is, by name or by description, in euery of those places, where hades is found in the new Testament, saue in Christs threatning of Capernaum, in which it is opposed to heauen, as fardest distant from it, and most repugnant to it: It is a plaine & true rule in mine opinion, that the Euangelists and Apostles euery where by Hades intended hell, and none of your wandring, or stragling fansies. Besides the Greeke Fathers with one consent vse Hades after the direction of the Canonicall writers, for a place of darknesse vnder the earth, prouided to receaue and detaine the Soules of men. And in this sense neither the Scriptures nor the Fathers departed much from the auncient and true vse of the word amongst heathen and prophane Authors; sa∣uing that the Pagans made it common to the Soules of iust and vniust, which the Scriptures neuer doe, and the Fathers vtterly refuse after Christs Resurrection, what∣soeuer they doe before. Since then Hades by the manifest exposition of Saint Luke in his Gospell, is the place of torment, where the wicked after death are punished; and the same Euangelist expresseth Dauids meaning to be this, that Christs Soule after death was not left or forsaken in Hades; what cause or reason hath any man to denie that Christ dying descended to hell; there to spoyle powers and principalities, and thence to leade Captiuitie Captiue, that as he ascended to the highest heauens, there to sit superiour to all the Elect Angels, so he first descended to the bottomlesse deepe, there to subiect the Reprobate Angels vnto his humane nature, and to dissolue the power and sorrowes of hell, of which it was impossible he should be held. Defenc. pag. 195. li. 36. Here we must consider a maine obiection of yours, euen those words of our common Creed, he descended into hell; originally it is he descended into Hades, and in truth this is all you haue to alleadge for your opinion: but I answere two waies: first admitting, then denying the Au∣thoritie of these words in our common Creede. ] You haue seene by this time what I haue to alleadge; for that which I defend may besafely conceiued of the Creed. The words themselues, he descended to Hades, haue euident warrant in the holy Scriptures, and Pe∣ter exactly concludeth out of Dauids words, that Christs Acts. 2. v 31. Soule was not left in Hades. What Hades is with S. Luke the writer of the Acts, we likewise haue seene. It is euen the place, where the wicked are tormented after death. Put these together, and tell me what they want of Christes descending into hell before he rose from the dead. The words in English, he descended into hell; are confirmed by the publike authoritie of this Realme, as well in the Booke of common praier, as in the Articles of Religion agreed on by the Conuocation, and ratified by Act of Parliament. So that all your euasions & elusions of the priuation, condition, and dominion of death to be ment thereby are vtter∣ly reiected and condemned by generall and full consent of Prince, Pastours & people within this Realme; and Christs descent to hell after death hath beene constantly and continually professed and beleeued in the Church of England euer since the Gospell was here established. What you haue said against it, I leaue to the Readers wise and indifferent iudgement, who wil easily tell you, you must bring better sluffe then either phrases or fansies before the common Creede may be thus reiected and despised. Defenc. pag. 196. You enioyne vs three Rules to be exactly and precisely kept in the expounding of these words; Namely, 1. distinction of Matter. 2. consequence of order. 3. proprietie of words. Might not those godly men (thinke you) misse in some such circumstances, although the Scripture cannot? ] The first compilers of the Creede meaning shortly, orderly, and plainly to deliuer the summe of the Christian faith, as touching the three persons in Trinitie, and the chiefest blessings which God bestoweth on his Church in this life and the next by Iesus Christ our Lord, might not with any discretion in so briefe and compendious assume of Christian Religon proposed to the simple and vulgar sort of all ages and sexes, vse either any needlesse repetition, disordered confusion, or obscure inuolution of things requisite to our Saluation. To these Rules agree all that haue ex∣pounded the Creede in the Church of Christ to this very day, saue your selfe, and such as haue opened you the gap to these innouations. And these Rules allowed do cleane cast your exposition out of doores. For where it is most plainly said that Christ died, and was buried; which words no plow-man, woman, nor child of reasonable yeeres can mistake; you after Christs buriall come in with a darke and figuratiue phrase of descending to Hades, which in effect you confesse is no more but what was said before in knowen and open speech, that Christ died. And this obscure and strange circumlo∣cution of death you will haue to be an Article of your faith, as if euery Christian crea∣ture were bound vpon danger of his saluation to vnderstand what Sheol or Hades doth signifie in the Greeke and Hebrew Tongues; which is a position meete for such a Di∣uine as you are. Your exposition therefore is repugnant to all three Rules. For it is a superfluous, vnorderly, & enigmaticall iteration of that which was before expressed in due place with as plaine and easie wordes, as any might be spoken by the tongue of man. Now with what Arguments you or any man liuing (Hu. Bro. not excepted,) can prooue that Hebrew or Greeke phrases are Articles of Religion, and must be conceaued and beleeued of all men before they can be saued, as yet I doe not vnder∣stand. And this is the miserie of your cause, that not onely you haue no word in La∣tine, English, nor in any tongue else answerable to your Sheol or Hades, but when you come to lay open your owne phrases, the exposition is more ridiculous then the Translation. For by Christs descending to Hades, which you call the power, dominion and kingdome of death, you meane no more, but that Christs Soule seuered from his Body went to heauen to the rest of the blessed Soules there. And here I report me to him that will vouchsafe to read your 196. & 197. pages, whether you haue any thing there but store of phrases, extending, intending, enlarging, amplifying the name, po∣wer, and dominion of death; which when all is done and said, amounteth to this much, that Christes soule seuered by death from his body submitted it selfe to the base and low condition of the dead, by taking the paines to goe to heauen to the rest of the Saints there. This is all in effect that your Periphrasis and Emphasis moriendi doe con∣taine; and the great fall or whole casting downe of Christes person, which you so Rheto∣rically set out with termes of the broadest and longest size, hath nothing in it, but on∣ly this, that his soule after death which dissolued his person, ascended to the societie of the blessed soules in heauen. The rest is your emphaticall and paraphrasticall va∣nitie swelling with wordes, and shrinking in sense; which needeth none other refuta∣tion but sober obseruation, that when two sides are spent, nothing is said; but you are where you began. For would you not varie so many phrases as you doe, tending all to expresse one thing; but seeke a little to shew vs what matter is contained in them, you should soone see what labour you haue lost in this Carrecke of words, which you haue newly brought vs home. Defenc. pag. 196. li. 34. Your meere and simple death, which you say is nothing els but the going asunder of the soule from the body, hath of necessitie thus much in it. It is the separation of the soule from the body, which is the cause of life in the body, It is the dissolution of the person, which consisteth of body and soule: It is the priuation of life which endeth with the depar∣ting What things the death of the bo∣die doth im∣port. of the soule: It is the continuing of death, since possibly there is no regresse from the priuation to the habite without the mightie hand of God working aboue nature. For the soule departing neuer returneth, till God commaund, by whose word heauen and earth were made. What now after death becommeth of both parts of man, is no hard matter to conceaue. Salomon saith, Ecclesiast. 1 Dust (meaning flesh, first made of dust) returneth to earth as it was, and the spirit, to God that gaue it; by him to be dis∣posed and adiudged to ioy or paine, as pleaseth him. The body then goeth to cor∣ruption, the soule receaueth iudgement, where it shall remaine in hell or heauen, till the bodie be restored againe, which shall be at the last day. Descending to hades after death cannot be verified of the whole person of man, but in respect of the parts. Re∣ferred to the body, it is as much as buried and laide in the place, where it shall putrifie and returne to dust. Applied to the soule, it must signifie the place to which the soule is caried, which I say must be vnder earth, since heauen is neuer called by that name, nor expressed by that word, either in the Scriptures, or in any other sacred or pro∣phane writers. The power and dominion of death, which you so much speake of, is nothing else but Gods ordinance, that from death there is no returne to life till hee appoint. If then there be no dominion nor kingdome of death preuailing or ruling in heauen, where the soules of the Saints are without their bodies, then Christ in ascending to heauen descended not to Hades. Againe with what trueth can you auouch Christes soule came vnder the full Pag. 196. li. 33. power and dominion of death, since death had no power ouer the bodie or soule of Christ longer or farder then he himselfe would permit; and his soule free from all bands and paines of death, destroied the dominion and kingdome of death, to which it was alwaies superiour and neuer sub∣iect, but onely that he might shew himselfe with greater power to be conquerer of death rather in rising from the dead, then in declining the force of death, as if he were not able after death and in death, to dissolue the dominion and power of death? Wherefore your exaggerating the power and dominion of death OVER THE SOVLE of Christ, and that IN HEAVEN; whither you graunt Christes soule went after death, is not onely a vaine and idle flourish, but a poisoned and pestilent doctrine, if you take not heed to it; since no power of death, but Christes will to shew himselfe Lord of life and death, either seuered his soule from his bodie, or bestowed his soule in any place after death, or detained him in the condition of death; but he was free to die when he would, and rise from death when he would, which euerteth all power and dominion of death ouer him, how much soeuer in wastefull wordes you auouch the contrarie. Touching the proprietie of wordes, that you say is as true as the rest. For Hades hath no such Defenc. pag. 197. li. 28. natiue and proper sense, as you talke of, but exactly and directly (when it is referred to a place and not to a person) signifieth a place of darknesse where no∣thing can be seene, as with one consent Heathen and Christian writers acknowledge. And the word descending after death, which you must applie to the soule ascending to heauen, you childishly change into the li. 35. fall of the person from lise to death, or incon∣stantly varie you know not how, to Christes submission Pag. 198. li. 1. when he died, or his abase∣ment by 4. lying held and subdued so long time in death. Where againe you incurre the same sands, that you did before in affirming Christ was held and subdued of death for the time, which is plainly false doctrine, since he would abide that time in death, least any should thinke him not truely dead, but was neuer vnder the power and domini∣on of death. And as for Ibid. li. 4. lying held in death, that phrase is strangely referred to the soule of Christ, which ascended to the third heauen with more honour and ioy, then it receaued in this life heere on earth. What Ruffine saith, is not much to be regar∣ded; if we beleeue S. In Apologia aduersus Ruffi∣n m. Ierom, neither was Ruffines faith sound, nor his authoritie any thing in the Church, and yet were he woorth the respecting, he maketh more a∣gainst you then for you. For first these wordes are not vsed as an exposition of Christs descent to Hades, but Ruffine saith, Ruffinus in Symbolum Apost. Diuina natura in mortem per carnem descendit, non vt lege mortalium detiner tur a Morte, sed vt per se resurrecturus ianuas mortis aperi∣ret. The diuine nature (of Christ) descended to death by (his) flesh, not to be held of death after the law of mortall men, but that rising of himselfe hee might open the gates of death. Where he saith, the diuine nature descended to death, he speaketh not of the soule, but of the godhead of Christ: which words by your leaue require a sober interpretation; and yet in respect of the diuine glory, the phrase of descending vnto death signifieth Christes submission to die, not his descent after death. And withall he refelleth two of your fansies, first that Christ was was not held of death, which you say he was: Se∣condly, that he followed not heerein the l w of mans nature, which you say he did. And that Christes soule descended to hell by Ruffines opinion, his wordes are plaine enough in many places. He applieth that to Christ, which Dauid saith; Thou hast brought my soule out of hell; and alleaging the place of Peter, In his spirit (Christ prea∣ched) to them which were in prison: heerein saith e it is declared, quid oper gerit in Inferno, What Christ did in hell. So that the lesse hold you take of Ruffine, the better for you and your cause; he will doe more harme then good. If any thinke this to be somewhat figuratiue, yet is it verely so familiar and easie to all people, as that other word in the Creede is, he sitteth at the right hand of God, yea it is farre easier. ] When you can diue deepe into your owne fansies, you thinke them as familiar to all others, as to your selfe. If this were so easie and readie with the simpler sort, as you make it, me thinkes it should not so much trouble you to expresse it right∣ly. But you varie so often, and say nothing in the end, that your hearers can hardly sound the bottome of your Hades. That God hath no handes as we haue, this euery What is meant by sitting at Gods right hand. meane Christian doth or should know. Since then this similitude is taken from men, and with them it is not strange to put those on their right hand, whom they will ho∣nour and aduance, it is easie for the simple to learne that Christes sitting at the right hand of God is as much as his sitting in glorie and Maiesty with God; which though they cannot presently perceiue how great it is, yet may they readily cōceaue what the meaning thereof is. In your descending to Hades it is nothing so. Your inconstancy and varietie in expounding that phrase is a proofe what difficultie there is in it; and your predicament of twelue parts at the end of your booke is a laborinth long enough for simple Christians to loose themselues therein. Though therefore your deuices be familiar to your selfe, who night and day dreame thereof, yet that maketh them no whit the easier to the simple; who can quickely apprehend that Christ was content to die for their sinnes, and to be buried for the more certaine triall of death, and to haue his soule bestowed where pleased himselfe, till his resurrection, when he raised him∣selfe from death as the vanquisher and commaunder of death, and of the whole power and Dominion of Satan, death and hell: but that Christe soule after death descended to Hades, that is to the generall indefinite condition and Dominion of death without any mention of the place, where it abode; this is more like one of Aristotles Meta∣physicall abstracts, then any part of the Christian faith. Defenc. pag. 198. li. 11. Heerein all the later, famous and godly restoarers of religion in a manner doe ioyne with vs; as Master Bucer, P. Martyr, Bullingere, Oleuian. &c. yea master Caluine liked this al∣so well enough, though yet he seemeth to leane more to another sense. ] If you meane, those learned men were of opiniō, that descending to Sheol (which the Septuagint cal hades) referred to the bodies or liues of good or bad, did in the old Testament signifie their going to the graue, I am of the same opinion with them, I haue not once nor twice pro∣fessed as much: but if any of them did thinke, as none of them doe, that Sheol in the Hebrew tongue, or in the Scriptures importeth not hell, but onely the graue, I must haue leaue to dissent from such as be of that mind. Howbeit neither Peter Martyr, nor Bullingere, nor Bucer, nor Oleuian, nor Caluine are of that mind, notwithstan∣ding they diuersely expound this Article. What Caluine thinketh of Christes suffe∣ring hell paines, is not to this purpose; but most certainely hee taketh Hades in the Creede for hell, and for the paines thereof. Of the rest, excepting Oleuian, I haue spoken before: and Oleuians reasons to prefer his sense before all other senses of this Article are very weake; and not worthy a man of his learning. He layeth this for the Oleuians cone∣ctures are but weake. maine ground thereof (which is not graunted, and cannot be prooued) That this Article, of Christes descending to Hades was Christs extreamest and lowest humilia∣tion, and no part of his exaltation. Which way will you, or Oleuian prooue that? and yet this is the onely cause, why he would haue Hades signifie the ignominious state of Christes bodie in the graue, where he lay oppressed, and as it were swallowed vp of death. But Oleuians suppositiō, that certainly Peter in the second of the Acts spake of Christs extreamest humiliation, and deriued it from Dauids wordes, is vtterly void of all iust proofe. For Peter proposeth the manner and power of Christes resurrection. Now that was no part of Christes humiliation. Againe the words, which Peter citeth out of Dauid, argue rather the singular prerogatiue, which Christ had ouer death aboue Dauid and others, that his flesh saw no corruption, nor his soule was for saken in hell; which things whatsoeuer their meaning be, sound rather to Christs honor and Soueraignitie, then to his abasement and humilitie. Thirdly Oleuian referreth this to the basenesse of the graue; where I hope Christes soule was not. And if you make heauen or Para∣dise, where Christes soule was, the lowest abasement that Christ could suffer, you will proue a mad merrie diuine. Lastly where Oleuian would haue the shame of the graue to be the victorie of those hellish paines, which he supposeth Christ suffered on the crosse, call you that the victory of hell ouer Christs soule, when it ascendeth with ho∣nour and blisse to heauen and the society of all the Saints? These things must hang better together before I can be induced to admit them, whosoeuer offereth them: though I make it as lawfull for me to refuse Oleuians coniectures, as he maketh it for himselfe to leaue all the Fathers, and the reformed churches of the Augustane con∣fession expounding that article of the Creed, as I doe. Defenc. pag. 198. li. 23. But we are to know that (as you cite them and vrge them) they haue no such authority and credit as hitherto we haue yeelded vnto them. And that for three causes. First, for that your translating and turning them, he descended into hell, is corrupt, partiall and vntrue. ] The exceptions, which you take against these words, are three. First, that they are ill translated by me. Secondly, that they were lately put into the Apostles Creed. Third∣ly, that they conteine an error, which was Christs going to Limbus to fetch the Pa∣triarks thence. If the rest be no truer then the first, we shal soone haue done with them. Is this my translation of the Creed, he descended into hell? Can you shew vs, since this Hell in the Creede is no new transla∣tion. Realme spake English, or since it receaued the Christian faith, that euer it had any o∣ther word in this place of the Creed but hell, or a word equiualent to it? The Saxons before vs said; And he ny o helle; and he downe went to hell. The Britons before them, if that tongue be not changed, Descenawdd y yffern, he descended to inferne. So that in calling this translation corrupt, partiall, and vntrue; you shew that you haue lately deuised a sense of that article, which these parts of the Christian world neuer heard before. And where you would haue me Pag. 198. li. 34. euidently and soundly conuince you by Greeke authority, that hades is neuer applied to the state and condition of the godly decea∣sed, and then you will yeeld: I like well your wit, that wilbe sure to say what you list with∣out warrant or proofe, and then lay the burden on others. Must I prooue the negatiue or you rather not be beleeued till you haue iustly prooued by the Sctiptures and by the auncient Greeke fathers, that hades with them did signifie the place where the soules of the righteous were receaued after Christs resurrection: or that hades with them was not a place of darkenesse vnder the earth, which what that be in Christian re∣ligion besides hell, I leaue to the iudgement of the wise and indifferent Reader. Your weake and seely proofes taking hold of the Pagans error, that thought good and bad after death were vnder the earth in Plutoes kingdome, whom they called hades, will neuer conuince our English translation to be partiall or false. Besides in the meane time you must remember, you reiect and impugne the words receaued and allowed by the publike authority of this Realme; and so conuince your self to refuse an article of the faith confirmed by the lawes of the land. Defenc. pag. 199. li. 3. This clause of Christs descending to hades or to infernum is new or lately put into our vul∣gar Creed called the Apostles Creed. Ruffinus witnesseth (who liued about fiue hundred yeeres after Christ) that it was not at all in the Creed in his time. ] You mistake euery thing that you meddle with. Ruffine liued in Ieroms time, and wrote against him, which was within 400 yeeres after Christ; and saith the Church of Rome, and (some) Churches of the East had not those words (he descended to hell) in their Creeds. Whence you most vntruely conclude, li. 13. There was no such article as this, nor any such words any where in the Creed for the space of 500 yeeres after Christ. To clap in fiue hundred for fower, and the whole world for some Churches of the East, are small matters with you, res∣pecting how els where you intrude vpon others; but this is more hast then good speed, what your Author doth not say, to supplie of your owne. [ Will you say Ruffine li∣eth? or can you bring to the contrary any proofe? I thinke not, yea I am sure, you cannot. ] Whatsoeuer I say, Ruffine saith; you doe little better then lie. For in that exposition of the Creed, which you cite, he setteth downe this for a part of the Creed, Ruffimus in Symbolum Apostolorum. Crucisix∣us sub Pontio Pilato, descendit ad inferna. Crucified vnder Pontius Pilate, he descended to hell. And therefore out of his report to inferre, there were not any such words any where in the Creed, for the space of 500 yeeres after Christ, is to bring your owne witnesse to giue the budge. That this clause was not conteined in the Creed of some Churches, may well be confessed; that it was no where receaued and professed as a part of the Creed for 500 yeeres after Christ, is a manifest vntrueth, though Ruffine had said it, which yet he doth not. Cyrill Bishop of Ierusalem 360. yeeres after Christ repeating and expounding ten points of the Creed for the better remembance of those, that were baptised, after the crucifying, and burying of Christ, and before his resurrection rehearseth this as one of the ten, Cyrill. Hiero∣s ly. Catech. 4. , he descended to the places vnder the earth. Chrysostom a Presbyter of Antioch 400 yeeres after Christ, repeat∣eth the same as a part of the Creed. Chrysosi. de expositione Symboli, ho∣mil 2. Crucified vnder Pontius Pilate, he was buried. Descendit ad infernum, he descended to hell, that this also might not want a wonder. Angustine in his Sermon, ad competentes, to those that desired baptisme, rehearseth the whole Creed, and this article as a part, descendit ad inferna; Christ descended to hell; and thus expoundeth it. Augusi. ser∣mo. 131. de ten pore. Dum corpus in sepulchro iacuit, anima illa de infernis trium∣phauit, whiles Christs body lay in the graue, his soule triumphed ouer hell. And elswhere repeating it by parts, saith, Idem sermo. 195. Credite passum sub Pontio Pilato, credite crucisixum, cre∣dite mortuum & sepultum, credite eum ad inferna descendisse. Beleeue that Christ suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, beleeue that he was crucisied, beleeue that he died and was buried, beleeue that he descended to hell. Your selfe, if you varie not in this as you doe in other things touching this cause since the making of your Treatise, acknowledge so much. Treat. pa . 94. li 25. We know (the Creed) to be most auncient and very neere to the Apostles times: Pag. 93. li. 7. yea this very article of Christs descending to hades; because Ignatius speaketh of it, and others most auncient likewise. And howsoeuer you eleuate the credit of Eusebij hist. ecclesiast. lib. 1. ca. 13. Eusebius report, whereof we shall speake anon more largely, the city of Edessa kept in their publicke monu∣ments from the Apostles times the chiefe parts of the Apostles Creed, touching the worke of our redemption by Christ, and amongst them this one, , he descended to hades. Which Ignatius one of S. Iohn the Euangelists scholars like∣wise numbreth amongst the speciall matters of our redemption; as that Ignatij epist. ad Trallianos. truely, and not in opinion onely, Christ was crucified, died, , descended to hades, and rose the third day, and was assumed vp to his father, and sitteth at his right hand. Defenc. pag. 199. li 8. This Erasmus may seeme to haue some colour for his coniecture, that about Thomas Aquinas his time they might (peraduenture) be put into the Creede. ] You can haue no colour for your error in mistaking Erasmus words. Could not Erasmus, being a man of that learning and reading which he was, tell whether this Article were in the Creed before Aquinas time or no? and could Aquinas so easily put this clause into all the Creedes that were vsed amongst Christians throughout the world? Innocentius the third, aboue 60. yeeres before Aquinas, expressing the mysteries of their masse, setteth downe the twelue parts of the Apostles Creede, and this for the fift Article, Innocent 3. de mysterijs Missae. li 2. cap. 15. Descendit ad Inferna, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis. He descended to Hell, and rose the third day from the dead. The same Innocentius in his great Laterane Councell propo∣sing the Catholike faith, as he calleth it, putteth downe this for a part thereof. Concil. latera∣nens. sub Inno∣cent. 3. cap. 1. de fide Catho∣lica. De∣scendit ad Inferos, resurrexit a mortuis. Sed descendit in anima, resurrexit in carne. Christ descended to hell, and rose from the dead: but he descended in Soule, and rose with his flesh. Of this could not Erasmus be ignorant, since it was openly published to all mens eyes in the Decretals of Gregorie: li. 1. Tit. 1. de summa Trinitate & fide Catholica cap. 1. Erasmus therefore had no such meaning, that Thomas Aquinas was the first, that ad∣ded this clause to the Creede, as you and others much mistake his words; but doubt∣eth whether Aquinas in commenting on the Creede expounded that Article, or no. And that appeareth by his next words cleane contrarie to your conceite, which you neuer tooke the paines to view. Eras. in Sym∣bolum Cateche∣si. 4. Nonnulla suspitio est, hanc particulam ab alio adiec∣tam, velhoc argumento, quod non est suo loco. There is some suspition, that this part (he descended to hell) was added (to Thomas exposition of the Creede) by some other, euen for this reason, because it is not put in his due place. For where he maketh the Resurrec∣tion to be the third article, the descent to hel he maketh the fourth: vnles happely he thought, that Christ returning from death to life descended to hell both in Body and Soule. Erasmus saith no such thing, that Aquinas was the first, who added this Article to the Creede; but he would seeme to suspect, that Thomas did not accept this as a part of the Creede in his time, for that he doth not set it in the right place, where it should be, but putteth it after the Resurrection. Howbeit Erasmus might haue suspected, that some other had changed Aquinas order, as well as augmented Aquinas worke. For it is euident, that Aquinas in his summe of Diuinitie acknowledgeth that Article (of Christs descent to hell) 9 & 28. to come from the Apostles, and numbereth it in the Aquinas 2. 2. quest. 1. Arti∣culo. 4. place before the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. And this reason he gi∣ueth, why it was not mentioned in the Creedes of the Fathers, because no heresie was then risen about that point, and therefore they still presupposed it as foredetermined in the Apostles Creede. And yet there want not Councels and Fathers declaring and confirming this to be a part of the Catholike and Christian faith. The Councell of Orleance kept in the 46. yeere of Charles the great, in the profession of their faith, say thus. Synod. Are∣laten sub Caro∣lo. ca. 1. Descendit ad Inferos, he descended to hell to deliuer the Saints, which there were held, deuictóque mortis Imperio, and subduing the kingdome of death, rose againe: con∣cluding also thus: this is the faith of the Catholike Church, this confession we keepe and hold. The Councell of Foroiulij otherwise called Aquileia, (in which Citie Ruffinus, that expoundeth the Creede, was a Presbyter) made this exposition of the Creede in the time of Carolus Martellus, and Pipine his Sonne, Father to Charles the great. Concil. Foro∣iu tens. in Sym∣boio fide . In Eadem dignatus est mori, sepeliri, ad Inferos descendere, tertia dei resurgere. In the same (humane nature) Christ vouchsafed to die, to be buried, to descend to hell, to rise a∣gaine the third day. Which they close with this attestation. Ibidem. This most sincere puritie of the Catholike faith we will all degrees of the Church distinctly to learne and commit to me∣morie, it a vt ne vnus quidem apex intermittatur vel augeatur, so that not one the least point of it be omitted or encreased. The 4. Councell of Toledo in the time of Sisenandus King of Spaine, about 630. yeeres after Christ, made the same profession word for word, which the Councell of Orleance did after imitate. Concilium To∣leta. 4 cap. 10. Christ descended to hell to deliuer the Saints, which there were held, and subduing the kingdome of death rose againe. Venantius Bishop of Poictiers in France, that dedicated some of his poems to Gre∣gorie the first, commenting on the Apostles Creede distinctly rehearsed the Article, Venantius in Symbolum A∣posto. descendit ad Infernum, he descended to hell, among the rest; and saith farder of it; but descending to hell Christ suffered no iniurie, for that he did it in respect of (his) mercie. As if a King should enter a prison, not to be there held himselfe, but to loose such as were guiltie. Defenc. pag. 199. li. 21. We can not see but that whensoeuer, whosoeuer put it first into this place, they signified thereby, it seemeth, that Christ went to Limbus a place vnder the earth, where they imagi∣ned the blessed Patriarkes rested. ] When this clause was first inserted into the Creede, no man can directly pronounce. Some places had it not for a time, and some had it aunciently transmitted from the first founders of their Churches; which being duely considered by the rest, that wanted it, and the Article on euery side confessed to be true, it was at length generally receaued throughout the Church, not as a thing new∣ly deuised by themselues, but formerly commended to many Churches euen from their first erection [ Pag. 199. li. 32. Thaddeus, Ignatius, and Athanasius haue these very words: yet say they not any where that they were in that set forme of the Apostles Creede, which we now haue. ] If Thaddeus deliuered it to the Church of Edessa at the first preaching of the faith vnto them, and they kept a record thereof in the publike monuments of their Citie to the time of Eusebius; why should it not be counted and calle a part of the Apostles Creede, that is, of the short and plaine forme of the faith deliuered to the people, when they first receaued the Gospell of Christ? And how should Ignatius, Athanasius, and all the auncient Fathers both Greeke and Latine throughout the world light on the same words in effect, & agnise them for a point of Christian faith, if sundry Churches had not retained that Article in the Summarie confession of their faith euen from the beginning? Ruffine alleageth truely these words, descendit ad Infer∣na, Pag 199. li. 38. but not out of any example of the Apostles Creede, yea he expresly denyeth it to be there∣in any where at that time. ] Cyrill and Chrysostom expound these words as parts of the common Creede receaued in their Churches, and called Apostolike, because it was descended from the Apostles times. Ruffine doth the like for the Church of Aqui∣leia, where he was a Presbyter; he setteth downe these words as a part of the com∣mon Creede, which he expoundeth, and nameth Apostolike. And here for triall of your truth and modestie, (if you know what those things meane) I referre my selfe to the printed Copies of Cyprians and Ieroms works, (where this exposition is ex∣tant,) whether these words, crucifixus sub Pontio Pilato, & sepultus, descendit ad In∣ferna, He was crucified vnder Pontius Pilate, and buried, he descended to hell: be not expresly set downe as a part of the Creede, which Ruffine expoundeth and calleth Apostolike. The Copies printed at Bafile by Frobenius, and at Lyons by Gryphius, 1537; at Basile by Heruagius 1540; at Antuerpe by Crinitus, and at Paris by Ste∣phan Petit. 1541; seuer these words with an halfe moone from Ruffinus explication, as they doe the rest of the Creede. Those printed at Rome by Paulus Manutius, 1563; at Antuerpe by Stelsius 1561; by Peter Bellerus 1589; and by Iohn de Preux 1593. at Paris by Sebastian Niuellius 1603. distinguish them by greater or different letters from the rest. So that your denying them to be part of the Creede, which Ruffine bringeth for Apostolike, is a manifest mentirie. As you peruert Ruffines wordes, so you doe his meaning. For he doth not say, that Christes descent to hell was all one with his buriall; but where the Churche of Rome with some others wanted those wordes, he descended to hell; yet with them the effect thereof was contained in the word, buried. And no maruaile, that the Church of Rome (for that he chiefly noteth by the Latin word, sepultus ) extended the word buriall to hell; since they did, and to this day doe follow the olde Latine translation of the Bible Luke 16. where it is written, the rich man was buried in hell. It was an easie mat∣ter therefore for them by Christs buriall to vnderstand his descent to hell, since as they thought, they found the word so farre extended in the Scriptures. And graunt that Ruffine and others of the auncients (as you affirme) did thinke it consequent as an effect to Christs buriall, that his soule did descend to hell; what prooue you by this, but against your selfe, that such as had not those wordes expressed in their Creede, yet retained the sense and meaning of them in that they were perswaded, this was the law of humane necessitie, without Christ, that as mens bodies were buried, so their soules descended to hell; which descent Christ refused not to restore men, as Hilarie and others auouch. This you say was Ruffines owne meaning, who [ Defenc. pag. 200. li. 24. going about to proue by the Scripture that Christ descended to Infernum, sheweth that he meaneth his death here∣by & his buriall. ] I suppose few men will trust you, hauing tried you false so often. Ruffine going about to prooue by the Scripture of the old Testament, that euery part of Christes passion and his resurrection was fore-shewed in the law and the Prophets, plainely distinguisheth his death, buriall, and descent to Hell. For Christs death he saith; Ruffinus in expositione Sym∣boli Apost. What Ruffinus meaneth by Christs descent to hell. spiritum post haec scribitur reddidisse; after this it is written, that hee gaue vp the Ghost. This was fore spoken by the Prophet saying; into thy handes I commend my spirit. Sepultus quo{que} perhibetur. He is then said to be buried. For which he alleageth a place of Ieremie, and addeth. Euidentissima haec Sepulturae eius indicia propheticis vocibus designata sunt, accipe tamen & alia. These most manifest signes of his buriall are expressed in the Prophets speeches, and yet thou shalt haue other. Where he alleageth three other places of Scrip∣ture; how fitly to his purpose, I need not pronounce. Then commeth he to Christes descent to hell, and saith; Sed & quód in Infernum descendit, euidenter praenunciatur in Psalmis. That also he descended to hell, is evidently fore told in the Psalmes. Now whether his places bee aptly cited or no, is not to the question, though you make that your whole aduantage. For first, they be as aptly cited, as the rest. Next they haue euery one of them somewhat more in Rusfines apprehension, then of Christes buriall. For hee standeth not onely on those wordes, the dust and corruption of death, but hee fast∣neth most on the words of descending and bringing downe in limum profundi, to the mire of the deepe. Which things though you flurt at, as waighing light in your eyes, it is certaine, he intended thereby more then the graue as is euident by his owne wordes. For citing the place of Peter thus. In which (spirit) Christ descended to preach to the spirits inclosed in prison which were incredulous in the dayes of Noe, he addeth, in quo quid operis eger m in Inferno, declaratur; in which it is declared, what Christ did in hell. In the graue I trust Christ did nothing. In Paradise he did not preach to those, that were in prison (& disobedient) in the dayes of Noe. Since then this end of Christs descent to hell is expressed by Ruffinus, and this could not bee done either in the graue, where no∣thing can be done; or in heauen, where these disobedients were not in prison: It is cleere that Ruffinus had no such meaning, as you make him by Christes descent to in∣tend no more but his death and buriall. Defenc. pag. 2. c. h 5. He holdeth indeed that Christ went downe to Infernum, that is to Limbus patrum, as an opinion then common among them, and worthie (as he thought) to be beleeued. ] If hee ment this, as you now confesse; then he ment more by Christes descending to Infernum then Christes death and buriall. And so by your owne mouth you are conuinced of a lie fathered on Ruffinus against both his words & meaning. And yet I find no such ex∣presse mention or description of Limbus in Ruffines words, as you would seeme to im∣pose vpon him. He mentioneth Christs conquest ouer hell; in Symbol. Apost. quód Inferna sibi Regna , that Christ would subiect the Infernali kingdome to himselfe; & qui mortis habe∣bat Imperium, disruptis Inferni claustris, velut de profundo tractus; he that had the rule of death, was drawen as it were from the deepe, the cloisters of hell being broken open. He saith also, Animabus de Inferni captiuit ate reuocatis, the soules being reuoked from the captiuitie of hell; but whom he thereby meaneth, he expressed before with the Apostles words, when he said, Ephes. 1. qui simul consuscitauit nos, simul{que} sedere fecit in caelestibus: Christ raised vs vp together with himselfe, and made vs sit in heauenly places with him. So that if you and your friends when you prate so much against all or the most of the auncient fathers as vpholding Limbus, would bethinke your selues, that most of them speake indiffe∣rently as well of the liuing and yet vnborne, as of the dead before Christes time, when they say that soules were deliuered out of the bondage and captiuitie of hell and Sa∣tan, you should doe them lesse wrong, and lesse deceaue your selues, then now you doe. And for those fathers, that indeede were of this opinion, that before Christes The place of A∣brahams bosome vnknowen. resurrection Abrahams bosome was vnder the earth, you shall doe well to thinke and speake more reuerently of them, considering what master Bullingere, a learned and graue Diuine resolued euen of that point. Bullingerus in Lucae ca. 16. Sinus Abrahae aliud non est quam portus salutis: vbi autem fuerat quondā hic locus, an apud superos, an apud inferos, nolo pronunciare, imo malo ignorare, quam temere definire, quodliteris sacris expressum non habeo. In his vt curiosus esse nolo, ita nihil desinio, cum nemine super hac re contendere volo. Satis mihi est intelligere & fateri veteres sanctos in refrigerio, loco vti{que} certo, non in tormentis, ante ascen∣sionem Domini fuisse, vt maximé ignorem, vbi ille locus fuerit. The bosome of Abraham is nothing els but an (entrance or) port of saluation. Where this place formerly was, whether aboue in (some part of) the heauens, or below (vnder the earth) I will not pronounce. Yea I had rather be ignorant thereof, then roshly to define that, which I find not expressed in the Scriptures. In these things, as I will not be curious, so doe I determine nothing, neither will I contend with any man about this matter. It shall suffice me to vnderstand and confesse, that the godly of the old Testament were in a certaine place of rest not in terments before the oscen∣sion of Christ, though I know not where that place was. That it was no part nor member of hell, we haue S. . Austins firme resolution, grounding himselfe on the words, which our Sauiour in the Gospell ascribeth to Abraham. Luke 16. Betweene you and vs there is a great gulfe setl d. But whether it were vnder the earth till Christs resurrection, of that some fathers doubted; wherein we may not be reprochfull to them, though we dissent from them, since the Scriptures, as this great Diuine thinketh, expresly decide not the question. Defenc pag 20. li. . Ignatius you thinke is cleerely yours: likewise one Thaddeus, by Eusebius report, one of the 70. disciples, which the Euangelist Luke speakes of. Also Athanasius Creed. Ignati∣ saying Christ des ended to hades alone, but rose againe with many, meaneth euidently his buriall, and going downe into his graue: as you acknowledge that hades many times may well signifie. ] With the septuagint, that were Iewes, (and translated the old Testament Hades with Ig∣natius is not the graue. out of Hebrew into Greeke almost 300. yeeres before Christes birth) I said indeed Hades stood aswell for the graue as for hell, euen as the Pagans also did vse it: but the Euangelists and Apostles retaining a difference betweene Thanatos, death, and Hades, take Hades for hell, and neuer for the graue: whose example the Greeke Diuines doe follow; and therefore Hades with them doth not signifie the graue, but the place where the wicked are tormented after death, as it doth in the Gospell of S. Luke. Secondly the wordes of Ignatius agree not with that in Matthew, by which you would expound them. For Matthew saith, Matth. 27. the graues did open (at Christs death) and manie bodies of the Saints, that slept, arose; and comming out of their graues, , after his resurrection, came into the holy citie, and appeared to many. They did not rise with Christ, but after him, as August. ep. 99. Austen well expoundeth it; that Christ alone might be 1. Cor. 1. the first fruits, and Colos. 1. first borne from the dead. And therefore Igna∣tius did not speake this of Christes resurrection, but of his ascension, euen as Thad∣deus did in the selfe same sort. Euseb. Eccle. hist. li. 1. ca. 13. He descended alone (to Hades) but he ascended to his Father with a great multitude. That Ignatius here noteth Christes buriall in none Defenc. pag. 201. li. 15. other wordes besides; If you meane in the same sentence, there was no cause nor need he should; if you meane in the same place, it is not true: for the next sentence sauc one is this. Ignat. epist. ad Trallianos. The day before the Sabbaoth at the third houre Christ receaued sentence of condemnation from Pilate, at the sixt houre he was crucified, at the ninth he breathed out his spirit, and before the Sunne-set he was laid in his graue. The Sabbaoth day he staied vnder the earth in his graue; and at the dawning of the Lords day he rose from the dead. But that Ignatius wordes can not be verified of Christes buriall, is euident by the very purport of the wordes them∣selues, he descended to hades alone, saith Ignatius. To his graue Christ descended not alone. Those that were crucified with him, were buried at the same time with him. Besides he descended alone, is as much as of his owne accord, and by his own force, no man helping, or accompanying him; which was not the manner of his buriall. For his bodie was buried by others, and could not of it selfe descend to the graue. His descending to hades was a voluntarie action, euen as his ascending from it was; which in a dead bodie no man can imagine. Lastly the wall neuer broken before, can not be vnderstood of the graue, since from the graue some others rose long before the death and birth of Christ, as is plaine by the storie of him, that was 2. Kings 13. cast dead into Eliseus graue, and of Iohn 11. Lazarus. Faine you would slubber vp these things, but they hang in your teeth, and will not goe downe. [ The power of the graue, or the strength of death, which remained indeed from the beginning of the world as a mightie wall not broken downe, was now (you say) by Christes death vtterly ouercome and dissolued. ] In this answer you inclose three vntrueths. First, The wall of hades neuer broken but by Christ. Christ neuer descended into the power of the graue, nor strength of death, as you con∣ceaue; they had no power or dominion ouer him, he breathed out his owne soule at his owne pleasure; to be resumed againe when pleased himselfe; though for the proofe of his death to be true and vnfained, hee was content his body should lie in the graue till the third day. Againe, the power of the graue or strength of death was no wall vnbroken from the foundation of the world. Many rose from the dead before Christ, and some were translated, that Heb. 11. v. 5. they should not see death. Thirdly, it is not yet, as you affirme, vtterly ouer come and dissolued. For the bodies of the Saints are vnder it, and so shall be till the last day; when the wicked shall rise from their graues aswell as the Saints, though not to heauenly blisse, as they shall. Besides this, the words as well of Ignatius, as these of Thaddeus, must be performed betweene Christs descent to hades and his resurrection. For so Eusebius reporteth the wordes of Thaddeus. Eusebij hist. li. 1. cap. 13. Christ descended to hades, and brake the wall neuer broken before since the world began. And rose againe, and raised the dead, which had slept from the beginning. Hades then hath a partition, which neuer man brake, as Abraham told the rich man: Onely Christ, who was God and man, voluntarily descended thither, and with his returne thence broke the wall, that was neuer broken before. Defenc. pag. 202. li. 4. Though some being dead did rise to life againe before Christs resurrection. (as touching the time) yet the vertue and power of Christs resurrection was before them, by which onely and meerely they rose againe. Neither yet was resurrection to al the dead forthwith perfor∣med by the resurrection of Christ: neuerthelesse purchased it was euen then, and by the onely power and vertue thereof is and shalbe performed to all in d e time. You would seeme in this to answere me, but indeed you refute your selfe. For you confeste, that this par∣tition betweene death and life was often broken before Christs resurrection, b it the power of Christs resurrection, you say, was before them, by which onely they rose a∣gaine. But both Ignatius and Thaddens say, it was neuer broken before the time, that Christ descended to hades. They therefore doe not meane the graue, as you doe. If you say, the graue was a partition to stay men from heauen till Christ was risen, then were not the soules of the Saints in heauen, whose bodies were in the graue, which is repugnant to your owne position. So that the graue, neither hindering the body from life, nor the soule from heauen before Christs comming, was not the wall vnbroken till Christs descent to hades, of which these auncient writers speake. Our resurrection was purchased by Christs death, and openly confirmed, and assured to vs by Christs resurrection; but since it shall not be performed vnto vs till the last day, this wall is not vet actually broken downe to all Christs elect, no more then death is abolished to them, which is the last enemy, that shalbe destroied, but is not yet sub ected vnder Christs feet in respect of his members, which doe and shall l e in thei graues to the end of the world. Neither doth the Apostle call Christ the first fruits of the dead, (as you intend) because others, who rose from the graue before Christ, did rise by the vertue and power of his resurrection: you commit heerein a double error. Christ was truely the first, that euer rose from death to an immortall and celestiall life, and the power and force of his resurrection bringeth not men backe to a mortall and misera∣ble life in this world, but to be conformed to his glorious body, that is, to incorrup∣tion and immortality. g Thus I vnderstand your Thaddeus, also Athanasius in his Creed (as it seemeth most Defenc pag. 202. reasonably and necessarily) because they expresse neither his death nor his buriall at all in any other words saue these, he descended to hades. You runne so fast on your owne con∣ceits, that you see not what you passe by. Hath Thaddeus no words touching Christs death? what make you then of these scant a line before; Euseb. hist. li. 1. ca. 13. , how Christ humbled himselfe and died? And though the Creed, prouided for the simpler sort, distinguisheth Christs crucifying, death, buriall, and descent to hell; yet what need is there, that the learned euery time they talke of Christs crosse or death, should number all these seuerally and orderly as they stand in the Creed? crucifying is enough to note his death, for they crucified him vnto death. Christs buriall had in it no more but the certainty of his death, and by Gods prouidence the vigilanc e of his enemies, that his body should not be thought to be stolen away by his owne Dis∣ciples. Other moment or matter of our redemption there was none in Christs buriall. The goodly words, with which you would feed vs, that in the graue he came vnder the power, strength, dominion, and kingdome of death, are rather variations for a nouice, then any points of sensible doctrine for a diuine. So that Athanasius expressing Christs suffering for our saluation, his descending to hades, and rising the third day from the dead, fully compriseth all the principall works, which Christ performed for our sal∣uation from his crosse to his resurrection. Now what Athanasius meaneth by hades, since his works are extant in Greeke, we shall not need to depend on your partiall coniectures. We haue many plaine and perspicuous places, which deliuer his sense and meaning vnto vs. I haue shewed before, which I must not so often repeat, that Athanasius maketh two places of condemnation, whither man after death was ad∣iudged for sinne: Athanas. de car. Christs. , the graue and hades. And of Christs body and soule he directly saith, Ibidem. . The bodie (of Christ) went to the graue, the soule to hades: these places being diuided with a great distance: and the graue receauing the presence of his body, (for there was his body present) and hades receiuing his (humane) spirit. Thinke you this to be plaine enough, that Christs descent to hades was not his buri∣all, where his body lay; but the going of his soule to hades, whither man was con∣demned for sinne, and which Athanasius saith, The Diuell kept as the onely place of his strength? The enemie saith he, fallen from heauen, remoued from the earth, expelled from the ayre; Idem in passi∣one & cru∣cem Domini. ; euery where vanquished, determined, if he could, to keepe hades safe. For this place was yet left vnto him. But Ibidem. as soone as Christ died, the world wanted the light of her Sunne, the Vaile of the temple rent, the earth trembled, the Rocks did cleaue in sunder, , and the souldiers together with the keepers of Hades did shake for feare Ibidem. . And the Diuell thi ing to carry (Christ) to hades, was himselfe throwen out of hades. Ibid. . For it was not long after, but (Christ) loosed the (sorrowes or) paines of hades. Athanasius then without peraduentures taketh hades for hell, and Christs descent thither in soule to worke the subuersion of Satans king∣dome, and deliuerance of all his elect thence, were they liuing, dead, or yet vnborne. Defenc. pag. 202. li. 27. Your seeking to peruert this reason because the auncient Creedes want sundry other Articles, which now are in our Creede, is to no purpose. For so much as they all do euermore intend to set downe perfectly the summe of Christs accomplished Redemption and media∣tion at the least. Not any of those his maine workes are in them omitted. ] If your pride were not greater then your skill, we should haue a great deale lesse prating from you. The ancient Creeds are im∣perfect in words. How shall the Reader beleeue your report of Fathers and their meanings, when you neuer saw so much as the Creedes of the auncient Councels, and yet pronounce so boldly of them, as if you had perused them all but yesterday. The great Nicene Creede maketh no mention of Christs death or buriall; but saith. Symbolum Niceni conci∣lij. He suffered, and rose the third day. The first generall Councell of Constantinople, whose Creede was after vsed in the Church Seruice, saith; Christ Symbolum Constantinop. suffered, and was b ied, and rose the third day; omitting his crucifixion and death. The great Councell Concil. of Aphrica, and the generall Councell of Concilium E∣phes. ca. 13. Ephesus concurre with the Nicene, and say, he suffered, and rose the third day. What truth then is there in your words, where you say, they all Aphrica. ca. 104. doe euermore intend perfectly to set downe the Summe of Christs Redemption for vs; not any of those his maine works are in them omitted? Is the death of Christ none of his maine works for our Redemption? finde you now, that his buriall may be omitted, and yet the Creede not be imperfect? These things, good Sir, are implyed as con∣sequent or antecedent to the parts expressed. For if Christ did rise the third day, he rose from the Graue, where he had lien three daies; and buried he was not, before he was dead. As also he rose not but from the dead. Wherefore in his resurrection are both his death and his buriall comprised. Besides he suffered vnto death. Which things were all plainly proposed to the simple in their Creede called Aposto like, but not in the Creedes concluded by the learned Pastours in their Councels. The same course kept the Greeke and Latin Fathers, sometimes expressing Christs death, buriall, and descent to hell: sometimes omitting some of them, as the cause required. Epiphanius saith, Epiphanius in eresium A∣nacephalai st. . Christ saith he speaking of the things as they were done, is crucified, buried, he descended to the places vnder the earth in his Deitie and in his soule, he leadeth Captiuitie Captiue, and riseth the third day. Vigilius. Vigilius con∣tra . li. 2. ca. 3. Constat Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum sexta feria crucifixum, & ipsa die ad In∣fernum descendisse, ipsa die in sepul hris iacuisse, ipsa die Latroni dixisse, hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. It is certaine, that our Lord Iesus Christ was crucified on the sixt day, and that day descended to hell, that day lay in the graue; and that day said to the Theise; This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. And declaring how this was verified in Christ; Ibidem. ergo dicimu Dominum iacuisse in sepulchro, sed in sola carne, & Dominum descendisse ad in∣fernum, sed in sola anima. Then we say, that the Lord lay in his graue, but with his Body alone, and descended to hell, but with his Soule alone, without his Body. Defenc pag. 203. li. 2. Howbeit to speake plainly your Thaddeus whom you so highly esteeme, is a meere counterfait. You say this report of him in Eusebius by some men is counted fabulous. Nay who euer since Eusebius, I thinke, held it for better? ] Were there no more in it but the records of Edessa then remaining, and the report of Eusebius translating the same, they fairely prooue this clause of Christs descending to Hades, to haue beene aunci∣ently Eusebius report allowed by the best Historio∣graphers. and openly receaued and professed in the Primatiue Church. Otherwise the religious of those Ages, that liued with and after Eusebius, if he had vnder this pre∣tence broched any new point of faith; as in duety they were bound, so no doubt they would haue resisted and refuted it. But the whole Church accepting and allowing that Historie, hath likewise admitted and approoued this Article of Christs descent to Hades, to be a part of the Christian faith; and the best learned of those times in their writings acknowledge the same. And where you aske, Who euer since Eusebius held it for better then a fable; it is a signe how little conuersant you are in any mans labours, that fit not your licentious humors. Your owne Author, on which you so much build, Ruffinus translated these bookes of Eusebius, Hi ro. de Ec∣clesiast. Scrip∣toribus in Eu∣selao. Ierom commended them, and D inct. 15. Sancta Ro∣mana. Gelasius an auncient Bishop of Rome with a Councell confirmed them. And touching this very Historie, Nicephorus largely reporteth it, and many of the best Historiographers before our time alleadge it; not as fable, but for a truth. As namely, Blondus Decadis 2. li. 5. Nauclerus volumine 2. generat. 2. Sabellicus Enneadis 7. li. 1. Volateranus. geographiae li. 11. de Sectis Syriae: Martinus Polonus in Friderico 1. Platina in Lucio 2. I am not alone then in allowing Eusebius report; Nicephor. li. 2. ca. 7. but you rather are so headstrong and withall so ignorant, that you censure all men be∣sides your selfe. Defenc. pag. 203. li. 9. It is all forged and fowly corrupted for these reasons: First this writing saith that Iudas the Apostle was the same, who was also called Thomas the Apostle. But the Scripture it selfe sheweth that Iudas and Thomas were diuers and seuerall Apostles. When you goe about to challenge a record, neuer corrupt it; for so you challenge your selfe, and not that How Thomas might bee called Iudas. which you would ouerthrow. The writing doth not say, that those two Apostles were one, as you dreame; but rather obserueth that with them, Thomas had two names. Now what inconuenience is in this, that one Apostle should haue two names, or that they should call Thomas also Iudas? Peter had three, if not foure names: Simon, Galat. 2. Cephas, Peter & Bar-Ionas, and Acts 1. Iudas the brother of Iames Matthew calleth Matth. 10. Leb∣beus and Thaddeus. Matthew was also called Mark. 2. Leui. It was a thing most vsuall with the Iewes to haue two or mo names, as appeareth in the genealogie of Christ rehearsed by Matthew and Luke, who vse many wordes in that Catalogue, no where recorded in other Scriptures. And since Thom in Hebrew, whence Thomas commeth, doth sig∣nifie no more but a Twinne, which name is common to both the brethren borne at one time; it must needs be that Thomas then had an other name to distinguish him frō his brother. This therfore is no iust exception, to discredit that auncient Record with a thing most vsuall among the Iewes. Againe with the Syria not skilfull in the He∣brew tongue, how easie a skippe was it in steed of a Iew, to conceaue Iehudah, which is Iudas; ( he and Iod being letters, that are often changed one from another:) and where the writer would haue said; a Ie which was Thomas nt Thaddeus, so to set it downe as if it were Iehuda, which was Thomas, sent Thaddeus. Yea the Syriack words for a Iew and Iudas, and differ but a od, which in auncient writings is soone worne out of sight: I omit other diuersiti s, which might easily happen in the Greeke; as that Iu as sent Thaddeus, which al Thomas did, one small title added to the Article to make it the uter relatiue; or changing their places, & saying, , Iudas and also Thomas sent Thaddeus. There is neither Greeke nor Latin Father, in whose Treatises I will not readily find greater st ps. This I may coniecture, because Nicephor. li. 2. ca. 40. Nicephorus writeth, that Iudas the brother of Iames came after to the Citie of Edessa, the Citie of king Abaga e which also Bed in 1. ca. Acto um. Bede and Oecumen. pro∣legom in Acta. Oecu∣menius doe witnesse and supplying what wanted in Thaddeus ministerie, there ended his life, and so might be one of those that sent him. But you that thinke this so great a matter in the recordes of Edessa, what say you to the Syriack translatour of the new Testament, who twice calleth this Iudas the Apostle, the Luke 6. Acts 1. sonne of Iames, where in∣deed he was the brother of Iames, and the Sonne of Alpheus? If you will excuse him, for that he neuer saw the Epistle of Iude, where hee calleth himselfe the Iudae epist. brother of Iames: how great reason then is it to excuse the men of Edessa, that were ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, and altogether vnacquainted with the Scriptures at that time, when this was written; if they put he for Iod, which letters are often permuted the one for the other? howbeit, as I first said, I see no ground of any iust challenge in this, that the record, which is auncient, importeth Thomas to be called Iudas in the place where he liued and died farre from Iewrie, which was a thing very common among the Iewes in their owne countrie: or Thomas to be called a Iew, and thereby to distinguish him from others that were not Iewes. Defenc. pag. 20 . li 16. Secondly we may probably conceiue another error, that this Thaddeus (one of the 70.) seeme h to be mistaken in the Syrian writing for Thaddeus one of the twelue Apostles. ] This is rather an error in you to thinke, that none were called Apostles but the twelue, or More Apostles then twelue. that Apostle doth not sometimes signifie a Messenger. Christ himself is called the Hebr. 3. Apo∣stle of our profession. Paul saith to the Philippians, Philip. 2. Epaphroditus your Apostle; and to the Corinthians he saith of some sent by him with Titus, Corinth. 8. They are the Apostles of the Churches. And to the Romanes he Rom. 16. saluteth Andronicus and Iunia, which are honorable , in the (number of the) Apostles. He chalengeth others for 2. Cor. 11. transforming themselues into the apostles of Christ, not that they affirmed thēselues to be of the twelue, (for Paul himselfe was none of them) but they pretended to be sent of Christ, when they were not. And so Christ meant when he said to the Angel of Ephesus, Reuel. 2. Thou hast examined them which say they are Apostles, & are not; that is which say, I sent them, when I did not. Now the Syriack writer taking knowledge, that Thomas was Eusebij li. 1. ca. 13. , an Apostle one of the twelue, and that he sent Thaddeus, , his brother one of the number of the 70. Disciples of Christ: how could he after erre so much, as to meane that Thaddeus was one of the twelue Apostles, specially the next wordes being: , one of the seuentie. Wherefore this is worse then a ca ill, when the wordes inferre no such thing to collect contrarieties vpon your owne conceits. He sent Thaddeus, as Christs messenger, (or their Apostle) being one of the seuentie. Defenc. pag. 203. li. 18. Further this counterfeit Thaddeus was content to receaue (and did receaue) euen from a king himselfe and also (as it seemeth) from one of his nobles Adoration and worship. Where∣as the true seruants of Christ Peter and the Angel refused vtterly the same in such very ma∣ner offered vnto them by meaner persons in respect of state. Therefore this Thaddeus was some false Apostle; and came not by Christs sending. ] By this reason, if it were any thing worth, you may prooue many Patriarkes and Prophets to be idolaters, and aswell re∣ceiuers, as giuers of that adoration, which you suppose is due to God alone. Omit, that the word heere vsed, is with Suidas and Phauorinus as much as to approch or draw neere to a man: and that Budeus obserueth it in the eccleasti∣call historie to be taken for a reuerend salutation; and so the King approched, or reuerently saluted Thaddeus; let it stand for bowing the bodie, which is a signe of reuerence or submission in the Scriptures; what inferre you thence? that the King, beholding the face of Thaddeus at his entrance in to shine with a strange and diuine brightnes, did him reuerence contrarie to the custome of Kings, which receaue from others, and giue not reuerence to others? If you thinke this word, , he bow∣ed himselfe to Thaddeus, is more then the godly may yeelde to men, or take from men; you foolishly deceaue your selfe. Of Abraham the Scripture saith, that speaking with the Hittites for a place to bury his dead, vpon their gentle and friendly answere, Genes. 23. vers. 7. , hee bowed himselfe to the people of the Land. Of Iacob when he met his Brother Esau, the Scripture saith, Genes. 33. ; he bowed him∣selfe to the earth seauen times: So Ibid. vers. 7. & 6. Leah and her children, Rachel and Ioseph, Iacobs maides and their children, euery troupe of them, bowed themselues to Esau. Moses said to Pharoh, Exod. 11. all these (thy) seruants shall come downe to me, , and shall bow them selues to me. So afterward Moses went out to Exod. 18. meete his Father in Law, , and gently or reuerently saluted him. Infinite are the pla∣ces in Scripture, where the word is vsed in that sense; and noteth the dutifull, friend∣ly, or fauorable respect had to Superiours, Equals, and Inferiours by bowing the Body. Now whether it were meete for a King gently to intreate, or reuerently to receaue the Messenger of Christ, directed to him to cure him selfe of his sicknesse in this life, and to giue him assurance of eternall life, being no subiect of his, but a stranger sent vnto him; this is all that can be doubted. Wherein though I be most willing to reserue to Princes, not onely their Soueraigntie ouer their Subiects, but their dignitie towards strangers, yet see I no cause, but when they receaue any spe∣ciall graces or blessings of God by the hands of men not subiected to them, they should adore the giuer, which is God; and acknowledge the bringer. Lnke. 10. He that de∣spiseth you, de seth me, saith our Sauiour excepting no man. The Apostle commen∣deth the Galathians for Galat. 4. receauing him as an Angell of God; and chargeth the faith∣full to receaue their godly Pastours Philip. 2. with all ioy in the Lord, and to haue them in honor. You and your adherents, when you take vpon you to censure Princes in your Con∣sistories, will not absolue them without some signe of submission, such as you like. And call you Thaddeus, sent of purpose to cure a Prince of his bodily and ghostly diseases, a false Apostle because the good King glad of his comming rose from his Seate, and bowed to him, as to the Seruant and Messenger of so great a Lord and Benefactour, as he beleeued Christ to be? Peter and the Angell, you say, vtterly refused the same in such very manner offered Angels and good en haue recei∣ued the bowing of the body. vnto them by meaner persons. ] Haue you so little good manner, that you know not the difference betwixt bowing the body as Abraham did to the Sonnes of CHETH, and MOSES to IETHRO; and falling flat at an others feete to giue him worship, as Cornelius did to Peter, and S. Iohn to the Angell? of Cornelius Luke saith, Acts. 10. , falling at (Peters) feete, he worshipped him. And Saint Iohn saith of himselfe, Reuel. 19. . And I fell downe at his feete to worship him. This the Angell refused in Iohn; but the bowing of the Body euen to the ground the two Angels refused not from Genes. 19. Loth; and Christ himselfe said to the Angell of Philadelphia; Reuel. 3. Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Sa∣tan, which call themselues Iewes and are not, to come, , and bow themselues at thy feete. Yea Dauid, when he was a priuate man, gaue this kind of reuerence to 1. Sam. 24. ve s. 9. Saul; and being a King receaued it of 1. Sam. 25. ve s. 23. Abigail; 2. Sam. 9. vers. 6. Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 14. Ioab, 2. Sam. 14. Absalon, 2. Sam. 18. Ahimaas, 2. Sam. 24. Aranah, and from 1. King. 1. Nathan the Prophet: which if it wholy pertained to God, could not be giuen to men nor Angels without danger of Idolatrie. But the deuotion of the hart ioyned with the submission of the body, and testified thereby, is adoration due to God alone; and differeth much from ciuill cur∣tesie and duetie reserued for Magistrates, friends, and strangers. Since then there is no such thing reported of Thaddeus, that the King fell at his feete, why compare you these examples together, which are so farre distant ech from other? of Abdus the Sonne of Abdus it is said, that hauing the goute, (and therefore not able to stand) Eusebij li. 1. ca. 13. he fell at the feet of Thaddeus, and with praiers & laying on of hands was healed. Where perchance you will mislike, that Abdus was suffered to kneele, whiles praiers were said ouer him; & hands imposed on him, that he might recou r; but since this submission was to God, and not to man, and dured the time, that prayers were made to God for him; I see no iust cause of condemning Thaddeus for suffering men to kneele, whiles they asked ought at Gods hands. Now what if this were profered to Thaddeus, doth that prooue, he therefore ac∣cepted it? had he written the Storie of himselfe, it had beene his duetie, ot onely to refuse that, which was vnlawfull, (if it were more then was permitted to the seruants of Christ, which we doe not know) but to witnesse his refusall. But others not then well acquainted with Christian Religion being the writers thereof, how easily might they report the one, and omit the other? Looke to the Story of Daniell, and see whe∣ther he doth not say of him selfe, that Daniel. 2. vers. 46. King Nabnchad-nezzar fell vpon his face, , and bowed himselfe to Daniell, and willed them to offer Sacrifice, and sweete odours vnto him. This the King profered by Daniels owne confession and though we doe not doubt but Den el refused it, and otherwise aduised the king; yet there is no such thing recorded in the Text. Hence if you will conclude Daniel to be a false Prophet, you shall shew your selfe to be a rash, false and wicked teacher: but if you will excuse him, because he was one that feared God, and knew his duty, though there be no mention made of his deniall; what spleene mooueth you to con∣demne Thaddeus, being not him selfe the writer of the Storie, and one that was not onely trained vp in Moses Law, but a Disciple of Christs, and sent by him to preach, and which more is, endued with the power of the holy Ghost to heale the sicke, to plant the Gospell, and conuert nations vnto the faith? Defenc. pag. 203. 27. Fourthly, I doe not see how it can possibly be true which this Thaddeus saith, that Christ ascended vp to his Father with a great multitude; seeing the Scripture sheweth how after fortie dayes he ascended in all their sights alone vp to heauen. ] Might Christ doe nothing, but he must first acquaint you with it, that you take so straight a view, who went vp to heauen with him? The Apostle noteth that God said of his Sonne, when he brought him into the world, Hebr . Let all the Angels of God worship him. Can you tell when this was done? Christ Coloss 2. spoiled powers, saith Paul, and principalities, and made an open shew of them. It would trouble you to tell; how, where, and when. So, Christ phes. 4. ascending on high, led captiuitie captiue. Who knoweth how farre, or how many? that he ascended to his Father with a multitude, may be referred either to Angels, or men. If all the Angels adored him, when he came into the world; what did they, when he ascended to heauen? Nazianzene saith, If Christ ascend to heauen, ascend thou with him; and ioyne thy selfe to the Angels, that accompanie him or receiue him. So Cyprian. Non indiget vectoribus Angelis, sed precedentes & subsequentes applaudebant victori. Christ ascending needed not Angels to beare him, but they going before and following applauded him as a conquerer. And Austen. August. in Psal. 90. Sublatus est Christus in manibus Ang lorum, quando as∣sumptus est in caelum, non quia, si non portarent Angeli, ruiturus erat; s d quia obsequeban∣tur Regi. Christ was caried vp by the handes of the Angels when he ascended to heauen not that he should haue fallen, if he had not beene stayed by Angels; but that they might serue their King. And touching men, why might not Thaddeus speake this of those, that were raised out of their graues, when Christ rose from the dead, since they were par∣takers of Christs resurrection, why should they be reiected from his ascension? They rose from the dead, not to die againe, much lesse to bee left wandring on the earth. Ascend before Christ they could not, he was in all things as the head to haue the pre∣eminence. Then must they ascend with him, or after him; neither of which is ex∣presly mentioned in the Scriptures. It appeareth by Tertullian, the Church in his time was opposite to his conceit, and made him this answere; Tertull. de anima. ca 55. Our abode after death, (which there is called sleeping.) is in Paradise, quò iam tunc & Patriarch & Prophetae appendices dominicae resurrectionis ab inferis migrauerunt; whither the Patriarkes and Pro∣phets, that were dependents on the Lords resurrection, p ssed euen then (with him) FROM THE PLACES BELOW. Cyprian saith of Christ, Cyprian. de resurrectione Christs. spolians Inferos, & captiuos prae∣mittens ad superos, spoiling the places below, and sending the captiues before towards heauen. Austen saith, August. de tempore sermo. 138. Reddunt Infernavictorem, & superna suscipiunt triumphantem. Hell re∣storeth him a conquerer, and heauen receiueth him a Triumpher. Where then the Apo∣stle saith, that Coloss. 2. Christ triumphed ouer powers and principalities in his owne person, and likewise that he Eph s. 4. ascended on high, leading captiuitie captiue, which prooueth his ascent to heauen to be the fulnesse and perfection of his triumph: since triumphes amongst mortall men are not secret nor solitarie; shall we thinke that Christs triumphant ascen∣sion Triumphs are not solitarie. to heauen was the close conueying of him alone into heauen, neither Angels, nor man attending, nor magnifying him? or rather, as Peter saith, 1. Peter 3. he went to hea n, hauing Angels, powers, and mights subiected to him, that is all sorts and orders, were they neuer so excellent, high, or mightie; seruing, submitting, confessing, and applauding his humane nature, as the subduer of all his enemies, and Sauiour of all his Elect? Where you would faine perswade the world, that the Defenc. pag. 201. li. 4. Apostles Creed was not in the primitiue Churches, which we haue now, yea that at irst it had no exact for me at all; This is the way to discredite all thinges besides your owne deuices. You may say as much against some parts of the Scriptures, as you do against some parts of the Creed. Some Scriptures ncertaine for a t me as well as the Creede. For the Scriptures themselues were not fully receiued in all places, no not in Eusebius time. He saith, the useb eccle∣siast. istor. 3 li.. ca. 25. Epistle of Iames, of Iude, the second of Peter, the second and third of Iohn, are contradicted; as not written by those Apostles. The Epistle to the Hebrewes was for a while Ibidem. li 3. ca. 4. contradicted by the Church of Rome not to be Pauls. Eusebius report is the truer, because the Churches of Syria did not receiue the second Epistle of Pe∣ter, nor the second and third of Iohn, nor the Epistle of Iude, nor the Apocalypse; as appeareth to this day by the translation of the new Testament into their tongue, which wanteth all these bookes, as no approoued parts of Scripture. The like might be sayd for the Churches of Arabia. Will you hence conclude, that these parts of Scripture were not Apostolike, or that we neede not receaue them now, because they were formerly doubted of? The Creede we doe not vrge, as vndoubtedly written by all the Apostles, for then it must needes be Canonicall Scripture; but we vrge it as the best and perfectest forme of faith, which was deliuered to the Christians at the first planting of the Gospell by the direction and agreement of the Apostles, and kept and professed in some of the most famous places; which when the Church of Christ had well considered and examined, she receiued and preferred before all others. Now that this forme of faith, which we haue, was both in auncient times, and diuers places preserued and professed as comming from the first erectors of the Churches; you haue seene the testimonies of Cyrill for Ierusalem, of Chrysostome for Antioche, of Austen for Africa, of Ruffine for Aquileia, of Venantius for Poyctiers: and this very Article, he descended to hell, is by them witnessed to haue beene then in their Creedes: of whom no doubt can be made, saue of Austen onely, because he sometimes repea∣teth the Creede without that clause, which yet he confesseth to be a maine point of the Christian faith. That in all places they did varie from this forme, though you pretend the names of Ignatius, Irenaeus, Iustine, Tertullian, Origen, &c. yet they prooue no such thing. These Fathers do often, as learned discoursers, enlarge the parts of the Creed; & somtimes, as short comprisers of it, they contract the summe thereof into fewer wordes: but yet Twelue parts of the Creed. the most, and most famous churches had from the beginning a briefe collection of the Christian faith deliuered to the simple people to be learned and said by heart, be∣fore they could be baptized. Of this doe many learned and auncient Fathers beare witnesse. Ambros. serm. 38. Duodecim Apostolorum Symbolo sides sancta concepta est. In the Creed of the twelue Apostles, saith Ambrose, is the holy faith conceaued (or comprised.) So Leo Leo epist. 13. ad Pa cheriam. Catholici Symbolibreuis & perfecta confessio d odecim Apostolorum totidem est signata sententijs. The short and perfect confession of the Catholike Creed is seal d vp with twelue sentences of the twelue Apostles. So Ierom. Hiero. p 61. ad ca . 9. In the Creed of our faith and hope, which being deliuered from the Apostles is not written in paper and ke, but in the tables of mens hearts, after the confession of the Trinitie, and vnitie of the Church, all the mysteries of Christian Religion are closed vp with the resurrection of the lesh. Isidore saith, Is orus de e lesiast. offi∣ s li. 2. ca. 3. the Apo∣stles readie to depart one from another, Normam prius sibi futurae praedicationis in commune constituunt: appoint first in common a summe of that they would preach, least s uered in di∣ ers places, they ould propose any diuers or dissonant thing to those, whom they brought to the ertull. de virgi∣ us. ith of Christ. Rabanus Ma rus de Institutione clericorum li. 2. ca. 56. hath the very same wordes. Neither could Tertullian, whose name you vse, haue truely said, r Reg fidei vn a omnino est, sola immobilis, & irreformabilis; there is but one rule of faith, and on∣ly that immooueable and vnchangeable, vnlesse there had beene some forme of faith re∣ceaued in the Church, which no man might alter or change. For how could he saie there is but ONE RVLE, if euery Church had a seuerall rule? Or how was it im∣mooueable or irreformable, if there were no certaine wordes or parts, but euerie man might alter at his will? Tertullian therefore doth not repeat the words of the Creed, which he varieth in euerie place where he citeth it, but he pointeth to the chiefe parts thereof; no where keeping the same words, but in substance the same matter. Against Praxeas the heretike he saith; Tertull. ad∣uers. Praxeam. Hanc regulam ab initio Euangelij decurrisse: This rule (of faith) hath had continuance from the beginning of the Gospell. Against heretikes in generall he saith, Idem de prae∣scriptionibus aduersus hae∣reticos. Haec regula à Christo probabitur instituta: This rule shall be prooued to haue bee e appointed by Christ. And yet in these two places he keepeth not the same wordes, but the same heades, and as it were the same principles of faith. As likewise both these differ in wordes from that rule, which he cited before, being Idem de ve∣landis virgini∣bus. omnino vna, euerie where one, and by no meanes alterable. Irenaeus saith. Irenaeus li. 5. cap. 2. The Church throughout the whole world, euen to the endes of the earth, recea ed from the Apostles and their Disci∣ples, that faith which be bele eth in one God, the Father almightie maker of heauen & earth, &c: and in Iesus Christ the Sonne of God, incarnate for our saluation: and in the holie spi∣rit, which preached by the Prophets the dispensation and comming of God; and the birth of Christ our Lord by the Virgine, his p ssion, resurrection, and ascension with his flesh into heauen; and his comming from heauen in the glory of his Father to recapitulate all: to raise vp all flesh; and to giue iust iudgement in all. Ib. dem li. 1. ca. 3. Th faith the Church disp rsed through the world, hauing receaued, faithfully keepeth, and constantly teacheth, and deliuereth these things as it were with one mouth. For though there be different languages in the worlde, , Yet the summe aud effect of the tradition (or faith deliuered) is one and the same. Neither doe the Churches in Germany otherwise be∣leeue or otherwise teach, nor those in Spaine, nor those in Fraunce, nor those in the East, nor those in Egypt, nor those in Africke, nor those in the middest of the world. So that all the churches in the world had one and the same tradition and rule of faith; and though the wordes in some places did differ, yet in sense they agreed, and the chiefer the churches were, the more was their care to preserue this Creed not written, as Ierom and others confesse, but deliuered and receaued by hart euen from the Apostles and their Disciples. And since the Church of Rome, then one of the most famous Churches in the world, kept this Creede comprised in twelue sentences according to the num∣ber of the twelue Apostles, as Leo testifieth not long after Ru ines time; and Am∣brose said the same in effect euen in Ru ines time, and other Churches likewise both East and West had & retained the same from their first foundation, as Irenaeus witnesseth; It can not be, but the Creede, which we haue at this day, was the verie same which the primitiue churches had and kept; and these auncient Fathers that al∣leage the authoritie thereof, bring not euerie where the exact wordes, but the chiefe parts and grounds thereof, as appeareth by Tertullian who saith; The Rule, or Creed, is one and vnchangeable. notwithstanding he bringeth three seueral variations therof in wordes. For the clause of Christs descent to hell, I haue said before it was retained in many places, though it wanted in the church of Rome, and some other churches of the East; and no doubt the Church of Rome and the rest conceaued no les e by Christes resurrection from the dead, but that he rose conquerer of death and hell, as the prophet foretold he should, in saying: O death, I will be thy death; ô hell, I will bee thy destruction; as Christ professed he did, when he said, I haue the keies of death and hell: and as the great and generall Councels of Ephesus, Chalcedon and Constantinople did expound that Article of the Creed, Christ rose the third day, ha∣uing irst spoiled hell. And vpon this resolution of these generall Councels, and not as you dreame vpon the opinion of Limbus preuailing, the Churches, that wanted that Article which others had, receaued it into their Creed, as contained there before in force and effect, but now they concurred in one consent of faith and wordes, which before they did not. Defenc. pag. 205. li. 19. Our third reason is: if there be no certaine benefit to the godly by Christs going to hell, then doubtlesse he went not thither. But there is no certaine benefit to the godly by Christs going to hell. Therefore doubtlesse he went not thither. ] You profere vs reasons very sel∣dome, but when you push them forth, they want all things that should support them. Your maior heere hath no force in it, your minor hath no trueth; and so your con∣clusion is like a forward bud, that shrincketh before it bloweth. That Christ should triumph ouer powers and principal ies, and all knees of those in heauen, earth, and hell bow vnto him, was aswell for his soueraignty, as for our safety. Your maior then must haue both those parts in it, that if Christs descent thither were neither for his glory not our good, then was it needlesse. But it was both. He was to rise superiour to all his and our enemies, that as in the crosse he submitted his life to the rage & fury of Satan & his members, so when he rose he might be made Lord ouer heauen, earth and hell. It was therefore his right to haue the keyes of death and hell, wherby Satans kingdom aswell in hell as in earth should be subiected to the power of his humane na∣ture, which could not be but beneficiall for vs, whose redeemer and Sauiour he was. Againe what need is there that you should know the depth of Gods counsels, and reason of Christs doings in euery thing, as though you were to take an account of him, what cause he had to doe, as he did? If the Scripture beare witnesse, that Christs soule was not left in hell, though we could not discerne the precise purpose of his descent thither, we may not therefore reiect it as superfluous. But what say you to those two maine points expressed in Scripture; the destroying of Satan, and deliuering of vs from feare of death, which Christ performed by his death? [ Pag 206. li. 11. The benefits all and euery one, (which you euery where rehearse) I most vnfeinedly and religiously beleeue: but what is this to his locall being in hell? ] You acknowledge the words, but not the deeds of Christs destroying and spoiling Satan, through, but not after his death: and so in name, but not in proofe you make him Lord ouer hell, as where he neuer shewed the power and prerogatiue of his humane nature, but onely by taking his body from the graue. Now this doth not answere the reall and actuall subduing of Satans strength and kingdome mentioned in the Scriptures with so magnificent and euident words, as the Apostle vseth; that Christ led captiuity captiue, and made an open shew of powers and principalities, and triumphed ouer them in his owne person. You call these Pag. 2 6. li. 19. blasts of vanity, because I say they were performed on euery part of Satans kingdome, and e∣uen in the place where his chiefest strength and power was, which was hell: but your replies are rather beesoms of infidelity, which would sweepe away whatsoeuer the A∣postle saith of Christs most glorious triumph ouer Satan and his whole kingdome, with the taking of his flesh out of the graue, where it lay dead; and ascribe no more to Christs conquest ouer death and hell, then you doe to all the faithfull, when they shalbe raised from the earth to the fruition of eternall life. This I say is not sufficient in Christs person. For he must not onelie be free himselfe, and the freer of all his from death and hell, but all infernall places and powers were to stoope to him, as Lord of all, when God would bring him to the glory of his resur∣rection. Defen pag. 206. li. 22. This conquest, you say, Christ purchased by his Passion, but hee did not execute it till his resurrection. If hee executed nothing till his resurrection, and purchased all by his Passion, then he did nothing in hell. For his resurrection was distinctly after his supposed being in hell. ] The Apostles wordes are plaine, that Christes crosse was his humiliation. Christ Philip. 2. hum∣bled himselfe being obedient to death, euen the death of the crosse. Then Christes Passion and death were parts of his debasing, and not his triumphing ouer death or hell. After death must his triumph beginne, and not before, nor at the time of his breathing out his soule: but when the time of his resurrection came, God loosed the sorrowes of death before his humane soule, which was not left destitute of glory & soueraintie in hell, and raised his bodie from the graue, restoring him to life as the subduer and Lord of all his enemies, that is as well of hell as of death. You would calculate the minutes, and see what distance of time there was betwixt the returne of Christes soule from hell, and the raising of his bodie from the graue; but this is like the rest of your vanities, to be more then audacious in blasing your owne deuises, and curious in searching Gods secrets reserued to himselfe. What time the soule of Christ ascended to Paradise, or descended to hell, we doe not know; we must leaue that to God; it sufficeth vs, that Christes Soule by the witnesse of holy Scripture was not lest in hell, nor his flesh in the graue, but both restored to life as conquerers of death and hell. Christs resur∣rection sheweth his conquest ouer hell and death. Christes resurrection therefore containeth the bringing of hissoule from hell, and the ioyning of it to his bodie, that both might be restored to celest all and perpetuall glo∣ry; and consequently the subduing of hell, as his soule returned to his bodie, is iustly reputed a part of the glorie of his resurrection. [ Defenc. pag. 205. li 32. I would willingly beleeue you, but alas who sayth so besides your selfe; or onely such as can tell no better then you. ] If auncient Fathers and later writers, if prouinciall & generall Councels did not professe the same that I doe, you might beleeue as you list; but if they all concurre, that this is testified in the Scriptures, which you labour to elude with phrases and figures; then pitie your selfe as stretching and shrinking the Scriptures at your pleasure; pitie not me, who haue the maine consent of all ages, and Christian assemblies (from the Apostles to this very time, wherein we liue) to interpret the wordes of the holy Ghost, as I doe; and to make Christes subduing of hell consequent to his death and precedent to his resurrection. Neither can the Apostles wordes, (that Ch ist Hebr. 2. through death destroyed him, that had power of death, and deliuered all them, which for feare of death were all their life long subiect to bondage) haue any full or effectuall performance, if Christ after death, and before the raising vp of his bodie, did not in that part of his humane na∣ture, which lay not in the graue, shew himselfe the conquerer of Satan and his Infer∣nall kingdome, that by Christes subduing eternall death, and taking the whole power thereof into his hands, we might be assured of our deliuerance from that, which we most feared; which was not the death of the bodie, but the destruction of bodie and soule in hell fire. This Conquest we both beleue; neither may we much differ about Christs man∣hoode must conquere hell. the time, since it must be through his death, and so after he was dead, and before his resurrection; the manner is all that is questioned, which you say was without any pre∣sence of his humane soule, and consequently must be referred to his diuine nature. I a irme the contrarie, that this exaltation, to be Lord ouer heauen, earth and hell; pertained not to Christes Deitie, which neuer wanted that Soueraintie, but to his manhood, which was obedient vnto death, and was therefore aduanced to this hight. And since this conquest ouer hell was reall in proofe, not verball in claime; speciall to Christes person, not generall to all his members; and performed after Christes death, not by Christes diuine, but by his humane nature; this must needs be referred to Christes soule; which might descend to hell, and must before it could shew it selfe vanquisher of hell; and not to his bodie, which lay dead in the graue, and could nei∣ther ascend nor descend till it was restored to life. You make Christ Lord ouer hell, because he kept himselfe from thence; but so were all the faithfull, whose soules were not inclosed in hell; whom yet the Scriptures make not Lords ouer death and hell, but deliuered from both. There must be a conquest peculiar to Christ, whereby he did take all power from them, and reserued it to himselfe, and rose from death, as hauing the keyes of both. The particular manner whereof in time and other such cir∣cumstances, though the Scriptures do not expresse, yet must not the general be doub∣ted, because the Scriptures witnesse, that Christs soule was not left, nor for saken in hell of Gods diuine power and presence, but thence returned as conquerer of all Satans power and Dominion. This the Church of Christ hath alwayes professed, and this may the godly safely bele ue, notwithstanding M. Broughtonsbedlom proclamation, that it is the generall corruption of religion, Scripture, and all learning. Defenc. pag. 206. li. 34. Our fourth reason. There is altogether as great reason, and as vrgent cause, that Christ, whole man, (both soule and bodie) should be present in hell to free vs thence wholy (that is our soules and bodies) as there is that his soule must be there present to free thence our soules. Heere I wish you would answere my proposition without skoffes and taunts and autie disdaine, as your manner is. ] You cannot mocke, and that is great pitie. When your propositi∣ons want not only proofe and trueth, but learning and vnderstanding, shall I say they be sage, wise, & Christian resolutions? your deuices I call dreames, your contradicti∣ons I call contrarieties, your neglect of all Councels and Fathers I call presumption; and your shifting, and outfacing, affirming that which is false, and d nying that which is true, I call vnshamefastnesse, if not impudencie. What other names should I giue them? I professe I cannot flatter you in your fansies, neither see I any cause, why you regarding no man besides your selfe, should thinke your selfe fit to be regarded with the disgrace of all auncients and others. Where the matter is not meet to be reiected with disdaine, I vse it not; and where it is, why should I not? Yet now you would haue a direct and faire answere to your proposition; though you little deserue it, you shall. This which you mention (to wit, our deliuerance from hell) was not the onely cause of Christs descent thither, his owne honour and right, that suffered shame and wrong at Satans hand on the crosse, was the chie e cause of his descent, that after death he might shew himselfe in his manhood the conquerer and destroier of Satans power. This you cleane leaue out of your proposition, because you would be sure to bring nothing that should be sound and sufficient. Againe your proposition, as it standeth, hath no strength in it besides your owne imagination. For hell once subdued and conquered by Christ needeth not the second time to be conquered. Since then till the day of iudgement hell hath no more but the soules of the wicked, (some few ex∣cepted who descended aliue to hell;) what needed more then the soule of Christ to conquer hell? Thirdly, s ing the body is cast into hell to increase the paines of the soule; the soule being acquited and freed from hell, there is no cause the body should goe thither. And so in respect aswell of Gods ordinance till the day of doome, as of the soules preeminence in and ouer the body, the soule of Christ after death might iustly discharge our bodies and soules from all the power and claime that Satan had against vs. Lastly, the proportion, which Fulgentius, Athanasius, and others mention, as deriued from the Scriptures, that as the two parts of man after death were for sinne appointed to two seuerall places; his soule to hell, and his body to the graue; so the Redeemer did etch man backe againe from those two places of condemnation, with the presence of his soule subduing hell, and of his body resisting corruption; this p oportion, I say, g ounded on the Scriptures is more then you can any way confute, or open your mouth against with any trueth. You aske, Pag. 2 7. li. 26. why this going to hell by our Sauiour was not rather af er his resurrection, when both pa ts were ioined together. First, because by death, which is the separa∣ting of the soule from the body, Christ was to destroy both death and hell. Next, he was to rise conquerer of them both; and not after his resurrection, which was a con∣quest Christ was to rise full con∣querer of hell and death. of both, to reconquer them againe. This therefore is an vnwise demand, and sheweth that you doe not vnderstand, what belongeth to Christs death or resurrecti∣on, who was to rise the full conquerer and Lord of all his enemies in his owne per∣son, and not a ter his resurrection to make a new conquest ouer them. And there∣fore your heaping of seuenteen places of Scripture in the Pa . 207. ad marginem l . 31. margine of your booke, to shew that Christ died and rose againe, is to let men see, that you haue emptied your note Booke, and there find that Christ did rise from the dead. To which if you will adde, which is the true intent of all those places, that Christ was to rise a perfect con∣querer of death and hell you shall make so many proofes that Christ conquered both before and with his resurrection, and by no meanes after it. For his resurrection was manifest proofe, that neither his soule was forsaken in hel, nor his flesh left to see corruption in the graue; and therefore both hell and death were perfectly subdued, when he ioined againe his soule to his body, and aduanced them both to an immortall and celestiall life. Considering then whence the parts of Christs manhood were taken, when he rose from the dead, to wit, his soule from h ll, where it was not forsaken, and his body from the graue, where it was not corrupted; you shall easily see, if you doe not wilfully shut your eies, that the power and force of Christs resurrection beganne with the subduing of hell by his soule, and ouermastering putrifaction by his body. Against whose soule and body since neither destruction nor corruption could preuaile it was not possible, but he should rise vanquisher and Lord of death and hell. And where you thinke it absurd, that one part of Christ, (his soule) should gloriously triumph, the other, (his body) ALL THIS WHILE lying in humiliation; the time was not so long, as you would haue it seeme; since these things were done in that shortnesse and neerenesse of me which pleased God; and the soule once remoued from the body, whether in heauen or in hell, was first to goe towards, and to the body, before that could receaue life from the soule; and so of force the glory of the soule must begin before the glory of the body. And euen according to your owne conceit, if the soule were in heauen all the while, that the body lay dead in the graue; did not the exalta∣tion of the soule in heauen begin a good while before the body, which the third day was restored to life, and till that time lay senselesse in the dishonor and dominion of the graue, as you conceaue? And is this so strange a thing with you in Christian reli∣gion, that Christs soule should enioy honor, blisse, and glory before the body, when the soules of the faithfull so many hundred yeeres before their bodies are partakers of heauenly ioy? Your likelihoode, that Defenc. pag. 207. li. 37. Christ would cleere himselfe first wholy and intirely in both parts before he would begin to strip and spoyle Satan for vs; Pag. 208. li. 1. seeing it is a greater degree of victorie to spoyle the enemy and to treade him vnder foote, then to get freedome to himselfe; Hath no likelihood but in your owne eyes. If Christ were in doubt of the victorie, or Christ ordered his conquest most to Satans shame. afraide of the enemie, it were good policie first to make him selfe sure, and after to helpe others; but the Sonne of God, hauing no such doubt nor dread, might de∣stroy and spoile those Infernall places and powers, when & as pleased him selfe with the most dishonour and shame that might be to Satan and his kingdome. For as he would die shew his power in raising himselfe from the dead, so when he was dead he would conquere Satan, that his strength might the more appeare in dissoluing the sorrowes of death, and returning to life with the full command ouer death and hell. And therefore your strong likelihoods, as you call them, are childish conceits and distrusts of Christs power and habilitie to performe his victory. Like to these are those other points which you aske. Pag. 208. li. 15. Why might not one part of Christ haue sufficed in his suffe∣rings, righteousnesse & obedience (which Apollinaris an heretick affirmed,) as well as that one part serued to triumph for vs in hell? ] Christ suffered for vs in this life, where body and soule were ioyned together in suffering and meriting; but he conquered hell by death, that is after death, when the Soule was yet seuered from the Body. What Apollinaris the Heretick affirmed, you vnderstand not, if you thinke he did hold that the Soule of Christ did suffer or merite for vs: his heresie was, that Christ had no humane Soule, but his Deitie did mooue and rule his body in steede of a Soule. Next you aske, [ Pag. 208. li. 18. Why the body ouer comming corruption in the graue, which I call a part of Satans kingdome, did not thereby destroy the whole kingdome of Satan, and so saue our Soules, that Christ might not haue needed to haue come to hell for that purpose? ] He that hath nought else to doing, may intend to aske such idle questions. Why God would haue the flesh of his Sonne by resisting corruption in the graue to assure our bodies of incorruption; and his Soule by subduing hell, to free our Soules from the power and feare of hell; you were best aske him a reason, whose will is the rule of all things: but since we were in danger and feare of both deaths, least the one should lead vs to the other, which was most to be feared; what reason can you bring against the Counsell and wisdome of God confirming vs against the power of death and hell, by the conquest of both parts of Christs manhoode ouer both his and our enemies? You would otherwise haue ordered our safetie and indemnitie, from death and hell, if your aduise had been asked; but nourish these impieties at home in your bosome; blaze them not so busily to the world, as if you would beleeue nothing till you saw a reason thereof that fitted your fansie. What God might haue done, is not for you nor me to aske; what improportion or discohaerence with the Christian faith is there in this, that the power of Christs Soule and Body superiour to hell and to the graue, should assure our Bodies and Soules the victorie ouer both in such sort and at such time, as God hath appointed? Defenc. pag. 208 li. 2 . If they meane, that Christs flesh being in the graue and his soule being in hell did seue∣rally and distinctly saue our flesh and our soules, then how will you be reconciled to them, who doe denie that point? You would faine put downe Fulgentius, Athanasius, and others; as if they did not vnderstand the first points of their Catechisme, that the ioynt Re∣demption of our Soules and Bodies was obtained by the ioynt-sufferings of Christ in Soule and Body on the Crosse; but yet since we are to die, when our Soules shall be seuered from our bodies; to assure vs that our Soules are freed by the merits of his passion from the danger of hell, and our bodies shall be raised from the dust of the earth, why might it not please the Sonne of God by the presence of his body in the graue without corruption to confirme the Resurrection of our bodies from corrup∣tion, and by the presence of his Soule in hell, subduing the power and kingdome of Satan, to strengthen our faith, that our Soules seuered from our bodies shall be free from all danger and feare of hell, which he hath conquered in his owne person, and whereof he hath taken the keyes into his hands, as him selfe affirmeth? This was no new sauing of our Soules and bodies, as you suppose; but rather the securing of vs by his example, that our Soules and bodies seuered by death, shall be subiected to nei∣ther, but be reserued to eternall life, that we may be partakers of his victorie. Defenc. pag. 208. li. 28. Further, why was it needefull, that an actuall presence of his manhoode should be in hell, seeing indeede it is certaine, that the whole actuall triumph of Christ ouer Satan proceedeth not of the proper vertue of the manhood, but only from the vertue & power of the Godhead of Christ? Conflict between the godhead of Christ & Satan there neither was, nor might Christs man∣hood was to con∣quere though by power of his Godhead. be any: but as by Adams disobedience Satan gained vs into his possession, so by the obedience of Christs manhood euen to the death, Satan lost vs out of his power and dominion. Neither might the Deitie of Christ through death be made Lord ouer all his enemies, except you will touch on a trick of Arianisme; but the manhoode of Christ for his submission vnto death receiued the keyes of death & hell, and power to dispose of Satans kingdome at his pleasure. Now had not those Infernall powers been subiected to the Soule of Christ after death, how should it haue appeared that his manhood, not his godhead, had the conquest ouer Satans strongest holds, and that the keves of death and hell were resigned vnto him? for since the Scripture beareth witnesse, that his Soule was not for saken in hell, that is not there left destitute of his di∣uine power & glory, what resistance could be made, that he should not returne thence the Lord and Ruler of all his enemies, whereof hell and Satan were the chiefest? His godhead then was the giuer, but his manhoode was the receauer of this power and pre minence ouer hell & Satan, that they for euer should stoupe to him, and see both what wrong they did him, and what vengeance was heaped on them; as also how righteous mans redemption was by the Crosse and death; of the Sonne of God. . Lastly, why did not the presence of his flesh in the graue keepe ours, that it should not come there, or at least that it should neuer putrifie nor rot, as his flesh did not? ] Euen be∣cause . such was Gods will, it should not. God by his sentence pronounced on Adam and his ofspring, adiudged them to returne to dust, from which Christ shall raise them at the last day, and not before. And from dust to restore them, sheweth greater pow∣er in Christ then to preserue them from dust. This therefore verifieth the iustice, and magnifieth the power of God; and for you to aske, why it might not be aswell other∣wise, as so; is to enter more saucely then wisely into those things, which you should religiously and faithfully beleeue. And where you say, all these sequels are as good and as li ly as my assertion. you shew your accustomed boldnesse, if not haughtinesse, that condemne so many learned and auncient fathers for plaine fooles in not seeing, what urd consequences depended on their assertion. How beit in the midst of your pride you shew little wit, that all this while you can light on none other reason of Christes descent to hell, but onely this that we should neuer come there. This indeed was one of the causes, euen to secure vs by his conquest, that hee hath the keyes of death and hell; and therefore we shall not need to feare either, since both are wholy subiected and submitted to his power, though he stay the time prefixed by his father, when we shall be partakers of his victorie ouer death at the end of the world, as we are ouer hell at our departing hence; assuring vs in this life by faith in him, that we neede not feare either death or hell, both which he hath conquered. Defenc. pag. 202. li. 7. I made this argument in my former Treatise; that Christes descending into hell (if euer he did so) could not be iudged any part of his exaltation or glorification. To which your reply is, I know not whether more strange or skornefull. But you resolue that these words, hee de∣scended to hell, importeth his exaltation and triumph. ] This argument was drawen from your imagination taking vpon you to dispose of the parts of the Creede as best pleased you, which because I reiected, as wanting all warrant besides your owne note booke, you interpret it to be a strange and skornefull answere. Howbeit there is no strangenesse in mine answere, but to him that neuer peeped farder then in his owne shell. The Fathers with one consent referre that clause to Christs Conquest ouer hell. Christ Athanas. de incarn. Christi. had power, (saith Athanasius) in the graue to shew incorruption, and in his descent to Hades (hell) to dissolue death, and to proclaime to all resurrection. Cyprian. Cyprianus de passione Christi. When in Christs presence hell being broken open, captiuitie was captiuated, his conquering soule presen∣ted to the sight of his Father, returned to her bodie without delay. Epiphanius. Epiphanius in 80. heresium. anacephalaiosi. Christ was crucified, buried, he descended to hell in his Deitie and his soule, he tooke captiuitie cap∣tiue, and rose the third day with his holy bodie. That he was Idem in An∣corat . free among the dead, signifieth hell had no power ouer him, but that of his owne accord he descended to heli with his soule, be∣cause it was impossible he should be held of it. So Austen. August ser . 138. & 131. Reddunt Inferna victorem. Hell restored him a conquerer; and whiles his bodie lay in the graue, his soule triumphed ouer hell. The Councels prouinciall and generall do the like, Concilium To∣leta. 4. ca. 10. & Arelatens. ca. 1. Christ descended to hell, & deuicto mortis imperio, and subduing the kingdome of death, rose the third day. Euen as the gene∣rall Councels of Ephesus and Constantinople say. Yea the later writers, as Innocent. de mysterijsmissae. li. 2. ca. 50. Innocen∣tius, Durand. in rationali. diui∣norum li. 4. rub. de Symbolo. Durandus, and others ioyne this clause with Christs resurrection, and make them both but one Article of our faith, as descendit ad inferna, tertia die resurrexit, he descen∣ded to hell, and rose the third day, they set for the fift Article of the Creede; euen as that auncient writer among Saint Austens Appendix de diuersis sermo. 42. workes did before them. So that neither Elder, nor later writers ioyne with you in this conceit of yours; that Christes descent to hell was the lowest part of his humiliation; they directly professe it to be the first part of his exaltation, and a preamble to his resurrection. And where you thinke it much, that his descending should belong to his exaltation, not the place, but the pur∣pose of his descent maketh that alteration. The Scripture saith. 1. Thess. 4. ver. 16. The Lord himselfe shall descend from heauen with a shoute and with the trumpet of God, when he shall come to iudge the quicke and dead: and yet that descent shall be the greatest part of his glorie. Defenc. pag. 209. li. 12. You skoffe at me for the like, as if I had said his descending was ascending, and heauen was Hell. But herein you affirmevntruely. First I say though his soule leauing his bodie ascen∣ded, yet this is not meant by that phrase, he descended to Hades. Secondly, I neuer sayd that Hades signified heauen, although some in Hades are in heauen. Thirdly, much lesse did I euer say that hell is heauen. ] The interpretation, which you made of the Article, Christ de∣scended to hell, I sayd had none other matter of faith in it (except you thought the Church in her Creede went to varying of phrases) but that Christs soule ascended to heauen. For where Hades in the Creede must signifie not a priuation, nor a generall and indefinite condition, (as if Christ went some whither, yet no man knew whither) but a determined place, whither Christs soule after death repaired; that place of force must be heauen or hell. And since by no meanes you will haue Christs soule descend to hell, as the whole Church hath hitherto receaued and beleeued, you must acknow∣ledge the meaning of that Article to be, that Christs soule ascended to heauen: and so whether you will or no, if that be the effect and intent of those wordes in the Creede, descending must be taken for ascending, and hell for heauen. This is not meant, you say, by that phrase. ] It is one of your skilles to bring Articles of the Creede to be phrases, as if the Apostles and their followers, which were the first planters of Churches, had ment to teach the simple people not principles of faith, but certaine Greeke or He∣brew phrases. He that will suffer you to turne his faith into a phrase, let him take heed that insteed of heauen he light not on hel, which is one of your chiefe phrases. [ But you neuer said that Hades signified heauen. You may saue this from a lie, if you be not he that wrote this part of your booke; as by the crossing and changing of your owne assertions it is euident to euery wise man, you did not: but otherwise, if the quoting of other mens authoritie to prooue Hades to be heauen, may conuince you to be of that mind with them, whom you cite for that purpose; you haue most plainely auouched hades to import and containe heauen. Whose words are these, I pray you, in your Treatise? Treat. pag. 97. li. 28. This most singular place sheweth, that Hades with them is not properly for hell, but for the world of the dead; and SOMETIMES AS NAMELY HEERE EVEN FOR HEA∣VEN. So in the next page. Pag. 98. li. 6. Againe he saith of heauen, that it is an vnseene estate, EVEN HADES, AS IT IS (COMMONLY) CALLED. li. 10. Wherefore it is plaine by Plato, Hades sometime may bee vnderstood for heauen; yea and with the Grecians it was a common phrase. li. 27. And Stephan iteth Plutarch concerning the godly departing & being in hades, that is in heauen, he meant I thinke, and not in hell. Infinite places might be brought to like purpose, but these may suffice; which whether they, & you by them auouch hades to be taken for heauen or no, I leaue to the iudgement of the Reader, as also whether this be not impudent facing, and worthy of other wordes, at which you take so much of∣fence. Yea this very Article Christ d scended to Hades, you expound by pretence of Bullingers wordes, Treat pag. 102. he did goe to Abrahams osome, that is into heauen. That you auouch Philip. 2. for it, is more strange: where we haue not one word of his lo∣call Defenc. pag. 171. being in hell. And that the Coloss. 2. should prooue it, passeth all the rest. Where, (though we graunt you your reading) yet the expresse text referreth that triumph to Christes crosse: which you openly deny. ] You doe well to make an Apologie for your impudency and facing, the next sentence before; but if you reclaime those t ades of yours, you re∣nounce the most part of your obiections and probations in this your defence. For doe I cite either of these places in the Pages, which you quote, to prooue Christes descent after death to the place of hell? When you in your proud and scorne ull hu∣mour mocked at Christes actuall conquest and t iumph ouer hell in generall, and called it a Treat. pa . 164. woorthie priuiledge surely, and very hon rable, to iumph and insult vp∣on the ice miserable & wofull wretches in their pre t vn eakable damnation; adding, Pag. 154. Pag. 156. All the world knoweth, it is the most in glorious and vilest debasing; to represse this disdainfull and proud conceit of yours, I told you, Concl s. pa. 3 . The Apostle made it a part of Christes high exaltation, that euerie knec as well of things vnder earth, as of things in hea∣nen should bow vnto him; and did you thinke it a matter to be mocked and derided? and of the place to the Colossians I said, Conclus. pa. 358. What l iteth then, since these wordes were not ve∣rified on the crosse, but they did take place in his resurrection; and therein, as by the effects it was most euident and apparant to the eies of all men, he did spoile powers, and Principalities, and made a shew of them openly, and triumphed ouer them in his owne person? When I speake of things euident and apparent to all mens eies, I speake not of things done in hell, where no man liuing was present; but prooued against you as well by your own wordes, as by the Apostles, that this triumph was not perfourmed and executed on the crosse, though there deserued and purchased. For you your selfe debase Christs triumph on the crosse, with woorse wordes then I doe; you say, Treatis. pag. 156. it was a miserable triumph, yea 159. a piteous triumph it was indeede where himselfe remained in such woefull torment where appeared no shew of conquest. I say not so, but that on the crosse Christ humbled himselfe euen vnto death, and thereby merited to be exalted aboue all names and sorts (of creatures) which God after death most gloriously perfourmed vnto him, when euerie knee of those in heauen, on earth, and vnder earth, bowed vn∣to him, and confessed him to be (their) Lord. This was all I said in those places; which you traduce; and yet if I had said more, and applied them to the actuall tri∣umph of Christes soule after death, I wanted not better authoritie so to haue done, then you haue any for so many cart-loades of conc its, as you haue brought vs. But of both these places I haue spoken before what may su ce, and he that will see more thereof, may read what Zanchius hath learnedly and soberly written of those places, Ephes. 4. vers, 9. and Coloss. 2. vers. 15. Where he likewise affirmeth: Zanchius in c. 2. Coloss. v. 15. Patres serè sic explicant, & ex nostris non pauci, neque vulgares; The Fathers for the most part doe so expound it; and of our writers not a few, nor the meanest. Defenc. pag. 209. li. 28. That of the Councels, how Christ rose againe hauing spoiled hell, I easily yeeld; seeing that prooueth not his locall being there. Then first you yeeld, that Hades with all these generall Councels signifieth hell. Next you yeeld that hell was spoyled by Christ be∣fore he rose; for he rose hauing spoyled hell. Thirdly you yeeld, that this was done by Christes manhood, since his Godhead can be said in no wise to rise from the dead; and consequently by his soule, since he spoiled hell before he rose, when yet his bodie was dead in the graue. There remaineth no more but this question, whether the soule of Christdid this absent from the place, or present in the place, which was spoiled. And since the scriptures auouch, that Christs soule was in Hades, which was spoiled; as these three generall Councels assirme; it is without question, that Christes soule present in hell, spoiled hell before his resurrection, and so returned to his bodie; which is the very point you all this while denied, and with so much lost labour impugned. And least this cause should depend on your slipper turnes and returnes, we must vnder∣stand, that not only the generall Councell of Acta conc ij Ephes. Ephesus confirmed and allowed these wordes in the Synodall Epistle of Cyrill to Nestorius, but the Councell of Chalced. con∣cilium. act. 5. Chalce∣don and the second Councell of Constantinop. concilium act. 6. Constantinople ratified the same. So that what sense Cyrill had in these wordes, the same did the Councell of Ephesus follow, Cyrill himselfe there sitting, and declaring his owne meaning. Yea the Treatises of Cyrill ex∣pounding these wordes are inserted into the Acts of the Councell of Ephesus, which the Councels of Chalcedon and Constantinople doe fully approoue. Now what Cy∣rill meant by spoiling hades, appeareth in these words. Cyrill de recta fide ad Reginas li. 2. ca. quòd Christus in vir∣tute patris re∣surrexit à mor∣t is. Our Lord Iesus, saith Cyrill, , hauing spoyled death, and loosed the number of soules, that were detained in the d nnes there, rose the third day. Idem de recta fide ad Theodo∣sium. We must not say that the Deitie of the onely begot∣ten returned from the denns vnder the earth, but his soule descended to hades, and vsing his diuine power and authoritie, , shewed it selfe to the soules there, and said to them in bands, come forth; and to them in darkenesse, receiue light. This Cyrill tooke from Athanasius, whom he much followed, and often cited. Athanas. in llud profecti in pagum inueni∣et pullum alligatum. Those wretches (the diuels) did not know, that the death of Christ should giue vs immortalitie, and his descent (to Hades) should procure our ascent to heauen. For the Lord rose the third day from the dead; : hauing spoiled Hades (hel), troden the enemie vnder foote, dissolued death, broken the chaines of sin with which we were tyed, and freed (vs) that were bound, saying, arise, let vs goe hence. Being therefore freed from the bondage of the diuell, let vs acknowledge our redeemer, and glorifie the Father, &c. So elswhere. What neede had (Christ that was) God, of the crosse, Idem de in∣carnat. Christi. of the graue, of hell to which things we were subiect; but that (in them) he sought vs, quick∣ning vs in this manner agreeable to vs? Idem contra Arianos orat. 2. For if the Lord had not bene made man, wee had neuer risen from the dead, as redeemed from our sinnes, but had remained dead vnder the earth; neither had we beene exalted to heauen, but had laine still , in hell. For vs therefore and for our sakes it is sayd, God exalted (him), and gaue him (the dominion of heauen, earth and hell). By which places, as by infinite others in Athanasius it is eui∣dent, that Christ conquered and spoiled hell and Satan for vs, and deliuered vs thence, aswell as those that were formerly deceased; to whom, as to vs, hell had a chalenge till the Sauiour of the world freed both them and vs thence. And this is the true meaning of those prouinciall and generall Councels, which say; Christ rose the third day, hauing (first) spoiled hell. Defenc. pag. 209. li. 30. The same I affirme of that Allegory in Luke; which sheweth Christs ouercomming, binding and spoiling of Satan indeed: but not by his locall being in hell. Christ expressely ap∣plieth it to his dispossessing of Diuels out of mens bodies. I did not alleage this parable to prooue Christs going to hell in soule after death, but to shew what parts Christs con∣quest ouer hell and Satan must haue; to wit, that he must subdue, bind, and spoile Satan, before his conquest ouer Satan, could be perfect. Other places of Scripture applied these parts to Christs rising from the dead, and spoiling the kingdome of Satan; for this parable it did suffice, that these things heere mentioned must be fully performed by Christ, before he did fully conquere Satan. Now that these things were throughly performed by Christ, whiles he liued on earth, is repugnant to the Scriptures. For so Christ should neuer haue died, since death was a part of Satans power, which Christ was to spoile. It is therefore certaine, that Christs ouermastering of Satan began here on earth, when he cast him out from such as were possessed, but Christs conquest o∣uer Satan, had not his sull and complete higth, no not in his owne person, till he rose from the dead, and ascended to heauen, leading captiuity captiue. That therefore it began before Christs death, I doe not denie; but that it was not finished till his resur∣rection and ascension, the Scriptures auouch. Christ saith Origen, Origen li. 5. in ca. 6. ad. ma. hauing bound the strong man, and by his crosse conquered him, went euen to his house, to the house of death, and into hell; and thence tooke his goods, that is, the soules, which he possessed. And this was that, which he spake by a Parable in the Gospell, saying: Who can enter a strong mans house, and spoile his goods, except he first bind the strong man? So Ierom. Hiero in ca. 12. Matthe . The strong man was bound and tied in hell, and troden vnder the Lords foote, and the Tyrants howsen being spoi∣led, captiuity was led captiue. And Zanchius, Zanchius in 2. ca. ad coloss. The Apostle to the Ephesians the 4. (where he speaketh of Christs triumph, and saith, he led captiuity captiue, that is, he led the Diuel captiue, and triumphed ouer him) doth not there say, this triumph was made on the crosse, but then performed (that is perfected) when Christ ascended to heauen. Christ then obteined it on the Crosse, but performed it afterwards. Ibidem. Of euill spirits subdued and spoiled, the Sonne of God triumphed. Whither pertaineth that parable of Christs, when a strong man keepeth his house (his goods are in peace) but when a stronger then he commeth vpon him, he ta∣keth his spoiles from him. Defenc. pag. 210. li. 2. Remember I pray how God shewed his displeasure against your wresting of his word, by that strange terrour, that happened euen then when you were descended int he depth of this vncouth doctrine at Paules Crosse. Indeed it may be, that you and such others were in a strange terror at that time, otherwise there was no cause, nor harme, but the breake∣ing of an old rotten forme, which men desirous to heare had ouer loaden, and so where they stood halfe a yard aboue ground before, they were then faine to stand on their feet. But Sir, by what autho ity doe you take vpon you to interprete Gods will by the cracking of an old stoole? Are you of late become a Southsaier, that you pro∣fesse to declare Gods meaning by the breaking of an old borde in sunder? What say you then to those Coronations of Princes, and other assemblies, where many haue been slaine? What say you to S. Pauls Sermon, where Acts 20. Eutychus falling downe from a third l ft, was taken vp dead? Will you say his doctrine was vncouth, because the hearers were a while troubled with that accident? had there any thing indeed fallen out, as God be thanked there did nothing, you would haue plaied the false Prophet apace to presume of Gods purpose, when by your owne foolish feare vpon the cracking of an old forme, you proudely and prophanely take vpon you to pronounce of Gods pleasure. Defenc pag. 21 li. . Where you charge me in the end arrogantly and absurdly to falsisie the Synod of this Realme, it is but what your selfe doth in effect. I said our Synod corrected King Edwards Synod. You acknowledge and professe that in the later words of that former Synod now left out are three things that cannot be iustified by the Scriptures. ] If a man would hire you, you cannot leaue this outfacing and falsifying, no not, when you goe about to cleare your selfe of it, which whether it be absurd or arrogant, I leaue to the Reader. Our Sy∣nod, you said, corrected King Edwards Synod. ] Said you no more? did you not lustily conclude; Treatis pag. 172. Therefore our Synod renounceth apparantly this sense of the Creed, that Christ descended to the hell of the damned? Now that is nothing so; they thought not good in this Article of the Creed to expresse more then was aunciently set downe for the peo∣ple to beleeue: but they doe not reiect as false, whatsoeuer they omit of the later words of King Edwards Synod. For so they should reiect this also for false, that Christs body lay in the graue till his resurrection, which I trust no Christian man doub∣teth. Three things I said there were, which the later Synod might conceaue to be conteined in the former, that could not be iustified by the Scriptures; and in that re∣spect they might leaue out those later words, not cutting of, putting out, or casting away (as you ruffle in your termes) euery thing there mentioned, for so they should cast a∣way aswell the buriall of Christs body, as the presence of his soule in hell, but refrai∣ning to confirme those later words, both because there was somewhat amisse in them, and they would not impose more on the people to beleeue, then was at first compri∣sed in their Creed; as also for that they would not establish this to be the right and vndoubted sense of Peters words, that Christ in soule preached to the spirits in hell. Defenc. pag. 210. li. 19. You arge these words of King Edwards Synod with two points, which are not in them. First, that it saith, how the spirits of the iust were in hell: and that Christ descending thither, staied there till his resurrection. In me you would make this a great matter so to misreport the words of a Synod, which indeed saith nothing hereof. ] Were there no more but this in the words of that Synod, that the preaching of Christ to the spirits in hell is set down The things mis∣liked in king Edwards synod. there as the sole cause of his descent thither; or that this sense of S. Peters words is imposed on all men by their authority to be beleeued: either of these was reason suffi∣cient to omit those later words of King Edwards Synod. But if we rightly looke into the manner and purpose of their speach, we shall easily see, that I wrong them not. For by those words they ment to shew the places, where Christs soule and body did abide, after they were seuered, vntill the resurrection. His body, say they, euen vntill the resurrection lay in the graue, his soule being breathed out, was (vntill the same time) Articuli Sy∣nodi Lond nens. anno. 1552. with the spirits in prison or hell, and preached to them, as the place of Peter doth witnesse. To say, that the soule of Christ dismissed from his body, was not at all in the place, where the spirits of the iust were, had been repugnant to Peters words in the next Chapter; if we grant as they did, by these words of Peter, that Christ preached to the dead. For there it is said, The Gospell (that is, the glad tidings of Redemption perfor∣med) was preached to the dead. Which could not be to the wicked, since the Gospell was not preached vnto thē, but the iustnesse of their condemnation rather published vnto them. Since then as they tooke S. Peters words, Christ preached to both the iust and vniust, and by their Article, declaring where Christ abode after death, no more is expressed, but that Christ was with the spirits in prison and hell, and preached vnto them; How can it in any reasonable mans iudgement be auoided, but that their words im∣plie, the iust were in prison and in hell, where Christ preached? Neither was this so strange a thing in those daies, since many hundred yeeres before it was receaued in most mens mouths and minds, that the iust deceased before Christs death were in the same place (called hell) with the wicked, though not in the same paines; and many of the Fathers directly affirme no lesse. Seing then themselues in their words make no difference betwixt the iust and vniust; and generally auouch, that Christs soule was with the spirits in hell, and preached to them, by warrant of Peters words, who saith, The Gospell was preached to the dead; What reason had I to wrest their words to any other sense then that, which I saw currant in many fathers before them, whose steps, by the generall purport of their words they seemed to follow? And how iustly might the later Synod refuse those words of theirs, which were either so dangerons, or so doubtfull, that they might not safely be retained? Defenc. pag. 210. li. 24. It is well that you renounce that of Peter (by Austens direction) as making not at all for any locall being of Christ in hell. But yet herein your selfe openly refuseth the mind of all your Predecessors, yea of our later Synode, if they beleeued as you vrge they did. For if they liked Christs locall being in hel, they misliked not the applying of that in Peter thereunto: as by Master Nowels Catechisme may appeare. ] It is true, that I refrained to bring those places of Peter, because Saint Austen, though he strongly hold Christs descent to hell to be a part of the Christian faith, yet he perceaued and confessed these places might haue an other sense, and nothing touch Christs descent to hell. Your illation, that if the Synode liked Christs locall being in hell, they misliked not the applying of that in Peter thereunto, is like the rest of your collections. As if Saint Austen did not like the one, and yet mislike the other. Notwithstanding there is difference betwixt li∣king a quotation as some way pertinent to the cause, and proposing the same as a part of Christian Religion for all men of necessitie to imbrace. The Synode might doe the one, and yet not the other; and so iustly leaue out that clause of the former Synode, though Peters words in their opinions might haue some such intent. Neither doe I preiudice any man to like or alleadge that place of Peter for this purpose, since I bind no man to my priuate exposition of the Scriptures; but rather stand on those places which haue the full consent of all antiquitie to pertaine directly to this mat∣ter. Yet this is no barre, but many auncient Fathers did vse that place of Peter to prooue Christs descent to hell, as Athanas. episi a tum. Athanasius, Cyrill de fide ad Theodosi m. Cyrill, ilar. in Psal. 118. vers. 82. Hilarie and Ambros in ca. 10. ad Roma. Ambrose did, though Austen did not; and the Synode in her Maiesties time (that is now with God) might like thereof, to shew that Christ amongst other things did also confirme by his presence and preaching in hell the condemnation of the wicked there, though I did not cite those places; because Saint Austen had otherwise expounded them. For take the word Spirite for the Soule of Christ, as the same word is taken in the next verse following for the Soules of men, where it is said, In which he went, and preached to the Spirits in prison: and expound the word , kept liue, or con∣tinuing in life, as the Syriacke translator doth in saying, Christ died in body, and liued in spirit; in which sense the Scripture saith, A man may Ezechiel 18. vers. 27. Luk. 17. v. 33. quicken his soule, that is keepe it aliue; and then the words of Peter runne more easily for Christs descent to hell, then for his preaching in the daies of Noah. There is no doubt, but Austens sense hath some difficulties and must haue some open additions to the text, before it will agree therewith; as by which he went, and preached to (those that now are) spirits in prison (and were) once disobedient in the daies of Noah. Againe, neither wicked men liuing on earth, are called spirits, by the course of the Scriptures; neither were the despisers of Noahs preaching then in prison, when he preached. Besides that Peter heere purposely speaking of the death of Christ, verse 18. persueth the consequents thereof in order, as his descent to the spirits in prison vers. 19. his resurrection, vers. 21. his ascension and sitting on the right hand of God vers. 22. The impediment to the former sense is, that they onely are mentioned, which were disobedient in the daies of Noah; where if we make the former words to be generall, in which he went, and preached to the spirits in prison, and the next speciall, as the point between may entend, (and) to the disobedient in the daies of Noah; or if this example be produced as the most famous, wherein the whole and first world was drowned; and so likest to the time of preach∣ing the Gospell, the contempt whereof should bring destruction on the second world and the iust be saued by water, (as Noah was) through the resurrection of Christ; that impediment is likewise remooued. Howbeit I leaue it indifferent to euery man to follow, what sense he liketh best, the rather for that many old and new interpreters referre these words of Peter, that Christ preached to the spirits in prison, and 1. Peter. 4. the Gospell was preached to the dead, to Christs descent to those places, where these dead were, 1. Peter 3. both good and bad; though I thought not fit to presse them, when Austen had once resigned them. And where you cite Master Nowels Ca echisme to prooue that the later Synod misliked not the applying of Peters words to Christs descent to hell, what doe you therein, but as your manner is, take the paines to refute your selfe? For if they liked that which Master Nowell hath written of Christs descent to hell, they allowed as much as I defend; and consequently they did not apparantly renounce the doctrine of Christs going down to the hell of the damned; as you did openly, I must not say arrogantly pronounce. It may be you will turne about, when you see your selfe thus angled, and say Master Nowell teacheth no more, but that the power and efficacie of Christs passion was reuealed to the damned: but the first point he teacheth, is this, Catechis anno. 1574. pa. 70. Christū, vt corpore in terr vis era, it a anima à corpore separata ad inferos descendisse; Christ, as in body (he went) to the wels of the earth (which was his graue) so in soule seuered from his body he descended ad inferos to hell. The ends of Christs descent he maketh to be three, where he saith; Simu etiam mortis suae virtutem at efficacitatem ad ortuos, at in∣feros adeo ipsos it a , v & incredulorum animae &c. And with all (that is together with his soule) the vert e nd force of his death so p arced to the dead, and euen to hell it selfe, that firs the ules of the ithlesse p rceaued the condemnation of their in delity to be most sharpe but i st. Secondly, and Satan the ruler of hell, sa all the power of his t ∣ny, and of to be we ened, . Thirdly, , and the dece d, in their lif beleeue in Christ, perceaued the worke of to be and thereof with most sweet and tain con ort. Heere is as much as I desire, grant this and I vrge you no farder. And thus much the late Synod liked and app ued. if you doe admit, as you doe when plea∣seth you, Master Nowell for their interpreter. De enc. pag. 210. li. 31. Neither misliked they his tarying there till his resurrection, which also Austen holdeth as firmely, as that he was there. ] If you speake of the later Synod, you speake more then you can prooue. If of others, you must tell vs, whom you meane. It is not true, that Austen fastened Christs soule to hell for three daies, but rather confessed him to be free amongst the dead, and so left to his owne liberty; though the Scripture in Aust∣ens opinion nameth no place, where Christs soule was after death, besides hell. August. con∣tra Arr num. ca. 15. If the soule saith he, be straightway called to Paradise, when the body is dead, thinke e any man so wi ked, as to dare say, that the soule of our Sauiour was for those three d ies of his bodily death restrained to the custody of hell? Gregorius Nyssenus doth the like. Gregorius in il∣l d , & exi∣uit s guis & aqua. That the soule of our Lord commended into his Fathers hands, quum it a bonum & commodum illi vi∣sum esset, etiam ad inferos descendit, went also to hell, when it seemed good and co nient vnto himselfe, that might publish saluation to the soules in hell, and be Lord ouer quicke and dead, and spoile hell, and might prepare a way for mans nature to returne to life▪ after hee himselfe had beene the first fruits, and first borne from the dead, may be perceaued by many places of Scripture. Anselmus a thousand yeeres after Christ, sheweth that the Church in his time held not this so firmely, as you imagine. For asking by way of a Dialogue, Anselmus in Elu idario to∣tius Christia∣nae T logiae. whither went Christs soule after death? He answereth; to the hea∣uenly Paradise, as he said to the Thiefe, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. When then went he to hell? at midnight before his resurrection, at what hower the Angell destroyed Egypt, at that houre, euen at midnight Christ s oiled hell, and made their d ke∣nesse as bright as day. So that you talke out of time, when you talke so much how long time Christ staied in hell. The time and manner of his descent we leaue to God; t su iceth vs, that the Scriptures witnesse he was there, and rose both Sauiour of his owne, and Lord of all. Defenc. pag. 210. li. 35. That our English Clergie generally did or doe beleeue Christs locall descent to hell (al∣though they read and reh arse these words so translated) certainly no man will nor ought to acknowledge. That al did, I neuer sayd; we haue to much experience of you and some others, that loue alwaies to be opposite to Lawes, Creeds, Canons and whatsoeuer pleaseth not your fansies; but that all should, I doe auouch; by reason the Church of England in her publike seruice, the Synod in their Articles, and the Parliament of this Realme in their confirmation of both, enioyn all men not onl to reade those words so translated, but to bele ue that Christ descended to Hell. If ou , they are bound to bel eue your emphaticall phrase, or your phantastical imagination o you know not what, generall, ind finite, priuati e condition of death, they w l ile at your presumptuous folly. If it be a matter of faith, it no phrase; if we must beleeue as they teach, that Christ (after his death and bu all) de cended to hell; you must shew vs some other hell, to which Christ descended after death; or els I conclude that the Lawes of this Land bind all men to beleeue and professe, that Christ de∣scended to that hell, which the Scriptures acknowledge, and not hich your roling conc its and totter ng tongu would establish against the warrant and word of God; whose only will should be the line, whose only trueth should be the guide, whose only praise should be the end of all our professions and actions. THE TABLE, SERVING for their vse, that are desirous with more ease to finde out the speciall contents of this booke, as they are handled in their seuerall places. A A Brahams bosom. pag. 552▪ the place therof vnknowen. 656 A yssus in the Newe Testa∣men is hell. 6 9 A sed, i nocents and peni∣t nts re not, though han∣ged on a tree. 238 Ch t was no A sed, how great soeuer his paines we . 164. 165 S. Au s i dgement how Ch ist was accursed. 241 Men c n not be truly bl ssed and accurs d. 253 Th t is cc ed wh ch God hateth. 257 A sac ifice for sinne is not ac ursed, but accep∣ted of God 258 Adam sinned aswell by bodie as by soule. 183. 184 Was punished for his sinne after Christ was promised. 147 What God threatened to Adam if he sinned. 177. 178 Aeternall death f r whom Christ might feare. 484 Against ae rnall death, as due to him, Christ could not p ay. 378. 379 Aeternally God doth not punish one for ano∣thers ault. 336 Affections are p infull to the soule: 4 9 make sen∣sible alterations in the heart. 193. 194 Good affections of loue and zeale are not pain∣full. 26 Euill affections are punishments of sinne. 31 Inward affections make outward impressions in the heart. 193 The heart is the seat of mans affections and actions. Christ cou d represse and encrease his affecti∣ons as he saw cause. 400 The A xe cleaueth to the Verbe and not to the Noune. 216 Affl ctions of the godly are moderated punishmēts 9. 10. 11. 17. manifest Gods displeasure a∣gainst sinne. 14 Agony what it is. 339 T e paines of hell were not the cause of Christs agony. 58. 59 The causes that might be of Christs agony in the ardē. 9 . they cross not one another. 97 I di not resolue what was the cause of Christs agony. The precise cause of Christs agony is not re∣uealed in the Scriptures. 338. 346. though the general occasions may be coniectured 346 The parts of Christs agony. 339 An agony proueth rather zeale then feare. 339 Feare and sorrow the Scriptures witnesse in Christs agony. 342 Submission to God and compassion on men, the generall causes of Christs agony. 347 The first cause cōcurring to Christs agony. 347 The second. 354 The third. 370 The fourth. 371 The fi th. 375 The sixt. 399 The Fathers determ ne not the exact cause of Chr sts agony. 371 How some vse the word agony. 403 The different aff ctions in Christs agony had different causes. 558 Amaz d neither Moses nor Paul were in their pra ers. 368 Christ was not amazed in his praier. 369. 479 Christs praier prooueth hee was not then amazed. 469 Christs raier was no amaze. 467 The Defender yeeld th perfect knowledge to Christ in his amazednes. 481 Angry God was with our sinnes, but not with Christs person. 463 God is truely angry with his childrens sinnes. 14 Angels sinned in their whole nature as men doe. 197 Angels and good men receaued the bowing of the body. 662 signifieth For as well as From. 501 The Apostle. 1. Cor. 15. speaketh onely of the re∣surrection to glory. 640. What his wordes H b. 5. inferre. 498. 499. 500 Beleeuers may not iudge of the apostles words. 89 More Apostles then twelue. 651 The diuers reading and translating of the apo∣stles words, 1. Cor. 15. 55. 639 Astonishment what it is. 441 What astonishment with feare is. 468 Christ did not pray in astonishment. 441 Why Christ might be somewhat astonished. 468 Athanasius lewdly falsified by the Defender. 275 taketh Hades for hell. 569. 600. 601 What Athanasius speaketh of Adam, the De∣fender referreth to Christ. 275 Augustine not ignorant of the Greeke tongue. 608 his iudgement how Christ was accursed. 241 keepeth the sense of Peters word, Act. 2. 626 is grossely mistaken by the Defender. 627 Christ tooke our naturall, but not sinfull, affecti∣ons. 330 Christ might beholde the power of Gods wrath, and yet not feare the vengeance due to the wicked. 348 Christ prayed for vs and against Satan. 352 Christ knew the burden of our sinnes must lie on his shoulders. 353 Christ and his members must drinke of one and the same cup. 353 Christ wept for the desolation of Ierusalem, and sorowed for the reiection of the Iewes. 354 Christ wept and sorrowed when he would. 355 Christ grieued at the wilfulnesse of the Iewes. 357 Christ sorowed that his death should be the ruine of the Iewes. ibid. Christ chose the time and place to shew his vehe∣ment affections. 358 Christ could not be content to be separated from God for vs. 367 Christ suffered the likenesse of our punishment, not of our sinne. 273 Christ was not ordained to be damned for vs. 364 Christ feared not death, but his Fathers power. 370 Christ might pray to haue the deepnes of his sor∣rowes comforted, & paines asswaged. 374. 375 Christ might pray against the sting of death, which he was to feele before he died. 381 Christ could not pray against eternall death as due to him, but vnto vs. 378. 379 Christ was most earnestly to aske, what God had faithfully promised to graunt. 384 Christ felt all our affections not of necessitie, but according to his owne power and will. 386 Christ shewed in the garden how mans soule strugleth with the panges of death. 388 Christ was weake to comfort the weak, but strong∣er then the strongest on the crosse. 388. 390 Christ saw the whole danger from which hee should redeeme vs. 392. 393 Christ teacheth all his to feare Gods power as himselfe did in the garden. 393. 394 Christ presented and dedicated his body in the garden, which he suf ered on the crosse to be done to death. 399 Christ died not in the garden. 400 Christ could represse and increase his affections as he saw cause. 400 Christ found no ioy in his paines, but comfort in his hope. 411 Christ emptied himselfe of glory not of grace. 412 Christ citing the 1. vers. of the 21. Psalme, noteth the whole to appertaine to his passion. 434 Christ was mortified in flesh but not in soule. 507 Christ might passe from hell to heauen. 550 Christ needed no long time to de cend to hel. 551 Christ presented himselfe in euery place, 564 Christ was to rise full conquerer of hell and death. 668 How Christs death was like the godlies. 7 How Christ laid downe his soule for vs. 132. 133 How Christ shall the second time appeare with∣out sinne. 27 How far Christs sufferings must be extended. 343 How Christs soule was in his Fathers hands. 549 How Christ was in Paradise the day of his death. 549 How Christ was like vs in all things sinne excep∣ted. 86 How Christ might feare and yet be freed from it. 486. 87 How Christ loosed the sorrowes of death. 624 How Christ must rise from the dead. 627 What Christ discerned in all his sufferings. 317 What Christ vndertooke for vs. 324 What things Christ inwardly beheld in the gar∣den 387 Why Christ might dislike the death of the body. 398 The ioynt sufferings of Christ in his bodily death most auaileable for our saluation. 68 Euery thing in Christ was meritorious, but not sa∣tisfactorie for sinne. 179. 180 Both body and soule must suffer in Christ. 130. 131 Christs bodily death part of the punishment of our sinnes. 11 By Christs corporal punishment we are freed from spirituall and eternall. 222. 223 Christs blood could not be shed but by Satan and his inst uments. 231 Christs recompence for the wrong receaued at Sa∣tans hands. 232 Christs suffering without the gate of the city. 113. 114 Christs death was most iust with God in respect of his will to saue vs. 262. 263 Christs death not exacted as a debt but eceaued as a voluntarie sacrifice. 264 Christs doings aboue mans reason. 310 The nature, measure, and purpose of Christs suf∣ferings. 332 The paines of Christs soule as of his body were equall to the strength of his patience. 334 Christs faith did not faile in the sharpest of his paines. 335 All Christs sufferings were righteous and holie. 344. 438 Christs words Iohn 12. auouch not contraries. 482. are expounded. 483 Christs senses were not ouerwhelmed with feare and sorrow. 477 Christs feares and sorrowes not like the repro∣bates. 448. 449. 450 We must not increase Christs sufferings at our pleasure. 478 Christs passió did not kil his soul but his body. 528 Christs conquest secureth our soules seuered from our bodies. 670 Christs Soule was not tormented with Gods imme∣diat hand. 34 Christs Soule suffered but died not for vs. 133 Christ soule suffered by all her powers but not the death of the Soule. 136. 137. 140 Christs Soule chiefe patient in paine and agent in merit. 179 Christs Soule could not merit, if it wanted vn∣derstanding and will. 480 Christs Soule in her greatest paines did most shew the life of patience and obedience to God. 524 Christs Soule was passible, but died not. 533 Christs Soule was not fastned to hell three daies. 551 Christs Soule was in glory before his Body. 669 Christs Soule liuing by grace could no way be dead. 523 Neither Scriptures nor Fathers vnderst nd Christs Soule by his Body. 426. 427 Christs Soule was not crucified through infir∣mity. 510 Christ Soule was not vnder the dominion of death. 650 What wee must beware in the sufferings of Christs Soule. 536 Many writers teach the sufferings of Christs Soule, without the paines of hell. 536 Why Christs Soule and not his Body was to conquere hell. 668 It is not against the faith that Christes Soule should conquere hell. 622 Christs man ood praied for that with all humilitie, which hi person by ight might haue cha∣lenged. 378 Christ manhood might feare the glory of Gods iudgement. 380 Christs manhood mi ht feare the power of Gods wrath against our sinnes, which he was to beare. 380 Christs manhood might feare the sting of death, as horrible to mans nature. 381 Christs manhoode was to conquere hell. 667. though by power of his Godhead. 670 Christs flesh found no ease in death though his Soule were full of hope. 424 Christs flesh was weake though his Spirite was willing. 508 Christs fl sh could not putrifie. 623 Christs praier in the Garden was well aduised. 397 Christ praier was no maze. 4 7 Christs praier was not against his Fathers will. 397. 465. 466. 470. 471. 472 Christs praier was full of faith. 474. 475 Christs praier was with condition and reseruation of Gods will. 382 Compassion and pittie are alwaies painfull. 27 Compassion is affliction though it be a vertue. 438 Christ more compassi nate then Moses or Paul. 359 Christs complaint on the Crosse. 409 How many senses it may beare. 418. 420. 421 The first sense. 416 The second sense. 418 The third sense. 421 The fourth sense. 430 The fift sense. 432 The sixt sense. 433 The Saints comp aint in their afflications. 418 The euent of Christs co plaint on the Crosse. 419 No shame for Christ to complaine on the Crosse as he did. 420 Leo maketh Christs complaint on the Crosse an instruction, no lamentation. 432 We were conceaued in sin before we were quick∣ned with life. 173 Mans flesh is defiled in conception before the soule is created and infused. 174. 175 None can be euerlastingly condemned for ano∣thers fault. 363 Christs conquest ouer hell and death. 667 was ordered most to Sat ns shame. 669 Contradictions obiected by the Defender are easily answered. 69 Contradictions in the Defender. 320 A shamefull contradiction of the Defender. 423 The words of the Creed examined. 648 How long this clause of Christs descent to hell hath beene in the Creede. 653. 654 Hades in the Creede mu t signifie hell. 649 Hell in the Creede is no new translation. 652 The Creede continued from the Apostles times. 664 Twelue parts of the Creede. 64 What Cr sse of Christ it was that Paul so much reoiyced in. 73. 74 75 How the Fathers and new writers expound that place. 76. 77 How farre the Crosse of Christ extendeth it selfe by the Scriptures. 79 We reioyce in the effects of Christs Crosse. 81 Christ was not vo de of all comfort on the Cross . 410. 411 What comfort Christ had on the Crosse. 412 The death of the Crosse the greatest ex anition of Christ. 433 Christs Soule was not Crucified through infirmi∣tie. 501 Figuratiuely the Soule may be said to be Cruci∣fied. 80 What Cup Christ dranke of. 373 What Christ meant by the houre and Cup of his Passion. 443 Christ and his members must drinke of one and the same Cup. 353 What part of the Curse Christ bare for our sinnes. 234. 235 Hanging on a tree was not the whole Curse of the Law. 236 A double Curse of sinne. 236 Two kindes o C rses in the Law. 239 The bodily death which Ch ist suffered was the Curse which he sustained. 240 Cursing and bl ssing compared doe manifest each the other. 249 What is true Cursing and blessing from God. 250 How Christ was made a Curse for vs. 257 Christs death was a kinde of Curse. 259 Christ vndertooke to satisfie but not to suffer our Curse 260 The Curse for sinne is triple. 266 Cyprian wrested by the Defender. 274 D D Amnation, What paines are essentiall to it. 37. 39 The horror of Gods iudgements not neere the paines of the Damned. 227 The Godly in this life feele not the paines of the damned. 320 Sharper paines are reserued for the damned then now they feele. 334 Christ was not ordained to be damned for vs. 364 Dauid neuer felt the true paines of hell. 453 Dauids feare vnlike to Christs. 442 What Death Christ died. 19 A threefold death the wages of sinne. 13 Corporall death in all men is the punishment of sinne. 149. 150. 151. 176 Death in Christ was the satisfaction for sinne. 176 Euerlasting death the wages of sinne which Christ could not suffer. 226 The death of the body is euill in it selfe though God to his make it a passage to life. 244. 245 The consequen s after death doe not proue death to be good. 246 The nature of death not changed in the godly. 252 God so h teth death that he will destroy it as an enemie. 254 Naturall death came not by the sentence of Mo∣s Law. 261 Th e is no death of the Soule without sinne. 366 All feele the sting of death which Christ expressed before he died. 389 The death and life of the soule here on earth mis∣taken by the Defender. 430 What the second death is in the Scriptures. 492 Eight p es of Scripture abused for the death of Christs Soule. 493 By one lande of death Christ freed vs from all kinds of death. 504 To be vtterly forsaken of God is the death of the Soule. 517. 518 The extreamest degree of pains where grace doth not faile is no death of the Soule. 524 What things the death of the body doth import. 649 The Defender grosly peruerteth my words. 44. 45 The Defender cont adicteth himselfe. 56. 57 The Defender contemneth the Fathers and their iudgements. 82 The Defender deuiseth shifts to decline Scriptures and Fathers against him. 94 The Defender would make the maner of Christes dying onely vnusuall. 95 The D fender doth grossely mistake the reiection of the Iewes to be the meaning of Christes complaint on the crosse. 98 The D fender not able to support his errors, doth quarrell with the question. 99 The Defender eludeth the Scriptures with his termes of single and meere. 125. 126. 127 The Defender clouteth one conclusion out of di∣uers places. 146 The Defender maketh the sufferings of Christs flesh needlesse to our redemption. 168. 169 The Defender peruerteth the doctrine of the Ho∣milies. 224. 225 The Defender maketh Christ sinfull, accursed, and defiled. 265 The Defender would not faile to cite Fathers if he had them. 273 The Defender compareth Christ in want of com∣fort with the damned. 291 The Defender vainly presumeth all places of his vnanswered to be granted. 319 The Defender hath deuised torments for Christs soule. 323 The Defender controleth the words of the holy Ghost by his new phrases. 413 The Defender in steed of proouing falleth to granting his owne positions. 5 3 The Defender misciteth S. Iohns words and on that error groundeth all his reasons. 644 The Defender giuing a reason of n thing, asketh a reason of all things. 415 The Defender claimeth like reuerence to his words as to the Scripture. 325 The Defender saith the Scriptures are ordinarilie true, that is, sometimes false. 367 The Defender doth euery where mistake and mis∣apply what is said. 384 The Defender forgeth a pace new parts of the Christian faith. 393 The Defender taketh the parts of Christs agonie for the causes thereof. 401 The Defender is somewhat pleasureable. 528 The Defender corrupteth S. Luke. 402. 403 The Defender ascribeth a liuely affection to Christs dead flesh. 422 The Defender vttereth a flat contradiction to his owne doctrine. 422. 423 The Defender confesseth the Fathers prooue my meaning. 425 The Defender is driuen to contrarieties. 431 The Defender taketh from Christ inward sense and memory in his sufferings. 440 The Defender yeeldeth perfect knowledge to Christ in his amazednesse. 481 The Defender foolishly prooueth the death of Christs soule. 495. 496 The Defender abuseth the Scriptures. 534. 535 The Defender cannot discerne a conclusion from a quotation. 568 The Defendours foure restraints of hell paines. 4 The Defendours disdaine of the fathers. 98 The Defendours vaine shifts. 114. 115 The Defendours skill in framing arguments. 327 The Defendours absurd deuises. 490 The Defendours manner of reasoning as illogicall as his matter is false. 336 Dereliction in the Scriptures neuer implieth the paines of the damned. 415 Deepe what it signifieth. 566 To what Deepe Christ descended after death. 565 567 The true sense of Paul and Moses words. Rom. 10. concerning the Deepe. 568 The who e church taught that Christ after death descended to hell. 544. 545 New Writers teach Christs descent to hell. 546. 547 Christ needed no long time to descend to hell. 551 Of Christs descending and ascending. 553 Christ aescended and ascended to be Lord ouer all. 563 To what deepe Christ descended after death. 565 567 Descending is to places below. 569 How long this clause of Christs descent to hell hath been in the Creed. 653. 654 What Ruffinus meaneth by Christs descent to hell. 655 Descending to hades was not the buriall of Christs body. 556. 557. 558 The causes of Christs descent to hell. 666 Des ending to hell was a part of Christs exaltation. 671 The descent of Christ to hell confessed by the Ca∣techisme. 677 The Lawes of this land doe binde all to beleeue Christs descent to hell. 678 Desperation in hell is no sinne. 71 Desperation is the sorest torment in this life. 238 A small Difference of wordes may quite alter the sense. 199 Difference of Christs offering and suffering. 276 Difference of outward and inward temptatiōs. 314 Difference betwixt Gods threats & iudgements. 472 How the Diuell may discerne and incense our af∣fections. 192 The Diuell tormented not Christes soule on the Crosse. 295 Christ suffered as deepe paines but not as deepe Doubts as we may. 321 E. ELect. Who is enemie to Gods Elect. 233 The Elect are neuer truely accursed. 252 The Elect cannot perish. 364 Erasmus fouly mistaken by the defendor. 653 Foure notable Errors grounded by the defendor vpon the facts of Moses and Paul. 363 The first. 363 The second. 365 The third. 367 The fourth. 368 What impressions Euill maketh in the soule of man. 341 Euill past, present, or to come worketh sorrow, paine, and feare in the soule of man. 341 what it importeth. 485 Is contrarie to feare. 501 Esay doth not touch the death of Christes soule. 526. 527 Esay 14. Shcol for hell. 559. 560 Eusebius report of Thaddeus allowed by the best historiographers. 660 F FAthers: their iudgements may be called Au∣thorities. 83 The Fathers may be left in some priuate opinions. 84 I leaue not the Fathers in the grounds of faith. 85 The Fathers doc not teach that Christ suffered all which we should haue suffered. 138. 139 The Fathers disclaime all necessitie in the death of Christ. 285 The Fathers determine not the exact cause of Christs Agonie. 371 Wherein we should follow the Fathers. 415 Some Fathers expound me in Christs wordes, for my members. 416 No Father auoucheth the death of Christs Soule. 142. 143 Diuerse Fathers euidently corrupted for the death of Christs Soule. 428. 429 By the iudgement of the Fathers, Christ died no death of the Soule. 519 The Fathers professe true fire to be in hell. 46 The Fathers plainly remoue the death of Christs Soule from the worke of our redemption. 330. 331 All Christs Feares were holy. 215 Feare and sorrow in Christ were sufferings for sinne. 345 Christs Feare in the Garden was religious. 371 Christs eare and sorrow were painfull but reli∣gious sufferings. 372 What Feare and sorrow Christ was to yeelde vn∣to God, when he offered the ransome of our sinnes. 374 What things Christ might iustly and greatly feare in the Garden. 380 eare may be intellect ue or sensitiue. 383 Christ might feare many thinges besides hell paines. 385 Why Christ feared more then Mattyrs doe. 395 Christ might iustly feare the p wer of Gods wrath. 380 Figuratiuely the Soule may be said to be cruci∣fied. 80 Fire in hell is not allego icall. 40. 41. 42. 43 The Fathers professe t ue fire to be in hell. 46 It is possible that brimstone may bee mingled with fire in hell. 47 The same fire punish th the wi ked both b fore and after iudge ent. 55 What fire did signifie in sacrifices. 112. 113 What fire might note in the holocaust. 116 How Christ was Forsaken on the crosse. 409 How farre and wherein Christ was Forsaken are the things questioned. 414 What forsaking could not be found in Christ 414 We were forsaken of God till Christ vs by his death. 417 Christ neuer forsaken of hope and comfo t. 7 God shewed by the present euent that he had not forsaken h s s nne. 419 We st iue not for the word but for the sense and maner of forsa ing. 431 G GEhenna was not vsed in speaking to the Gen∣tiles. 618 God can doc more then he will. 23 Gods loue to Christ appeared euen in his death. 20. 21 Gods purpose in the death and crosse of Christ. 154. 155. 156 God vseth meanes and instruments in punishing. 33 God tempereth loue and iustice in punishing his elect. 147. 255 God worketh good by euill. 254 God is iust as well in forgiuing as in punishing sin. 262 God was able to saue vs otherwise then by Christs death. 287 God was the author of all Christes afflictions, but not with his immediate hand. 298. 299 God vieth his creatures to performe his iudge∣ments. 302 God is the principal agent in all our sufferings, but not with his immediate hand. 302 Gods hand worketh whatsoeuer meanes he vseth. 300. 301 Gods loue to his sonne ouerswaied his hatred to our sinnes. 268 Gods iustice in subiecting Satans kingdome to Christs manhood. 230 The Gospell differeth much from the Law. 264 How the Graue is a habitation for the godly. 575 God would not haue our flesh as yet freed from the Graue. 670 Christ was not Guil y of our sinne though he took our punishment on him. 162. 163 The whole man is guilty of all sinne. 185. 186 187. 208 Guilty stretcheth as well to the punishment as to the fact. .266 A mediator not guilty of the sinne for which he doth mediate. 276 H HAdes what it signifi th with the Greeke Fa∣thers. 589. 590. 591. 592. 593 Hades what it is with Chrylostom. 589 Ath nasius taketh Hades for hell. 599. 6 0 Hades in Athanasius Creed is not the graue. 659 Hades with Ignatius is not the graue. 657 The soules of the godly are not in Had s. 602 Hades is a place of darkenesse. 609 How Hades is vsed in the new Testament. 629 Hades with new writers is the graue or hell. 609. 610 611 Hades is a place vnder the earth. 613 Hades an vnseene and darke place. 618 Hades in the Creed must signifie hell. 649 Hades is not the ignominie of the graue. 651 Hades was first the name of the diuell. 615 Hades is hell or the diuell in the new Testament. 619 Hades is hell in the new Testament without any figure. 621 Why Hades signifieth hell in the new T stament. 647 Hades with the Pagans was the place not the state of the dead. 616 The whole created world is Hades with the De∣f nder. 615 Hades in effect is nothing but death with the De∣fender. 624 How and Inferi concurre in signi∣fication. 579 How the Defender wauereth about Hades. 619 How Hades is vsed in the Reuelation. 642 How Hades shall be cast into hell fire. 644 S. Luke maketh Hades a place of torment. 621 What Hades Matth. 11. 23. is threatned to Caper∣naum. 630 Many Greeke copies haue Act. 2. 24. the sorrowes of Hades. 625 Hades in the Scriptures opposed to the highest heauens. 635 Christ loosed the sorrowes of Hades. 625. 626 The wall of Hades not broken but by Christ. 657 Hades hath not all the dead. 646 Hades followeth after death. 643 Hades taken for the rulers or persons in hell. 647 The soules of the godly are not in Hades. 602 Hanging on a tree was not the whole curse of the law. 236 Hanging on the crosse a cursed kind of death. 237 Innocents and penitents not truely accursed though Hanged on a tree. 238 Hard speeches should rather bee qualified then strained to the highest. 271 All affections make sensible alterations in the Heart. 1 3. 194 The heart is the seat of mans affections and acti∣ons. 2 3 The H art suggesting euill sinneth. 311 The ioyes of Heauen are proper to the place. 455 456 The sight of God in this life uch differeth from the sight of his face in Heauen. 456 The Saints of God had some sight of God in earth, but not comparable to that in Heauen. 460 The soules re not yet in the same height of Heauen where Christ is. 5 0 541 How many Heauens the Scriptures make 541. 542 The graces of God in earth are not the ioyes of Heauen. 461 Why the Heauens are compared with hell in the Scriptures. 634 God is not the immediate and principall in ∣cter of Hell paines. 2 . 29 The sentence of the iudge containeth the essence of Hell paines. 35 Christ suffered not the substance of hell paines. 36 Reiection from Gods kingdome essentiall to Hell paines. 37. 38 Malediction essentiall to Hell paines. 38 Hell fire is not allegoricall. 40. 41 42. 43. 49. 53 54 I neuer said Hell fire was materiall. 44 The Fathers professe t ue fire to be in Hell. 46 51. 52 So doe later Diuines. 49. 50 It is possible that brimstone may be mingled with fire in Hell. 47 Chaines there are in Hell though not of iron. 7 Whether there be true fire in hel before the iudg∣ment is not the question. 54 Christ suffered not the essentiall part of hell paines. 56 Hell paines not the cause of Christs agonie. 58. 59 The sharpnesse of Hell paines. 60 The foretast of iudgement in Hell, is neither full, finall, perpetuall, nor gen rall. 210 Positiue punishment now in Hell. 214 The suffering of Hell paines, no way necessarie to our saluation. 220 Men may feare, but not feele the tru paines of hel in this life. 320 The paines of hell are no naturall affections. 383 Christ might feele somewhat extraordinarie yet not the paines of hell. 391 The vehemencie of hell paines passe the patience of Men and Angels. 450 The true paines of hell are not felt in this life. 451. 462 The true paines of hell are proper to the place 454. 455 The true paines of hell are aboue and against na∣ture. 464. 465 We must not re oyce in suffering hel paines. 441 A broken spirit is not the paines of hell. 516 Christ brought vs backe from hell. 607 No place for soules vnder earth but hell. 614 It is not against the faith that Christs Soul should conquere hell. 622 Christ must rise conquerer of death and hell. 628 The Iewes were promised their Messias should conquere hell. 628 All the names of hell prooue it to be in the earth. 632 Hell is in the earth & yet some diuels in the aire. 633 Why the heauens are compared with hell in the Scriptures. 634 Our victorie against death and hell not full till the last day. 637 638 Christ th the keyes of death and of hell. 642. 643 Nothing but persons cast into hell. 645 The Defender maketh three hells in steede of one 645 Christs spo ling of hell precedent to his resur∣rection. 673 Hereticke alwaies vrged the same places that the Defender doth. 425 What the Holocaust did signifie. 111. 112 What ire might note in the Holocaust. 116 I. IMmediate. What suffering is Immediate from God. 27. 32 God is not the Immediate and principall inflicter of h ll paines. 2 . 29 Christs soule was not tormented with Gods Im∣med a e hand. 34 God can punish the soule by meanes without his Immediate hand. 219 God the author of all Christs afflictions but not by his Immediate hand. 298. 299 God is the principall agent in all our sufferings but not with his Immediate hand. 302 How and Infers concurre in signi∣fication. What place Tertullia taketh Inferi to be. 585. 586 Inferi are places and persons vnder the earth. 5 7 Inferi are not now the place and state of good and bad deceased. 588 Saint Austin taketh Inferi for hel, and not for the state of the dead. 198. 590 The soules of the godly are not in Inferi. 602 Infernus with the latin fathers is more thē death. 603 Inferi not found in the Scriptures in any good sense. 04 Inferi no place for the godly after Christes resur∣rection. 605 Infernus is not the place nor state of all soules de∣ceased. 606 Christ did not suffer paines truely Infinite. 161 Christs Infirmitie was voluntarie. 407 Christs Infirmitie was power. 416 How all the kingdomes of the earth might bee shewed vnto Christ in an Instant. 308. 309 Irenaeus did write in Greeke. 584 Where Irenaeus thought Christs soule was after death. 583. 584 The rule of Iustice suffereth the stronger to beare the burden of the weaker. 292 Gods Iustice in subiecting Satans kingdome to Christs manhood. 230 Gods Iustice might punish Christs bodie, but not Christs soule with death. 337 The Iudgement of God to which Christ submitted himselfe for our redemption. 348 Gods Iudgement for our redemption concerneth Christ, men, and Angels. 348 In this Iudgement God required of Christ satis∣faction for the sinnes of men. 349 K K . what it signifieth. 625 Christ hath the Keyes of death and of hell. 642. 643 Kindred goeth by blood and not by the soule. 509 Our naturall Knowledge commeth by sense. 196 The meanes of mans Knowledge. 199 Our loue and ioy doe follow our Knowledge. 462 L LEo maketh Christs words on the Crosse an instruction, no lamentation. 432 How Christ was like vs in all things sinne excep∣ted. 86. 324 Christ not like vs in any sinfull affections. 322 How Christ was like vs in his sufferings. 323 Christ not like vs in any want of grace or touch of sinne. 326 To what lower parts of the earth Christ descen∣ded. 554 What is ment by the lower parts of the earth. 555 The lower earth is all one with the lower Sheol. 556 The lower Shcol signifieth hell and not the graue. 557. 558 The lower earth Ezechiel vseth for hell. 561 The lower parts of the earth are hell. 562 M MArtyrs and Malefactors haue a stronge con∣flict with death though we perceaue it no . 389 The glory of Martyrs were not great, if their paines were not great. 390. 391 Martyrs find ioy and ease after death, but not in death. 301 Why Christ feared more then Martyrs doe. 395 Christs senses might not be ouerwhelmed as Martyrs are. 396 The manner of breathing out Christs Soule was miraculous. 87. 88. 89. 90 The Fathers obserue that it was miraculous. 91. 92. 93 So doe the new writers. 94 Moses praier for the people examined. 359 The purpose of Moses praier for the people. 360 How Moses in his praier is excused from sin. 365 Moses face did shine when he know it not. 461 Moses was not amazed in his prayer. 368 N THe name of nature in the graces of God and ioyes of heauen is a vaine distinction. 461 There was no necessitie in our redemption but Christs will, power, and libertie. 283 284. 285 The Fathers disclaime all necessitie in the death of Christ. 285 No necessitie in the death of Christ 286 Christs feare and agony came not from necessitie but from his humilitie and feruencie. 339 Neither necessitie nor infirmitie could oppresse Christ. 405 New w iters teach the sufferings of Christs Soule without the paines of hell. 536 New writers teach Christs descent to hell. 546. 547 New writers obserue Christs manner of dying to haue beene miraculous. 94 O OLeuians coniectures for his sense of Christs descent to Hades are but weake. 631 P. PAines of this life Christ did beare, but not of hell. 217. 218 Christes Paines might be vnknowen and yet not the paines of hell. 161 In outward Paines men perceiue and acknow∣ledge Gods hand vpon them. 170 Paines proper to the soule are not by and by the paines of hell. 214 All Christs Paines were holy. 215 More required in our ransome then onely Paines. 216 We cannot iudge of other mens Paines. 328. Excessi e Paine bringeth death. 447 How Christ was in Paradise the day of his death. 549 The Parable of the strong man bound and spoy∣led. 74 Christes Patience was greater then any mans whatsoeuer his paines were. 394 How Christs patience exceeded all mens. 395 Christs patience at the highest before he complai∣ned on the crosse. 418 Sa nt Paul 1. Cor. 15. keepeth the true sense of the Prophet Osee. 641 Pauls wish for the Iewes considered. 360 The time was when Paul so wished. Ibid. If Paul spake of the time when he wrote, his words were conditionall. Ibid. What Paul meant when he wished to be sepa∣rated from Christ for the Iewes. 361. 362 How the Grecians expound Pauls words. 361 How Paul in his wish was excused from sinne. 365 Paul wished if it were possible or lawfull. 366 Paul was not amazed in his prayer. 368 The true sense of Pauls and Moses words. Rom. 10. 567 568. Positiue punishment now in hell. 214 No Positiue thing common to good and bad after death. 581 Christ suffered not the proper wrath of God. 19 What proper applied to wrath signifieth. 18 The Scriptures often intermingle proper speeches with figuratiue. 19 Proper opposed to Metaphoricall. 123 A part may Properly denominate the whole. 124 The ioynt sufferings of soule and body most pro∣per to man. 167 The whole suffering of Christ was not Gods proper action. 303 What the Prophets foretold of Christes sufferings that the Euangelists confirme was verified. 299 In punishing his elect God tempereth both loue and ustice. 147 Corporall death in all men is the punishment of sinne. 149. 150. 151 God is most iust in punishing his Saints. 262 The Defenders partition of punishment applied to Christ is insufficient and impious. 153 All punishment is not for correction or vengeance properly so called. 154 The godly iustly punished for their offences. 256 Q QVaestion. The first quaestion wholy peruerted. 3 The chiefe points coincident to the first Question. 9 Whether there be true fire in hell before the iudgement, is not the Question. 54 When and how farre Christ was forsaken are the things Questioned. 414 R RAnsome. To whom our ransome was paid. 228 To saue from death is to raise from death. 50 Whence their soules come that are raised to 25 Redemption by Christs blood most sufficien 67 The Scriptures teach no redemption bu y the blood and death of Christ. 127 Both body and Soule are redeemed by blood of Christ. 128. 129 The body hath not his redemption fore the last day. 129. 130 Christ vndertooke to be our demer 4000. yeers before he was made man 280 The willing offer of the S e to be our redeemer did induce the the whole Trinitie. 281 The redeemer might pay as well for the prisoners as for him selfe. 377 Christs sufferings way like the sufferings of the reprobate. 331. 332 Christs feare sorrow not like the reprobates. 448. 449 What is by sitting at Gods right hand. 651 The claue of Christs descent to Hades was in the Cree e before Ruffinus time. 655 What Ruffinus meaneth by Christes descent to hell. 655 S SAcrifice. Three properties of the true Sacrifice for sinne. 99. 100 The bloody Sacrifices represented no death but onely bodily. 105 No Sacrifices of the Iewes figured the death of Ch ists Soule. 106 What Salt, flower, oile and wine added to the Iewes sacrifices might signifie. 109. 110 What fire did signifie in sacrifices. 112. 113 What is consequent to the true sacrifice for sinne. 272 Why the people laid their hands on the head of their sacrifices. 277 Feare and sorrowe necessary in the sacrifice for sinne. 379 More then affliction requisite to Christs sacrifice. 437 A de d Soule is no sacrifice for sinne. 527 Wh t the Sacraments of the new Testament im∣port. 117 Sacraments doe constantly and continually signi∣fie and represent the same 117 The Spirit o sanctification is the holy Ghost. 511 My exception, to the Defenders instance of the Scape-goate. 106 What was figured by the scape-goate. 107 108 The scape-goate might in some sort be a signe of Christ. 108 How the Scripture limiteth Christs death. 5. 180 What the Scriptures meane by the wages of sinne. 12 What they meane by the wrath of God. 15 Phrases of Gods wrath against the wicked in Scripture are improper. 15. 16 Scriptures neuer mention that Ch ist suffered Gods wrath. 21. nor the death of the Soule. 493. 49. 515 nor the paines of hell. 399 ow the Scriptures speake of Christs Passion. 22 Scriptures often intermin le proper speeches figuratiue 48 The riptures sometimes put a condition all to thin most certaine. 473 True how to expound the Scriptures. 435 Many pla. s of Scriptures haue diuerse exposi∣tions. 4 which may be tolerated though they canno e reconciled. 435 The Scriptures the words but not the er∣rors of the heat. en. 612 Some Scriptures vnc ine for a time. 664 Satan was conquered fast by iustice, then by power. 229 Satans kingdome subiected to Christs m nhood. 230 Satan assaulted Christ on the rosse but by ex∣ternail meanes. 296. 297 Satan might doe nothing against hrist but what Christ would. 315 Satan worketh not but where he is. 306 Christ ordered his conquest most to shame 669 What was impugned in the Sermons. 2 The text of my Sermons was not mistaken. 72 But rightly and orderly pursued. 78 Our naturall knowledge commeth by Sense. 196 Prouocations and pleasures come by the senses. 200. 201 The soule for want of her senses sometimes cea∣seth to sinne. 206 Christs senses might not be ouerwhelmed as mar∣tyrs are. 396 In what sense Ezekiah vseth the gates of Sheol. 247 The lower Sheol signifieth hell and not the graue. 557. 558 Sheol for hell Esay. 14. 559. 560 The soules of the Saints are not in Sheol. 571 Sheol is no meere priuation of this life. 572 Sheol is properly a place vnder earth for the dead. 573 The soules in Gods hands are not in Sheol. 574 The Sheol of soules is more then a meere priuati∣on. 575 What Sheol is to the wicked and what to the god∣ly. 575 To what Sheol Iacob would descend mourning 576 Sheol no place for iust mans soules. 577 There is neither knowledg nor praise of God in Sheol. 578 Sheol is no destruction to the godly. 575 What is me nt by me nt neere to Sheol or most dwelling there. 500 The Defender abuseth Plato and Plato, to haue a Sheol for all things. 630 Prooueth Moses and Dauid to haue a Sheol for all thin s. 631 To what Sheol Corah and his company descen∣ded. 631 The Desendours absurd proofes for the Sheol of all thin s. 632 The Similitude of an earthly suerty not fit for Christ, though the name may well be vsed. 282 283 No humane similitude can throughly fit Christes sufferings for vs. 293 Similitudes are not alwaies of things lawfull. 293 Similitude is no equalitie. 328 How we are freed from Sinne by Christ. 152. 153 We inherit sinne and death from our parents flesh 171 How sinne is communicated from the soule to the body. 188. 189 All acts of sinne by the body. 202 Bodie and soule that were ioyned in sinne shal be ioyned in paine. 209 How sinne maketh men vncleane. 265 How sinne was condemned in Christs flesh. 268 How Christ was made sinne. 269. 270 Our sinnes were imputed to Christ, that is, he was punished for them. 272. 277 Inward and infinite Sorrow for sinne must bee found in Christs sacrifice for sinnes. 372 Christ must as well sorrow as suffer for sinne. 373 Inward and voluntary sorrow of the soule is a sa∣crifice to God. 438 Sorrow differeth from paine. 444 What sorrow is. 444 We may both sorrow and reioice at one time. 489 What meanes of suffering the Soule hath. 24 The passibilitie of the Soule is but one facultie of the soule. 25 The soules suffering by the body is the proper suf∣fering of the soule. 26 The meanes by which the soule suffereth paines. 30 The soules suffering from and with the bodie not common with beasts. 31 The substance of the soule suffereth in and by all her powers. 134. 135 The soules suffering by sympathy is the Defenders owne phrase. 170 The soule is not deriued from the fathers of our bodies. 171. 172 The Soule chiesly sinneth and chiefly suffereth, but not onely. 181. 182 What powers and faculties of the Soule the Fa∣thers corporall and why. 187 The Soule ioyned with the Body hath one state, and seuered another. 198 The Soule vseth her corporall spirits in thinking and remembring. 207 The Soule leadeth and the flesh followeth to all sinne. 210. 211 The Soule hath a st of sinne and paine before the last day. 213 The Soule feeleth paine and griefe by her vnder∣standing and will. 344 Whence the Soules come that are raised to life. 425 The Soule is a consequent to a liuing body but no part of it. 426 The Soule is some time called flesh. 529 The Soule taken for life. 570 The Spirit of sanctification is the holy Ghost. 511 Flesh and Spirit doe not alwaies note the two na∣tures of Christ. 512 The Spirit signifieth the Soule of man. 529 The preaching to the Spirits in prison. 676 The law which curseth offendors admitteth no Suerties. 264 Christ no way bound to be our Suertie. 277 Christ a Suretie to vs of the new Testament. 278 Though Christ may be called a voluntary Suerty, yet was he truely a mercifull Redeem r. 280 The similitude of an earthly Suertie not fit for Christ, though the name may well be vsed. 282. 2 3 The Law alloweth no offendois any Suerties. 288 I mislike not the name but the bondage of a Suertie in Christ. 291. 292 Submission to God and compassion on man the generall causes of Christs Agony. 347 Submission with great feare and trembling Christ yeeldeth to God sitting in iudgement. 350. 351 The correcting of King Edwards Synode. 675 The things misliked in king Edwards Synod. ibid. T TArtarus a part of Hades with the Poets. 613 Tartarus with the Pagans is hell. 617 Tartarus taken for the a e ouer vs. 617 Christ could not be tempted to euill by any moti∣on of his owne hart. 304. 305. 306 Christ was tempted in the wildernesse by the sug∣gestion of Satan. 307 Christ was tempted after 40. daies. 307 Christ was tempted all his life long, but not in∣wardly. 312 Perswasion tempteth as well as compulsion. 314 Difference of outward and inward temptations. 314 No temptations without desperation kill the soule. 525 The Terror of God felt by Iob and Ionas were not the paines of hell. 452 Tertullian ascribeth all sinne to the whole man. 208 What forsaking Tertullian speaketh of. 427 Tertullian nameth no death but of Christs body. 428 Tertullian is farre from affirming the death of Christs Soule. 532 Tertullian admitteth none to Paradise before the last day but Martyrs. 594. 595. 596 Tertullian therein followed Montanus the Hereticke. 597 How Hades and Inferi concurre in sig∣nification. 579 The storie of Thaddeus no fable. 660 Thaddeus did not receaue adoration. 662 Thomas, how he might be called Iudas. 660 Euill Thoughts defile the whole man. 204 Our will the cause of our euill thoughts. 200 Christs bodily transfiguration was imperfect and transitorie. 458. 459 Triumphes are not secret and solitarie. 664 V VEngeance proper to the wicked appeared not in the Crosse of Christ. 156. 157 All Christs infirmitie was Voluntarie. 407 W VVHat the Scriptures meane by the Wages of sinne. 12 A threefold death the Wages of sinne. 13 Weakenesse, appeared in Christs flesh, but willing∣nesse in his spirit. 424 Whole redemption, and propitiation are verie large and doubtfull termes. 103 The Whole man dieth though the soule liue. 513 514 Euill thoughts defile the whole man. 204 The whole man guilty of all sin. 185. 186. 187. 208 Our Will the cause of our euill thoughts. 200 What is ment by the Worme that neuer dieth. 46 What the Scriptures meane by the Wrath of God. 15 What proper applied to wrath signifieth. 18 Christ suffered not the proper and meere wrath of God. 19. 23 What Wrath of God Christ suffered. 57 58 What is Gods Wrath against sinne. 60 God h d neuer displeasure or Wrath against Christs person. 61 God wrath against sinne hath many degrees and arts. 157 How the wrath of God in this life differeth from wrath to come. 158 Christ might suffer the wrath of God and yet not the true paines of hell. 159. 160 Wrath must be measured by Gods intention, not mans discerning. 165 The triall of Gods Saints is no effect of Gods proper wrath. 313 What Christ discerned of Gods wrath against our sinnes. 333 Christ did not apprehend of Gods wrath as the damned doe. 335 Christ was to see more of Gods wrath against our sinnes then he felt. 376 Christ might iustly feare the power of Gods wrath. 380 Z ZAnchius what he teacheth of mans redemp∣tion. 537 Faults escaped should thus be amended. PAge 4. line 25. for fourth read foorth. ibid. l. 34. infimities. r. infirmities. p. 26. l. 48. neighbour. r. neighbour? p. 38. title to his. r. to hell. p. 58. marg. of agony. r. of Christs agony. p. 66. l. 47. death? r. death. p. 230 tit. in subuerting. r. in subiecting. p. 353. l. 47. what to doe. r. what they doe. p. 428. marg. in manibus. r. in manus. p. 466. l. 14. the comfort. r. to comfort. p. 468. l. 4. thambeesa. r. thambeesai. p. 69. l. 1. astonished. r. astonished him. p. 473. l. 38. because God. r. because Iacob. p. 485. throughout, enlabeia. r. eulabeia. p. 487. l. 49. eisaekonstheis, r. eisakoustheis. p. 488. l. 6. eisakonstheis. r. eisakoustheis. ibid. 26. & in marg. Zinglius, r. Zuinglius. p. 502. l. 35. in members. r. in my members. p. 597. l. 23. since. r. sense. ibid. 32. affections. r. afflictions. p. 520. l. 20. . r. . ibid. 22. , r. . ibid. 24. . r. . p. 522. l. 17. Vigius. r. Vigilius. p. 523. l. 39. enstranging. r. estranging. p. 528. marg. your, r. the., LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for John Bill.