Boanerges. Or the humble supplication of the ministers of Scotland, to the High Court of Pariament [sic] in England Scott, Thomas, 1580?-1626. Boanerges. Or the humble supplication of the ministers of Scotland, to the High Court of Pariament [sic] in England Scott, Thomas, 1580?-1626. 2. CHRON. 19. 6. Take heed what you doe: for you execute not the iudgement of man, but of the Lord, and he shall be with you in the cause and iudgement. A Preface or Introduction to the Supplication. THere is a common saying among ours and Gods enemies the Papists, that the Christian Church must be knowne by these Characters, Visibility, Antiquity, Vniuersality, and Consent: but the Spirit of God sayes, that all these are the marks of the Beast; and persecution and paucitie the in∣fallible signes of the true Church: thus began the first prophesie, I will put enmity betweene thee and Gen. 3. 15. the woman, and betweene thy seed and her seed; thus it continued in Iohns Reuelation, Then the Dragon Apoc. 12. 17. was wroth with the Woman, and went and made warre with the remnant of her seed, which keep the comman∣dements of God, and haue the testimony of Iesus Christ. And thus could we spread the testimonies of Scrip∣ture like a mantle exposed to your view, full of delicate resemblances, wherein you might behold how the true Church of God hath been euer with∣out any cessation subiect to scornes, opprobry, the malignant circumstances of time, or fearfull perse∣cution. But withall we pray you remember, that we make not our approches from Nebuchadnezars heating the oven seuen times hotter, but the Dra∣gons Dan. 3. Apoc. 12. watching the Woman, the Man that sitteth in the Temple of God as God, those that be in Moses chaire, such as were invested with Aarons or∣naments, and in plaine termes the continued per∣secution which we meane must arise out of the hate and malice of Christians; yea Preachers themselues, that are opposites to zealous professors, and this we complaine of. Oh reade, reade for Gods sake the story of Iere∣mie, and marke his persecutions, and who were his greatest enemies? Shemaiah a false Prophet, and Ze∣phaniah Ch. 29. the chiefe Priest in stead of Iehoiada; yea if you step a litle further you shal find, that the king Zedekiah durst not iustifie his conference with Iere∣mie, Ch. 38. 24. as being afraid of the Princes and Priests: so that in truth he had no friends but Baruch the Pro∣phet, and Ebedmelech the Moore. And as it was with him, so it continued with all the rest, vntill the com∣ming of Christ, and then wherfore did he call them generation of Vipers? or who were those hypocrites that Christ exprobrated, but the Scribes and Phari∣ses who sat in Moses chaire, and at last condemned the Sauiour of the world to an ignominious death: so that it is apparant, here was nothing but perse∣cution. And for visibility, did not Eliah crie out, he was alone, and those that were the true seruants of God, durst not iustifie their profession? And after∣terward, he that was the Author of all truth, was re∣puted an impostor and deceiuer of the world. Oh marke what the Apostle saith: For I thinke that God hath set forth vs the last Apostles, as men appoin∣ted to death: for we are made a gazing-stocke vnto the 1. Cor. 4. 9. world, vnto the Angels, and to men. Which place of Scripture driues vs to amaze, when we consider the disparitie betweene the flourishing Churches, ambitious Prelacie, exalted Bishops, and maiesticke glory of Clergie men in Europe, and the pouerty, persecution and disreputation of the true Church of God indeed, as either it was in the time of the Apostles, or must be (according to this prophesie) to the worlds end. Reconcile vs then (we pray you) whether the Apostle onely meant the present time, or from the Spirit of God by way of prediction had reference to after ages, yea the end of the world? but doe not come too neare our eyes to dim our sight, or deafe our eares with the fearfull sound of the prerogatiue of Princes, the high command∣ing voices of authoritie, or the seeming flourishes of the orders of a Church; but plainly out of cohe∣rence of Scripture, rectifie our vnderstanding in this point. For if the Apostles haue prophetically set downe, and indefinitely concluded, that this must be the estate of the true Church of God; we shall neuer beleeue, but that outward pomp, pride, wealth, eminencie, and the ill sounding accent of supereoritie ouer their brethren, can decipher any o∣ther thing then Antichrist; and so must loue such in our soules, as either out of Pauls humilitie content themselues with that portion which God hath al∣lotted, or Dauids patience endure the Micols of the world to call them fooles. THE SVPPLICATION OR PETITION IT SELFE. Most gracious Lords, WHen Paul came to preach at Ephesus, and bring as it were the Arke of God into the Temple of Dagon, that hee might breake his necke, it is said, the whole Citie was moued, and Demetrius a siluer-smith, who got his li∣uing by making of Images, raised such a hurliburly amongst the people, that they would not endure any motiue for their conuersion to Christianitie, but cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Where∣upon the Apostle afterward exclaimed vpon them, that he had fought with beasts at Ephesus. Thus is it with all kingdomes and setled gouernments, though neuer so many thornes and thistles grow vp to choke the good seed, yet if there be a desire to set a crowne of gold on the Priests head, and take away his rags and deformed garments, to bring some leprous offender to publicke view, that it may be discerned whether he be vnclean or no; to make the Priests to cleanse the Temple of filth and pige∣ons dung, as you reade of Hercules who let in the riuer to cary away the ordure of Angens stable; to search the vnswept corners of vicious mens soules; and in a word to reforme the abuses of a Cōmon∣wealth; then shall some Amasiah tell Amos, Bethel is the Kings Court, and the Kings Chappell, there is no preaching there: then shall some Prince or Lord tell Zedechiah that Ieremy weakens the king∣dome, and disheartens the souldiers: then shall San∣dolet and the rest affright Nehemiah, when hee at∣tempts the discouery of foule enormities: in a word, then shall your great men and officers, for feare some charming arme of Hecate turne their inside outward, crie out of innouation, sedition, turbu∣lencie, or some hare-braind spirit. But, most gracious Lords, we beseech you re∣member how worthily King Philip of Macedon en∣tertained a petitioners presumption, when a cer∣taine woman kneeled before him to deliuer a sup∣plication, he reiected her suite, and turned away in scorne from her: the woman amazed, yet boldly answered, Then cease to be a King, if thou deniest to heare thy subiects petitions. The King hearing her voice, but not vnderstanding what she said, retur∣ned againe, and askt her what she meant. The vn∣daunted woman repeated the words againe; and the magnanimous Prince, not onely pardoned her, but tooke her vp in his armes, and as you shall reade that Dauid blessed Abigail for keeping him from shedding of blood, so did King Philip blesse the woman for telling him his dutie, and chid all the rest for being flatterers and parasites. Thus doe we say to you, seeing our great and considerate Prince hath now condescended to call this high Court of Parliament to heare his subiects grieuances, and redresse the enormities of the Com∣monwealth; either cease to sit, and come not there at all, or entertaine our petitions, and relieue our discontents. But because we will not affright Is∣rael, as the ten explorators of the land of Canaan did, with talking of Enachims and giants, of iron walls and high towers, that is, with medling with the Church and gouernment of the Clergie, either by finding fault with the setled state, or proposing vnto you our maner of discipline, according to o∣ther reformed Churches of Europe, the Confession of Auspurgh, the Harmonie of Confession, or other fearfull petitions which in the dayes of Queen Eli∣zabeth were presented to the Councell; we will at this present contract ourselues, and insist onely vp∣on three things. 1. First concerning Non-residents, and the ill example which the Clergie giue by their ill liues to weake and ignorant soules. 2. Concer∣ning the mixtures of Papistrie in your kingdome, or conniuing at the impudencie of such men, that with Bels priests eate vp the Kings prouision, and make him beleeue the Dragon did it. 3. Last of all, not to giue eare to the Syrens incantations, but tie yourselues close to the mast of true Religion and Christian policie, that you be not seduced and brought within the Panthers reach, whose sweet sa∣uours and persumes intoxicateth many innocents and ignorants. First concerning Non-residents, Formalists, and other abuses of the Clergie; if it please you to re∣member, in the Law of Moses, the malefactor or de∣linquent in any kind, saued his life if he could once take hold of the hornes of the Altar; yet when the case was against King Salomon, it could not serue Ioabs turne, but hee perisht immediatly: so is it a∣mongst you, if you can but name the orders of go∣uernment and constitutions of the Church, you are able to stop any disputants mouth, to silence a∣ny Preacher; but this shall not serue your turne in any cause against the maiestie of heauen, but the sentence of our Sauiour shall be denounced a∣gainst any hypocriticall Formalist vnder the Sunne, He that knowes his masters will, and doth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. If againe he be an igno∣rant, oh reade the prophesie; the flying booke came to one, and he could not open it, it was too fast sea∣led; it came to another opened, and hee could not reade it; and it came to a third, and hee could not vnderstand it. Thus out of ignorance or wilfulnesse you haue silenced many worthy spirituall stones of Gods building, and traduced those that could not endure the prophane mixtures in religion, with the termes of heretiks, schismatiks and sectaries, termes more affrighting then Iewes, Turks and Infidels: for their misunderstanding themselues may be ex∣cused ex magno inscitia bello, yet Corasim and Beth∣saida shall answer the matter more fearfully. But, most gracious Lords, notwithstanding these calumniations, or the brand of malice by intempe∣rate humours; the crime of heresie is not to be im∣puted to any, whose faith doth wholy rely vpon the sure rocke of Gods word; they are no Schisma∣tiks who runne for shelter vnder the comfortable shade of the tree of the Church of God, such as the Prophets, Apostles, and primitiue Church de∣scribe, or such as all the Reformed Churches of Europe take vpon them to defend: nor are they to be reputed Sectaries which embrace the truth al∣wayes one and itselfe, and so impregnable, that all the assaults of Satan shall not preuaile against it: and therefore, Right honorable Lords, we do here exhibite a petition vnto you, so to order the mat∣ter, that neither we be thus scandalized, nor any seruant of God put from his estate & maintenance, for making a conscience against some friuolous ce∣remonies, which are not things indifferent (as now is the phrase) if you compell men to the obserua∣tion; and therefore to affright them with losse of liuing, maintenance or imprisonment, is no bro∣therly punishment, nor charitable discipline, doe rather, as Augustus did by his Senator, we beseech you. There was a Romane dwelling in the great city, named Ouidius Pollio, who determining to invite the Emperour to supper, made a great preparation; but in the washing of his christall glasses, the slaue broke one of them; for which he was condemned the next day to be cut in peeces, and throwne into his fish-ponds. The Emperour comming to supper, and hearing of this most cruell doome for so triuial an offence, cōmanded all the glasses to be brought into his presence, and so brake them to peeces: This I doe (quoth Augustus) to preuent further mischiefe which may happen vpon so slight occasions. Wee will not apply, but leaue all to be throughly searched and discussed, and that for two causes: 1. The one, for that wee are confident, you are able in respect of your singular knowledge in the Scriptures, and hope you are willing in respect of your honours and sincere pietie toward Religion, to convince our errors by Gods word, and discouer our wandrings, if in any thing we be out of the way. 2. Secondly, that if you find the testimony & confession of faith of honest religious men agreeable with the word of truth, you will also agree either to convince vs by writing, or giue vs leaue to liue without oblo∣quy or infamous characters in our poore and despi∣sed estates, or not to clog our consciences (as we said) with ceremonies and devices of men. For, what said Stephen King of Poland, Princes might command the bodies and liues of their subiects, but not their soules and consciences. And who, I pray you, are our greatest enemies, but such as liue in pomp, state, glory, feasting, with much aboundance and affluencie; such as haue plu∣ralitie of Benefices, are resident at none of them, and scarce preach once in a yeare; such as are Pre∣bends in Cathedrall Churches, whose liuings are inordinatly spent vpon a number of Drones and deuouring panches, Singing-men, Organists, Que∣risters, and diuers superfluous officers, which other∣wise might be extended toward the reliefe of poore schollers and the true seruants of God; and all this is the more lamentable, because many times the place of preaching is vnsupplied, and when it is supplied, you shall finde at least a dozen Ministers walking in your most frequented Churches with∣out hearing the word of God at all: to be briefe, such are our enemies, as neither know what true zeale or deuotion meanes, nor once thinke vpon the propagation of religiō, or purity of a sincere life. Iudge, most gracious Lords, whether our soules are truly vexed or no, at the enormities and grosse wickednesse of Clergie men; when amongst you there are such couetous and ambitious Preachers that retaine divers Benefices, offices and Church∣liuings in their hands, and growing rich, are able to purchase Lordships and Mannors, when yet you reade the Levites might haue no lands, nor any sordide commutations of rents, keep princely hou∣ses and diet with song and minstrelsie, their wiues and children coached in the streetes, and equalling your best Ladies in habit and fantasticall attire, fea∣thers, frisled haire, masks, fans, bodkins, and in a ma∣ner vsing all those fashions for which Isaiah repre∣hendeth Isai. 3. the daughters of Zion in his time. We could name frequenting publicke assemblies, com∣mon Interludes, Iesabels painting among the wo∣men, Herodias dancing, and all other fearfull cu∣stomes of temptation, wherewith the diuel beguiles the wandring soules of Gods people, and bringeth poore innocents vnder the captiuitie of sinne, who with Heuah dare adventure on the apple, because it was faire to the eye. We could tell you, that when Cardinall Woolsey was made Legatus alatere, Lord Chancellor of England, Archbishop of Yorke, and had a Bull read in publicke of all his temporall and spirituall liuings, there was such murmuring and repining among honest ciuill men, that they durst publikly presage his downfall, and the Courtiers themselues were amazed at his wealth. The like was spoken of Gardiner, and Car∣dinall Poole. And many in those dayes shed teares againe to thinke that such as had the cure of soules should affect other offices, dignities and temporall honors; and wee pray God there be not the like corruptions still. As for the vanities of the world, yea life it selfe, what are they but bubbles and balls raised out of a little niter and ope, as boyes in their pastimes blow vp with their quils, and ere they be tossed three times, they burst of themselues. Wee must say yet further, that there are such Formalists, Temporisers, flatterers, and meere parasites, in imi∣tation of the Courtly priests in the times of Israels and Iudahs Kings, that sundry Chaplins lie watch∣ing ouer Gods true Ministers indeed, and if they preach according to their consciences and the word of God, or be examined before hand how they meane to dispose of themselues, they shall be told to their faces that the text serueth not for the times; nor are men to be endured that dare put their rude hands vnto the raw wounds of the gouernment: but wee will be bold to say, that all this Courtly pomp, large reuenues, abundance of wealth, and maintaining of pleasures, are the diuels clogs to presse their minds and meditation to the earth and corruptible drosse, so that they cannot looke vp to heauen, nor affect such things as are aboue. To end, lest we neuer end, many of these tem∣porising Clergie men are so curious, trim and neate in their apparel, with garters, roses and shoo-strings, with bootes and spurres, with velvet, sattin and da∣mask cassocks and tippets, with horse and coach, and in a word with all worldly pomp and brauery, that except the colour, no man can discouer them from Knights and Gentlemen; when yet a Prophet was knowne in those dayes by the habit of a Pro∣phet; and he that reades shall finde that Eliahs lea∣ther girdle, Isaiahs nakednes, Ieremies dungeon, A∣mos neat-heards staffe, Iohn Baptists camels haire, Christs coate without a seame, Peters fishing net, and Pauls labouring with his hands, did far exceed the proud Priests miters, or the Pharises philacteries. Here wee might adde the frequenting of publicke Theaters, vsing all maner of exercises, gaming, ta∣uernes, wantonnesse, and such like, insomuch that the Apostles, especially Iude truly presaged what maner of men they would be, and what corrupti∣ons should creep into the Church; yea our Sauiour Christ prophesied, that for these and other grosse impieties, at his second comming hee should scarce find faith vpon earth. And thus much for the cor∣ruptions of your Clergie, and our expostulation, that you will remember Iethro's counsell to Moses: Moreouer, prouide thou among all the people, men of Exod 18. 21. courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating coue∣tousness. Secondly, concerning Papists, or the conniuen∣cie at superstitious Popery, or coming so neare the chariot wheeles of the Strumpet, to be dashed with the flingings of her dirt and filth; what is it but to bring in the Syrian idolatry to be mixed with Sa∣marias 2. King. 17. 25. sacrifices, for which the Lord sent Lions out of the wildernesse to deuoure them: what is it, then for Ahas to go to Damascus, and send word to Vrias 2. Kin. 16. 10. 17 2. Chron. 28. the Priest to make an altar like vnto that in Syria▪ and set it vp in Gods house; for which both he the Priest and the people were seuerely punished: what is it but when a Prophet is sent on Gods errand, 1. King. 20. 36. and maketh knowne the pleasure of the Almighty, which is not obeyed, and so the offender is slaine and punished. Marke, we beseech you (most graci∣ous Lords) how iealous God is of his honour, and will not endure any disobedience, especially the pollutions of idolatry, which are maintained in their prophane religion and sophisticate distincti∣ons and deceits of equiuocation. When Rahel stole her fathers idols, she made no more accoūt of them Gen. 35. then to tombe them in the straw, and so sat vpon them; but as soone as Iacob came to a resting place, the text sayes, he presently cleansed his house of such filthinesse and abomination: when Moses de∣tracted Exod. 4. 24. the time for circumcising his son, the Lord had like to haue kild him in the way; and when it was done, his wife Zipporah reuiled him with the name of bloody husband. Oh how angry and incen∣sed was God at Aarons calfe, insomuch that Moses in a great rage broke the tables of stone all to fit∣ters; and God himselfe would haue destroyed Israel Exod. 32. in the wildernesse, & made a greater nation of him. And what are the idols and images of Papists, with their Roods and Crucifixes, and painted pictures, but Egypts calues; and Naamans going into the temple of Rimmon, which he knew was a sin, and so craued mercie? Are not the Papists ashamed of these things, when among their owne Doctors and Schoole-men, it is doubtfull & disputable, whether Salomon was saued or no, by reason of his apostacie? Would it not make a mans heart to tremble to heare the fearfull epithites and characters where∣with the holy Ghost hath branded Papistrie? and is not the Pope proued to be that Antichrist, not one man, as the diuell would deceiue weake Chri∣stians, but the Conclaue of Cardinals, and the gouern∣ment of Rome, as it is now exalted. Oh reade, reade, reade for Gods sake, There must come a depar∣ting, and that man of sin be disclosed, euen the sonne of perdition, which is an aduersary, and exalteth himselfe 2. Thes. 2. 3. 4. 7 against all that is called God, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God: and therefore neither Iew nor Turke, nor Idolater, but a meere Christian Prelate, and should be a Preacher of Gods word: then he followes with the mystery of iniquitie, the reuealing of the wicked man, the con∣suming of him with the spirit of Gods mouth, his com∣ming by the working of Satan, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders, in all deceiueablenesse of vn∣righteousnesse, with many other things to the end of the Chapter. What think you of Pauls instructions to Timothy, concerning the doctrines of diuels, speaking through 1. Tim. 4. hypocrisie, hauing their consciences burned with a hot iron, forbidding meates and mariages, and giuing heed to the spirit of errors to be seduced: so that you see there must be a doctrine amongst professors of Gods word, prescribing things abominable to the truth, and it shall be perspicuous to the world, and plainly reuealed, and when it is discouered and made knowne, the conclusion followes, without distinction or exception, that it is the doctrine of the diuel: answer then a Gods name, you that must answer before the throne of the Lambe; is not this Papistrie? and who would be thus defiled? Oh marke the goodnes of God when the guests made excuses, and would not come to the feast, the Ma∣ster sent about into the high wayes and hedges for the poore, the blind, the halt and the lame; yea hee compelled some to come, that knew not what that hospitalitie meant; and yet for all this, when hee discouered a man in the bride-chamber that had not on his wedding garment, he cast him forth, and his ministers threw him into vtter desolation: what then will become of Papists? can you conceiue that the Popes triple crowne, his vestments embro∣dred with pearle and gold, the Cardinals bloody scarlet gownes, the Priests stately and pompous copes, the altar-hangings of rich arras, with all those proud and pompous attires, are wedding garments fit to come into Christs bride-chamber? No, no. It is true humiliation and the washing of our sins with his precious blood must make vs fit for ad∣mission. What is Calamus, Benimmi, or Storax, says the Prophet, or a thousand riuers of oile to make vs delicately cleane, and smell of perfumes, except the Lord purge and cleanse vs, and by the opera∣tion of his holy Spirit wipe away our leprous spots of iniquitie, and purifie vs by a new sanctification, not by the Purgatory of Papistry, the intercession of Saints, the Masses of Priests, the merits of works, the Indulgences of the Pope, the trentals & dirges of cozening Friers, nor in a word the trumperies and fooleries of processions and puppet playes. Now come to the hammer that strikes all home, to the stone that pushed the golden image in pee∣ces, to the iron rod that bruiseth Gods enemies to powder, the Apocalips I meane, and he that hath eares to heare, let him heare. I saw vnder the altar the soules of them that were killed for the word of God Apoc. 6. 9. and for the testimonie which they maintained. Oh the bloody massacres of France, and the crueltie of the Romane Bishops! oh the tyrannie of the Inquisi∣tion, and the searches of Iesuites and Priests all ouer Europe! oh the fiery trials & persecutions in Queen Maries dayes, and those blood-thirsty enemies of God, Gardner and Bonner, with the rest of Satans in∣struments, worse then Adonibeseck the tyrant, who cut off the hands and feet of 70 Kings. But vnder∣stand what followes both to them and all the rest that forget God: And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chiefe Captaines, 15 and the mightie men, and the bond-man, and euery free∣man hid themselues in dens and among the rocks of the mountaines, and said to the mountaines and rocks, Fall 16 on vs, and hide vs from the presence of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. And he opened the bottomlesse pit, and there arose the smoake of 9, 2 the pit, and the smoake of a great fornace, and the Sunne and the aire were darkned by the smoake of the pit; And there came out of the smoake Locusts vpon the earth, and 3 vnto them was giuen power, as the Scorpions of the earth haue power. What is all this, and much more that followes, but Popish Priests, false teachers, he∣reticks indeed, and such as would eclipse and dar∣ken the glory of Gods word, and peruert the do∣ctrine of holy Scripture. Marke the rest, we be∣seech you: And when they haue finished their testimo∣nie, Apoc. 11. 7. the Beast that cometh out of the bottomlesse pit shall make warre against them, and shall ouercome them and kill them: and their corpse shall lie in the streets of the great Citie, which spiritually is called Sodome and Egypt, 8 where our Lord also was crucified. And there appeared another great wonder in heauen, for behold a great red 12. 3 Dragon hauing seuen heads and ten hornes; and there 7 was a battell in heauen, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon; And the great Dragon that old Ser∣pent, 9 called the Diuell and Satan, was cast out, which de∣ceiueth all the world. And I saw a Beast rise out of the 13. 1 6 Sea, with seuen heads and ten hornes, and he opened his mouth vnto blasphemy against God. And I saw three vn∣clean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the Dra∣gon, 13 and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. And great Babylon came 16. 19 in remembrance before God, to giue vnto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath. Come, I will 17. 1 shew thee the damnation of the great Whore that sitteth vpon many waters, with whom haue committed forni∣cation the Kings of the earth. And I saw a Woman sit 2 vpon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy. Oh reade the whole Chapter with all that follow∣eth concerning Romes prophesie, and then consi∣der with your selues, who would either be a Papist or allow of Papistry in any Christian gouernment: for either you must discredit this prophesie, or think the holy Ghost very vnmannerly in these epith tes and titles, or be ashamed of your profession, and so turne to the Lord (if be possible) by true con∣trition and reformation of life. But, most gracious Lords, we will come nearer home to you, you know what letters haue passed from your Bishops to inferiour Ministers, concer∣ning what and how they shall preach, with certaine limitation of handsome language toward the Pa∣pists, that none of these fearfull characters in Scrip∣tures shall be once mentioned against them: you know how the Lord Keeper would faine haue mode∣rated the charges of the Iudges of Assise at their so∣lemne Sessions and Assemblies, as if there were a full determination in the gouernment to repeale all the Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, yea the King him∣selfe against Papists, Priests and Iesuites. You know how audacious they haue been euen of late dayes to iustifie their bad dispositions toward the State, and make a publicke protestation of their inficious wilfulnesse, insomuch that some of them dared to say, when we reioyced with bonfires at the Princes returne, that they were sory to see so much wood spent in vain, for there would not be fagots enough left to burne the Hereticks in London. What then hath our gracious Soueraigne gotten by this partiall charitie or conniuencie at Papists; but at home a generall feare lest the Diuell should lay hold vpon the latch of the doore, and so take ad∣uantage of no bodies watching without; or their negligence within, and politikly enter, and then who knowes not, what a subtil Serpent, raging Lion and watching Dragon hee is? And abroad, iniuri∣ous reports, that hee was afraid of the Popes and Spaines mightinesse, or durst not trust his owne greatnesse against the factious Papists of England, if they should vnite themselues to any forrein Prince; when yet he hath had experience of his owne pre∣seruation, and the many deliuerances of his prede∣cessor that famous Queene of euerlasting memory: for the hand of God is not shortned, and he hath still a cloudy pillar by day, and a fiery pillar by night to conduct his Israel through the wildernesse. If there were no more to make you abhorre Papistrie, then the martyrdome of the Saints in Queene Ma∣ries dayes, it were sufficient: Oh horrible crueltie to haue men and women burnt for saying the Lords prayer in the vulgar tongue, and instructing their families in the word of God. The bloody Bishop Bonner in his owne person burnt a poore seruants hand with a flaming linke for saying a part of a Ca∣techisme: and to make the spectacle the more vgly, he whipped a man with rods in his garden, till his fury made his owne blood spurt out of his paunch. The rest were not inferiour vnto him: for by a Bi∣shops commandement a woman with childe was put to death, and when the infant burst out of her womb, one of the guard pitcht him backe againe into the fire vpon the point of a halbert. To name the rest, were to write out the whole booke; but for this and the rest, wee end with the Poet, Horresco referente. Shall we step into France, and remember those fearfull times of Guisean massacres, especially Henry of Bourbons mariage, when the Admirall was slaine, of which one writes, that there was more blood spilt then wine drank. Shall we name the Leagures Oligarchy, and holy conuention of Catholiks, when they had like to haue expeld their Prince out of the kingdome, and draue him to a nooke of Normandie, the towne of Deep, and onely because he was or see∣med a Protestant. In these warres and times of wic∣kednes, so many outrages & cruell blood sheddings were committed, that Nero's opening his mothers wombe was not comparable. You reade of a battell in heauen, betweene Mi∣chael and his Angels, and the Dragō; wherein at last the Diuell and all his complices were discomfited: if euer this might be rightly applied, it was to Queen Elizabeth, of whō it may well be said with the Poet, —Namque haud tibi vultus Mortalis, nec vox hominem sonat ô dea certe. For if euer the Cherubins spread their wings ouer the Arke, the God of heauen tooke a charge of her person; else could she not haue escaped so many at∣tempts, so many enemies, so many mischiefes, pi∣stols, poniards, poisons, threatnings, insurrections, invasions, curses, excommunications, hate, & deadly malice, all which arose from the poisoned spring of the Papists inventions, and flowed into streames of monstrous impietie, and Popish absolutions for murder. If there were nothing in the world to be a motiue to the abhorrencie of their religion and actions, the Catastrophe of Henry the 4. of France, surnamed the Great, would dissolue an heart of ada∣mant, and make men wonder that some exorbitant vengeance did not fall vpon the contriuers: for when was this done? when he had condescended to their owne conditions, the Popes Legat, and the Papists intercession; but Satan hath his instruments; and when the Lord giues vs ouer, or we giue ouer the Lord, we must endure a strange alteration. Who can forget, or who can euer be reconciled to any adherents of Popery, when the Gun-powder plot shall be questioned, and the memory of that Satanicall machination be renewed, of which I wil say no more, but answer with Solon, when there was a motion made for a law against parricides, You see (saith he) how murder is to be punished; but no man can beleeue that any dare attempt to kill his father: so treasons, massacres, slaughters, and villanous attempts may be proiected, but it is im∣possible that there should be such a forge in hell it self, to hammer out so vile a work, as the destruction of a whole kingdome at once, and the blowing in∣to the aire the Nobilitie and principall wise men of a Cōmonwealth. Why Neros wish was not com∣parable to this, to haue all the Senators heads set on one necke, that he might diuide it asunder at a stroke. If it be thus, most gracious Lords, be iudges your selues of our poore supplication, whether it is not high time to roote out Papistrie, and crie with Sara, that the sonne of the bondwoman should not dwell with Isaac, and so neuer left till Hagar and Ismael were thrust out of doores; or to take that or∣der, that Popery haue not any further footing in in the Land, nor that Man of sin, that Antichrist of Rome, that sonne of perdition, that scarlet Strum∣pet, that painted Iesabel, and that doctrine of diuels be neuer admitted againe or taught in England, to imposture ignorant soules, and seduce innocent people. Thirdly, concerning Spanish practises, and the hate that all the nations of the world beare vnto them: for the generall (most gracious Lords) wee refer you to the seuerall tractates of many Historio∣graphers, and the great experience of iudicious tra∣uellers; but especially to Paragone and Nouita Per∣nasso written in Italian, to a letter to the Duke of Sauoy, and a treatise of Figuira a Portingal Gentle∣man concerning the conquest of Portingall, written in Spanish to the Figre of France, the Cheualier of France, the Leaguers Oligarchy, and the Spanish Mo∣narchy compiled in French; and for our owne lan∣guage, to Sir Francis Hastings works, and a well com∣posed treatise concerning English fugitiues, with diuers of this sort, wherein you shall see, quasi digito demonstrata, as in a table well deliniated, the 1. pride, 2. irreligion, 3. tyrannie, 4. treasons, 5. ingratitude, and 6. inhumanitie of the Spanish nation, wherein we hope one day to satisfie vnderstanding men, and according to the prouerb of Dies dabit quod dies ne∣gat, make you partakers of such truths, that the best friends which Spaine hath, shal confesse the Castilian comes of goatish barbarous blood, and all the rest are polluted with Mahumetan mixture, and Moo∣rish affinitie. And although it may be obiected a∣gainst such an attempter, Non tu plus cercis, sed plus temerarius aeudes; yet iuuante Deo it may be performed, and we will rely on Mordechais answer to Hester, that if she will not go in to the King to saue her people, God will raise them vp meanes of preseruation from some o∣ther part of the earth. But to come nearer home, and to your selues, as the present stands; Who knowes not, since the treaty with Spaine, with what insolency the Papists haue proceeded both at home and abroad; at home they haue dared to publish and copy deuised pardons, scorned the lawes of the Land concerning Recusancie, boasted of publicke assemblies, set vp printing Presses in priuate hou∣ses, and iustified their idolatrous meetings, as if the Masse meant to outface the Gospel of Iesus Christ, frequented the Embassadours houses with much immodest iustificatiō of their Conuenticles, threat∣ned zealous Ministers for their inuectiues against Antichrist; continued priuate inhibitions that no man should speake, write, preach, or practise any thing against their designes, insomuch that diuers haue beene imprisoned for discouering the Spani∣ards pride and hypocrisie, and many put out of countenance for inuectiues against the Kings friends, as the terme went. Abroad, I am ashamed to name the sundry pictures they haue published both in Antwerp and Brussels (for all the peace, and treaty with Spaine) against the King and his chil∣dren, against our Countrey and Religion, against God and his Annointed; yea it is wonderfull to reade the infamous and scandalous lies they haue exposed, as if his Maiesty had gone with his Coun∣cell to Masse to please the Pope and the King of Spaine, as is apparant in Gallo Belgico. What say you to oron Regi , a booke printed in Brussels against his Maiesties royall person; an Invectiue against Holland, by laughing at her neer nosse vnto hell, as being low ground; and traducing the vertuous Queene Elizabeth most maliciously; Iohn Kings Le∣gacle Bishop of London; the Gag for the Gospell; the vneasing of heresie, with diuers others, all which though they be hellish and damnable, yet are sold by the Diuels factor, or a Spanish Iohn, and in a ma∣ner winked at in the State; whereas other relations tending onely to the discouery of errors and abuses in the Church, are not onely suppressed, but the authors punished and imprisoned, to no other pur∣pose, but to discouer our feare that wee should be found guilty in Gods sight: so that one hath beene imprisoned for writing a letter to the then Marquis of Buckingham against the Spanish march; another for making or publishing a booke, wherein Gondomar apprehended himselfe mockt & derided; a third for preaching a Sermon, Be not vnequally yoked with Infidels; a fourth for discouering the in∣cestuous mariages of the house of Austria; a fifth for reuealing the secrets of that tyrannous Inquisi∣tion in Spaine; a sixt for applying to the present Ezechias folly in shewing the Baby lonish Embassa∣dours the treasures of the Temple and the riches of the Pallace; a seuenth for making a prayer to be de∣liuered from all infectious Spanish sheep, by reason you had once a great rot of sheep in England, by an infectious Ewe brought out of Spaine; and diuers others for putting the axe to the roote of the tree, and applying other texts contrary, to your Bishops minds, and some other Lords who affected Spaines greatnesse. But such is your misfortune ( p o nely abuse Gods prouidence with such cha cte ) or the malignitie of time, that hauing two fac t and befitting pictures, as your aduersaries deserued, they were both suppressed, the plates cut in p eces, and the sellers imprisoned; one was of the Kings holding the Pope nose to a grind stone▪ with the two Archbishops turning the same▪ another was made by M r Ward of Ipswich, concerning 88. and the powder treason, and both for Gods glory and En∣glands honour; yet neither they nor any thing else against the Pope or Spaine would be to era ed: yea when your reuerend and honorable Archbishop▪ whose Statue deserues to be set vp in gold, proued the Lords Champion against some Papisticall mo∣tiues, and mixtures to be made amongst you, some prophane tongue calld him Puritan Bishop, and wic∣ked stomacks belched contradiction in his face: but we will vrge this matter no further, onely pray that God will protect such as protect true Religion; and assure your Honours, that the Spirit of God will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which call Reuel. 3. 9. themselues Iewes, and are not; but such as keep the word of his patience, shall be deliuered from the houre of temptation which must come vpon all the world. Wee could name other seuerall conferences and disputations since this treaty with Spaine, of which with diuellish arrogancie they haue boasted that Fisher the Iesuite so preuailed against Doctor White, that many hearers turned Catholicks; and how the illuminations of the Priests were diuine from hea∣uen, and the Papists Preachers had an Euangelicall spirit: oh horrible impudencie, and Spanish blas∣phemie! Wee will not be preiudicate (most honorable Lords) and say, it was a iudgement of God in that fatall Vosper of the Blackfriers, to kill a hundred peo∣ple with the fall of a loft, and giue you all warning, that God will not be mocked, that blasphemies shall be reuenged, that there is no such enemy to God and his Church as apostacie: but wee will be bold to tell you, that this disaster is turned vpon your owne heads; for at Rome there hath been so∣lemne Procession, and from Rome letters of disco∣uery, that in England God hath beene so angrie with the hereticks, (meaning the Protestants) that Churches and lofts haue ouerwhelmed many of them in their ominous falls. If the diuell now be the father of lies, who could inuent such vntruths? You had a tempest of lightning and thunder in Iuly last, and it spared not the gate-house in the Pal∣lace of Saint Iames, we will not say, it was to chide you for building a Chappell to Idolatry, and swea∣ring to strange articles for the pleasure of the Spa∣niard; but may affirme, that if any Bishop was con∣senting to such a worke, is it any other then when the Leuite became Priest to Micha, and consecrated his idoll. Come, come, be not deceiued; if God be God let him be God; if Baal be God, serue him: and if Spaine will match with England, let it be done without fearfull conclusions; and be not ouermat∣ched with a prodigious treaty. We are the bolder (most gracious Lords) to enter into these termes with you, and to prostrate our selues before the throne of our dread Soueraigne, with teares in our eyes and drops of blood from our heart, because we desire that he would but con∣sider the many and sundry inconveniences the Country hath endured since the peace with Spaine; and with what particulars of disgraces and scorne, wee haue all been branded since this last treaty a∣bout a mariage: let vs then craue pardon, great Lords, if we make a mixture of triuiall and solid bu∣sinesse together, or are carelesse of method, prece∣dencie of time, or not ranking the most eminent things in the first place; shall wee begin with the complaints of the whole Land, the swarming and increase of the poore, the decay of trades, inso∣much that in London there are at least a thousand seuerall houses to be let, and in the principal streets inferiour occupations are intruded, to the disgrace of that great and famous Citie; the exportation of our gold, the carying away of our ordnance, the anticipation of the benefit of our Virginia commo∣dities, by selling vnderhand Spanish Tobacco, and such like; and the slack eventing of our cloth and cottons, by reason Spaine and Italy haue proclaimed inhibitions for bringing in any English cloth or woollen clothes amongst them? Shall wee follow with the losse of the Palatinate, the slighting of our Embassadours in Germany, the hazard of the Kings children in Prague, the bereauing them of their in∣heritance, the bestowing the Electorship vpon Ba∣uaria, and all those perils and indignities wee haue endured about that warre, when yet we were made to beleeue there should be a more tractable com∣position or orderly course taken, if we would defist from the prosecution? Shall wee continue with your disgraces at home? how euer many gracious things haue been published to reconcile the peo∣ples opinion to the affecting the Spanish match, all which haue yet had the misfortune of diuerting them from it, either as disallowing the pamphlets that haue been that way written, or esteeming them too triuiall, and onely common tricks to get mony. With what scorne did a supposed Spanish mad man aduance himselfe into the Chaire of Estate in the presence at White-hall, and was onely dismist with a iest from Gondomar, and a shipping out of England? Was there euer such an abuse offered to a Kings house, as the cutting of his pictures in the princely gallery, when certaine Spaniards were so kindly entertained to be admitted into such priuat rooms? Who could haue had better welcome then that counterfet fugitiue the Archbishop of Spalato? and yet in requitall he preached publickly in the Mer∣cers Chappell, that the Church of Rome was a true Church of God; and in priuate conference argued as if the Ecclesiasticall gouernment of England was but a mongrell Papistry. How did Gondomar cou∣zen our hospitalitie, and abuse his Maiesties fauor? for after he and his Priests had been welcomed to many noble houses in England, and discouered the Ladies humors or dotage vpon their Iesuites, after he had fraughted himselfe with the knowledge of our kingdome, and diued (as it were) into the arca∣na regni; after he had drawne on the net of political enforcement, concerning the profit and honour of both Nations by this match, with the iocundity of the Princes in their vnion; and penselled out the excellencies of the Infanta Maria: after, we say, that hee had as it were made a faction in England, and knew by name who were Hispaniolized, and for their priuate ends (as all temporisers do) neglected the publicke good either of Church or Common∣wealth. With what a iollitie did hee returne into Spaine, and boasted there how easie it was to de∣ceiue your simplicitie, insomuch that wee in Scot∣land heard more particulars then you in England, that his arguments were but Elo chi, and wished in our hearts his wisedom might proue Ahitophels, and his deuices like Perillus bull, of whom Phallaris for his inuention made the first triall. Shall we prosecute other matters? was it well done, thinke you, to compose that booke of Rosa Hispanioa, and Anglicum punicum, and expose it to publike view, with an idolatrous and blasphemous frontispeece, Christ comming from heauen to mar∣rie them, when he himselfe had cursed Israel if they matched with the Canaanites, and Nehemiah with pulling their haire from their heads, made the peo∣ple put away their idolatrous wiues; and for the booke it selfe, the wiser and iudicious sort not onely derided it for the phrase and fantasticall title vnto as fantasticall a man, but for the substance and ex∣amples which might be euery way, and euery one retorted against the other: and for the frontispeece, the very women in Edenborugh haue made good sport to heare of the iests that haue beene contriued vpon it. At the first, when a certaine man deman∣ded whom those pictures did personate, and answer was made, that the one was Charles Prince of Wales, and the other, the Lady Maria Infanta of Spaine; and the third, Iesus Christ come from heauen to marry them. Not too fast, (replied the fellow) but yet I am glad that Christ is between them, for then sure he wil neuer suffer them to ioyn together, except God giue her so much grace, which seldome happens to a Spaniard, to come out of Babilon, and not be partakers of her Idola∣tries. After this, the book lying long on their stalls, and the man ouen angred againe at such lukewarme gospellers and trades-men, that care not by what for did meanes, and superstitious filthinesse they en∣rich themselues, he asked once againe what those pictures meant? and they once againe answered, the Prince of Wales, and Princesse of Spaine, with Christ between them. Oh, said he, thats impossible! For if Christ meant any such matter, he would haue dis∣patcht it before now: and questionlesse there would neuer haue been such delayes, and rediculous pride amongst them. Then followed the Princes iorney into Spaine, with rigging out a Nauy, and selecting the Com∣manders to please the King of Spaine, as was inter∣pred of some of the principall Catholike Lordes of England, who apparrelled their followers honora∣bly, and did all things befitting the dignitie of the nation; but what followed vpon Brunswicks ouer∣throw? Spaine with Ixion bosted, he must lie with Iuno: and the house of Austria swelled so big, that if the tumor of pride be not pricked downe, it will burst with her own greatnes and presumption, that they are not able to raise another Gigantomachia, and with Typhon cast the mountaines against hea∣uen: for presently the noble Prince found a kind of remisnes and relaxation concerning his first enter∣tainment, & peraduenture being a pathick to some indignities, he and the Navy were all dismist with∣out the Lady or any dispatch of the businesse: so that we in Scotland did wonder how so great and so wise a King could either be misinformed, or rely on any Temporiser to go forward with vncertainties; and yet for all this you in England printed more books of the Princes royall entertainment in Spaine, and like childrens wormseed it was trimmed ouer with gold and put into candid stuffe, that is, it had braue phrases and oratory, with some things that sauored of impossibilitie. A second booke told you of a se∣cond entertainment which the Prince had in Spain, and for Spanish businesse had such an exotik phrase, that when it came amongst vs, we reputed it a very Rhomantidos indeed: for the author inuented words neuer in any author before, and bestowed as much paines about killing of buls and beasts, ioco de cuno, and other sports, like our countrymen in times past, who ran at S. Quintine, as Homer did in describing the Troian wars, Curtius in Alexanders conquests, and Lucan in his Pharsalia. Then followed a third booke of the Princes farewell, and reciprocall gifts bestowed betweene Spaine and vs; and this was as vineger to the teeth and smoake to the eyes of the subiect: for had not their hearts been seasoned with the ioy and gladnes for his returne, their mouthes had cursed outright, and wished such deceiuers the womans reward, that for golde betrayed her countrey, and so had so much layd vpon her, that they pressed her to death. These collections (most gracious Lords) wee haue made, not to intercede against the will of our great King, or pleasure of the Prince, if hee haue ta∣ken any pleasure in his iourney to Spaine, but to put you in mind, what you must trust vnto, if you mer∣chandize for any Babylonish trumperies, or meane to trafficke with Spaine or Rome for mens traditions and policies: nor are wee presumptuous in any ad∣uice, but onely to remember you, how the blood of the Saints lies crying for vengeance, and mourn∣ing for their redemption before the throne of the Lambe, what Rome hath done to Gods seruants: wherefore Spaine hath abused most of the countries of Europe, and with what enforcements the whole world complaines of them all; and then no doubt the God that hath bin so merciful to you and vs in these discoueries, will be as mercifull in opening the doores of your hearts to preuent future mischiefes, by exposing vnto you present inconueniences, and assuring you according to that Machiuilian positiō of fides non est conseruanda cum haereticis; the Pope and all that be his adherents and louers of his Holi∣nes, will take the first opportunitie and aduantage of any of your weaknesses; but let them know from Gods owne mouth, there is a feast proclaimed for the birds of the aire and beasts of the field to come and prey vpon the carkeises of Emperors and Kings, and gorge themselues with the daintie food of the flesh of Princes. As for the supposed causes (gracious Lords) of your now Assembly, at this high Court of Parlia∣ment, we gesse they may be to redresse the publike grieuances of the people, to reforme the enormities of the gouernner, to rectifie the disordred liues of particular persons, and to supply the Kings wants as is great reason; For as the honor of a King consi∣steth in the multitude of his subiects: so the glory of a nation appeareth in nothing more, then in the Maiestie & Magnificence of a Prince, which cannot be done without contributions of the subiect: and so by consequence, where the people are rich, the Prince cannot be poore; we pray the God of euer∣lasting happinesse so to direct and prosper all your proiects and consultations, that they may extend to the glory of God, the honor of the Kings Maiestie, the propagation of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, the benefit of the Common-wealth, the flourishing of this great and happie Iland, the reformation of sin and enormitie, and the confusion of Antichrist with all his adherents. And the same God that gaue Lawes vnto his peo∣ple, comming in power of feare, threatning & iudg∣ment, when Mount Sinai did shake like an earth∣quake vnder him, spread his wings ouer your house, like the Cherubins ouer the Arke, & keepe you safe from any more Powder plots, especially the Ar a∣dos, and Spanish inuasion of 88, which must neuer be forgotten: and would to God it would please his Maiestie as he hath done by the 5 of No e be , to to make a festiuall of that day of their dissipation, and set vp a Pillar of brasse vpon Dover peere, with insculping the whole occurrences as they chanced, that the first worke which strangers vndertook after their landing, might be to run to the monument, to vnderstand how God protected you from the Spa∣nish pride and oftentation. And the same God that appeared to Salomon with a blessed donation of wisdome, whereby he prostra∣ted himselfe before the Brasen Alter, praying both for himselfe and the people, so gouerne, guide, and preserue the heart of his Maiestie, in finishing the worke he now begins, & opportunity sets forward, at Europe it selfe take a pattern of great Brittaines Royalty, & be driuen to admiration, that true Ma∣iestie, religion, pietie, loue, vnion, peace, plentie, and strength of men are met together in one Island, and corner of the world. And the same God that made the sea his instru∣ment of vengeance vpon Pharoah, the heauens to raine downe stones vpon the head of Sisera, the stars to fight in their order, the Angel to destroy the host of the Assirians, the fire to consume the Captaines of fifties, hell to open and swallow vp Corah and Abiram, the Lions to destroy the idolaters of Sama∣ria, the Beares to tear in peeces the mockers of Eliah, and the inferior creatures to serue his turne vpon his enemies; keepe you from forreine and domes∣ticke aduersaries, especially outlandish women, who if they haue power to tempt Salomon to Idolatrie, are sure to bring a fearefull iudgement vpon him, and his posteritie. FINIS.