A direction for the plantation in Vlster Contayning in it, sixe principall thinges, viz. 1. The securing of that wilde contrye to the crowne of England. 2. The withdrawing of all the charge of the garrison and men of warre. 3. The rewarding of the old seruitors to their good content. 4. The means how to increase the reuenue to the Crowne, with a yearely very great summe. 5. How to establish the puritie of religion there. 6. And how the vndertakers may with securitie be inriched. Blenerhasset, Thomas. A direction for the plantation in Vlster Contayning in it, sixe principall thinges, viz. 1. The securing of that wilde contrye to the crowne of England. 2. The withdrawing of all the charge of the garrison and men of warre. 3. The rewarding of the old seruitors to their good content. 4. The means how to increase the reuenue to the Crowne, with a yearely very great summe. 5. How to establish the puritie of religion there. 6. And how the vndertakers may with securitie be inriched. Blenerhasset, Thomas. For the Plantation of VLSTER. E Xcellent and High Renowned Prince, since such time as it hath plea∣sed the Lord Treasurer to referre the Peticion of M. Henry Honnings, vnto the Irish Commissioners, for the vndertaking of threescore thousand Acres of the Eschea∣ted Lands in the North of Ireland, to bee planted by certaine English Gentlemen, of which my selfe being one, considering the greatnes of the Action, to satisfie my selfe I passed the Seas, and not farre from the Lyf∣ford I found that very worthy Gentleman, Sir Arthur Chichester, the Kings Lord De∣putie with other Commissioners, surueying those escheated Lands from the Church Lands, and from their Lands who haue hi∣therto bene loyall. I being there conuersant with some of the chiefe Knights and Captaines, desired of them to know the cause why they themsel∣ues were not forward to vndertake those profitable seates and rich grounds: I was an∣swered, that to build Castles and Fortes was chargeable, neither then if there should be a Mannor erected with twentye or fortye Tennants, would they and it secure their goods: for although that Castle or Forte would serue for a sufficient refuge to pre∣serue their liues vpon any extremitie, yet the cruell wood-kerne, the deuowring Woolfe, and other suspitious Irish, would so attend on their busines, as their being there should be little profitable vnto them. For an exam∣ple: Sir Tobye Cawlfield he dwelleth in Char∣lemount a Forte of many other the best, and well furnished with men and munition: yet now (euen in this faire calme of quiet) his people are driuen euery night to lay vp all his Cattle as it were in warde, and doe hee and his what they can, the Woolfe and the Wood-kerne (within Calieuer shot of his Forte) haue often times a share: yet I do ve∣rily beleeue, no man keepeth better order, aswell for the safeguard of himselfe and his neighbors, as for the gouernment of al those parts about him. The like I haue obserued in many other places▪ and to speake the truth, all men there in all places doe the like, and that within the English Pale (as they a long time haue cald it) Sir Iohn King he dwelleth within halfe a mile of Dublin: Sir Henry Harringtō within halfe a mile on the other side thereof, Fewe men that euer I haue seene better seated for much good Soyle: they also doe the like, for those sore named enemies, doe euery night suruey the Fields to the very wals of Dublin, whatsoeuer is left abroad is in danger to be lost: so they cannot for the foresaid causes contriue any thing to much profit, although it hath bene inhabited a long time. The consideration whereof satisfied me with the impossibilitie of planting a Mānor vnder the protection of any strong built Castle; but after that I had trauailed amōgst the meere Irish, and had sufficiently infor∣med my selfe with their conditions, their na∣ture, and manner of life, I found it most cer∣tainely impossible by such kinde of plantati∣on to improue any thing with security, to a∣ny great profit, neither any with whome I conferred, would or could set downe how with security any thing might be vnderta∣ken. Therefore the principall studd of this frame must be wrought with a tennor more substantiall then hath bene hitherto by any one mencioned. I acknowledge and see it sufficiently, that many Castles and fortes well fortified, doth and wil restraine the violence of such a scat∣tered people as they are, being at this pre∣sent altogether without men of conduct or armour, but I thinke those Castles & Fortes more necessary in time of warre; for then thereby the Cattell of the Rebels are cut off, and they are inforced to vnite themselues into many strong troopes, otherwise the ga∣risons of those places would bereaue them of all their victuals, and hinder their com∣merce, and all their other intentions whatsoeuer, for they cannot be strong y∣nough at one instant in euery place to en∣coūter the force of those millitary garrisons, who are maintained at a great rate (as I thinke) out of the Exchequer: for these vn∣dertakers to plant themselues so in this time of quiet, I doe verily beleeue it would be to small auaile, and not the best way to secure themselues with their goods, and that wilde country to the Crowne of England; for al∣though there be no apparant enemy, nor a∣ny visible maine force, yet the wood-kerne and many other (who now haue put on the smiling countenaunce of contentment) doe threaten euery houre, if oportunitie of time and place doth serue, to burne and steale whatsoeuer: and besides them there be two, the chief supporters of al their insolencie, the inaccessable woods, & the not passible bogs: which ot subiect to our desires is not easie, and that not performed, it is not possible to make a profitable, improuement, no not by any meanes in any place. Moreouer the frowning countenance of chance and change, (for nothing so certaine as that all thinges are most vncertaine) doth also incite a prouident vndertaker to lay such a foundation, as it should be rather a violent storme then a fret of foule weather that should anoy him. A scattered plantati∣on will neuer effect his desire: what can the countenance of a Castle or Bawne with a fewe followers doe? euen as they at this present doe: which is nothing to any pur∣pose. What shall we then say? or to what course shal we betake our selues? surely by building of a wel fortified Towne, to be able at any time at an houres warning with fiue hūdred men well armed, to encounter all occasions: neither will that be sufficient, except that be seconded with such another, and that also (if it may be, as easily it may) with a third: so there will be helpe on euery side, to defend, & offend: for as in England, if a priuy watch be set, many malefactors are apprehended, euen amongst their cuppes: so there when the spaces in the Woods be cut out, and the bogges be made somewhat passible, then these new erected townes intending a re∣formation, must often times at the first set a vniuersall great hunt, that a suddaine search may be made in all suspitious places, for the Woolfe and the Wood-kerne, which being secretly and wisely appointed by the gouer∣nors, they with the helpe of some Irish, well acquainted with the holes and holdes of those offenders, the generallitie shall search euery particular place. For an example, the fourth day of March, the Lyfford, the Omigh, they in Farmanagh, Donganon, and Colrayne, shall on that day send forth from euery one of those places, an hundred men; which fiue hundred men shall as then make search in all, or in all the most suspitious places: and by being at one instant dispersed with furniture fit for such busines, they shall discouer all the Caues, holes, & lurking places of that country, euen for an hundred miles compasse: & no doubt it will be a pleasant hunt, and much preye Hassets Hunt. will fall to the followers: for what dooth e∣scape some, will fall to the hands of others, and bring such a terror, that the woolfe him∣selfe will not dare to continue his haunt, where such so suddaine incursions shall be vsed, although it be but once in a moneth: the charge none, the pleasure much, the pro∣fit more: then may they make inclosures, & venture their Cattell abroad, for to starue in the night doth ouerthrow the feede of the day, with the generall improuement and chief profit, for the feeding of al kind of Cat∣tle: then may they sowe, mowe, plant, thriue & be merry, for this kind of planting wil not onely supplant those domesticall enemies, but there will be out of those townes fiue thousand well armed men, to encounter any forraine enemy, that shall offer arriuall to inuade, whereby his Maiestie shall shortly haue little neede of those so chargeable gar∣risons: For these vndertakers will easily re∣straine the mutinies of them at home, and confront the power of any inuader whatso∣euer, and those good fellowes in trowzes, I meane the euery where dispersed creatures in the creats, seeing this course, they will no longer hearken after change, nor entertaine the lurking wood-kerne, as now they doe. Throughout all Ireland where there be Fortes and garrisons in paye, if all those places were planted with this kinde of vn∣dertaking, & the old worthy Soldiers, who in those places haue garrisons in pay, with euery one of their Soldiers, if they were re∣warded with the fee simple thereof, to them & to their heires, paying after one life yeare∣ly vnto his Maiestie a fee-farme, as the other vndertakers doe: but these Captaines and Soldiers would haue their pay continued, otherwise they shall not be able to pro∣ceede with the charge of planting, and then other lands there next adioyning laide also to such places, that many might ioyne with them to erect corporations: which may be performed now ten times better cheape then it wil be heerafter: their security would be much better, and the societye farre ex∣cell, & so the charge of the garrisons might be withdrawne, the olde worthy warriour who hath gone already through with the brunt of that busines, shall with a good satis∣faction be rewarded, and all Vlster a whole hundred times better secured vnto the Crowne of England: for the generation of the Irish, (who doe at this time encrease ten to one more then the English, nay I might well say twenty) will neuer otherwise be sufficently brideled: of all which I would sa∣tisfie your highnes by an example. The Lyfford, whereas there be an hundred Soldiers in pay, (as is reported) which can∣not come vnto lesse then a thousand pounds yearely, and if there were in that kingdome many such, it would amount vnto a great somme by the yeare, and many of them per∣aduenture like this, able indeed a smal time to withstand the first or second assault of a weake enemie. But if the Lyfford and the Lands adioyning neere thereunto, were vn∣dertaken by many, their many helping hands (euery man respecting his owne pro∣fit) they would not regard charge, not be weary with labor and paines to frame a per∣petuall security, and good successe to their businesse: and so there might out of dout by that goodly riuer side, be laid out so much land, (besides the Gouernours and Soldiers allowance) as the vndertakers would cleere all that pay, and the like in many such other places: and giue vnto the Crowne a hundred poūds yerely for a fee-farme for euer, which would rise in that kingdome, to every great masse, and the great charge of the garrisons withdrawne. I might say the like of the O∣migh, of Dongannon, and of many such other places, and so there would be in stead of po∣pery true religion; & a comfortable society, whereas at this present, there is small appa∣rance and much defect of them, and of all other the chiefest things to make the life of man happy, onely plenty of good victuall excepted. How exceedingly wel standeth Ardmath, better seate for rich soyle there cannot bee, but so poore, as I doe verily thinke all the houshold stuffe in that Citty is not worth twenty pounds, yet it is the Primate of all Ireland, & as they say for antiquitie, one of the most antient in all Europe: it is also of so small power as forty resolute men, may rob, rifle, and burne it: were it a defenced corpo∣ration it would soone be rich and religious, and the security would make one acre more worth then now twenty be. At this present it is a most base and abiect thing, not much better then Strebane, & not able to restraine, no, not the violence of the Woolte. Moreo∣uer many be the commodities of this kinde of vndertaking a scattered plātation, for ma∣ny vndertakers to be dispersed three score miles in cōpasse, alas they shal be now at the first like the vnboundsticks of a brush fagot, easie to be gathered, hewen and had to the fire, neither shall there be true Religion, sweete society, nor any comfortable securi∣ty amongst them, no, nor any other the principall respectes and commodities that mans life desireth, as they who there now doe liue do know very well: but in one and the selfe-same estate for many to be bound vp together in the band of one hope, so as all must be but one, It must be the power of some great Monarch, who receiuing more blowes then benefites, shall buy the vnbind∣ing of this fagot, at a much greater rate then will be for his gaine or reputation. But some peraduenture will say here is much speech of corporations, but nothing how the Lands which lyeth farre remote, which these vndertakers must take vp, shall be vsed, for it will be very inconuenient that vnto this corporation all the commodities of that great quantity of ground shal be pre∣sently transported, both for the distance of the place, and other discommodities: and it is expected that there should be Manors erected, & not that one corporation should containe so great a circuit. My answere is, that the corporation shall containe all that quantity of ground, for when they therein haue framed the country to their desires, then there shall be by these vndertakers many Manors erected, and after the first or second yeare, most of the houses within this corporation built by these vndertakers, (for euery man according to the quantity of his land must put to his aide) although these houses shall be still their owne, yet then, when the great Huntes before mentioned, haue reduced the country to such passe, as in the seueralties of euery man, their Cattell may be in security, then most of those buil∣dings in the corporation shall be left, and e∣uery man of the vndertakers shall build on his demeanes a strong Mannor house, and certaine Tenements for his Tenants about him, on such Lands as he shall allot them by coppy of Court role, or otherwise, to them and their heires for euer: and within the cor∣poration, euery one of the vndertakers shall stil retaine his mansion house, there to dwel at his pleasure, and all the other of his hou∣ses there, shall be set ouer vnto tradesmen; as Shoomakers, Smithes, Carpenters, Weauers, and such like: so in Sommer he may remain with his tennants in the country, and in win∣ter with his farmers the tradesmen in the corporation, which I hope to see a faire well gouerned and a very strong Citty, which will serue at all times to defend them and all their moueables, if inuasion or any other vi∣olent storme should come: so all the land farre remote shall be built and inhabited with good security. On this word Myne is a strong warrior, e∣uery man for his owne will aduenture farre, the Mercinary Rutter will often times haue his charge empty with men, when his purse shall be full with dead payes. This my vali∣ant and prouident warriour Myne, he will rather increase then decrease his nomber, he doth watch and ward night & day with∣out ceasing. Therefore in this our vnderta∣king, let all the people be such as shall enioy euery man more or lesse of his owne, and if they were such as had no other estate then there, it were the better. But I feare, if many shall peruse this reci∣tal, most of them wil be vtterly deterred with the charge, saying, it is easie to be spoken, but to their capacitie very difficult to be per¦formed, and so they will withdrawe them∣selues & their conceits from imbracing that which I would haue them entertaine chere∣fully in the best fashion. Therefore I doe in∣cite them to consider, that all those great and sumptuous buildings which former a∣ges haue left vnto euerlasting posterity, were not erected any where, where continuance of peace had improued all thinges to a high rate and great price, but the originall of all nations, was where and when the Lands and all the commodities of those places were of small worth. To enter into the perticular heereof would be rather tedious then neces∣sary. There be twelue of vs vnder the assigna∣tion of the right honorable, Gilbert Earle of Shrewesbury, who intend by the help of al∣mighty God to imploye a good part of our substance, and bestowe our best indeuours therein: for discoursing will not doe it, it must be a paineful hand, & a discreet minde furnished with knowledge and much expe∣rience: we cannot enioy the happy Elizian fields, but by passing ouer the blacke riuer Stix: for heauen wil not be had without some tribulation, neither may we feede vpon the delicates prepared in a rich and plesant ban∣quetting Gallery, except we doe straine our feete to passe vpon the first & second staire: so difficult is the thing that we intend, Demi∣dium toti, qui bene caepit, habet. If any thing seeme difficult, rouse vp thy spirit, and put to both thy hands. Great thinges without much labor can not be obtained: Rome was not built in one day, but this in fiue yeares may be performed without admiration, e∣specially if all these planters do draw closely together without dissentiō, or muteny: ther∣fore there must especiall regard be had, that in this corporation the chiefe Gouernor be of wisdome, wealth, and authoritie, such a one as wil be obeyed, yet will conferre with other, and not be too much addicted to his owne conceits: without gouernment there is nothing but confusion: so many heads so many opinions. Let all the vndertakers haue recourse vnto the consultations, the meanest may sometimes bring foorth a necessary knowledge, therefore let euery mans opini∣on be heard, but let the Gouernor with his assistants determine, and let all the rest con∣sent thereto, or endure condigne punish∣ment. And as for thee that puttest diffidence in the assurance, which thou shalt haue from his Maiestie, thou needest not trouble thy head therwith, there hath bene already two suruaies to know the parcels and precincts exactly: no doubt vpon the deuision there will be proclamation, that whosoeuer can iustly and apparantly claime any part of those Lands to these vndertakers by Pattent assigned, he shall then within some conueni∣ent time put in his claime or else be silent for euer. So before thou doost charge thy selfe any way, thy portion shall be cleere, or else thou shalt haue some other that shall be voide of all incombrance. Furthermore, to comfort thy fearefull spi∣rit, there thou shalt haue many good neigh∣bors, for all they thy countrymen that are al∣ready there estated with part of those Lands, of which there be many of the chiefe in that kingdome, they are hearty well willers vnto al vndertakers, both for that your good pro∣ceedings will second, and as it were fortifie their already beginnings: and they be in∣deede Gentlemen of such sort and quality, as they speake alwaies what they thinke, and performe what they speake. They doe not after the fashion of this age carry bread in the one hand and a stone in the other; but they haue a sword alwaies ready to maine∣taine truth and equity; besides a very excel∣lent course of proceeding by law: And to knit thy affection more firmely to the hope of thy well doing there, I doe insure thee, there be excellent warriors, and they such worthy men as wil willingly backe thy busi∣nes, & in time of need violently abate the vi∣olence of any that shal intēd thy trouble: so Mars himselfe shall protect thee, & perhaps Mercury too: & if thou beest honestly con∣tent with that which is thine, thou mayest there liue and neuer trouble the Lawyer, and thou shalt finde it to be a great blessing. All which I haue written to encourage thy fain∣ting spirit, which rather then faile wil obiect the charges thither, and the danger, which is nothing so much as amongst good fellowes it is, to be beastly drunke at home. To conclude, what art thou? one whome kindenes, casualty, or want of wit hath de∣cayed? make speede, get thee to Vlster, serue God, be sober, if thou canst not gouerne, be gouerned, thou shalt recouer thy selfe, and thy happines there will make thee reioyce at thy former fortunes. Art thou rich, possessed with much re∣uenue? make speed without racking of rents, or other offenciue meanes; thou shalt doe God and thy Prince excellent seruice. Thou hast the three brayded bande which will binde Beares, vse there thy talent, it will be quickely a million. Art thou a poore indigent fellow? and hast neither faculty nor mony? goe not thither, for though there be plenty of all thinges, thou shalt starue there, Loyterers and lewd persons in this our new worlde, they will not be indured. Art thou a Tradesman? a Smith, a Weauer, a Mason, or a Carpenter? goe thither, thou shalt be in estimation, and quickely inriched by thy indeauours. Art thou an husband man, whose worth is not past tenne or twenty pounds? goe thither, those new Manor-makers will make thee a Coppy holder: thou shalt whistle sweetely, and feede thy whole family if they be six for six pence the day. Art thou a Gentleman that takest pleasure in hunt? the Fox, the Woolfe, and the Wood-kerne doe expect thy comming: and the comely well cabba∣zed Stagge will furnish thy feast with a full dish. There thou shalt haue elbowe roome, the Eagle and the Earne and all sorts of high flying fowles do attend thee. Art thou a Minister of Gods word? make speed, the har∣uest is great but the laborers be fewe: thou shalt there see the poore ignorant vntaught people worship stones and sticks: thou by carrying millions to heauen, maiest be made an Archangell, and haue whiles thou doost liue for worldly respects, what not. So Vl∣ster which hath bene hitherto the receptacle and very denne of Rebels and deuowring creatures, shall farre excell Munster, and the ciuellest part of all that country, and perad∣uenture in ciuility and sincere Religion, e∣qual euen faire England herselfe, with a chri∣stian and comfortable society, of neighbour∣hood, & so they at the least In all Ireland three hundred thousand soules, besides Children (which are no lesse in number) may come vnto the true knowledge of God, and by faith in Ie∣sus Christ may be freede from euerlasting damnation. So the Kings maiestie shall be disburthened of a very great charge out of the Exchequer, the Country safely secured vnto the Crowne, and we his Maiesties sub∣iects inriched by our endeauours, which God of his vnspeakeable mercy graunt, for his deere sonne Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. The Conclusion, contayning an exhortation to England. F Ayre England, thy flou∣rishing Sister, braue Hibernia, (with most respectiue termes) cōmendeth vnto thy due con∣sideration her yongest daughter, depopula∣ted Vlster: not doubting (for it cannot but come vnto thy vnderstanding) how the long continuance of lamentable warres, haue ra∣ced & vtterly defaced, whatsoeuer was beau¦tifull in her to behold, and hath so bereaued all her royalties, goodly ornaments, & well beseeming tyers, as there remaineth but onely the Maiesty of her naked personage, which euen in that plite is such, as whosoe∣uer shall seeke and search all Europes best Bowers, shal not finde many that may make with her comparison. Behold the admira∣ble worth of her worthines! euen now shee giues the world to vnderstand by testimo∣niall knowne sufficiently to all that knowe her, that if thou wilt now but assist her with meanes to erect her ruynes, she will nourish thee with much dainty prouision, and so fur∣nish thee, as thou shalt not neede to send to thy neighbour-kingdomes for corne, nor to the Netherlands for fine Holland: shee will in requitall of thy kindenesse prouide those thinges, with some other, such as thy heart most desireth. Art thou ouerchargde with much people? Vlster her excellency will imbrace that thy ouerplus in her amou∣rous sweete armes: she will place them as it were by Euphrates, and feed them with bet∣ter Ambrosia then euer Iupiter himselfe knew. Then proclaime, & let all the inhabitants of spatious Brittane know, that (in respect e∣uen of their own good) it is conuenient and most necessary that euery one of thē should in some proportiō put to his assistance: didst thou, and were thy people indeede willing? with Horse, with men, with munition, and money, oftentimes, and euer anon to abate their insolency, whose pride sought to be∣reaue from thee and them, your right and interrest in her fields and forrests? true it is, and some thousands, no doubt thou didst imploy to keepe her from the captiuity of traytors: do then, and let thy people willing∣ly finish the worke which you so valiantly haue (although not performed) yet brought to such passe as now there remayneth no∣thing but how to couer her nakednes, & to furnish her coastes with corporations and other such meanes, as heereafter there shall be no doubt of change or chance, but that she may repose her selfe in such sweete secu∣rity, as her beautifull bosome shall by peace & plenty abound with so many dainty good∣ly thinges, as it will be a wonder to behold. Some of thy most louing and welbeloued children, to their great glory and euerlasting renowne, with feruent mindes, they haue ta∣ken this taske in hand, thinking it no small honor for thē to aduenture their liues, their liuings, and all their indeauours therein. The County of Farmannagh, sometime Mack Gueres country, reioyce: many vnder∣takers, al incorporated in minde as one, they there with their followers, seeke & are desi∣rous to settle themselues. Woe to the Wolfe and the Wood-kerne; the Ilands in Lough∣earne shall haue habitations, a fortified cor∣poration, market townes, and many new e∣rected Manors, shall now so beautifie her desolation, that her inaccessible Woods, with spaces made tractable, shall no longer nourish deuowrers, but by the sweete soci∣ety of a louing neighbourhood, shall enter∣taine humanity, euen in the best fashion. Goe on worthy Gentlemen, feare not, the God of heauen will assist & protect you, the rather for that simply of your selues, you do desire to performe so honourable an action. And they the successors of high renowned Lud, will there reedifie a new Troy. Their spatious coffers haue the receipts of Eng∣lands treasure, and the continuall resplen∣dancy of his Maiesties presence doth so illu∣strate with the neuer-discending-beames of his euer-respecting fauour, their super-ex∣ceeding good, that all whatsoeuer by imagi∣nation may be thought of, or by pollicy of man be deuised, so much absolutely haue they from thence, therefore they wil not ca∣pitulate the fresh and flourishing County of Colraine, with the exceeding bounty ol the Band that may suffice. They haue Ocanes Country, The Riuer of the Band. and whatsoeuer Irelands Eden can affoord, and therefore euen in respect of their owne reputation, they of them selues wil performe this the most honourable acti∣on that euer they attempted. Therefore let Colraine reioyce, for the heart of England (London herselfe) will no doubt make her more beautifull then many, and furnish Loughfoyle with a goodly fleete. O pow∣erfull Englād! no doubt if thou wilt extend the bounty of thy liberall hand, to other lesse able to performe such designes, then they also will vndertake the other Coun∣ties, so as within three yeares their endea∣uours shall bring thee and thine altogether out of doubt, euer heereafter to be charged with any taxation for her defence: for cer∣tainly so she shall shortly be able rather to lend then to borrow aide. Let not then these kinde vndertakers want any kinde of kindenesse. Little doe many of thy inhabitants, care to spend a pound or two to passe away one houre (as it were) at a merry meeting; and presently it is forgotten. Let euery one of worth giue but his crowne to this honourable intenti∣on and merry meeting, it shall remaine as a crowne of glory to euerlasting posterity, and free euery one of them peraduenture from the expence of many pounds. And this Trophy of al thy triumphs the most renow∣ned, obtained with the liues of many thou∣sands of thine (as the euery where dispersed sculles of slaine men doe there at this present manifestly declare) if it be now neglected, they thy next neighbours & those the Prin∣ces and people far remote, wil suppose thee very poore both in power and pollicy. And thus (faire England) hauing laid before thy amiable eyes, how naked Vlster may be relieued, deckt, and richly adorned, and thy selfe certainely disburdned of much charge: I referre the effecting thereof to the Kings most excellent Maiestie, who hath power to commaund, and will no doubt prouide for Vlsters prosperity. FINIS.