Bel-vedére, or, The Garden of the muses Bel-vedére, or, The Garden of the muses Bodenham, John, fl. 1600. Shakespeare, William, 1564-1616. Of God. God is beyond raile sence to comprehend, He first began all, and of all is end. VVHere God puts too his hand, all else is vaine. God thunders oftner than he strikes or beates. God giues his wrath by weight, but mercie free. Where God doth blesse, abundāce quickly springs. Gods wisdome too much s archt, is daungerous. Gods iustice ouer-vrgde, strikes heauily. Without the vnderstanding of Gods will, Our wi is follie, and our best sight ill. God doth not hate to loue, nor loue to hate. God with his finger strikes, and not his arme. No m o o re, but God can blesse his dayes, Who a i n Iob did from the dunghill raise. In vaine it is for man with God to stand. God will controll when mortall men haue done. Gods eq doth euery action ooue. Gods ha h s thunder, who dare him off nd? Faith finds passage to ods mercie seate. Where vertue raiseth men to dignitie, There God his blessings still doth multiply. Little auailes Gods gifts where wants his grace. Men order warre, but God giues victorie. Gods mercie doth his iustice farre exceed. God deales not with vs as our sinnes deserue. Gods doctrine is the rule of prouidence. God is eternall, therefore without end. God made all mortall things, and orders them, According to his wisdome, where and when. Gods greatnes is more seene in loue, than wrath. God ne're made any equall to himselfe. If God he e not, yet deeme him not v iust. Gods mercie is the worke of our redemption. If thou lif vp thy selfe, God flyes from thee: If thou be humble, then he comes to thee. If God dart lightning, soon he dewes down raine. Gods wrath soone kindled, is as quickly quencht. No misaduentures crosse, where God doth guide. Where God doth saue, no other s lue doth need. How can that enterprise ill issue haue, Where God himselfe doth guide, doth speed, doth saue. Happy are they who fauour from God find. God and our shame are staies vnto our sinne. Gods iustice doth mans iustice farre excell. Those that God loues, in them he nothing hates. How can a simple current him withstand, Who all the mightie Ocean doth commaund? God loues the faithfull, but doth hate their sinne. Good life begun in earth, in heauen is ended. When Sathan tempts, he leads vs vnto hell, But God doth guide whereas no death doth dwell. When Sathan tempts, he seekes our faith to foile, But God doth seale it, neuer to recoile. God makes our burning zeale full bright to shine, Amongst the candles of his Church diuine. God euer seekes by triall and temptation, To sound mans heart and secret cogitation▪ God well knowes men, and still his eye doth see, All thoughts of men, ere they conceiued be. God out of season neuer yet doth trie, His children new conuerted by and by. Man made of earth, sounds not the seas profound Of Gods deepe iudgements, where there is no ground. The Lord law-maker, iust and righteous, Doth frame his lawes, not for himselfe, but vs. Gods wisdome guides this worlds societie, With equall power, and equall pietie. Gods word which made the world, and guides it still, To diuers en s conducts both good and ill. He that preferres not God fore all his race, Amongst the sonnes of God deserues no place. He that the furrowes ploweth of Gods field, May not turne backe his fainting face, nor yeeld. Sathan suggesteth ill, God mooues to grace. God can doe all, saue that he will not doe. Our mightie God, alwaies for his elect, Of wicked things can draw a good effect. God keepes his watch aboue the starrie skies. For his elect, who neuer idle lyes. Similies on the same subiect. AS one poore drop is nothing to the sea, So all we can is nothing in Gods sight. As the bright Sunne defaceth candle-light, So Gods great power controlleth all the world. As Princes are to be both lou'd and fear'd, So God the Prince of princes, must haue more. As with great care a Pilot guides the ship, So with great grace doth God direct the world. As when the soule departs, the body dies: So where God blesseth not, all things decay. As mothers hugge their children in their armes, So God enfolds his chosen with his grace. Examples likewise on the same. PHerecides, for his contemning God, Was eate with lice, and dyed miserably. Lucian an Atheist, and denying God, Was afterward in pieces torne with dogs. Iustinian for his light regard of God, Became a foole, and so in follie dyde. Th' Athenians banished Protagoras, Because his bookes question'd the deitie. Socrates did confesse one onely God, And tearn 'd the heathen Gods but vaniti . Plato, when he wrote any serious thing, Began still, In the name of one sole God. Of Heauen. Heauen is Gods seat, the throne of endles grace: The Soules true home, and Hopes desired place. ALl powers are subiect to the power of Heauen. Nothing but Heauen, is perfect happinesse. What heauen will haue, that needs must come to passe. The Soule is heauenly, and from heauen relieu'd. Heauen is as neere to sea, as to the land. Heauen sings for ioy, when sinners truly pray. The waking heauens will plague all sleeping ill. When as the heauens are to iustice bent, All things are turn'd to our iust punishment. None can attaine what heauen and earth withstands. Earth must come in, when awfull heauen commaunds. When heauen yeelds meanes, they must not be neglect. Though men reuenge not, yet the heauens will. Heauen is the habitation of th'elect. Heauen is the iust mans true inheritance. It's hard to liue well, easie to dye ill: Hard to winne heauen, easie to keepe from thence. In vaine do men contend against the starres. Heauen workes our fall, but yet the fault is ours. All men ought know they haue the Heauens aboue them. No walles can hide vs from the eye of heauen. Repentance carries heauens eternall keyes. When heauens lampe shines, all other lights are lost. We neuer know what 'tis in heauen to dwell, Till wee haue had some feeling of grim hell. Heauen is our home, we are but straungers here. All earthly things are darke, to them diuine. What heauen decrees, sollie may notwithstand. Earths admirations are the heauens delights. Heauens deepe dessignes are hid from mortall eyes. We are at heauens dispose, and not our owne. Heauen sets our time, wherwith can nought dispence. High heauens hand restraine our wilfull powers, Whose will must rule aboue this will of ours. Heauen doth repaire what fortune hath destroid. Things that are heauenly, no corruption tast. Whome heauen doth spight, the earth disdaines to hate. Heauens couers him that hath no bu iall. Earth feeds on earth, heauen giues the spirit food. Proui ence heauenly, passeth humane thought, And doth for wretched mens reliefe make way. Earth giues vs gold, but heauen the wealth of grace. The Sunne which shines in heauen, doth light the earth. Hell cannot hurt, whome heauen doth preserue. The care of heauen doth seeke the soules content. It is the doome of heauen, which can and will, Con ound the braunch, whose root was planted ill. Sinne, is earths Sun; the Sun of heauen, sinnes death. Thoughts sixt on heauen, contemne all earthly things. Mortals may feele heauens doome, but not remooue. All men are subiect to the powers aboue. Heauens secrets are conceald from mortall sight. By mortall lawes a bond may be diuorst, But heauens decree by no meanes can be forst. From heauen, our soules receiue their sustenance. Hell is the place of horror, heauen of rest. Good death is true inheritance in heauen. The way to heauen is not so wide as hell. Men looke vp to the starres, thereby to know, That as they progresse heauen, they earth should so. Heauen often winkes at mortall mens amisse. Heauens Sun doth shine both on the good and bad. All humane wishes neuer haue the power, To hast or hold the course of heauen one hower. Similies on the same subiect. AS hell was made to punish sinnes proud guilt, Euen so was heauen for comfort of the iust. As base clothes ill become a princes court, So none can enter heauen but purely clad. As trauailers desire their natiue homes, So should all soules long for their heauenly home. As hells obscuritie excells all darke, So nothing with heauens brightnesse may compare. As Iacob for his Rachell thought sower sweet, So we for heauen ought deeme all else but vile. As all ioyes in this life are fraile and vaine, So none but heauens ioyes are perfect gaine. Of Conscience. Conscience is that accuseth and condemnes, Needing no other witnesse than it selfe. FAults long vnfelt, the conscience will bewray. The feare of conscience entreth iron walls. Where coyne preuailes, conscience beares little sway. Kings, but the conscience, all things can defend. Death, but an acted passion doth appeare, Where truth giues courage, and a conscience cleare. Conscience owne doome doth halfe condemne a man. No armour proofe against the conscience terror. Weake consciences are with vaine questions wounded. Sound conscience, well is cald a wall of brasse: Corrupted, fit compar'd to broken glasse. In conscience booke, our faults are daily writ. There conscience failes, where faith beares no account. A guiltie conscience neuer is secure. The conscience stain'd with blood of innocents, Is alwayes subiect to appeaching guilt. Repentance brings the keyes of conscience. After minds guilt, doth inward griefe begin. Runne where thou wilt, into all lands betake thee, Yet will a w unded conscience nere forsake thee. A stained conscience finds no ioy at all. They dread no shame, that v e no conscience. If thou but find thy conscience be vpright, No matter for the worlds rebuke or spight. Conscience will neuer suffer wicked thoughts. Conscience needs no tormenter but it selfe. Conscience sees that which no eye else can doe. Conscience once drownd in wealth and worldly pompe, Esteemes all wisdome as meere foolishnes. A guiltie conscience is a gnawing worme. Conscience t kes vengeance on her owne transgressions. Nothing but true repent cleares conscience. The riches we may carrie to our graue, Is a good conscience: blessed they that haue. Conscience once faultie, still abides in feare. Innocence is the ioy of conscience. A conscience standing free from all detect, Feares no accuse, or doth excuse respect. Lookes confident and sober, shew cleane soules. Conscience for heauen contemns all worldly things. To frame excuse, before thou be accusde, Shewes that thou hast not conscience truly vsde. Conscience doth couet nothing but her owne. Conscience craues nothing, but by lawfull meanes. Conscience wi l willingly offend no man. Conscience once loden with the weight of sinne, Is Iudge and Iuror to it selfe therein. Conscience doth bind vs to respect our kinne. Conscience despiseth bribes in any case. Conscience commaunds vs to relieue the poore. A conscience cleare, is like a well fenc't tower, Not to be shaken by rough Canon shot. Conscience, to princes alwaies giues their due. Conscience submits, when Iustice doth commaund. Similies on the same subiect. AS persecution is the bodies death: So foule despaire quite kills the conscience. As the bright Sunne doth lighten all the world, So a cleare conscience shineth in the soule. As beautie is a thing glads mortall sight, So vnstain'd conscience doth high heauen delight. As wine cheeres vp the heart when it is sad, So peace of conscience makes it much more glad. As brazen walls defend a cittie best, So conscience taintlesse, is at peace and rest. As gold is best, when through the fire 'tis tride, So conscience is by troubles purifide. Examples likewise on the same. O Restes matricide was iustly plagu'd, With sting of conscience by his mothers ghost. And Nero (whose foule fact did equall his) Was whipt in conscience with her walking shape. Caesar Caligula could neuer rest, But conscience torment did him still molest. Tullie affirmes, a conscience well emploi'd, Is chiefest comfort in aduersitie. Plato saith: Sweetly sle peth innocence, In the safe chamber of good conscience. Lactantius writes, that no sinne can preuaile, Where quiet conscience sits, and guides the saile. Conscience must leaue a little while to grieue, To let in horror, comming to reprooue. Of Religion. Religion is the ground of euery grace, And teacheth man saluation to embrace. WHere God is not, religion cannot be. Sundrie religions, make no religion. Where saints are clarks, there alwaies God is iudge. Religions touchstone best doth trie the truth. Religion is the soule of innocence, Working in each vnspotted conscience. After religion, painted zeale doth runne. Blessings come seldome, but by earnest prayer. Ignorance is religions enemie. The Scriptures are sufficient to resolue All doubts that in religion can arise. The word's a med'cine to a troubled mind. Religion is the perfect bond of loue. No poyson worse than Scripture falsly taught. Religion is in truth, not fallacies. No surer signe of kingdomes ouerthrow, Than where religion liueth in contempt. Change of religion is most daungerous. Faith, and not reason, teacheth true religion. Man was created for religions vse. There is no error halfe so daungerous, As that committed in religion. Ill happens when religion we neglect. Doubt in religion, punishment deserues. Where no religion is, no vertue bides. Religions cloake can couer much abuse. Those men may well be cald religious, That hate the world, and nothing mind but heauen. Religion linketh men in vnitie. Religion, to all vertues is the guide. Humilitie expresseth true religion. Religion doth relieue the fatherlesse, And succours widowes in aduersitie. Religion is the councell of the iust. Religion only can support the weake. Religion teacheth remedie gainst sinne. Religion comforts all afflictions. Similies on the same subiect. LIke as a Torch directs vs in the darke, So doth religion lighten all our hopes. As these our bodies liue by earthly food, So true religion doth our soules most good. As yron maketh soft the rudest earth, So doth religion temper hardest hearts. As sore eyes cannot gaze against the Sun, So wicked minds brooke no religion. As want of food the body hunger-sterues, So pines the soule through pure religions lacke. As med'cines make sicke bodies whole and sound, So doth religion wash out errours wound. Examples likewise on the same. BRennus for wronging of religion, Was smitten with a thunderbolt to death. Conomachus, religious rites prophan'd, But with an earthquake was he swallowed vp. Pherecydes nick-nam'd religion, For which he was consum'd by wormes aliue. In Athens they would not create a king, Except he had tane orders of a Priest. The chiefest oath th'Athenians had, was this: Pugnabo pro sacris, & cum alijs, & solus. Old Rome, her sonnes sent to Hetruria, To be instructed in religion. Of Truth. Truth is the fount of knowledge, earths best light: The scale to heau'n, and onely rule of right. THe weakest things are strongest props to truth, Truth is most strong, and alwai s findeth friends. Truth neuer failes, and true loue wants no might. Triall doth certainliest the truth bewray. Falshood with truth may by no meanes abide. Deeds not by manhood, or the do rs might, Are to be scand, but by their truth and right. What shineth nearest best, holds truest worth. Where then is truth, if there be no selfe trust? Truth is the onely shield of best defence. When truely in our selues our faults we see, We deeme them known to all, as well as wee. An honest tale speeds best being truly told. Truth may be shent, but neuer shall be sham'd. Truth to all goodnesse is the perfect guide. All doubts resoluing, is by finding truth. How shall he thinke to find a straunger iust, That in himselfe dare put no confidence? False dreames do euermore the truth deny. Time shewes the truth, and wit that's bought is best. Truth soundeth sweetly in a sillie tongue. Who cherish wrongs, are bent against the truth. Truth needeth not the aid of Rhetoricke. Happie the people, blessed is the land, Where truth and vertue get the vpper hand. Nothing so hard, but is by truth explain'd. All hidden secrets, truth can best disclose. Truth to all goodnes, is the perfect guide. Truth hath two friends; Wisdome, and Constancie. Truth standeth not vpon the tongues of men: Nor Honour, on authorities bigge frownes. Truth triumphes long, when falshood soone decaies. The truth of things, the end or time will trie. The smoothest tale, hath oft-times smallest truth. Truth most delights, when shee goes meanest clad. The seate of Truth is in our secret hearts, Not in the tongue, which falshood oft imparts. Truth needs no Orators to plead her cause. Truth feareth nothing more than to be hid. Truth with her owne light is best satisfide. A certaine truth doth need no subtill glose. Truth is a health that neuer will be sicke: An endlesse life, a Sunne that neuer sets. Truth shewes her selfe in secrecie of trust: A cleare case needs no shifting councellour. Truth vnbefriended, will find friends at last. Truth hateth most to here a feigned tale. Innocence smile before the Iudge by truth, And falshood found before he was suspect. Reprooue not rashly, neither hide the truth. Truth is a blab, and will no treasons hide. Truth is a text that troubles many minds. Truth still hath certaine bounds, but falshood none. Similies on the same subiect. AS the best steeled glasse bewraies the face, So truth best shineth in an honest soule. As purest Emeralds without foyles shine best, So truth most pleaseth in her plainest clothes. As wormwood fitteth not a lickerish taste, So truth doth neuer please a lyars tongue. As clouds oft threaten raine, and yet shed none, So stormes oft menace truth, yet hurt her not. As darkenesse is an enemie to light, So falshood is continuall foe to truth. As meane attire impaires not beauties face, So poorest ragges to truth giue no disgrace. Examples likewise on the same. IVlian Apostat the foe to T u h, Cried out at length, that Truth had conquerd him. N s riu , who contended with the truth, His tongue was eaten in his life, with wormes. The Per a s in the honour of the truth, Ordain d death to such as did denie it▪ Popiel king of Poland, for vntruth, Was as he late aliue, deuou d with Rats. C to was so r nowmed for the truth, That he was onely said, to speake the truth. Vntruth, saith Se eca, are meetest Armes, For any coward or base minded man. Of Vertue. Vertue, is Queene of labour, Nource of loue: The minds true grace, and blessing from aboue. ALl things decay, but vertue cannot die. Vertue makes beautie more angelicall. Vertue is free from time, and fortunes power. Men cannot leaue their vertues to their heires. Faire vertues seat is deepe within the mind, And not by shewes, but inward thoughts defin'd. Vices are noted, vertues soone forgot. Vertues best store, by giuing doth augment. There is no vertue that is borne with vs. No vertue springs, where wanteth due regard. Vertues obscurde, yeeld small and sorie gaines: But actiuely employd, true worth-retaines. Winne fame by vertue, let opinion goe. Vertue is in the mind, not the attire. Vertue and fortune neuer could agree. Vertue is loath'd of fooles, lou'd of the wise. Vertue is much more amiable and sweet, When therewithall true maiestie doth meet. Vice careth not if vertue sinke or swimme. Wit shines in vertue, vertue shines in wit. Sweetest temptations most make vertue knowne. Vertue it selfe turnes vice, being misapplyed: And vice sometimes by action dignified. The field of honour, vertue neuer looseth. Vertue will beare what can on vertue fall. True happinesse, on vertue taketh ground. The more vice reignes, the lesse doth vertue thriue. To vertues goods we onely ought to cleane, The rest are good in semblanc , but deceaue. Vertue will liue when villanie shall die. Vertue may be disturb'd, but ne're disgrac'd. No beautie like the vertue of the mind. Vertue through darkest shades doth light her selfe. Vertue in greatest daungers being best showne, May be opprest, but neuer ouerthrowne. Vertue oft lyes where life is in disgrace. If sinne were dead, vertue could not be knowne. Sweet is the gaine which vertuous trauaile brings▪ All vertuous minds doe vertuous deeds declare. Our vices nor our vertues neuer die, Though vnder ground a thousand yeares we lye. Vertue doth mortall things immortall make. The bond of vertue alwaies surest binds. Than vertue, there can be no greater dower. 'Tis vertues selfe, that her rewards doth pay. Enuies black cloud would dim bright vertues rayes. All sorrowes in the world are farre more lesse, Than vertues might and valours confidence. Sinne counted solace, vertue is despisde. Vaine praise is shame, but honour vertues due. Without defence of vertue, nothing lasts. Onely faire vertue scales eternitie, Aboue earths all-abating tyrannie. All Orators are dumbe when vertue pleads. Vertue but stampt in Lead, is rich enough. That growes apace which vertue helpes to raise. Vertue curbes in the most vnbridled will. With goodnesse men doe s one grow discontent, Where states are ripe to fall, and vertue spent. True vertue is rich dower for chastitie. In vertuous deeds all stratagems are good. Vertue is beautie of the inward man. Exclude discretion, vertue turnes to vice. Like to the Sunne, so vertue lights the world. Such as leaue off faire vertue to esteeme, Doe greatly erre, that take things as they seeme. Vertue will shine though ne're so much obscur'd. Vertue depressed, is expressed more. Vertue makes women seeme to be diuine. With honours eyes let vertues plaints be scand. Vertue doth raise by very small degrees, Where in a moment Fortune casteth downe. While vertue suffers, still it vanquisheth. Need clad with vertue, is aboundant rich. Vertue is better and more sure than Artes. Vertue is not to get things, but to keepe them. Vertue on earth doth soonest bring vs fame, Makes our graues glorious, writes our names in heauen. Vertue most grieueth at her owne disgrace. A vertuous act seemes straunge in some mens sight. A vertuous mind cannot be miserable. Death is true life to euery vertuous man. Though vertue many times wants due reward, Yet seldome vice escapes deserued blame. Vertue doth neuer enuie good desert. Loue maketh vertue liue, and vice to die. Reports can neuer harme the vertuous. He is not vertuous that's too timerous. Ech cunning sinne being clad in vertues shape, Flyes much reproofe, and many stormes doth scape. Vertues are many times by faults disgrac'd. Honours defects, by vertues are supplyed. Vertue still doteth on perfection. Vertue, in beauteous bodies shineth best. All the gay pleasures that the world can prooue, Are but sicke sorrowes to pure vertues loue. Vertue is most renowm'd in honors eyes. Vertue still smiles, when vaine conceit doth crie. Immortall vertue liues an endlesse dat . Wisdome on Vertue as her handmaid waits. The world opinion so doth vertue smoother, A one beares that belongs vnto another. Vertue makes euery where a straungers home. Vertue doth conquer dissolute desires. Vertue in Princes is most glorious. Vertue deserueth more than wealth can doe. The blasts of Fortune neuer can preuaile, In the maîne sea where vertue oiset saile. All pompe is vile, where vertue hath no place. Vertue doth vanquish Fortune, Time, and Death. Similies on the same subiect. AS feare of torment holds the wicked in, So vertues loue m ke good men loath their sin. Looke how one vice begets another sinne, Euen so one vertue drawes another in. As Musicke pro its nothing but by sound, So vertue helpes not if it saile in life. Like as the Sunne obscures all lesser lights, So vertues lustre damps all enuies sleights. As spices in their b uising sauor most, So vertue in affliction best is seene. As wine refresheth sad dismayed minds, So vertue comforts poore distressed soules. Examples likewise on the same. KIng Alexander got the name of Great, By vertuous cariage of himselfe in warre. Spurina chose to mangl his faire face, Rather than be seduc'de from vertuous thoughts▪ Hercules, bad vaine pleasure get her gone: And made faire vertue his companion. Xerxes for beastlines was not so blam'd, As Galba for his vertue was renowmd. Thales affirmes, that nothing in the world, For man was meet, but vertuous actions. Cicero saith: That vertue of it selfe Is the sol cause of happie life and death. Vertue was neuer ireling of the mind, But still will liue though fame had ne're a tongue. What sute of grace hath vertue to put on, If vice shall weare as good, and doe as well. Of Faith and Zeale. Faith shewes a good mans fruits, preserues the soule, And zeale doth best giue euidence of faith. FAithes best is triall, then it shineth most. The faithfull stands, the faultie man will flye. Zeale is but cold where louelesse law restraines. Tis hastie rashnes where true faith doth flye. In deepe distresse, true faith doth best auaile. When once mans faith is spotted and defamd, The bodie had been better neuer framd. Zeale and good courage best become a Prince. Faith bides no perfit triall, but by time. Shipwracke of faith is made, where conscience dyes. Friends haue no priuiledge to breake their faith. The gift deserueth most is giuen in zeale. False fainting zeale, shadowed with good pretence▪ Can find a cloake to couer each offence. F lse faith is ouer-pois le with we l st weigh . The ballanc yeelds vnto the lightest feather. An easie yeelding zeale is quickly quaild. Faith violate, is most detestable. Faith once resolu'd, treads fortune vnder foot. The man that holds no faith, shall find no trust. Where faith doth fearelesse dwell in brazen tower, There spotlesse pleasure builds her sacred bower. A zealous heart is alwaies bountifull. The faith of Knighthood is by vertue tryed. Euery occasion quailes a hireling faith. The gift deserueth much is giuen in zeale. A princes greatest fault, is breach of faith. The faith of Pagans ought not be belieu'd. Faith is a fortresse gainst all fainting feare: And Zeale, the walles doth euermore vp-reare. Take faith from iustice, all things runne to spoile. Authoritie is strengthened best by zeale. Who binds himselfe by faith, had need beware. Faith to rash oathes no credit giues at all. The greater faith, the greater sufferance. Faith is the true foundation of the soule, And soonest doth redeeme the same from sinne. Zeale makes opinion stand inuincible. A good mans wish, is substance, faith, and fame. Selfe-will doth frown, when earnest zeale reprooues. Faith mounteth to the clouds on golden wings. Faith brings forth workes, and workes declare our faith. No faith too firme, no trust can be too strong. Similies on the same subiect. AS raine makes euery ground bring forth encrease. So faith of euery soule doth shew the fruits. As honours fire doth kindle high desires, So zealous faith lifts vp the lowest soule. As night doth best the diamonds glory show, So sharpe affliction best makes faith to grow. As wisdome is the only way to weale, So true discretion best directeth zeale. As loue and hate cannot agree in one, So without zeale, faith thinkes her selfe alone. Examples likewise on the same. PArmenio wild his king to breake his faith, I would (quoth he) were I Parmenio. Lysander made no reckoning of his faith, And therefore was by euery one reproou'd. Attilius sent to Rome vpon his faith, Boldly return'd, although it cost his life. Rastrix the Duke of Cleueland, breaking faith, Was therefore dispossest of both his eyes. Let none speake ill of vs, said Pittacus, To whome we stand obliged by our faith. Keepe faith (saith Cicero ) with enemies What ere mishap doe follow thereupon. Of Hope. Hope is the sad hearts help, the sick thoughts friend, And what distrust impaires, Hope doth amend. ALl hope is vaine without the feare of God. Hope, on each least occasion taketh hold. Hope doth forbid vs sorrow to beleeue. When loue growes sickely, hope then daily sterues. Things out of hope, by ventring oft are woon. Hope many times on blessed hap doth light. When hope is lost in care then comfort bleeds. Vnworthy he of grace, whome once deniall Excludes from fairest hope, without more triall. All foolish hopes haue euermore bad speed. Councell doth come too late when hope is past. Men well may hope to rise, but feare to fall. Its good to hope the best, but feare the worst. Chaunging the aire, hopes time will alter chance. Despaire and hope doe still attend on loue. Its good to feare, yet let our feare be so, That to our hope it prooue no ouerthrow. Oft present hap, makes future hope to yeeld. No hap so hard but hope doth much amend. Hope to enioy, is little lesse than ioy. Honour once lost, giues farewell to all hope. Vnhappie men are subiect to no hope. Fortune may take our goods, but not our hope. The heart that's inly hurt, is greatly easd, With hope of that may make griefe best appeasd. Hopes are vnsure, when certaine is the paine. We often fall, when most we hope to clime. As wee waxe hopelesse, violence still growes. Hope well in loue what euer be thy hap. Hope is the daily dreame of waking men. This life, is but the hope of endlesse life. Vnworthie is he of one happie day, That will not take the offer of good hope. There is no trust in youth, nor hope in age. The hope of things vnseene beares greatest price. Good conscience alwaie hath a perfect hope. Hope is a pleasing passion of the mind. To hope against all hope, is high resolue. True hope is swift, and flyes with swallowes wings, Kings it makes Gods, and meaner creatures Kings. Inconstant hope is drowned oft in feares. In midst of griefe, hope alway hath some part. Hope being deluded makes the torment more. Who cannot feare to loose, ne're hopes to haue. All greedie hope, vaine vicious humour feeds. Hope is companion euermore to loue. No one without great hopes, will follow such, Whose power and honour doth not promise much. No hope of rest, where hap true hope delayes. Hope still perswading hope, expecteth good. Hope is the God of miserable men. In vaine he hopes, who here his hope doth ground. From fruitlesse hopes but sillie fauours spring. The euenings hope may comfort mornings care. Hope built vpon the world, doth neuer thriue, But grounded once on God, at no time failes. Hope is the bread and food of wretched men. Bad haps are holpe with hope and good beliefe. No greater griefe in loue, than fruitlesse hope. Hope waits on great mens tongues, and oft beguil . Hopes aboue Fortune, doe fore-point deepe falls. Who thinkes to thriue by hope, oft haps to begge. To hope too much, is boldly to presume: To hope too little, asely to despaire. Small is his gaine that hopes for golden griefe. Meane mens preferments eleuates their hopes. Sad hopes seeme ouer long and burdenous. Grace to thy hope is alwaies safest guide. When hope and hap, when health and wealth is highest, Then woe and wracke, disease and need is nighest. Hope (of all passions) is the pleasantest. Vaine hopes, are like a Vane turn'd with the wind, To haue no hope, is held most miserable. To liue in hope of that men meane to giue, Is to deceiue our selues, and not to liue. Hope not for that which iustice doth denie. Where grace begins, hope makes a happie end. Similies on the same subiect. AS greatest calmes oft turne to thunderclaps, So sweetest hopes doe change to sowrest haps. As in meane places may much wealth be hid, So little hopes may mightie things expect. As sadnes is the hearts chiefe punishment, So hope is highest helpe in deepe distresse. As one part of the body toiles for all, So hope striues to accomplish all desires. As euery mettall is of Sulphur made, So euery pleasure doth from hope proceed. As honest pastimes can no way offend, So good mens hopes must needs haue happy end. Examples likewise on the same. WHen Alexander gaue great gifts away, Being askt, What for himselfe he kept? replied, Hope. Caesar continually wasled with hope, That he should gouerne many Monarchies. Androclidas derided being lame, Said; Then in fight I hope I shall not flie. Pindarus calleth hope, The nource of age: And Thales said, Hope was a common helpe. Learned men differ from the ignorant (As Bias saith) but onely by their Hope. Hope (as Simonides the Poet saith) Is the sole guide and gouernour of men. Of Loue. Loue is a vertue, measur'd by duteous choice, But not if it be maim'd with wilfull chaunce. TRue loue is simple like his mother Truth. Firme and vntainted loue, had neuer meane. In long delay, loue most impatient is. Our treasure we may hide, but not our loue. The truest loue is most suspitious. Loues eyes in looking neuer haue their fill. MAY is not loues month, MAY is full of flowers, But dropping APRIL: Loue is full of showers. Leud loue breeds losse, ill peace hath deadly fight. Life is most loath'd, where loue may not preuaile. Loue is the mistresse of a many minds. Loues little sweet, oft finds a longer sower. Loue's like the winters Rose, or Sommers Ice. Loue where it likes, life where it loues would be. Loue doth desire the thing belou'd to see, That like it selfe in louely shape may be. As loue is loth to part, so seare shunnes death. Luke warme desires best fit with crazed loue. Valour nor loue dwells where diuision is. Nought worth is loue without true constancie. Loue cannot sound well, but in louers tongues. Loues strongest bands, vnkindnes doth vnbind. Firme loue that is in gentle brests begun, No idle charme may easily remooue. Short is the ioy of him that longest loues. Loue neuer can endure a Paragon. The greater loue, the greater is the losse. True loue is often sowne, but seldome growes. Loose loues are vaine, and vanish still to smoake. Loue, that two hearts makes one, so frames one will. Too hard a lesson tis for liuing clay, From loue (in course of nature) to refraine. Firme loue, the dread of daunger doth despise. Loue may not be compeld by masterie. Sweet loue barres lewdnesse from his companie. Causelesse to chaunge loue, is most foule reproch. Loue hateth thought of all vngentlenes. A louers heauen must passe by sorrowes hell. All losse is lesse, yea lesse is infamie, Than losse of loue to him that loues but one. They cannot iudge of loue, that ne're did loue. Loue wants his eyes, yet shoots he passing right. The shrine of loue doth seldome offrings want. What can be said, that louers cannot say? Blind loues, best Poets haue imperfect sight. Loue deeply grounded, hardly is dissembled. Loue is a fiend, a fire, a heauen, a hell, Where pleasure, paine, and sad repentance dwell. Where both deliberate, the loue is light. True loue is mute, and oft amazed stands. Who euer lou'd, that lou'd not at first sight? The darkest night is Cupids brightest day. Loue alwaies makes those eloquent that loue. There's nothing more than counsell, louers hate. The light of hidden fire, it selfe discouers: And loue that is conceald betraies poore louers. A louer most restraind, the worser fares. Loue is too full of faith, too credulous. Great force and vertue hath a louing looke. No stonie limits can hold out true loue. What loue can doe, that dare it still attempt. Sweet are those bands that true loue doth combine. Loue goes toward loue like schoole-boyes from their bookes: But loue from loue, to schoole with heauie lookes. No loue so sweet as where both soules consent. True perfect loue is quickest of beleefe. It's better loue and liue, than loath and die. Free vent of words, loues fire doth asswage. Lookes doe kill loue, and loue by lookes reuiues. Foule words and frownes will not compell a louer. Louers well wot, what griefe it is to part, When twixt two bodies liueth but one heart. Loue easily commenteth on euery woe. Loues gentle spring doth alwaies fresh remaine. Loue maketh young men thrall, and old men dote. In follie loue is wise and foolish wittie. A louers houres are long, though seeming sho . Louers doe say, The heart hath treble wrong, When it is bard the ayding of the tongue. Loue doth with gall and hony both abound. It is not loue, that loues to anger loue. Loue still is free and led with selfe-delight. Sweet is the loue that comes with willingnes. Who learnes to loue, the lesson is so plaine: That once made perfect, neuer lost againe. There is no paine like loues sweet miscrie. Great talke of loue proceeds but from the tongue. Loue makes blunt wits, right pleasing Oratours. All loue deceits are held excusable. Loue is most sweet and faire in euery thing. Loue well is said, to be a life in death, That laughes and weepes, and all but with a breath. Such ve ue loue hath, to make one of two. The fire of loue is blown by dalliance. Loues speciall lesson, is to please the eye. Loues glorie doth in greatest darknes shine. Loue is a spirit all compact of fire, Not gr sse to s ke, but light and will aspire. Loue paints his longings in faire virgins eyes. If merit looke not well, Loue bids, stand by. Loue loftie, doth despise a lowly eye. Loue neuer will be drawn, but must be led. Although sweet loue to conquer glorious be. Yet is the paine farre greater than the fee. He that shewes all his loue, doth loue but lightly. Fauours make happy louers euer dumbe. The latest wonne, is alwaies lou'd the longer. Equall estate, doth nourish equall loue. Loue in braue spirits, kindles goodly fire, Which to great height of honour doth aspire. Loue makes at once, sicke, sound, aliue, and dead. Loue makes diuided creatures liue in one. Loue is a thing that feeds on care and feare. Poore is the loue that pouertie impaires. All loues conceits are excellently wittie. Two eyes him needeth, both to watch and wake. That louers will deceiue and find their scape. That loue is singular, is least in sight. A pregnant loue conceits a thousand things. Wanton conceits are rife, where loue is wittie, Disdaine to true loue yet was euer foe. That loue is it which alwaies lasteth long. That tends to neither of the louers wrong. Vnwoed loue knowes not what pittie meanes. They loue indeed, that dare not say they loue. Loues workes are more than of a mortall temper. Hearts are Loues food, his drinke is louers teares. Loue is a golden bubble full of dreames, That waking breakes, and fils vs with extreames. The gaine is griefe to them that traffique loue. Loue is in prime of youth, a Rose; in age, a Weed. Loue, for a minutes ioy, payes endlesse paine. Meane men in loue haue frownes as well as Kings. Two constant louers being ioyned in one, Yeelding to one another, yeeld to none. Loue truly bred, true triall will abide. Mens loue is written on the Angels brests. Loue, with true friends will alwaies liue and die. Loue is refiner of inuention. The faultes that are in loue▪ by loue committed, By loue for loue doe claime to be remitted. Loue teacheth musicke to vnskilfull men. Loue woon by vertue, still is permanent. The loue of beautie, reason oft beguiles. Loue is the Lord of hope and confidence. Loue whe s the d llest wits, his plagues are such: Yet makes the wise by pleasing dote as much. Likenesse in manners maketh loue most pure. Vertue cannot be perfect, wanting loue. Loue is most fortunate where courage liues. Concealed loue burnes with the fiercest flame. Louers best like to see themselues alone, Or with their loues, if needs they must haue one. A cold base loue, cooles not a hot desire. Hate in the name of loue doth oft presume. Sel e▪loue, of mischiefe is the only ground. The owards warfare is a wanton loue. Where rowes a perfect sympathie of hearts, E h passion in the one, the other paineth. Pure loue did neuer see the face of feare. Lasciuious loue is root of all remorse. Loue wonne in heat, will with a cold be lost. Loue, and high seat, no equals can endure. Louers haue quick all corners searching eyes. Similies on the same subiect. LIke as the waxe doth quench, and feed the flame, o loue to men giues both despaire and life. As luie finds fit meanes whereby to climbe, So loue sorts out his subiect where him list▪ As fire with violence consumeth wood, So scorne with crueltie doth murder loue. As young vines yeeld most wine, but old brings best, So young loue speaketh much, but old doth most. Like as affection is in louers restlesse. So being perfect, it is likewise endlesse. As fancie must be cured by affection, So loue is onely remedied by loue. Examples likewise on the same. PAusanias lou'd his wife with such firme loue, As no description well could set it downe. Prediccas for his loue to Alexander, Refused mightie wealth in Macedon. The Emperour Claudius would not loue or hate, But as he wa thereto by others led. Scipio so lou'd the Poet Ennius, That being dead, he kept his picture still. Zeno, although a Stoicke, yet did yeeld, That loue in young men was most requisite. Cicero not gain-said wise men to loue So they might loue without deepe cares and sighes. Of Hate. Hate, is loues enemie, and Friendships foe: Neighbourhoods bane, and Peaces ouerthrow. HAte cannot worke, where nature planteth loue. Hates eies may slumber, but can hardly sleepe. Hatred is chiefest enemie to loue. That which is h ld with hate, we feare to loose. Who hates himselfe to loue another man, Sencelesse should be esteemed of all men. The deadliest hate, with s iles, securely stands. Where rancour rules, there hate doth most preuaile. Lewd loue, is hate; and base desire is shame. Youth old in will, age young in hate doth make. 'Tis incident to them who many feare, Many to them more grie o es hate doe beare. In meckenesse maskes the most distemperd hate. True faithfull loue will neuer turne to hate. Men oft shew fauour to conceale the hate. Hatred attendeth on prosperitie. The sweetest loue, changing his propertie: Turnes to the sowrest and most deadly hate. Loue so, thou maist haue little feare to hate▪ Few hate their faults; all hate of them to heare. A rooted hate will hardly be displac'd. Fie on the loue that hatcheth hate and death. These are the greatest spoilers of a state: Young nsell, priuat gaine, and partiall hate. Hate without might comes euer more too late. A poore mans hate is very perillous. Mercie may mend, whome hatred made transgresse. From deepe desire , oft comes the deadliest hate. Hatred must be beguil'd by some new course, Where states are strong, and Princes doubt their force. Neuer put trust in them that hate their blood. Hate seekes to salue his harmes by swist reuenge. Enforced wedlock breeds but secret hate. Hate euurmore is blind, and so is loue. In v lgar eares delight it alwaies breeds, To haue the hated authors of misdeeds. Where h e doth rule, Lordship small safetie hath. Hate nourisheth contempt, debate, and rage. Hate furrowes vp a graue to burie loue. But few will follow them whom princes hate. Hate and disdaine doe neuer brooke respect, Consisting in true louing hearts neglect. To colour a e with kindnesse, some commend. Hid hate exce deth open enmiti Lookes oft ti hate, when as the heart doth loue▪ No hate like that of friends, once chang'd to foes. Who foster hate, can neuer find out loue. Most happie he, to whome loue comes at last, And doth restore what hate before did wast. Hate many times is hid in smoothest lookes. The wrong of friends exceeds the soe-mans hate. Hate buried once, hurts deadly afterward. A b d mans hate can neuer harme the good. With pleasing speech men promise and protest. When hatefull hearts l e lurking in their breast. Whome all men hate, none is so fond to loue. Hate commonly doth most offend it selfe. Hates winking is a prep'ratiue to death. Similies on the same subiect. AS Lyons are discerned by their pawes, So hatefull men are by their qualities. As enuie braggeth and can draw no blood, So hate in stead of hurt, oft doth men good. As greenest wood lies long before it burne, So hate stands watching till fit time to harme. As blindnes, led by blindnes, needs must fall, So hate, vrg'de on by hate, harmes least of all. As children for their faults haue slye excuses, So hates smooth lookes hide very foule abuses. As crauen Cocks make shew, yet dare not fight, So hate makes proffers, when he dares nor bite. Examples likewise on the same. DEmetrius Phalerius did condemne Any that iustly could be said to hate. Stesilia did procure Themistocles, Euen to the death to hate Aristides. Cato and Caesar hated not each other, Vntill Seruilia made them enemies. Clodius did hate the men that lou'd him most, And therefore was of all abandoned. Cicero saith, No honest citizen Can be procur' de to hate his enemie. Pindarus held no vice more odious, Than enuious hatred, in what man so ere. Of Chastitie. Chast life is graces seale, deuotions staffe, Marke of the iust, and crowne of martyrdome. CHastitie is bright honours glorious crowne, Lost iewels may be found, Chastitie neuer That's lost but once: and once lost, lost for euer. Shee is most chast, that's but enioyd of one. Pure chastitie is beautie to our soules, Grace to our bodies, peace to our desires. We breake chast vowes when we liue loosely euer. The purest incense on the altar smokes. But chastest thoughts are Nectar in Ioues sight. Chastitie lost, can neuer be restor'd. Eternall thraldome rather should be wisht, Than losse of chastiti , or chaunge of loue. Chast loue is founded on a iust desire. When chastitie is rifled of her store, Lust, the proud theefe, is poorer than before. Chast things are charie to the Gods themselues. Chast eyes are blind at any gaudie gift, And dease her eares to goodliest promises. Chast eyes will banish lustfull sights away. Riches and beautie praiseth not a wife, But pleasing of her husband, and chast life, No princes wealth can prize true chastitie. The browne complexion fam'd for chastitie, Exceedeth farre the fair'st suspected beautie. No life to libertie, no loue like chastitie. Chastitie beautifies the meanest coat, Better than blame in richest clothing clad. Beautie vnchast is reckned nothing worth. Chastitie, weakely can withstand proud wealth And dignitie, both leagued to assault. Chastitie is the crowne of happy life. In wedlocke, chastitie is speciall good: But more, in virgins life and widowhood. Chastities wrongs, bondage awarrants not. Chastitie is the beautie of the soule, The ioy of heauen, best iewell here on earth. Wanton desire, chast lookes doth often hide. Chastitie, charitie, and humilitie, Are the united vertues of the soule. Frugalitie is badge of chastitie. Beautie vnchast, is like the Mandrakes fruit, Sightly in shew, but poysonous in tast. Idlenes is the foe to chastitie. Nothing in women worthy praise remaines, If once their (glorie) chastitie be lost. Where gold's too plentie, chastitie growes cheape. Faire is the face which promiseth pure loue, But that celestiall, liues by chastitie. Fortitude, with chast life, adorne the soule. Shee is not chast that is by feare compeld: Neither she honest, that with need is wonne. Modest and chast, is dourie rich enough. Chastitie in extremitie is knowne, And in the end crownd with eternitie. A wandring eye bewrayes an vnchast mind. With reasons reines, chastitie bridles lust. Where needie want is ioynd with chastitie, There vncleane life gets some authoritie. Chast eares cannot endure dishonest talke. The modest eye controlles loues wanton ryot. Chast modest thoughts beseeme a woman best. Similies on the same subiect. AS beautie lookes like flowers in the spring, So chastitie is like the starres of heauen. As Violets smell sweet in any sente, So chastitie shines bright in euery eye. As water-drops will pearce the hardest flint, So chast resolue o'recomes the proudest lust. As glasses broke, can neuer be repaird, So chastitie once lost, is ne're restor'd. As lust and libertie doth shorten life, So chastitie makes endlesse liue the soule. As champions by their manhood are best knowne, So is good life by spotlesse chastitie. Examples likewise on the same. THe Spartane virgins rather chose to die, Than loose the honour of pure chastitie. Nic nor moou'd a Thebane maid to lust, Which to preuent, she gladly slue her selfe. Lucrece once rifled of her chastitie, Imagin'd following life, but infamie. Diripen na, by her fathers hands, Was done to death to saue her chastitie. Va ro did hold the man religious, That made a conscience of his chastitie. Qu t l an saith, I hat heauens chiefest gift Bestowed on man, is blessed chastitie. Of Beautie. Beautie is Natures priuiledge, a close deceit, A short times tyrant, and vast Monarchie. BEautie but seldome seene, makes vs admire it. Beautie is such a bait, that (swallowed) choakes. Beauties best treasure, is the owners harme. Selfe-pleasing soules doe play with beauties baites. There is no name (if shee be false or not) But being faire, some enuious tongue will blot. Beautie doth varnish age, as if new borne. Where faire is not, no boor to paint the brow. Beautie being borrowed, merits no regard. Simples fit beautie, fie on drugs or Art. Beautie doth sweetly quicken when 'tis nigh: But distant farre, murders, where 'tis belou'd. Seldome want guests where beautie bids the feast. Care and suspition is faire beauties dower. Beautie brings perill, wanting safe protection. Beautie at death can be bequeath'd to none. Were beautie vnder twentie lo kes kept fast, Yet l u will through, and picke them all at last. Nice fooles delight to be accounted faire. Beautie is soonest lost, too choicely kept. Beautie to beautie alwaies is benigne. Beautie within it selfe should not be wasted. Bright beautie is the bait, which with delight, Doth most allure man to encrease his kind. Beautie and wealth are fraught with coy disdaine. Beautie is often with it selfe at strife. True beautie needs no other ornament. Men praise the face, yet blame the flintie mind. The fairest flower of beautie fades away, Like the fresh Lillie in the Sun-shine day. Swift time makes wrinkles in the fairest brow. Faire women grieue to thinke they must be old. Pittie and smiles doe best become the faire. Beautie hath priuiledge to checke all dutie. All things that faire, that pure, and glorious been, Offer themselues on purpose to be seene. Alluring shewes most deepe impression strike. Sweetly it fits the faire to wantonnize. Nothing but crueltie misseemes the faire. Beautie is nothing if it be not seene. No greater corsiue to our blooming yeeres, Than the cold badge of winter-blasted haires. Beautie will be where is the most resort. Beautie is mightie, yet her strength but weake. Beautie like Autumne fades and falls away. Beautie hath power to ouercome the strong. Faire flowers that are not gathered in their prime. R t and consume themselues in little time. The Summers beautie yeelds to winters blasts. By clouds of care best beauties are defac'd. Beautie being shamelesse, soemes a loath some sight. Amongst faire Roses grow some stinking weeds. The fairer and more beautifull the skie, The ouglier seeme the clouds that in it lye. Nothing so soone allures as beautie doth. Religion is austere, but beautie mild. The fair'st in shew must carrie all away. At fairest signes, best welcome is surmiz'd. Beautie in heauen and earth this grace doth win, It supples rigor, and it lessens sinne. Dainties are made for tast, beautie for vse. Seeds spring from seeds, and beauty beauty breedeth. Beautie oft crazeth like a broken glasse. Both old and young, and all would fairest be. Hardly perfection is so absolute, But some impuritie doth it pollute. A small fault soone impaires the sweetest beautie. The verie fairest hath her imperfection. Beautie to dwell with woe, deformes it selfe. As fairest beautie fades, so loue growes cold. Beautie it selfe, doth of it selfe perswade The eyes of men, without an Oratour. If beautie were not, loue were quite confounded. The fairest flowers haue not the sweetest smell. The painted face sets forth no perfect blood. The beautie of the mind excels the face. Desire being Pilot, and bright beautie prize. Who can feare sinking where such treasure lyes Beautie is able sorrow to beguile. There's none so faire, whose beautie all respect. The fairest buds are soonest nipt with frosts. Who builds on beautie, builds but for a while. Beautie is cuer held so much more faire, By how much lesse her hate makes loue despaire. That's quickly staind, which is the purest fine. In fairest stone small raine soone makes a print. Ill fare that faire which inwardly is foule. Beautie is inward vertue of the soule. We trample grasse, and prize the flowers in MAY, Yet grasse is greene, when fairest flowers decay. The loue of beautie, Reason quite forgets. The cause of loue is only beauties lookes. Beautie and youth once banisht, ne're returne. Chast thoughts makes beautie be immortallizd. Faire beautie is the sparke of hot desire, And sparkes in time will kindle to a fire. Sicknesse and age are beauties chiefest foes. Weeds oft times grow, when fairest flowers fade. Beautie is like a faire, but fading flower. Where beautie most abounds, there wants most ruth. The goodliest gemme being blemisht with a cracke, Looseth both beautie and the vertue too. Beautie doth whet the wit, makes bold the will. Beautie makes Art to worke beyond it selfe. Vnhonest beautie is a deadly poyson. Vertue-Iesse beautie doth deserue no Ioue. The fairest flower nipt with the winters frost, In shew seemes worser than the basest weed. The perfect glasse of vertue, beautie is. No bait so sweet as beautie, to the eye. White seemes the fairer when as blacke is by. The purest Lawne is apt for euery staine. Better it is with beautie to be blinded, Than beauties graces should be blindly minded. Beautie is tearm'd the mistresse of delight. Beautie oft iniures them endued there with. Beautie enflates and puffeth vp the mind. Humilitie with beautie seldome is. Beautie brings fancie to a daintie feast, And makes a man, that else were but a beast▪ Man of all creatures is most beautifull. Beautie not proud, nothing more excellent. Similies on the same subiect. AS the right Corall need no other grace, So Artl sse beautie best sets sorth the face. As finest cloth will soonest catch a staine, So fairest lookes may shadow minds most vaine. As greatest feasts seldome can want fit friends, So beauties house will hardly lacke resort. As medlers with the fire are easily scorcht, So they that gaze on beautie soone are caught. As coldest Climates haue their Summer dayes, So coolest thoughts are fierd at beauties blaze. As that same Speare which harme must heale the wound, So looke where beautie kills, it must reuiue. Examples likewise on the same. HErcules being a mightie conquerour, Yet vaild his courage at faire beauties feet. The ybian Lyons loo e their sternest might, If of a beauteous face they once get sight. The S an ian Lord, by nature dull and rude, By sight of beautie lost this seruitude. Alcestaes beautie made M ande s Swannes, To leaue the stood and on her shoulders pearch. Chrysippus held, that beautie did preserue Kindnes, and all societie with men. Zeno, the Prince of Stoickes did agree, That beautie, like could very hardly be. Of Iealousie. Iealousie is hells torment to the mind, Quite quenching reason, and encreasing rage. LOue euer laughes when Iealousie doth weepe. If age be iealous, youth will be vntrue. No hell can be compard to Iealousie. This still we find, where iealousie is bred, Hornes in the mind are worse than on the head. Suspect bewraies our thoughts, betraies our words. Suspitious eyes are messengers of woe. Iealous suspect is linked with despaire. Well fares the man, how ere his cates doe tast, That tables not with foule suspition. Better to die, than be suspitious. Trust not too soone, nor all too light mistrust. Mistrust doth treason in the trustiest raise. Where Iealousie directesh forward wills, Beauties sweet dalliance with despight a kills. Iealousie kindles enuie quenchlesse fire. Suspition alwaies haunts a guiltie mind. Suspition often wounds as a ope as death. When sweet repose doth calme the troubled mind, Then base suspect soon'st leaues his ing behind. Daungerous suspect still waits on loues delight. Suspition oft times breeds a further ill. Once guiltie▪ and suspected euermore. O Iealousie, when truth once takes thy part, No mercie-wanting Tyrant so seuere. No secrecie can be without suspect. Iealousie is the father of reuenge. Iealousie pines it selfe to death aliue. Thy wise being faire be not thou iealous, Because suspition cur not womens follies. Iealousie growes extreame, by lengthning it. A iealous man no counsell will admit. Iealousie is the sruit of suddaine choice. The heart being once infect with iealousie, Griefe is the night, and day darke miscrie. No thraldome like the yoke of iealousie. Suspition giues continuall cause of care. Iealousie is Disdaines blacke harbinger. Iealousie is the torment of the mind, For which▪ nor w t, nor counsell helpe can find. Suspition wounds, but iealousie strikes dead. Suspect sends men too swiftly to their end. Who trauailes in suspect, are bound to haste. Too much s spition o another, is A flat nd ng of ou owne amisse. Passio kept priuat, doe most preiudice. Suspition needs no vrger but it selfe. Wise men haue alwaies hated iealousie. Where once suspition breedeth enmitie, 'Tis hard with shewes to compasse amitie. Iealousie murdereth hospitalitie. Iealousie rootes vp all good neighbourhood. Iealousie reckons friends no more than foes. Similies on the same subiect. AS no content is like the sweetes of loue, So no despaire can match with iealousie. Loue, as it is diuine with loyaltie, So is it hellish, wrapt in iealousie. As from small brookes great riuers doe arise, So huge distemper springs from iealousie. As Crowes do deeme their brood the fairest birds, So iealous men their owne choise most commend. As shippes in tempests by the winds are tost, So fond conceits doe hurrie iealous heads. As kindnesse doth delight in companie, So is it poyson to mad iealousie. Examples likewise on the same. THe Persians were so iealous of their wiues▪ As but in waggons they ne're went abroad. Phanius lockt vp his wife through iealousie, Whereby she compast what she could not else. Procris was slaine through her owne iealousie, Hid in a bush to watch her husbands walke. Argus, albeit he had an hundred eyes, Yet could not keepe from Io, Iupiter. Cicero calleth Iealousie, a feare Of loosing that belongs to ones owne selfe▪ Chrysippus holds, that iealousie ill brookes A partner in the thing it most esteemes. Of Wit and Wisdom Wisdome is Natures child, Experience heire, Discretely rul'd, while Wit gads euery where. WIsdome seemes blind, when she beholdeth best. Wisdome growne wealthie, liueth then at quiet. No wisdome with extremities to deale. It's wisdome to giue much: a gift preuailes When deepe perswading Oratorie failes. Mans wit doth build for time but to deuoure, Wisdome is alwaies held the chiefest wealth. Ech soyle o cou trey is a wise mans home. He is not wise, that hauing scap a harme Will afterward goe meddle with it more. Faire sober speed, is counted wisdomes hast. All after-wit, is euer dearely bought. Wisdome bids stay, though foot be in the gate. Not cowardise, but wisdome warnes to yeeld▪ When fortune aids the proud iusulting foe. Feed les with toyes, and wise men with regard. When clouds appeare, wise men put on their cloakes. He wisely walketh that doth safely goe. All places that the eye of heauen sur aies, Are (to a wise man) happie ports and hauens▪ What wise men see, the vulgar little thinke. Sad pawse and deepe regard, becomes the wise. Warie sore-sight doth master head-strong will. Wise men doe seldome sit and wayle their wo s, But presently preuent the wayes to waile. No common things can please a wandring wit Without discretion, vertue seemes like vice. Good wit ill vsde, may harme a common-wealth▪ Wisdome commaunds to part the dead and sicke, Ieast they infect the faulelesse and the quicke. Discretion practiseth the things are good. In loue, discretion is the chiefest helpe. Ouer discretion, Fortune hath no power▪ All after-wit is like a shower of raine, That falls i ely on the r pened graine. Sharpenesse of wit quickly enslames desire. What strength denyes, wit may aspire vnto. Wit bendeth not where will doth shew most force. If thou haue lost by fore-wits rash preuention, Win it againe by after-wits contention. Who trusteth most his wit, is ignorant. Wisdome in midst of rage appeareth best. By others faults wise men reforme their owne. The Pilot, that by skill the ship doth guide And not by might: makes vessels brooke the tyde. Wisdome is poore, her dowrie is content, To play the foole well, is good signe of wit. Some little pawse doth helpe the quickest wit▪ Wise men for fortune doe so well prouide, That though she shake them, yet they will not slide. Wisdome will flourish when as folly fades. True wisdome bids, rather doe well than speake. Wise-men haue companie, though left alone. Wisdome must iudge twixt men a t to amend, And minds incurable, borne to offend. A wise mans countrey is the world throughout. Wisdome is wealth, euen to the poorest wretch. Natures imperfect things, wisdome makes right. Reformed wit can scant so instly deeme, But that it leaues true goods, for such as seeme. Wisdome doth beautifie meane pouertie. Vnskilfull heads run recklesse on their will. Sound iudgement slightly weighes opinion. Too few there be that doe discreetely learne, What pr sit rightly ought themselues concerne. Who trusts his wit, by wit is soonest tript. By wit we speake, by wit the mind is rul'd. By wit we gouerne all our actions. Wit in a woman, like to oyle enflam'd, Kindles great vertue, or much vanitie. Wit is the load-starre of ech humane thought. Wise men will take their opportunities. All wisdomes heires are iealous of their fall. Wisdome hath charmes and incantations, Can tame huge spirits and outragious passions. Slow to beleeue, from wisdome doth proceed. High is the seat which wisdome doth commend. It's wisdome when we winne, to winne to saue. When all gainst one, and none for him will speake, Who thinkes himselfe most wise, will prooue too weake. Will doth desire, what wisdome still reprooues. Wisdome breeds care, but folly want doth bring. Wit daunceth many times, when folly pipes. T attempt with others daunger, not our owne, A chiefest part of wisdome may be browne. 'Tis wisdome not to be too credulous. Short l ued wits doe wither as they grow. Home i l is y k s e to a wand ng wit. Wis men a e, Th'v i peace, before the insiest warre. Vnwise weaues he that takes two webbes in hand. Things well regarded, longest doe endure. Fore-fi ht doth f ll on all aduantage wait. It is no wisdome to enlarge thrall, Whose free may returne thee greater harme. The office of wisdome, is to shadow griese. Wisdome is that where by the soule doth liue. Wisdome is plentifull in good examples. Those wits that know how much faire graces mooue, May there by draw sound arguments of loue. Wit getteth wealth, but none by wealth get wit. No noble b ge like ornament of wit. Nothing more fine than wit, nothing more sickle. Men that neglect their owne for want of wit, Make something nothing, by augmenting it. Wit wonne by industrie is hardly lost. When age approcheth, wisdome waxe h young. Wisdome makes poore men rich; rich, honourable. All pearles are not deriued from one shell, Nor all good wits within one countrey dwell. Iustice, not ioyn'd with wisdome's crueltie. Wisdome in man, is no meane happinesse. Similies on the same subiect. AS from the earth the plough all brambles cleares, So wisdome from the mind all vices root. As wise men for them selues are meetest scribes, So fooles ne're care what straunger knowes their hearts. As brasse or yron (by vse) become most bright: So wit employ'd, shines faire in all mens sight. As emptie vessels yeeld the loudest sound, So those of meanest wit will prattle most. As Bees by their owne hony oft are hurt, So wit by wisdome many times is scourg'd. As Sea-crabs vse to swimme against the streame, So wit with wisdome alwaies will contend. Examples likewise on the same. CAesar in his great fortunes gloried, Yet by his wisdom all were brought to passe. Antonius the Emperour was so wise, He ne're repented what- oe're he did. Scipio, accus'd vniustly, by his wit In making answere, wonne himselfe renowme. The Senate did acquire Emilius Scaurus, Onely because he answer'd wittily. Plato in his Conuiuim doth affirme, That wisdome is the onely gift in man. Tullie tearmes wisdome, mistresse of this life: Likewise, an Art instructing to liue well. Of Learning, &c. Learning and Knowledge are the lampes of life, Chiefe guides to Artes and all perfections. LEarning in spight of fate will mount alost. Vaine is the Art that will deceiue it selfe. Midas base brood doe sit in honours chaires, Where to the Muses sonnes are onely heires. Art hath a world of secrets in her power. There is no age ought thinke too late to learne. The world doth smile on euery so tish clowne, And most vngently treadeth learning downe. Oft highest worthes are paid with spightfull hire. Art is but base, with them that know it not. None haue more hard or more obdurate minds, Than vicious hare-braines, and illit'rate hinds. The rarest gifts doe need no trumpets sound. Learning by vertue is more beautifull. True Art can wound as deepe as any steele. Who may haue helpe assuredly else where, In vaine seeke wonders out of Magique Art. Knowledge is hurtfull, if discretion want. Art must be wonne by Art, and not by might. Needs must those men be blind, an blindly led, Where good l ss ns a n'd or read. Nature is most of all adorn'd by A tes. The purest studie seeketh things. Learning hath power to d a men waxen rude, To ciuill loue of▪ Art and rti . Wit learneth vs what secret Science yeelds. Artes perish, wanting ho and ap l u e. Learning can bridle the infornall kind: To wit, the perturbations of the mi ▪ The priest vnpaid can neither sing nor say. Skill and the loue of skill, doe ue kisse. ooles will in fault witho the cause disc ring. And argue most of that they a e n lea g. No bond of loue so s rong a▪ knowledg is. Learning, to graue experience, ought to bow. True Science suted in well ou d imes, Is nourished for sa in after-times. Learning to conquest adde h p rpetuitie. Learning, first founder w of publ e w a es. When dolts haue lu , o hen ▪ step to s ay: Let Schollers burne their boo e , and g e to pla . Learning is ages comfort, you hes b st guide. Learning makes young men so , old men wi e. D ll learnin d e desire, Bu e wise. To vnl uill, hat'hest learning is. Opinion without l rning is not good. Some men so , That o ther rre the worke before was well. Knowledge continues when all wealth else wast . Knowledge in all things is ight prositable. The mind withdrawne rom studie, for supplies, Is learnings wracke, where want doth tyrannize. To know, and want performance, is mishap. Best knowledge is or men to know themselues. Coy readers deeme, that dull conceits proceed From ignorance, the cause being onely need. Poets are borne, but Oratours are made. Poetrie quickeneth wit, sweetens discourse. Poets scant sweetly write, except they meet With sound rewards, for ser oning so sweet. Learning and knowledge, good minds most desire. Knowledge, before all else should be preferd. True learning hath a bodie absolute, That in apparant sence it selfe can su e. Breuitie is great praise of eloquence. Silence in wise men is sweet eloquence. The man that scorneth all the Artes of schoole, Lackes but a long coat, to be natures foole. Eloquence is the ornament of speech. Eloquence makes bad matters oft seeme good. They which doe like all Artes which can be thought, Doe comprehend not any as they ought. Experience is the mistresse of old age. Men rich in knowledge hate all other wealth. Arts, which right hard doe seeme at our first sight, By triall are ade easie, quicke and light. Experience, times characters rac th out. Knowledge distinguisheth twixt en and beasts, Learning will liue, and vertue still shall shine, When follie dyes, and ignorance doth pine. Learning, with courage, make a man complete. Let Guns serue gownes, and bucklers yeeld to books. Arts want may stop our tongues, but not our teares. Similies on the same subiect. AS learning helpe▪ to purchase all men fame, So (truly le n'd) doth more renowme their name. As ground vntil'd can neuer bring o th g aine, So vnlearn'd valour taketh paine. As men by folly the Gods, Euen so by they neerest them. As Bees sucke honey out of di ers fl we s, So out of Science men knowl d learne▪ As seales i p in ly o e in wa e, So Poets in dull mind hou hts presse. As Musque quic n hea t , So drowsie soules are c 'd w th eloquence. Examples likewise on the same. ALexander honoured Aristotle, And made his pillow Homers ades. In campe or else-where sar alwaies bare, His Commentaries as hi bosome friend▪ Robert king of Sci ill vs'd to say. Kingdome and all goe, I learning loose. Ptolomie Philadelp , l i gs friend, Fiue hundred thousand bookes had in his studi . Man (as saith▪ Aristotl ) was create To vnderstand, and afterward to doe. Oh Science said graue Plato ) how would men Loue and esteeme thee, if they knew thee right? Of Kings and Princes. Kings are the images of Gods on earth: And therefore they are cal'd, Gods of the earth. KIngs like to Gods should gouerne euery thing. Monarchs misdeeds cannot be hid in clay▪ Vnhappie kings, that ne er may be aught To know themselues, or to discer e their saul . Princes are glasses to their subiects eyes. The liues of princes are their subiects bookes. To whome should su iects for true iusti s e, When Kings themselues doe reig e by ? The greatest scandale wai s on great s s a e. Poore groomes are sightlesse night; Kings, glorious day. A king should euer priuiledge his pleas e, And make his peeres esteeme it as t ir treasure. The cares of kings wast li , and hasten age. Within one la d, one single sway i best. Princes like Sunnes are eu re in sight, All see the clouds that doe ecclipse their lig t. Diuided kingdomes make diuided hearts. Good deeds from kings must not be drawne perforce. A Princes wealth, in spending still doth spread, Like to a poole with many fountaines fed. Minions too great, argue a king too weake. Kings sleeping, see with eyes of other men. Whereas proud conquest keepeth all in awe, Kings oft are forc'd in seruice okes to draw. A kings great arme doth reach from shore to shore. Kings vse their loues as garments they haue worne. Princes haue but their titles for their glorie, And outward honour for an inward toyle. Kings pardon death, but can not pardon shame. Kings want no means t'accomplish what they would. Princes, for meere vnseli imaginations, Do often feele a world of resilesse ca e . It shames a Prince to say▪ IF THAT I COVLD, Kings liues reputed are their subi cts lights. Betweene kings titles and their lowly name, There's nothing differ▪ but the outward f me. No common fortunes can once blemish kings. A begging prince, what begger pitties not? Where Angele in the cause of Kings doe sight, VVeake men must fall▪ for bea n regards the right. A king, woes slaue, must kingly woe obey. Kings may winne kingdoms, but not conquer hearts▪ Not all the water in the rough rule sea, Can wash the balme from an annoi ted king. The linkes of princes loue, are blood and warre. Poore priuat men ound not their princes hearts. This fault is euer incident to kings, Too much to credit ouer pleasing things. Princes respect their honour more than blood. To be a Prince, is more than be a man. The man that at a subiects use doth anne, To the princes bodie giues a priuie maime. Princes like Lyons neuer will be tam'd. Kings will be onely, competirors must downe. Gnats are vnnoted where-soe're they flie, But Eagles gaz'd vpon with euery eye. A kings great name makes not his fault the lesse. Desire of soueraigntie respects no faith. Foolish the begger, that to touch a crowne, VVould with the scepter strait be smitten downe. The threats of kings are like the thunders noise. Kings haue long armes, and rulers reach at large. Princes are as the glasse, the schoole, the booke, VVhere subiects eyes doe learne, doe read, doe looke. Maiestie shines like lightning from the East. A princes will ought not exceed his law. Mildnesse doth better sute with maiestie, Than rash reuenge, and rough seueritie. Princes desires are many times corrupt. Princes oft fauour flatterers more than friends. Kings doe approach the nearest vnto God, By giuing life and safetie to their people. Vnworthie mens preferment, shames the prince. Kings Courts are held as vniuersall schooles. Succeeding heapes of plagues doe teach too late, To learne the mischiefes of misgnided state. Kings by example sinne more than by act. Kings seates for soules distrest, are sanctuaries. The youth of Princes haue no bounds for sinne, Vnlesse them-selues doe make them bounds within. Princes oft purchase quiet with price of wrong. Wish for good princes, but endure the ill. Subiects may well complaine, but not correct A princes faults, they beare more high respect. No ruler yet could euer all content. The face of kings makes faultie subiects feare. Kings, Lords of times and of occasions, May take aduantage when and how they list. It's hard to rule, and please both good and bad. New kings doe feare when old Courts furder straine. Poore maiestie, that other men must guide: Whose discontent can neuer looke aright. When princes worke, who then will idle stand? Peasants may beare, but kings must needs requite. Who would all mastring maiestie defeat Of her best grace: that is to make men great. A princes wrath is messenger of death. What els is pompe, rule, raigne; but earth and dust? Kings must haue some be hated worse than they, On whome they may their weight of enuie lay. Pride is no ornament for diademes. Selfe-loue doth very ill beseeme a prince. Blest is that league, where citties further Kings, And kings doe further them in other things. Kings that would haue lawes kept, must rule themselues. Graue heads are meetest Councellors for kings. Looke what a King doth most of all embrace, To that his subiects will encline as fast. The strength of princes is their subiects loue. Kings ought be free from partialitie. Sleeplesse suspition, pale distrust, cold feare, Alwaies with princes company doth beare. Kings should be fathers to their common- ale . Kings should preferre them most that least. A Prince not fear'd, hath oft his death : And dreaded Princes haue their death de . Maiestie scornes to looke on cowardise. Kings reasons should be more than their opi . What else are kings when regiment is g n , But like to shadowes in a Sun shine day? In i cts wrongs, princes sustaine abuse. It' ater care to keepe, than get a crowne. Kings fauours in their eye-lids vse to hang. Ready with euery winke to be wip'te out. He is no king, that is affections slaue. No fall like his that falleth from a crowne. Kings are not tearmed Gods for wearing crownes, But for o're fame and fortune they are Lords. Misgouern'd kings are cause of common wracke. Kings chaunging customes, euer feare a chaunge. Iest not with Princes if that thou be wise: For in vnequall iest great daunger lyes. Kings are their subiects ioy, their countries hope. True subiects hearts are princes chiefest stay. In Princes, these two qualities well sit: For strength a Lyon, and a Foxe for wit. Great perils are compriz'd within a crowne. Beggers make maiestie a gazing marke. True iustice is the chiefe and onely thing That is re uir'd and lookt for in a king. Mislikes are sillie lets, where kings resolue. Iust soueraigntie can neuer be displac'd. A king, hereft of all his trustie friends Is dead aliue; for fame and honour ends. All lawfull princes, first or last preuaile. A princes safetie is his peoples loue. Who hath been kneel'd vnto, can hardly kneele, Or begge for that which once hath been his owne. Kings greatnes stands on the great king of heauen. No maiestie, where vertue is despis'd. Similies on the same subiect. AS princes wills are commonly held lawes. So life or death dependeth on their lookes. As often burials is Physicians shame, So many deaths argue a kings hard raigne. As beasts obey the Lordly lyons looke, So meane estate must mightie prince brooke. As the Sun-beames doe lighten all the world, So princes liues are l nternes to their lands. As Princes wanting wealth, learne tyrannie, So too much treasure makes them vicious. As biggest winds enkindle greatest flames, So much submission makes a king most mild. Examples likewise on the same. THe Kings of Persia, alwaies shewed themselues More subiect to the law, than to their Lords. Antiochus told his sonne Dem trius, That kingly rule was noble slauerie. B lus the sonne of Nemrod, was first king That in this world had title of that name. The Romane kings did vse to weare no crownes. But alwaies bare their scepters in their hands. Tully saith, then 'tis best to checke a prince, When he forgets himselfe to be a prince. S ates wil'd good kings preferre their friends, And shewe some kindnesse to their enemies. Of Kingdomes, &c. The Kingdome, Countrey, and the Common-weale, Are things that subiects loue doe most reueale. KIngdomes are Fortunes slattering gifts, soone lost. Kingdomes are burd'nous to the wi est men. Con rd doth keepe a Realme in stable stay. When discord brings all kingdomes to decay. Wretched the state where men desire to die. Who striues to alter lawes, disturbes the state. Kingdomes are commonly much sooner lost Than kept: desir'd, than had with mightie cost. Kingdomes are Fortunes atall tenise balls. A wicked king, makes a more wicked land. A man that takes delight in doing all, To trouble all the State deui eth i l. In a well-gouern'd state one head is best. Some men vnwilling benefit their land. Fooles set in office, doe their sple es e e le: And meaning well, m st h t the common-weale. Some vnawares their countries good pro erre. All earthly kingdomes, euen as men m st perish. Kingdomes are rul'd but badly, where the base Will checke the chiefe that sit in highest place. No state stands sure, but on the grounds of right. Realmes neuer get by chaunge, but paine and losse. When lawes are ma e, they ought to be obey'd, And rulers willes with reuer nce to be weigh'd Wisdome and care are kingdomes chiefest prop . Rude multitudes are kingdomes ouerthrow. By nature, man vnto the wo st i bent, If wholsome statutes stay not his inten . Innocent men are common-weale b st treasure. Innocence makes kingdoms florish more than arms. That kingdome ought of right to be destroy'd, Which once was vertues lower, now vices weed. Wise princes are their kingdomes con o ters. Vniust ex ons killes a common-weale. No greater da nger to a common-wealth, Than when vnskilf ll ▪ ide her powers. Kingdomes are nothing el e but common care. Where tools b are r le the common wealth decaies▪ In calme a many see how gin, But few respect the en and em lie. Where wi m n are neglected, kingdomes perish. No n ar r kinred can be, than our countrey. The e no common-weales more loose and bad, T a w e e the c m n ue most libertie. Our countrey, parents▪ kin, claime part in vs. Our countries loue ought be most deare to vs. And ties of common-weales d ay, b il ing , and carel sse heads beare sway. Where any may li e well, that is his countrey. Remembrance of ou countrey is most sweet. In common-weales such should be honour'd most, As shew their care both insterne warre and peace. countrey first by nature claimeth vs. t is the death in cause of common-weale. The gouernment of common weales and state, Will (without wi dome) soone he ruinate. Reward and punishment are kingdomes keyes. Peace in a common-wealth is mellodie. There's nothing c n impresse so deare constraint, As countries cause and common foes disclaine. Men of desert, their countrey least esteemes. Discretion best doth rule a common-weale. That kingdome may be counted fortunate, Where no man liueth by anothers sweat. Seditious heads disturbe the common good. Vnruly members soone should be lopt of. Similies on the same subiect. AS spring and Autumne hazard health by chaunge, So nnouations harme a common-wealth. Looke how the body void of members is, Euen so are kingdomes dispossest of lawes. As ships in tempests need all helping hands, So in a kingdome none must idlely stand. As many Elements one temper frame, So diuers mens endeauours helpe the state. As from the heart all members haue their life, So from the common-wealth comes each mans good. As Captaines are the eyes to lead their men, So kings are Load-starres to their common-weales. Examples likewise on the same. VLysses lou'd so deare his natiue land. As for it, he refus'd to be immortall. Aglaurus to redeeme his countries peace, From Athens walls himselfe threw headlong downe. Faire Iphigenia for her kingdomes good, Made willing sacrifice of her owne blood. King Codrus, rather than his realme should perish, Gladly did runne vpon his foe-mens swords. Xenophon did thinke them vnworthie life, That made no conscience of the common-wealth. He that denyes to die in countries cause, Deserues (saith Tullie ) hate of all good men. Of Nobilitie. Nobilitie, is a sir-name or praise, Which to our selues by vertue we doe raise. A Noble nature no mishap can daunt. Vertue feeds scorne; and noblest honour, shame. A noble mind doth neuer dread mischaunce. That which in me ne men we call patience, In noble breasts, is pale, cold cowardise. Noblenes neuer stoupes to seruile feare. A noble heart doth still contemne despaire. Oft noble deeds by falshood are desac'd. Good gis are sometim s giuen to men past good: And noblesse stoop s o t times beneath his blood, Our vertues make vs noble, nothing else. Nobilitie from kinred is but bor owed. It is thine owne des ts nnobles thee. He is not noble, but most basely ed, That ransacks tombes, and doth d ace the dead, A noble nature is to all men kind. Nobilitie cont neth latterie. A noble resolution makes men iust. Nobilitie is best continued, those conu nient meanes that made it rise. In boldest actions, noblesse shines most cleare. He is not noble, beares a nigga ds mind. True nobl sse is a signe of happie life. In chaunge of streames ch fish makes shif to liue, And euery place a noble mind content . Nobilitie (to bad men) is reproch. To vertuous men, nobilitie brings glorie. Nothing are nobl ti es worth, if life be bad. If noblenesse ge b t a minutes sla e, An hundred yeares s ant makes it well againe. Truth is the title of true noblenesse. 'Tis vertue only giues nobilitie. In vertues loue no noble mind dismayes. Faire speech, with vsage affable and kind, Wipes malice out of any noble mind. Much babbling doth offend a noble re. A noble nature is religious. Pouerties best friend, is the noble mind. Noble discents make vertue more diuine. Similies on the same subiect. AS none but Eagles gaze against the Sunne, So none but vertuous eyes discerne nobilitie. As credit from opinion often comes, So from desert ensues nobilitie. As bricks from clay haue their originall, So noblesse first rose from meane parentage. As grosse thicke clouds obscure the Suns faire light, So muddie crimes disgrace nobilitie. As bitter roots may yet yeeld pleasant fruit, So meane discent may bring forth noble minds. As in the barren grounds best gold doth grow, So poorest race s aines not true noblesse. Examples likewise on the same. CAmillus did expresse a noble mind, In safe returning t e al ri n youthes. Py us well found b iti s noble nature, When his Physicion would haue poyson'd him. Lysander in his famous vi to ies, Euer declar'd his minds tr noblenesse. Catilines wicked life disgraced him, And quite obscur'd his former noble race. The name of Noblenes (saith Cicero ) Must giue them place that by their vertue claime it. Plato affirmeth, that a noble heart Will not by base attempts once wrong it selfe. Of Honor & dishonor. Honour, is that the mind doth couet most: And no dishonour like that honour lost. HOnour once lost, can neuer b repair'd. Honor, ambitious womens sexe doth please. It is no honour to be Princes heires: When we can boa t▪ but only birth is theirs. Their fall is great, that from high honour slide. Honour is least, where oddes appeareth most. Honour was first ordained for no cause, But to see right maintained by the lawe . To honour, beautie is a due by right. Die rather, then doe ought dishonour yeelds. True loue doth alwaies bring forth bourteous deeds, And in good minds desire of honour reeds, It is more honour to preserue, than s ill. Who cheapneth honour, must not stand on price. Fie on the fawe, for which good same is sold, Or honour with indignitie emba 'd. Honour is grounded on the tickle Ice. No kingly vaile can couer villanie. An honourable graue is more esteem'd, Than the polluted close of a king. No scepter serues dishonour to excuse. No subtill plea reuokes dishonours error. Pr fi e with honour still must be commixt, Or else our actions are but scandalous. Honour and enuie are companions. Honour is purchas'd by the deeds we doe. To frustrate them that but expect their due, Doth ill beseeme an honourable mind. On generall bruit, honour doth most depend. With painfull oyle is honour soonest found. Honour will hardly fellowship endure, Nor neuer Crowne corriuall could abide. Some honour liues in honourable spoile. 'Tis honour to forgiue a yeelding foe The mightier man, the mightier is the thing: That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate. Daunger hath honour; great dessignes their fame. Honour's a thing without vs, not our owne. It's honour to depriue dishonour'd li e▪ The one will liue, the other being de d. Honour by oath, ought right poore Ladies wrongs. Honours are smoakes, and dignities haue c es. Honour and beautie in the owners armes, Are weakely fortrest from a world of armes. Honour relieues a foe as well as friend. It is no honour to be swol e with pride. Honour doth scorne dishonourable thoughts. The v tor can no honour iustly claime, To loose the meanes that should aduance the same. Where hate beares soueraigntie, there honour di s. He that regards his honour, will not wrong it. Disquiet honour hurteth more than helpes. Honour and wealth oft times too dearely cost The death of all, so altogither lost. Honour doth euer iudge with lenitie. No greater honour than a quiet mind. Honour's no priuiledge against defame. Alwaies doth great employment for the great, Quicken the blood, and honour still beget. Honour, to many is more sweet than life. Honour is fruit of vertue and faire truth. Honour once gone, bids farewell to all hope. The inward touch that wounded honour beares, Findeth no helpe, till death cure the disease. Honour and glorie labours in mistrust. Honour is first step to disquietnesse. How hard is princely honour to attaine? High honour▪ not long life, the treasure is, Which noble mindes without respect defend. Dishonest deeds no honour can attaine. The praise of honour is not alwaies blood. Neuer retire with shame, bright honour saith, The worst that can befall thee, is but death. Honour doth scorne the height of Fortunes pride, Great honours youth may loose it selfe in age. Report, that seld to honour is true friend, May many lies against true meaning mint. No honour comes by spilling aged blood. Who seekes for honour, lingers not his time. Vilde is that honour, and the title vaine, The which true worth and honour did not gaine. Honour doth hate with base delights to dwell. Honour helpes nothing where contentment wants. He that contends with th'inferiour sort, May with dishonour reape but bad report. Honour is worthlesse in a wretched state. High honour cryes reuenge vpon his foes. No death or hell can damnifie thine honour, So long as reasons arme vpholds thy banner. Who reach at honour, spurne at beauties baits. Honour is like a vaine, yet pleasing dreame. Honour deckes learning that with honour reares it. Similies on the same subiect. AS fairest blossoms soone are nipt with frost, So honours pride by fortunes frownes are c ost. As goodly trees that yeeld no fruit are bad, So beautcous bodies (honour-lesse) as bad▪ As shadowes are the flectest things that be, So honours haue the like inconstancie. As raine in haruest doth but little good, So fooles for honour be are no likelihood▪ As he that climbes aloft may quickly fall, So honours seat is not the fu 'st of all. As euery crowne fits not a conque our, So honour not agrees with euery one. Examples likewise on the same. NEstor rehearst his honourable deed , That Hectors combat might be vnd ane. Leonidas to honour E tich s, Led him from forth the daunger of the fight▪ Pericles being requested to sw are false, Replyed: That honour would not suffer him. Agesilaus vrg'd to giue sentence wrong, Said: But for honour he could easily doe it. Parmenides, his schollers did instruct: No wound was comparable to dishonour. Cleobulus condemn'd that citie quite, Where honour was not held in high esteeme. Of Councell, &c. Councell and good aduise is wisdomes square, And most auailing to the life of man. COuncell doth mitigate the greatest smarts. In publicke shame, oft counsell seemes disgrac'd. That counsell euermore is held most fit, Which of the time doth due aduantage take. They that thriue well, take counsell of their friends. Vntroubled night giues counsell euer best. With grauest counsell all must be directed▪ VVhere plainest shewes are openly suspected. All wounded minds good counsell helpeth most. With patient counsell thirst is not appeas'd. A kingdomes greatnesse hardly can he sway, That wholsome counsell will not first obey. Direct not him, whose way himselfe will choose. Oft long debated counsels hinder deeds. In vaine be counsels, statutes, humane lawes, VVhen chiefe of counsell pleads the vniust cause. Ne're grieue his harme that would not be aduis'd. Friends by aduise may helpe ech other much. Alway too late comes counsell to be heard, Where will doth mutinie with wits regard. The sicke man may giue counsell to the sound. The wisest men (in need) will list aduise. When greene deu se by graue aduise is stayed: A world of harmes are openly displaied. Who vseth counsell, s not soone deceiu'd. A worldly mans aduise is daungerous. Time, and fit place, giues alwaies best aduise: For what comes out of season's out of price. Aduise is quickly giuen, not ta'ne so soone. No man so wise, but he may counsell want. Ost times the counsell of a very friend, Appearing good, may faile yet in the end. Councell con oundeth doubts, dissolues denials. Afflicted hearts, all counsels doe deferre. Counsell vnto a carelesse man applyed, Is like a charme vnto an Adders eare. The wise accept of counsell, fooles will not. The carelesse man is full of wretchednesse. Counsell vnto it selfe most honour drawes. Wounds oft grow desperate, and death doth end, Before good councell can the fault amend. Aduise bids quench a sparke before it slame. Counsell best curbs doting affections. Where sound aduise and wholsome counsell want , Trees hardly prooue, but perish in the plants. Counsell, the iealous scorne, and will not learne. What boots complaining, where's no remedie? It cannot be, but such as counsell scorne, Shall in their greatest need be l t forlorne. In euils, counsell is a comfort chiefe. Good counsell oft times cheares dispai ing mindes. The sicke that loathes to listen to his cure. To die the death for lacke of helpe is sure. Good counsell may be call'd a right good worke. Courteous aduise, calmes stormes of miserie. Similies on the same subiect. AS wise men scorne not to accept aduise. So fooles hold counsell not of any price. As young rash heads without discretion run, So old mens counsels tell what should be done. As gentle showers doe cause the earths encrease, So mild aduise assures the conscience peace. As treachers treasons prooue against themselues▪ So euill counsell oft turnes on it selfe. As flowers in their prime haue sweetest sente, So in distresse counsell best shewes it selfe. As foes by sleering seeke each others harme, So friends by councell gaine each others good. Examples likewise on the same. TO Plutarch did the Emperour Traiane write, Only to counsell him what he should doe. The Emperour Galba said; All his mishaps Ensued, because he would not be aduis'de. Demetrius of Maccdon would say: Reprooue me, when I councell doe refuse. Verres had neuer fallen in miscrie, But that good counsell alwaies he despis'd. Solon bad wealthie Croesus be aduis'd, For counsell was more worth than all his wealth. Philo enus the Poet did esteeme Nothing so precious as discreete aduise. Of Iustice, &c. Iustice is that which giueth equall right, Punisheth wrong, keepes law in publicke sight. IVstice and order keepe vp common-weales. Iustice allowes no warrant to de raud. Iustice giues euery man that is his owne. Good Iustices are common weales Phisitions. Honour and ame hold vp mild iustice traine, And heauenly hopes in heart she doth retaine. Wrong must haue wrong, & blame the due of blame. A world of wrongs can not weigh downe one right. Men are content to leaue right, being distrest. Weak doth he build, that fenceth wrong with wrong▪ To a strong man, and of most pu ssant might, He giues him more that takes away his right▪ What wrong hath not continuance out worne? Yeares makes that right, which neuer was s borne. That right is wrong, ill sought and got with poile. Proud, rich, and poore▪ to ustice are alike. Princes ne're doe themselues a greate wrong, Than when they hinder iustice, or prolong With loue and law is iustice ioyned still. Wrong richly clad, to blindnesse seemeth right. To pay each with his owne, is right and due. In suffering harmes great wrongs are offered. Where iustice swayes in time of peace and quies, It fits not shifters fishing, nor their diet. Right often-times by might is ouer-raught. Men higly wronged, feare not to displease. True noble minds doe still respect the right Iustice, not pittie, fits a princes mind. Where our owne wrongs doe worke our ouerthrow, In vaine we hope to weare it out with woe. Men arm'd with iustice, know not how to feare. Companion to offence, is punishment. The punishment of some, reformeth all. Speed doth loue right, but long delay is wrong. Innocence, concord, friendship, and godlinesse: These doe support iustice and equitie. Right maketh roo e somtimes where weapons faile. Accusers should themselues be innocent. Iustice forbids to slay them that submit. The foe doth iustly kill where prince for sakes. The iudge himselfe doth for condemned stand, Where guilt goes free with pardon in his hand. Possession is no plea where wrong insults. They that haue part in wrongs▪ haue part in griefes. Wrongs are remembred while the scarres remaine. A lawlesse peere, by law deserues to die. Iustice is vertues badge, and staffe of peace: Maintaining honour in her rich increase. True iustice payes the bloodie home their hire. Blood spilt by wrong, calls vengeance scourge by right. Seldome aduantage is in wrongs debar'd. Who soweth wrong, is sure to reape the same. All runnes to wracke and ruine, where selfe-kind, From selfe-same kind with-holdeth mutuall right. Delay in punishment no pardon is. A publicke fault craues open punishment. Who flyeth iudgement, shewes his guiltinesse. Equitie iudgeth mildly, law seuerely. Wrongs done vs, we are sparing to forgiue: Not minding, we by mercie onely liue. Wrong is the triall of true patience. Law with extremitie is extreame wrong. Similies on the same subiect. AS hardest mettals in the fire is melt, So greatest sinnes by iustice soone are felt. As sinne at first is sweet▪ but after sower, So Law lookes sterne, yet shewes not all her power. As from worst maladies best med'cines come, So are best lawes from lewdest manners form'd. As citties with their walles are fenced round, So are good minds with right and equitie. As he that wanteth reason is no man, So who liues lawlesse may be tearm'd a beast. As thirstie soules doe seeke some long lookt spring, So wrongs receiu'd with right, doe comfort bring. Examples likewise on the same. PHilip, when any made complaint to him, Stopt one eare, till the other part were heard. Aristides so loued Equitie, That he of all men was sir named IVST. Iunius the Consull so respected right, As his owne sonnes he did condemne to death. Cato Censorius was so iust and firme, As none durst mooue him in a naughtie cause. Iustice (saith Seneca ) is the law of God, And bond of all humane societie. Deuotion and good will ( Lactantius saith) Ioynes vs to God, as iustice doth to men. Of Pollicie. Pollicie is a wise and discreet care, For King, for countrey, and for common good. POllicie oft religions habit weares. What wants in strength, is holpe by pollicie. Small pollicie hath prowesse learn'd, to spill Much blood abroad, to cut her owne with skill. Small harme, pretending good, is pollicie. Oft times hath reaching pollicie deuisde, A cunning clause which hath himselfe surpriz'd. A wrastlers sl ights oft counter-checketh force. Strength, wanting wit and pollicie to rule, Is soone cast downe, and prooues himselfe a foole. 'Tis pollicie to feare a powerfull hate. Counsell in any kingdome pollicied, More worthie is than warre, more dignified. No pollicie where lambes doe lyons lead. It is the summe of perfect pollicie. To worke securely with vulgaritie. Who builds on strength, by pollicie is stript. More worthie 'tis, by wit and pollicie To compasse honour, than by progenie. Pollicie is to prowesse chiefest friend. Where power and pollicie doe often faile, Respect of gold both conquers and commaunds. The very poorest hath his pollicie. Men may in conquest benefit themselues, As much by pollicie as power and might. All pollicie is soone destroy'd by pride. Pollicie oft subdues where valour failes. Courage that hath nor wit nor pollicie, Flyes like a slaue before his enemie. A well-establisht pollicie is best. Societie must be preseru'd by pollicie. Similies on the same subiect. AS dull neglect is follies chiefest badge, So quicke conceit is signe of pollicie. As carelesse heads doe soonest harme a state, So pollicie fore-sees before too late. As cunning crafts-men are commended most, So Realmes of polliticke aduisers boast. As subtiltie is slye to helpe it selfe, So pollicie is wise to shield it selfe. As daungers felt are worse than others fear'd, So pollicies not executed, most offend. As counsell is some comfort in distresse, So pollicie employ▪ lls wretchednesse. Examples likewise on the same. L curgus by his polliticke aduise, eform'd the Lacedae on mangled state. Numa Pompilius discreete pollicie, Made Rome to flourish in her royaltie. Deucalions pollicie be riended Greece, And brought the people to religious awe, Sc p oes Lieuten n nam'd Pol us Was highly praised for his pollicie. Byas did much commend the gouernment, Where the chiefe heads were wi e and polliticke. Plutarch thought, cities could as ably st nd Without foundation , as no pollicie. Of Peace & Concord. Peace is the ground of kingdoms happinesse: Nource of true concord, loue, and all encrease. PEace is great riches in the poorest state. Men know not peace, nor rightly how to deeme it, That first by warre haue not been taught 'esteems it. Peace hath best biding in a setled mind. Peace brings in pleasure, pleasure breeds excesse: Excesse procureth want, want workes distresse. Peace doth depend on reason, warre on force. You whose faire calme make neighbors storms seeme sore, Try you your tydes, before you trust the shore. Peace, all extreames concludeth with remorse. Sourges may rise on suddaine ere we thinke, And whiles we swimme secure, compell vs sinke. Mild calm'd fac't peace, exceeds blood-thirsting war. Warre is ordain'd for nothing else but peace: And perfect peace is end of bloudie warre. Peace flourisheth where reason beareth sway. Peace still is honest, humane, and vpright: When warre is brutish, foste ed by despight. Concord of many, makes an vnitie. Concord makes small things mightily encrease: Where discord makes great things as fast decrease. True peace, is peace with vertue, warre with vice▪ In peace, for warre let vs so well prouide, As in each state, no harme doe vs betide. Peace from a Tyrants mouth, is treacherie. Deare and vnprofitable is the peace, That's purchast with expence of guiltlesse bloud. The weight of peace, is easie to be borne. They iustly doe deserue the sword of warre, That wilfully withstand faire offered peace. To flye from peace, is seeking selfe-decay. Peace asketh no lesse wisdome to preserue is, Than valour was bestowed in getting it. Peace still succeeds, what euer drifts withstand. That's more esteem'd, obtain'd by peace-full words, Than any thing atchieu'd by violence. State-stabling peace, brings froward minds in fashion. Similies on the same subiect. AS members knit in one, doe maintaine life: So states combin'd in peace, doe nourish loue. As desolation dwelles where discord is, So where is concord, liues all happinesse. As Laurell euer crownes the Conquerour, So peace becommeth any Emperour. As they that seeke their harme, deserue to haue it, So they which flie from peace, should neuer feele it. As warre cuts deepe, and maketh mightie wounds, So peace like soueraigne balme doth cure them all. As griefe is cognisance of falling states, So peace is glorie of faire shining sway. Examples likewise on the same. FOrtie yeeres keeping Ianus temple shut, Gaue testimonie of the Romanes peace. Numa (the second king of Rome) so loued peace, That all his reigne, was neither warre nor strife. Archidamus, wrote to the Elians Nothing but this; Peace is a goodly thing. The cause why Cato did oppose himselfe Against great Caesar; was, For breach of peace. Tullie saith: Let vs so begin our warre, That afterward we may be sure of peace. Phocion being askt; What fitted kingdomes best? Replyed: A little warre, to win long peace. Of Warre. Warre is most lawfull for a countries good, To purchase peace with least expence of blood. WArre makes the conquer'd yeeld, & serue with hate. Where warre once enters, ruine doth ensue. Great is the h rror of intestine broyles, When with our blood we fat our natiue soyles. Warre makes the victour to desire debate. A Captaine talketh best of bo s ious warre. Looke where the sword for pittie leaues to s ill, Pittie that Iustice s c begin to ill. Warre leaues naught sure, though we presume to choose. Bloodshed by bloodshed still is nou ished. Warre should not fill kings ll es with mo e: Nor perill come whe 'tis least thought vpon. In vaine are armes, when heauen becomes our foe. Warres ag hath no respect of pietie. It is a meritorious faire dessig e, To chase mi stice with reuengefull armes. Vertue may somtimes be surpriz'd by number. Valour and Art, are both the sonnes of Ioue. Who would not be a Souldiour in that band, Which (ere it fight) holds victorie in hand? Arte is Nobilities true register. Nobilitie, Arts champion still is nam'd. Honour doth say: That if shee chaunce to faile, The braue attempt the shame shall counteruaile. Learning, is fortitudes right kalender. Faire fortitude is learnings saint and friend. Honour shields learning from all iniurie, And learning, honour from blacke infamie. A crowne twixt breethren breeds contention. Valour in greatest daunger shines most bright. If thorow rashnes valour doe get honour. We blame the rashnes, but reward the honour. Well doth he die, that dies gainst countries foes. An honourable buriall is the field. He that hath once sustain'd the bullets wound, What need he feare the Canons harmlesse soun ? Blood, nought but sin; war, nought but sorrows yeeld. Sad are the sights, bitter the fruits of warre. Those that are brought vp in the bro les of realmes, Thinke it best fishing still in troubled streames. A martiall man ought not be fancies slaue. Men vs'd to warre, are greatest foes to peace. The smallest iarres if they be suffered run, Breed wrath and warre, yea death ere they be done. No warre is right, but that which lawfull is. The sword must mend what insolence did marre. Who knowes to win by sword, can iudge of wit: For without wit, no warre can prosper well. On little broyles ensueth bloodie warre. Who best doth speed in warre, small safetie sinds. The best obseruing prouidence in warre, Still thinketh foes much stronger than they are. Vn naturall warres where subiects braue their kings▪ A bloodie conquest staines the captaines praise. A brauer mind hath he that fights for more, Than he that warres for that he had before. His flight is shamefull that flyes victorie. Warres conquerours, in loue doe seldome pine. When warre and troubles doe s most molest, Then wicked persons euer prosper best. In warie and loue, courage is most requir'd A coward Captaine marres the souldiours fight. Armes, but in great extreames, doe neuer serua To reconcile and punish such a swerue. A valiant leader, makes faint cowards fight. By armes, Realmes, Empires, Monarchies are wonne. Let warre his boast of dignitie surcease, And yeeld to wisdome, which seekes all encrease. To armes, lawes, iustice, magistrates submit. Artes, Sciences, before Armes triumphes sit. The plough-mans hope, and husbands thriftie illage. Oft times become the wastfull souldiours pillage. Vnciuill warre, all iustice doth diuorce. Basely he fights, that warres as others bid. It's much to conquer, but to keepe it then, Is full as much, if not a great deale more. Booke-expert warriours ne're are truly bold. Warre for our countrie is a holy fight. Those wiser heads that know the scourge of warre, Seeke safest meanes to mitigate the iarre. Warre rightly handled, is most excellent. Who fights for crownes, set life and all too light. To keepe our countrie safe from any harme: For warre or worke, we either hand should arme. Warre was ordain'd to make men liue in peace. Warre doth defend our right, repulse our foes. In warre they are esteem'd as Captaines good, That win the field with least expence of blood. Neuer vse armes where money may preuaile. Th'effects of warre, are couetous desires. Let desperate men and Russians thirst for blood: Win foes with loue, and thinke that conquest good. In warre, let female honour be preseru'd. Ambition is the chiefest cause of warre. He that was woont to call his sword to aid: It's hard with him, when he must stand to plead. Necessitie makes warre to seeme most iust. Many may talke of warre, but few conclude. Similies on the same subiect. AS Earth and Fire were first in this worlds frame, So Warre and Peace are chiefe in kingdomes rule. As cunning Pilots best can guide the ship, So expert Captaines aptest manage warre. As peace may suffer wrong, and be abus'd, So warre is harmelesse, if but rightly vs'd. As pleasant talke makes short the longest way, So valiant leaders whet on dullest mindes. As lingring sicknesse most offendeth life, So quicke dispatch in warre is glorious. As rusticke notes likes any loutish swad, So drummes and trumpets please a Souldiour best. Examples likewise on the same. PApyrius Cursor punisht Fabius, Because vniustly hee commenced warre. The Emperour A relius gaue strict charge, That no man should abuse himselfe in warre. The worthie Souldiour Bell zarius, Would neuer warre but on some speciall cause. Traiane was neuer vanquished in warre, Because he would not meddle, but in right. Warre makes men cruell, so saith Sen a: But peace prouo eth them to gentlenes. Plato affirmed, warre was excellent When it did ha me to none but enemies. Of Fame and Infamie. Good Fame is that which all men ought desire: But euill Fame is bad mens worthy hire. FAme neuer finds a tombe t'enclose it in. Fame neuer sloops to things are mean or poore. No fame doth follow any vniust act. To fames rich treasure, Time vnlockes the doore, Which angrie Fortune had shut vp before. Fame neuer lookes so low as idle drones. Base Enuie still will barke at sleeping same. Life is not lost that brings eternall fame. All perils ought be lesse, and lesse all paine, In open field, than the deare losse of fame. Dearer is loue than life, and fame than gold. The path is sweet which daunger leads to fame. Fame being once foil'd, incurable the blot. Our deeds in life to worth cannot be rated: In death our life with fame euen then is dated. Fame is not subiect to authoritie. Fame neuer prosi eth a wicked man. Infamie hath no power to hurt the good. Thy same defa 'd, or toucht with any staine: Being once supplanted, neuer growes againe. Fame is a speedie herald to beare newes. A good report, in deepest darknesse shines. Good life is readiest way to purchase same. If sp tl sse reputation be away. M n ar but guilded loame, or ainted day. Fame, by our ertuous actions is maintain'd. Rumours soone rais'd, decay; but same stands fume. A man can haue no sweeter friend than fame. Fame, not suppos'd to was e, but grow by wa ing: (Like snow in riuers falne) consumes by lasting. Couet not same, without great care to keepe it. No like mishap, as to be inmous. Fame, that the liuing saues, reuiues the dead. Fame hath two wings; the one of false report: The other hath some plumes of veritie. No law can quit, where fame is once endighted. Fame is the ioy and life of valiant minds. Preferre sharpe death before infamous life. The chiefest thing a princes fame to raise. Is, to excell those that are excellent. Glorie doth neuer blow cold pitties fire. There's nothing can be done, but fame reports. To know too much, is to know nought but fame. Let not proud will hold vp thy head for fame, When inward wants may not expect the same. Fame dyes with them that all their honour waste. Fame, bad concealer of our close intenrs. Fame got by follie, dyes before it liues. Fame with her golden wings aloft doth flie, Aboue the reach of ruinous decay. He liueth long enough, dies soone with fame. Where fame beares sway, there Cupid will be bold. Good fame is better than a crowne of gold. Similies on the same subiect. AS thunder nor fierce lightning harmes the Bay, So no extremitie hath power on fame. As precious stones (though set in Lead) will shine, So fame in poorest corners will appeare. As earth producing salt, brings nothing else, So vertue, seeking fame, craues nothing else. As many voices make the consort sweet, So many vertues doe confirme true fame. As pride is enemie to good report, Solowly thoughts doe lead the way to fame. As sight receiues his splendour from the aire, So fame from vertue doth deriue her selfe. Examples likewise on the same. PVblicola wonne fame for leading armes: And Solon by his ciuill actions. The fame Milciades got at Marathon, Would not permit Thems stocles to sleepe. Fabius did by his vertues get such fame, As Maximus was added to his name. Lysimachus was famous through the world, Because he kill'd a Lyon in his youth. Seneca saith; Fame should be followed, Rather than coueted by fond desire. No man (saith Cicero ) is learn'd and wise, But fame must needs attend his actions. Of Praise, &c. Praise is the hyre of vertue, for those partes That well deserue it, both in eyes and hearts. PRaise is but smoake that sheddeth in the skie. Men for their owne deeds shall be prais'd or blam'd. True la d proceeds by the report of other: Of more esteeme, when we our selues it smoother. The peoples voice, is neither shame nor praise. Safetie may breed delight, not nourish praise. Hard words doe discommend some men to day, Yet praise tomorrow with all might they may. Many will praise in words, but spight in workes. Chiefe praise consisteth in contented life. It's better to be praised for a truth, Than for a leasing to be honoured. To praise vnworthie men, is flatteri . Saue vertuous deeds, there's nothing merits praise. When men doe praise themselues immoderately, Makes other sentence them with obloquie. Praise stirres the mind to great and mightie things. Praise nourisheth true vertue where it sprang. The benefits of peace deserue more praise, Than all the cunningst stratagenis of warre. Praise maketh labour light, enricheth hope. When others praise thee, best to iudge thy selfe. Praise is a poyson to ambitious men, Because it makes them out ran honestie. In doing that we ought, deserues no praise. By counterfeited vertue seeke no praise. In vaine we seeke the idle smoake of praise, Since all things by antiquitie decayes. All good things haue preheminence in praise. Neuer praise that which is not commendable. Oft those whome princes patronage extold, Forget themselues, and what they were of old. Condemne not that deserueth praise by due. An ill mans praise, is praise for doing ill. Who striues to gaine inheritance of aire, Leaues yet perhaps but begg ie to his heire. Helping the poore, deseru th double praise. Vertue begetreth praise; praise, honours height. Nothing of more vncertaintie than praise: For one dayes gift, another robs vs of. An open praise deserues a secret doubt. Too much commending, is a heauie load. He that commends a man before his face, Will scant speake well of him behind his backe. Bad nature by good nurture mended, merits praise. Abasing worthie men, argues selfe-praise. It is more worthie praise to keepe good fame, Than the bare stile, or getting f the same. Our elders praise, is light vnto our liues. Be not too rash in discommending any. Be not too hastie in bestowing praise: Nor yet too slow when due time calls for praise. A mans owne praise, is publicke infamie. Honest attempts can neuer want due praise. Similies on the same subiect. AS shadowes on our bodies doe attend, So praise doth wait on vertue to the end. As praising make the Peacocke spread her taile, So men commended doe expresse themselues. As fooles in folly are not to be sooth'd, So wicked actions are not to be prais'd. As Cockes by crowing shew their victorie, So mens owne praises blab their obloquie. As niggards are discerned by their giftes, So mens commendings doe expresse their loue. As greatest praises fatten not thy fields, So much commending pleaseth not thy friend. Examples likewise on the same. THe noble Romane Titus Flaminius, Could not endure when any praised him. Caesar beholding Alexanders image, Wept, in remembring his exceeding praise. Pompey did count it praise enough for him, To set Tigranes in his throne againe. Agathocles condemned all vaine praise, And still confest himselfe a potters sonne. By vertue (saith Euripide ) get praise, For that will liue when time expires thy dayes. Solon said, All vaine-glorious men were fooles; And none praise-worthie, but the humble-wise. Of Friendship, &c. The summe of friendship is, that of two soules One should be made, in will and firme affect. TRue friends partake in either weale or woe. Faint-hearted friends, their succours long delay. A deare friends graue is a more heauie sight, Than all the feares wherewith death can affright. Of foes, the spoile is ill; farre more of friends. Who faileth one, is false, though true to other. That friendship can no length of time endure, Which doth se ill, or euill end procure. The truest friendship, is in equalitie. Likenesse in manners, makes best amitie. When equall might is vp vnto the chin, Weake friends become strong foes to thrust him in, Among kind friends, departing drinkes vp ioy. Better a new friend, than an auncient foe. Call him not friend, that sauours most of foe: Tea me him thy deaths-man, looke he prooue not so. Giue foes no oddes, nor friends vnequall power. Trust not to foes, if friends their credit loose. For friends if one should die, were rarely much: But die for foes, the world affoords none such. In base minds dwells friendship nor enmitie. No seruice will a gentle friend despise. Looke what abuse is offer'd to a friend, The shame and faule finds no excuse or end. To wrong a friend doth prooue too foule a deed, Foes often wake, when loyall friends doe sleepe. Faire louely concord, and most sacred peace, Doe nourish vertue, and make friendship fast. A stead fast friend is to be lou'd as life. Faint friends, when they fall out, prooue cruell foes. Those friends that loue the Sun shine of delights, Will flye the winter when affliction bites. True friendship at the first affront retires not. Most friends befriend themselues with friendships shew. Suspition is sedition mongst good friends, When eithers drift to others mischiefe tends. They kill, that feele not their friends liuing paine. Be enuied of thy foe, rather than pitied. More conquest is the gaining of a friend, Than the subduing of an enemie. He is too foolish that mistrusts his friend. In greatest need, a friend is best discern'd. We ought sometimes as well to reprehend, As praise the partie whome we count a friend. True friendship maketh light all heauie harmes. A friend in most distresse, will most assist. Who entertaineth many friends, doth loose The title of a true and stedfast friend. Men in their friendship, alwayes should be one. A hard attempt to tempt a foe for aid. Make all men our well-willers if we can, But onely chuse good men to be our friends. Small is that friendship table-talke will cracke▪ Requests twixt friends are counted as commaunds. To straungers let great proffers still be made: But to true friends vse sound and perfect deedes. Performance is in friendship held a dutie. No man should loue himselfe more than his friend. Foure things we ought supply our friend withall: Our perso , counsell, comfort, and ur goods. A friend is to a man another selfe. With euery one to shake hands, is not good. Who w teth f i nds to a e what he begins In lands faire off: gets not, although he winnes. A wise man takes not ech one as his friend. Prooue strangers to loue them, and not loue to prooue them. The man that makes a f iend of euery ir unger, Dis ards him not a aine without some danger. True friendship ought be free, like charitie. Opinion of vertue is the sount of friendship. In friendship this one difference is tryde: T ue f iends stand st, when as the gned slide. Who neuer had a foe, ne re knew a friend. Friendship admitteth not an angry frowne. A ue f rme f i will neuer sound retreat, Nor so op sail or ny storme of weather. Vn e, is A t es chiefest nc . Hazard displeasure to relieue a friend. True frien ips Sunne continual y doth last, And shines the clearer in the bitterst blast. They are no friends, that hazard them they loue. True friendship scornes confederacie with shame. In earnest, east, in quiet, peace or warre. Neuer presume to try thy foe too farre. Aduersi i doth best disclose a friend. Amitie stre heth not beyond the Altar. An open oe a man may soone preuent, B t a false friend, murders in blandishment. A feigned friend will quickly chaunge conceit. Ouer-much boldnesse makes men loose their friends. Whil'st things go well, friends alwaies will be neer thee, But sailing once, the dearest friends will feare thee. What death is life, when dearest friends are lost. It's good to haue a wise and discreete friend. No foe so fell, or cunning to escape, As is a friend, clad in a foe-mans shape. Often to trie our friends is profitable. Flatterie is friendships forme, but not the fruit. Many to those they should most friendship show, Doc lie in wait to worke their ouer throw. Suspition is the poison of firme friendship. Forgetfull fooles vnfriendly vse then friends. Of any foe, be re no gift thou take, Least to thy ruine it some entrance make. Follie respecteth latterers more than friends. Good natures inly grieue to trie their friends. No mortall fee so full of venemous sp ght, As man to man, when mischiefe he pretends, Begging at friends hands, is esteemed buying. Friends hide no coine, or secrets from their friends. Who sees their friends in want, and them despise: When they doe fall, neuer deserue to rise. True friends doe soone forget a friends offence. Scornfull and proud, are very perillous friends. He that intendeth giule, and thou findst so: No wrong thou doest, to vse him as thy foe. Where friends are knit in loue, there griefes are shar'd. Quicke promisers, slow doers, are slacke friends. Where many hearts doe gently sympathize In sacred friendship, there all blisse abounds. No friend like him whome no distresse can daunt. Happie is he that finds and feeles a friend. Similies on the same subiect. AS no calamitie can thwart true loue, So no mishap can separate firme friends. As wan of friends is very perillous, So talking friends doe prooue too tedious. As fire from heat cannot be separate, So true friends hearts will no way be disjoyn'd. As Physicke cures the secret'st griefes we haue, So friendship heales the hearts extreamest woes. As instruments are tun'd e're musicke's heard, So friends are tride ere they be firmely found. As exiles haue no comforts but their cares, So home-abiders haue no ioy like friends. Examples likewise on the same. C rus vpon his left side plac'd his friends, Because they should be neerest to his heart. and Caesar rather wished death, Than they should grow distrustfull of their friends. Cato this poesie caried in his Ring: Be friend to one, and enemie to none. Lu i ius seeing Brutus round engirt, Call'd himselfe B utus, that his friend might scape. Ph o , in despcrate furie sau'd his friend, Saying: For his cause was I made thy friend. Three thing (saith Tullie ) men should wish their friends: Health, good account, and priuiledge from need. Of Patience. Patience, is voluntarie sufferance Of hardest matters, for faire vertues sake. PAtience preuailes against a world of wrongs. What Fortune hurts, patience can onely heale. No ba shment can be to him assign'd, That hath a pa ient and resolued mind. The minds affliction, patience can appease. To be borne well, and die worse, breaketh patience. That life is only miserable and vile, Which from faire▪ patience doth it selfe exile. Patience doth passions alwaies mortifie. The minds distresse, with patience is relieu'd. They that loose halfe, with greater patience beare it, Then they whose all, is swallowed in confusion. For curelesse sores, pa ience is chiefest salue. Patience, all trouble sweetly doth digest. True patience can mili ly suffer wrong, Where rage and furie doe our liues defame. True patience is the prouender of fooles. Patience importun'd, doth conuert to hate. The strength to fight with death, is patience, And to be conquer'd of him, patience. The onely salue for wrong, is patience. Reuenge on fortune, is mild patience. Let such whome patience cannot moderate, Endaunger them that would endammage him. He is most valiant that is patient. No conquest can compare with patience. Patience is oft from princely seat puld downe, When bloodie minds doe s ssle for a crowne. Patience makes light, afflictions heauiest load. The shield of patience beares off all mishaps. Comfortlesse patience brings consumption. No sting hath patience, but a sighing griefe: That stings nought but it selfe without reliefe. The end of patience, is expect of promise. Patience beares that which care cannot redresse. A heauenly spirits hope, is patience. Similies on the same subiect. AS rage doth kindle still the fire of wrath, Patience to quench i , store of water hath. As fire impaires not gold, but makes it bright, So greatest wrongs by patience are made light. As physicke doth repaire decayed health, So patience brings true blessings to the soule. As water quencheth the extreamest fire, So patience qualifies the mightiest wrongs. As Diamonds in the darke are best discern'd, So patience is in trouble best approou'd. As angrie splenes are hastie in reuenge, So discreete soules brooke all with patience. Examples likewise on the same. WHat-e're mishap Darius did befall, Yet in his mind he was not moou'd at all. Marcus said, that pati nce Had holpe him more than any thing be side. Sylla endur'd reuilings patiently, And mildly yeelded his Dictator-ship. Mauritius moou'd not at his childrens death, Although he saw them slaine before his face. When Socrates was councel'd to reuenge, Said: If an Asse strike, shall I strike againe? In patience conflict, saith Euripides: The vanquisht doe exceed the vanquisher. Of Man, and Men. Man is a creature of such excellence, As all else was created for his vse. MAn in himselfe a little world doth beare. All other creatures follow after kind, But man alone is ruled by his mind. All men, to some peculiar vice encline. The greater man, the greater is the thing, Be it good or bad, that he doth vndertake. A man once stung, is hardly hurt againe. Fond is the man that will atte p great deeds, And loose the glorie that attends on them. Where ease abounds, men soone may doe amisse. Men doe not know what they themselues will be, When as more than themselues, themselues they see. The worth of all men by their end, esteeme. When men haue well fed, and the bloud is warme, Then are they most improuident of harme. Birds haue the aire, Fish water, Men the land. When from the heart of man ascends true sighes, From Gods diuinest spi it descendeth grace. The man that seekes his thraldome, merits it. Man of himselfe is as a barren field, But by the grace of heauen, a fruitfull vine. Men easily doe credit what they loue. The man that liueth by anothers breath: Looke when he dies, is certaine of his death▪ No man weighes him, that doth himselfe neglect. Men ought especially to saue their winnings In all attempts, els loose they their beginnings. Oft one mans sorrow doth another touch. The man vniust, is hopelesse fortunate: Quickely misse-led, but hardly reconcil'd. It grieues a man to aske, when he deserues. Men are but Fortunes subiects, therefore variable: And times disciples, therefore momentarie. Deuise of man, in working hath no end. There liues no man so seiled in content, That hath not daily somewhat to repent. Ech man must thinke, his morning shall haue night. Mens imperfections often-times are knowne, When they repine to thinke them as their owne. Man neuer takes delight to heare his fault. Men often iudge too well their owne deserts: When others smile to see their ignorance. Men honoured, wanting wit, are fruitlesse trees. Man is but meere calamitie it selfe. Man when he thinkes his state is most secure, Shall find it then both fickle and vnsure. Mans nature is desirous still of chaunge. To greatest men, great faults are incident. Mishaps haue power o're man, not he o're them. Similies on the same subiect. AS flowers by their sight and sente are knowne, So men are noted by their words and workes. As snow in water doth begin and end, So man was made of earth, and so shall end. As waxe cannot endure before the fire, So cannot vniust men in sight of heauen. As all things on the earth are for mans vse, So men were made for one anothers helpe. As Toades doe sucke their venime from the earth, So bad men draw corruption from foule sinne. As fooles erect their houses on the sands, So wise men doe rely their hopes on heauen. Examples likewise on the same. PHilip of Macedon was daily told: Remember Philip, thou art but a man. Cyrus held no man worthie gouernment, Except his vertues were to be admir'd. Those men did. Alcibiad s count safe, That kept their countries lawes vnchangeable. Timon was cal'd, the enemie to men, And would perswade them to destroy them-selues. What else is man (saith Pindaru ) but a dreame, Or like a shadow we discerne in sleepe? Homer cryed out: Man was most miserable Of all the creatures that the world contain'd. Of Women. Women are equall euery way to men, And both alike haue their infirmities. WOmen by men receiue perfection. Women and loue like emptie houses perish. Like vntun'd golden strings faire women are, Which lying lon vntoucht, will harshly iarre. Faire and vnkind, in women ill beseemes▪ Women are wonne, when they beginne to iarre. Griefe hath two tongues, and neuer woman yet Could rule them both, without ten womens wit. All women are ambitious naturally. In womens tongues is quickly found a rub. A womans will that's bent to walke astray, Is seldome chaung'd by watch or sharpe restraint. Ripe still to ill, ill womens counsels are. All things are subiect, but a womans will. 'Tis fast good will, and gentle courtesies Reclaime a woman, and no watching eyes. Women are most wonne, when men merit least. Women that long, thinke scorne to be said nay. Neuer as yet was man so well aware, But first or last was caught in womens snare. Find constancie in women, all is found. Women desire to see, and to be seene. Great vaunts doe seeme hatcht vnder Sampsons lockes, Yet womens words can giue them killing knockes. Women haue teares for sorrow and dissembling. Women allure with smiles, and kill with frownes. It is a common rule, that women neuer Loue beautie in their sexe, but enuie euer. Women with wanton eyes, haue wanton trickes. Vertue is richest dowrie for a woman, Though men can couer crimes with bold sterne lookes, Poore womens faces are their owne faults bookes. Women least reckon of a doting louer. What cannot women doe, that know their power? If womens hearts, that haue light thoughts to spill them Die of themselues: why then should sorrow kill them? No beast is fiercer than a iealous woman. Women oft looke, one to enuie another. A womans teares are falling starres at night, No sooner seene, but quickly out of sight. A womans fauour lasteth but a while. Two things, to be a woman, and a Queene. Women doe hold, 'tis ioyes life, lifes best treasure, Both to begin, and leaue to kisse at leisur Oft womens mercie, more than mens is seene. Some womens wits exceed all Art, in loue. A womans passions doth the aire resemble: Neuer alike, they sinne if they dissemble. Loue, women, and inconstancie ne're part. Blushes shew womens thoughts, and teach men wit. Those vertues that in women merit praise, Are sober shewes without, chast thoughts within. A womans heart and tongue, are relatiues. Women may fall, when there's no strength in men. Those women of their wit may iustly boast, That buy their wisdome by anothers cost. A womans mind is fit for each impression. High praises hammer best a womans mind. Thy wife being wise, make her thy secretarie: Else not, for women seldome can keepe silence. Women in mischiefe, are more wise then men. A womans tongue, wounds deeper than her eye. Constant in loue, who tryes a womans mind: Wealth, beautie, wit, and all in her doth find. Women are Natures wonder, louing Nature. Women doe couet most, what's most denyed them. Extreame are womens sorrowes, past redresse: Or so dissembled, not to be beleeu'd. A woman of good life, feares no ill tongue. Silence in women, is a speciall grace. Similies on the same subiect. AS none can tell a griefe but he that feeles it, So none knowes womens wrongs, but they that find them. As women most despise what's offered them, So to denie their minds, is worse than death. As a sharpe bridle fits a froward horse, So a curst woman must be roughly vs'd. As the best mettal'd blade hath iron commixt, So the best women are not free from faults. As readines of speech becomes a man, silence do h a woman best beseeme. As goodliest gardens are not void of weeds, So fairest women may haue some defect. Examples likewise on the same. IS rina, sometimes Queene of Scithia, With her sweet voice, made calme the rough swolne seas. Romane Cornelia was so eloquent, That to her they did daily sacrifice. Lachis of Athens, to her country-men Appointed lawes for ciuill gouernment. Queene Parisatis caus'd the Persian kings, To haue their buriall in rich tombes of gold. Plato held women in a familie, As needfull as a kingdomes gouernour. If nature doe desire her selfe to see, (Saith Plutarch ) women then her glasse may be. Of Ambition. Ambition is a humour that aspires, And slayes it selfe in seeking high desires. AMbition, with the Eagle loues to build. Ambition being once inur'd to raigne, Can neuer brooke a priuat state againe. Ambitious fauorites alwaies mischiefe bring. Th'aspirer once attain'd vnto the to , Cuts off those meanes where y himselfe got vp. Ambition yet tooke neuer lasting root. High aimes, young spirits, birth of loyall line: Make men play false, where kingdomes are the s a es. Th' ambitious will find right, or else make ight. It is ambitions sicknes, hauing much, To vexe vs with defect of that we haue. Might makes a title where he hath no right. Those men that commonly o're-looke too much, Doe ouer-see themselues, the r sta e is such. Ambitious minds, a world of wealth would haue. Ambitious minds to get a prince traine, Would afterward of beggers life be faine. Ambition, paine, and loue, brookes no delay. Lyons doe neuer cast a gentle looke On any beast, that would vsurpe their den. Who climbes too soone, oft time repents too late. Bloud and alliance nothing doe preuaile, To coole the thirst of hot ambitious breasts. Aspiring things are readie still to fall. Bruises are sooner caught by reaching high, Than when the mind is willing to sloope low. Many vsurpe, but most in mischiefe end. Fortune doth neuer grudge at them that fall: But enuie stings and biteth them that climbe. Aspiring thoughts led Phae on awry. Reware ambition, 'tis a sugred ill, That fortune layes, presuming minds to kill. Ambitious Icarus did climbe too high. Ambitions bold and true begotten sonne, Is quite spent in desire, ere hope be wonne. Gaze s on starres, oft stumble at small stones. Seldome can proud presumption be enthroan'd To liue esteemd; or die, to be bemoan'd. Ambition, no corriuall will admit. The man that doth presume aboue his state, In stead of loue, incurres but deadly hate. Highest attempts to low disgraces fall. Craft giues ambition leaue to lay his plot, And crosse his friend, because he sounds him not. Competitors the subiects dearely buy. Presuming will counts it high preiudice To be reproou'd, although by sound aduise. Beware ambition in felicitie. Such reaching heads as neuer thinke them well, After their fall, their owne mishaps may tell. High mounting Eagles soone are smitten blind. Ambitions dying, is great glorie wonne. Similies on the same subiect. AS breath on steele, as soone is off as on, So climbers are as quickly downe as vp. As nothing in substance is more light than aire, So nothing can out-goe ambitious thoughts. As winds being vp, doe blow more violent, So proud vsurpers tyrannise in height. As bad men grieue at good mens happinesse, So high aspirers grudge at lowlines. As powder fier'd, is but a suddaine flash, Euen so ambition is no more than smoke. As B ts doe flutter, not directly flie, So climbers aime at much, and misse of all. Examples likewise on the same. F ederic e the third, was by his bastard sonne Ambitious Manf o dispossest of life Geta murdered Antoni s his brother, Through his ambitious mind to rule alone. Crassus procur'd himselfe a shamefull death, Through his ambitious spight at Caesars fame. Marius, not satisfied with former praise, Through his ambition soone abridg'd his dayes. Plato would haue good men exalted still, But none that sauour'd of ambition. Saith Aristotle, kingdomes soone decay, Where pride, or else ambition beareth sway. Of Tyrants, &c. Tirants are kingdoms plagues, and good mens woe: Their owne destroyers, and soone ouerthrow. A Tyrants lookes breed terror after death. Oft in the childrens slaughters, fathers die. The man that once is strong in equitie, Will scorne th'austerest lookes of tyrannie. Tyrannie still strikes terror to it selfe. Death is the vtmost end of tyrannie. Those that in blood a violent pleasure haue, Seldome descend but leeding to the graue. Birth is no shadow to sterne tyrannie. Ladies and tyrants doe respect no lawes. When tyrannie is with strong aid supported, All iustice from ood minds is quite extorted. No tyrannie can force true fortitude. Tyrants are leaders to a many ills. A tyrant that hath tasted once of bloud▪ Doth hardly thrine by any other food. Tyrants will brooke no tearmes, or list dispute. Tyrants are torturers of honest soules. Words not preuaile, neither can fighes aduise, To mooue the heart that's bent to tyrannise. No fame consists in deeds of tyrannie. Tyrants are alwaies traitours to them-selues. To punish many for th'amisse of one, Most properly to tyrants appertaine. Where tyrants reigne, God help the land that while. It's worse than death, to liue a tyrants slaue. Tyrants being suffred, and not quail'd in time, VVill cut their throats that gaue them leaue to climbe. The smallest worme will turne, being trode vpon. The Doues will pecke in rescue of their brood. The sauage Beare will neuer li ke his hand, That spoiles her of her young before her face. By vniust deeds, a true prince growes a Tyrant. Nothing more abiect than a tyrant i . He that in bountie doth exceed himselfe, Becomes a tyrant fterward to others. Tyrants subdue by strength, maintaine in hate. Tyrants are Nobles scourge, the commons plague King as they ought, Tyrants rule as they list: The one to profit all, the other few. No peace, no hope, no rest hath tyrannie. One iniurie, makes not a tyra nie. Princes ou ht iu tly to defend their owne, Rather than t rant-like to conquer others. Who kings refuse, deserue a tyrant Lord. Vsurping rule is held by tyrannie. Tyrannie in a teacher is most vile: For o with loue, not rigour should be taught. Tyrants tread lawes and honour vnder foot. Subiects in yrant eyes, are held as slaues. Tyrants by armes, the i st referre their cause To due arbi rement of right and lawes. A tyrants reigne hath seldome permanence. Tyrants doe neuer die an honest death. Similies on the same subiect. AS kings doe rule by counsell and aduise, So tyrants by their will, and not by law. As want of riches makes a tyrant prince, So great abundance heapes vp wickednes. As boistrous winds doe shake the highest towers, So blood and death cuts off proud tyrannie. As enuie shooteth at the fairest markes, So tyrants leuell at tr princes liues. As forest tempests are in largest seas, So greatest euill ensues on tyrannie. As trees are alwaies weakest toward the top. So falleth Tyrants in their chiefest height. Examples likewise on the same. TH asillus teaching meanes of tyrannie, Was first enforst to tast thereof himselfe. Scyron threw others headlong in the sea, Till Theseus did the like by him at length. Caligula wisht Rome had but one head, That at one stroke himselfe might smite it off. Cyrus that neuer had enough of blood, Had afterward his head all drown'd in blood. The soules of tyrants, Plutarch doth affirme, To be compos'd of crueltie and pride. A tyrant seekes his priuate benefit And no mans else, as Seneca maintaines. Of Treason, &c. Treason is hated both of God and men, As such a sinne, as none can greater be. TReason hath no place where obedience is. Rebellion doth bewray corrupted nature. There is no treason woundeth halfe so deepe▪ As that which doth in prince bosoms sleepe. Rebellion springs of too much head strong will. The rebell shrinkes, where rule and order swayes. Kings pallaces stand open to let in The oothing traitour, and the guide to sinne. In darknesse dwels the blind rebellious mind. Traitours are loath'd, and yet their treason lou'd. They that gainst s ates and kingdomes doe coniure, Their head-long ruine none can well recure. Treason first workes ere traitors are e pied. Most bitter-sower doth foule rebellion taste. Bet me 'tis good to let the traitour die. o sparing ustice fee s iniquitie. All filthie floods flow from rebellions brinks. No vertue merits praise with treason toucht. No worthy mind by treason will assaile, When as he knowes h valour can preuaile. A factious Lord s ld benefits him-selfe. Who builds in blood and treason, builds vnsure. A troubled streame of puddle mixt with mi e, Doth quench the thirst of rebels h e desire. Men in seditions nour 'd, in factions liue. Shame, is the rightfull end of treache e. It's madnesse to giue way to treacherie, Without due vengeance to such iniurie. In carelesse trust is treason soonest found. Reuolted subiects, of them-selues will quaile. No greater spight, than basely be betra ed By such a one whome thou before hast made. Reuolt's a mischiefe, euer-more pernitious. Who nill be subiects, shall be slaues at length. Conuerse with treachers, looke for treacheri : Who deales with bad man, must haue iniurie. Conflict with traitors is most perillous. A traitor once, ne're trusted afterward. They that doe couet deadly to betray, By sweetest meanes first practise to entrap. No place is ase enough for any traitour. Time is the touch that treacherous minds doth try. Nothing auailes, strong bulwa kes, sence or towers: When treacherous foes all inward strength de ou s. Traitours are subiect to continuall feare. Traitours, like vipers, gnaw their countries bones. Similies on the same subiect. AS Iuie kills the tree embracing it, o traitours murder with their smoothest lookes. As euill sauours doe corrupt the aire, So treachers doe pollute a common-weale. As in faire weather greatest stormes arise, So in mild seasons, treason is most bold. As braunches too much loden quickly breake, So traitors too farre trusted, doe most harme. As too much rankenesse bends the stalkes of corne▪ So too much mildnesse whets the traitor on. As hawkes are lost by soaring ouer-high, So traitours perish in their chiefest hopes. Examples likewise on the same. THey that slew Caesar in the Senate-house, Perisht like traitours, neuer prospered. The traitours that great ompey did betray, With death did Caesar iustly guerdon them. Sylla to her owne father proou'd vntrue, And therefore felt desert accordingly. Lyciscus rotted aliue aboue the ground For his vile treason to th'Orcmenians. Th'Athenians would let none be buried, That had been traitours to the countrey. Tullie saith: Wise men not at any time Will trust a traitour or a faithlesse man. Of Enuie. Enuie is nothing els but griefe of mind, Conceiu'd at sight of others happinesse. ENuie is hand maid to prosperitie. Enuie let in, doth in more mischiefe let. Enuie doth cease, wanting to feed vpon. Enuious is he, that grieues his neighbors good. Enuie hath oft times eloquence in st e To serue his turne, than which he craues no more. Ill will too soone regardeth enuies cryes. Hee's most enuied, that most exceeds the rest. Promotions chaung'd, glorie is enuies marke. No sooner excellent, but enuied straight. Enuie doth vertue in such sort disgrace, It makes men foes to them they should embrace. Enuie to honour, is a secret foe. The fruits of enuie, is despight and hate. It's hate, which enui s vertue in a friend. Anger and enuie, are lifes enemies. ie liues with vs while our selues suruiue, And when we die, it is no more aliue. Let enuie with misfortune be contented. Honours is still a moare in ennies eye. Enuie cannot offend but such as liue. On dead mens vertues, enuie hath no power. Enuie in this point may be knowne from hate: The one is euident, the other hid. All poysoned thoughts, are enuies daily food. Enuie is friendships secret enemie. Enuie at other shoots, but wounds her selfe. It's bette: be enuied, than pitied. Enuie doth make the body ill dispos'd, And kills the colour of the countenance. Men enui us, by their manners are best knowne. Enuie doth often brag, but drawes no blood. Enuie like lightning in the darke is seene. Enuie is blind, and vertues mortall foe. Enuie doth scorne to cast her eye below: As proud ambition alwayes gazeth vp. As rust the iron, so enuie frets the heart. At good mens fatnesse, enuie waxeth leane. Enuie spots beauties colours with disdaine. Enuie will reach at them are farthest off. The enui us man is sed with daintie fare, For his owne heart is his continuall food. Enuie is mightie mens companion. Enuies disease proceeds from others good. Enuie at vertues elbow alwaies waits. The enuious man, thinkes others losse, his gaine It's better be a beggers mate in loue, Than in base enuie, fellow with a king. Enuie teares vp the dead, buries the quicke. Enuie speakes alwaies what comes next in mind. Glorie erects, what enuie casteth downe. Enuie is like a shaft shot from a bow, Which flies a while aloft, but lighteth low. The enuious an ne're spares to persecute. Hid enuie is more daungerous than knowne. When enuie winkes, then waiteth he most harme. If any man be good, he is enuied: If euill, then himselfe is enuious. Patience endures what euer enuie dare. An enuious neighbour is a double ill. Similies on the same subiect. As Bauens by their bands are easily knowne, So enuies lookes doe most disclose her selfe. As greatest floods haue alwaies quickest ebbes, So enuies heat is commonly soone cold. As rigour blasteth fancies fairest bloomes, So enuie doth the no lest man disgrace. As no disease with inward griefe compares, So nothing more than enuie wounds the mind. As fire not maintain'd is quickly out, So enuie not supplyed, dies of it selfe. As in the Cedar, wormes doe neuer breed, So in the wise, enuie can haue no power. Examples likewise on the same. PHilip was told, that men enuied him: Quoth he; I care not, I haue giuen no cause. Caligula had such an enuious heart, As he repin'd at all mens happinesse. Th'Athenians so enuied Themistocles, As they made verses in reproch of him, Pompey and Caesars enuie to each other, Can scant be matcht in any histories. Plutarch saith, enuie is damn'd sorcerie, And therefore witht it generally abhorr'd. Thucidides graunts, wise men may be enuied, Only to make their vertues shine the more. Of Lust. Lust, is the minds disturber, purses foe: The conscience wronger, and first step to woe. LVst oft is fill'd, but neuer satisfied. Lasciuious lust the sences doth deceiue. Where lust gets footing, shame doth soon ensue. Lust like a lanthorne sheweth through it selfe, The poysoned venime hid within it selfe. Lust puts the most vnlawfull things in vre. The Leachers tongue, is neuer void of guile. Lust liues by spoile, like theeues that rob true men. Lust makes obliuion, beateth reason backe: Forgette h shames pure lush, and honours wracke. The flames of lust doe from loues fewell rise. The fil h of lust, vncleannesse wallowes in. Lust gads abroad, desire doth seldome sleepe. Most sweet it is, swift same to ouer-goe: But vile, to liue in lusts blacke ouerthrow. Where lust is law, it booteth not to plead. Lust lacks no wings, when loue is fled away. Blind is base lust, false colours to descrie. Iustes Owle-sight eyes are dazeled with the light, Yet see too clearely in the darkest night. Loue surfets not, lust like a glutton dies. Loue is all truth, lust full of perjur'd lyes. Lusts winter comes ere sommer halfe is done. While lust is in his pride, no exclamation Can cur e his heat, or reine his rash desire. Lust being Lord, there is no trust in kings. Leud lust is endlesse, pleasure hath no bounds. As corne o're-growes by weeds, so feare by lust. All faire humanitie abhorres the deed, That staines with lust loues modest snow-white weede. Teares harden lust, though marble weare with drops. Faire loue, foule lust, are deadly enemies. Lust blowes the fire when temperance is thawed. Faire day discouers lustes obscurest wayes, And sheweth ech thing as it is indeed. The loue of lust is losse vnto our health. Lust led with enuie, dreads no deadly sinne. Sower is the case that from lusts root doth spring. Inchastitie is euer prostitute, Whose tree we loath, when we haue pluck the fruit. It is great vertue to abstaine from lust. Who followes lust, can neuer come to loue. Lust alwaies seekes the ruine of chaste loue. Better seueritie that's right and iust, Than impotent affections led with iust. Greatnesse doth make it great incontinence. No bondage like the slauish life to lust. Lust is a pleasure bought with after paine. The gate that opens to iniquitie, Is vnrestrained lust and libertie. Lust by continuance growes to impudence. Shame and disgrace attend vnbridled lust Adulterie is iniurie to nature. Where wic ed lust doth dwell in foule excesse, That is no house but for damn'd beastlines. Adult'rie is vnlawfull matrimonie. Adult'rie is despis'd among bruit beasts. Concupiscence doth violence the soule. Loue comforteth like Sun-sh ne after raine, But lust effect is tempest after Sinne. No beastlines like base concupiscense. Lust is the path way to perdition. Concupiscense leads on the way to death. Poore sillie flyes may teach great men be lust, And not to yeeld them selues a prey to lust. Lust is in age most loathsome, vile in youth. Lust makes vs couet things beyond our power. Lust cuts off life before the dated time. Lust neuer taketh ioy in what is due, But still leaues knowne delights to seeke out new. A man long plung'd in lust, is hard v purg'd. Slothfulnesse is the nourisher of lust. Similies on the same subiect. AS fire consumeth wood into it selfe, So lust drawes men into her deepest sinnes. A Sulphur being hot▪ is quickly fier'd, So lust vnb dled easily is prouokt As wanton thoughts are full of wanton speech, So leud conceits are fild with loose desires. As greedie minds encroch on other▪ right, So lust makes no respect of leud delight. As leprosie the members doth corrupt, So luxurie enuenometh the soule. As rauenous binds make no respect of prey, So all are apt that come in lusts foule way. Examples likewise on the same. Cleopatra had her brothers companie, Wronging thereby her husband & her selfe. Thalestris trauail'd five and twentie dayes, To lye one night with mightie Alexander. Claudius of his owne sisters made no spare. Sem ramis in lust desir'd her sonne. Nero slew Atticus the Romane Consull, That he might haue accesse vnto his wife. Aristotle saith, that lust mens bodies chaunge. And likewise breedeth madnesse in their soules. Hippocrates call'd lust the foule disease, Than which could be no worse infection. Of Pride, &c. Pride, is a puft vp mind, a swolne desire, That by vaine-glory seeketh to aspire. PRide, is the chiefe disgrace beautie can haue. Pride drawes on vengeance, vengeance hath no meane. Weake weapons doe the greatest pride abate. When pride but pointeth once vnto his fall. He beares a sword to stay him-selfe withall. Vaine-glorie neuer temperance doth retaine. Vaine-glorie fondly gazeth on the skies. Pride gapes aloft, and scorneth humble lookes. Pride is contemned, scorn'd, disdain'd, derided: While humblenesse of all things is prouided. Proud will is dease, and heares no heedfull friends. The flesh being proud, desire doth sight with grace. Suppresse the proud, helpe to support the m ke. Vaine-glories vice, l e to th n , Doth blemish oft o r . Small Onats enforc'd oud to stoope. Very vnsurely stands the t o . Vaine-glorious men des to i . Such is the nature still of haughtie pride, Than others praise, can nothing worse abide. In-sight illustrates, outward brauerie blinds. Shame followes pride, as doth the bodies shade. Wit oft-times wrackes, by selfe-conceit of pride. Though pride leads on, yet shame doth wait behind, And shame for pride by iustice is assign'd. Beautie breeds pride, pride bringeth forth disdaine. Vertue is plac'd, where pride may not presume. The plague of pride presumption did begin. Nothing there is that heauen can worse abide, Amongst mens deeds, than arrogance and pride. Trust not to choise of proud confederates. High-builded castles ouer-looke low lands. Enuie is auncient'st sinne, but pride is greatest. Proud thoughts, that greatest matters take in hand, Falls soonest, where they safest thinke to stand. Sorrow ne're followes him that flyes from pride. Where least desert is, alwaies pride is most. Prides lowest step is blood, Enuie the highest. Pride bathes in teares of poore submission, And makes his soule the purple he puts on. A proud mans glory, soone begets defame. A rich man hardly can be free from pride. Similies on the same subiect. AS vapours in ascending soone are lost, So prides presuming but confounds it selfe. As great fires hazard simple cottages, So pride in poore men is most perillous. As winds blow sternely being neere to cease, So pride is loftiest, neere destruction. As Cadar trees vnfruitfull are and stiffe, So proud men helpe not any, nor themselues. As pride is the beginner of all vice, So the destruction is it of all vertue. As still the dropsie couets after drinke, So pride is neuer pleased but with pride. Examples likewise on the same. FAbius the Senatour, o're-come with pride, Swallowed a haire in milke, and thereof dyed. Poppeia that was Neroes concubine, Had with the purest gold her horses shod. Chare for hurting Cyrus in the knee, Became so proud, that forth-with he ran mad. The Emperour Di lesian in hi pride, Would needs be call'd the brother to the Sunne. Saith Aristotle, Men ouercome with pride, Their betters nor their equals can abide. Quint liam would haue men of greatest gifts, Rather be humble, than swolne vp with pride. Of Couetousnes, &c. Couetousnes is onely root of ill, That kingdome, conscience, soule and all doth spill. THey that most couet, oftentimes loose more. Gaine co meth, while as the mi ler sleeps. Co etous wretches doe such griefes sustaine. That they prooue bankrupts in their greatest gaine. Vaine is it, all to haue and nothing vse. Intemperance t ralles men to couetise. Treasure is most abu 'd being hoorded vp, When being employed, in turneth two for one. It's vaine to couer more than we need vse. He that encrocheth much, is alwaies needie. Rich roabes, other both and themselues adorne. But nor themselues nor others, if not o ne. Great is the sc p that greedie will desires. Gaines got with i san e, is greatest losse. Lesse sinnes the poore man▪ that doth starue him-selfe. Than he that sl es his soule by hoor ing pelfe. Desire to haue, doth makes vs much endure. Auarice is good to none, worse to himselfe. Who would not wish his treasure safe from theeues, And rid his heart of pangs, his eyes from teares? The man that couets much, he wanteth much. The gaine of gold makes many loose their soules. Learnings decay, is thankelesse auarice: Not rendring vertue her deseruing price. All vices haue their taste from auarice, The couetous mans excuse, is childrens care. Who hugs th'idolatrous desire of gold, To scorne and ruine hath his freedome sold. The deuils mouth is tearm'd a misers purse. Mens faults, by couctousnes the world discernes. The greedie wretch that for him-selfe still spares, Doth hoord vp nothing but contiz ail cares. A couetous eye doth seldome and content. Desire of gaine, at no time hath enough. A niggard seldome wanteth this s e shift, To call his cursed auarice, good thrift. The couetous minded man is alwayes poore. Couetousnes runnes round about the world. Couetousnes deserueth speciall hate In Iudges, or in rulers of a state. Auarice disease, nothing can cure but death. To flie from auarice, is a kingdomes gaine. So greedie minds may but augment their wealth. They not respect how much they harme their health. How hard from couetousnes can men refraine? Gold, that makes all men false, is true it selfe. Treasures fast bard vp by a couetous mind, As prodigall expenders after find. The more we spare, the more we hope to gaine. To haue gold, and to haue it safe, is all. In old men, couetousnesse is monstrous, Because they are so neare their iournies end. Auarice (like the dropsie) still seckes more. The gulfe of greedinesse will ne're be fild. The couetous churle, whose care great heapes attaines: Hath for his end affliction, griefe his gaines. Auarice is the chiefest hooke of death. The misers mind is neuer satisfied. Similies on the same subiect. AS fire, the more it hath, the fiercer burnes, o couetous minds doe alwaies craue for more. As Bees doe flocke vnto a hony dew, So couetous men still haunt the sente of gaine. As greatest fish deuoure the smaller frie, So couetous wretches feed vpon the poore. As glurtons from them-selues can nothing spare, So misers will let nothing passe their purse. As without waues we neuer see the sea, So couetous men are neuer free from cares. As clouds do somtime hide the Sunnes cleare light, So couetousnes depriues the light of grace. Examples likewise on the same. HErmocrates lying at the point of death, Bequeath'd his goods to no one but him-selfe. Euclio his treasure in his house, And durst not goe abroad for feare of robbing. Caligula became so couetous, That he would spare no meanes to compasse coine. Demonica for gold sold Ephesus, And after dyed vnder the weight thereof. Socrates seeing one ignorant, yet rich, Said: He was nothing but a golden slaue. Diogenes would say to couetous men, That he had rather be their sheepe, than sonne. Of Sloth, &c. Sloth is to Vertue, chiefest enemie: And Idlenes, the guide to euery ill. SLoth dulles the wit, and doth corrupt our strength. Sloth both corrupts, and chokes the vitall powers. Idlenes is a death in life esteem'd. Long slumbers are for idle persons meet. The idle luske, that no way is enclin'd, Walkes as one dead among the liuing kind. Ease is the mothet of dissention. Who growes too negligent, too soone repents. Humours, by much excesse of ease are bred. All idle workes, are but the workes of lyes. All idle houres are Calenders of ruth, And time ill spent is preiudice to youth. Idlenesse causeth errour and ignorance. Through idlenes, kingdoms haue ben destroi'd. Idlenes is the root of desperation. The idle mind is apt to all vncleannesse. In height of weale who hath a slothfull heart, Repents too late his ouer-foolish part. Sloth blunts conceit, but studie sharpens it. Prosperitie alwaies ingendreth sloth. The slothfull man in his owne want doth sleepe. Sloth hinders thrift, and much displea eth God. Loue is a prodigie to loytring wits, A hell of life, a trap for idle toies. The idle heart is mooued with no prayers. In doing nothing, men learne to doe ill. Sloth is a feare of labour to ensue. The Bees abide no idle Drones among them. Vsurie is the nource of idlenes: And idlenes the mother of all euill. The wise mans idlenes, is d ily labour. A noble nature, sloth doth soone corrupt. Idlenes is the canker of the mind. Similies on the same subiect. AS mothes eat garments that are seldome worne, So idlenes infecteth loytring wits. As too much bending breakes the strongest bow, So too much sloth corrupts the chastest mind. As mosse growes on those stones which are not stirr'd, So sloth defiles the soule, not well employed. As standing waters venemous wormes ingender, So idle braines beget vnholy thoughts. As pooles freeze sooner than the running streames, So idle men speed worse than those that worke. As sitters sooner sleepe than they that walke, So sinne tempts sooner sloth, than diligence. Examples likewise on the same. SCipi did banish from his campe, all such As could be toucht with sloth or idlenes. The wise men thus did answere Alexander, If he were idle, long he could not liue. Because the Sabies did abound in wealth, They gaue them selues to nought but idlenes. Metellus being arriu'd in Africa, Dismist all meanes might offer idlenes. Tully saith, Men were borne to doe good workes, As a pre eruatiue gainst idlenes. Pythagoras gaue all his ho l s charge, At no time to admit an idle thought. Of Anger, &c. Anger is entrance to vnseemely wrath, Prouoking Furie, Rage, and Violence. ANgers rash fire conceal'd, enkindles more. Anger must be no reason of diuorce. Anger doth still his owne mishaps encrease. Thunder affri hteth infants in the schooles: And angry threats are conquests meet for fooles. What reason vrgeth, rage doth still denie. Vntamed rage doth all aduise reiect. Rage is like fire, and naturally ascends. Hot hastie wrath, and heedlesse azardi , Breeds l te repentance, and long i mie. Full many mischiefes follow hastie wrath. Happie who can abstaine when anger swelles. Words haue great power t'appease enflamed rage. Furie and frenzies are fit companie▪ To helpe to blaze a wofull tragedie. Mightie mens anger is more fear'd than death. Mishapen stuffe is meet for ude demeanour. Violent fires doe soone burne ou them selues. Oft times we see, men troubled with ann y Doe laugh for anger, and yet weepe for ioy. Small showers last long, but angry stormes are short. Oft outward rage doth inward griefes encrease. The wrathfull man is seldome free from woe. The broken top of loftie trees declare, The furie of a mercie-wanting storme. Men will not spend their surie on a child. Young slippes are neuer graft in windie dayes. Loue being resisted▪ growes impa ient. Raine added to a riuer that is ranke. Perforce will make it ouer-flow the anke. Calmes seldome hold, without ensuing stormes. Choller vnto digestion is a friend. He that loues ease, offends no angrie man. If once the fire be to the powder go , It's then too late to seeke to flie the shot. Heat added vnto heat, augmenteth it. There is no rest▪ where rage runnes all on head. The waters swell before a boistrous sto me. In windie dayes we hold our garments fast, But glaring Sun-shine makes vs put them off. Tydes being restrain'd, o'r well their bounds with rage. The depth is hid by troubling of the flood. Great mists arise before the greatest raine. If rage spare not the wal es of pieti , How shall the profane piles of sinne keepe strong? The raine doth cease, before the floods doe rise. All stormes are calmed by a gentle starre. P le angrie death a gr edie longing stops. When discontented sectes and schismes arise, They seed the simple, and offend the wise. The edge of reprehension, is sharpe words. Reprooue with loue, not anger, others faults. Cold breath doth not coole fire, but makes more hot. What is with f ri d ste ne rage begun, Doth challenge shame before it be halfe done. Fond disagreement is loues ouerthrow. Loue should preuaile, iust anger to asswage. Similies on the same subiect. AS hate is oft conceiu'd vpon no cause, So anger on small matters doth ensue. As he that loueth quiet, sleeps ecure, So he that yeelds to wrath, much harmes him-selfe. As wrathfull anger is a grieuous fault, So sufferance is great commendation. As winter commonly is full of stormes, So angrie minds haue still impatient thoughts. As luke-warme water inward heats asswage, So gentle language calmeth angers rage. As tumours rise by blowes vpon the flesh, So anger swelles by buffetting the mind. Examples likewise on the same. GReat Alexander, in his angrie mood Kild Clytus, his old councellour and friend. Dionysiu being ouer-come with rage, Stabd to the heart his innocent poore Page. Periander, angry and misse-gouerned, His deare wife most vnkindly murdered. Architas, though his bond-man did amisse, Yet in his anger he refus'd to smite him. Euripides, held nothing in a man Of more defect, than sterne impatience. The elder Cato counsail'd angrie men, To banish rage, if they desir'd long life. Of Gluttonie, &c. Gluttonie, drunkennesse, and leud excesse, Is the high-way to woe and wretchednesse. VVHo daily taste neat wine, do water loath. Disorder breeds by heating of the blood. Aduantage feeds him fat, while men delay. In Italie, the fat, faire, slick and full, Are better lik'd than leane, lanke, spare and dull. Staru'd men best gesse the sweetnesse of a feast. Worldlings (like Antes) eat vp the gaines of men. Things vndigested, neuer turne to blood. Steele is the glasse of beautie for our sight, But wine is tearm'd, the mirrour of the mind. A beastly shape with brutish soule agrees. Set-banquets made by Courtiers, want no cates. It's good in health to counsell with a Leach. It's good abstaining from superstuous feasts: Where too much feeding maketh men bruit beasts. Wine burnes vp beautie, and prouokes on age. No secrecie abides, where liues excesse. Excesse is nothing else, but wilfull madnesse. He that delights in pampering vp himselfe, Is chiefest seeker of his bodies shame. Chastities daunger waits on drunkennesse. Wine is the earths blood, and th'abusers blame. A double fire in man, is wine and youth. Gluttonie dryes the bones, more thereby die Than in a kingdome perish by the sword. Surfet hath sicknesse to attend on him. Gluttonie causeth many maladies. Excesse is that which soone dispatcheth life. Rich men may feed their bellies when they please, But poore mens dinners stay till they haue meat. Much feeding causeth much infirmitie. The belly alwaies is a thanklesse beast. Drunkennesse is a many headed monster. Moderate diet is a wise mans badge, But surfetting, the glory of a foole. Women and wine haue made the wise to dote. Too much of any thing conuerts to vice. A meane in all things is most commendable. Similies on the same subiect. AS corporall fasting quickens vp the soule, So too much feeding doth depresse it downe. As sable clouds obscure the siluer Moone, So gluttonie dimmes glorie of the mind. As birds with weightie bodies hardly flie, So men o're-come with drinke, scant rightly goe. As too much wet doth cause a moorish ground, So too much drinke doth make a muddie mind. As ships of lightest burden lightliest saile, So minds of quickest motion are most apt. As drowsie souldiours are vnfit for fight, So drunken humours are not meet for men. Examples likewise on the same. THe Tyrant Dionysius, by much drinke, Lost vtterly the benefit of sight. Aruntius in his beastly drunkennes, With his owne daughter incest did commit. Ptolomie slew his father and his mother, Through wine and women, dying like a beast. Geta the Emperour three dayes feasting sate, Seru'd by the order of the Alphabet. Men giuen to belly-seruice, Plato saith, Deserue no better name, than brutish beasts. Excesse (saith Tullie ) is a testimonie Of soules incontinence, and base desires. Of Griefe, &c.. Griefe, Sorrow, Woe, and sighing care, Endaunger health, and often vrge despaire. GRiefe doth await on life, though neuer sought. Griefe being disclos'd, the sooner is recur'd. Ech griefe best iudgeth of his contrarie. Extreame and hard with sorrow doth it go , Where woe becomes a comforter to woe. Sorrow doth dimme the iudgement of the wit. Great griefes more easily can be thought than told. There is no griefe, but time doth make it lesse. Sighes of them▪ selues, are ouer-silent much, And farre too short to make our sorrowes knowne. Griefe, to it selfe most dreadfull doth appeare. Neuer was sorrow quite deuoid of feare. Sorrow best fitteth with a cloudie cell. Still we behold some griefe our blisse bese ▪ Yet often-times that griefe, some good ege s. Sorrow discloseth what it most doth grieue. The deapth of griefe with words is sounded least. No plaister helpes before the griefe be knowne. Words are but shadowes of a further smart, But inward griefe doth truly touch the heart. Sower is the sweet that sorrow doth maintaine. A heauie hear , with sorrowes pipe must daunce. Sorrow her selfe, is in her selfe confounded. Where sorrow serues for food, where drinke is teares, There pleasure sighes amidst confused feares. Sighes often sue, but seldome times find grace. We may conclude our words, but not our woes. Great griefes are mut , when mitth can chearely speake. What bootes i plaine that cannot be redrest, Or sow vaine sorrowes in a fruitlesse eare? Nothing auaileth griefe, when fates denie. Cares, close conceal'd, doe aggrauate the pain . It's ease to tell the cares that inly touch. Men torne with tempests, safe arriu'd at last, May sit and sing, and tell of sorrowes past. Well sitteth moane the mind, neer kill'd with care. A double griefe afflicts concealing hearts. One louing hower quits many yeares of griefe. When thou dost feele thy conscience rent with griefe, Thy selfe pursuest thy selfe, both robd, and thiefe. All earthly sights can nought but sorrow breed. Woe waxeth old, by being still renew'd. Woe neuer wants, where euery cause is caught. When sorrow once is seated in our eyes, What-e're we see, encreaseth miseries. Men change the aire, but seldome change their cares. Griefes are long liu'd, and sorrowes seldome die. Griefe need no feigned action to be taught. Know how to weepe when mightie griefes constraine, Else teares and sighes are meerely spent in vaine. Sorrow growes sence-lesse, when too much she bears. We need not cherish griefes, too fast they grow. Woe be to him that dyes of his owne woe. To meane estate, but common woes are knowne▪ But crownes haue cares that euer e vnknowne Sorrow doth make the shortest time seeme long. One griefe conceal'd, more grieuous is than ten From strongest woe we hardly language w est. Oft times it haps, that sorrowes of the mind Find helpe vnsought, that seeking cannot find. Huge horrors, in high tydes of griefes are drown'd▪ Woe past may once laugh present woe to scorne. Griefe arueth deepest, comming from the heart. Enough of griefe it is to pensiue minds, To feele their faults, and not be further vext. Care makes men passionate, and sorrow dumbe. High floods of ioy, oft falls by ebbbes of griefe. No note is sweet, where griefe beares all the ground. It's euer pleasing for man to heare, Those griefes discourst, that once were hard to beare. Some often sing that haue more cause to sigh. Griefe neuer parts from a care-filled breast. Free vent of griefe doth ease the ouer-flow. Vnhappie man, the subiect of misfortune, Whose very birth doth following woe importune Mens dayes of woe are long, but short of ioy. Our time may passe, but cares will neuer die. Oft greatest cares, the greatest comforts kill. Men die, and humane kind doth passe away, But griefe (that mak s them die) doth euer stay. Ioy still ascends, but sorrow sings below. Men may lament, but neuer disanull. Sorrow still seazeth on a grieued heart. Things of small moment we can scarsely hold, But griefes that touch the heart, are hardly told. They easily grieue, that cannot choose but moane. Sorrow concludes not when it seemeth done. Conceit deriues from some fore-father griefe. Conceiued griefe reboundeth where it falls: Not with the emptie hollownesse, but weight. Things past redresse should be as free from care. It is no losse to be exempt from care. Against a chaunge, woe is o're-run with woe. Woe with the heauier weight doth alwaies sit, Where it perceiue it is but faintly borne. The deepest cares cure not the smallest griefe. Sorrow is mortall enemie to health. Griefe wanteth words to vtter what it would. Fell g a ling sorrow hath least power to bite The man that mockes it, and doth set it light. No need to hasten care, it comes too soone. Griefes best redresse, is the best sufferance. Griefe finds some ease by him that beareth like. Sharpe sorrowes tooth doth neuer ran kle more, Than when he bites, and launceth not the sore. The hearts deepe sorrow hates both light and life. Mirth may not soiourne with blacke male-content. What helpeth care, when cure is past and g ne? Ech substance of a griefe hath twentie shades, Which shewes like griefe it selfe, yet is not so. It is some case our sorrowes to reueale. Sorow doth euer long to heare the worst. Long are their nights whose cares doe neuer sleepe. The eyes of sorrow glaz'd with blinding teares, Deuide one thing en re to many obiects. No farre remooue can make sterne sorrow lesse, Care-charming sleepe, is sonne of sable night. Idlely we grieue, when fruitlessely we grieue. Their legges can kee e no measure in delight, Whose heart doe hold no measure in their griefe. They that report griefe, feele it for the time. Sad soules are slaine in merrie companie. Griefe is best pleas'd with griefes societie. In wooing sorrow, it is best be briefe, When wedding it, there is such length in griefe. Great griefe grieues most at that would do it good. Griefe dallied with, nor law nor limit knowes. A wofull hostesse brookes no merrie guests. Ech thinks him-selfe to fetch the deepest grone, Because he feeles no sorrow but his owne. Distresse likes dumps, when time is kept with teares. Woe is most tedious when her words are briefe. Though woe be heauie, yet it seldome sleepes. Kind fellowship in woe, doth woe asswage, As Palmers chat makes short their pilgrimage. Loue ne're so loyall, is not free from care. Weepe ne're so long, yet griefe must haue an end. Of sorrow, comes but fancies and fond dreames. True sorrow then is feelingly suffis'd, When with like semblance it is sympathiz'd. Sad hearts with weeping liue vpon their teares. Sad sighes set downe the hearts most feeling woes. Assurance alway putteth griefe to flight. Deepe woes roll forward like a gentle floud, Which being stop , the bounding bankes o're-flowes. Accustom'd sorrow, is meere c ueltie. Sorrow is very doubtfull in beleefe. Silence, is sorrowes chiefest Oratour. To see sad sights, mooues more than heare them told, For then the eye interprets to the care. Sacietie makes passions still lesse strong. All sence must die where griefe too much abounds. All care is bootlesse in a carelesse case. Sorrow is like a heaui hanging bell. VVhich set on ringing, with his owne weight goes. Sorrow best speakes by signes of heauie eyes. On greatest charge, the greatest care attends. Dombe is the message of a hidden griefe. Sorrow breakes seasons, and reposing houres: Makes the night morning, and the noon-tyde night. Our inward cares are most pent in with griefe. Sad cares, mens eyes doth alwayes open keepe. Short walkes seeme long when sorrow metes the way. Sorrow hath onely this poore bare reliefe, To be bemoand of such as wofull are. Wounds helpe not wounds, nor griefe ease grieuous deeds. Excesse of sorrow listneth no reliefe. Passions encreasing, multiply complaints. To moane ones care, yet cannot helpe his thrall, It kills his heart, but comforts not at all. No griefe like to the bondage of the mind. No outward vtterance can commaund conceit. Similies on the same subiect. AS fire supprest, is much more forcible, So griefes conceal'd, vrge greater passions. As streames restrain'd, breake through or ouer-flow, So sorrow smoother'd, growes to greater woe. As tendrest wood is most annoyed of wormes, So feeblest minds doth sorrow most afflict. As clouds doe rob vs of faire heauens beautie, So care bereaues vs of our speeches libertie. As the sweet rose doth grow among the bryars, So oft in sorrowes some content is found. As discreete Pylots doe for stormes prepare, So in our ioy let vs prouide for care. Examples likewise on the same. COriolanus, finding his offence For warring gainst his country, dyde with griefe▪ Torquatus, banisht from his fathers house, For griefe thereof did rashly slay him selfe. The Romane matrons for a whole yeares space, Sighed and sorrowed for B t death. Lepidus grieuing long his wiues abuse, Shortned his owne dayes with conceit of griefe. The Pythagorians alwaies had th s poesie: The heart ought not be aten with sad griefe. Cicero thought, the minds chiefe enemies, Were melancholly griefes, and pensiues. Of Feare, &c. Feare is defect of manly fortitude, Continually by dread and doubt pursude. A Hell-tormenting feare, no faith can mooue. Safetie (most safe) when she is fenc'd with feare. Better first f are, than after still to feare. Daunger deui eth shifts, wit waits on feare. Abhorre sinne past, preuent what i to come, These two are things feare not the day of doome. The bait in sight, the hooke much lesse is fear'd. Who euer feares, is better neuer feare. To loue for feare, is secretly to hate. Feare is companion of a guil ie ind. Faint feare and doub still taketh their delight In erile, which exceed all perill might. F delitie doth flye where feare is hatcht. Feares vrge despaires, ruth breeds a hopelesse rage. By needlesse feare, none euer vantage got. The benefit of feare, is to be wise. Wh would not die, to kill all murdering griefes? Or who would liue in neuer-dying feares? Feare giueth wings, and need doth courage teach. Fond is the feare that finds no remedie The d ead of dying, payes death seruile breath. Who liue c ntent, need feare no f owning fate. To feare the foe, when feare oppresseth strength, Giues in our weaknesse, strengthning to the foe. Feare finds out shi ts, timiditie is s b ill. No greater hell than be a slaue to feare. Birds feare no bushes that were neuer lim'd. The guilt being great, the feare doth more exceed. Feare, and be slaine, no worse can come to fight: And fight and dye, is death destroying death. Loue thriues not in the heart that shadowes feare. Against loues fire, feares frost can haue no power. The Lyons roaring, lesser beasts doe feare. Doubt takes sure footing oft in slipperie wayes. Huge rockes, high windes, strong pyrats, shelues and sands, The erchant feares, ere rich at home he lands. Delay breeds doubt, and doubt brings on dismay. A fearefull thing to tumble from a crowne. Giue no beginning to a doubtfull end. It's fearefull sleeping in a serpents bed. Extreamest feare can neither fight nor flye, But coward-like, with trembling terrour die. Our owne examples makes vs feare the more. Feare that is wiser than the truth, doth ill. Greatnesse that standeth high, stands still in feare, Feare casts too deepe, and euer is too wise. Who feares a sentence, or an old mans saw, May by a painted cloth be kept in awe. The doubtfull can no vsuall plots endure. A moderate feare fore-casts the worst of ill. It's vaine to feare the thing we cannot shun. Better to feare thy choice, than rue thy chaunce. He rightly may be tearm'd a val ant man, Whome honest death doth not affright with feare. Distracted terrour knowes not what is best. No feare of death should force vs to doe ill Dread of vnknowne things breeds a greater dread. Feare not the things must come, be thinke faults past. In vaine with terrour is he sortifide, That is not guarded with i me loue beside. The loue vnseene, is neuer knowne to feare. A seru le feare, doth make a drooping mind. Least we presume, we must goe backe with feare. Delay doth much torment a doubtfull mind. It much offendeth to be old with feares, When youth saith, thereof thou want'st many yeeres. Hardly we credit what imports our ill. Men feare not them whose feeble strength they know. Feare commonly doth breed and nourish hate. Small ease hath he that feared is of all. Cold doubt cauills with honour, scorneth fame, And in the end, feare weighes downe faith with shame. Dissention euer more breeds greater doubt. We soone beleeue the case we would haue so. A fearefull looke bewrayes a guiltie heart. Death is farre sweeter than the feare of death. It's better much, to suffer that we feare, Than still by feare, to liue in martyrdome. Continuall griefe, is feare beyond all feare. Basenesse aduanced, purchaseth but feare. Who walke in feare, suspect the pathes they tread. Death being assur'd to come, deserues no feare. Whiles timerous knowledge stands considering, Audacious ignorance performes the deed. He that knowes most, the more he hath to doubt. Better mistrust too soone, than rue too late. We deeme things doubtfull, breed not contentation. Where men least feare, there harme they soonest find. Wicked men commonly are void of feare, And therefore daunger alwaies with them beare. Loue neuer was without both feare and teares. Feare lendeth wings for aged folke to flie. Similies on the same subiect. AS suddaine bleeding, argues ill ensuing, So suddaine ceasing is fell feares renewing. As leaking vessels cannot long endure, So fearefull minds haue slender permanence. As nettles haue no prickes, and yet doe sting, So feares haue little motion, yet oft kill. As salt ta'ne moderately doth ellish meat, So discreet feares doe often benefite. As in calamitie good friends auaile, So sound aduise aduantageth in feare. As wrong suspitions are but mens disgrace, So needlesse feares declare but want of wit. Examples likewise on the same. CLaudius being giuen to feare, his mother said, Nature begun, but had not finisht him. Midas grew desperate by his fearefull dreames, That to be rid of them, he slew him-selfe. Aristodemus fear'd with howling dogges, Tooke such conceit, that soone he ended life. Nicias th'Athenian, through cowardly feare, Lost many famous opportunities. Tully saith, Much more euill is in feare, Than in the thing that doth procure the feare. Solon gaue instance to his country-men, That shame did euermore attend on feare. Of Fortune, &c. Fortune is nource of fooles, poyson of hope, Fewell of vaine desires, deserts destruction. WHat fortune works, seemes not alwaies pretended. Fortune not alwaies doth poure forth her bagges. Fortune in tariance, to her selfe is straunge. Fortune her gifts in vaine to such doth giue, Who when they liue, seeme as they did not liue. The end is it that maketh fortune good. The sea of fortune doth not alwaies flow. Hap commeth well although it come but late. When Fortune all her vtmost spight hath shewen, Some blisse-full houres may ne're thelesse appeare. Fortune's not alwaies good, nor alwaies ill. Fortune doth some times laugh as well as lower. Misfortune followes him that tempteth fortune. How can mischaunce vnto that ship etide, Where fortune is the pylot and the guide? Fortune oft hurts, when most she seemes to helpe. Wisdome predominates both fate and fortune. Oft where best chaunce begins, ill chaunce doth end. Misfortune is attended by reproch: Good fortune, fame and vertue si llifies. Th'euent oft times makes soule faults fortunate. What follie hurts not, fortune can repaire. Like clouds continually doth fortune chaunge. Where Fortune doth her bountie franke bestow, There heauen and earth must pay what she doth owe. Mishaps are mastred by discreet aduise. The helpe-lesse hap, it booteth none to grieue. Misfortune waits aduantage to entrap. Misfortunes power can neuer yle thy right, Doe thou but beare a mind in her despight. Misfortune followes many ouer-fast. Where first mishap began, there will she end. A chaunce may win, what by mischance was lost. Where great mishaps our errours doth assault, There doe they easiest make vs see our fault. Nimble mischaunce, is verie swift of foot. Silent mishap discloseth mourning griefe. Our friends misfortune doth encrease our owne. A mischiefe seene, may easily be p euented, But being hapt, not helpt, though still lamented. In some things all, in nothing all are crost. On mischiefes maine, mishap full saile doth beare. The greatest losses seldome are restor'd. Nothing so much a mans mishap torments, As who to him his good state represents. Harmes vnexpected, still doe hurt vs most. Vnlook for things doe happen soon'st of all. Power h th no priuiledge against mishap. Complaine not t y misfortune to thy foe, For he w llt i nto when he sees thy teares. The highest state awarrants not mishaps. Vnfortunate are some men that be wise. Happy he liues that tasteth no mischaunce. Oft times we see amidst the greatest cares, Some ill successe doth slip in vnawares. No wit nor wealth preuailes against mischaunce. If ill approch vs, onely that is ours. Of greatest ill, a greater good may spring. The man that still amidst misfortunes stands, Is sorrowes slaue, and bound in lasting bands. Neuer stayes tickle fortune in one state. The basest meanes, oft highest fortune brings. Well may he swimme, held vp by fortunes hand. The world is rightly tearmed full of rub , When all our fortunes runne against the byas. Fortune hurts not where she is held despis'd. The fleece of fortune striues to haue the fell, Who keepes his fortunes wisely, needs no more. They fall, which trust to fortunes fickle wheele: But stayed by vertue, men shall neuer reele. Time goes by turnes, and chances change by course. A tragicke note best fits a tragicke chaunce. By fortunes smiles ensues the greatest falls. He cannot iudge aright of fortunes power, Nor taste the sweet that neuer tride the sower. Fortune may raise againe a downe-cast foe. The cards once dealt, it boots not aske, why so? Loue throwes them downe, whom fortune raised vp. Riches are nothing else but fortunes gifts, An bring with them their owne confusion. Mariners sound at first for feare of rockes. Fortune assaults, but hurts no constant mind. Physicall drugs helpe not sinister chaunce. It's seldome seene in any high estate, Father and sonne like good, like fortunate. Fortunes fierce frownes, are oft times princes haps. Fortunes being equall, are loues fauorites. Where Fortune fauours much, she flatters more. Nothing is ours that we by hap may loose: What nearest seemes, is furthest off in woes. Birth many times by fortune is abas'd. Fortune in sleepers nets poures all her pride. To painfull persons fortune is ingrate. When Fortune doth most sweetly seeme to smile, Then soone she frownes, she laughes but little while. Few reape the sweete, that taste not of the sower. Whome fortune scornes, the common people hate. Trust not to Fortune when she seemes to smile, For then she doth intend the greatest guile. Fortune is tear'md a bog or dauncing mire. Fortune, though fickle, sometime is a friend. Fortune helps hardie men, but scorneth cowards. Long-passed cares renew againe their course, When fatall chaunce doth chaunge from bad to worse. Fortune can take our goods, but not our vertues. Fortune is first and last, that ruines states. Fortune oft brings vs to misfortunes gate. Desert awaits, while fortune makes prouision, For fooles and dolts, and men of base condition. While worthiest fall, fortune doth worth-lesse raise. Fortune best shewes her-selfe in women kind. Fortune doth glorie in her chaunging mood. While grasse doth grow, the labouring Steed may starue, For fortune seld each wishers turne doth serue. On vertuous actions fortune hath no power. Fortune can neuer hurt a steadfast mind. Who farthest seemes, is to misfortune nighest. Similies on the same subiect. EVen as the racket takes the balls rebound, So doth good fortune catch ill fortunes proofe. As winds blow some men good, and other harme, So fortune friending some, on others frownes. As Archers alwayes cannot hit the white, So no man may of fortune alwaies boast. As glasses shew the figure of the face, So doe our fortunes best disclose our minds. As Hedge-hogs doe fore-see ensuing stormes, So wise men are for fortune still prepar'd. As haile hurts not the house, though makes a noise, So haps may daunt, but not dismay the mind. Examples likewise on the same. SCylla for multitude of high good haps, Would often say: That he was Fortunes child. Caesar said to the Pilot in a storme: Feare not, thou cariest Caesar and his fortune. Augustus wished Scipioes valiancie, And Pompeys loue, but Fortune like him-selfe. Paulus Aemilius greatly feared Fortune, Chiefly in those things which he held diuine. To him whose hope on fortune doth depend, Nothing can be assured, Tully saith. Pindarus said, the Romanes did rely Only on Fortune, as their patronesse. Of Fate, &c. Destinie, or the firme decree of Fate, Is sure to happen, be it soone or late. NO priuiledge can from the fates protect. The fates farre off sore-seene, come gently neere. Men are but men in ignorance of fate, To alter chaunce exceedeth humane state. Mens haps by heauen are fram'd preposterous. That yeelds to fate, which will not stoope o force. We often find the course of fatall things, Is best discern'd in states of ealmes and kings. No one can turne the streame of destinie. No man can shun what destinie ordaines. I lye not in our p wer to loue or hate, For will in vs is ouer-rul'd by ate. There's none by warning can auoid his fate. Ou haps doe chaunge, as chaunces on the dyce. In vain we ize that at so high a rate, Whose best assurance but depends on fate. What te imposeth, we perforce must beare. All mens estates alike vnsteadfast are▪ Things which presage both good and bad there be, Which fate fore-shewes, but will not let vs see. Our frailties doome is written in the flowers. Fate cannot be preuented, though fore-knowne. VValles may a while hold out an enemie, But neuer castle kept out destinie. Errours are neuer errours but by fate. No prouidence preuenteth destinie. Those fates that one while plague poore men with crosses, Another time prouide to mend their losses. The fairest things are subiect still to fate. No man is sure what finall fruits to reape. Men attribute their follies vnto fate, And lay on heauen the guilt of their owne crimes. What happens me this day, may you the next. He thriueth best that hath a blessed fate. Fatall is that ascent vnto a crowne, From whence men come not, but are hurled downe. What fate intends, follie cannot fore-stall. Whome fate casts downe, hardly againe recouers. The breach once made vpon a battered state, Downe goes distresse, no shelter shrouds their fate. Force cannot winne, what fate doth contradict. Men are but men, and may not know their lot. VVhen en doe wish for death, fates haue no force, But they (when men would liue) haue no remorse. It fatall is to be seduc'd with shewes. To alter course, may bring men more astray. Similies on the same subiect. LIke as the day cannot preuent the night, So vaine it is against the fates to fight. As with the worst, fate spareth not the best, So faults are easier lookt in, than redrest. Euen as the starres and sands haue wondrous date, So are our liues subiect to nought but fate. As cities are o're-come by batterie, So all on earth must yeeld to destinie. As lookes of loue oft shadow inward hate, So times faire hope is shortned soone by fate. As flowers in morning fresh, oft fade ere night, So fate cuts off what goodliest seemes in sight. Examples likewise on the same. AS Bibulus in triumph rode through Rome, His fate was with a tyle-stone to be slaine. Aurelius sister, Lucia, by her needle But prickt her breast, and dyde immediatly. Cneius Rufferius, combing of his head, One of the teeth bereft him of his life. Methridates, suppos'd mens destinies Consisted in the power of hearbs and stones. Chilo of Lacedaemon did maintaine, That men might comprehend what was to come. Plato affirmed, That a good mans fate Neuer to euill could be destinate. Of the Mind. The Mind is that bright eye, which guides the soule And gouernes men in all their actions. THe mind is free, what euer man afflicts. Libertie is the minds best liuing fame. Hope of long life, is balefull to the mind. O're-many thoughts, maze-like the mind enclose Confusedly, till order them dispose. Patience doth giue a troubled heart delight. Patience is the true touch-stone of the mind. The griefes of troubled minds, exceed beliefe. When roomes of charge are giuen to minds of praise, Then maiestie doth shewe her brightest rayes. The gentle mind, by gentle deeds is knowne. The noblest mind, the best contentment hath. No deuilish thoughts dismay a constant mind. Fame, cherisher of honour-breathing hearts. Is valours friend, and nource of sacred Artes. By outward lookes, the mind is oft discern'd. The mind discernes, where eyes could neuer see. A yeelding mind doth argue cowardise. The action and affection of the heart, Two wayes whereby a christian playes his part. The vertuous mind beares patiently all wrongs. Ill may a sad mind forge a merrie face. The highest lookes haue not the highest minds. The carelesse man with vnaduised mind, Doth blindly follow euery puffe of wind. Free is the heart, the temple of the mind. Mens bodies may be ours, their minds their owne. The mind of man doth many times behold, That which fraile sight can neuer reach vnto. Great hearts will breake before they yeeld to bend. A priuat mind may yeeld, yet cares not how. Mans mind a mirrour is of heauenly sights: A briefe wherein all maruailes summed lye. No man can slay the mind resolu'd to die. Our seeming each man sees; God knowes the heart. The mind a creature it, yet can create, And adde to natures patternes higher skill. None hath enough for euery greedie mind. Mens minds oft times are tainted by their eares. Bad mind, so much to mind anothers ill, At to become vnmindfull of his owne. Men haue rude ma ble, women soft waxe minds. Theeues, cares, and troubled minds, are long awake. There's none can tell the ease the mind doth gaine, VVhen eyes can weepe, heart groane, or griefe complaine. The mind corrupted, takes the worser part. A gentle mind will alwaies iudge the best. Oh what a balme is made to cheare the heart, If pearle and gold and spices beare a part! Where minds are knit, what helps, if not enioyed? What the tongue dares not, oft the mind doth say. The gentle mind doth plainly represent, The glorious splendour of the firmament. The mind stoopes to no dread, though flesh be fraile. Little perswasion mooues a wicked mind. It's pittie gold should sunder vertuous minds. He doth but pine among his delicates, VVhose troubled mind is stuft with discontent. The heart oft suffers for the eyes offence. Much promiseth the mind, if fate as much. Great is the will, but greater farre the mind. In case of iarre, when as one man espyes Anothers mind li e his, then ill breed worse. Hire of a hireling mind, is earned shame. The guiltie mind hath neuer quiet li e. The bodies rest, is quiet of the mind. Agrieued minds seldome weigh the intent, But alwaies iudge according to th' intent. The mind well bent, is safe from any harme. Cares cruell scourge doth greatly whip the mind. No plague is greater than the griefe of mind. The feeble mind through weaknesse coines new feares: VVhen stronger hearts their griefes more wisely beares. Ignorance is the deadly night of mind. Mens faces glister when their minds are blacke. The face is held the Herald of the mind. VVhereas the mind is willing and addict, Examples are more forcible and strict. The greatest minds doe aime at greatest things. Pithie demaunds are whetstones to the mind. The fairest face may haue the foulest mind. All impious minds, though their fore-casts be great, They cannot hide them from the greatest great. The minds old habit hardly will be chaung'd. Pure is the mind that neuer meant amisse. Where mind consents not, faults deserue excuse. When many tunes doe sweetly symphonize, It conquers hearts, and kindly them compounds. Dombe plaints in feeling minds, make greatest noise. The mind by wrong is made a male-content. Similies on the same subiect. AS Scales by poise are mounted vp and downe, So too and fro conceits doe vrge the mind. As tender trees bend euery way we please, So gentle minds are easily ouer-rul'd. As heauines fore-tels some harme at hand, So minds disturb'd, presage ensuing ills. As sickly bodies brooke not heat nor cold, So crazed minds dislike of euery thing. As working vessels are by vent kept sound, So troubled minds by conference find ease. As fennie grounds send forth vnsauorie sents, So bad minds bl nder out distempered thoughts. Examples likewise on the same. SCeuola in the greatnesse of his mind, Entred Porsennaes Tent to murder him. Queene Tomiris to shew her dauntlesse mind, With Cyrus blood, reueng'd her deare sonnes death. Zenobia told Aurelian in the field, He was not able to subdue her mind. Lucius Dentatus, neuer matcht for mind, Came eighteene times a conquerour from field. Cicero saith, the goodnesse of the m nd, Is most discern'd in pardoning iniuries. Socrates said, His quietnes in mind Was cause he neuer sickned till his death. Of Affection, &c. Affection, and sweet fancies secret fire, Kindle the coales, that quicken vp desire. WHere we affect, we seldome find defect. Of things vnknowne, we can haue no desire. Men ost affect them, that doe loue them least, And least doe loue them whome they should like best. That one desires, another doth disdaine. Affection by the countenance is descried. Full easily the fault may be redrest, Where kind affection onely hath transgrest. Kindly affection, youth to liue with youth. Truest affection doth no bounds retaine. Affection is a ierce, yet holy fire: Free of him-selfe, and chain'd to strong desire. Desire, with small encouraging growes bold. It's easie to desire, but hard to chuse. Affections speech, that easily can dissolue, Doth moisten Flint, yet Steele in stiffe attire. The sea hath bounds, but deep desire hath none. In darkest nights, desire sees best of all. Sweet are the kisses, the embracements sweet, When like desires, with like affections meet. Affections slaue regards no oathes nor lawes. Luke-warme desires best fit with crazed loue. Affection is a coale that must be coold: Else suffered, it will set the heart on fire. Entire affection hateth nice coy hands. Affection will like fire, him-selfe betray. Affection faints not like a pale fac'd coward, But then wooes best, when most his choise is froward. The coales are quicke, where fancie blowes the fire. Desire can make a Doctor in a day. Where loue doth reigne, disturbing iealousie Doth call him▪ selfe, affections Sentinell. Fauour and grace, are tearmed fancies fuell. An equall age doth equall like desires. Bad mens affections, turne to feare and hate: And hate, to daunger and deserued death. That's hardly kept, which is desir'd of many. The most maid-seeming, is not without affection. That needs must issue to the full perfection, Hath grounded-being by the minds affection. There's nothing can affections force controll. Drunken desire doth vomit his receit. Affections gawdie banner once displayed, The coward fights, and will not be dismayed. Things much restrain'd, make vs the more desire them. In meanest shewe, the most affection dwells. Small drops doe oft-times quench a mightie fire, But hugest Seas not qualifie desire. All qualifide affections loue doth hate. Beautie strikes fancie blind, vaine shewes deceiue. Sad per ur ations that affections guide, Should not giue iudgement, till their cause be tride. Desire is life of loue, and death of feare. Death is the finall end of all desires. Nothing can quench an infinite desire, Once kindled through the first conceiued fire. Sad sighes doe shew the heat of hearts desire. Desire controld, doth aggrauate desire. Desire being fierce, is spring of sighes and teares. Men once degenerate and growne deprest, Are pleasd to share affections with a beast. Desire doth spring from that we wish and want. Fancie is blind, deafe, and incredulous. Fancie is watchfull, and doth seldome sleepe. Fancie compeld, to Lute strings is compar'd, Which ouer stretcht, doe cracke before they sound. Lawfull desires, are honesties best notes. Affection's rest lesse, yet (being perfect) end-lesse. Delay is preiudiciall to desire. The greater part leane to example so, That what they fancie, they will s ant forgoe. Fancies best cure, is mutuall affection. Fancie soone ires, but long before it quench. When loue leads lookes, no compasse keepes desire. A hot desire, on present heat doth dote: When cold repentance will it not fore-note. Low fortunes often times haue high desires. Like fortunes globe, euen so is fancies seat. Appetites flame, with wisdome best is quencht. There neuer did all circumstances meet, With those desires which were conceiu'd before. Affection brooketh no diuision. Sleepe hath no priuiledge ouer desire. Similies on the same subiect. AS poyson sweetly mixt is sooner ta'ne, So fancie close conceal'd, is soonest fier'd. As Chrysolites are prooued in the fire, So is affection in enforc'd restraint. As cities wanting Magistrates, decay: Euen so desire vngouern'd, hurts it selfe. As all the world were darke but for the Sunne, So life, but for affection, were vnsure. As steele brings fire from the hardest flint, So fancie mollisies the stearnest mind. As Almond trees in age doe beare most fruit, So yeares doth best approoue affections. Examples likewise on the same. ZAleucus to the Locrians made a law, To loose their eyes that sinn'd in foule desires. Appius was banished the cittie Rome, For leud affection to Virginia. Marke Anthonie disgrac'd his former fame, By not restraining his affections. King Alexander hated to the death In men or women loose and leud desires. Fancie (saith Aristotle ) often makes A frenzie in their soules are led thereby. Desire (saith Socrates ) no limits holds, And therefore hardly can be mastred. Of Disdaine, &c. Contempt and Scorne, are Wits infirmitie, Wherwith Disdaine and Scoffes keepe company. FLint, frost, disdaine; weares, melts, and yeelds we see. Things long in getting, quickly are disdain'd. Present disdaine oft after-loue diuines Prayers preuaile not, where is coy disdaine? Better to die a thousand deaths and more, Than liue contemn'd, that honour'd was before. Disdaine deliuers a depraued mind. Griefe often-times giues place to nice disdaine. Too much precisenesse sauours of selfe-loue. Gibing demaunds deserue scornefull replyes. Neither can wit or Art take any place, Where aduerse scorne, with feare, strikes boldnesse dead. Presumption giues no guerdon, but disdaine. Despised men on earth, must liue in heauen. There must be some contempt, ere plagues ensue. Disdaine attends where greatest honour haunts. In high disdaine, loue is a base desire: And Cupids flames doe seeme but watrie fire. Disdaine repines at all good things it sees. They others vertues scorne, that doubt their owne. Mocke none in need, beware thine owne mishap. Scoffes without feare, from foll e doe proceed. The choice hard, whe e silence kills with griefe▪ O speech reapes no reward, but base contemp . To mocke a friend, is held no manly part. Scorne can haue no reward, but like contempt. Ieasting is tollerable, but scorne most vile. Disdaine declares a proud presuming heart. Loues passions quenched by vnkind disdaine, Doth often times encrease the more desire. Scorning is artificiall iniurie. Who scorneth most, shall be but paid with scoffes. Scorne not thy wife, least scorn'd, she do thee s athe. Better an open foe, than scornfull friend. Better be borne a foole, than wrong thy wit. No mocker, but at length did meet his match. Similies on the same subiect. AS hottest loue hath soonest cold disdaine, So greatest pleasures haue the greatest paine. As good and ill each other doe pu ue, So hate-full estimation scorne succeeds. As Adders keepe their venime in their tayles, So scoffers poyson lurketh in their tongues. As fairest beautie may deserue some blame, So wittiest scoffes prooue but ridiculous. As some things sweet in taste, are sowre going downe, So scoffes that like the eare, dislike the mind. As faire demeanour most commends a man, So scornes and scoffes as much dishonour him. Examples likewise on the same. CAligula did couet his owne ease, And yet disdain'd others should doe the like. Anthonie causde the head of Cicero In scorne, be set before him at his meat. Plato, Xenophon, and Demosthenes, Against each other were contemptuous. Geta and Antoninus, being brethren, Slew one the other through their priuat scorne. Among all perturbations, Tullie saith, Disdaine is most iniurious to it selfe. And Fabius Maximus holds like conceit, Affirming, nothing worser than contempt. Of Slaunder, &c. Slaunder and base Detraction, is the fruit Of deuilish hearts, and foule polluted soules. WHo liues, that standeth out of slaunders reach? Detractions tongue, delights in ill reports. What likes not mallice, straight disprais'd must be, Slaunder is blind, and cannot vertue see, In slaundring speech, enu e takes pleasure most. With spightfull tongue detract no honest mind. Doe what we will, we cannot s ape the sting Of slaundrous tongues, that s li afresh doe spring. Take not away that thou canst not restore: Encrease not griefe, but rather sai e the sore. Detracting speech, of heauen doth not smell, But rather stinking, like the p t of hell. Leudnesse is still defam'd, and euer was. Bold slaunders tongue, time neuer can suppresse. Good words of all men gaineth laud and praise, Where slaunders are but counted cast-awayes. No secret's hid, where slaunder keepes the dor Detraction will not spare Dianaes name. Detracting talke, Gods picture out doth race, And setteth vp the Deuils in the place. A free consent is priuiledg'd from blame. Slaunder can neuer iust deserts deface. The Bee hath honey, so he hath a sting: The one doth wound, more than the other heales. Against bad tongues, goodnes cannot defend he . A sprightly wit disdaines detraction. Men hardly stop the infamie and noise, Of slaunders published by common voice. An vniust slaunder hath no recompence. Foule mouth'd detraction is his neighbours foe. Blame is esteem'd more blame-lesse generall, Than that which priuat errours doth pursue. Slanders call things in question, not approues them. A tale vn ptly told, may be dep au'd. An open slaunder, often times hath brought That to effect, which neuer else was thought. Flatterie, lyes, and slaunder, are sworne friends. Slaunder will wrong his friend behind his backe. Slaunder like enuies dogge, detects the dead. Slaunders like arrowes gainst a wall rebound, And soon'st of all the slaunderer doth wound. Slaunder being odious, so would others make. Slaunder may barke at truth, but cannot b te. All itching eares doe swallow many wrongs. Who by his slaundring tongue his neighbour harmes, Doth wound his owne soule by his wicked words. Large slaunders are apparant signes of enuie. Slaunder offends the liuing, gnawes the dead. Patience is prooued by detraction. No bane to friendship, worse than slaunder is. Similies on the same subiect. AS Rats and Myce doe feed vpon our meat, So slaunderers feed on flesh of other men. As diuers meats doe hurt digestion, So changeable reports begetteth slaunder. As Princes armes reach very farre in length, So slaunder stretcheth vnto following times. As deepe incisions are for festred sores, So mightie meanes must cure vp slaunders wounds. As vultures prey vpon dead carion, So slaunderers feed vpon mens liuing names. As Somners liue by peoples daily sinnes, So slaunders liue by killing mens good fame. Examples likewise on the same. NArsetes that renowmed Generall, By slaunders was dismissed from his charge. When Scipio was by slaunder highly wrong'd, His discreet answere soone acquited him. Calisthenes, Parmenio, and Philotae . By slaundrous accusations lost their liues. Augustus pardon'd one that would haue slaine him, But banisht him that falsely slaundred him. Diogenes affirmed, the slaunderer Was worse than any wild or furious beast. Seneca saith, O theeues men may beware, But hardly shall they scape the slaunderer. Of the Tongue, &c. The tongue is tell-tale of the priuat thoughts, And words oft times doe ouer-reach the wise. WOrds are but wind, they bid, but doe not buy. The greatest words, oft times haue weakest deeds. Deepe sounds make lesser noise than shallow foords: And sorrow ebbes, being blowne with wind of words. Imperious tongues doe scorne to vse entreats. The vulgar tongue prooueth vnpartiall still. Few words doe euer it a trespasse est, Where no excuse can giue the fault amends. A soft slow tongue, true marke of modestie. The least discourse is commonly most stout. Presumption's euer fullest of deceits, And many times proud words haue poore effects. Words are but shadowes of a further smart. Things being twise told, the vulgar not allow. The further men doe speake of things well done, They haue more mouthes, but not more merit wonne. Not words, but deeds are still respected most. No charming words by dead tongues vttered are. Of others faults what need we babble so, When we our selues haue vices many moe? Few words will serue a righteous cause to plead. Great power haue pleasing words, and mickle might. Faire pleasing words are like to Magiq e Art, That doth the charmed snake in slumber lay. With words and gifts, it's easie to attempt. Speech doth preuaile, where weapons cannot win. He that no more must speake, is listned more, Than they whome youth and ease hath taught to glose. By good perswasion, what cannot be done? Curses, are but vaine breathings in the aire. Curses resemble arrowes shot vpright, Which falling downe, light on the shooters head. The tongues of dying men enforce attention, The hearts aboundance issues from the tongue. Still easie yeelding zeale is quickly caught, With what the mouth of grauitie hath taught. Foule paiment for faire words is more than needs. The tongues mis-vse oft breeds the bodies smart. Sorrow makes silence her best Oratour, Where words may make it lesse, not shew it more. In poore mens words, the rich haue small delight. Report can make a substance of a shade. Follie doth guide the tongue that vainly speakes, And vaine is that which modest measure breakes. In many words must needs be much amisse. Mens thoughts and words nothing so opposite. Few words among the wise haue greater grace, Than long Orations with vnskilfulnes. Words are the shadowes of our daily workes. Superfluous speech doth much disgrace a man. Griefe sometimes doth distressed minds so wreake, That heart neere bursteth ere the tongue can speake. The tongue gads many times before the wit. Much babling doth bewray great impudence. Words are but fruitlesse that infect the eare, Without some sweet impression of the mind. Wine often-times is cause of many words. The fewer words, the more discretion. That man may worthily be said to do e, That trusts faire words, and solles his goods for smoke. When swords haue pleaded, words doe come too late. The lesse men speake, the more they meditate. Bargaines made by constraint, may well be broken: And words by force compeld, as well vnspoken. By the hearts thoughts, the tongue is carried. Few words well coucht, doe most content the wise. Reports in Co s are held both night and day, As common guests, and seldome pa t away. Seld speaketh loue, but sighes his secret paines. Of whome the tongue talkes much, the heart thinkes more. Better by speaking little, make a s arre, Than by much babling cause a wide deepe wound. Report hath oft a blister on her tongue. The sweetest words may come from sowrest hearts. The words that sound the sweetest in the eare, Are not the wholso 'st alwaies to the heart. In many words is couched most mistrust. Who fights with words, doth soonest wound himselfe. Many repent the words that they haue spoke, But neuer any, that they held their peace. The coldest words, oft cooles the hottest throat. Workes, and not words, doe most commend a man. Spend stripes on him, whome words may not retaine: Yet spend to mend by strokes, but not to maime. From fewest words may great effects ensue. Silence hath seldome yet made any sad. Whereas desire doth vrge the tongue to speake, Somwhat must out, or else the heart will breake. The tongue is call'd, the gate of life and death. Who speakes with heed, may boldly say his mind. The man whose tongue before his wit doth run, Oft speakes too soone, and rues when he hath done. A word once past, can be recalde no more. Better be silent, than in vaine to speake. As good be dombe, as speake and not be heard. Similies on the same subiect. AS one sparke may procure a mightie fire, So one ill tongue may cause great enmitie. As riuers are bound in with bankes for ouer-flowing, So reason should restraine too lauish talking. As gold boiles best when it doth bubble least, So mild deliuerance sweetens best our words. As silence is a gift deuoid of feare, So talking is a thing to vrge suspect. As he beares miserie best that hides it most, So he declares least wit that prateth most. As we must giue account for idle silence, So much more must we for our fruitlesse talke. Examples likewise on the same. POmpey let burne his finger in the fire, Rather than he would be too free of tongue. V ysse in his you h refrain'd from speech, Because in yeares he would direct his tongue. Great Alexander, gaue Cherillus coine To hold his peace, and to forbeare to write. Antig nus this lesson taught his sonne, First to learne silence, then to practise speech. Ze o repr oued one that prated much, And said, his eares were founded on his tongue▪ The to gue (saith Aristotle ) blabs the mind, And fooles or wise men soone thereby we find. Of Flatterie, &c. Flatterie, is friendships vtter ouerthrow, The wracke of States, and honest natures foe. THe greenest hearb, oft hides the foulest toad. The stillest water hath the deepest channell. It's better to be blamed by a friend, Than to be kissed of a flatterer. Soothing g ts friends, but truth doth purchase hate. A seeming friend, is a deceitfull bogge. Flatterie suruiues not at the dead mans dore, Liue men haue eares, when tombes are deafe and poore. Of false dissembling, foulie must be fall. The best dissembler, hath the brauest wit. It is esteem'd no certaine way to thriue, To praise the dead, but flattering men aliue. Dissembled holinesse, is double crime. Faire feigned tales conuey foule things from sight. Dissembling sometimes may attaine to saue Mens liues, their ame, their goods, and all they haue. Chuse few friends, trie them, flatterers speake faire. Men strew sweet flowers to hide the deepest snares. Mens pleas in loue, like painters pensils are, Which figure shadowes, and the substance leaue. Faire outward shewes prooue inwardly the worst. Loue looketh faire, when hap is most accurst. The badge of hypocrites is noted still, By alwayes speaking well, yet doing ill. Flatterie doth verie seldome want rewards. To flatter wise men, shewes discretions want. When greatest braues are brought to trials proofe, The boasters are content to stand aloofe. Flatterers r spect their owne good, no mans else. Better a wretch, than a dissembler. False flatterers are worse than greedie crowes: The one de oure aliue, the other dead. Plaine, and not honest, is too ha sh a style. Men still doe foullest, when they fairest speake. Fond Physiognomies complexion, Guides not the inward disposition. Better offend with truth, than flattering praise. Flatterers are nought else but trencher flyes. True loue's a Saint, so shall ye true loue know, False loue's a S ithian, yet a Saint in show. Flatterie i the nource of wickednesse. Dissembling weares a cloake, truth naked goes. The smoothest lookes, doe soon'st of all beguile, And oft are clokes to cogitations vile. Womens dissembling hardly can be matcht. A foe is better than a dissembling friend. Similies on the same subiect. AS vultures sleepe not where they find no prey, So flatterers haunt not but where profit growes. As vermine bre d in places of most warmth, So flatterers cling where best they find reliefe. As Pilgrims creepe not but where is some crosse, So slye dissemblers crouch not but for gaine. As othes the finest garments doe consume, So flatterers feed vpon the frankest hearts. As Panthers haue sweet sents, but rauenous minds, So flatterers haue smooth lookes, but killing hea s. As straightest trees haue still the crookedst roots, So all dissemblers haue the craftiest trickes. Examples likewise on the same. THe Emperour Sigismond strooke a flatterer, And said: He bit worse than a Scorpion. Augustus so detested flatterie, He could not bide his seruants kneele to him. Tyberius seruants might not call him Lord, Because he said, therein they flatter'd him. Clisiphus was call'd Philips counterfeit, Because like him he fashion'd all he did. Phocion said to king Antipater, He could not be his friend and flatterer. Wise men (saith Bias ) make not all their friends, But haue a speciall eye to flatterers. Of good Deeds, &c. Good Deeds confound all bad, suppresse offence: Correcting faults with loue and patience. THat is a good deed which preuents the bad. Good vowes are neuer broken by good deeds. He that sets downe what gifts in goodnes lurke, Shall breath him twise, before he end his worke. In persons full of note, good deeds are done. Vowes are but seeds, and good deeds are the fruits. Good turnes ought not be held a seruile bond, To bind their doers to receiue their meed. That which doth good, disgraceth no degre . We haue no good, that we can say is ours. Of passed good to make a new discourse, By double vsurie doth twise renew it. Good lampes will shine till all their oyle be gone. Each goodly thing is hardest to begin. When as the doing good, is only thought Worthy reward, who will be bad for nought? Raise not the bad, to make the good complaine. No good at all, with doing ill, is wonne. Let vs not thinke, that that our good can frame, Which ruin'd hath the Authors of the same. They are too blame, which deeds well done wil wrest. Good deeds, the cruelt'st heart to kindnesse brings. Good done to any, doth impression strike Of ioy and loue, in all that are alike. Good deeds, are famishment vnto the deuill. The end is crowne of euery worke well done. Good still is best when it is soonest wrought, For lingring-fauour euer comes to nought. The way to good, is neuer learn'd too late. Faults should be measur'd by intent, not deed. Nothing so good, but may through guiltie shame, Be much corrupt, and wrested to great blame. Ig orant faults craue pardon still by course. Fa ts done, may be repented, not reclaim'd. He that will purchase things of greatest price, Must conquer by his deeds, and not by words. Faults vncommitted, challenge no repent. Many deserts, may lessen slender faults. Vniust offences daunger scape a time, But yet at length reuenge doth pay them home. Faults oft are measur'd by their secr cie. An error past, is likewise past recalling. There's nought so vile that on the earth doth liue, But to the earth some speciall good doth giue. Good is the end that cannot be amended. Where good is found, we should not quit with ill. There's nought so good, but strain'd from that faire vse: Reuolts to vice, and stumbles on abuse. Gold and base mould, no difference but by vse. Better to heare than doe what is not well. For ones offence, why should a number fall, Or priuas sinne be plagu'd in generall? Seldome but some good commeth ere the end. Gay without good, is good hearts greatest loathing. Forraine defects giuing home faults the way, Make many times bad actions well succeed. Still the directest courses best succeed. Vertue conducteth to all things are good. First weigh the qualitie of each offence, And thereunto apply the punishment. What one thinkes good, another counts as vaine. The highest iudger quickely can spie, If faults or fraud doe vnder couert lye. Wisdome directs to know the good from bad. As oft as we doe good, wee sacrifice. The more ur grace and goodnesse doth encrease, The more our soules prepare them selues to God. Truth is the guide to all good actions. Neuer repent thee of thy well-done deeds. The goodnesse that proceeds from ignorance, I like the hearbs that on a dunghill growes. Good men doe still delight in doing good. Good deeds doe shew the fruits of zealous faith. Similies on the same subiect. AS hardest stones are pier 'd with softest drops, So vertuous deads reforme the loosest minds. As ond behauiour most displaies a foole, So honest deeds declare an honest heart. As falling starres are soone extinguished, So slight offences craue quicke pardoning. As sullein lookes bewrayes reuenge-full thoughts, So mild aspect declares a gentle heart. As golden bridles better not a horse, So words without good deeds, shew not a man. As bankets haue no grace, where wanteth guests, So words are litle worth, where deeds come short. Examples likewise on the same. TRaiane reproou'd for listning poore mens wrongs, Said: None should hindet him from doing good. The Emperour Au elian had great care, Least malice should obscure his well done deeds. Philip did thanke the woman for her checke, And said: Still c ide me when I doe not well. Augustus left his friend to iudgements triall, For hindring law (quoth he) becomes no king. Cleon being call'd to deale in state affaires, Fore-warn'd his friends be carefull of their deeds. Reward the good (saith Solon ) for their doing good, Aud punish them delight in wicked deeds. Of euill Deeds, &c. Euill deeds and wicked, come from vicious minds: And here, or some-where els, due vengeance finds. EXtreamest ills, some time a ioy possesse. Ill hardly set on, is as hard got out. Those things which we deeme good, oft prooue but ill. Counsell that comes when ill hath done his worst, Blesseth our ill, but makes our good accurst. To put backe ill, our good we must forbeare. Euill tidings still doe faster flye than good. Our greatest ills, we most of all mistiust. A guiltie conscience, vrged with the thought Of former ill done deeds, not easily erres. Euils vnto euils, still conducters are. Ill comes too soone, repentance oft too late. Ill newes hath wings, and with the wind doth ye. In the first rising, seeke to stifle ill, Least it get head, and grow against thy will. That daye's ne're ill, that brings a pleasing night Worse than the worst of euils, are wicked thoughts. No blush can paint the shame is due to ill. The apprehension of what e're is good, Giues but the greater feeling to the worse. All wicked deeds doe wrathfull doomes procure. In euills, counsell is the comfort chiefe. Many times good doth grow by euils proofe. By euill courses may be vnderstood, That their euents can neuer fall out good. When ill is hapt, teares but encrease the ill. Ill by example often gaineth good. It's double griefe to see a helplesse ill. Great men that will haue lesse doe for them still, Must beare them out, although their deeds be ill. Good heart in ill, doth much the ill amend. It's better to reforme, than cut off ill. The wor er deed, the doer likes for best. Neuer was man so euill, did or thought, But would pretend some good cause, though starke naught. Good words doe often couer ill pretence. One day doth wreake the ill that many wrought. Mischiefe oft falls vpon the meaners head. An euill deed one by authoritie, Is mightie sinne and subornation. The good compar'd with bad is soonest seene. Who will not stoope to good, must yeeld to ill. Mischiefe doth euer ouer-match the bad. The wicked cannot sleepe or take their rest, Till they be pleased with some ill done deed. Mischiefe is light, and mounteth ouer head. Old mischiefes oft doe set new ills abroach. Ill president, the tyde that wa tes to vice. A minute spent in good, seemes long loath'd day, But nights of ill like moments slip away. The more ill threats vs, we suspect the lesse. To harme, there alwaies needs but little helpe. Euill ensueth of each wrong intent. With vniust men to stand debating lawes, Is to giue power to hurt a rightfull cause. Constrained ill must needs be suffered. We see the good, but yet we chuse the ill. Oft that is vile, shewes like a vertuous deed. Nothing the world with greater harme doth fill, Than want of feeling one anothers ill. Mens faults doe seldome to them-selues appeare. Men smoother partially their owne misdeeds. Faults still against them-selues giue euidence. When better choices are not to be had, We needs must take the seeming best of bad. The euill doth alwaies argue the offence. One bad done deed, may worke to many ill. Euill seeming good, is most pernicious. Those euils where to a man by loue is driuen, So much the rather ought to be forgiuen. Things badly got, can haue but bad successe. Custome confirmes, and makes ill in perfection. Nothing is euill, that is necessarie. Too small a sacrifice for mischiefes done Is one mans breath, that thousands did defeat. Mischiefe is no meet way to seeke redresse. Mischiefe is oft thought good by speeding ill. A bad beginning makes a wor er end. Ill some-times is the cause of good successe, And wicked meanings turne to happinesse. One mischiefes Sunne, thawes not anothers Ice. The sight of euill sets out goodnesse best. Euill dessignes haue euill accidents. All such as are the ministers of ill, The gallowes eates, or fatall sword doth kill. Similies on the same subiect. AS Fowlers by their craft beguile the birds, So wicked deeds corrupt plaine meaning minds. As serpents food is onely on the earth, So wicked mens delights, is ill done deeds. As sheep-cloath'd Wolues do alwaies greatest spoile, So painted deeds doe most of all deceiue. As Circes witch-craft chaunged men to beasts, So wicked deeds makes seeming men bruit beasts. As braunches prosper not cut from the tree, So all is vaine that swerues from honest course. As little sparkes of ire procure great harme, So least ill deeds doe hardly find amends. Examples likewise on the same. PEricles said, th' Athenians loued him, Because they neuer could detect his deeds. Demetrius lost all his followers, Because he had no care of doing ill. Pyrrhus desired to be smit with death, When he did ought that ill beseem'd a King. Seuerus caus'd his man be smoakt to death, Because his deeds should not dishonour him. Men to doe ill, or iniurie each other, Is no meane eye-sore, Tullie doth affirme. No man (saith Socrates ) should deale vniustly In any matter, be it ne're so small. Of Thoughts. Thoughts are the flowring blossoms of the mind, And words, the daily fruits of our desires. CLose thoughts stands free from sword or violence. No kings commaund could euer hinder thought. What thought can thinke, another thought can mend A secret shame in euery thought will smother. Where feares doe Candie-thoughts with Icie-cold, Heat stirres the tongue to daungers manifold. Thoughts are but dreames, till their effects be tryed. Vnstained thoughts doe seldome dreame of ill. A fault vnknowne, is as a thought vnacted. Preuention speaketh all, but what he thinkes. That which the thought would by the tongue digest, The eare conuayes it backe into the breast. The thoughts of men are fed with expectations. All wishing thoughts sprout forth by quicke desire. Citties doe bastardize the brauest thoughts. It's very hard, imprisoned thoughts to bale. Pure thoughts doe alwayes sleepe secure and still, While lust and murder wakes to staine and kill. Thoughts oft times force a lingring life to pine. Hope strengthened, addes much matter to each thought. All womens tongues and thoughts seldome agreee. How poore soeuer, thought is rich enough. If springing thoughts be any iot diminisht, They wither in their prime, and prooue nought worth. The heart hath but one string, yet many thoughts. All earthly thoughts are subiect to annoy. Vnreuerend thoughts gainst kings, are treacherie. Vnmeasur'd thoughts, by fortune are cut short. Nothing doth sooner dry vp beauties blood, Than sullein thoughts, though it be ne're so fresh. Oft princes thoughts are tyed to beauties wings. All wicked thoughts haue still a wicked end. Sweet is the thought, where hope perswadeth hap. Sweet are the thoughts that neuer found amisle. Nothing doth sooner shorten life of man, Than vaine deluding hopes, and idle thoughts. Deare is the thought whereby discretion liues. Thoughts prosper not, where feare doth perish them. No witnesse needeth for a guiltie thought. The meanest man, will yet in thought aspire. Our narrow-eyes thoughts oft times looke more direct▪ Than our loose wisdomes, borne with wild neglect. All leaden thoughts, than earth no higher flyes. Full many signes bewrayes our secret thoughts. Thoughts often-times doe shroud vs in the earth. To muse and meditate, is learnings life. By common cariage of the outward parts, The secret thoughts are seene of many hearts. Cartie thy thoughts in silence sealed vp. Sweet are the thoughts of pleasures we haue tryed. Thoughts are not seene, yet lookes bewray the mind. Similies on the same subiect. AS white and blacke are contrarie in sight, So words and thoughts are very different. As fire and water neuer can agree, Euen so mens words and thoughts doe disagree. As courtiers cloakes are shifted very oft, So are our thoughts neuer at certaine stay. As light is welcome to perplexed minds, So merrie thoughts doe banish sadnesse best. As euery tree hath his peculiar fruit, So euery man hath his owne priuat thought. As merrie hosts care not for frowning guests, So pleasant minds can brooke no pensiue thoughts. Examples likewise on the same. CAesar did neuer feare a merrie looke. But doubted sad men to haue wicked thoughts. The Spartanes carried commendation, Because they scorn'd to beare iniurious thoughts. Puluillus being told, his sonne was dead, Made answere: Therefore he would take no thought. When Scipio read the bookes of Xenophon, He said: They counsail'd him from taking thought. Thoughts doe afflict the mind, saith Cicer , And makes it subiect to no certaintie. Saith Aristotle, They need Physicke most, That doe deuoure their health by fretfull thoughts. Of Teares, &c. Teares are best friends to solitarie minds: And mourning is a foe to company. WEeping auailes not, where laments are scorn'd. Our teares oft times draw teares from others eies. Great losses, greatly are to be bemoan'd. Teares tye the tongue of an accusers grudge, And softs the rigour of the stearnest iudge. No griefe like that, to mourne and be despis'd. A troubled soule in teares her comfort seekes. Well mourning garments fit a mourning mind. Teares are dumbe Oratours, and wanting speech, Perswade some-time more than the tongue can doe. Teares are the most effectuall hetoricke▪ Teares are the treasure of a griefe-gald heart. Griefe tyes the tongue, and sorrow stoppeth teares. Teares must not be as torments, but at markes To shew the loue we beare vnto our friend. Teares will appease, where trespasse hath incenst. Repentant teares doth quench Gods kindled ire. Teares sh d in time, doth winne a blisse-full houre. Our teares must be as drops of vitall blood, Not feigned, but deriued from the heart. The heart may weepe, although the eyes be drie. Partners in loue, are partners in laments. Eyes are first causers of the hearts lamenting. Musicke can hardly solace humane eares, When strings are broke, and eyes are drown'd in teares, Soft teares make batterie in the hardest heart. Teares deem'd but silent, are as loud as thunder. Teares are swift postes to certifie our griefes. They seldome doe respect poore beggers teares, That may haue musique to delight their eares. Teares are as nourishment to godly soules. Weeping is ioy to well-affected minds. Our eyes must not be drowned, nor yet dry. To weepe for losse, or worldly dignitie And not for sinne, is meere hypocrisie. Teares kindle loue, and qualifie displeasure. The deepest cares, breake neuer into teares. Teares ill becomes the Iudge that first condemnes. To weepe alone, is thought an yrkesome sore: Yet companie disturbeth some, much more. Venus smiles seldome in a house of teares. It's better wake and weepe, than sleepe and ioy. Teares ease the mind, though else doe small auaile. Drops pierce the flint, not by their force or strength, But by oft falling weares it out at length. Teares shed for vertues sake, are blessed teares. Teares worke no ruth, but where the heart is tender. Teares are the riches of a sighing soule. Griefe-broken hearts doe liue with teares in eyes, And dy with mirth, appearing in their lookes. Griefe till all ends, hath neuer perfect ending. Sighes vsually proceed from griefe and smart. Teares doe but blind the eyes, as clouds the aire. The rich man doth reuenge him-selfe by armes, But poore men haue no other helpe than teares. Whose griefes are great, haue need of quickest cure. Teares cannot change what God hath fore-decreed. Teares do want eies which should giue tears to weep. Teares are no remedies for sad distresse: Neither can present plaints ease passed harmes. Hearts true contrition, is soules blisse beginner. Teares are the badges of true penitence. Similies on the same subiect. AS some men weepe that are not rightly sad. So many smile that are not rightly glad. As trees by nature bringeth forth their fruit, So sorrow doth by custome shed ad teares. As thunder alwayes is not quencht with raine, So griefe not euer is appea d with teares. As too much boldnesse is in women bad, So fits it not in men to be too ad. As showres of raine doe cause the earths encrease, So streames of teares doe giue the soule true peac . As weeping Oliue trees most fruitfull are, So mourning minds doe soonest kill despaire. Examples likewise on the same. BRaue Coriolanus being banisht Rome, oucht with his fault, went forth, and dide in teares. The Romane matrons for old Brutus death, For one whole yere did nothing else but mourne. The wife of Lepidus, her misbehauiour, In teares and anguish did abridge his daies. Crassus was neuer seene in all his life But once to smile; but many times to mourne. Sen e saith, That mightie men by power Reuenge themselues; the weaker, by their teares. The broken heart (saith Tullie ) hath moist eyes, When often-times it faignes forth merrie lookes. Of Humilitie, &c. Humilitie, is lowlinesse of mind, The onely way, the seat of blisse to find. HVmilitie lookes lowly on the ground. Humilitie, her friends with kindnesse feeds. The lowly dales enuie not highest hills. Humilitie, to heauen, the steppe, the staire, Is by deuotion, heartie griefe, and prayer. The lowly mind doth highest gifts adorne. Meeknesse of heart is glorie to man-kind. Humilitie admires his paine with ioy. The kindly dew drops from the higher tree, And wets the little plants that lowly dwell. The Cedar yeeldeth to the Axes edge. Better sit still, than rise, and after fall. The shrub is safe, when the tall Cedar shakes, H that high growth on Cedars did bestow, Gaue likewise lowly Mushromes leaue to grow. Humble and meeke, becomes both young and old. Gray hath lesse griefe, than costly silken utes. Humilitie walkes lowly on the earth, Assur'd of certaine dignitie in heauen. The lowest shrubs doe feele the fewest stormes▪ The minds submission pulls downe loftie lookes. When as the Eagle meanes his highest flight, He makes his mounting in the lowest dale. Great floods doe often rise from humble streames▪ Content below, ne're climbes to seeke aloft. The cottage seated in the lowly dale, Is more secure than highest soueraigntie. Humilitie, the oules chiefe beautie is. Humilitie doth anger soone asswage. A lowly life that feares no suddaine losse, Is still content, how-euer things goes crosse. An humble mind sauours of pietie. True humblenes doth all mens vertues praise. A mind that feares no fall, nor craues no crowne, Is in the rightest way to true renowme. Religions chiefe precept, is humblenes. Happie that man, who is in honour humble. Where humble thoughts doe to the heauens aspire, There is no place for any proud desire. The minds best armour, is humilitie. Lowlinesse is the perfect path to honour. Humilitie hath brought those things to passe, Which reason, nor no vertue else could doe. Pride wageth warre against humilitie. By lowlinesse, is true discretion wonne. Proud minds can hardly learne humilitie. Humilitie augments beneuolence, Supporteth truth, and keepes a kingdome safe. Humilitie reuiues dead charitie. The face doth soone expresse an humble mind. Truth soone appeares to humble minded men. The noble Lyon neuer slayes the least, But alwayes preyes vpon the proudest beast. Humilitie rules all the minds affects. No way to heauen, but by humilitie. Humilitie winnes immortalitie. Humilitie with perfect grace stands fast, When all things else are vanished and past. Breake not a bending reed, spare the submisse. Earth vessels, with the brazen may not striue. Similies on the same subiect. AS lowlinesse of heart brings downe heauens grace, So humble words can proudest tearmes deface. As salt doth season euery kind of meat, So lowlinesse doth shew all vertues best. As vallies sertilnesse the hills exceeds, So humble lowlinesse shewes fairest deeds. As wine in lowest vaults is best preseru'd, So grace in humble minds is best discern'd. As proud presumption seekes his owne decay, So lowlinesse to blisse directs the way. As ignorance most scorneth to be taught, So humblenesse desireth still to learne. Examples likewise on the same. PHilip for humblenes of mind was praisd, Beyond all princes of the Macedons. Antigon s with great humilitie, Bare off the launders of his enemies. Scipio, in all his fottunes neuer sweru'd, From patient sufferance, and humilitie. Pericles most of all defam'd him-selfe, By making scorne of true humilitie. Tullie affirmes, all vertues what-soe're, Are soonest learned by humilitie. Plato calls lowlinesse, the soules defence, And onely shield against extremities. Of Authoritie, &c. Authoritie, proud pompe, and worldly power, Makes monarchs but as marks, whē fate doth lower. AVthoritie makes many m n seuere. Death giues no thanks, but checks authority. It is in vaine, and fondly we resist, Against proud might, that can doe what it list▪ A lawfull title counter-checks proud might. The greatest oft may need a weaker helpe. Little auailes a lawlesse vsurpation, Which gaines ascepter, but not rules a nation. Might wanting measure, prooueth surquedrie. Nothing o l as w ong, being arm'd with right. Might is reputed absolute alone, When of two powers there's true coniunction. Some lea e to rule, while others learne to liue. They th stand high, haue many blasts to shake them Vain is the vaunt, and vi orie vmust, Th t more to might, than ightfull cause doth trust. When great leaues all, then winter is at hand. Needs must we doe, what might will force vs doe. The er-spreading pompe of greatest might, Will darken weaknesse, and debase his sight. What mightie men misdoe, they cannot mend. Deepe are the blowes made with a mightie Ax . More than enough he finds, that finds his might, Hath force to make all that he will haue, right. The more, the migh ier, if they gree in one. Arme not vnskilfulnes with mightie power. He, who his ow e cause makes, doth still deuise, To make too ch▪ to haue is more than sure. Great is the daunger of vnmastred might. Too many great, one kingdome cannot hold. Where power hath decreed o find offence, Th cause is better still, than the defence. Might makes a title, where he hath no right. M n count that wrong, is compassed by might. He onely tr ds the sure and perfect path To greatnesse, who loue and opinion hath. Vncertaine power, cannot it selfe retaine. Custome hath power to kill with weakest might. Who falls bu ow, may quickely rise againe: Who falls rom h ight, is mercilessely slaine. Loue is not alwa es dign ies companion. The tallest trees are shaken most with winds. When one selfe-power is common made to two, Their duties they nor suffer▪ nor will doe. Preferment is the first step to disquiet. In equall play-fellowes, no perill lyes. The man that giues a weapon to his stronger, Is like himselfe to carrie rule no longer. Ech little spot, appeares most in the face. Great might is like a fortified tower. No man can manage great affaires of state, And yet content a wayward multitude. Where many lead, they lead to many blowes. Let Gods with Gods, and men with men contend. What ere he be, with his superiour playes, Stands in the mouth of daunger many wayes. He hardly will entreat, that may commaund. All dignitie on tickle stayes doth stand. With mightie men 'tis better ceasing strife, Than an vnequall quarrell to maintaine. There is no hell, like to declining pompe. He sits not safest, that is mounted high. In high degree small faul s are quickely spyde, But low estate a many errours hyde. No high estate can yeeld a quiet life. The power of vertue euer-more preuailes. What though our sinnes goe braue and better clad? They are in ragges as base and all as bad. Might breakes the law the sacred Senat makes. The more our greatnesse, makes our faul s the more. Similies on the same subiect. AS in fine cloth the brightest staines we see, So faults are most discern'd in high degree. As stie cl mbers oft catch suddaine falls, So might mis-vsde, doth kindle nought but braules. A he that stands on high, stands still in feare, So they that manage states, doe want no care. As Rasors are not fit for childrens hands, So fooles no way beseeme authoritie. As presidents are aptest meanes for youth, So rulers goodnesse giues example best. As the great Elme supports the spreading vine, So might ought still support humilitie. Examples hereof are generally through the booke: as in Kings, Princes, Kingdomes, Magistrates, &c. and therefore no need of other collections. Of Courage, &c. Courage, is foe to faint-heart cowardise: And man-hood, teacheth valour to be wise. COurage emboldneth wit, wit courage armes. Without experience, valour wants his armes. Daunger and feare, like cowards turnes aside, Wh n man-hood is by resolution tryde. Skill valour guides, and valour armeth skill. Who hopes a conquest, leaues no means vnsought. The inward thoughts, that haughtie courage bear s, Gri ucs mo at words, than deaths pale-faced f ar s. Courage, with cowardise will not be matcht. The valiant man, doth most in warre delight. Seldome shall any liuing creature se , That courtesie and manhood disagree. The coward seekes to liue at home in ease. Valour is neuer knowne till it be tryed. They that attempt high da ngers uident, Vpon no reason, are not valiant. Actions doe kill imaginations sway. Vnequall warres, t'vnequall shame is sold. The man that dares, not caring how he dar s▪ Sells vertues name, to purchase foolish skarres. Rebellious natures must be roughly vs'd. Repining courage yeelds no foe a foot. Cowards doe onely wish and call for death, While valiant hearts in silence banish breath. Vaine words cannot bewitch a valiant mind. Measure not manhood by the outward shewe▪ The noble courage neuer weeneth ought, That may vnworthie of it selfe be thought. Chaffer no words, high courage to prouoke. Courage may lend a cloake to cowardise. Nothing the praise of manhood more doth marre Than foule reuenge, and base contentious iarre. Action, is fierie valours soueraigne good. True valour lodgeth in the lowliest hearts. High courage with true wisdome alwayes backe▪ Winnes perfect fame, and shunneth each mishap. Weakenesse is false, and faith in cowards rare. Glori doth follow, courage goes before. The man that couples courage with desire, Runnes freely through his daunger, and preuailes. True valour aimes at honour euermore. A cowards heart keepes words and deeds asunder. A iewell in a ten-times bard-vp chest, I a bold spirit in a loyall breast. Courage and industri can neuer want. In conquering will, true courage most is shewen. In vain hee seeketh others to suppresse, Who hath not learn'd first to subdue him-selfe. All strength is fraile, and full of ficklenesse. No fortunes frowne can daunt true valors heart. Beggers (but eigning brauerie) are the proudest: And cowards (bragging boldnesse) wrangle loudest. A valiant mind disdaines to hide his head. It's cowardise, vnworthie wrongs to beare. Where wronged valour reign s, it's hard to find Such pittis, as may honours pride controll. True valour, feeles nor griefe nor miserie. Resolute courage, makes loue fortunate. Cowards in p ace doe dread the weapons sight. But vrg'd by need, will venture then the pikes▪ Courage to die, exceeds a captiu'd life. Courage despiseth dread, and conquers death. Similies on the same subiect. AS courage addeth wings to braue desire, So bloodie shewes doth quench incensedire. As it is valour to be conquerour, So wisdome maketh vse of victorie. As courage keepes the mind from base assaults, So cowardise infects it with all faults. As courage is esteem'd a wise mans coat, So cowardise is follies cognisance. As Faulconers doe in Faulcons most delight, So mightie men reioyceth in their might. Examples likewise on the same. THe Roman Sergius, loosing his right hand, Slew with his left hand, foure in single fight. Scaeuola entred king Porsennaes Tent, Either to kill him, or be slaine by him. Agis disswaded from the fight, replyed: No man wonne shame, that with true courage dyde. Stout Al ibiades cheerd vp his followers, By his couragious lead ng them to field. Courage, saith Seneca, is of such power, As it can conquer any miserie. Plato saith, Courage eleuates the mind, To all things that are laudable and iust. Of Pleasure, &c. Pleasure and sweet Delights, doe much beguile: Expecting ioy, griefe happens oft meane-while. PLeasures are poore, and our delights soone dye. Where pleasure is displac'd, care keepes his arte. Where care killes pleasure, life not long endures. Who tries, shall find, that pleasures long restrain'd. Be farre more pleasant when they once are gain'd. Where strife is stirr'd, there pleasure hath no part. Worlds pleasure lasts not long, but griefe abides. Farewell delight, when graueld is all grace. Neuer haue vniust pleasures been compleat In ioyes entire, but feare still keepes the doore. The sweetest pleasure hath the shortest date. Long wished things, a sweet delight doe beare. Pleasure and penaunce still are mortall foes. Enforced solace, like a vapour flyes, And hath no power repining hearts to mooue. Solace and sorrow haue their certaine times. While pleasure withers, paine more ripe doth grow. When pleasures bbe, then griefes begin to flow. To vaine delights, a man may easily goe: But safely to returne, may much be fear'd. Best musicke breeds delight in loathing cares. The strong, through pleasure falls; he weak, by smart. Pleasures doe neuer feed, but n exc sse. He that in pleasures vaine doth time bestow, Treads but the path to his ow e ouerthr w. In things without vs, no delight is sure. Pleasure is felt, opinion but conceiu'd. Pleasure is short, and glory lasts not long. The sweets we wish for, tu ne to at ed son e s▪ Euen in the moment, that we call them ours. That pleaseth most, is arthest from the eye. Low is the stalke, whereon best pleasures grow▪ Pleasure asleepe, then so ow will awake. Maids are not wonne by brutish force or might, But speeches full of pleasure and delight. Pleasure maintain'd by care, is quickly lost. After long sicknesse, health brings most delight. Vncertaine pleasures, bring a certaine paine. Ma des doe take more delight, when they prepare And thinke of wiues state, than when wiues they are. Shortest delights, doe bring a long repent. Pleasures them-selues, are but imaginations. Things soone obtain'd, doe least of all delight. This wo ld is but the pleasure of an houre, And yet the sorrow of a thousand da es. Oft pleasures past, doe way to woe prepare. In worldly mi th, lurketh much miserie. All sweet delights, are drown'd in dulled minds. Pleasures (li e posting guests) make but small stay, Where griefes ide long, and leaue a score to pay. It's true delight, to know the cause of griefe. Mi th oundeth harsh to melancholly men. Mirth makes the longest iournies to seeme short. What more apparant signe can be of madnesse, Than haue anothers pleasure cause thy sadnesse? Who buyes a minutes mirth, may waile a weeke. Mirth searcheth out the bottome of annoy. Vnlawfull pleasures, haste destruction. Potions (if pleasant) though insectious, Are sooner ta ne, than holesome pill for health. Sorrow, fore-going pleasure, graceth it. Gladnesse with griefe, continually is mixt. Banke-rupts in pleasure, can but pay with woe. We are right docible to imitate Depraued pleasures, though degenerate. Short pleasures many times haue large repents. Pleasures are still inductions to our griefes. Oft hath a tragicke entrance, pleasant end. Similies on the same subiect. AS no estate can stable stand for aye, So euery pleasure hath his ending day. As small brookes swell and are enrag'd with raine, So sight of pleasure trebleth euery paine. As weeds expeld, the corne doth better thriue, So care being kild, pleasure bides long aliue. As greatest griefes doe make the least not seene, So huge delights cause meane ones vanish cleane. As greatest light, is in the largest skie, So that delights, is furthest from the eye. As sad minds brooke no merrie companie, So sorrow is to pleasure enemie. Examples likewise on the same. SArdanapalus was so giuen to pleasure, That of a man, he made him-selfe a beast. Xerxes bestowed gifts on none but such, As daily could inuent new kinds of pleasures. In King Latinus Court, the royans In choise of all delights did spend their time. Demetrius being to all vaine pleasures giuen, Was by the Macedonians quite expulst. Cineas told Fabritius, that vaine pleasure, Did like a moath consume the life of man. Demosthenes in his Orations, Alwayes forbad voluptuous vaine delights. Of Paine. Paine, as companion doth on Pleasure wait: And Daunger is the hand-maid to Delight. SHort paine may be endur'd, that brings long ease. He neuer findeth helpe, that hides his paine. Farre harder is it, to learne continence In ioyfull pleasures, than in grieuous paine. They lesser paines can beare, that hide the great. Paine profit reapes, if seeds be wisely sowne. Where words be scarse, th'are seldome spent in vaine, For they speake truth, that breath their words with paine. Soone-dying mirth, begets long-liuing paine. Who bears the wound, perfor e must feele the paine. The man that needs will seeke for vnknowne gaine, Oft liues by losse, and leaues with mickle paine. The greater paine, the greater miserie. Paine payes the in-come of each precious thing. It easeth some, though none it euer cur'd, To thinke that others haue their paines endur'd. It's paine to keepe the things we would expresse. All labours haue their end, but paine hath none. No paine or sicknesse doth so swiftly breed, As euill humours grow, the griefe to feed. To get, and keepe not; is not losse, but paine. Paine breedeth honour, vertue getteth fame. Better in prison euer to remaine, Than being orth, to suffer greater paine. With ease a sparke, with paine is quencht a flame. Pleasure doth follow paine, and blisse annoy. It's paine and griefe, to beare and suffer wrong: But shame and sinne to him that causeth it. An inward sore strikes the Phisition blind. Salues seldome helpe ouer-long festred sores. How mightie is the soueraigne power of loue, Which paine, thirst, hunger, no nor death can moo ? Sad musicke to sad passions, addes more paine. One paine is lessened by anothers anguish. Let him for euer liue in woe and griefe, That feeleth paine, and will not haue reliefe. Paine is the entrance to eternall ioy. How fraile is that which men atchieue with paine▪ They that must either serue, or pine in want, Ought scorne no paines, that ay relieu their sca . The cause, and not the paine, the martyr makes. Remembrance of ioyes past, breeds greater paine. He that with ease may paine and harme eschew, Is vaine, if he his proper death pursue. Patience doth put all toyle-some paine to flight. He best doth beare his paine, that hides it most. ew linke for loue, but all for greedie gaine, Though in the end, it turnes them most to paine. An vnknowne paine, is greatest miserie. He cannot iudge of pleasure, ne're felt paine. Similies on the same subiect. AS daunger waiteth at the heeles of pride, So euery pleasure hath a following paine. As where mishaps doe flow, there loue doth ebbe, So where friends faile, the heart feeles no like paine. As sicke men with least anguish are disturb'd, So to vexe troubled minds, augments their paine. As Sun-shine daies of fortune getteth friends, So paine or perill looseth them as soone. As miserie a med'cine hardly finds, So inward paines, are not with pratinge cur'd. As he beares sorrow best that hides it most, So who knowes patience, stands prepar'd for paine. Examples likewise on the same. PHilostrates endured all his paines, To th'admiration of his enemies. Marius the Romane said, he felt no paine In all his hurts, if but one friend were by. Sextus Pompeius could abide no paine, No, not so much as feele his head to ake. The Spartanes for their pleasures, made strict lawes, Shewing, what paine to each one did belong. Cicero said, No paine could touch the mind, That was but rampierd▪in with usterance. And Aristotle held the same opinion, Firme resolution could subdue all paine. Of Pouertie, &c. Pouertie is a vertue of it selfe, Content with want and needie miserie. POuertie is not wisdomes hinderance. Contented pouertie is greatest wealth. Need, is esteem'd a perfect Schoole-mistresse. Need answers not to euery mans request. Poore miserie i troden on by many, And being low, neuer relieu'd by any. Wise men, must giue place to necessitie. Ignorance is the greatest pouertie. Stout vowes are oft repeal'd in extreame need. Sweet are poore crummes, where pained thoughts doe starue. Need hurteth none so much as sillie soules, Who cannot patiently endure her yoke. Plentie breeds perill, want procures di daine. Miserie craues rather mercie, than reproofe. There is no vertue like necessitie. Thanks ought be deem'd th'Exchequer of the poore. We should our selues not miserable deeme, Sith none are so but in their owne esteeme. To needie men, delay is euen as death. Most wretched he, that is, yet cannot tell. Miserie oft makes sport to mocke it selfe. The wretched conquered, may nought refuse. Who in distresse from resolution flyes, Is rightly said, to yeeld to miseries. That needs must be perform'd, which need constraines. Poore wretches haue remorse in poore abuses. The graunts are small to them that stand in need. Men flye from foes, but not from miserie. Sharpe are the wounds, but sweet the medcines be, That wretched soules from wearie bondage free. Want pines away, and comfortlesse doth dye. Delay leads impotent and s aile-pac'd need. He is not poore, hath little, but that much desires. Contented pouertie, is happinesse. A little roke will serue to make him die, That is hal e slaine before with miserie. Diligence most enableth poorest men. The loue of poore men, great mens harmes debates▪ Loue neuer keepes where wretchednes abides. Poore men should suffer for no great mens sinnes. No truer friends haue poore men than their teares, Wherein men ( ach way wretched) may be rich. It is too much for one good man to want. Giue them that want, not such as haue no need. To liue and lacke, doth breed a daily griefe. Sharpe is the food necessitie imposeth. Want smiles secure when pri cely thoughts doe feele That feare and daunger treads vpon their heele. Speed in necessitie is chiefest s e. Distresse cuts deeper than sterne fortunes frownes. Necessitie endure▪ what else would not. Miserie finds no multitude of friends. It is an ur aduersitie, With s igh▪ to ine prosperitie. Where need comp s, Orat on are in vaine. Occasion makes them s ir , that else would not. The iust mans miserie is no meane me it. Though thou a t poore▪ yet se k , and thou shalt find. Prosperitie is o of very , But men i want are hardly olpe by an . By others wants we know our owne good haps. Miserie doth the brauest mind abate. Need makes men eeke for that they somtime scornd. Want, is the enemie to good desires. Pouertie oft with heauie l gge of care Pulls ny downe, when th as ending are. Poore men are little shrubs, rich men tall trees. Need sometimes doth instruct nlawfull things. A poore and honest life hath no compare. Similies on the same subiect. AS Kings haue honour to beare out their deeds, The po re aue honestie to guide their liues. As riches se meth umbersome to ooles, So pouertie is pleasing to the wise. As riches is the mother of delight, So pouertie doth no rce calamitie. As want, to ma in tollerable, So in good men, it is most comfortable. As the wild Asse is still the Lyons prey, So doe the rich feed on the poore ech day. As euery Artizane best knowes his trade, So euery poore man best doth feele his want. Examples likewise on the same. PVblicola cast downe from high degree, Sham'd not, but ioyed in his pouertie. Aristides, from humble pouertie, Was raised to degree of dignitie. Fabritius in his meanest pouertie, Pyrrhus made choise of, as companion. Vul urnus banished by Anthonie, Neuer repined at his miserie. Pouertie, is helpe to Philosophie, Learn'd of it selfe; so said Diogenes. Lactantius said: Take away insolence, And there's no difference twixt the rich and poore. Of Bountie, &c. Bountie hath open hands, a zealous hart: And liberally bestowes without respect. LIke clouds that haue no raine, are liberall words. The whole effect of bountie, is in loue. The liberall heart, God cherisheth and loues, And from him still, all cause of want remooues. The more the fruit, more precious is the tree. The more the fish, more valued is the streame. That bountie is the best, and most approou'd, Which without perill of renow ne is past. The goodliest night is, when most starres are seene. Bounties best onour is to helpe the poore, And happines to liue in good mens minds. We count that ground the best, which yeelds most grain. Bountie, r mitting fraile and mortall things, Doth for reward receiue immortall fame. The whole effect of bountie, is in loue. They that in bountie d e begin to want, In weake estate shall find their friends and foes. True bountie is not fastened to respect. A spend-thrift sworne to prodigalitie, Excuseth it with liberalitie. A liberall minded man, base enuie hates. He that still draweth forth without supply, The fountaine of his store will soone be drie. He neuer giues in vaine, that giues in zeale. Gifts to the poore, let them be done with speed▪ For long delay, more wretched makes their need. Bountie and thankfulnesse are concords bonds. One gift in time bestowed, as good minds doe, Falls out in pooose to helpe much more than two. A liberall heart procures beneuolence. Honours chiefe grace is liberalitie. Similies on the same subiect. AS pride makes enemies of perfect friends, So liberalitie makes friends of foes. As hollow spouts retaineth nought but aire, So hollow hearts all bountie euer ha e. As Bees doe flocke vnto a honey dewe, So multitudes flyes to a liberall mind. As s dowes hinders ripening of the fruits, So couetousnes still holdeth bountie backe. As H nbane causeth death by sleepines, So bountie is destroy'd by niggardnes. As manhood is discern'd by cowardise, So bountie is beheld by wretchednesse. Examples likewise on the same. BY liberall bountie, Alexander wonne ore fame, than all his conquests else beside. Caesar, by bountie to his followers, Was call'd the liberall'st prince in all those times. Archelaus gaue not to vnworthie men, For that h held not liberalitie. Titus, remembring one day nothing giuen, Said: O my friends, how haue we lost this day▪ Plato said, Niggards neuer can be good, For all attendeth on the bountifull. Phocylides will'd no man sleepe at night, Till that day he could count some well-done deed. Of Follie. Follie is both rewarded and respected, When wit is often scorned and reiected. WHat folly can pretend, wisdome preuents. A greater signe of follie i not knowne, Than trusting others force, distrust our owne. Repentance, youthfull follie quite expells. Who hazards his estate, to remedie A curelesse mischiefe, may be tearm'd a foole. Wishes are vaine, where will is follies guide. Fooles may not play with swords, nor maids with loue, Least follie crye, and wantonnes repent. Fooles many times, to dignities arise. A foole such pastime with his pleasure maketh, As in the end his ruine he awaketh. Fooles wanting knowledge, doe cont mne the wise. He is a foole that doth prepare a ginne, To be him selfe the first man t therein. Vnlettered fooles, at learning doe repine. Who with a rasour thinkes to c t the Flint, But vnder-takes a foolish fruit lesse ta ke. Follies oft leaue a memorie of shame. Learning doth liue in pen orie and bare, When fooles grow rich, and feed on daint st fare▪ Wisdome doth frowne when follie is in place. Fooles are set vp in offices full gay, When wiser men come downe, and sit below. It's better be a foole, than prooue a Foxe. Follie is iudg'd in silence to e wise, For too much babbling, wisdome doth despise. Follie flings forth, if counsell touch him neere. For childrens hands, a rasour is vnfit, And fooles vnmeet in wisdomes seat to sit. What greater scourge than follie, is to wit? Foolish that science is, held ne're so deare, Which fore-shewes perils nre, not daungers neere. Silence is still best answere to a foole. Promote a foole, his follie strait appeares, And prooues a shame to them which caus'd him climbe. All's prouender to Asses, but the aire. Mount vp a foole, his wit is quickely heard: Then keepe such downe, let wise men be preferr'd. Instructions giuen to fooles, encreaseth follie. A leaden sword clad in a golden sheath, Is like a foole of natures finest mould. Follies are sooner thought on, than redrest. For man, it is great follie to delight In fading smoake, and loose the heauenly light. Follie, to saue a part, and loose the whole. A very foole I doe him firmely hold, That loues his fetters, though they be of gold. A Lyons skinne hides not the Asses eares. So much doth follie thrust men into blame, That euen to leaue off shame, they count a shame. Follie, though ouer-guilt, at length appeares. Prosperitie oft maketh fooles starke mad. Similies on the same subiect. AS foolish questions merit silence best, So kind demaunds require as kind replyes. As no mishap can mooue a carelesse mind, So no instructions can reforme a foole. As wise men not esteem'd by outward shewes, So any semblaunce satisfieth fooles. As snow in Summer no man doth commend, So none deemes honour requisite for fooles. As spots disfigure any beauteous face, So follie is the blemish of the mind. As smoake at highest, soonest vanisheth, So follie praised, quickliest perisheth. Examples likewise on the same. BY follie Nicias was ta'ne aliue, Dismayed onely with the Moones ecclipse. Oemilius tearmed Perses but a foole, To be dismay'd because of vanquishing. Cleander, who would needs betray his lord, Lost all his hopes, and proou'd him selfe a foole. Torquatu foolishly shunn'd dignitie, Because himselfe was pained with sore eyes. Be neither simple, nor yet ouer subtill, Such counsell gaue the wise and learned Bias. Follie, saith Cicero, pollutes the sou e, But wisdome is a glorious o a t. Of Time. Time calls account of what before is past, For time will haue a reckning made at last. TIme wanting bounds, still lacketh certaintie. Time hath a alue for all e emities. There's none but haue in time perswaded been. Flowers haue time, before they fall to seed. VV e can helpe time, to ow vs with age, Bus stop no w inkl in is pilgrimage. Times office is to end the hate of fo s. Times glorie is to calme contending kings. Time is a tutour oth to good and bad. Short time seemes long, in sorrowes sharpe s staining. Time is the herald, that doth best of all Emblazon all affections of the mind. They that watch well, see time how slow it creepes. Dalliance of time doth long lookt ioyes preuent. Time offers still each houre to doe amisse. In time all things decay, and draw to end. Time is the sweet Phisition, that allowes Some remedie for all our past mishap. Times minutes losse, no treasure can restore. We may much shorten time by negligence. Time h ales, when Art and reason both doe faile. No time so long as that which breedeth griefe. Nothing than time there is more precious, And nothing lesse than time accounted of. Nothing so firme, but time dissolueth it. Faire baits of time doth all the world deuoure. By time and wisdome, passions are supprest. In time, small wedges cleaue the hardest Oakes. He that will not endure the stormie time▪ VVhere will he liue vntill the lustie prime? In time the flint is pierc'd with softest showers Time is the anker both of truth and right. In great extreames, aduantage hath no time. Times losse, is greatest prodigalitie. Time ripens all, and hastes the haruest on, To sow new seeds ere all the old are gone. Showres come out of time, when corne is ripe. Time is discouerer of all mishaps. Time hath set downe the compasse of his course. When time is lost, repentance is but vaine. VVhile we haue iewels, we doe not esteeme them: But being lost, would with our liues redeeme them. Times chaunge, and we in them, doe alter still. By times delay, new hope of helpe still liues. Time is the father of vncertaintie. Time measureth our daily actions. Times motions equalleth the reeling Sunnes, Or as the Sea reciprocally runnes. That longest kept, must yet at length be spent. Both life and loue, in time must haue an end. Our daily labours harbour deepe distrust. Time, on the weariest wretch, bestoweth rest. The losse of time, all other losse exceeds; And commonly, too late repentance breeds. Time is best gouernour of all our counsailes. Time to the greatest sorrowes limits end. Neglected time is follies chiefest signe. Time is our liues discreetest councellor. Similies on the same subiect. AS when the ship is split, no anker helpes, So time once spent, can neuer be repeal'd. As ioynts cut off, the plaister comes too late, So time being past, repentance booteth not. As no retrait auailes, when fight is fought: So no deuise recouereth passed time. As time well vsde, a mans best treasure is, So badly wasted, is most miserie. As nothing is of greater price than time, So nothing should with greater care be kept. As winter nips the freshest flowers that be, So time makes furrowes in the fairest face. Examples likewise on the same. SEuerus made such deare account of time, As nothing grieu'd him more than losse of time. Pyrrhus had priuat obseruations, Whereby to know how time did steale away. Philip of Macedon would chide him-selfe, For the least vaine employment of his time. Great Alexander learn'd of Diogenes, How in his warre affaires to spend his time. Byas maintain'd; Fooles might in time be wise, And ignorance attaine to learnings reach. Our happines of time (in Solons mind) Consisteth in the shorter while it lasts. Of Youth. Youth is that state our minds doth most affect, Our speediest spoile, without most wise respect. YOung grafts of future goodnesse, soone appeares. When youth haue wealth before they can well vse it, It is no wonder though they doe abuse it. Custome, small faults of youth permits to scape. The meane is best, young fruits the stomacke gripe▪ And elder cloy, when they are ouer-ripe. Suspect is still a page that waits on youth. The Summers glorie figures youths vanitie, The winters wracke, ages declining steps▪ Youth hardly can obey an old decree. Looke what impression we in youth retaine, In age, our reason hardly will refraine. Loue is youths plague, wits scourge, and ages hell. Looke where vnbruised youth, with vnstuf braines Doth couch his limbes, there golden sleepe remaines. The spring hath flowres, but autumne withe d leaues. It's often seene, that loue in young men lyes Not truely in their hearts, but in their eyes. Youths loue is quicke, swifter than swiftest speed. Nothing can temper well a young mans rage, But thraldome, wedlocke, or the staffe of age. Youth is too hot, and void of care or dread. Youth learnes to cha nge the course that he hath run, When he perceiues and knowes what age hath done. Youth minds no daunger in his hastines. Young slips new set, are quickely pluckt away, But elder roots cleane faster to the clay. Youth, into needlesse quarrels soone is led. How▪ euer youngsters seeme to boast and braue, Their worth and wit, they from their elders haue. Lewd obiects, forward natures soone retaine. Youths common fault, is to admit and chuse Those errours which their lawlesse parents vse. Youth by encreasing, doth as fast decrease. What thing by vaine examples youth conceiues, The same or lawfull daily he receiues▪ Youth well instructed, makes age well dispos'd. The faults nd follies men in youth commit, Are causes of repentance in old age. Examples are best presidents for youth. The prime of youth is like the pine tree flowers. Seemely in sight, vnsauorie in their sente. Like to a shipwracke is the death of youth. He that in youth, by reason guides his life, In age shall find the foot-steps from decay. Youth vseth pastimes but as naturall rest. The better that a child is borne by birth, The more respect should wait vpon his youth. So tutour youth, that ages sinnes may die. Good doctrines characters being stampt in youth, No age or fortune once can weare them out. Vanitie is the maske for youths fond march. Where vice in youth doth beare the chiefest sway▪ Their vertue is neglected most in age. Lesse paine to learne in youth, than dote in age. Tyrannie is no schoole-master for youth, Rather vse kindnessae than compulsion. Wild youth, by gentlenesse will soonest yeeld. When beautie and sweet youth are banished, They neuer after can be call'd againe. Young willowes easily bend, greene wit soon caught. Youth grac'd with vertue, then most perfect is. Similies on the same subiect. AS sinne is soonest entertain'd in youth, So is it hardly shaken off in age. As gentle mould is apt for any print, So youth receiues what-e're impression. As vntill'd fields bring nothing orth but weeds, So vntaught youth yeelds all but vanitie. As freshest flowres the canker soonest eats, So youthfull heads are quickly caught by vice. As vnripe apples fall not but by force, So vnconstrain'd, outh hardly yeelds to die. As youngest nettles are not free from stings, So wisest youth hath imperfections. Examples likewise on the same. COmodus not well tutor'd in his youth, Did afterward prooue a most wicked Prince. Neroe vnbridled youth, made him to fall To greater leudnesse than was euer heard. Cato would to his sonnes be schoole master, Because he would not haue their youth infected. Scemides and her sonne were cast in Tyber, For bringing vp the gulfe of shame to Rome. Youth well instructed, saith Euripides, Doth after make his age more honourable. Pythagoras bad, tutor so young youth, The sinnes of age be not imposde on thee. Of Age. Age is the gift of Heauen, expence of yeares: Exchaunge of haps, and graue experience schoole. AGe is a Cinicke, not a flatterer. Age, or infirmitie, soone blasteth beautie. Age i alike in Kings and other men. Gray haires in youth, kindles no greene desires. The power of Kings may well with-stand proud foe ▪ But cannot keepe backe age, with time that growes. In womens honour, age is worst disease. Let s ringing youth r iourne old ages woes. For age to die, is right; for youth, it's wrong. Blame we not youth, if wantonly he wooes, Since doting old, and booke-wise cannot choose. Follie in you h, is sinne; in age, it's madnesse. Age, though conceal'd, doth warme with thoughts desire▪ Cold age dotes most, when heat of youth is gone. Age still is prone to credit what it likes. Mens chiefest aime, is but to nource vp life, With honour, wealth, and ease in waining age. Respect and Reason, wait on wrinkled age. Youthfull delights, lode crooked age with griefe. Age is as credulous as suspitious. What can auaile vnpleasurable age, That feeds on lust, or base vnable rage? Age is a glorious crowne, adorn'd with grace. Death is the due to nature, ages almes. Gray haires are fruits for death, not flowers for life. Trees may haue roots, although they beare no leaues. Loue (as a vertue) is in age allowed, Except vnequall choise doe disallow. Age well may ioyne with youth in law, not loue. When old Bees dye, the young possesse the hiue. Age is chill cold, and full of doubts and feares. Pleasant conceits are blossoms for young yeares, But melancholly thoughts, fruits of gray haires. Age with fore-sight, a many harmes preuents. Age takes aduise, ere he presume too farre. Age is ordaind to counsell, youth to fight. Age lends fore-sight, young courage must enact▪ Age is allowed to gaze at beautie tree, But youth must cl mbe and gather vp the fruit. Old age, helpes by good counsell and fore-sight. Old age can neuer pay youthes debt set downe. Discretion waxeth young, when age drawes neere. Care keepes his watch in euery old mans eye, And where are lodgeth, sleepe can neuer lie. Age breedeth no d ct in innocence. Innocence is an excellence in age. Old age being come, life cannot long endure. Each age of man hath end, but old age none. Age can report, and youth doth aily prooue, There is no comfort like the sweets of lo e. Sicknesse and age are ou conducts to death. It helpes not age to wi h him young againe. It's grieuous to be old with feares, not yeares. It's time to flye from brawles of iudgement seat And publique noise, when age once ge the start. Gray haires are wisdomes badge, and ages pride. The benefit of age, is libertie. Respect old age, it commeth not alone. Old men, are young mens meetest presidents. Aduised age right warily doth keepe, VVhat headstrong youth would loose, and loosing weepe. Youth runneth well, when age the b idle holds. Old age hath all things, and yet all things wants. Our parents age, worse t an our gran ▪s es be, VVe worst b g t, our children worse than we. White haires, are grauities embassadours. Aged and wise, deserues great reuerence. Similies on the same subiect. AS Cedars in their age the straighter g owes, So men in age should haue the grauer showes. As bo ds being seald, are past recalling backe, So age once com , by no meanes can be shund. As flo d-gates helpe not, when the towne is drown'd, So c g helpes not, when gray haires are seene. As co ne consum'd, e pence is ued too late, So snow-white heads in vaine wish youth againe. As physicke oots not for a bodie dead, So counsell helpes not ages way ward head. As fairest Sunnie dayes must haue their nights, So goodliest youth old age at length affrights. Examples likewise on the same. C achu of Carthage, in good yeares Went to be scholler to Carn ades. M cus Aur us told to cius, He went to lear e what et he did not know. Teren i Var o. and M rcus Po tiu Cato, Went to lear e Greeke when they were verie old. Alpho sus, king of Arragon, at fiftie yeares, Translated ie into the Spanish tongue. When men sa h llie looke on their white haires, They must doe nothing becomes those yeares. Old men, whose soul s ar s d with heauenly light, Grieue not their age, but ioy it, so saith Sophocles. Of Life. Life, is a frost of cold felicitie, And death, a thaw of all our miserie. LIfe is a wandering course to doubtfull rest. Life is but losse, where death is counted gaine. When vertues dayes doe end, they are not done, But liue two liues, where others haue but one. The death of sinne, is life vnto the soule. Mans life still endeth, with the end of life. In vanitie of lif , and wandring wayes, The wicked r n and weare out all their dayes. Better not be, than being, soone to die. Life is most loath'd, where loue may not preuaile. Death is most louely, sweet, and amiable, But captiu'd life, for foulnesse admirable. The longer life, the greater is our guilt. Life must with life, and blood with blood be paid. Hate not thy life, but loath captiuitie, Where rests no hope to purchase victorie. He that giues life, best knowes the date thereof. Mans life may less'ned, not enlarged be. Who will not bide the burden of a stresse, Must not here liue, for life i wret he nesse. True loue despiseth shame, when life is fear'd. Life warres with loue, and loue contends with life. Too long they l ue, that liue till they be naught, Life sau'd by sinne, base purchase, dearel bought. Mo e are mens ends markt, than their liues before. As death is fee to life, so hate to loue. Euen then when we of obscure life doe boast, It often prooues, that then we are knowne most. Men must haue griefe, so long as life remaines. Life is not that which should be much desir'd. We often see, who on a ing relyes, Fin s death aliue, while liuing yet he dyes. So some men liue, they care not how they liue. Life suffers wrong, when death would end her woes▪ Ill, compassing sit opportunitie, Or killes his life, or else lifes qualitie. That dead things can giue life, we seldome find. Contrition doth reformed life begin. To liue or dye, which of the twaine is better, When life is sham'd, and death reproches debter? First doe we bud, then blow; next seed, last all. We aske deaths a d, to end li es wretchednesse. God guides mans life, and when he list to haue it, Wit, wealth, nor any thing beside can saue it. Our life is death, if we doe liue in sinne. A dying life, all kind of deaths exceeds. Contented meane estate, true life doth giue, Resting secure, not rising vp to grieue. This life affoords no sweet without some sowre. To liue and loue not, is no life at all. Fond blinded g eatnesse, with his busie toyle, Seeking for happie life, doth life despoyle. Life neuer is too short, where death is wisht. There is no force so great, as life enforc'd. What kind of life (alas) liue those men in, That cannot liue without, nor with their kinne? Life is ill spar'd, that's spar'd to spill more blood. To liue in death, is but a dying life. Long vse of life, is as a lingering foe, And gentle death the onely end of woe. Sweet is the life that is maintain'd by loue. Redeeme thy life, although with all thou hast. The good doe liue, as if they li ed not: And die, as if their death were but a dreame. That life is death, where men doe liue alone. A good life doth beget as good a death. No wise man likes in such a ife to dwell, Whose wayes re strait to heauen, but wide to hell. Mans life may not be destitute of office. A good life, is next way to winne good fame. The life co upt with vnexpected shame And imelesse death, is buried with defame. They liue but ill, who alwayes thinke to liue. To men in miserie, life seemes too long. Long life hath commonly long cares annext. The breath that maintaines life doth finish life. Similies on the same subiect. AS falls the tree, so prostrate still it lyes: So speedeth life, in liuing, as it dyes. As men by life in bondage soone are brought, Euen so by death is freedome soonest wrought. As si e burnes fiercely, being still supplyed, So life postes swiftly when it least is spyed. As sharpe frosts easily nip forward springs, So life to end it, hath too many things. As Easterne winds doth towardly blossoms blast, So inward cares makes life to finish fast. As life is onely by the gift of grace. So death by nature taketh time and place. THere is hardly any one Chapter in this Booke, but it deliuereth plentie of exam∣ples for this argument of life; the whole summe (indeed) but containing the course of our actions, euen from our entrance into life, vnto the verie houre of our death: therefore there shall need no speciall colle∣ction vpon this head. Of Death. Death is the keye, which vnlocks miserie, And lets the soule to blessed libertie. DEath is the end of woe and wretchednesie. When deaths houre comes, let none aske reason why. He ought to die, that not deserues to liue. Who dyes the death with honour in the field, Both his lifes woe and sorrowes rie e s. With sharpe as liction, death first grounds his cause The fairest blossome, deaths sterne winter ni . Death hath no dart to slay deserued same. The Seene where death er pl y begins, Are a t of ight, and d of giy darke To wretched men, death is the welcom st friend, Death neuer comes when need doth most require. Life is but losse, and death felicitie. Who dyes, the vtmost anguish doth abide: But e that liues, is left to w e his losse. Sad life, is much more worse than gladsome death. Our life is day, but death is ougly night. Faire death it is, to shun more shame, to die. Death to sharpe sorrow, quickely ease doth send, For death, doth griefe and sorrow soonest end. Death to the wretched, is both grace and gaine. In death, aduise for daunger comes too late. It's worse than death, to linger on reliefe. Death is the gulfe of all, and then I say, Thou are as good as Caesar in the clay. A sicke man best sets downe the pangs of death. Deaths name is much more mightie than his deeds. To die, is all as common, as to liue. It is not death, that which the world calls dying, But that is death, which is all ioyes denying. The shade pursues the bodie, so death vs. Death is the driery Dad▪ and dust the Dame. Death is misfortunes monarchizing foe. Thy fatall end, why doest thou so begin, Locking death out, ye keep'st destruction in. None moane his death, whose life hath all annoy'd. We haue one life, and so our death is one. Death lends vs sight, while he doth spare vs breath. It's treble death, a freezing death to feele, For him on whome the Sunne hath euer shone. Long liues the man, that dies in lustie yeares. Death is the lowest step a man can fall. Death is not shunn'd of them that dutie yeeld. Death which e ds care, yet carelesse of our death, Doth steale our ioyes, but stealeth not our breath. Parting breeds mourning absence cruell death. To good and bad, death is an equall doome. Though death be poore, it ends a world of woe. Death is to some a fierce vnbidden guest, But those that craue his aid, be beloeth least. There's nothing we can call our owne, but death. Death's the deuourer of all worlds delight. It's sweet to dye, when we are forc'd to liue. When heapes of treasure is the meed preposed, Though death e adiunct, there's no death supposed. Neere death he stands, that stands too neere a crowne. It's double death to drowne in ken of shoare. Death is too good for base dishonest life. There's nothing else remaines for vs beside, But tea es and co ins onely to prouide. All things are subiect to deaths tyrannie. What thing soeuer liues, is sure to die. All killing death, by Christ is kill'd him-selfe. Oh Sicknesse, thou art many times belyde, When death hath many w yes to come beside. The sharpest sting of death, hurts not but helpes. Carrion corruption is the food of death. The day of death, excels our day of birth. Oft times their gaines whome greatnesse fauoureth, When chiefe preserr'd, stand as preferr'd to death. Raise vp no liuing blame against the dead. A present death exceeds a lingring life. Life leads to care, death to the scale of heauen. The dying man, whose eyes are sunke and dimme, Thinkes euery passing bell rings out for him. To die in life, is but a liuing death. Good death, not loftie life, is most renowme. In countries cause to die, is noble death. Death doth no time, no age, no reason measure. Similies on the same subiect. AS the hearb Rew is bitter in our taste, o deaths remembrance fearefull is to many. As sleepe depriues the memorie of paines, So sleepe of death ends all our wretchednes. As all small currents runne into the sea, So all mens toiles are swallowed vp in death. As borrowed money must be paid againe, So what life owes, must be by death discharg'd. As we are merrie at our childrens birth, So should we not grieue vainly at their death. As darknesse doth obscure the fairest day, So death laies hold vpon the forward'st life. Examples likewise on the same. HEctor said to his wife Andromache, Grieue not my death, all men are borne to die. Gorgias, askt in sicknesse how he far'd? Said, Sleepe now yeelds me to his brother death. Pindarus sleeping on a young lads breast, Neuer awaked, but in that sort dyed. Vespasian stood vp at the point of death, And said, An Emperour should standing dye. Plato thankt Nature, that she let him liue, In such a time, as taught him well to die. Thales will'd euery man amend his life, Else he could haue no honour in his death. The Conclusion. T His worke, which cost no meane paines and labour, to reduce into this forme and method; is thus at the length happily concluded, & com∣mended to the kind accep∣tation of all gentle and well-disposed minds. If some carping Sycophant (readier alway to cauill and find fault, than correct and amend) shall mislike of the course obserued in this booke, and imagine the heads not aptly or properly placed, (according as in his nice opi∣nion perhaps hee would haue them:) let me thus plainely answere him, That they were neuer meant for the pleasing of his vaine ap∣petite, and therefore hee hath more loue to looke off, than be prying into matters aboue his capacitie. Onely to the iudiciall and affa∣ble iudgements of this age, both the paines and pleasure of this labour is published: not doubting, but they will measure it by the iust desert, and censure thereof as their owne kind natures haue euer beene accustomed. In this first Impression, are omitted the Sentences of Chaucer, Gower, Lidgate, and other auncient Poets, because it was not knowne how their forme would agree with these of ten syllables onely, and that some∣times they exceed the compasse herein ob∣serued, hauing none but lineall and cou∣plet sentences, aboue and beyond which course, the Gentleman who was the cause of this collection (taking therin no meane paines him-selfe, besides his friends labour) could not be perswaded, but determinately aimed at this obseruation. Neuerthelesse, if this may enioy but the fauour hee hopes it will, and the good intent thereof be no way mis∣construed: at the next impression it shall be largely supplyed, with things that at this pre∣sent could not be obtained, both in respect of some vrgent occasion, beeing the hinde∣rance thereof: as also because there wanted apt meanes to furnish further purpose then intended. All which, shall then be answe∣red effectually, and any thing els may be thought auaileable to this worke, and the good liking of the wise. FINIS. An Alphabeticall Table, of the seuerall things handled in this Booke. A ABoundance. vide Riches. Absence. vide Loue and Friendship. Abstinence. vide Gluttonie. Accusation. vide Iustice. Actions. 1, 17, 19, 50, 67, &c. Admiration. vide Loue. 40 Admonition. vide Counsell, Aduise, &c. Aduersitie. vide Pouertie. 12 Aduise. 73 Adulterie. vide Lust. Affection. 161 Affliction. 12, 20, 74 Age. 222 Ambition. 108 Amitie. vide Friendship. Angels. vide Heauen. 58 Anger 132 Armes. vide Warre. Arrogancie. vide Pride. Art. vide Learning. Aspiring. vide Ambition. Auarice. 127 Auncestors. vide Kings. Authoritie. 194 B BAbbling. vide Words. Beautie. 40 Beleefe. 30 Benefits. 63 Blasphemie. vide God, and Heauen. Blessednes. 2, 11, 16, 24 Blood. 58, 71, 77, 79, 82, 84, &c. Boasting. vide Pride. Body. vide Mind. Bountie. 22, 211 Bragging. vide Pride. Brauerie vide Pride. C CAre vide Greefe. Charitie. vide Loue. Chastitie. 37, 38, 39, 40 Chaunce. vide Fortune. Chaunge. 11, 24, 29, 34, 37, &c. Children. 36, 97 Choyce. 46 Choller. vide Anger. Ciuilitie. vide Anger. Clemencie. vide Pittie. Comfort. 20, 24, 54, 64, 80, &c. Common-wealth. vide Kingdomes. Compassion. vide Pittie. Concord. 81 Concupiscence. vide Lust. Confidence. 18, 32 Conquest. vide Warre. Conscience. 8, 9, 10 Consideration. vide Counsell. Conspiracie. vide Treason. Constancie. vide Women. Contemplation. vide Religion. Contempt. vide Disdaine. Content. vide Peace. 6, 49, 67, 71 Contention. vide Anger, Concord, &c. Couetousnes. 127 Counsell. 73 Countrey. vide Common-wealth. Courage. 197 Courtesie. vide Kindnesse. 75 Cowardise. 33, 48, 60, 66, 86 Craft. 97 Credit. 22, 68 Credulitie. 30, 51, 58 Crueltie. vide Tyrannie. 33, 41, 51 Curiositie. vide Pride. Custome. 61, 70, 79 D DArknesse. vide Day and Night. Daunger. vide Feare. Day. 29, 46, 57, 92 Death. 230 Deceit. vide Falshood. Deeds, 177, &c. Delay. 28, 78 Delight. 201, &c. Desert. 19, 65, 67, 68 Desire. 161 Despaire. 24, 26, 33, 43, 45, 47, 66, 74 Desperation. vide Despaire. Destinie. 154 Deuill. vide Sinne. 2 Deuotion. vide God. 37 Diligence. vide Labour. Discord. vide Concord. Discretion. 18, 48, 49, 50, 53, 65, &c. Disdaine. 165 Dishonestie. 39, 43, 71 Dishonour. vide Honour. Dissimulation. 29, 174, &c. Distresse. 20, 21, 26, 59, 75, 76, 80 Distrust. vide Trust. 24 iuision. vide Discord. Doctrine. vide Learning. bt. 144 Dr d. vide Feare. Drunkennes. vide Gluttonie. Dutie. vide Subiects. 41 E EArth. 2, 5, 6, 12, 19, 42, 57, 60, 63, 87 Education. vide Children. Election. vide Choice. Eloquence. 30, 55, 56 Enuy. 117, &c. Equalitie. vide Equity. Equity. 1, 3, 13, 33, 76, &c. 94 Error. 12, 18 Eternity. 18, 37, 39, 54 Euill Deeeds. 181, &c. Example. 51, 59 Excesse. vide Drunkennesse. Exile. 82 Experience. 48, 54, 55 Extremitie. 32, 39, 46, 48, 78, 82, 90, 98 F FAith. 21, &c. Falshood. vide Friends and Friendship. Fame. 88, &c. Familiarity. vide Friendship. Fancie. vide Affection. Father. 60 Faults. 14, 19, 21, 22, 32, 35, 36, 42, &c. Fauour. 2, 26, 31, 35, 59, 61 Feare. 144, &c. Felicitie. vide Happines. Flatterie. 174, &c. Foes. vide Friends, and Friendship. Folly. 1, 5, 17, 24, 30, 41, 49, 50, 52, 213 Fortitude. 39, 54, 85 Fortune. 149, &c. Force. vide Strength. Fraud. vide Deceit. Friends. 94, &c. Friendship. vide Friends. Frugality. 38 Fury. vide Tyrants. G GAine. 18, 26, 32, 35 Generall. vide Warre. Gentlenes. vide Kindnes. Gladnes. vide Ioy. Glory. 31, 38, 67, 71, 89 Gluttony. 135, &c. God. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 24, 26, 37, 41, 59, 79 Gold. vide Riches. 80 Goodnes, 14, 17, 18, 36, 50 Good Deeds. 177, &c. Good name. vide Fame. Good will. vide Loue. Gifts. 2, 21, 26, 27, 38, 40, 48, &c. Grace. 21, 24, 26, 37, 42, 44 Greefe. 138, &c. Guile. vide Fraud. Guiltines. 46, 77, 78 H HAp. vide Fortune, and Fate. Happines. 5, 17, 25, 27, 36, 51, 67, 81, 98 Hate. 34, &c. Health. 26 Hearing. vide Iustice and Iudgement. Heauen. 5, 6, 7 Hell. vide Sinne. 2, 6, 7, 29, 45, 72 Honestie. 14, 15, 27, 39, 82, 92, 93 Honour. 69, &c. Hope. 24, &c. Hospitalitie. vide Bountie. Humanitie. vide Manhood. Humilitie. 191, &c. I IDlenes. vide Sloth. Iealousie. 45, &c. Ieasting. vide Pleasure. Idolatry. vide God, and Religion. Ignorance. 9, 11, 27, 49, 55 Immortalitie. 18, 19, 43 Impietie. vide Religion. Impudence. vide Shame. Incontinence. vide Lust. Industrie. vide Learning. 51 Infamie. vide Fame. Ingratitude. vide Loue. Iniury. vide Wrong. 44, 85 Iniustice. vide Iustice. Innocence. 10, 11, 15, 64, 77, 224 Instruction. vide Arte. Intemperance. vide Gluttonie. Inuention. vide Learning. 32 Ioy 5, 8, 9, 25, 29, 32, 61, 89 Ire. vide Anger. Iudge. vide Iustice. Iudgement. 3, 77, 78, 92 Iustice. 76, &c. K KIndnesse. vide Pittie. 3, 7 Kingdomes. 63, &c. Kings. 57, &c. Kinred. 3, 64, 67 Knighthood. 22 Knowledge. 13, 53, &c. L LAbour. 16, 71, 92 Lamentation. vide Sorrow & Teares. Lawes. 3, 60, 61, &c. Learning. 53, &c. Lecherie. vide Lust. Lenity. vide Kindnes. Liberalitie. vide Bountie. Libertie. 17, 38, 39, 64 Life. 226 Light. vide Day. 30 Loue. 28 Lowlinesse. vide Humilitie. Loyaltie. 47, 95 Lust. 120 Lying. 15, 71, 92 M MAdnesse. vide Furie. 47 Magistrates. 64, 86 Magnanimitie. vide Courage and Warre. Maiestie. 17, 59, 60, 61 Malice. vide Hate. 67 Man. 101 Manhood. vide Valour. Marriage. vide Loue, and Lust. Meane. vide Equitie. Melancholly. vide Griefe. 64 Memory. vide Learning. Mercie. 1, 2, 35, 78 Might. vide Power. Mind. 157 Misery. 19, 26, 30, 46, 75 Mishap. 2, 55, 66, 89, 98 Mistrust. vide Trust. Moderation. vide Law. Modestie. vide Temperance. 39 Monarch. 27, 40, 57, 86 Money. vide Wealth. 87 Mourning. 188, &c. Muses. vide Poetrie. 53 Musicke. 20, 32, 56, 98 N NAture. 29, 34, 40, 48, 50, 54, 55, 64, &c. Necessitie. vide Need. Need. 19, 26, 39, 55, 74, 87, 95 Negligence. vide Sloth. Neighbour. 34, 47, 68, 82 Niggardise. 67, 93, 212, 213 Night. 29, 46, 57, 73 Nobilitie. 66, &c. Nurture. vide Children. O OAth. 37, 70 Obedience. vide Subiects. Obliuion. vide Memory. Occasion. 22, 24, 69 Offence. 9, 21, 36, 77, 97 Offers. vide Gifts. Office. vide Authoritie. Old age. vide Age. Opinion. 17, 19, 22, 50, 54, 60, 68, 96 Opportunitie. vide Occasion. 50 Oratory. vide Oratours. Oratours. 15, 18, 31, 42, 55 Order. vide Iustice. P PAine. 25, 29, 31, 32, 33, 64, 70, 204, &c. Painting. 40, &c. Parasites. vide Flatterie. Pardon. vide Obedience, and Age. Parents. 64, 66, 68 Partialitie. vide Iustice. Passions. 26, 33, 46, 50 Patience. 99, &c. Peace. 81, &c Perill. vide Daunger. Periurie. vide Oath. Perseuerance. vide Patience. Pittie. 32, 35, 41, 43, 45, 47, 77, 84 Plainnesse. vide Honestie. 15 Play. vide Pleasure. Pleasure. 201, &c. Plentie. vide Abundance and Wealth. Poetrie. vide Learning. Pollicie. 79, &c. Poore. vide Need. 207 Pouertie. 1, 15, 31, 35, 50, 51, 57, 58, &c. Power. 5, 14, 18, 25, 26, 35, 42, 49, 54 Praise. 18, 38, 41, 50, 66, 91, &c. Prayer. 11, 79, 80, 81 Precisenesse. vide Pride. Preferment. vide Promotion. Presumption. vide Ambition and Pride. Pride. 124, &c. Princes. 57, 58, &c. Prodigality. vide Bountie, and time. Profit. 50, 54, 70 Promise. 36, 34, 70 Promotion. 26, 59 Prosperity. vide Wealth. 35 Prouidence. 2, 6, 85 Prudence. vide Wisdome. Punishment. 65, 77, 78 Q Qualitie. 36, 61 Quietnes. 10, 48, 59, 71, 77 R RAge. vide Anger. 35, 45, 49 Rashnes. 21, 22, 49, 59, 75, 85, 93 Reason. 12, 15, 32, 39, 43, 45, 60, 72, 82 Religion. 11, &c. Repentance. 6, 8, 29, 213, 217 Report. 19, 71, 89, 91 Reproch. vide Shame, and Slaunder Resolution, 22, 25, 39, 61, 67 Reuenge. 5, 35, 46, 59, 72 Rhetoricke. 11 Riches. 9, 18, 38, 51, 76, 81 Right. 13, 14, 64, 69, 77 Rigour. vide Cruelty. 42 Riot. vide Prodigality. 39 Ruine. 84, 90, 97 Rule. vide Authority, and Kings. Ruth. vide Pitie. S SAdnesse. 26 Sapience. vide Wit, and Wisdome. Science. 56, 86 Scoffing. 165, &c. Scorne. vide Disdaine. Selfe-loue. 33, 40, 60 Selfe-will. vide Vain-glory. 22 Secrecie. 46 Security. vide Idlenesse. Senses. vide Learning. Seruice. vide Duty. Shame. 2, 18, 29, 42, 58, 59, 66, 67, 71, 73. Sicknes. vide Death. 43, 74, 75, 87, 224 Silence. vide Talke. Sinne. 2, 6, 9, 12, 17, &c. Sight. vide Loue. Slauery. vide Tyrants. Slaunder. 167, &c. Sleepe. vide Death. Sloth. 130, &c. Sobriety. 9, 48 Solitude. vide Griefe. Sorrow. vide Woe. Souldiours. 86, 87 Soule. 5, 7 Sparing. vide Niggardise. Speech. vide Words. Spending. vide Bountie. Spoile. vide Warre. Sport. vide Delight. Stabilitie. vide Resolution. State. vide Kings and Common-wealths. Strength. vide Power. Study. vide Learning. Subiects. 57, &c. Subtilty. vide Fraud. Sufferance. vide Patience. Surfet. vide Gluttony. Suspition. vide Iealousie. Swearing. vide Oath. Sword. vide Warre. T TAlke. vide Words. Taunts. vide Disdaine. Tasting. 38, 42 Teares. 188, &c. Temperance. vide Sobriety. Temptation. 3, 17 Terrour. vide Tyrants and Feare. Thankfulnesse. vide Kindnes. Thoughts. 185, &c. Time. Tongue. 170, &c. Treason. 114, &c. Treasure. 28, 40, 43, 57, 62, 64, 71 Triall. 3, 14, 21, 24, 55, 78, 82, 97, 98 Trouble. vide Affliction. 10, 63 Trueth. 13, &c. Trust. 14, 22, 25, 45 Tyranny. vide Tyrants. Tyrants. 111, &c. V VAliancie. 86, &c. Valour. 18, 29, 56, 80, 82, 84, 85 Vaine-glory. vide Pride. 94 Vanity. 18, 26, 44, 50, 53 Variety. vide Pleasure. Venery. vide Lust. Vertue. 16, &c. Vice. 17, &c. 62, 82 Victory. 2, 85, 86 Violence. vide Crueltie. Virginity. 37 Vnderstanding. vide Wisdome. 56 Vnity. 12, 38, 82, 96 Vnkindnesse. vide Affection. 29 Vowes. vide Oath. Vsury. vide Riches. W WAnt. 39, 55, 82, 89 Wantonnesse. 31, 33, 38, 39, 41 Warre. 84, &c. Wealth. 9, 20, 26, 33, 38, 42, 48, &c. Weeping. vide Mourning. Wife. 38, 46 Will. 18, 29, 30, 43, 44, 46, 49, &c. Wine. vide Drunkennes. 10, 20 Wisdome. 48, &c. Wit. vide Wisdome. Wickednes. 3, 63, 86, 89, 93 Woe. vide Griefe. Women. 104, &c. Words. 170, &c. Workes. 22, 32, 60, 75, 86 World. 12, 17, 19, 26, 53, 74, 87 VVretchednesse. vide Misery. VVrath. vide Anger. 1, 2, 60, 85 Y Youth. 219 Z Zeale. 21, 22, 23