


TRACT 1. TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE.
IHSAMONG so many and so important reasons (most Gratious Soue^aigne as are preuailing more th^n ordinary in question of the truth ther doth none occur of greater satisfaction, then such as is graced with answerableMr. Whitaker. de ecclesia co^trou. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 14. initio. pag. 366. saith firmum sit necesse est argumentum illud quod sumitu^ ex aduersariorum confessione: etc. efficax eni^ erit aduersariorum ipsoru^ contra ipsos testimonium etc. et quidem fateor veritatem etiam e suis inimicis testimonium extorque re. etc. acknowledgement of the learned aduersarie: And seeing it is the honourable priuiledgeHereby wee vnderstand the Puritane preachers and their complices. of our CATHOLICKE faith, to be so Iustified by her enimies, of whom neuerthelesse many (to make vs more odious and deiected) haue (of their inueterate hatred) busied them selues in their daily Sermons and other-wise neuer more then now of late, publikely to depraue our professed religion with all vnworthy and scandalous calumniation, perplexing so against vs, euen the more sober and quiet iudgements, with a dispersed contagion of their sophisticated (and to vs most dangerous) incantations; we cannot therfore in so greate necessity of times, (in our owne defence) vse either a more proper Antidote to expell the poison of such their intemperate and impurest language, or lesse offensiue
 meanes to your MAIESTIE, for the appeasing of our former continued calamities, so farre as to your PRINCELY and Christian wisdome may seeme requisite, then if in this our needfull Apologie vndertaken wholly to that end, we do professe purposely to abstaine from all such matter as remaineth questionable, contenting our selues only with that, which is in it selfe euident or otherwise acknowledged for true by learned Protestants them selues. The which also we will acco^dingly endeuour hereby to accomplish, not with insulting against them in matter of vnnecessary and vnkinde exprobration nor yet with affected entertainement of prolonged discourse,1. Cor. 2, 4. Neither in the persuasible words of humane wisdome: but humbly, breifly, and plainely, as being very confide^t, that naked truth, presented thus to your HIGHNES though but in her natiue and simple habitt, shall yet neuerthelesse, appeere in vewe of so vnde^standing a minde, both gratious and regardable:

THAT ENGLISH MEN VVERE aboue 1000 yeares since conuerted to the now professed Catholicke faith. @. 1.
PLEASETH it therfore your most excellent Maiestie to call to mind, that it is now somewhat aboue oneMr. Couper late Bishop of Lincolne, in his chronicle fol. 156. a. affirmeth our conuersion to haue bene Anno Do. 599. and Mr. Foxe in his actes and monuments, printed 1576. pag 117. a. prope finem affirmeth the like. thousand yeares since Gregorie then Bishoppe of Rome, for his vertue and learning surnamed the Great, a man highly commended both by FathersS. Gregorie is commended by Damascen in orat. de defunctis: by Isodore. de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis cap. 27. and by the Fathers of the eight Toletane Councell. can. 2. and by S. Bede hist. l. 2. c. 1. andMr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitissimi. part. 2. rat. 5. pag. 624. saith: Gregorius nomine quidem magnus and reuera magnus, vir magnis and multis diuinae gratiae dotibus exornatus: etc. And Mr. Godwyne in his catalogue of the Bishopps of England. p. 3. ante med. saith: That Blessed and holy Father S. Gregory was the occasion of replanting the Christian faith in our country: and Mr. W^itaker co^tra Duraeum. l. 5. pag. 394. fine. saith. quod nos magno beneficio affecit Gregorius, id semper gratissima memoria recolemus: Protestants, conuerted vs Englishe men (by the preaching of Austine) from heathenish infidellitie to the faith of Christ.

Concerning the religion professed by Gregory, and wherunto we were as then so by him conuerted, it was so vndoubtedly our now professed Catholicke faith, that the protestant writers (not of vulgar note but those that are for learning reputed most accomplished, do for such throughout euery particuler specially and at largeIn prooffe that our then co^uersion was to euery perticuler pointe of our now profess^d Catholike faith, Mr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitissimi part. 2. rat. 5. pag. 626. and 627. saith. In ecclesiam vero quid inuexerunt, Gregorius and Augustinus. onus caeremoniarum: etc. intulerunt pallium archiepiscopale ad sola Missarum solemnia: Purgatorium etc. oblatione^ salutaris hostiae, and preces pro demortuis etc. reliquias, etc. transubsta^tiatione^, etc. nouas temploru^ consecrationes etc. ex quibus omnibus quid aliud quaesitum est, quam vt indulgentiae, monachatus, Papatus reliquu^que Pontificiae superstitionis chaos extruatur? Haec autem Augustinus magnus monachus, a Gregorio monacho edoctus, importauit Anglis: etc. Also Luke Osiander in his epitom. historiae ecclesiasticae centuria sexta pag. 289. fine. and 290. initio. describeth it yet more perticulerly, saying. Augustinus romanos ritus, and consuetudines Anglicanis ecclesijs obtrusit, nimirum Altaria, Vestes, Imagines, Missas, Calices, Cruces, Candelabra Thuribula, Vexilla, sacra Vasa, Lustrales aquas, Romanarum ceremoniarum codices: etc. And ibid. pag. 288 prope finem. he saith of Gregorie, in pluribus articulis turpiter and pontificie hallucinatus est, nam and libero arbitio and bonis operibus nimium tribuit, de poenitentia non recte docet, caelibatum ministrorum ecclesiae acriter vrsit, inuocationem Sanctorum eorumque cultum, sed and imaginum idolatricam venerationem approbauit, palliauit, and defendit: Also the Centurie writers of Magdeburg in their sixt Centurie ca. 10. col. 748. circa med. make like report of Austines doctrine to vs English men. And collecting (els where in the sam^ booke) out of Gregories owne writings by them recited certaine his opinions which th^^ hould for erroneous, as being popish they do in their index or Alphabeticall table of tha^ sixt centurie at the word Gregorij specially set downe (with figures of p^rticuler reference w^^ euery such said opinion is to be found, as followeth.) eiusdem error de bonis operibus, de (...) ^sessione, de coniugio, de ecclesia, de Sanctoru^ inuocatione, de inferno, de Iustificatione, (...) ^^rbitri^ de Paenitentia, de Purgatorio, de Satisfactione,: Also they charge him ye^ (...) ^^itings with Consecration of Aultars, Chalices, and Corporalls: col. 369. fine. with Oblati^ ^rifice for the dead col. 473. post med. with Exorcisme col. 376. circa med. with translati^ ^^^ues. col. 381. fine. and 382. with Monachisme. 383. initio. and 384. with Pilgrimage. co^ (...) with Consecration of Churches, with Masse, Reliques and sprinckling of holy water. (...) with Con^ (...), of ^ap^^^e, of ^o^^ia, and O^le: ^l. 367. prope in^^um. ^^^h C^^^r^ti^n of Masse: (...). 36^. ^^n^ and 370. ^i^o, and 693. post med. and (...) in (...): and with Claime and exercise of Iurisdiction and P^^macie ouer all Churches: ^ol. 425, 426, 427, 428 429, 430. 431. 432. etc. with which last point concerninge Primacie he is in like manner charged and reproued by Mr. D. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory pag. 310. ante med. and by Peter Martir in cap. 8. iudicum. describe it: Mr. Doctor Fulke tearming it therfore in generall our peruersionMr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory. pag. 333. initio.: Danaeus also calling it, inebriatioDanaeus in resp. ad disputat. Bellarm. part. 1. pag. 780. fine. meretricis de qua est apoc. 17. vers. 4: and Mr. Harison confessing likewise thatMr. William Harrison in his description of Brittanie set before Holl^nshed great Chronicle volum. 1. (after the last edition) pag. 29. b. line 11. And see his other more plaine wordes. ibidem. pag. 27. a. line 27. Austine came and brought in Poperie: with whom agreeth Mr. Bale, affirming that Aust.Mr. Bale in catalog. scriptorum illustrium maioris Britaniae cent. 14. pag. 117. saith of Austine, plebem per interpretes fidem papisticam docuit. by his interpreters taught our people the Papisticall faith with the profession
 whereof they doubt not likewise sin plaine tearmes,) perticularly to charge certaine famous and godly learned English men, who liued in the ages nexte after our said conuersion, as namelyMr. Bale in Catallog scriptorum illustrium maioris Britaniae centur. 14. pag. 145. speaking of their martirdome saith: Passisunt pro papismo papistici Martires Anno 693. And see further the Centurie writers cent. 7. cap. 6. col. 154. and Luc. Osiander in epitom. cent. 7. l. 4. c. 20. pag. 331. circa and post med. the two (memorable) brethren named Eualdi whom they therefore call Papisticall: and S. Bede whom they likewise expresly charge withLuc. Osiander in epitom. cent. 8. l. 2. c. 3. pag. 58. initio saith of Beda: Omnibus pontificijs erroribus (in articulis in quibus nos hodie a Papa dissentimus) inuolutus est etc. and saieth yet further of him, bonus fuit vir: error in all those popish articles wherin they at this day dissent from the Pope: and yet (that his profession notwithstanding) they do thinke him worthy of the surname ofMr. Foxe in his acts and monuments printed 1576. pag. 128. b. initio, and M. Couper in his chronicle at the yeare 724. fol. 168. b. and Hollinshead in his great Chronicle of the last edition volum. 1. pag. 130 b. initio. reuerende not doubting to number him amongstMr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi. part. 2. rat. 3 pag. 326. ante medium. the godly men raysed vp by the holy Ghost.


THAT THE SAME FAITH VVAS VNIuersally professed for sundry ages before, and was also agreeable to that first faith, where to the Brittons of Wales were conuerted in the Apostles times. @ 2.
(...) (most dreed Soueraigne) being our confessed Catholicke religion, whereunto most vn^oubtedly we were (so many ages since) thus conuerted,
 and for which we haue of late yeares endured such affliction, was not as then priuate only vnto Rome, or vs Englishmen, but (as our aduersaries do complaine) was vniuersaly the^Mr. Parkins in his exposition of the Creed pag 307. saith: During the spa^^ of nine hundred yeares the popish heresie hath spread: selfe ouer the wholle earth professed through the Christi^n worlde, neither first as then became so vniuersall, but (as they yet further complaine and acknowledge) continued such for sondry ages then before.Mr. Iohn Nappeir in his treatise vppon the reuelations dedicated to your Maiestie pag. 68 prope sinem saieth. Betweene the yeare of Christ 300 and 316. the Antichristian and papisticall reigne begunne reigning vniuersally and without any debatable contradiction. 1260 yeares. Re^gning vniuersally (saith Mr. Nape^e) and without any debateable contradiction, (euen) twelue hundreth sixtie yeares: nexte ensewing the first 300. yeares after Christ,Mr. Nappeire vbi supra pag. 145. fine faith. Euen 1260 yeares the Pope and his Cleargie hath poss^ssed the outward visible Church of Christians: And with this accompt of Mr. Napeir agreeth Mr. Broca^d in his treatise vpon the reuelations fol. 110. a. circa med. vvhere he affirmeth, that the Church was trodden downe and oppressed by the papacie, euen from Siluesters time, vnto these times: which he there and fol. 123. (b) collecteth to be during the said 1260 yeares the Pope and his Clergie during all that time poss^ssing the outward visible Church of Christians. In so much that whereas our learned aduersaries do truly affirme (as being vndoubted) that our neighbours the Brittons of Wales,M. Camden in his Britannia etc. pag. 40. circa med. saith: Certum est Britannos in ipsa ecclesiae infancia christianam religionem imbibisse: In proofe, thereof he there alleadgeth sondrie auncient authorities. pag. 40. circa med. And pag. 157. paulo post med. he saith. In hac floruit monasterium Glastenburie quod antiquam repetit originem a Iosepho Arimathensi. etc. hoc enim and antiquissima huius monasterij monumenta testantur etc. Nec est cur de hac re ambigamus. And Mr. Harrison in his description of Brittannie annexed to Hollinshead his great chronicle of the last edition: volum. 1. pag. 23 a. l. 18. saith: that Ioseph preached here in England in the Apostels times, his sepulcher yet in Glastenburie and Epitaph affixed therto is proofe sufficient: Also Mr. HENOCH CLAPHAM in his soueraigne remedie against Schisme pag. 24. speaking of the conuersion of the Brittons in the Apostles times saith therof. Our Schismatickes may as well aske me what assurance I haue there was a King Henry, as demaund what assurance I haue of the other. This point is also yet further affirmed by Mr. D. FVLKE in his booke against Heskins, Sanders etc. pag. 561. sect. 71. and in his confutation of Purgatorie pag. 332. also by Mr. GODWINE in his catolog. of Bishoppes. etc. pag. 1. initio. receiued theMr. BALE in his pageant of Popes saith: The Brittons being conuerted by Ioseph of Aramathia held that faith at Austines coming: And D. FVLKE against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Cor 12. sect. 5. fol. 316. a circa med. saith The Catholicke Brittons with whome Christian Religion had continued in succession from the Apostles times would not receaue Austine: And in his answere to a counterfait Catholicke pag. 49. fine he saith: The Britons before Austins coming, continued in the faith of Christ euen from the Apostles times And Mr. FOXE in his acts and monuments printed 1576. pag. 463. a circa med. saith:
 faith of Christ by the preaching of the Apostles and helde that faith at Austines comming not being (as they yet further affirme) in the meane timeIn proofe that the Brittons of wales at and before Austines coming into England were not altered by th^ ROMAN Church: Mr. D. HVMFREY In Iesuitissimi. part. 2. rat. 3. pag. 304. circa med. saith: Habuerunt Brittanni templa sibi non Romanis, qui tum Romano iugo non erant subditi, nec Romana^ religione^ suscipiebant, nec Augustinum Apostolum suum agnoscebant: Et vide ibidem. pag. 624. fine. Also Mr. Doct. FVLKE in his confutation of Purgatory pag. 372. initio saith. It appeareth that this Land did neuer receaue the doctrine and ceremonies of the lattin Church, before the time of the Saxons. altred or corrupted by the Romane Church:The Brittons after the receauing of the faith, neuer forsooke it for any manner of false preaching of other nor for torments. etc. In the speciall proofe whereof (as being most certainly true)Mr. D. BARLOWE in his defence of the articles of the Protestants religion pag. 21. affirmeth the Church of, he Brittons to be as auncient euery day, and as Christian euery way as the R^mane, affirming further, the integritie therof (or not being altered by the Church of Rome) first by their obseruation of Easter different from Austine: Secondly by the opposition which they made against Austine: Mr. D. Barlowe seriously laboureth: it is neuerthelesse euident by S. Bede who liuedBede did write his historie thereof Anno. 724. as witnesseth Mr. Cowper in his Cronicle fol. 168. b. so nere to those times and write the Historie therof. And is also acknowledged since by Protestant writers, that vpon conference then had at a place thereof called in Bedes timeBed^ hist. lib. 2. c. 2. initio saith Augustinus adiutorio vsus Edilberthi Regis, conuocauit ad suam colloquium, Episcopos siue doctores maximae and proximae Britonum prouinciae, in loco vbi vsque hodie linqua anglorum Augustineizat appellatur: And Holenshead in his greate Coronicle of the last edition. volum. 1. l. 5. c. 21. pag. 102. b. line. 33. 40. etc. maketh like mention hereof. Austineizat betwene Austine and the Britton Bishops, who at the first frowardly resisted Austine all they could, (for which Mr. Foxe not vniustly reproueth the^)Mr. Fox in his acts and Monuments printed 1576. pag. 120. b. the greatest differences the^ stood vpon betwene Austen and them, were expresselie and only mencioned to beBeda hist. l. 2. c. 2. paulo post med. reporteth how Austine said to the Brittons: si in tribus his obtemperare mihi vultis vt Pascha. suo tempore celebretis, vt ministerium Baptizandi quod co renascimur iusta morem romanae and apostolicae ecclesiae compleatis, vt genti Anglorum vna nobiscum praedicetis verbum Domini, cetera quae agitis quamuis moribus nostris contraria, equanimiter cuncta tollerabimu^. And the like is testified by Hollenshead volum. 1. pag. 103. a. line 17. and by Mr. Godwine in his catallog. of the Bishopes. etc. pag. 6. ante med. their dissent from the vse of the Romane Church in their (Ceremonies) or ministring
 of Baptisme and keeping of Easter: which let er (as Luc.Luc. Osiander in epitom. cent. 2. l. 3. c. 2. pag. 51. circa med. saith: Ioannes and Philippus apostoli Pascha celebrauerant decima quarta luna post aequinoxium vernum, quo tempore Iudaei etiam pascha suum celebrare solebant, idque apostoli haud dubie fecerunt in gratiam corum Iudae orum, qui nuper ad Christum conuersi fuerunt, and vt plures etiam Iudaeos Christo lucrifacerent: Osiander witnesseth from antiquitie) was tollerated by the Apostles in re^arde of the knowne weakenes of some, euen as for like respectact. 16.3. Circumcision was by them in like sorte tollerated, andact. 15.29. abstinence from blood and that which was stra^g^ed specially prescribed: By which their so earnest dissenting about these only maters of smaller importance, is most plainely signifiedFor the Brittons who Contradicted Austine and that so earnestly about these so fewe and smaller points, would neuer haue ben silent, but much the rather haue with-stoode him in the other so many and in comparablie much greter points of faith, had they in like sorte disagreed from him therein: their full agreement in all other substantiall and head points of faith: Which thing is also as yet more certainely euident, aswell in that the Britton Bishopes as thenBeda hist. l. 2. c. 2. ante med. saith, tum Britones quidem confitentur intellexisse seueram esse viam Iusticiae, quam praedicaret Augustinus: Hereof also see Hollenshead vbi supra pag. 102. b. line 54. Confessed that
 it was the right way of iustice and righteousnes which Austine taught: As also for thatMr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatorie, pag. 335. prope finem. Austine did (as Mr. Fulke affirmeth at the last obtaine the aide of the Brittish Bishopes to the conuersion of the S^xons: So euidently doth that faith which Austine taught vs, and which the Protestants acknowledge for Popish, demonstrate it selfe in generall to be consonant and agreable with that primatiue faith whereunto the Brittons of wales were (as is confessed) co^uerted in the Apostles times: which point is as yet made much more euident by like further obseruation of so many other remote Nations conuerted in the Apostles times as namely of Gracia Armenia. India, etc. which although they be in some things departed from the faith whereto they were first conuerted, yet by their remnante of religion to this day preserued, sufficiently appeareth what faith it was whether Catholicke or Protestant, whereto they were at first conuerted, and from which they be so in some pointes at this day departed witnes hereof are the seuerall publickeSee in those Liturgies mention made of Reall Presence, Sacrifice Praier for the dead, Praier to Saints etc. Liturgies of the Cratians, Armenia^s etc. further witnes also hereof is their late professed agreement orOsiander in Epitom. histor. eccles. centur 15. pag. 477. post med. saith. Anno 1430. conuocaret (Papa) Eugenius quartus, concilium Florentiae etc. huic concilio etiam Graeci Atmenij Iacoboini consenserunt and, Mr. Marbecke in his common places. pag. 258. post med. acknowledgeth that at the Councell of Florence the Christians of Armenia and India consented to the Romane Church, and that the Greekes agreed etc. also Abdisu Primate of the Armenians subscribed to the late Councell of Trent. s^bmission to our Catholicke Church; and most full and plaine witnes hereof is the aunswerableIt appeareth by the treatise published by the Protestants diuerse of Wittenberg Anno. 1584. entituled acts theologorum witebergensium and Hieremiae Patriarchae Constantinop. etc. that the Greeke Church at this day though deuided from the Lattin, professeth to beleeue Inuocation of Saints, Relickes, worshipping of Images, Transubstantiation, Sacrifice, the signifying Ceremonies of the Masse. Auriculer Confession: Enioyned Satisfaction: Confirmation with Chrisme: Extreme vnction: all the seuen Sacraments: Prayer for the dead: Free will: Monachisme: Vowed Chastitie: the fast of Lent: that Preistes may not marry after orders taken etc. see this alledged in perticuler hereafter Tract. 1. ss. 7. in the margent at Figur. 11. And Chrispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church pag. 253. initio: affirmeth that Anno 870. the greeke and Lattin Churches became deuided only for the Primacie and diuersitie of Ceremonies: so fully did they at that time consent in all other pointes: And concerning the other orientall Churches further remote, Osiander (in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 16. pag. 970. post med.) saith, Hoc Anno. 1585. Christiani qui etc. the yeare 1585. the Christians who inhabit neere to Mount Libanus, became at last Conquered, and subiect to the Turkish Empyre, neither is that to be maruailed at, for the Christians in the East haue not sincere religion, but are in most parte of Articles Popishly. Testimonie of our learned aduersaries: By which foresaid examples of so many remote nations, so far distant each from other, as namely Wales Graetia, Armenia India etc. ConuertedAs concerning the conuersion in the Apostles times of Armenia: See Chemnitius examen. part. 2. pag. 7. b. Paulo ante med. when he saith, Armenit Bartholomeus Euangelium praedicauit. of the like conuersion of Indiae: See Osiander centur. 1. pag. 37 circa med. and Paulus venetus l. 3. cap. 27. and 43. and Hayton Armen. l. de tartaris cap. 6. the like conuersion of Graecia appeareth by Paules epistles to sondry of that Nation as to the Corinthians Ephesians Thesalonians. And see reuelat. 1, 11. and concerning the like confessed conuersio^ of Wales See heretofore pag. 4. in the margent there at the letter. (...). vndoubtedly all of them in the Apostles times, and agreeing so far with vs and against our aduersaries in so many principall points of faith, is not obscurely signified that our now Catholicke Religion is that Primatiue faith, which the Apostles them selues first planted in all nations.



A FARTHER DEMONSTRATION BY Confessed Testimonie from the Fathers that it was taught in the Apostles time. @. 3.
VVHICH antiquitie or prescription of our professed Catholicke Doctrine vp to those Apostolicke times is also made as yet much more probable or rather euident, by that which our learned aduersaries them selues do yet further acknowledge and collect from the writings of the more ancient Fathers: To goe through eueryconcerning euery perticuler see more fully hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. perticuler would be ouer tedious to your MAIESTIE and improper to this place:
Vouchsafeth therefore your HIGHNES that we may giue instance in such as be cheefe.
1 First concerning vowes it is acknowledged thatPeter Martir de votis pag. 490. fine. saith: erant ergo Clementis aetate professiones castitatis and vota fateor. Iam tum inceperant homines deflectere a verbo dei. etc. the profession and vowes of Chastitie were extant amonge Christians in the time of Clement Bishope of Alexandria thatPeter Martir ibidem. pag. 524. fine saith Scio epiphaniu^ cum multis alijs ex patribus in eo errare, quod peccatu^ esse dicant votum huiusmodi violare cum opus fuerit, and male illum id referre in traditiones Apostolicas: Epiphanius and many other Fathers erred therin: thatcentur. 3. c. 6. col. 140. line. 27 and centur. 3. c. 7. col. 176. line. 39. Tertulian and Ciprian taught vowes of Chastitie: That the same haue bene vsedCaluin institut. l. 4. c. 13. sect. 17. ab vltima memoria, and antiquitus receptum: thatPeter Martir de celebatu and votis versus finem. imediately after the Apostles times to much was attributed to vowes: that Ignatius him selfe (though their scholler) signifieth in his epistles: hiscentur. 2. c. 4. col. 64. line. 40. It is said ex epistolis Ignasij apparet homines iam tum paulo impensius caepisse amare and venerari virginitatis studium, nam in epist. ad Antioch. ait: virgines videant, cui se consecrarins. to much liking of that profession: andCentur. 2. c. 10. col. 167. line 24. de virginitate minus comode loquitur. speaketh incommodiously of virginitie.Abraham Scultetus in his medulla theologiae Patrum. pag. 450. circa med. alleageth Ignatius saying ad Philadelp.Saluto collegium: virginu^ wherupon he imediately inferreth: Ergone in illo ecclesiae flor^ fuerunt, quae castitatem and continentiam perpetuam profiterentur Virgines? fuerunt omninq. etc. saluting (and affirming Colleges of Virgines: and so plainely, that our learned)
 aduersaries doe there-vpon affirme, how that euenScultetus vt supra. in that flower of the Church there were Virgins, that professed Perpetuall Chastitie that lastly S. Ambros and Epiphanius deriuePeter Martir de coelibatu and votis. pag. 543. paulo post med. and pag. 525. initio. Professed Chastitie from the institution of S. Paule:
2 Secondly co^cerning the Reall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament, the reseruation thereof, and the mixture of water with wine in the Challice: concerninge the first, it is affirmed that Gregory, the greateHumfred. Iesuitissimi part. 2. tat. 5. pag. 626. post med. taught transubstantiation thatThe Centurie writers. cent. 5. col. 517. l. 23 say: Chrisostomus transubstantionem videtur confirmare, nam ita scribit. etc. Chrisostome is thought to confirme transubstantiation: thatCentur. 4. c 10. col. 985. line. 30 Eusebius Emissen did speake vnprofitablely of transubstantiation: thatAothonie de Adamo in his Anotomie of the Masse. fol. 221. a. fine. and see the centurie writers, cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295. l. 3 And oecolampadius in libro epistolarum oecola^padij and Zuinglij. lib. 3. p. 765. the bookes of Sacraments ascribed to Ambros, affirme the opinion of Christs Bodely Presence in the Sacrament: wherin Peter Martir likewise professeth toPeter Martir in defens. obiect. Gardner. part. 4. pag. 724. And see also Peter Martirs further dislike of Cyrils s^yings in his epistles annexed to his co^mon places in English, his epistle there to Beza pag. 106. b ante medium. where he saith. I will not so easely subscribe to Cyrill, who affirmed such a communion, as therby euen the substance of the flesh and blood of Christ first is ioyned to the blessing. (for so he calleth the holy Bread) etc. And in his epistle to Caluine ibidem pag. 98. a. ante med. he proueth further for this opinion Cyrill and some other Fathers. dislike the Iudgment of Cirill: thatIn the treatise attributed to Vrsinus entitled Commonefactio cuiusdam theologi. de S. caena and eiusdem commonefactionis consideratio pag. 211. and 218. In Ciprian are many sayings which seeme to affirme transubstantiation: in so much as they doThe sermon of Cyprian de caena Domini, which this foresaid testimonie concerneth, is dedicated to Cornelius who was Bishoppe of Rome when Cyprian liued, and to whom Cyprian him selfe l. 1. ep. 1. and ep. 3. did write, in so much that Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish testament in 1. cor. cap. 11. fol. 282. a. circa medium alleageth testimonie from thence, affirming that the Author de caena Domini was not in time much inferior to Cyprian. vnworthely affirme that Sermon of his in which those sayings are extant to be counterfaite: that lastly IgnatiusMr. Whitgift in his defence against Carthwrightes reply pag. 408. ante med. who was S. Iohns scholler, and liued in Christs time did (as Theoderet 1200 yeares since, and them selues now doTheodoret. dial. 3. and Hamelmanus de traditionibus apostolicis etc. col. 746. line 18. 19. 22, 23 etc. alleageth not only Theodoret but also one Wydefortus alledging Anno 1396. this saying of Ignatius, out of an auncient copie of that time. affirme, and as the Lutheranes
 do obiectVide recitationes de concilio scripti libri concordiae etc. (printed Lipsiae 1581.) nona recitat. p. 177. ante medium. in proofe of their Reall presence, say of the heretickes in his time, they do not admitt Euchariste and oblations, because they do not confesse the Eucariste to be the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sinnes: and one of our aduersaries confesseth accordingly, thatAdamus Francisci in Margarita theologica. p. 256. saith. Commentum Papistarum de transubstantiatione mature in ecclesiam irrepsit. Transubstantiatio^ entred early into the Church: and an other saithAnthonie de Adamo in his Anotomie of the Masse pag. 236. a. ante med. I haue not yet hetherto beene able to knowe, when this opinion of the Reall and bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did beginne:
As concerninge reseruation of the Sacrament: whereas according to our aduersaries Doctrine,Mr. Willet in his synopsis pag. 460. ante med. It is no Sacrament vnlesse it be receaued. The contrary was so plainely taught and practized, euen in the more ancient times of S. Chrysostom,Chrisostom. in ep. 1. ad Innocentium. CiprianCyp. in serm. de lapsis post med. Ireneus,Ireneus apud Eusebium hist. l. 5. c. 24. Iustine,Iustine in Apolog. 2. prope finem. etc. that Mr. Fulke confesseth hereof sayingFulke against Heskins Sanders etc. pag. 77. prope finem. That the Sacrament (of some) was reserued in the elder dayes of the Church, is not so great a controuersie, as whether it ought to be reserued. and Caluine acknowledgethCaluine. instit. l. 4. cap. 17. sect. 39. the reseruation of the Sacrament (to be) veteris ecclesiae exemplum,See Peter Martir. lib. contra Gardineru^ obiect. 88. the example of the auncient Church: and (to omitte others) Chemnitius doth likewise acknowledge thatChemnitius exame^ part. 2. p. 102. a. paulo post me^iu^. witnesses of this custome of priuate reseruation of the Eucharist, are Tertulian, Ciprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Basile, etc. and thatChemnitius ibid. certaine of the aunicent Fathers greately commended the same, as Nazianzen, Ambrose etc. and that it was,Chemnitius ibid. antiqua consuetudo late patens and diu propagata. In so much as PeterSee this hereafter tract. 1. sect. 8. pag. 57. in the margent at at the letter .k. Martir cannot but acknowledge that (by the testimonie of S. Cirill) the anthropomorphites were specially condemned for their impugning of the Sacraments reseruation:
As concerning the minglinge of water with wine in the Chalice before consecration of the Sacrament It is so abundantly testified by the FathersIustine apol. 2. fine and Ireneus l. 5. c. 1. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3. Ambros l. 5. de sacramentis cap. 1. and l. 4. c. 5. Hierom. in morc. c. 14. Austine tract. 120 in Io^n. and de eccles. dog. cap. 75. and de doctrina Christiana lib. 4. c. 21 Euseb. emissen. ser. 5. de Paschate. concil. 3. Carthag. can. 24. and concil. Auraicen. can. 17. and concil. 3. brach. c^n. 1. and concil. tribur. can. 21. and concil Aphrican. can. 4. and ex capitulis graec. synd. c. 55 and concil. 6. consta^tinop. can. 32 of all
 ages and Countries, that Mr. Whitguifte saith.Mr. Whitgift in his defence etc. pa. 473. prope initium. Ciprian was greately ouer-seene in making it a matter so necessary, in caelebration of the Lordes Supper, to haue water mingled with wine, which was at that time no doubt, common to moe then to him: Mr. Carthwright likewise acknowledgeth thatMr. Carthwrite alleaged in Mr. Whitgifts foresaide defence. p. 525 fine. in the minglinge of water with wine, a necessitie and greate misterie was placed, as may appeare (saith he) both by Iustine Martir and Ciprian: and Mr. Iewell speaketh of this mixture, confesseth in like manner saying,Mr. Iewell in his reply pag. 34. paulo antemed. in deede S. Ci^rian and certaine olde Fathers, spake of it, and f^r^^ it much, adde but now hereto, that the Armenians being the first wee reade of, that denied the mixture, ^ffirming (with our aduersaries) th^t only wine wa^ to be vsed, were therefore speciall^ conde^ned of error, as witnesTheophilac^. in Io^n. cap. 19. ^^nom^ the water and blood which issued from Christs side: saith. Confund^ntur Armenij qui non admiscent in misterijs aqua^ vino, non enim credunt vt videtur, ^uod aqua ex latere egressa sit. Theop^ilact and the Fathers of the si^t CouncellCouncil. 6. constantinop. can. 32, saith. Nouimus quod in Armenianorum Regione vinum ta^ tum in sacra mensa offerunt aquam illi non miscentes, qui sacrificium incruentum peragunt: which their vsage that councell there condemneth, saving there further against it, nam and Iacobus Domini nostri Iesu Christi frater. etc. and Basilius Cesareae Archiepis^opus. etc. mistico nobis in scripto tradito sacrificio, ita per agendum in sacro misterio ex aqua and vino sacrum poculum ediderunt. of Constantinople, who (aboue a thousand yeres since) alleaged against themibidem vt supra. S. Iames his Liturgie in proofe of the foresaide mixture:
3 Thirdly as concerning Antichrist, Altars, and sacrifice, Mr. Whitaker confesseth touching Antichrist saying,Whitaker. l. de Antichristo. pag. 21. the Fathers for the most parte thought that Antichrist should be but one man. But in that as in many other thinges they erred: concerning the short time of his persecutio^ or raigne gathred from the scriptures. Mr. Fox confesseth thatFoxe in Apoc. c. 12 pag. 345. post medium. almost all the holy and learned interpreters do by a time, times, and halfe a time vnderstand only three y^ares and a halfe: affirming further to beFoxe in Apoc. ca. 13 pag. 392. fine. the consent and opinion of almost all the auncient Fathers. As concerning Aultars and Sacrifice, (which as D. Rainoldes grauntethD. Rainlodes in his conferrence with Mr. Hart pag. 552. fine. are linked by nature in relation and mutuall dependance one of other. And first concerning
 Aultars: Peter Martir reproueth the auncient Fathers, saying,Peter Martir in his common places in english. part. 4. p. 225. b. post med. Petrus Alexandrinus etc. attributeth more to the outward Aultar then to the liuely Temples of Christ. And yet further against Optatus:Peter Martir ibidem. p. 226. a. initio. Optatus l. 6. ag^inst Parmenianus saith, what is the Aultar? Euen the seate of the Body and Blood of Christ:ibidem. such sayings as th^se (saith Peter Martir) edified not the people etc. and in no lesse plaine maner is Optatus foresaid saying mentioned and reproued by the centuriecent. 4. c. 6. col. 409. l. 25. writers:Peter Martir in his common places part. 4 pag. 225. b. ante med. As also Peter Martir, reproueth the Fathers in generall, saying the Fathers shoulde not with so much libertie haue seen ed he^re and there to haue abused the name Altar: Now as concerning sacrifice, it is affirmed, by our learned aduersaries that the more auncient Fathers, namlySee this affirmed by Caluin hereafter pa. 145. in the margent vnder the letter. t. at Anno. 320 Athanasius, Ambrose, Austine, Arnobius, etc. erred herein, and so fully, that their supper (is therefore saide to haue) carried the face of a renewed oblation, imitating ouer n^r^ly the Iewish manner of sacrificing etc. that theyCaluin. in omnes Pauli epist. in haebr. c. 7 vers. 9. pag. 924. b. forged a sacrifice in the Lords supper with out his Commaundement, and so adulterated the supper with adding of sacrifice: that also the writinges of Ireneus and Ignatius, (who are most auncient are herein)Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 63 line 9. and cent. 2. cap. 10 col. 167. line 17. and see hereafter pag. 145 in the margent vnder the letter .t. and at Anno 90. and 170 incommodious and dangerous: and thatSebastianus Francus in his epist. de abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis. presently after the Apostles times, the Supper of our Lord was turned into a sacrifice. In so much as some of our aduersaries doubt not to charge the auncient Fathers euen with propitiatoryAndreas Christianus lib. de opificio Missae pag. 167. initio reciting the Fathers opinion hereof saith: Dicta autem Patrum non solum impetrationem sed etiam intrinsecant quandam vim placandi Inuunt Origines hom. 13 in Leuiucum a^t: ista est commemoratio sola quae propitium facit Deum hominibus. Athanasius in sermone de defunctis apud Damascenum ait: incruentae hostiae oblatio propitiatio est. To which end he alleageth likewise further the perticuler sayings of Ambrose, Chrisostome, Augustine, Gregorie, Bede, and of the 3. Councell of Brach: and concerning the Fathers further testimonies for Masse see more hereafter Tract 3. Sect 1. in the margent at the letter .t. sacrifice, and sacrifice for the dead: So chargeable were the ancient Fathers no lesse then we now are, in that greate question of sacrifice.
4 Fourthly concerning Praier for the dead it is graunted thatMr. George Gifford in his demonstration that our Brownists be full Donatistes pag. 38 and see hereafter pa. 44 post med. and pag. 45.it was generall in the Church longe before the daies of Augustine, as it appeareth in Ciprian and Tertulian: that alsoMr. Fulk in his confutation of Purgatorie pag. 362 ante med and vide ibid. p. 303 circa med. and 393 post med. Tertulian, Ciprian, Austine, Hierome, and a greate many more, do witnes that sacrifice for the dead i^ the tradition of the Apostles. That likewise praier for the dead is taught in the writingsMr. D. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatorie pag. 353 and 354 ante med and vide Dio^is. de eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. part 3. now extant vnder the name of Dionisius Ariopagitta, who is mentioned in the Actes,Act. 17, 34. and those w^itings aswellMr. Fulke against the Rhemish Test^ment in 2. Thess. 2. sect 19 fol. 361. b. paulo ante med. thinketh that Dionisius liued in the time of Origen. acknowledged by Mr. Fulke to haue bene written aboue 1300. yeares since, (which was long before the obiectedWhere as it is vsually obiected against this booke that if it had bene the writing of Dionisius then Eusebius or Hierome would haue mentioned it, this confessed antiquitie therof before their times, auoideth that obiection, which is also no lesse plainly auoided by Eusebius hist. l. 5. c. 26. and Hierome (in catul. prope initium) who signifie that the bookes of sondry writers were vnknowne to them. times to the contrarie of Eusebius and Hierome) as also alledged specially by Mr. Sutcliffe as beingSutcliffe de Presbiterio c. 13 pag. 91 prope finem saith. Dionisius antiquitatis optimus sane testis, videtur enim esse antiquissimus etc. And the Lord Archbishop of Canterburie in his answere to the admonition pag. 105 sect vlt. alledgeth Dionisius saying, Dionisius Ariopagitta in his booke de caelesti hierarchia and seauenth chapter speaketh thus. etc. And see hereafter in this Section numb. 13 in the margent at this marke () most auncient, and the best witnes of antiquitie.
In like maner concerning Limbus Patrum where as Bellarmine alledgeth in proofe thereof the plaine testimonies of the Greeke Fathers, as namely ofBellarm. tom. 1. l. 4 de Christi Anima cap. 14 Iustine, Ireneus, Clemens, Origen, Eusebius, Basill, Nazianzen, Nicen, Epiphanius, Chrisostome, etc. and of the Lattine FathersBellarm. ibid. Tertulian, Hipolitus Ciprian, Hillarie, Gaudentius, Prudentius, Ambros, Hierome, Rufinus, Austine, Leo, Fulgentius, etc. our aduesarie Dan^^us answereth to their testimonies saying.Danaeus ad Roberti Bellarmini d^^put. part. 1 pag. ^76. paulo post med. as concerning them, they were not inctructed out of Gods word, neither doe th y confirme theire opinion from it, but only from their owne coniectures etc. In like plaine maner doth my Lord of Winchester make his acknowledgement, saying.

Master Bilson in his booke of the full redemption of mankind pag. 188 fine. All the Fathers with one consent affirme, that Christ deliuered the soules of the Patriarkes and Prophets out of Hell, at his comming thither, and so spoyled Sathan of those that were in his present possession: where-vnto might be added the like liberall and plaineMr. Whittaker contra Dur^um l. 8. p. 567. fine. answereth to Dureus his testimonies from the Fathers concerning Lymbus Patrum saying: quod scripturis euincere minus potuisti, id Patrum Testimonijs procul dubio conficles: de qu^bus vt tibi quod fentio libere, breuiterque respondeam, apud me vna scripturae vocula plus habet ponderis, quam mille Patrum sine scripturis pronunciata, itaque non expectabis dum singulati^ hos Patrum errores diluo. And see further Mr. Whitaker ibid. pag. 773. initio And D. Barlowe in his defence of the articles of the Protestants religion pag. 173 Post med. sayeth hereof. This passeth most rife among the Fathers, who taking Inferi for Abraham^ bosome, expound it that Christ went thither, ad liberandum liberandos, to conuey the Fathers deceased before his Resurrection into the place where now they are. confession of Mr. Whitaker and Mr. D. Barlowe. In so m^ch as Ioannes Lascicius a learned Protestant of Polonia, doubteth not to affirmeIoannes Lascicius in the booke entituled de Russorum, Muscouitorum, and Tartarum Religione. pag. 122 initio and 123 and deriue the Doctrine therof, from manifestSee the testimonie of Ignatius in his epistle ad Trallianos paulo post med. and the like testimonie of Thaddeus apud Euseb. hist. l. 1. cap. vlt. testimonies of Ig^atius,Mr. Whitguift in his defence etc. pag. 408 ante med. who was scholler to S. Iohn. as also of Thaddaeus who was one ofMat. 10, 3. the twelue. the authoritie and creditte of which last Testimonie FrigenilleusFrigeuilleus Gauuius in his Palma Christiana pag. 74 post med. Gauuius (an other Protestant writer) vndertaketh specially to defend.
5 Fiftly as concerning f^eewill, it is affirmed that ProtestantsSo sayeth the Puritanes in their breefe discouerie of vntruthes etc. conteined in D. Bancrofts sermon pag. 203 fine. knowe that euer since the Apostles time in a manner it florished euery where, vntill Martin Luther tooke the sword in hand against it. And that accordingly the most auncient Fathers, namelyHereof see Abraham Scultetus in medulla theologiae patrum pag. 369 post med. and 304 post med. and 466. fine and 151 paulo ante med. and 105 circa medium and 98 circa med. and 48 prope initium and fine. and 66 fine and 73 initio and 40 ante med. and see the centurie writers cent. 2 c. 4 col. 58 line 30 and col. 59 line 11. and cent. 3 c. 4. col. 77 and 78 and col. 48 line 15.. Ciprian, Theophilus, Tertulian, Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustine Ireneus, Athenagoras Tatianus: etc. erred therein:
6 Sixtly as concerning freewill and merite of workes Mr. D. Humfrie saith,Humfreid. Iesuitismi pa^t. 2 pag. 530 ante med And concerning the confessed doctrine of Me ite, of W^rkes in Clemens Alexandrinus, Theophilus, Cypr. Iustine, Martir etc. See Abraham Scult^tus vbi supra pag. 48. ante med. and 122 post med. and 151 post med. And the centurie writers cent. 2. c. 4 and cent. 3 c. 4. it may not be denyed but that Iereneus, Cl^menes, and oth^r^ (quos vocant Apostolicos) called Apostolicall (in respect of the time in which they liued, haue in their writing^ the opinions of freewill^
 and of meritt of wookes:
7 Seuenthly concerning freewill, meritts of workes, inuocation of Saints, and such other like: The Lord Archbishope of Canturbury discourcing ofMr. Whitguift in his defence etc. against the reply of Carthwrite pag. 472 fine and 473 initio. Doctrine taught in any age ^ine the Apostles time: affirmeth without any other exception, either of age or Father, that (to vse his owne wordes)Mr. Whitguifte vbi supra pag. 473 paulo post initium and ^e Mr. Louel in his examination etc. pag. 120. almost all the Bishopes and learned writers of the Greek^ Church, and Lattin also f^r the moste parte were spotted w^^h Doctrine of freewill, of merite, of inuocation of Saintes, and such l^ke:
8 Eightly concerning Baptisme, that the most auncient Fathers (who suc^eeded next to the Apostles schollers) namely Iustine, Cl^ment etc.Centur. 2. c. 4. col. 47. line. 43. and in Centur. 3. c. 4. col. 82. line. 55. it is saide: Affirmare audet Ciprianus quod persona Baptizans Spiritum sanctum conferat and Baptizatum intus sanctificet. thought regeneration (not to be signified but) wrought by Baptisme, and the word; vnto which (two) ioyned t gether they attribut efficacie, that is to say remission of sinnes: that alsoCent. 3 cap. 6. col. 125 line 16. Origen, Tertulian, and Cipriane, mencion how that the Baptized persones were accustomed to be signed with the signe of the Crosse. That there were likewise then vsed in Baptisme sundry other Ceremonies ascent. col. 124. line 53 and col. 126 line 20. Abrenunciati^:cent. 3. col. 125. line 1 and 124 line 57 Three sould immertio,centur 3. col. 125 line 9. vncton etc. thatSoe saith Carthwrite in Mr. Whitguifts defence etc. p. 522 fine And Bullenger in his decades in English decad 5. serm. 8. pag. 1049. a. circa med. Austine was of minde that Children could not be saued without Baptisme: thatMusculus ho. comun. de Baptismo pag. 308. post med. Austine and many Fathers were of the same opinion. In so much that (as Caluin confesseth) the Fathers hereupon doubted notCaluin. institut. lib. 4 c. 1 sect 20. almost from the very beginning of the Church, to vse the Baptisme of laye persons in daunger of death.
9 Ninthly concering Confe^sion, Absolution, Penance and satisfaction: that euencent. 3. cap. 6. col. 127. line 28. and see the wordes alledged hereafter tract. 2. sect 7. in the margent at the letter c. neerest the end in (those firster) times of Ciprian and Tertulian was vsed priuate Confession (euen) of thoughtes and lesser sinnes, and that the same wasvide ibidem then commaunded and thought necessarie that also as then Penancecent. 3. col. 127 line 40 or satisfaction was enioyned according to the offence. that the same FathersWhittaker contra Camp. rat. 5 pag. 78 and see him also alledged in Mr. Fulkes defence of the English transl^tions c. 13 pag. 368 ante medium. though by (such) their externall discipline of life, to paie the paines due for sinnes, and to satisfie Gods Iustice. ThatWhitaker in resp. ad. Camp. rat. 5 pag. 78 paulo ante medium. not Ciprian only; but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time were in that error
 and that the Priest, when Confession was (as before) made, and Penance enioyned,Cent. 3. col. 129. l. 77. did afterwardes absolue the Penitent (euen)Vide ibid. And see this ceremonie of imposing the Preists hand in absolution mentioned by Cyprian in serm. de lapsis paulo ante med. and l. 3. ep 17. and 18 Concil. 4. Carthag. Can. 76. and 78 and Chrisost in Ioh. 20. hom. 85 fine. with the now like vsed Ceremony of imposing his hand.
10 Tenthly concerning the Primacie of Peter, and the Romane sea, our aduersaries reprehend sundry of the Fathers for their af^^rming the Church to be builded vpon Peter: namelycent. 4 col. 1250 line 2. S. Hierome:cent. 4. col. 555 line 30 Hillary:Cent. 4 col. 558 line 54 Nazianzen:Cent. 3 col 84 line 37 Tertulia^Cent. 4 col. 84 line 59. Ciprian:Cent. 3. col. 85 line 3. Origen: and in generallCaluin. institut. l. 4 c. 6. sect 6 saith. In Petro fundatam esse ecclesiam quia dictum sit, super hanc petram etc. At nonnulli ex Patribus sic exposuerunt, sed recl^mat tota scriptura etc. And Daneus in respons. ad Bellarmini disput. part. 1 pag. 277 post med. saith. Patres pessime de Petri persona sunt interpretati etc. many Fathers reprouing also others for their entitling PeterCent. 4 col. 556 line 17. the head of the Apostles: andibidem col. 1074 l. 16 the Bishope of B^sh^p^s in so m^ch that whereas the Fathers doubted not to celebrate publickly a yearely festiuallConcil. 2 Turonense 2 can. 16 saith: sunt etiam qui in festiuitate Cathedr^ domini Petri Apostoli etc. And Austine serm. 15 de Sanctis saith. Institutio solemnitatis hodiernae, a Senioribus nostris cathedrae nomen accepit, etc. recte ergo ecclesiae, natalem sed^^ illius colunt, quam Apostolus pro ecclesiarum salut suscepit, dicente Domino, tues Petrus etc. ideo digne fundamentum hoc ecclesia colit: and see farther mention hereof in Beda in martirologio. day, in honour of Peters sea (which respect so had the^eto, is more then we finde had to any other sea of any o^her Apostle:) Daneus answering hereunto ^ffirmeth the Fathers assertio^, hereof to beDanaeus in resp. ad Bellarmini disput. part. 1 page 375 fine et 276 initio: the iudgements and testimonies of the Church then corrupt d and betwitch^d, or made blinde with this error.
As concerning the Primacie of the Romane sea, the Centurists s^yCent. 5 cap: 10 col: 1262 line 30. Leo very painefully goeth about to proue that singul^r pr^heminence was giuen to Peter aboue the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacie of the Romane Church: and Beza further saithConfess. Geneue c: 7 sect 12 and Whitaker de concilijs contra Bellarminum pag. 37 paulo ante medium faith, de Leone primo non laboro, magnus ille suit Antichristiani regni architectus, and yet ibidem pag. 34. circa medium he sayeth: of Leo, fuit ille quidem doctus and pius Episcopus, sed fuit tamen magis ambitiosus: etc. it is manifest that Leo in his Epistles doth clearely breathe forth the arrogancie of the Anticristian Romane sea and my Lorde
 of Canterbury saithMr. Whitguifte in his defence pag. 342 post med. it is certaine that then viz. in the time of the auncient carthage and Aphrican Councell the Bishope of Rome beganne at least to claime the superioritie ouer all Churches. In like manner is that auncient councell of Sardis whereat sundry fathers of the Councell were present, charged for acknowledgingHereof see Osiander cent. 4. p. 294 ante med. and Caluin instit. l. 4 c. 7 sect 9 and see hereafter Tract. 1 sect. 7 in the margent at the letter d of the second alphabet. appell^s to the Bishope of Rome and Mr Ful^ke and other Protestants affirme that the auncient Romane BishopesSee Mr. Fulke alleaged hereafter Tract. 1 sect 7 letter a of the second alphabet: And see Sparke against Mr. Iohn de Albines in his answere to the preface ante med. and Osiander cent. 5 pag 28 and 218. Anastasius, Innocentius, zozimus, Boniface and Celestinus, (who liued 1200 yeares since) challinged prerogatiue ouer the Bishopes of Aphrica by sorging a false canon of the Nicen Councell which pretence of forgerie is hereafterSee herafter Tract 1 sect 7 in the margent at the letter c. d. of the second alph^bet auoided: Mr. Whitaker saith also of Iulius Bish^pe of Rome (who liued in Constantines time) thatSee Whitaker de concilijs etc. quoest 2 pag 42 fine 43 initio and 44 paulo ante med. he challenged to him selfe authoritie that no Councell shoulde be celebrated without the sentence of the Bish^pe of Rome: S. Cipriane though a Bishope of Aphrick (who liued Anno. 240.) is charged by the centurie writers for his affirmingCent. 3 c. 4 col. 84 line 44. our chaire sounded by our Lords voice vpon the rocke: and thatibid. l. 49 there ought to be one Bishope in the CATHOLICKE Church: and for his challengeibid. l. 56 Peters chaire the principlll Church from whence Priestly vertue ariseth and lastly for his (say they)ibid. line 51. teaching without any foundation of scripture, that the Romane Church ought to be acknowledged of all others, for the Mother and Roote of the Catholi k Church victorMr. Whitgifte in his defence etc. pag. 510 prope finem. (as my Lord of Canterbury affirmeth) liued Anno 198. and was a Godly Bishope and Martir, and the Church at that time in greate puritie: (as) not being long after the Apostles time: yet is he charged by Amandus Polanus toAmandus Polanus in silogethesin theologiae. p. 165. haue shewed a Papall minde and a^r gancie: and by M. SparkeMr. Spark. against mr. Iohn d' Abbines in his answere to the preface ante med. and see Osiander cent. 2. pag ^7 and 96. somewhat Popel k^ to haue receaued h^s bonndes when he took^ vpon him to excommunicate the Bishopes of the East Mr. Whitaker also charging him withWhitaker contra Dureum. l. 7. pag. 480. initio exercising iurisdiction vpon former Churches: Lastly S. Ierneus (who liued next after the Apostles schollers and in the same time
 victor) is disliked for his affirming, thatThe centurie writers. cent. 2. c 4 col. 64 line 10 all the Churche ought to accord to the Romane Church in regard of a more powerable principallitie: wherein the Centurists charge him withSee the 2. centurie in the Alphabeticall table at the word Irenaeus. a corrupt saying concerning the Primacie of the Roman Church:
11 Eleuenthly as concerning the appointed Fast of Lent: St. Ambrose saithAmbrose serm. 25 34. and 36 it is sinne not to faste in Lent: for which M. CarthwrightMr. Cartwrite alleged in master Whitgiftes defence p. 100 initio. reproueth him: and yet no lesse is affirmed byAug de tempore serm. 62 and 77 S. AustineChrisost. ad pop. ho. 6. prope finem. Chrisostome and otherconcil. 8. Tol. can. 9 Fathers: in so much as Chemnitius confesseth thatChemnitius exame^ Concil. Trident. part 1 pag. 89. b. ante med. saith Quadragessi nam enim Ambrosius, maximus taurinensis, Theophilus, Hieronimus, and alij affirmant ess^ traditionem apostolicam. Ambrose, Maximus, Taurinensis, Theophilus, Hierom, and other do affirme the faste of Lent to be an Apostolicall tradition. In more vndouted proofe whereof other Protestante writers do not only affirmeSee this in Abraham Scultetus in medul. theologiae Patrum p. 440. initio. The superstition of Lent and fasting, to haue bene allowed and commaunded by IgnatiusMaster Whitgifte in his defence etc. pag. 408 circa medium who was schol^er to S. Iohn: but do also defendSee Abraham Scultetus vbi supra. And the same epistle of Ignasius (being ad Philippenses) is in like manner cited and acknowledged by Mr. Whitgifte in his deffence p. 102 ante med. And by mr. Carthwrite alleaged ibidem. pag. 99 prope finem. And mr. Hooker in his ecclesiasticall policie l. 5. sect. 72 pag. 209 circa med. answereth our aduersaries vsuall obiection made against it. and so likewise doth mr. Whitgifte in his defence. etc. that very Epistle of Ignatius, in which this Doctrine is extant, to be his true Epistle and not counterfaite:
12 Tweluethly concerning vnwritten Traditions and Ceremonies, and first concerninge vnwritten TRADITIONS it is Confessed as followeth, whereas Sanit. CHRISOSTOME saithChrisost. in 2. Thessal. hom. 4 the Apostles did not deliuer all thinges by writing, but many things without, and these be as worthie of credit as the other: Mr. Whitaker in answere thereof saithWhittaker de sacra scriptura. p. 678 paulo post med. I answere that thi^ is an inconsiderate speech and vnworthie so greate a father and whereas Epiphanius saithEpiphanius haer. 61 circa med. we must vse Tradition for the scriptu^e hath not all thinges, and therefore the Apostles deliuered certaine thinges by writinge and certaine by Tradition: with whom agreeth S. Basill sayingBasil. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 27. some
 thing we haue from scripture other things from the Apostles Tradition etc. both which hath like force vnto Christian Religion: Mr. D. Rainoldes answering to these foresaid sayings of Basill and Chrisostome, saithD. Rainoldes in his Conclusions annexed to his conference the 1. conclusion. pag. 689. I take not vpon me to controule them, but let the Church Iudge if they considered with aduice enough: etc. Whereunto might be added the like confessedWhere Eusebius l. 1 demonstr. Euang. c. 8 is obiected to say, that the Apostles published their doctrine: Partly by writing, partly without writing, as it were by a certaine vnwritten law. Mr. Whittaker de sacra scriptura pag. 668 fine. saith therto. I answere that this testimonie is plaine enough, but in no sorte to be receaued, because it is against the Scriptures. testimonie, from Eusebius.
And thus much breifly concerning the Fathers of the Greeke Church. Now as concerning the like confessed Doctrine in the Fathers of the LATTIN Church (to avoide tediousnes) S. Austine only (as being mostGomarus in speculo verae ecclesiae etc. pag. 96 ante mediu saith: Augustinus Patrum omnium communi sententia purissimus habetur. approued by our aduersaries) shall serue for all: who labouring to proue that those who are Baptized by heretickes shoulde not be Rebaptized, saithAug. de Bap. contra Don. l. 5. c. 23 the Apostles commaunded nothinge hereof, but that custome which was opposed herein against Ciprian is to be beleeued to proceede from their Tradition, as many things be, which the wholle Church houldeth, and are therefore well beleeued to be commaunded of the Apostles, although they bee not written. Wherein andSee the like saying in Austine epist. 118 ad Ianuarium. other his like sayings his meaning is so euident and confessed, that Mr. Carthwright speaking thereof, saythSee Mr. Carthwrite in mr. Whitgifts defence etc. p. 103 ante med. to allowe St. Austines saying is to bring^ in Poperie againe: and thatSee Mr. Carthwrites wordes alleaged vbi supra. if S. Austines Iudgement be a good Iudgment, then there be some things commaunded of God, which are not in the scriptures, and there-upon no sufficient Doctrine conteined in the scriptures: Add but now hereunto, thatSee Chemnitius examen part. 1. pag. 87. 89 90. Chemnitius, reporteth for their like testimonie of vnwritten Traditions; Clemens Alexandrinus, Origen, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierome, Maximus, Theophilus, Basill, Damascene etc. That M. FulkeSee mr. Fulke against Purgatory pa. 362 ante med. and 303 and 397 and against Martiall pag. 170. 178. and against Bristowes motiues p. 35 and 36. also confesseth as much of Chrisostom^, Tertulian, Ciprian, Augustine, Hierome, etc. that lastly, Mr. WhitakerSee master Whitaker de sacra scriptura pag. 678. 681. 683. 685. 690. 695. 696. 670 668. acknowledgeth the like of Chrisostome, Epiphanius, Tertulian, Ciprian, Augustine, Innocentius, Leo, Basill, Eusebius, Damascene, etc. Now as concerning Ceremonies Mr. Calfehill
 (to omitte others) affirmeth thatHereof see Mr. Fulkes reioinder to Martialls Replie printed 1580. pa. 131 fine and 132 initio. the Fathers declined all from the simplicitie of the Gospell in ceremonies.
13 Thirtenthly it is confessed yet further in generall concerning Dionisius Artopagitta and Hermes, who are houlden most auncient and Apostolike,Of Dionisius mention is made act. 17, 34. and of Hermes rom. 16, 14. namely that Dionisius in his fore-saide writinges which were aboue a thousand yeares since (as D. HumfrieHumfreid. in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5 pag. 513 fine and 514 initio. saith: Hunc Arcopagitam, Suidas, Michaell Singelus, Gregorius Turonensis, and alij Pauli auditorem credunt fuisse illum scriptorem caelestis et ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae: And see before Sect 3. n. 4. lit. .o. confesseth) publickely extant and alleadged vnder his name, doth (casually and obiter amonge other thinges) make mention ouer and besides the foresaide Doctrine of praier for the dead,Hamelmanus de traditionibus apostolicis col. 707 line 27 and col. 736 line 56 and master Whitaker de sacra scriptura pag. 655 ante med. of Apostolicke vnwritten Traditions: ofHamelmanus vbi supra col. 707. l. 4 and col. 732 l. 51 ChrismeHamelmanus vbi supra col. 707. l. 49 and col. 743 l. 4 Consecration of Moncks. andHumfreid. in Iesuitismi par 2 pag. 519 circamed ^nd Luther tom. 2 Witeberg. Anno 1562 de captiu. Babil. fol. 84. b. ante med. Sixe of our Sacraments that the booke of Hermes entituled Pastor affordeth in like manner testimonie or grounde worke ofAbraham Scultetus in medulla theolog. etc. pag. 467 post med. freewill and monasticall solitude ofHamelmanus de trad. apost. col. 252 fine and col. 253 initio. and col. 254 line 38 and Abraham Scultetus vbi supra pag. 467 post med. Pu^gatorie, and praier for the dead: ofHamelmanus vbi supra col. 253 l. 54 and col. 254 l. 49 Merite and Iustification of workes: of Professed ChastitieHamelmanus vbi supra col. 251 line 48 and col. 254 l. 30 in ministers ofHamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 l. 36 Fasting from certaine meates: ofibidem col. 253 line 46 the Innocent parties remainnig vnmaried in case of adultrie: ofChemnitius examen concil. Trident. part. pag. 127 a prope finem workes of superogation: and ofHamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 l. 53 saith. Furtigitur bonum papismi initium impurus ille liber pastoris, vel Heremitis. Poperie: And though in the primatiue Church some questionVide Eusebium hist. l. 3 ^. 3 prope finem was made of this booke, as whether it were Canonicall scripture or not, (many FathersIt was thought to be sacred, and for such alleaged by Origen lib. 10 in epist. ad Rom. Tertulian l. de oratione. Clemens Alex. l. 6 stromat. Athanasius in libro de decretis Nicen Synod. Cassianus collat. 13. c. 12 and by Ireneus l. 4 c. 37. thinking that it was) yet is it confessed to haue ben receaued at the least forHamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 line 24 saith. illum pro ecclesiastico habuerunt quidem Patr^s: and col. 730 line 25 he saith Hermetis libellus qui dicitur Pastor, est olim aliquando in numerum ecclesiasticorum librorum relatus: In so much as Eusebius hist. l. 3 c. 3. Ruffinus in Simbolum and Hierom. in catul. do comme^d this booke for profitable, and so Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura p. 93 fine confesseth of Hierome. Ecclesiasticall, and the authoritie thereof to haue bene so many ages since specially alleadgedHamelmanus vbi supra col. 253 line 10 saith: Liber pastoris videtur receptus esse ab Ireneo and Clemente. And col. 255 line 42 he saith: Ostendit Eusebius a quibusdam librum pastoris receptum esse, and imprimis ab Ireneo sic and Origines l. 1 de Principijs c. 3 citat quaedam ex libro pastoris eiusque libri lectionem commendat: ho: 13 in Ezech: by Origen, Clement, and Ireneus, who liued next to those Apostles times.
14 Fourthtenthly whereas the Lord Archbishope of Canterburie doth against Carthwright learnedly and truly vrge this generall rule or proofe of Apostolicke Doctrine, sayingMr. Whitgiste in his deffence: etc. pag: 351 for so much as the originall and beginning of these names, Metropolitaine, Archbishop etc. such is their antiquitie, cannot be found so farr as I haue read it is to be supposed they haue their Originall from the Apostl^s themselues. For as I remember S. Austine hath this rule in his 118 Epistle. In somuch as he yet further saith in proofe of this ruleMr. Whitgifte vbi supra pag: 352 it is of credit with the writers of our time, namely with Mr. Suinglius Mr. Caluine, and Mr. Gualter, and surely I thinke no learned man doth dissent from them:
It is now by the premisses made more then euident that the seuerall Doctrines of our faith, are according to this rule, no lesse fr^e from all noted and knowne beginning since the Apostles times, then are the other foresaide Doctrines of Metropolitaines and Bishopes: a thing so manifest that Master. Carthwright though our greate aduersarie) doubteth not yet further to acknowledge the same, saying therefore of this very rule in plaine wordes,See Mr: Carthwrite his wordes in Mr. Whitgiftes foresaide deffence etc. pag: 352 initio: that thereby a windowe is open to bring in all Popery: AndMaster Carthwright alleaged ibidem pag: 103 paulo ante medium. I appeall (saith he) to the Iudgement of all men, if this be not to bringe in Poperie againe, to allowe of S. Austines saying: and. So euidently do our owne learned aduersaries, confirme and proue our foresaide Catholicke Religion, wherto we were so manie ages since conuerted, to be vndoubtedly Apostolicke.



ANOTHER LIKE DEMONSTRATION thereof by Testimonie from the Auncient Iewes. @. 4.
ADD but now in further demonstration hereof that concerning such Articles of faith now in question as are co^mon to vs with the Fathers of the olde Testament whensoeuer vpon any occasion, direct mencion is made of any of them either by those that were before Christs time, or by the Iewish Rabines since, it is still with vs and against our aduersaries. So in the example of praier for the dead, admitting the booke of Machabees but for a true Historie, it may not be denied but that long before Christs time, Iudas Machabeus (the vndoubted seruant of god2. Machab. 2, 43 procured sacrifice for the dead: that the Priestes at Hierusalem accordingly offred2 Machab. 2, 45 So he made a reconciliation for the dead that they might be deliuered from sinne. it, and that the Author of the Historie so many yeares after commended2. Machab. 2, 45. It was a holy and good thought, and vide ibidem: verse: 43 the same. Whereunto might be added further like Testimonie thereof, from IosephusIoseph cap: 9 diswadeth those distressed souldiers that were ready to kill the^ selues saying: ignoro milites quae sit propitiatio animae hominis qui seipsum interfecit: quis intercedet pro nobis ad Deum si sic peccauerimus? most plainely therby insinuating that for such as dye in better estate, Praier may be made. Bengorion, also from Rabby SimeonRabby Symeon in libro Zoar. in c. 18 Genesis, saith of such as are temporally punished after this life. After they are purged from the filth of theire sinnes, then doth God cause them to ascend out of that place. (who liued bef^re Christ) and from sundry other olde IewishMenachim siam in Comment. ad Leuit. c 16 and R. Hismi. Alphesi^ scholiastes ad caput Roch: Haschana. And R. Isaac. Ababab. in Lucerna lucis conclusione. 1. part. 2. c. 2. and R. Dauid. Kimhi in Psalm: 32. Rabbines. In so much as the Iewish Rabbines of latter age do therevpon yet to this day professefull to retaine and obserueRabby Moyses in his simbolum fidei Iudeorum printed at Paris Anno 1569. fol. 26. b and 27 a and 22 b expr^ss^th a prescript forme of praier for the dead. like testimonie therof is giuen by Ioannes Isaac in institutionibus linguae haebricae impressis Coloniae. 1553 And by Antonius Margarita: (a late conuerted Iewe) in his booke entituled vniuersi Iudaeorum fides: Praier for the dead: a thing not denied but plainelie confessed by Mr.Whitaker contra Dureum lib. 1 pag. 85 antemed. saith: Scio enim Iudae is esse libros memoriales quos in Sinagogis suis legunt, eosque nunc precibus quibusdam pro mortuis vti solere non ignoro. Whitaker.
2 Secondlye concerning Limbus Patrum the booke entituled Ecclesiasticus, though we should for the time suppose it not to be Canonicall Scripture, yet was it Collected or penned before Christs time, and by such an Author as then beforeIn the prologue of the booke of ecclesiasticus ante med.had giuen him selfe to the reading of the Lawe and the Prophets and other b^okes of their Fathers and had gotten therein sufficient knowledge. In this booke is our Sauiours discending in to that place specially foretoulde vs where it is said in his person:Ecclesiasticus 24, 37. I will pearce through the lower partes of the earth, I will looke vpon all such as bee a sleepe, and will lighten all them that trust in the Lord: a saying so directThis pearcing thing the lower partes of the earth to lighten those that were there a sleepe and tr^sted in the Lord argueth plainely that those faithfull so a sleepe (or dead) were not the^ in Heauen: for by the lower partes of the e^^th cannot be ment heauen. and pertinent that Master VVHITAKER seeketh to euade by these two only waies, as first in answering thatWhitaker contra Dureum l. 8 pag. 567 postmed. these wordes are wanting in the Greeke Coppie: Se^ondly (this being notoriously false^alse for the English Bible (to omit others) of Anno 1576 purporting by the title on the first page thereof to bee translated according to the H^brue and Greeke hath these wordes translated accordingly. he finally and only reposeth him selfe in answeringe thatWhitaker contra Dureum l. 8 pag. 567 post med. saith, Nec libri huius authoritate^ canonicam agnosco, his fundamentis limbum immixum reuera est necesse. the booke is not Canonicall and so acknowledging the plaine meaning of the wordes, reiecteth their authoritie: So euidently doth this author make with the Doct^ine of Limbus Patrum. In like maner Rabbenu^ Haccados who liued before Christ, saith in the person of the MessiasRabbenus Haccados libro qui inscribitur: Reuelator Arcanorum. I haue decreed to discend into Hell to redeeme the soules of the iust which my Father did thrust there in the rodd of ^ s indignation, for Adams sinne: and the same doctrine is more plainly as yet affirmed
 by RabbyRabby Symeon filius Iohai apud Rabbenum Heccados foretelleth of the Messias saying: Tunc anima eius discendet ad inferos, apud quos triduo morabitur, vt inde omnes animas Patrum iustorumque educat. etc. iuxta illud Hoseae 6. visitabit nos post duos dies, in die tertia suscitabit nos, and viuemus ante faciem eius. Symeon (who liued before Christs comming) and by otherSee these more at large alleaged by Petrus Galatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis l. 6 c. 9 and 10. See them also alleaged by Peter Martir in his common places part. 3. cap. 16 sect 13 pag. 377 a. fine and b. Iewish Rabbines, and it is further more so agreeable with the writings of theIt is said that the law brought nothinge to perfection but was onely an introduction of a better hope: hebr. 7, 19) that therefore the way of holies was not open whiles the sister Tabernacle was standing. hebr. 9, 8 the same way being therefore called the new way which Christ dedicated (hebr. 10, 20.) that the Fathers of the olde testament are saide to dye according to faith not receauing the promise. hebr. 11, 13. God prouiding a better thing for vs, that they with out vs should not be made perfect. ibidem verse vlt. that accordingly the soules of sondry persons dead before our Sauiours Ascention, as of Lazarus: Ioan. 11, 43, 44. the made Luc 8, 55. and of those many bodies of the Saintes that rose and appeared to many. Mathew 27, 52, 53. did not returne from the eternall and vnchangeable ioies of heauen, but from that other place which is called Abrahams bosome (Luc. 16, 22 the which was not heauen, as is testified by Peter Martir in his co^mon places part. 2 pag. 621. a and part. 3. pag. 378. b and 379 a. initio: that (lastly) our Sauiour in regard of his deliuery of the olde Patriarkes and iust men from this place at the time of his ascention, is accordingly said to Ascend on high leading captiuitie captiue: (Ephes. 4, 8.) new Testament, that the auncientSee heretofore sect 3. subdiuision 4. Fathers and sondry learnedSee hereafter tract. 3. sect. 7 in the margent vnder the letter .m. example 17 pag. 174 fine: and see Peter Martir vbi supra. Protestants do therefore allow of it.
3 Thirdly as concerning Freewill it is saide in the foresaide booke of Ecclesiasticus not only of Adam who was then dead, and his sinne past, but by way of admonition to the men of that time, and against their sinnes then to come:Ecclesiasticus 15, 12, 15, 16, 17. say not thou he hath caused me to erre, if thou wilt, thou shalt obserue the Commaundements, h^ hath set water and fire before thee, strech out thy hand to which thou wilt. Before man is life and death, good and euill, what liketh him, shall be giuen him, a saying so plaine, that Mr. VVhitaker therefore saith thereof de loco Ecclesiastici Patrum, laboro etc.Whitaker in respons. ad rationes Campiani rat. 1. pag. 15 ante med. I make smalle account of the place of Ecclesiasticus, neither will I be leeue the freedome of mans will although he should affirme a hundreth times, that before man were life and death: and aun^ient Philo who liued in Christs time, affirmeth in like maner thatPhilo. in libro quod Deus sit immutabilis. man hath freewill etc. to which purpose (saith he) is extant the Oracle in Deutronomie, I haue placed before the l^fe and death, good and euill, choose life: whereunto might be added no lesse plaine sayings of the other olde IewisheRabby Moyses filius Maimon in epistola aduersus astrologos, saith: Ac illud quidem intelligere debetis, praecipuum ac principale ex fundamentis legis nostrae omnesque item Philosophos aperte confiteri, quecunque ab ipsis hominibus fiunt, ea in ipsorum manu esse ac potestate etc. Si velit homo seruit Domino etc. sin placet adire concilia impiorum, and illud quoque facit: And see the other no lesse plaine sayings of Rabby Moyses Hadarsan in cap. 4. Gen. and also of Rabby Abba and Rabby Selomo, alleaged by Petrrus Galatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis: Printed Francofuf. 1602. l. 6 c. 6. colum. 339. f. and 340. b. c. Rabbines, and the answereableMr. Fulke in his defence of the English translatio^s etc. p. 320 initio, saith: The Iewish Rabbines Patrons of freewill, do erre etc. And wheras Rabby Akiba in capitulis Patrum, saieth: Et potestas data est and in bono mundus iudicatur Paulus Fagius in hunc locum saith: Haebrei hanc sente^tiam sic explicant etc. vt cuiuis homini potestas tradita sit vel bene vel male agendi. And againe. Apotheca aperta est etc. Hoc referunt ad liberum arbitrium videlicet in nobis situm, vt vel male vel bene agamus, Deum nobis mortem aut vitam pro ponere. confession in that be halfe of Mr.
 D. Fulke and Paulus Fagius.
4 Fourthly as concerning Gods induration or hardening of Pharos hart: the Iewishe Rabbines are so plaine in affirming with vs the same to bee by Gods Permission, and not by his working (which expositionCalum institut. l. 2. c. 4 sect. 3. in^^o Caluine disliketh in the auncient Fathers) that Peter MartirPeter Martir in epist. ad Rom. c. 9. and MunsterM^nster: Annot. in Exod. c. 7 doe accordingly acknowledge this their aforesaide exposition.
5 Fiftly as concerning Angells and Saintes, the booke of Toby written so many ages before Christ, is soToby. 5, 5.12, 12.13, 15.18. plaine with vs concerning the patronage and intercession of Angells, that Mr. Whitaker doth therefore accordingly confesse and say thereof,Whittaker in respons. ad rationes. Campiani rat. 1. pag. 15. ante medi. illum vero Tobiae Raphaelem etc. Little doe we regard the example of Raphaell the Angell mentioned in Toby. Ne^ther doe we acknowledge thoseOf the like number of seauen Angels which Mr. Whitaker so misliketh: see reuelat. 1, 4. and 5, 6. seuen Ang^l^ whereof he speaketh, all this is different from the Canonicall Scriptures, and sauoreth I know not of what superstition: In like maner doth the booke of Machabees make mention how that Iudas Mach^beus2. Machab. 15, 12, 13, 14. sawe in vision Onias the highe Preiste (who was then before sl^ine)See 2. Machab. 3, 33 and 4, 34 houlding vp his hand^s towards heauen and praying for the People, after which there appeared to him an other man who was ag^d etc. And Onias spake and said, this is a louer of the Brethren who Prayeth much for the People, and for the whole Cittie, (to witt) Ieremias the Prophet of God: A place so directe for the intercession of Saints, that Mr. Whitaker doth therfore contemne itWhitaker in respons. ad rationes Campiani pag. 16. circa medium, saith: Illud Iudae de Oum somnium quod. 2. Machabe. 15. legimus, vt somnium pretermitto, sed parum refert mortuorum siue intercessionem siue sacrificium intelligas, vtrumque tuum est, vtrumque est falsum. And it is to be obserued f^rther as very probable, that the Iewes present at our Sauiours Death, coulde not haue bene so easesly perswaded to thinke and say that our Sauiour sayingMat. 27, 46, 47, 49. and Marc. 15, 34, 35, 36. Eli Eli Lammasabacthani, called He ias: If the inuocation of
 Saintes had not bene as then familiar and vsuall to them: which their opinion appeareth yet more euidently, aswell by further testimonie of the auncientSee Flauius Iosephus de Bello Iudaico l. 3. c. 14 where it is said: Purae animae quae exaudiunt inuocantes, retinent locum in coelo adeptae sanctissi nu^: And Iosephus Bengorion in Bello Iudaico. cap. 21 where it is said: Exurge nunc Moises fili Amram and vide populu^ tuum. exurge nunc Aaron etc. and R. Abr ham in Gen. 22: saith of the Iewes. Isaac interponere solent interse and Deum in suis precibus quasi intercessorem. Iewes, as also of those other Rabbines of latterConcerning the like practise of the latter Iewes, see simbolum fidei Iudaeorum impress. Prarisijs 1569. fol. 22. b and 28. b And in their office of the dead, (where it is said) Angeli pacis egredimini in occur^um defuncti, portas Paradisi voluptatis reserate illi: and in libro precationum Iudaicarum it is said: Angeli misericordes ministri Dei altissimi placate quaeso faciem Dei optima deprecatione etc. times.
6 Sixtly concerning the vnwritten Traditions of the Iewes.Origen hom. 5 in numer. and in ep ad Rom. c. 3. Origen and HillaryHillarie in Psal. 2. saith: Erat iam a Mose antea institutum in omni Synagoga septuaginta esse Doctores: nam idem Moyses quamuis veteris Testamenti verba in literis condidisset, tamen separatum quaedam ex occultis legis secretiora misteria septuaginta senioribus, qui Doctores deinceps manerent, intimauerat. etc. doctrina ergo horum in posterum, quae ab ipso scriptore legis accepta, in hoc seniorum and numero, and officio conseruata est. do affirme that Moyses left many things vnwritten, the knowledge whereof was continued by Tradition, which his vnwritten Traditions: the booke of Esdras doth not obscurely signifie, as where it is said in the person of God, touching Moyses4. Esdras. 14, 4, 6, 26. I brought him to the mount Sinay, I did detaine him with me many daies etc. I commaunded him saying th s^ wordes thou shalt make knowne, and these keepe secret. And Egesippus mencioneth in like maner (as Mr. Hanmer Translateth EusebiusEgesippus apud Eusebium hist. l. 4 c. 21 fine. the vnwritten Traditions of the Iewes. To which their vnwritte^ Traditions that most auncient Author AnatoliusAnatolius apud Eusebium hist. l. 7. c. 26 giueth also further Testimonie, and the auncient Iewes do affirme of their vnwritten Lawe, thatIn capitulis Patrum. Moyses receau^d it vp^n Mount Sinay and deliuered it to Iosua, and Iosua to the Elders etc. which saying as Rabby Iudas affirmethR. Iudas in hunc locum. concerneth the order of Tradition deliuered by word of mouth: a thinge not denied but confessed byPaulus Fagius in hunc locum saith: Tenet enim Iudeoru opinio, Mosen duplice^ legem a Domino in monte Synai accepisse, al teram quam legem inscripto siue scripto traditam vocant, alteram quam legem quae in ore est siue ore traditam nominant atque hanc postremam succedanto quodam ordine per Mosen ad posteros derinatam affirmant. Paulus Fagius.
7 Seuenthly concerninge the force or meritte of Almes, and other good workes, proceeding from
 true faith in the Mesias the Doctrine of the auncient Iewes is deliuered in the booke of Toby, where it is said:Toby 12, 9 after the translatio^ of the English Bible of 1576. and according to the greeke copie published by the diuines of Basill 1550: the which I doe more precisely note, for that Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament fol. 109 a. circa med. denieth the latter parte of this text to be in the greeke. Almes doth del^uer from death, and doth purge all sinne: and againeToby. 4, 10. Almes doth deliuer from death. and suffereth not (the soule) to goe into da^knes: and in the foresaide booke of EcclesiasticusEcclesiasticus. 3, 33. water quencheth burning fire and Almes expiateth (or purgeth) sinne: and this is but agreeable with the other Scriptures acknowledged for Canonicall, as where it is saideDaniel 4, 24. Wheras our aduersaries doe here insteed of Redeeme translate breake of. Hemnigeus in his exposition of the 84 psal. Englis^ed pag. 527. thinketh that the haebru word signifieth to Redeeme: so also most cleerelye in the gre^ke translation doth the greeke word and so likewise doth the vulgar interpreter, and the auncient F^thers read accordin^ly, in so much as the same reading is obserued likewise by Luther in loc. comun. class. 1. pag. 72. ante medium: and by Peter Martir in his common places in English: part. 3. cap. 4. pag. 114. b. circa med. by Melancthon in loc. con^un. edit. 1536. cap. de bonis op^ribus pag. 157 in fine: by the Apology of the Confession of Augus^a fol. 104. a circa med. And by the T^gurine translation of 1544 whereunto might be added the like reading and iudgement of Caluine, Aretius, Bullenger and many other Protestants. redeeme thy sinne with almes, and thy iniquities with mercie to the poore:Prouerb. 16, 6. By mercy and truth sinne sha^l be forg^uenProuerb. 15, 27. although this be omitted in the English Bible of 1576 yet is it so euidently parcell of the text that (to omitt the Fathers) the Diuines of B^sill in their edition hereof in Greeke and Lattin printed. 1550. do reade it accordinglie. By almes and saith sinnes are purged:Luc. 11, 41. Giue almes and behoulde all thi^ge are cleane to you.
8 Eightly concerning Monasticall ^ife that it was not altogither wanting, but in some sorte professed amonge the auncient Iewes, Iosephus testi^^eth sayingIosephus antiquit^tum: Iudaicarum. l. 18. cap. 2. the righteousnes of the essenes is maruailous: etc. they enioy their riches in Co^mon: etc. And in this course aboue. 4. thousand men doe liue, hauing neither wiues nor seruantes: etc. And else where it is affirmed of them thatIosephus de Bello Iudaico l. 2. c. 7. they are Iewes by nation, and doe obs rue continencie, auoide Mariage, are contemners of riches (and) enioy things in common, none being ritcher then other: And that before any be admitted amongst themIbidem. Triall
 is had of his Continencie, and his other manners are for two yeares pr^ued, and then he is taken into the Company. And Philo also who liued in the Apostles times, maketh mention of those who thenPhilo de vita contemplatiu^. forsaking their goodes did dwell without the walles louing solitarine^: he also maketh like mention ofPhilo, ibidem. their Monasteries, where being solitarie, they studied the Misteries of holy life, and ofSee Philo his wordes apud Eusebium hist. l. 2. c. 16. post med where it is saide of them, quidam po^ro etc. vix semel toto triduo cibi recordantur: (and againe) nonnulli illec ebris sapientiae etc. sic oblectantur etc. vt duplo plus temporis inedi^m facile sustineant and vix tantum sex diebus expletis alimentum necessarium degustent: their (wonderfull greate) fasting from meate: Which foresaide professors of monasticall life thus mencioned by Philo, are by the CenturieCentur. 1. l. 2. c. 3. col. 18. line 33. writers, and D. RainoldsD. Rainoldes in his Conference pag. 488. prope fine^. (for theire lesserTo their lesser disadua^tage, least other wise being taken for Christian professors (as they are by Eusebius hist. l. 2. c. 16. and by Hierom de scriptor. Eccle. verbo Philo) it should argue monasticall profession to be apostolicke. disaduantage) acknowledged to be Iewishe.
9 Ninthly concerning Vowes: it is saide in the writings of the olde Testament.Psal. 76, 11. Vowe yee, and render your vowes vnto God:Numeri. 30, 3. whos^euer voweth a vowe vnto the Lord, etc. He shall not breake his promise, but shall do according to all which proceedeth from his mouh.Deutro. 23, 21. when thou shalt vowe a vowe vnto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not be slacke to paye it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee:Ecclesiastes 5, 3, When thou hast vowed a vowe vnto God deferre not to paie it: etc: It is better that thou shouldest not vowe then that thou shouldest vowe and not paie it: Whereunto might be added sondry otherPsal. 22, 25. and psal. 50, 14. and Esay. 19, 21. like Testimonies from the writings of the olde Testament. We are not ignorant how that Peter Martir, Mr. D. Fulke, and others seeke to euade in answering thereto, thatPeter Martir de caelibatu and votis pag. 302. fine and 303. and ibidem pag. 304. post med. He further saith. Votu^ ego caeremoniale antiquae legis praeceptum fuisse affirmo. And Mr. Fulke. answering to psal. 76, 11. saith That text pertaineth to the olde Testament in his retentiue against Bristowes Moiues. etc. pag. 153. fine. And Bullinger in his decades in English, pag. 380. ante med. saith vowes belong to the Iewsh Ceremonies. v^wes were Ceremonies of the olde Testament: etc. Abol^shed by Christs commi^g But is not the contrarie manie waies euident? as .1. First in that vowes were made before Moyses time, as is to be seene in the example ofGen. 28, 20^ Then Iacob vowed a vowe saying, etc. Iac^^s v^we. 12. Se^ond^y by the heretoforeSe heretofore. tract. 1. sect. 3. initio. confessed Doctrine of the most auncient Fathers, teaching vowes. 3. Thirdly, (to omitte the sundry other proofes that might bee alleadged from the new Testament) by the euident confession of sundry learnedMr. Perkens in his re^ormed Catholicke, pag. 155. post, med. saith. And now in the new testament we haue warrant in like maner to vowe etc. of this kinde are the vowes to keepe set times of fasting etc. And see the the like lawfulnes of Christian vowes. further affirmed by Musculus in loc. comun. de votis. p. 524. circa med. And by Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis. pa. 241. post med. And by Amandus Pol^nus in partitionihus theolog. l. 2. pag. 394. and Danaeus in primae partis altera parte contra Bellarminum pag. 987. affirmeth it, fas esse Christianis Hominibus vouere quae cum dei volu^tate consentiunt: Protestants who a knowledg the lawfullnes of Christian vowes: in so much as Mr.
 Hooker acknowledgethMr. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall policie. l. 2. pag. 103. paulo post med. Ananias his solemne vowe vnto God, which strictly bound him to the giuing of his possessions to the Churches vs^, (though vet Mr. Fulke and Mr. Willet will notMr. Willet in his Sinopsis pag. 245. ante med. saith VVe do not reade that ANANIAS made any Vowe etc. And Mr. Fulke against the Remish Testament: in act. 5. fol. 191. a. propt finem. affirmeth the like. in any case acknowledge Ananias to haue vo^ed) and Augustine Marloret acknowledgeth in like maner how thatAnd so doth Peter Martir de caelibatu and votis pag. 323. initio. Marloret in. 1. Tim. cap. 5. vers. 11. pag. 375. a fine: the widdowes) men^ioned by S. Paule,) did giue their faith to Christ the spouse, and to the Church, willingl^ barring them s^lues from Mariag^: with whome herein do agree, sundry otherThe Protestant author of the booke entituled Antichristus siue Prognostica finis mundi. pa. 148. fine. and 149. saith quod Lutherus hanc primam fidem de fide iustificante intelligit and non de fide pudicitiae, id plane coactum est etc. loquitur apostolus de fide seu voto officij etc. quia autem Paulus vitio vertit quod nubere postea voluerint, clarissi num est hanc conditionem in voto intercessisse etc. And Mr. R. Alison in his confutation of Brownisme. pag. 71. affirmeth likewise of these widdowes, that before God and his Church they had vowed not to marrie: And thus (saith he) is this place expounded, by Bullenger, Claudius, Guiniam and others. Protestant writers affirming the vowed Chastitie of the saide widdowes.
10 Tenthly as concerning our con^ession of sinnes PetrusGalatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis l. 10. cap. 3. Galatinus giueth examples of seuerall testimoniesIn libro Sanhedrin Hierosolomitano in capite quod nigmar haddin id est definitum est iudicium it is said. Omnis co^fitens habet partem in seculo futuro sic enim in Achan reperimus quod dixit ei Ieho^uas, fil^m^da obsecro honorem Domino Deo Israel, and da confessionem, and indica mihi quaeso quid feceris nec celes a me etc. And in libro Ioma id est dierum in capite tom ^a^^ppurim id est dies propitiationum. It is said, dixit R. Hurma omnis qui transgressione transgressus est, necesse est vt singulatim exprimat peccatum. etc. in the auncient Iewes, and like further testimonie or prefiguration thereof is not wanting in Leuiticus for whereas seuerall sacrifices are there apointed for seuerall sinnes, as forLeuit. 4, 2, 3. etc. sinne through ignorance, and otherLeuit. 5, 1, 4, 17. and 6, 1, 5. and numeri 5, 7. perticular offences, for whichLeuit. 4, 3. the Priest was appointed to offer and makeLeuit. 4, 20. and 5, 6, 13. and 6, 7. a^^onement, how coulde the Priest heere offer those sundry sacrifices appointed seuerally according to the diuersitie of SINNES, vnlesse the partie so offending confessed the same sinnes to him; which to haue bene so, is yet furthermore probable, in that it
 was there also appointed and saideLeuit. 5, 6. and numer 5, 7. when hee hath sinned in any of th^s^ thinges, then h^e sha^l confesse that he hath sinned therein and^: And the Preist shall make attonement for him c^ncerning his sinne.
11 Eleuenthly as concerning Melchisadechs offering of B^ead and Wine in sacrifice (which our aduersariesMaster Fulke against the Remish Testament in haebr. 7. sect. 8. fol. 406. a. initio saith Melchisadechs Bread and VVine pertended not to his Priestly office neither did he offer it to God. And Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis. pa. 478. ante med. and versus finem affirmeth the like; And Mr. Whitakes in his answere to Mr. Rainolds etc. pa. 67. saith, Melchisade^he did not by any thing wherein he so sacrificed, pr^figure the sacrifice and Priesthood of Christ: deny) and the prefiguration thereby, of our nowe sacrifice of the new Testament. Rabby Samuell saithRabby Samuell in Bereschit Rabba ad cap. 14. Genes. Melchisadech set forth the acts of Preisthood, for he sacrificed Bread and Wine, to the holy and Blessed God. Rabby Phinces saith,Rabby Phinces ibidem in cap. 28. numer. In the time of the Messias all s^^rifices shall ceasse, but the sa^rifice of Bread and Wine shall not ceasse etc. as it is saide Psal. 110. thou art a Preist fore^^r acco^ding to the order of M^lchisdech. Rabby Moyses Hadarsan saith of Melchisadech,Rabby Moyses Hadarsan in Bereschit Rabba ad cap. 14. Genes. bringing forth bread and wine, sheweth that he taught the acte of Priesthood, which was to sacrifice Bread and Wine, and this is that which is read in the Psalmes etc. thou art a Priest for euer according to the order of Melchisadich: This point is so euident in the olde Iewish Rabbines: that TheodorusThe^dorus Bibliander de SS. Trinitate l. 2. pag. 89. saith, erat apud veteres haebraeos dogma receptissimum in aduentu Messiae Benedicti, cessatura esse omnia legalia sacrificia, tantumque celebrandum sacrificium thoda gratiarum actionis etc. and illud peragendum pane et vino sicut Melchisadech Rex Salem and sacerdos etc. panem et vinum protulit Bibliander (a Protestant writer) doubteth not accordingly to confesse the same.
12 Tweluethly as concerning their further opinion of the Churches sacrifice vpon the comming of the Messias: our now sacrifice is therein so plainely signified and affirmed by the auncient Iewes who liued before Christs time, that (as Galatinus saith of one of them)Galatinus de Arcanus Catholicae veritatis l. 1. cap. 3. circa med. they may be thought not so much to haue foretoulde things to come, as to haue reported Euangelist-like thinges alreadie done: To this end saith Rabby CahanaRabby Cahana ad c. 49. genes. vers. 11. the sacrifice which shalbe offered of Wine, shall not only be chaunged into the substance of the Blood of the Messias, but also into the substance of his Body: the sacrifice which shalbe of Bread notwithstanding that it be whit as milke, it shall be conuerted into the substance of the Body of the M^ssias. In like maner Rabby Iudaes saithR. Iudas in 25. exod. the bread shall be changed when it shall be sacrificed from the substance of bread into the
 substance of the Body of the Messias, which shall discend from Heauen, and he him selfe shall be the sacrifice etc. R^bby Symeon saithR. Symeon filius Iohn libro qui inscribitur reu^latio secretorum. The sacrifice which after the Messias his comming Priests shall make etc: they shall make it of Bread and Wine etc. and that sacrifice which shall b^ s^ celebrated vpon euery Aultar, shall be turned into the Body of the M ssias: Rabby Barachias teacheth that at the comming of theR. Barachias in ecclesiasten. M^ssias, foode shall come from Heauen like a little Cak^. Thus did these religious and auncient Iewes who liued before CHRISTS comming, foretell and write (by speciall inst nct) concerning our Chur^hes Blessed Sacrifice: whereto might be added sundry of their other no lesse plaine testimoniesRabby Ionathas in libro collectionum in psal. 72. saith ille est M^ssi^s de quo loquitur totus psalmus, cum ergo ait, et erit placenta frumenti in terra in capite montiu^, vult dicere quod placenta panis fiet sacrificium in capitibus sacerdotu^ qui sunt in ecclesia. And Rabby Moyses Hadarsan in psal. 136. saith, Gustate and videte quoma^ bonus est deus, quia panis quem dat omnibus, ipse est caro eius, et dum gustatur panis, conuertitur in carnem etc. ^he whi^h togither with these are collected specially by PetrusSee these foresaide testimonies and sondry other like alleadged from the Rabbines by Petrus Galatinus de Arcanis Catholicae veritatis. l. 10. ca. 5. 6. and 7. Galatinus, and by Mr. WhitakerFor whereas Duraeus vrgeth this collection made by Galatinus of the Hebrues foresaide so plaine sayings co^cerning Reall Presence and Sacrifice. Mr. Whitaker answering thereunto (l. 9. co^tra Duraeum pag. 818 circa med.) Neither confesseth nor yet denieth but shufleth them of, saying only thereto. Tuum in hac causa petru^ Galatinu^ minime profecto desideramus, nec H^braeoru^ Testimonijs illis indigamus. And is this a direct and sufficie^t answere, to so many pl^ine sayings of the olde Hebrues that liued before Christ, so euide^tly foreshewing and affirming the Reall Presence and sacrifice of Christs Blessed Body in the holy Sacrament? rather sh^ffled of then answered,) wherein they do no lesse plainely fore shewe the truth of Christs Body Really present and offered in the Blessed Sacrament, then d d the Heathen Sibills in like maner foretell the truth of his incarnation. And for so much asEsaye 41, 23. God only knoweth thinges to come. The Diuell not being able to foretell things s^mplie future, but only such other future effects as depend vpon their seconda^y causes then already past or present, in which causes, he (of his greate skill and experience) foreseeth the comming of the said effects, to which kinde, the foresaide Doctrines of Re ll Presence and Sacrifice, cannot in any so^te be reduced, by reason they cannot be saide to h^ue bene then depending vpon any naturall or other cause, then past or in being, saue only the imediate and sacred will of God. This therefore so pl^ine foresaide p^ediction m^de by the auncient Rabbines before Christs t^me, in behalfe of
 Reall Presence and Sacrifice, demonstrating it selfe so euidently to haue proceeded not from any secondarie cause but only from a diuine instinct, yeeldeth thereby a most strong argument in behalfe of the saide Doctrines.
13 Thirtenthly and lastly (to omitte other pointes) as concerning the finall ending of controuersies, not only scripture, but a certaine visible and liuely Iudge vpon earth was appointed and acknowledged. To omitt all other proofe thereof, the Lawe of Deutronomie was that when there didDeutron. 17, 8, 9, 11. arise any matter to hard for the (people) in Iudgment: they were appointed to goe vp to the place which God had ch^sen, and to come to the leuiticall Pri^st, and to the Iudge in those daies: and to aske of them the sentence of Iu^gement, and to do according to ^he Iudgment which they did tell, not declining neith^r to the r^g^t hand nor to the lefte, it being yet further saide of him that didDeutron. 17, 12. presumptiously refuse to obay the commaundement of the Priest, tha^ by the decree of ^he Iudge that man should di^: Now that the sentence grounded vpon this Lawe, was not subi^ct to new question vnder colour of appeal ng to the scriptures but was definitiue and finall, and concerned aswell Ecclesiasticall as Ciuill Causes is in it se^fe plaine, and for suchDoct. Rainolds in his confere^ce pa. 251. circa med. saith, The lawe of Deutronomie was made to establish a highest Court of Iudgement, in which all harder causes Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill should be determined without appeall further: and Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura p. 466. prope finem. saith: Respondeo verba ista intelligenda esse etc. de authoritate tantum definiendi difficiles lites ac co^trouersias, siue ecclesiasticas, illas quidem per ministrum, siue politicas et foreses per magistratum, vt esset semper in vtrisque aliquis, a quo prouocare non liceat alioqum enim nullus esset litigandi finis: and vide ibidem pag. 470. paulo post med. And Mr. Bil^on in his perpetuall gouerment of Christes Church. pag. 20. post med. saith, hereof that the same did conscerne such matters as were of greatest mome^t both Ciuill and sacred, and their sentence by Gods law no man might refuse without punishment of death: And see the like assertion in Mr. Hooker in his preface before his bookes of e^clesi^sticall policie pa. 26. fine. and 27. and 28. fine. confessed by Mr. D. Rainolds, Mr. D. Whitaker, Mr. D. Bilson, and Mr. Hooker Where-vpon it is euident that not only scripture (which they of the olde Testament had as well as we now haue) but besides that a certaine visible Iudge, was then appointed to determin co^trouersies. And for so much as the occasion to haue controuersies ended, is as greate now as during the olde Testament, the doubts of religion being as now many moe and the daunger of error no lesse greuous: whether theref^re may it be thought that ourHaeor. 8, 6. Testament which is established in better promisses is want^ng of this priuiledge? and so therby the Ecclesiasticall policie of Moyses time, to be
 preferred herein before that other which succeeded by Christ? With which only laste reason the Puritanes doubt not toPenrie in his supplication to the high Courte of Parliament. p. 21. fine. saith That forme of gouerment which maketh our Sauiour Christ Inferior vnto Moyses is an impious, vngodly and vnlawfull gouerment contrarie to the word etc. See him further p. 22. and 23. and peruse the occasion and circumstance of this his reason, and it will appeare to houlde much more stronge in this point then in that other for which he vrgeth it. presse their other Protestant Brethren in matters of much smaller importance.
By which so many foresaide examples of our Catho^icke Faith, thus affirmed by the auncient Iewes that liued before Christs comming, it is made further probable that our religion is not new or lately deuised, but most auncient and vndoubtedly apostolicke: which point is made as yet much more cleare by that which is hereafterSee hereafter tract. (...). sect. 7. and 8. alleadged concerning the Romane Church being conuerted in the Apostles time and her not being sithence changed in religion.


THAT TREW MIRACLES MAKE a strong argument: And that the aforesaide faith whereto the Englishe were conuerted, was confirmed with such Miracles. @ 5.
AND like as in those firster times of the Churches infancie, our Sauiour did make manifest the truth of his Apostles Doctrine with vndoubted Miracles, to serue as(...). cor 12, 12. signes of theire Apostleshipe, to that end.Marc. 16, 20. Confirming the word wi^h s^gnes followinge: So likewise this vertue or power of Miracles not ceasing, but (as our aduersaries confesse)Whereas our Sauiour, Ihon. 14, 12. saith. Hee that beleeueth in mee the workes that I do he shall do and greater: In the Marginall Notes of the Englishe Bibles (Printed 1576.) it is there-upon saide, this is referred to the wholle Body of the Church, in whome this vertue doth shine for euer. shininge in the Church for euer, the necessitie thereof being one and the same in all succeeding ages to the conuersion of the heathen, who contemning the scriptures, are nothing moued with the Miracles thereof mencioned, our Sauiour did in like maner confirme our now faith so then taught by Aust^ne, with like manifestation of Miracles, not such only as Antichrist or the Diuell can by the power of nature or secondarie
 causes bring to passe, which may beThes. 2, 9. lying signes, against which wee are forewarned, but with Miracles exceeding the power of nature, and done imediately by God: which by the Doctrine of learned ProtestantsVrsinus in Co^mentar. catech. pag. 21. fine saith: Etsi Ethnicorum nonnulla miracula commemorantur, ac de Antichristo, and pseudoprophetis dictum est edituros esse signa etc. tamen caneque numero neque magnitudine paria sunt miraculis Ecclesiae etc. primum enim ea miracula quae iactantur ab hostibus ecclesiae, sunt eiusmodi, quae (ordine naturae non mutato) hominum vel diaboloru^ fraudibus possunt effici etc. miracula vero quibus Deus ecclesia^ ornauit, opera sunt preter aut contra naturae and causarum secundarum ordinem, ac proinde non nisi diuina potentia facta. And the like is affirmed by Zanchius in D. Pauli epistolas ad Philipenses, Colloss. and Thessai. pag. 241. and 242. By Danaeus in Isagoges Christianae. part. 4. pag. 43. initio 46. fine and 47 initio By Piscator in Annal. epistolarum Pauli pag. 470 paulo ante med. and by many others. are euermore true and infallible, of which kinde though some be somtimes done (as the scriptures forewarneMat. 17, 22. and DaneusDanaeus in Isagoges Christianae part. 4. pag. 48. initio saith: Ad eos qui donum duntaxit miraculorum adeo acceperunt absque dono regenerationis, pertinet, quod ait Christus, multi dicent mihi in die illo; Domine nonne per nomen tuum prophetauinius, and daemonia eiecimus etc. And see the same further affirmed by Sigroartus in 23. disputat. theolog. and p. 164 sect. 12 etc. 13. confesseth) by professors of wicked life (accordingly as our Sauiour in like manerMat. 10, 1. gaue power ouer vncleane spirites, and to cure all maner of diseases to his Twelue Disciples: Whereof euen the wicked IudasMat. 10, 4. was then one) yet are the Miracles so wrought though by such neuerthelesse certaine and vndoubted testimonies of Gods truth, and for such in general are MIRACLES throughout the wholle course of scriptures most fully both acknowledgedExod. 8, 19. and 3. Reg. 17, 24 and 3. Reg. 18, 39. and 4. Reg. 5, 15. and Mat 27, 54. and Mat. 14, 25, 33. and Ioan. 2, 23 and 3, 2. and 4, 53. and 9, 30 and 11, 45. and act. 4, 14 16. and 9, 35. and vrged,Exodus 7, 17. and 16, 12. and numer. 16, 12 28. and Iosue 3, 10, 16. and 3. Reg. 13, 3, 5. and 18, 24, 38. and 20, 23, 28. and 4. Reg. 20, 8, 9, 10. and Mat. 9, 6. and Marc. 2, 10 and Ioan. 14, 11. and 15, 24. and 20, 30, 31. as being euen to our Sauiour him selfeIoan. 5, 36. a greater Testimonie then Iohn.
And hence it is that the credible histories as well of all former times, as also of thisIn the booke entituled a report of the kingdome of Congo a region of Aphricke printed 1597 published by Mr. Abraham Hartwell seruant to the Lord Archbishop of Canterburie, and by him dedicated to his Lo. mention is made l. 1. c. 1. initio. Of the discouerie of that Kingdome Anno 1587 by Odoardo Lopes: and of the Conuersion therof to the Christian faith l. 2 c. 2. and of the greate and vndoubted miracles shewed by God in the presence of a wholle armie l. 2. c. 3. in so much that Mr. Abraham Hartwell in his epistle there to the Reader post medium, confesseth that this Conuersion of Congo was accomplished (by Massing Priestes) and after the Romish maner. And this action (sath he) which tend^th to the glory of God shall it be concealed and not committed to memorie, because it was performed by popishe Priestes, and popishe meanes? God forbid. In like manner Mr. Iohn Porie lately of Goneuill and Caius College in Camebrige in the Geographicall history of Aphrica by him published Anno 160 pag. 410 versus finem, acknowledgeth and mencioneth the said Miracles and page 413 initio he commendeth Mr. Hartwell for Publishing his fores^ide treatise. Also wheras it appeareth in the booke entituled: Rerum in oriente gestarum Commentarius. fol. 2 that Francis Xauerus set forwarde in his iorney from Lisbone to the East India Anno 1541 to the Conuersion of those Nations, and page 36. That the King of Portugall hearing of the great Miracles as then there wrought, sent forth his Commission to his Vice-Roy there dated in Aprill 1556 to take examination therof vpon oath, vpon execution wherof and certificate therupon being accordingly made, it did appeare (fol. 8. b.) that Xauerus in testimonie and proofe of the Christian faith by him then preached and taught, Cured miraculously the Dumbe, the Lame, the Deafe, and with his Worde healed the Sicke. (and fol. 9. a.) raised sondry dead persons to life, and after his death which happened (fol. 14. a) Anno 1552 the graue being opened, wherein his dead body for a time had bene buri^d, to the end his naked bones might be carried from thence to Goa (fol. 14. b.) they found his body not onely vnconsumed, but a^so yeelding forth fragrant smells from whence they carried it to Goa, and placed it there in the Church of S. Paull, where yet to this day (saith the Commentarie) it remaineth free from corruption: Witnes wherof saith that treatise are all the inhabitants of that Citie, and trauellers that repaire thither, and the truth hereof for matter of facte is so probable, that Mr. Whit^ker lib. de ecclesia contra Bellarminum page 353. dare not in his answere therto alto^ither rest in deniall of the matter of facte, but saith: ne putet (Bellarminus) me omnino haec mir^^ula contemnere: respondeo fieri posse vt in regno pontificio fuerint huiusmodi miracula and nunc sint. and page 354. post medium (he saieth:) Potuit Diabolus Xauerij corpus ad tempus seruare incorruptum and suauiter olens: and so he not so much denieth those miracles as ouer bouldly referreth the^ to the Diuels worke: wheras yet to the contrarie Mr. Richard Hackluit preacher in his booke of principall nauigations etc. printed 1599 in the 2. parte of the 2. volume page 88. initio. doubteth not to afford co^mendable mention of that holy man (Xauerus) his perticuler vertues and wonderfull workes in that Region present age, are
 plentifull in like examples of true and vndoubted Miracles shewed by God, at the Conuersion of heathen Nations. Amonge which our Countries foresaid conuersion by Austine houldeth not the least place, as being in like maner greately then confirmed with vndoubted Miracles, not lately fained, but so credibly testified by the faithfull writers of those times, that now sithence they are acknowledged for certaine and true by learned Protestantes themselues. To this end doth S. Bede and our owne Chronicles witnes, how that AustineBeda hist. l. 2. c. 2. ante medium saith. Allatus est quidam de genere Anglorum, oculorum luce priu^tus etc. tandem Augustinus iusta necessitate compulius, flectit genua sua etc. deprecans vt visum caeco quem amiserat restitueret, and per illuminationem vnius hominis corporalem, in plurimorum cordibus fidelium spiritalis gratiae lucem accenderet, nec mora illuminatur caecus, ac verus summae lucis praeco ab omnibus predicatur Augustinus, tum Britonis confitentur intellexisse se veram esse viam iusticiae quam preditet Augustinus. And see Hollinsheads Cronicle after the last edition volum. 1. l. 5. c. 21. page 102 b lin. 51. to proue his
 opinion good, wrought a Miracle in restoring sight to one that was blinde. Which kinde of Miracle, as HemnigiusHemnigius in his exposition of the 84. Psal. englished part. 1. c. 6. acknowledgeth for a true Miracle, so likewise the Christian Brittons present thereat, were speciallyBeda vbi supra and Hollinshead vbi supra moued there-with. In like maner it is testified by S. Bede and Protestant writers, that Austine perswaded the King to his religionBeda hist. l. 1. c. 26 circa medium saith of the King, Miraculorum multorum ostensione credens Baptizatus est, and Hollinshed vbi supra pag. 100 b, line 60. and Mr. Foxe in his actes and monuments printed 1576. page 117 a prope finem. by diuerse MIRACLES shewed. Which were at those times so certainely knowne, that (as S. Bede reporteth) it wasBeda hist. l. 2. c. 3 fine. written in the Epitaphe vpon his tombe: that he was: Suffultus a Deo Miraculorum operatione.Beda hist. l. 2. c. 1 versus finem saith. Quibus verbis beatus Gregorius declarat quod Sanctus Augustinus and socij eius coelestium ostensione signorum gentem Anglorum ad cognitionem veritatis perducebant. and S. Gregory himselfe l. 7. epist. 30 indict. 1 reporteth hereof to Eulogius Archbishope of Alexandria saying. Knowe then that wheras the English nation etc. remained hitherto in infidelitie, I did by the helpe. of your praiers etc. send vnto that nation (Austine) a Moncke of my monasterie to preach to them etc. and now letters are come to vs, both of his health and of his worke that he hath in hand: And surely either he or they which were sent ouer with him, worke so many Miracles in that Nation as they may seeme therein to imitate the power and miracles of the Apostles them selues. And Gregorie him selfe, not only affirmeth those Miracles, but also by hisHollinshead vbi supra page 192 a line 25. Letters dated Anno. 602. did speciallyThis letter of Gregorie is extant in Bede hist. lib. 1. c. 31 and mencioned by Hollinshead vbi supra page 102 a. l. 10, 11. etc. write to Austine touching the Miracles shewed by him, aduising him not to glorie therein, but rather to consider that God gaue him the gifte for the weale of those to whome he was sent etc. In so much that Mr. Foxe and Mr. Godwine (both of them learned Protestantes) do accordingly mention and acknowledgeMr. Foxe in his actes and monumentes printed 1576. page 117. a. prope finem and Mr. Godwine in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England page 4 fine. the Miracles (then) wrought by Austine through Gods hand. As also S. Bede, Mr. Foxe, and Hollenshead do in like maner speacially mencionBeda hist. lib. 2. c. 12. post medium and Mr. Foxe his actes and monumentes printed 1576 page 121 b. post medium 122 a. and Hollinshead in his greate Chronicle the last edition volume 1. page 108 b initio and 109 a line 29. 30 etc. the Miraculous conuersion
 of Edwine King of Northumbers, which hapned some 26. yeares after Augustines foresaide comming into England, Mr. Foxe not doubting to place the same in his Catallogue ofMr. Foxe in the Alphabeticall table of his actes and monuments printed 1576 at the word Miracle. true Miracles. Here-vnto we coulde likewise add, the vndoubted many and greate MiraclesAs concerning the miracles of Malachias: To omitt perticuler mention of them, no meaner a witnes then S. Bernard, who liued in the same time with him, and was to him so familiarlye knowne, saieth of them in generall (in vita Malachiae: In what kinde of olde miracles did not Malachias excell? Hee wanted not proph^sie, nor reuelation, not the gifte of healing, and to conclude not raising of the dead. And no lesse vndoubted miracles are written of S. Bern^rd by his owne scholler Godfridus, and others of that time, who write his life: Godfridus (de vita Sancti Bernardi lib. 3. c. 5.) mencioning an vndoubted knowen miracle wrought by him in Tholouse in confirming of his doctrine against the Heretickes called Apostolic: who (as appeareth heareafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3 in the margent vnder the letter ^n. denied the Reall Presence, Masse, Purgatory etc. of which said miracle S. Bernard him selfe in his 241 epistle (which was written to the same persons) giueth a modest signification in like wordes, as doth S. Paull 1. Thessal. 1, 5. the many miracles of S. Bernard are so credibly and certainely reported, that Osiander in Centur. 12. page 310. post med. dare not rest in deniall of them, but saith of them, Partim permissione Dei, praestigijs Satanicis effecta existimo, non quod S. Bernardum magum suisse putem, sed quod verisimile sit Satanam talia miracula effecisse etc. ad confirmationem idolatriae and falsorum cultuum: so good a Protestant he maketh S. Bernard. wrought of later times, (to omitte sondry
 others) by holy Malachias, and S. Bernard, both of them confessed, and knowneAs concerning Malachias his Religion: Osiander Centur. 12. page 315. post med. saieth: Malachias Archiepiscopus in Hibernia abineunte aetate literis and religioni addictus tandem inuitus and diu admodum coactus Archiepiscopatum Hiberniae assumpsit S. Bernardo admodum familiaris fuit, eius monachatum admiratus and imitatus est, superstitiones Pontificias amplexus, Romanum Pontificem pro Deo coluit, tribuuntur illi admodum plurima miracula etc. (and vide ibidem page 256. post medium.) and S. Bernard in vita Malachiae affirmeth that Malachias was Legate to the Pope. As concerning S. Bernardes religion of whom Mr. Whitaker (in prelect. de ecclesia contra Bellarminum page 369 paulo post medium) saith: Bernardum vere sanctum fuisse existimo: He was Abbot of Claireuaux (as testifieth Symon de Voyon vpon the Catallog. etc. page 126.) and he acknowleged so plainely the Popes primacie. (wherof see S. Bernard l. 2. de consider. ad Eugenium and l. 3. c 8 and epist. 125. and 131. and 190 ad Innocentium.) That he is therfore reproued by D. Fulke (against the Rhemish Testament in Luc. 22. sect. 11. fol. 133 b. post initium) and by Mr. Whitaker. lib. 2. contra Duraeum page 154 ante medium. and was so euidently a professed Catholicke, that Gomarus in speculo Ecclesiae page. 23. versus finem alleageth him to vs saying. Bernardus sanctus vester: and mr. Whitaker in respons. ad ratio. Camp. rat. 7. P. 105 ante med.) saith, Bernardus quem ecclesia vestra multis annis vnum tulit Pium Viru^: etc. Lastly this point is yet made further euident in Malachias, and Bernard: in that it is manifest that they both liued Anno. Domini. 1140. When the profession of our now Catholicke faith was most florishing; which thing Mr. Iewell In his defence of the Apology printed 1571. pag. 557. Paulo ante med. confesseth saying, S. Bernard liued in the midest of the Popes rout and tirany: Whereupon it followeth that for so much as neither of them is found to haue bene troubled for any one point of Doctrine disagreeing from those times, but were to the contrary both of the^ in high fauour as then with the Romane Sea, th'one of the^ being the Popes Legate the other an Abbot, that therfore they were agreeable in religion to the professed Doctrine of those times: So improbably do our aduersaries pretend S. Bernard to haue bene a member of their Church, for his only then zealouse reprouing the corruption of life and manners in the Clergie of that age. members of our now professed Catholicke faith.


THAT HIS MAIESTIES AVNcestours liued and died in that faith: and that it is acknowledged by Protestants for sufficient to Saluation. @ 6.
IN this faith thus dedicated and continued, haue your MAIESTIES most Noble Auncestours (KINGES and QVEENS of this Realme) for so many ages togither liued and died, with peace towardes God, and honour to the worlde. In this faith died your HIGHNES dearest MOTHER (of Blessed Memory (admired at her death for her moste Christian resolution, the which (at the time of her Funerall) was accordingly and for such Celebrated, euen by the then Preacher Protestant whom the Puritanes publickely, and reprochfully traduced, for that (to vse their owne wordes therefor had of him)Martin Marprelate in his Epistle Printed ouer Sea etc. pag. 50. Preaching at Peterburrow Agust. 2. Anno. 1587. at the funerall of one who died a professed Papist (viz. the Scottish Queene) he praied that his soule and the soules of all there present might be with the soule of the dead Papist. For this faith thus taught vs, haue our learned aduersaries honoured.Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Lincolne in his foresaid Chronicle fol. 156. a. Mr. Bilson now Bishope of winchester in his true difeference betweene Cristiane subiection and vnchristian rebellion, Part 1. pag. 57. and Mr. Foxe in his Acts and Monuments Printed 1576. pag. 117. a. Mr. D. Fulke in his booke against Heskins Sanders, etc. p. 561. fine and 562. initio. Gregorie and Austine with due and answerable commendation, calling therefore th'one of themMr. Godwine in his Catallog. of Bishopes pag. 7. ante med. S. AustineMr. Godwine vbi supra pag. 7. initio. our Apostle and th'otherMr. Godwine vbi supra pa. 3 ante med. that Blessed and holy Father S. Gregorie etc. To this faith like-wise haue all the learned Protestants of sober
 Iudgement afforded the promisses of hopefull saluatio^, as appeareth most plainely. 1. By their owne most euident testimonies. 2. By their like confessed examples thereof giuen. 3. And by their vndoubted answerable practize. To giue proofe of euery of these partes.
And 1. First concerning theire testimonies in this kinde: Mr. D. Baro saith,Mr. D. Baro in his foure sermons and two questions disputed ad cleru^ etc. serm. 3. pag. 448. fine. I dare not deny the name of Christians to the Romanistes sithe the learneder writers do acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the Church of God And Mr. Hooker also saith.Mr. Hooker in his third booke of Ecclesiasticall Policie pag. 188. initio. And Iohannes Regius in his liber. Apologeticus etc. p. 95. fine. saith In Papatu autem cum fuerit ecclesia vera. etc. The Church of Rome is to be reputed a part of the House of God, a limme of the visible Church of Christ: andMr. Hooker vbi supra pag. 130 ante med. we gladly acknowledge them to be of the familie of Iesus Christ: Mr. Bunnie likewise saith of Catholickes and protestants:Mr. Bunnie in his tretise tending to Pacificatio^ sect. 18. p. 109 circa med. Neither of vs may iustly accompt the other to be none of the Church of God,Mr. Bunny vbi supra pag. 113. post med. we are no seuerall Church from them, nor they from vs: In like sorte doth Mr. D. Some in defence thereof (against Penrie the puritane) say:Mr. D. Some in his defence against Mr. Penrie and refutation of many absurdities etc. in Mr. Penries treatise pag. 164. ante med. that the Papistes are not altogither aliens from Gods couenant, I haue shewed before: forMr. Doct. Some vbi supra pag. 182. initio. in the Iudgement of all learned men and all reformed Churches, there is in Poperie a Church, a Ministerie, a true Christ etc.Mr. D. Some vbi supra pag. 176. prope finem. If you thinke that all the Popishe sorte which died in the Popish Church are damned you thinke absurdly, and dissent from the Iudgment of the learned Protestants. Lastly to omitte many othersPeter martir (as appeareth by his Epistles annexed to his common places in English pag. 153. a. fine. Desired at the conference had at Poysie betweene the Catholickes and Protestants, that they should not for diuersitie of opinion breake brotherlie Charitie, nor call one another Heritickes: and see the same opinion yet further affirmed by the Protesta^t writter against Nicholas Machiuell. printed at London 1062. page 80 post medium and 83 paulo post medium and 85. prope fine^. (for we are vnwilling to become tediouse to your MAIESTIE) Mr. D. Couell in his late treatise Published by Authoritie and didecated to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, defendeth this opinion at large, and concludethMr. D. Couel in his defence of mr. Hookers fiue bookes of Ecclesiasticall pollicie. P^blished by authoritie. page 77. ante med. saying wee affirme them) of the Church of Rome (to be partes of the Church, of Christ, and that those that liue and die in that Church may notwith-standing be saued: In so much as he doubteth not to charge the Puritanes
 withmr. D. Couel. vbi supra page 68. paulo post med. Ign^rance for their contrary opinion. 4 Hithe^to concerning their Testimonies before vndertaken.
2 Secondly, As concerning now their like confessed examples we will out of very many alleadge only some fewe: It will not (we thinke) be denied but that our late SOVERAIGNE KING Henry the Eight, did after his breach with Rome, beleeue and maintaine the wholl frame and substance of our now professed Catholicke faith, the Article of the Popes Premacie only excepted. To which end their owne author Sleidane saith of himSleydan in English .l. 13. fol. 174. a. initio: He exiled the name of the Bishope of Rome, but kept still his Doctrine: and Mr. Foxe saith a^cordingly:Foxe act. monu. pag 1472. b. sine He set forth and by full consent of Parliament established the booke of sixe Articles conteining the summe of Popish Religion. And it is euident that he himselfe in person, not only as then disputed,Act. monu. pag. 530 a. and b. initio. but also commaundedact. monu. page 533. a circa med. sentence to be pronounced against Lamberte: as also the L. Cromwell redde andact. monu. page 533. a. pronounced that sentence, and at his owne death protested him selfeAct. mon. page 598 b circa med. and see Hollinsheads Chronicle page 591. to die in the Catholicke faith, not doubting in any Article of faith or Sacrament of the Church, though (saith he) many haue slaundred me to the contrarie. And yet is he commended by Mr. Foxe to dye asAct. mon. page 598 b. post med. a valiant Souldier and Captaine of Christ: as also the Church vnder the raigne of King Henry the .8. is by Mr. Fulke affirmed to be a trueMr. Fulke against Heskines, Sanders etc. pag. 564. sect 80. and 82. Chur^h: and the King him selfe acknowleged in like manner forFulke vbi supra sect. 82 and see D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi. part. 2. rat. 3 page 304 circa med. a member of the Catholi^ke Church of Christ. In like sorteOsiander cent. 12. pag. 309 post med. S. Bernard liued (some 400 yeares since, as Mr. Iewell confesseth) euenIewell in his defence of the Apologie printed 1571. page 557. paulo ante med. and see Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 2 page 154 ante med. in the middest of the Pope rou^e and tyrany: And as we do not finde that he was then troublede or gainesaid so much as in an one article diffe e^t f om the doctrine of the Romane Church of that tim^, so we find confessed to the contrarie, that he acknowleged euenBernard l. 2 de considerat. ad Eugeniu^ and vide epist. 125. and 131 and ep. 190 ad Innocentiu^ and see this confessed by mr. Fulke against the Rhemishe Testament in Luc. 22. sect. 11. fol. 133. b. post initium. and by Mr. Whitaker l. 2. contra Duraeum, pag. 154. ante med the Popes Supremacie, and was so conformable
 to the doctrine of the Romane Church, that he was madeOsiander in epito^. etc. cent. 12. page 309. and Symon de voyon. in his catalog. etc. pag. 926 Abbot of Claireuaux, being alsoOsiander vbi supra page 309. fine saith: Centum and quadraginta Monasteriorum author fuisse creditur: and Danaeus in primae partis altera parte contra Bellarminum page 940. saith. Hieronimus and Bernardus fuerunt monachi and istius erroris authotes and fautores. author of many monasteries: In so much as our aduersaries alledging him to vs do call him, Sanctus vesterGomarus in speculo ecclesiae pag. 23. fine. our S. andWhitaker in respons. ad rat. Campiani. rat. 7. pa. 105. ante med. saith: Bernardus ecclesia vestra, multis annis vnum tulit pium virum. a man brought forth by our Church: who in regard of Christian communion was deerelyOsiander Centuria. 12. page 305 post med. familiar to Malachias whom our aduersaries reiecte for a confessedOsiander ibid. See his wordes heretofore sect. 5. in the margent at the figure. 3. initio. Catholicke, or papist. And yet this his knowne religion notwithstanding our aduersaries do acknowledge him forWhitaker de ecclesia page 369 paulo post med. saith. Ego quidem Bernardum vere fuisse Sanctum existimo. And see thee like in Whitaker against mr. William Rainoldes page 125 and 126 a true SainteOsiander Cent. 12. page 309 post med. a very good man,See this in Pasquils returne into England. page 8. and 13. a good Father, and one of the lampes of the Church of God. In like maner S. Bede (who liued about 900 yeeres since) was so euidently of our religion, that our aduersary Osiander therfore saith of him:Osiander in epitom. etc. cent. 8. l. 2. c. 3. pag. 58. initio. Beda was wrapped in all the popish errors, wherin we at this day dissent from the Pope, for he admired and imbraced the worshippe of Images, the popish Masse, inuocation of Saintes. etc. which thing appeareth also yet more vndoubtedly: (to omitt his euident writinges) by hisSee mr. Foxe act. monu. printed. 1576. p. 128. and 129 confessed credite and estimation had with the Popes of that age, and yet is he (all this notwithstanding) acknowleged by our aduersaries to haue beneOsiander cent. 8. p. 58. ante med. a good manmr. Couper in his Chronicle at the yere of our Lord 734. fol. 171 b. renowned in all the world, for his learning and godly life: for which he was also priuileged with the surname ofOf this title see Hollensheds Chronicle at the yeere 735. and mr. Couper in his Chronicle at the yeere 724. fol. 168. b. and mr. Foxe act. mon. printed 1576. pag. 128. b. and vide 129. a. and Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Zuinglij and Oecolampadij p. 654 post med. Reuerend, and by D. Humfrey specially registred, amongHumfredus in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. p. 326. initio. the godly men raised vp by the holy Ghost. Hitherto also appertaineth the like examples of Gregory and Austine both of them heretofore acknowleged forhereof see heretofore tract. 1. sect. 1 d. 2. 3. e confessed popish Catholickes,
 and yet th'one of them called by our aduersaries,hereof see before in this section at d. That Blessed and holy Father S. Grego. and the otherbefore in this section at b.c. S. Austine our Apostle: where-vnto (to omitte others) might be added the foremencioned example of your HIGHNES Dearest Mother, whose vndoubted Saluation (her knowne religion notwithstanding) was (euen in that oposition of time) by the learned aduesarie as beforebefore in this section at z. publickly acknowledged. What now can our aduersaries answere vnto these confessed examples? Is thereIames. 1, 17. with God variablenes? orEphes. 6, 9. and deutro. 10, 17. and Rom. 2, 11 and 1. Peter. 1.17. any acception of persons? or is heNumer. 23, 19. as the sonne of man that he should change so as one and the same religion, which was before in them holy, should now be in vs damnable? And thus much breifly concerning certaine vndoubted examples of this kinde.
3 Thirdly to make this point, more euident as yet by the like answerable practise of almost all Protestant reformed Churches. Whereas they hould thatIn the propositions and principles disputed in the vniuersitie of Geneua page 166. sect. 25. the Sacraments are only to be administred, to those that are taken for knowne members of the Church: Which no man can be with-out faith, because thatHebr. 11, 6. without faith it is impossible to please God. For which cause they teach concerning Infants, who in their opinion haue notThat children haue not faith is affirmed by master Carth write in mr. Whitgifts defence pa. 611. And in the propositio^s and principls disputed in the vniuersitie of Geneua. p. 178. sect 4. and by Iacob. Kimedoncius in his redemption of mankind l. 2. c 15. page 164 fine. and by mr. Whitaker contra Dureum lib. 8 pag. 682. faith, (which as the scriptures witnesRom. 10, 17. commeth by hearing which Infants cannot accomplish) thatSo saye the Deuines of Geneua in the foresaid propositions and principles disputed page 178. sect. 4. also Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij l. 2. page 301. circa med. saith hereof. Parentum and compatrum fides pueros sanctificat. And Praetorius l. de Sacramentis page 108. saith: Respectu fidelium parentum, infantes fideles habentur. etc. Credunt igitur infantes, sed in parentibus they are comprehended within the couenant of eternall life, by meanes of the faith of theire Parents, andIn the propositions and page 178 are for that cause to be Baptixed, and that there-fore the Children of Iewes, Turkes and such like professed Infidels, areIn the propositions and principles etc. vbi supra. sect 8. page 179. and mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 8. page 679. fine saith. Infidelium liberos (vt Turcarum, Iudeorum, Ethnicorum Caluinus merito and vere negat esse baptizandos and the like is taught by Kimnedoncius in his redemption of mankind: l. 2. c. 15 page 167 fine: and see mr. D. Some in his defence against Penrye, and refutation etc. page 150. not to be Baptized, as not being comprehended within the couenant, by reason that their Parents do not beleeue. All this yet notwith-standing
 they professeTaught by mr. Whit gifte in his defence. etc. page 623 ante med. By mr. Hooker in his ecclesiasticall policie l. 3. sect. 1. page 131 by D. Some vbi supra page 149 and 150 and in the foresaide propositions and principles: etc. page 179. sect 9. It is saide by the Diuines of Geneua: We are of minde that the children of Papists may be receaued vnto Baptisme: to teach and practise their Baptizing of Infants Borne of Catholicke (or as they terme) Popishe Parents: Not (saith Mr. Hooker) in regard ofmr. Hooker vbi supra: Gods promise which reacheth vnto a thousand generations: for by this reason the Children of Turkes and (as Mr. Hooker saith)Master Hooker ibidem: all the worlde may bee Baptized, in so much as no man is a thousand discents remoued from Adam. But their saide Baptising of them is (according to the other premises of their Doctrine) by them selues practised and holden good, though (as Mr. D. Some affirmethmr. Some in his foresaide defence etc. cap. 22. page 165 and 167 to Penry) they were the Children of Popishe west-Indians whose other former auncestors neuer knew the Christian faith, and though (saith hee) those West-indiansMaster Some ibidem: page 167. were Baptized by Popish Shauelings, yet they receaued true Baptisme and were ingraffed into Christ, and for this reason, because there is a Church in Popery, for (saith he)mr. Some ibidem p. 149 post med. saith: And Amandus Polanus in partic. theologic. page 305: post med. saith. Hodierna Ecclesia Romana est adhuc Ecclesia Christi, sed omnium impurissima etc. alioquin ij qui in papatusunt baptizati, extra ecclesiam Christi. ac proinde nec baptismo Christi fuissent baptisati. etc. If there were no Church at all in Popery, (then) the Infants of Papistes were not to be Baptized in any reformed Church: By which premisses of their confessed practise it appeareth 1 that the Children of Catholicke (or Popish) Parents are to be Baptized 2 as being comprehended within the couenant of eternall life: 3 and that by reason of their parents Faith: So euidently in their Doctrine and practise, is the faith of the Catholicke (or Popish) Parents, houlden for auaileable to his Childe. And shall it then be thought damnable to him selfe? or houlden worthy to be yet further persecuted by our so implacable and vnrelenting aduersaries?



THAT PROTESTANTS CANNOT proue, that the Romane Church did change her Religion, since the first Conuersion thereto in the Apostles time. @ 7.
AND for so much as it is your HIGHNESIn the summe of the Conference before the Kings Maiestie pag. 75. circa med. Constant and resolute opinion, that no Church ought further to seperate it selfe from the Church of Rome, then shee hath departed from her selfe, whe^ shee was in her florishing and best estate. In further probabilitie therfore of the Premisses we do presume hereby most humbly to submitte to your MAIESTIES most learned Iudgment this briefe discourse had thereof in the two sections next ensuing: it is generally confessed that the Romane Church was once the true Church and professed the right faith, whereto theI thanke my God for you etc. because your faith is renowned throughout the wholle worlde. Rom. 1, 8. To all that be at Rome, the beloued of God called to be Saintes, grace to you. Rom. 1, 7. That which is common to vs both, your faith and mine. Rom. 1, 12. Your obedience is published in euery place. Rom. 16, 19. Apostle him selfe giueth full and assured testimonie: where-vpon it euidently followeth that if the Romane Church haue not sithence changed her religion, then she still retaineth and persisteth in the right faith.
Now as touching her supposed change. we will breifely examine what our learned aduersaries (who haue purposely and seriously laboured in discouery or proofe of this pretended change) do most materially obiect in that behalfe 1 First thenMr. Whitaker contra Duraeum. l. 7 page 480 initio: and mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfeite Catholike p. 36. post med. the first (saith Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Fulke) That exercised Iurisdiction vpon forraine Churches was Victor: whereto we answere (as doth the Lord Archbishope of Canterburie concerning womans Baptisme) saying to Mr. Carthwrightmr. Whitgifte in his defence page 510 prope finem. you say in the margent that Victor Anno. 198. did first appointe that women might Baptize, by this you do add more credit to the cause then you are aware of, for Victor was a Godly Bishope and Martir and the Church at that
 time was in greate Purity as not being longe after the Apostles whereto we further add, that whereas Victor in the example now vrged, did vpon occasionThe occasion hereof was that the Churches of Asia minor had receaued of S. Iohn the Euangelist to obserue our Lordes Pasch or Easter day not alwaies vppon Sonday but with the Iewes (in regarde of theire knowne weakenes) vpon the 14. of the moone, as in like sorte vpon the same grou^d was for the time tollerated, Circumcision: Act. 16, 3. and abstinence from bloode and that which is strangled. Act. 15, 20. The Bishops of Rome who had receaued of S. Peter and Paule the other manner did accordinglye tollerate the Churches of Asia, til such time as that certaine of them in Asia made this their obseruation necessarie, in so much that the other manner was condemned by the Iudaizing hereticke B^asius. Tertulian de praescript. circa finem: and centur. 2. c. 5 col. 107. l. 12. hereupon Victor thought good to tollerate them no longer, and therfore prescribed the Bishops of Asia to be excomunicated, vnlesse they conformed them selues to the latine Church in the obseruation of Easter day. then seeming very slenderThe Churches of Asia not denying the feast of Easter, but differing onely from the Romane Church in the day on which it should be kept, wherin also they had (as they presumed) the fore mentioned example and tradition of S. Iohn for their warrant, thought this no iust cause of excomunication. excomunicate the Bishopes of Asia: wherein (saith Mr. Fulke)mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke page 36 post med. (he passed the boundes of his Authoritie, howso-euer the Bishopes of Asia (in respect of the saide occasion seeming to them so slender) censured Victor as ouer seuere,Euseb. hist. l. 5 c. 23 and 24 yet (which is most to be obserued) no one of them (though thus in their owne opinion prouoked,) chargeth him (as in all reason if they might they would) with any vndue claime or exercise of vsurped authoritie:Euseb. hist. l. 5 c. 24. initio. reporteth how Ireneus who thought Victor ouer sharpe herein, admonisheth Victor by letters that he would not for the obseruation of a Tradition so long vsed, quite cut of so many Churches from the bodye of the vniuersall Church: in which wordes he doth not so much impugne as plainely acknowledge his authoritie. for how could Victor so cut them of vnles he had authoritie therin. euen Ireneus him selfe (who stood most herein) acknowledgeth so plainely els where, the Primacie of the Romane see, that he is therefore specially reprehendedCent. 2. c. 4 col. 64 l. 10. It is said: Nouitate^ deinde quanda^ and illud recipere quibusdam videri posset, quod in exemplaribus Irenei, qualia nunc h^bemus, extat libro tertio cap. tertio. Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse ^st omnem conuenire Ecclesiam etc. And in the Alphabeticall table of that centurie at the word Ireneus speciall reference being there made to this saying of Ireneus, it is withall saide therof: Irene^ corrupta sen^entia de ^r ma^u Ecclesiae Romanae: 64, 12. by the Centurie writers of Magdeburge: 2 Secondly Mr. WhitakerWhitaker contra Duraeum. l. 7. p. 480 giueth example In Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus. Bishopes of Rome,mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke pa. 37 circa medium. Challenging (saith Mr. Fulke) Prerogatiue ouer the Bishops
 in Aphrica by forging a false Canon of the Nicen Councell: Whereto we answere: that the former example of Victor who liued about some 200. yeares before these, fully auoideth this obiection: for if Victor so long before them challenged primacie, then did they but continue it, and not first bring it in; As for the suspitionThe suspition which Protestantes enforce was this: Zozimus Boniface and Celestinus to prooue vnto the Bishoppes of Aphrica appeales vnto Rome alleaged in behalfe therof the Nicene Councell: whervpon (saith mr. Iewell in the 4. article of his replye The said Aphricane Bishopes wrote to the Bishoppes of the East to see their copies of the Nicene Councell: vpon returne of which Copies from Cirrill Bishope of Alexandria and Atticus of Constantinople, there appeared therein no such Canon: As also (say they) neither in the 22 Canons set downe by Rufinus (hist. l. 10 c. 6) doth any such Canon appeare, whereupon Protestants vrge this to haue bene a forgery and innouation in Zozimus Boniface and Celestinus. of pretended forgery of the Canons of the Nicen Councell by Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestinus it is both vntrueVntrue for betweene the time of the Nicene Councell and of the foresaid Bishopes Cirrill of Alex andrra and Atticus of Constantinople; The Arrianes had occupied those sees, whereof see Socrates l. 2. Zozom. l. 4. Theodoret. l. 2. and Niceph. l. 9 and 10) and corrupted the true originals of the Nicene Councell, so as the Canons which Rufinus setteth downe and which Cirrill and Atticus sent (howsoeuer those Fathers thought of them) were false and corrupted, which to be true, appeareth many waies. 1 First in that sondry auncient Fathers haue alleaged sondry Canons of the Nicene Councell which are not to be found in these: As for example Ambrose ep. 82 saith: It was decreed in the Nicene Councell, Ne bigamus in clerum asciscatur: S. Austine ep. 110 saith, It was there decreed (Ne Episcopus sibi successorem sufficiat: Hierom. in praefat. Iudith saith, concerning the booke of Iudith: Hunc librum Synodus Nicena in numero Sanctarum scripturarum legitur computasle: And the Fathers of the second generall Councell of Constantinople (which was 30 yeeres before Zozimus) in their Sinodicall letters written to the Bishopes of Italye Damasus and others, extant in Theodoret hist. l. 5 c. 9. post medium, affirme that there was sanctorum Patrum in Concilio Niceno decisio: vt videlicet singularum Prouinciarum antistites vna cum finitimis (modo ipsis ita visum fuerit Episcopis) ministros ad ecclesiarum commodum in suis ipsorum prouincijs ordinent. Iulius who was Bishope of Rome presently after the Nicene Councell (in rescript. contra orientales pro Athanasio etc. which is in Isidors collection, and a great parte thereof specially recited and alleaged verbatim by Zozomin hist. l. 3. c. 7. and whereof see Socrates hist. l. 2 c. 11) saith, Canonibus in Nicena sinodo Iubentibus non debere preter sententiam Romani Pontificijs concilia caelebrari. And Socrates affirmeth accordingly that such a Canon was hist. l. 2 c. 5 and that it was alleaged by Iulius hist. l. 2 c. 13 and so likewise doth Zozomine hist. l. 3. c 9. also it is notoriouse and most certaine (as appeareth by Athanasius in epistola de sinodis Armini and Selenci, and by Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 5. 17 and 18 and by Epiphan. haer. 69. that one principall occasion of the Nicen Councell was to determine the controuersie about the obseruation of Easter day, and that accordingly those Fathers made a Canon therof. To omitt sondry other like examples in that kind: (wherof read Concil. Aphricanum Can. 14. and Leo ep. 25. ad Theodosium Augustum. And the Lord Archbishope of Canterburie in his defence etc. page 334. post medium. And to omitt likewise that the Canons alleaged by Rufinus do vary from the Canons sent by Cirrillus both in number, order, and matter, diuers learned Protestants, as Oecolampadius, in libro epistolarum Occolampadij and Suin glij page 664. and 667. Caluin lib. 4. institut. c. 17. sect. 36. mr. Iewell in his Apologie of the Church of England. and mr. Bilson now Bishoppe of Winchester in his true difference betweene etc. part. 4. page 555 ante med. do acknowledge and mencion a Canon of the Nicene Councell concerning the Sacrament. All which said Canons are wanting aswel in the 22. Canons set downe by Ruffinus as also in the 20 Canons sent by Cirrill, in so much as Occolampadius vbi supra p. 664 ante med. expresly chargeth our latine copies as defectiue in this behalfe. 2. Secondly in that the Arrians had burned the originals of the Nicene Councell, which to be true appeareth by Athanasius in epist. ad omnes orthodoxos. And Iulius in rescript. ad Orientales alleageth in perticuler very many of the other Canons of the Nicene Councell, which Protestants now reiecte for forged, and among them one Canon concerning appeales to Rome. 3 Lastly the Aphricans (whom this matter most concerned) were so far from charging the said Popes with Innouation or forgerie that S. Austine one of them calleth Zozimus the most blessed Pope Zozimus: Aug. de gra. Christi l. 2 c. 2 and 6. 7. and 8. and 17 and epist. 157 and Concil. Aphric. in epist. ad Bonifacium. And like titles of reuerence and honour are giuen by the Aphricane Bishopes to Boniface, and Celestinus. Vide epistolam Aphricani concilij ad Bonifacium. and vide epist. Aphric. concil. ad Celestinum. andImpertinent because that the Councell of Sardica (not that hereticall conuenticle against Athanasius mentioned by Zozomen hist. l. 3. c. 10. And which mr. Whitaker mistaketh contra Dureu^ l. 7 p. 499) but that other Catholike councell mentioned by Dresserus in millenar. 5. page 104 and 246. and by Carion in chronic. p. 283 initio. and by Zozomen l. 3 c. 11. (wherat as witnesseth Theodoret hist. l. 2. c. 7 and Carion in chronic. page 282 post med.) Athanasius and many other of the Fathers of the Nicene Councell were present) affirmeth can. 7. before the times of Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestinus, this very matter of appealing to Rome, in so much as Caluine l. 4 institut. c 7 sect 9. mencioneth this decree, and thought that the Pope did not forge, but by mistaking alleage this decree of Sardica as the decree of the Councell of Nice, so cleare hereby it is that Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestinus were no Innouators. impertinent.
3 Thirdly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Pope Siritius saying,Whitaker cont. Duraeum l. 7. page 480 ante medium. Siritius was the first that annexed perpetuall Chastitie to the Ministers of the word. Whereto we answere First that Mr. Whitaker alleageth no proofe that Siritius was the first, neither doth he or can he name any Catholicke writer of that time so reporting: Secondly we alleadge most plainely to the contrarie how that S. Hierome who liued in the time of Damasus predecessor to Siritius saith thereof.Hierom. in Apolog. ad Pamach. c. 3 and the same doctrine doth he affirme in c. 1 ad Titum: If Married men like not this, let them not be angry with me but with the holy scriptures, with all Bishopes Priests and Deacons, who know they cannot offer sacrifice, if they vse the act
 of Marriage: And this opinion was then not first begune, but (to the contrarie) so vniuersall, that Saint Hierome affirmeth it to be the generall Doctrine and practise ofHierom: contra Vigillant. c. 1 saith. Quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae quid Egipti and sedis Apostolicae? quae aut Virgines clericos accipiunt aut continentes, aut si vxores habuerint mariti esse desinunt. the Church of the East, of Egipte and the Sea Apostolicke. And in like manner was the Marriage of Priests long before these times so plainely impugned euen in the Greeke Church byEpiphanius haer. 59. after other plaine wordes had herof saith: At dices mihi in quibusda^ locis adhuc liberos gignere, Presbiteros, Diaconos and Hipodiaconos: at hoc non est iuxta Canone^ etc. So plainelye doth he acknowledge hereby a former Canon. Epiphanius,Origen in numer. hom. 23 saith: Certum est quia impeditur sacrificium indesinens ijs qui coniugalibus necessitatibus seruiunt, vn de videtur mihi quod illius est solius offerre sacrificium indesinens, qui indesinenti and perpetuae se deuouerit castitati. and vi de Origen in Leuit. hom: 4. and l. 8. contra Celsum. Origen, and also euen by that misapliedMisaplied for that many learned Protestants do vrge it in profe of Priestes marriage: wheras it prooueth the contrarie. example of Paphnutius,It doth appeare by Socrates hist. l. 1. c. 8. ante med. and Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 22 and by the Centurie writers Cent. 4. c. 9 col. 656. line 44. and by mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in Mat. 8 sect. 3. fol. 14 a. post med. that Paphnutius, though he thought that Priesthood did not dissolue marriage contracted before orders giuen, yet he affirmed to the Nicene Councell that those who were made Priestes before they were married, should not afterwards marry: alleaging for this (veterem Ecclesiae traditionem,) the auncient Tradition of the Church: so plainely doth Paphnutius hereby acknowledge that this doctrine was then holden for the Churches auncient Doctrine. that our learned aduersaries doubt not therefore toSo Ch^mnitius in his examen concil. Trident. part. 3. reprehendeth Hierom, Ambrose, and Origen page 50. a. ante med. and Epiphanius p. 62. a. initio. And Frigeuilleus Gauuius in his palma Christiana page 103 reprehendeth Socrates and Zozomen for their reporte of Paphnutius. reprehend the saide Fathers, and as Epiphanius and Paphnutius in their cited testimonies hereof, do in plaine tearmes rest vpon the Churches Doctrine before their times: so likewise the Fathers of theConcil. 2. Carth. can. 2. saith: Omnibus placet vt Episcopi, Presbiteri, and Diaconi etc. ab vxoribus se abstineant (and for this reason there sett downe) vt quod Apostoli docuerunt and ipsa seruauit antiquitas, nos custodiamus. Carthage Councell doubt not in like manner to ground this point vpon Antiquitie and the Apostles Doctrine. So euident hereby it is, that Siritius in his foresaide Doctrine hereof brought in no Innouation or change:
4 Fourthly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Innocent the third sayingWhitaker l. 7 contr. Duraeum page 480. circa med. He that first inuented Transubstantiation was Innocent the third in the Laterane Councell: Whereto we answere First that Mr. Whitaker barely affirmeth but proueth not this his assertion, neither doth he alledge so much as any one author of those times, charging this Pope Innocent or that Councel
 with any Innouation or change of Doctrine in this matter. And we further say that Mr. Whitaker vrgeth this example how soeuer against his knowledg and learning, yet most clearely against all euidence of truth: for this Councell of Laterane was houlden Anno. 1215.Whitaker l. 7 contr. Duraeum page 480. circa med. And as appeareth by the said Councell and further testimonie ofCrispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 345. fine Protestants. there were present thereat the Patriarches of Hierusalem, and Constantinople; 70. Metropolitaines; 400. Bishopes: and 800. Conuentuall Priors. Now that so many learned men of so many seuerall remote Nations of the CHRISTAN worlde, as were here assembled, should all of them agree to decree Transubstantiation, and yet the same to be an Innouation (as Mr. Whitaker saith, then First inuented, is more the^ improbable: The truth here of therefore was most plainely to the contrarie, that in the age before that Councell, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was publicke and generall: only Berengarius as then impugned the same, and was therein publickly contradicted and specially written against by diuers FathersThere did in that age write purposelye in proofe of the Reall presence Anselmus Lanfrancus, Guitmundus Adelmanus, Algerus, Hugo Lingonensis, and others: in so much that Papir. Maslon. Annal. francoru^ l. 3. in Henrico Rege, testifieth saying. Berengario, omnes illius temporis Theologi Bellum indixere: And Oecolampadius in libro epist. Oecolampadij and Suinglij l. 3. pag. 712. fine saith, Viuo Berengario, multi contra ipsum scripserunt. of seuerall Nations in that age: In so much as the fore-saide Councell of Laterane was at length then afterwardes assembled against that his then new seeming opinion. A thing so euident that Mr. Foxe confesseth and saith therof,Foxe act. monume^ printed 1576. pag. 1121 b. circa medium. about the yeare of our Lord 1060. the denying of Transubstantiation, beganne to be accoumpted Heresie, and in that num^er was first one Berengarius who liued about Anno. 1060. So farr was Transubstantiation from being (as Mr. Whitaker pretendeth) first affirmed or invented after-wardes in the Councell of Laterane Anno. 1215. Secondly we say that also the many sayings (ouer tediouse here to recite) of the other much more auncient Fathers who liued long before the Laterane Councell, are so plaine and pregnant for Transubstantiaton, that the learned Protestants the^ ^elues do in plaine tearmes accordingly acknowledge
 the same, and therefore reprehend the saide Fathers: To omitte the plaine testimonieOsiander in epitom. hist. eccles. Cent. 9. 10. 11. and page 95. fine: saith Anno. 950. exorta est in Clero Cantuariensi acris contentio de Pane Eucharistico, alij enim asseuerabant priorem panis substantiam remanere and nihillominus simul ibi veru^ Christi Corpus porrigi^ alij vero pugnabant recitatis verbis Domini priorem substantiam elementorum prorsus euanescere atque transire in corpus Domini. etc. And Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 286. circa med. and pag 289 initio. and 323. post medium. confesseth that Paschasius (who liued Anno Domini 880.) taught Transubstantiation. herein of Osiander and some others: in this sort it is confessed and affirmed thatAffirmed by mr. Carelile in his booke that Christ descended not into Hell: fol. 58. and by Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij. l. 3. page 661. and see Mr. Fulke against Heskens page 217 post med. and 204. ante med. and 296 fine. And by Carion in chronic. page 451. initio. Damascene taught Transubstantiation that bothSee the treatise entitled Commonefact. cuiusdam theologi de sacra Domini Caena. and eiusdem Commonefact. consideratio page 211. post med. where it is said, Theophilactus and Damascenus plane inclinant ad Transubstantiatione; and vide Chemnitiu^ examen. part. 2. p. 83. a. paulo post med. and pa. 90. b. circa medium. Damas^ene and Theophilacte do euidently encline to Transubstantiation: thatHumfredus in Iesuitismi part. 2 rat. 5. page 626 saith: In Ecclesiam vero quid inuexerunt Gregorius and Augustinus, intulerunt etc. Transubstantiatione^ etc. Gregorie the greate and Austine brought into England Transubstantiation: thatThe Centurie writers cent. 4. c. 10. col. 985. line 30. say of Eusebius Emissenus that, parum commode de Transubstantiatione dixit. etc. Eusebius, Emissenus did speake vnprofitably of Transubstantiation thatThe Centurie writers vndertaking in their fifth centurie. c. 4. col. 496. line 4. to set downe, errores Doctorum huius seculi do therein col. 517. line 23. say: Chrisostomus Transubstantiationem videtur confirmare nam ita scribit in sermone de Eucharistiae, num vides Panem? num Vinum? num sicut reliqui cibi in secessum vadunt? absit ne sic cogites, quemadmodum enim si cera igni adhibita illi assimilatur, nihil substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit, sic and hic puta misteria consumi corporis substantia. Chrisostome doth seeme to confirme Transubstantiation: whereto sondry other like examples might be added: A thinge so euident that Adamus Francisci (a learned Protestant writer) doth therefore acknowledge, how thatAdamus Francisci in Margarita theologica page 256. post med. saith: Commentum Papistarum de Transubstantiatione mature in ecclesiam irrepsit. Transubstantiation entred early into the Church: so improperly (if not wilfully vntruly) is the foresaide example of the Laterane Councell, and Innocent the third vrged by Mr. Whitaker, and so many other of his brethren.
5 Fiftely Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Boniface the third, sayingWkitaker contra Duraeum. lib. 7. page 480. post medium. he that first intitled the Romane Church to be Caput omnium ecclesiarum, the head of all Churches was Boniface the third: Whereto we answere
 that although this point be for the matter thereof, alreadie answered by that which hath bene heretofore saide to the former examples of Victor, Zozimus Boniface, (the first) and Celestinus: yet to refell Mr. Whitaker euen in Terminis: whereas Boniface the third was Pope Anno. 607. that verie title of being Head is acknowledged, and giuen to the Romane Church by many FathersTheodor^e (though agretian) in epist. ad Renatum presbiterum saith of the Romane Church, tenet enim Sancta ista sedes gubernacula regenda rum cuncti orbis ecclesiarum. And in the Counsell of Calcedon act. 1. it is saide, and not contradicted, Papae vrbis Romae, quae est caput omnium Ecclesiaru^, praecepta habemus. Greeke andProsper de in gratis c. 2. saith, sedes Roma petri quae Pastoralis honoris facta caput mundo etc. And Victor Vticensis de persecusione vandalica, l. 2. saith, praecipue ecclesia romana quae caput est omnium ecclesiaru^: And Ennodius diaconus in libro de sinodis sub spiniacho habitis saith, sanctorum voce patet pontificu^, dignitatem sedis apostolicae factam toto orbe venerabilem, dum illi quicquid fidelium est submittitur, dum totius corporis caput esse designatur: Vigilius Bishope of Rome in epist ad Euterum. c. 7. saith, Sancta Romana Ecclesia etc. Primatum tenet omnium Ecclesiarum, ad quam tam summa episcoporum negotia, and iudicia, atque quaerelae, quam and maiores Ecclesiarum quaestiones, quasi ad caput semper referenda sunt. Latin, who liued before those times: And Gregorie the greate predecessor to this Boniface, affirmeth in sundry places, thatGreg. l. 11. ep. 54. and in quartu^ Psalmum Paenitentialem. Romana Ecclesia est omnium Ecclesiarum caput: For and with which very title, theCentur. 6. c. 7. col. 425. line 38. and l. 41. and centur. 5. c. 7. col 774. line 53. Centurists do reprehend and expresly charge both him and sondry others that liued before Bonifacius tertius.
6 Sixtly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Gregory the greate saying:Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. p 480. He that first deliuered Purgatorie for a certaine Doctrine was Gregorie the greate: whereto in Gregories full discharge from all Innouation in this pointe we answere, that S. Austine longe before Gregorie deliuereth the Doctrine thereof for most certaine saying:Aug. de verbis apost. serm. 34. saith, Orationibus vero sanctae Ecclesiae and sacrificio salutari and elemosinis quae pro eorum spiritibus erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos adiuuari, vt cum eis miserecordius agatur a domino, quam eorum peccata meruerunt, hoc enim a patribus traditum vniuersa obseruat ecclesia. And in his booke de cura pro mortuis c. 1. he saith of praier for the dead, non parua est vniuersae ecclesiae quae in hac consuetudine claret authoritas. It is not to be doubted but that the dead are holpen by the Praiers of the holy Church, and the healthfull sacrifice, and almes which are imployed for their soules, that God will deale with them more mercifully then their sinnes deserued, for this doth the vniuersall Church obserue as deliuered from our forefathers: and els where he saith no lesse certainelyAug. in enchirid. c. 110. saith, neque negandu^ est defunctoru^ animas pietate suoru^ viuentiu^ releuari, cumpro illis sacrificiu^ mediatoris offertur it may not be denyed but that the soules of the deceassed are reliued by the pietie of their liuing
 frendes, when for them is offered the sacrifice of the mediator etc. In so much as he for the Latine Church doubted not toAug. haer. 35. saith, of Aerius, fertur quoque propria dogmata addidisse nonnulla, dicens orare vel offerre pro mortius oblationem, non oportere. censure Aerius for an hereticke, for his deniall of this Doctrine: as also Epiphanius for the Greeke Church, condemneth Aerius in like sort, saying against him in defence of praier and oblatio^ for the dead,Epiphan. haer. 75. and ibidem versus finem. He further saith, Ecclesia necessario hoc perficit traditione a patribus accepta. The Church hath receaued (this) through the wide world, it was agreed vpon before Aerius was: Hence it is that Mr. Fulke confesseth and saithMr. Fulke in his aunswere to a Counterfeite Catholicke pa. 44. finem. Aerius taught that Praier for the dead was vnprofitable, as witnes both Epiphanius and Austine, which they coumpt for an error: Also he acknowledgeth thatMr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatorie pa. 320. ante med. and p. 194. ante med. and pag. 326. initio. and 349. circa and post med. Ambrose, Chrisostome, and Austine allowed Praier for the dead, thatMr. Fulke vbi supra pa. 320. ante med. and pa. 326. initio. and 349. post med. and pa. 78. fine. it was the common error of their times: thatMr. Fulke vbi supra pa. 161. ante med. the error) of Purgatorie was some what rifely budded in Austines time, thatMr. Fulke vbi supra page 392. ante med. and vide ibidem p. 303. circa med. and 393. post med. Tertulian, Austine, Ciprian, Hierome, and a great, many more do witnes that sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the Apostles. In like manner Mr. Gifford affirmeth, that euenMr. George Gifford in his Plaine demonstration that our Brownistes be full donatists etc. pag. 38. initio in the (Churches) publicke worshipe to praie for the soules of the dead, and to offer Oblation for the dead was generall in the Church long before the daies of Austine, as appeareth in Ciprian and Tertulian, which was before him and nearer to the time of the Apostles. Where-vnto might be added like testimonie from CaluineCaluin institut l. 3. c. 5. sect. 10 acknowledgeth that, ante mille and tre cent. Annos vsu receptum fuit vt precationes fierent pro defunctis (and a little after) sed fateor in errore^ abrepti fuerunt etc. So cleare is Gregorie (who liued so many ages after these Fathers) discharged from all innouation in this point:
7 Seauenthly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Innocentius the third, affirming thatMr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. pag. 480. post med. He was the first that instituted auriculer Confession for necessarie: whereto we answere that an Innouation so strange and compulsorie as for men (against all naturall shamefastnes) to be constrained to confesse their secret sinnes, could neuer haue bene brought in by mans only authority, without some open and greate contradiction: If therefore Innocentius first brought in this vsage before that time strange and vntaught, what Father
 or other writer of that age then resisted it? or who is witnes to this change? Herein Mr. Whitaker is silent. But to cleare Innocentius who was Pope about Anno. 1200. It is euident that the Iacobites were condemned Anno. 600. For affirming thatWitnes hereof Guido de Iacobit^^ c. 2. and Michaell Buchingerus in ecclesiastica, historia: And Matheus Parisius in Henrico tertio; and Iacobus Vitriacus historiae orientalis. c. 76. and Nicephorus l. 18. c. 45. we are to confesse our sinnes to God only and that Confession of sinnes to a Priest is not needfull. And HaymoHaimo in psal. 31. saith licet deus dimittat peccata etc. tamen confitendu^ est Ministris ecclesiae quia nisi confiterentur, ex sua inobedie^tia damnarentur; and no lesse plaine is hee (ad Euangeliu^ dominicae. 15. post pentecosten ite osten dite vos sacerdotibus. who liued about Anno. 790. expresseth the like agreeable Doctrine of the Church in his time: as also S. BernardBernard. in meditationibus c. 9. saith sed dicis sufficit mihi soli deo co^fiteri quia Sacerdos sine eo a peccatis me absoluere non potest; ad quod non ego sed beatus Iacobus respondet dicens, co^fitemini alte rutru^ peccata vestra etc. And vide eum de interiori domo c. 37. Petrus Damianus and othersConcil. 2. Cabilonense (which was Anno. 813) can 32. saith, Sed and hoc emendatione egere perspeximus, quod quidam dum confitentur peccata sua Sacerdotibus non plene id faciunt etc. And Alcuinus who liued Anno. 730. l. de diuinis officijs c. 13. in c. Ieiunij, saith. confiteatur omnia peccata sua quae recordare potest etc. quo facto fixis genibus in terram and super ipsa innixus stans suppliciter tensis manibus blando ac flexibili vultu respiciens sacerdotem, dicat etc. And see Aug. de visitatione infirmorum l. 2. c. 4. and l. 50. homiliarum hom. 49. c. 3. and Hospinianus in historia sacramentaria l. 4. pa. 366. circa med. reproueth the same Doctrine of Auriculer Confession, in Peter Lombard who (saith he) liued Anno. 1150. and also in Hugo de S. Victore who liued (saith he) about the yeare 1130. both of them before Innoce^t the third. who all liued before Innocent the third, do the like for their times. To omitte that S. Basill affirmeth plainely that Confession isSee Basills words. hereafter tract 3. sect. 1 in the margent vnder the letter a. Necessarie: and that S. Leo affirmeth it to be ChristsSee the wordes of Leo hereafter tract 3. sect. 1. in the margent vnder the letter .a institution, teaching with all euenVide ibidem. secret Confession: Our aduersaries the centurie writersThe centurie writers cent. 3. c. 6. col. 127. l. 28. say, absolutione^ deinde a peccatis ita conferebant, si qui paeenetentiam agebant, peccatum prius confessi essent: sic enim confessione^ magnopere Tertulianus vrgent in libro de paenitentia; and vsitatam fuisse priuatam confessionem qua delicta and cogitata quoque praua confessi sunt, ex aliquot C^priani locis apparit, vt ex sermone quinto de lapsis, and l. 3 epistolaru^, epistola 14. and 16. vbi diserte ait in minoribu^ etiam pecca tis quae quide^ non in deum committuntur, necesse est ad exomologesm venire, idque frequenter fierr inbet l. 1. epist. 3. etc. speaking of the auncient Churches vsage euen in those former times of Ciprian and Tertulian, do out of their writings most plainely collecte and set downe priuate Confession euen of thoughts and lesser sinnes: and that it was as then commaunded and thought necessarie. So greately is Mr. Whitaker mistaken in this example.Petrus Damianus: epist. 1. alleadgeth a notable example in proofe hereof: (and vide eum in serm. 2: de S. Andrea Apostolo) and concludeth aduising men not to deferre their confession.
 8 Eightly Mr. Whitaker giueth example in Pope Nicholas the second, saying of himWhitaker contra Dureum l. 7. pa. 480. Qui primus docuit corpus Christi sensual^^er tractari. fra^gi and dentibus atteri is Nicholaus secundus suit: Whereto we aunswere 1. First that the matter hereof is already sufficiently answered by that which hath bene heretofore saide concerning The fourth former example of Transubstantiation, and the confessed antiquitie thereof in many Fathers who liued long before this Pope Nicholas the second: 2. Secondly co^cerning the phrase (which is but a verball obiection) S. Chrisostome (many ages before Pope Nicholas) saide in like manner,Chrisostom in Math. hom. 83. post med. Ipsum vides, Ipsum tangis, Ipsum comedis: And else whereChrisosto^ in Iohn hom. 4 5. post med. Non se tantum videri permittet desiderantibus, sed and tangi and manducari and dentes carni sua infigi: And in what true and sober sence, these words may (in regardAs S. Paule in like regard saith, This is my Body which is broken for you 1. cor 11, 24. and Caluin de caena dom. inter opuscula saith in like manner, Iohn Baptist saith, he sawe the holy Ghost descending, of we looke narrowly, we shall finde he sawe nothing but a Doue etc. Yet because hee knewe that vision to be etc. a most certaine signe of the presence of the Holy Ghost, he bouldely affirmeth that he sawe him etc. As the holy Ghost is in regard of this foresaid presence saide to be seene and to descend: so may Christs Body in regard of it like presence in the Sacrament be likewise saide to be handled, broken, etc. of Christs Body Really present in the Sacrament) be vsed, is at large affirmed by our aduersaries the Lutheranes, who doubt not specially toIacobus Andraeas in confut. disput. Iohan. Iacobi Grinaei pa. 214. ante med. saith, quomodo autem corpus Christi in hoc sacramento dentibus teri, videri, tangi, dicatur, quae non a Luthero recens inuentae and in ecclesiam introductae, sed eruditae, piae, and orthodoxae vetustatis phrazes sunt, etc. Luculenter explicatum est. And page 215. post medium. Hee saith: Haec Berengario a Papa Nicholao and sinodo praescripta pallinodia nihil continet, quod inscriptis orthodoxoru^ Patrum, Chrisostomi in primis non continetur: and vide page 306. And of Luthers like allowance and defence of Pope Nicholas herein, vide ibidem page 307. initio. and fine. And so the booke entituled apologia modesta ad acta conuentus quindecem theol. torgae nuper habit page 36. post medium. defend against their other brethren our aduersaries, this very obiection concerning Pope Nicholas.
9 Ninthly and lastly (for we will not in this our discourse which toucheth only Rome, be tediouse in rehearsing Mr. Whitakers other vntrue and impertinent examples concerning other Churches or Bishopes,) Mr. Whitaker (for wante of greater matter) chargeth Pope Calixtus thatWhitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. pag. 480. he was the first that ordeined
 Ieiunium quatuor temporum where-vnto for so much as this auncient Pope was the imediate successor (next but one) to Victor, we answere as heretofore did the Lord Archbishope of Canterbury concerning Victor saying:Se hertofore tract 1. sect 7 letter r. By this you add more credit to the cause then you are aware of: etc. And seeming that Mr. Whitaker can alleadge no auncient writer charging Calixtus with Innouation herein, the example therfore and authoritie of so auncient a Father, doth not so much impugne as giue credit to this appointed fast, so as further answere herevnto is needlesse.
Mr. Whitaker hauing thus failed in euery one of those examples whereof he made boulde to giue instance, and the Romane Church being found therein free from all supposed change or Innouatio^: how much the rather now are we to esteeme it no lesse cleared from change in those other so many and greate Doctrines, whereof he is not able to aforde so much as colour of instance to the contrarie? his apparent want in that behalfe being such as enforced him for shew of varietie, to giue (as before) seuerall examples concerning one and the same question, as namely concerning the Blessed Sacrament, and the Popes foresaide Primacie. In all which neuerthelesse he had so little trust and did so well fore knowe the discouerable weakenes thereof, that he else where protesteth plainely that he and his breethrenMr. Whitaker l. 3. contra Duraeum pag. 277. ante med. And Bucanus in loc. comun. pag. 466. saith: non est nostrum designare quo temporis momento experit ecclesia deficere etc. are not bound to answere in what age Superstition crepte into the Church, and thatMr. Whitaker l. 7. contra Duraeum pag. 477. post med. it is not needfull for them to search out in histories the beginning of this change: And for that in deed he right well knewe that he could not shew the same, therefore quite against his owne former examples, and in proofe that it cannot be shewed, he alleageth similitudes ofWhitaker contra Camp. ^at. 7. pag. 101. and 102. the haires of a mans head which waxe not whit sodainly, but by degree not to bee discerned: and ofWhitaker contra Camp. ibidem. slifters entring into a building, at first not to be perceaued. etc. and so with deceiptfull
 andDeceiptfull and misaplied in many respects: As 1 In that the haires, nor somuch as any one haire of a mans head are instantly at the first become white at changed. Neither doth euery first beginning of decay in buildings at the first become an outward and markeable ruine, wheras in Doctrine euery opinion is at the first either true or false: 2 Secondly the first whitnes of some few haires, and the first decay in buildinges cannot be at the first discerned, though they were precisely regarded, which is otherwise in change of Doctrine: 3 Thirdly none is specially charged so preciselie to marke these, whereas on the contrary, it is the special charge not of a fewe, but of all the Churches Pastors not only to marke but also publickly to withstand the other. misaplied resemblances, laboureth to perplex and sophisticate his readers Iudgement, wherin to beare with his bouldenes, and to admitte (for the time) his saide similituds for pertine^t, yet is al this vnable to relieue our aduersaries: for though we should be sparing herevpon to charge the^ with shewing the first begi^ning of so great a chang as is by the^ imagined (which is all that by these foresaide-misaplied resemblances, our aduersaries do wrongefully vrge) neuerthelesse at the least yet, we are in all reason to expect, that (according to the nature of these their owne examples)For though the first whit haire or slifter be not discerned, yet the further degrees and increase thereof are markeable and discerned. they should discouer and describe to vs some proceedings and increase of this supposed chaunge: If therefore they say that this change was not made all at once, but by little and little, some times in one pointe of faith, some times in an other, then are they accordingly to shew forth those seuerall little changes or some degrees of the increase and proceedinges therof. As what be those seuerall points of faith so by degrees at seuerall times changed, which bee the Popes that were agentes therin, and who be the fathers that impugned the same etc. In this sort (to omitte the like inSarauia in defensione tractationis de diuersis ministrorum gradibus. cap. 23. p. 362. initio. saith vpon like occasion, respondeo id dici non fat esse, sed ex historijs demonstra^dum esse quae illa fuerint schismata, and vbi and quando nata, and quomodo inde tam vniuersalis consuetudo fuerit profecta: And see him further, ibidem pag. 429. initio. D. Sarauia) doth the L. Archbishope of Canterburie defendingMr. VVhitgifte in his defence etc. pag. 747. initio. Cathedrall Churches against Mr. Carthwright,Mr. VVhitgifte ibidem. demaunde accordingly of him: from what Pope they came or in what time they were first inuented: Affirming withall (else where) against the Puritanes thatSee heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. l. m. num. 13. for so much as the originall and beginning of these names Metropolitaines Archbishope etc. cannot be founde, it is (therefore) to bee supposed, that they had their originall from the Apostles, for (saith he) S. Austine hath this rule etc. In defence wherof
 he further alleagethSee heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. l. n. num. 14. sondry Protestant writers: And hence like-wise it is, that S. Hierome doubteth not to teach, thatHierom ad clitesi phontem. to reduce an heresie to it beginning is a confuting thereof, the truth of which his assertion Mr. WhitakerVVhitaker contra duraeum l. 7. pag. 479. paulo post med. saith, multum autem ad haereses refutandas conferre, earum origine^ nosse nemo negat. acknowledgeth.
This point therefore is not our only assertion or vrging, but is also yet further grounded vpon the confessed sence of scriptures, which teach thatSee hereafter Tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 1. z. a. b. d. Pastors and Doctors must be alwaies in the Church: and thatHereafter Tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 1. l. 1. and ibide^ l. p. q. r. they shall not be silent: but shallSee hereafter tract. 2. ca. 2. Sect. 1. l. p. alwaies resist all false opinions with open reprehension: The office also and nature of the Church argueth no lesse, for how can she be the true Church, and yet suffer so many and important errors as are pretended to invade her children without resistance vpon her part? the experience likewise of all former times is answerable herevnto, for in this sort haue the olde Heresies of the Graetians and Lattines bene discouered, andSee this at large in the seueral treatises of Ireneus, Epiphanius, Theodoret Augustine, Damascene, etc. written purposely by the^ against haeresies: contradicted: In this sorte were of later times, Berengarius, Waldo, Wicliffe, Luther, etc. Euer at their first arising contradicted and charged with Innouation. In this sorte lastly is the defectio^ or change in Doctrine heretofore made by the1 First, concerning the defection of the Greeke Church, the more auncient examples thereof in Paulus samosetanus, macedonius, Nestorius etc. are so memorable as further testimonie thereof needeth not. 2 Secondly as concerning the seuerall defections for later times of the Greeke Church from the Romane, they are testified by Nicephorus, Zonoras, Clycas, Hunbertus against Nicetas, and others. And in part by some Protestants, as namely by Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church pag. 364. fine. and 253. initio. And by Osiander in his Epitom. Centur 9. 10. 11 etc. p. 144. circa med. and 156. post med. and 261. fine. and 262. fine. and by Mr. Sparke against M. Iohn de Albines p. 158 And by Keckermanus in Sistem theolog. l. 1. pag. 68. and 69. Twelue times or there aboutes hath the Greeke Church reconciled it selfe to Rome, and afterwardes fallen from thence being thereupon now at last wholly opressed with barbarouse turcisme. 3 Thirdly as concerning the seuerall errors (fewe in comparison) wherein the Greeke Church at this day dissenteth from the Romane: theire beginning and contradiction is notoriouse: As for example their deniall of subiection to the Romane sea was begune by Iohn of Constantinople and he therevpon specially contradicted by Gregorie the Greate l. 4. ep. 34. and 36. and l. 7. ep. 36. and 64. and by Pellagius in his epistle, vniuersis Episcopis qui illicita vocatione Ioannis Constantinop. ad sinodum conuenerunt. Also their deniall of praier for the dead. was begunne by Aerius and contradicted in him by Austine haer. 53. and by Epiphanius haer 75. And yet afterwards in both these doctrines they conformed them selues to Rome, as is reported by Mr. Sparke vbi supra. and by Osiander cent. 15. page 477. and by Crispinus vbi supra pag. 451. In like manner theire defence of mariage of Priestes was contradicted against Theodorus by Chrisostom. in epist. 6. ad Theodorum Monachum: and against certaine other by Epiphanius haer. 59. ante med. Also their deniall of the holy ghost proceeding from the Father and the Sonne was begunne and gaine saide about Anno 764 as witnesseth our aduersarie Keckermanus in sistem. theolog. pag. 68. the deniall of vnleauened bread in celebration of the Sacrament was begunne about Anno Domni 1053 as appeareth by Leo the .9. in epst. ad Michaelem Episcopum Constantinop. c. 5. and by Osiander cent. 11. page 156. post med. And by the centurie writers cent. 11. c. 8.Like example might be giuen of their other, but few and lesser errors. the which Anno Domini 870. consist (as appeareth by testimonie of Chrispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church page 253. initio) but only in the Primacie and the diuersitie of Ceremonies All which notwithstanding they do vehemently professe to detest the Protestants religion, as appeareth by the two seuerall treatises translated lately into lattine, the one made by Hieremias Patriarch of Constantinople, the other entituled responsio Ioan^^s Basilij magni ducis Muscouiae etc. Anno 1570. And published and replied vnto by Ioannes Lasicius a Protestant writer of Poland, and extant in the booke intituled de Russorum Muscouitarum and Tartarorum religione etc. printed 1582. And it appeareth in the treatise set forth euen by the Protestant diuines of witteberg, entitled acta theologorum witebergensium and Hieremia Patriarchae constantinop. de Augustana confessione etc. Printed witeberga Anno 1584 that the Greeke Church yet to this day professeth and teacheth Inuocation of Saintes and Angells (pag. 55. fine. 102. ante med. and 128. initio) Reliques (pag. 243. fine. and 368. post med.) worshipping of Images, (pag. 243. initio 244. circa and post med. 247. ante med. and 251. fine) Transubstantiation (pag. 86. initio 96. initio. 100. circa med. 240. post med. and 318.) Sacrifice (pag. 102. and 104. post med.) The signifying Caeremonies of the Masse: pag. 97. Circa med. And see the marginall note thereupon. And pag. 99. and 100. Auricular Confession in prefat. ante med and in libro pag. 87. initio. and 130. post med. Enioyned satisfaction: pag. 79. and 89. post med. Confirmation with Chrisme: (pag. 78. initio. and 238. fine.) Extreame vnction: (pag. 242. initio and 326. ante med.) And all the seauen Sacraments (pag. 77. Circa med. and 242. Also Praier for the dead page 93. post med. 102. ante med. and 109. post med. Sacrifice for the dead: page 95. circa med. and 104. post med. Almes for the dead. page 93. post med. and 109. circa med. Freewill page 224. circa med. 296. ante med. and 367 circa med. Monachisme: page 132 ante med. and 257. ante med. Vowes of chastitie: page 111. circa med. and 129. post med. and 135 post med. The fast of Lent and other sett fasting daies page 126 fine. That Priestes may not Marry after orders taken: page 129. circa med. and lastly (to omitt many other) that the tradition and doctrine of the Fathers is to be kept page 131 fine 138. initio and 142. so plainely in all these chiefe points doth the greeke Church yet to this day remaine vnchanged. GREEKE CHVRCH to vs (though in comparison strangers thereto) at this day yet discouerable. And coulde then our home neighbour Rome, only Rome, caste of her primatiue faith, and in liew thereof set abroach pretended errors,
 not few but many, not small but of importance not of beleefe only but also of practize (as praier for the dead: Praier to Saintes: Pilgrimage. Vowed Chastitie: Monachisme: Offering of externall sacrifice to God. and aboue
 all (to omitte many other) the externall adoring (as protestants thinke of Bread and Wine for God,) neither keepe these priuate to her selfe, but therewithal infect so many Christian NationsNappeire vpon the reuelations. page 68. Reignening vniuersally: and all this as Mr. Napeire confesfethNappeire ibidem. without anie debateable contradictionIbidem page 239. ante med. neuer suffering for the space of a 1000. yeares after Siluester the first, (nor before for any thing that is alleadged, so much as) any to be seene vouchable or visible of the true Church to match or encounter her: (whereas yet our aduersaries them selues, do acknowledge and reporteReported at large by the centurie writers in the fifthe Chapter of their seuerall Centuries of euerie age. the confessed and knowne heretickes who in euery of the foresaid ages, haue in other points openly and bouldely contradictedThis is testified by the centurie writers vbi supra and by the other ecclesiasticall writers of euery age: and see hereafter tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 9. l. 2. the ROMANE Church) And though we shoulde suppose all this so strangely to haue hapned, coulde yet so great and strange a wonder but so much as in that one foresaide example ofWheras our aduersaries pretend that Honorius the third who was Pope Anno. 1220. did first bring in the adoration of the Sacrament: it is a meere fiction, for no writer of that age did gainesay or so much as charge him with Innouation therein, onely he did ordaine that Priestes should admonish the people against theire ne^ligence in that behalfe. Before this Honorius Odo Parisiensis, who liued. 1175. (in synodicis constitutionibus cap. 5. de sacram. Altaris) saith in like maner: Frequenter moneantur Laici, vs vbicunque viderint deferri Corpus Domini, statim genua ^^ectant tanquam Domino and creatori suo, and iunctis manibus quoadusque transierint orent: also Algerus Anno Domini. 1060. l. de sacram. Eucharist l. 2. c. 3. fine. saith, Hac fide ipsu^ sacramentum quasi diuinum quiddam and rationabile alloquimur, and rogamus: Agnus dei qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nobis, quia non quod videtur, sed quod vere est, Christum ibi esse credimus. Also Antonius Praetorius a learned Caluinist in libro de sacramentis pa. 288. prope initium: Telling how Damascene taught Transubstantiation, with all further saith Anno. 735. Subse^^^ est Panis adoratio, ac si ipse Christus esset. And so accordingly Carion in his Chronic. (pag. 451. prope initium, doth not only charge Damascene most expresly with transubstantiation, but doth also (ibidem pag. 476. circa med. and 477. paulo ante med.) place Artolatria. That is to say (saith he) the odoration of the reserued and eluated Bread (sequentibus Annis quingentis etc.) within the second fiue hundreth yeares after Christ. By which only premisses as it is cleare and confessed that adoration of the sacrament was vsed long before the time of Honorius the third. So also it is as euident and confessed by Protestantes, and namely by Mr. Foxe (act mon. pag. 896. b. fine. and after the aedition of Anno 1596. pag. 1276. a. line 14.) that if this Honorius did not beginne the same, the first beginning thereof, is then so sarr from being found, that we cannot (saith Mr. Foxe) finde it to come in by any other: Add but now here-vnto the aunswerable testimonies of Austine in Psalm. 98. of Ambrose de spiritu Sancto l. 3. c. 12. of Theodoret dial. 2. of Chrisostome in 1. cor. hom. 24. of Basill de spiritu Sancto cap. 27. of Nazianzen, in Epitaph Gorgoniae, and of Dionisius Areopagita, de Eccles. Hierach. c. 3. which are so plaine and agreeable with our externall adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, that our aduersari^ Chemnitius doth for such alleadge sondry of them against our aduersaries the sacramentaries (in his examen Concil. Trident part. 2. p. 92.) adoring the sacrament for God, (much more in so many other pointes of faith) haue bene so brought and devulged into so many Christian Nations nere and remote, and not once testified or remembred, so much as by any one of the Churches enimies neither hereticall nor prophane: were the Churches owne pastors, her home enimies and strangers to her Religion all of them silent herein,



THAT CATHOLICKES ARE ABLE TO proue the contrary euen by Testimonie of the learned Protestants. @ 8
AND although the proofe of the ROMANE Churches supposed change of her religion lying on our aduersaries part, and hitherto wanting, might be matter in this behalfe sufficient to offer vnto your HIGHNES learned Iudgment; yet will we our selues in surplusage exhibit futher demonstratio^ of her not change in any needefull article of faith, by manifest testimonie from our learned aduersaries: First then it is heretofore fully proued by euident confession of the learned Protestants (aswell in generall,This is fullie confessed heretofore Tract 1. Sect 1 paulo post initium, and Mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke pag. 36. initio. affirmeth also that, the religion of the Papists, came in and preuailed in the yeare of our Lord 607. as also concerning euery point of faith in perticuler)This is hertofore proued Tract. 1. Sect. 1. in the margent at the letter d. that in the time of Gregorie the great Bishope of Rome, the Romane Church professed our now Catholicke, or (as they terme it) Popishe faith; and that shee hath perseuered in profession thereof euer since that time, is confessed likewise by our aduersaries, and made so euident by all histories as that to vndertake further proofe thereof were
 tediousnes bothConfessed hertofore tract 1. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter l. and also at this marke *. And Mr. Fulke in his aunswere to a counterfaite Catholicke pag. 27. circa med. speaking of Boniface the third who was Bishope of Rome the 2 yeare after the death of Gregorie the greate (teste Anastasio l. de vitio Pontificum) saith the Popes from Boniface the 3. were all blasphemous haeretickes and Antichristes: And he affirmeth the same in his confutation of Purgatorie pag. 344. post med. And he likewise affirmeth Boniface the third to be Antichrist, and that vnder him The Papistes religion preuailed (in his foresaid aunswere to a Counterfaite Catholicke pag. 36. and in his confutation of Purgatorie pa. 194. paulo post med. and vide Whitakerum l. de Ecclesia pa. 260. fine. and 261. improper and needelesse. ThisThis is manifestly affirmed and collected from the Ecclesiasticall writers of euery age, and by our aduersaries the Centurie writers, in euery of their seuerall Centuries. Gregorie liued somwhat within the first 600. yeares after Christ, so that hauing now hereby already proued the continued profession of the Romane Church in our now taught Catholicke faith for all these last thousand yeares: The only difficultie and doubt least to be examined, is whether that shee did make change of her faith, during these other foresaid first 600 yeares next after Christ.
This being the maine pointe or issue of this present controuersie, we will now first examine for how many hundreth yeares next after Christ, the Church of Rome is confessed to haue perseuered with-out reuolt or chang in the faith first to her deliuered: In discouery whereof, whereas our writers do obiect, how that Tertullian prouoked the heretickes of his time with the succession of the Romane Bishopes, Mr. D. Fulke aunswering thereto affirmeth the reason thereof to be, for that (saith he)Mr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory p. 374. post med. The Church of Rome reteined by succession vntill Tertullians dayes that faith which it did first receaue of the Apostles: With whome agreeth herein Mr. D. WhitakerWhitaker de Ecclesia pa. 278. post med. speaking of certaine Apostolicke Churches, and emongst them of Rome by name: saith, vnde intelligimus cur ad illas Ecclesias prouocaret Tertullianus, nimirum quia tum Doctrina^ Apostolicam perpetua successione tenebant. and HieromeZanchius de vera relig. p. 148. circa med. Zanchius and where one of our writers vrgethIn Mr. Fulkes confutation of purga. p. 372. ante med. the succession of the Romane Bishopes by example of Ireneus, Ciprian, Tertullian, Optatus, Hierome, Austine, and Vincentius Lirinensis, Mr. Fulke aunswereth thereto saying,Ibidem p. 373. paulo ante med. that these men specially named the Church of Rome. It was because the Church of Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles, so it continued in the Doctrine of the Apostles. And Mr. D. Rainoldes being prouoked in the same kinde acknowledgeth in
 like manner thatMr. D. Rainoldes in his confere^ce with M. Harte pa. 442. post med. the succes^ion of the Romane Bishopes was a proofe of the true faith in the time of Austine, Epiphanius, Optatus, Tertullian, and Ireneus etc. And the like acknowledgment or aunswere thereto, is made by many otherRidley in Mr. Foxe actes and Monuments p. 1359. b. circa med. saith, The Patriarche of Rome in the Apostles time, and longe after was a greate maintainer and setter forth of Christs glory in the which aboue all other Countries and Regions was Preached the true ghospell, the sacraments were most duly administred etc. After the Emperors became Christians the ghospell there florished most: And Mr. Iuell in his reply to M. Harding pa. 246. ante med. saith, Aswell S. Austine as also other godly fathers right lie yeelded reuerence to the sea of Rome etc. For the puritie of religion which was there preserued a longe time without spo^. And pag. 628. paulo post med. he further saith, the godly Fathers (of those fore saide times) sought to the Church of Rome, which then for puritie in religion, and constancie in the same was most famouse aboue all others. learned Protestants: only we will conclude with Caluin, who setteth downe our foresaide allegation saying of vsCaluin institut l. 4. c. 2. sect. 2. saith Magnifice illi quidem suam nobis Ecclesiam comendant: allegant enim ^am apud se initio sana Doctrina and sanguine Martirum bene fundatam, perpetua Episcoporum successione conseruatam fuisse ne intercideret; commemorant quanti hanc successionem fecerunt, Ireneus, Tertullianus, Origenes, Augustinus, and alij. They in deede sett forth their Church to vs very gloriously etc. They reporte out of Ireneus, Tertullian, Origen, Augustine and others, how highly they esteemed this succession: Whereto he then aunswereth and giueth his like reason thereof, saying,Cum extra controuersiam esset nihil a principio vsque ad illam aetatem mutatum fuisse in Doctrina, sumebant quod omnibus nouis erroribus conficiendis sufficeret, illos opugnare Doctrinam ab ipsis vsque Apostolis constanter and vnanimi assensu retentam. (Caluin vbi supra l. 4 cap. 2. sect. 3.) Considering it was a matter out of all doubt that from the beginning euen vntill that time, nothing was changed in Doctrine, the (fore-saide) holy Doctors tooke in argument that which was sufficient for the ouerthrowing of all new errors, (to witte) that they (viz. the heretickes) oppugned the Doctrine which euen from the very Apostles them selues had bene inuiolablie and with one consent reteined: And in his booke of Institutions set forth in French he saith expresly thatCaluin in his institutions in French Printed at Gaeneua by Corradus Badius, Anno. 1562. saith, C'estoyt vne chose notoire and sans doubte, que depuis L'ange des Apostres, iusques a lour temps, il ne S'estoit fait nul. Changement de Doctrine, ny a Rome ^y aux autres villes. It was a thing notoriouse and without doubt, that after the Apostles age vntill those (fore-said) times, no change was made in Doctrine neither at Rome nor at other Citties: So plainely do our learned aduersaries acknowledge that no change of faith was made by
 the Romane Church from the Apostles age vntill the times of Saint Austine, Epiphanius, Optatus etc. Which was for foure hundreth and fortie yeares after Christ.
The Church of Rome being then thus cleared from all change of Doctrine (at the least concerning any needfull article of faith which is the only point now pertinent and questionable) during aswell the first 440. yeares after Christ, as also the other thousand yeares now last past. There remaineth only to be examined, the interim of those 160. yeares which passed betweene the saide first 440. and the saide other last 1000. yeares; in which meane time, if no such supposed change was, then doth it hereof vnauoidably follow that as the Church of Rome at first receaued and professed the right faith, so likewise she doth yet still to this day continew and preserue the same.
The matter being as then (euen from the testimonies of our learned aduersaries) made thus issuable, and plainely deduced to this certainety or narrow compasse of time: we haue here often prouoked the^ to giue example or instance of this their supposed change in the Romane Church during the saide meane time of 160. yeares. In full discouery of which point, we will breifly vrge three speciall reasons next ensuing: As First seeing the scriptures do witnes to vs aswel that Christ hath placed in his ChurchEphes. 4, 11, 12, 13. Pastors and Doctors, (to continew) to the consummation of Saints, vntill we all meete in the vnitie of faith, euen as our aduersaries do here-vpon expounde)Mr. Fulke against the Remish testament in Ephes 4. fol. 335. a. initio. And Caluin institut. (Printed Geneuae 1550.) c. 8. de fide. sect. 37, 38. p. 233. 234. and melancthon in loc. Comun. (Printed 1561.) c. de Ecclesia. for euer: as also that theseEsay. 62, 6. watchmen orSee the margi. notes of the English Bible of Anno 1576. in Esay 62, 6. PastorsEsay 62, 6. shall not be silent, but shall (as Mr. Fulke confesseth)Mr. Fulk in his aunswere to a counterfaite Catholicke pa. 11. initio. alwaies resist all false opinion (euen)Mr. Fulke ibidem pa. 92. ante medium. with open reprehension which thing is also other-wise most euident, in that by the Iudgment of all menSee this confessed hereafter tract 2. c. 1. sect. 6. in the margent at the letter m. and tract 1. c. 2. sect 13. in the margent at the letter r. Christes true
 Church must euer continew, but the true Church she neither is nor can be, if she faile so much in dutie, as to suffer so many supposed errors to assaulte and inuade her Children, without some open defence and resistance to the contrarie: Therefore so many and so important Doctrines, as Merit of workes, Praier for the dead, Praier to Saints, Free-will, Reall presence, Adoration of Christ in the sacrament, Sacrifice of the Masse, The vnmaried life of Priestes, and so many other moe such like, could neuer (supposing they were errors) haue in so small a compasse as of those saide 160. yeares, bene brought to haue bene as then begunne and publickly professed by the Romane Church, without greate difficultie of resistance and open reprehension of some one or other Godly man in some parte of the true Church. The examplesThese examples are yet extant, and to be found in Ireneus in libro aduersus haereses. And in Epiphanius and Augustine in their seuerall bookes against haeresies. aswell of the times then precedent wherein were so contradicted but for some one or other seuerall opinion. The Vale^tinians, Tatianists, Manichees, Arianes, etc. As also of the ages then subsequent, in which were in like sorte contradicted the seuerallThese examples are collected out of the Fathers of euery of those ages by the Protestant writers, as namely by the Centurie writers in their fifte Chapter of euery seuerall Centurie: See also Pantaleon in his Chronologie, and Osiander in his seueral centuries. other heresies of euery age, and all yet to this day manifouldly recorded, giue plentifull demonstration herein. The like examples also of the very foresaide 160. yeares now in question afforde no lesse euidence hereof, for euen as then were contradicted for their seuerall opinions to vs, yet at this day discerned and knowne not only theAug. l. de haeresibus ad quod uultdeum haer. 88. Pelagianes,Aug. ibidem haer. 91. Nestorians,Aug. ibidem haer. 69. DonatistsSexta sinod. Constantinop. and see Centur. 6. col. 311. line 37. Monothelites etc. But also (which argueth this matter most inuinciblie and clearely for vs and against our aduersaries) sondry heretickes for theire then priuate and singular denying (as protestants now do) sondry points of our now professed Catholicke faith. The vndoubted examples whereof, are many and by our very aduersaries acknowledged: So euen in or (which is more stronge) nexte before the beginning of the saide 160. yeares
 was (as is confessed) the deniall of praier and offering sacrifice for the dead and of our appointed fasts condemned as singuler inHereof see Aug. haer. 53. and Epiphanius haer. 75. ante med. And Mr. Fulke in his aunswere to a Counterfaite Catholicke pag. 44. fine. and 45. initio. Confesseth this saying, I will not dissemble that which you thinke the greatest matter, Aerius taught that Praier for the dead was vnprofitable as witnes both Epiphanius and Austine, which they coumpt for an error: Also he taught that fasting daies are not to be obserued: And see this confessed in like manner by Pantaleon in Chronographia pag. 28. initio. Aerius. So also was the deniall of praier to Saints and worshipping of Saints Relickes condemned likewise as then inHierom contra Vigilantium c. 2. and. 3. And Mr. Fulke confesseth this likewise, vbi supra pag. 46. paulo ante med. saying, Last of all Vigilantius shall be brought in who wrote against Inuocation of Saints, superstition of Relickes, and other Caeremonies, him Hierome reproueth. and vide centur. 4. col. 1250. line 45. And Osiander in epitom. cent. 4. l. 4. pag. 506. ante med. And see this further confessed by Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church pag. 131. post med. Vigilantius: In the same times were conde^ned in like manner the deniall of Images inFunctius (a Protestant writer) in libro 7. Comentariorum in precedent. Chronologiam. At Anno. Christi 494. confesseth saying, Porro is xenayas primus in Ecclesia bellum contra imagines excitauit: And Nicephorus in hist. Eccles. l. 16. c. 27. saith, Xenayas iste primus (o audacem animam and os impudens) vocem illani euomuit, Christi and corum qui illi placuere imagines venerandas non esse. And see also hereof Cedrenus in compendio histor. Xenayas and the deniall of voluntarie pouertie and monasticall profession inHierome contra Vigilantium prope finem saith, quod autem asseris cos melius facere qui vtuntur rebus suis and paulatim fructus possessionum suarum pauperibus diuidunt, quam illos qui possessionibus venundatis semel omnia largiuntur; non a me cis sed a Domino respondebitur si vis esse perfectus, vade and vende omnia quae habes and da Pauperibus and veni, sequere me. Ad eum loquitur qui vult esse perfectus etc. iste quem tu laudas, secundus and tertius gradus est, quem and nos recipimus dummodo seramus prima secundit and tertijs preferenda; nec a suo studuo monachi deterrendi sunt a te lingua ^^perea and morsu saeuissimo, de quibus argumentaris and dicis, si omnes se clauserint and fuerint in solitudine, quis caelebrabit Ecclesias, etc. And see this plainely confessed by Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church pag. 131. and 132. Vigilantius and others.In like manner is Ianuarius for this like Doctrine reproued by S. Austine serm. 49. ex diuersis cap. 1. and Instus is for the same reproued by Gregorie l. 4. dial. c. 55. And see further hereof Leo ep. 92. ad rusticum. And concil. Chalcedon cap. 7. and Austine ep. 89. ad Hillarium and Chrisostom l. aduersus vit^peratores vitae monasticae. The deniall of the power of Priestes to remitt sinnes in theSee this hereafter Tract. 3. Sect. 1. in the margent at the letter x. Nouatians: The deniall of freewill and of remission of sinnes and grace conferred in Baptisme in theHierom in proaem. librorum aduersus Pelagianos fine. saith, Manichaeorum est hominum damnare naturam, and liberum auferre arbitrium. and dei adiutorium: And see Hierom in explan. symb. ad damasum. And S. Austine de fide contra manich. c. 9. saith, Aduersus haec solita caecitate manichaei latr^nt, and cum conuincuntur naturam non esse malum, sed in potestate esse hominis facere bene aut male, dicunt non esse animae liberam voluntatem, and non vident cae^tatem suam etc. and vide ibidem cap. 10. and in actis cum faelice manichaeo l. 2. cap. 4. And Chrisostom in Iohn hom. 45. prope initium saith, Christ saide to them, no man can come to me, except the Father who sent me drawe him: Here at the Manichees do rise vp contending by testimony of this scripture that we can do nothing of our selues etc. But this taketh not awaie our freewill, but sheweth that we neede Gods helpe. And concerning the other point touching Baptisme, Mr. Whitaker l. 10. contra Duraeum pa. 883. confesseth the same saying: Nos in Baptismo peccata remitti and gratiam conferri credimus ac docemus, quod negare soliti sunt Manichaei, ergo nos a Manichaeis alienisumus, and vide sarcerium loc. comun. tom. 1. de Baptismo fol. 232. b. post medium.
 Manichees The deniall of the necessitie of Childrens Baptisme in theInnocentius in rescripto ad mileuitanum conciliu^ post med. saith of the Pelagians, illud vero quod vestra fraternitas cos asserit predicare, paruulos aeternae vitae praemijs absque Baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est: In like plaine manner is this poine condemned in the Pelagians by S. Austine haer. 88. and contra Iul. Pelag. l. 6. c. 7. and de pecc. mer. and rem. l. 2. c. 9. and 27. and by S. Leo. ep. 86. ad Episcopum Aquiliensem. Pelagianes The deniall of the Blessed Sacrame^ts reseruation in theCirrill ad Calosyrium sayth. I heare they say that the misticall blessing, If any remnants therof do remaine till the nexte day following is vnprofitable to sanctification, but they are mad in so saying, for Christ is not made an other, neither shall his body be changed but the vertue of blessing and liuely grace doe alwaies remaine in it. This pointe is so plaine and confessed that Peter Martir) aduersus Stephans Gardeneri librum de Eucharistia printed Basilea Anno 1581 obiect. 213. col. 838. post med. saith of this saying of Cirrill: Quod autem subijcitur Eucharistia reliquias asseruatas in chrastinum diem a sanctificatione non cessare, spectat opinor ad receptam quanaam consuetudinem. (etc.) ea consuetudo etsi saperet nonnihil superstitionis, tamen illi Cirrillus alique subscribebant: statim enim a temporibus Apostolorum paulatim caeptum est degenerar^ ab illa veteri simplicitate diuini cultus. Anthropomorphites The deniall of the single and vnmaried life of Priests inHierom contra Vigilantium c. 1. condemneth this doctrine in Vigilantius saying hereof against him. Quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae, quid aegipti and sedis Apostolica, quae aut virgines clericos accipiunt, aut continentes, aut si vxores habuerint mariti esse desinunt. Vigilantius,See Hierom. l. 1. contra Iouin. c. 19. and 14. and ad Pamahium apol. c. 8. Iouinian andEpiphanius haer. 59 ante med. saith. At dices mihi omnino in quibusdam locis, adhuc liberos gignere and Presbiteros and Diaconos and Hypodiaconos wherto he aunswereth) at hoc non est iuxta Canonem, sed iuxta hominum mentem etc. And see Siritius in epist. ad Himerium Tarraconensim. c. 6. and 7. others. The deniall of enioyned times of penance in the heretickes calledTheodoret l. 4. haer. and fab. de Audianis. reproueth them saying deinde confessis etc. They giue remission to such as are Confessed without prescribing time for Penance as the lawes of the Church Commaunde. Audiani: The deniall of the diuersitie
 of Merittes inAug. de tempore serm. 191. saith, Iouiniani damnamus errorem, qui dicit nullam in futuromeritorum distantia^ And Hierom l. 1. aduersus Iouin. c. 2. reproueth Iouinian for that he taught that Mariage and Virginity were (Eiusdem Meriti) of aequall meritt, confessed by Pantaleon in Chronographia pag. 32. And S. Ambrose and others say against Iouinian: Agrestis vlulatus est etc. Promiscue velle omnia confundere etc. diuersorumque gradus abrogare meritorum. hereof see further Concil. Tolense. and rescriptum Ambrosij ibidem and aliorum ad Siritium prope initium. I^uinian: The deniall of the Commaundements being possible in certaine otherHierom in explanat. symb. ad Damasum saith, Execramur Blasphemiam eorum qui dicunt impossibile aliquid hominia Deo praeceptum esse etc. And the same words hath Austine, de tempore serm. 191. and vide Hieronimum ad Cleantium and Concil. 2. Arausican Can. 25. heretickes of those times. The deniall of Exorcisme and Exufflation vsed in Baptisme was condemned like-wise inAug. de nuptijs and concupiscentia l. 2. c. 29. saith, Iulianus Antiquissimam Ecclesiae traditionem n^sario crimine aspergit, qua Exorcizantur, and vt dixi exufflantur Paruuli: and vide Aug. ibidem l. 2. c. 17. and contra Iulian. Pelag. l. 6. c. 2. Iulianus the pelagiane: And lastly (to omitt sondry other) The denial of the Churches continuing visible, was condemned in theAug. epist. 170. ad Seuerinum saith, facile tibi est attendere and videre ciuitatem supra montem constituta^ de qua Dominus ait in Euangelio, quod abscondi non possit ipsa est enim Ecclesia Catholica, vnde Catholice Graece appellatur quod per totum orbem terrarum diffunditur, hanc ignorare nulli licet, ideo secundum verbum Domini abs^ondi non potest: and vide Aug. de vnit. Eccles. c. 12. and 13. and ep. 48. ad Vincentium Rogatianum. Donatists, andHieromini d^al. a^u. Luciserianos paulo post medium and cap. 6. Prosecuteth this point at large: saying, (amonge much other matter) vbi sunt isti nimium prophani qui pluris sinagogas asserunt quam Ecclesias etc. si Ecclesiam non habet Christus, aut si in sardinia tantum habet nimium pauper factas est etc. (And then he aunswereth their obiection saying) Quod si de illa quae in Euangelio scripta est sententia sibi blandiuntur, Putas ne cum venerit filius hominis inueniet fidem super terram, sciant il^^m fidem nominari. de qua Dominus alebat fides tua te saluum fecit. Luciferin^s and all this done by the sondry writers that liued in or next before the foresaide 160. yeares now in question. And which is most, not so much as any one Catholicke Father of the saide times being knowne, to haue but defended or excused any one of the saide persons so condemned in their deniall of any one of our foresaide recited seuerall Doctrines.
Secondly we do here-vnto add in further demonstration that whereas on the one parte our learned aduersaries are not able to shew, that any of the Catholicke writers of those foresaide 160. yeares did note or charge the then Bishopes of Rome with Innouation or change of faith, so againe we on the contrarie are able to giue perticuler proofe, how
 that the Catholicke Fathers of those same times,In those times was Leo the first Bishope of Rome beginning Anno. 440. and continuing POPE 21. yeares. (Teste Anastasio. de vitis Rom. pontific.) of the Communion which other Bishopes of that age professed to haue with him: Read Leo Epist. 39. and 41. c. 1. And the Epistle of Theodoret (a Graecian) to Leo and see the Centurie writers Centur. 5. c. 7. Col. 774. circa and posi med. and col. 775. initio and vide concil. Chalced. act 1. 2. and 3. Hillarius was Bishope of Rome Anno 461. of the like Communion of faith had with him: Vide Epistolas Tarraconensium Episcoporu^ ad Hillarium in 1. tom. concil. Felix the third was Bishope of Rome Anno 483. of the like Communion professed towards him: Vide Epistolam Anastasij Patriarchae Hierosol. ad faelicem Papam: Horm^sda was Pope Anno 514. and continued so about 9. yeares: Of the like Communion had with him: Vide Iohannem Patriacham Constantinop. in Epist. ad Hormisdam, in 1. tom. concill. inter Epistolas Hormisdae. and vide ibidem rescriptum Hormisdae ad Episcopos Betica prouinciae: and Epistolam Iustini Imperatoris ad Hormisdam. and Epistolam possessoris episcopi ad Horm sdam. and vide conc^lium habit: in epiro ad Hormisdam. extat apud Baromium Boniface the second was Pope Anno 530. of the like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Eulalij Carthaginensis ad Bonifacium secundum: and vide Centur. 6. c. 10. col. 670. Siluerius was Pope Anno 535. of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Amatoris episcopi ad Siluerium: And see Liberatus in breuiario cap. 22. Vigilius was Pope Anno 537. of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Eutychij Patriachae Constantinop. ad Vigilium, and Epistolam synod. mopsuestan. ad Vigilium: Also the 2. Councell called Turonense Anno. 570 can. 21. and the 1. Councell of Brach c. 22. and 23. Anno 572. professed like Communion with the Romane sea. Gregorius primus was Pope Anno 590. of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Iohannis Episcopi rauennatensis ad Gregorium inter Epistolas Gregorij l. 2. indict. 11. ep. 55. and Isidorum in Praefact. in Opus conciliorum and vide Centur. 6. col. 677. 678. 679. and 687. line 4. 5. 6. etc. This Gregorie was Pope within two yeares or lesse of the last yeare now in question: and of the times nextThe Bishopes of Rome in the times next praecedent were, Innocentius Zozimus, B^niface, and Celesi^nus, of the Communion had with Innocentius Vide Epistolam Chrisostomi ad Innocentium, and Paladium in vita Chrisostomi, and vide Epistolam Concilij mil^uitant ad Innocentium, and Epistolam Concilij Carthag. ad Innocentium: And concerning the other three Bishopes of Rome, see heretofore page 40. in the margent at the letter c. fine. and vide Epistolam Civilli Alexandrini ad Caelestinum. A little before them was Pope Damasus of the Communion had with him read Hierom. Epist. 57. ad Damasum: And see the further Communion had betweene Damasus and the Greeke and Lattin Fathers specially reported and confessed by Crispinus in his booke of the state of the Church page 137. before, and afterConcerning the reuerend aestimation had of the Romane sea in the times next after the foresaide 160. yeares, it is generally confessed: yet for more certainetie reade the Centurie writers Cent. 7. c. 10. and how reuerently this our Nation of England thought as then thereof: Vide Bedam in hist. l. 2. c. 8. etc. 10. etc. 17. and 18. and 19. the same, professed to reuerence and Ioyne in Communion of faith with the then Romane Bishopes: wherby also it is (in our opinion) most euidently yet further proued, that during all that meane time of the foresaide 160. yeares, the Bishopes of the Romane
 Church did not come to the profession of our now religion, by meanes of any their then deuised Innouation or change in faith.
Thirdly this point is as yet made furthermore demonstratiue in that it is euident and by our learned aduersaries confessed, that sondry euen of the chiefest Articles of our faith, as namelySee heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 2. Reall presence:See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 2. subdiuision 3. and hereafter in the margent at the letter 1. Tract. 3. Sect. 1. Sacrifice:See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdeuision 5. Free-will:Ibidem Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 6. and 7. Merit of workes:Confessed by Mr. Bilson in his dooke of the full redemption of man-kinde pa. 188. fine. By Danaeus contra Bellarmine pag. 176. Paulo post medium. By Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 9. pag. 773. initio. And by Iohannes Lascitius in the booke entituled, de Russorum, Mascouitarum, and Tartarorum religione page 122. initio. And see heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 4. Limbus Patrum:Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision. 4. And see also heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 7. subdiuision. 6. Praier for the dead:Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 7. And see the Centu^ie writers Centur. 3. col. 84. line 23. and Centur. 3. col. 83. line 47 and Centur. 4. col 1183. and Centur. 5. col. 1009. initio. And Mr. Fulke against the Remishe testament fol. 443. a. paulo ante med. And against Purgatory pag. 310. ante med. Praier to Saints:Hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. l. q. r. s. Monachisme:Heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 3. initio. And hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. l. p. Vowed Chastitie:Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 7. example 1. and 2. and 5. And heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 10. Popishe Primacie:See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 8. The grace and necessitie of Baptisme:Vide ibidem. The Ceremonies of Baptisme:Vide ibidem subdiuision 9. And see also heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 7. in the margent at the letter c. Conf^s^ion of sinnes and absolution:Heretofore Sect. 7. example 3. The vnmarried life of Priests:Confessed by I^bbertus de Principijs Christian. dogm. l. 2. c. 10 p. 675. ante med. and 678. fine. and 674. prope finem. And by Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura pag. 678. paulo posi med. and 668. fine. and 690. post med. and 670. post med. And by Carthwright in Mr. Whitgittes defence etc. pag. 103. ante med. and hertofore tract. 1. sect. 3. subdiuision 11. and 12. Vnwritten Traditions, And (to omitt many other)Hereafter tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. most of ourSee heretofore tract. 1. sect. 3. l. y. Dionysius mencioning sixe of our Sacraments. Sacraments are plainely found to haue bene professed and publickely taught in the writings yet extant of sondrySee hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. of the confessed Doctrines beleeued and taught in the fourth hundreth yeares after Christ. aunc ent Fathers who liued before the foresaide 160 yeares now in question; In so much that Mr. Iohn Napeire (though our greate aduersarie) affirmeth and confesseth the like aunswerable continuance of
 our religion before that foresaide meane time of 160. yeares: Affirming to that end most plainely, that fromMr. Nappier vpon the reuelations proposition 37. pag. 68. post. med. the yeare of Christ 319. (which was before the saide time now in question) the Antichristiane and Papisticall Re^gne hath begunne reining vniuersally, and without any debatable Contradiction 1260 yeares last past: And that fromMr. Nappeir ibidem in c. 12. pag. 161. col. 3. circa medium. the yeare of Christ 316. God hath with-drawne his visible Church from open assemblies to the hartes of perticuler godly men etc. During the space of 1260. yeares:Mr. Nappeir ibidem in c. 11. pag. 145. col. 3. fin^. The Pope and his Clergy hauing p^ssessed the outward visible Church of Christians euen 1260. yeares:Vide ibidem p. 191. initio. The true Church abiding (so longe) LatenteVide ibidem p. 161. col. 3. circa medium and pag. 156. ante med. and 237. paulo post med. and 23. fine. and inuisible with (which his opinion or computationMr. Brocard vpon the reuelations fol. 110. a. and 123. b. Mr. Brocard also professeth to agree, whereby it is more then euident that our religion being thus publickly professed in the Romane Church both before and e^er since the foresaide 160. yeares, coulde not therefore be any matter of Innouation of change, newly brought in or diuised by the Romane Church either then or afterwards: Which point is also made as yet otherwise more manifest, by that which hath bene heretofore confessed by our aduersaries, concerning the conuersionSee heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 1 in the marg. at the letter d. and in the texte at the letter c. and ibidem l. f. g. of vs Englishmen vnto our now professed Catholicke faith by S. Austine then sent from Gregorie Bishope of Rome. Concerning also the vndoubted conuersion of theSee heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 2. l. m. and in the marg. there at the letter m. Brittons of Wales in the Apostles times, and their perseuera^ceSee heretofore Tract 1. Sect 2. in the margent there at this marke . in that faith till Austins comm^ng. And the foresaide euidenthereof see hertofore Tract 1. Sect. 2. l. 1. y. z. agreement of Austine and of the Brittones of Wales in all substantiall points of faith: So plainely is that faith which the Romane Church now professeth, the very same, whereto the Romanes were conuerted in the Apostles times. A thing so euidentlie true, that our aduersarie M. Bunny (though vsing all warines to acknowledge or vtter more then of necessitie he must) confesseth yet (as enforced) and saith of the whole time since the Apostles to this present,
 thatSee Mr. Bunny in his treatise tending to pacificatio^ Sect 14. circa med. pa. 89. the Church of Rome hath euer continued after a sorte in the profession of the faith, since the time that by the Apostles it was deliuered to them etc. and hath also in some manner preserued and hitherto maintained both the word and the sacraments that Christ himselfe did leaue vnto vs, which surely (saith he) is a very speciall blessing of God, an euident worke of the holy Ghost. etc.
And thus much briefly whether that the Romane Church professing the right faith in the Apostles times, hath at any time since euer altred or changed the same, against our foresaid discourse wherof grounded vpon seuerall truthes confessed euen by our aduersaries if any boulder forehead shal wilfully oppose it selfe and shall without other answere or respecte had to that which his learned brethren haue heretofore co^fessed, and we otherwise proued, leape ouer al the foresaide proofes and ages iumping per saltum vp to the Apostles, and then tell vs,So Mr. Whitaker. l 7: Contra Duraeum pa. 478: ante medium saith, Nobis sufficit ex Pontificioru^ dogmatu^ and scripturarum collatione discrimen and dissimilitadine^ ^gnoscere: historicis liberum relinquimus scribere quid v^ lint: that howsoeuer we proue from histories and Fathers or other testimonie of their owne writers, concerning euery of the ages since the Apostles times, yet the scriptures the^selues are (in hisHereof see hereafter Tract 2. c. 1. Sect. 1. initio in the margent at the letter p. and (...) q. opinion) contrary in many points to that faith which the Romane Church now professeth and that therein therefore she hath changed the faith which was first to her deliuered: Besides, that this is a most needie and miserable begging of the thing in question, against which we doe vehemently contest, (as being more then perswaded that our aduersaries cannot truely alleage from the first of Genesis to the last of the Reuelations, so much as any one texte of scripture, which maketh with them and against vs.) Let that man and all other of his minde yet also further consider, that for so much as the sacred SCRIPTVRES them selues, do as (beforeSee heretofore Tract: 1. Sect. 8. l. n. o. and hereafter Tract. 2. c. 2. Sect 1. prope initium. affirme that the Churches true Pastours must euermore continew and withstand all innouation of false doctrine euen with open reprehension. The answerable performance
 wherof in perticuler being matter of fact, can be to vs at this day, no otherwise made knowen, then vpon the onely credite of humane testimonie commended to vs by historie,Mr. Whitaker Contra Duraeum l. 7. page 472. saith, Quicquid de Ecclesiae Propagatione, Amplitudine, gloria veteres Prophetae predixerunt id perfectum esse historia Luculentissime testatur, ita vatic inijs Prophetarum, Ecclesiasticam historia^ suffragari nulla controuersia est: the force of which testimonie our very aduersaries acknowledgeMr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policie l. 2. p. 115. initio saith, The strength of mans authoritie is affirmatiuely such, that the weightest affaires in the world depend there-vpon: And ibidem pag. 116. ante medium: VVhatso-euer we beleeue concerning saluation by Christ, although the scripture be therin, the grounde of our beleefe, yet is mans authoritie the keye that openeth the dore etc. The scripture coulde not teach vs these thinges, vnlesse wee beleeued men: etc: And ibidem l. 1. page 86. ante medium: Of thinges necessarie the very cheefest is to knowe what bookes we are bound to esteeme holy, which point is confessed impossible for the scripture it selfe to teach: And l. 2. Sect. 4. page 102. fine. for if any one booke of scripture did giue testimonie to all, yet still that scripture which giueth credit to the rest would require an other scripture to giue credit vnto it, neither coulde we euer come to any pause whereon to rest our assurance vnlesse besides scripture there were some thinge which might assure vs. etc. vpon which ground l. 3. Sect. 8. page 146. fine. he saith, VVe all knowe that the first out-ward motiue leading men so to esteeme of the scripture, is the authority of Gods Church: And Mr. Whitaker aduersus Stapletonum l. 2. c. 4. page 298. post med, saith: non nego traditionem Ecclesiasticam esse argumentum quo argui and conuinci possit qui libri sunt canonici, qui non: (And ibidem page 300. ante medium) Hoc semper dixi sensique and vide ibidem l. 1. page 25. ante medium. And in his booke against Mr. VVilliam Rainoldes page 44. circa med. In so much as the Protestant author of the treatise of the scripture and the Church (so greatelie commended by Bullinger in his preface before that booke) doth (after the Englishe translation thereof cap. 15: page 72:) say we coulde not beleeue the ghospell, were it not that the Church taught vs and witnessed, that this Doctrine was deliuered by the Apostles: And see further there cap. 19. page 74. and 75. that there-fore the same SCRIPTVRES do therein most euidently perforce reduce them to this foresaid triall by historie and Fathers: whereto if they stand, their ouerthrow (they see) is certaine, and in refusing the same, their flight is shamefull. As for the further extremest bouldnes of such, who are in these straites (resolued not to acknowledge theIohannes Regius in libro apologetico etc. page 192. post medium: and 193. being vrged to shew wherein the Romane Church changed her faith, and not able to giue any one perticuler example thereof, betaketh him-selfe to this extreemest bouldnes. answering page 193. post medium: Sed denique licet verum esset, Romanam Ecclesiam, in sua religione nihil mutasse, an propterea mox sequetur eam esse veram Ecclesiam? Non opinor: In defence whereof he is not ashamed to alleadge sondry impertinent reasons vnworthy of rehersall. Romane Church to be a true Church, though it were true, that she had not changed any thing in religion. We passe the same ouer as being most absurde, and much more worthy of contempt then answere.





THE SECOND TRACT

FIRST CHAPTER.

SECT. 1. THAT CHRISTS CHVRCH VVAS BY the Predictions of the Prophets foretolde to become vniuersall and to conuert with great increase the Kinges and Nations of the Gentiles.
AND for so much (most GRATIOVS SOVERAIGNE) as it hath bin the course of certaine our aduersaries (vnder the pretence of onely scripture (to vnder take libertie of reiecting all our former confessed proofes drawen from the authoritie of Mir^cles, (though neuer so true and of Fathers though neuer so auncient) and so thereby in the end, making them selues and euery of their vulgar followers, IudgesLuberius in libro de principijs christian. dogm. l. 6. c. 13. page 563. ant^ med. saith. Omnes publicos Iudices) vt interpretando errare posse ostendimus, ita in iudicando errare posse asserimus; priuati Iudices sun^ singuli fideles, hi etiam habent potestatem iudicand^ de doctrinis and interpretationibus. And page 573. paulo ante med. he further saith. Deus dedit cui. libet fideli non tantu^ spiritum intellige^di, sed ^^tiam spiritum discer^end^ falsam doctrinam a vera. And Mr. Bilson in his true difference betweene Christian subiection and vnchristian rebellion. part. 2 page 353. saith: The people must discerne who teacheth right before they beleeue. and againe afterwardes, the people must be discerners and iudges of that which is taught. And the same power Iudicandi and decidendi etc. Of Iudgeing and deciding doctrine of religion, is no lesse fully giuen ad vnumquemque priuatum hominem to euery priuate man, by Brentius in Prologomenis contra Petrum. a Soto and in confessione Witebergica cap. de sacra scriptura. both of scripture, and of all interpreters: Finally to restraine all thinges to that onely framed sense of scripture, which they them seluesZanchius de sacra scriptura page 412. initio. saith: concerning interpreters: Eatenus illorum interpretationes amplectamur, quatenus videmus allatas iuxta analogiam fidei, and ex. alijs erutas esse scripturis. And Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura: page 529 post med. saith of the vnlearned, debent illi alios se peritiores adire, Doctorum interpretum Commentarios consulere etc. sed videndum interim est ne nimium illis tribu^mus etc. Sed caute semper atque ita vt nostram interim libertatem retineamus. And Mr. Carthwrite in mr. Whitegiftes defence etc. page 111. paulo post med. alloweth Caluines iudgement, yet with this cautell. So far (saith he) as we can esteeme, that, that which M. Caluine saith doth agree with the canonicall scriptures. vpon their conferring of places can collect for true. Pleaseth
 it your HIGHNES so much to afford vs your PRINCELY patience, as that we may (in further manifestation of the equitie of this our most humble Petition) yeeld to them though thus far for the time and thereupon (following the^ in their owne course) briefly alledge from that confessed sence of scripture which euen them selues and their folowers do generally a^knowledge, but two speciall points (amongst many other) which are most clearly auaileable to vs in this behalfe.
The first is concerning the Churches continuing Catholicke or vniuer^all after her f^rst increase and the predictions of the Prophetes affirming the same; to which purpose Esay foretellingSee the marginall notes of the English Bible 1576 in Esay 60. verse vlt. that the Chur^h should be miraculously mul^^plied: saith.Esay 60, 22. a litle one shal-become as a thousande, and a small one as a stronge nation. wherto our Sauiours like saying agreeth:Marc. 4, 31. and see the marginall notes of the English Bible in Daniel 2. verse 45. and speaking ofSee the marginal notes of the English Bible of 1576 in Esay c. 2. verse 2. at the letter a. and ibidem at the letter c. the restauration of the Church of Christ and the enlargement thereof. Esay foretelleth likewise, that all NationsEsay. 2, 2. shall flowe to it: and yet further concerningSee in the English Bibles the contentes of the 60. chapter of Esay. the Gentiles coming to the Church in aboundanceEsay. 60, 5. thou shalt see and shine, thy harte shalbe astonied and enlarged, because the multitude of the sea shalbe conuerted to thee:Esay. 60, 9. the Iles shall waite for theEsay 60 10, 11. and vide Psalm. 102, 15. and Esay. 62, 2. their Kinges shall minister to thee: and thy gates shalbe continually open, neither day nor night shall they be shutt, that men may bri g to thee the riches of the Gentils. And that their KINGES may be brought:Esay. 60, 16. Thou shalt sucke the milke of the Gentiles and the breastes of Kinges:Esay. 49, 23. and see the marginall notes of the Englishe Bible of 1576 in Esa. 49, 23 Kinges shall be thy nursing Fathers and Queenes thy mothers:Psalm. 2, 8. I wil giue thee the heathen for thy inheritance, and the end of the earth for thy possession: In like manner it is saide in the person of the ChurchEsay 49, 20. The place is straite for me giue rowme that I may inhabit: And againe to the Church:Esay 54, 2, 3: And see the Contentes of the Englishe Bible vpon that Chapter. Enlarge the place of thy tents, spread out thy Curtaines of thy habitation for thou shalt increase on the right hand, and on the left, thy seede
 shall possesse the Gentiles and inhabit the desolate Cittie: And lastly it is foretoulde concerning the ChurchesEsay. 62, 6. watch-men: orSee the marginall notes of the english Bible in Esay 62, 6. Pastors thatEsay 62, 6. they shall not be silent or wanting, but dailyHieremie 33, 18, 21, 22. and that this is ment of Christes Church see in the Englishe Bible of 1576 the contentes of this chapter, and the marginall notes ibidem in ver 16. multiplied to minister to him not with interrupted seasons, but continually,Esay 66, 21, 23. and that this is ment of the Pastors of Christs Church see the marginall notes of the said englishe Bible ibidem. euen from mouth to mouth, and from sab^th to saboth: And that albeit all other monarchies had end, (as the Assirians, Persians, Macedonians, and Romanes: yetDaniel. 2, 44. this Kingdome should not be giuen ouer to an other people (or altered as they were:) But should stand for euer asEsay 60, 15, 16. an externall glory and ioye, from generation to generation; and that the couenant (made of the premisses vnto Christes Church) shouldPsalm. 89, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. not be broken for any transgression committed by her children but should most assuredly be fulfilled:Hierom. 33, 20, 21, 25. referred to Christs Church by the contentes vpon that Chaper in the. Englishe Bible of Anno 1576. according to which confessed sense of the Catholike dispersion, and co^tinuance of Christs Church, her Kinges and Pastors. Occolampadius saith vpo^ IeremieOecolampadius in Hieremiam cap. 33. God speak^th here of the Eternitie of Christes kingdome etc. He shall haue Kinges and Priestes and that for euer, and not a fewe, but as the starres of heauen, etc. for their multitude: In so much as that graue and learned man the L. Archbishope of Canterburie teacheth like-wise thatMr. Whitgifte in his defence etc. pa. 465. the Church of Christ is dispersed through the whole worlde. and cannot nowe (at any time) be shut vp in one kingdome for that he tearmethMr. Whitgift vbi supra. an impossibilitie: as also Mr. D. Whitaker saith of the fore alleaged scripturesMr. VVhitaker in his answere to Mr. VVilliam Rainoldes in the preface pag. 37. ante medium, And in his booke contra Duraeum l. 7. page 472. he further saith, Quicquid de Ecclesia Propogatione amplitudine gloria, veteres prophetae praedixerunt, id perfactum esse Historia Luculentissime testatur, ^ta vaticinijs Prophetarum, Ecclesiasticam historiam suffragari nulla Controuersia est. the promisses of God concerning the largenes and bewtie of his Church haue bene accomplished etc. with whome agreeth Mr. Henoche Clapham, saying,Mr. Henoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 23 circa med The Church was to enlarge her tents and stretch her coardes vniuersally through the earth, for which cause it is called Catholicke.



THAT THE SAME VVAS NOT PERFORmed by Protestants during either the first or second 300. yeares after Christ @ 2
TO examine now the accomplishment of these predictions, we will for the more plaine vnderstanding thereof deuide the time of the Churches continuance into three seuerall stations orOf this diuision see the breife discourse of the Churches estate initio annexed to Crispinus his treatise of the state of the Church etc. Periods obserued and mencioned by our very aduersaries: The First which was from Christ till the Conuersion of Constantine our first Christian Emperour, (which amounteth vnto some 320. yeares:) The Second from thence vntill the time of Bonifacius tertius Bishope of Rome Anno 607. (which wanted some thing of 300. yeares. And the Third from that time till Luthers first appearing, which was nine hund^eth yeares and aboue.
1 Concerning the First it is without question, that during all the time after Christ vntill Constantines conuersion, the true Church remained so vnder persecution, as that the foresaide amplitude and glory, fore-toulde of her (concerning her greate increase of beleeuers and of Kinges and Queenes to serue her) was not as then fulfilled, to which purpose (if any question thereof were) the sayingsMr. Barlowe in his defence of the articles of the Protestants religion pa. 34. post med. saith, In the primatiue nonage of the Church this promise of Kinges allegeance there-vnto, was not so fully accomplished, bicause in those daies that prophesie of our Sauiour was rather verified, you shallbe brought before Kinges for my names sake, by them to be persecuted euen to death: the best of the Kinges for a longe time, reaching but Kinge Agrippa his in modico a slender inclination to religion. And see S. Austine ep. 48. And see Mr. D. Fulke in his treatise against Stapleton and Martial. page 51. of our learned aduersaries are very pregnante.
2 And for the Second it is like-wise euident that during the 200. and odd yeares from Constantines raigne till the time of Boniface the third, there were fewe or rather almost no Kinges that then professed the Christian faith, the Emperours of the East and West onely excepted, and of those fewe, some reuolted
 (as IulianSee Mr. Cowpers Chronic. fol. 128. b. and 129. a. the Apostata, and sondry other) were (as Mr. FulkeMr. Fulke in his answere to a Counterfaite Catholicke p. 15. fine. And in his reioinder to D. Bristowe pag. 375. obserueth) Arians as Constantius,Mr. Cowpers Chronic. vbi supra fol. 126. a. at Anno 340. ValensMr. Cowper vbi supra fol. 129. b. at Anno 368. and fol 131. a. at Anno 380. etc. And did for a greate parte of that smalle time, so greuously persecuteLuc. Osiander in Epitom. cent. 4. pa. 255. 256. etc. and p. 449. 451. and cent. 5. pag. 425 432. fine. And centur. 6. p. 91. fine. And see further hereof Carion in Cronic. pag. 281. and 282. 283. 284. etc. the Catholicke professors, that the Protestant writers doubt not toObiected by Mr. Fento^ Preacher of Graies Inne in his booke against Alablaster the 4. motiue p. 21. fine. and 22. initio. obiect the persecution and pancetie of Christians in those very times as a stronge argument against the Churches vniuersalitie: And therefore for such other Princes of those times, as were neither Apostataes nor Arians, although they had bene for number so many, and had also for current of ages so long continued as were aunswerable to fulfill the saide predictions of the Protestants, (as it is most cleare by the premisses that they neither were, nor in so short a season possiblie coulde be) it is yet at the least questionable that they were in religion not Protestants but Catholickes, whereof euen for the first and best of them namely Constantine our first Christian Emperour and the Church in that age (the example whereof. your MAIESTIEIn the summe of the conference before his MAIESTIE had with the Bishopes and other of his Clergie etc. pag. 69. post med. not vnworthely seemeth to affect) sondry (and those not obscure) probabilities are remaining and confessed.


THAT CONSTANTINE OVR FIRST Christian Emperour was not of the Protestants but of the Catholicke Faith. @ 3.
FOR it is euident that ConstantineEuseb. de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 47. erected Te^ples in memorie of MartirsEuseb. ibidem l. 4. c. 58. 59. dedicated a most sumptuouse Church in memorie of the Apostles.Euseb. ibidem l. 4. c. 60. Prouided his Sepulcher there to the end that after his death he might he made partaker of the praiers there offered.Centur. Magdeburg centur. 4. col. 452. line 30. He celebrated the dedication of the Temple with a yeerely festiuall day. HeIbidem cent. 4. col. 497. line 50. caused Churches new builded to be consecrated, for seruice
 therein to be celebrated, in so much asZozomen hist. l. 1. c. 8. versus finem. He carried about with him a portable Tabernacle or Church, and Priestes and Deacons attendi^g it for celebration of the diuine Misteries.Centur. 4. col. 497 line. 48. and col. 410. li. 7. He had lightes in the Church in the day time.Hierom contra Vigilantium ante med. saith, Constantinus Imperator sanctas Reliquias Andreae Lu^ae and Timothei transtulit Constantinopol in apud quas daemones rugiunt. He translated to Constantinople the holy Reliques of St. Andrew, Luke, and Timothie.Cent. 4. col. 457. line 58. and col. 458. vnder him in that age were Pilgrimages.Cent. 4. col. 704. line 11, 21. In his time it was decreed by Councell that Priestes might not marrie.Cent. 4. col. 467. line 10. and Euseb. de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 28. and Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 9. He honoured sacred Virgins professing perpetuall chastitie.Cent. 4. col. 1294. line 50. 51. Vnder him were Monckes throughout Siria, Palestine, Bithinia, and the other places of Asia.Cent. 4. col. 1306. line 19. 20. Also throughout Africa. andSozomen hist. l. 1. c. 13. initio. He greatly reuerenced Anthonie the Moncke whose religiouse and austere life Protestants termeOsiander in Epitom. cent. 4. c. 2. p. 100. superstitiouse.Euseb. de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 2. He signed him selfe with the signe ^f the Crosse.Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 4. and 8. prope finem. And Euseb. in orat. de Laudi^u^ Constantini ante med. saith, Imperator triumphale signum honorat: And Prudentius in apotheosi doth accordingly affirme this vsage in the auncient Emperours, saying thereof Vexillumque Cruci^ summus dominator adorat. And Szegedinus in his speculum pontificu^ pag. 229. saith, Crux honorari capit Constantini tempore. Honoured the same signe. Had affianceEuseb. de vita constantini l. 2 c. 7. and successe of victorie in the virtue thereof. andEuseb. ibid. l. 1. c. 25. and l. 2. c. 3. and l. 3. c. 48. erected it publickly HeZozomen hist. l. 1. c. 9. post med. ordayned that the decrees of Councels should be kepte firme and inui^lable.Euseb. vbi supra l. 3. c. 10. fine. And Theodoret hist. l 1. c. 7. circa med. And the Centurie writers cent. 4. col. 460. line 31. He would not sitt downe at the Councell of Nyce till the Bishopes had therto giuen him their assent. HeAmbrose epist. 32. And Rufinus hist. l. 10 c. 2. And see this fully confessed and reported by Crispinus in his discourse of the state of the Church pa. 99. prope finem: where he thus writeth thereof. Constantine said, God hath ordained you B shopes and hath giuen you power to iudge of your s^lues. By meanes whereof we yeelde our selues to your Iudgement, men may not Iudge you but God alone: And ^n Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 16. Constantine saith, Mihi vero non est fas cum homo sim, Eiusmod^ tausaris cognitionem arrogare. would not vndertake the iudgement of Churche causes but committed the same ouer to Bishoppes:Cent. 4. col. 653. line 26. 27. He reprooued A^esius the N^ua^ian for denying the power giuen Priests to remitt sinne.Centur. 4. col. 454. line 26. and Euseb. de vita. Consian. l. 4. c. 71. After his death praier was made for his soule: andEuseb. vbi supra. the mistical^ sacrifice offered. And as concerning the Churches doctrine of that age, it was so
 euidently our now professed Catholicke faith, that to omitt all other perticuler proofe, and what is by our other aduersaries confessedIn the breefe discourse of the Churches estate: etc. Annexed to Crispinus his booke of the estate of the Church. it is affirmed how that aboute the e^l^ of this period (which continued vntill Constantine) the loue of solitude and Monckerie, the abstinence fro^ mariage and from certain meates on perticuler daies, many feastes and other seedes of superstition after succeeding tooke a marueilouse roote, so the Commencement of praiers for the dead and sacrifice of the Masse, did discouer them selues: etc. in this behalfe, the centurie writers of Magdeburge, (whose writinges are by our English Protestants affirmed to beMr. D. Hill in his defence of the article, Christ descended in to hell: fol. 23. b. post med. worthie of immortall memorie do in their fourth Centurie (by the^ dedicated to our late Souraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth) professe toCol. 278. line 16. sett downe the peculier supposed errors of the doctor of those times, and do charge them in perticuler (by collection from their owne writings) withCent. 4. col. 291. freewill:Cent. 4. col. 292. Iustification by workes:Cent. 4. col 293. Meritt of workes:Cent. 4. col. 425. l. 54. and col. 426. line 10. and col. 294. Confession of Sinnes: and Penance: withCent. 4. col. 425. line 60. absolution of such as had confessed. with affirmingCent. 4. col. 1243 line 33. And see Caluin in institut l. 4. c. 19. sect. 17. Penance to be the second table after shipwracke. and error inCent. 4. col. 231. line 12 and col. 294. line 1. the doctrine of penance: withCent. 4. col. 295. line 58. and col. 296. 297. Inuocation af Saintes,Cent. 4. col. 304. line 42. 43. etc. Purgatorie,Cent. 4. col. 409. line 15. 25. Aultars,Cent. 4. col. 295. line 3. and 40. and col. 985. line 30. Transubstantiation,Cent. 4. col. 456. 457. and 482. line 44. and col. 1250. line 45. translation of Saintes R^lickes: and their worship.Cent. 4. col. 457. line 58. and col. 458. line 1. 2. 3. Pilgrimage to holy places.Cent. 4. col. 470. line 20. Heremites,Cent. 4. col 300. line 39. and col. 301. line 46. and col. 464 465. Monckes, theirCent. 4. col. 464. line 59. and col. 301. line 28. 29. etc. voluntarie pouertie: theirCent. 4. col. 471. l. 23. and col. 474. l. 10. 11. 22. 23. abstine ce from certain meate, and other austeritie of life: theirCent. 4. col 472. l 20. Cowle, girdle, and other religiouse habites: their vndoubted and greatCent. 4. col. 493. l. 18. MiraclesCent. 4. col. 301. l. 1. 2. 3. 54. and col. 706. l. 57. and col. 847. line 50. the Vowed chastitie of VirginsCent. 4. col. 467. l. 8. 9. etc. Monasteries of vowed Vi^gins.Cent. 4. col. 495. l. 18. Rising in the night to praier. also
 also withCent. 4. col. 302. line 9. 10. 14. etc. And col. 495. line 30.31. And Mr. Fulke against Heskens Sanders etc. pag. 657. circa med. Affirmeth that Rufinus and Cirill had a superstitiouse estimation of the signe of the Crosse: and that also by the reporte of Paulinus the Crosse was by the Bishope of Hierusalem brought forth at Easter (yearely) to be worshipped of the people: And Danaeus in prime partis altera parte, ad Bellarminum 5. controu. respons. pag. 1415. initio. Affirmeth that Paulinus Cirrill and sondry other Fathers were plainely superstitiouse and blinded with this enchauntment of the Crosses adoration. attributing to much the signe of the Crosse: withCent. 4. col. 417. 418. 419. Abrenunciation, ANNOILING, threefould Immersion. And sondry other like Ceremonies vsed in Baptisme: withCent. 4. col. 415. line 25. Baptisme of laye persons in case of necessitie: withCent. 4. col. 1160. line 53. and col. 1^43. line 39. Remission of sinnes (not signified but) giuen in Baptisme: withCent. 4. col. 415. line 44. Consecration of the water of Baptisme, with teaching thatCent. 4. col 303. line 18. and col. 704. line 11, 21. and col. 1293. line 5. and 17. Priestes might not marrie: thatCent. 4. col. 303. line 10. and col. 847. line 47. and col. 1293. line 25. Bigamus (or he that hath bene twise married) may not be Priest: also with Consecration of religiouseCent. 4. col. 874. line. 11. women: and their religiouse habite: withCent. 4. col. 873. fine and col. 874. initio. Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolites, Exorcistes, Readers, Dorekeepers: and the speciall rites vsed in making of them. withCent. 4. col. 497. line 50. Sumptuouse Church^s consecrated, and superstitious insolencie in celebration. Of the Mass^ appointed to be said in no places but such as were hall^wed by a Bish ppe: with affirmingeCent. 4. col. 555. line 30. and col. 557. l. 45. and col. 558. line 54. and 1250. line 2. the Church to be built vpon Peter. and f^rther teachingCentur. 4. col 551. l. 31. and col. 556. line 15. and 1074. line 13. Peters ^^macie. And lastly euen with sondry noted examples ofCentur. 4. col. 549. line 39. and col. 550. line 26. and col. 551. line 36. and col. 529. li^e 20. Primacie in the Bishope of Rome. In so much as certaine Protestants doubt not to deale plainely with vs herein, affirming that Helene mother to Constantine wasCentur. 4. col. 458 line 5. a superstitiouse woman: and the visible Church in his timeMr. Iohn Nappeir vpon the reuel^tions pag. 68. post medium. Antichristian, and papisticall. Whereu^on we doubt not in behalfe of our religion to say now to our aduersaries. as did your MAIESTIE (most religiously) to the Puritanes in defence of the Crosse in Baptisme vsed in Constantines time,In the summe of the Conference before his MAIESTIE had with the Bishopes and other of his Clergie page 69. post med. Is it now comen to that passe, that we shall appeach Constantine of superstition, if then it were vsed, I see no reason, but that still we may continue it. So cleare it is by the premisses, that the foresaide predictions of the Prophetes were not accomplished by the Church which continued the 300 yeares next after Constantine, and that though we should admitt they were, it was that Church not protestant but Catholicke.



THAT AFTER THE SECOND 300. yeares after Christ the foresaid predictions were not performed by the Protestants Church and were accomplished by the Catholicke Church. Sect. 4.
NOvv for the third, namely the wholle residue of time fro^ Bonifacius the third till Luther which conteine the last 100. yeares in which (for that time) the predictions of the Prophetes concerninge the Churches increase, and continuance of Kinges and Pastors, were most euidently fulfilled: that the same were not yet during that time fulfilled, (otherwise then in and by ourThe centurie writers mention the Conuersion of sondrie Nations wrought since the time of Gregory the first, and Boniface the third by our Catholicke Romane Church: as of Germanie (cent. 8. c. 2 col. 20.) Of the Vandalls (cent 9. c. 2. col. 15.) Of the Bulgarians, Sclauonians, Polonians, the Danes, and Morauianes. (cent. 9. c. 2. col. 18.) and of sondry Kings and Kingdomes (cent. 10. c. 2. col. 18, and 19.) and of a greate parte of Hungarie (centur. 11. c. 2. col. 27.) and of the Norueigians (centur. 12.) As also the Protestant writer Osiander in his Epitomes hist. Ecclesiasticae Centuriae. 9.10.11.12.13.14. and 15. mencioneth the like Conuersion of sondry Nations performed by our Catholicke Church since the times of Gregorie and Boniface. As namely of the Danes page 16. initio and 94. fine. the Morauians. (p. 16. fine.) the Polonians: (p. 36. circa med.) the Sclauonia^s. (p. 36. circa med: and 16. post med.) the Bulgares: (p. 36. post med.) the Hunnes. (p. 37. initio.) the Normanes: (pag. 72. post med.) the Bohemianes: (pag. 77: fine) the Suecians: (pa. 21. circa med. and 90. post medium.) The Noruegianes: Liuonians, and Saxones: (pag. 86. circa medium.) Tee Vagarians pag. 104. circa med. The Rugij Thuscanes pag. 99. post med. of Scandia (p. 111. circa med.) Maior^a (p. 341. circa med.) of Tunes in Africa: (p. 377. fine.) and of sundry other Nations: (p. 342. ante med. Whereunto might be added sondry other like testimonies mencioned by Osiander in his Epitome cent. 7. pa. 73. and 168. and cent. 8. pa. 48. 112. 121. and 127. and the like knowne conuersion of sondry Nations wrought in this age in the East Indies, the VVest Indies and Africa confessed by our aduersarie Simon Lithus in respons. Altera ad Altera^ gretsert apol^giam p. 331. where he saith, Iesuitarum seges etc. paucorum annorum spacio etc. non contenta europae finibus, Asiam, Aphricam, Americam suis idolis compleuit. A thing so euidently performed only by our Catholicke Church, that Mr. VVintaker answering therunto (l. de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum p. 336. ante med. saith, Respondes illas Conuersiones tam multarum gentium post tempora Gregorij, de quibus hic Bellarminus loquitur non puras and integras fuisse, sed corrupta^: And Danaeus in respons. ad disput. Bellarmini part. 1. pa. 780. fine, answereth thereto in like manner saying, Propogatio autem illa quam Gregorius primus, Conon, Zacha ^^s and al^ Gr^gori^ secerunt s^it i^^riatio meretricis m^n facta, de qua est apoc. 17. versi^. 4. and 18. vers^^. 3. As concerning examples to be giuen of Protestants co^uerting he^the^ Nations, we finde one only endeuour of the Caluinists l^boring to preach to the Indians, but their labour tooke no effect, as is confessed by their Francis^^^ G^narum in s^^culo verae Ecclesiae page 161. fine. and 168. post med. And see further thereof Villagag. con. Caluin. and Epistolae Iudicae. Catholicke Church) is in it selfe so certaine, and withall so euidently confessed by our learned aduersaries, as that we will not seeke for other proofe therof.

To this end one of them affirmeth that AnnoSee Symon de Voyon his discourse vpo^ the Catallog. of Doctors etc. in the epistle there to the reader post medium. 605. when Pope Boniface was Stalled in his Papall throne, then falsehood got the victorie etc. then was the wholle world ouerwhelmed in the dregges of Antichristian filthines, abhominable superstitions, and traditions of the Pope. Then was that vniuersall apostasie from the saith foretould by Paule. To this end likewise saith Mr, Parkins:Mr. Parkins in his expositio^ vpon the Creed page 400. We say that before the daies of Luther for many hundreth yeeres an vniuersall apostasie ouerspred the wholle face of the earth, and that our Church was not then visible to the world: and thatMr. Parkins vbi supra page 370. during the space of nine hundredth yeeres the popish heresie hath spred it selfe ouer the wholle earth: In so much that wheras it isHeretofore tract. 2 c. 2. sect. 2. and 3. heretofore confessed as euident, that the foresaide predictions of the Prophetes concerning the conuersion of so many foretould Kings and kingdomes of the Gentiles, neither were nor could be fulfilled during the 600. yeeres next after Christ and before Boniface the third. And where also we haue giuen perticularSee this heretofore in the begining of this section, in the margent at this marke. *) instance of the more euident and cleare accomplishment therof begunne afterwardes and continued at and after the foresaid times of Gregorie and Boniface, with most plentifull and answerable successe in so many Kingdomes before mentioned. Our aduersaries are not now abashed,) an opinion most dreadfull to be heard, or thought of) that where the foresaid predictions of the Prophets take their chiefest begining encrease and continuance in regarde of the Churches answerable accomplished enlargement, they doubt not euen then and there to place the very contrarie defection of Antichrist. Mr. Whittaker to that end (is before) affirmingeSee Mr. Whitaker alleaged ibidem. the Conuersion of so many Nations after the times of Gregorie
 to haue bene not pure but corrupte: Daneus also terming it in^briatio meretricis mundo facta de qua est Apoc. 17, vers. 4. and 18.See Danaeus his wordes alleaged ibidem. Turninge so most euidently the Churches most gloriouse foretould enlargement by the answerable co^uersion of so many heathen Kings and kingdomes fulfilled but since the times of Gregorie and Boniface into their pretendedSee before in this Section at. n. o. p. vniuersall Apostasie wrought by Antichrist.Hieremie 2, 12. O ye Heauens be astonied at this: Be afraid and vtterly confounded. Are they Christians who dare thus affirme the Churches foretoulde enlargement to be Antichristian? Is this the end or issue of our aduersaries DoctrineMath. 13, 9. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare. But to omitt the like further testimonie herein of Mr. D. Fulke:Mr. D. Fulke in his treatise against Stapelton and Martial p. 25. paulo post med. acknowledgeth that Some (Protestants) haue written that the Pope hath blinded the worlde these many hundreth yeares, some say a 1000. yeares, some 1200 some 900. etc. Mr. Iohn Napeire affirmeth yet more fully both concerning this time and the other former 300. yeares next after Constantine, thatMr. Napeire in his treatise vpon the reuelations pa. 43. versus finem. the Popes kingdome hath had power ouer all Christians from the time of Pope Siluester and the Emperour Constantine for these 1260. yeares: and thatMr. Napeire vbi supra p. 145. colum. 3. fine. From the time of Constantine till these our daies euen 1260. yeares, the Pope and his Clergie hath possessed the out-ward visible Church of ChristiansMr. Napeire vbi supra pa. 68. versus finem. Reigning vniuersally and without any d^bateable contradiction 1260. yeares:Ibidem p. 191. initio. Gods true Church most certainely abiding so long Latent andIbidem pag. 161. col. 3 circa med. and pa. 156. ante med. and 237. paulo post med. and 23. fine. inuisible: with whome agreeth M. Brocard:Brocarde vpon the reuelations fol. 110. a. and fol. 123. b. And Mr. Napeire doubteth not to proceede yet much further, affirming that alsoNapeire vbi supra p. 191. initio. during euen the second and 3. ages (after Christ) the true Temple of God and l^ght of the ghospell was obscured by the Romane Antichrist him-selfe: But Sebastianus Francus reacheth the very point, and doubteth not to comprehend all the foresaide ages since the Apostles times, affirming that, Statim post Apostolos etc.Sebastianus Francus in Epistola de Abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis Ecclesiasticis. And Mr. Fulke in his aunswere to a Counterfaite Catholicke pag. 35. post medium saith, The true Church decaied imediately after the Apostles times. Presently after the Apostles time, all things were turned vpside downe etc. And that f^r ^ertaine through the worke of Antichrist: the externall Church togither with the faith and sacraments vanished awaie presently after the Apostles departure, and that for th^s^ thousand foure hundreth yeares the
 Church hath bene no where externall and visible: So far hath the Protestants Church hitherto bene (euen by their owne testimonies) from fulfilling the foresaide foretoulde Conuersion, of so many KINGES and kingdomes of the Gentiles.


THAT THE KNOWEN DEFECT THEROF in the Protestants Church aduantageth the Iewes against them, made Sebastian Castalio doubtfull of his faith and Dauid Georgean Apostata. @. 5.
THESE thinges (most Gratious SOVERAIGNE) being thus explained and confessed, we do here as now insist, and most humblie appeale vnto your MAIESTIES Learned and equall iudgement betweene our aduersaries and vs concerning the accomplishment of the foresaid predictions, whether that the same may be said to haue bene hitherto performed by our Catholike or their Protestant Church Here haue we often knocked at the dores of theire hartes, demaunding but with what probabilitie they can (before Luthers time) make good that which the scriptures foretell (as Oecolampadius and them selues vnderstand) concerning theOecolampadius alleageth before Tract. 2. Sect. 1. letter q. eternitie of Christs Kingdome, and the multitude of Kings to serue it: and which be those many Kinges and Kingdomes of the Gentiles which their Church hath in all that meane time accordingly conuerted from heathenishe Paganisme to the faith of Christ, or how can their Church but be said (accordingly as the scripturesThe glorie of this last house shalbe greater then the first Aggeus 2, 10. the desolate hath more Children then the married wife (Esay 54, 1. and Galat. 4, 27. He is mediator of a better testame^t which is established vpon better promisses (haebr. 8, 6.) and OecolampadiusOecolampadius in Esay c. 2. vers. 2. saith, Greate is the dignitie of the Christian Church aboue the sinagoge of the Iewes, in that it shalbe most populouse, and of all Nations sondry shall Ioyne them-selues vnto it abundantly. from them teach, that the true Church ought to excell the Sinagogue of the Iewes: but so much as since the coming of the Messias (which was the appointed time of the Sinagoges decay and the Christians Churches increase) considering that it is heretofore
 fullySee heretofore tract 2. c. 1. sect. 4. confessed, and hereafterSee hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 7. 10. further proued, that for the thousand yeares last before Luther, their Church hath continued vnknowen Latente and inuisible etc. whereas on the other parte it appeareth (by sufficient authoritie of histories in all times) that the Iewes during all those ages, and euer since Christes time, haue had theire Sinagogues (though vnder some kind of restraint) yet dispersed knowenPeter Martir in his common places in English part. 2. pag. 599. b. initio saith hereof. The Iewes as yet continew, and are kept in so greate aduersities, in so diueres and greeuouse captiuitie and dispersion, they houlde still their religion, doubtles no auncie^t Troians, Lombards, Hunnes or Vandalles, haue so helde still their owne etc. and could shew theire originall and history set forth in most true writting, and being euery where dispersed as they were coulde neuertheles keepe their owne ordinances which for so much as it contineweth among the Iewes, is vndoubtedly a singuler worke of God etc. If now then Godes worke be such in the dispersed and reprobate Iewes afrer the time of their Sinagoges decay, shall it not much the rather bee more Gloriouse in his Church of the new testament, which according to Paule haebr. 8, 6. Is established in better promises? Then euer was the other of the Iewes euer before the dissolution and end thereof? And see Peter Martir vbi supra pa. 328. b. fine and 329. a initio. and visible in the most notable prouinces of the world, as Greece, Italy, Spaine, France, Germanie, England, etc. And therfore here also againe we do submit to your MAIESTIES learned iudgement, whether we or they be the men, that can against the obiections in this kind of the doubtfull and misbeleeuing Iewes, maintaine that before Luthers time, the foresaid predictions of their Prophetes haue bene fulfilled, and so consequently that our Sauiour is the true Messias, which falleth necessarily into great daunger of further doubt with them, if so many of their Prophecies as went of the Messias and his Church, haue for so many ages before Luther bene lefte vnaccomplished.
Neither may the scandall or scruple hence arising be a stumbling blocke onely to the Iewes, but such as hath also distracted certaine of our learned aduersaries: To alleage some few examples therof (and withall to omitt the straites and laborinthes into which certaine principall ProtestantCaluin in Daniell c. 2. vers. 44. and Luther tom. 7. printed at Witteberg Anno 1557 lib. de Iudaeis etc. writers haue bene driuen in their disputation had of this matter against the Iewes) Sebastian Castalio professor at BasillOsiander in Epitom. histor. Eccles. cent. 16. pa, 753. initio calleth him, Sebastianus castalio vir apprime doctus, Caluinista tamen: Linguarum peritissimus etc. And Pantalion in his Chronographia p. 125. placeth him there in his catalog of the Fathers and lightes of the Church, saying further that for such, Guilielmus Farellus, Petrus Viretus and Sebastian Castalio agnoscuntur a
 very learned Caluinist, and highlyCastalio co^mended by D. Humfrey de rat. interpret. l. 1. pa. 62. 63. and 189. And by Gesnerus in bibliotheca Sebastia^ Castall: And by Fridericus Furius alleadged in Sebast. Castal. defens. suarum translat. pag. 236. commended by D. Humfrey and others,) hauing recited sondry of the foresaid Prophecies concerning the conuersion of Kinges, and the Churches foresaide happie estate and continuance, and looking to the accomplishme^t thereof, writeth thus perplexedly thereof to our late Soueraigne Lord King Edward the sixte.Sebastia^ Castalio in his preface of the greate Lattin Bible dedicated to Kinge Edward the sixte saith, Equidem aut haec futura fatendum est, aut tam fuisse, aut Deus accusandus mendacij: quod si quis fuisse dicit, quaeram ex eo quando fuerint, si dicet tempore Apostolorum, quaeram cur nec vndiquaque perfecta fuerit, and tam cito Exoleuerit dei cognitio ac pietas, que and aeterna and marinis vndi^ abundantior fuerat promisse. Verely we must confesse either that these thinges shall be performed hereafter, or haue bene already, or that God is to be accused of lying: If any man answere that they haue bene performed, I will demaund of him when? If he say in the Apostles time, I will demaund how it chaunceth, that neither then the knowledge of God was alt^gither perfect, and after in so short space vanished away which was promised to be aeternall and more aboundant then the floodes of the sea? So plainely doth he more then insinuate this perilous scruple, (and which is most dangerous) withall leaueth the same not explained or answered but perplexed and doubtfull, saying yet further thereof,Castalio vbi supra saith Quo magis libr^s sacr^^ co^sidero, eo minus hactenus praestitum video vtcunque ^ra ^^la ^lla intelligas. the more I do peruse the scriptur^s, the lesse do I finde the same performed howsoeuer you vnderstand the said Prophecies. But much more greeuous is the example hereof in Dauid George the hollander, who for many yeeres continued at Basill professing there the Protestants religion, and by them well estemed of till in the end he became a most blasphemous Apostata: and affirming our Sauiour to be a Seducer, drew secretly many to his opinion, the principall motiue of his reuolt, being, that:Historia Georgij Dauidis printed at Antwerpe 1568. in Octauo the Diuines of Basill published his historie. Si Christi and Apostolorum doctrina vera and perfecta fuisset etc. If the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had bene true and perf^^t, the Church which they planted etc. sh^uld haue continued etc. But now it is manifest that Antichrist hath subuerted the doctrine of the Apos^l^s. and the Churche by them begunne, as is euident in the papacie, th^rfore the doctrine of the Apostles was false and imperfect. Thus far that wretched Apostata.
By which two foresaid examples of Castalio and
 Dauid Ge^rge, and other the premisses is fully discouered not onely the not fulfilling of the foresaid Predictions in the Protestants Church, but also the dangerous sequell which thence ensueth against theire wholle Church and religion in generall.


A CONFVTATION OF THE PROTEstants obiections and answeres concerning their Churches not accomplishment of the said predictions. Sect. 6.
AND we may not here dissemble but referre like wise vnto your MAIESTIES graue iudgme^t, the colours, rather then answers wherwith certaine our aduersaries do (in these straites) seeke to vphold them selues and their Church,
1 First some woulde enforce that the vniuersalitie which is foretould of the Church, was to be accomplished but afterThe Author of the booke entituled Antichristus siue Prognostica finis mundi pag. 12. fine saith, spiritus qui annunciat futura non operatur nisi eunte Euangelio, quod sub finem ex confesso Lutherus primus inuexit: And pag. 13. post medium. he further saith, Non manifestatur aute^ perseudoprophetarum surrectio: nisi Euangelio: quod inde a primatiuo Apostolorum Euangelio ante Lutherum, vt diximus nunquam iuit, ne quis autem Hussiticum Euangelium pertinere huc putet, id prohibet quod Christus illud Euangelium edicit quod sub finem per vniuersum orbem esset iturum: porro Hussiticum Euangelium Bohemis tantum venit, signo ergo esse non potest, nam co^mune orbis Euangeliu^ signo esse voluit, non illud vnius gentis: Lutheri Euangelium per orbem volat tam voce, tam praelo. Luthers ghospell preached which long intermission til Luthers time, as it implieth a manifest breach of Gods foresaidHereof see heretofore Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 1. l. 0. Couenante: which foresheweth and assureth the Churches increase and prosperouse continuance thereof, and is directly against the opinion of the most learnedMr. Whitaker in his booke Contra Duraeum l. 7. pag. 472. saith, Quicquid de Ecclesiae propagatione, amplitudine, gloria veteres Prophetae praedixerunt, id perfectu^ esse historia Luculentissime testatur etc. Protestants who affirme that the foresaid predictions haue bene heretofore performed. And is also other-wise not answerable to the euent since Luthers time, for not so much as any one King or Kingdome of the Gentills is yet hitherto conuerted from paganisme by Luther or any of his followers: So likewise Christian hartes may hardly endure to thinke that we
 haue for so many ages before Luther, wanted weapons in this behalfe against the Iewes, or that God hath during the youth and middle time of his Church suspended his foresaid promises of her happie conuersion of Kinges and Nations to serue her, and is but now to fulfill the same in herIn hac mundi senecta post tenebras lucem Euangelij exorir: and pr^lucere voluit Deus. So say the Protestant Diuines apud Osiandrum Centur. 16. page 872. post medium. declining and decrepit age.
2 Secondly others in steed of answere doe obiect that the Apostle foretelleth2. Thess. 2, 3. a falling away: In discharg wherof it is manifest, first that there is nothing in this place to prooue that the said falling away should continue for so many hundred yeares as are before pretended: Secondly we say that this falling away is (as the Fathers vnderstand) not of the Church, whereofGloriosa dicta sunt de te Ciuitas Dei. psalm. 86, 3. glorious thinges are foretould, but ofAmbros. in hunc locum. and Tertul. de resurrect. carnis. and Aug. de ciuit. dei l. 20. c. 19. and Hierom. qu. 11. ad algasiam. the Romaine Empire, which did then2. Thess. 2, 7. hould or florish, and yet in the end mustSee Dresserus in mil lenar 5. pa. 92. fine and 93. initio. fall away, and that not in part. but as the texte there saith, must2. Thess. 2, 7. be taken away: which to referre to the Church, were as Mr. Witaker him selfe confessethMr. Whitaker against Mr. William Raynoldes in his aunswere to the preface pag. 33. saith: We beleeue that Christes Church shall neuer faile, and we account it a prophane heresie to teach that Christes Catholicke Church hath p^rished from the earth at any time, for this assertion s^aketh the foundation of all faith: a prophane heresie.
3 Thirdly they do furthermore yet (in lieu of answere) obiect with Mr. D. Fulke, that S. Iohn foretelleth that (by reason of Antichrists persecutionReuelat. 12, 6. obiected thus by Mr. Fulke in his answere to a Counterfaite Catholicke pa. 16. ante medium. the woman must flee into wildernes there to remaine a long season. Whereunto we likewise say, first that the same scripture witnesseth thatRenelat. 20, 2, 3. the olde Serpent Satan was bound for a thousand yeares that he should no more deceiue the Nations till the thousand yeeres were ended: and not loosedReuelat. 20, 7. Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis pa. 160. post med. thinketh these 1000. yeares to haue ended Anno Do^ni 1294. Mr. Foxe in apoc. c. 11. pag. 245. circa medium, thinketh then to haue ended Anno Domini 1300. And vide ibidem pa. 346. fine and 347 fine And see Hospianus in historia sacramentaria l. 4. c. 2. p. 295. ante med. and in Epist dedicatoria antemed. And Bullenger vpon the Apo^^lipps s^rm. 87. fol. 267. b. fine. Affirmeth hereupon that the g^spell was preached not ^n ^^^^r-m^^ker, but most manifest, not short and pin^^ed, ^^at p^^bshed by (...) space of a thousand yeare^, and re^eaued not of a fewe, but of all Nations: etc. till then. Which number though it be perhaps incertaine as signifying mo yeeres, yet fewer it cannot
 signifie. and therefore our aduersaries in placing Antichrists appearing and forecing of the Church to flie into wildernes, so many ages within the first thou sand yeeres after Christ, do therein affirme against manifest scripture, and the iudgmentFor it is affirmed and collected from the scriptures, that Antichrist is yet to come by VVicelius in libro de singularitate Antichristi: by Hierome Zanchius in epist. Pauli ad Phillip. Collos. and Thes. page 245. a. and by Franciscus Lambertus who^ Bullenger vpon the Apocalips serm. 62. fol. 202. b. post med. commendeth for a most godly and excellent learned man: of whose iudgement that Antichrist is not yet come, see the booke entituled Antichristus siu^ prognostica finis mundi, printed at Basill. page 74. and 75. and 79. ante medium And concerning the like opinion of other Protestants see Mr. Doue in his sermon of the second coming of Christ etc. versus finem where he saith: Some Protestants being ouermuch modest make a doubt whether Antichrist be yet reuealed or not. And see Mr. Foxe act. mon. (printed 1576.) page 739. b. prope finem and printed Anno 1596. page 366. a. lin. 17 of theire owne brethren. Secondly we say that these foresaide wordes obiected, there to remaine a long season, being most materiall and inserted by Mr. D. Fulke, not as his owne wordes, but as in the seuerall print or letter of the scripture, are his owne negligent (or els more faultie) addition, and therefore that there is nothing in the texte to proue that this flight (though it were to haue hapned within the saide thousand yeares) should against so many foresaide Prophecies continew for so lorge a season: as either of these last 1300. or 900. yeares, but only as the texte saith, modico tempore forReuelat. 12, 12. and 17, 10. and 20.3. Mr. Foxe in Apoc. c. 11. page 239. versus finem saith hereof: Neque enim fieri potest vt longum tempus codem modico tempore figuretur, modico enim tempore, modicu^ tempus designatur: to which end he alleageth there Franciscus Lambertus and Dauid Chitraeus. and vide pag. 347. fine and 348. and see Fr. du. Ion. vpon the reuelations c. 20. page 257. and 258. a short time namelyReuelat. 12, 6. for a thousand two hundreth and sixtie daies: or as it is explained in other tearmes, forDaniel. 12, 7. and reuelat. 12, 14. a time, two times, and halfe a time: or as it is yet further explained forreuelat. 11, 2. and 13, 5. two and fortie monethes: all which aswell by ordinary computationMr. Dent in his ruine of Rome, or exposition vpon the reuelation page 134. as also by exposicion of the Fathers,Aug. de Ciuitat. Dei lib. 20. c. 23. and Hi^rom. in Daniel. c. 7. and Cirrill Catech. 25 and Ireneus lib. 5. fine. and others. in so much as Mr. Foxe in Apocalipsin. page 345. post medium saith hereof. Docti sanctique hic interpretes, plerique fere omnes quos hactenus videre contigit, nihil hic certi statuunt, nisi quod tempus, tempora, and dimidium temporis ad tres duntaxit annos and semialterum restringu^t. and vide ibidem page 362. prope finem. and of that learned Protestant Hierom ZanchiusZanchius in epistolas Pauli ad Phillip. Collos. and Thessal. page 245. a. do amount but vnto three yeares and a halfe: during which time the hight of Antichrists persecution is in theire opinion hereby
 foretoulde to rage: Thirdly we further say that other Protestant writers (who dislike this exposition of three yeares and a halfe: and would enforce a longer terme as namely Mr. Forde,Mr. Ford in Apoc. c. 13. vers. 5. page 97. ante med. saith. Menses isti 42. designant paululum id temporis quod Diabulo concessumerat supra c. 12, 12. videl. tempus grauissimae illius persecutionis quae durauit ad Constantinum magnum, supputandi sunt enim prorsus sicut sanctissimus pater Ioannes Foxus accepit, nempe per sabatha annorum, quomodo menses 42 efficiunt annos 294. quibus ex vicesimo anno imperij Constantini (qui ide^ fuit Annus Christi 329.) subductis, Constabit Prophetia^ istam statim post mortem Christi incepisse. and Mr. Foxe, do vnderstand by euery month a Saboth of yeares affirming so by the 42. monthes to be ment. 294. yeares and that by theire opinion those 294. yeares begunne in the first persecutions of the primatiue Church, and so ended about the end of the first 300. yeares after Christ: which their expositio^ as it altogither maketh with vs, strengthning our former assertion of the not fulfilling (during that time of the foresaid predictio^s concerning the Churches happie enlargement, so likewise it leaueth our aduersaries wholly as before chargeable, to answere for the fulfilling thereof in the ages succeeding.
And thus much breistly to shew to your MAIESTIE 1 First That according to that confessed sence of scripture which Protestants them selues acknowledge,Mr. Foxe in Apoc. page 346. fine and 365 ante med. expresseth his like iudgement affirming page 365 that this exposition was deliuered to him as it were by reuelation, arcano quodam admonitionis sibilo, siue voce tamen etc. and with this exposition agreeth Mr. Downham in his treatise concerning Antich^ist c. 8. page 77 fine: the Church of Christ was fore toulde to continew after her first increase wonderfully enlarged with conuersion of many KINGES and Kingdomes of the Gentilles.
2 Secondly, that it is like-wise confessed that many Kinges and Nations of the Gentilles haue continually since the conuersion of CONSTANTINE our first Christian Emperour till Luther bene accordinglie conuertedHereof see heretofore tract. 2. c. 1 sect. 4. in the margent there in the begining at this mark (*) by our Catholicke Church, and that our Church hath in that estate continued and florished, as Mr. Napire confesseth for these 1260. yeares Reining vniuersally etc.
3 Thirdly that by like confession of Protestants, their Church hath bene so farr from performing the like, that as them selues acknowledge, shee hath most certainely for so l^nge remained Latent and inuisible: A scruple so euident that Castalio there-vpon fell to doubtfull speaches of our Christian faith, and Dauid George to plaine Apostasie




THE SECOND CHAPTER

THAT THE TRVE CHVRCH MVST haue her Pastors, administration of the word and Sacraments euer-more to continew. SECT. 1.
THE second pointe which we intend to offer to your MAIESTIE from that confessed sense of scripture which Protestants acknowledge, is touching the Churches continued and visible administration of the Word and Sacraments, which our Sauiour hath ordained to serue as the necessary appointed ordinarie meanes of our saluation: for albeit that God was able to call, iustifie, and confirme the elect without any mediate meanes, yet hath he not as (Caluine confesseth)See Caluin. institut. l. 4. c. 1. sect 5. initio. determined to accomplishe the same, otherwise then in and by the ministerie of his Church.
To beginne therfore with the administration of the Word, the Apostle teacheth. .1. First that Christ hath placed in his CHVRCH,Ephes. 4, 11 12, 13. Pastours and Doctors to continue to the consumation of Saintes, till we all meete in the vnitie of faith, euen as our aduersaries doe hereupon expound) for euer:Doctor Fulk against the Rhemishe Testament in Ephes. 4. sect 4. fol. 335 a. inition. And Caluin. in institut. Printed Geneua. 1550. c. 8. de fide sect 37 38. page 233. 234. Melancthon. loc. commun. aedit. 1561. c. de Ecclesia And hence it is that they affirme, thatCaluin. vbi supra the Church can neuer want Pastors and Doctors. and which is more, thatMr. Fulke against Heskins, Sanders etc. pa. 539 prope finem. Christ will suffer no perticular Church to continue without a seruant to ouersee it: and thatMr. Fulke ibid. pag. 536 paulo post med. And mr. Sparke in his answere to mr. Iohn d' Albines p. 11. prope initium saith accordingly. The Church of Christ hath alwaies had and shall haue to the end successiuely in all ages in one place or other, such as haue shewed the truth faithfully vnto others, as haue shined as lights in their daies set vpon a Candlesticke. Pastors and Doctors must be in the Church till the end of the world: (euen) fromMr. Fulke ibid. page 569 initio. Christs time till Luthers age. In the like assertion wherof the other Protestant writersThe Confession of Heluetia cited in the harmonie of Confessions pag 337. and Bertram de loque. in his discourse of the Church p. 79. are plentifull. 2. Secondly that these Pastors must not be silent, the holy ghost testifieth, foretelling of the ChurchesEsa. 62, 6. Watchmen or Pastors.The marginall notes of the English Bible 1576. in Esa. 62, 6. that they shall notEsa. 62, 6. be silent. But euen
 as the Apostle saith.Rom. 10, 14. How shall they beleeue whome they haue not heard, and h^w shall they heare without a Preacher. So our aduersa^ies do accordingly hould concern^ng preachers, that (as Mr. Fulke saith)Mr. ^ulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke p. 100. initio. truth cannot be continued in the world but by their ministrie. That therforePropositions and principles disputed in the vniuersitie of Geneua pag. 245. circa med. the ministrie is an essentiall marke of the true Church: that also as Mr. Deering faithMr. Deering in his reading vpon the epistles to the Hebrues ca. 3. lectur. 15. post initium. Saluation springeth in preaching of the ghospell, and is shutt vp againe with the ceasing of it. and thatIbid. c. 3. lectur. 16 fine. take away preaching, you take away faith: for which he citeth many scriptures. 3. Thirdly our aduersaries do yet further confesse, and the nature of the thing proueth it, (for otherwise they were no true Pastors) that these Churches Pastors (at the least some of them) shallMr. Fulke in his answere to a ^ounterfaite Catholicke page 11 initio and 92 ante med. alwaies resist all false opinion) euen with open reprehension: and thatMr. Deering vbi supra in c. 2. vers. 12. lect 10 circa med. etc. 3 lect. 12. fine. the religion bei^g of God, no feare of man shall keepe them backe, because as Mr. Deering saith hereof)mr. Deering ibid. that were to keepe the honour of God for corners and sol tary places: for as the Apostle prescribethRom. 10, 10. with th^ harte a man beleeueth vnto righteousnes, and with the mouth confesseth to saluation.
Concerning now the continued administration of Sacrame^ts. 1. First the scriptures affirme, that we are therby to1. Cor. 11, 26. shew the Lords death till he come. 2. Secondly our puritane aduersaries do acknowledge, and accordingly teach, that there must beBeza in his sermons vpon the Canticles englished page 79. and 80. Pastors and Doctors to the end of the world for the administration of the Word and Sacraments: that therforeMr. Bancroft in the suruey of the holy pretended discipline page 440 post medium. the ministrie of the Worde and Sacraments are in absolute degree of necessitie to saluation. with whom our other Protestant aduersaries do agree: Mr. Whitaker saying to this end of the administration of the Word and Sacraments, thatMr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 3. pag. 249 ante med. saith. S^ adsunt Ecclesiam constituunt and tollunt, si auferantur. being present they do constitute a Church, and being absent doe subuert it. and Mr. D. Wil^et likewise saith of them:Mr. Willet in his synopsis page 71 fine. these markes cannot be abs^nt from the Church, and it is no longer a true Church then it hath these markes: for as he further saithMr. Willet vbi supra page 69 finc. the onely absence of them doth make a nulletie
 of the Church: with whom herein the Lutheranes alsoLobechius a Lutherane Doctor and publique Professor in the vniuersitie of Rostoche in disput. theologic. pag. 213. sect. 44. affirmeth of these and of the Church, that tam areto and indistolubili nexu inter se copulata sunt, vt in coetu vocatorum, alterum sine altero esse non possit, and negato vno, alterum quoque negare necesse sit. do agree. 3. Thirdly our aduersaries do yet further hereupon affirme of these, thatMr Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 3. page 260. saith. Sunt Ecclesiae proprietates essentiales. And see mr. Whitgifte in his defence etc. page 81. ante med. and see mr. D. Couell in his examination etc. page 21. ante med. and page 5. fine. they are essentiall notes of the Church: and thatHiperius in method. theolog. page 548 ante med. and page 532. prope finem. And Amandus Pol^nus in partition. theolog. page 304. ante med. these notes are needfull to distinguish the true Church from the false, that men carefull of their saluation may know where the true Church is and to which company cheifly th^y ought to adioyne them selues. And th^t therefore the Church militant is in some sorte euermore to remaine, not poore or slender in paucetie of professors, but rich and plentifull:Caelius secundus Curio writt a wholle booke hereof, entituled de amplitudine regni Dei. wherein read him lib. 1. page 1. 5. 14. 24. and l. 2. page 135. 148 167 183 232 233 243 246. etc. And he answereth the common obiections vrged to the contrarie l. 1 page 96. 97 100 106 108 115 117 120 128 131. neither obscure or latent but like toMath. 5, 15. and Esa. 2, 2. Concerning the answerable exposition of which textes see D. Humfrey hereafter page 84. in the margent vnder the letter. e. And S. Austin tom. 6. contra faustu^. Manich. l. 13. c. 13. saith Propter hos enim motus paruulo^um qui possint seduci ab hominibus, a manifestatione claritatis Ecclesiae, Dominus quoque prouidens ait, non potest Ciuitas abscondi supra monte^ constituta. And tom. 7. contra liter. Petil. l. 2. c. 32. he further saith. Hinc fit vt Ecclesia vera neminem lateat, vnde est illud, quod in Euangelio ipse dicit, non potest Ciuitas abscondi supra montem constituta: ideoque in eodem psalmo connectitur, In sole posuit tabernaculum suum, id est in manifestatione. a Citie placed vpon a hill that cannot be hid, knowen andBartholomeus Keckermanus in sistem. theolog. page 408. initio saith. Noui testam. Ecclesiae, ratione notarum and formae externae semper debet esse sensibilis, seu conspicua, vt nimirum reliquae gentes quae adhuc extra Ecclesiam sunt, scire possint cuinam Ecclesiae sese debeant agregare, id quod de ecclesia noui testam. Esa c. 61. ab initio magnificis verbis predixit. And Hiperius in method. theolog. page 552. prope finem, saith: Profecto nisi signa haec extarent, ac vera ecclesia sensibus deprehenderetur, qui scire possit homo cumam caetui salutis consequendae ergo adherendum sioi foret. And Peter Marter in his epist^es annexed to his common places in English page 153. a. circa medium: reporting certaine pointes wherein he professeth to agree with vs Catholickes saith: We also doe not appoint an inuisible Church, but doe define Congregations, vnto which the faithfull may know that they may safely adioyne them selues. affirming further a little there before, that this opinion is (saieth he) Common with vs to Catholickes. conspicuouse: a truth so euident that they doubt not thereupon to
 affirme and teach out of the scripturesMr. Henoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme. p. 18. after many proofes alleaged by him from the scriptures, and otherwise concludeth, saying. Not onely all auncientes euer holde the Churches euer visibilitie, but also all learned men of our age: In like full maner is the Churches visibilitie affirmed from the scriptures as well by Melancthon in loc. comun. edit. 1561. c. de Ecclesia, and in prefat. lib. corp. doctrinae Christianae in Ecclesijs Saxon. and mismicis electoris Saxon. impress. Lipsiae Anno 1561. And in Concil. theolog. part. 1. page 512. and part. 2. pag. 201. and 394. As also by D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 240. where he saith: Declaratum est nos Ecclesiam non in aere ollocare sed in terra, nos Ecclesiam confiteri esse opidum supra montem positum, quod abscondi non p^test. Math. 5. montem excelsum domus Dei cunctis collibus editiorem, ad quem omnes gentes confluent. Esa. 2. etc. Cur ergo anxie and curiose probant quod est a nobis nunquam negatum? etc. (And ibidem page 241. initio. he saith) Visibilis est propter exercitia pietatis, quae videntur ab omnibus in Ecclesia, nam dum ministri docent, alij discunt, illi sacramenta administrant, hij communicant. etc. qui ista non videt talpa est caecior, visibilis est quia notae sunt insignes and conspicuae etc. and page 242. initio. he saith, non enim clancularij se^essus etc. conuocationes sunt Christianae. and page 281 fine he affirmeth concerning the Church militant (which is the onely pointe in question) ^portere Ecclesiam esse conspicuam, conclusionem esse clarissimam. the Churches euer visibilitie: condemning the contrarie opinion of the Churches pretended Latencie or inuisibilitie, for a monstrouseMelancthon in Concil. theolog. part. 2. saith: necesse est fateri esse visibilem Ecclesiam etc. quo spectat haec portentosa oratio qua negat esse vllam visibilem Ecclesiam. page 393. fine. and 394 initio. assertion andMr. Henoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 17 ante medium saith. Contrary to all scriptures they do affirme that there hath bene no visibilitie of the Church for former hundreth of yeeres, whi^h position is against Psalm. 72, 3, 17. Esa. 59, 21. contrary to all scriptures: against which our Sauiour did (as they thinke) specially forewarne vs, saying:Math. 24, 23. whereupon mr. H^noch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 23. post med. saith. Our Sauiour forbides going out vnto such desert and corner ghospels. Math. 24, 23, 24, 26. and S. Austine tom. 4. quaest. euang. l. 1. quaest. 38. saith, accordingly: Constituta ergo authoritate Ecclesiae per orbem terrarum clara atque manifesta, consequenter discipulos admonet and qui in eum credere voluerint, ne schismaticis atque hereticis credant: vnumquodque enim schisma and vnaquaeque heresis aut locum suum habet in orbe terrarum partem aliquam retinens, aut obscuris atque occultis conuenticulis curiositatem hominum decipit: Ad quod pertinet quod ait, si quis vobis dixerit, Ecce hic est Christus aut illic, quod significat terrarum partes and Prouinciarum. Aut in penetralibus aut in deserto, quod significat obscura and occulta conuenticula haereticorum. etc. And see him further contra Faustum Manich. l. 13. c. 13. If therfore they shall say vnto you, Beholde he is in the deserte, go you not forth: Beholde he is in secrete places beleeue it not. In so much as they also affirme the visible dispersion therof euen for thatReuelat. 12, 12, and 17, 10. and 20, 3. short time during which she is foretouldReuelat. 12, 6. to flee
 into wildernes by reason of Antichrists persecution: to which end Mr. Fulke (though most precise in this behalfe) is yet enforced to confesse, thatMr. Doct. Fulke against the Rhemishe Testament in 2. Thessa. 2. sect. 5. fol. 354. b. fine. the true Church th^^gh obscure and driuen into wild^rnes by Antichrist, yet still continued dispersed ouer the world, and thatMr. Fulke ibid. fol. 355. a. initio. to this like effecte see Mr. Whitaker in his answere to master Rainoldes preface pag. 34 and 37. mr. Foxe in Apoc. page 349. post medium in the time of Antichrist it was not driuen into any corner of the world, but was, is, and shall be alwaies dispersed in many nations: and that not obscure, but (as Bullenger saith)Bullenger vpon the Apocalips fol. 200. a. fine. and b. initio. see the words of Bullenger hereafter in the margent at the figure 3. tract. 2. c. 2 sect 11. right famous: which pointe the text it selfe doth also most inuincibly argue: for as it affirmeth that the womans flight into wildernes must continueReuelat. 12, 6 1260 dayes: so likewise it affirmeth that the preaching of the Word, must as then continue in like maner during euen the same terme of 1260. dayes:Reuelat. 11, 3. and must so be as generall as the persecution: a matter so vndoubted, that Szegedine saith hereupon,Szegedinus in tabul. Analatic. page 368 circa medium. the ministers of Gods word shall preach all the time in which Antichrist shall tread vnder foote the holy Cittie. And Mr. Gifford saith likewise,Mr. Gifford vpon the reuelations serm. 21. page 191. fine. these two witnesses are not to be taken for two and no moe, but for all those which were raised vp to impugne Antichrist: and that they should prophecie during all the time of Antichrists reigne. In like testimonie wherof, the otherSee Mr. Fulke against the Rhemishe Testament fol. 475. b. sect. 4. and Bullenger vpon the Apocalipes in c. 11. fol. 142. b. post medium. Protestant writers are very plentifull.


THAT PROTESTANTS TO PROVE THE answerable performance therof (for former ages) in their Church do alleage promiscuously both Catholicks and knowne Heretickes as members of their Church. SECT. 2.
THIS continued and visible administration of the Word and Sacraments, being the confessed sense of the scriptures, and without which the true Church cannot be, we will now examine somewhat concerning the answerable performance therof: In which
 point when we prouoke our aduersaries, there is nothing more vsuall with them, then (for theire owne defence in this behalfe) to search out in the examples of former times, for all such whatsoeuer, as may be said (though often falsely) in any sorte to haue impugned the Pope, but so much as in any one pointe either of manners or doctrine: And although they were otherwise neuer so different from Protest^nts, yet are they (in these straites) promiscuously registred by our aduersaries in the Catallog. of the Doctors of their Church. In this sorte are namedSee hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 7. in the margent there at the figure 2. concerning Ioannes de Rupe Scissa, and Willm. de S. Amore: and see co^cerning Peter Bloix (claimed by Mr. Gabriell Powell in his consideration etc. pa. 52. initio.) Osiander incentur. 12. page 281. post med. where he saith: Petrus Blesensis etc. Pricipum Prelatorum religiosorum and priuatorum peccata grauiter arguit. etc. non tamen Pontificios errores refutauit was this man then a Protestant? Ioannes de rupe Scissa Willielmus de S. Amore, and Peter Bloix. for thei^ onely reprouing the life and maners of the Cleargie, for this onely cause also are namedConcerning Willm. Occam read act. mon. printed 1596. page 358. a sin. 88. and b. line 40. and of Scotus see Foxe ibid. page 130. b. line 8. and Osiander cent. 9. page 44. and of Ioannes Gaudauensis read Foxe vbi supra page 358. 2. line 88. William Occam, Iohn Scotus, and Iohn Gaudauensis. In like vniust maner is namedBy Mr. Sparke in his answere to Mr. Iohn d' Albines page 64 prope finem And by Simon de voyon in his discource vpon the Catallog. of the Doctors of Gods Church, in the table. numer. 11. Alcuinus Archbishoppe of Canterburie, and scoller to S. Bede for his onely opinion vntruely pretended against the Reall presence, the contrarie wherof is by his owne writings more thenAlcuinus in lib. de diuinis officijs c. de Missa. saith: Consulens Deus infirmitati nost^ae, qui non solemus carnes crudas manducare, and sanguinem bibere, facit vt in pristina remaneant forma, duo illa munera, and est in veritate corpus Christi and sanguis. euident. So likewise do they nameDoctor Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 326. initio. And Simon devoyon vbi supra in the table numer. 107. and claime S. Bede him selfe whom others of them do more truely and plainely reiect, for a confessed Papist: euenLuke Osiander in epitom. cent. 8. page 58. initio. see this heretofore tract. 1. sect. 1. in the margent at the letter g. in all those articles wherin Protestants do at this day distent from the Pope. In like manner Peter Lumberd master of the sentences is by them sortedSymon Pauli. in method. aliquot locorum doctrin. etc. tradit. Rostochij. fol. 12. b. in the Catallog of the Doctors and restorers of the heauenly doctrine, andSymon Pauli ibid. fol. 15 b. and Hiperius in method. theolog. in praefat. page 1. fine and 2. cit^a and post medium. placed euen with Husse and Luther, who was so euidently a knowne Catholicke, that Mr. Foxe therfore termeth himActes and monuments page 41. b. circa medium. an Archpiller of papistrie. We coulde
 giue like exampleMr. Gifforde in his sermons vpon the reuelations page 195. post medium giueth instance in Ioannes Picus Earle of Mirandula. And Simon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catallogue etc. page 126. post medium: nameth S. Bernard. And Mr. Foxe in his Callender placed in the begining of his actes and monuments placeth Erasmus and Picus Mirandula and yet Erasmus (in who^ they do more pretend) doth in lib. 16. ep. 11. excuse him selfe briefly and fully to the contrarie: saying. Christum agnosco, Lutherum non agnosco, Ecclesiam Romanam agnosco. of S. Bernard, Erasmus, Picus Mirandula, and sondry other knowne Catholicke writers, whom our aduersaries do in like maner most iniustly claime to be of their Church. And as with Catholickes so likewise in this exigeme of need, are they constrained to make like claime toMr. Foxe actes monu. page 70. a. ante medi. Almericus, theLike claime is made to the Albigenses by mr. Sparke against mr. Iohn d'Albines. page 58. ante medium. by mr. Fulke contra Stapletonum, de successione Ecclesiae page 112. and 271 initio. And by Chrispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 350 ante medium. But see plaine testimonie of the execrable errors of the Albigenses in Osiander Centur. 13. page 329. And in Cesarius, Cistert. 5. dist. dial. and Luxemb. haer Albig. See also hereafter tract. 2. c. 2 sect. 3. in the margent at the figure 2. Albigenses, and sondry otherOf like claime made to Peter Bruis, and the Henricianes or Apostolici: see Catallog. testium veritatis printed Anno 1597. tom. 2. page 561 and 562. confessed and knowne heretickes. In diuers of whom Mr. Iewell (to omitt others)See these other Protestants so disclaiming hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. in the margent at the letter .o. is enforced to disclaime, saying expresly of them:Mr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie page 48. And see certaine of Almaricus his confessed errors mencioned hereafter tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. in the margent at the letter o. And by Chrispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 349 post medium And see also thereof Cesarius lib. dial. d. 5. and Gaguinus lib. 6. franc. and Gerson tr^ct. 3. in Matt. and Paulus Amilus l. 6. hist. Galliae. and Genebrardus in Chron. Anno 1208. they are none of ours. In examinatio^ therfore of these and such other like knowne impertine^t exa^ples, we will not be so Idly tedious as to trouble your Maiestie, but will make triall of those in whom our aduersaries haue greatest confidence, as namely, Waldo, Wicliff^, and Husse, and in their seuerall followers, and see if that these can vpholde the Protestant Churches administration of the word and Sacramentes, but so much as for those seuerall ages in which they liued: in whom if our aduersaries doe faile, then remaine they for any hope to be had of the other no lesse then desperate.



THAT VVALDO (WHO LIVED ANNO Domini 1220.) was no Protestant and that therefore the examples of Waldo and his followers is not sufficient to proue (but so much as for their times) a continuance of the Protestants Churches administration of the Word and Sacraments. SECT. 3.
TO beginne then with Waldo the Protestants adm^n^stration of the worde and sacraments is so litle proued by his example to haue bene but so much as in beinge imediatlye befo e and at the time of his first appearing, that (in cl^re prooffe to the contrarie he (as Mr. Foxe testifieth) was then a Catholi^ke lay-manAct. mon. page 628. b. circa med. a rich marchant of Ly^n^ and soact. mon. pag. 628 b. paulo post medium. vnlearned that he gaue rewardes to certaine learned men to translate the holy Scriptures for him and certaine other workes of the Doctors: and being thus holpen, did as Mr. Foxe reportethact. mon. vbi supra. conferr the forme of religion in his time to the infallible worde of God: where vpon saith Mr. Foxeact. mon. page 41. b. paulo ante medium sprong vp the Doctrine and name of t^ose which are called Waldenses:act. mon. p. 628. b. ante medium. or (as he saith page 41. b. circa med. About Anno. 1160. Anno 1218.
2 Seacondlie he had no ordinarie vocation or calling by man for our Catholicke Church condemned him, and his proceedings, and therfore would not, call him, and as for any other Church then being of his profession to call him, there was noneSee herafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. at this marke (). at that time, so much as but in being or knowne to him. For which cause he and his followers contemned all calling, teaching thatIlliricus in Catal. testium page 730. 731. 732. 740. 745. And Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. cent. 9.10.11 etc page 287 fine and 440 Laye men and woemen might Consecrate (the sacraments) and Preach. And as for any pretence of extraordina ie calling by God, (which euerie sectmaster may a^rogate) euen as by the Protestants grauer assertion, it had euermore when it
 was in vse,Amandus Polanus in partition. theolog. l. 1. p. 308 saith: Ministrorum extraordinarie vocatoru^ etiam dona extraordinaria fuere, nempe Prophetiae, donum edendi miracula: etc. And Musculus loc. comun. page 394. saith: Vocatio quae imediate est a Christo, iam in vsu non est, vt erat olim, habebat sua signa vnde cognosci potuit, de quibus memenit Marcus Euangelista. cap. vlt. dicens, predicauerunt etc. sequentibus signis etc. And mr. Henoch Clapham in his soueraigne remedie against schisme page 25. initio doth vpon this ground reprehend Browne for that he did take vpon him extraordinarie calling, and wanted Miracles: and Luther in loc. comu. Clas. 4. c. 20. initio p. 38. post med. admonisheth to this end saying: Hoc explores an vocationem suam possint probare: neque enim Deus vnquam aliquem misit nisi vel per Hominem vocatum, vel per signa declaratum, ne ipsum quidem filium. And Luther tom. 5. Ien. Germ. fol. 491. a. b. saith: Vnde vetus? quis te misit etc. vbi sigilla quod ab hominibus missus sis? Vbi sunt miracula quae te a Deo missum esse testantur? Also Luther admonished the Senate of Milhouse against Muncer the Anabaptist saying: Si dicat se a Deo atque ipsius spiritu missum esse quemadmodum Apostoli: probet hoc signis and miraculis editis, vel nolite ferre vt concionetur, nam vbicunque Deus ordinariam viam mutare vult, ibi semper miracula facit: Luther tom. 2. Ien. Germ. fol. 455. b. and 456. a. and hereof (...) Sleydon lib. 3. An. 25. Also Sigwartus in his 23 disputationes theologic. etc page 207 sect. 8. saith: Haec vocatio semper extraordinaria quaedam and diuina dona comitantia habet quae sunt tanquam sigilla doctrinae etc. cuiusmodi fuerunt miracula etc. Miracles adioyned thereto in testimonie that it was from God, (which were wanting in Waldo) So likewise as the learned Protestants them selues graunt, it is now since the Apostles timesMusculus vbi supra and Lobechius in disput. theolog. page 358 fine and 359 initio. saith: Imediatam porro vocationem cum mediata ab Apostolis permutatam esse scriptura testatur etc. credimus imediatae vocationis vsum Deo in hoc mundo nullum (amplius futura, nullam quippe de ea dedit promissionem, nullum mandatum. And D. Sarauia in his booke of the diuers degrees of Ministers page 9. initioterm^th extraordinary calling an vnknowne coast out of which (the now defendors thereof) can no waies wind them selues. And see mr. D. Couell in his defence of mr. Hooker pag. 86. fine and 87. initio. and see Sarauia in defen. tract. etc. contra resp. Bezae p. 306 and 307. And ibid. page 37. circa med. he saith Sed speciem illam extraordinariae vocationis ad Ecclesiae ministerium etc. cum nullo testimonio scripturarum, nec exemplo certo doceatur, non admitto, est enim periculi plena, and noui malique exempli etc. ea sola fretus nemo se ministerio Ecclesiastico ingerere debet. And see there page 35. 36. 38. etc. ceassed and not t^ be expected as being without all proofe or testimonie in the writings of the new testament. If now therefore Waldo did (as appeareth by Protestants them selues vndertake toSimon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catalog. of the Doctors etc. page 132. post medium, and Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church page 339. ante med. Preach being (but) a Lay^ s^culer man, and so wanted call^ng, much lesse then could he conferre calling to others: therefore both he and all his followers which discended
 from him were through theire want of callingNo man taketh the honour vnto him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron: hebr. 5, 4. How shall they preach excepte they be sent. Rom. 10, 15. Who so entreth not in by the dore into the Sheepefould but clymeth vp an other way, is a theefe. Iohn. 10, 1. intrudors, hauing no more authoritie to celebrate and administer Sacraments (excepted only Baptisme in time of necessitie whichBaptisme by lay persons in time of necessitie is affirmed by the Fathers as witnesseth. Caluin. institut. l. 4. c. 15. sect. 20. confessing and saying hereof. Multis abhinc seculis, adeoque ab ipso fere Ecclesiae exordio vsu receptum fuit, vt in periculo mortis Laici Baptizarent si minister in tempore non adesset. It is in like manner affirmed by the Lorde Archbishope of Canterburie in his defence against Carthwrite pa. 518 and 519. ante med. and many other Protestants. a lay person may do) then they had power to create a new world, so litle is the continuance of Protestantes administration of the Word and Sacraments enabled by Waldo.
3 Thirdly concern^ng the Protestantes doctrine of Iustification by onely faith, which is in their iudgme^tMr. Clarke in the disputation had in the Tower with Edm. Camp. the 4. daies conference Arg. 1 D. iiii the soule of the Church:The Cofession of Bohemia in the harmonie of Confessions in English page 253. of all other points of doctrine the weightiest. and which saith: Mr. Foxeact. mon. page 402. a. circa med. Luther opened as being long hid before. It was so vnknowne to Waldo, and he so wholly affected to our Catholike doctrine of merittes and Workes (which Protestants termePenrie in his booke entituled Mr. Some laid open in his colours page 29. 30. the very harte, life, and soule of Papistrie,) that he didD. Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 270 circa medium: and Mr. Foxe act. mon. page 628. b. fine forsake all thinges that being poore he might follow Christ and the Euang^licall perfection: which our aduersaries reiectMr. Fulke against the Rhemish testament in Math. 19. sect. 9. fol. 38. b. And mr. Perkins in his reformed Catholicke page 241. and Caluin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 13. sect. 13. for Popish: In so much as he and his followers were a very profession of begging Friars, and therfore calledactes and monuments page 41. b. circa medium and page 629 a. ante medium. the poore men of LyonsDoctor Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. page 270 circa medium. professing (as D. Humfrey vrgeth) a kind of monasticall life: wherin they were so forward, that they afterwardesVrspergenses in Chronic. Anno 1212. made means to Innocentius the third then Pope to haue their order by him confirmed, but could not preuaile
4 Fourthly the Waldenses held sundry grosse errors. as namely their deniallSee Guido and Antoninus de Waldensibus: and Aeneas Siluius in his Bohemica historia de Waldensium dogmatibus: And Luxemb. in haer. Paup. de Lugduno. of all iudgement to blood. andSee Illiricus in Catal. testium veritatis page 748. prope initium. of the Saboth. In regard of which latter they
 were also calledAct. mon. page 41. b. circa med. and see Simon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catallog. of the Doctors of the Church. p. 134 insabalistes. They also further taughtIlliricus in Catal. testium veritatis p. 731. fine. and 745. ante med. and 730. circa med. and 732. initio 740. ante medium. that Layemen and women might Consecrate (the Sacrament) and preach. ThatIlliricus ibid. page 729. circa med. and 747. post medium. and 760 circa med. Cleargie men should haue no Possessions or propertie. thatIlliricus ibid page 729. post medium there should be no diuision of Parishes, nor Churches: forIbid. page 749. initio: and 733 circa med. and page 760 fine. a walled Church they reputed as a barne and^. alleaging textes againstIbid. pag 749 initio Churches made with handes: thatIlliricus ibid. page 735. ante med. and 756. ante med. and 752. initio. men ought not to swere in any case.Ibid. page 731 circa med. and 743 post med. they condemned the Sacrament of marriage: affirming that thoseIbid. married persons mortally sinned, who accompanied togither without hope of issue. they heldIbid. page 746. ante medi. and 731. post med. all thinges done aboue the girdle, by kissing, touching, wordes, compression of the pappes etc. to be done in charitie, and not against continencie. That alsoIbid. page 760. circa med. and 740. ante med and teste Osiandro in epitom. histor. Eccles. ce^t. 9. 10. 11. etc. page 440 post med. neither Priest nor ciuill Magistrate being guiltie of mortall sinne did enioy their dignitie, or were to be obeyed.Illiricus in Catall. test. Ver. page 735. post med. and 755. post med. They conde^ned Prince and Iudges.Ibide^. page 730. fine. They affirmed singing in the Church to be an infernall clamor. And (to omitt sondry other), they taught that they might dissemble their religion, and so accordinglyIbid. page 734 paulo post med. they went to the Catholicke Chur^h dissembling, and offered, confessed, and Communicated diss^mblingly. By reason of which their dissimulation they secretely increased in sondry places to a great number before they could be discouered: for which our aduersarie IlliricusIlliricus ibidem page 722. ante med. faith of them: Non est quidem id omnino probandum, quod in multis locis diu sine vlla publica Confessione fuerint. not vnworthelie reproueth them.
And if Protestants will not beleeue the writers of those times reporting these and sundry other grosse errors of them, why then may they not excuse in like manner Peter Bruis, Almericus, the Albigenses, and the Apostolici, or Henricianes: all which liued in that age and are confessed to haue heldPeter Bruis denied Transubstantiation, Masse, Praier for the dead, the single life of Priestes and Monckes, Veneration of the Crosse, Church musicke etc. Osiander centur. 12. page 282. 283. and see Catallog. testium veritatis printed 1597 tom. 2. page 561. and 562. Almericus denied the Reall Presence C^nsing of Churches with frankencence: he also taught that, euery faithfull person ought to beleeue his owne saluation, as surely any article of his faith. Hereof see Vincentius in speculo historial. and Bernardus Lutzemb. de haeresibus) and Osiander centur. 13. page 327. Also he denied Images. Foxe act. mon. fol. 70. vpon the A. side col. 1. ante med. and denied likewise Tra^substantiation, Aultars, and praying to Saints. herof see mr. Mores Table page ^74. fine. And Pantaleon in Chronograph. page 98. the Albigenses denied Praier for the dead, Purgatorie, Confession, Extreme Vnction, the Popes authoritie, Images, Pardons, Ceremonies, and Traditions: Hereof see Foxe act. mon. fol 71. vpon the B. side col. 2. post med. And Cesareus Hesterbachius l. 5. c. 21. and Antoninus 4. part. tit. 11. c. 7. the Apostolici or Henricianes, Burned Crosses: denied the Reall presence and Sacrifice of the Masse: Also Festiuall daies, consecration of Chrisme and Oyle, Purgatorie, and Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saintes. etc. Hereof see Petrus ^^^na^^^sis lib. contra haereses etc. S. Bernard. serm. 66. in Cantic. And Bernardus Bo^aualensis vitae S. Bernardi l. 2 c. 5. and Osiander in Epi^om. etc. Centur. 12. page 291 ante med. and Pantaleon in Cronograph. page 92. sundry of the
 Protestants opinions as well as did the Waldenses: and are yet neuerthelesse by learned Protestants reiected and reputed forThe Apostolici are censured for Heretickes by mr. Fulke in his retentiue against Bristow etc. page 124. and by Osiander centur. 12. page 291. ante med. And Mr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie page 48. disclaimeth in Almaricus, the Albigenses, and Apostolici, saying expresly of them: they be none of ours. And Peter Bruis is censured for an Hereticke by Osiander centur. 12. page 282. 283. And see the seuerall absurd errors of Almaricus reported by Osiander in epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. etc. page 326. and of the Apostolici reported by Osiander ibidem page 291 ante med. and of the Albigenses reported by Osiander ibid. page 329. and o^ Peter Bruis reported by Osiander in cent. 12 page 282 and 283. and see further heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2 in the marge^t at the letters q. and r. And Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria lib. 4. page 361 post medium saith: Henricus quidam cum Petro Bruis circa Annum Domini 1140 docere caepit semel tantum in ipsa vltima Domini caena Apostoli Christi corpus vere datum sub specie panis, deinceps autem ^^eram deceptionem esse quod Sacerdotum ministerio dicitur aut creditur: testis est and refutator huius erroris Petrus Cluniacensis qui eodem tempore floruit, in tractatu de Sacrificijs. Heretickes, in regard onely of those sundry other most absurd hereticall opinions, wherwith the writers of those times do in like sorte charge them. Or why also may not the now succeeding ages say as much hereafter in like excuse as well of Barrowe, Browne, Hacket: Ardington etc. as also ofMr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfaite Catholicke. page 62. the horrible heresies of the Anabaptistes, Libertines, Swenfeldianes, and such otherlike of this age as haue sprong from Protest^nts, holding as yet most of their opinions? Or with what credit can Protestants them selues al eage the same writers to proue that the Waldenses held certaine points of thei^ faith? for if they depend vpon their testimonie in that, how
 can they vpon meere supposall make it doubtfull in the other? considering it is euident that in those former times the saide reporters indifferently and alike condemned all those opinions wherin the Waldenses did as then dissent from the Romane Church, as not fo^eknowing which of those opinions we of this age would a low or reiect. This point is yet made much more euident by example of the foresaide Albigenses whose execrable errors are specially acknowledged andOsiander in centur. 13. l. 1. c. 4. page 329. initio. saith: Exorta est haeresis Albigentium etc. Dogmata haec illis attribuuntur, duo esse principia Deum viz. bonum and Deum malum, hoc est Diabulum, qui omnia corpora creet, bonum autem Deum creare anim^s: etc. Baptismum abijciunt, ire in Ecclesias vel in eis orare nihil prodesse etc. Matrimonia damnabant, promiscuos concubitus eosque nefarios, sanctos ducebat Corporum resurrectione^ negant: etc. Quod Christus non fuerit verus homo, nec vere comederit: etc. And a little after there, he further saith. Hae propositiones cum sint absurdae, impiae and hereticae etc. Cum Albigenses admonitiones non admitterent, sed in erroribus and sceleribus persisterent. Adhortante Pontifice Romano, magistratus polliticus, collecto exercitu, duabus vicibus aliquot millia Albigensium tru^^darunt: multi etiam Capitibus truncati and cremati leguntur qui hinc inde sunt deprehensi: fuit enim Albigensis furor Anabaptisticus, qualis Anno 1534. nostro seculo Anabaptistarum monasterientium erat; See also further hereof the centurie writers of Magdeburg. centur. 13. c. 5. and mr. Marbecks common places page 22. may now mr. Foxe and Chrispinus alledge these thousands thus slaine in their Catallogue of Protestant Martirs? reported by sundry Protestant writers, and they the^eupon reiected for confessedMr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie page 48. disclaimeth in the Albigenses, and others there named, saying expresly of them, they be none of ours. and Osiander cent. 13. page 329. saith, as is before alledged that their opinions were absurd, wicked, and hereticall that they admitted no admonition, but persisted in their errors and wickednes: and calleth them yet further an anabaptisticall furie. And Pantaleon in chronographia page 98. numbreth them amongst Heretickes. And so likewise doth Mr. Marbecke in his common places page 22. Heretickes. Now these Albigenses liued in the same time with the Wal^e^s^, and were (as Mr. Fulke and other Protestant writers do acknowledge)Mr. Fulke de successione ecclesiastica contra Stapletonum page 332. ante medium. saith of the Waldenses: Iam dixi a Papistarum vulgo nomen hoc i^lis inditum, vt alias dicti sunt pauperes de Lugduno, Leonistae, Albigenses, and quicquid placuit Antichristi Scurris: And ibid. page 333. circa med. he saith: Quae Antoninus etiam and Matheus paris. de Albingensibus quos eosdem esse cum Waldensibus illa Archiepiscoparum epistola probat etc. and vide ibid. page 359. post medi. And Mr. Sparke in his answere to mr. Iohn d'Albines page 58. saith to Albines concerning the Waldenses, your frendes call them Waldenses, Albigenses pauperes de Lugduno etc. changing their titles and names according to the diuersitie of places and times they liued in, howsoeuer their religion was all one. of the same secte with th^m b^ing therfore by him and others challengedHereof see heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter. q. as members of the Protestants Church,
 and called Albigenses onely of the countreyMr. Sparke vt supra and Simon de Voyon in his defence vpon the Catall. of the Doctors of Gods Church page 138. initio saith they inhabited the Cou^trie about Tholouse and Albi. in which that company remained, as in like resembla^ce the Hugonottes of France, and Puritanes of Scotland, and England professe to be of one religion notwithstanding the diuersitie of name, wherby they be diuersly called or knowne in those se^erall countries.
Hereunto we could (in further explanacion of this point) also add the sundry confessed and knowne doctrines and rebellions of the Waldenses of latter times condemned by Protestants and testified by MelancthonMelancthon. in concil. theologic. part. 2. pag 152. ante med. in an epistle to a frend of his who ministred the Communion to Infants: saith. Gaudeo te de summa doctrinae nobiscum sentire, Waldenses scio dissimiles esse and quidem nimis morose defendant quaeda^, de quibus aliqua^do cu^ eisrixatus sum quida^ nolunt absolue re Lapsos, qui ad poenite^tiam redeunt, negant coniugium suis Sacerdotibus. and other ProtestantBenedict. Morgenstern. in tract. de ecclesia page 79. paulo post med. saith: Di^i autem possunt noui Waldenses (ex seipsis nati) vel participantes quia partem capiunt a Papistis, partem a Sacramentarijs, partem meliorem a Lutheranis vel fratres (quo nomine valde gaudent) sed falsi, vel certe ignorantiae, quia lucem doctrinae diuinitus accensam hoc saeculo supercilio se neglexeru^t, and errores crassissimos etia^ ab ipso Luthero An. 1523 monstratos etc. clam scriptis apud suos mordicus defenderunt, id quod demu^ post obitum Lutheri innotuisse. D. D. Ioannes Hedericus scribit etc. And ibid. pa. 124. he saith to them. Antichristi institutum de numero sacramentorum confirmatis. licet id quidem saepius in alijs articulis fecistis, vt in doctrina, de celibatu, votis, sacra scriptura, bonis operibus, Iustificatione, Baptismo paruulorum, nec non de Purgatorio. Et vide ibid. pag. 154. and 226. fine. See Seluecerus his testimonie of the Waldenses false doctrines, and grosse errors not to be suffered. And in the booke de Russorum, Muscouitarum, and Tartarorum religionis. pag. 96 Lascitius a Protestant writer, affirmeth the calling of their Clergie to be by casting of lottes. Persuasi Deum moderatorem sortis futurum. writers, euen after that they were altredLaconici Antisturmij Spongia aduersus Lamberti Danaei Antiosiandrum. pag. 35. initio. mencioneth their being altred by Luther. in many things by Luthers instruction.
Vpon which premisses concerning Waldo and his folowers for so much as it is made euident therby. 1 First that imediately before his first appea^ing he was a Catholicke, and not member of any other Church to him then knowne or in being a matter furthermore so manifest that the Protestant writers do therfore affirme his first proceeding to haue bene in time ofCrispinus in his discource of the estate of the Chucch. page 338. paulo post medium. thicke darkenes, and as a first and litle begini^g of the instauration of the Christian religion 2 Secondly that he was then also, but a lay man, and so wanted calling. 3 Thirdly that his opinion concerning Iustification, and sundry other pointes of faith were
 Catholicke. 4 Fourthly and lastly that he and his followers held sondry grosse and damnable errors. We do humblie as now submitt to your MAIESTIES learned iudgement, whether that Protestants may alledge this example of the Waldenses as sufficient to continue and vphould the administration of their Churches Word, and Sacraments. But so much as at and since that foresaid timeSee before tract. 2 cap. 2. sect. 3. b. x. y. of Anno 1218. in which Waldo first appeared.


THE LIKE IS SHEVVED OF VVICLIFFE (Who liued Anno Domini 1370.) and his followers. SECT. 4.
AS concerning Iohn Wycliffe and his followers, he as Mr. Foxe reportethAct. mon. 85. a. post medium. florished Anno Domini 1371. was our countrie-man and so farre before his first appearing from being of any Church in which the Protestants administration of the Worde and Sacraments was then cont^nued: (whereof as appeareth by Mr. FoxeMr. Foxe act. mon. p. 85. b. initio. affirmeth that, out of all doubt all the world was in a m^st desperat and vile estate, and that lamentable ignorance and darkenesse of Gods truth had ouershadowed the wholle earth, when Iohn Wycliffe stepped forth. etc. as the morning starre in the middest of a cloud. And mr. Foxe act. mon. printed. 1596. page 391. b. line 60. saith, that in times of horrible darknes whe^ there seemed in a manner to be no one so little sparke of pure doctrine lefte or remaininge, Wycliffe by Gods prouidence rose vp, through whom the Lord would first waken and raise vp againe the worlde. etc. And Osiander in his epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. page 439 post med. saith. Libri Wycleu^ non per omnia sunt pur^, non enim habuit tum coaetaneos qui potuissent eum (sicubi longius extra metas progressus fuisset.) fraterne admonere. and others not so much as any entrie or being could be to him then knowne.) that he himselfe was then before a Catholicke Priest, euen theMr. Stowes Annales of England faithfully collected etc. Printed 1592. pa. 464 initio. Parson of Lutterworthe in Leicestershire: And as Mr, Stowe in his Annualls or chronicle dedicated to the new Lord Archbishop of Canterburie abridgeth his storieStowe ibid. pag. 425. post med. He (first) Inueyed against the Church f^r that he had bene depriued by the Archbishope of Canterburie from a certaine benefi^e etc. And hauing so vpon this occasion seperated him selfe from the Church in which he formerly wasStow vbi supra. He with his disciples went barefooted and baselie clothed in course russet garmentes
 downe to the heele: andStow ibidem. page 426 ante medium. seemed to contemne all temporall goodes for the loue of aeternall riches, adioined him selfe to the b^gging Friar^ approuing theire pouertie and extolling theire perfection: reteining also his fo mer Catholicke opinion concerningWycleuus de blasphemia ap. 17. mencioning aqua benedicta saieth withall in proofe therof, Habuerunt Christi Discipuli potestatem corpora tam rationabilia quam irrationabilia consecrandi. Holie Water:Wycleuus de Eucharistia cap. 9. saith, adoramus imagines vnde vt signa etc. conceditur ergo quod reliquiae, imagines, and sacramenta sunt cum prudentia adoranda. And in decalogo super primo mandato cap. 15. he saith Introductae sunt imagines in Ecclesiam vt sint libri Laicorum and signa recordatiua singulis Christianis vt adore^t debite Sanctos Dei. the worshipping of Reliques, and Images:Wycleuus in serm. de Assumptione Mariae, saith: Hic videtur mihi, quod impossibile est nos praemiari sine Mariae suffragio etc. the intercession of our Blessed Ladie, St. Marie: TheWycleuus de tractatu degradationibus scholasticis c. 3. saith of them: Sunt docta implicite in sua specie vel suo principio, (and that) supposita quacunque tali caeremonia virtuosa vel licita, fuit docta per appositiones in su^ principio. apparell and tonsure of priestes: TheWycleuus de Apostasia c. 18. mencioneth and alloweth them: And Ioannes Przibrauus (an hereticke who liued neere the same time) in professione fidei c. 28 saith Ioannes Wycleuus libro de Apostasia cap. 18. approbat totum ritum Missae a principio fere vsque ad finem etc. Rite: and Cerem^nies of the MasseWycleuus ad caput primum prioris ad Corinth. saith: Vnctio extrema est medicina ad sanandum peccatum, vt patet Iacobi. 5. (affirming there further that it is made) cum oleo oliuae ab Episcopo consecrato. Extreme Vnction. and allWycleuus in Postilla super 15. c. Marci numbreth and mentioneth them all. and in postilla super 1. Cor. 1. he further saith quaedam sacramenta etc. per se promulgauit (Christus) vt Baptismum, Eucharistiam, Ordine^, and Poenitentiam: quaedam autem per Apostolos vt Confirmationem and Extremam Vnctionem etc. the s^auen Sacraments, and all those sundry other pointes of our Catholicke faith now in question, with deniall whereof he is not found somuch as charged.
2 Secondly he held sondrie strange and damnable heresies, as (amongest other) thatAct. mon. page 96. a. art. 4. and b. art. 15. Osiander in epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. and pag. 452. art. 4. if a Bishope or Priest be in deadlie sinne he doth not order Consecrate nor Baptizeact. mon. page 96. a. fine and 93. b. art. 12. and Osiander vbi supra page 453. art. 10. and page 458. art. 36. that ecclesiasticall ministers should not haue any temporall p^ss^ssions orMelancthon in epist. ad Frideric. miconium (extante) in libro epistolarum Suinglij and Oecolampadij page 622 initio. saith of Wycliffe. Contendit Presbiteris non licere vt possideant quicquam propriu^. propertie in any thing. but shouldMelancthon. loc. comun. de potest. eccles. ante med. sa^th. illa Wycleuica superstitio pernitiosa and seditiosa est, quae adigit ministros ecclesiarum ad mendicitatem, and negat eis licere proprium tenere. begge.Osiander vbi supra p 459. art. 43. He condemned lawfull oathes. Sauoring therin (saith Osiander) of Anabaptisme. he also taught th^tOsiander cent. pag. 457. prope initium. all thinges come to passe by absolute necessitie. whi^h is
 Stoicall. and as for the Protestants doctrine of Iustification, it was so vnknowne to him that as Waldensis (who liued in the same time with him) affirmeth he exceeded in the contrarie, defendingWaldensis tom. 3. cap. 7. 8. 9. Humaine merrittes as the damnable hereticke Pelagius held them. In so much that Melancthon saith accordinglie of WicliffeMelancthon in epist ad Frideric. mico^. in lib. epist. Suinglij and Oecolampadij page 622. prope initium saith. prorsus nec intellexit nec tenuit fidei iustitiam. verily he did not vnderstand nor hould the Iustice of faith. and doubeth not with all to say of him,Melancthon ibid. I haue found in him many other errors whereby one may iudge of his spirit.
Lastlie (to omit diuers other) he held as Melancthon tearmeth itMelancthon ibidem saith of Wycliffe. De domino ciuili sophistice plane and seditiose rixatur. a se litiouse doctrine, and mother of all rebellion, teachingOsiander in epitom. histor. Ecclesiast. centur. 9. 10. 11. 12. etc. page 454. fine art. 15. and Concil. Constantien. Sess. 8. art. 15. And Melancthon in disput. de Iure magistratuum saith hereof. Insanij^ Wycleuus qui sensit impios nullum dominium habere. And in Commentarijs ad politica Aristotelis, he further saith, miras tragedias excitauit Wicleuus, qui contendit eos, qui non habent spiritum sanctum amittere dominium, and colligit multas so phisticas rationes ad confirmandum hoc dogma. etc. recitabimus quaedam argumenta Wycleu^ etc. that there is no ciuill Magistrate whilest he is in mortal sinne: and thatOsiander in epitom. centur 9. 10. 11 etc. page 405 art. 17. the people may at theire pleasure correct Princes when they do offend. and according to this principleMr. Stowes Annales etc. page 550. post med. the fauourers of wycliff^s doctrine did (as Mr. Stow reporteth) n^^ ^e vp schedules vpon the Churches dores of London conteining that there was a hundreth thowsand men readye to rise against all such as could not awaie with theire sect. In somuch as Sr. Iohn Ouldcastle Wycliffes cheife disciple oract. mon. page 268. b. fine And Mr. Stowes Annales etc. page 550. post medium. followerMr. Stowes Annales ibidem. to whose force and witt these other trusted Burst forth intoMr. Stowe vbi supra page 566. initio. also his enditement of high treason is extant of record, and set downe by Mr. Foxe act. mon. printed 1596. pag. 529. b. where he more bouldly then aduisedly laboureth vpon surmises to discredit the said record. treason against the King andMr. Stowe ibidem pag. 551. prope initium. did confederate him selfe with others to fight against the King in St. Giles feelde. At that timeMr. Stow ibid. pag. 551. circa medium. were taken fourescore men in armour of that faction. AndIbid. page 551 prope finem. 37. of the^ (publikely) condemned and executed. And Sr. Iohn Ouldcastle him selfe being at the last taken, was likewise executed in the said feilde of St. Giles, at what time he was so fantasticall, that at the time of his executionMr. Stow ibid. 572 fine. when
 many honorable persons were present, the last wordes he spake was to Sr. Thomas Erpingham, adiuring him, that if he sawe him rise from death to life againe the third day, he would procure that his sect might be in quiet. By all which premisses concerning Sir Iohn Ouldcastle, taken from Mr. Stowes Chronicle (dedicated to the now Lord Archbishope of Canterburie) it seemeth that Mr Foxe was in extreme need of examples to maintaine the continuance of his visible Church, when in his actes and monuments he so publickely and seriously registred this Sr. Iohn forAct. mon. page 261 b. and see there the title of Ouldcastles historie. and see Mr. Downeham in his treatise concerning Antichrist. pag. 41. prope initium. a valiant and most worthie M^rtir for the true profession of Christs Ghospell.
And thus much briefly (to omitt much moreIoachimus Vadianus a Swinglian of Zuriche de Eucharistia lib. 5. page 161. saith of Wycliffe. In nonnullis faede lapsus est. etc. He was fowly ouerseene in sundry pointes of religion and more giuen to scoffinge and pratinge then became a sober Deuine. And Pantaleon in Chronolog. page 119. ante med. accou^teh Wycl^ffe for an Hereticke. And placing him there in his Catallogue of Heretickes. saith. Ioannes Wyclefius cum Lolhardis in Anglia suam haeresim predicat. etc. And Mathias Hoe in his tractat. duo etc. tract. 1. de disput. page 27. expresly placeth and numbreth the W^clenistes and Hussistes in the ranke of Heretickes, calling them and others by him there named most monstrous monsters. Also it appeareth by mr. Foxe that Wicliffe was an vsuall dissembler of his faith: and that to preuent daunger of trouble he did ordinarily practize the same, to which purpose mr. Foxe. act. mon. page 95. a fine, saith. W^cliffe being beset with troubles was forced once againe to make confession of his doctrine, in which confession, as occasion serued for to auoid the rigor of thinges he answered with intricate wordes etc. Anno. 1381. And page 91. a. versus finem. he signifieth Wicleues often recantation: alledging Wicliffe saying. And now againe as before, also I doe reuoke and make retractation etc. by meanes wherof as Mr. Foxe confesseth a litle there before Wicliffe wonde him selfe out of the Bishopes snares Anno 1377. And p. 846. a. paulo post med. it is testified how that Wycliffe in an epistle written by him ad Ioannem Episcopum Lincoliensem, retracted his former doctrine against the Reall presence of Christes Bodie in the sacrament and in the Masse, reconciling him selfe in that article to the Church of Rome: and page 98. b. post med. and 99. a. it appeareth that Wicliffe Anno. 1384. (which was not three yeeres before his death) in his epistle to Pope Vrbane doth purge him selfe to the Pope, acknowledging that, the Bishope of Rome is the Vicar of Christ here vpon earth. with much more other like dissimulation: By ^eason of which kind of practize, Wicliffe so escaped the aggrauated danger of those times, that as Mr. Foxe witnesseth pag. 98. a. paulo ante med. He return^d agai^^ to his parish of Lutte^ worth wherof he was parson, and quietly there (saieth mr. Foxe) Slept in the Lord vpon St. Siluesters day ann^ 1387. that might be said (concerning Wycliffe and his followers) wherin is shewed. 1 First that imediately before his first appearing he was a Catholike Priest, and no Church of Protestants then knowne to be so much as but in being. 2 Secondly that after his reuolte he reteined still sundry Catholicke pointes of faith. 3 Thirdly that he held sundry grosse and damnable
 errors. 4 Fourthly and lasty that his doctrine was treasonable and his followers were notable co^uicted traitors: whereupon we referre (as before) to your Maiesties learned iudgeme^t, whether that the example of Wicliffe and his followers doth enable the co^tinuance of the Protestants Churches administration, of the Word and Sacraments, but so much as for and since that time in which he first appeared.


THE LIKE IS SHEVVED OF HVSSE (who liued Anno Domim 1400.) and his followers. SECT. 5.
AS concerning Iohn Husse, who was brought in questionSymon de Voyon in his discource vpon the catallog. of the doctors of Gods Church pag. 159 about the yeare 1405. litle is needfull to be saide, for his chiefe trouble was for vrging communion to the lay people vnder both kindes, (which pointe Protestants acknowledge to be but a matter of indifferencie,Melancthon in centur. epist. theologic. page 252. initio. and see the protestant writers alledged, and by mr. Iewell not denied, in his replie page 110. and 109. and for his affirmingact. mon. page 230. b. art. 1. and 2. and confessed of Husse by Osiander in epitom. cent. 15. page 469. paulo post medium. where he repeateth Wycliffe and Husse his doctrine saying: Nullus est Dominus ciuilis, nullus est Prelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in mortali peccato: haec propositio approbari non potest, sed passus est Ioannes Husse hac in parte aliquid humani vt supra demonstrauimus. of Wicliffes seditious doctrine against Princes, Priestes, and Bishopes, if they committed mortall sinne: other wise he beleeuedAct. mon. page 216. a. fine and b. initio. seauen Sacraments.act. mon. page 209. a. fine and b. initio. and post med. and page 197. b. fine. Transubstantiation.Mr. Iacob in his defence o^ the Churches and ministerie of England page 13. ante med. and act. mon. page 227. b. art. 7. and 8. and pag. 216 are. 12. and Luther in assertionibus Art. 30 saith. Ioannes Husse non repugnare videtur quo minus sit Monarchia Papae. (and a litle there before) he further saith of Wicliffe. non parum detulit romano idolo. the Popes Primacie. andLuther in colloquijs germanicis cap. de Missa saith: Missa priuata multos sanctos decipit a tempore Gregorij per Annos. 800. Ioannes Husse codem reti captus fuit. the Masse it selfe: and being a Catholicke Priest saidMr. Iacob. vbi supra. And Hulderich Reichentale who was a Citizen of Constance and liued in that time testifieth the same in hist. teutonic. de con^il. Constantiens. Masse euen to his dying day: and was so Catholickly resolued in other points of faith, that Luther saith.Luther in colloquijs germanicis cap. de Antichristo. the Papistes
 burned Iohn Husse when as yet he departed not a finger breadth from the Papacie, for he taught the same which the Papistes do, onely he found fault with their vices and wicked life, against the Pope he committed nothing. And the same is yet further testified of Husse byMr. Foxe in Apoc. c. 11. page 287. post med saith: Hieronimus Laudans Ioannem Hussium ait, nihil illum aduersus Ecclesiae statum commeruisse, tantu^ abusus, Clericorum superbiam, fastu^ ac Pompam Prelatorum ferre minus potuisse. Hierome of Prag, who liued in the same time with him: a thing so euidently true that no meaner a witnes then Mr. Foxe, testifieth the same as yet much more fully, rebuking for that very reason the Popes causing Husse to be burned: to which end Mr. Foxe saith:Mr. Foxe in Apoc. c. 11. page 290. post med. saith. Hussium and Hieronimum vt haereticos traducunt, quid ita obsecro? etc. Addo aliquid amplius si hereticus est, qui a placitis Romanae Ecclesiae de flexit, quid vnquam docuit, aut in concilio defendit Hussius in quo non cum Papistis superstitiose co^sentire videbatur? quid de Tra^substantiatione statuit fides Pontificia quod ipse pariter cum ijsde^ Pontificijs non confirmauit? Quis Missas illo religiosius celebrauit, aut vota sacerdotalis celibatus castius obseruauit? Adde huc quod in dogmate Catholicorum de libero arbitrio, de Predestinatione de fide formata, de iustificationis causa, de meritis bonorum operum, quid aliter sentit ille quam quod docetur Romae, quam ille vnquam statuam aut diui imaginem eiecit e templo suo Bethlehem? etc. Agedum, quid igitur commeruisse illum dicemus, in quo aut non ipse pariter cum Romana Sede condemnandus sit, aut cum eadem absoluendus? What did Husse at any time teach or defend in the Councell, wherin he did not rather seeme superstitiously to consent with the Papistes? what did the popish faith decree co^cerning Transubstantiatio^ which he likewise with the Papistes did not confirme? who celebrated Masse more religiously then he, or more chasilie obserued the vowes of Priestlie chastitie? Add further that in the doctrine of Cath^lickes concerning freewill, Predestination, informed faith, the cause of Iustification, and merit of good works? what other thing did he hould then is taught at Rome? What image of any Saint did he euer cast out of his Church at Bethleme? etc. What therfore shall we say him to haue committed for which he is not together with the Romane see to be co^demned, or with it to be absolued? And Mr. Foxe repor eth accordingly of Husse his followers the Bohemianes thatAct. mon. page 260. b. ante med. being demaunded in what points they did diff^r from the Church of RomeIbidem circa medium. the onely propositions which they (thervpon) propounded were theseAct. mon. page 260. ante medium. And see the very same testimonie hereof in Dresserus his millenar. 6. page 255. post medium. foure articl^s: First the necessitie of Communion vnder both kindes: the Second that all ciuill dominion was forbidden to the Cleargie. the Third that the preaching of the Word is free f^r all men and in all places. the Fourth that open crimes are in no wise to be suffered
 for auoidi^g of greater euell. So euidently also did the B^hemianes in all other pointes of faith embrace the Catholicke doctrine.
And thus much brie^lie concerning Husse and his followers that they were not of the Protestants Church, and therefore cannot iustlie be alledged as examples sufficient to vphould their Churches adm^nistration of the Word and Sacraments: A truth made so euident by the premisses as we hould it altogether vnworthie of your MAIESTIES further consideration, onely we cannot but (as before) so here also admire Mr. Foxe his extreme bo^ldnes or rather need of protestant Pastors and professors, when he so seriously registred Iohn Husse forAct. mon. page 190. b. ante med. and page 241. b. post med. A^d Mast^r Dowaeham in his treatise ^o^cerning Antichrist pag. 40. fine. a most holy martir, of their Church: not doubting likewise so vnaduisedly to honour, the succesfull for the time (though barbarouse)Of their barbarous crueltie, see act. mon. pag 253. b. insurrection of hisAct. mon. pag. 250 b. post medium. disciples and adherentes in Bohemia (who proceededAct. mon. pag. 251 a. post medium. to reue^ge his death withAct. mon. ibid. an armie of. 40000 men and confessedAct. mon. page 252 a. ante mediu^. Mr. Foxe saith of them, they rebelled out of hand. and Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. etc. pa. 472. circa med. saith of them. Cum Bohemi de exustis duobus Martiribus Ioanne Husso and Hieronimo Prage^si certiores facti essent vehementer exasperati sunt, a Magistratu politico aliquot Templa extorserunt in quibus Conciones ab Hussiacis ministrs audiuerunt and Sacramenta perceperunt. postea progressu temporis monasteria quaedam and Templa pontificia destruxerunt, Sacerdotes quosdam pontificios trucidarunt, denique multa designarunt, quae Hussus si in viuis adhuc fu^sset minime approbasset. etc. rebellion against their Soueraigne) with the vnfitting title ofact. mon. pag. 258. a. initio. the ghospells increase.


THAT THOVGH VVALDO WICLIFFE and Husse had bene Protestantes yet theire examples are insufficient in this case. SECT. 6.
HITHERTO we haue proceeded that neither Waldo, Wicliffe, nor Husse were of the Protestants Church, and that therefore theire examples are impertinently alledged: onely now we will suppose for the time that they had bene all of them full Protestants in opinion, and withall yet appeall to your MAIESTIES learned iudgme^t, whether their fo^esaide examples be not altogether insufficient to proue a continuance of their Churches administration of the Word and Sacraments, but so much as for
 those only times in which they liued, and that for two speciall important reasons.
As 1 First in that neither they all (nor so much as any one of them) were before their first appearing members and professors of the said supposed Protestants Church and faith, but were (as appeareth by the premisses,) all of them originally professed and knowne Catholikes: as in like maner were Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Pelagius, Eutiches, and the other ould Sectmasters before their times, who all being first Catholickes (through Innouation afterwardes and noueltie of opinion)1. Iohn. 2, 19. and act. 15, 24. went out from vs: the very brand or character wherwith the holy scriptures, and ProtestantsMr. Alison in his confutatio^ of Brownism. pag. 1. initio. them selues doe note false teachers. And therfore the foresaid example of Waldo, Wicliffe, and H^sse, who before their first appearing were Catholickes supposing they were afterwardes Protestants) proueth in steed of continuance rather a manifest defection, and not being of their Churches administration of the Word and Sacraments, at and imediately before the first begining of euery of them.
2 Secondly, as Luther saith:Luther vpon the epistle to the Galathianes englished in c. 1. fol. 10. b ante medium. It is not enough for a man to haue the word and puritie of doctrine, but al o he must be assured of his calling, and he that entreth without this, certainely entreth to no other end but to kill. etc. to which purpose the scripture saith:Rom. 10, 15. How shall they preach except they be sent.Hebr. 5, 4 No man taketh to him the honour of Pries^hood but he that is called of God as Aaron was:Iohn. 10, 1 Who so entereth not by the dore into the sheepfolde, but climeth an other way, is a theefe. And for so much as the refuge of pretended extraordinary calling hath bene heretoforeSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 3 in the margent there at the letter z. and in the margent at the letter a. sufficiently discouered, and reiected, by learned Protestants, Lutheranes, and Puritanes: the Churches ordinarie calling by man, being, (as the auncient FathersCiprian. l. de simplicitate Prelatorum condemneth such as want the Chur^hes calling saying. I^ sunt qui se vltio apud temerarios conuenas sine diuina dispositione praesiciunt, qui se praepositos sine vlla ordinationis lege constituunt: qui nemine episcopatum dante Episcopi nomen sibi assumunt. And Ciprian. l. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum. sayeth of Nouatianus: Nouatianus in Ecclesia non est, nec Episcopus computari potest qui Euangelica and Apostolica traditione contempta, nemini succedens a seipso ordinatus est, habere namque aut tenere Ecclesiam nullo modo potest qui ordinatus in ecclesia non est (and a litle afterwardes) nemini succedens and a seipso incipiens, alienus fit and prophanus. Vpon this ground Tertulian. in libro de prescrip. vrgeth the Hereticks of his time saying: Edant origines ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporum suoru^ ita per successionem etc. And Optatus l. 2. contra Parmen. vrgeth in like maner the Donatisies saying. Vestrae Cathedrae vos originem ostendite qui vobis vultis sanctam ecclesiam vindicare: mistus est Victor ex Africa Romam, erat ibi filius sine patre, sequens sine Antecedente And St. Austine ex quaest. in nouo and vet. Test. quest. 100. saith of Heretickes. Ordinem ab Apostolo Petro caeptum and vsque hoc tempus per traducem succedentium Episcoporum seruatum perturbant, ordinem sibi sine origine vendicantes etc. and them seluesLuther vpon the epistle to the Galathianes fol. 10. a. circa med. saith: God calleth vs at this day to the ministerie of his word not imediately him selfe but by man. And Piscator. volum. 1 thesium. theolog. pag. 405. circa med. saith. Post tempora autem Apostolorum vocauit, and adhuc vocat, and ad finem vsque mundi vocaturus est Pastores, Doctores and Presbiteros per Ecclesiam etc. And see D. Couel. in his defence of Mr. Hooker page 86. fine and 87. initio. and in his examination etc. page 131. fine and 106 initio. do yet further confesse) the established course of the new Testament, without which no man may vndertake the
 publique charge and administration of the word and sacraments: To which end the now Lord Bishop of Winchester affirmeth that,Mr. Bilson in his perpetuall gouernment of Christs Church. c. 9. pag. 111. ante medium. the moderation of the keies and imposition of handes were at first setled in the Apostles: and that they can haue no part of Apostolike Comission that haue no shew of Apostolicke succession etc. and therfore thatIbid. page 111 post med. and see the like in Mr. D. Couel. in his examination page 97. circa med. and 106 initio. Pastors do receaue by succession the power and charge of the Word and Sacraments from and in the first Apostles: against all which, the vulgar obiections which some precisians vrge (contrarie to scriptures, and so many of their owne writers) ofObiected by master Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in Rom. c. 10 fol. 255. a. paulo post me. Aedesius and Frumentius (two lay persons) Conuerting a great nation of the Indianes: and of a captiue woman conuerting the nation of the Iberianes, and grossely mistakenMistaken and impertinent, for though it be reported that Aedesius and Frumentius did by priuate exhortation perswade the people of that Nation to the Christian faith, a thing which Laye persons may do: yet is there no mention that either of them did vndertake the administration of the Word and Sacraments, vntill such time as Frumentius went to Alexandria to Athanasius who gaue to him the holy function of a Bishop. Theodoret (after Christofersons translation. hist. l. 1. c. 23.) wherewith he returned to the said nation and so proceeded to their conuersion. In like maner it is not said that the captiue woman did vndertake the administration of the word and sacraments, but that Priests onely were wanting, which she perfited by perswading the King to send to the Emperour of R^me for some Doctor etc. Whervpon a certaine worthy man was made Bishope and sent to preach to the nation of the Iberianes. Thendoret hist. l. 1. c. 24. versus finem. See also the former example of Frumentius answered in this sorte, by D. Sarauia in defens. tract. etc. contra respons. Bezae. c. 1. page 46. ante medium. and impertinent.

If now our Catholicke Church be a true Church able to conferre this calling so by herWhittaker contra Duraeum. l. 9. page 820. saith hereof to Duraeus: Fuit Lutherus vestro etiam ritu Presbiter atque Doctor etc and talem fuisse Suinglium, Bucerum, Oecolampadiu^ aliosque innumerabiles constat. etc. And see Ioannes Regius in libro Apologetico. etc. page 122. ante med. and page 121. giuen to Husse, Wicliffe etc. and that it was sufficient to them, why then do our aduersaries so greeuously accuse and maligne our said Church for false and Antichristian? And if according to their doctrine the Pope be Antichrist and our Church Antichristian, then followeth necessarily that which them selues therupon say, namely that,Propositions and Principles disputed in the Vniuersitie of Geneua. page 245. circa med. And Mr. Gabriell Powell in his consideration of the Papistes reasons etc. page 71. saith the Popish ordination is nothing els but meere prophanation: etc. there is no true Ecclesiasticall vocatio^ in the Papacie. etc. And see further hereof mr. Sutliffe in his answere to the Masse Priestes supplication to the 19. section And Mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfeite Catholicke page 50. circa med. saith, to vs, you are highly deceiued if you thinke we esteeme your offices of Bishops Priestes and Deacons any better then Lay men, and you presume to much to thinke that we receiue your ordering to be lawfull. And page 51. ante med. he answereth and giueth reason, why he alloweth our Baptisme though not our orders. And see Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum. l. 9. page 821. initio. there is in Babilon (thereby meaning our Church) no holy Order or ministrie in deed, no lawfull calling but a meer^ vsurpation: F^r it must needs to all men seeme absurd that Ch^ists Ministers shou^d receiue then spirituall power and Comission from Antichrist: and then also not onely Waldo the ^ay man, and all those who discended from him (which is heretoforeheretofore tract. 2. c. 2 sect 3. prope initium. in them made most euident) but likewise euen Husse, Wicliffe, and Lu^her him selfe (who had no other calling but from our Church) and so many other as haue afterwards claimed vnder them, are destitute hitherto of all lawfull calling,The Protestant Lascius in proofe hereof alledgeth (in the booke entituled de Russorum, Muscou^tarum, and Tartararum religione. page 23. Caluine saying, quia Papae Tirannide abrupta fuit vera ordinationis series, nouo subsidio nunc opus est etc. atque omnimo extrao^dinarium fuit hoc munus quod Dominus nobis iniunxit etc. so say they fleeing to extraordinarie calling. And Beza in the Conference at Poyssie being demaunded of the calling of him selfe (and his other then associates) affirmed the same to be extraordinarie. Hereof reade Sarau^a in defens. tract. contra respon. Bezae page 59. fine. and 60. post medium. and 74. fine. the true succession
 of ordination being (as our aduersaries therupon affirme) then broken of: which needfull continuance of personall succession or calling, seemeth furthermore so manifestly defectiue or wanting in the Protestants Church, that euen sundry of themselues, (who as Sadell complaineth therat)Anthonie Sadell in his booke entituled de rebus grauissimis controuersis disputationes theologicae page 719. ante med. saith hereof, hoc ipsa rei veritas ab illis obtinuit, veram, atque expresso Dei verbo fundatam esse eam doctrinam, quam ecclesiae nostrae amplexae sunt: sed affirma^t ministros esse apud nos legitima vocatione destitutos, cum non habea^t perpetuam ac visibilem ab Apostolis ad haec vsque tempora successionem. etc. acknowledge the doctrine which their Church doth embrace to be true and grounded vpon the expresse word of God, do yet affirme the ministers with them to be destitute of lawfull calling: etc. In which opinion they are so resolute that Sadell did therefore write a speciallThe title of that treatise is, de legitima vocatione Pastorum Ecclesiae reformatae aduersus eos, qui in hoc tantum capite se ab Ecclesia reformata dissentire profitentur: and beginneth page 719. of the booke aboue alledged. treatise therof against them.
And thus much briefly whether Waldo, Wicliffe, Husse, and Luther, had suficient calling or not to administer the Protestant Churches word and sacrame^ts: which if they had not, the^ admitting that we should for the time suppose them to haue bene full Protestantes in opinio^, and also neuer to haue bene reuolted Catholicks, but orig^nally professors of the Protestants Doctrine, yet all th^s notwithstanding there appeareth by reason of their foresaid alledged onely want of true ordination, a con^essed and vnanswerable defecte or downefall (for so many hundreth yeares last past) of theire Churches administration of the word and sacrame^ts, without which (as them selues haueSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. at x. y. z. heretofore confessed fro^ the scriptures) it were no Church.


THAT THE EXAMPLES OF BERTRAM Berengarius and others (who liued before Waldo) are also insufficient to answere in this behalfe for their times. SECT. 7.
HAVING spoken thus fully of Waldo, Wycliffe and Husse in whom remained our aduersairies greatest confidence, it shalbe lesse needfull to make this point more manifest as yet in the other seuerall ages precedent to theire times, as well for that thus
 much onely may suffice as haue bene already said of the Protestants foresaide defection (though but during the seuerall times or ages of Waldo, Wycliffe, Husse or any of them) concerning their Churches then euident want of administration of the worde and Sacraments which (acording to their formerSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1. at. t. v. and ibid. x. y. z. b. c. confessio^) must euermore continue and be in the true Church, as also for that their like manifest defect, euen also in those other precedent ages is by our learned aduersaries no lesse the^ very plainely acknowledged. To ad yet somwhat to that which hath beneSee heretofore tract 2. c. 1. sect. 4. heretofore most fullie confessed, in that behalfe, the other learned Protestants (such as are more wary and sparing what to saie or write thereof) do acknowledge thatMr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfait Catholicke page 36. prope initium. and Mr. Gabriel Powell in his Consideration of the Papistes reasons etc. page 105. fine. saieth. I graunt that from the yeare of Christ 605. the professani company of Popery hath bene very visible and perspicuous. Anno 607. (at the furthest) from Christ the papistes religion preuailed,Mr. Fulke ibid. pag 27. circa medium. all Popes from Boniface the third being Antichristes. And that since that time theire ChurchMr. Fulke ibid. pag. 16. paulo ante med. fled into the Wildernes there to remaine a long season inuisible now Waldo (who was many yeares before Wicliffe and Husse) begunne butAct. mon. page 628 b. ante medium. Anno 1218 so that betwixte him and the foresaid yeares of 607 were sixe hundreth and odd yeares, for and during all which time no lesse then for the time since Waldo, our aduersaries rest chargeable againe to answere for their churches continued administration of the Word and Sacraments, wherat they stand wholly silent, and confesse as before their defect therin, being vnable to afford but any one exa^ple so much as of any one Kingdome, Cittie, or Village vpon the wholle face of the earth, nor so much as of any one person liuing in the world, professing their religion and celebrating their sacraments, but during any one moment day or time within any one of all those said sixe hundreth yeares.
In further triall wherof to deale as now liberally with them, and to admitt for true, as well that Apocriphall and forged epistle, printed lately at Basill, and written in behalfe of Priestes marriages in the name
 of Vtricke Bishope of Augusta vnto Pope Nicholas,For Pope Nicholas the first, to whom this Vtricke should write was made Pope Anno. 858. and enioying the same nyne yeeres two monthes xx. daies dyed Anno. 867. as testifie Onuphrius in libro de Romanis Pontificibus: and vide Anastasiu^ Bibliothecarium de vitis Roman. Pontific. etc. Printed Magnutiae Anno. 1602. pag. 305 fine. and 328. initio. And Pantaleon in cronog. p. 70 wheras Vtricke was not made Bishope of Augusta till after the death of Pope Nicholas viz. Anno. 924 (Vide Vrspergensem in chronic. and Chitreum in Chronic. and Pantaleon in chronic. page 75.) and continuing Bishope 50. yeares: dyed Anno. 973. Beuther l. Fastorum page 209. And see Pantaleon in Chronograph. page 75. and Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. cent. 9. 10. 11. 12. etc. page 99. fine. and 100. ante medium. sundry yeares, either before that Vtricke was borne, or els after that Pope Nicholas was dead: as also that other though perhaps more auncient, yet no lesse forgedIt appeareth by the booke of Pope Adrian vnto Charles, (which booke is extant tom. 3. Concil. and in many thinges long since specially cited by Iuo, and purposely written in confutation of that other booke vnder Charles his name) that the same was then forged by some hereticall enimie against Images. and lying booke written against imagesCaluin. in institut. l. 1. c. 11. sect. 14. Insinuateth it to be forged about Charelemaines time, saying: extat refutatorius liber sub Caroli magni nomine, que^ ex dictione colligere licet eodem fuisse tempore compositum. Vnder the name of Carolus Magnus, who in deed was not onely an extreme enemieIoanas Aurelianensis (who liued in those times) affirmeth (l. 1. pro imaginibus) that Claudius Taurinensis who impugned images durst neuer publish his doctrine therof during the life of Carolus magnus. And Paulus Aemilius l. 2. hist. Franciae such, that Carolus magnus sent 12. Bishops vnto a Councell holden at Rome by Pope Stephan^^ in confutation of the error of the Greekes against images. Hereof also see the Centurie writers cent. 8. c. 9. col. 570. And Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Lincoln in his Chronic. fol. 174. b. circa med. repo^teth of certaine Bishops sent by Adrian to Charles, who held a Councell in Fraunce against the condemnation of images. etc. to all those that impugned Images, but was also (as the learned ProtestantsHereof see Luc. Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. cent. 8. pag. 101. circa med. and Mr. Cowpers Chronic: fol. 173. a. post med. and 175. b. paulo ante med. Foxe in Apoc. page 436. paulo post med. And Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church: page 221. paulo post. med. and 226. initio. and circa med. And Hospinianus in epistola dedicatoria. hist. sacramentar. circa med. saith. Imperator (Carolus magnus) non solum publicis edictis mandauit, vt ceremoniae and ritus, itemque Missa latina Rom. eccles. aliaque decreta placita and instituta Romani Pontificis per totum imperium obseruarentur, sed ipsemet etiam carceribus ac varijs suppliciorum generibus ad hoc ipsum cogebat ecclesias: was this man then like to impugne the Church of Rome in her doctrine of Images. confesse) wholly denoted to the Romane Church. And to admit likewise the booke written of the Sacrament, and set forth lately (not without greatIn so much that Pantaleon in his chronogra. pag. 65. mencioning Bertram and his other writings, forbeareth yet to mencion this booke or to charge him with this pretended opinion. suspition) by Oecolampadius vnder Bertrams name to be in deed that auncie^t booke which Bertra^ is mencioned to haue written de Corpore and Sanguine
 D^mini, to King Charles the balde: and that also this present booke were not doubtfullThis booke is so perplexedly and doubfullye penned, and vseth the wordes figure spirituall and misterie, with such qualifications, and so fully also withall affirmeth the presence of Christs Body vnder the veile or couerture of bred that it affordeth no plaine sense against the Reall presence. but plaine and direct against the Reall presence, which thing the Centurie writers vtterly denie:Centur. 9. c. 4. col. 212. It is said: Transubsta^tiationis semina habet Bertramus. In so much also, as our auncient Catholicke writers nearer to those times, doubteth not to honour Bertram,Hospinianus in hist. sacramentaria. l. 4. page 317. paulo ante med. mencioneth this at large. for a holy Martir of their Church, and Illiricus accordingly for beareth to name him in hisIlliricus in Catall. test. ver. printed Basiliae Anno 1556. Catalog. of Protestant witnesses. And to admit lastly the exa^ple of Berengarius Archdeacon of Angiers, denying Transubstantiation, and that he had not, (as he after did)Act. mon. pag. 13. a recanted that his opinion, and had also bene free from all those other confessed errors wherwith Oecolampadius and other Protestant writers charge him,Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij l. 3. page 710. fine. saith: Berengarius nonnulla affirmabat aduersus Coniugiu^ and Baptismum paruulorum (and page 711.) deinde etiam Berengarius parum candide incessisse deprehenditur. (and page 712. initio.) Damnata est Berengarij opinio, nimirum sacerdotio parum, Christiano minus tribuens: And see Papir. Masson in Annalibus Francorum. l. 3. in Hugone, and Roberto: where it is said that Berengarius and his followers denied the grace of Baptisme, denying that men committing mortall sinne could euer obteine pardon therfore. and that Beside^ this he was an en^mie to marriage. etc. And Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church. page 289. ante medium saieth: Although Berengarius had the truth on his side, yet had he a certai^e hatred ag^inst La^francus and R^gerius mingled with glorie. etc. He mingled with all certaine speeche^ of m^^riage and the Baptisme of little children etc. So ^t commeth to passe when without the Lords feare w^ will m^^ntaine the cause of the Gh^spell. yet what do all these, or any one of them, or any other like that may be alledged, conuince in this behalfe? euery of them, (though thus admitted) extendeth only but to some one parte or small time of the said 600 yeares: and is also for the most parte but the example of some one or other priuate man, being at first Catholike and begining afterwards to holde some one onely singuler pointe of the Protestants faith, remaining in al^ other matters of controuersie still Catholicke: which thing Mr. Fulke did well foresee, and therfore being prouoked in this kind, he iumpeth quite ouer these foresaid examples, and all the saide si^e hundreth yeares, and giueth his first instance in Wi^l^ff saying:Mr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfeite Catholicke. page 34. paulo ante med. Wicliffe I weene you will not deny but he was of our Church: and as to Bertra^ and those other
 who seuerally impugned Images and the vnmaried life of Priestes, he saith expresly of them:Mr. Fulke ibidem. Although these and such like defended some parte of the truthe which we holde against you, yet least you should obiect it was but in some one or two pointes, I passe them ouer with silence. So manifestly are these foresaid exa^ples of Bertram and the rest found impertinent (though we should admit them for true) and so plainely withall are the said 6. hundreth yeares betweene Boniface the 3. and Waldo, found destitute of all examples wherby to vp hould the Protestant CHVRCHES administration of the Word, and Sacraments: which pointe Master Iohn NappeirMr. Nappeir vpon the reuelations in c. 20. page 239. ante med. affirmeth that for the space of a thousand yeares from the daies of Pope Siluester the first (who liued Anno Dom. 320.) to the daies of Pope Boniface the .8. the seate of Rome had no match nor encounter (neither) euer suffered any to be seene vouchable or visible of the true Church but thence forth such hotte warres fell betwixt the empire of Rome and the mahumeticke empire, that at vnwares diuers true professors openly and vowably did arise, as Iohn de R^pe scissa Anno 1240.. Guilielmus de sancto Amore. Anno. 1260. etc. Wicliffe Anno. 1390. Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prag. Anno. 1415. So plainely doth Mr. Napeir disclaim in Bertram Vtrike and all those other foresaid examples which were before Boniface the 8. As for Ioannes de Rupe Scissa (whom Mr. Napeire nameth) he liued not Anno. 1260. but (as Mr. Foxe) act. mon. printed. 1596. page 359. a. line 70. testifieth Anno. 1340. of whom Mr. Foxe there saieth, that he for rebuking the spiritualtie for their great enormities, and neglecting their office was cast in prison: otherwise he was in Religion Catholicke, and wholly ignorant of the Protestants doctrine. In like maner concerning Willm. de S. Amore. his trouble is by Mr. Foxe (vbi supra page 287. b. line 60.) and by Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church page 359.) mencioned to be onely for writing against the Friars and their hypochrisie in so much as Pantaleon (in chronographia page 102. initio) saith. Guilielmus de S. Amore, Monachos ex elemosina in ocio viuentes non saluari scribens a Papa hereticus censetur; and to the like effect testifieth Osiander centur. 13. page 367. ante med. as for any further prooffe of him being a Protestant there is no testimonie; to such impertinent examples as our aduersaries enforced for vpholding of their Churches continuance. (though our aduersarie) doth as yet much more fully acknowledge. Add but now he^evnto in full conclusion or demonstration that neither H^sse, Wi^l ff^, Waldo, nor any other within the foresaid 600. ye^res betweene Boniface the 3. and Waldo were professed members of the Protestants visible Church, a briefe repet^tion of that which the lea^ned Protestants the^ selues haue heretofore most plainely acknowledged: to this end saith Mr. PerkinsMr. Perkins in his exposition vpon the Creed page 400. We say that before the daies of Luther for many hundreth yeares an vniuersall Apostasie ouerspread the wholle face of the earth and that our Church was not the^ visible to the world: wherof he giueth the reason saying,Mr. Perkins ibidem. page 307. during the space of nyne
 hundreth yeares the popish heresie hath spread it selfe ouer the wholle earth. To omit the like acknowledgment of Mr. D. Fulke concerning the Churches remainingMr. Fulke in his answere to a counterfeit Catholicke. page 16. ante medium. invisible a long season, after Anno. Dom. 607. Master Iohn Napeire confesseth as before thatMr. Nappeire vpon the Reuelations. pag. 145 colum. 3. fine. the Pope and his Cleargie hath possessed the outward visible Church of Christians 1260. yeares,Mr. Nappeire ibid. page 191. initio. Gods true Church most certainly abiding so long Latent, and invisible:Ibid. p. 161. col. 3. circa med. and page 156. ante. med. and 237. paulo post med. and 23 fine. and Sebastianus Francus affirmethSebastianus Fra^cus in epistola de Abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis. that for certaine, through the worke of Antichrist, the externall Church togither with the faith and sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles departure, and that for these thousand foure hundreth yeares, the Church hath bene no where externall and visible.


A CONFVTATION OF THOSE PROTEstants who answere that their Churches administration of the Word and Sacraments did during all those times continue in being and yet withall remaine as then inuisible or vnknowne; with solution to the vsuall obiection of Elias complaint that he was left alone. SECT. 8.
AND for so mu^h as in this extreamest need, Anthonie Sadell offereth his last helpeSadell de rebus grauissimis controu. disputa. etc. pa. 783. prope initiu^. affirming that although their Pastors, Doctors, administration of the Word, and Sacrame^ts, had for so many s^uerall hundreth yeeres together, bene to the world so invisible and vnknowne as the premisses argue, that yet notwithstanding they were at all times in euery of those seuerall ages most certainely (though so vnknowne yet) daily extant and in being, euen as those 7000.1 Of Kings. 19, 18 faithfull, though vnknowne in like manner to Helias, when he thought1 Of Kings. 19, 10 him selfe alone were yet neuerthelesse at the same time reserued and remaining.

we humblie pray your highnesse of patience to vouchsaue our examination of this their last and dispairing refuge: in full discouery whereof, we saye: 1 First that though those .7000. of that one speciall time were vnknowne as the^ to Elias, yet this proueth not (which is the onely matter pertinent hereby to be proued that therefore they should be as then vnknowne also to all others of the same time, and much lesse therfore can this perticuler exa^ple proue, that all the faithfull not of one speciall time onely, but also of so many seuerall hundreth yeares as are before examined should all of them during all those ages continew so generally Latent and vnknowne (not to one Elias onely but) to the whole world, as that there should remaine no memorie or notice of the needfull preaching, and administratio^ of Sacraments to haue beene performed, so much as by any one of the^ in any one Nation of the earth, for any one moment of all those times,
2 Secondly we say that this example of Elias maketh wholly for vs and against our aduersaries, and is therefore by them either ignorantly mistaken, or wilfully misapplied: for it is euident that Elias1 Of Kings. 19, 3. And see the contents of the Englishe Bible vpon that Chapter. fleeing the face of Iezabell wife to Achab, who soughtIbid. vers. 2. his life, laye therupon secret inIbid. vers. 8. and 9. a Caue vpon Mount Horreb. in the wildernes at the time of his foresaid complaining that he was left alone, the which he then vttred not generally but in regard onely of that countrie of Israell which was the kingdome of Achab (wherein he then a stranger laye secret) as appeareth most plainely aswel in that God himself accordingly answered his said complaint, with like respect to that onely countrie, saying as is obiected,Ibid. vers. 18. I haue lefte to me in Israell 7000. etc. as also for that in those very times the Church did greatly florishe in the other next adioining kingdome of Iuda, and was as then to him there, both knowne and visible, vnder two
 good kinges Asa and Iosaphat, who reigned euen in the time1 Of Kings. 22, 41. of Achab: at what time the number of the faithfull was there so exceeding greate, that the souldiers onely were numbred to many2. Chron. 14, 8, 9. and 17, 14, 15.16, 17, 18, 19. hundreth thowsands: so visible and knowne was the Church at that time, and so euident withall is the truthe of this our answer, that this very obiection, is in this sort answered and refelled, not onely byMr. Clapham in his soueraign remedy against schisme pa. 17. paulo post med. saith. Our ignorant reformists say, the Church was invisible in the time of Helias* wherto he answereth saying, the holy Ghost recordeth Helias to haue spoken this against Israell, not against Iuda, for as he knew that good Iosophat at that time reigned in Iuda: So he well knew that there, was not onely the Church visible, but also mightely reformed. and vide ibid. page 18. initio. and circa med. Mr. Henoch Clapham an English Protestant, but also (as certaine of our other aduersaries do thereatBenedict morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia pag. 4. saith: Mirum quod Philippus ea quae dicuntur de inuisibili Ecclesia ita prorsus reijcit, vt illud etiam Domini verbum ad Eliam, reliqui mihi 7000 etc. ad visibilem Ecclesia^ detorqueat. complaine) euen by Philip Melancthon.Melancthon in corpore doctrinae. page 530. and that the Churches Pastors and Doctors should for so many ages together be in being and withall vnknowne, is yet otherwise at the least in it selfe inexplicable if not co^tradictorie, for what do our aduersaries affirme to be the reason of this their pretended latencie, a^l they can al^edge is persecutio^. But against this we say 1. First that the Churches persecutio^ maketh her the more knowne, for who are persecuted but knowne men, this Mr. Ca^thwright confesseth calling the^efore the Church vnder persecution.Mr. Carthwrite in Mr. Whitgiftes defence etc. page 174. paulo post med. And he saith there further: What a conclusion is this, the Church were few in number because they were vnder the Crosse etc. To let passe both scriptures and stories Ecclesiasticall, haue you forgotten what is said in the first of Exodus, that the more the children of Israell were persecuted the more they increased. visible and sensible, for els (saieth he) how could it be persecuted and Mr. Iewell saith accordingly,Mr. Iewell in his replie page 506. circa med. And see Mr. Iewell in his defence of the Apologie printed 1571. page 33. and 34. the Church is placed vpon a Mount her Persecutions cannot be hidde. In cleare demonstration wherof, it is euident, that although the primatiue Church during the first 300 ye^res, after Christ, enduredHereof see Mr. Foxe in his actes and monuments Printed 1576. from page 34. till page 86. describing the first tenne Persecutions. And see the Centurie writers of Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 2. col. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. and Cent. 2. c. 2. col. 10. 11. 12. 15. 16. 17. 18. 20. 21. 22. etc. and Cent. 3. c. 3. col. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. etc. incomparablie the most vniuersall and violent persecutions that euer were, (yet the same notwithstanding)
 our aduersariesCentur. 1. and Cent. 2. and 3. throughout. And Pantaleon in Chronogra. and Functius in Chronolog and Osiander Cent. 1. 2. and 3. and Foxe act. mon. in his discourse of the tenne first Persecutions of the primatiue Church. And Dresserus in millenar. 5. pag 11. and 12. And of the sundry Councells or Synodes then assembled and had. See Mr. Fulks booke de successione Ecclesiastica, contra Stapletonum. pa. 246 ante med. the Centurie writers, and sundry otherrs, do at this day take certaine and perticuler notice, of the Catholicke Bishops and Pastors by name in euery of those ages, of their administration of the Word and Sacraments, and their open impugning of Heresies.
2 Secondly we say that for so much as (according to many beforeSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1. recited plaine testimonies from scriptures and Protestants) it is euident and confessed that the Church is to continue so knowne, that all menSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. l. c. and in the margent there. carefull of their saluatio may know where the true Church is, and to which company they ought to adhere: that therfore no force or persecution of man can or shall be able to dissolueAct. 5, 39. If this worke be of God you are not able to dissolue it. or make frustrate the ordinance of God made in this behalfe.
3 Thirdly we say that euen common vnderstanding argueth this inuincible, from the very nature of the Church, for we must needes affirme of the Church vnder Persecution, that either she doth in some sorte or other make profession of her faith, and also openly refraine the externall communion of all Idolatry, false doctrine, and sacraments, or els that she doth not professe and refraine as beforesaid, if the latter, then (as appeareth most euidently by the premisses)See heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1. she is not the true Church: if the first then is she thereby made knowne and visible, for besides her foresaid profession consisting in administration of the Word and Sacraments, and impugning of errors; which being done (though neuer so priuately) is impossibleHumfred. in Iesuitismi. part. 2. rat. 3. page 241. initio. saith hereof. Dum Ministri docent, alij discunt, illi Sacramenta administrant, hij Communicant, omne Deum inuocant, and fidem suam profitentur, qui ista non videt talpa est caecior. etc. to be in so many countries kept secret, for any smaller time, much lesse for so many ages together, her onely foresaid open refraining or recusancie (wherto she is by the iudgment of ProtestantsThat Protestantes thinke them selues bound to auoide the open profession of our Catholicke faith and communion of our Sacraments, is made more the^ euident by their recusancie, to be so much as present only at our seruice whereof more is s^ide hereafter. tract. 3. sect. 1. in the margent at the letter c. no lesse in dutie bound) lieth euermore open to be discerned, and by how much the persecution is more grecuous, so much the lesse can this recusancie be kept secret or vnespied, as appeareth most plainly
 by that small resemblance had therof in the exampleFor if during but the last 20. yeeres, we of this one nation in comparison but few, could not so escape the mileder search of Protestant Magistrates, but that by our onely recusancie we were daily discerned, could the^ all Christians supposed to be dispersed through out so many nations of the world, escape for so many hundreth yeeres togither, that inquisition of our Church, which Protestants affirme to haue bene vniuersall and farre more greeuouse. onely of our owne times and nation.


A CONFVTATION OF THOSE WHO AN swere that their Churches administration of the word and Sacraments, continued during all those seuerall ag^s in being and also knowne and that as now through the iniurie of later times no testimony or notice therof is to vs at this day remaining. SECT. 9.
IF now any of our aduersaries doe disclaime in vrging as before the foresaid example of Helias, and in the foresaide opinion of affirminge their Ch^rch to haue bene for so many ages in being, but yet vnknown, and will now in steed therof lastly say, (which is all that can be imagined to be left for them vnsaid) that their Churches Pastors and Doctors, their impugning of errors, their administration of the word and sacraments were in euery of those foresaide ages knowne, and visible to the worlde, though now sithence, all testimonie and record thereof is through the late violence of the Pope and his clergie vtterly suppressed and made awaie, the idle vanitie of this conceipt is many waies discouerable. As, 1 First in that it is but a meare imagination whereof is neither testimonie nor proofe. 2 Secondly in that all proofe and experience is most cleerely and directly to the contrarie, as appeareth by example of Husse, and Wicliffe, whoseOf the writinges of Husse and Wicliffe yet extant, and printed at Noriberg. See Iunius his Animaduersiones ad controuersiam quintam etc. de membris Ecclesiae milita^tis, quam Bellarminus exarauit etc. l. 1. page 14. circa med. And Illiricus in Catallog. testium veritatis page 847. and 850. prope finem. maketh like mencion of their writings yet extant. And mr. Foxe act. mon. printed 1596 mencioneth W^cliffes writinges page 428. a. lin. 35 and so likewise doth Crispinus in his treatise of the estate of the Church page 419. initio. And Mr. Fulk saith. Nondum interierunt B^rtrami, Valdi, Ioannis a Ga^dauo, Wicleui, Hussi plena pietatis ac Christianae doctrinae monume^ta Fulke contra Stapletonu^ de successione ecles. pag. 308. initio. and ibid. pa. 349 initio. he saith. scripta W^cleu^, Bertrami, Hussi etc. extant. and vide page 320. writinges are yet extant: also
 to our aduersaries, by like example of their other foresaid aledged epistle of Vlrike in defence of Priests marriage, of Charlemaines booke against images: and of Bertrames booke concerninge the Sacrament: in like maner by the decrees of our Catholicke Councells daily condemning and reciting all such arising opinions as were co^trary to the same, likewise by the many and ample now extant volumes of our Catholicke writers in euery age reciting in like maner, and at large confuting all appearing Doctrines contrarie to the Roman Church. Lastly (as Mr. Whitaker confesseth) by our eclesiasticallMr. Whittaker contra Duraeum. l. 7. page 469. prope initium. obseruing for true that all opinions contrarie to the Romane Church are me^cioned by our historiographers, and being enforced for the vpholding of the Protesta^ts Church, to make claime almost to all such as in any sort resisted the Pope (whereof see heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2.) saith deinde post Apostasia^ inuectam, and tirannidem Antichristi constitutam, nullus vnquam historiam scripsit, qui non ecclesiae nostrae doctrinam, mores instituta, semitia aduersarios commemoret ita vestris historijs nostrae Ecclesiae memoria viget: and qui Pontificij regnires narrare conati sunt, ij nostrae ecclesiae testes sunt. etc. historiographers of euery age, who make this the very argument of their writing: in so much that nothing is as now better knowne to vs, then that which the Church of Rome hath heretofore impugned, and many an hereticke is hereby likewise m^de noted and infamouse to all suceeding age^, whose better obscuritie would otherwise haue beene buried in forgetfulnes. And that all this is most true is yet furthermore so euident, that our verie aduersaries them sel^es, do from hence take notice, and in there owne writingesThis is at large performed and set downe by the Diuines of Magdeburg. in their seuerall Centuries. by Pantaleon in his Chronographia. by Luc. Osiander in his epitom. eccles. hist. and by Illiricus in his hooke entituled Catallogus testium veritatis qui ante nostram aetatem reclamarunt Papae. And see further hereof Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum. page 276. initio. and 469. ante medium. make mention of the daily opinions cond^mned in euery age by the Church of Rome, of which opinones certaine also (which maketh this point most euident) were often times euen some one or other speciall DoctrineBesides the foresaid examples of seuerall doctrines of the Protestants reported and condemned in Waldo, Berrengarius, Wicliffe and Husse. See also heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. in the mar^ent vnder the letters n. o. The other like examples of sundry articles of the Protestants faith, mencioned and condemned in other confessed Heretickes, as namely in PETER BRVIS, Almericus, the Albigenses and the Apostolici. so plainely were the Protestants seuerall doctrines, not purposely suppressed or passed ouer in silence, but in all times (euer as they appeared) specially recorded and condemned. now sithence taught by Protestants, and heretofore seuerally profe^^ed by so^e one or other perticuler co^demned person of those times: 3. Thirdly
 (supposing with Protestants that their Church is a true Church) it is against manifest scripture, which testifieth of the true Church thatEsay. 60, 20. her sonne should not be set nor her moone hid: that sheDaniel. 2, 44. should not be geuen to an other people, but should stand for euer, asEsay. 60, 15, 16. an eternall glorie and ioy from generation to generation.
4 Lastly it is against the euident confession of our learned aduersaries who acknowledge their owne Church to haue bene (in regard of externall profession) for many hundreth yeeres pastSee before tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4 post medium. inuisible andSee Mr. Iohn Nappeire vpon the reualatio^s in c. 12. page 161. col. 3 circa medium. withdrawne from open assemblies to the hartes of particuler godly men.


THAT EVEN LVTHER HIM SELFE WAS no member of the English Protestants Church: nor professor of their Religion. SECT. 10.
LIKE as it appeareth by the premises, that our aduersaries are not able to find out any testimonie or proofe of their Churches administration of the word, and sacraments for so many seuerall ages before Luther, their principall examples of Waldo, Wicliffe, Husse etc. being heretofore discouered for altogether insufficient, so likewise in further euidence we will now shew, the like insufficiencie also euen in the very example of Luther him selfe: concerning whom we will endeuour two speciall points, the First that Luther neuer was of the Englishe Protestants now faith and religio^. Secondly that though he were, yet is his example therin of no force in this behalfe: not for so much as for his owne time.
Now concerning the First namely that our aduersaries may not challenge Luther to haue bin of their now Church and religion, appeareth by his sundry grosse and confessed errors, wherin they are enforced to disclaime.

As for example 1 First co^cerning the successe and preseruation of our Christian profession in generall: he affirmed and taught (to the great daunger therof) thatLuther in assertionibus damnat. per Leonem decimum Artic. 34. which was praeliari aduersus Turcas est repugnare Deo visitanti iniquitates nostras per illos. And in explicat. articuli. 34. he saith emong his other defence therof. Ite praeliamini contra Turcas vt resistatis virgae Dei, and cadatis sicut and Achab cecidit. And in epistola contra duo mandata imperialia (he further saith) Oro cunctos pios Christianos, ne vllo modo sequamur vel in militiam^re vel dare aliquid contra Turcas, quandoquidem Turca decies prudentior probiorque est quam Principes nostri. to warre against the Turkes, was to resist God visiting our sinnes by them: the which opinion he did also afterwardes more at large defend, concluding and sayingLuther in explicat. Art. 34. prope finem. and hereof see the treatise against the defence of the censure page. 230. ante med. and 231. initio. Luther in his booke de bello contra Turcas, affirmeth that the Deuill by Gods permission did gouerne and hinder the Councells and assemblies of the Princes of Germanie for no other cause, but that his article of not warring against the Turke might remaine in force and vnconde^ned. He that hath eares to heare let him heare, and abstaine from the Turkish warres whiles the Popes name preuaileth vnder heauen: I haue saide: And wheras Doctor Fulke doth excuse all this, asMr. Fulke in his Apologie of the professors of the Gospell etc. against Peter Frarine page 31. initio. meant of those Christians which were vnder the Turkes Dominion: It is so directly against the scope andHis former mencion of God visiting our sinnes by the Turke and likewise of the Pope, and also of the Princes of Germanie, and the wholle passage of his treatise made therof at large, auoideth this answere, in so much as the author against the defence of the censure page 231. laboureth to excuse Luther otherwise. circumstance of Luthers wordes, that Roff nsisRoffensis in confut. Assert. Luther. printed 1523. Art. 34. did therefore write speci^lly against this his foresa^d doctrine, at large ^eciting and confuting his reasons: which foresaid doctrine of Luther was also so knowne andHereof see Belforest in Cosmogra l. 2. c. 7. col. 579. gratefull to the Turke, that as (Luthers owne ^choller reporteth)Manlius in loc. comun. pag. 636. fine. the Turkish Emperour (to the great shame of Luther hearing therof) demaunded our Christian Embassadour how oul^ Luther was, and wished him yonger, promisi^g to be his good Lord. And the Duke of Saxony (a professor of Luthers doctrine) was accordingly charged,Hereof see Sleida^. l. 18. fol. 277. ante med as being confederate with the Turke. In so much has Erasmus (whom our aduersaries thinke to haue bene indifferentlyAct. mon. pa. 404. a. fine. affected towards Luther) saith hereofErasmus in epistola ad fratres inferioris Germaniae. pag. 39. many of the Saxones following that first doctrine of Luther, denied to Cesar and King Ferdinando aide against the Turke etc. and saide they had rather fight for a Turke not baptized, then for a Turke baptized, therby meaning the Emperour.
2 Secondly concerning the Canonicall scriptures it is euident that Luther denied sundry co^fessed parts therof: concerning the Apocalips Bullenger giueth testimonie saying.Bullenger vpon the Apocalips englished c. 1. serm. 1. fol. 2. a. post med Doctor Martine Luther hath as it were sticked this book^ by a sharpe preface set before his first aedition of the new Testament in dutch, for which his iudgme^t good and learned men were off^nded with him: and concerning the epistle of S. Iames, Luther saith therof.Luther prefat. in epist. Iacobi in aeditione Ienensi. The Epistle of Iames is contentious. swelling, dry, strawne, and vnworthy an Apostolicall spirit. In so much as liliricus Luthers scholler expresseth and defendeth Luthers foresaid iudgment saying.Illiricus prefat. in Iacobum. Luther in his preface vpon S. Iames epistle giueth great reasons why this epistle ought in no case to be accounted for a writing of Apostolicke authoritie vnto which reasons I thinke euery godly man ought to yeeld, which foresaid iudgme^t of Luther concerning these, and other partes of the new Testament is yet to this day so continued and defended by Luthers owne schollers, that (to omitt sundrySee Pomeran. in epist. ad Rom. c. 4. And Vitus Theodorus in Annot. in nou. test. pag. vlt. And the Centurie writers of Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. and cent. 2. l. 3. c. 4. And Hastenrefferus in loc. theologic. l. 3. stat. 3. loc 7. page 292. And Adamus Francisci in Margarita theologic. page 448. saith: Apocriphi libri noui testamenti sunt epistola ad haebreos, epistola Iacobi, secunda and tertia Ioannis, posterior Petri, epistol^ Iudae and Apocalip. other of them) Chemnitius (Luthers greatest scholler) affirmeth thatChemnitius in Enchirid. etc. page 63. And see Chemnitius in his examen. Concil. Tride^t. part. 1. page 55. the second epistle of Peter, the second and third of Iohn, the epistle to the hebrues, the epistle of Iames, the epistle of Iude and the apocalips of Iohn are apocriphall asChemnitius examen part. 1. page 56. b. initio. not hauing sufficient testimonie of their authoritie, and therfore thatChemnitius ibidem page 57. a. nothing in controuersie may be prooued out of these bookes Concerning now the other bookes of scripture, although Luther acknowledged them for canonicall, how far yet he was changeable otherwise in misse translating them, we will (omitting perticulers) referre to the credit of Zuinglius his testimonie, who saith hereof to Luther.Zuinglius. tom. 4. ad Luther. l. de sacram. page 411. and 412. Thou doest corrupt (Luther) the word of God, thou arte seene to be a manifest and common corrupter and peruerter of the holy scripture, how much are we ashamed of thee, who haue hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prooue thee to be so false a man.
3 Thirdly as concerning faith, he reprooueth as well such Protest^nts as sayLuther vpon the Galathians englished in c. 2. fol. 67. b. post med. nei^h^r can faithe be
 true faith without charitie, as also those other who teachLuther ibid. fol. 67. circa medium. though my faith be neuer so perfect, yet if this sait^ be without charitie I am not iust^fied calling itLuther ibid. fol. 68. b. prope finem. and fol. 126 b. and see Luther in his sermons Englished. etc. page 204. circa med. impietie to affirme that saith except it be adorned with charitie iustefieth not, nay ^e proceeded so far, as he douted not to say,Luther. tom. 1. prop 3. Fides nisi sit sine etc. Faith vnlesse it be without euen the l^ast good workes doth not iustefie, nay it is no faith. which saying of his master D. Couell specially acknowledgeth and reciteth, tearming itMr. Couel. in defence of Mr. Hookers fiue bookes of Ecclesiasticall policie. page 42. ante med. harsh andMr. Couel. ibid. iustly called in question, by the Church of Rome. He also further taught thatLuther de captiu. Babilon. and see further hereof the treatise against the defence of the Censure. page 198. a Christian or Baptized person is so rich, that although he would he cannrt lose his saluation by any sinnes how great soeuer, vnlesse he will not beleeue: wherof he giueth his reason els where saying.Luther in loc. commun. etc. Class. 5. c. 27. page 68. initio. As nothing iustefieth but faith, so nothing sinneth but vnbeleefe.
4 Fourthly as concerning workes: he teachtehLuther in his sermo^s Englished etc. page 147. ante medium. that work^s take their goodnes of the worker: and thatLuther ibidem page 276. ante medium. no work^ is disalowed of God, vnlesse the author therof be disalowed before: saying therfore further.Luther ibidem page 278. ante medium. Such a one worketh nothing but good workes, neither can it be but good, which he being good before shall do. And as concerning the necessitie of good workes (affirmed against him by English Protestants)The necessitie of good workes is affirmed by Mr. Willet in his tetrastilon. Papismi. page 90. fine. by Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Petr. 2. sect. 3. fol. 444. a. post med. and by Mr. Whitaker against mr. Rainoldes page 350. post medium. Of the dissention had herein betweene the Diuines of England and the Lutheranes in Germanie, speciall report and mention is made, in colloquio Altenburgens. fol. 168 a. fine. And also in actis colloquij Adelburgensis page 102. circa med. and 483. circa medium. it is so farre disclaimed in by him and his followers. that they denyIlliricus in prefat. ad Rom. and vide Conradum Schlusselburg. in catal. hereticorum l. 13. and vlt. pag. 819. circa med. good workes to be so much as causa s^ne qua non of saluation, affirmingIlliricus in prefat. ad Rom. And see colloquium Altenburgense. fol. 210. a. b. and 231. 324. 382. and 352. the controuersie with the Papistes to be (not onely) whether good workes do iustefie, (but also) whether they be in any respect necessarie to sa^uation: which last position they callIlliricus vbi supra. a papisticall error: tearming itIlliricus. ibidem. the doctrine of the new Papists as perniciouse as the ould,
 to say (as English Protestants do) that the Apostle ment to exclude good workes from iustification, not simplie and as due, but onely as meritoriouse and cause efficient: they will not in the point of our iustification grauntConradus Schlusselburg. in catal. Hereticorum. l. 13. in epist. dedicatoria pa. 22. paulo post med. good workes to be necessarie (necessitate presenti^) so much as with a necessitie of presence: condemning their brethrens contrarie doctrine forIlliricus de originali iusticia ac iniusticia in appendice page 163. worse then is the Papistes doctrine concerning good workes: they fortefie them selues herein with the testimoniesSee Luthers sayings alledged in actis colloquij Aldeburgensis pa. 8. circa med. and in Illiricus in prefat. ad Rom. of Luther, and haue proceeded so farr against all necessitie of good workes, that some of them (as namely Amsdorphius) doubt not to affirme, thatHereof see acta colloquij Aldeburgensis page 120. sect. 11. initio. And pag. 443. paulo post initium. and pag. 293. paulo ante medium. good workes are not onely, not necessarie to saluation, but also hurtfull to it.Vide ibid. pag. 205. post med. and fine. alledging Luther in proofe of this opinion.Vide ibid. pag. 120 sect. 11. initio. and 293. paulo ant^ medium. the which Illiricus doth allowe and defende by publique writing. And all this so grossely and intollerably, that sundry other Protestant writers, who acknowledge AmsdorphiusD. Amsdorphius piae memoriae. so called ibidem pag. 206. circa med. for a man (otherwise) of godly memorie do yet neuerthelesse in this, professe toIbid. pag. 205. fine. and 206. initio. It is saide hereof nos quidem ipsos (Lutherum and Amsdorphium) interse committimus, hanc propositionem non vsurpaturi. leaue both him and Luther to themselues.
5 As concerning marriage and diuorce: Luther saith:Luther in serm. de matrimonio. Si non vult vxor, aut non possit, veniat ancilla: If the wyfe will no^, or can not come, let the maide come: and whereas Mr. Whitaker (who would make the best gloze hereof) answerethMr. Wh^taker in respons. ad rat. Campiani rat. 8. pag. 150. circa med saith therof. Lutheri aute^ istam de ho^ diuortij genere sententiam, ego minime defendo. hereunto, that Luther hereby meant first to diuorce and then after to marry the maide, yet is this diuorce (though vpon such foresaid occasion either of infirmitie or wilfulnes) vtterly reiectedWhitaker ibide^ vt supra and contra Duraeum l. 8. pag. 687. fine. euen by Mr. Whitaker him selfe: and neuerthelesse Luther was so vehement against the wiues froward refusall of her husbandes bed, that he further saieth therof,Luther tom. 5. Witteberg serm. de matrimonio fol. 123. a. verius sinem. See also Luthers wordes cited in the treatise against the defence of the censure pag. 219. post med. the Magistrates duetie is to bridle this wyfe, yea and to put her to death, this if the Magistrate omit, the husband must imagine that his wyfe
 is stolne awaie by theeues, and dead, and consider how to marrie, an other: (for saith he yet further,See the foresaid treatise against the defence of the Censure page 213. prope finem. And see Luther tom. 5. Witteberg. in 1. Cor. 7. fol. 113. a. initio we cannot stopp St. Paules mouth etc. his wordes are plaine that a brother or sister are free from the law of wedlocke if the one departe or do not consent to dwell with the other, neither doth he say that this may be done once onely, but leaue it free, that so often as the case shall require he may either proceed or stay: in which case (as he signifieth) a manSee the treatise against the defence of the Censure page 213. paulo post med. And see Luther tom. 5. Witteberg. fol. 112. b. fine. may haue tenne or moe wyues stedd from him and yet liuing: nay he doubteth not in case of adulterie co^mitted by a maried man or married woman to giue libertie euen to the offending adultererIn aliam profugere treram. maechus potest, ibique si continere nequeat vxorem ducere rursum. Luther tom. 5. Witteberg serm. de matrimonio. fol. 123. a. initio to flee into an other countrie and marrie againe: so dangerously doth he incline to poligamie, the which (to be sparing herein to his otherMusculus in epist. Pauli ad Phillip. Colloss. etc. in 1. Tim. 3. page 396. circa med. thinketh that Poligamie was tollerated by the Church in the Apostles times. and see the Alphabeticall table there at the word (Poligamie) And see Poligamie defended by Bernardinus Ochinus l. 2 dial. 21. page 200. and 204 co^mended in the treatise of the life and death of Peter Martir (ante med.) for an excellent and learned man. schollers) himselfe els where seemeth to defend, affirming thatLuther in propositionibus de Bigamia Episcoporu^ aedit. Anno. 1528 propositione 62. 65 66. and vide Lutherum in explicatione Geneseos edit. Anno. 1525. in Commentario. c. 16 poligamie is no more abrogated, then is the rest of Moises law, and that it as free, as being neither commanded nor forbidden: in respect whereof he signifieth thatLuther. in Genes. c. 16. edit. Anno. 1525. he will neither bring in poligamie nor condemne it: which foresaid errors concerning marriage, diuorce, and poligamie were so plaine and grosse in Luther, thatWicelius in his method. concordiae Ecclesiasticae c. 9. initio saith. Reducat ad calculum Lutheri factio and retractet quae portenta and quam non pudice admodu^ scripta ediderit, de coniugio, de diuortijs, de it^ra^do post diuortia, de gradibus, de poligynecia populi etc. Wicelius (a learned Protestant) doth therefore specially charge and reproue him.
6 As concerning Magistracie, how fully, plainely and directly he impugned the same (especially before the Princes of Germanie had vndertaken the defence of his doctrine) is by his owne writinges more then manifest,See hereafter tract. 3. sect. 5. in the margent at the figure 3. and hereafter in part from thence declared: onely now I will add as not altogether improper hereunto the base and inuectiue calumniacions wherewith he charged (to omit sondrie other Princes and Magistrates) our late soueraigne K. HENRY the 8. of famouse memory calling him

Luther in libro contra Rege Angl. in prefat. an enuiouse mad foole, babling with much spittle in his mouthIn the same booke extant in tom. 2. Witte^berg fol. 333. and 334. more furious then madnesse it selfe, more doltishe then folly it selfe, endued with an impudent and whorish face without any one vaine of Princely blood in his body, a lying s^phiste, a damnable rotten worme, a Basili^ke and progenie of an adder, a lying s^urrill couered with the title of a King, a clownishe wit, a doltishe head, most wicked foolish and impudent Henry. and saying furtherIbid. fol. 338. he doth not onely lye like a most vaine scurre, but passeth a most wi^ked knaue:Ibid. fol. 339. and vide 442. thou liest in thy thro^e foolish and sacriligious^ King. Wherunto might be added his exceeding many othe^moe like dispitefull and s^ur^ill wordes vsed against his Maiestie, some of them being so immodestly base,Ibidem fol. 333. and 337. where he saith. Ius mihi erit Maiestate^ tuam Angelicam stercore conspergere (and.) Sit ergo mea haec generalis responsio ad omnes sentinas insulsissimae huius laruae (and) haec sunt Robora nostra aduerius quae obtumeseere cogu^tur, Henrici, Thomistae, Papistae, and quicquid est faecis, sentinae, latrinae, impiorum and sacrilegorum eiusmodi: Sordes istae and labes hominu^ Thomistae and Henrici sacrilegus Henricoru^ and asinorum cultus: furor insulsissimorum asinorum and Thomisticorum porcoru^os vestrae dominationis impurum est sacrilegum. W th infinite moe such like. as we are ashamed to english them.
7 Concerning the administration of the word and sacraments he maketh it co^mon to lay men with the clergie, s^ing to this endLuther tom. 2. l. de ministris Ecclesiae instituendis fol. 362. and vide ibid. l. de abroga^da Missa priuata. and in libro de captiu. Babilon. c de ordin^. And see Hospinianu^ in hist. sacrame^tar. page 22. paulo post med. the first office of a Priest is to Preach the word and^. But this is co^mon to all, next is to Baptize, and this al^o may all do euen women etc. The thirde is to Consecrate bread and wine, But this also is common to all no lesse then Priests, and this, ^aun^^h by the authoritie of Christ him selfe, saying, do this in remembrance of me, this Christ spoke to all there present and to come afterwardes whosoeuer should eate of that Br^ad and drincke of that Wine etc. this also is witness^d by St. Pau^e, who .1. cor. 11. repeating this, applieth it to all the Corinthians: making them all a^ him selfe was, that is to say Cons^crators: and. if then that which is greater then all be giuen indifferently to all men and women, (I meane the word and Baptisme) then, that which is l sse. (I meane to Consecrate the supper) is also geuen to them. And the like doctrine doth he affirme no lesse plainlyLuther in assertionibus damnatis per Leone^ decimum art. 13. saith. In sacramento poenitentiae ac remissione culpae, non plus facit Papa, ^piscopus, quam infimus Sacerdos. Immo vbi non est Sacerdos aeque tantu^ quilibet Christianus etiamsi mulier aut puer estet etc. quod autem absente Sacerdote etiam puer aut mulier and quilibet Christianus absoluere potest Mat. 18. clare patet vbi Christus omnibus Christianis dicit quodcun que solueritis super terram solutum erit in coelis, hanc inuictam authoritate^ non mihi subuertent. And see further in loc. comun. class. 2. page 136. and 138.
 in other of his writinges, being (as Mr. D. Couel. affirmeth)Mr. Couel. in his defence of Mr. Hookers 5. bookes of ecclesiasticall policie Art. 15. pag. 101 post med. And see Luther de Missa priuata. editio. Anno. 1534. And see Hospinianus in histor. sacramentar. page 22. paulo post medium. not afraid to affirme that sacraments are affectuall t^ough administred by Satan him selfe: this did Luther write against the POPE, though els where to serue his owne turne against the Anabaptistes (who vsed the very same weapon against him) he presseth and chargeth them for their want of ordinarie calling: so variable,Zuinglius in responsione ad confessione^ Lutheri saith. Lutherus nunc hoc nunc illud de eadem repronunciat, nec vsqua^ sibi constat, haud dub^e ea inconstantia and leuitate in Dei verbo vtendu^ esse existimat, qua effrictae frontis scurrae, inter aleam vti consueuerunt. inconstant, and t^mporizing (as oc^asion requiered) was he in his doctrine.
8 Concerning the sufficiencie of our redemption by our Sauiours Passion in his humane nature vpon the Crosse, Luther taught thus farre to the contrary, as that notLuther in confessione maiore de caena Domini. saith: Cum credo quod sola humuna natura pro me passa est, Christus ille vilis nec magni praetij Saluator est: Immo ipse quoque saluatore opus habet. onely the humane nature of Christ suffered for vs, for (saith he) in affirming but so much,Luther vt ^upra. Christ is a Sauiour of vile and small account, and needeth him selfe also a Sauiour. But also thatLuther libro de concilijs part. 2. saith of the Zuinglia^s Pertinacissi^^e co^tra me pugnaba^t, quod diuinitas Christi pati non posset. etc. And see Luther further. tom. 3. germ. Ien. fol. 455. b. the Diuinitie of Christ did suff^r which his opinion of the Godhead suffering is admired and yet further taugh by AndreasSiluester Czecanorius in dial. de corruptis moribus vtriusque partis fol. 5. saith. Andreas Musculus non veritus fuit palam docere diuina^ Christi naturi, q^^e Deu^ est, vn^ cum human anatura mortua^ fuisse in Cruce etc. nec destirit. etc. id dogma de mortua diuinitate publi^e profiteri ac spargere, adiutore Ioanne Islebio. M^s^ulus and sundrieNichol^us Seluecerus in confut. accusat. sol. 192. saith. Nemo dicere posset vel debet D^um non este p^ssum vel mortuum: And the same doctrine is in like maner affirmed by Stephanus Gerlachius contra Busaeum pag. 24. and 126. And by Iacobus Andreas. Wherof see in Respons. ad acta colloq^. Montisbelgar. pag. 82. versus finem. and 92. versus finem. other of Luthers schollers, and so in^ollerablie and grossely, that they are therfore the^in speciallyBeza in epistolis theologicis. ep. 60 initio. And after the Geneua Print of Anno. 1573. pag. 285. saith. Non potest a nobis satis bene disputari de sententia Islebij and Musculi Andreae, contendentium Christum in vtraque natura passum esse etc. istorum sententia Prophetarum and Apostolorum and ominum orthodoxorum sanae doctrinae aduersari videtur. Whereupon he doth at large confate that opinion there. pag. 286. 287. 291. And see Beza hereof further in respons. ad acta colloquij Mentisbelgar part. 1. pag. 82. versus finem. and 92. versus finem. And Siluester Czecanorius vt supra at 5. and Luther vt supra at 4. contradicted by diuers other lea^ned Protestants.
9 Concerning his contempt of the ancient Fathers and his owne great vndertaken knowledge: he saith.Luther in libro ad Ducem Georgium. And Luther ad cap. 1. ad Galatas. saith: Esto, Ecclesia, Augustinus, and alij Doctores, item Petrus, Apollo, imo Angelus e coelo diuersum doceant, tamen mea doctrina est eiusmomodi quae solius Dei gloriam illustrat etc. Petrus Apostolorum summus, viuebat and docebat extra verbum Dei. And after the English translation fol. 33. b. paulo post med. and 34. a. initio.since the Apostles times no Doctor or writer hath so excellently, and clearely, confirmed instructed and comforted, the consciences of the seculer States as I haue done: By the singuler grace of God this certainely I know, that neither Austine, nor Ambros, who are yet in this matter the best, are aequall to me herein. And againeLuther in serm. de euersione Hierusalem. the Ghospell is so copiously preached by vs, that truely in the Apostles time it was not so cleare In what strange maner he contemneth, Origen, Athanasius, Chrisostome, Basill, Ciprian, Hierome, and Gregorie: I passe ouer as being els whereSee this in Gasper Vkenbergius in his booke entituled, graues and iustae causae, cur Catholicis in Co^munione veteris eiusque veri Christianismi constanter vsque ad vitae finem, permanendum sit etc. Printed Anno. 1589. causa. 7. pag. 175. and 176. And see Coccius his thesaurus tom. 1. pag. 1118. b. collected specially from his owne perticuler sayings ouer tediouse and vnworthy here to rehearse. How highly he esteemeth of such doctrine as him selfe collecteh from the scriptures and how much he preferreth him selfe therein before the Fathers, him selfe signifieth sayingLuther tom. 2. l. contra Regem Angliae. fol. 342. Gods word is aboue all, the Diuine Maiestie maketh for me, so as I passe not if a thowsand Austines, a thowsand Ciprians, a thowsand King Harrie Churches stood against me. Nay he doubteth not in plaine tearmes to exempteLuther aduersus falso nominatum ecclesiasticum statum saith: Scire uos volo quod in posterum non amplius vos hoc honore dignabor, vt sina^ vel vos, vel ipsos Angelos de coelo, de mea doctrina iudicare etc. nec volo meam doctrinam a quoquam iudicari, atque adeo ne ab Angelis quidem, cum enim certus de ea sim, per eam quoque and vester and Angelorum iudex esse volo. his doctrine from all iudgement of men and Angells, making him selfe therby iudge of both: and will our English Diuines allow this in the doctrines of Reall pres^nce, Images etc. wherwith they chargeHereof see Mr. Bridges in his defence of the gouernment etc. pag. 559. Mr. Perkins in his foure treatises how to applie Gods word etc. sect. 10. initio. And see Mr. Whitgiftes defence. etc. pag. penult. and reproue Luther.
10 As concerning the implacable contentions betweene him and the Zuinglians or Caluinists (to who^ our English Diuines adhere) and how they disclaimed
 ech in other Luther expresseth saying.Luther contra Articulos Louanienses. thess. 27. tom. 2. Wittenberg. fol. 503. And in epistola ad Iacobum Presbiterum he further saith. Beatus vir qui non-abijt in concilio Sacramentariorum, nec stetit in via Zuinglianoru^, nec sedet in cathedra Tigurinoru^, habes quid sententiam. We censure in earnest the Zuinglians and all the Sacramentaries for Hereti^k^s and alienated from the Church of God: andSee Luther. tom. 7. Wittenberg. fol. 380. 381 and 382. I do protest before God and the world that I do not agree with them nor euer will while the world standeth, but will haue my hande, cleere from the blood of those sheepe, which these Heretickes do driue from Christ, deceiue, and k^ll And againe in the same place: Cursed be the charitie and con^ord of Sacramentnries, for euer and euer to all eternitie. And a little before his death, he protesteth saying.Luther de caena Domini tom. 2. Germ. fol. 174. And see this a so reported by the Tigurine Diuines in confess orthodox Ecclesiae. Tigur. tract. 3. fol. 108. And Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 264. calleth them Persons condemned in their owne knowledge with whom he will haue no entercourse neither by letters writings or wordes. I hauing now one of my feete in the graue, will carie thi^ testimonie and glorie to the tribunall of God, that I will with all my harte condemne and eschue Carobastadius, Zuinglius, O^colampadius and their schollers, nor haue wi^h any of them familiaritie, neither by letter or writi^ges, neither by wordes nor deedes accordingly as the Lord ha^h commanded. with infinite much more to the same effect: To make this more euident as yet by the like answerable testimonies of the Zuinglians and Caluinistes: The Tygurine, Diuines say hereofTigurini tract. 3. co^tra suprema^ Lutheri confessionem pag. 61. And the Author of the treatise against the defence of the censure doth hereupon charge Luther with breach of all Christian modestie and immoderate zeale. pag. 155 circa med. euen farre beyond the bondes of charitie and modestie. page 101. ante med. Nos condemnatam and execrabilem vocat sectam etc. Luther calleth vs a damnable and execrable sect, But let him l^oke that he do not declare himselfe an Archereticke, seeing he will not nor cannot haue any s^cietie with those that confesse Christ: But how marueilously doth Luther here bewray him selfe with his diuells? What filthie wordes doth he vse, and such as are replenished with all the diuells in hell? For he saith that the Diuell dwelleth both now and euer in the Zuinglianes, and that they haue a blasphemous breast insathanized, supersathanized, and persathanized, and that they haue besides a most vaine mouth, ouer which Satan beareth rule, being infused, perfused, and transfused to the same: did euer man heare such speeches passe from a furious Diuell him selfe? In so much as Zuinglius saith of him,Zuinglius in respons. ad confessionem Lutheri saith. En vt totum istum hominem Satan occupare conctur. Behoulde how Satan doth endeuour wholly to possesse this man. And Oecolampadius acco^dingly forewarneth Luther,Oecolampadius in responsione ad cofessione^ Lutheri. Least that being puffed vp by Arr^gancie and pride, he
 be seduced by Satan: whereunto might be added sundry other like testimonies:Conradus Regius in libro Germanico co^tra Ioannem Hussium de caena Dom. saith. Deus propter peccatu^ superbiae qua sese Lutherus extulit, que^admodum pleraque ipsius scripta testificantur, veru^ illi spiritum abstulit, vti Prophetis illis. 3. Reg. 22 atque in eius loco iracundu^, fostuosum, atque mendace^ spiritu^ dedit. And the Tigurine Deuines in confessione Germanica impresta. Tiguri. Anno. 1544. in octauo. fol. 3. say. Superioribus diebus edidit Ma^tinus Lutherus librum que^ inscripsit (breuis confessio de Sacrame^to) in quo non obscure pro hereticis sacramentarijs and sceleratissimis hominibus, habet and condemnat Oecolampadium, Zuinglium and omnes Tigurinos, liber plenus est demonijs, plenus impudicis dicterijs, scater iracundia and furore. etc. This contention betweene Luther and his followers on the one partie, and the Zuinglians or Caluinists on the other is yet further testified not onely by the almost infinite many writingsHereof see hereafter tract. 3. sect. 7. in the margent at this marke. *. of one against an other yet daiely encreasing, but also by the knowne mutuall proscriptio^ or banishmentConcerning the many examples hereof: see Apolog. modest. ad acta conuentus quindecem theologorum torgae nuper habit. pag. 3, 4. and 5. and Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 16. part. altera pag. 803 ante med. and 860. initio. and 609. initio. and 735. initio. and Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church. pag. 697. post medium. And Conradus Schlustelburg. in catal. hereticorum. l. 13. and vlt. pag. 828. prope finem. and 847. circa med. ech of other from their seuerall territories or dominions: So farre were they from reputing one an other for members of one and the same Church:
11 As concerning Luthers life and maners, for so much as ^e is so strongly priuileged in the opinion of the present time, we wi^l in respecte thereof but brief^y touch the same, and that also not without great and re^pectiue obseruation as forbearing purposely the credible testimonies in that behalfe of Cocleus, Lindanus, Staphilus and other our Catholicke writers, to whom his life and maners were well knowne, and choosing specially to speake therof from no other testimonie then of hi^ selfe and his owne dearest schollers. As touching his life before his reuolt from our Catholicke Church, it is confessed that he as then liuedSee Simon Voyon vpon the catalog. of the Doctors etc. englished pag. 180. and Luther ad Galat. c. 1. ver. 14. fol 35. a. after the English translation. in his monasterie punishing his bodie with wat^hing, fasting and Praier.See Luthers owne wordes hereof in his Come^tarie vpon the epistle to the Galathians in english in c. 1. fol. 35. a. Honoured the Pope of mere co^s ience:Luther. ibidem. fol. 35. b. kept Chastetie, Pou rtie, and Obedience: andLuther. ibid. fol. 35 a. whatsoeuer (saith he) I did, I did it with a single harte, of good zeale, and for the glorie of God, fearing greeuously the last day, and desirous to be saued from the bottome
 of my harte. Whereas afterwards vpon his defection from our Church, he was so farre from his former cource of chastitie, that he saith to the contrarieLuther tom. 7 in epist. ad Wolfangu^ etc. fol. 505. He that resolueth to be without a woman, let him lay aside from him the name of a man, making himselfe a plaine Angell or spirit. And againe.Luther tom. 5. Wite berg. serm. de matrimo. fol. 119. a. versus finem. quam non est in meis viribus vt vir non s^m etc. As it is not in my power that I should be no man, so it is not in my power that I should be without a woman etc. It is not in our power that it shoul be either staied or omitted, but is as necessarie as that I should be a man, and more necessarie then to eate, drincke, purge, make cleane the nose etc. (And to omitLuther in colloquijs German. cis c. de matrimonio, saith. vt nemo potestest cibo vel potu carefe, sic fieri nequit, vt aliquis a muliere abstineat. etc. causa haec est, quia in vtero mulierum concepti, eo aliti, inde nati lactati and edudati sumus ita vt caro nostra maiori ex parte mu lieribus caro sit, and sic plane fieri nequit, vt ab ijs separemur. his other like sayings) yet he further saith.Luther tom. 1. epistolarum latinarum. fol. 334 ad Phillippum. I am burned with the great flame of my vntamed flesh, I who ought to be feruent in spirrite, am feruent in the flesh, in Lust, slothe etc. eight daies are now past, wherein I neither write, pray, nor studie, being vexed partely with the temptations of the fleshe, partly with other trouble. (But saith he) ItLuther vbi supra. pa. 345. sufficeth that we haue knowne the riches of the glorie of God, the Lambe which taketh away the sinnes of the world, from him sinne cannot draw vs, although we should commit fornicacion or kill a thousand times in one day, And being in this case he laboureth not to preserue his former kept chastitie by his foresaid pun^shing his bodie with Watching, Fasting, and Praier, before time continued by him in his monasterie when he was a Catholicke, which cource of resistance by praier, the blessed Apostle1 Cor. 12, 7 (being so assaulted) instantly vsed, and therby preuailed, but vnmindfull of his former vow, and forbearing as before praier sometimes euen for eight daies togither, at the last (in speedie accomplishnent of his desire)Melancthon in epist. ad Ioac. Camer. de D. Lutheri coniugio. It is extant in Melancthons Consilia Euangelica part. 1. pag 37. He married vpon the sodaine Katherine Bore the Nunne, without any communication before had therof with any of his frendes, but hauing in the euening inuited to supper Pomerane, Luke the painter, and Appelles the lawier, he finished the espousalls. A thing then holden so scandalous bySleidan in his Comenraries in englishe l. 5. An. 25. fol. 65. b. paulo post med. saith In those daies Luther married a Nunne, wherby he gaue occasion to his aduersaries to speake euell of him. An. M. Fulke in his answer^ to p. Frarines declamation pag 32. ante med. con^esseth that many men misliked Luthers marriage with a Nu^ne in so much as Luther him selfe. in colloquijs latinis tom. 2. de coniugio saieth hereof. Nisi ego clam celebrassem nuptias, omnes impedissent, quia omnes amicissimi clamabant, non illam, sed aliam. reporte of Sleidan and others that his dearest Melancthon did
 therfore speciallyMelancthon his fore said epistle ad Ioc. Camer. extant vbi supra. write to a frend of his in excuse therof, wherin neuerthelesse he holdeth itMelancthon vbi supra saith. Ac possit fortassis aliquis mirari illu^ hoc infaelici tempore, bonis and honestis viris vbique grauiter laborantibus, non modo non affici simul dolore, sed videri propemodum nihil penitus curare ea mala quae ante oculos versantur. marueilous, that Luther should be so regardlesse and litle touched with griefe at the calamitie then present, as to vndertake that marriage: onely he excuseth it withMelancthon vbi supra saith. Atque ego rem hanc sic gestam esse arbitror, est vir iste nequaquam ex ijs qui homines oderunt and congressus fugiunt, quotidianae autem vitae illius vsum non ignoras, vnde cogitare te cetera quam mescribere melius vt opinor fuerit. Luthers sociable condicion of life, andMelancthon vbi supra. What other good matters were these which Melanctho^ did thus forbeare to write, leauing them rather to his frends thought? other matters (therupon depending and not to be vttered,) which (saith he) are fitter for you to imagine then me to write. For (saith he)Melancthon ibid. pag. 38. initio. saith. Ego naturam Lutherum arbitror coegisse vt fieret maritus I am perswaded that Luther was a man enforced to marriage by nature. Hereunto we may ad, that Luther lying thus open, acknowledged hisIn Sleidans Comentaries in Englishe l. 3. An. 21. fol. 29. b. initio. profession not to be of life or manners, but of doctrine:Sleidan ibid fol. 22 a circa med. wishing that he were remoued from the office of preaching, because his manners and life did not answere to his profession: wherin he was so censured of euen by Protestants themselues, that (as appeareth by their owne reportReported by the Protestant writer Benedict Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia pa. 221. circa med who saith of the Caluinistes. Si quando volunt indulgere genio non verentur inter se dicere, hodie Lutheranice viuemus. If at any time they would geue assent to the prouocation of nature, they blush not to say among them s lues, to day we will liue Lutheranely. Hereunto we could further add like confessed testimonieConradus Schlusselburg. (a Lutherane Protestant of great note.) and is great an enemie to the Pope as either Caluine or Beza, in his theologia Caluinistarum. l. 2. fol. 72. a. circa med. and post med. saith of Caluine. Deus manu sua potenti adeo hunc hereticum percussit, vt desperata salute, Demonibus inuocatis iurans, execrans, and blasphemans miserime animam malignam exhalarit: obijt autem Caluinus morbo pediculari, vermibus circa pudenda, in apostemate seu vlcere faetentissimo, ^^^^centibus, ita vt nullus assistentium faetorem amplius ferre posset. Haec publicis scriptis Caluino obijciuntur (in quibus etiam de ipsius ASELGIA, varijs flagitijs, and sodomiticis libidinibus ob quas, stigma ferro cadenti dorso Caluini impressum fuerit a magistratu sub quoru^ vixit ho^renda narr^ntur.) ad quae non video solida^ and luculentam aliqua^ refutationem. etc. Scio and lego Bezam aliter de vita moribus and obitu Caluini scribere, cum vero Beza eadem haeresi, and codem ferme peccato nobilitatus sit, vt historia de candida eius meretricula testatur, nemo ipsi in hac parte fidem habere potest. And see further there concerning Beza. l. 1 in proemio pag. 4. b. and ibid. pag. 92. a. post med. and b. and 93. a. initio. And Tilmannus Heshutius an other Protestant writer in his booke entituled verae and sanae confessionis etc. saith of Beza. Spurcissimis suis moribus dedecori fuit ipsis disciplinis honestis, quique nefandos amores, illicitos concubitus, scortationes, faeda adulteria, sacrilego carmine decantauit orbi, non contentus eo, quod ipse more porci in caeno flagitiosarum libidinum sese volutaret, nisi etiam aures studiosae iuuentutis, sua illuuie contaminaret. in this kind euen against Caluine and Beza.
12 As concerning Luthers confessed instruction from the Deuill by sensible co^ference had with him, we referre the same to his owne testimonie therofSee in the next section in the margent there at the letters c. d. hereafter more fitly alledged.
13 Lastly (to omitt much more that might be said) we will now onely alledge (which point in generall, ZuingliusZuinglius in responsione ad confessionem Lutheri saith. Lutherus obstinato and deuoto animo conceptum semel opinionem persequi and obtinere conatur, nec multum curare solet, quodcunque tandem de re quauis pronunciet, etiamsi vel sibi ipsi vel diuini verbi oraculis contradicere deprehendatur: these wordes of Zuinglius are also in Schlusselburg. in theologia Caluinistaru^ l. 2. fol. 122. a. fine. reproueth in Luther) certaine examples of his wilfull frowardnes or obstinacie against that which him selfe acknowledged for true. As where he saith of Communion vnder both kindesLuther de formula Missae. and vide Lutherum tom. 3. Germanic. fol. 274 And whereas Mr. Iewell answereth hereunto in his replie against Mr. Harding pag. 107. post med. that Luther onely ment that Gods truth should not hang of the authoritie of man: doth this enable Luther to teach that in despite of the Councell we should vse either but one kinde or neither; which-last were directly against Christes institution. If the Councell should in any case decree this, least of all then would we vse both kindes, yea rather in despite of the Councell and that decree, we would vse either but one kinde onely or neither, and in no case both. Of like nature is it where he teachethLuther tom. 2. Germ. fol. 214. that if the Councell should graunt the Church-men libertie to marrie, he would thinke that man more in Gods grace, who during his life kept three whores then he who married according to the Councells decree, and that he would commaund vnder paine of damnation, that no man should marrie by the permission of such a Councell, but should either liue chaste, or if that were impossible, then not to dispaire though he kept a whore. In like manner he saith touching Eleuation of the SacramentLuther in parua confessione saith. Eleuationem Sacramenti scieban^ esse idolatricam sed tamen eam retinebam in Templo Wittebergensi, vt aegre facerem diabolo Carolastadio And see Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 55. and in colloqu. mensal. germ. fol. 210. I did know the Eleuation of the Sacrament
 to be idolatricall, (as making for sacrifice) yet neuerthelesse I did reteine it in the Church at Wittenberg, to the end I might despite the Deuill Carolastadius, a saying and practise so grosse, that Amadus Polanus professor at Basil speacially mentioneth, andAmandus Polanus in Sillogethesium. theolog. p. 464. ante med. reproueth the same: saying further.Amandus Polanus ibid. saith. Sed nolo plura absurde dicta Lutheri recensere quae multa sunt, quae tegenda potius quam exagitanda etc. I will not recite more of Luthers absurd sayings, which are many: may this man then be said to beMr. Iewell in his Apologie of the Church of England part. 4. c. 4. S. 2. and in his defence of the Apollo^ie printed 1571. page 426. prope finem. a man sent of God to lighten the worldSee the actes and monume^ts pag. 416. a. ^uitio the Hleias, Conductor and chariote of Israell: to be reuerencedChristus habet primas, habeas tibi Paule secundas, at loca postillos proxima Luther habet. And Ciriacus, Spangenbergius in his dutch booke against certaine Catholike writers of his time, in the parte therof against Stephanus Agricola, commendeth these verses for true and godlie, and such as the Papists must suffer, will they nill they. next after Christ and Paule:Andreas Musculus in prefat. in libellum Germ. de diabol. tyrannide: And see Nicholaus Anisdorphius Conc. 8. de Luthero pag. 88. and vide Amsdor. in prefat in primum tomum Lutheri. and Alberus contra Carolastadianos l. 7. b. greater then who^ liued not since the Apostles times:Conrad. Schlusselburg. catal. haeret. l. 13. and vlt. pag. 314. 316. and 489. the Angell and last trumpet of God: whose calling wasand immediate andHereof see Aretius loc. comun. de ministerio. loc. 63. pag. 198. circa med. And Lambertus Daneus in Isagog. Xpian. part. 4. l. 2. pag. 36. initio. And Lascius in the booke entituled de Russorum, Muscouitarum, and Tartarorum religione. pag. 93. ante med. extraordinarie, and his coming speciallySee the booke entituled Antichristus siue pronostici sinis mundi pag. 12. fine. 13. fine. and 86. fine. And Mathias Hoe. in his tract. duo. part. 1. pag. 136. initio. And Conrad. Schluffelburg in catal. heret. l. 13. pag. 314. and 316. post med. And Michael Neander in libro orbis terrae partium explicatio l. 8. calleth him ^pi. os, Deus aliquis theologorum, quem Deus multo ante per D. Pauli and Hussi os Ecclesiae promisit. foreshewed in the scriptures, and sithence also foretouldHereof see the acts and monuments pag. 339. b. ininitio. and Mr. Foxe in Apocall. page 324. and Neander vt supra. by sundry prophecies (of latter times) which went vpon the time of Martine Luther. O sinne and most hatefull sinne of former Catholike times which (in Gods iust iudgment) made the world (for the time) subiect to such grosse illusion. And thus much briefly to shew that our English Protestants may in no sorte challenge Luther to haue bene so much as but a member of their Church.



THAT ALSO DVRING THE 20 YEERES next before Luther (which are yet in memory of this present age) no example, can be alledged of the Protestants (but only of the Catholicke) Churches administratio^ of the word, and Sacrame^ts. SECT. 11.
BVT admitting now for the time that Luther had bene a member of the Protestants Church, we will as now yet further shew, that his example is for all that, of no force to proue a continuance of their Churches administration of the word and sacraments but so much as for that onely age in which he liued. Wherein (to make the equitie of this our Apologie as yet more perspicuous) we will discend from all those foresaide seuerall ages before spoken of, and will as now make examination but of one onely peculier time, and that most euident, as being yet within the memorie of this present age, namely the twentie yeares that were next before Luthers first writinge against the Pope, which happenned Anno Domini 1520.Act. mon. pag. 402. (...) the late and fresh occurrants whereof concerning the matter now in question can not be either mistaken or forgotten, at the least, not in all countries where Christian religion was professed. And for so much as our aduersaries do collect and graunt from the scriptures, thatMr. Fulke against Heskins, Sanders etc. pag 536. paulo post med. Pastors and Doctors must be in the Church till the end of the world, euenMr. Fulke vbi supra pag. 569. initio from Christes time to Luthers age. that they shallMr. Fulke in his answere to a countefeit Catholicke page 11. initio. alwaies resist all false opinionsMr. Fulke ibid. page 92. ante med. with open reprehension. thatMr. Deering vpon the Hebrues in c. 2. vers. 12. lectur. 10. circa med. etc. 3. lectur 12. fine. the religion being of God no feare of man shall keepe them backe, that thereforeThe Puritans words alledged in the Bishops of London Suruey of the holy pretended discipline pa. 44^ circa med. the ministrie of the word and sacraments are in absolute degree of necessitie to saluation. that,Mr. Willet in his sinopsis pag. 71. fine. it is no longer a true Church then it hath these markes: and thatMr. Willet vbi supra pag 69. fine. the onely absence of them
 doth make a nulletie of the Church that alsoHiperius in method. theolog. siue loc comun. l. 3. pag. 548. ante med. and 552. prope finem these signes (must be) externall and visible that men may knowe where the true Church is and to which company they ought to adhere that lastlyMr. Whitgiftes defence etc. pag. 465. post med. the Church of Christ is dispersed through the whole worlde, and cannot now be shut vp in one Kingdome. All which hath beneSee before tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. heretofore more specially and at large declared out of our aduersaries owne writings we do here as now insist, and as our aduersariesThe Deuines of Heidel berg. in prefat. in Protocollum Frankentale^se, say to the Anabaptistes. Sivos Ecclesia Dei sitis, sequetur Deum sine sine populo and Ecclesia fuisse etc. nam si vel omnes historias perlegatis, nullum ab exordio mundi populum inuenietis, qui confessionem fidei vestrae similem habuerit: quia vero neque deus a principio fine populo and Ecclesia, neque sempiternus ille Rex Iesus Christus sine regno fuit, vestra autem Congregatio primu^ Anno. 1522. caepit, sequitur vos veram Dei Ecclesiam atque populum esse non posse. So plainely do our aduersaries vrge the Anabaptistes to proue the continuance of their Church. And Beza in epist. theologic. ep. 16. and (after the Geneua Print of Anno. 1573.) pag. 127. paulo ante med. vrgeth vpon the same ground saying. Si verum est eorum dogma etc. vbi tandem fuerit vnquam Ecclesia ipsos ostendere iub camus, quum a pro pagato Euangelio facile fit demonstrare, nullum vnquam eiusmodi quicquam sensisse, quin perpetuo Ecclesiae consensu fuerit damnatus. did vpon this ground charge and prouoke the Anabaptistes, so we in like manner charge them, demanding what pastors and Doctors of their Church did accordingly impugne false doctrine, preach the word, and administer their sacraments, and in what seuerall nations were the same visible and externall, but during euen those foresaid xx. yeares next before Luther; where might any man as then haue performed Christs co^mandeme^t ofMath. 18, 17. tell the Church: which Mr. Carthwright confesseth to beMr. Carthwrite in Mr. Whitgifts defence. pag. 635. fine. necessarie and perpetuall. or whereas then might a man haue found so much as any one of thoseFoxe in Apocall. c. 12. page 349. post med. saith. Scio ac fateor non adeo omnes terrae angulos sua seductione imposterem Demonem corripuisse, quin Ecclesia semper habeat aliquot milia. (etc. quae nunquam incuruauerunt genua ad Baal:) and vide Whitaker de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum. page 161. fine and contra Dureum l. 3. pag. 259. fine. thousandes: or of thatBullenger in Apocall. serm. 62. initio. and fol. 200. a. fine. and b. initio saith. By the description of the Romish tyrrannie and reigne of Antichrist it should seeme that the Church and preaching of the ghospell had bene vtterly l^st etc. He declareth therfore by a most excellent vision, how Christ shall notwithstanding etc. haue his Church cottinually and that right famouse. Church (not obscure, but) right famouse: which (as Mr. Foxe, Mr. Whittaker, and Bullenger do collect from the scriptures) were euermore to co^tinue euen during the greatest persecution and seducing by
 Antichrist: Luther him selfe imediatly before his first preaching against the Pope, was not a professed me^ber of any Chur^h of Protestants the^ known to be in being, but was a knowne Catholicke, euenSimon de Voyon in his discource vpon the Catallog. etc. pag. 180. an Augustine Friar: and as him selfe protestethLuther saieth hereof, Casu non volu^tate in illas turbas incidi, Deu^ ipsum testor. Witnesse hereof his owne schollers Timotheus Kirchmeru^ in his thesaurus etc. in epist. nuncupatoria versus finem. and Iacebus Andreas in confut. disput. Ioan. Iacob. Grinaei. etc. pag. 312. He fell into the troubles or (as he tearmeth it)Luther in loc. commun. Clasi. 4. pag. 58. paulo ante med. saith. Initio Euangelij, cum Deus in hanc (vt sic votem,) factionem, preter meam voluntatem per mirabiles occasiones me inuolueret. faction of controuersies concerning religion but casually and against his will not knowing of any other thenLuther in loc. commun. Class. 4. c. 30. pag. 51. fine saith. Tanta^ causam in me vnum recipiobam, and mihi vnisustinendam auxilio diuino iudicabam. And see further hereof hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 11. e. f. g. h. to ioine with him therein, and not so much asAct. mon. pag. 404. 2. initio. and Simon de Voyon in his discourse vpon the Catalog. etc. pa. 182 dreaming or suspecting any cha^ge that might happen: for as Sleidan (Luthers owne scholler) reporteth the storieSleidan in English l. 13. fol. 177. a. prope line^^. the cause and originall of this busines was by occasion of Iohn Tecel a dominicke Friar, who carried about pardons to sellSleidan. l. 16. fol. 232. b. fine. Against which Luther beganne to preach. (not vpon iudgme^t, but) as him s^lfe confesseth when he knew not what the matter ment:Luthers wordes in Sleidan. l. 13. fol. 177. b. paulo post med. for (saith he) I scarcely vnderstood then what the name of indulgences ment: In so much as afterwardes Luther did much dislike of his owne vndertaken cource in that behalfe, often times (saith he)Luther in colloqu. mental. fol. 158. b. wishing that I had neuer begune that busines. And Mr. Foxe doth accordingly testifie how that after the said busines so begunneact. mon. pag. 404. b. initio. Luther was determined not to stire vp any new debates, but rather coueted a common quiet: whereunto he semed so enclining as he douted not to insinnate with the Pope making euen hisSleidan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. prope initium. appeale to him, andSleidan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. fur. professing (saieth Sleidan) his affection to the Church of Rome and that he will attempte nothing against it: acknowledging alsoLuther in Sleidan. vbi supra. the power thereof to be so greate, that Christ onely excepted there is nothing in this world more excellent: In which cource he was so forward, that (saith Mr Foxe)Act. mon. pag. 404. a. fine. And Osiander in epitom. etc. centur. 16. pag. 61. fine. and 62. initio saith accordingly: quod Lutherus in Pontificem quaedam durius scripserit aut dixerit, id condonari sibi petit, promittens posthac maiorem modestiam, indulgentiarumque posthac nullam se facturum mentionem, modo aduersarijs etiam suis silentium imponatur. And see further there page 68. paulo post itutium. where he offered like condition to the Pope. it is apparente that
 Luther promised Cardinall Caietane to keepe silence (with this annexed condition of pride) prouidid also that his aduersaries would do the like: And Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Winchester, reporteth further, thatMr. Cowper in his Chronicle. fol. 278. a. paulo post initium. Luther by his letter submitted him selfe to the Pope (with this other like condition so that he might not be compelled to recant: so plainely was pride, euen hisConcerning Luthers co^fessed Pride many Protesta^t writers geue testimonie. So Conradus Regius. libro Germanico contra Ioannem Hossum de caena Domini. saith. Deus propter peocatu^ superbiae qua sese Lutherus extulit (quemadmodum pleraque ipsius scripta testificantur) verum illi spiritum abstulit. And Zuinglius in responsione ad confessinem Lutheri, chargeth Luther with magna Arrogantia, and cum Arroganti verborum fastu, minis quoque plus quam turgidis. And Oecolampadius in responsione ad confessione^ Lutheri: saith that Luther was, Arrogantiae and superbiae affectu inflatus. Also the Tigurine Deuines in their answere to Luthers booke against Zuinglius: say. Prophetae and Apostoli, Dei gloriae, non priuato honori, non suae pertinaciae and superbiae studebant, Lutherus autem sua quaerit, pertinax est, insolentia nimia effertur etc. And Simon Lithus in resposione Altera ad Alteram Iacobi Gretzeri apologiam pag. 333. paulo ante med. saith. Lutherus plus quam debebat, tribuit gloriolae partae, cuius particulam communicari cum alijs indignissime ferebat. And Thomas Naogeorgus (a learned Caluinist) alledged by Schlusselburg. in theolog. Calumistaru^. l. 2. fol. 131. a. post med. saith of Luther. Plurima scripsit per iram, carnalem, and per emulationem, ne succumbere cerneretur vlli: doctorum veterum orbitam reliquit, indulgens stomacho suo ac honori. And Iohn Caluine alledged ibidem fol. 126. a. post med. saith. Lutherus vt pollet eximijs virturibus, ita magnis vitijs laborat: Hanc in^emperiem qua vbique ebullit, vtinam magis frenare studuisset etc. vtinam recognescendis vitijs plus operae dedisset. etc. And Conradus Gesnerus in vniuersali Bibliotheca saith. Illud non est dissimulandum Lutherum virum esse vehementis ingenij, impatientem, and qui nisi per omnia sibi consentientes ferre nesc^^t. etc. Dominus faxit, ne quid contentione and impudentia oris obsit Ecclesiae, cuius olim crepundia ta^ faeliciter promouit: In so much as Luther him selfe (in Lutheri loc. comun. class. 4. fol. 35. b.) acknowledgeth the worlds opinion herein had of him. saying there. Video ab omnibus in me peti modestiam. and againe there he further saith. Omnes fere, in me damnant mordacitatem etc. confessed intollerable pride, the onely true cause of his further reuolt and apostasie. And it is accordingly yet further testified by Sleidan how thatSleidan. l. 1. fol. 10 paulo post initium. for so much as Luther offred (as before) most reasonable co^dicions, he thought to haue found some fauour in the humanitie of the Bishope of Rome: andSleidan l. 13. fol. 177. b. fine. that the Bishope would assoile himLuther apud Sleidan. ibidem. But lo: (saith Luther.) whilest I looke for a ioiefull sentence from Rome, I am stricken with the thunder boult (of excomuincatio^, (and co^demned for the most wicked man aliue:Sleidan l. 13. fol. 178. a. initio. then (saith he.) I beganne to defend my doinges
 setting forth many bookes etc. and seeing it is so, let them impute the faulte to them selues, that haue so excessiuely hanled the matter: In this sort (as Sleidan testifieth) Martine Luther, his foresaideSleidan l. 1. fol. 10 a. paulo post initium. appellation to the Pope being co^demned, his offers dispised, looking for no more helpe nor health at the Popes handes, was through extreeme necessitie brought to appeale from the Bishope of Rome: and so vpon occasion of these his foresaide procedings (which whether they were from heaue^ or not, we will with out all further infere^ce refer to your MAIESTIES grauest iudgment) he fell into the open ^nd ouer viole^t current of his further ensuing Apostas^e: notwithstanding which, he did yet still for a space afterwardes, continew his accustomed saying of Masse, vntill that amongManlius Luthers scholler testifieth this in loc commun. pag. 42. fine. And see also the Alphabeticall table of that booke where it is set downe Luthero sapius spectra apparuerunt. seuerall apparitions hapned to him: (nor ofLuther in (Lutheri loc. comun. class. 4. page 39. prope fine saith. nullas apparitiones Angelorum habeo. And ibid. pag. 40 ante med. he further saith: Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, ne vel visiones vel somnia, vel etiam Angelos mihi mittat. and vide ibid. post med. Ang ll for therein he disclaimeth but of wicked sp^rits wherewith he was infested or hau^ted) whereof one was so terrible thatManlius in loc: commun. pag. 42. fine. and 43 initio. He was almost cast into a sound: in preuention whereof, oyle was distilled into his eare, and his feete rubbed with hotte clothes. It chanced thatLuther tom. 7 Witteberg. Anno. 1588. in libro de Missa priuata, and Vnctione Sacerdotum fol 443. and tom. 6. Germ. Genensi. fol. 28. in libro de Missa angulari. Also Luthers wordes hereof are acknowledged and sett downe in the Treatise against the defence of the censure. pag. 234. 235. 236. vpon a certaine time (as him selfe reporteth the matter) hee was sodainly awaked about midnigh^: then (saith he) Sathan beganne this disputation with me saying harken right learned D. Luther thou hast said priuat Masse by the space of 15. yeares etc. and so the Diuell with arguments which Luther him selfe there setteth downe, (whereat Protestants are greatly ashamed and striue though in vaineMr. Charke and others to auoide that their doctrine against the Masse should thus proceed or beginne from the Deuill, answere, that by this disputation which Luther as thus reporteth to haue bene betweene the Deuill and him, was onely ment a spirituall temptation of mind, and not any sensible conference had with the Deuill. But the contrarie is to manifest. 1 First by Sathans foresaid preface to him calling him according to the humour of his Pride, right learned Doctor Luther. 2 Secondly in that he saith therof in the same place, plane persuasus sum Empserum and Oecolampadium etc. his ictibus horribilibus subito extinctos fuisse: which argueth more then a spirituall temptatio^ 3 Thirdly by Luthers there describing the sound of Sathans voice: whereof he there saith. Hic certe sudor mihi erupit, habet Diabolus grauem, and fortem vocem, atque ego tum bene expertus sum, quomodo mane homines in lecto mortui inueniuntur. Which last wordes are purposely omitted by the Lutherans in their latter edition of Witeberg. but are yet still extant in the more auncient edition of Luthers workes. tom. 6. Gen. Germ. fol. 28. b. 4 Fourthly by reporte of like other terrible apparitions hapned to Luther testified as here by Manlius a Lutherane. 5 Fiuethly by Luthers owne report els where of the Deuill of ten walking with him in his bed Chamber affirmed by Luther in colloquijs mensalibus Germanice editis. fol. 275. 6 Sixth^y by our aduersaries the Tigurine Deuines, who therefore obiect against Luther his disputation had with the Deuill. Tigurini in confessione Germanica impress. Tigurini. 1544. vide fol. 25. 26. and 127. 7 Lastly this eu^sion of a spirituall temptation to be hereby onely ment is so weake, that Mr. Sutliffe l. de vera Catholic^ Christi Ecclesia. page 298. 299. saith, that Luther hereby setteth downe but onely his dreame, but that also is most clearly against Luthers wordes, which are that he was first, sodainely awaked, and then after Sat^n begunne disputation with him. to auoide the same.

And it is this kind of perswasion or appa^ition reported by Protestants them selues as hapning likewise to Suinglius,It appeareth by Zuinglius his wordes set downe by him in libro de subsid. Euchar. and also in the treatise against the defence of the censure. page 249. and 230. that Zuinglius hauing laboured the abolishing of the Masse at Zurich against a certaine Scribe that had opposed him selfe (in argument) against Zuinglius: Zuinglius was in that disputation prouoked to bring forth examples which were ioyned With no parable: therefore we beganne (saith he) to thinke of all that we could, but yet n^ other example came to mind. etc. But when the 13. day of Aprill drew neere (I tell the truth) and etc. my Conscience compelleth me to vtter what the Lord bestowed vpon me: (my th ught as I was a sleepe) that I was againe disputing with the Scribe, and my mouth so stopped that I was not able to speake etc. and sodainely ther seemed an admonisher to be present with me. ater fuerit an albus nihil memini whether he w^re blacke or white I remember not etc. which said, why dost thou not answere him, that which is written Exodus. 12. (for it is the Paschall which is the Passeouer of the Lord etc. wherupon (saith he) I (afterwardes) considered the place, and thereof bef^re the whole Congregation preached, which sermon when it was heard, draue away all mist. Thus were Zuinglius his foresaid proceedings against the Masse furthered with nightlie instruction in his dreame, by an admonisher whether blacke or white he remembreth not: whereof though he made seriouse and great accompt affirming it to be no light matter which (saith he) I learned by this dreame, thankes be to God etc. Yet is the same derided as a meare illusion by his other brethren, as namely by Iacobus Andreas in confut. disput. Ioan. Iacobi Grinaei pag. 120. 254. fine. and 304. and by Schlusteli urg. (in theolog Caluinistarum l. 1. in Proem. fol. 3. a. b.) and by Gerhardus Gresekenius de veritate Corporis Christi in S. Caena. pag. 64.) By Benedict Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia pag. 68. and by Iacobus Heilbrunerus in Schwenck^^ldio Caluinismo etc. in prefat. ante med. Carolastad^us,In the booke entituled Conspiracie for pretended reformation page 83. initio. It is said, among others, Carolasta^ius a Preacher professing the Ghospell. etc. attributed much to Cabinet teacher^ in priuate conuenticles, and vnto v^sions, and pretended conferences with God. Oecola^padiusLuther alledged vbi supra. saith, concerning these apparitions: Plane persuasus sum, Empser^m and Oecolampadium etc. his ^ctibus horribilibus subito extinctos fuisse: so plainely was he perswaded that Oecolampadius was in one of these apparitions slaine by the Deuill.
 and Mr. FoxeIn like maner doth Mr. Foxe in Apocalipsin. pag. 364. fine and 365. initio. and in his acts and monumentes Printed 1596. pag. 90. b. circa med. See also heretofore pag. 80. in the marge^t at the letter y. report the very like pretended wonderfull reuelatio^ happened to him (as did to Zuinglius) whereby he was instructed that by the 24. monethes mentioned in the Apocalips was vnderstoode the 294. yeares of the primatiue Churches first persecution, and yet is this vnderstandinge of them sithence reiected, and in steed thereof is thereby vnderstood the last 1260. yeares before Luther by Mr. Napeir vpon the reuelations. Proposition 15 pa. 22. 23. 24. By Mr. Brocard vpon the reuiatio^ fol. 110. a. and by Master Gifford vpon the reuelat. pag. 890. post med. was the first that diswaded Luther from further saying of Masse.
If now then that Luther him selfe was at first a Catholicke, and our aduersaries in steed of plaine instance or example to be giuen of their Churches impugning of errors, of her Pastors Doctors, administratio^ of the word and sacraments during but the foresaide 20. yeeres next before Luther: do answere vs that they were as then persecuted? we replie to them from them selues, aswel that no persecution of man can frustrate the foresaid ordina^ce of god made to his Church in this behalfe, as also that persecutio^See heretofore tract 2. c. 2 sect. 8. at o. p. maketh her most knowne and therfore we aske as before, who these were that were as then so persecuted? if they say that for feare of persecution they durst not professe theire faith, and so escaped vnknowne, we againe tell them from themselues, thatSee heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 11. 1. l. p. q. r therfore they were not as then the true Church. And we vrge yet further that the feare of persecutio^ could be no such let to them, after that sundry common wealthes and Magistrates had vndertaken the publique profession, and defence of Luthers doctrine, but that as then at the least if any such had bene in being, they might safelie haue shewed them selues and ioyned in comunion with Luther: If lastly they say that their Pastors, and Doctors, administration of the word and sacraments were as then visible and knowne, and that now since, all testimonie thereof is suppressed to omit what hath beneSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 9. already sufficiently said against this, and to admit also that all our Catholicke writers should so strangely haue passed them onely ouer in silence, remembring all others as the Annabaptistes Swenefeldians etc. why yet should Luther, Zuinglius, and the other Protestant writers forbeare to mention them? the cause we take to be euident, and onely, for that during the foresaide 20. yeares before Luther, they were not
 knowne to be so much as but in being, in any one nation of the world, which thing is in our opinion not obscurelye graunted, rather then signified by our learned aduersaries them selues. To this end our learned aduersaries, Ioannes Regius acknowledgeth that the Church was euen the^Ioannes Regius being vrged in this kind. doth (in his liber apologeticus etc. pag. 176. circa and post med.) answere therto saying. Negas Lutherum suae fidei caetum inuenisse etc. dico fuisse ante Lutherum verae religionis and qui cum Luthero per omni^ consentiret caetum ecclesi^sticum. But coming to answere where this Congregation w^s to be then found, he hath no other refuge but saith there, that it was, a ^ontificijs non agnitus, nec propter tyrannide^ pontificiam visibiliter fortassis ostendi non potuerit: iucoque qua^do vrgent Iesuitae, vt Lutherus verae religionis asse clam Ecclesiam ostendat. etc. volunt vt Lutherus oppositum in adiecto demonstret, and inuisibile, visibile probet etc. interim tamen absurdum est ita argumentari, haec res ab alijs non agnoscitur, nec potest etiam videri aut demonstrari, ideoque non est in rerum n^tura etc. So plainely doth he (being vrged to particulers) acknowledge his pretended Congregation at Luthers coming to haue bene then inuisible, and not able to be shewed inuisibl^ and could not be shewed: and Mr. Iewell affirmeth accordingly, thatMr. Iewell in his Aplogie of the Church of England part. 4. c. 4. diuision 2. and in his defence of the Apologie printed Anno 1571. pag. 426 prope finem. the truth was vnknowne at that time and vnheard of, when Martine Luther and Hulderi^h Zuinglius first came vnto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospell: Mr. Parkines s^ith in like manner,Mr. Parkins in his exposition vpon the Creed. pag. 400. And Caluin in his booke of Epistles. printed Hannouiae 1597. ep. 141. pag. 273. paulo post med. saith accordingly. Ad^urdum est, postquam discessionem a toto mundo facere coacti sumus, inter ipsa principia alios ab alijs dissilire. And Daniel Chamierus in his epist. Iesuitic. part. altera. printed Geneuae. 1601. pag. 49. saith hereof. Arianoru^ venenu^ non portiuncula^ qua^da^ fed pene totum orbem contaminauerat etc. In ea nos tempora deuinimus quae etiam excedent Ariani furoris co^fusionem: non portiunculam vnam aut alteram error occupauit, sed totum ^orpus Apostasia auertit a Christo. we say that before the daies of Luther, for the space of many hundreth yeares an vniuersall apostasie ouerspread the wholle face of the earth and that our Church was not then visible to the world: in so much as Bucer doth therfore call Luther,Primum Aposiolum purioris Euangelij. Bucer in epist. Anno. 36. ad Episcopum Hereford. and vide Conradum Schlusselburg. in theolog. Caluinistarum l. 2 fol. 17. a. initio. the first Apostle of the reformed doctrine. whose vocation (said our aduersaries) was by reason of the then generall defection of a^l protestant Pastors)See before tract. 2. c. 2. sect 10. fine at q. r. immediate and extraordinarie the cource ofBez^ ep. 5. Al^m^nno. paulo post initium. Ordinarie vocation being then no where extant. And the Lutheranes do affirme itConrad. Schlustelburg. ibid. l. 2. fol. 130. b. versus finem. impudencie to say, that many learned m^n in Germanie before Luther did h^uld the D^ctrine of the Gospell. And an other of them further saith: Si antecessores Lutherus in
 officio habuisset orthodoxos etc.Georgius Milius in Augustan. confess. explicat. art. 7. de Ecclesia pag. 137. If there had bene right beleuers that went b^fore Lu^her in his office etc. there had then bene no nede of a Lutheraine reformation,Georgius Miluis ibid pag. 138. th^refore (saith he) we say that Luther was raised vp (diuinitus and extra ordinem) by Gods speciall appointment, and extraordinarily. And an other Lutherane writer affirmeth, itBenedict. Morgenstern. tract. de Ecclesia pag. 145. ridiculouse (to thinke) that in the time b^fore Lu^h^r any had the puritie of Doctrine, and that Luther should receiue it from them, and not they from Luther, consideri^g (saith he) it is manifest to the whole Christian worlde, that before Luthers time, all Churches were ouerwhelmed with more then Cymeriane darkenes. And that Luther was diuinely raised vp to discouer the same, and to restore the light of true Doctrine. So plainely do our aduersaries them selues, in steed of instance or example to be geuen, acknowledge (to the contrary) the vtter defection and want of their Churches Pastors and Doctors, of administration of the Word and Sacraments for and during the age next before Luther: wherevnto we further add, that the Protestants Doctrine of Iustification by onely faith, (which them selues affirme to beMr. Charke in the Tower disputation the fourth daies conference Arg. 1. d^nii the So^l^ of the Church,Mr. Foxe act. mon. pag. 402. a. circa medium the onely principall ^^gine of saluation. andThe Confession of Bohemia in the Harmony of Confessions pag. 253. ante medium. of all ^h^r p^ints of Doctrine the chiefest and weightiest,) was so vnknowne in the age before Luther, that the contrary Doctrine of Iustification by M^rrit and Workes (which Protestants termeMr. Penrie in the booke entituled Mr. Some laid open in his colours page 29, 30. the very hart life and soule of Poperie) was defended not onely by theSee this heretofore for the Waldenses, at pag. 90. i. l. and for Wicliffe at pag. 97. f. and for Husse at pag. 101. g. Waldenses, Wycl^ffe, and Husse, but also by all other nearer Luthers time in so much that Mr. Foxe hauing spoken of the t^mes next before Lut^er, and of the learned writers then liuing, concludeth onely of Luther, thatAct. mon. pag. 402 a. circa med. and the Deuines of the Confession of Augusta alledged by Luc. Osiander in epitom. hist. ecclesiast. centur. 16. pag. 157. paulo ante med. confesse the same likewise saying. Cum igitur doctrina de fide quam oportet in Ecclesia praecipuam esse, tam di^ tacuerit ignota, quemadmodu^ fateri omnes necesse est etc. he gaue the str^ak^ and pluckte downe the f^undation (of our Catholicke faith, and all by opening one vaine l^ng hid before which is our free Iustification by our faith onely in Christ. so plainely also by Mr. Foxe his confession, was this chiefe article of the Protestants faith, vnknowne
 and vnheard of during the age next before Luther.
And thus much briefely to shewe that whereas it is euident and confessed from the Scriptures, that the true Churches pastors, her administration of the Word and Sacraments must euermore continew yet our aduersaries Church, religion, administration of of the Word and Sac^aments, are not knowne so much as but to haue beene in being, during the xx. yeares next before Luther. Whereupon we are to resist and say to them as did the ancientTertulian in libro de praescript: saith. Qui est is vos? vnde est quando venistis? vbi ta^ diu latuistis? and Augustine l. 3. de Baptismo contr. Don. c. 2. saith Vnde ergo donatus apparuit? de qua terra germinauit? ex quo mari emersit, de quo coelo cecidit? And Aug. de Vtilit. Cred. c. 14. saith to the Manichees vos autem and tam pauci, and tam turbule^ti, and tam novi, nemini dubiu^ est, quoniam nihil dignum auctoritate proferetis: and Optatus, l. 2. contra Parmenianum saith Vestrae Cathedrae originem ostendite, qui vobis vultis sanctam Ecclesiam vendicare: and Hillarie, l. 6. de Trinitate ante med saith, tarde mihi hos Pijssimos doctores aetas nunc huius seculi protulit, etc. and Hierom, contra Luciferianos in fine saith: ex hoc ipso quod posterius instituti sunt, eos se esse indica^t quos futuros apostolus praenu^ciauit. Fathers in like manner to the Heretickes of their times: and as didLuther. (in Lutheri Loc. Comun. class. 5 c. 15. pag. 50. ante med. saith of the Sacrame^taries, Sine nobis and ante nos nihil erant, ne hiscere quidem audebant, nunc nostra victoria inflati, in nos vertunt impetum. Luther him selfe vpon this like ground to our aduersaries the Sacramentaries.


A FVRTHER DEMONSTRATION Otherwise of the Protestant Churches defection. SECT. 12.
BVT forbearing as now, further to prosecute the foresaid euident defection of the Protestantes Church her administration of the Word and Sacraments, by reason of the heretofore alledged disparetie (or rather contrarietie) in doctrine betweene our now Protestants, and the foresaid examples of Waldo, Wicliffe, Husse, Luther etc. and all those other, whom our aduersaries haue (as hath beneSee heretofore for Waldo. tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3 for Wicliffe sect. 4. for Husse sect. 5. for. Luther sect. 10. and for others, see sect. 7. heretofore perticulerly proued) iniustlie pretended to be of their Church: we will as yet in further proofe otherwise of their Churches no lesse vnanswerable defection, but briefelie put youre MAIESTIE in minde, of
 one onely other point, (worthye of a much more laboured discource) the which being hereby but signified, rather then at large entreated of, we do neuerthelesse (^n full confidence of the manifest and vnanswerable clearenes therof) presume humblie to offer vnto your HIGHNES more retired and seriouse consideration.
We haue heretofore shewed how that supposing Waldo had bin a Protesta^t yet was he before his first preaching against the Pope, originally a knowne and professed member of our Catholicke Church: and the like we haue discouered in Berengarius, Peter Bruis, Wycliffe, Husse, Luther etc. all whose followers, as namely the Berengarians, Waldenses, Wy^leuistes, Hussi^s, Lutheranes. and^. are in their forenamed seue all Sectmasters from whome they are knowne to haue discended, most plainely reduc^d to a knowne Catholicke begin ng. As were in like manner the A^r^ans, Dona^ist s, N^st^rians. and. knowne to haue had their like first begining in Catholickes, as in A^ius, D^natus, N^^torius. and. who all together with Berengarius, Waldo, Wy liffe, Husse, Luther. etc. were professed members of our Catholicke Church, before such time as they1. Ioh. 2, 19. went forth from vs the peculier marke or stig^a. wherewith the1. Ioh. ^, 19. It is said of heretickes: they went out from vs. And Act. 15, 24. it is likewise said of them. Certaine that went forth fro^ vs: And Act. 20, 30. Out of your owne selues shall arise men speaking perverse things in so mu^h as our Sauiour forwarneth vs against this departure or going out saying: If therefore they shall say vnto you, behold he is in the desert, goe you not forth: Mat. 24, 26. See S. Austen vpon these words heretofore, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. in the marge^t at the figure 2. Scriptures,Optatus, lib. 1. saith herevpon against the Donatistes vide^dum est quis in radice cum toto orbe manserit, quis foras exterit, quis cathedram sederit alteram quae ante non fuerat etc. And S. Augustine, tom. 8. in Psalm. 106. saith quid est ergo seduxit eos? dimisit eos in inu^o and non in via, quomodo enim in via, homines qui partem tenent totum relinqunt? quomodo in via? quae est ergo via? Aut vbi agnoscitur via? Deus (inquit) m^sereatur nostri (and^) vt agn^scamus in terra vtam tuam: in qua terra? in omnibus gentibus salutare tuum: vtique t^les vt min^antur, vt pauci fi^nt, hinc exeunt: A multitudine vnitatis omnes exieru^t, si^ut P^ulo ante co^memoraui dictu^ de illis, ex nobis exierunt (etc.) And Aug. tr^. 3. in ep. Io^ saith omnes Haeretici, omnes Schismat. ex nobis exieru^t, id est ex ecl. exeu^t. Fathers, andSee M. Al^s^n in h^s confutacio^ of Brow^^s^^e: pag. 1. initio. Protestants doe (not without euident reason) note the sectemasters of their times.
For seeing that truth is auncient to heresie, (the which is but a deniall of some part of the truth then in being and professed) and that the summe of our Christian religio^ was accordingly at first established and continued in and by the ApostlesSee M. B^^sons words alledged heretofore, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. at z. a. and their
 Successors; There neuerThis is evidently seene in the examples of Arius, Novatus, Donatus, etc. And all other Arch heretikes or sect-masters of every age, neither can our adversaries give any one example to the contrarie. was therefore, nor possiblie could bee, any Arch Hereticke or sectmaister, who d^d not by his the seco^dary Innovatio^ in denial of some truth deuide himselfe from the Catholike Churches the visible societie: whervpon as it followeth (by necessary sequele) that it sufficeth not our adversaries to affirme with such needy begging of the thing in questio^, and no lesse peremptory and assuming iudgeme^t (vnder prete^ce of that forbidde^2. Peter. 1. private interpretation wh^chHereof see heretofore, tract. 2. cap. 1. initio. in the margent at the letter p. q. themselues do frame vpon the Scriptures that we haue departed fr^m God, vnlesse withall they can shewe from what other knowne companie of Christian to vs then elder and in being we did devide our selves, betaking v^ so thereby into an other singuler societie, as did in their several times W^l^^, Wi^li^e, Husse, Luther, Calvin etc. in their departing from our Catholike church, the like whereof to haue hapned by any such departure made by our Church f om any other knowne ^ompay of Christ ans to it then ancient and in being in any age or nation since the Apostles times, our learned adversaries areWheras the proof hereof lieth on our adversaries part, their most materiall obiections in this behalfe are examined and answered heretofore. tract. 1. sect. 7. and the contrarie by vs proved. tract. 1. sect. 8. not able to shew, a thing (in regard of the reason befo^e alleaged) worthy of all speciall and due observation. So likewise, (which is no lesse worthie also to be observed) although it be manifest and grou^ded that the true Church must vndoubtedly evermoreHereof see hereafter tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. initio in the marge^t at the letter r. continue withHereof see heretofore. tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 1. lit. t^^. x. y. Z. b. c. administration of the Word and Sacrament. Yet to avoide the example of the Primitiue Church, being as made by our adversaries vnworthily questionable, and by vs heretofore even from themselues sufficientlyConcerning testimonies of our n^w Catholike doctrine to have beene taught in the Primitive Church. see heretofore. tract. 1. sect. 2. and 3. and tra. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. cleared, and withall to restra^ne the^ to an other no lesse large, certaine, and knowne time) they are not able to name fro^ Anno Dom. 700. for other 700. yeeres then next after following, (a time long and larg enough) so much as but any oneThe Waldenses, Wicle^^stes, H^ssites, and Lutherans. admitting they were all Protestants (the contrarie wherof is heretofore prooved) are yet in their forenamed severall sect-masters, (as are also the Calvinistes in Calvine) reduced to a Catholike beginning: And as for other examples our adversaries ca^no^ giue instance, so much as of any one other man, whom they can pretend to haue been originally a Protestant and not a Catholike: And if they flee to the examples of such other, as themselues cannot but acknowledge for confessed heretikes, it is ridiculously impertinent, and sheweth their full conviction herein. other perso^ living during any part of althat time, in any one nation of the earth, whom
 they can but with any coulor pretend, to haue beene at first no Catholike but originally a Protestant: As we haue before said, Waldo, Wicliue, Husse. Luther, Caluin etc. (from whom haue sprong, the Waldenses, Wiclevistes, Hussites, Lutherans, Caluinistes, etc.) were each of them originally Catholickes, as likwise were for former times Arius, Nouatus, Pelagius, Nestorius etc. Let now our aduersaries peruse (though most carefully) the seuerall writings of their own most painful writers in this behalf, as n^mely M. Fox his Acts and monuments, Il iricus his Catalogus testium veritatis, Simon de voyon, his Discourse vpon the Catal^gue of the Doctors of Gods Church, and also the century writers of Magdeburge, and they shall not in all or any of them, or in any other find instance or example of any one other man named to the contrarie of that which wee now vrge, if then our learned adversaries be not able to giue vs neither instance of any departure made by our Church fro^ any other knowne co^pany of Christians to it then ancient and in being, yet neither also example (as it is before required during the time before limited so much as but of any one man liuing in any part of the world, who was at first no Catholike but originally a Protestant: If these things be plaine evident and not to be excepted against by our learned adversaries, what then can be more cleere to proove a manifest interruption and discontinuance of their Churches Pastors, adminstration of the Word and Sacraments, and that as our Religion is vndoudtedly thatMath. 13, 24. Good seede which Christ the good husband-man first Sowed in his field. So also their aduerse doctrines are those forewarnedMath. 13, 25. tares which the enemie (afterwards came and s^wed among the Wheate and went his way: And thus much concerning the Protestants apparent defection of their Churches Pastors, administration of the Word and Sacraments.



THAT THEREFORE PROTESTANTES for preseruation of Christs Church in being doe acknowledge th^ Catholick^ Church to haue bin the tru^ Church and the Religion thereof for sufficient to Salvation. SECT. 13.
WHICH sai^le defection or wante of their Churches Pastors administratio^ of the Word and Sacramentes, carrieth with it such an evident scandall or rather scroople, by reason of the confessed doctrine to the contrarie of all men con^erning the true Churc^ (which according toM. Whitaker against M. Raynoldes: in his answere to the preface pag. 33. saith Wee beleeue to the comforte of our soules, that Christs Church hath continued and neuer shall faile, so long as the world endureth: and we accompt it a prophane heresie to teach otherwise. And the same is yet further affirmed by D. Fulke in the tower disput. with Edm. Camp the 2. daies co^f^rence. And ^lso by the confessions of Belgia, in the Harmonie of confessions p^g. 321. and by the conf^ssion of H^luetia, ibidem pag. 306. And by the conf^ssion of Saxonie, ibidem pag. 324. and 325. and 473. in so much as the Divines of Witenberge in Colloquio Badensi apud Osiandrum in epitom (etc.) ce^tur. 16. pag. 1064. ante med. say Ecclesiam inde ab asce^sione, vsque ad hac tempora nunqua^ interruptam sed perpetua su^cessione in terris per mansisse firmiter credimus: And ibidem pag. 1065. p^st med. It is said^ Contra omnes furores Satanae. Ecclesia vera in terris vsque ad adventum Christi ad extremum iudicium est mansura. all opinions must evermore continue, without fa^ling or ceassing to be, not so much as for any one moment of time) that the more sobe^ and learned Protestants, whom headstrong and inconsiderate zeale hath not altogether b^inded do therefore in preventio^ thereof, and for preservation of themselues, make in these straits, our Catholike Church as it were theirNumeri 35, 11. Cittie of refuge: acknowledging to that end, that the true Church imediately before Luthers time, had it being in our Catholicke Church; and that accordingly, like as Luther himselfe before his preaching against the Pope, was anS^e^dan. lib. 1. initio. Augustine Fre^r: and (as himselfe saith)Luther in his Commentarie vpon the Epistle to the Galathians Englished, fol. 35. b. circa m^di^m. kepte chastitie pouertie and obedi^nce: was onely giuen to fasting, watching, praying, saying of Masse, and such like, andLuther ibidem fol. 35. a. circa medium. ho^o^ed the Pope of meere co^scie^ce, etc. and was so therby most vndoubtedly, a professed me^ber of our Catholike (or as they te me it popish Church.) So likewise vpon his pretended reformati^n or preaching afterwards against the Pope, he did not (say they) therebyM. D. Couel in his defence of M. Hooker, Art. 11. pag. 73. post med. sayeth As it is strange for any man to deny them of Rome to be of the Church. S. I ca^not but wo^der, that they (of Rome) will aske where our Church was before Luther, as if any were of opinio^, that Luther did erect a n^we Church, etc. And see the like saying in M Hooker, in his Ecclesiasticall ^olicie, lib. 3. pag. 129. post. med. erect a new Church the^ befo^e not in being, (for that
 were most directly against themselues) and therefore d^ n^t depa^t from the Church he wa^ of be^ore, but continued still a membe^ thereof, whi h th ng both in H^^k^ and M. D Cou^ (speaking the^eof doe verye plainelyM. Hooker lib. 3. pag. 130. and M. D. Couel in his defence of M. Hooker pag. 68. say Wee gladly acknowledge them of Rome to bee of the familie of Iesus Christ, therefore we hope that to reforme our selues is not to sever our selves f^o^ ^he Church we were before; n the Chur h wee were and are so still, as also vvee say that they of Rome (notw^thsta^ding their manifo d def ct) are to bee helde a parte of the house of God, a lymme of the visible Church of Christ. acknowledge to the great dislike of theIn the Christian lett^r of certain English P^ot^st^nts vnto that rev^^e^d man M R Hooker pag. 1^. and 19. they doe reproue at large M. Hook for this opinio^ of not severing the^selues f^o^ the Church they were of b^fore. Purit^ins: As also M. Bunm^ prosecuteth the same more at large affirming thereforeM B^nny in his treati^e tending to Pacification pag. ^0^. Paulo post Medium. That of departing f^^ in the Church there ought to be ^o qu^stion at all amon^est vsIbidem pag. 113. post m^dium. wee are saith he no severall Church from them nor they f^o^ vs and therf re there is no departing at all out of the Church f r a^y to depar^ from them to vs, nor from vs ^o them, all the difference betweene vs is concerning the truer members, whether we or th^y may b^ f^und more w^r^hie of that accompt, as f r th^ other we all^w no su h question, in so much as hee doubteth n^t to sayIbidem p^g. 109. circa medium. It wa^ evill done of them who f^rst v^ged ^uch a ^eparati^^ co^fess^ng further our g eatIbidem pag. 92 circa medium, he saithe of his seperation, our aduersaries see themselues to h^^ advantage if they can winne vs to acknowledge (it) advantag giuen thereby, whi^h our advantage he afterw rds very pla^nel^ to this purpose expresseth to beIbidem pag. 96. c^rca m^dium. for that saith he) it is great pr^babilitie wi^h the^, that (...) we make ou s l^es a swerable ^or to find out a distinct and s uerall Chur^h from them, which continued from ^he Apo l s ^g^ t^ this p^e^n^, ^lso that ^ele we must acknowledge that our Church is str^g vpon late, or since theirs: And he^ce it commeth, that M. H^ler and M. D. Couel doM. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Policie. l. 3. sect. 1. p^g. 130. ante medium and l. 5. pag. 188. initi^. and M. D. Couel in his defence of M. Hooker, pag. 68. acknowl^^g^, the Church of Rome t^ be^ of the sami^ie o^ I^sus Ch^^st, a pa^te f the h^use of God, a Lymme of ^h^ vi^^bl^ Church of Christ: that M. D. Bar^ s^ithIn his ormer sermons a^d two questions, etc. serm. 3. pag. 448. fine. the learnedder writ^rs acknowle^ge the Chu^ch of Rome to bee th^ Church of God: that M. D S^me saithM. D. Some in his defence against M. Penrie (etc) cap. 23. fine pag. 182. initio. in the iudgement o^ all learned
 men, and all reformed Church s there is in Popery a Chu^ch: that another late Englishe Protestant wryter saythSee the discourse vpo^ the meanes of w^l governing (etc.) against Nicholas Matchiuell Printed at London 1602. pag. 80. post med the Catholicke and r formed make not two but one same r ligion,Ibide^ pag. 83 Paulo post med and 85. prope finem. agreeing in all principall points ^f rel^gion ^ecessarie for our saluatio^ that also George Cass^l^r (though dislikingCass^der in libro de offic^o Pij viri etc. pag. 14. ante medium and 15. initio. the Pope) and a knowledged forDauid Pareus in his booke de Symbolis Sacramentatibus etc. in praefat ante medium, saith C ssader ^rditius scriptor. etc. a learned writer saithCassander ibidem pag. 14. post medium. and in defence of his opinion h^e alledgeth Luther ibid. pag. 14. fine and pag. 21 and. 22. the Ch^r^h of Rome is to bee reuerenced as bei^g the true Church and Templ^ of God; and that a late d sguised French Protestant writer, affirmethExamen Pacifique de la doctrine de H^guenotes, etc. imprimee a Caen. 1590. en argum du liure pag. 2. Ca^h^l^ ke^ and H g^^^^^s to be of one saith and r^l g ^n: with whom agreeth another l ke ^rite^ term^ng the^ in like mannerApologie Catholique etc. part. 2. pag. 26. and 203 and 204. Dom^sti^kes ^f o^^ fa^^h, and braunch^s of one and the same Vine. And hen e lastly it commeth, that the lea ned Protestants (as wee beforeHeretofo^e tract. 1. s^ct. 6. haue she^ed doe afford to our C^tho ike professors, the ho efull promises of Salvation, af^irming this to beeM. D. Some vbi supra pag. 176. prope finem. the iudgment of a^l ^^a n^^ Pr^^e^tan^. and ^^dM. B^nny in his treati^e tending to Pacifi^ation pag. 93. circa medium. ^are by the wh^l^ course of all ^heir writ^ gs: in so ^uch a^ ^hey doubt not to cha^ge such of their other head-strong brethren as affirme the contrarie even withMr. D. Couell in his defence of M. Hooker, pag. 68. Paulo post medium. Ignorant zeale.


A briefe repetition of ^he premisses of this second Chapter. SECT 14.
SINCE therefore (most Gratiouse Souer^igne) it appeareth by the second chapter of this second tra^t grounded vpon the Scriptures, and that confessed sense therof which our aduersaries themselues ackno^ledge 1 First that the Chu^ches Pastors and Do^to^s, t^eir impugning of errors, administration of the Word and Sacrament^ must euermoreSee hereto^ore tra. 2. c. 2. sect 1. b. c. d. and ibid. n o. u. and ibidem, x. y. z. continue in being 2 Secondly that where these are wanting there the true Church isSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 1 y. z. not. 3 Thirdly that the examples ofSee heretofore tra. 2. c^p. ^. sect. 7. Bertram, theSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. Wal^e s s,See heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 4. Wi^liffe,

See heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 5. Huss, ^ndSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. and 11. Luther, vpon which our adversa^ies doe most insist and all otherSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. Sect 7. examples of former times are altogether impe^tinent to enable (but so much a respecti ely for those times:) a continuan e of their Churches administrat^on of the Word and Sacraments: in so much as themselues are vrged to co^fesse that the same haue continued latent andSee h^retofore tra. 2 c. 1. sect. 4. p. q. r. s. t. u. x. y. z. invisible to the world (at the least) for these 1000. years l st past. 4 Fourthly whi h po^nt onely wo^^d suffice to convince our adversaries) t^at not so much as an one e^ample thereof can bee found, b^t during eve^ the last xxSee heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. yeares before Luthers first preaching ag^inst the Pope, which are yet within the memo^ie of t^is present age. 5 Fifthly th^t in regard thereof, our adversarie^ a e (for preservation of themselues) vrged to fleeHeretofore tract. 2. c^p. 2. sect. 13 y. and ibidem z. b c. d. e. f. g. h. i. to our Catho^ike Church whose Pastors administration of the Word and Sacraments, haue accord^ng to their former confession) continuedSee heretofore tra. 1. sect. 2. and tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. q. r. s. t y. kn^wne and visible ^or 1300. yeares last ^ast, and so to acknowledge it for a trueSee heretofore tra. 1. sect. 6. e. f. and ibidem g. h. l. and tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 13 b. c. Church, wherof Lu^her at and after his s^^d fi^st pre c^^ing was andHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. y. continued (^ccording to their en^orced con^ession) a knowne and prof^ssed member.
We do most humb ^e now hereupon appeale to your MAIESTIE concerning the eq^itie of this our pre^ent Apologie, and whether ^h t we haue not her by greate cause, to stand (a^ we do) aga^nst our aduersaries in defence of our Catholike Church, and whe her also that they, are not in all sen^e and r^ason fo^nde of all others most vnreasonable, n thei^ seeking further to af^^ict and persecute the same.





THE THIRD TRACT

FIRST CHAPTER,

SECT. 1. CONCERNING THE CONFESSED ANtiquitie of Catholicke Priest-hood Confe sion Absolution Masse etc. and of the penall lawes made against them.
ALBEIT most gracious Soueraign that in regard of these so pl^ine and ^onfessed premisses already alledged in be^alfe of our Catholike faith, the same can appeare (even to our enemies) no lesse then worthie of all reuerend and due estim tion, such yet neverthel^s hath bin the calamity of our former ti^es, th t even for this faith, though th^s bewt^full with all this outward o na^et of co^f^ssed probabilitie, (which being indeed but as it were th mother pear^e conteineth vnder it such further speciall proofe fr^m Scriptures Fathers, ^nd Protestant write^s s is much more orient ^nd richly demonstrat^^e, the particule^s whereof we h^mblie pray but by this discourse m^de onely in generall da^e not presume) to offer to your Maiestie: we h^ue for many yeares past susteined the ^mpositio^ of sundry p^nall lawes, the CatholikeS. Chrysostom writ a ^peciall booke of this Priest-hood. Priest hood of our spiritua l Pastors, who (as St. Austine saith) are now not ^^properlie butAug. de civ. Dei l. 20. c. 10. post medium saith non vtique de solis Episcopis and Presb^teris d^ctum est, qui ^a^ prop^e voca^tur in Ecclesia Sacerdotes. prope^lie called priests in th^ Church: and to w^om there^ore the words Presbiter, and Sa^^rd s are ^nd fferentlyA^gust^^ vt supra and the Greek word Hiereus which signifieth Sacerdos is vsed and referred to Christian Priests by Dionisius Areopagita de eccles. Hierarch. c. 5. and Epist. 8. ad demophilum monachu^: And Ignatius in his vndoubted Epistle ad Smyrnenses nowe extante (wherof divers sentences are verbatim alledged vnder the name of Ignatius, and title of this Epistle by Hierom. lib. de viris illustribus and by Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 32. as is more at large vrged and proued by the L. Archbishop of Canturburie in his defence etc. pag. 408. circa medium: and he not so much as therin gaine-said by Carthwright affirmeth the Bishop to be as the high Priest, and Chr^sts Image in respect that he sacrificeth: affirming further, that in the Church nothing is greater then the Bishop, who sacrificeth to God for the safetie of the w^ole world and Nazianz^^ in Epist. 8. ad Simplicium Heret. affirmeth the Priest to be the mediator betweene God and man and sacrificing togither with Christ: this point is so evident and common in the Greeke and Latine Fathers, that M. Whitaker lib. 9. contra D^^^am, pag. 813 initio, acknowledgeth the same and answereth onely that the said Fathers vsed the words H^^reus and Sacerdos: (non proprie sed catacresticos, not properly) (directly against S. Austines foresaid testimonie) But by abuse of speech: and yet as the L. Archbishop of Canturburie in his said defence etc. pag. 411. versus finem, confesseth and saith this name Priest is vsually applied to the Minister of ^he Gospell in all Histories, Fathers and writer of Antiquitie. referred in respect of the blessed Sacrame^t,
 which is by them off^ed to GodAug. de civ. Dei lib. 17. cap. 17. circa medium. vnder Christ the (High) Priest, andAmbros. in 1. Tim. c. 4 vers. 14. in his steed orCiprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3. post medium. place, as the churches e^tern^ll and acceptable oblation, and acknowledgedFor these last 1000. yeares M. Beacon in his works set forth 1560. the 3. part in his treatise entituled the reliques of Rome fol. 344. a post. med. saith, the Masse was fully finished by Pope Gregorie the first, about Anno Domini 600. etc. And from Charles the Great vnto Charles the first, the Masse reigned as a most mightie Queene in all the Churches of the West part of the world. and Melancthon lib. 4. Chronic. in Henric. 4. fol. 186. 187. saith of Gregorie. he allowed by publique auctority the sacrifice of Christs body and blood not onely for the liuing, but also for the deade: And the like is affirmed of Gregorie by Carion. in Chronic. pag. 567. Paulo ante med. Also Musculus Loc. Comun. de caena dom. pag. 339 fi^e saith of Pelagius Predecessor to Gregorie, Pelagius commemoratione^ mortuorum in secreta canonis mistatic^ retulit (etc.) vt mortuis virtus and efficacia Missae communica^etur: Also Simachus was Bishop of Rome (Anno 501) of whom the centurie writers centur. 6. cap. 10. col. 664. line 30, say, notas Antichristi and hic habuit, missam enim in formam redegit: Before him was S Leo (Anno 440.) of whom M. Bale in his Pageant of Popes fol. 27. saith, Leo the first allowed the sacrifice of the Masse n^t without great blasphemie to God: Before Leo was Ambrose (Anno 370) whom the centurie writers cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295. line 3. reprove and ch^rge with not writing well de transubstantiatione and applicatione pro mortuis: and ibidem line 23. they further s^y, Ambrosius locutionibus vtitur quibus ante eum ex patribus nemo vsus est: vt miss^m facere, offerre sacrificium etc. Before him againe w^s Gregorie N^ssene of the Greeke Church: (Anno 340.) of whom Andreas Chrastouius in his booke (against Bellarmine) de opificio missae lib. 1. sect. 164. initio and pag. 81. saith An ignorat opinionem Nissem per se absurdam esse (etc.) ait ille (Nissenus) cum itaque dedit (Christus) discipulis suis corpus suum ad comedendum (etc.) ^am latenter (etc.) in effabiliter and inuisibiliter corpus immolatum erat (etc.) And see further hereof M. Whitaker co^tra Duraeum l. 4. pag. 320. fine: Also Cyrrill of Hierusalem another Father of the Greeke Church florished (Anno 320.) whom Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria pag. 167. initio chargeth and reproveth saying, quod ad Cirrillum Hierosolomitanum attinet, dicit ille quide^ pro ^u^iam temporis recepta consu^tudine, sacraficium altaris, maximum iuvamen este animarum: and Ca^vin in libro de vera Ecclesia reformatione saith of the Fathers of this age sole^ne est nebulonibus istis (meaning vs Catholikes) quicquid vitiosum in Patribus legitur coriadere (etc.) cum ergo obijciunt locum Malachiae de missae sacrificio ab Ireneo exponi, oblationem Melchisedech sic tractari, ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino, Arnobio, brevite. ^^^ponsu^ sit, eosdem illos scriptores alibi quoque panem interpretari Corpus Christi, sedita ridicu^e, vt distentire nos cogat^atio and veritas (etc.) And in his booke of the institutions printed Argentorat. 1539. pag. 350. ante medium. And after the ^ther edition lib. 4. institut. cap. 18. sect. 11. he further saith veteres quoque illos video hanc memoriam alio detorsisse quam institutioni domini co^veniebat, quod nescio quam repetitiae aut saltem renovatae in^ol^tionis faciem, ^orum caena prae se f^rebat (etc.) Imitati sunt enim propius Iudaicum sacrificandi morem quam aut ordinauerat Christus, aut Evangelij ratio ferebat and see heretofore pag. 13. Before these times liued S. Ciprian (Anno 240.) whom the Centurie writers cent. 3. cap. 4. col. 83. line 34. reproue saying, Sacerdorem inquit (Ciprianus) vic^ Christi fugi, and Deo Patrisacrificium offerri. And M. Fulke against Heskines, Sanders etc pag. 100. circa med. saith It is granted that Ciprian thought the bread and wine brought forth by Melchisad^ch to bee a figure of the Sacrament, and that herein also Melchisadech resembled the Priesthood of Christ. Also Tertullian liued (Anno 220) him doth Luc Osiander centur. 3. lib. 1. cap. 5. pag. 10. circa med. reproue saying, Tertullianus approbauit oblationes pro defuciis, orationes Annuas pro natalitijs: In like sort is he reproued by the Centurie writers cent. 3. cap. 5. col. 338. line 56. and no lesse plainely by M Fulke in his confutation of Purgatorie pag. 265. circa and post med. Before Tertullian liued Ireneus (Anno 170.) him Caluine reporteth as before, and the Centurie writers cent. 2. cap. 4. col. 63. line 20. charge, saying de oblatione porro Ireneus l. 4. c. 32. (etc.) satis videtur loqu^ in co^^n ode, cum ait noui Testamenti novam docuit (Christus) oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniverso mundo offert Deo. Before him liued Ignatius the Apostles vndoubted scholler, (Anno 90) of whom the Centurie writers in cent. 2. cap. 4. col. 62. line 9. say, quaedam ambigua and incomode dicta in quibusdam occurrunt, vt in Epistola Ign^tij ad Smyrnenses, non licet inquit Ignatius sine Episcopo neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare, and cent. 2. c. 10. col. 167. line 17. the Centurie writers affirme these words of Ignatius to be periculosa and qu^si errorum semina: Lastlie M. Beacon in his foresaid treatise fol. 344. a. post med. saith, the Masse was begotten, conceaved and borne anone after the Apostles times, if all be true that historiographers write. And Hospinianus in historia sacrame^taria l. 1. c. 6 pag. 20 fine. saith, Iam tum primo illo seculo viuentibus adhuc Apostolis, magis huic sacr^mento quem Baptisme insidiari ausus sit (demon) and homines a prima illa forma sensim abduxerit (etc.) And Sebastianus Francus in Epistola de abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis (saith most plainely) statim post Apostolos omnia inuersa sunt (etc.) caena dom. in sacrificium transformata est. by learned protestants to haue beene for such acco^d ngly offred not only fo^ these thousand yeares last past, but also for so many other precedent ages,
 as being (in our opinion) not any new redemptio^ but rather a continuall commemoration and application of the force and benefit of that one sacrifice, whichHaebr. 9, 28. was offred once for all: is against all example of former times made treason in our Priests: our releeving
 of them is death to vs, the remission or forgiuenes of our sinnes, (which Protestants terme reconciliation) defe^ded by auncientAmbros. l. 1. de poenitentia c. 2. saith of the Novatians, sed a^unt se domino deferre reverentiam cui soli remittendoru^ criminum potestatem reservent. Immo nulli maiore^ iniuriam faciunt, quam qui eius volunt mandata rescindere. nam cum ipse in Evangelio suo dixerit dominus, accipite spiritum sanctum quoru^ remisseritis peccata remittuntur eis (etc.) quis est ergo qui magis honorat, vtrum qui mandatis obtemperat an qui resistit. And cap. 7. he further saith to them, cur Baptizatis si peccata per hominem dimitri no^ licet: In Baptismo vtique remissio peccatorum omnium est, quid interest vtium per paenitentiam, an per lauacrum hoc ius sibi datum Sacerdotes vindicentur vnum in vtroque ministerium est. Also Pacianus in epist. 1. ad S^mp^onianum nouatianum saith, numquam Deus non poenitenti comminar^tur nisi ignosc^^e^ poenitenti: solus hoc (inquies) Deus poterit, verum est: sed and quod per Sacerdotes suos facit ipsius potestas est, nam quid est illud quod Apostolis dicit: quae ligaueritis in tertis (etc.) In like manner Socrates in hist. tripart. lib. 2 cap. 13. fine. reproueth Acesius the Nouatian: for that hee taught concerning such as fell in persecution (inuitandus quidem ad poenitentian, spem vero remissionis non a sacerdotibus, sed a Deo solummodo sustinere, qui potestatem h^bet peccata remittere: Haec cum dixisset Acesius, imperator ait, o Acesi pone scalam and si potes ascende solus in coelum; so strange and singuler in those times was this opinion deemed: and vide hist. tripart. l. 8. c. 9. prope initium. Fathers against the Novatians, and by other ProtestantLobechius Doctor and professor in the Vniversitie of Rosticke in his disput. theolog. pag. 301 answereth our adversaries common obiection saying; est quide^ solius De^a peccatis absoluere, sed ita vt (hoc fac^at alias immediate, (etc.) alias mediate per suos ministros condonando nobis culpam (etc.) errant ergo Calum^^m, qui (etc.) absolutioni ministri verbi, illam efficaciam detrahant, (etc.) contendentes mini^^um absoluere tantum vt internuntium etc. In like plaine manner is our adversaries obiection of God onely forgiuing sinne: and their denial^ therevpon of that power to Ecclesiasticall Minis^ers, no lesse plainely further answered and refelled by sundrie Protestants, as namely by Andrea^ A^thamerus in conciliat. locorum Scripturae pugnantium etc. loc. 194. fol. 218. a. b. And by Iacobus He^lbranerus in Schwenckfeldio Caluinism. pa. 55. In so much as Absolution (is affirmed to be) properly a Sacrament, by Melancthon in Apolog. Confest. August. Art. 13. de numero and vsu Sacramentorum fol. 161. b. initio. by Spangeberg in (hu) Margarita Theologica. pag. 116. and 117. by Andraeas Acthamerus in conciliat. lo^orum Scripturae Pugnan. (etc.) loc. 191. fol. 211. b initio. and loc. 195. fol. 219. b. And by Sarcerius in loc. comun. tom. 1. de potest. Ecclesiae fol. 305 b. post med. writers against their brethren our adversa^ies, which our said Priests (according to their commission most plainly set downe in theIoh. 20, 21, 22, 23. Scriptures) vndertake to impart to vs, vpo^ perticuler confession had of our sinnes, (which saide confession bothTo omitte the plentifull testimonies of the Fathers S. Leod^s^ribeth the vsage of the Latine Church in epist 91. ad Theodoru^ foro iulij Episcopum saying, Christus hanc Ecclesiae praepositis tradidit potestatem, vt and confitentinus actionem poenitentiae darent, and cosdem salubri satisfactione purgatos, ad communionem Sacramentorum per Ianuam reconcil^^tionis admitterent: And epist. 80. ad Episcopos Campaniae. He further saith, cum reatus conscientiarum sufficiat solis Sacerdotibus iudicari confessione secreta. And it is saide in the ancient tripartite historie. lib. 9. cap. 35. Ad hanc causam presbiterum bonae conuersationis, seruantemque secretu^ ac sapientem virum statuerunt, ad quem accedentes hi qui delinquebant delicta propria fat^bantur: At ille secundum vniuscuiusque culpam indicebat and mulctam: quod etiam hactenus diligenter in occide^talibus servatur ecclesijs, and maxime apud Romam, vbi etiam locus est certus poenitentium. And S. Basile (signifieth the like doctrine of the Greeke Church) in quaestionibus brevioribus interrogat. 288. saying, necessario peccata ijs apariri debent, quibus credita est dispensatio mysteriorum Dei: siquidem rationem hanc in poenite^tia etiam veteres illos cernimus sequutos fuisse: etc. And the Centurie writers Centur. 3. cap. 6. col. 127. line 29. 30. 31. etc. Describe the life doctrine and vsage of the Church of Aphricke out of the writings of Ciprian, and Tertullian. And see further hereof heretofore pag. 53. num. 7. And in the margent there at the letter t etc. Fathers and Protestants

Sacerius in loc. comun. de confessione fol. 289. b. saith it is an error adserere confessione^ quae coram Deo fit sufficere, ita vt contemnas claves and absolutionem per fratre^: Hic error prorsus tollit vsum clavium and absolutionis (etc.) falsum ergo est confessionem, quae cora^ Deo fit tollere confessionem privatam: etc. In like plaine maner is private confession defended most earnestly against our adversaries. by sundrie of their owne other brethren, as namelie by Lobechius in disput. theol pag. 295. sect. 4. By Conradus Schluselburg. in theol. Caluinistarum, fol. 147. a. By Melancthon l. 1. epistolarum pag. 234. ante medium. By the confessions of Saxonie, and Boheme in the Harmony of Co^fessions. pag. 231. circa medium. and pag. 357. and 358. initio. and by many others. doe likewise acknowledge) is (to our greatest greefe) condemned for Lasa maiestas, as being a disloiall abnegation of our allegeance. To the clearing whereof, we doe (as in the presence of God and your Maiestie) protest vpon our soules, that no such matter, is therein or thereby expressed implied or ment: our recusancie or refraining to be present at Protestants service: (notwithstanding that the like deniall or recusancie of Protestants to be present at our Catholike service, is prescribed and taught by sundrie of their owne most learnedM. Willet in his Synopsis printed Anno 1600. pag. 612. 613. 614. teacheth this recusancie, and alledgeth in proofe of his opinion sundrie testimonies from the most famous Protestants, as Ridley, Latimer, Philpot, Bradford etc. In like manner is it further taught by Ridley in the Actes and Monuments pag. 1285. b. paulo ante medium. By Haukes Act. Mon. pag. 1150. b. initio. and 1151. a. circa medium. By Melancthon in concilijs theologicis pag. 628. By Peter Martyr in his discourse hereof recited in Melancthons foresaid treatise of Consil. theolog. pag. 634. 635. By Martine Bucer alledged ibidem pag. 632. and 633. and 634. By Iohn Caluine alledged ibidem pag. 635. fine and 636. and by the Divines of Germanie alledged by Sleydane in his Comentaries Englished. lib. 7. fol. 87. a. circa medium. writers) is neverthelesse iudged in vs a kind of froward and superfluous remorse, and accordingly taxed with a confiscation or waist of our goods and yearely revenue: wherevnto might be added our sundry other losses, contumelies, imprisonments and publike disgraces heretofore susteined whereat though we doe all mourning plaine, yet complaine we will not,



THE PROTESTANTS OBIECTION OF Catholickes disloyaltie retorted vpon themselues. SECT. 2.
AND for somuch as sundry of our vncharitable aduersaries who are nothing moued with our foresaid calamities, do out of their inueterate and implacable hatred, daily seeke to auert from vs your HIGHNES most gratious and Princely dispositio^, inclined otherwise to commiserat all such as are afflicted, and do therefore to make vs more odious often inculcate the doctrine wherewith certaine our writers are charged concerning the Popes vndertaking in some cases to despose Princes, pretending with all what greate danger may at last hence ensue when by reason of your Maiesties mercie in the meane time to vs exte^ded, our estats shall be bettered and number increased: Vouchsafeth your HIGHNES (before we enter into petition for our selues) graciously to weigh with equall consideration that which herevnto wee shall alledge, aswell co^cerning our adversaries, who thus charge vs, as in answere for our selues that are so charged.
First then concerning our aduersaries, wee say that they in their thus vrging or but remembring of this point against vs, doe of all others shewe themselues most indiscreetely malicious, for: quis tulerit grachum de seditione loquentem etc. or how can it be decorum in any, to charge others with imputation of that, wherin themselues are further chargeable? And although we for our partes doe altogether dislike all acerbitie and gall of in vectiue writing; being yet thus provoked to such iust and necessarie recrimination as our owne defence and safetie requireth; we say from the^selues as followeth 1 First concerning the Lutheranes doth not Sleydane Luthers owne Scholler make full reporte of the seditious doctrine of the Divines of Magdenburge maintaining and publiquelie

In Sleydane in English hist. l. 22. fol. 345. a circa medium the Divines of Magdenburg thus teach thereof: If it so fortune that the Magistrate passe the boundes of his authority and commaund any thing that is wicked etc. If hee attempte any force he should be res^sted etc. and seeing the case standeth t^us, there can no rebellion of right be obiected vnto vs. And ibide^ fol. 345. b. initio It is further said, The Min^sters of the Church set forth a writing wherein they recite the confession of their Doctrine, and declare how it is lawfull for the inferior Magistrate to defend himselfe against the the superior compelling him to forsake the truth. teaching in defence of their rebellion, that in case of religion it was lawful for subiects even with force to resist the Prin^e: doth not Chitraeus a learned LutheraineChitraeus in Chronic. Anno 1593. and 1594. pag. 74. fine and 75. saith hereof tandem rex flecti se sibique persuadere passus est, vt assentiretur se religionem and cultum Dei, in verbo Dei and Augustana confessione comprehensum etc. solam in regno conseruare ac tueri, nec templa in vrbibus vlla alteri, quam Augustinae confessionis reli^ioni destinare velle, nec aditum in senatum regni, vel ad vlla r^gni officia publica, alijs quam Augustinae confessionis doctrinam retinentibus concedi debere: regem ve^o ip^um ad suae religionis Pontificiae exercitium, sacellis arrium in quibus habitabit contentum fore. etc. repo t how the King of Suethland being a Catholike was by hi^ subiects the Lutheraines vrged to asse^t to the de^ree that no Catholike should beare any of^ice in that kingdome and that the King should content himselfe with his Catholike service to be Celebrated only in his own private Chappell? was not the force attempted by the GermainesOf the Germaines insurrection against their Emperour, see further hereafter in this tract in the margent at the figure 4. against thei^ Emperour in defence of their Lutherane religion so publiquel^ m^de knowne to the world with lamentable effus^on of much Christian blood throughout Germany, as that the same is mu^h more wort^ie o^ pittie t^en reme^bran e?
Se^o^dl^ concerning t^e Cal^iniste^, doth not Caluine him selfe teach hereof, thatCalvine in Dan. c. b. vers. 22.25. saith, abdica^t se potestate terreni Principes dum insurgunt contra Deum, immo indigni sunt quicenscantur in hominu^ numero, potius ergo conspuere oportet in illoru^ capita, qua^ illis parere etc. ear^hly Prin^es doe be^eaue h^m selue o^ auth^ritie when they erect thems lues against God, yea that they are vnworthie to b^ accompted in the number of men, and therefore we must rather spitt vpon their faces, then obeie them etc. doth not S^inglius likewise say,Suinglius lib. 4. epistolarum Suinglij and oecolampad. epist. Cunhardo Somio and Symperto etc. pag. 868. post medium and pag. 869. saith, Promittendum est Caesari officium debitum si modo fidem nobis permittat illibatam etc. Romanum Imperium, imo quodque Imperium vbi religionem sinceram opprimere ceperit, and nos illud negligentes patimur, iam negatae aut contemptae religionis non minus rei erimus quam illi ipsi oppressores: exemplum est apud Hieremiam 15. vbi exterminium cominatur Deus Israeli quod Manastem permisissent impune esse pessimum. due l^ial^ie is to be promised to Ces^r, i^ so that he p r^nt to vs our rel gio in violabl^ and. if the romaine Empire or what ^^her, souerai n^ s^euer, should opresse the sincere religion, and we n^gligently further the same, we shalbe
 charged with contempte, no less^ then the oppressors thereof them s^lues. whereo^ (^aith he, abusing therein ^he Scriptures most g^o^ely) we haue an example in the 15. of Ieremie, wher the distruction of the Pe^pl^ is proph^sied for that they suffred their Kings Ma^^ss s ^e^^g vngodly to be vnpunished. And doth he not aduise to haue this Doctrine priuately and with respect(Ibidem pag. 869. post medium.) Prudenter igitur ac paulatim age^da sunt huiusmodi, atque cum paucis quibus credere possis quae ardua sunt. Co^municated vnto certeine chiefe pe^sons of credit, did not also the Caluinists of Embden (as a brother of t^e^r o^neGerhardus Giesekenius lib. de veritate Corporis Christi in Sacra caena. pag. 256. paulo post medium saith, Embdens^s illustrem dominu^ suum, mota seditione and advocato peregrino milite, fere non solum civit^te, sed tota ditione pepulissent: pacti eti^m sunt ne pot^state^ habeat dictus illustris comes vllius religionis nisi C^lvinistae exercitium subditis in Civitate Embd^na co^cedere, and tamen liceat (quod magnae est gratiae) facere in aula co^cionatorem, qui sit Augustinae co^fessionis. H^ sunt fructus fidei vestrae etc. reporteth) by force expell the Civill Magistrate, being a Lu^herane and inforce that the e^ercise of the Calvinistes religion should be publique and ^he other but priuate; to the Magistrate in his o^ne house. Is there not also like further ^epo^t or mention made by the Protestant writer ^ri^tuus of theCrispinus in his booke of the Churches State pag. 509. initio. S^dition at Basile betwixte the Bu ge^^^s and certeine of the Senators for the cause of religio? and that the Burg^sses hau^ng taken armes, cast downe the Imag^^ in the Templ^s, and cau^ed the Sena^e to agree to what they demaunded: and that herevpon twelue Senators fav^uri^g Pap^strie were deiected out of the Senate. and that in this sort, the Masse was then abolished through all that Signorie: Wherevnto might be added the knowne confessed example of likeOsiander in epitom-hist. Eccl. centur. 16. pag. 801. post med. and. 803. ante medium. impatient furie at Antwerpe, and certaine other plac^s of Holland, Zelland etc. as also ofTestified by Crispin^^ vbi supra pag. 627. fin^, and by Osiander centur. 16. pag. 959. And Sarauia in defens. tract. de diversis gradibus ministrorum etc. cap 2. pag. 74 ante and circa medium. saith, quid his verbis D. Beza si^nificare velit quando pios expectare non a^quum censet donec lupi publica auctorit^te expellantur, quidam dubitant: and videre privata auctoritate lupos illos posse expelli sicut in Belgio and alijs lo^s factum est, vbi templa and monasteria cum Monachis and Episcopis, vniu^rsoque clero pa^istico spoli^ta and diruta sunt populari tum vltu and militari licentia, invitis summis magistratibu^, and contra fidem datam. Petrus Dat^enus, and others chiefe of the Congregation in Gaunt, who Anno 1578. stirred vp the Cittizens there to thrust out all th^ M^sse Priestes and Monckes out o^ the Cittie, and put their goods into their treasurie etc. doth not Mr. Doctor Su^clyffe accordinglie confesse thatM. Sutclyffe in his aunswere to a certaine Lybell Sapplicatorie etc. pag. 75. paulo post medium. Bezain his booke de iure magistratum in s^bditos
 doth arme the subiectes against the Prince in these causes, and that thisM. Sutclyffe vbi supra pag. 192. post medium booke ouerthroweth in effect all the auctority of Christian Kinges and Magistrates. Doth he not likewise further affirmeM. Sutclyffe vbi supra pag. 75. post medium. that the author of the booke which is intituled, vindiciae contra tyrannos, whom (saith he) many affirme to be Beza or Hottoman doth giue power to the subiectes not onely to resist but also to de^ose and kill the Pri ce if he impugne Gods rel^gion, did not Iohn Knoxe alledge in proofe of his owne seditious opinionHereof see the historie of the Church of Scotland printed by Vautrouilier pag. 213. and M. Sutclyffe vbi supra pag. 192. ante med. Caluine, and certaine other ministers then residing at Geneua, teaching that it is lawfull for subiectes to reforme religion whe^ Princes will not, yea rather then faile euen by force of armes, do not our aduersaries themselues acknowledge accordingly that the ProtestantsHereof see Bodinus de republica pag. 353. and Calvine to Sadolet. pa. 172. and M. Sutclyffe vbi supra pag. 194. initio, and the L. Bishop of London in his Survey of the prete^ded holy disciplin. pa. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. of Geneua did depose their Leige Lord and Prince from his temporall right there, from which yet to this day they keepe him by force excluded. In so much as the Lord Bishope of London, and Mr. D. Sutcliffe pro^esse without any couerture of wordes, plainely to dislikeSee the foresaide S^rvey etc. pag. 14. circa med. and M. Sutclyffe in his said answere pag. 194. initio. the diuinitie which was pretended in defence thereof by the Ministers of Geneua.Con^erning the Lowe Countries, see Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. centur. 16. pag. 941. fine, where he saith Belgici publico scripto Domino and regi suo Philippo omnem obedie^tiam and subiectionem renunciant. And see there further pag. 801. post medium, and 803. ante medium, and 805. prope finem. Thirdly to forbeare aswell the confessed example of IoannesSee Osiander in his Epitom. centur. 16. pag. 802. fine. Functius a prime Protestant, publiquely executed for his offence of this kinde, as also (for some respect) what is or may bee further saide conce^ning the Protestant Subiectes ofFor Fraunce see Peter M^rtir in his epistles annexed to his como^ places in English pag. 157. b. and Osiander in epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 16. pag. 697. initio and 708. circa medium. and 804. post. mediu^. and 809. initio. And see Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church pag. 614. post medium, and 615. and 616. fine, and 619. post medium, and 611. fine, and 613. fine, and 625. post medium. And see the Historie of the civill Warres of Fraunce (gathered from Anno 1585. till 1591. Printed at London Anno 1591.) of the Kinges royall auctoritie ioyned with the Leaguers, pag. 91. initio, and 168. fine, and of resistance after made thereto by them of the reformed religion pag. 48. and 49. fine, and 51. circa medium, and 104. and 135. post medium, and 143. circa med. and 144. ante med. and 165. paulo post medium, and 169. post medium, and 172. etc. Fraunce, and the LoweConcerning the Lowe Countries, see Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. centur. 16. pag. 941. fine, where he saith Belgici publico scripto Domino and regi suo Philippo omnem obedie^tiam and subiectionem renunciant. And see there further pag. 801. post medium, and 803. ante medium, and 805. prope finem. Countries, and many otherSee these other examples in Osiander centur. 16. pag. 115. circa med. and 735. initio and circa med. and 599. paulo ante med. and 692. fine, and 802. fine, and 942. and 125. ante med. and 523. initio, and 350. ante med. and 1120. fine, and in Crispinus in his booke of the estate of the Church pag. 636. circa medium, and 682. ante medium. And see the Protestant writer Dresserus in parte secunda millinarij sexti, where he acknowledgeth and reporteth conc^rning G^rmanie, pag. 656. ante medium, saying, scripto publico Saxonem and Lautgrauium proscribit Cesar tanquam perfidos rebelles etc. Protestantes cognita tanta severitate Bellum and ipsi denunciant Caesari (and pag. 658. fine) Mauritius Sax. elector and Augustus frater, non quiescendum sibi arbitrabantur, priusquam in tuto religionis Lutheranae professionem collocassent, inde expeditionem Mauritius in ipsum Caesarem suscepit* (and pag. 661. ante medium, hee acknowledgeth that) dissidium and bellum omne ex mutatione religionis Pontificiae in Lutheranam in Germaniae quibusdam ducatibus, comitatibus, and civitatibus ortum est: and pag. 464. ante med. he saith, Mauritius itaque cum rege Galliae foedus fecit and in obtinendum id, ta^dem ratus quod aequitate non poterat, milites presidiarios in Pacificatione Magdeburgica dimissos tacite rursum conduxit, and contra Caesarem ipsum adduxit: etc. like forraine examples confessed and reported
 even by Protestant writers, and to come neerer home, was not our Cou^trieman Mr. Goodman so farre caried away with this rage of sedition that he doubted not to publish, that in case of religionSee Goodmans booke, pag. 4. 43. 59. 63. 87. 72. 99. 180. 184. 185. 196. it was lawfull to resist the Superior Powers, and for subiects to withstand their Prince. Doth hee not herevpon affirme thatCap. 14. pag. 204. ad 212. Wiat did but his dutie, and that it was the dutie of all others that professed the Gospell to haue risen with him: is it not evident and confessed that thisM. Sutclyffe in his answere etc. pag. 192. fine. book^ was printed at Geneua in Queene Maries time,See Whittinghams Epistle before Goodmans book. co^manded by M. Wihittingham, andWhittingham vbi supra, and M. Sutclyffe in his said answere, etc. pag. 193. initio. approued to be good and godly by the cheefest men of learning that were then in that Cittie: did not the auctor of the booke of obedience write^ in Queene Maries time, affirme therein thatObed. pag. 99. and 113. and se M. Sutclyffe in his foresaid answere pa. 193. ante med. and see the booke intituled dangerous Positio^s etc. pag. 36. circa medium. Queene Marie ought to be put to death, as being a tyrant, a moster, and a cruell beast: did not one William Thomas and others accord^nglie conspire toHollinsheades greate Chronicle the last editio^ volume 3. pag. 1104. a. initio. murther the said Queene, and was not yet the said WilliamMaster Cowper in his Chronicle fol. 365. b. ante medium. Thomas being for that ^ff^nce hanged, drawne, and quartered nothing abasht to iustifie and sayM. Stowe in his Annalls or Chronicle Printed Anno 1592. pag. 1058. paulo ante medium. at his death that he died for his Countrie: etc.
As con^erning our Englishe Puritanes of latter times who yet at this present (to exasperate the state against vs) do so tediously and tragically riot in their pulpitts with so much want of matter and wastfull prodigalitie of time, we will requite their malice with all sobrietie and patience forbearing purposelie
 at this present to mention in perticuler, what may be, and by their owne brethren already isIn M. Sutclyffes answere to a lybell Supplicatory and in the treatise intituled dangerous Positions and Proceedings published and practised within this Iland of Britainy vnder pretence of reformation, whereof M. Bancrofte is saide to b^e the Auctor. And in the booke intituled conspiracie for prete^ded reformatio^, etc. printed 1592. pag. 28. 29. 30. 32. 33 35. collected in this kind against them out of their owne writinges as also wee willinglye passe ouer the like further exam^les to well knowne to your Maiestie of, Knoxe, Buchanan, Andrew Melum, and those other vnquiet spirrits of scotland, whose Seditiouse doctrine and designe^ents complotted against your Maiestie, are to the world more odiouse and doubtfull, in that besides other respects, they did perpetrate the same against your Highnes, a Prince zealouse in their owne religion onely we will premonishe in generall, that the iurisdiction (more then papall) which they vnder the vaile of paretie, wou^d induce into euery of their seuerall parishes, is, (as her late Maiestie obserued out of her owne Princely experience)In her Maiesties Oration in Stowes abridgment. pag. 1196. prope initium. dangerous to a King^y rul^: and to the state so much the more doubtfull and to be suspected, by how much it is euident, that manyM. Hooker in his preface to his booke of Ecclesiasticall policy, pag. 34. post. medium, saith to the Puritanes you admit so many Supremacies, as there are seuerall parishes etc. domesticke Popes among whom is no subordination, are to be reputed for more turbulent, and enabled with oportunitie to attempte the hurt by them intended, then any one forraine Pope can be: a thing so evident that certaine of the rowne brethren d^ubte not to affirme and say of them, thatM. D. Sutclyffe in his foresaid answere etc. pag. 192. prope initium and pag. 198. ante medium. they doe deliuer doctrine as dangerous to Princes, as R^ss^, Sanders, Allen, and other Papistes.


A REPETITION OF CONFESSED examples proui^g the Loialty of English Catholikes. SECT. 3.
BVT certaine of our adversaries wil perhaps hereto answere (which is all they can well answere) that sundrie of them doe dislike of the foresaid seditious doctrine and practises wherewith their foresaide brethren are (as before charged) and that therefore
 we should greatly wrong them, if for the example of those, we should hould all of them in like sort chargable. Truely we acknowledge no lesse, and doe perswade our selues that many graue and learned amongst them, would professe and teach Loyalty to their Soveraigne, any diversitie of religion notwithstanding.
If now the^ they could but afford vs the like charitable and indifferent censure, concerning that other foresaid doctrine wherewith they charge certaine of our writers, they should so discerne matter no lesse evident and sufficient for our excuse. To alledge therfore even from themselues, that which blinded malice w ll not as now suffer certaine of the^ to confesse: (and by themselues published) and first concerning our owne countrie: To omitte the knowne doctrine ofIn the epistle of Iohn Harte to the Reader, sette before the beginning of the Confere^ce between Doctor Raynoldes and him published by auctoritie. Mr. Harte andIn M. Bishops booke entituled A cortuyse Conferen e etc. writen by Iohn Bishop a recusant Papist Printed at Londo^ for Robert Dexter in Paules Church-yard at the signe of the Brazen Serpent. Mr. Bishoppe do not the English Chronicles testifie concerning Salisburie, and those other (who were sinisterly seduced, to designe with Babington to the effusion of innocent and sacred blood) that sundrie of them, as namelyH^llinsheades Chronicle of England the last edition vol. 3. pag. 1574. b. line 8. Salisburie, andIbidem pag. 1574. b. linea. 14. 15. Dunne, did at the time of their death, (when their conscience, and religion was not to bee dissembled) publiquely and most grievously repent them of their error, diswading all Cathol ckes from attempting to restore r^l g^^n b^ vi^lence. Did not Ioanes very earnestly as the^ and to the ^omiseratio^ of the behouldersIbidem linea. 60. pr^test, that alth^^gh he was a Catholicke yet he so deepely weighe^h libertie f his countrie as that he would be and euer was rea^y to s^e^d his life in withstanding any force Italishe, Spa^^sh, or what^o^uer? Doth not the said Chronicle report ^n like sort concerning ^he conspiracie wherew^th a^r^ was char^ed, that when he came to confer^e with the S^minarie Priestes beyond the Seas,See Hollinsheads foresaid Chronicle volume 3. pag. 1385. b. linea 41. 42. Mr. Wat^^s a l arned Pries^ plainely pronounced that it was vtterly ^nlawfull, with wh^m ma^y Engl^sh Pries^e did agre: And that ^ar^i in his letter to our late Soveraigne did conf^sse thatIbidem pag. 1387. A. linea. 36. most of the ^^gl s^ Divines
 did vtterly mislike and ^odemne it: And also that William Chreichton the Scottish Iesuite in his private resolution thereof to ParrieIbidem pag. 1387. b. linea vult. Beyond the seas, did at sundry times answere himIbidem pag. 1388. a. linea 24. quod omnino non liceret, that it was altogether vnlawfull, and withall alledged vnto him sundry graueIbide^ linea 32. etc. reasons to withdraw him fro^ that reported enterprise. In like maner the book entituled the execution of Iustice in England etc. penned (as some thinke by a late deceased worthyThe late Lord Treasurer. Magistrate of very honorable memory published by auctoritie, and now sinceIt is inserted into Hollinsheades foresaid Ch^onicle volum. 3. Anno Eliz. 26. pa. 1358. and 1359. etc. inserted into the foresaid Chronicle is it not ple^tifull in testimonies of this kind? doth it not affirme and say, thatIbide^ pag. 1360. b. linea 26. there be many subiectes knowne in the Realme, that doe not forbeare to prof^sse their religion and yet doe also professe Loyalty and obedience to her Maiestie, and offer read^ly to her Mai^stie defence to impugne and resist any forraine force though it should come from the Pope: In respect whereof they rece^ued favour, and thatIbidem linea 35. of these sorts there haue beene and are a ^umber of persons not of base and vulgar note. A for exampleIbidem linea 40. the first and chiefe by office (saith the booke) was Doctor H^ath Archbishoppe of Yorke, a faithfull and quiet s^biect* AlsoIbid. lin. 53. 54. etc. Doctor Poole Bish^p of Peterborrow a very quiet subiect: Doctor Tunstall Bishop of Durham a person of grea^ reputatio^; Doctor White, and Doctor Oglethorp^ the one of Winchester, the other of Carlile Bishops and he of Carlile so in^^^ed to dutifulnesse to the Queene, Maiestie as hee did the office (...) the Conse^ration and Coronation of her Maiesty. To these also are there addedIbidem linea 65. Doctor Thurl^bey, and D^ct^r Watson the one of Eli^, the other of Lincolne Bishops. Besides someIbidem linea 69. and pag. 1361. a. linea 2. Abbottes and Dean^s there mentioned, andIbide^ pag. 1361. A. linea 61. a great number of Laymen of good possessions and credit in th^ir countrie. In like manner ourM. D. Bilson Bishop of Winchester in his true differe^ce betweene Christian subiectio^ and vnchristian rebellion part. 3. pag. 243. 244. aduersaries themselues do take notice and affirme that the Com^ns of this Land in the reigne of King Richard the seco^d did in open Parliame^t acknowledge in regard of spirituall Iurisdiction theThese words of the Comons are in the Statutes of King Richard the 2. Anno 16. C. 5. Bishoppe of Rome (to be) their most holy father and yet withall did at
 the very same time expresly deny that theIn the saide Statutes vbi supra and in D. Bilson vbi supra pag. 244. ante medium. Crowne of England wh ch was immediatly subiect to God and to no other in all things touching the regalitie of the saide Crowne, should be submitted to the Bish^p of Rome: wherf^re (say they) we will be with our said soveraigne Lord the King and his said Crowne and his regalitie in the cases aforesaid and in all other cases attempted against him his Crowne and r^galitie in all pointes to liue and die. Is it not also testified concerning controversie moved in this kind in the time of King Edward the first, that to vse Hollinsheades words hereofHollinshead in his second volume of the last edition pag. 309. b. line 66. All the Lords temporall of the Land assembl d in Parliament at Lincolne in name of all the Estates there gath^red did a^swere (concerning) the Popes r^ght to bein^ge etc. that they would not consent that their King should doe anie thing that might tend to the disinheriting of the r^ght of the Crown of England: (And that)Hollinshead ibid. pag. 310. a. line 2. it was never known that the Ki^gs of this land had answered or ought to answere for their rights in the same R^alme ^f^re any Iudge Ecclesiasticall or Seculer. Did not they in their letter hereof specially written to Pope Bonifac^ and by Hollinshead at large recited, acknowledge and call Pope Boniface to whom they did so writeIbidem pag. 310. a. line 11 Boniface by Gods providence high Bishoppe of the holie Romane and vniuersall Church and themselues, hisIbidem pag. 310. a. line 14. devoute Sonnes: and did they not also (all that notwithsta^ding) yet further affirme, thatIbidem. pag. 311. a. line 2. the Kings of England ought not to aunswere for their rightes in the saide Re^lme or for any their temporalties before any Iudge Ecclesiasticall or Seculer by reason of the free preheminence of the estate of his Royall d^gnitie and custome kept without breach at all times And thatIbidem pag. 311. a. line 9. after full treatie and deliberation it was their common agreement and consent with one minde and should be without faile in time to come that their foresaid Lord the King ought by no meanes to aunswere in iudgement nor ought to send any Procto^s to the Popes presence especially seeing that the premises tended manifestly to the disenheriting of the Crowne of England, and al^o to the hurt of the liberties and lawes of their Fathers, and the dutie of their oath made, which
 (say they) we wil maintain with all our power and defe^d with all our strength and will not suffer our foresaid Lord the King to doe or attempte the premisse being so vnaccustomed and before not heard of? Hitherto concerning onely those testimonies which our very adversaries afford vs from the Catholickes of our owne nation, wherevnto wee adde this one further observatio^ co^cerning our own countrie, that whereas at the first comming to the Crowne of our late Soveraigne Queene Elizabeth, so many Bishopes as are before me^tioned, and so many other of the Clergie and Co^mons of this Realme, were all of them Catholicke, and at that time had also the publique state and government setled in that course, and so thereby were of force (no doubte) sufficient to haue impugned and withstood the alteration then evide^tly foreseene to ensue, they did yet her Maiesties knowne professed diuersitie of religio^ notwithstanding) generally and without resistance receiue her withallFor the Lord Archbishop and Chancellor of England being a Catholicke made a publique Oratio^ to persuade the people to acknowledge her Maiestie for their Queen.H^llinshead vbi supra pa. 1170. a. lin. 35 36. etc. and the Lords and Bishoppes with al speed repaired into London to proclayme her: Hollinsheade vbi supra pag. 1170 b. linea 15. Loyall and dutifull respect, whereas yet againe in cleare example to the contrarie, it is evident that Queene Marie came to the Crowne not without open resistance, and endured afterwards mo^e knowneCo^cerning open rebellions in the fielde in Queene Maries time, M. Stowe in his Annalls printed 1592. mentioneth the rebellion the^ made by the Duke of Northumberla^d, and his co^plices pag. 1039. and pag. 1045. circa med. he mentioneth howe that Cranmer Archbishoppe of Canterbury was condemned for high treason. Also pa. 1046. post med. and 1047 etc. He mentioneth the rebeho^ made by W^at and his confederates, and pag. 1070 he me^tioneth the rebellion made by Tho. Stafforde and others, and their taking of Scarborowe Castle. rebellions in ope^ field within the Realme during but those fiue yeares of her short government, then were after in the fiue and fortie succeeding of her late Maiesties reigne: wherto might be likewise added the severall notable and violent mi^behaviours of those times, done (to omitte other) even to the publique preacherM. Stowe vbi supra, mentioneth pa. 1039. initio, how at one time a dagger was throwne at the preacher at Paules Crosse and pag. 1058. paulo post med that at another time a Gunne was shotte at the Preacher there, the pellet whereof went verie neere him. at Paules Crosse, the like whereof to haue beene committed by Catholickes would haue appeared verie strange during the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth.



A LIKE REPETITION OF CONfessed examples proving the Loialtie of forreyne Catholickes. SECT. 4.
Novv concerning forraine examples do not our adversaries affirme and confesse that the Fre^ch King,M.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. pag. 223. paulo ante medium. Phillippe the fai^e resolutely withstood the Pope with all his interdictions and depositions: that likewise concerning the EmperourM.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. pag. 215. fine and 216. initio and Naucler Gener. 43. Anno 1344. Lodowick the fourth, the Princes and Bishoppes of Germanie signified their generall determination to him in these wordes. Most gracious Lord, the Princes electors, and other faithfull of your Empire pervsing the articles of your submisison, which the Pope requireth, and resteth on, with one consent haue decreede them to bee conceiued to the s^buersion and overthrow of the Empire, so that neither you nor they by reason of the oath you haue taken to the Empire can yeeld to the, and they inte^d to send Orators to the Pope, and to the Colledge of Cardinals to request him to cease fro^ this course, if they re^use, your Princes are resolved to meete at Rhens vpon Rhene there to deliberate with you for the further resisting of these practises doth not D. Bilson further confesse and affirme thatibidem part. 3. pag. 212. circa medium in the margent there. all the Prelats and Princes of Germany tooke with Lodowicke against the Pope, and that vpo^Ibide^ pag. 212. post med. and Naucler gener. 45. anno 1338. grou^ds (of the Popes) owne Canon, as namely these the Prince hath his dominion not from the Pope but onely from God? And do not our aduersaries in like sorte affirme and acknowledge asmuch touching the Emperours FrederickeConcerning Fredericke the second, see M.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. pa. 187. fine and Vsperg. in anno 1227. And hereof see further M. Bilson part. 3. pag. 206. initio, and pag. 207. ante and circa medium, 173. ante medium and fine. the second and HenryConcerning Henrie the fourth, Osiander in epitom hist Eccles. cent. 11. pag. 193. fine and pag. 223. circa med. testifieth his publique defence made by Wezilo Bishop of Mentz and Sigebert the Moncke, notwithsta^ding the Popes former excommunication. the forth? doe the^ not in like manner take further notice and say, thatD. B^lson vbi supra part. 1. pag. 130. circa medium, and part. 3. pag. 233. ante medium, and Chronicon Masse^ in Anno 1510. And see further hereof Crispinus in his book of the state of the Church pag. 495 circa med. and Crispinus vbi supra, addeth further, howe that it was by the same Councell agreede that the Pragmaticke Sanction should be kepte throughout Frau^ce, notwithstanding the Popes excommunication. Lewes the twelueth in a councell at Towers had the
 resolution of all the French Bishoppes, that he might contemne the Popes iniust censures: that alsoSee the Historie of the civill warres of Frau^ce from Anno 1585. till 1591. printed 1591. pag 58. circa medium. the Senate of Paris hauing considered vpon the Popes excomunication, did Anno 1585, reproue the Pope for vsurping vpon the liberties of the Crowne of Fran^e, and condemned the excomunication: that likewise (as Mr. Bilson affirmethAffirmed by Doctor Bilson vbi supra, pag. 4. fine. Thomas Aquinas had this moderatio^, that Princes should no^ lose their dominio^ for heresie, wherwith even Cardinal Bellarmine himselfe (who is most cha ged he ein by our aduersaries) seemeth yet so farre to asse^t, as that he maketh the King subiect to censure, but condition^llyBellarmine tom. 1. lib. 5 de Romano Pont^f. cap. 7. if he goe about to drawe by f^rce his subiectes to heresie and infideliti^: affirming also thatBellarmine ibidem. if Princes doe not endevour this, but permit liberty of co^science to their subiects, the^ (saith he) Non existimo posse eos priuari Dominio suo. I thinke they may n^t be depriued of their dominion for he acknowledgeth the PopeBellarmine ibide^ cap. 4. the title of that chapter being, Papam no^ habere vllam temporalem Iurisdictionem directe. to haue (in this case) no temporall iurisdiction directly but onlyBellarmine ibide^ cap. 7. ante medium. quando al^ter non potest bonu^ spirituale tueri: when he cannot otherwise preserue the spirituall good: in so much as hee doubteth not to affirme thatBellarm. lib. 2. de Romano Pontifice. cap. 29. vesus finem. it is lawfu^l to resist the Pope invading the bodie, or troubling the common wealth: it is lawfull I say (saith he) to resist him by no doing that which he commaun^eth, and by letting or hindring him that hee execute not his will: wherevnto might be added as well the lateSee this at large in the civill warres of France in English, collected by Anthony Coll^net. from An. 1585. till 1591. printed at London 1591. lib. 7. and 8. examples yet fresh in memorie of the Catholickes of Fraunce who not onely acknowledged but also assisted, and ayded this their present King notwithstanding his then knowne diversit^ of religion or any former excommunication h^d fro^ the Popes As also the King of Spaines no lesse kno^ne detayning (even to this day) of Naples against the Pope notwithsta^ding the Popes yearely clayming of it ^n the right of his See. And thus much briefely co^cerning such forraine examples as are alledged and acknowledged by our owne adversaries Onely wee th^nke this one point further worthie of observation. That whereas it is
 manifest and confessed that sundrie Catholike Princes haue beene by their Protestant subiects actuallie deposed as your Highnes late Mother fro^ her kingd^me of Scotland; (which we referre to your Maiest^es owne more feelingHowe they vsed that poore Ladie my mother is not vnknowne, and with griefe I may remember it: who desired onely a private Chappell wherin to serue God after her manner with some fewe selected persons, but could not obteine it at their hands: in the summe of the Conference before his Maiestie betweene the Bishops and other of his Clergie printed 1584. pag 81. fine, and 82 initio. testimonie) the temporall Lord of Geneua from his territories there, and to forbeare the examples of the Lowe Countries) the KingHereof see heretofore, tract. 3. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter c. of Suethland restrained as before to his private Catholike service ^n his owne Chappell, we finde not yet on the other parte, that so much as any one Protesta^t Prince, was ^t any t^me deposed by his Catholike subiects so different ^re the spirits of Catholikes and Protes^ants: and yet is it ev^de^t that Protest^nts h^ue received their c^^efest beginning, increase and strength, by the onely favou^ and tolle^ation of their Cat^olike Princes.


A PROTESTATION OF THE now English Catholickes. SECT. 5.
AS concerning our selues we hould that the authoritie giuen by God to Kings, is imediate, abso^ute, and ndependant and wee doe acknowledge from the Scrip^ures, that asRom. 13, 1. there is no power but from God, so likewise that vntoWisdom. 6, 3. King rule is giuen by the Lord, and pow^r by h^ most High, thatProv. 8, 15. by him Kings doe reigne, as beingRom. 13, 4, 6. his minister: and thatRom. 13, 2. whoso^v^r r^siste^h them, d^ h withall resist he ordinance of God: Hen e it is that we are commaunded toMath. 22, 21. and Rom. 13, 7. re^der vnto Caesar the tribute of o^r obedience: to be1. Pet. 2, 13. subiect to the king as hauing preeminence toProv. 24, 21. ^eare, and1. Pet. 21, 17. honor himExod. 22, 28. Act. 13, 5. not to speake ev^l^ of him, no not so much as in ourEccles. 10, 20. thought, to imagine his hurte; but to beeRom. 13, 5. subiect of ne essiti^ and even for consc^ence sake. Least that by our disobedience weeRom. 13, 2. purchase to our
 selues domnation. In so much as we doubte not further to affirme with our brethren the Rhemistes, thatSee the Rhemish Testament and the Annot. therein. Rom. cap. 13. vers. 2. after M. Fulkes edition, fol. 259. a paulo post med. Christians are bound in conscience to obey (even) their heathen Emperours: Herevpon it is that wee differ ^n doctrine from our adversaries.See Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Lai^is cap 10. and 11. maintaining against them and their contra^ieLuther de Seculari potestate, in tom. 6. Germanico saith, among Christians no man can or ought to be Magistrate but each one is to other equally subiect etc. among C^ristian men none is superiour saue one and onelie Christ: And in serm. de o^e perdita, and also in his sermons Englished by W^lliam Gage. pag. 97. fine. Luther further saith, therefore is Christ our Lorde that hee may make vs such as himself is, and as he ca^not suffer himselfe to be t^de and bound ^y Lawes etc so also ought not the cons^ie c^ of a Christian to suffer them. And in hi^ said sermons pag. 261. circa med. he doth ad^on s^ that we obey the C^v^ll Magistrate, f^r (saith he) there commeth no losse of Christ^an libertie or faith thereby: for forsomuch as they do^ not contend that those things are necessarie to salvat^on which they ordaine etc. howbeit, if any should contende that those comma^ndem nts of the Civill Mag^s^rate be necessarie to salvation (as doubtlesse they be in regard that they binde vs in ^ons^i^nce, and to breake them were sinne) then as it is saide of the trad^t^ons of the Pap^sts, the ^otrari^ rather were to be done. And M. Whitaker doubteth not to maintaine this doct^in^o. Luther, teaching vs obedience of policie rather then conscience. For whereas Luther is ^h^^ ^d to say absurdly. Christiani liberi sunt a statutis hominum M. W^^taker expl^neth and de^end^th the samesaying liberi Christiani s^nt non vt n^llis legi^u obtemperent, (...) ^que semp^r v^^^n^, s ^ vd conscientia: mentesque sua^, legum human^rum relig^one liberat^ ^s^e ^n^^ll^gant. W ita ^r ^^^^ss. ad ^ati^nes Campiant rat. 8. pag. 154. circa medium. And s^e this l^k^ ^octrine in Danau, in prima partes a^tera ^arte co^tra Bel arm^n^m pag. 1127 assertion t at the Civill Magistrates Lawes made of things lawfull or indifferent doe binde vs even in cons^^ence And fro^ this sured ground-worke proceedeth likewise that reverend and religious respect of loue and duetie, wherewith we doe admire your royall Maiestie, and hence lastlie it is that we do as now in most humble remonstrance and test^monie of our Loyaltie acknowledge and recognize, even with vnspeakeable ioy to our selues and all due thankefu^nes therefore to ^od, that your HIGHNES is our true vndoubted lawfull Soveraigne Lord and King, in whom is fulfilled the succe^full and blessed event of a most graue and pr^dentIn regard ^^d ^o^e^ight of this which ^ow is h^ pely con^ne to passe K. Henrie 7. e^^owsed his eldest ^^ugh^^ to Iam^s King of S^o^la^^, Anno 1502. foresight, and we thereby enriched with the most happie vnion of our long devided continent, by whom only also and no other, our dearest count^ie may enioy her established and sweetest ^eace, avoiding so, that dreadfull confusion and turbulencie of state, which otherwise our former feares haue of long imagined: and vnto whom only therefore immediately and next vnder God, we are by all
 lawes divine and humane obliged in the highest degree of all earthly alleagea^ce: To the inviolable observing whereof, against the ambitious claime or co^petencie of all pretenders whatsoever forraine or domesticall, we do hereby (as in the presence of God and his Angels) most seriously, and sincerely protest vpon our soules: most humbly this one for ever: imploring of your Maiestie, that whereas the auncient enemie of our Catholike faith (obseruing the weakenes of such as are most apte to bee seduced) will (in d^scredite of our religion) still busie himselfe withMath. 13, 24. Sowing of tares amongest the wh^ate. If therefore (as God forbid) and we strongly hope the contrarie, any one or other vnquiet spirit should arise and1. Ioh. 2, 19. and Act. 15, 24. goe forth from vs (as amongest theIohn. 6, 70. chosen twelue one was a divell) whose least error or indiscretion our politicke adversaries (over greedy of our discredit) would drawe on and agravate against vs with all tragicall and immoderate amplification, your HIGHNES would yet in your Princely and rightfull Iudgment, distinguish the fault from the religio^, retorning (which we wish most severely, the offence and punishme^t therof vpon the offender himselfe according to the lawes in that behalfe p ovided without imputation thereof to vs, or further scandall to our profession.


THAT THE ARGVMENT DRAWNE fr^m the Confession of the Adversaries is stronge, with a br^ef repetitio^ of the principall points throughout al th^se severall tractes, all of them proved by the testimony and confession ^f l^arned Protestants, with an hu^b^e Pet^tio for private tolleration SECT. 6.
FO^ so much as our le^^ned aduersaries do af^^rme, ^h tAcademiae N^mansis respons. ad professorum ^urnoniorum Societatis Iesu assertionis etc pag. 84. saith, magnae prof^ct^ ^n^ustriae ^st ex ipsius a^versar^^ erbis adversarium convincere. it s^ gr^ate ^ee^e of wo k to co^uince the adue^^a^^e from himse^^e: And M. D. Whitaker saith ^ccordingly,

M. Whitaker de Ecclesia Controu. 2. quaest 5. cap. 14. initio pa. 366. saith Decimam tertiam notam statuit Bellarminus adversariorum co^fessionem, firmum certe sit necesse est argumentum illad, quod hinc sumitur: etc. efficax enim erit adversarioru^ ipsorum contra ipsos testimonium etc. et quidem fateor veritate^ etiam and suis inimicis testimonium extorquere etc. the argument must needes be strong which is taken fro^ the confession of the aduersaries, for the confession of the adversaries against themselues is effectuall, and truely (saith he) I do acknowledge that the truth enforceth testimonie from her enemies. And since also most gratious Soueraigne) that we haue in this d^scourse (forbearing o^r other plentifull helpes) restrained our selues to this inequality or precisenes of Method, and ^ri^ging so forth as the Pro^het saithEsay. 19, 2. the Ae^iptians against the A^g ptians, haue to the more euident setting forth of the equitie of this ou^ most humble supplication accordingly shewed euen by the frequent and manifest ^onfession of our learned aduersa^ies. First, that we English men were aboue a thousandHeretofore tract. 1. sect. 1. initio. yeares since conuerted by Gregorie and Austin^ to our now professed Catholicke faith, 2 Secondly that the same faith was as yet much more ancient and longTract. 1. sect. 2. pag. 5. initio. before that time vniuersally professed 3 Thirdly that it carrieth with it greatTract. 1. sect. 2. ante and post medium and sect. 3. probab^lities to haue begun euen in the Apostles time, and is so thereby cleared from that note of noueltie, which yourFor my part I know not how to answere the obiectio^s of the Papists whe^ they charg vs with novelties, but truelie to tell them that their abuses are new: in the Summe of the Confere^ce before the Kings Maiestie, pag. 73. ante medium. Maiesty most religiouly seemeth to dislike in what profession soeuer. 4 Fourthly that the argument of true miracles isTract. 1. sect. 5. paulo post initium. strong and certaine, and that our faith is confessed to haue beene accordinglyTract. 1. sect. 5. pag. 35 and in the margent at the ma^ke * confirmed with such 5 Fiftly, that the hopefull promises ofTract. 1. sect. 6. pa. 40. 41. 42. 43. and 44. saluation do appertaine to it 6 Six^ly that the Romane Church being conuerted in t^e Apostles time did neuerHeretofore tract. 1 sect. 7. and sect. 8. since make change of her religion: Since also we haue by like testimonie of our adversaries further shewed in the 2. tract of this discourse. 1 First that the Prophets do foretell how that Christs true Church m^st after her first inc^easeTract. 2. c. 1 sect. 1. pag. 74. and 75 at a. b. c. d. cont^nue Cathol cke and ^niversall and m^st likewise w^th gre^t and prospero^s successe convertHeretofore tract. 2. ca^ 1. s^ct. 1. pag. 74. and pag. 75. at q. many nations ^nd K^ngs of t^e Gentiles f^om paganisme to the faith of Ch^ist. 2 Secondly that d^ring
 the first 300. yeares after Christ these predictio^s wereHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 2. initio. pag. 76. not performed by rea^on of the persecutions that as then raged 3 Thirdly that the performa^ce of them was begunne butTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 2. circa and post med. pa. 76. et 77. not accomplished during the second 300. yeares after Christ, and howsoever it were as then either begunne or accomplished, yet was it done by ourTract. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. pa. 77. 78. 79. 80. Catholike, and not their Protestant Church (4) Four^hly that after the saide second ^00. yeares euen till Luthers time, the protestants Church was so farre from performing the saide predictions, that during all that time and long before, it is confessed to haue remainedHeretofore tra. 2. c. 1 sect 4. pag 81. 82. 83. inuisible our Church neuerthelesse during all the saide time conuerting theTract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4. pa. 81. in the margent at the marke *. and pag 83. at q. r. and 82. at n. o. p. Kings, and nations of the Gent^^es 5 ^if^y that the manifest and confessed defect of the protestants Church in not performing of the saide predictions, adua^tageth theTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. ante medium pag 85. Iewes against them, in so much as it made their learnedTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. paulo post med. pag. 86. at d. e. Castali^ to stagger in his faith, and DavidTra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. prope finem pag. 86. at f. George to revolte fr^m them to plaine apostasie: Since also in the same se^ond tract we haue likewise further shewed from the like testimonie of our learned adve^saries. 1 First that Christs true Church can neverHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. initio pag. 91. at z. a. b. c. d. want Pastors and Doctors that these shalltract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. circa med. pag. 92 at p. q. r. alwaies resist f l e d^ctrine with open reprehension: that also the true Church can never be withoutTra. 2. c. 2. sect. 1 paulo p st medium pag. 92. at y. the administration of the Word and sacraments thatI^idem pag. 92. at z. the onely absence of them d^th make a n^ll tie of the Church. and thatIbidem prope finem pa. 93. at c. th^se notes are needefull to disti^g^ish the true Church from the false, that men careful of ^heir salvatio may know where the true Church is a d t^ which companie they o ght to a^here: 2 Secondly that th^ com^on ins an^^es or examples ofTract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. pag. 98. WaldoTract. 2. cap. 2. s^ct. 4. pag. 105. ^^ic iffe,Tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 5. pag. 109. Huse,T^act. 2. cap. 2 sect. 10. pag. 126. 127. etc. at s ct. 11. Luther and t^eir followers alledg^d ^^^al y^^ ^^r^o^mance hereof are fou^d insuf^cient to pro^^ a continuance of these prem sses, but so much as for those times in which they first begunne or l^ued, and that noHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2 sect. 7. pag. 115. 116. 1^7. 118. 119. and 120. sufficient example
 thereof during those times and sundry other ages before can be giuen 3 Thirdly that in steed of example in this kin^ to be alledged, it is confessed to the contrarie that the Protestants Church hath during all those ages, and many other before remainedHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. ante and circa med. pag. 83. at t.u. and pag. 82. at o. Latent and invisible, and that our Church hath neverthelesse during all the same time continuedTract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. pag. 83. at r.s. visible, reigning vniversally etc. 4 F^urt ly (wh^ch only point is sufficie^t to co^vince our adversaries that no known example can bee f^unde hereof but during the lastTract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. twentie yeare^ next before Luther, wh^ch are yet in the memorie of this presentage, our adversaries acknowleeging to the contrarie, thatHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. pag. e. the truth was at that time vnknowne and vnheard of; and that as thenVide ibidem. an vniuersal apostasie over spread the whole face of the earthIbidem. all Churches being as the overwhelmed with more then Cimeria^ darkne^. 5 Fifthly that therfore for the preservation of Christs true Church (which is confessedHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 13. initio and in the margent there at the letter r. never to faile so much as for any one moment of time:) sundrie of our learned adversaries doe acknowledge that Luther tho^gh being before his first preaching against the Pope a confessed earnest Catholike, did yet neverthelesse after his saide preaching against the Pope notHeretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 13. y. and also in the margent there at the letter y. and ibide^ in the margent at the letter z. erect any new Church, or become member of any other Church the^ before not in being but remained stil a member of he same Catholike or Popish Church withoutHeretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. b. c. departing from it, and so withall, that the Pop^sh Church,Tra. 2. cap. 2. sect 13. versus finem and tra. 1. s^ct. 6. post medium pag 40 e. f. is the Church of God, and the religion th reof sufficient toTract. 1. sect 6. versus finem pag. 40. at m.n. Salvation: All whi^h premisses ha^e beene heretofore proved fro^ the f^eque^t ^^fess^on of our learned adversaries.
Since al^^ we for our ^arts do hereby most seriously and as ^n the presence of God, professe (according to your Highnes gra e and me^orableBasilicon doron. in praefat. pr^uision to content our selues sob^^ly and qu^e^ly with our owne opinions, not resisting a^thority, but to p^sess^ur s^^les in peace etc. and are accordingly in good hope that there
 will appeare to your Maieistie iust cause to moue your highnes (in your Princely wisedome) so much the rather to obserue towards vs, this worthie and kingly sayingIbidem. that it can no waies become to pronou^ce so ^gh be sentence in so olde a controversie: By how much it is by so many confessed premises made evide^t, that our doctrin^ is vndoubtedly more olde then was any question of that other doctrine) or in comparison rather innovation) whereto your Maiestie vo^chsafed this gracious favour. Since Lastlie the obiection of dislo^alty vrged against vs by our adversaries, is retortedHeretofore tract. 3. sect. 2. fully vpon themsel^es, and we foundHeretofore tract. 3. sect. 3. and 4. and 5. to deserue at the least) as wel as they, some part of that princely favour, which they (without our repyning thereat) in ^reater measure doe enioy, therefore all p^ostrat before your royal Maiestie, we do most hu^blie pray, even by our holy communio^ of faith with her whose soule is now blessed in heauen, and her memorie vpon the earth to your Maiestie most deare and to vs reverend, and by the most humble intercessi^n of our allegeance, and ever resolved loyaltie, that your Highnes would of your princely clemencie graunt vs so much favour, as the vndoubted example of all former and present times, and the co^fessed Doctrine both of Fathers and Protestantes,Hereof M. Covell in his examination etc. pag. 199. post med. saith, Concerning the Iewes, a Prince may lawfully permitte them to dwell in his kingdome etc. the lawes of the Emperours haue permitted the like, and some of the fathers, but speciall^ S. Austine was so favourable to them, that he alledgeth severall reasons for the doing of it etc. And Peter Martyr in his Comon places in Engli^^, part. 2. pag. 329. b. fine, affirmeth likewise that they may be tollerated among Christians, and haue also Sinagog^es etc. But it is not lawful to grant vnto Turkes relig^ous assemblies. affordeth eve^ to the misbeleeuing Iewes, vouchsafeing so, (for our humble thoughts presume no higher) but that we might adoreAct. 3, 13. the God of our Fa^^ers, with our private freedome and libertie of co^science The integritie of our ancie^t Catho^ike faith, and confessed current of so many former ages, spent in profession thereof from the time of our Countries fi^st c^nver^^on, with all honour to your Maiesties most noble auncestors, can in our opinion no lesse then claime it. The distressed and miserable condition of so many your Catholike and Loyall subiectes altogether needeth it: our long cont^nued hopes of
 your princely clemencie, with cheerefull expectation of milder times to ensue vnder your Highne^ happie Reigne, presume with all h^mble respect, to demaund it. The many yet standing monuments of sacred Churche^ and Colledges, erected by our Catholike auncestors for the one^y profession of our fa th, and now since impropriated to our adversaries, make (in their kinde most religious and mournefull intercession for it. The doctrine of so many learned Protestants, who) teachM. Hayward in his answere to R. Dolman dedicated to your Maiestie cap. 9. paulo post medium s^ith, all the che^fe writers of our age are nowe reduced to the former opinion affirming with Tertulli^n, Lactantiu^, Cassiodorus, Ios^phus, Bernard, and others that religion must bee perswaded not enforced: Tindall in the Acts and Monuments pag. 1338. a. initio, saith, the new Testament of Christ wil not suffer any law of co^pulsio^ but onely of councell and exhortation. And ibidem pa. 1337. b. post mediu^. And ibidem pag. 1152. b. fine. Haukes saith to Bis^op Boner, where proue you that Christ or his Apostles did kill any man for his faith: Al^o Iacobus Acontius stratagematu^^ satanae libri octo, ^iscourcing at large of this point saith, consequens ergo est manere quidem suo in vigore vete^^m legem aut certe renouar^^si ^ilem poss^, n^que t^men ^ermitti haereticorum supplicia quia videlicet ali^ sit apostatae, ^lia haer^tici c^^s^ (pag. 158. initio.) And further, Dominus profecto definite decl^^uit magistratus non esse idon^os dogmatum Iudices, interdixitque illis talis Iurisdictionis vsu ^mni (pag. 160. circ^ med.) and pag. 161. circa med. hee farther saith hereof, haec quidem Iudiciorum gen^r^ ^d magistratum non pertinent, sed ad solum Dei filium, qui in nouissi^o die per ange^os s^os seperatu^^s sit^^t itico z^zan^^, with much more against all punishment f^r Chr^stian religion. And Vrbanus Regius i^ loc. theolog fol. 117. c. ^a^th hereof, Christianorum Spiritus combu^it tantum igne ch^rit^tis and^. Deus non docet combur^re e^^ant^s ouiculas, sed Ezechi^l, 34. sanare infirmas, ma^il^t^s pascere etc. And Luther in ass^rtionibus art. 33. de non comburendis haereticis, ma^eth a speciall d^s^ours^ in proofe thereof. And Castalio in his Preface vpon the Bible to K. Edward the six^e affirmeth the same doctrin^; and so ^ikwise d^th Coelius Secundus Curio in lib^o de amplitudine regni Dei lib. 2. pag. 216. And ^rancis^us Goma^us in speculo v^rae Eccl^siae p^g. 227. and 229. And M. Marbecke in his Comon places pag. 483. and 484. that no man ought to bee compelled or suffer for his faith, prescribeth it: The graver Iudgment of our forenamed learned adversaries who acknowledge our Catholike Church to bee a trueSee heretofore pa 4^. e. f ^h. Church, and o^r religion for s^ffic^entH^retofore pag. 40 at m.n. to salvation maketh ^ost clearely f^r it. The po^icy of the time and succesfu l event, vpon like examplesSee in Luc. ^siander ^^ep^tom hist. eccl. centu. 16. sundrie e^a^ples of tolloration as namely in Fraunce, pa. 1135. fine. and 1136. initio. and pag. 816. and 713 and 750. and 735 fine. and 718. And in Liuon^a p^g 950. initio, and in Ge^m ^ie pag. 629. and 630. and pag. 598. An^ of G^^manie see farther the Prot^stant wr^ter Dresserus in pa^te secu^da Millen^rij texti, w^ere he saith, (pag. 659 initio.) Anno 52. pax profitentibus Augustan^m Confessionem perp^tua conc^ss^ ^st etc. And (pag. 661. ante medium) he^ further sai^^, it was agreede v^^^, ea quidem lege and conditione vt Pontificij qui ante in sectati religione^ Evangelicam er^^^, ins^ctari desisterent, and contra, Evang^lici qui religonem Pontificiam abro^arant de^^^^s a tali abrogatione abstinerent, caueretque vtraque pars ne in suis dominijs quenquam ad iu^ae religionis professionem cogat, aut a religione quam prof^tetur contra ipsius conscienti^m ^voc^t ^ut dep^llat, And pag. 666. ante med. he saith (in allowance thereof) ne^ hic metuo eorum^^e ^^hensionem qui putant non nisi vnam religione^ esse feranda^ etc. And M. D. ^^lke lib. d^s^ccessione Ecclesiastica etc. pag. 285. and 286. giueth very many examples of tolleration g^uen by Catholike Magistrates to Protestants: in so much as hee doubteth not to say fu^ther: H^ip^ni^rum Rex vnicus est inter omnes Europae reges tam alienus a nobis, vt nec foueat, nec p^l^m coire ecclesias permittat in suis ditionibus ibid. pag. 285. fine. And see further Ch^traeus in his Chron. An 93.94. and 95. pag. 74. and 75. and 76. co^cerning tolleratio^ in the kingdome of Suecia, and concerning like tolleration in Fraunce, see l. edit du roy sur la Pacification des trobles de^^roy ^^me. Anno 1576. And see likewise the Kings edict published in Paris, 25. Februarie 1599. ^^gi^^d and printed Anno 1599. And see the like example of tolleration in Heluetia in the booke entituled, Centuri^ Epistol^^um theologicarum Epist. 39. Martini Buceri pag. 123. and 1.4. wherevnto might be added the knowne example of like tolleration in Poland. had of tolleration in other countries stro^gly perswadeth it And (aboue all the generall care of Chr^stian p^ofession, and long desired peace of so many Christia^ kingdome, disturbed (to the Turkes
 great advanceme^tconcerning cou^tries which the Turke hath gotten by our discention, for former times read the oration of the Fre^ch Embassador in M. Sleydanes Comentaries in English, lib. 14. fol. 187. a. b. And M. D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. pag. 286. And for latter times see Chitraeus his Chronicon. Ann^ 1593. and 1594. And see the treatize entituled (ad Principes populumque Christianum de Bello adversus Turcas gerendo etc. Guilielmi Brus^ij co^cilium Lipsiae. 1595. and hinderanceM. Foxe in his Actes and Monuments Printed. 1576 in his Alphabetical table at the word discorde sheweth (with particuler references thereof to his booke) that discord brought the Turke into Hu^gary 727. 695. And giueth him st e^ tha a^st Christe^dome, 712. 998. spoileth Germanie 317. and Christendome, 314. of Christians) with intestiue division, for the appeasing and reconcileing whereof (to the full enabling of a most holie and needefullConcerning the important necessitie hereof reade the oration m^de by Dress^^us a learned Protest^nt entituled de bello Turcico oratio mathae^ Dressers in Accademia ^^^sica printed 1598. And s^e the treatize intituled the Ottoman of Lazaro Soranzo published in english by M. Abr. Hartwell An. 1603. in his epist. dedicat. to the L. Archbish. of C^nt^rbury ^irca m^d ^^m. and see in the treatize part. 3. c. 33. fol. 106. b. 107. a. vndertaken warre against that hatefull monster to ^od and man, whose proceedings Luther and some other Protestantes haue over indisretely (if not favoured yethereof see heretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. initio, pag 127. furthered, your Maiestie being in happy league with the^ all, is therefore and otherwi^e the most ^orthie honorable and able instrume^t, most instantly vrgeth and requireth it.


CONCERNING THE EVIDENT INCERtainety and disagreement of Protestants in their faith and the reason and particuler examples thereof with a like humble Petition therevpon for disputation. SECT. 7.
AND now lastly, for so much as our learned adversaries do hould. 1 First that co^cerning matter
 of faith, theyM. W llet in his Synopsis pag. 38. initio saith, the Scripture is not one of the meanes, but the sole, whole, and only means to work faith. are to beleeue nothing for certaine but the holy Scriptures onely 2 Secondly thatM. D. Raynolds in his Conference with Harte. pag 68. ante medium. it is not the shewe but the sence of the wordes (of Scripture) that must decide controversies: and that herein the Scripture doth notM. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Policie lib. 2. pag. 116. paulo ante medium saith the Scripture could not teach vs the thinges that are of God, vnlesse we did credit me^ who haue taught vs, that the word^ of Scripture do signifie those thinges. instruct them of it selfe, but only by certaineM.D. Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura. pag. 521. circa medium. saith, nam qua^do Scriptura no^ habet vivam vocem quam audiamus, vtenuum est quibusdam medijs, quibus in vestigamus quid sit ^ nsus, quae mens Scripturarum And in his book de Ecclesi^ co^tra Bellarminum co^trou. 2. quaest. 4. pag. 221. ante med. demaunding of vs if we affirme the Church to interpret the Scripture without meanes saith Si sine medijs dixerunt est and Anabaptisticum. meanes on their behalfe to be observed. 3 Thirdly that these means are affirmed to be theirM. D. Raynolds in his conference pag. 83. 84. 92. 98. 99. and M. Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura. pag. 521. 522. 523. reeding thereof, their conf^rences of places, their weying of the circumsta^ces of the text, their skill in the tongues, their dilig^nce, prayer: and such like, in which if they erre, they do also thereby erre in the r vnderstanding of the Scriptures. 4 Fourthly that these being actio^s on their behal^e are but humane indeavours and such wherein every man (w^thout extraordinarie priviledge from God) is subiect toLubbertus de Principijs Christian. dog. pag. 563. initio saith of the le^r^^d interpreters, Hos omnes vt interpretando errare poste ostendimus, ita etiam in iudicando errare posse asserimus. And Hierome Zanchius de Sacra Scriptura pag. 411. fine and 412. initio saith of the^, cum Iudicio eos audiamus p^rsu si eos esse homines, and potu^ss^ ac poste errare. error oversight and mans infirmitie (all his prayer and possible diligence notwithstanding.) 5 Fifthly that in full demonstration hereof, aswell MartineM. Bridge in his defence o^ the Government etc. pag. 559. and M. Perkines in his foure treatizes tract. How to applie Gods word etc. s^ct. 10. initi^. Luther, (whom themselues acknowledge to beApolog. Angl. part. 4. c 4.2. a man sent of God to lighten the worldF^x^ in his Actes and Monuments pag. 416. a. initio. the H^lias cond^ctor and chariot of Israell whose calling they thinkeAretius Loc. Comun. loc. 63. pag. 198. circa medium. And Danaeus in Isagog. Christian. part. 4. lib. 2. pag. 36. initio. extraordinarie and specia^lyThe booke entituled Antic^r^stus, sive Progn^sti^. finis mundi pag. 12. 13. and 86. fine. And Schluse burg. in Cai^^ Haeret. lib. 13 and vit. pag. 314 and 316 fine. foreshewed the Scriptures: and since foretold in like manner, byAct. M^n. pag. 399. b. initio. and (...) in Ap^ca^. pag. 324. s^ndry Prophecie, that went of him himselfe being furthermore affirmed to be^leydane in Engli^^. 101. 222. b. paulo post medium. and see the margent there. a Prophet,
 and most assured andLuther adversus falso nominatum Ecclesiasticu^ statum saith, scire vos volo quod in posterum non amplius vos hoc honore dignabor, vt sinam vel vos vel ipsos angelos de coelo, de mea doctrina iudicare etc. nec volo mea^ doctrinam a quoquam iudicari, atque adeo ne ab angelis quidem: cum enim certus de^ea sim, per eam quoque and vester and angelorum iudex esse volo. certaine of this doctrine, and likewiseM. Whitguift in his defence of the answere to the admonition pag. 201 circa med. And M. Sparke in his answere to M. Iohn d' Albines pag. 107. initio. Calvine,M. D. Sutclyffe and D. Sarauia haue write^ whole treatizes hereof against Beza. Beza,In M. Whitguifts defence etc. pag. 522. initio M. Cartwright saith: Bucer though otherwise very learned hath grosse absurdities. Bucer etc. and sundrie of theM.D. Fulke in his answere to a cou^terfeite Catholike pag. 35. and 87. and Gomarus in speculo verae Ecclesiae Christi. pa. 93. and. 94 auncient Fathers: and GenerallM. Fulke ibidem pag. 89. and 90. and M. Willet in his Synopsis pag. 92. Councels are accordingly affirmed to haue erred notwithstanding all their prayer and possible diligence in conferring the Scriptures: As also it is further taught that evenM. Fulke vbi supra pag. 86. fine. the whole Church millitant may erre altogether as every part thereof. These being the confessed grounds and principles of our adversaries doctrine, they do appeare to be no other, but as it were) lincked chaines or naked convections of vnavoidable incertainetie, and being such, can therefore afford to our adversaries not assured knowledge or certainty of faithM. Whitaker de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum controu. 2. quaest. 4. pag. 221. paulo post. med. saith hereof, qualia illa media sunt, talem ipsam interpretatione^ este necesse est, at media interpretandi loca obscura sunt incerta, dubia, and ambigua, ergo fieri non potest quin and ipsa etiam interpretatio incerta sit, si incerta, tunc esse potest falsa: etc. But according to the nature of the^se^ues a necessarie doubtfulnes and incertaintie of opinion: for albeit that the Scriptures be in themselues certa^ne infallible, and free from er^or, yet what can this prete^ce thereof availe to free our adversaries fro^ incertaintie, seing it is euident and by them co^fessed that the Scriptures instruct them not otherwise, the^ by the foresaid meanes on their behalfe to be obserued, and that their obseruation of those meanes is but humaine and subiect to error, and that accordingly Luther and many other (notwithstanding all their diligent and careful observation of the saide meanes) haue grievousely erred even in those points wherof they thought themselues so cleerely certaine, that sundrie of them haue not doubted to testifie the same with their blood, and yet indeed were therein (as our adversaries confesse) but incertaine and deceiued as also of others who haue thought themselues no lesse certaine, some haue neverthelesse afterwards altered their opinions, as did Melancthon, and Bucer, concerning the reall presence, and others who as yet continue in their sundrie opinio^s
 certainly perswaded, are notwithstanding daily in many things contradicted by the manyTo omitte the over many bookes of this kind published by English Protestants one against another: Iodocus Coccius in his Thesaurus etc. printed 1569 tom. 1. pag. 1068. 1069. 1070. 1077. 1078. 1089. and 1090. numbreth vp almost two hundreth severall bookes written and published by forraine Protestants one against another, recyting withall in particuler, the special name or title of every of the said bookes their severall volume and yeare of printe. And co^cerning further testimonie of the Protestants many book^s written one against another: see Castalio alledged hereafter in this tract and sect p. and Osiander in epitom. etc. centur. 16. pa. 822. 823. 824. vsque pag. 829. and vide ibidem pag. 863 and 712. and 713 volumes and publique writtings of their owne learned brethre^, who in many cheefe points are as certainely and fully resolved in their iudgme^t to the co^trary: the over many and knowne particulerFirst, as Concerning the reall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament to the bodily mouth, it is affirmed by Luther and the Lutherans: and contradicted for Po^^sh by Calvine and his followers. 2 Secondly, the reall presence not onely of the efficacie of Christs body but also of the body it selfe after a wonderfull and incomprehensible manner to the mouth of faith, is affirmed by Caluin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 17. sect. 7. and 10. and 32. By M. Ryder in his friendly Caveat etc. the third leafe a. circa med. By M.D. Whitaker contra Duraeum pag. 169. the confession of Belgia in the English Harmonie pag. 431. and by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Policie lib. 5. sect. 67. pa. 174. circa medium and pag. 177. post medium and vide apolog. modest. ad acta conventus quindecim theologorum torgae nuper habit. etc. pag. 19. and pag. 13. initio. and 23. and 47. And Contradicted as inclining to Poperie (to omitte Oecolampadius and Suinglius) by Peter Martyr in his epistle annexed to his Comon places in English pag. 170. b. epist. 25. and ibid. pag. 98. a. and pag. 108. a. By Aretius sermon. 3. de caena, and by our English Puritaines in their Christian letter to M. R. Hooker pag. 35. paulo post med, and by Lodouicus Alemanus Italus in positionibus apud Lugdunenses editis Anno 1566. who saide hereof, neque etiam per fidem sen incomprehensibili modo vt vocant, quia hoc totum imaginarium and repugnat apertissime Dei verbo, of whose opinion see further Beza epist. 5. 3 Thirdlie, that Sacraments doe not onely signifie but also conferre, grace is affirmed by Osiander in Enchirid. controuersiarum quas Augustinae Confess. theol. habeat cum Caluianu. pag. 272. post. med. By Iacobus Andraeas in epitom. colloquij Montis belgar pag. 58. prope initiu^ and pag. 42. initio By M.D. Bilson in his true difference betweene etc. part 4. pag. 539. ante med. and 592. post medium. and 368. post med. By M. Hooker in his Ecclesi^sticall Policie lib. 5. sect. 57. pag. 127. and 128. And by M.D. Whitaker conta Duraeum lib. 8. pag. 662. paulo ante med. and 664. post med. And Contradicted for Popish by M. W^llet in his Synopsis pag. 415. ante med. and by M. Fulke against Purgatorie pag. 35. and many others: 4 Fourthly, the sufficiencie of Christs corporall death vpon the Crosse, without his suffering of further paines in soule etc. is affirmed by M. B^^son in his treatize intituled the full redemption of mankind by the blood and death of Christ, in his Preface to the Christian Reader. post med. and by many others. And Contradicted for Popish by Calvine Iustitut. lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 10. And by M. Willet in his Synopsis printed 1600. pag. 985. ante med. and pag. 987. initio and many others. 5 Fifthly, that Christ after his corporall death did descend in soule into Hell is affirmed by M.D. Hill in his speciall treatize of that title printed 1592. and by Aretius Apinus, M. Nowell, and Melancthon alledged by D. Hill vbi supra fol. 33. and 44. and Contradicted for Popish by M. Carelile in his booke that Christ descended not into Hell: By Beza in act. 2. By Bucer in Matth. 26. and many others. 6 Sixtlie, that the Church must continue visible is affirmed by Melancthon and sundrie others alledged heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 1. pag. 93. at d. and pag. 94. at e. f. g. in the margent there at the letters d. e. f. and Contradicted for Popish by M.D. Fulke in the Tower disput. with Edm. Camp. the second daies conference, by M. Willet in his Synopsis, pag. 48. circa med. and many others. 7 Seventhly, as concerning the necessitie of good workes to salvation it is affirmed by M. Willet in his Tetrastilon Papismi pag. 90. fine, by M. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Petr. 2. sect. 3. fol. 444. a post med. and by M. Whitaker against M. Reynolds pag. 350 post. med. and Contradicted for new Papistrie as pornitious as the olde, by Illiricus in praefat. ad Rom. and many others: wherof see Colloquiu^ Altenburgense fol. 210. a. and 231. b. and 324. a. and 382. b. fine, and acta colloquij Aldeburgensis pag. 5. and 7. and 151. initio. 8 Eightlie co^cerning Evangelicall councells viz. that a man may do more then he is commanded, is affirmed for most cleere by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall policie lib. 3. sect. 8. pag. 140. post med. and lib. 2. pag. 103. and 122. post med. by D. Covell in his defence of M. Hooker Art. 8 pag. 49. 50. 51. 52. by Luther in assertionibus art. 30. and others: and Contradicted for Popish by M. Willet in his meditations vpon the 122. Psalme pag. 91 post. med. by M. Parkins in his Reformed Catholike pag. 241. and many others. 9 Ninthlie, As concerning the doctrine of vniversalitie of grace, and that Christ died for all, it is affirmed by Suinglius in libro Epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij lib. 1. pag. 274. circa med. by Hemingius Enchirid. clas. 3. pag. 220. 221. and lib. de vniuersaligra^. by Hiperius in method. theolog. lib. 2. pag. 431. 435. 436. By Suecanus in Method. descript. pag. 430. by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Pollicie, lib. 5. pag. 104. By Bullinger vpon the Apocalipes in English fol. 79. b. initio. By M. Gibbeus in his questions vpon Genesis pag. 108. circa med. By M. Smyth in his treatize of Praier in generall for all mankinde etc. and (besides the Lutherans) by very many other learned Calvinists alledged by Huberus in his Theses. etc. pag. 159. and 163. and 164. and 166. and 167. and 168. and Contradicted for Popish by M. Willet in his Synopsis of Anno 1600. pag. 789. circa med. and 808. post initium. and by Beza, Caluine, Knoxe, etc. in whole treatises. 10 Tenthlie, that God doth permitte or suffer sinne, and not will and decree the same is affirmed by Iacobus Andraeas in epitom. colliqu. Montisbelgar pag. 47. 49. and 53. by Hemingius lib. de vniversali gra^. and all the Lutheranes, and (of the Calvinists) by Amandus Polanus in Partition. theolog. lib. 1. pag. 75. 76. and 10. 11. and 12. By Snecaenus in Methodic. descript pag. 621. 622. etc. 645. 650. By Bullinger in his Decades Englished pag. 492. 493. 494. By Castalio in lib. ad Caluinum de predestinat. By Melancthon in loc. comun. de causa peccati and contingent. and in libro de concil. theolog. part. 2. pag. 111. and 112. By M. Gibbens in his questions vpon Genesis pag. 108. circa med. And Contradicted for Popish by Calvine. Institut. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 3. and 4. and 5. and lib. 1. cap. 18. sect. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 23. sect. 8. By D. Baro in his treatize of Gods providence cap. 4. paulo ante med. By Aretius Loc. Comun. loc. 40. de induratione pag. 129 By M. W^llet in his Synopsis pag. 562. fine 563. ante medum. and many others. 11 Eleaventhly, that men are not certaine of their election, and that he who is once in state of grace may finally fall, is affirmed by their publique confessions cyted in the Harmonie etc. pag. 224. post medium. and 80. paulo ante med. and 230. post. med. and 233. fine. By Chemnitius examen part. 2. pag. 193. a post med. and part. 1. pag. 190. b. initio. By Musculus loc. comun pag. 29. circa med. By Lobechius in disput. theolog. pag. 317. 318. By Haffenrefferus in loc. theolog. etc. pag. 184. 188. and 331. By Rungius in disput. etc. ex epist. ad Corinth. part. 1. thest. 5. By Cefnerus in disput. pro libro concord. pag. 150. 156. 157. 650. By Iacobus Andraeas in epitom colloqu. Montisbelgar pag. 47. 61. and Contradicted for Popish by M. Parkins in his Reformed Catholicke pag. 39. and 55. By Calvine, Beza etc. 12 Tweluethly, that in case of divorce vpon adultery the Innoce^t partie may not many againe, was some few yeares since preached ope^ly at Paules Crosse by D. Doue, and since defended publikely in the Vniversity by M.D. Howson in tertia Thesi printed Anno 1602. and is the co^stant doctrine of many others. And is yet Co^tradicted for popish by M. Fulke against the Rhemish testame^t fol. 38. a circa med. and many others. 13 Thirteenthly, that to children of the faithfull dying vnbaptized salvation is not promised affirmed by Vrbanus Rhegius in 1. part. operum in Catechismo minore fol. 105. By Hoffman in Commentar. de poenitentia lib. 3. c. 4. fol. 229. a.b By Sarcerius in loc. comun. fol. 238. 239. 240. By the confession of Auspurg. in the Harmonie pag. 403. fine. and by M. Bilson (now Bishop of Winchester) in his true difference etc. part. 4. pag. 368. ante med. and 369. ante med. And Contradicted for popi^^ vulgarly by Beza, Calvine etc. 14 Fourteenthly, freewill is affirmed by sundrie Protestants mentioned in M. Foxe his Actes and Monuments pag. 1533. b. paulo post med. and pag. 1605. b. fine. also by Snecanus and Hemingius, witnes hereof M. Willet in his Synopsis printed anno 1600. pag. 808. post initiu^ and 810. post initium, and by sundrie others: and is Contradicted for popish by Calvine, Beza etc. 15 Fifteenthlie, that in regard of Christs Passion and promise, our good workes proceeding from faith, are mentorious or deserving, affirmed by their publique confessions in the Harmonie etc. pag. 495. ante medium. and pag. 273. circa med. By Spangeburg. in Margarit. theol. pag. 48. and 50. post med. By Melancthon loc. comun. etc. de bonus operibus circa med. and see M. Hooker lib. 5. Eccles. policie sect. 72. pag. 208. fine. Contradicted for popish by Calvine Beza etc. 16 Sixteenthly, temporall punishment reserved by God in Iustice for sinne remitted, is affirmed by Iohn Knoxe in his answere against the adversaries of Gods Predestination, pag. 215. 216. 217. By Gasper Oleuianus in S^a^bolum pag. 8. ante med. and by the publike confessions of Protestants in the Harmonie etc. pag. 229. paulo ante med. and pag. 235. circa and post medium. and 508. initio. Contradicted as inclining to Purgatorie by M. Willet in his Synopsis pag. 514. By Calvine, Beza etc. 17 Seaventeenthly, (were this place capable thereof) wee could alledge the other pointes of our Catholike faith defended in like manner from the Scriptures by sundrie of our learned adversaries: as namely Vowed Chastitie (By Augustine Marloret in 1. Tim. cap. 5. vers. 11. pag. 375. a fine. By M. R. Alison in his confutation of Brownisme pag. 71. whereof see heretofore tract. 1. sect. 4. example 9. pag. 30. in the margent at 14. Intercession of Saintes, by Latimer act. mon. pag. 1312. a. initio. Art. 6. and pag. 1315. a. paulo ante medium, and by Oecolampadius ad orationem 1. Chrisostomi de Inuentio and maxime Martiribus. Lymbus Patrum (By Iohn Lascicius in the booke entituled de russorum muscouitarum and tartarorum religione pag. 122. and. 123. and by Oecolampadius in libro episiolarum Suinglij, and Oecolampadij lib. 1. pag. 19. and by Suinglius ibidem lib. 3. pag. 560. and 561.) Prayer for the deade by Luther and Vrbanus Rhegius, teste Vrbano Rhegio in prima parte operum in formula cante loquendi cap. de sanctorum culta: and vide Vrbanum Rhegium in loc comun. cap. 19. and 18. and by W^lliam Thorpe act. mon. pag. 149. a. paulo post initium. Purgatorie: (By Luther tom. 1. W^tteberg. an. 1545. in resolut de indulgentijs conclus. 15. fol. 112. a. prope finem, And in disputatione Lipsica cum Echt. and by Latimer act. mon. Pag. 1313. a paulo ante med. and b. ante med. and pag. 1315. b. paulo ante med. The sacrifice of the new Testament according to the order of Melchisadech. (By Andraeas Christouius in libro de opificio missae lib. 1. pag. 28. paulo post medium, and 119. paulo ante medium, and 51. post med. and 58. paulo post med. and 102. ante med. and 171. and see M. Iewell in his replie pag. 7. initio) Seaven Sacraments (By the Protestant Diuines assembled in the Conference of Lipsia, teste Illirico in adhortatione ad constantiam in agnita Christi religione etc. paulo post initium. And by the Protestant Divines assembled in the Conference at Ratisbone anno 1541. whereof Bucer in actis colloquij Ratisb. saith, Protestantes non grauatim admiserunt septem sacram^nta: And so likewise throughout (almost) all other Controuersies: whervnto we could likewise adde aswell thother knowne different opinions in perticuler betweene Protestants and Puritaines: and the testimonie at large of Schluss-lburg. a prime Protestante, who in his theologia Caluinistarum (in his Catalog. praecipuorum doctrinae capitum etc. placed there before in the beginning of his booke) reciteth in particuler three and thirtie severall pointes of doctrine in question betweene the Lutheraines whom he defendeth, and the Calvinists against whom hee there writeth at large in every of the saide questions As also Luke Osiander a learned Protestant who of late writte a speciall treatrize hereof entituled, Enchiridion contro versiarum, quas Augustinae Confessionis theolog^ habent cum Caluinianis etc. printed Tubingae Anno 1603. And all this defended of either part vpon pretended certainety from the Scriptures. examples whereof even in the sundrie Articles of our Catholike faith defended (and that most earnestly) against our learned adversaries by sundrie of their owne no lesse learned brethren, and all this by either party vpon pretended certainety fro^ the Scriptures as so evident and co^fessed that Nicolaus Gallus superintendent at Ratisbone complaineth


 thereat sayingNicholaus Gallus in thesibus hipoth^sebus etc. and vide ibidem fol. vlt. non sunt leues etc. the dissentions that are among^t vs are not light nor of light matters, but of the cheefe articles of Christiane Doctrine, of the lawe and the Gospell, of iustification, and good workes, of the Sacrame^ts, and the vse of ceremonies etc. as also Seluecerus signifieth his like greefe sayingSeluecerus in 3. part. Comentar in Psalmos in Psa. 131. concerning the publique discord in the Church, their is no neede to aske etc. amongst vs who glory to haue the true doctrine of the Gospell, disagrements are moued, concerning thinges indifferent, good workes, our iustice b^fore God, freewill, the presence and participation of Christes body in the s^pper, the humanitie of Christ, the proprietie of his humaine nature, his ascention and sitting vpon the right hand of God, the vbiquitie and other matters. These things being thus, how now ca^ our aduersaries auoid (in these straits) the dangerouse sequell of theire incertaintie, and ignorance, in faith and religion: for whereas the learned Protestants hould thatM. Bilson in his perpetuall government etc. pag. 372. initio. to haue no Iudge for the en^ing of (their) ecclesiasticall contentions were the vtter subuersion of all peace affirming thereuponM. Bilson ibide^ pag. 370. post medium. Synodes to be an externall iudiciall meanes to discerne error andM Bilson ibide^ pag. 374. circa medium. the surest meanes to decide doubtes, and thatM. D Couel in his modest examination etc. pag. 110. ante medium. if Synodes want, the Church neithe^ at any time was, nor indeede can safely be without tempestes themselues are yet (vpon vnanswerable and iustConradus Schlusselburg. in catall. haereticorum lib. 13. and vlt. pag. 864. post medium saith, Hoc nobis potissimum considerandum videtur, num hoc tempore inter exterarum ecclesiarum theologos and nostros vlla sinodus indici and cogi possit: quis onim nostrum sibi arrogabit vt locum constituat, diem dicat, variarum nationu^ theologos evocet etc. Ia^ vero in ipsa synodo quis praesidebit etc. porro quis iudex erit inter li^egantes? etc. And see the Protestant auctor of the booke entituled, Laconici Antisturmij Sp^gia adversus Lambertum Danaeum pag. 44. fiue where it is saide, magna est stultitia provocare ad vniversalem sinodum quae institui non potest, sicut ex supradictis manifestum est. And whereas Master Whitaker lib. ^e concilijs pag. 56. circa medium, truely teacheth that without auctoritie no Councell can be assembled: who now shall haue this auctorttie to compell so many Christian Protestant Princes so variablie different in religion and amongst whom is no subordination to cause the divines of their severall nations to assemble themselues to a councell? reasons by them signified) in vtter dispaire to haue any councell assembled by the
 deuines of their seuerall Churches and nations. therfore theire foresaid ignorance or incertainty (all imaginary helpe to the contrarie by councells notwithstanding) it is still to them so euident and vnauoidable, that their CastalioSee heretofore tract. 2. c. 1. sec. 5. at this marke * a verie learned Caluinist saith concerning their reformed Church: Profecto si verum fatere volumus, etc.Sebastian Castalio in pretat. Bibl. truely if we will confesse the truth, this our age is as yet drowned in extreame darkenes and ignorance, a most assured proofe whereof are these so grieuous, so obstinate and so pernitious dissentions etc so great a number of bookes every day set out, so farre differing one fro^ another etc. if the day of the most cleere truth shined vnto vs, we would never lighten so many darkesome and obscure candles of bookes and writings, and therefore (saith he)Castalio ibidem. Crassa Crassa (inquam seculum tenet ignorantia. And for so much as there is no certaine way in his opinio^ to find out the truth, he concludeth sayingCastalio vbi supra. expectemus iusti iudicis sententiam etc. Let vs attend the sentence of the iust Iudge and suffer the Cockle vntill the time of Harvest etc. Least perhappes wee plucke vp the good corne. As also our other adversaries doe (in regard of this confessed incertainety) reduce all grounds and Ivdgments whatsoever of faith, vnto privateHereof see heretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 1. and in the margent at the letters p. q. examination, alledgedLubbertus de principijs Christian. dog. pag. 562. and 563. And M. Bilson in his true difference part. 2. pag. 353. And see Assertiones theologic. de Sacram. Caenae dom. etc. printed Argentorati. Anno 1564. pag. 1. in defence thereof that we are,1. Ioh. 4, 1. to trie the Spirites if they bee of God: and to1. Thessall. 5, 21. proue all thinges and hould that which is good: Whereat we now take hould, and charging our adversaries with their owne rule, do therevpon provoke them to open and equall triall of disputation, the which we for our parts could wish to be proceeding, with observation of such indifferent and reasonable conditions, as are by Mr. Hooker in his discourse
 hereof against the Puritanes speciallyHereof see M. Hookers preface sette before his bookes of the lawes of ecclesiasticall policie, sect. 5. and pag. 25. post medium. and 26. ante medium. prescribed, or as wereHereof see acta colloquij Ratisbonensis, printed Monachij, 1602. pa. 4. And see colloquiu^ Ratisbonae habitum, printed Louingae, 1602. pag. 9. 10. 11. agreed vpon, in the late conferen^e at Ratisbone: for the obteining whereof wee presume hereby to become most humble and earnest petitioners to your Maiestie. The foresaide evident and necessarie incertainety of our adversaries Iudgements in doctrine, may well seeme to neede it: The weight and consequence of the cause being no lesse then matter of faith and religion) deserveth it: our adversaries former rule of reducing all things to examination and triall appointeth it: our earnest desire of their conversion thirsteth greatly after it: Their full perswasion of our pretended erring, and like charitable care of our reformation, should in all reason be no lesse willing of it.
The seuerall examples of the s^me course heretofore obserued and practised in soundry nations and by our very aduersariesHereof see Mathias Hoe in his Tractat. duo quorum prior de disputationibus theologicis etc. in praefat. prescribed do as it weare lead to it. The venerable and confessed antiquity of our Catholicke faith, established but neuer hitherto condemned in generall councell, (and therefore vnworthey to be as now reiected without some indifferencie of triall) presumeth very confidently to obtaine it. And lastly your Highnes mature and learned iudgme^t, able to moderate and censure the same, maketh vs so much the rather to become most humblie desirous and earnest for it.
The Almightie God who hath so powrablie preserved your Maiesties most royall person fro^ so many dangers past, and no lesse graciouslie reserved it to accomplish the blessings of our happie times and nation, conserue it ever accordingly with all worldlie felicitie in this life and heavenly in the nexte.


GOD SAVE THE KING.

