A consolation for our grammar schooles: or, a faithfull and most comfortable incouragement, for laying of a sure foundation of all good learning in our schooles, and for prosperous building thereupon More specially for all those of the inferiour sort, and all ruder countries and places; namely, for Ireland, Wales, Virginia, with the Sommer Ilands, and for their more speedie attaining of our English tongue by the same labour, that all may speake one and the same language. ... Brinsley, John, fl. 1581-1624. A consolation for our grammar schooles: or, a faithfull and most comfortable incouragement, for laying of a sure foundation of all good learning in our schooles, and for prosperous building thereupon More specially for all those of the inferiour sort, and all ruder countries and places; namely, for Ireland, Wales, Virginia, with the Sommer Ilands, and for their more speedie attaining of our English tongue by the same labour, that all may speake one and the same language. ... Brinsley, John, fl. 1581-1624. A CONSOLATION FOR OVR GRAMMAR SCHOOLES. T HE vncomfortable and fruitlesse toyles, Occasion of this worke. which the Lord hath left vn∣to men, to humble them thereby, haue euer caused many to bēd their wits and beate their braines, to find out more plaine and profitable wayes, both to rel eue themselues, and to make their burdens more light. Amongst others, my selfe hauing first had long experience of the mani∣fold euils which grow from the ignorance of a right or∣der of teaching, and afterwards some gracious tast of the sweetnesse that is to be found in the better courses truly knowne and practised, I haue betaken me almost wholly, for manie yeares, vnto this weightie worke, and that not without much comfort, through the goodnesse of our blessed God. And thence the more earnestly haue I pursued this same, for that I haue bene fully perswaded vpon happie experience (I trust) that I could neuer em∣ploy my thoughts and trauels more acceptably in anie earthly thing, or whereby a greater benefite might re∣dound both to Church and Commonwealth, and in some sort to euery soule, then in searching out, and set∣ting forth to the view of all, the shortest, surest, and most easie entrance to all good learning, and how with cer∣taine hope of good successe all may proceed therein. Who knowes not the grieuous complaints, which (to the disgrace of learning) are made almost in euerie place, The vsuall complaints against non∣proficiencie in schooles. for the iniuries done to countries, townes, pa∣rents and children; because in so manie schooles, the children, which are the chiefe hope of parents and poste∣ritie, are either spoiled altogether, or else do profite so verie litle? Where good is done, how hardly it is ef∣fected com∣monly. And for the most part, wherein any good is done, that it is ordinarily effected by the endlesse vexa∣tion of the painfull Maisters, the extreme labour and er∣rour of the poore scholars, with enduring far ouermuch and long seueritie. Now whence proceedeth all this, but because so few of those who vndertake this function, A chief cause hereof, want of knowledge of a right course of tea∣ching. are acquainted with anie good method, or right order of instruction, fit for a Grammer schoole? This therefore hath bene in my heart, to shew my loue and dutie to all sorts, in seeking for my part to deliuer the poore, pain∣full & honest minded Schoolemaister from this reproch and griefe, The authors desire to help all this. and to helpe withall to supply this so great a want. And in stead hereof my earnest desire hath bene to procure a perpetuall benefite to all estates and degrees, And to pro∣cure a perpe∣tuall benefite to all posteri∣tie. euen to euery man for his children and posteritie; by en∣deuoring to make the path to all good learning more e∣uen and pleasing in the first entrance, then former ages haue knowne; and thereby also in the continuall procee∣ding afterwards, so farre as the Lord shall vouchsafe me his mercifull assistance in this great attempt. That chil∣dren being so entred in a plaine manner, may striue to∣wards the goale with vndoubted certaintie of obtaining their desire, with pleasant delight and chearefulnesse throughout all their time. Concerning the singular benefits and blessings which come by good learning, Of the rare benefits of learning no good man euer doubted like as to euery particular soule, and so to whole nations, no man truly wise did euer yet make doubt. No not anie one who hath knowne aright what learning meant; or who vnfainedly loued his coū∣trey, the soules of Gods people, or the Gospel of Christ. For what maketh a nation to be a glorious nation, but that the people are a wise and an vnderstanding people? What is it whereby we come so neare vnto the Highest, or to that blessed estate from which by our first parents we are so fallen, and to which we must be renewed and restored, if euer we shall inherit againe the tree of life, as by true vnderstanding and knowledge, especially if the same be sanctified vnto vs? Yea, what is it else whereby we excell the beastes, but by this diuine reason, with which the more we are enlightened by the spirit of the Lord, through the meanes of learning, the more we dif∣fer, the more we do excell? Or who is he that can giue God that glorie for which he was created, and redee∣med from hell, or can in anie measure honour him as he ought to do, to his owne saluation, but onely he who is endued with right knowledge and vnderstanding? Con∣trarily, whence is that inhumanitie, as amongst manie of the Irish, the Virgineans, and all other barbarous na∣tions, but frō their extreme ignorance of our holy God, and of all true and good learning? If anie man should dislike of learning, The licenci∣ousnesse of some learned or abusers of learning, ought not to cause vs to thinke the worse therof. or thinke that there is ouer-much of it, for the strange licentiousnesse and outragious courses of sundrie learned ones, or for that so manie do abuse their learning, euen to their own perdition, without vnfained repentance; why doth not the same man dislike also of the light, yea of riches, ho∣nours, and pleasures, all which are abused commonly by the selfe same men, as they haue occasion, as much as learning is? Good learning is indeed the heauenly light, the truest honour, the best riches, the sweetest pleasure. Learning is all, and all in all, if we beleeue that wise Sa∣lomon, or anie of the graue Sages who haue euer liued since the beginning of the world. Neither is the lear∣ning of these men the cause of their licentiousnesse, but this is it in truth; either that being left vnto themselues, to humble them thereby, they haue put out that light of learning which checked and controlled them, and haue chosen, in their courses, to liue in darknesse rather then in the light; or for that God hath therfore in his heauie displeausre and most iust iudgement (as we are to feare of manie of them) giuen them vp to such palpable blind∣nesse in the midst of the shining light of this last age, be∣cause they loued darknesse rather then the light, Iob. 3. 19. 2. Thes. 2. 10. or at least for that they receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be saued. But wholly to conuince all sorts, Learning is the glorie of man, in the verie naturall mans account that learning is the true light, and that principall part of mans glorie; let any naturall man aske of his owne heart, whether if he would haue his child brought vp to make a worthie man, he would not haue him trained vp in the most excellent learning, notwithstanding all the abuses of it, and what∣soeuer can be deuised against it. And why should anie one who knoweth but the law of nature, much more the diuine law of our holy God, (that whatsoeuer we would that men should do to vs euen so we should do to them) once grudge or disdaine that vnto others, which of all other things he most desireth for himselfe & his? Why should he not as well repine against them for the vse of light, seeing the Lord in his rich bountie, in like maner gran∣teth the light of true learning to be communicated to e∣uerie one, chiefly for his soule, as he shall be capable, as well as he hath the light of the day for the bodie; and also hath charged all most strictly, to seeke after it aboue all other things. According to that of Salomon: Wisedome is the principall thing, Prou. 4. 7. therefore get wisedome, and with all thy getting get vnderstanding. Exalt her, a d she shall pro∣mote thee, she shall bring thee to honour when thou doest em∣brace her. Wisedome is that one thing without which a man is not in truth a man, nor can euer honour his Crea∣tor as he ought. Yet to passe ouer this point, as not so needfull (I hope) amongst vs, especially the true professors of Christs glo∣rious Gospell; whereof neuer anie one was a sound fa∣uourer, who was not likewise an earnest furtherer of the best learning: & contrarily, they onely who haue sought the ruine of the Church, as Iulian, haue sought (cun∣ningly at least, and vnder other faire pretences) the shut∣ting vp of the schoole dores, and the bringing of all good learning into open contempt or base esteeme. And the rather do I represse my selfe herein, for that this point hath bene so worthily handled and cleared by some of high place now sundrie yeares agoe, and all obiectours put to silence. To ret rne therefore towards our proposed marke, The first and principall meanes of good lear∣ning, the schooles of learning. & to consider of the meanes whereby the Lord bestowes this heauenly gift of all true knowledge and good lear∣ning; is not the first and principall the right education of children in the Grammer schooles, which God hath ordained to be his nurseries of all learning and vertue? In verie many of which schooles abroad the contrarie rudenesse is notwithstanding verie much to be pitied and layed to heart of all; like as it hath bene long, and is at this day too generally complained of, and that to be feared not without iust cause. In what schooles the best learning & nurture are to be found. Of which sort are all those wherein the schollers are so brought vp, as that they are made more vnfit for anie calling, or so much as to take paines in anie profitable employment. But these true nurseries are onely such, wherein learned Maisters and Vshers, being incouraged with meete maintenance and due rewards, do follow the best & most approued cour∣ses, A wonderfull differēce be∣tweene those scholes wher∣in the best or∣ders are ob∣serued, & the rest. labouring constantly to put the same in vre. For in these a wonderfull difference will appeare, when they are compared with those other, in which the right meanes and orders are litle knowne, and lesse regarded to be put in practise. And first to begin with the matter of learning, 1. The matter of learning easie in such schooles. which ordinarily and in it selfe, through our naturall blindnesse and dulnesse is so hard and vnpleasant; it is made in these schooles most easie, and replenished with all sweete de∣light. Secondly for the manner of proceeding, 2. The maner of procee¦ding in a sin∣gular order without con∣fusion. it is in these schooles so direct and orderly, to the verie highest top of all perfection in the same, that the things taught be∣fore do euer giue light to those that follow after; and the later do so hang vpon the former, as that they haue a continuall dependance, and also the scholars haue a con∣tinuall helpe and vse of all those things which they haue learned before. There is moreouer in them a very come∣ly array, as in a well gouerned armie, each knowing his owne ranke and office, The painefull schoolmaster may there ex∣pect a rich blessing. without the least disorder or con∣fusion. Whereupon the painfull Schoolemaister may, through Gods blessing, as certainly expect much com∣fortable fruit of his labours, as anie other man in all the world. That euen as the best husbandrie bringeth forth vsually the greatest increase, the shortest and safest cut in nauigation, doth fetch in soonest the double gaine; so the shortest and fairest way of teaching, shall bring in speedily double learning without anie losse or danger. So as it must needs be great follie to go further about with more trouble and perill, where a shorter and more sure line is plainly directed and pointed out vpon infal∣lible experience. But for the fruits hereof they will be found such, The fruite hereof able to encourage each Maister to take the vttermost paines to fol∣low the best manner. as are able to allure and encourage euerie one, to take the vt∣termost paines to seek out & to practise the best meanes which euer God shall afford. For in the meaner schooles will soone appeare such a change, from raw and rude be∣hauiour, vnto all commendable qualities, as if they had bene cast in a new mould. Hence wil en∣sue a maruel∣lous chāge in schooles. So that verie children will be∣gin to vnderstand, write, speake, oppose and answer, and in all thinges so to demeane themselues, as to gaine the hearts of all who shall rightly make triall, and compare them with most others. The bringing learning into esteeme, and to make it to be desired, & honored of al▪ Whence it must needs follow, that whereas learning is now commonly so basely reputed of, and so few in the countries abroad regard to set their children to it; yet if the best courses were in vse, euerie one would desire to haue his brought vp in some learning and nurture, The stirring vp many be∣nefactors to learning. and all of the better sort and qualitie should be prouoked to become benefactors to schooles, to augment their maintenance and encou∣ragements for the nourishing & increasing of the same. Things ac∣companying a right course in procee∣ding. These things likewise will certainly accompanie such a right order of proceeding; both a maruellous free∣dome of the Maisters from their wearinesse and discon∣tent, Deliuery of the maisters from much vexation and ouermuch se∣ueritie. Of scholars from terrour. and from that ouer-great seueritie which they are enforced to exercise, or else to do litle good; and withall a ioyfull deliuering of the poore children from that con∣tinuall feare, whereby in manie schooles, the greatest part haue bene wont to be exceedingly dulled and to be made most vnwilling to their bookes. That all things in schooles may be done with delight and comfort. That now contra∣rily Maisters may teach with much delight and comfort, and scholars learne with an ingenuous emulation, like as they recreate themselues in their ordinarie sports. And for the time spent in getting learning, More substan¦tiall learning in such at 7. yeares▪ then in others atten. assuredly more true, sound, and substantiall learning will be found to be gotten in such places in seuen yeares, then is in others commonly in seuen and halfe seuen. For this is a thing notorious, State of most schooles and scholars of 15. yeares of age. that in the greatest part of our common schooles abroad, (some few of principall note excep∣ted) the scholars at fifteene or sixteene yeares of age, haue not commonly so much as anie sense of the mea∣ning and true vse of learning, for vnderstanding, resol∣uing, writing, or speaking, but onely to construe and to parse a little, to steale an exercise, and to write such La∣tine as anie of iudgement will disdaine to reade. Vnfit for the Vniuersities. That in respect of being fit to be sent to the Vniuersities with credit, that they may proceed with delight and vnder∣standing, when they come there, they are commonly so senslesse, as that they are much meeter to be sent home againe. And if they be admitted into the Vniuersities, it is not without the griefe of all who respect the credite thereof. Euils in their entrance and continuance in the Vni∣uersities. So as that they enter commonly with fowle dis∣grace, and continue with much contempt, to spend their friends monie & their owne precious time, which might haue bene farre better employed. That they become there a great deale more readie to anie kinde of exercise then vnto the studie of good learning, the ignorance whereof proues such a reproach vnto them. Hence also after sundrie yeares so euilly spent, manie of them return home againe, almost as rude as they went thither, or are sent abroad to be vnprofitable burdens, both of the Church and Common-wealth perpetually. Or if such do light into the hands of painfull and conscionable Tu∣tors, Tutors must playe the schoolmasters if euer they shall do good. and fall to their studies, yet their Tutors must then act for them the School-maisters part, which must needs be verie harsh and vnpleasing, yea rare to be found amongst them. So that in stead of their Academicall readings, they must be enforced to supplie that which was wanting in the Grammar schoole. Such scholars must vse ex∣traordinarie paines. Such schollars must likewise vse extraordinarie paines and industrie, and be of most happie capacities, if euer they shall come to that pitch and height of good learning, which being trained vp rightly from the beginning, they might verie easily and in shorter time haue attained vnto. Hereof the complaints of the worthiest and most care∣full Tutors in the Vniuersities giue too sufficient testi∣monie. And doing best, shall yet euer feele the want of the Grammar schoole. And though such scholars proue neuer so well, yet shall they feele the want of the Grammar schoole all their life long. But to leaue the Vniuersitie a litle, and to returne to our schooles againe for the gracing of thē. Whereas now in sundrie of them, yea some which are of good maintenance, there are to be found some few like vnprofitable drones, not by the vnaptnesse of na∣ture, but for lacke of better guidance and education; then contrarily should we haue all such schooles gene∣rally, as the litle bee-hiues, If the best or∣ders were had the schooles should be as the bee-hiues euerie one in his owne cell, and each knowing his owne taske, and all gathering iointly to fill the hiues with the most excellent life ho∣nie. So that tast wheresoeuer you pleased, you might e∣uer find most sweete contentment; if thus the best cour∣ses were alike made known to all, and care had that they might be constantly put in practise euerie where. Yea then it would come to passe, that whereas now there is litle or nothing in verie manie of them, wherein the eye or eare can take delight, but rather those who come to make triall haue enough at the first, and euer take iust cause of griefe, that there should be such lamentable spoiling of so manie toward youths, so wretchlesse mis∣spending of their golden age, with such inualuable and irrecouerable losse and iniurie to all, As the good∣ly gardens & sweet singing birds. yet in short time we should see the same as the goodly gardens, & as amongst the litle singing birds, in the flourishing Spring; where we still looke and hearken after more sweete varietie of pleasant flowers, And general∣ly excell thē∣selues. and of melodious tunes. Then should we find by ioyfull experience, that each meane schoole would ot onely excell it selfe, but be equall to manie of chiefer note. And as much as the goodliest garden doth excell the place ouer growne with briars and nettles, the litle bee-hiues the nests of drones, so much should these each way surpasse those same which now they are. That wee should as much reioice in these, as e∣uer we grie∣ued for the other. That as we haue bene grieued formerly for the one, we should be rapt with admiration of the other, and thinke all our paines and cost farre too litle to be bestowed vpon them. Maisters should be much more encouraged to go on with cheerefulnesse, in seeing Gods blessing vpon their labours, and by hearing the due commendations giuen to their scholars, then by anie other rewards whatsoeuer. The children should euer likewise haue their emulation increased, Maisters and schollars should pro∣ceed with all alacritie. which of them all should most excell. And to conclude this point, hence it should come to passe, that although all could not be expected to excell in learning, Though all should not excell, yet all should be fit∣ted to some good emploi¦ment, for the benefit of the whole. (for then should we be left destitute of husbandmen to till the ground, and much more of meete supplies to fur∣nish all other callings; neither is it possible, by all the meanes or paines in the world, to make such to be scho∣lars, to whom God in their naturall co stitution seemeth to haue denied it; chiefly where parents or teachers thē∣selues are too indulgent or remisse: so that their children are disobedient, much absent from schoole, come and go at their pleasures, neglect their exercises or the like, or haue bene spoiled by ill entrance at the first,) yet these things would follow through a right and carefull gouern∣ment. That a good part would be found in euerie forme to credit the schoole: some to store the Vniuersities, o∣thers to adorne all other places and conditions of life; that thereby might be had men expert in each kinde as necessitie should require, for the common benefite and good of all. All these ve∣ ied in some few schooles. All these things we may see verified in some few and rare schooles, by comparing of which with most others, and so by considering what a difference there is (onely through the better courses practised constantly in them,) we may fully iudge of the truth of all that hath bene said, and most necessarily be enforced to subscribe thereto. Vpon the due consideration hereof, This endeuor to di charge a debt to all, by making all sorts par∣takers of the blessings, which he hath vouch∣safed. and vpon much and loug experience of diuerse places, together with the certaine assurance of these and the like vndoubted bene∣fites, which must needes ensue generally vpon the best courses of learning and good education, first diligently sought out amongst all, and then diuulged for the pub∣like good, to be put in practise, I haue presumed to en∣deuour to my poore abilitie, as the Lord hath vouchsa∣fed me mercie, to make all sorts partakers of this blessing, and thus to be paying my debts to all, in communica∣ting the same vnto them. This trauell therefore hath bene, Dutie to all in high place for their chil∣dren and po∣steritie. and is my dutie and seruice, first vnto you all (ye worthies of the chiefest ranke) who are vnfained fauourers of good learning, and more especially to you to whom the Lord hath engaged me and mine; yea my heartie wish (with all thankfull ac∣knowledgement) towards you, in your children, and posteritie, in whom you are to remaine after your de∣parting hence, & by whom you would haue your names and dignities still preserued euen in the earth. That they may with sporting, in a pleasant kind of recreation, at∣taine vnto that heauenly gift of learning, and excell all others therein, according to their places and degrees. And that hereby they may adorne your houses, increase their owne honour in euerie kinde, to become principall lights, and pillars of their countrey, and not to liue to the ouerthrow, or the dishonour of your houses, and names, much lesse to the euil example, or to the spoiling of the poore people amongst whom they dwell, as those who leaue their names for a curse behind them. It hath bene and is my debt, Desire to all parents. and true desire to all pa∣rents, to further their comfort in their beloued children, that they may see before their eyes their childrens for∣wardnesse in learning and vertue, which may be vnto them some recompence, of all their loue, care, and cost. And also that being hereby encouraged to bring them vp vertuously, they may alwayes haue the testimonie of a good conscience, to cause them to reioice, in that they haue had this first care to prouide them this portion. Hereby they may depart hence with gladnesse, when they may leaue those in their places, in whom they may see iust hope, that they shall liue still in the earth with worthie reputation. And in more especiall manner hath it bene my studie for all such who in their naturall and tender affection, To all more tender hear∣ted parents. would haue their children brought vp in the most lo∣uing and gentle manner, as it were in playing, and with ingenuous strife and emulation, without that sharpnesse which they cannot endure, so much as once to heare of. Yea to all likewise of the meaner sort, Wel-wishing to the poorer sort. that euen their children may the more easily attaine vnto learning, that so some of them being aduanced thereby, may become a stay to their parents, a comfort to their kinsfolkes, a credit to their countrey which brought them vp. And to come vnto our Schooles, To the schooles thē∣selues. for whose comfort I haue chiefly spent my strength, it is my loue vnto you all, that you may be such fertile Seminaries, of the best instruction and nurture, as to replenish all places and cal∣lings. Such as from which all crueltie and terrour may be driuen farre away; that you may be Ludi literarij, truly so termed; when the Maisters may teach with delight, and scholars learne with delight: yea when the greatest delight and comfort may follow in the end, in reaping, and enioying the fruit of all your trauels. When as the meaner schooles may be either equall, or at least come neare to those of greater name, & the chiefe may seeme as litle Colledges, euerie yeare sending forth their new supplies, vnto our renowned Vniuersities, our Innes of Court, and to all other places of principall note; not onely to match our aduersaries herein, but also to sur∣passe them in that, wherein they haue sought to gaine the chiefest credit, & to giue our Church the sorest blow. It is the debt of my loue, To the Vni∣uersities. and token likewise of my thankfulnesse to you, famous Vniuersities, by endeuou∣ring that ye may be replenished with the choisest plants, when Tutors may be wholly employed as Tutors ought to be, that so you likewise proceeding in the best courses after, may euer flourish more and more, in all the liberall and worthie Arts, adorned with the sweetest Rhetorici∣ans, the sharpest Logicians, most acute and wise Philoso∣phers, skilfull Physitians, holy and great learned Diuines; for beautifying and fully furnishing the sacred Ministe∣rie, Loue to all who haue lost their learning to repaire it, and recouer them selues. to your eternall praise and commendation, and to the euerlasting glorie of Christ. My loue to you who haue mis-spent your time, and estate in vnprofitable courses, which will be bitter vnto you in the end, and who know not how to employ your selues or your talents. That hereby you may retire your selues in time, and not onely recouer in a few moneths, that which you haue formerly got in schooles, and now haue lost, (as experience warrenteth you may in good sort) but that you may moreouer grow on forward in the konwledge of good learning, to become at length some way profitable to the Church of God, and your countrey which bred you. That at least you may betake your selues, if not to the more fruitfull reading of the sacred story with other learned works helping thereun∣to, to your eternall saluation; yet to the diligent studie of the famous and ancient Grecian or Roman history, & their noble warres; to helpe the better to preserue, and defend your natiue countrey; or for the succour of the distressed parts of Gods true Church, and the poore members of Christ against that Roman Antichrist, as you now see the Lord to neede your helpe, and call you forth thereto. That thus you may receiue comfort to your owne soules, of the pardon of your former courses, and of the Lords fauour, when you shall walke with him in some profitable calling: which otherwise I can neuer see how you can attaine vnto, but that you shall find the flashing of h ll within you, when your consciences shall be once thoroughly awakened, to consider seriously how vnprofitable you haue bene; and of that fearefull doome denounced against the vnprofitable seruant: Cast that vnprofitable seruant into vtter darknesse, Matth. 25. where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This will surely be exe∣cuted vpon you without your vnfained repentance, and laying liuely hold on the Lord Iesus Christ. Finally it hath bene, Desi e to all functions. and is mine vnfained desire to all functions and places, and more particularly to euerie ruder place, as to the ignorant countrie of Wales, and more especially that poore Irish nation, To all ruder places, as to Wales, to the Irish, Virgi∣ ia the Som∣merlland . with our louing countrie-men of Virginia, or where euer else, if it might please the Lord to cause the light to breake forth vpon them, which now fit in such palpable darknesse, and in the shadow of death, and wholy vnder the slauerie of Satan. To the end to make the way of knowledge more easie vnto them, not onely to the attaining of the Latine tongue, but also that hereby they may much more easily learne our English tongue, to helpe to reduce the bar∣barous to more ciuilitie, and so to plant Gods true reli∣gion there, that Iesus Christ may reigne amongst them, Sathans kingdome fall, and they saued eternally, if the Lord vouchsafe them that mercie. To this purpose I cannot but oft thinke of the speech of a worthy learned man whom Cambridge in his time much reuerenced, Maister Iohn Ireton of Legworth in Leicester∣shire. who hauing laboured many yeares with little fruite, amongst a blinde, and superstitious people, was wont much to lament, that he was enforced to labour in a barren soyle where salt had bene sowen: whence he vsed to affirme that the chiefe hope of Gods church for all such pleaces so nuzled vp in rudenesse and superstition, was to come out of our Grammar schooles. And indeede for bringing men vnto ciuility, the very heathens saw this to be the onely way, according to these verses of the Poet, which are familiar to euery child. Adde quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes Emollit mores, Ouid. nec sinit esse feros. Right learning of ingenuous Arts, The sauage frames to ciuill parts. This was one chiefe cause that all the wisest among them did so much prefer, and euer so aduance learning, and learned men. To shut vp this point; Discharge of debt to all. this (I trust) shall bring a blessing in due time to euerie one, when this way of at∣taining to learning, shall become so plaine and direct, as that each poore mans child may with a litle cost and labour get some vnderstanding, to know how to serue the high God, and his owne necessary occasions: and that the children, and posteritie of those, may come to the knowledge of the truth, who themselues haue li∣ued in most grosse ignorance, and extreame blindnesse. By the meanes hereof euery one shall be the better ena∣bled to pay that debt, That euerie one may pay the debt of his birth. which by his very birth he oweth vnto the Lord, and to his natiue countrey. For we are none of vs borne vnto our selues, For that none of vs are born to our selues. but as the heathen Oratour could say, Our countrey doth challenge a part (of our life & seruice,) our parents a part, our freinds a part, &c. So that all the course of the life of euery one of vs should be bent, to the faithfull discharge of this our debt: so to leaue to posterity a thankfull remembrance of our well deseruing of them. If the heathens professed this, how much more should we Christians oft bethinke our selues, how much we owe not onely to our coun∣trey, & to the Church of God in generall, but euen to e∣uery particular soule, and more specially to those whom he hath linked vs to by nearer bonds. And to this end ought each of vs to seeke, as he offereth opportunity, to be alwayes paying this debt of ours; which none are likely to discharge, so well as they, who haue bene best instructed in their youth. Hereupon there shall neuer be wanting many cheere∣full aduancers of all good learning, Learning be∣ing in reputa∣tion, shall ne∣uer want mul∣titudes of be∣nefactors. from which so ma∣ny blessings do proceed, especially when learning shall come into the right estimation. This also shall be the chiefest glorie of all such in the earth, to haue bene bene∣factours and furtherers vnto the best learning and true pietie, and likewise a notable euidence of the eternall happinesse prepared for them. To this purpose if that heathen Orator could likewise say further, The chiefest glory in earth to be aduan∣cers o lear∣ning & piety. euen by the light of nature: That to all who haue preserued, helped, or any way augmented the happinesse of their countrey, there is a most certaine place ordained in the heauens, where they shall enioy eternall happinesse; how much more boldly may we Christians auouch the same, vpon certaine grounds out of the word of God: That there is indeed a place of euer∣lasting happinesse, and glorie prepared for all those, who in witnesse of their loue & thankfulnesse to Iesus Christ, and to their countries, shall employ their studies, and their wealth, to the greatest aduancement of all heauen∣ly learning, and vnto the vertuous education of youth, the hope of the succeeding ages? Finally, The glorie of our nation shalbe increa∣sed as learning increaseth. from all these shall the glorie of our nation be enlarged continually, when men of true wisedome & godlinesse, do both rule and obey euerie where. A state most certaine to endure long. A Prince ten times hap∣pie, and renowmed to be the head of a people so excel∣ling in all true wisedome and vnderstanding. Being thus vndoubtedly perswaded of so manie and rich blessings to ensue, A part of our happinesse to shew our loue in furthering so great a good. vpon the right finding out, and making knowne the best courses of teaching in the Grā∣mar schoole, without the least euill that I can surmise, I haue thought, that this shall be a speciall part of my com∣fort, and a mercie aboue all other outward fauors, which the Lord hath euer vouchsafed me, if I may but do the least seruice herein, or but shew my desire to further so great a good. Hereupon haue I bene encouraged (as I said) not onely to trauell thus farre in it, but also to ten∣der this my poore seruice vnto all, presuming vpon the kind acceptance of it amongst all sorts; which the Lord hath hitherto vouchsafed, so far forth as I know. Because my confidence hath bene, from my first entrance into this trauel, according to the desire of my heart, that these small beginnings might soone receiue such plentifull augmentations, as in time to accomplish all the good which hath bene mentioned; and as the Lord hauing ve∣rified amongst verie manie, will I trust euerie day more manifest vnto all. Why this work was the more hastned to the publike view. I also at the first edition of it, hastened it the more, because, as we are borne for all, (as before was said) and receiue all our talents for the benefite of e∣uerie one, to whom they may do good, and are thereby each so deeply indebted vnto them, so I haue endeuored since to increase my former experiments, and to make them vndoubted, by full, and most certaine triall (as I trust and heartily pray:) that all sorts for whom they haue bene written, The vncer∣taintie of our liues ought to make vs to do all the good we can whiles we may. may reape some benefit by them, so long as schooles or learning shall remaine. And what is my life but a vapou , so that I might haue bene taken away before the work had euer come to light, like as some of my fellow labou ers in this kind haue bene, (of whom I receiued some of these directions, M. To ey. M. Coote. M. Richardson and those not of the smallest moment) who had bene able to haue done farre greater seruice in this kind; We cannot appeare be∣fore our od, if we haue not done our vt∣termost ende∣uour to pay our debts, and to employ our talents to bring most aduantage to our maister. most of whose worthie ex∣periments in this behalfe, were buried with them? Or how could I haue euer stood before the Lord, if (being so fully resolued & assured of the good that might come by this labour, and for that likewise, by the bond of the Communion of Saints, all to whom this benefite of it might redound, had interest in it; the Lord also hauing offered me so fit oportunitie,) I should not haue sought the discharge of this my debt to the vttermost farthing? Might I not iustly haue feared, that he would haue bene displeased for my negligence and loitering in so necessa∣rie a worke? Why should I not then still communicate from time to time, what he hath further vouchsafed me in my continuall trauell? Yea why should I not stirre vp all my louing brethren, to the full perfecting of that, which hath bene by his goodnesse brought thus far for∣ward towards the same? Why should we suffer the industrie of the enemies to be a condemnation to vs, Considering well the indu∣strie of our enemie. for omitting our opportuni∣ties of accomplishing any seruice, which may concerne the glory of our God, the welfare of this people, and the perpetuall benefit of this our deare nation: when they watch all occasions not onely to hinder whatsoeuer good they can amongst vs, but to put out for euer the candle of Israell. Witnesse for euer the pow∣der fornace. When as they will toyle day and night with the perill of their liues, to vndermine, and blow vp our royall King, and Prince, our Nobles, and wor∣thies, with all our glorie at once; thereby to make an ea∣sier passage to their most bloudie and accursed massa∣kers, to murder all who beare anie loue to Christs Gos∣pell, yea to destroy vtterly all the people of the Lord, e∣uen through the whole world, if it were possible, as their furious rage doth at this day proclaime, though with the endlesse destruction of themselues both soules and bodies, and euen of their natiue countrey their mother which bred them. Notwithstanding, This worke hath not bene set vpō rashly, but vndertakē by an holy & warrantable calling. I haue not rashly attempted to en∣ter into this so great a worke, but, I hope, that I may tru∣ly say, that the Lord our louing God, who hath holpen me hitherto, hath called me vnto it. And this hath he done, partly enforcing me by necessitie, to seeke out the easiest, speediest, and best meanes to manage this my calling, and wherby I might do most good in my place, to be thereby in some sort answerable to the same. Partly by giuing me a confident assurance, euen from the be∣ginning of this my trauell, what a benefite might come to all sorts, by the read est courses once found out; and more also in this, that I haue seemed to my selfe, by his goodnesse, to haue from time to time gained euer some∣what by my search: & haue withall obserued how much some few schooles haue excelled others, chiefly through the better courses which they haue followed. Partly by vouchsafing me strength, and cheerfulnesse to proceed thus farre, still adding vnto me some new experiments. More specially by causing me to haue an earnest desire, and an hope by this meanes to answer the loue of cer∣taine worthie friends, in seeking that good to theirs, which I was not able to performe vnto themselues. But aboue all, hath he called me hereunto, by the encou∣ragement which I haue receiued from some principall benefactors to schooles, By special be∣nefactors to schooles such who had au∣thor y to cō∣mand y ser∣uice. & good learning; who though they might by their authoritie and fauours haue com∣manded all my seruice, yet knowing my endeuour here∣in, haue both most louingly cheared me, and withall somewhat supported me to goe through with this so weightie a businesse: The ight Hon. E of H. M. Iohnson Archdeacon of Leicester∣shire. for the good of their own schooles and places, and of all others. Who haue not thought it enough to found or bestow the places, and to endow them with meete maintenance, vnlesse they shall also do what may be to leaue in them the best meanes of all good instruction and education. To whom not onely my selfe, but the Church of God (as I trust) shall euer be beholden. From his So∣ueraigne Ma∣iesties desire for all his hooles. But to passe ouer this point. That worthie desire of our royall Soueraigne (whom the Lord long preserue to his glory and the good of all his people) namely to haue all good learning to florish in these his dominions, declared so many wayes, & specially in that his gracious incitement to all Schoolemaisters (in the conclusion of his Maiesties letters, set before our common Grammar (ought not onely to prouoke, but to binde vs all, who haue this function and charge, to indeuour our selues to the vttermost, to search out still the best meanes for the most fruitfull training vp of our Scholars, in all good literature and vertuous conditions, where he so royally assureth vs, that as we shall receiue reward of Almightie God for the same, so of his Maiestie worthy commenda∣tions. And therefore whatsoe er comfort we shall finde by our trauels therein, to make the same fully knowne for the generall good of all, as God shall vouchsafe vs fit occasions thereunto. For the manner which I haue vsed in all this procee∣ding; For the man∣ner of pro∣ceeding in this worke, the Preface to our common Grammar doth direct it. the Preface to the Reader in the same our com∣mon Grammar hath directed me; where hauing affir∣med that the varietie of teaching is diuerse, and alwayes will be, for that euerie Schoolemaister liketh that which he knoweth, & seeth not the vse of that which he know∣eth not, and therefore iudgeth that to be the most suffi∣cient way, which he seeth to be the readiest meane to bring a learner to haue knowledge therein; it directeth vs thus: Wherefore it is not amisse (saith it) if one seeing by triall an easier and a readier way then the common sort of Teachers do, would say that he hath proued, and for the commoditie allowed it, that others not knnwing the same, might by experience proue the like, & then by proofe reaso∣nably iudge thereof: not hereby excluding the better way when it is found, but in the meane season forbidding the worse. This course haue I followed in all directions which I haue here obserued, & set them downe accor∣dingly. Whereas it may be obiected and said, Though ma∣ny haue writ∣ten hereof, yet none haue proceeded in this particular manner for the helpe of he meanest. that sun∣dry haue written very learned treatises, concerning the trayning vp of youth: I answer, that it is so indeede; yet (that I may speake in modesty as the truth is) all the lear∣ned do well know, that they are such, as do onely set downe the same in a generall maner; or do write of some one piece or two alone, or at most of some few parts of Grammar learning and matters appertaining thereunto; and the principall of them vnknowne to the common sort of teachers: or else they are beyond the capacity and reach of the meaner sort (for whom this is cheifly in∣tended;) or at least, they haue specially fitted their course, for the instruction of two or three alone, to be trained vp in priuate houses, as our renowned Maister A kam. But none whom I know, or haue heard of, haue in this kind of search and triall, gone through the seuerall parts of our Grammarschoole learning, applying themselues for the weakest, & for the common countrey Schooles, thus leading them as by the hand, thorow all the whole courses thereof, onely according to our common Gram∣mar and most approued classicall Authors. Neither haue I in this, This worke hath not bene proceeded in by priuate conceit. followed mine owne priuate conceit, but besides searching by reading, triall and ob∣seruation, I haue first for many yeares inquired further (as I said) the best courses, from the most experienced, who haue proued them: euen of such as haue sent most excellent scholars vnto the Vniuersities; as I haue bene assured from some of the chiefe in the same. Secondly I haue made triall to see a demonstration of euery thing. Thirdly I haue had (so much as I could) the iudgement of all the learned, with whom I could confer or commu∣nicate. Fourthly, so far as I haue bene able, I haue procu∣ ed yearely trials to be made by some of the best autho∣ritie, learning, and iudgement that I could obtaine this fauour of, & haue intreated them to censure all things frankely, and to direct vs wherein they found or thought vs defectiue, to confirme and encourage vs wherein we proceeded in a right course. Neither haue I conferred with any louing friend hereof (so farre as I remember) who hath not approued of the course, and wished all good successe to this my trauell. Nor posted on, but haste∣ned slowly. So that I haue not posted it forward, but hasted slowly; and vsed so farre as God hath granted me oppor∣tuniy, all meanes of due preparation, and of mature de∣liberation: thus enquiring of (as I said) and conferring with so many of the best experienced, as either my cal∣ling, or greatnesse of the charges in trauell would per∣mit. And moreouer before I published any thing hereof in print, I sent some draughts, vnto sundry learned, for their helpe and direction, though not to the hundredth man to whom I desired. For that I was neither able to get copies enow written, nor to procure them written truly, much lesse to be at the charge to send thē abroad into all parts, to many, who I know would willingly haue laid to their hands, and added their experiments. There∣fore herein also, in steed of sending any moe written co∣pies abroad, I after a time, by the coūsell of some faithfull and iudicious welwillers to this worke, thought it best to follow that worthy President of most happy labours, Maister Perkins; who when he was in hand with his Probleme, being aduised to send some copies first to his learned freinds, answered that he could not get copies enow written, & though he procured some writtē forth, and by good scholars, yet they were so defectiue, as that he could not well send thē. And for that cause he would print some few of them first, which might go forth to the view of the world, and so he might heare the com∣mon censure of all, and receiue the helpe of his freinds, and then reforme accordingly. Thus did I aduenture to send forth the former draught of my Grāmar Schoole, with some other parts belonging to the same to the pub∣lique view of all, that I might the sooner heare and re∣ceiue the free censures and better directions of all louing freinds, and welwillers vnto this worke, so to be forth∣with trying, reforming and supplying, like as I haue continued vntill this day. In the whole worke, The Author assumeth to himselfe one∣ly the wants & errors. as I promised not any thing but my trauell, which I haue striuen to performe with all the poore ability which the Lord hath vouchsafed me, so I take nothing to my selfe, but onely the wants and errours. The rest is his who hath giuen this desire, and prolonged my life, granted me vnderstanding, strength, and opportunitie to bring it thus farre forward. What directions or experiences herein, I haue receiued from others, as yet, or lately liuing, I would haue set downe with their names adioyned, like as I haue done of some (which I know might haue brought much credit to the worke, for the authority of sundry of them; and thereby euerie one of them haue had their due) but that they did not thinke it meete, desiring to be concealed. What I haue gathered out of the writings of the chiefe learned who haue reuiued learning in this last age, as Sturmius, Melanchton, Erasmus, & others, either shortly set downe, or plainly poynted at in them; I haue omitted likewise to mētion particularly; not any way to wrong or detract from them, but partly for that I did not note the places at my reading of them; and moreouer for that I thought that labour more troublesome then profitable to the Reader. Neither take I vpon me any way to prescribe to the meanest, Prescribeth not to anie. knowing my self so far inferiour to the greatest part, but do begin to thinke more and more, of this weightie calling, as Paul did of the sacred Ministerie, and to breake out into that his admiration, who is sufficient for these things? who is meete to haue the treasure both of Church and Common-wealth, with the hopes of all posteritie committed vnto him, and much more to pre∣scribe perpetuall rules in this behalfe? Much lesse do I pre ume to teach them of most excellent gifts; but as a poore fellow labourer for the common good, and a willing learner of all, I do humbly desire the iudgement and helpe of all the chiefe learned, both for their cause who wish this, and for the vniuersall benefit of the pre∣sent age, and of all posteritie. That I may see still both what they approue in the courses set downe, also what they disallow, and likewise vpon what grounds; what may be bettered, what is yet wanting, and what is super∣fluous. Thus is my hearts desire, to trauel in it still, according as I haue begun, vntill the Lord shall accomplish the whole worke, which although it should be seuen yeares more, yea many moe before; yet the Lord prolonging my dayes, I shall euer increase in reioycing in my vn∣doubted assurance of the rich blessing, which God will giue vnto it, & thinke all my labour most happily spent. But herein let not any man expect from me great mat∣ters, in a lofty kind of verse or prose, or eminency in de∣clamations, orations, or the like, this I leaue to our wor∣thy renowned schooles of Westminster, Eaton, Win∣chester, and the rest both in London & elsewhere, and to our Schoolemaisters of chiefe fame, whose breeding & imployment in schooles hath bin accordingly; and who haue ancient scholars long exercised in these kinds. Cō∣cerning whom I am so far off frō enuying any excellent learning in them, that I wish all others partakers of the like in their kind. And for my selfe I content me with this mercie from the Lord, and blesse him for it, that I haue trauelled chiefly for our meaner & ruder schooles; and that he hath vouchsafed me this fauour, to bring my worke so farre forward, as to helpe to direct hitherto, according to the things mentioned in the Contents. Yet this I humbly desire of all such of principall note, for education, gifts and experience, to further vs with their better directions in all these exercises and the rest; & now God hauing so accomplished my desire for the first foundation, and let me see his blessing vpon the lit∣tle ons, I will labour to follow them in what I am too short, as fast as his goodnesse shall enable, vntill I shall likewise find by experience, wherein that excellency and comfort of theirs doth consist, and come as neare vnto them as I can. Though therein, Cum in primis non liceat; in secundis tertijsve consistere pulchrum erit. For the length of the worke in the Grammar schoole, Reasons for the length of the worke. I haue in many things contracted very much in this edi∣tion. And for those things wherein I may seeme ouer tedious, as namely in the first entrance of children, in teaching Accidence and Grammar, also for construing, parsing, and making Latine, I would haue all consider how therein I haue contended to direct the carefull Maister, to incite both himselfe, and his little ones, as by play, to make the least to loue the Schoole and learning; and for that those things being well performed, all the difficulty is past. Yea in all such places I would wish you euer still to remember this, that I wrote not for the great learned, but chiefly for the simplest, & yong beginners, both teachers and learners, with whom I cannot be too plaine; although I haue and do still striue to abridge whatsoeuer can be, so as I may be well conceiued of all, for whom I labour; and in the end of euery chap∣ter haue vsually repeated briefly the sum thereof. And knowe withall, that I haue thought it my dutie to set downe whatsoeuer I haue found to be profitable, that out of them all, the best may bee setled, being confir∣med by the trials of many. In which respects some of great learning, who perused the work formerly, haue not seene how it could well be any shorter, nor what might well be spared, especially being thus offered to the pub∣lique censure. Consider moreouer what great volumes haue bene written of some one of these points alone, whereas my indeuour hath bene to go thorowe them all, shewing in euery one, what I take to be principally necessary or behooffull. And finally remember that which Martiall wittily and truly affirmeth: Non sunt longa quibus nihil est quod demere possis. Martial. Epig. Things are not long, wherin there is not ought to spare. Those for whom it hath bene labored in, who wil not vouchsafe it the reading because of the length, would much lesse haue taken the paines, or haue bene at the cost, to haue trauelled, searched, and tried to haue found it out. Although this I dare constantly auow, and keepe within my bounds, that it had counteruailed vnto me both the labour of an hundredth times rea∣ding it ouer, and as manie times the charges, if I had knowne but the things from my first entrance into teach∣ing, which God hath now thus made knowne to all; be∣sides the freeing both of my body and minde from much toyle and griefe. Notwithstanding that I then both read all whom I could get in this argument of teaching, and also had from the beginning for sundry years the aduice and direction of Master Iohn Ireton of Keg∣worth, men∣tioned be∣fore. one in whose house I liued, who was well knowne to be inferiour to few in all excellent lear∣ning, and euen in this kinde amongst other. Neither do I doubt, but that whosoeuer he be that would do good in this function, especially of the new beginners, and shall peruse the worke with desire to make his benefit of it, shall meete with some one thing alone or other in it, (which if he will practise it aright) he will freely ac∣knowledge to be worth all his labour, as I haue done sundry of them at the receiuing and triall of them, and much more shall he do the same for all the rest. Yet for those who would not reade ouer the whole treatise at large, The vse of it to the lear∣ned, who would not reade the whole. they may see the sum briefly in the mar∣gents, & so in the table in the end, to reade what they de∣sire, to passe ouer the rest. But for them for whom I haue trauelled, I had much rather to be ouerlong, to the end that I may omit nothing which concerneth their helpe, Better for the learners that the worke should be o∣uerlarge then too short. & may be vnderstood of all, then by being ouer-short, to omit many things, or not to be vnderstood of the grea∣test part: as it falleth out in most Compendiums. For as I once heard a great learned and holy man say publikely in the Vniuersitie concerning Compendiums, D . . that they brought ordinarily but a compendiarie knowledge; so it will be found certainly true, amongst all learners of them in matters of any difficulty, vnlesse they haue the help of good readers, or of most familiar Commentaries and expositions, to make them plain. Because cōmonly the learners do imagine that they haue gotten that lear∣ning by them which indeed they are ignorant of, and so ceasse from searching further; although for those who vnderstand them fully, or haue meanes to haue them plainly opened, they are of most singular vse, for the easie remembring and practise of the things contained in them. Moreouer howsoeuer I should not be able to at∣taine to each point aymed at here, and wished, nor to any one of them in the absolute perfection, This trauell happily em∣ploied, if but to effect these things fol∣lowing. yet I euer thought from the beginning that my trauell should be most happily employed, if I might effect but only these things following, or some of them, as namely: If I might but set others on work, 1. If but to set others on work hereby. to search yet further, or to make trial of these experiments or better, for the ful assurance of all sorts, to finde out at length, that which is desired. Or secondly, 2. Or to gain moe experi∣ments, which men are so hardly drawn to commu∣nicate. if it were but to gaine the experiments of some others who haue most happily trauelled herein. And the rather, for that sundry of chiefe experience in this kinde, are so hardly drawne to impart that which they know; either for lacke of opportunities, or lest they should be thought to presume ouer much, or suspecting the censures of others, or for some like by respects, wher∣by both Church and Common-wealth are depriued of their due; to wit, of such singular helpes as might excee∣dingly tend to the benefit of them both. Or thirdly, 3. Or to make known sundrie most profitable bookes and helpes. if I might but make known amongst alsorts, sundry most profitable bookes and helpes which God hath to this end prouided, both for Maisters and Scho∣lars, which haue formerly bene hid, and are vtterly vn∣knowne to the greatest part. Or fourthly, 4. To helpe all desirous to doe good, and yet toyle without fruit. if I may but only help such of my brethren as toile without fruit or comfort, wearying themselues in an earnest study to do good, and do mourne and sigh, wishing better directions. And much more those, who neuer knew any good proceedings, and liue as burdens to the publike hurt, for lacke of direction in this behalfe. That so not any one, who maketh conscience of his cal∣ling, and will inquire, should be vnprofitable. Yea fiftly, If but to gain one yeare. if I might but helpe the common sort, how to gaine but one yeare only in the getting of lear∣ning, Thogh there may be hope of almost double sound learning, to that which hath bene in manie rude places. & lessening of charges, chiefly for the poorer. Al∣beit that my vndoubted hope is, that by these courses alone almost double sound and good learning may be gained, in regard of that which hath bene and is in many country Schooles, for vnderstanding, speedinesse, cer∣tainty and delight. That little children being rightly trained vp, may do more at nine or ten yeares old, then in many places at fourteene or fifteene, as Master Askam saith, concerning the Northern parts in his time; when they went to the schoole little children, and came away great lubbers; alwaies learning, little profiting, learning without booke euery thing, and vnderstanding within booke little or nothing, as he rightly affirmeth. And for the further euidence hereof, that so much more good may bee done hereby, it is very apparent in this. That a great deale may be gained by three or foure of these helpes alone, For that so much may be gained by three or foure of these helps alone. which either are not knowne, or not practi∣sed in the ordinary Schooles. As first, by winning a yeare or two in the beginning, by etting them to schoole so soone as they are able to learne. Secondly, by causing all things in Schools to be done with vnderstanding. Of the benefite whereof see Chap. 5. of the Grammar Schoole. Thirdly, by making the Scholars very perfect, first in their grounds, viz Accidence, chiefly in Nounes and Verbes, after the maner which is shewed there; and after likewise in the Grammar it selfe, for the perfect vse, vn∣derstanding and applying of the rules. This will gaine much in time, and more in ease and certainty then can be imagined. Fourthly, by making them very perfect in their au∣thors, as they proceed. Fiftly, by the knowledge and practise of the rule of construing, and of translations formed according vnto the same, for all the lower sort. Sixtly, by hauing in all things the most easie, sure, and excellent patternes to follow; which, they being kept vnto constantly, must needes come in time to expresse very liuely, or at least come neere vnto them. To omit the benefit of increasing in our owne toung as in the Latin; and all things for going certainly without stagge∣ring or doubting, and much more by their growing in their writing, together with their other learning, & that by one and the same labour. Now if by these few so much may be gained, and much more by all the rest together, being constantly practised: then let euery man iudge what we might cer∣tainly expect, if many moe learned well-willers, would adde still but each his seuerall experiment. These same, amongst others, haue bene the seuerall ends, whereat I haue aimed, and thought my labours should be happily emploied, if I might in any sort at∣taine vnto them. Wherein how farre the Lord hath vouchsafed to fulfill my desire, I refer it to euery one who hath or shall duely make triall of that which I haue written. That I do in this worke so much account of Gram∣maticall translations, Reason of the high ac∣count of grā∣matical trans∣lations. which I so oft mention in the Grammar schoole, as namely Chap. 8. where I shew the manner, vse and benefit of them, I hope that this wil be found true by experience, that after children haue bene well trained vp in their Accidence, and a litle entred and acquainted with them, following the courses directed for thē, they will go ouer their whole Authors so translated, by the help of thē, before they could haue gone through one third part of them without. And also that they will learne their authors far more perfectly for each good vse, and keepe them much more surely, with lesse labour or trouble; besides that they shall continually learne by them to make Latine truly and purely, and to get matter and phrase, aswell as to construe and parse. And further∣more because in all the formes which shall vse them, chiefly in the higher, they wil be found for the most part to be in stead of the Maisters or Vshers labour, and euer certaine, teaching English as wel as Latine, without any of the inconueniences vsually imagined; so that there be a wise direction and ouersight, as in all other things, that they be vsed aright. Besides experience, the reasons are most euident, as I haue shewed in their place; Chap. 8. especially by making all their authors to be so easily and soone vnderstood, and then for the continuall practise by them of the Grammar Analysis and Genesis: and finally that by them may be such a daily vse of translating both into English & Latin: all which are so highly commended by the lear∣ned, for the speedy getting of any tongue. And here∣unto the two first leaues of Master Askams Schoolmaster whom I principally esteeme and propound, Master A∣skams testi∣monie of the practise of translating. do giue sufficient testimony. Hee in the very entrance of his booke, sharply reproouing the common order of ma∣king Latins practised in Schooles; and hauing shewed how by that (as it is comonly said) children are vtterly marred, and also hauing giuen most manifest reasons of the hurt which comes thereof, for the feare that children are driuen into: affirming moreouer, that nothing hath more dulled the wits, or taken away the wils of children from learning, then that: and lastly how they learne euill choise of words, wrong placing, and ill framing of sentences, and that which they must vnlearne againe; he afterwards speakes thus, concerning this kinde of translating, and the benifits of it. There is a way (saith he) touched in the first booke of Cicero de Oratore, This is well worthie the marking of all. which wisely brought into Schooles, truly taught, and constantly vsed, would not onely take away that butcherly feare of making Latines, but also with ease and pleasure, and in short time, as I know by good experience, worke a true choise, and placing of words, a right ordering of sentences, an easie vnderstanding of the tongue, or readinesse to speake, facilitie to write, a true iudgment both of his owne and other mens doings; what toung soeuer he doth vse. Then he setteth downe the manner, how the child should be taught to translate a peece of Tully, or a like Author thus plainly, & afterwards out of his translation to turne it into the Latin of the Author againe; and then by comparing with the Author to see how neere he came, and where he missed; so to amend it, still striuing vntill he come to expresse his Author truly. By this he saith, the maister may teach all those things which are most tedious and difficult without any errour, and the scholar may learne without any great paine, the Maister being led by so sure a guide, & the scholar brought into so plaine and easie a way. This is the summe of Maister Askams speech. Now these Grammaticall translations of our lowest Schoole Authors, do performe the same things for all young scholars farre more surely and speedily. More surely, because the scholar translating into En∣glish of himselfe, vnlesse the Maister vse maruellous dili∣gence, before in making him very perfect in the true con∣struing of it, and as much after in perusing & amending euery thing which is faulty, the child wil misse in transla∣ting; and if he translate falsly into English, or misse of the Grammaticall order, he can not translate into the same Latine againe, vpon sure grounds and reason, vnlesse he go by rote, as we say. Moreouer that labour for so perusing the translations, of euery one of each forme thorough a Schoole, would be endlesse in the greater schooles, and much more when they haue turned it into Latine, for comparing all with the Author, and reducing each thing into the right order; whereas these being so translated vnto their hands, do first guide them certainly how to construe or to translate, to reade all things which they learne by them, into a true translation, and conse∣quently to turne them perfectly into the Latine of the Authour againe. These do it also more speedily, More spee∣dily. in as much as they may reade ouer many lines turning them into English or La∣tine before that they can write one. Although that kind of translating by pen of themselues, both into English and Latine, hath also her due place and singular vse, for some speciall benefits thereof, as writing true Or∣thographie, and the like, as I shall shew in the handling of it. Furthermore, This verie course in ef∣fect practised by Maister Askam. this very course of translating peeces of Tully or the like good Author, into plaine naturall En∣glish, by the Maister himselfe, and giuing them to the Scholar to turne into Latine, to trie how neere he can come to the Author, and then comparing it with the Author, he sets downe in the beginning of his second booke, page 2. By this meanes he saw that experience which might seeme almost incredible, Experience of the singu∣lar benefit of it in Maister Iohn Whitne . in that hopefull young Gentle∣man (whose death he so much bewaileth) Maister Iohn VVhitney, in Sir Anthony Dennies house, where the Ladie Elizabeth did lye, when he came to serue her; that within lesse then the space of a yeare, he had so profited in writing pure Latine, that (as he saith) some in seuen yeares in the Grammar Schooles, yea some in the Vni∣uersities, could not do halfe so well. So afterwards he saw the like in his happiest Schollar that euer England had bred, our late Queene, who made vs all happie; who, as hee saith, did so farre surpasse all of her yeares in excellencie of Learning, This way of translating the chiefe & sure meanes to attaine speedily to any tongue. Maister Askams Schoolema∣ster. Lib. 2. p. 33. and knowledge of diuers Tongues, that verie fewe of the rarest wits in the Vni∣uersities could any way reach vnto her. And this see∣meth euidently to haue bene the chiefe meanes; like as he prooueth at large, by the authoritie of many great learned, this way of translating, to be either the onely, or at least the chiefe, readie, and sure meanes to attaine speedily to any tongue. And that I may adde but one other testimonie of a rare and knowne experience in this kind. A late known and worthie experience in a young No∣ble-man of rare hope. At the Com∣mencement of that right noble, and memorable Gen∣tleman, Sir Iohn Harington, (who now rests and reignes with the Lord) hauing speech with Maister Touey, who had bene a Schoolmaister, equall (as he was indged) to most of the chiefe in that kind; but was then wholly em∣ployed for the attendance and tuition of that young Noble-man (with whom he also liues now in heauen,) I desired to know this of him: that whereas I had writ vnto him formerly, to haue taken some paines, in setting downe the shortest and best way of teaching, according to his experience; and now there was a rare fame, that God had giuen an extraordinarie blessing to his ende∣uours with that young Noble-man, so that he did of a sodaine go farre beyond most others of his time, (aboue all former expectation:) that he would vouchsafe to impart vnto me, in a word or two, what were the prin∣cipall meanes he had vsed thereto. He acknowled∣ging thankfully, that he had indeed seene much experi∣ence of Gods mercie therein, told mee, that this was the principall and summe of his course: That he had bene enforced to begin againe, euen from the verie Ac∣cidence, causing him to get the perfect vnderstanding of the Rules, for the meaning and vse, though he could not the words in so short a time; and after that, he had caused him to practise continual translating into Latine, after this manner. That he himselfe had chosen easie places of Tully, and other familiar Authors, which the Gentleman knew not, and caused him to turne them in∣to Latine, and after brought him to the Author, to com∣pare that which he had written, to the same, iust accor∣ding to this last manner mentioned out of Maister As∣kam. After, rounding me in the eare, he said; But shall I tell you, It was by Prayer, quoth he. Hereupon, after my returne, I set my selfe to put all these in practise, yet more seriously then formerly I had done. But for this kinde of translating, finding the toyle and impossibilitie of it, first to translate peeces fit for euerie Forme, and after to examine euerie ones exercise, how he had tran∣slated, and to correct them; I wholly bent my selfe to trie how this might be done, thorow the seuerall lower Formes, that they might haue most practise of it. Thus trying sundrie waies, which were ouer-long to recite, and amongst others, hauing seene in a chiefe Schoole in London, good vse of verball translations; a∣mongst some other things, I began to thinke, that by the meanes of translations of the first Authors which Scholars learne, this translating might be practised in each lower Forme continually. But there were yet two maine difficulties, which had formerly hindred me from any such vse of them. First, that our vsuall translations did direct the young Scholars vncertainly, and some∣times amisse, being oft rather to expresse the sense, then the words in anie right order of Grammar; and that the learners must go by memorie, and as it were by rote, more then by anie certaintie of Rule, vnlesse they were of better iudgement. And secondly, that for this and other inconueniences, translations were generally in disgrace in Schooles. Therefore, this then I thought necessarie to be my first labour, to finde out some cer∣taine rule to follow, according to which to frame these translations, and which might be the guide of all. And herein I, To whom the finding out of the rule, and of translations thereby is acknowled∣ged. vnder Iesus Christ, acknowledge my selfe be holden for the rule of construing and translating, in the beginning of my Schoole labours, now aboue 30. yeares ago, first to Maister Crusius: since to the reue∣rend and ancient Schoole-maister, Maister Leech. Third∣ly, after them to that painefull, Maister Coote, of Hunsden in Essex, now with the Lord. And fourthly, to that lear∣ned Go leuius, and to some other of my acquaintance, who had likewise taken paines in this rule, which they willingly imparted vnto me. And so from that time vntil this day, Labour to find out the rule▪ and to frame the translations accordingly. I haue still bene labouring to find out the rule more exactly, & to frame the translations according to the same. Secondly, this hath bene my next studie, to seeke out the right vses and benefits of these translations, And also the right vses & benefits of them. and so in all things to set them downe, as they might be a certaine direction, wher∣by most easily and surely to reape the fruite of them. Lastly I haue trauelled herein specially to haue full triall & assurance in euerie thing, And finally, to haue ull assurance of euery thing. that as I had gathered these amongst other experiments, for the vse of all schooles, so vpon certaine proofe by my selfe, and other of better iudgement, I might at length commend them to all lear∣ners, and so helpe to bring in that excellent vse of them (which Maister Askam aduised) euen into the Schooles, in which they had bene so formerly distasted, as that it was thought a Paradox, but to name the vse of transla∣tions i them. Now vpon this rule, Vpon what things all the chiefe bene∣fits of these translations depend. and the expressing euerie thing in the translations, both in proprietie, and also according to the sence and meaning of the author, with varietie of other English phrases, and supplying what is wanting, to make vp the construction, with the other things ob∣serued therein, especially vpon the rule, depend all the chiefe benefits, for a certaine Analysis and Genesis; both for construing, parsing, making and tying Latin surely, and sundrie of the rest, Chap. 8. as is shewed at large in the eight Chapter of the Grammar Schoole. By the right practise of these translations, so framed, as I am fully assured, Certaine be∣nefits of these translations rightly vsed. by long experience, through the Lords mercie and goodnesse, an increase will be found in learning, farre more then can be well conceiued, be∣fore due triall made, and that with much lesse trouble to the Maister then otherwise: and with farre more delight, certaintie, ease, and cheerfull emulation to the scholar. I haue therefore thought it my dutie, after my vnfallible experience of them, rightly vsed, so as I haue plainely set downe the maner in this second edition of my Gram∣mar Schoole, and after my so long and painfull trauell, to find out the Rule most certainly, with the best, and most profitable vses thereof, to commend them more confidently vnto all our Schooles, and to all desirous to recouer speedily the knowledge of their Latin tongue, or to increase therein. In a certaine affiance, that all who shall vse them aright, shall see a rich blessing, without in∣conuenience: yet lest in anie thing I should be thought too peremptorie, I intreate the learned first to make proofe, then to iudge hereof according as they find. For anie further apologie therefore for my bold at∣tempt, Further Apo∣logie need∣lesse, except, 1. The Au∣thors desire to do all this good. in these endeuours, I trust that some few of the reasons lightly touched before, may be defence suffi∣cient. And first my vnfained studie to do all this good to all sorts, without the least iniurie to anie one, so farre forth as I shall know it, or without inuerting anie ap∣proued course. And that howsoeuer I haue bene the vn∣fittest of manie of my brethren, to enter vpon so hard a taske, yet the weaker, the more meete haue I bene, to haue a compassionate feeling of the wants of others; and more like to applie my selfe to the capacitie of the mea∣nest and most ignorant: whereas the great learned and acute do oft times thinke, that what they themselues vn∣derstand, all others should presently conceiue, though the most of the simple comprehend litle or nothing of it fully, as they should. Secondly, 2. The ha∣uing all these experiments gathered to our hands. for that in these my poore labours, euerie one may haue the wearie trauels, and comfortable expe∣riments, of manie learned thus gathered into one, and brought therby vnto his hands without labor or charge, which otherwise might haue cost them manie miles tra∣uelling, and some yeares triall, as well as my selfe, and yet they might haue failed of manie things, which here they may find, and more hereafter, as God shall vouch∣safe moe supplies vnto it. Thirdly, 3. Assurance of each mans affection, to haue his child so brought vp as is here de∣sired. because there is no man, hauing the nature of a wise father, who would not haue his child to haue some learning, howsoeuer he purpose to employ him afterward, and who to that end would not haue him so instructed, as whereby to get the best learning, in the shortest time, and with the least seueritie, or who will not giue almost double, if he may be assured to haue his child so trained vp. Fourthly, 4. For the te∣stimonie of his cō cience to be vpright & faithfull all his worke. for that I haue him who searcheth & trieth the hearts, and whose good hand hath bene with me in goodnesse, in all this worke, to beare witnesse vnto my conscience, that I haue not either in this, or anie other my trauels, aimed at vaine praise or commendation (for that our holy God would turne into shame) or at anie other sinister end; but that I haue striuen with all my heart, so farre as in my weaknesse I haue bene able, to aime at those verie ends alone, which our blessed Saui∣our hath taught me, in that diuine patterne of heauenly prayer, which hath bene in all my labours my principall direction. And namely, to manifest my dutie & thank∣fulnesse to my heauenly father, like as for all other his mercies chiefly in heauenly things in Christ, and for in∣numerable temporall fauors, in his fatherly prouidence, protection and direction vouchsafed vnto me; 1. Anno 1588 so more especially for those three great deliuerances (to be had in euerlasting remembrance) not onely of our Church and nation, 2. The death of Queene E∣lizabeth, and peaceable bringing in our Soue∣raigne. & of all other the Churches of Christ with them, but euen of my selfe particularly in euerie one of them. And this I haue desired to do, by seeking first to honour him, 3. Powder reason. and secondly to aduance and enlarge his kingdome, and to these ends searching to know and ac∣complish all his holy will, tending thereunto, and so all the other subordinate ends, as he hath directed me. Thus haue I endeuoured to rely vpon that his gracious pro∣mise, that thus seeking first the kingdome of God, and his righteousnesse, all these other things should be ad∣ded vnto me, (as an ouer-measure) so farre as should be good. And herein indeed I haue felt no breach of pro∣mise from his Maiestie, but found him faithfully and true; yea, exceeding bountifull, aboue all that I could conceiue, in all things wherein his goodnesse hath ena∣bled me so to seeke him. Vpon all these grounds I can nothing doubt, but through the mercie of the Lord, this labour being intended to these verie ends, and prooued to be answerable thereunto, without inconueniences in the right vse of it, as my assured confidence is; I cannot but fully hope, that it will in due time be most welcome, and acceptable to all, that euer shal make triall by them∣selues or others. Lastly, 5. For willing sub ission of al things to the publike cen ure. for that I willingly submit it, with all my la∣bours, to the louing censure of all the learned, who tru∣ly loue Christs Gospell, being readie to be taught of the meanest, who shall in anie thing shew me my error, or giue me clearer light. And though the defects should still be verie many (as in so difficult a worke it is no great maruell;) yet sith I am most desirous to be continually reforming, euerie ingenuous well-willer vnto good lear∣ning, will (I trust) louingly pardon them, and thankful∣ly accept of that which God of his goodnesse hath gran∣ted. Thus I put forth each first Copie of translations or others, And desire to be still lear∣ning of all. as not set forth, but to go more generally to all my louing friends, and well-vvishers to this worke, to craue of them further helpe, as I sayd before. To this end, I do still humbly request, euerie true fa∣uourer of good learning, to lay to his hand, that so I may be continually learning, amending, and perfecting, so long as the Lord shall lengthen my daies. If in anie thing, The cause of the confi nt reioycing in it. I haue or shall seeme to reioice ouer∣much, yet consider first, that in my generall work, in my Grammar-Schoole, I haue thought the forme of a Dia∣logue most fit; wherein more libertie is granted to incite and incourage others. Secondly, that I haue not, nor will speake anie more, then either what I haue seene ex∣perience of, or whereof vpon good grounds, I am fully assured, and which I take my selfe bound to relate, onely to the praise of our God, & the good of others, to make all others partakers of the comforts, which to that end he hath vouchsafed vnto me, following so neare as I can, that direction mentioned before, in the Preface before our common Grammar. Thirdly remember that report of Maister Askam, cōcerning Maister Iohn Whitney, farre greater then all mine are together: and then I doubt not (these things being rightly weighed) but all who are wise hearted, will easily beare with me, in my confident reioycing, trusting moreouer that God will verifie all things, to euerie one who shall duly make triall. And in this affiance, and testimonie of my conscience, before his sacred Maiestie, I wholly relie my selfe. Therefore, Exhortation & encourage∣ment to the weaker tea∣chers. before I conclude, giue me leaue a lit∣tle to turne my speech to you, (my deare fellow la∣bourers,) and namely to all you of the weaker sort, for whom I haue and do still chiefly trauell, whose hearts are set as mine to do all the good you can, in your se∣uerall places, all your dayes. To you all I wish, that as we haue bene sometimes companions, in fruitlesse toile, and vexation; so we may be now in reioycing at, and admiring the new fruites of our labours. What a griefe may this iustly be vnto vs, Griefe to all honest hear∣ted maisters, for com∣plaints and murmurings against thē. when one shall come, and crie out of vs, to our faces: My sonne hath bene vnder you six or seuen yeares, and yet is not able so much as to reade English well; much lesse to construe or vnderstand a peece of Latin, or to write true Latin, or to speake in Latin in any tolerable sort, Complaints of parents for the chil∣dren not pro∣fiting. which he might haue bene well able to haue performed, if that you had taken that course and those good paines with him which you might haue done; for in such a schoole others much yonger then mine are able to do it. Another shall com∣plaine; My sonne comes on neuer a whit in his writing. Besides that his hand is such, Murmurings of Townes for charges ill bestowed and children spoiled. that it can hardly be read; he also writes so false English, that he is neither fit for trade, nor any employment wherein to vse his pen. When all in a towne generally, shall murmure a∣gainst vs, in this or the like manner, that their children do no good vnder vs, but lose their time, and spend their friends mony, being brought vp idlely, made fit for nothing, and therefore what should a schoole do a∣mongst them? That it were much better to turne the maintenance giuen to the schoole, to beare the charges of the towne for other duties and seruices, then so vn∣profitably to employ it. Moreouer how must this needs trouble vs, Some to crie out against our seueritie. when ma∣nie shall crie out of our seueritie: some shall wish, I would my child had neuer knowne him. If he had not dealt so cruelly with my child, he had bene a scholar, wheras now he is vndone. Or when our scholars coming to mans estate, shall curse vs, for that by our blowes they were made dunses or deafe (though this oftentimes vniustly) or to hate all learning. Scholars comming to mans estate to bewaile losse of their time. Or shall generally be∣waile the losse of their time vnder vs, complaining as the vsuall maner is, My Maister neuer taught me anie vnder∣standing, or right vse of good learning, that though I was with sundrie, yet I was neuer the better. I got more sence, and saw more light for the vse and excellency of learning, and also felt more sweetnesse therein, in one halfe yeare in the end, with one who directed me in a better order, then in all my time, with all others. The rest deceiued my parents, and were my vndoing. Or when they shall thus complaine: Our Maister had not anie care of our gouernment and manners. That they were not taught any religiou. He neuer taught vs the feare of the Lord, nor made the least con∣science to plant anie Religion or grace in vs. Finally, Terrour for for lacke of growth of Gods religion. what a terrour shall this be vnto vs, and what a wounding to our consciences, when we shall but thinke, how the Lord and all good men, may most iust∣ly lay this vnto our charge, that the cause hath bene chiefely in vs, that Gods religion, hath not thriuen any better in our Land, in so long a time; but that Popery, ignorance, Atheisme, and all irreligiousnesse, haue farre more growne vp in many places? If we had bene as carefull to season our youth, in the truth of Christ, and to settle them in the grounds of his holy religion, truly professed amongst vs, to their saluation, as the Po∣pish schoolemaisters are to corrupt them with Idolatry, and superstition, vnto perdition, the knowledge and loue of Gods true worship, and pietie, had flourished amongst vs, euery where long ago, all Popery and A∣theisme rooted out. And what answer can we thinke to make to God, for his religion, and people, for so many who haue bene lost, chiefly through our lacke of care? How should these things touch euery one of vs, euen to the very hearts, and cause vs to bethinke our selues at length, of this our weighty function, to the end to take away all this reproch, and to begin to recouer the credit of our worthy profession. You know well, The charge committed to vs. that we are they to whose charge that rich treasure, both of Church and Cōmon wealth is committed in trust, (as was said) and the hope of a more happy age hereafter yet to come. We are they who helpe either to make or marre all; for that all the flower of our Nation, and those who become the lea∣ders of all the rest, are committed to our education, and instruction: that if we bring them vp aright, there is great hope, that they shall prooue goodly lights, and marks to all the rest of the Land, especially, to the townes and countries where they are; and cleane contrarily, most wofull ensamples (as are euery where to be seene) if they be spoiled through vs, or for lacke of our better care. So that we must needs do the greatest good or the greatest euill. As we are before them, so we may ex∣pect, that they shall prooue for the most part after vs. We are therefore the men, vpon whom the flourishing of this our Canaan, doth very much depend. We can∣not then but know, that as our worke aud charge are so weighty, and in course of education next vnto the worke and charge of the holy Ministery, which we also are to helpe to furnish: so our account must be ac∣cording to that which our God hath trusted vs withall, and our reward answerable; dreadfull, if we haue bene negligent; glorious, if we haue bene faithfull. We cannot be ignorant, how our enemies the Iesuits, not onely in their Semina ies, but also in their lesser schooles, do bend their wits, to go beyond vs in this ve∣rie kind. Giue me leaue to put you in mind of that which was written vnto me, from an ancient acquaintance in the Vniuersitie, now sundrie yeares ago, and which I do gladly acknowledge, to the praise of God, that it hath from the first relation put more life vnto me in this busi∣nesse. The summe of it was this. The Iesuites, The combi∣nations of the Iesuites ought to pro∣uoke vs. October, 28. 1608. the Popish schoolemaisters beyond the seas, do combine themselues together, and all, or at least manie schooles do reade the same bookes at one time, and the same places, and do change euery quarter, and set vpon the schoole dores, the Authors, place, lectures, exercises, euerie quarter, newly printed, and for this they haue great suite made vnto them by the Printers. This haue I lately learned of certaine whom I vsed beyond the seas to this end. Thus farre my lo∣uing friend. Whether this report was true in each parti∣cular, I cannot certainly affirme, yet for the generall, we all who vnderstand anie thing, do know that it is most certaine. Now who are these who thus combine? are they not the principall plotters of the ruine of all the Churches of Christ, and of Common-wealths, as they are cried out of, euen in the Popish countries themselues; the arch e∣nemies of Christ and his Gospell, and the chiefe vphol∣ders of the throne of the Beast, to make him king of kings, and Lord of Lords. And what is their purpose in seeking out the most excellent courses of getting most speedily all good learning as they would pretend? Sure∣ly their purpose is nothing else, as all the world may plainely see, but by that their learning to ou -counte∣nance the heauēly learning, the sacred truth of that euer∣lasting Gospell, and all the learned, who professe Christ Iesus throughout the earth: to gaine all the flowre of the Nobility, and Gentrie, yea of all the youth in all places where they come, to bewitch all with an opinion of their learning, the more easily when their time serues to cut the throats of all, who truly and sincerely professe Christs Gospell, and to possesse their places. Yea if it were in their power, or possible, to destroy all the Churches of Christ, to extinguish vtterly all true lear∣ning, to bring in againe all their old learning, as (they call it) their palpable delusions, and abhominable I∣dolatry. What our state was al∣most by them. We all saw, how nea e we were to be consu∣med by their fornace. We with our royall King, our Prince, our Nobles, and Rulers, the Church of Christ, with the glory thereof. Now our God hauing so mira∣culously plucked vs out, and we all being in a speciall manner (next vnto our Gracious Soueraigne, and his royall Progeny, together with these our Nobles and Rulers, the holy ministery and noted professors) desig∣ned in their hearts, as flesh for their caldron; let vs shew our selues thankfull, euery one in our places and callings: and in token of our thankfulnesse, Our miracu∣lous preser∣uations, and their deadly malice, ought to put new life into eue∣ry one of vs. to our most merci∣full and blessed God (whose name is for this aboue all other outward deliuerances, to be extolled for euer∣more;) first for our liues, and then for our Religion the life of our liues; let vs all be prouoked to bend our stu∣dies, and euen to spend and end our liues, for our Christ, and for our dread Soueraigne, vnder him. By whose hand e so (euen miraculously) deliuered vs, the second time, like as formerly he had in a most wonderfull manner, at his first comming to the Regall Crowne, and his entring in amongst vs; whereby all their long hopes, and bloudie designes against vs were dashed in a moment, and that heauenly light continued to vs, and to our posteritie (I trust till Christ shall come) which they certainly accounted at both those times, to haue put out for euer. Let vs now contrariwise stirre vp our selues, more then euer heretofore, that the light of all good know∣ledge may breake forth, and be as the morning bright∣nesse before the Sunne rising, to prepare the way to that glorious appearing, and kingdome, when we with all the children of the light shall shine eternally in the hea∣uens: and when all those who haue sought deuices to bring in againe darknesse vpon all, or but to hinder the glorious light of truth, shall without their vnfained re∣pentance liue perpetually in their place of vtter dark∣nesse. We haue no cause to fea e our bloud-thirstie aduer∣saries, if we will but sticke vnto our Christ. Oh that these enemies could thinke of this, and be warned in time, to turne their thoughts another way, euen for the King of Kings, that they might haue bold∣nesse at his appearing. But to leaue them, praying for them, that so many of them as belong to Gods eternall election, may haue their eyes open to see their miserie, and be conuerted and saued; and to returne to our selues. There is no cause at all for vs, why we should feare or doubt of a glorious triumph and crowne here∣by; if that we will but cheerfully ioyne hearts and hands; prouoked by the combinations of these our bloud-thirtie aduersaries, and all sticke close vnto our Lord and Sauiour, our Captaine and teacher. With them is but an arme of flesh, the spirit of man, of Sathan, and Anti∣christ: Our confi∣dence in our Captaine. but with vs our Christ, commanding and assu∣ring vs. He who is King of Kings and Lord of Lo ds. With vs is he who must reigne, vntill he haue vtterly ouerthrowne, 2. Thes. 2. 4. and abolished that man of sinne, (though now exalting himselfe aboue all that is called God, or worshipped) and all those his souldiers with him. He will be with vs, and guide vs, he will direct and blesse vs. He can make the meanest of his to do more seruice for the vphoding and furthering of his owne king∣dome, The power of our Christ, with vs, & cer∣tainety of victorie of his side. which must come with power and glory, and endure for euer; then all their combinations shall do to the contrary. And much more when we shall louingly and faithfully, as of one heart and soule, vnite all our for∣ces, and labours in one, to this so happy and blessed a worke, wherein we are sure to preuaile, if we will but go on manfully, and stand fast to our Captaine, and great Commander. The victorie is his, he hath got∣ten it already; he rideth on the white horse, conquering till he haue accomplished all his worke. If we of the weaker so it can for the presen , but at∣taine neare vnto those things mentioned in the Con∣tents of the Grammar Schoole, viz. what may be done for sp edy & certaine attaining to learning in schooles, which are also hereunto adioyned; our labour shalbe most pleasing to our God, profitable to all, sweete and comfortable to our owne hearts. Euen we shall helpe to restore learning againe to her ancient reputation and honour, and ee our selues from all reproch, being able to liue with credit in our places. And that we may come vnto them all, Assurance that we may come vnto them. make ye no doubt. My selfe and many others, haue seene so much experience, in as weake meanes, as most of vs haue, as whereby to assure vs, that by our constant labour and diligence, but in the courses set downe in the Grammar-schoole, we shall through the helpe of our good God finde them in such sort, Let vs therefore double our diligence, An to double u diligence and we have made triall, in these, or in better, item God haue or shall vouchsa e them vnto vs. You see how much through his mercifull goodnesse I haue herein (though the vnablest of very ) and how farre the worke is proceeded in; to the end hereby to prouoke and encourage you. You who haue not better, proue these, which God hereby offereth vnto you; or at least so many of them, as you shall most like of, and as your leisure and opportunitie well serue; yet not ouerloading your selues or your children. That we may approue, what is best, reforme what is amisse, and draw euery thing still more shortly, euer receiuing bet∣ter, as his goodnesse shall affoord them. And so in time by our ioynt consent, we may confirme all the surest, both vnto our selues, and to all other whosoeuer shall succeed. You that haue more excellent in any kinde, communicate them with vs, as we haue presumed here∣in, in duty to tender thus much vnto you. But let none of vs be discouraged though we do not find our desires at the first; None to be discouraged, if he see not his desire at the first. set to it cheerfully, and in due time our eyes shall behold it. Thus also our brethren, who are of the most excel∣lent gifts, I meane the Maisters of all the principall schooles of our nation, and all other sound hearted fauourers of good learning, seeing our louing con∣tention, shalbe enforced to ioyne hearts, and hands, and to affoord vs likewise their vttermost helpe and countenance; which, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by our appearing before him, as they tender his glory, the good of our Church & their natiue coun∣trey, I againe humbly intreat at their hands: especially their directions for the best performance of these chie∣fest and most necessarie excercises mentioned, and what∣soeuer else they find vs too short in, for the full adorning of the Grammar Schoole. By this means, shall the worke of God prosper in our hands, going forward happily, that we shall vndoubtedly find the desires of our s les, and wherein the excellency of the speedy at∣taining to all good learning doth consist, to the endlesse glory of our most holy and onely wise God, the lasting honour of our Nation, & of the Church of Christ, the safe preseruation of our liues and religion, with the hap∣pinesse of posteritie, euen to match & go beyond our ad∣uersaries. Thus finally all true learning shall be had in lasting honour, and all vnfained fauourers and furthe∣rers of the same, shall triumph eternally. Which that it may, let me onely adjoyne that worthy incourage∣ment, wherewith Christophorus Hegendorphinus inci∣ted one of his scholars, now many yeares ago. Christoph. Hegendor∣phinus L. E. discipulo suo, Tu verò in liter as & Graecas & Latinas, vt soles gna∣uiter incumbe. Nec te deterreat, quod in hoc seculo, tam literae quam literati contemptui sint; redibit, crede mihi, redibit suus honor, & literis & literatis: nam omnium re∣rum vicissitudo est. , inquit Sophocles. But applie you your selfe cheerfully vnto Greeke and Latin studies, as you are wont. Neither let this terrifie you, that in this age, as well learning as learned men are in such contempt. There will returne (beleeue me) there will returne, their due honour, both to learning and to learned men: for there is an intercourse of all things. For vnto them that shall liue in the last age, pleasant things shall be made bitter, and yet pleasant and beloued afterwards againe, as saith Sophocles that ancient Greeke Poet. Thus farre Hegendorphinus, as foretelling (truly I trust) the glorie of this last succeeding age, whereto let all heartie friends of good learning euer say, Amen. CONTENTS IN GE∣NERALL OF SVCH THINGS AS may (by Gods blessing) be easily effected in our ordinarie Grammar schooles▪ 1. TO teach schol rs how to be able to reade well, and write true or orthographie in a short time. 2. To make them ready, in all points of their Accidence and Grammar, to answer anie necessarie question therein. 3. To without booke all the vsuall and necessarie Rules, to their Grammar rules; to giue the meaning, vse, and order of the rules, to shew the examples, and to ap∣ply them: which being well performed, will make all other learning easie and pleasant. 4. In the seuerall and Authors to construe truly, and in proprietie of wor s and sense, and also in pure phrase; to parse of themselues, and to giue a right reason of euerie word, why it must be so and not otherwise; and to deliuer the English of the Lectures perfectly out of the Latine. 5. Out of an English Grammaticall translation of their Authors, to make and to construe anie part of the Latine which they haue learned, or do presently learne; to proue that it must be so, and so to reade the Latine out of the En∣glish, first in the plaine Grammaticall order; after as the wo ds are placed in the Author, or in other good composition. Also to p rse in Latine, looking onely vpon the translation; and to all their Poets which they so learne: to do all this with∣out booke, which is farre the surest, viz. to repeate, construe, and parse with their booke vnder their arme. 6. To take their Lectures of themselues, except in the verie lowest Formes, and first entrers into construction; or to do it with verie little helpe, in some more difficult things. 7. To enter surely in making Latine, without danger of making false Latine, or vsing anie barbarous phrase. 8. To true Latine, and pure Tullies phrase, and to proue it to be true and pure. 9. To , imitating Tully and the best A ∣thors in that kind, and pithie, in pure Latine, and fa∣miliar. 10. To translate into English, according to proprietie both of words and sense▪ and out of the English to reade the Latine againe, to proue it, and giue a reason of euerie thing. 11. To take a peece of Tully, or of anie other familiar ea∣sie Authour, Grammatically translated, and in proprietie of words, and to turne or reade the same, out of the Translati∣on into good Latine, and verie neere vnto the words of the Author; so as in most, you shall hardly discerne, whether it be the Authors Latine or the Scholars. 12. To correct their faults of themsel es, when they are but noted out vnto them, or a question is asked of them. 13. To be able in each Forme (at anie time whensoeuer they shall be apposed of a sodaine, in any part of their Au∣thors, which they haue lately learned) to construe, parse, reade into English, and in those Authors, whereof they haue translations; forth of the translation, to construe and to reade into the Latine of their Author. First into the na∣turall order, then into the order of the Author, or neare vn∣to it, and in their Poëts to do all this without booke, as was sayd before, and so to giue an account, at each quarters nd, what they haue learned in that quarter; so from quarter to quarter to do the like. 14. In Virgil, Horace, and other the chiefe and most approued Schoole Authors in Poëtrie and Prose, to resolue any peece, for all these points of learning, and to do it in good Latine: In Construing, to giue propriety of words and sense, and also to expound in good phrase. Scanning the Verses, and giuing a reason thereof. Shewing the difficulties of Grammar. Obseruing the Elegances of Rhetoricke in Tropes and Figures. Noting Phrases and Epithets, with other princi∣pall obseruations. 15. So to reade ouer so much of the chiefe Latine Poëts, as Virgil, Horace, &c. and of other the best Authors, as shall be thought necessary, by that time, that by reason of their yeares they be in any measure thought fit, for their dis∣cretion, to go vnto the Vniuersity; and to be able to go tho∣rough the rest of themselues, by ordinary helpes. 16. In Greeke to take their Lectures of themselues, to construe perfectly, and parse as in the Latine; to reade the Greeke backe againe, out of a translation, Latine, or English; also to construe, parse, and to prooue it out of the same. 17. In the Hebrew to be able to construe perfectly, and to resolue so farre as is necessary for the Grammar-schoole; and to reade the Hebrew also out of the translation; which pra∣ctise of daily reading somewhat out of the translations into the Originals, must needs make them, both very cunning in the Tongues, and also perfect in the Texts of the Originals themselues, if it be obserued constantly; like as it is in the daily reading Latine out of the translation. 18. To answer most of the difficulties in all classicall Schoole-Authors; as in Terence, Virgil, Horace, Persius, Iuvenal. 19. To oppose scholar-like in Latine of any Grammar que∣stion necessary, in a good forme of words; both what may be objected against Lillies rules, and how to defend them. 20. To write Theames full of good matter, in pure La∣tin and with iudgement, and how to inuent matter of them∣selues. 21. To enter to make a verse with delight, without any bodging at all; and to furnish with copie of Poëticall phrase, out of the best Poëts. 22. So to imitate and expresse Ouid or Virgil, as you shall hardly discerne, vnlesse you know the places, whether the verses be the Authors or the Scholars: and to write verses ex tempore of any ordinarie theame. 23. To translate forth of English or Latin into Greeke. Also to write theames or verses in Greeke. 24. To pronounce naturally and sweetly, without vaine affectation; and to begin to do it from the lowest fourmes. 25. To make right vse of the matter of their Authors, besides the Latin, euen from the first beginners: as of Sen∣tentiae, and Confabulatiunculae Pueriles, Cato, Aesops fables, Tullies pistles, Ouids Metamorphosis, and so on to the highest. To helpe to furnish them with varietie of the best morall matter, and with vnderstanding, wisdome, and precepts of vertue, as they grow; and withall, to imprint the Latin so in their minds therby, as hardly to be forgottē. 26. To answer concerning the matter contained in their Lectures, in the Latin of their Authors, from the lowest fourmes and so vpward. 27. To construe anie ordinarie Author ex tempore. 28. To come to that facilitie and ripenesse, as not onely to translate leisurely and with some meditation, both into English and Latin, as before in the sections 10. and 11. but more also, to reade anie easie Author forth of Latin into English, and out of English to reade it into Latin againe, as Corderius, Terence, Tullies Offices, &c. To do this in Authors and places which they are not acquainted with, and almost as fast as they are able, to reade the Author alone. 29. To write fa re, in Secretarie, , Gre ke, He∣brue; . 30. To aue all the principall La∣tin, Greek and Hebrue, with the etymologies both Latin and Greek: worthie helpes and meanes to be had in the Vniuersities. 31. To be acquainted with the grounds of Religion, and to haue the summe, and all the chiefe Histories of the Bible. To take all the substance of the Sermons, if they be plainly and orderly deliuered: and to set them downe afterwards in a good Latin style, or to reade them extempore into Latin out of the English. To conceiue and answer the seuerall points of the Sermons, and how to make a briefe repetition of the whole Sermon without booke. 32. To be set in the high way to attaine to the puritie and perfection of the Latine tongue by their further labour aud practise in the Vniuersitie: hauing both the rules & grounds thereof, and also varietie of the best phrase meete and ne∣cessarie for them. 33 To grow in our owne English tongue, according to their ages, and growths in other learning: to vtter their in the same, both in propriety, and purity; and so to be fitted for diuinity, law, or what other calling or faculty soeuer they shalbe after employed in. 34 Finally, thus to proceed together with the tongs; in the vnderstanding and knowledge of the learning, or mat∣ter contained in the same, to become alike expert, in all good learning, meete for their yeares and studies; that so procee∣ding still, after they are gone from the Grammar Schooles, they may become most exquisite in all kinds of good learning, to which they shall be applied. These things may be effected in good sort, through Gods blessing, in the seuerall fourmes, as the scholars proceed, by so manie in each fourme as are apt and industrious, onely by the directions in the Grammar schoole constantly obserued. If the Maisters being of any competent sufficiencie will take meete paines: and the Scholars being set to schoole, so soone as they shall be meete, be kept to learning daily, without loitering, hauing bookes and other necessarie helpes and en∣couragements: and by their par nts care caused to do their exercises at home, and be euer kept in meete awe, and sub∣mission to their Maisters. But out of these I will extract onely those which I take most necessarie and profitable for schooles (not to trouble with ouer manie) and set them downe briefly in the Grammar Schoole. That so all scholars of anie towardnesse and diligence, may be made good Gram∣marians and euerie way fit for the Vniuersitie by fifteene years of age, or at least by that time that they shall be meete by discretion and gouernment, which is commonly sixteene or seuenteene. And all this to be done with delight aud cer∣taintie, both to Maisters and Scholars; with strife and con∣tention amongest the Scholars themselues, without that v∣suall terrour and crueltie, which hath bene practised in manie plaees, and without so much as seueritie amongst good natures. How greatly all this must needs tend to the furtherance of the publike good, euerie one may iudge; which it will d still, so much the more as the Lord vouchsafeth a further supply, to the seuerall meanes and courses after set downe, by adjoining daily moe helpes and experiments, especially of the learned. Of whom my hope is stil, according to my earnest desire, that they will lend their helping hands, to the full perfecting of so profitable a worke. For the vndoubted certaintie hereof, and of each parti∣cular, first reade and consider of the meanes aright, then try according to the directions in their seuerall places in the Grammar Schoole, and so giue sentence. For mine owne selfe, I trust (God assisting) to be euer able to make such plaine demonstration of euerie thing, as to giue full satisfaction to any one indifferently affected, that by labour and diligence all may be in good sort accomplished, so farre as shall be requisite. Or wherein I shall be found too short, I am resolued (God willing) neuer to giue ouer, du∣ring life, vntill I shall therein likewise see the de∣sire of my soule, vnto his glorie, and the generall good of all. ❧ Helps for attaining to those things mentioned in the Contents. T Hese helps God hath prouided for our Grammar-schooles, more then in former times, or at least more then are common∣ly knowne and vsed in them: whereof experience teacheth, that there may be excellent furtherance in a right vse of them, for all the seuerall parts of good learning in Schooles, for obtai∣ning the same more speedily, easily, surely & profitably: and namely for thus running through all our ordinary classicall-schoole authors, and attaining to the best ex∣ercises and faculties in Schooles, as any one shall haue occasion to vse them. First, for the more speedy and right reading of En∣glish, and so leading the childe as by the hand to the Grammar schoole, as a preparatiue thereto. The English-schoolemaister, of that honest and painfull Maister Coote. There is also a little Briefe, of a sheet of paper named, A Plaine Method for speedy learning to reade, by Iohn Merest: of whose directions there might be very good vse, if his Rules and style were amended by some Scho∣lar, and brought to perfection. Other directions and helps for teaching to reade, see in the Grammar-schoole, chap. 3. For further growth of young Scholars in our English tongue, to expresse their mindes in proprietie and puritie, for their procee∣ding therein, as they proceede in Latine: and also for them who would teach strangers our language, or learne it. See after. Secondly, for better learning the Accidence and first grounds of Grammar (whereas children are vsually very long in getting their Accidence, and oft, when they haue done it, are little the better for it, especially for the vnderstanding and right vse of it) to the end that the learner may get it sooner & more profitably: for a right vnderstanding and vse thereof, and for answering any necessary question belonging to it, and for better kee∣ping all in memory, to be able thereby to proceed most speedily, pleasantly and certainely in their construction, is prouided the Booke called The posing of the Parts. as also M. Leeches questions of Accidence and Grammar. Other helps, especially for directing the Maisters, see in the Grammar-schoole, Chap. 6. Thirdly, for more speedy construing the Latin Gram∣mar, to saue much labour therein, and for keeping the same with ease, which is otherwise very hard to the children, and ouer troublesome to the Maister, Lillies rules construed. Fourthly, for better conceiuing, vnderstanding, apply∣ing, and making vse of all our Grammar rules. The Grammar of this last Impression hauing the summes of the Rules in the margents more perfectly and fully then formerly, and in the Syntax, the words no∣ted wherein the force of each ensample lieth. In the first Impression of them many things were mistaken and corrupted in the printing. Fiftly, 2. For the speedy and profitable learning all our first and lowest school authors, Gram. tran∣slations. For speedy and profitable learning of all our first and lowest Schoole-bookes and Authors, (whereas children are commonly very long in learning some little peece of them, as of Sententiae pueriles, Coufabulatiun∣culae, Cato, &c. and so the rest; and when they haue lear∣ned them through with much toyle to themselues and their Maisters, they are commonly little the better for them, for any good vse, and doe after presently forget them, for the most part;) to the end that they may soone runne thorow all of them, or so much as shalbe thought good, and that for construing, parsing, vnderstanding, reading them forth of Latine into English, or forth of English into Latine; for making the same Latine, and prouing it; and finally, for leading the learner by the hand with delight, vntill hee be able to go of himselfe by ordinary helpes, Books gram∣matically translated. with much lesse trouble to the Maister, are prouided Grammaticall translations of them, as namely; first, of Sententiae pueriles: Confabu∣latiunculae pueriles: Corderius dialogues chiefly for the ready helpe of speaking Latin of ordinary matters in a very good and pure phrase. Catoes morall Disticks, with the Sentences adioyned, and also Isocrates ad Daemonicum, translated into latine by Rodolphus Agricola: part of Esops Fables: the first booke of Tullies Offices: part of Ouids Metamorphosis: Virgils Eclog es, with that excellent booke De Aptbus, of the gouernement and ordering of Bees. All these are made so plaine, Plainnesse & readinesse of these tran∣slations. as that children, if they be any thing studious, and well trained vp in the first grounds of Grammar, by the former helpes, may with a little direction, euer prepare their lectures afore-hand at home ouer-night: such peeces (I meane) as they are to learne in lectures; and that, as was said, fo euerie good vse, without neede of other Commentaries in any of them, or so much helpe of the Maister as is vsuall. So that they will, by the helpe of them, fall to their priuate studies of themselues. And for things to be learned without booke, namely their Authors in verse so translated, they will be able thereby so to keep them, as by the meanes thereof, and their other helpes, from quarter to quarter, to say them without booke, construe, and to giue all the chiefe difficulties of them, with a ve∣ry little priuate labour, thus to keep them better in me∣morie, and haue vse of them continually. Hereof I might giue you instances of experiments, according to which you might iudge of them; but I passe them ouer, standing vpon so euident grounds of reason, as hath bene shewed before, and as I shall more fully manifest (God willing) in the Grammar-Schoole, chap. 8. where I shall set downe the vse of them, with th benefit in a right practise. If you desire a praxis of all or most of the chiefe rules of the Syntax or construction shortly comprized, take Maister Leeches Dialogues, For a practise of the chiefe rules of con∣struction, Maister Lee∣ches Dialogues set downe in the end of his Grammar-questions: which Dialogues are so contriued of purpose for children to that end: and so likewise translated into English, as they may be gone through for each good vse so soone as any of the former. By that time that children haue gone through these bookes so translated, and haue by this practise attained vnto the knowledge and right vse of their Grammar rules, especially that golden rule of Construing: for construing, parsing, &c. they will be able, easily, with much lesse toyle of the Maister, to go through all other classicall-Schoole-Authors, by such helpes and meanes as God hath further prouided. For speedy running ouer the rest of the lower schoole For the rest of the lower Schoole-au∣thors, other translations. bookes, which are not so translated grammatically: first, the other translations of them may be of very good vse thus farre foorth. As namely, first to giue the lear∣ners some light for the right vnderstanding & meaning of the Authors (which vnderstanding of the matter is a maine foundation for the speedy attaining to any such learning, especially for getting the Languages, as I haue shewed elsewhere) as also for resoluing the Authors, and affoording some good English phrase, with varietie thereof to expresse their minds. And withall, that by the right vse of such translations, they may the more easily learne the manner of our vsuall translating of Authors, or anie other worke, respecting onely the matter and intent of the Author, whereof our commonest vse is: and so for reading forth of Latin into our owne tongue, to expresse the sense onely, not directly, verbatim, or grammatically, but obseruing perfect sense, good phrase, and purity of our tongue, and so back againe out of the English into a good Latine style in like manner. For the right learning of these Authors doth not so much con∣sist in the construing and parsing of them, as in getting by them the matter, phrase and style of the Author, and to these ends and purposes amongst others, as I take it, they haue bene translated, and are many of them vn∣knowne to most. The Translations are these. 1. For the rest of Tullies Offices, For the rest of Tullies Of∣fices not tran∣slated gram∣matically, M. Grimmalds translation. which are not tran∣slated grammatically; as namely the two latter bookes, Maister Grimmald his translation, which yet would be much more profitable to this end, to them who would make vse of it, if the English were separated from the Latine, set in a booke by it selfe, as the Grammaticall and other translations vsually are. 2. For Tullie De Amicitia, Senectute, &c. Thomas Newtous translation. For the other parts adioy∣ned to the Offices, Tho. Newtons tran∣slation. 3. For the rest of Ouids Metamorphosis, Arthur Gol∣dings translation in very good English meeter. 4. For Ouid de Tristibus, the translation hereof in English meeter. For the rest of 5. Ouids Epistles, the like. 6. For the rest of Virgils Georgickes, not translated grammatically, Maister Abraham Flemmings transla∣tion in English meeter, comming next to the Gram∣maticall translations. 7. For Virgils Aeneidos, Maister Phaer Virg. a neid Maister Pha∣er. in English meeter. 8. For Terence, For erence Maister B r∣nards transla∣tion. if you thinke good, and especially to furnish with English phrase to answer the Latine, and by reading out of the English into Latin, to helpe more speedily to obtaine the Latin phrase and style, Maister Barnards translation. Prouided alwayes, Caution to be vsed in this and other authors. that this be with great caution, for auoyding all danger of corrupting their manners by lasciuiousnesse or otherwise; considering the prone∣nesse of our nature, like to tinder or gunpowder, if neuer so little a sparke fall into the same. The like caution is to be had for other, as Horace, Iuvenal, Persius, Martial, &c. For higher Authors. For the more profitable, For higher Authors, as Caesars Com∣mentaries, Sir Clement Ed∣munds his translation. This author, with those which follow next, are worthy workes for Noble Gentlemen and all other, who would doe seruice to the Church of God; and their natiue Countrey, to bestow some of their trauels and idle houres in. easie, and speedy reading o∣uer Caesars Commentaries (concerning the Roman warre a chiued chiefly by Caesar) to the end not onely to giue light: first, for the true vnderstanding of the Author, but also to expresse the same in the best and fittest words in a pure English phrase; and likewise for notable obserua∣tions for warre, gathered all along out of it, which is one principall vse of the booke. The translation of it by Sir Clement Edmunds, Clarke of the Councell. This booke, as it is wel knowne to be the purest style, and an excellent history for matter of warre and martiall affaires, and therefore most necessary for our dayes, for the better helping to preserue the Church of God and our natiue countrey; so it is difficult for children, in regard of the subiect, viz. matter of warre, which they are not acquainted with. Yet by the Translation rightly vsed, it is made so plaine & easie, that children of twelue or thirteene yeares of age, rightly trained vp, may be a∣ble to go through it for all the vses mentioned in short space, and much more others of riper iudgement. So that it were great pitty, in regard of the benefit that may come by it to all sorts, that so worthy a worke should lie hid as it were, being vnknowne to the greatest part. The like we may say for these following. For Lucans Pharsalia For Lucans Pharsalia Sir Arthur Gorge. of the like argument in verse, viz. of the warre betweene Caesar and Pompey, Sir Arthur Gorge in English meeter. For Liuy his Roman history, D. Hollands translation. For Liuy D. Hollands tran∣slation. For that excellent part of the Roman history by Cor∣nelius Tacitus his foure Bookes, For Cornelius Tacitus, Sir H. Sauill. translated by that wor∣thy fauourer and rare promoter of all good learning, Sir Henry Sauill. For Florus Florus. his Roman history, from the foundation of Rome to Tratanus, the translation of it, dedicated to the Lord Marquesse of Buckingham. For Seneca, Seneca. that admirable Moralist and sweete La∣tinist, the translation of it by Maister Lodge. Commentaries. Besides these Translations for the ordinary schoole-authors, Comments▪ on all O id. For the Me∣tamorphosis Sabine. there are also Commentaries for them who desire their helpe; as, for all Ouid, not onely that large Commentary of sundry together, but more particularly, For Ouids Metamorphosis, Sabins Morals briefly. Also Raphael Regius, a large Commentary. For Virgil, On Virgil, Seruius Do∣nate, &c. besides the large Commentary of Seruius and Donate, with the Annotations of sundry other, set out by Frabricius: see, The Analysis of Ramus on the Eclogues and Georgicks for the Logicke and Rhetoricke thereof. Ramus, on the Eclogues and Georgickes. A very sweete paraphrase of Friskiline on the Eclogues and Georgickes. Friskilines paraphrase. Meins Annotations on Virgil. Meins. So for the vse of the Maisters, and all of riper yeares and vnderstanding: Taubman on Virgil, a very profitable worke. Moreouer, For the rest of the anci∣ent Poets short and pi¦thy commen∣taries. for the speedy and more profitable rea∣ding of all the rest of the chiefe ancient Poets, are pro∣uided short and pithy Commentaries, or Annotations, containing the substance and whatsoeuer is of worth in all the ancient and large Commentaries, and the same made so plaine, as that very children, rightly trained vp, may be able, by them, to reade their Lectures of themselues, or with very little helpe: whereas formerly they were ouer crabbed and obscure for the Maisters in many places to vnderstand; as namely, Maister Bonds Commentarie on Horace and Persius. Maister Bonds▪ Maister Farnabee on Maister Farn. Iuvenal, Persius, Lucan, Senecaes tragedies. Martiall. Also, For the Ro∣man histories and antiqui∣ties Maister Goodwin his Anthologia. for the more cleare and full vnderstanding of these and of all the Romane historie and Antiquities; Romanae historiae Anthologia, viz. a short and very plaine Exposition in English, of the Romane Antiquities, by Maister Goodwine of Oxford, for the vse of Abingdons Schoole. Theames. For helpes for Theames both for matter and maner, besides the vnderstanding of Aphthonius common Pla∣ces, For Theams M. Vicars his for in∣uention and manner. and the chiefe heads of Inuention by Ramus and others, see Maister Vicars his , or Manudu∣ctio, leading the scholar (as by the hand) to the vse of Rhetoricke; especially for making Theames, Declama∣tions, or Orations. For matter, viz. for short, witty, and easie Sentences for the yonger sort, For matter, Bibliotheca scholastica. Maister Drax his Bibliotheca schola∣stica. Flores Senecae. Epitome sentent. Stobaei. For store of the best examples for Theams both Ro∣man and forren of most morall matters, Exampls, Va∣lerius Max. in stead of new, they may vse Valerius Maximus. This is made plain for the better help of the teachers where need is, by two ancient Commentaries together, the one of them by Oliuerus Arzignanensis, the other by Badius Ascensius, expounding euery thing clearely, and almost grammatically, besides the Annotations of others. For further help of Theames, Stobaei An∣thologia. both Latin and Greek, Stobaeus sentences, or his Anthologia of the largest: a most excellent worke, gathered & digested by him Common place-wise, in Greeke, out of all the famous Greeke Authors, translated into Latin by Gesnere that learned Phisitian, hauing the Latin set ouer-against the Greek, and may be singular for acquainting the higher and bet∣ter sort of scholars, with the best morall matter of sundry kindes. For phrases in generall, Phrases for Theames. Maister Drax his Cilliepeia. For Epithets, Ciceroniana Epitheta. For some select Phrases to this purpose, Drax his Cal∣liepeia, Mai∣ster Farnabees Phrases. and the like, Maister Farnabees phrases. Epistles and Letters. For patterns of short Epistles and pithy letters of all sorts of matter; Patterns for Epistles, Laconicae Epi∣stolae. see the Laconicall Epistles, to wit, the shortest and pithiest gathered out of Tullie, Manutius, Politian, Erasmus, and many others, comprized by Bu∣chlerus in a little volume of purpose to this end. For examples, Examples for imitation of Epistles of all sorts, Flores & Sententiae scribendin{que} formulae illu∣stres. seruing and directing for imitation of sundry kindes of Epistles, both Consolatory, Gratu∣latory, and also Hortatory, with all the rest of the kinds of Examples: see Flores & Sententiae scribendi{que} formulae illustres. For pure phrases more peculiarly belonging to Epi∣stles, see Manutius phrases. Orations. For Orations: Orations, Melchior Iu∣nius. The Orations of sundry, and those of diuers kindes of Morall matters, and vpon sundry occa∣sions, gathered and set forth by Melchior Iunius. Examining of Phrases in Prose. For helpe in examining of phrases, Examining phrases in prose. and so for ob∣seruing propriety and purity therein. 1. Godscalcus his obseruations of the Latin tongue digested alphabetically. Godscalcus. 2. Schorus phrases, Schorus. shewing also the manner how to obserue phrases in the reading of Authors. 3. Erasmus his Epitome of Vallaes elegancies, Erasmus Epit. of Vallaes e∣legancies, Popma. of the last Edition. 4. Popma de Differentijs verborum. For flourishing and amplifying in Prose, see Cicero∣niana Epitheta, Antitheta & Adiuncta. Poetrie. Besides Textoris Epitheta, In Poetry. Text. Epith. Buchleri The∣saurus poëti∣cus. See Buchleri Thesaurus poë∣ticus, a booke of notable vse for each scholar: for helpes of Epithets and Poeticall phrases: and also for his dire∣ction of the right manner of making a pure verse, with other things belonging thereto. For quantities of Syllables, Smetius. Smetius his Prosodia. Dictionaries. For both English and Latine, Dictionaries. especially for finding out the fittest Latin words to the English, and most na∣turall; and according to propriety first, together with the Etymologies or notations of the Latine words, Rider. Ri∣ders dictionarie of the last. For giuing the Greeke to the Latine, and for supply of sundry of the best Latin phrases expounded, Thomas Tho∣masius. and the vse shewed, Thomas Dictionarie of the last. For a short comprising of most Latine Primitiues in Sentences (except those which belong to the seuerall Arts and Trades &c.) and so to furnish with most words of all sorts, For a short comprising of the Latine Primitiues, Ianua lingua∣rum. for reading of any ordinary author belon∣ging to the grammar schoole, or otherwise, Ianua lingua∣rum, a booke in twelue hundred sentences containing the most of the ordinary words, to be euen as a Dictio∣narie in the childrens heads, translated into English, to the end it may be more easily and speedily gotten. Analysis or resoluing of Authors. For a plaine and easie resolution of the matter of Au∣thors meete for young scholars, For resoluing authors, Gram. trans. of &c. see the grammaticall translation of the first booke of Tullies Offices. Also of the first booke of Ouids Metamorphosis. And withall, the like translation of the first and last Eclogue of Vìrgil, and of his fourth booke of the Geor∣gickes De Apibus, some of these in the inmost colums, others in the outmost. For a more learned Analysis in Latine, both Logicall and Rhetoricall, see Ramus Commentaries on the Ec∣logues and Georgickes, and also vpon all the Orations of Tully, on which he hath commented. Also Piscators A∣nalysis of Tullies Offices. For a short and methodicall Analysis of the seuerall bookes of the Scripture, and of each chapter therein, see Gemma Fabri. Disputing scholar-like of Grammar Questions, and to pre∣pare for more learned Disputations in the Vniuersities. 1. In English, Disputation of Grammar questions, in English; Posing of the Parts. by way of Questions and Answers to make children perfect in the Accidence and Grammar; The Posing of the Parts. 2. In Latine, In Latine, M. Stockwoods disput. for the better scholars in a more large and scholar-like dispute, Maister Stockwoods disputati∣ons of Grammar. 3. For the like dispute in Tullies Offices by Questi∣ons and Answers, Disputing of morall que∣stions, master Brasbridge questions of Tullies Off. the better to vnderstand the rare and almost diuine matter, for direction of manners, in that booke, Maister Brasbridge his Questions of Tullies Of∣fices. Proper words for seuerall Arts and Sciences. To be able to get and remember words appertaining to Arts, For words belonging to Historie, Trades, &c. Stanbridg. vo∣cabula. Trades, Sciences, histories of diuers kinds, and the like, as any one desireth them; first Maister Stan∣bridge his Vocabula in verse. These verses are some of them amended already; the rest so purposed. After him, where he ends, others may be adioyned, in the end of Hunters Cosmographie, in verse like∣wise. For words belonging to Astronomy and Cosmography: Hunters Cos∣mographie. and also the ancient proper names of places, as Coun∣tries, Cities, and Riuers, &c. Hunters Cosmographie in verse. If the names of the places, How this might be more profi∣table. riuers, &c. as they are ter∣med at this day, were set directly ouer the heads of each of the ancient names there, after the manner of Stan∣bridges Vocabula, it might be of most excellent vse, and soone gotten, or set on the opposite page directly a∣gainst them. All other words of like nature, belonging to the se∣uerall histories, or whatsoeuer else, might be thus com∣prised in verse, after the manner of Stanbridge or Hun∣ter, or otherwise, they might be set downe in a short narration, in forme of a Dialogue grammatically tran∣slated, after the manner of Corderius Dialogues, where∣in he sets out, to the like purpose, a very sumptuous banquet in an historicall narration, in the 22. Dialogue of his fourth booke. Such a booke might easily be compiled by a iudici∣ous scholar, How such a worke might be easily compiled. of a pregnant wit, hauing meete leisure, by the helpe of Hadrianus Iunius his Nomenclator; and the speciall Dictionaries for seuerall vses, and so any such words be very readily gotten, by studying and reading them oft forth of English into Latin: as experience tea∣cheth in the like. But all these would be gotten much sooner, How best learned. if being thus verbally translated into English, the English were set by it selfe, so to study it out of them, like as the Gram∣mar translations are. Greeke. Whereas there is nothing in any tongue for the per∣fect obtaining of it, For speedy attaining to the Greeke. but Grammar, words, and pra∣ctise of them in a right composing and setting them to∣gether: I meane, first, the knowledge of the Grammar rules, belonging to that tongue; words to expresse the minde, and practise of both in reading Authors, and in writing; for most easie and speedy attaining to the Greek tongue, which hath bene wont to be so difficult and te∣dious: God hath prouided these readie helpes. 1. For the Grammar, For the Grammar Maister Cam∣dens most profitable for vs. Maister Camdens is of all o∣ther most easie and profitable (as I take it) like as for Westminster, so for all our schooles; for that it followes the order of our Latine Grammar most directly, chiefly in the Syntax, wherein many of the rules are the very same, or neare vnto them. The Anomalies in the Verbs being set alphabetically, so as they may be found very readily; and the Dialects set directly after the order of the Declensions and Coniugations, that by it alone well studied, most difficulties may be easily vnderstood and answered. For all other difficulties, For other difficulties concerning Grammar, Cleonards Gram with Ant sign. and wherein it seemes to faile; see Cleonards Greeke Grammar, with Antesigna∣nus, set foorth by Sylburgius, wherein by the help of the large Index, you may be resolued of most doubts. Hereunto adioyne, The short a∣bridgement in the eud of Scapula. if need be to enquire further, the Anomalies, Dialects and other difficulties set downe al∣phabetically in the end of Scapulaes Dictionary. Secondly, For speedy attaining the greeke Pri∣mitiues. for attaining very speedily to all the Greek Primitiues or Radices; which being had, all the rest are easily and plainely learned, as deriued from them, God hath prouided, 1. The Clauis linguae Graecae, Clauis Graecae. by Lubine. In which litle briefe, all, or most of the Greeke Radices are included in some seuen hundred little sentences, in imitation of Ianua linguarum, with a double Index adioyned, viz. both Latine before the Greeke, and Greeke before the Latine; whereby they may be soone gotten, and easily kept, or recouered being forgotten. 2. For the more full vnderstanding of the tongue, For a more full know∣ledge of thē, Fundamētum linguae Graecae, siue Epitome Lexici & Ety∣mologici graeci proschola Br ∣mensi. for propriety and right significations, Notations or Ety∣mologies, Deriuations, and the like, see Fundamentum linguae Graecae; a little Epytome gathered briefly of pur∣pose, according to the order of Scapula. For the larger explication of the same, with phrases and vse of words; see Scapula. For practise in reading some vsuall Authors. Authors in verse, Theog∣nis, &c. with Sylburgius. The fit∣test for yong scholars (so faire as I can iudge) after they haue runne through their Clauis, if you will begin with Poetry, that they may learne to make a verse in Greek, is Theognis his sentences with the other Poets ioyned with him; as namely Phocilides, Pythagoras, &c. with the Latine translation and annotations thereof, set forth by Silburgius. Some whereof being learned without booke perfectly, is a speciall helpe that scholars may haue quantities, phrase, and apt morall matter for verse. 2. If you please to reade Hesiode his Opera & Dies, Hesiode with Ceporine & Melancth. you may vse Ceporine and Melancthons Commentaries set foorth by Iohannes Frisius Tigurinus; and the new translation of it by Erasmus Schemidt professor at Wit∣tenberg. Or if you desire to reade Homer, For Homer. which is most ge∣nerally approued of all, as the most excellent Poet: be∣sides the Latine Translations, especially that which ex∣poundeth it most neerly and properly. For the better vnderstanding and expressing of it in English, Maister Chap∣man in En∣glish meeter. Maister Chapmans translation in English mee∣ter; whom we may rightly call, the English Homer. To these you may adde, Eustathius. if you will, Eustathius, and the large Commentarie of Spondanus. Spondanus. For the best and fittest Authors in Prose to be read in Schooles, For prose▪ Isocrates tran∣slated by VVolphius. Schorus his translation with annotat. as namely Isocrates ad Daemonicum, are the translations of Wolphius: and also of Rodolphus Agricola: and like wise the translation of Antonius Scorus, with his annotations adioyned to his booke De ratione discendi▪ linguae Graecae. 2. For Zenophon, Zenophons Cy∣ropaideia. the translation of his 3. first bookes de Cyri vita & disciplina. For more speedy reading the Greeke Testament, For the Greek Testament, Pasors dictio∣narie. Pa∣sors Dictionary gathered of purpose to that end. What is defectiue may be supplied by the Fundamentum, Pis∣cator and others. VVriting in Greeke. For writing exercises in Greeke, For writing in Greeke, Clauis, Thomas s, Garthius. Poselij Calligr. Elegantiae graecae. or translating into Greeke: besides, the Clauis linguae Graecae for words, and also Thomas his Dictionarie, for phrase you may vse Garthius his Lexicon: and withall for prose Poselii Calli∣graphia: Elegantiae Graecae by Vollandus. In verse for Epithets and Authorities, In verse for Epithets and authorities, Dinnerus. Dinnerus his Greeke Epithets. For morall matter in Greeke, For morall matter out best Greeke Au∣thors, Stobaei Anthologia, Cornucopia. with excellent senten∣ces and discourses out of all the ancient and best Greeke Authors, for the vse of Translations, Theames, Verses, Declamations or Orations. Stobaei sententiae, called Anthologia; or Cornucopia of the largest. Speaking Greeke. For speaking of ordinarie matters in Greeke, For speaking Greeke, Po∣selius. Poselius his Dialogues. Hebrue. For a most speedy attaining to the Hebrue. 1. For the Grammar, For Hebrue Grammar. though euery one may take for his owne vse what Grammar he hath learned, or is most familiarly acquainted with, and supply out of o∣thers what is wanting therein; yet for him that is newly to beginne, or desires most easily to teach or direct o∣thers Martinius printed by R ∣phalengius at Berne. I take (vnder better iudgement) Martinius to be the best. My reasons are, 1. For that it is most methodicall, Reason of it. proceeding ac∣cording to the right order of Nature and rules of Art. 2. For that it hath answering vnto it, Maister Vdals Hebrue Grammar in English, being in effect a meere translation of Martinius, onely leauing out some things which he thought lesse necessary, and making most things in Martinius very plaine, in stead of a Commen∣tary, as the translations do the Authors. 3. For that the Martinius Grammar printed by Ra∣phalengius and by Abrahamus VVeerlinus at Berne, haue a Praxis adioyned, for the parsing of three Psalmes, viz. the 1. 25. and 68, like as Maister Vdals hath in English: which Praxis is so orderly for the right examining or a¦nalysing of euery word according to the order of na∣ture and art, and according as all things are set downe in the Grammar in order of the Chapters, that they leade the learner directly, as by the hand, to the plaine parsing and resoluing of those three Psalmes; and by them, auy other part of the Hebrue Bible. And lastly, for that Maister Vdals Grammar, (which I commend as a short Commentarie to it) hath also a briefe Epitome of the Hebrue Lexicon adioyned, for the more speedy finding out any word, and so attai∣ning the tongue. Or in stead of Martinius, Maister Vdals Grammar. Maister Vdals Grammar it selfe, which I finde to be farre more easie for the lear∣ner, and much sooner gotten, for the vse of it, and also may be readily deliuered and vttered in Latine, at least by comparing with Martinius. For the best Lexicon or Dictionarie, Lexicon Buxtorphius. Buxtorphius his Epitome for continuall vse: and also his Thesaurus for more exquisite knowledge: or, For giuing the Hebrue words to the Latine; Lexi∣con Latino-Hebraicum, in the end of the Epitome of Pag∣nine by Raphalengius. For helpe for construing, and so reading priuately, and knowing the Radices. The Interlineal Bible, by Arias Montanus. For the Psalmes, Tossanus. Tossanus may affoord some helpe. English. Concerning our owne language, For our owne tongue to grow in pro∣prietie and puritie. whereas some great learned, haue much and long complained, that in most Schooles there hath bene litle care, to teach Scholars to expresse their mindes readily in proprietie and puritie of speech, so to helpe to adorne our owne tongue; whereof wee haue continuall practise, to the end that they may grow herein with the Latine and other lear∣ned tongues, God hath prouided these helpes. 1. The vse of the grammaticall translations (hauing to that end, 1. Grāmatical translations for all the first begin∣ners. both proprietie and also varietie of words and phrase to expresse the minde) may be a good en∣trance for the yonger sort. 2. After them, 2 Other tran∣slations. all the other translations, vsed onely in such sort, as hath bene and shall be further shewed in the Grammar schoole; so to ascend to those who haue written most exquisitely in that kinde of Tran∣slation. 3. Dictionaries, 3. Dictiona∣ries. where fit words are wanting, to make choise of those English words in them which best agree to the matter in hand. 4. Adioyne to these, 4. Best authors in each kinde for English. for them who would grow to more exquisite perfection, the bookes of such as haue written the purest style in English in each faculty, which they purpose to exercise themselues in. For strangers, For strangers. who vnderstand the Latine tongue, at least in some sort, and would learne our tongue them∣selues, or would teach it vnto others publiquely or pri∣uately, besides the former helpes for reading English. 1. The English Grammar, The English Grammar. called Grammatica Angli∣cana, a little Epitome written according to the rules of Art, by P. Gr. printed at Cambridge Anno 1594. 2. Logonomia Anglica, Logonomia Anglica. by Maister Gill Schoole-mai∣ster of Paules. 3. Translations, first grammaticall; which leade the Scholar directly to learne our tongue; after other tran∣slations, Translations. and so the best English Authors and Dictio∣naries as before. Rhetoricke. For Rhetoricke, For Tropes and Figures briefly in vse, Maister Fa ∣nabees tropes and figures. so farre as shall be necessary for the Grammar-schoole. 1. For Tropes and Figures of Rhetoricke, and so for other figures of Grammar, Maister Farnabees Tropes and figures, so shortly comprized in verse, as that they may be most easily gotten in a very little time, and so likewise kept in memorie, to serue for euery good vse. 2. For a more full vnderstanding of that little booke, For a more methodicall tractate▪ M. Butlers Rhe∣toricke. and of all other matters belonging to Rhetoricke, as for a methodicall handling, and short comprizing of the whole Art, by precepts, illustrations by examples, and the like. M. Butlers Rhetorick of Magd. colledge in Oxf. with a short commentary adioyned, now the 4. time printed. 3. For the vse of Rhetoricke, 3. For the vse of Rhetorick, Maister , Ma∣nuductio ad artem Rheto∣ricum. viz. for the practise thereef in Theames, Declamatious, Orations, &c. The , or Manuductio ad artem Rhetoricam, by Maister Vicars of Queenes Colledge in Oxford. Religion. Concerning Religion; Religion, for laying surely the grounds . for laying surely the first grounds of our holy Religion in Schooles, according to our good lawes; and for seasoning the first and ten∣der yeares of our children therewith: (wherein the Ie∣suites shall rise in iudgement against vs, being farre more vigilant and industrious to destroy, then we to saue; to ouerthrow the Gospell, then wee to propagate and spreade it.) 1. To the end that Scholars may speedily get and e∣uer keepe in fresh memorie with ease and delight, For know∣ edge of the historie of the Bible, Bibliorum summula. the whole summe of the sacred story, viz. the holie Bible, (being the sole foundation of our Religion,) and so the summe of euery Chapter therein; wherby they may be∣come sound Christians, and in time (through the Lords blessing) admirable Diuines, God hath prouided a litle Booke called Bibliorum summula, which comprizeth the arguments or sums of euery Chapter of the whole Bible in Disticks, viz. each Chapter in two verses, be∣ginning alphabetically, that they may be more happily committed to memorie, and recalled more easily when they are forgotten. This booke is most painefully and profitably compo∣sed in a familiar and easie verse, by Maister Shaw, ac∣cording to the contents of the seuerall Chapters. A more brief abridgement Memoriale, Biblicu . Hereunto is adioyned in the end, for further helpe of memorie, the same contriued farre more briefly, viz. in a very few verses: as namely Genesis hauing fiftie Di∣sticks in the Summula, according to the fifty Chapters, is comprized in ten verses, euery verse whereof compre∣hends fiue Chapters, & almost euery word notes a seue∣rall Chapter; thus notably deuised by Math. Martinius. 2. For the first principles or iudiments in Religion, For the p in∣ciples besides those by law appointed, Maister Per∣kins ixe Prin∣ciples ex∣pounded. to be taught in Catechizing; and for building soundly vpon the sacred Scriptures, according to the doctrine of our Church: besides our ordinary Catechismes by Law established, for a further vnfolding and demon∣strating of the principles out of the expresse texts of the Word, Maister Perkins six Principles expounded, with many other, and chiefly such briefe ones, as by their oftest printing do testifie the greatest liking, and most generall approbation of the godly learned. VVriting. For faire writing in our owne, For faire wri∣ting, Copie bookes for Secretarie, Romane, Greeke, He∣brue. and all the chiefe lear∣ned tongues. Copie bookes, prepared of purpose for the Gram∣mar-schooles, as in Secretarie for our English, so for the Latine, Greeke and Hebrew, together with dire∣ctions for writing in the beginning of them, printed by Maister Thomas Man; whereby all Scholars, well entred and practized from their beginning, euery day a little, may come to write commendably, and many of them verie faire euery of these hands, without hindering their learning, as is proued by experience. Memorie. For the helpe of Memorie, For Memory. besides all directions for briefe summes of euery matter, as are set downe in their places in the Grammar schoole and others; and besides diuers good rules and precepts for memorie in a little booke called The Castle of Memorie, Maister Wil∣lies Mnemo∣nica. Chap. 6. Maister VVillies his booke of Memorie, called Mne∣monica siue Reminiscendi, are gathered out of the best who haue written thereof: out of which the most profi∣table things may be selected and vsed by them who are judicious. Other Bookes and helps, Bookes pre∣pared for the Presse. some of them readie for the Presse, others in good forwardnesse to be soone prepared, if they shall be generally desired, and the desire signified to the Stationers, as necessarie or profitable for the ends for which they haue bene trauelled in, as namely; 1 F Or furnishing with fit matter for Theams in Prose or Verse, Helpe for matter for Theames. Latine and Greeke, which so troubleth young scholars, and discourageth them, An Index ga¦thered out of the fittest Schoole-authors and others, with references to the places. for that they know not where to finde such fit matter for them, and must needes be very difficult before a great deale of reading and practise; there is an Index or booke of References, gathered out of their Schoole-authors and others, onely pointing at the places where to finde them. 2. For patterns for Theames, Tullies para∣doxes transla∣ted gramma∣tically for patternes for Theames. The Laconi∣call Epistles translated. Tullies Paradoxes tran∣slated grammatically, with a short Analysis in the mar∣gent, whereby they may be learned more perfectly, and vnderstood more fully to that end. 3. For direction and patterns for writing pithy and short letters in English, which is amongst vs, both most commendable, and of principall and daily vse. The La∣conicall Epistles, translated into a good English style, with the Grammar order and propriety in the margents. 4. For the more speedy and profitable learning the Ianua linguarum for euery good vse; 4. For the more speedie & learning it is pre∣pared to be , printed as to supply what is wanting or Grammar order, pro∣p etie, de∣clining, quan∣tities, and E∣ ymologies. whereas now, the English, in many places keepeth onely the sense, but va∣rieth both from the verball and Grammar order, and also from the propriety of the words in the Latin, wher∣by the learners are oft exceedingly puzled and carried amisse: there s prouided a grammaticall translation to be set in the margen s in the English, to carry the lear∣ner aright, both for proprietie and Grammar. And also in the Index or Table, are set downe the declining of the Nownes and Verbs, with the Genders of the Nownes, to serue in of a Dictionarie for all of them: and withall, both the doubtfull quantities, and likewise the Etymologies or notations of the words briefly, be∣ing examined by comparing the best Authors in that kinde, and conference with other learned. So that the learner may soone runne through it, to get both English by the Latine, and Latine by the En∣glish, with certainty, and for the other vses mentioned. For furnishing with Terence phrase, with the best matter, Terentianus Christianus, translated grammati∣cally. For the Greeke. 1. For getting speedily the Greeke Radices or Pri∣mitiues, For speedie getting the Greeke Pri∣mitiues, Cla∣uis linguae Graeca , made much more plaine. the Clauis linguae Graece is made much more plaine, easie and profitable; first, by the Latine set in the margent, according to the Greeke, answering word for word in such places where it now differs, and the whole Latine sentences to be placed in the page oppo∣site to the Greeke, to leade the learner rightly by the hand to the knowledge of the Greeke, whereas now many of the Sentences in Latine do onely expresse the sense, and so set the learner at a stand, or carry him quite amisse. 2. By the principall Etymologies set in the margent of the Greeke Sentences, directed with letters to know them speedily. 3. By a grammaticall construction of the same in English, answering the Greeke so neare as may be, ad∣ioyned in the end of the Clauis, with proprietie and va∣rietie of the sense in the margents. By the h lpe where∣of (as experience will soone shew) all the Sentences may be gotten in a very little time, both for Latine and Greeke, by studying them out of the English, onely hel∣ped by looking vpon the Greeke and Latin, as need re∣quireth; to be able thereby to giue the Greeke and La∣tine words to the English, and contrarily, so to serue for any good vse thereof: and euer easily by this means to keepe all perfectly, without any trouble or charge of memorie, through the help of the perfect vnderstan∣ding of it by this translation. Also for the easier entrance of the young Scholar to runne cheerefully and speedily through the best Greeke Authors in prose, For entrance in the speedie the running tho∣rough the best Greeke Authors in prose, Grammatical translations of Isocrates ad Daemonicum. as well as in verse, is prepared Isocra∣tes ad Daemonicum, translated both in Latine gramma∣tically; and also with another translation in a more pure Latine style. So likewise the first booke of Zenophons Cyropaideia in like manner. Which three bookes being well gone through, The first Z ∣nophons Cyro∣paideia. scho∣lars will easily and speedily run through all other Greek Authors, by the ordinarie helpes of translations, and the like meanes which God hath so bountifully proui∣ded for this last Age, especially if they haue said a good foundation in the Grammar first. Hebrue. For laying speedily a sure foundation; For the spee∣dy and sure attaining all the Hebrue Radiees, are preparing a word and a there∣unto like and Greeke. first, for the right knowledge of all the Hebrue Primitiues in their first and proper signification; secondly, by what Tropes their significations are changed into other senses: and so thirdly, by what reasons or notations all their deri∣uatiues and issue come thereof: and finally, for getting speedily all the Hebrue Primitiues without booke; and with the getting of them, to learne also so much of the Hebrue Bible in most profitable matters and sentences, there hath bene long thought of, and is now in prepa∣ring. First, a briefe Hebrue Lexicon, after the manner of the Fundamentum linguae Graecae. And secondly, another little booke after the manner of Clauis linguae Graecae, wherein all, or most of the He∣brue Primitiues are to be comprized, in certaine choise sentences of the sacred Scriptures, of sundry kindes of matt r. This may be called fi ly Ianua linguae Hebraicae; the other, the Clauis vnto it. As these two may be of notable vse, to make speedily perfect Hebricians, and likewise to helpe to prepare the way to the calling of the Iewes thereby, so they re∣quire the cunningest workemen for the more curious framing and finishing of them: whom God hath also prouided, if some noble minded fauourers of good learning, and of the Church of Christ, will but a little lay to their helping hands, for defraying the charges of their maintenance, till they shall be able to go through the worke, to bring them to perfection, for the full ac∣complishment of all the good therein desired. For all these bookes and helpes more particularly, For all these helpes more particularly, and the right vse of them: the Grammar schoole in this last Edi∣tion. and for the right vse of euery of them, and how to auoid all the abuses and other in conueniences; and so for at∣taining all those parts or learning mentioned in the Contents, see the Booke called , or the Grammar-schoole in this second Edition: where, in a familiar Dialogue betweene two Schoole-maisters all these things are full discussed and set foorth, and yet the booke in many things abridged, and made lesse then before. For matter of charges to prouide so many helpes, Matter of charge, and all objections there answe∣ ▪ the gaining of one yeares learning will plentifully recom∣pence, if we vse onely the necessarie: and all the other benefits be a sufficient ouerplus. For all other obiections, I referre you likewise to the Grammar-schoole, where (I hope) you shall see your selfe well satisfied in all. And what is still wanting, I trust the same good hand of our God will, in his due time, f ly supply. FINIS. ❧ The Examiners Censure: March. 16. 1620. W Here as this Author, still desirous to com∣municate all the new comforts, which God hath vouchs fed him in his long and painefull trauels, for the generall good, and specially for our Grammar-schooles; and fearing lest in anie matter he should deceiue himselfe or others, hath intreated vs to make some further triall of the things which he hath written h rein, for the better confirmation of himselfe and of all others; we could not denie his so honest a request. There∣fore Labours in this kinde, by of Worcester, at the first of his Gramm r-schoole, as appeares in the Preface before it, and by other since; yet now that it is to come foorth , much more compleate and perfect after so much long trauell and experience) we haue her upon made new and further triall accordingly. In which we haue found so much content in euery forme, from the lowest to the highest, for the time which we then had, as perswaded vs of the trueth of whatsoeuer he hath written concerning the same; and giues vs withall much assurance of a very great blessing to be hoped for, both to Church and Common-wealth in all places for which he hath trauelled, by these his happie La∣bours rightly put in practise: which all well-willers to Religion and Learning are to wish to their Coun∣trey, and by all meanes to promote, for the good of the present and of all succeeding ages. IAMES VSSHER Doctour and Professor of Diuinitie in the Vniuersitie of Dublin. DANIEL FEATLY Doctour of Diuinity, and Chaplin in house to his Grace of Canterburie.