A declaration vnto the Lordes, of the Iewes desire these fiftene yeres for Ebrew explication of our Greke gospell hindered by a brase of wicked selly D.D.: wherof the God of Iewes & Gentiles hath payd the one: & will pay the other: when he hath detected who he is. Broughton, Hugh, 1549-1612. A declaration vnto the Lordes, of the Iewes desire these fiftene yeres for Ebrew explication of our Greke gospell hindered by a brase of wicked selly D.D.: wherof the God of Iewes & Gentiles hath payd the one: & will pay the other: when he hath detected who he is. Broughton, Hugh, 1549-1612. I heard, R. H. of a most honorable bent of the K. for clearing in Ebrew & Grek by the Apoc. all the Bible: & my desire that way is stird by newes from Graecia. One Edw. Crain a shipper of N. Castell: was long in Thrace: where Iewes dayly reioyced of our knowledge in the law, hoping to learne from vs salvation. And one came with him to Venice, for Leyden, hearing (by the Post of Collen belike) that I meant stay there. He wold be fully instructed of me: that hee might returne to saue his nation. And I whole fiften yeres craued allowance to shew Christ through the Bible. But Satan hindred all hitherto. Now I hope the sting in the Dragons tayle shalbe pluck vp: that no libellers crew sting more. They ioy that I shew Iesus not Ioseph son to Ely: Luc. 3. Iechonias, Matth. 1. only by Kings phrase fa∣ther to Salathiel, by all Rabbines vpon Ier. 22. & Parted Macedo∣niens the fourth Kingdome in Daniel: & Daniels 490. yeares sea∣uen times the captiuity space, begon at the Angels message & dra∣wen exactly vnto our Lordes death. Euen by Aben Ezra their owne Doctor: forced to overthrow their owne Thalmudiques all: by clear ending of Moyses. Also this was acceptable, that I shewed Ps. 16. That▪ Christ sayd, that thou wilt not leaue me to the Graue till the body see corruption. & so Act. 2. & Crede: crucified dead & buryed: & went to God: wher hath heauen for the Godly, & Gehenna for the wicked: both on high. They thought we in England held a going to Hell. As Chrysologus now 1200. yeres: & Rome confuted by Isaac Ben Arama. fol. 205. that so our Gospel could not be from God: yf it taught that the Fathers could mis of Paradise hence or Messias. The very Deuels & Porphyrie their Angel in Euseb. Apod. Euang. 3. say: our Lordes soule was the Godliest of all soules: & the soule of the godly goeth into the soile of heauen: wher Iesus & all iust bee. This much the very Deuels confessed: But our translation Ps. 16. thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hell, & the same Act. 2. is more shameles then any part of the Alkoran. And a sixt poinct cheared the text of the holy Grek: wher Beza 60. yeres checked the text & milliones after him. Hence they thought God never gaue it. For as in the course of nature God preserveth all his creatures & all the letters of the Law: so he wold haue kept euery letter of the New Testament yf he gaue it. But be∣fore me none defended the general purenes & eloquēce to be from God. So longe they staggered: But now reioiced vncredibly. Fiue Hebrew litle works the most Eloquent Rabbin of all the worlde, as prage censured, Rabbi Ruben sent into England for me. Beside that which I printed to the delite of all Christendom: But the li∣bellers crew that libelled I forged the first of six: bezelled them that poor Ruben died in vnperfect hope. A copie of one a merchand hath in Ingland. And the Turky marchants might find who had them. I wold request the K. to try who were the Atheistes that durst so deale to hinder the glory of Christendome: & salvation of Abrahams sonnes. I haue lately complayned to your Lordships a litle: But I reserue this to myne owne complaint to his sacred Maiestie. To whom I haue to shew the original of Abraham Rubens Epistle printed: for a memoriall against them that libelled I forged it. The one died horribly. Men may mark the others end. I hasten home to instruct the K. & Pr. yf it please them in few houres in all the Bible: & groundes of Diuinity study. And then I may de∣tect the barbarous atheisme & brainsick profanesse of the libellers, scoffing the scottish mist & brettish nation, as the mate wold scoph: for these poinctes: That he turneth Atheanly, for the Popes vse, our Lordes wordes in to damne heathen Governours of tyranny. Wher our L. Prov. 8. telleth that by him Princes de∣cree right. But he wold teach that our Lord taught against Caesar: to bee gilti by Humane Lawes. And for Grek in he is to be accused of extreme blindenes, twelue times the 70. haue the word: but the Ebrew answerable never signifieth tyranny: & old Heathen never vse it. So his raving is against the cōcent of Scriptu∣re, which God gaue: I did but shew: & his denying Messias to bee Christ our Lord in M. Liuely, vpon Dan. 9. & time of his baptisme or death: which endeth Moses, to be plain in prophecy: & his asser∣tion that Sacrifice was Lawfull in Emperour Vespasians dayesi: this crossing of all salvation worse then Machumedean shalbe obie∣cted: & his Lunatique scoffing of the conclusion of the most fa∣mous Syllogisme of Archb. whit & B. Winton, concluding vn∣vincibly that in the Crede to descend to Hell is to go vp to heauen: this shalbe vrged to disgrade him: or to send him to Bishop the wild in Virginia. And wheras he bestoweth: the terme Asse on me: The K. may set him to dispute whether the libeller or I shall beare that name. Yf it please the K. to try my vein: yf in 24. sermons I make not his court better in all the Bible, & rules of Diuinity: then the libeller will euer be: I will be greved at no disgrace. I stay to heare of the Iew sent from 15. yeres zeale of his folk: who giue me such wordes, all, for hebrew eloquēce, & the most, for perpetual orthodoxie, that wold make Barre Loe to burst their panches for envy. Yet yf the wind serve I will hasten to salute his M. & will take order to haue the Iew sent to England after leaue that he may come. being yet vnbaptized. I wish him to heare before the King all the Bible in one Hebrew Sermon: & then Baptized. Your Lordships most Humble H. BROVGHTON.