



THE FIRST CHAPTER:
CONCERNINGE THE FIRST 5. PROtestants Articles, not differinge from the Apostles Religion, and the Roman Church.
BEEINGE to enter into the Examen, and comparison of the parlament protestant Articled Religion of England, with the Religion of the present Church, of Rome, and ^e whole Christian world, named Catholike, ^or profession whereof, the Catholiks of England, ^y the protestants thereof, haue longe tyme suff^red, and still most constantly endure, most bitter persecutions) by the first knowne and confessed ^ue Christian, Catholike, Apostolike, Religion, ^ the Apostles, and that their happy age; wee finde ^t in the first fiue Articles of this new Religion, ^y difference or difficulty, to be thus decided, both ^atholicks and parlame^tary protestants agreeing, them all, and they all beeing ordeyned by these pro^tants, against other Sectaries so soone within 4. ^ares of the beginning of Q. Elizabeth her Reigne, re^eing old condemned heresies, amongst them, as their ^tories, and registers remember: and therefore, it will ^re suffice, onely to recite the Titles of these ar^les to giue notice thereof. The contents and title ^ the first article are. Of faith in the holy Trinity. The second: of the word or sonne of God which was
 made veryma^. The 3. Of the going downe of Christ into hell. The 4. Of the Resurrection of Christ. The 5. Of the Holy Ghost. The whole Article (the Title being subiect to doubt) is The holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the sonne, is of one substance, Maiesty, and glory, with the Father, and the Sonne, very and eternall God. Hitherto wee finde nothing against the doctrine of the Catholike Church. Which no^ vnlikely these men did rather to winnesome credi^ at their entrance to be thought louers of truth then that they hated the enemies of these articles not yet suppressed among them.


THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Examining their 6. Article about Scriptures and traditions, and condemning it, by the Apostles, and Apostolike men, and doctrine of their age.
THEIR next sixt Article intituled, of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for Saluation: ^ thus: holy Scripture containeth all things necessary ^ saluation: Soe that what soeuer is not read therein, n^ may be proued thereby is not to be required of any ma^ that it should be beleeued as an article of faith, or ^ thought requisite or necessary to saluation. By the na^ of holy Scripture, wee doe vnderstand those canonic^ bookes of the old and new testament, of whose auth^rity was neuer any doubt in the Church. And from t^ number of those bookes which there they allow^ to be canonicall, They doe in expresse words, a^ tearmes reiect. The booke of Tobias, the booke of Iudit^ the rest of the booke of Esther, the booke of wisdom^
 Iesus the sonne of Sirach, Baruch the Prophet, the songe of the three children, the story of Susanna, of Bel and the Dragon, the prayer of Manasses, the first and second Bookes of the Machabees. Concerning the new testament thus they adde: all the bookes of the new testament, as they are commonly receiued, wee doe receiue and accompte them for canonicall. This their Article is in their proceedings, as the grounde worke and foundation, whereupon their Religion is wholy framed, and builded; and yet so weake, Feeble, totteringe ruinous arid deceitefull, that not any one true certaine and infallible point of doctrine (as euery Article in true religion is) can be framed vpo^ it, or from it so deduced, by the expresse graunt of this article it selfe, and of all English Protestants, professed, and sworne maintainers of it.
For whereas they sentence and define: In the Art. 6. supr. name of holy Scripture, wee doe vnderstand those canonicall bookes of the old and new testament, of whose Field Booke of the Church lib. 4. cap. 5. wotton def. of perk. pa. 442. Couell. ag. Burg. pag. 60. def. of Hooker pag. 31. 32. 33. pro^^st. glosse on the 6. art. Tho. Rogers ibid. authority was neuer any doubt in the Church: They plainely make the Iudgment of the Church, to be the highest tribunall in spirituall questions, euen of the scriptures themselues. And thus their best and cheife writers, published by authority doe glosse and expound this article. And of necessity so they must say, except at their first entrance they will plainely confesse their religion, and congregation, their Church of England (as they terme it,) to be erroneous or hereticall, and to haue noe power or warrant at all to doubt deny or determine, and propose what bookes be, or be not Scriptures canonicall, either of the old or new testament. Or what one chapter, or sentence in them is part or not part of such canonicall and vndoubted holy
 Scriptures: for this power and prerogatiue being onely committed to the true Church by their Article, and professors before, if these men doubt, or Iudge otherwise in this case, then the true confessed Church hath hitherto done, They can be noe part, or members of that true Church. And whatsoeuer is read, or may be deduced from vntrue or doubted Scriptures, cannot be possibly any certaine, and vndoubted article of faith, and religion. For noe conclusion can be more certaine and vndoubted, then the Maximes and authorities from which it is concluded, but as the light of nature, and common law and vndeniable Maxime of true reasoning teacheth all men, and all men truely acknowledge for a verity most certaine, it euer followeth the weaker part; euer erroneous, doubtfull, vncertaine or false, if both, or any of the propositions from which it is deduced, be or is of that nature. Nothing can giue that to an other, which it selfe wanteth, and by noe meanes hath to giue. A lying false or vncertaine humane witnesse or assertion, can by no meanes possible make a constant and certainely true probation in any thing whatsoeuer, much lesse in supernaturall matters, articles of faith aboue mans capacity, and therefore to be proued by diuine testimony, which possibly cannot deceaue vs.
And in this miserable and desolate estate and condition, is the Protestant congregation of England, in, and for euery article pretended by them to be of faith which they hold against the Roman Church at this day, and so they censure themselues by their owne definitiue sentence, in this their owne cheefest Article, and publikely authorized
 glosse thereof, with diuers others of their Religion, allowed and recommended writers among them, Artic. 6. supr. Confessio Wirtemberg. cap. de Scriptura. Protest. glosse in art. 6. and p. 1. Willet Synop. quaest. 1. of scripture. pag. 2. 3. ^dit. an. 1594. holnish. chron. f. 1299. Stowe hist. an. 1579. in Q. Elizabeth. Io. Bre^t. Apolog confess. Wittemberg. histor. Dauidis Georg. Display Art. 6. Magdeburg. hist. cent. 3. ca. 11. In their Article receauing onely for canonicall bookes, neuer doubted of in the Church, and in the others (to vse their owne authorizing words) perused, and by the lawfull authority of the Church of England, allowed to be publike, plainely and manifestly deliuering from all kinde of Authors, Greeke and Latine, old and late, Catholike and Protestant, That euery booke in particular, not one excepted, which they allowe for canonicall Scripture, either ^n the old or new testament, haue both beene ^oubted of, and by their owne, men, Protestants, de^ied for such.
Therefore it remaineth without question con^rary to this Protestante Article, euen by them^elues and their best authority, that neither all nor ^ny one of those bookes which vpon this vayne ^retence they haue blotted forth from the Canon ^f holy Scripture, and the Roman Church still re^eaueth, may be denyed by that Title of sometimes ^eing doubted of: for wee should haue noe Scripture ^nonicall at all, all bookes thereof hauing beene ^us doubted of. By that colour wee might deny ^l Articles of faith, which sometimes doubted of, ^ue beene concluded and agreed vpon against the ^est heretiks that euer were, and all their heresies ^th might and ought to be reuiued againe. Sainct ^ul and Sainct Thomas Apostles were thus to ^ denied Apostles, and thrust out of heauen, be^use they had doubted; wee might and ought to ^, that no conuerted Christian first doubting, ^as ^rue Christian, neither our first brittish Christian ^nge Sainct Lucius, nor Kinge Ethelbert among
 our Saxons, nor any of their first doubting and afterward conuerted Subiects, and soe of the whole Christian world doubting or denying before it receaued the law of Christ. All Courts, Consistories, Tribunals, and Seates of Iustice and Iudgment ecclesiasticall, and ciuil, to decide and determine must be ouerthrowne, no sentence or decision though of Kings, Parlaments, or any community is to b^ obeyed, no doubt, no Controuersie, hitherto eue^ was, or hereafter can or may be finally determined nothing but doubtes, quarrels, Controuersies, an^ contentions, as wee see among Protestants, n^ peace, quiet or vnion must be left vnto vs. Ther^ fore this Protestant paradoxe and presumption i^ reiecting so many bookes of holy Scripture again both the Latine and Greeke Church, onely vnde^ colour of being sometime, and by some doubte^ of, being thus grosse and absurd by their ow^ Iudgments, and proceedings, let vs examine wh^ this first pure and Apostolike age did Iudge of th^ And first to begin with the scripture it selfe of t^ The new testament by Protest. ^r^st. published by King ^ames authority. Matth. 6. 2. Cor. 9. Luc. 14. Ioan 9. Hebr. 5. 1. Cor. 1. Hebr. 1. new Testament euen as our Protestants recea^ and translate it. King Iames his new testament the 6. chapter of Sainct Matthew his ghospell, a^ the 9. chapter 2. Corinth. citeth Ecclesiasticus ^ two seuerall places. In the 14. chapter of Sai^ Luke the 4. chapter of Tobias is cited. And in ^ 10. chapter of Sainct Ihon the 4. chapter of the ^ booke of Machabees. And in the 5. chapter to ^ Hebrewes the second booke. And 7. chapter the Machabees. In the 1. chapter 1. Corinth. T^ first chapter of the booke of wisdome is cited chapter to the Hebrewes citeth the 7. chapter wisdome. And the 9. chapter thereof is cited Ro^ Rom. 11.
 cap. 11. And yet wee shall scarcely finde any Text of diuers bookes of the old Testament, which our Protestants allowe for canonicall, to be cited at any time or place of their new testament, as the 4. Booke of the Kings, the 1. and 2. of Paralip. the booke of the Iudges, Ruth, Esdras 1. and 2. Esther, Ecclesiastes, Cantica canticorum, Abdias, Sophonias, Therefore wee are as well warranted by this argument of concordance of Scriptures, and that holy authority to receaue for canonicall Scriptures of the old Testament, all those bookes which our Protestants haue excluded, as those they haue receaued. The Canons ascribed to the Apostles, and published by Sainct Clement per me Clementem Concil. gener. 6. can. 2. Successour to S. Peter in this age, are plainely acknowledged by the sixt generall Councell to haue beene receaued by the holy Fathers before them as deliuered from God, firmi stabilesque maneant, qui a sanctis patribus qui nos praecesserunt, susceptiac confirmatisunt, atque a Deo nobis etiam traditi sunt, sanctoctorum Apostolorum nomine 85. Canones, These doe Canon. Apostolor. can. 85. vl^. ^n the last Canon expressely receaue the books of ^he Machabees, Esther, and the booke of Ecclesiasticus for holy Scriptures of the old testament. Ve^erandi ac sacri libri veteris Testamenti. In the very same ma^ner as they doe the others which our Pro^estants allowe for such. Sainct Clement often ci^eth, Clem. epist. 1. 2. Apostolic. constitut. li. 2. c. 4. cap. 21. c. 49. 51. cap. 63. l. 3. cap 3. l. 6. c. 19. 23. 29. l. 8. l. 7. and alloweth for bookes and parts of the old Testament, Baruch, Ecclesiasticus, Sapientia, To^ias, The prayer of Manasses, the history of Su^anna, the booke of Esther, those parts of Daniel which our Protestants reiect, the bookes of Ma^habees and others. Sainct Ignatius receaueth the booke of Daniel which our Protestants deny, Ecclesiasticus.
 Sainct Policarpus approueth Tobias. Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph. epist. ad maynesian epist. ad Heron. Polycarp. epist. ad Philippen. Dionis. l. de diu. nom. cap. 4. Ecclesiast. Hier. c. 2. de diu. nom. c. 7. Sainct Denys the Areopagite conuerted by Sainct Paul alloweth the booke of wisdome, calleth the part of Daniel excluded by our Protestants, diuine Scripture. Diuina scripta. These be all, or the chiefest writers especially by Protestants allowance in this first age, and consideringe how few of their works are preserued to posterity, and how briefe they are: It is rather to be wondred, that they should cite and allow so many of those books, of the old testament, and parts of them, so often a^ Eleuther. ep. ad Lucium Reg. Rritan. apud Gal. Lambrrt. l de leg. S. Eduardi Stowe hist. fore tom. 1. Godwin. Co^uers. of Brit. Hollinsh hist. of Eng. Speed. Theat. of Bit. Matth. park. antiq. Britan. Matth. park. antiq. Brit. p. 69. Io. Gosc. hist. Eccl Dauid. poiuel. in Annot. in l. 2. c. 1. Girald. Ca^br. I^iner. Ca^br. Bal. l. 1. Script. Brit. cent. 1. in August. Rom. l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Rom. in Greg. 1. they doe, then that they should omit any.
And although wee doe not finde any Antiquity of Britaine which in this age entreateth of such things, yet the most auncient which our Protestants will graunte vnto vs beinge the Epistle o^ Pope Eleutherius to Kinge Lucius, wee finde there in, that he makinge mention, that Britaine had receaued both the Testaments of holy Scripture, although in particular he citeth so few bookes o^ them, that out of the new testament he citeth n^ more then onely the 23. chapter of S. Matthew, and from the old testame^t, but three texts, two of them beinge out of the Psalmes 45. 55. the third is th^ booke of wisdome, disallowed by these Protesta^n^ in this Article, but allowed by him and our primatiue Christian Britans of that time, and so from ou^ first receauing of holy Scriptures. And if I may but write what all our Protestant Antiquaries generally affirme for a constant, and vndoubted truth that our Christian Britans did neuer vntill Sainc^ Augustines cominge hither change or alter any o^ materiall point in the holy Religio^ which they receaued in the Apostles time, I must needs auouch^
 that those Scriptures of the old testament which Godwyn Co^uers. of Brit. pag. 43. 44. fore pag. 463. edit. an. 1576. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. cap. 21. l. 4. fulke answ. to a cou^terf. cath. pag. 40. harr. descript. Brit. c. 9 Gild. ep. de excid. and conq. Britan. this Article refuseth Were receaued both in Britaine, and in other nations, as Italy and Rome, whence our conuersion came, with other contries in that happy Time, for Sainct Gildas our most auncient, and allowed Historian, both in many manuscripts, and bookes published by Protestants and their warrant, for his wisdome Surnamed, Sapiens, the wise, doth very often in one short worke allowe and cite for holy Scriptures diuers of those bookes, especially Ecclesiasticus, many times, and the booke of wisdome vsinge the authority thereof 8. times in one page and lesse. And vnto what time, persons, or place soeuer wee will appeale for Triall, wee shall in noe age, contry, councell or auncient particular writer finde, any one person which agreeth with this Protestant Article in the nu^ber and bookes of canonicall Scripture. It citeth S. Hierome but both hee himselfe and these Protestants, Kinge Iames his Protestant Bishops in their publik dispute at Hampton Court with others, proue that Conference at Hampton Court pag. 60. Couelag. Burges pag. 87. 8. 86. 88. 89. 90. 91. S. Hierome spake onely against the bookes which these Protestants reiect, not in his owne opinion, but what the Iewes obiected. Most of the obiections made against those bookes were the old cauils of the Iewes, renewed by S. Hierome in his time, who was the first that gaue them that name of Apochryphe: which opinion vpon Ruffinus his challendge, hee after a sort disclaymed: and the rather because a generall offence was taken at his speaches in that kinde. They are most true, and might haue the reconcilement of other Scriptures. If Ruffinus be not deceaued, they were approued as parts of the old testament, by the Apostles. S. Hierome pretendeth, that what hee had spoken, was not his
 owne opinion, but what the Iewes obiected. And for his paines in translating the booke of Iudith (which this article reiecteth) he giueth this reason: because wee reade, that the Councell of Nyce did reckon it in the number of holy Scriptures. And Sainct Hierome is plaine, both for this booke of Iudith, and the rest, that he did not deny them; for first, of Iudith hee saith the Nicen Councell which he and all Catholiks euer honored, receaued it: Hunc librum Synodus Nicaena Hieron. Tom. 3. oper. praef. in Iudith. Ruffin. inuectit. 2. in Hieronym. in numero sanctarum Scripturarum legitur computasse. And for the other books beinge chardged by Ruffinus, to speake in his owne words, to be the onely man, qui praesumpserit sacras Sancti Spiritus voces and diuina volumina temerare. Diuino muneri and Apostolorum haereditati manus Intulerit. Ausus est Instrumentum diuinum quod Apostoli Ecclesijs tradiderunt, and depositum Sancti Spiritus compilare. To haue herein abused the words of the holy Ghost and diuine volumes. To haue offered violence to the diuine office and Inheritance of the Apostles. And (to speake in Protestants Couel. sup. pag 87. translation) to haue robbed the Treasure of the holy Ghost, and diuine Instrument, which the Apostles deliuered to the Churches. Sainct Hierome neuer denieth any of those things for true which Ruffinus spake Ruffin. supr. of the authority of those books of Scriptures, that the Apostles deliuered the^ for such to the Churches, and no learned man euer denied it, and that S. Peter at Rome deliuered them to the Church, Petrus Romanae Hier. Apol. 2. aduers. Ruffin. Tom. 4 oper. praef. in libros Machul. Ecclesiae per viginti and quatuor annos praefuit. Quid ergo? decepit Petrus Apostolus Christi Ecclesiam, and libros ei falsos tradidit? But onely denieth that he wrote in his owne, but in our Enemies the Iewes opinion: non enim quid ipse sentirem: sed quid illi contra nos dicere soleant, explicaui. And writinge
 to Pope Damasus plainely testifieth, that he ioyned with the Catholike Church in this busines: nouum and vetus testamentum recipimus, in eo librorum numero quem sanctae Catholicae Ecclesiae tradit authoritas. And Feild l. 4. of the Church. cap. 23. pag. 245. Act. 6. Gloss. ordin. and Lyra. in eund. locum. our Protestants from Antiquities acknowledge thus: The Iewes at the cominge of Christ were of two sorts, some named Hebrews commorant at Hierusalem and in the holy land, properly named Hebrewes: others named Hellenist, that is Iewes of dispersion, mingled with the Greeks, these had written certaine bookes in Greeke, which they made vse of, together with other parts of the old Testament, which they had of the translation of the Septuagint. But the Hebrews receaued onely, the 22. bookes before mentioned. Hence it came, that the Iewes deliuered a double Canon of the Scripture, to the Christian Churches. And in this second Canon of the Iewes, as these men write, were those bookes of the old Testament which this article denieth. And whereas some Protestants would excuse this Article by some old Authorities, of Melito, Sardensis, Origen, the Councell of Laodicia, S. Cyrill of Hierusalem, Sainct Gregory Nazianzen, and Amphilochius. There is not any one of them which ioyneth with this Article, but they all differ from it in the very places which they cite. Melito Sardensis Melito Sard apud Euseb. hist Eccl. l. 4 cap. 25. Origen. in p 1. Euseb. his Eccl. li. 6. cap 24. receaueth the booke of wisdome, which this Article reiecteth, and omitteth Iudith. Origen onely citeth the books of the old testament according to the first Canon of the Hebrews, sicut Hebraei tradunt, And yet in the end addeth the books of Machabees: praeter istos sunt libri Machabaeorum, qui Inscribuntur Sarbet Sarbaneel. And doth not agree with them in the books of the new testame^t. The Councell Conc. Laodic. can. 60. of Laodicia differreth from this article, in omittinge
 Esther in the old, and Apocalips in the new Greg. Nazia^z. de vir. and Gorm. sacrae scrip. l. 6. Amphil. l. ad Sele^cum. Cyrill. Hierosolim. Catech. 4. Tho. Rogers vpon this 6. Art. Confess. Gallic. c 3. 4. Confess. Belg. c. 4. 5. Testament, otherwise then this article doth. S. Gregory Nazianzen so likewise numbreth as Amphilochius also. Sainct Cyrill omitteth the Apocalips. So this Article hath no authority from any old writer, Iew or Christian, Greeke or Latin in this so greate, and with them most important Question, whereupon they grounde all Religion.
And as litle concordance amonge themselues: for amonge 13. or 14. Confessions of Protestant Religion, they onely cite, and haue noe more then two of France and Belgia Rebels and Traytors to their temporall Kings in ciuill matters, as they are in spirituall to God and his holy Church, and these for want of other authority founde this their error, as the rest vpon the hereticall conceipt of internall reuelation, and their spirit so tellinge them, extestimonio, and intrinseca Spiritus Sancti reuelatione. By the one and the other: quod Spiritus sanctus nostris conscientijs testetur illos a Deo emanasse. And by this Spirit they are at such harmony, and agreement amonge themselues, as in other places, so in Engla^d as I haue related, none of them agreeinge together herein. But by the suggestion of this false spirit, and their exploded doubt of Scriptures doe leaue all Scriptures and questions of Religion to be deduced from them, doubtfull, which Bilson a Protestant ^ilso^ Suruey ^ag. 664. Bishop of winchester, one of the best learned they euer had, thus proueth: The Scriptures themselues were not fully receaued in all places, no not in Eusebius time. He saith the Epistle of Iames, of Iude, the second of Peter, he second and third of Iohn are contradicted. The epistle to the Hebrews was co^tradicted: The Church of Syria did not receaue the second epistle of Peter, nor
 the second and third of Ihon, nor the Epistle of Iude, nor the Apocalipse: the like might be said for the Churches of Arabie. Will you hence conclude, that these parts of Scripture were not Apostolike, or that wee neede not receaue them, because they were formerly doubted of? The same reason is of all the books of the old testament which this Article reiecteth vpon the same surmise ^or Eusebius ouerliuinge Constantine, and writinge Euseb. de vit. Const. lib. 3. hist. c. 22. l. 3. cap. 3. Concil. Cart. 3. can. 47. ^is life and deathe, deliueringe this doubt of so many bookes of new Testament liued neere the ^ime of the Councell Chartage of 428. Bishops in which both these bookes of the new Testament contradicted in his dayes, but receaued by our Pro^estants, and all those bookes of the old Testament which in this Article they disable, are by all those Bishops in one and the same tenor of words with ^he rest decreed to be, Canonicae scripturae canonicall Scriptures. This Canon and Catologe of Canoni^all Concil. Cart. 3. supr. bookes is confirmed by the Pope of Rome, ^hen beinge, and other Bishops absent as appeareth ^y the same Councell. Pope Innocentius deliuereth Innoe. 1. epist. ad Exuperiu^ Tholosanum Episc. August. lib. 2. doctr. Christ. c. 8. and in speculo. ^he same Canon of holy Scriptures Canonem sacra^um Scripturarum. S. Augustine hath the same, as ^eceaued by all Churches, Scripturae Canonicae quae ^b omnibus accipiuntur Ecclesijs Catholicis. And saith ^hat all which feare God receaue them, in his omni^us libris timentes Deum and pietate mansueti quaerunt ^oluntatem Dei. Pope Gelasius with a Councell of Gelas. Tom. Concil: ^o. Bishops declareth that to be the Canon which ^he holy and Catholike Roman Church receaueth, ^nd reuerenceth, quem Sancta and Catholica Romana Alcim. Auit. l. ad Soror. de consol. Cassiodor. lib. 1. diu. Iust. c. 13. ^uscipit and veneratur Ecclesia. So hath Alcimus A^itus, Cassiodorus and others.
And this may suffice for this place of this Question.
 And it further proueth how feeble and weake the rest of this Protestant Article of the sufficiency and allowance of onely Scripture and disableinge Traditions is, for if so many Canonicall bookes of Scripture in both testaments were doubted of, vntill so greate a time aboue 300. yeares in the lawe of Christ were passed, and Religion generally, and in all questions necessary to saluation planted, and receaued, how were or possibly could all these necessary things be reade in Scripture or proued thereby (which is the rule of this Article) when so many bookes were not then receaued for certaine and vndoubted holy Scriptures* Things and euidences doubtfull and vncertaine can make nothinge certaine in morall certainty much lesse with certainty of true and infallible faith, which aboue all others is and must needs be most certaine. Seco^dly as Sainct Ireneus disputeth Ireneus l. 3. cap. 4. and proueth vpon his certaine knowledge and experience, That many nations which had not receaued the Scriptures, or any part of the^ did truely beleeue in Christ, by vnwritten traditions, whic^ the Apostles doliuered to the Churches. Quid si n^ que Apostoli scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem sequi traditionis quam tradiderunt i^^ quibus committebant Ecclesias? cui ordinationi assentiunt multae gentes barbarorum, eorum qui in Christ^^ credunt sine charta and atramento, veterem traditione^ diligenter custodientes. This he writeth both of thi^ first age, and the second in which he died by martyrdome. And it is most euident both by hol^ Scriptures and other antiquities, that many nations not onely of the barbarous, which were withou^ learninge, but of the learned did thus beleeue before
 any Scriptures of the new Testament, in Rom. 1. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 1. Gal. 1. Ephes. 1. Phil. 1. Colloss. 1. Thess. 1. and 2. 1. Tim. 1. 2. Tim. 1. Tit. 1. Epist. ad Philem. Hebr. 1. Iacob 1. 1. Petr. 1. 2. Pet. 2. Ioh. 1. Io. 2. and 3. Iud. 1. which and by which Protestants necessitate vs to reade and proue our Religion, were written.
This is manifestly proued by all the epistles of Sainct Peter, Sainct Paul, and the rest of the Apostles written vnto such places, and persons, as had before beleeued, and receaued the Religion of Christ, as is in euery of them plainely expressed. And yet as is shewed before diuers of these were doubted of, and not generally receaued for holy Scripture vntill 300. yeares after they were writte^. The not receauers or doubters of them being faith^ull and true Christians in all points. S. Matthew the ^irst of the Euangelists which wrote, writinge for ^he conuerted Iewes in Hebrew, could not thereby ^rofit any but Hebrews, And yet Sainct Ireneus Irenaeus lib. 3. aduer. haereses cap. 1. Hieron. catal. Script. Eccl. in S. Matthaeo. Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 21. Iren. supr. witnesseth he did not write, vntill both Sainct Peter and Sainct Paul were come to Rome. Matthaeus in Hebraeis ipsorum lingua scriptura tradidit Euangelij, cum Petrus and Paulus Romae Euangelizarent, and fundarent Ecclesiam. And onely for the Iewes before conuerted without scripture. Propter eos qui ex cir^umcisione crediderunt. And taught them by tradition, not writinge, vntill he was to depart from them, to preache vnto others in other places, And so was vrged by a kinde of necessity, as S. Iohn, also to write a Ghospell. Ex omnibus Domini discipulis commentarios nobis soli Matthaeus, and Ioannes reliquerunt, quos etiam necessitate ad scribendum esse adactos ferunt; Matthaeus enim quum primum Hebraeis praedicasset, etiam ad alios quoque transiturus esset, Euangeliu^ suum patrio sermone literis tradidit, and quod subtracta praesentia sua desiderabatur, illis a quibus discedebat, per liter as adimpleuit.

 Sainct Marke placed in order to be the secon^ Euangelist, he beinge none of those Apostles and immediate Schollers of Christ, but disciple of Sainc^ Peter the Apostle, as he could not receaue his learninge in Christian Religion, from the Scripture^ but from his Master, and Tutor in Christ S. Peter noe writer of any Ghospell, but of one onely shor^ epistle at that time, if the first was then written, th^ last and second being written a litle before his death as the same Scripture withnesseth: certus quod velo^ 2. Petr. 1. est depositio tabernaculi mei secundum quod and Dominus noster Iesus Christus significauit mihi. So followinge Sainct Peter, and learninge his Ghospell fro^ him, he writ it by Sainct Peters warrant, and orde^ at the entreaty of the Christians at Rome. This fo^ whome hee wrote it being conuerted before without Scripture, Marcus discipulus and Interpres Petr^iuxta quod Petrum referentem andiuerat, Rogatus Romae Clem. lib. 6. hypo^. Hier. l. de Script. Eccl. in Marc. Euseb. hist. l. 3. c. 21. l. 2. cap 15 Matth. westin. chr. an. 42. Flor. wigorn. chr. an. 45. and 67. Marian. Scot. an. 47. Marian. Scot. an. 47. Martin. Polon. an. 44. Hier. lib de sc. in Luc. Act. 1. Luc. c. 1. a fratribus breue scripsit Euangelium. Quod cu^ Petrus audisset, probauit, and Ecclesiae legendum sua authoritate edidit, sicut Clemens in six to Hypotyposeon libro scribit.
The case of Sainct Luke was the like with S* Marke, but that Sainct Luke cheifely followed S* Paul, which was not of the 12. Apostles which conuersed with Christ, wryting his Ghospell, after S* Marke, and the Acts of the Apostles being writte^ i^ Rome, in or after the 4. yeare of New the 57. or 58* of Christ, both the Bookes were writte^ by traditi^ and after the faith of Christ receaued, as he him selfe witnesseth of the first: sicut tradiderunt nob^ qui ab initio ipsi viderunt, and ministri fuerunt Scrmonis. His Acts of the Apostles is an history of things done, and encrease of Christians by tradition.

 By all Antiquities S. Iohn was the last, which wrote his Ghospell, at the entreaty of the Bishops of Asia, against Cerinthus, and other heretiks, and ^heifely the Ebionites, denying the diuinity of Christ: Ioannes nouissimus omnium scripsit Euange^um, Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccl. in Ioanne Apost. Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 3. cap. 21. rogatus ab Asiae Episcopis, aduersus Cerinthum ^iosque haereticos, and maxime Ebionitarum domga ^nsurgens, qui asserunt Christum ante Mariam non ^isse. And neuer wrote before, but onely by word ^reached vnto the people, conuertinge them by ^n written tradition. Ioannem aiunt, qui toto tempore Euseb. supr. l. 2. and 3. hist. Hier. libr. de Scriptor. Ecc. in Ioanne. ^uangelici cursus praedicatione sine literis vsus fuerat, ^ndem ad scribendum hisce de causis esse permotum. Whereby wee also see, that his Epistles were not written vntill his later time, and the two last, longe ^me doubted of, as his Apocalipse also was, and ^et neither written, nor reuealed vntill his bannish^ent into Pathmos in the 14. yeare of Domitian Athanas. Synopsi Crdren. in nerua. Epiphan. Hier. 51. Iren l. 3. ca. 1. and apud Eus. l. 5. hist. cap. 8. flor. Wigorn. chron. an. 81. 103. Mat. westin. chron. an. 98. ^e yeare of Christs Natiuity 97. or 98. And the ^mmon opinion in antiquity is, that he did not ^rite his Ghospell vntill his returne to Ephesus, ^ter the death of Domitian. Matthew of west^ister with others saith, that he first by worde con^emned those heretiks Cerinthus and Ebion affir^ing the world was made by the Angels, that Christ ^esus was onely man, and denying the resurrection ^f the deade, and after by entreaty or compulsion ^ther of the Christians, wrote his Ghospell to the ^me end. Ioannes Apostolus Ephesum redijt. Et quia ^ncussam se absente, per haereticos vidit Ecclesiae fi^em, Cerinthi and Ebionis haeresim, ibidem damnauit. ^struunt enim mundum ab Angelis factum, and Iesum ^ominem fuisse tantum, nec resurrexisse, resurrectio^em quoque mortuorum non credebant. Contra hanc haeresim
 a fratribus compulsus Apostolus Euangeliu^ scripfit, oftendens in exordio eius, in principio fuiss^ verbum, and ipsum esse Deum, per quem omnia fact^ sunt.
Therefore it is thus made euident, that the wor^ was not conuerted to Christ, nor his doctrine, an^ Religion receaued and established first by scriptures, but vnwritten tradition. As to exemplifie ^ this our Kingdome of Britaine, whose history ^ write, one of the remotest then knowne natio^ from Hierusalem, and apply the rest to the sam^ being in like estate with it, for these things. It ^ proued both by old and late, Greeke and Latin^ domesticall and forreyne, Catholike and Protesta^ writers, that it receaued the faith of Christ, long before any part of the new testament was writte^ And it is euident in Antiquities that none of t^ Ghospels except that of Sainct Marke, was writt^ in this parte of the world, or in any language whi^ the Britans vnderstood. And that was, but br^ Hier. in Marco supr. and Io. an Euseb. li. 3. hist. Euangelium, a short Ghospell, and so short as bei^ assisted both with the Ghospell of Sainct Matthe^ and Sainct Luke they were not all thought able ^ condemne those named hereticks, which S. Ih^ confounded. Amonge the Epistles onely that of ^ Paul to the Romans, was sent into these parts, ^ was in a language wee did not vnderstand, a^ written after the faith of the Romans was spre^ both in Britaine, and all the world, as Sainct P^ witnesseth: fides vestra annuntiatur in vniu^ Rom. 1. mundo. The two Epistles of Sainct Peter accordi^ to antiquity were written in Rome, and after B^taine had receaued the faith, especially the last; a^ the first being longe doubted of, was sent quite co^
 ^rary from Britayne vnto the contries of Po^tus, Ga^atia, 2. Petr. 1. Capadocia, Asia, and Bithynia in the easterne ^arts. Wee finde no memory after of Scripture re^eaued here vntill longe time after in the second ^ge, expressed in Pope Eleutherius his Epistle to our ^ing Lucius. And yet all our Protesta^t antiquaries ^ue before assured vs, that Britaine had in the A^stles time and longe before any Scripture came ^ther, or probably was written, and possibly in ^orall Iudgment could come hither; receaued the ^ith of Christ, so fully) purely, and sincerely that it ^euer changed it in any materiall point, after the ^riptures were receaued here, nor diuers hundreds ^ yeares after.
And if wee will be directed by Scriptures in this ^int, those which our Protestants allowe for such, ^e testimony to vnwritten Traditions in many ^ces. To exemplifie onely in Sainct Paul which ^ote most in the new Testament, hee chargeth S. 1. Tim. 6. ^mothy, and all others in him, to keepe and obserue ^ngs so deliuered without writinge. O Timothee, 2. Tim. 2. ^ositum custodi. This in his first Epistle, not ha^ge written vnto him before. And in his second ^stle hee giueth him commaund, that the things ^ich he had heard fro^ Sainct Paul, he should de^er vnto others fit to teach them. Quae audisti a me ^ multos testes, haec commenda fidelibus hominibus, ^idonei erunt and alios docere. And expressely com^undeth 2. Thessal. 2. the Thessalonians, and in them all, in ^ second epistle to them, to obserue and keepe the ^aditions, which they had learned either by word ^ writinge. State and tenete traditiones, quas didici^ siue per sermonem, siue per epistolam nostram. ^hich the Fathers expound of the necessity of
 keepinge vnwritten traditions, as Catholiks now doe. Hinc est perspicuum, quod non omnia per epistola^ Chrisost. in 2. Thess. orat. 4. tradiderunt, sed multa etiam fine scriptis: and eaquoque sunt fide digna. Quamobrem Ecclesiae quoque traditionem censeamus esse fide dignam. Est traditio nihil quaeras amplius. And expoundinge that of S. Paul in his first epistle to the Corinthians, ho^ they kept his commaundements by word befor^ he wrote vnto them, sicuttradidi vobis praecepta m^tenetis, he doth inferre the doctrine of Traditions ergo fine literis mult a tradid^rat, quod alibi saepe meminit. And Sainct Hierome vpon the same words Hier. in eadem Verba. Tom. 9. quasi legem praecepta meatenetis, scientes illum in ^ spiritum loqui, qui in lege locutus est, and prophetis. Th^ like hath S. Ambrose vpon the same, and S. Epphanius: Ambros. in 1. Cor. Epiph. haeresi 69. oportet and traditione vti non enim omnia diuina Scriptura possunt accipi: Quapropter aliqua ^ traditione Sancti Apostoli tradiderunt: Quemadmdum dicit Sanctus Apostolus: Sicut tradidi vobis. ^ alibi, sic doceo sic tradidi in Ecclesijs.
Thus the best learned both Greeke and Lati^ Fathers expounded these, to inferre a necessity Traditions, and their equality with Scriptu^ Which our best Protestant writters with th^ common allowance thus confirme. Our aduer sar^ Feild. l. 4. c. 20. pag 238. meaninge Catholiks, make traditions equall with words, precepts, and doctrines of Christ, the Apost^ and Pastors of the Church, left vnto vs in writinge, ^ther is there any reason, why they should not so doe, they could proue any such vnwritten verities, for not the writinge that giueth things their authority, the worth and credit of him that deliuereth th^ though by word and liuely voyce onely. Thus t^ confesse, and the reason which they giue, so en^ceth
 them, the worth and credit of the reuealer and deliuerer or proposer of holy misteries supernaturall being the motiue and cause of mans assent, so firme and vnmoueable, in articles of faith, not to be proued by humane reason, and not the writinge or not writinge being fallible and subiect to many casualties, corruptions, and vncertainties, which we are sure are not to be found in Christ the reuealer, nor his holy Church the vndoubted true proposer of his mysteries and reuelations. And both these are the same, and as certaine in traditions not written, such as Catholiks maintaine, as in the written Scriptures. For wee doe not defend any one vnwritten tradition, that it should be beleeued as an Article of faith, or to be thought requisite necessary to saluation, which be the very words of this Protestant Article of Religion, but wee produce, the Artic of Protest. Relig. 20. highest authority in their owne publike Iudgment also in these their Articles, the true primatiue Church of Christ to warrant it, The which Church hath power and authority in controuersies of faith. That euery tradition came from Christ and his Apostles to be receaued and professed in Christian Religion.
As, to instance in some, and those which most concerne, euen in our Protestants proceedings, and by their owne confessions, and testimonies, vnwritten Traditions are necessary. For first in this Engl Protest. Rel. artic. 6. very article they haue giuen their finall sentence, in the very first words thereof that the holy Scriptures are of this nature. Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary for saluation: So that whatsoeuer is not read therein, nor may be proued thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be beleeued, as an Article of faith, or to be thought requisite necessary to saluation.
 And yet in the immediatly following words, they plainely declare, and professe, that wee haue noe warrant in Scripture, for any booke, chapter or sentence of Scripture to be such holy Scripture but for euery least percell thereof wee must resor^ to Tradition, and the Churches Iudgment. In th^ name of holy Scripture, wee doe vnderstand those canonicall bookes of the old, and new testament, of whose authority was neuer any doubt in the Church. Where we^ are assured from these men, that the Church, an^ Tradition vnwritten is supreme Iudge of all questions in Religion, euen of the Scriptures themselues. And so necessarily they must say, and confesse or els leaue no Religion, or Scripture at all, to b^ proued, or proue vnto vs. For it is vnquestionabl^ that no part of Scripture doth propose vnto vs, an^ Catalogue or Canon of Scriptures. Which the thus further testifie in their publikely approue^ Feild. l. 4. pa. 238. c. 20. writers: much co^ntention there hath beene, about trad^tions, some vrginge the necessity of them, and others r^iectinge them. For the clearinge whereof, wee must o^serue, that wee reiect not all: for first wee receaue t^ number and names of the Authors of bookes diuine, a^ Couell cont. Burg pag. 60. whitaker ib. Wotton def. of Perk. pag. 442. Couell. def. of hook. pag. 31. 34 32. 33. feild l. 4. c. 5. pag. 203. Ormer. pict. Pap. pag 93. Sutcliffeag. the 3. conu. pag. 79. canonicall, as deliuered by tradition. This tradition w^ admit. The number, Authors, and Integrity of the part^ of these bookes, wee receaue as deliuered by tradition. T^ Church of Christ according to her authority, receaued ^ him, hath warrant to approue the Scriptures, to ackno^ledge, to receaue, to publish, and commaunde vnto ^ children. The Church of Rome teacheth noe badde op^nion, to affirme, that the Scriptures are holy, and diui^ in themselues, but so esteemed by vs, for the authority the Church. That the Scriptures ar true wee haue it fro^ the Church. Wee say that wee are taught to receaue ^
 word of God, from the authoritie of the Church: wee see her Iudgment, wee heare her voyce: and in humility subscribe vnto all this. The Church hath fower singular offices towards the Scripture. First to be of them, as it were, afaithfull register. Secondly to discerne and Iudge betweene false and adulterate, and that which is true and perfect. The third to publish and diuulge, to proclaime as a Crier, the true Edict of our Lord himselfe. The last is, to be an Interpreter: and in that followinge the safest rule, to be a most faithfull Expositor of his owne meaninge. Wee thinke that particular men and Churches may erre damnably: But that the whole Church at one time cannot so erre: for that the Church should cease vtterly for a time, and so not be Catholike, beinge not at all times: and Christ should sometimes be without a Church. The Church is called a pillar, because it is like vnto a pillar. For as a pillar doth support, and vnderproppe a buildinge, and maketh it more stable, firme, and stronge: So the Church doth sustaine and supporte the truth: for the truth is no where preserued, but in the Church. Christs true Church is a diligent and wary keeper of doctrines committed to her, and changeth nothinge, at any time, diminisheth nothinge, addeth nothinge superfluous, looseth not her owne, nor vsurpeth things belonginge to others. And this is publikely warranted in Protest. Reli. of Engl. Art. 19. these their Articles and Rule of their Religion, where thus they define the Church: The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithfull men, in the which the pure word of God is preached. And the Sacraments be duely ministred, accordinge to Christs ordinance, Art. 8. Catech. com. Booke. Iniunct. Canons. feild l. 4. c. 20. pag. 238. 239. in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.
Secondly those men in their Rules of Religion, and their priuate writers affirme, that the Apostles
 Creede, which by all Antiquity, was by them deliuered to the Church, and by these Protestants, as Rule of faith, before the Scriptures of the new Testament were written, is an vnwritten Tradition yet by their words, a summary comprehension of th^ cheife heades of Christian Religion, a Rule of th^ Churches faith. And yet it is constantly maintaine^ by many Protestants, that diuers articles thereo^ as our Ladies perpetuall virginity, natus ex Mar^ Virgine, Christs descending into hell, descendit a^ inferos, The communion of Saincts, and forgiuenesse of sinnes, Sanctorum communionem R^missione^ peccatorum, and others by diuers others Protestant^ are not contained in any Scripture written befor^ or after. And this Creede deliuered by word, an^ tradition onely by the Apostles before the new t^stament written, this Scripture could not possibl^ be a rule or direction vnto it, but rather otherwis^ for euery rule hath priority to the thinge ruled, an^ the things ruled posterity to their rule. Matters a^ done without rule, when there is no rule vntill aft^ they be acted.
These Parlament Protestants proceede furth^ Feild supr. pag. 239. in this question, and plainely say, with greate a^lowance: The third kind of Tradition is that somme ^ Christian doctrine, and explication of the seuerall par^ thereof, which the first Christians receauinge of the sa^ Apostles, that deliuered to them the Scriptures, co^mended to posteritie. This may rightly be named a trad^tion, for that wee neede a plaine and distinct explicati^ of things, which are somewhat obscurely contained the Scripture. The fourth kinde of tradition, is the cont^nued practise of such, as neither are contained in t^ Scripture expressely, nor the example of such practi^
 expressely there deliuered of this sorte is the Baptisme of Infants, which is therefore named a tradition, because it is not expressely deliuered in the Scripture, that the Apostles did baptize infants, nor any expresse precept there founde, that they should doe it. Which their rule of Religion in these Articles thus further iustifieth: The Baptisme of yonge children is in any wise to be retained Art. of Engl. Prote. Relig. Art. 17. Communio^ Booke Tit. Baptisme. The. Rog. in Art. 27. Q. Elizab. and k. K. Iames Iniunct. and Canons. in the Church, as most agreable with the institution of Christ. Where they plainely in their publike rule of Religion make it a tradition, and no Scripture article. And by the co^mon practicall of their religion, their communion booke, so they practise, baptizinge all infants, and sayinge, all Christian Churches allowe of the baptisme of infants. And these Protestants are onely baptized when they are infants, and not after, and yet confesse it is most necessary to saluation.
And whereas they reiect all other Sacraments besides Art. of Relig. art. 25. this, and the Eucharist, or the Co^munion, as they terme it, confessing that these Sacraments be necessary to saluation, And yet denyinge the Eucharist to be, as Catholiks professe, the true body and blood of Christ, and sacrifice for the lyuinge and deade, they contradict themselues, for that they confesse that in this sinse it was generally vsed in Kinge Iames and Casanb. resp. ad Card. per. pa. 51. 52. 20. Middle^. Papistom. 20. p. 92. 113. 49. 137. 138. 47. 45. Feild l. 3. cap 29. p. 138. Couell. Exa. pag. 114. primitiue Church, that the Apostles so deliuered it by tradition, all Churches so obserued it, and it was heresie to deny it. Their words be: The sacrifice of the altar, and vnbloody sacrifice were vsed in the primitiue Church. The primatiue Church did offer sacrifice at the altar for the deade, sacrifice for the deade was a tradition of the Apostles, and the auncient Fathers. Aerius condemned the custome of the Church, in naming the deade at the altar, and offeringe the sacrifice of Eucharist,
 from them: and for this his rash and inconsiderate boldenesse, and presumption, in condemninge the vniuersall Church of Christ, he was iustly condemned. Their whole congregation, Kinge Iames, his councell, King Iames, Prot. Lords, Bish. and Doct. in Confer. at Ha^pt. Court. p. 13. 18. 35. 36 10. 11 Couell. ag. the plea. of the Innoc. p. 104. Barlow Serm. before the K. Sept. 21 an. 1607. part. 3. cap. 2. Protestant Bishops, and best learned Doctors* assembled in publike confere^ce, haue left thus concluded: The particular and personall absolution from sinne after confesson is apostolicall and a very Godly ordinance. That baptisme is to be ministred by priuate persons in time of necessity, is an holy Tradition. Bishops and Archbishops be diuine ordinations, confirmation i^ an apostolicall traditio^. And in their publike Rituall their communion booke, they testifie that confirmation was a Tradition of the Apostles, hath an externall signe also, vsed by them, and giueth grace which by the 25. Article of their religion maketh ^ Communion booke of Engl. Protest. Titul. Confirmation. @. Almighty. Prot. of Religion art. 25. a Sacrament. So that to insist onely vpon these graunted Traditions, not contained in Scripture by these Protestants, and yet so necessary to saluation as they by their greatest allowance and authority deliuer, wee may not say as this Article doth Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary for saluation.
These men also deliuer vnto vs, with greate approbation Articul. 6. supr. (makinge the Author of that worke, and for the same, a Bishop) certaine sure rules to knowe such true Thraditions by, in these words Rules by which wee may Iudge which are true and Indubitate Feild. Books of the Church l. 4. pag. 242. August. l. 4. contr. Donat. c. 23. Traditions. The first rule is deliuered by Sainct Augustine. Quod vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, nec Concili^^ Institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. Whatsoeuer the whole Church holdeth, not ordained by Councels; but beinge euer holden, it is most rightly belieued to haue
 beene deliuered by Apostolike authority. The second Feild supr l. 4 c. 21. p. 242. c. 5. pag. 202. Kinge Iames and Confer. at Hampton. Couel def o^ Hooker. Ormer pict pap. p. 184 Down. l. 2. Antichr. pag. 105. Sutcliffe Subuers. pag. 57. rule is, whatsoeuer all or the most famous, and renowned in all ages, haue constantly deliuered, as receaued from them, that went before them, no man contradictinge, or doubting of it, may be thought to be an Apostolicall Tradition. The third rule, is the constat Testimony, of the Pastors of an Apostolike Church, successiuely deliuered. Amongst Apostolike Churches the Church of Rome is more specially to be obeyed, reuerenced, and respected. The Church of Rome is our mother Church, it was a rule to all both in doctrine and ceremonies when it was in her florishinge and best estate. The Church of Rome was the cheife and onely Church. It was a note of a good Christia^ to cleane vnto the Romane Apostolicall Church. Euery Church ought to haue respect to the Church of Rome, for her eminent principality. And our English Protestant antiquaries and Diuines, haue generally giuen their allowance, that the Church of Rome both in this and the next age, when Britayne did receaue the most pure Religion of Christ, from thence, was most holy and vnspotted free from all error. Therefore whatsoeuer wee doe, or may bringe in generall, or particular, for vnwritten traditions, either from this so renowned Apostolike Church in this time, from the whole Church, or the most famous and renowned in this age, beinge our Protestants owne allowed rules, and to be denied by none, must needs be euidence and testimony vndeniable, in this, and all others their questioned Articles. Frst I exemplifie in the Apostles Creede stiled by our Protestants before, a sundry comprehension of the cheife heads of Christian Religion, Protest. supr. Ruffin in exposit. Symboli and alij. a rule of the Churches faith, This was deliuered by the Apostles, by tradition, not by Scripture, but before
 the Scriptures of the new Testament, wer^ written, as both they and the auncient Fathers by ^ common consent of the whole Church of Christ are witnesses. And the same consent of Christ Church with these our Protestants, in these their Articles so conclude, of Sainct Athanasius, and the Art. 8. of prot. Religion. Nicen Creede, in these words: The three Creeds, Nicen Creede, Athanasius Creede, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creede, ought throughly to b^ receaued and beleeued. And so generally they obserue although the reason which they immediatly yeel^ thereof, for they may be proued by most certaine warrants of holy Scripture, is childish and impertinent^ for being confessed that the Apostles Creede wa^ deliuered onely by tradition of the Apostles and by that authoritie receaued before the Scriptures either receaued or written, this Creede could not possibly be receaued by the written warrant of Scriptures but vnwritten tradition and warrant of th^ Apostles. And although the Nicen and S. Athanasius Creeds were written longe after this time, y^ they were both written and receaued in the Churc^ before the Scriptures were generally allowed an^ receaued, as both the auncent Fathers, and Protestants haue acknowledged before, and it is testifie by the publike warranted Protestant glosse vpo^ Prot. Glosse by authority of Church of Engl. in Art. 8. these their Articles, that very many both old an^ late writers, euen whole sects and profession^ namely (to vse their owne words, Ebionites, Tr^theits, Antitrinitarians, Apollinarians, Arians, M^nichies, Nestorians, Origenians, Familists, and An^baptists with others) are Aduersaries vnto, and deniers that these Creeds, may be proued by hol^ Scripture. Much more doe they, and many other
 both Catholiks and Protestants themselues deny, that all and singular their articles necessary to saluation, may so be proued.
And to come to the holy and happy Apostolike writers, and Saincts which liued, and wrote in this first age, and first hundred of yeares, to wit S. Linus Sainct Clement, Sainct Denys the Areopagite, S. Martial, Sainct Ignatius, Sainct Policarpus, or any other of whom any worke is extant: I shall make it S. Ignat. epist. ad Smyrn. Theod. dialo. Euseb. l. 3. c. 31. Hiera^. lib. de vir. Illust. S. Bern. Serm. 7. in ps. 9. Marc. Michal Carnoten. lib. de vir. illustr. Dion. Carth. ad l. Areop. de diuin. nom. Sint. Sin. lib. 2. Ignat. ep. ad S. Ioh. 1. 2. ad B. Mar. Virg. B. Mar. epist. ad Ignat. S. Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen. Euseb. hist. l. 3. ca. 33. ^. Chrisost. orat. de tra^sl. S. Ignatij. Foelix Rom. ep. ad Zenon. Imperat. synod. S. Constant. Theodoret. Immutabil. dialog. 1. euident that in euery Article in this Protestant Religion contained in their booke of the Articles thereof, they dissented from these Protestants, and they and the Apostolike Church then vniuersally agreed in, and professed the same doctrine, which the present Roman Church doth at this day in all points. This will plainely appeare in euery Article hereafter, and therefore in this place I will onely cite Sainct Ignatius, as a sufficient pawne or pledge for the rest, vntill I come to them in the Articles followinge. He had personally seene. our Sauiour, was an eyewitnesse of his resurrection, had written vnto, visited, was instructed and confirmed in Christian Religion, both by the words and writinge of the blessed Virgin Mary Mother of Christ. Hee was disciple to Sainct Ihon the Euangelist, disciple and immediate Successor, of Sainct Peter the Apostle at Antioch, consecrated there Bishop by him, as Sainct Chrysostome Patriarke there, Sainct Felix Pope of Rome and Theodoret testifie: S. Ignatius dextera Petri ordinatus Episcopus Ecclesiae Antiochenae, per magni Petri dexteram Pontificatum suscepit. And so consecrated Bishop, was taught himselfe, and taught others before either the Ghospels, or other parts of the new Testament were written.
 Hee liued longe Patriarke of Antioch the cheif^ and Apostolike See of the Greeke Church, he die^ a blessed Martyr at Rome, the greatest of a^ Churches, he ioyned in Religion with the most renowned Churches, and Prelates, Apostles, and others of the Christian world, as the very Titles o^ his extant epistles to the Romans, Philippians, Ephesians, Smyrnians, Philadelphians, Magnesian^ Trallians and others. To Sainct Ihon the Apostl^ Sainct Policarpe, with others most famous among^ Christians, and all auncient writers, Sainct Hierome, Eusebius, Ireneus make him a most gloriou^ learned man and Sainct Eusebius testifieth that h^ Euseb l. 3. hist. cap. 32. Euseb. hist. l 3. c. 33. Hieron. l. de Scriptor. in S. Ignat. Gildas epist. de excid. and conquest. Britan. wrote a particular worke of the Apostles traditio^^ But those few and short Epistles which he wrote and receaued, as all, Greekes, Latines, and amonge ou^ primatiue Britans, the most auncient historian S* Gildas is an ample witnesse, will sufficiently prou^ vnto vs. That very many things euen necessary i^ Christian Religion and to saluation in our Protestants Iudgment, and in their opinion not containe^ in Scripture, were then taught, practised and generally receaued in the Church of Christ in the Apostles time. Concerninge the Church of Rome h^ thus stileth it: misericordiam in magnificentia altissim^ S. Ignatius epist. ad Romanos in initio. Dei Patris, and Iesu Christi vnigeniti filij, Ecclesia sanctificata and illuminata per voluntatem Dei (qui se^^ omnia, quae p^rtinent ad fidem and charitatem Iesu Christi Dei and Saluatoris nostri) quae and in Loco Romanae regionis, Deo digna, decentissima, beatificanda, laudand^ digna qua quis potiatur, castissima, and eximiae charitati^ Christi and Patris nomine fru^ns, spiri^uque plena. Th^ Rulinge Roman Church, sanctified, Illuminated, worth^ of God, most decent, blessed, to be praised, worthy to b^
 attained vnto, most chaste, of excellent charity enioyinge ^he name of Christ and his Father, and full of the holy Ghost: With other Titles of dignity and priuiledge, more then he giueth to any, or all, those principall Churches of Greece to which he wrote, and as greate and ample as any learned Catholike now ^eeldeth to the Church of Rome at this time, or ^eretofore, since then. Hee remembreth the same Ecclesiasticall Orders in the Church then, which Catholiks now and euer since obserue, as in the Church of Antioch founded by Sainct Peter and ^ainct Paul and their tradition there, Pauli and Petri ^istis discipuli ne perdatis depositum. Hee himselfe was there Bishop, besides whome it had Preists, ^eacons, Subdeacons, Exorcists, Readers, Iani^rs. Saluto sanctum Presbyterorum Collegium, saluto Epist. ad Antiochen. ^acros Diaconos. Saluto Hypodiaconos, Lectores, Ianito^s Exorcistas. And him that was to be Bishop after ^is martyrdome, as it was reuealed vnto him: opta^le illud nomen eius quem vid^o in spiritu locu^ meum ^nere, vbi Christum nactus fuero. Hee giueth them ^e same honor preeminence worth office and dig^ty which the Church of Rome now yeeldeth to ^em. All must honor and obey the Bishops. Omnes ^piscopum sequimini vt Christus Patrem. Kings and Epistol. ad Symrnen. ^ulers must be ruled by him being greatest in the ^hurch. Honora Deum vt omnium Authorem and Do^inum: Episcopum vero vt Principem Sacerdotum, ^iaginem Dei reserentem: Dei quidem, propter princi^tum: Christi vero propter Sacerdotium. Honorare ^ortet and Regem: nec enim Rege quisquam praestan^r, aut quisquam similis ei in rebus creatis: nec Epis^o qui Deo consecratus est pro totius mundi salute, ^icquam maius in Ecclesia. Nec inter principes quisquam
 similis Regi, qui in pace and optimis legibus subditos moderatur. Qui honorat Episcopum a Deo honorabitur: sicut qui ignominia afficit illum a Deo punietur. S^ enim Iure censebitur paena dignus, qui aduer sus Rege^ insurgit, vt qui violet bonas legum constitutione^ quanto put at is grauiori subiacebit supplicio, qui sine Episcopo aliquid egerit, concordiam rumpens, and decent^ rerum ordinem confundens? Sacerdotium enim est o^nium bonorum, quae in hominibus sunt Apex: qui a^uersus illud furit, non hominem ignominia afficit s^ Deum, and Christum Iesum primogenitum. Laici Di^ conis subijciantur, Diacom Presbyteris, Presbyteri Epicopo, Episcopus Christo. Principes subditi estote Caesa^milites Epist. ad Philadelphienses. principibus, Diaconi Presbyteris, Presbyteri v^ and Diacom at que omnis clerus simul cum omni populo militibus at que principibus sed and Cesare obediant Epicopo, Episcopus vero Christo, sicut Patri Christus, and ^ vnit as per omnia seruatur. Where wee plainely s^ there was no Princes supremacy in spirituall thin^ in those happy times, but Princes kings and Em^rors, as those of the cleargy and all others were s^iect and ought obedience to the Bishop, and preihood was the highest and most honorable dign^ in the world. And the honor which was due Kings themselues was inferior to that of Bisho^ Ego dico honorate Deum, vt authorem omnium and ^minum, Epistol. ad Smyren. Episcopum autem tanquam Principem Sa^dotum, Imaginem Dei ferentem, principatum qui^ secundum Deum, Sacerdotium vero secu^dum Christ^ and post hunc honorare oport^t etiam Regem. N^mo e^potior est Deo, neque similis illi, neque Episcopo hon^bilior, in Ecclesia Sacerdotium Deo gerenti pro mu^ salute, neque Regi quis similis in exercitu, pacem and neuolentiam omnibus principibus cogitanti. Where
 giueth an vnanswerable reason of the preeminence of Episcopall dignity before the Regall, though in good Kinge, because this ruleth onely in martiall ^nd temporall affaires, the Bishop in spirituall, the Church of God, his howse and Kingdome. And he ^hargeth all without exception to be subiect, not ^nely to the Bishop, but to Preists and Deacons ^uen vnder paine of eternall damnation. Exitimini S. Ignatius epist. ad Ephesios. ^ubiecti esse Episcopo, and Presbyteris and Diaconis, qui ^im his obedit, obedit Christo qui hos constituit. Qui vero his reluctatur, reluctatur Christo Iesu: qui autem ^on obedit filio, non videbit vitam, sed ira Dei manet ^uper eum. Praefractus enim contentiosus, and superbus ^t qui non obtemperat praestantioribus. And by that ^eading which the Canon law vseth, euen Princes ^nd all not obeying their Bishops are excluded both ^rom the society of the faithfull on earth and the Kingdome of heauen. Si vobis Episcopi, non obedieint S. Ignat. citat, C. Si autem. 11. quaest. 3. Iacob. Simanchal. dedignitare Episcopali. omnes clerici, omnesque Principes, at que reliqui pouli, non solum infames, sed etiam extorres a Regno ^ei, and consortio fidelium, ac a limitibus sanctae Eccle^ae alieni erunt: eorum est enim vobis obedire, vt Deo, ^ius legatione fungimini. And he plainely confineth bedience to temporall Princes, that it be not with reiudice of the spirituall, and danger of the soule. ^aesari subiecti estote in ijs in quibus subdi, nullum ani^ae S. Ignat. Epist. ad Antioc. periculum est. And saith plainely that a Bishop is ^boue all other principality and power. Quid aliud I. Ignat. Epist. ad Trallia* ^ Episcopus, quam is qui omni Principatu and potestate ^uperior est? And to expresse the lamentable estate ^f them which want true Bishops, Preists, and ^eacons, concludeth, there neither is nor can be ^y true Church, nor communion of Saints with^ut them. Sine his Ecclesia electa non est, nulla sine his
 Sanctorum congregatio, nulla Sanctorum collectio. An^ setteth downe their holy functions and offices to b^ such, that noe Protestants can possibly clayme t^ haue either Bishop, Preist, Deaco^, or other Clearg^ man amonge them. Sine Episcopo, nec Presbyter, n^ Epist. ad Magnesian. and ad Philadelph. Epist. ad Heronem. Diaconus, n^c Laicus quicquam facit. The Bishop^ saith he, doe baptize, offer sacrifice, giue orders, ^ vse Imposition of hands. Baptizant, sacrifica^t, eligu^ ordinant, manus imponunt. Nothing is to be done ^ the Church without their allowa^ce, no Sacrame^ ministred, he is dispenser of all spirituall busines, ^ Epist. ad Smyrn. is not lawfull for the Preists without his approb^tion, to baptize, to offer, to sacrifice, to say Mass^ Sine Episcopo nemo quicquam faciat eorum quae ad E^clesiam spectant. Rata Eucharistia habeatur illa q^ sub Episcopo fuerit, vel cui ipse concesserit. Non li^ sine Episcopo baptizare, neque offerre, neque sacrificiu^ immolare, neque dochen celebrare others reade, n^ que Missas celebrare, which is sufficiently express^ and approued in offerre, and sacrificium immola^ before. The Bishops did consecrate Virgins, an^ Mariages made by their warrant. Si quis potest in c^stitate Epist. ad Polycarp. permanere, ad honorem carnis Dominicae, vi^ iactantiam: and si idipsum statuatur sine Episcopo c^ ruptum est. D^cet vero, vt and ducentes vxores, and n^bentes, cum Episcopi arbitrio coniungantur. The Preis^ Epist. ad Smyrn. and ad Heronem. besides their preaching, and ministring of Sacr^ments, did offer sacrifice, and say Masse, as is befo^ expressed. And the Deacons ministred vnto the ^shops, and Preists in their holy sacrifice. Diacon^ Sacerdotum minister. Sacerdotes sacrificant. And w^tinge to Sainct Heron a Deacon of the Church ^ Antioch hauing immediately spoken before ho^ the Preists did offer sacrifice, he saith, that he d^
 ^inister to them in the holy Sacrifice, as Sainct Stephen did to Sainct Iames the Apostle, and Preists ^ Hierusalem, prouing that they there said Masse, ^s the Preists of Antioch and other Churches did. ^uillis ministras, vt Sanctus ille Stephanus Iacobo and ^esbyteris qui erant Hierosolimis. And in an other e^stle saith plainely, that Deaco^s ought to doe such ^ty in those misteries to Preists, as Sainct Ste^en Epistol. ad Trallian. did to Sainct Iames, Sainct Timothy and S. ^ucius, to Sainct Paul, Sainct Anacletus and Sainct ^lement, to Sainct Peter. Purum and inculpatum mi^sterium illis exhibent, vt S. Stephanus Beato Iacobo: ^motheus and Linus, Paulo* Anacletus and Clemens ^ero. And expresseth this their office in these plaine ^mes. Oportet Diaconis mysterio^um Christi; per omnia ^cere; nec enim ciborum and po^u^m ministri sunt, sed ^clesiae Dei administratores. The Geeke readinge ^eifely signifieth ministring in the holy sacrifice of ^asse, and so expresseth it selfe in this matter. (...). He re^embreth both altar and sacrifice, (...) in as plaine termes, as any present writers of ^e Roman Church now doth; and to manifest he ^h not meane such acts as Protestants terme sa^fice, and are so many as the different kindes of ^otion, but onely the externall common sa^fice, he saith, there is but one sacrifice and this sa^ice the onely flesh and blood of Christ. Vna est Epistol. ad Philadelp. ^ Christi Iesu Domini nostri, vnus illius sanguis qui ^ nobis eff^sus est, vnus panis omnibus confractus, and ^us calix, qui omnibus distributus est, vnum altare ^^ Ecclesiae. The prayer and words of a Preists, are Epistol. ad Ephes. ^uch force, that they place Christ among vs. V^s siue alterius precatio ta^^^irum virium est, vt Christum^nter
 illos statuat. It is a preparatiue of eterni^ a preseruatiue against death, procuring life in G^ and a medicine expelling all euill. Pharmacum ^ mortalitatis, mortis antidotum, vitamque in Deo c^cilians Epis. ad Rom. per I^sum Christum, and medicamentum, o^ expellens mala. The breade or foode of God, heau^ly breade, the flesh of Christ the sonne of God, ^ Ignat. apud Theodoret. Dialog. 3. blood of Christ. Panis Dei, panis caelestis qui est ^ Christi filij Dei, and potus sanguis illius. The Eucha^ which is the flesh of our Sauiour, which suff^ for our sinnes, which his Father raised againe. ^ charistia est caro Saluatoris quae pro peccatis n^^ passa est, quam pater sua benignitate suscitauit. T^ holy sacrificing Bishops and Preists, and Dea^ ministring vnto them, in those sacred misteri^ they were farre from the pretended Protes^ cleargy, which haue to their vttermost endea^ euer afflicted such holy Functions, especiall^ England with most bitter edicts and persecuti^ and the sacred Priests of that, and for that onely ^fession, with most barbarous and cruell d^athes* seing by the most constant Testimony and pra^ of this blessed Apostolike age, no true Church ^ or could be without them, no Protestant com^ or congregation, all of them wantinge such ^ consecrated Bishops, Preists, and Ecclesias^ persons, and Professors, can possibly haue the ^ and Title of a true Church and religion: And ^ tending (as they doe, that these sacrificing hol^ders, without which no true Church can be, a^ contained in Scripture, They must needs ^ They were deliuered vnto the Church, and ^ Church well founded in these so essentiall th^ by Tradition. Which they must needs lik^
 ^raunt of these ensuing doctrines and practises in Religion vsed in the same time, and remembred ^y this and other Apostolike writers of that first ^ge.
First whereas Protestants ascribe iustification to ^nely Faith, being a cheife foundation of their new ^eligion: Sainct Ignatius and this happy age knew ^o such doctrine, but the contrary, That faith was Epistol. ad Ephesios. ^ely to begin Iustification, but it was perfected by ^arity and good deeds. Non vos laedet aliqua diabo^a cogitatio, si vt Paulus perfectam habueritis in ^ristum and fidem and charitatem, quae initium vitae and ^is est. Principium vitae fides: finis eiusdem charitas. ^ ac autem duo quoties in vnum coeunt, Dei hominem ^ficiunt. And againe: Eleemosyna and fide expiantur Epist. ad Heronem. Epist. ad Mar. Cassobolit. Epist. ad Tarsen. ad Rom. Epist. ad Philadelphenses. ^ccata. Praesens labor modicus, multa quae hinc expe^atur merces. Nihili pendo supplicia haec, neque tanti ^io vitam meam, vt eam plus amem quam Dominum. ^uare paratum me offero igni, feris, gladijs, cruci, dum^do Christum videam Saluatorem and Deum meum. ^secro vos, quot quot paenitentia ductir^dierint ad v^atem Ecclesiae, suscipite illos cum omni man suetudi^ vt per bonitatem and patientiam resipiscentes ex dia^i laqueis, digni iam Christo facti salutem consequan^ aternam in regno Christi. Illibatum mihi est ar^uum Crux Christi, mors and resurrectio eius, and fides, ^ quae cupio iustificari precibus vestris. Qui honorat Epistol. ad Smyrnenses. ^phetum in nomine Prophetae, mercedem Prophetae ac^et, nimirum qui honorat vinctum Iesu Christi, ^rtyrum accipiet mercedem. Nihil vobis apud Deum ^ibit eorum, quae in illos contulistis: det vobis Domi^ vt inneniatis misericordiam a Domino in illa die. ^inam meus spiritus cum vestro commutari possit, and ^icula haec m^a, quae non fastidistis, nec obea erubuistis.
 Quare nec de vobis erubescet consummata spes ^sus Christus. Precationes vestrae appropinquarunt ^ Antiochenam Ecclesiam, and pacem habet. Deposita v^stra, Epist. ad Policarpum. sunt opera vestra, vt quae accepistis, eadem dig^ Deo reportetis. Antiochena Ecclesia pacem est nacta p^ orationes vestras, and ego tranquilliori animo factus su^ in securitate Dei, si per passionem Deum assecutus fu^ dis^ipulus inueniar per orationes vestras. Quibus ^ Epist. ad Hero^. Deus inuenire misericordiam a Domino in illa die pr^ter of ficium and ministerium erga nos. Orate pro m^, ^ Epistol. ad Trallianos. in Dei misericordia charitate vestra indigeo, vt dig^fiam sorte ad quam assequendam iam destinor, ne rep^bus inueniar. Where wee euidently see, by many ^stimonies, that the Imagined Protestant faith n^ther doth, nor possibly can iustifie any man; b^ charity, almes, pennance, praier and other h^ works, and deeds of Christians, are meritorious ^ iustifie them.
And that Protestants paradoxe of the certai^ of Saluation is most certainely false. Which ^ confirmeth also in other places, as where he tak^ vpon him the knowledge of the celestiall spir^ their orders, and dignities, yet he plainely mak^ himselfe ignorant of his owne saluation, m^ Epistol. ad Tr^ll. supr. more not certaine thereof. Our Protesta^ pretend for themselues. Angelicos ordines, Arch^ gelorum militiarumque differentias, thronorum p^ testatumque distantias, principatuum magnific^nt^ Cherubim Seraphimque excell^ntias, spiritus sub^^tatem and Domini regnum, and in^omparabil^m Dei ^tris omnipotentis diuinitatem; haec ^um nouerim, ^ continuo perfectus prorsus ego sum, multa d^sunt^ Deo d^relinquar. Where wee see him further to h^ described the heauenly hierarchy and order^
 heauen as Catholiks now doe and Protestants take no notice of them.
And he doth not onely thus describe them, but assureth vs, they know the things on earth, and so by protestant allowance may be praied vnto, as Catholiks vse, and they condemne. Praecipio tibi coram Epistol. ad Heron. Deo vniuersorum, and coram Christo praesente, and Sancto Spiritu and administratorijs Angelorum ordinibus, ^ustodi depositum meum, quod ego and Christus tibi commendauimus. Where the holy Angels doe not onely knowe our actions as Christ and the blessed Trinity doth, but assist and minister vnto vs. And is ^o farre from denying this knowledge, to Saints, and Angels in heauen, that he yeeldeth knowledge of affayres on earth namely of the Passion of Christ euen to the soules which were in Limbus patrum, or Epistol. ad Trallian. Purgatory at that time. Vere crucifixus and mortuus videntibus caelestibus, terrenis and ijs qui sub terra ^detincbantur: caelestibus quidem inspicientibus, ni^nirum incorporeis naturis: terrenis vero, vt Iudaeis and Romanis, and caeteris qui tunc temporis crucifixo Domino aderant: subterraneis autem, ijs videlicet, qui plurimi cum Domino resurrexerunt, multa enim, ^nquit, corpora Sanctorum, qui dormierant, cum Matth. 27. Domino resurrexerunt, monumentis apertis. Descendit ad infernum solus, regressus est cum multitudi^^, and septum illud aeternum rupit, and medium pari^^^m illius destruxit. By this wee finde, as Catholicks hold, and Protestants deny, a place where soules were, and whence there is deliuery and redemption, and not euerduring Torment, and desperation, of the reprobate, and damned in their hell, and place of eternall punishme^t, of which there is no end or freedome to be had, or hoped for. And therefore it's
 a place from whence a Ransome will make deliuery, and there is no merit or deseruing after thi^ life, as our Protestants most freely graunt.
This freedome of soules from that place of punishment, purgatory, or howsoeuer wee shall nam^ it, is principally to be procured, and effected, by th^ sacrifices, prayers, almes and other meritoriou^ deeds, and workes of holy Christians still liuing i^ the estate and condition of deseruinge. Such as S* Ignatius hath before remembred. And other Apostolike writers of this age, as Sainct Denis the Areopagite, and Sainct Clement Schollers of the tw^ greate Apostles Sainct Peter and Sainct Paul, to b^ cited with others in this particular question in th^ proper place thereof, beinge of the same religion i^ all points with Sainct Ignatius, and the holy Churc^ of Christ, doe as plainely expresse, and deliuer fo^ the constant custome practise, and doctrine of, th^ time, to offer sacrifice, pray, and doe other hol^ works, for faithfull people departed out of th^ life, as any learned writer of the present Roma^ Church doth in these dayes. And Sainct Ignati^ with much honor remembreth them, especially S* Clement Scholler to Sainct Peter and Paul an^ Pope of Rome Papa beatissimus Clemens Petri ^ Pauli Auditor, and testifieth, that he liued in perp^tuall Epistol. ad Mar. Cassob. chastity, in castitate exegi^ hanc vitam. Whic^ he affirmeth of other Apostolike Preists and B^shops of that age Sainct Timothy Sainct Titus ^ Epist. ad Philadelph. Euodius his predecessor at Antioche, and of himsel^ in diuers places; So that then neither the Preists ^ the Latine or Greeke Church, Antioche beinge th^ cheifest, and where the name of Christians fi^^ began, were maried, but continually liued a^
 ^heir life time in chastity, in castitate exegerunt hanc vitam.
And therefore they were honored in those dayes, ^nd the holy Maydens which had professed virgi^ity, were compared to the Preists in this point ^f perfection, and for it honored as they were. ^as quae in virginitate degunt in pretio habete, velut Epistol ad Tarsens. Christi Sacerdotes. It is manifest, their were Col^edges or Nunneries of such vowed and professed ^irgins and Nonnes then. Saluto Collegium virgi^um. Epistol. ad Philippen. Epistol. ad Smyrn. Epistol. ad Polycarp. And they liued in perpetuall virginity. Saluto ^as quae in perpetua degunt virginitate. They were ^rofessed by the Bishop, whether men or women: ^i quis potest in castitate permanere, ad honorem carms ^ominicae, sine iactantia permaneat* si idipsum statuatur ^ne Episcopo corruptum est. And of this profession and ^onsecration of virgins, he further putteth them, ^nd all in memory in this manner: virgines agnos^ant, Epistol. ad Antiochen. cui seipsas consecrarunt.
And he proueth, That it is in the power and free ^ill of man, to doe these, and all holy duties in a Christian life, by the grace of Christ, and noe man ^ecessitated to sinne, heauen and hell good and bad ^n the free will and election of man. Decet non modo Epistol. ad Magnes. vocari Christianos, sed esse, nec enim dici, sed esse, bea^os facit. Obseruationi proponitur vita, mors inobedien^iae, and singuli, qui hoc aut illud delegerunt, ^n eius quod ^nuenerint locum abituri sunt, fugianius mortem, and eli^amus vitam. In hominibus enim geminas not as inue^iri dico, and hanc esse veri numismatis, illam vero advlterimi. Pius homo numisma est a Deo excusum: im^ius ementitum, adulterimum, and illegitimum, non a ^eo, sed a diabolo ^ffectum. Non quod velim dicere ^uas esse hominis naturas, sed vnum esse hominem, qui
 iam Dei, iam diabolisit. Si quis pietati studet, Dei ho^ est; si impie agat, diaboli est: non id factus per natura^ sed animi arbitrium. He proueth that concupiscen^ Epist. ad Ephesios. without consent, condemneth not nor is sinne a^ protestants hold. Cum nulla in vobis sit conscupisce^tia, quae vos inquinet, and supplicium adferat, secundu^ Deum viuite. Non vos laedet aliqua diabolica cogitati^ si vt Paulus perfectam habueritis in Christu^, and fide^ and charitatem. He hath before in one place spoke^ of foure Sacraments, Baptisme, the Sacrament o^ Christs blessed body and blood, Orders, and Confirmation, by al expositors: Baptizant, Sacrifican^ Epistol. ad Heron. Eligunt, manu^ imponunt. He hath asscribed iustification vnto pennance, and so allowed it in that degre^, and although he hath so dignified the virginall life, and saith it is better praestantius, (...)* Epist. ad Philadelph. then wedlocke, he giueth so much honor vnt^ Marriage, that it was not to be performed withou^ the Bishops assent and allowance. Decet vero v^ Epist. ad Polycarpum. and ducentes vxores, and nubentes, cum Episcopi arbitrio coniugantur, vt nuptiae iuxta Domini praeceptu^ sint, non autem ad concupiscentiam.
Our protestants generally and absolutely deny these holy Christian doctrines, and practises, to be contained in Scriptures, or to be proued by them; Therefore they must needs yeeld that that primatiue and Apostolike Church by so greate and liuing* then witnesse, held and professed them by tradition, and certaine it is, that many bookes of Scripture were neither generally receaued, nor written, when the things were so generally vsed, and professed, not onely in the commaundinge Greeke Church of Antioch, where Sainct Peter, S. Paul, S. Euodius and Sainct Ignatius professed, and practized
 them: Pauli and Petri fuistis discipuli, ne perda^^s Epist. ad Antiochen. depositum. Mementore Euodij beatissimi Pastoris ves^^i, qui primus vobis ordinatus est ab Apostolis Antistes* Where the disciples were first called Christia^s, when Sainct Peter and Sainct Paul came thither, and there founded the Church: Antiochiae primum Epist. ad Magnesian. discipuli appellati sunt Christiam cum Petrus and Paulus fundarent Ecclesiam: But in all the renowned Churches before remembred, and in all the whole Christian world, at that time, by the preachinge and tradition of the holy Apostles, as the same Apostolike man thus witnesseth: Scribo ad vos, moncoque Epist. ad Philadelph. vt vna praedicatione, vna Eucharistia vtamini. Vna enim est caro Domini nostri Iesu Christi, vnus illius sanguis, qui pro nobis effusus est, vnus item panis omnibus confractus, and vnus calix qui omnibus tributus est: vnum altare omni Ecclesiae, and vnus Episcopus cum presbyterorum collegio, and diaconis. Quandoquidem est vnus est ingenitus Deus and Pater, and vnus vnigenitus Filius Deus, verbum and homo, vnus Paracletus Spiritus veritatis, and vna praedicatio and fides vna, and vnum baptisma, and vna Ecclesia, quam suis sudoribus and laboribus fundarunt Sancti Apostoli a fimbus terrae vsque ad fines, in sanguine Christi. Vos itaque oportet vt populum peculiarem, and gentem sanctam omnia perficere concordibus animis in Christo. And directly Epistol. ad Heron. concludeth, that whosoeuer shall teach otherwise, then the Traditions of the Church be, he is to be accompted a wolfe amonge sheepe, though he be otherwise, a man of credit, fasteth, liueth chastely, doth miracles, and prophecieth: Quicumque dix^rit quippiam praeter ea quae constituta sunt, (...), tamet si fide dignus sit, quamuis signa edat, quamuis prophetet, pro lupo illum habeas qui subouina
 pelle exitium pestemque aedfert ouibus. Wee may add^ vnto these greatest solemnities; and festiuall daye^ of the Cristians, receaued in the Church in th^ time by tradition, and not Scripture, and by th^ same authority of tradition without Scripture, th^ feasts and highest festiuities of the Iewes euen thos^ which were solemnely set downe and commau^de^ in Scripture to be religiously obserued, quite eu^cuated and vtterly reiected.
The Sabbath which is now our saterday, wa^ with greate ceremony and solemnity deliuered i^ Scripture to be kept euery weeke, and that whic^ wee call sonday was commaunded to be a working day. Yet all Christians in this time, by tradition di^ celebrate that old working day next after the ol^ Sabbath, for our Lords day, consecrated to Christ^ resurrection as the cheifest of all dayes. Post Sabbatum Epistol. ad Magnesianos. and epist. ad Trallian. omnis Christi amator Dominicum celebret diem, resurrectioni consecratam Dominicae, Reginam and principem omnium dierum, in qua, and vita nostra exorta est* and per Christum mors deuicta: as all Christians now also doe. The feast of Easter was also chau^ged, with other solemnities, and they were accompted as cursed persecutors of Christ, and his Apostles, which obserued otherwise, or kept any festiuity o^ the Iewes, although before commaunded in Scriptures. Si quis cum Iudaeis celebrat Pascha, aut Symbol^ Epist. ad Philadelphenses. festiuitatis corum recipit, particeps est eorum, qui Dominum occiderunt, and Apostolos eius. He proueth plainely, that both the principall feasts and fasts also o^ the Church, as Lent and others were then in vse, by this authority of Tradition: Festiuitates ne dehonestetis, Epistol. ad Philippen. quadragesimale iciunium ne spernatis, contine^ enim imitationem conuersationis Dominicae. Post Passionis
 Do^^^i^ae hebdomadam ieiunare quartis and sextis (...) negligatis. Si qui^ Dominicam diem ieiunarit, ^ic Christi interfector est. He often there remembreth the perpetuall virginity of the Blessed Virgin M^ry: Mariae Virginitas and admitandu^ ille partus: Virginem esse quae parit. The forme and manner of offering the holy Sacrifice of Christs body and blood, of consecrating Bishops, Preists, and other Clergy men, of ministringe so many Sacraments, as he hath remembred, the publike Church seruice, to which he bindeth all, the order of receauing peni^ents, the custome and limitation of their vsed f^sts, and whatsoeuer almost appertaining to the holy vse and exercise of Christian Religion in that Apostolike age, was knowne, and practized by this blessed disciple and all Apostolike men which was deliuered and vsed onely by tradition, and so descended to later ages and posterities, no Scripture prescribing Christians, any such requisite instruction, in so necessary and essentiall parts of Religion* or the true practise and profession thereof, to which all true Christians vnder paine, and daunger of euerlasting damnation were bound.
And as Sainct Ignatius, so also testifie the other holy and Apostolike writers of this age as I shall most clearely proue and cite them in euery particular article, questioned by these Teachers. For this present it will be more then needfull to remember what they write hereof in generall termes. Sainct Denis the Areopagite conuerted by Sainct Paul the Apostle, writinge of Christian necessary doctrines, saith plainely that the Apostles deliuered some of them by tradition onely without writinge, as they did some by writinge: partim scriptis partim
 non scriptis suis institutionibus ex Sacrosanctis legib^ Dionysius Areopag. l. Eccles. Hierarc. c. 1. nobis tradiderunt. And proueth that in this Apostolike time, the Christia^ mysteries were neither communicated by writing nor word for their greate reuerence; but to holy and perfect Christians. Vide ^^ Sancta Sanctorum enunties; sed reuereberis ea patius* and quae occulti Dei sunt; cogniti^ne mentis and ^nimi ^ honore habebis ac preteo: ita tamen vt ea and minus perfectis non tradas, and cum ijs folis, qui Sancti erunt, cu^ Sancta illustratione, pro sacrarum rerum dignitate communices. And setteth downe expressely. That th^ Apostolike Church then did not permit Cate^h^mens, Energumens, or penitents to be present at the the holy misteries. Catechumen^s, and Energ^menos, Cap. 5. quique in poenitentia sunt, Sanctae Hiererchiae mos pa^itur quidem audire sacram psalmorum modulationem, diuinamque sacrarum Scripturarum recitationem: a^ sacra autem operae quae deinceps sequuntur, at que mysteria spectanda, non eos comiocat, sed perfectos ocul^^ eorum qui digni sunt. And testifieth what greate Cap. care the Christians then had, to conceale their ceremonies.
Sainct Timothy also, as this holy writer proueth, Dionys. supr. c. 1. S. Dionys. l. de diuin. nomin. cap. 3. Clem. Rom. ep. 1. 2. 3 4. 5. l Recog. l. co^stitut Apost. Chris. hom. 49. in Matth. Euseb. histor. Eccl. Cedren. Nicephor. Callist. hist. l. 2. Epiphan. in panar. Ruffin. praef. in Clem. Bed. in cap. S. Luc. Freculp. Lerouien. Chron. lib. 2. Synod. Sext. in Trullo. Ruffin. praef. and translat. oper. S. Clement. S. Proclus Patriarch. Constant. l. de tradit. diuinae Liturg. Nichol. Episcopus Methonen. l. de vero Christi corp. in Eucharist. Marcus Ephes. l. de corpore and sang. Christi. Bessar. l. de Sacr. Eucharist. Manuscript. Gallic. antiq. an. D. in S. Clem. Manuscript. Brit. antiquis. Protest. Collectio^ of priuate prayers. An. 1627. p. 147. 125. 107. 87. 35. Mat. Park. antiquit. Brit. pag. 47. was of this opinion and practise. S. Hieroth eus also Tutor to Sainct Denis did write a booke of Christians holy traditions. Hierotheus clarissim^s praeeeptor noster elementa Theologica magnac^m la^de collegerit. And this before S. Denis write.
The Apostolike Traditions collected together, and committed to writinge by Sainct Clement Successor to Sainct Peter at Rome, as both he himselfe, with other auncient and approued Authors, Greeke and Latine and generall councels witnesse, are so many that a short volume containeth them
 ^ot, yet in all things condemne Protestant Reli^io^, not approuing it in any one Article, wherein it ^ifferreth from Catholiks and the doctrine of the ^resent Roman Church, as will be made euident ^ the particular articles hereafter, manifestly ^nowne and confessed by Ruffinus his translation ^nd testimony, to haue bene then, and from the beginninge contained in his workes, and aggreable ^oth with the Apostolike doctrine of this age, and ^ther confessed vnspotted times after, as in the ^ourth hundred yeare of Christ, wherein Ruffinus ^ued, and the Church of Rome at this time, wherein ^ee now liue. I will onely in this place exemplifie ^ the publike liturgy, Masse, or Church sacrifice pu^lished by him vnto the Church of Christ. Greeks ^atines, French, and our old brittesh antiquities and our Protestants the^selues confesse, That as Peter ^t Antioch, S. Marke at Alexandria, Sainct Iohn ^nd S. Andrew in Asia, So Sainct Clement wrote ^nd published a forme of Masse, and generally all Churches embraced it: Omne sque vniuersae Ec^esiae vbicumque sint, per eam quam Sanctus Cle^ens conscripsit liturgiam tradiderunt. In this so old, ^ vniuersall, so approued, wee finde protection of ^e Angels, Angelorum tutelas, honor to all Saincts, ^atriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confes^ors etc. Sanctis, Patriarchis, Prophetis, Iustis, Apo^olis, Martyribus, Confessoribus. Sanctorum martyrum ^emoriam colamus. Prayer for the faithfull deceased. ^roijs, qui in fide quieuerunt, oremus. The Ecclesia^icall orders which I haue before remembred from ^ainct Ignatius. That the holy sacrifice was offered ^r all Seruants of God. Offerimus tibi pro omnibus ^ui a saeculo placuerunt tibi. Wee finde virgins, and
 liuers in professed chastity. Pro virginibus and castit^ serua^tibus. The sacrifice of breade and wine made t^ body and blood of Christ. Corpus Christi, Sang^is Ch^sti. Epifcopus det oblatione^ d^cens, corpus Christi, and ^ mens dicat Amen. Diaconus teneat calicem, and qua^ tradit, dicat. Sanguis Christ^, calix vitae, and bibens ^cat Amen. And this very body and blood of Ch^ were receaued by the Co^municants, those kept ^ in godlinesse, procured remission of their sinn^ percepto pretioso corpore, and pretioso sanguine Chri^ gratias agamus ei, qui dignos nos reddidit precipie^ Sancta eius mysteria, Arogemus vt non in Iudici^ sed in salutem nobis fiant in v^ilitatem animae, and ^poris, in custodiam pietatis, in remissionem peccator^ in vitam futuri saeculi. The Preists which s^ Masse, were adorned with a sacrificing vestime^ signed themselues with the signe of the crosse, ^ so came to the altar. Orans pontifex vna cum Sacer^tibus; S. Procl. supr. S. Isod. l. 1. de off. ca. 15. Albin. lib. diuin. offic. c. de celebrat. Mis^ae. Egbert. Serm. de increment. and manif. ca^h. fidei. Steph. Edu. l. Sacr. altar. Paschas. Ra^b^rt. l. de corpore and sang* Chr^sti. Mich. Singel. in vit. S. Dion. Areopag. Epiph. l. de her. in Andian. and Messal. Nicephor l. ^. c. 18. induensque vestem splendidam, and stans ad a^re, trophaeo crucis se consignans infronte.
That the holy traditions could not but be fro^ the Apostles, from whom Sainct Clement ^ceaued them, both Sainct Proclus and other w^nesses without exception giue vs able testimo^ multi diuini Pastores, qui Apostolis successerunt sa^rum diuinae liturgiae misteriorum rationem explicant^ scriptis mandatam Ecclesiae tradiderunt, in quibus ^^mi and clarissimi sunt S. Clemens, summi illius Apo^^lorum discipulus, and successor, qui sacro sancta illa ^^steria, a sanctis Apostolis sibi reuelata in lucem e^dit.
Our old brittish manuscript of the first instit^tion of the Ecclesiasticall office especially in Fra^ and Britaine most concerninge vs euen as our Pr^^sta^t
 Antiquaries intitle it, prima Institutio and varie^^ Manuscript. Brit. ant^q. de prima Institutione Eccl. officij. Ecclesiastici scruitij, praecipue in Britannia and Gal^ae, doth also assure vs, That S. Trophimus, Sainct ^hotinus, and others, disciples of the Apostles, which Antiquaries agree, Sainct Clement sent into ^raunce and these parts) did vse this Romane forme ^f Masse, digested by Sainct Clement, and in the ^rench persecution it was carried to him againe at ^ome to be perused. Beatus Trophimus Episcopus Arelatensis, and Sanctus Photinus Martyr and Episcopus ^ugdunensis, discipulus S. Petri Apostoli cursum Ro^anum in Gallijs tradiderunt. Inde postea relatione beati ^hotini Martyris cum quadraginta and octo Martyribus ^etrusi in ergastulum, ad beatum Clementem quartum ^ci, successorem beati Petri Apostoli deportauerunt. Where it hath the warrant and testimony of the ^ost glorious Apostolike men and Martyrs in ^his part of the world. All the formes and Orders ^f Masse, ascribed to the Apostles, to Sainct Basil, ^ainct Chrysostome, and whosoeuer Greeke or ^atine, conspire and agree with this of Sainct Cle^ent in all and euery tradition denied by our Pro^estants, and vsed by him. Sainct Denis the Areo^agite, and Sainct Martiall whom with others he ^ent into Fraunce renowned among the Apostolike writers of this time, haue the same and more. I haue ^lready spoken of Sainct Denis, and shall more spe^ially hereafter. Sainct Martiall, who saith he was present at Christs Ascension in heauen: Testes su^us, Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. cap. 2. Martial. supr. cap. 3. quia eum ascendere in coelum vidimus, He testi^ieth that the Priests then ministred life in their ^oly sacrifice, Sacerdotes Dei omnipotentis vitam tri^uunt in calice and viuo pane. Sacrificium Deo Creatori ^ffertur in ara. Sacrifice on the Altar. The Altar dedicated
 to God and Sainct Stephen. Dedicata in ^mine Domini Dei Israel and ipsius testus Stephani. T^ sacrifice was the body and blood of Christ offe^ by the Masse: cuius (Christ) corpus and sanguinem vitam aeternam offerimus, for obtaining life. T^ same body of Christ which the Iewes crucified ^ offered in Masse, and for to obtaine eternall life, a^ Christ so ordained and Instituted. Quod Iudaei ^ inuidiam immolaucrunt, nos causa salutis nostrae in ^ sanctificata proponimus, scientes hoc solo remcdio n^ vitam praestandam, and mortem effugandam. Hoc e^ ipse Dominus noster iussit nos agere in sui commemo^tionem. He giueth as much power and reuerence^ Cap. 8. the crosse of Christ, signe, and vse thereof as. S. C^ment did, or any learned Catholike now do^ Cruce Domini semper in mente, in ore, in signo ten^ Crux enim Domini armatura vestra inuicta contra S^thanam, gal^a custodiens caput, lorica protegens pect^ clypeus tela maligni repellens, gladius iniquitatem ^ angelicas insidias peruersae potestatis sibi propinqu^ nullo modo Sinens. Hoc solo signo caelestis victoria d^ est nobis; and per crucem baptisma Dei sanctificatum e^ He teacheth that the Church of Christ shall ne^ Cap. 11. fayle: firma Ecclesia Dei and Christi, nec cadere, nec d^rumpi poterit vnquam.
He affirmeth, Christ co^stituted three degrees, t^ Martial epist. ad Tolosanos. cap. 8. 9. married, widowhood, better, viduitatem in pr^mio maiori, virginity the third, most excellent, an^ angelike, tertium excellentem gradum honestatis ^ virginitate demonstrate nobis perfectum, and per oni^ simile^ angelicae dignitati. And that it was then vowe^ euen by such as were espoused, as namely by S. V^leria Virgin and Martyr, spouse of the King the^ called Stephen by S. Martial his preaching: Vir^
 ^aleria sponsa Regis terrestris, sed melius sponsa Re^is coelestis, quae per meam praedicationem, virginitatem ^entis and corporis Deo deuouerat, gladio decollata. Demochar. l. 2 Petr. de Natal l 1. Bed. 16. cal. Ian. Anton. paet. 1 cap. 19. Guliel. Eisengrencent. 1. part 5. Man^. fast. l. 8. Antonin. part. 1. Petr. de natal. l. 9 Bed. 8. cal. nou. Ado. Treu. ib. Volater. l. 3. 16. That S. Lazarus whom Christ raised from death, ^ishop of Marsiles, said Masse in the same manner, ^ S. Maximus also, both the French Antiquities, ^ their sacrifying or massing vestures still reserued ^ the Cathedrall Church there, are sufficient testi^onys: in cathedrali Basilica, and caput, and vestes in qui^s Missas celebrabat adhuc bodie conseruantur and mon^antur. S. Martha Sister of S. Mary Magdalen ^ad many Virgins and Nunnes with her, and S. ^onto 70. Monkes in one place, in an other 300. ^o in all other Apostolike Persons in Fraunce ag^eeing in the same onely true profession of Reli^on. For Britaine it is euident before, it receaued ^hristianity before the Scripture of the new Testa^ent was either receaued, knowne of, or for the ^ost part written. And yet the Christians here ^aied vnto Saincts, and Angels, for the dead, reue^nced the signe of the crosse, and other holy Images, ^d sacred Reliks, said, or heard Masse, and pra^ized other Christian rites and duties, which pro^stants deny to be contained in, or proued by ^cripture.
Tertullian lyuing and writing as many testifie, ^en Protestants, before Pope Eleutherius time, Tertull. l. de praescription. Magdeburg. Centu^. 3. col. 34. c. 4. col. 240. 241. Sutcl. subu. p. 4. Whitg. def. Respon. pag. 96. ^d witnessing Britayne had in his dayes receaued ^e faith of Christ euen in those parts thereof whe^er the Pagan Romans could neuer come, loca ^omanis inaccessa, speaketh of the traditions before ^membred, as both his owne works, Catholiks ^d Protestants proue in these words: Tertullianus ^ genere de doctrina suae aetatis inquit eam consentire
 cum Ecclesijs Apostolicis, eamque consensum and c^ cordiam communem esse omniu^ Ecclesiarum in Europ^ in Asia, and in Africatestatur: That this the doctrine his time did agree with all Apostolike Churches: tha^ was the common consent and concordance of all ^ Churches in Europe, in Asia and in Afrike. And thou^ wee assigne a somewhat later time to Tertullian, others doe in the later end of the second age, ^ when he so confidently and generally assign^ this common consent of all Churches of Britai^ Fraunce, Spaine Italy all Europe Asia and Afri^ in these holy Christian doctrines thus impugned Protestants, hauing therein the consent of all A^stolik Churches, wee must needs say, whether t^ were receaued, and professed from Scriptures, Traditions, being longe before any generall Co^cels kept, by the generall confessed rule of the ^thers and Protestants before, they must need^ deliuered by authority of the Apostles: non ^ authoritate Apostolica traditum certissime creditur^
And the first receauing of the holy Scripture^ Britayne which wee finde in Antiquities, was in ^ time of Pope Eleutherius, and from the Churc^ Rome, the same Catalogue of Scriptures it t^ vsed and still vseth, as wee finde in the epistl^ Eleuth. Pap. epist. ad Lucium Regem Britan. Godwin. Co^uers. of Brit. in epist. Eleuther. Stow. hist. Romans. that holy Pope to Kinge Lucius: suscepistis n^ miseratione diuina in Regno Britaniae legem and fi^ Christi. Habetis penes vos in Regno vtramque pagi^ You haue there in your Kingdome both testament^ our Protestants translate it, or, both parts of Scriptur^



THE THIRD CHAPTER.
The 7. 8. 9. 10. Articles examined; and wherein they differ from the present Romane Church, condemned by this first Apostolike age.
HAVING thus absolutely, and at large confuted and ouerthrowne by the Apostolike ^ge, the last Article, the erroneous ground of all ^rotestant Religion, wee may be more breife in ^he rest, being all at the least generally confuted ^nd ouerthrowne in their false foundation, so de^royed. And vntill wee come to their 11. Article ^tituled: of the Iustification of man: It may be que^ioned, whether any of them doth in common, and ^robable construction, and meaninge, oppose the ^oman Church or no. And for the two next, the 7. ^nd 8. Articles, it is most certaine and euident, the ^rst of them being intituled: of the old testament, only ^acheth, The old Testament is not contrary to the new. ^nd the other stiled, of the three Creeds, is in t^e ^me condition, onely affirming, The three Creedes, ^icene* Creede, Athanasius Creede, and t^^^ ^hich is ^mmonly called the Apostles Creede, ought throughly ^ be receaued and beleeued. But the reason hereof, ^hich thus they yeeld: for they may be proued by most ^rtaine warrantes of holy Scripture, is both before ^onfuted, and very friuolous, for neither is the Scrip^re the compleate Rule of Religion, neither was ^e Scriptures of the new testament written, when ^e Apostles deliuered their Creede, to the Church, ^or the Scriptures agreed vpon, vntill after both ^e Creedes of the Nicene Councell, and Sainct
 Athanasius were generally receaued and profess^ by all Catholiks, as is already made manifest, eue^ by Protestants themselues aswell as other Autho^ of more worthy credit. The next Article is int^tuled: of Originall or birth sinne. And was expresse^ concluded by them against the Pelagians, denyi^ originall sinne in man, as they expou^d themselu^ naming the Pelagians, and their heresie there, wi^ a confutation of it in their proceedings, holdi^ that Originall sinne in those that be not baptize^ deserueth Gods wrath and damnation. Yet in the l^ and concluding words of the Article, their phra^ of speach hath perhaps giuen occasion to some p^ritane Nouelists, to thinke they held as these m^ Caluin and such doe, that concupiscence witho^ assent is sinne, The words be: Although there is ^ Artic. 9. supr. cond^mnation for them that beleeue, and are baptiz^ yet the Apostle doth confesse, that concupiscence and l^ Thomas Rogers in Articul. 9. Confes. Helu. 2. c 9. Saxon. ar. 2. 20. hath of it selfe the nature of sinne.
A Puritane glosser vpon this place saith: Con^piscence, euen in the regenerate, is sinn^. Among fo^t^ene Protestant Confessions he citeth but two f^ his opinion by his owne exposition, And so seau^ to one by his owne argument of Protestant auth^rity, he is deceaued. And the Puritan Heluetian ^sembly Protest. Engl. Art. art. 10. Caluin. lib. 1. Instit c. 5. l. 2 c. 2. and 3. and a. lib. l 3. c. 3. Ant Wotton. against D. Bish pa. 112. ruled by Caluine, holdeth this besides t^ other errour, which our English Protestants de^ in ther next article, that man hath not free will ^ doe well, or fly sinne. And he plainely confesse^ that all the primatiue Fathers, sufficient for t^ purpose, are against him, holding concupiscen^ without assent to be no sinne. Omnium sentent^^ So do our English Puritans also, which hold th^ errour, acknowledge, and it is apparant euen ^
 ^e words of this article before related, that the En^ish Protestants doe no otherwise terme co^cupis^nce sinne, then materially as the Apostle doth, ^hose onely authority they vse in that matter, and ^ot properly and formally, as sinne is truely and ^ right sense vsed, and taken, hauing liberty and ^nsent of minde annexed vnto it; otherwise In^nts, Ideots, frantike madde men without iudg^ent, and men sleepinge, doinge the materiall part ^ things sinfull, should also sinne: or if the flesh of ^ selfe, the vegetatiue or sensitiue power abstra^ing from reason could sinne, creatures onely ha^ng beeing, vegetation, and sense might and should ^nne, equally, as those that be reasonable: Beasts, ^shes, fowles, plants, herbes and trees would be ^oth capable and guilty of sinne.
And our English Protestants in their commu^on booke of as greate credit, and approued by as ^reate authority with them, and their Religion, as ^ese articles, acknowledge that the baptized are deade Communion Booke Titul. ministrat. of publike Baptisme. And Catechisme. ^ sinne. And the whole body of sinne is vtterly aboli^ed in them. They promise and vowe to for sake the ^uill, and all his workes, the carnall desires of the flesh, ^d not to followe, and be ledde by them, obediently to ^epe Gods commaundements.
Therefore I dare not say, that the Parlament ^rotestants of England doe, or by their religion ^ould professe, that condemned errour, which hol^eth concupiscence without assent to be truely ^nne. And all auncient expositors of holy Scrip^re both of the Greeke, and Latine Church, doe ^pounde the Apostle in the place insinuated in ^is Article, to speake of sinne onely materially, and ^ot properly when he termeth concupiscence by ^at name.

 This is confessed by the professors of this ^rour before, and the name of the Fathers are nee^lesse, and too many to be cited in a confessed cau^ And wee haue the Catholike doctrine in t^ point deliuered and taught by Apostolike men ^ this age. Sainct Ignatius proueth, that concupcence without assent defileth not: cum nulla in v^^ Ignat. epist. ad Ephes. sit concupiscentia, quae vos inquinet, and supplicium ^ferat, profecto secundum Deum viuitis. And Rab^ Moses Hadarsan proueth the same, for the true b^ leeuing Iewes: and quod iam scriptum est: and ad te c^cupi scentia Rabbi Mos. Hadar. ad ca. 4. Gen. peccati, scilicet, quod est figmentum mal^ iugiter concupiscens, and affectans, and tu dominabe^ illius, hoc est, si volueris praeualebis aduersus eum. A^ all the holy writers of this time affirme the sam^ when they teach, that free will is in man, and sin^ is not contradicted without it, nor can be, where, ^ when it doth not consent. Which cannot possib^ be in the first motions of concupiscence, by co^mon experience, Iudgment and agreement of a^ arisinge both without and against the will and ^ berty of man.
First Sainct Ignatius who hath so plainely test^fied before, that concupiscence not consented vnt^ doth not defile, and so cannot be sinne, proueth als^ abseruationi proponitur vita, mors obedientiae and si^guli Ignat. epist. ^d Magnesian. qui hoc aut illud elegerint in eius quod inu^ner^ locum abituri sunt: fugiamus mortem, and eligamus v^tam, That to sinne or not sinne, to haue life ^ death, is in the power and will of Christians. A^ againe, most plainely that sinne is not without fre^ will. Si quis piet ati studet, Dei homo est;, si impie ag^ diaboli est: non td factus per naturam, sed animi arb^trium. (...).

 Sainct Clement disciple and Successor to Sainct ^eter the Apostle speaketh as plainely, or rather ^ore, both in Sainct Peters and his owne words and ^pinion and all true beleeuers: liberi sumus arbitrij, Clem. Rom. epist 3. ^uia liberum est animo, in quani velit partem declinare ^dicium suum, and quam probauerit, eligere viam, con^at euidenter inesse hominibus arbitrij libertatem. And Recognit. l. 3. ^ffirmeth plainely, that they which should deny ^ree-will in man, consequently should say that God could not iudge and condemne men for any ^inge termed sinnes: all ciuill courts, lawes, and ^ustice should cease, there should be no goodnesse ^o wickednesse no sinne, no vertue, nor God at all. Quomodo Deus iudicat secundum veritatem vnum^uemque pro actibus suis, si agere aliquid in potestate ^on habuit? Hoc siteneatur, conuulsa sunt omnia; fru^ra ^rit studium sectandi meliora: sed and Iudices saeculi ^ustra legibus praesunt, and puniunt eos qui male agunt: ^on enim in sua potestate habuerunt vt non peccarent. ^ ana erunt and Iura populorum, quae malis actibus poenas ^atuunt: miseri erunt and qui seruant cum labore iusti^am: beati vero illi qui in delicijs positi cum luxuria and ^celere viuentes tyrannidem tenent. Secundum haec er^o nec iustitia erit, nec bonitas, nec vlla virtus, and, vt ^vis, nec Deus. Est ergo in potestate vniuscuiusque, quia Lib. 4. ^beri arbitrij factus est homo, vtrum nobis velit audire ^d vita^, an daemonibus ad interitu^. And defineth free^ill to be an essentiall and vnseparable power of ^he soule of man, to yeeld to whatsoeuer acts it ^ill: Arbitrij potestas est sensus animae habens Lib. 3. Dionis. Areopag. Eccles. Hierar. cap. 2. l. de diu. nom. cap. 4. ^irtutem quam possit ad quos velit actus incli^ari.
Sainct Denis the Arepagite is plaine of the same ^pinion, and calleth that which wee commonly
 terme freewill, electiualibertas, electiue liberty, a^ that man hath such power in himselfe. (...) Rab. Moses Hadars. ad c. 4. Gen. Rab. Akiba in capitul patrum. Philo. l. quod Deus sit immutabilis. Rab. Moses Fil. Maim. epistola adu. Astrologos. Ioseph. Alb. fund. tract. 1. c. 9. Rab. Iudas in capitul. pa. Clem. Rom. l. 3. Recognit. los. lib. 13. Antiq. c. 4. Epiph. l. 1. Tom. 1. cont. haer. c. 16. de pharisaeis. Plutarch. l. 1. de placitis Philosophorum cap. 27. Clem. Alex. l. 5 stromat. part. ante f^n. (...).
This was the constant and receaued opinion, ^ doctrine both of Iewes and gentiles also: for t^ first, their Rabbines, Rabbi Moses Hadarsa^ Rabbi Akiba, Philo, Rabbi Moses ben-Maimo^ Iosephus, Rabbi Iudas with others doe aboundan^ly proue it. So doth Sainct Clement reciting the ^stimony of Simon Magus, professor of the aduer^ errour, confessing it was the receaued doctrine ^ the Iewes, though he singularly denied it. Sim^ Magus inquit ad P^trum: quoniam Hebraeis ista ma^dantur, velut recte scientibus Deum, and opinantib^ quod vnusquisque in suo arbitrio habeat agere ^ de quibus iudicandus est; mihi autem ab illis discrep^ sententia.
Iosephus, Sainct Epiphanius and others pro^ the same, and put such Iewes as held otherwise i^ the number of heretiks. So Plutarch, Clemens Alexandrinus and others proue of the Gentiles test^fying how Heraclitus was singular among them* for the contrary errour, and Plato proued inuincibl^ the truth of the Christian Catholike doctrine i^ this point, otherwise, God should because of sinne which he possibly could not be. Liberum autem arbitrium Plato per haec ostendit: virtus autem non par^ alterius dominio, quam prout vnusquisque vel honorauerit, vel despexerit, erit eius particeps. Eius qui elegerit, culpae non potest in Deum causa conferri: Deu^ enim nunquam est causa malorum.
Thus generally and confidently the doctrine o^ free will was receaued and professed in this first ag^ in the same manner as the present Roman Churc^
 ^w doth, approuing and requiring also the neces^y of grace, and not excluding it, as the Pelagian ^retiks first did, some hundreds of yeares after, and ^t makinge mens actions meritorious, but as they ^ere assisted by grace. Nihil meritis vestris ascriba^, Martial. Epis. ad Tolosan. cap. 22. quasi non egentes Dei gratia: quia sine Deo nihil po^tis facere.
And in this sense the Protestant Article of free^ill receaueth this doctrine, and their writers admit ^in these Termes: wee deny not, that it is in the power Wotton defence of Perk. pa. 67. 68. 65 88. 90. Couel. def. of Hooker. p. 35. ^ man, to make choyce of life, wee acknowledge, that the ^ult is in euery ma^, that is not saued. Wee say with Au^n both in words and meaning that true Religion neither ^nies free will, either to a good or badd life. As S. Ber^ard saith, there is a threefold freedome, from necessity ^om sinne, from misery. The first of nature, the seconde ^ grace, the third of glory. In the first from the bondage ^ coaction, the will is free in its owne nature, and hath ^wer ouer it selfe. That freedome by which the will of ^an is named free is the first. And thereof wee dare say, ^at the wicked want not the freedome of will.
Thus they write publish and approue with their ^uthority to be the doctrine and allowed opinion ^f English Protestants in this matter. Our prima^ue Christian Britans of this first age could neither ^earne of their first Apostles, and Fathers in Christ, ^or professe any other doctrine, or opinion in this ^oint: for Sainct Peter being the first founder of ^heir Church, and faith, could deliuer no other in ^his matter to them, then he had taught at An^ioch, and Rome, and recommended to his two ^lorious Successors S. Ignatius and S. Clement in ^hose two highest Apostolike Sees.
And Sainct Clement either preached here in
 Britaine, or as he expressely deliuereth, by cha^ Clem. Rom. epist. 1. giuen, and committed to him by Sainct Peter, ^ send learned Bishops into all these westerne p^ where Sainct Peter had not ordained such bef^ And for Sainct Ioseph of Aramathia and his h^ company, who made free choyce and election, ^ the loue of Christ, to forsake contry, kindred ^ all temporall goods, and trauayle so many th^sands of myles into the end of the knowne wo^ to liue and dye there, in such austerity and S^ctity of life as they practized lyuing here, they m^ of necessity, be professours, as they were renow^ Examplars in this businesse. And that the Brit^ Tertul. l. de anima c 20. 21. l. 2. aduers. Murc. c. 5. 6. 8. de epiph. ortat. de constit. cap. 2. then generally that were conuerted, so profess^ with the whole Christian world, Tertullian an ^deniable teacher of this doctrine in many places, ^stifieth of it, as of others before, that all Apostoli^ Churches, Europe, Asie, and Afrike agreed the^ in. And it so continued euer in Britaine in su^ manner that afterwards Pelagius the heretike ^tolled it to much, and was therefore both by B^tans and all other Catholiks condemned and d^ tested for an heretike, for so enabling it, without ^sistance of grace. All writers, Catholike and Pr^testants thus agreeing.


THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
The 11. Article, of the Iustification of man, ex^mined, and condemned by the Apostolike Fathers of this first age.
THEIR next 11. Article is intituled: of the i^stification of man: and expressed in these words
 ^e are accompted righteous before God, onely for the ^rit of our Lord, and Sauiour Iesus Christ, by faith, ^d not for our owne workes, or deseruings. Wherefore ^at wee are iustified by faith onely, is a most whole some ^ctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is ex^ssed in the homily of Iustification.
This is the whole article, and the doctrine there^, that wee are iustified by faith onely, is before ^ndemned by Sainct Ignatius and the Apostolike S. Ignatius epist. ad Ephes. ^ctrine of this first age, affirming, that faith is ^ely the beginninge of mans perfection or iustice, ^d charity doth perfect it, without which a man ^ not iustified. Principium vitae fides: finis eius cha^as: haec autem duo quoties in vnum coeunt, Dei ho^nem perficiunt. He saith also, that sinnes be taken way by almes, and faith, and not by faith onely, ^ this article speakes. Eleemosina and fide expiantur ^ccata. And though a man be otherwise faithfull, Ignat. epist. ad Heron. ^steth, liueth in virginity, worketh wonders, and ^ophecieth, yet if he keepe not the constitutions ^f the Church, he is to be esteemed as a wolfe ^mong sheepe. Quicunque dixerit quippiam praeter ca ^uae constituta sunt: tametsi fide dignus sit, quamuis ^iunat, qua^uis in virginitate degat, quamuis signaedat, ^uamuis prophetet, pro lupo illum habeas qui sub ouina ^elle exitium pestemque adfert ouibus. All men agree, ^ainct Ignatius was a true beleeuer, yet writing to Ignat. epist. ad Philadelp. ^he Philadelphians, he confesseth he was not there^y sure of his saluation, as Protestants say they are, ^ut desired to be perfected by their prayers. In Do^ino Iesu vinctus, necdum perfectus sum, sed precatio vestra ad Deum me perficiet, vt id consequar, ad quod vocatus sum. He professeth that he beleeued in Christ, as he ought to doe, yet desired to be iustified
 by others prayers. Iesus mihi pro Archiuis est; q^ nolle audire, manifesta pernicies est. Illibatum mihi ^ archiuu^, crux eius, and mors, and resurrectio eius, and fi^ horum, per quae cupio iustificari precationibus vestris.
True it is Sainct Ignatius citeth and approu^ that saying of scripture, Iustus ex fide viuit, the i^ man liueth by faith, which the Protestants make^ a ground of their errour, in this question, but he ^ueth not that prerogatiue vnto it, which they do^ either to iustifie onely, or at all, but to be necessa^ to iustification, as all true Catholiks co^fesse, and th^ no man can be iustified without it, neither doth ^ meane the Protestants pretended presumptio^ faith, or such as is singular to any sect, but the co^mon faith of the vniuersall Church of God; y^ in the same place ascribeth iustificatio^ to constan^ in goodnesse, doing and suffering for the loue ^ God, and louinge him aboue our selues and a^ other things. Nihili pendo supplicia haec, neque ta^ facio vitam meam, vt eamplus amem quam Dominu^ Quare paratum me offero igni, feris, gladijs, cruci, du^ Epist. ad Tarsenses. modo Christu^ videam, Saluatorem and Deum meum, q^ propter me mortuus est, obs^cro vos ego vinctus Chr^sti state in fide; este constantes, quia iustus ex fide vi^^ estote immobiles, quia Dominus habitare facit vn^^ moris in Domino.
That faith where there is but one preachin^ thereof, one Church founded by the Apostles in a^ the world, where the professours liue in one vnity haue one altare, one sacrifice: vna praedicatio, and v^na fides, and vnum baptisma, and vna Ecclesia qua^ Epist. ad Philadelph. suis sudoribus and laboribus fundarunt Sancti. Aposto^ a finibus terrae vsque ad fines in sanguine Christi: v^ oportet vt populum peculiarem and gentem Sanctam, om^ia
 perficere concordibus animis in Christo. Vna est caro ^omini nostri Iesu Christi, vnus illius sanguis, vnum ^tare omni Ecclesiae. And yet the true vniuersall, and ^atholike faith which all Protestants and parti^lar sectaries doe want, though it is so necessary ^ saluation, that no King, Prince, Prelate, Poten^te or whosoeuer can be iustified and saued with^ut it, yet of it selfe, without hope, charity, and loue ^f God and our neighbour, which bringeth all ^ood vnto vs, and the keeping of Gods commaun^ements, such faith, neither saueth, nor iustifieth. ^emo erret, nisi crediderit Iesum Christum in carne ^nuersatum, and crucem illius confessus fuerit, and pas^nem Epistol. ad Smyrnen. and sanguinem quem effudit pro mundi salute, ^n assequetur vitam aeternam, siue Rex fuerit, siue Sa^dos, siue princeps, siue priuatus homo, siue Dominus, ^e seruus, siue vir, siue foemina. Qui capit, capiat, qui ^dit, audiat. Locus, dignitas, diuitiae neminem efferant, ^obilitas and paupertas neminem deijciant. Totum ^mque and praecipuum, est fides in Deum, and spes in ^ristum, and fruitio eorum quae expectamus bonorum ^aritas in Deum and proximum. Diliges enim Domi^m Deum tuum extoto corde tuo, and proximum tuum ^ut teipsum. Et Dominus inquit: haec est vita aeterna, ^ cognoscant te solum verum Deum, and quem misisti ^um Christum. Et mandatum nouum do vobis, vt di^atis vos mutuo. In his duobus mandatis pendet tota ^ and Prophetae. Sainct Clement teacheth the same ^ctrine, assuring vs, that Christ was so farre from ^ching, that man is to be iustified onely by faith, ^he lawe of the ghospell, that he tyeth vs to more ^ct lawes, and commaundements then vnder the ^e of Moyses. Qui tunc homicidium interdixit, nunc ^am iram t^nere concitatam: qui tunc adulterium,
 nunc prauam quoque cupiditatem: l^gem natural^m ^sustulit, Clem. Rom. l. 6. constit. Apost. cap. 23. sed confirmauit. Qui dixit diliges proxi^ tuum, idem in Euangelio ait renouandi gratia, ma^tum nouum do vobis, vt diligatis inuic^m. And ^ching the way and meanes, how wee should ^ made friends with God, and so be iustified, he^leth vs, that this friendship is to be procured by ^uing well, and obaying his will, which is the la^ all liuing men. vt tendamus ad amicitiam Condit^amicitia Clem. Rom. l. 1. recognit. autem efficitur bene viuendo, and vol^^ eius obediendo, quae voluntas omnium viuentium ^ est.
The like hath Sainct Martiall, vtterly cond^ning all such presumption as is in the preten^ Protestant iustifying faith, teaching, and direct^ to obay the will of God, in holy words, and g^ workes. Vobis est testis scutator renum and cordiu^ eius S. Martial. ep. ad Tolosan. cap. 17. obedientia nihil arroganter, nihil superbe, nih^^ mere praesumere, sed tanquam pusillus grex Dei ^ luntatem eius adimplere studete, in verbis Sancti^ operibus honis. Where wee euidently see that ^ will of God is not fulfilled, nor iustice wrough^ onely faith, but holy speaking, and doing g^ workes.
Sainct Denis the Areopagite saith, that ^ knew well, and therein agreed with the di^ Scriptures, that euery one was to be rewarded ^cording to his worthinesse, or deseruing. Probe^ Dionys. Areo. Eccl. Hierar. cap. 12. scriptis diuinis assentiens, vnumquemque prae^ accepturum pro dignitate. And addeth, that euery shop or learned Preist being the Interpretor o^ nine things, doth learne from holy Scriptures, ^ euerlasting life and happenesse is with most ^ measure giuen vnto men according to their d^^ings,
 and merits. Diuinus Antistes, interpres diui^orum iudiciorum, didicit a scriptis quae diuinitus pro^ita sunt, clarissimam diuinamque vitam pro dignitate ^c meritis, iustissimis lancibus tribui.
Sainct Polycarpe in his Epistle, which Sainct Irenaeus l 3. c. 3. Euseb. l. 3. hist. c 36. Polycarp. epist. ad Philipp. ^eneus, Eusebius, and others cite and approue, doth ^istinguish faith and iustice, in Christians, and ^heweth that holy men that are saued, obtayned ^lory, by such distinct iustice and sufferings for Christ. Hi omnes qui non in vacuum cucurrerunt, sed in ^de and iustitia, and ad debitum sibi locum cum Domino, ^ui and compassi sunt, abierunt. And this glory was ^ue vnto them, for such iustice, and sufferings.
Sainct Iustine in his publike Apologie, for all Iustin. Apol. 2 pro Christianis ad An^on. Pium Imper. post med. Christians to the Emperour, protesteth, that all ^ood Christians euer from the beginning so held, ^ued and practised, that men were punished or re^arded, according to the worth and dignity of their ^eeds, and the Prophets before the Apostles so ^aught. Hoc etiam explicamus, nos supplicia and poenas, ^tque praemia pro dignitate actionum redditum iri, a ^rophetis didicisse, idque vere enuntiamus.
That this article of Catholike Religion was pro^essed and practiezed here also, it is euident, being ^he vniuersall doctrine and profession of the whole Catholike Church, as before appeareth. And for ^hat this Kingdome being so remote a nation ^rom Hierusalem, Rome, Antioch, and other cheife ^laces, where Christian Religion then most flori^hed, and those glories of the world whose autho^ities I haue cited, and such others as then florished, ^ust needs receaue their faith from them, and ^hence, and be of the same minde and opinion with ^hem herein.

 And to examplifie onely in particular in th^ which our Protestant antiquaries confesse to h^ beene Christians of or in this nation in this ag^ Sainct Beatus a noble Britan, Sainct Ioseph of ^romathia who buried Christ, and his holy comp^nions, which conuersed with the Apostles, and t^ Speed Theater of greate Britaine li. 6. Pantal. de vir. Illustrib. German. Antiquitat. Glast. tabulis affir. Guliel. Makn. l. de antiq. caen. Glaston. Cupgr. in S. Ioseph Arom. Apostolike Doctors remembred they thought ^ faith onely to be it by which men were iustifi^ as these Protestants hold, but liued in most strict ^ penitentiall life, all their dayes, in watchings, f^stings and prayers, so seruing God, the bless^ Virgin Mary, with other Saincts, and Angels. V^gilijs Ieiunijs and orationibus vacantes, Deo and Be^ Virgini deuota exhibent^s obsequia. Their reueren^ which they vsed to the holy reliks, which th^ brought with them, spoken of before, and to t^ crosse and other Christian Images, ther building ^ chappell in honour of the blessed Virgin Mary, ^ the admonishment of S. Gabriell the Archange^ Archangeli Gabrielis admonitu, their poore, chast^ and obedient religious life, foresaking all, eu^ their wiues, Sainct Ioseph bringing his wise i^ Britaine as these antiquities say, and leauing h^ and all wordly comforts for the loue of Chris^ proue sufficiently vnto vs, they were not of o^ Protestant profession, that onely faith did iustif^ and that there was no Iustice, merit, or reward b^ and for good workes, holynesse and perfection ^ lyuinge well.



THE V. CHAPTER.
The 12. Article examined, and in whatsoeuer differing from the present Romane Church, condemned by the Apostolike age. So of the 13. and 14. Articles.
AND by this, their next article also is plainely confuted: the title thereof is: of good workes: and the whole article as followeth: Albeit that good works, which are the fruites of faith, and follow after iustification, cannot put away our sinnes, and endure the s^uerity of Gods Iudgment: yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and doe springe out necessarily of a true and liuely faith, in so much that by them a ^iuely faith may be as euidently knowne, as a tree dis^erned by the fruite. For it is euidently proued before, that good workes done in grace, doe iustifie, by the common doctrine and practise of this Apostolike time, or else man could not possibly be iustified at all, but notwithstanding the incarnation, ^abours, and passion of Christ, man should still be without iustification and remaine in sinne, and vn^ustice: for all haue agreed, that faith alone or onely, doth not iustifie: then if wee take iustificatio^ away from our holy Christian Sacraments, which be good workes, and from all other good workes, as this article doth, and the other before likewise did, Christians haue no meanes to be iustified, either by good workes, or without good workes. Petrus concion. apud S. Clement. l. 6. Recog. and l. 1. Recogni^*
And besides that which is said already, in this matter, and reason conuinceth so, Sainct Peter the Apostle in his publike sermon, and Sainct Clement
 the Register and publisher thereof, doe prou^ it in his manner: confertur meritum homini p^ bonis gestis; sed si ita gerantur, sicut Deus iubet. De^ autem iussit omnem colentem se, baptismo consigna^ And otherwise a man cannot be saued, neither iustified, for the iust shall be saued: ita peruenire poter^ and salutem: aliter vero impossibile est. Sic enim nob^ cum Sacramento, verus Propheta testatus est dicen^ Amen dico vobis, nisi quis denuo renatus fuerit ex ^qua, non introibit in regna caelorum. Est in aquis ist^ misericordiae vis quaedam, quae ex initio ferebatur sup^ eos, and agnoscit eos, qui baptizantur sub appellatio^ triplicis Sacramenti, and eripuit eos de supplicijs futuri^ quasi donum quoddam offerens Deo, animas per baptis^mum consecratas. Confugit^ ad aquas istas, solae s^ enim quae possint vim futuri ignis extinguere Baptismum per omnia necessarius est: Iniusto, vt peccatorum q^ gessit in ignorantia remissio concedatur. Cum regenertus fueris per aquam, ex operibus bonis ostende te in ^militudinem eius qui te genuit patris. Agnouisti eni^ Deum, honora patrem: honor autem eius est, vt ita v^uas, sicut ipse vult. Vult autem ita viuere vt homi^dium, adulterium nescias: odium, auaritiam fugias: ir^ superbiam, iactantiam respuas, and execreris, inuidi^ caeteraque his similia, penitus ate ducas aliena. Est s^ propria quaedam nostrae religionis obseruantia, quae ^tam imponitur hominibus, quam proprie ab vnoquoq^ Deum colente causa puritatis expetitur. Where w^ finde that man is iustified by sacramentall and oth^ good workes, keeping Gods co^maundemts, auo^ding all mortall sinne, and embracing vertue, a^ this obligation is imposed vpon all Christians, a^ by them to be effected, and performed, and witho^ such perfermance they are not iustified.

 And Christ will giue to euery one according as Clem. l. 6. const. Apost. c. 30. they haue deserued or merited. Mortuos est excitaturus, mundo finem impositurus, and vnicuique pro meritis tributurus.
Sainct Denis the Areopagite, besides that which he hath testified before, proueth the different degrees of glory in heauen, some more glorious then others, as the Scriptures are plentifull in the same, because the good workes and merits of some, in this life are greater and more then others. Ostendit Dionysius Areop. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 3. cunctos in regeneratione illas consequuturos sortes, ad quas hic vitam propriam direxerunt* puta, si deiformem quis hic and sanctissimam egerit vitam, quantum viro possibile est Deum imitari, diuina in seculo futuro, and beata donabitur requi^: Sin autem summa illa deformi vita inferiorem egerit, sactam tamen, conformia and iste recipient sacra praemia. And by this their 14. Article intituled: of workes of supererogation, is also confuted; their next and 13. Article stiled, of workes before Iustification, being rather a question in naturall or morall Philosophy, then Theologicall, and to be handled in Christian Religion, and so more fit to be omitted then handled in this treatise of religious Controuersies, though it be not wholy sounde in Philosophicall proceedings. That the 14. Article is already condemned, will be plaine by the recitall of it in these words: voluntarie workes, besides ouer and aboue Gods commaundement, which they call workes of supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogancy, and impiety.
This is euidently contradicted and condemned by Sainct Denis, Sainct Clement, and Sainct Ignatius before, prouinge different degrees of glory in heauen, answearing the diuersities of mens merits
 on earth, assuring, that they which haue not liue^ in such perfection as others haue, and they als^ might haue done, yet keeping the precepts, an^ doing things commaunded shall be saued, and s^ are iustified, though they haue not wrought su^ workes of counsaile onely and perfection, as many more holy haue done, and therefore are rewarde^ with greater ioyes and honour, as both the Scriptures and Apostolike Fathers of this age are plaine i^ many places. And the pretended reason which the^ onely yeeld in this article in maintenance of the^ errour, is both ridiculous, and hereticall, being this for by them men doe declare, that they not onely rend^ vnto God as much as they are bound to doe, but that they doe more for his sake, then of bound duty is required whereas Christ saith plainely, when you haue done ^ that are commaunded to you, say, wee be vnprofitabl^ seruants.
This first is ridiculous, and proueth nothing t^ the question of workes of perfection, not commaunded, and their eminent and singular rewar^ but onely of the commaundements, and things o^ duty, which Catholiks say (more then Protestant^ ordinarily doe) are to be done and performed vnder paine of eternall damnation. It contradicteth their owne doctrine, which vsually graunteth there ar^ both precepts, and counsailes in Scripture, as o^ voluntary pouerty, chastity, obedience and such others, which no sect of Protestants performeth, and yet they speake much of their Iustification o^ righteousnesse in this life, and saluation after. That it is hereticall and condemned the old Apostolici, heretiks, some Pelagians and others, and their condemnation for it, will witnesse from the beginning,
 ^s both Sainct Ireneus, Sainct Epiphanius, Sainct Epiph. heres. 61. Augustin. haeres. 40. ^ugustine with such renowned writers and our ^rotestants themselues doe proue. Apostoli affirma^abant non posse saluari eos, qui non viu^rent in caeli^atu, ac paupertate more Apostolorum.
The heretiks called Apostoliks did affirme that those ^hich liued not vnmarried and in pouerty after the ^anner of the Apostles, could not be saued. The Eucra^tae Irenaeus. l. 1. c. 10 Epiph. l. 1. Tom. 3. haer. in Tatian. c. 46. vlt. Epiphan. l. 2. Tom. 2. haer. cap 67. cont. Hieracit. Schollers to Tatianus were drowned in the ^ke heresie: docuerunt omnes Christianos debere a nup^ijs abstin^re, and caelibes viuere, and sic continentiam ^olebant esse praecepti and non consilij. Hierax and his Hieracitae maintained the like, excluding all mar^ied Christians from the Kingdome of heauen. Non admittit nuptias, concessum est ait, in veteri testa^ento, nuptias contraherc, verum a Christi aduentu, ^on amplius nuptias admitti, neque posse ipsos possidere ^egnum caelorum. Some of the Pelagians also held, ^hat no man could be saued, except he sold all he ^ad, and gaue it to the poore: neminem saluum esse August. epist. 89. ^osse, nisi omnia venderet and daret pauperibus, quasi ^on consilium, sed praeceptum hoc esset. As if this were ^ot a counsaile, but a commaundement. Which the Protestants thus also plainely confesse: in these Couel. def. of Hook. p. 52. points all haue not holden the same opinions; some thought the counsail^s to be of the same necessity with precepts: as those heretiks called Apostolici. Thus with publike approbation, And yet this article in the reason it would make, falleth into the same heresie, plainely affirming that whatsoeuer worke of piety or perfection is, or may be wrought, or done in this life, virginity, chastity, voluntary pouerty, obedience, or what such soeuer, none excepted, in this their doctrinall decree, all men are beunde to doe,
 they be bound in duty, they are commaunded. And so ^ married men or women, none that be rich, no^ that be in authority, and rule spirituall, or temp^rall, Kinge, Prince, Prelate or whosoeuer, t^ liue not in virginity, and chastity, forsake not ^ for Christs sake, and followe him, as the Apostl^ and such did, or liue not in professed obedien^ which no Protestants doe, or euer did, can possib^ be saued by the expresse conclusion of this artic^ leauing no place or hope of saluation for any of th^ religion, which hath vtterly to their power aba^doned all such holy estates and conditions of perf^ction. When Christ himselfe and his Apostles, a^ the Apostolike writers of this age haue taught ^ otherwise, that the keepinge of the commaund^ments is sufficient to bringe men to saluation, a^ there be other perfections of counsaill, and not n^cessity, bringing greater glory, and reward ^ heauen. Si vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata. A^ Matth. c. 19. illi Iesus, si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende omnia q^ habes, and da pauperibus, and habebis the saurum in coel^ and veni s^quere me. De virginibus praeceptum Domi^ 1. Cor. cap. 7. non habeo, consilium autem do. Qui matrimonio iung^ Matth. 19. virginem suam, bene facit, and qui non iungit melius f^cit. Su^t eunuchi qui seipsos castrauerunt propter regn^^ caelorum, qui potest capere capiat
That these holy estates of perfection besides th^ keepinge of the commaundements, were professed* Ignat. epist. ad Philippen. ep. ad Philadelp. epist. ad Smy. epist. ad Polycarp. Dion Areop supr. Ignatius ep. ad Heron. exercised and honored in this age, I haue proued before, by the Apostolike writers then, Sainct Ignatius, Sainct Denis, and others. And in his epistle t^ Sainct Hero these holy virgins are stiled the pretious Iewels of honor vnto Christ. Virgines serua v^ pretiosa Christi monilia. Sainct Iames in his liturgy
 ^aketh honorable mention of the liuers in mona^eries Dionysius Areop. Eccl. Hierarc. c. 6. in such condition. Proijs qui in virginitate and ^stitate in monasterijs degunt, Dominum oremus. S. ^ionisius giueth vnto them the greatest titles of ^onour perfection and holinesse, which this life can ^ue, and next to God himselfe. Ordo monachorum ^ exactissimam perfectionem diuina ratione subuehi^r. Vnde sancti patres nostri diuinis eos appellationibus ^nt prosecuti, partim Therapentas, id est, cultores a ^cero Dei famulatu, atque cultu: partim monachos, ab ^diuidua and singulari vita appellantes, vt quae illos ^nctis diuisibilium complicationibus in diuinam and ^eo gratam monadem perfectionemque promoueat. The ^der of monkes by a diuine manner is exalted to the most ^act perfection. Whereupon our holy predecessors called ^em by diuine names, partly Therapents, that is wor^ippers, for their sincere seruinge and worshippinge of ^d, partly also naming the^ monkes for their indiuiduall ^d singular life, exalting them to an h^auenly perfe^ion and acceptable vnto God.
Antiquaries recken Sainct Iohn Baptist, greater ^en whome by the testimony of Christ himselfe ^e best witnesse, no man was who was onely man, ^er natos mulierum n^n surrexit maior Ioanne Bap^ta, his chastity, contempt of the world, pouerty, ^d austerity of life was a profession, lesson, and pa^ne of this perfection. Wee may recken such both ^ Scriptures, and histories, all the Apostles, which ^r the loue of Christ forsook all, and followed ^m in holy chastity, paines, pennance and auste^y of life, so longe as they liued. And this was not ^gular and peculiar vnto them, but a thinge al^ost common to very many Christians besides the ^postles, and properly named disclples, selling their
 possessions and giuing away their wealth, and Ric^ of this world, to serue God in more perfection, a^ to be made rich in heauen, and were honored m^ for so doing, as the holy Scriptures and the m^ worthy writers proue. So at Hierusalem: omnes ^ Act. c. 2. eredebant, habebant omnia communia. Possessione ^ substantias vendebant, and diuidebant illa omnib^ prout euique opus erat. Habentes gratiam ad omnem p^bem. So at Alexandria vnder Sainct Marke, as Ph^ then liuing and seeing it, Sainct Hierome and oth^ witnesse. Philo disertissimus Iudaeorum, videns ^lexandriae Philo l. de vita contempl. Hieron. l. de Script. Eccl. in Marco Euangel. Clem. l. 1. recogn. and in ep. praesertim. S. vita communi. Vrban. Papa ep. decret. Robert. Barnes. in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Vrban. 1. Ignat. Epistol. ad Philadelp. primam Ecclesiam adhuc Iudaizantem, q^ in laudem gentis suae librum super eorum conuersat^ scripsit. Et quomodo Lucas narrat Iero solymae crede^ omnia habuisse communia: si^ and ille, quod Alexand^ sub Marco fieri Doctore cernebat, memoriae tradidit. ^ it was also in the Church of Rome vntill Pope V^banus time, as Sainct Clement and Sainct Vrba^ write, and after as others proue. And our Protesta^ antiquaries consent, affirming that Pope Vrban^ concluded and decreed in his time: fundos vltro ^clesiae oblatos, accipiendos esse: praedia debere esse com^nia, prouentus vero viritim inter clericos distribu^ dos esse iussit. S. Ignatius speaking of the hono^ and noblenesse of chastity, and how it was kept ^ cleargy men, exemplifieth in the Church of Ro^ Antioch, Ephesus, of Creete: and instanceth in the Apostolike Bishop, Sainct Timothy, Sainct Tit^ Sainct Euodius, and Sainct Clement, ioyning the therefore in dignity with Iesus the sonne of Na^ Melchisedech, Heliseus, Ieremias, and Sainct Ih^ Baptist the most renowned, and greatest Sain^ Vtinam fruae vestra sanctimonia, vt Iesu filij N^ vt Melchi sedech, vt Helisaet, vt Ieremiae vt Bapti^
 ^nnis, vt Timothei, vt Titi, vt Euodij, vt Clemen^ qui in castitate exegerunt hanc vitam.
That this holy chaste and religious conuersa^n was also vsed amonge the Philadelphians to ^om he thus wrote, is plaine in the first cited ^rds, vtinam fruar vestra sanctimonia, vt Iesu filij ^ue: comparing them in this point to those glo^us Saincts of the old and new testament, among ^om S. Ihon Chrysostome and S. Hierome stile Chrys. in Mar. homil 1. and homil. de Ioan. Baptist. Hier. epis. 22. ad Eustach. Dion. Areop. ep. ad Gaium. Maxim. in Dion. Grat. d^st. 93. Dion. ep. 8. Vuolfg. Laz. geneal. Austriac. l. 1. Annal. Abbal. Ebershaym. Annal. Tren. Petr. de Nat. l. 9. Vincent. l. 9. Ant. part. 1. Ant. sup. Tit. 6. Guliel. Eisen. centenar. 1. part 3. Martyrol. Rom. Bed. vsuard. Menolog. Graec. Ignat. Epist. ad Poly carp. Dion. Arcop. lib. de Eccl Hier. c. 6 ^hon Baptist the most holy, monachorum principem ^ prince of monkes. S. Gaius, or Caius called also the 20. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles Der^s, was a monke, as Sainct Denis in his Epistle him, and others testifie. So was Sainct Demo^ilus as the same S. Denisis witnesse.
The auncient and renowned monastery monaste^n nouietense, now named Ebershaime in Ger^ny as the Antiquities of that contry proue, was ^t founded by Sainct Maternus and Sainct Vale^s fent into those parts by S. Peter the Apostle. ^ likewise was the monastery at Treuers by S. Eu^rius directed thither by Sainct Peter with the ^e Saints. S. Fronto disciple of S. Peter also liued ^h. To others religious in a most desart wilder^se. S. Amator Scholler to S. Martiall liued in a ^ke in Fraunce still called by his name. Neither ^re many holy virgins and chast women wan^ge in this sacred state of life in this age remem^d in Antiquities and diuers of them set downe ^ Gulielmus Eisengrenius and others, euen our ^st auncient Martyrologes.
Sainct Ignatius hath told vs before that this sa^d state of perfection was euer professed by the ^hops admittance and benediction. So hath S.
 Denys: diuina sanctio eos consecrante quadam in^tione dignata est, saying the diuine decree w^ And setteth downe at large the manner and O^ how they publikly renowned the world, profe^ Georg. Buch. rer. Scoticar. l. 4. c. 35. and l. 6 c. 75. Hollin. hist. of Engl. and Scotl. in fin. com. Hect. Boeth. hist. Scot. l. 6. Antiq. Glast. Guliel. Malin. l. de antiq. caenob. Glasten. Capg. in S. Ioseph. and S. perfection, were signed with the signe of the ^ Crosse, their hayre shaued, their cloathes chau^^ they communicated. This Kingdome of Bri^ was now renowned with this holy state of p^ction, and the professours thereof here for thei^ cellent piety, and worshippe towards God call^ the old language, Culd^is, Dei cultores, reno^ worshippers of God, as all Antiquaries euen ^testants themselues acknowledge, continuing ^ from the beginning vntill the yeare of Chri^ they say 943. It was first founded and settled ^ by Sainct Ioseph of Aramathia, who buried blessed Sauiour, and his holy Associats ^ in number at Glastenbury, in the 63. yea^ Christ.
Their regular obedience is sufficie^tly testifie^ all antiquities making S. Ioseph their Superi^ cheife or Abbot, prouing a regular order and ^pline among them; so doth the manner of the^uing in seperated cels, yet often euery day at pointed times assembling together in their p^ Church to performe their diuine office. In di^ locis sicut Anachoritae prim^ duodecim primit us h^runt, in vetustam tamen Ecclesiam ad diuina obs^ deuotius complendacrebo conuenerunt quotidie.
Their continued longe life there in solitary eremiticall manner, without any woman wit^ neare them, leauing noe child or posterity, noth^ but desart and desolate cells with signes of t^ perfect profession of Christian Religion behi^
 ^m is sufficient argument of their perpertuall cha^y in that place and state.
Their forsaking all they had, riches, contry, ^ds, and cominge so many thousand myles for ^ Ioue of Christ, into an outward Iland of the ^rld, and here to finde no other patrimony or ^porall preferment, then a little out cast Ile ^er before Inhabited, and hauing nothing fit for ^ life of man, compassed about with woods, bu^s, and fennes, Insula syluis, rubis atque paludibu^ ^undata, and their Church their greatest riches ^onour onely builded by their owne labours, of ^ithen wands, call vs sufficiently to minde how ^ate their voluntary pouerty was. And they ^ich next succeeded them in place, succeeded ^em also in the same state and condition of perfe^on and contempt of this world by all Antiquities ^ diuers ages.
Our Protestants themselues with common con^t of all of them, which they take to be of sound ^gment, are as they write with publik allow^ce in these words, of this opinion: There is none of Prot. of Engl. apud Couel. def. of Hooker pa. 51. 52. 50. ^ sound Iudgment, in our (Protestant) Church, ^ich doth not thinke, that willinge pouerty, humble ^dience, and true chastity, are things very commen^ble, and bringe with them greate aduantage, to the ^e perfection of a Christian life. By these wee doe more, ^n without these wee should. Precepts and counsailes* ^aue this difference, that the one is of absolute necessity. ^e other left vnto ourfree election.

To cast away wholly the things of the world, is precept of necessity, but an aduise of greater perfe^on. Hee that obeyeth not a precept, is guilty of descrued ^nishment: but he that faileth of those counsailes, only

wanteth without sinne, that measure of perfection. ^ is not a faulte, not to vow, but to vowe and perfor^ praise. He that performes the one, shall haue greater g^ but hee that faileth of the other, (without repe^tance) ^ haue certaine punishme^t. Neither is it said, saith S. ^gustine, as thou shalt not co^mitt adultery, thou shal^ kill: So thou shalt not marrie, for those are exacted, ^ are offered. This if it be done, is praised: those v^ they be done, are punished. For saith S. Hierome, ^ it is but aduise, there is left a fr^edome, but where ^ is a precept, there is a necessity. Precepts are comm^ all: counsailes to the perfections of some few.

The precept being obserued, hath a reward, being n^ serued a punishme^t: But acou^saile or aduise, not obs^ hath no punishment; and being obserued hath a great^Theater of great Britaine l. 6 @. 9. Beat. Rhen. hist. germ. Pantal. l. de Vir. Illustr. Stumph. l. 7. de S. Ioan. Leland. in Arthur. stowe hist. Drayton polcolb. Georg. Buchan. rerum Scoticar. l. ^. c. 65. Holinsh. hist. of Engl.ward, all our Protestant Antiquaries reme^ber ^ greatest honour, all of this nation, which prof^ the holy state of life in this age, making the^ si^larly renowned on earth and glorious in heaue^ they testifie of our noble Britan Suetonius bo^ name and deed called for his extraordinary Sanc^ Beatus, blessed.
They stile the remembred Eremites of G^enbury, the Saincts of that place, and the pla^ their buriall in honour of them and such others ^ried there, Tumulus Sanctorum, the graue of Sai^ and holy Church yard caemeterium Sanctum to ^ day. So they testifie of their Successors in that ^mitage, and order, and in other places euen v^ and after the time of Charles the greate Empe^ one of them Sainct Albinus, or Alcuinus, his ^tor, Caroli praeceptor, a man most renowned in ^ age. And others both for learning and sanctity ^strious: multi erant monachi, vetere disciplina no^
 ^tincta literis and pietate insignes, founders of the ^hoole of Paris in Fraunce, and both with learning ^d piety especially euangelicall perfection, ma^ing both Britaine Ireland, Fraunce and Germany ^nowned. All their writers and allowed publike ^lenders keepe memory of such, for most holy ^d worthy Saincts. Their perpetuall and vowed ^ate in such holy perfection, is sufficiently before ^membred by S. Ignatius, and S. Martial with o^ers who giue confirmation vnto it.
But of all others that diuine man S. Denis in his ^oke of the ecclesiasticall Hierarchy or holy ^der of the true Apostolike Church of Christ, ^aketh of the worthinesse and dignity thereof, ^oue all others, preistly order excepted, with the ^emne manner of their profession: initiandorum Dion areop. l. de Eccles. Hirarc. c. 6. ^ium excellentior ac sublimior ordo monachorum est ^cta distinctio, expiatione omni, tota virtute, atque ^ctissima suarum operatione mundata, omnis item ^antam sibi licet imspicere) sacrae operationis spiri^liter speculatrix and princeps facta, pontificumque ^summantibus virtutibus tradita.
This he further deliuereth, both by the words ^he Bishop which professeth him, and vowe of ^ that is professed, with all the significatiue ce^onies in that holy admittance. Stat Sacerdos ^ sacrum altare, monasticam imprecationem psal^, ea finita, Sacerdos ad eum accedens interrogat ^um, an renuntiet diuisibilibus omnibus, non solum ^ijs, verum imaginibus quoque ac phantasijs. Deinde, ^nit illi perfectissimam vitam, illud aperte conte^s, oportere illum medio longe antecellere. Vbi vero ^sta omnia intente promiserit, consignans eum crucis ^ sacerdos, tondet, trinas diuinae beatitudinis personas
 inclama^s: Exutumque veste omni, alia^ induit, and ^ sanctis alijs, qui astant, viris ipsum salutans, di^rum mysteriorum participem efficit. And deliuereth ^ particular and religious signification of euery ^ of those sacred significant ceremonies, to shew ^ perfection of that holy state, their cominge to^ altar, next behinde the Bishop, and Preist, their ^fection nearest and next vnto them, and aboue ^ others. Their vowed abrenuntiation of wo^ things, signifying, and binding them to that p^ction, from which others without offence are ^ Their signing with the crosse, protesting morti^tion of all carnall and other not good desires. T^ Tonsure declareth their most pure life. Their ^ting of their old, and putting on a new garme^ a testimony of their passing from the middle ^ of life, though holy, vnto a more perfect. A^ white vesture in baptisme was the signe of s^ Innocency. Diuisibilium non modo vitarum, v^ Imaginationum quoque abrenuntiatio suprema^^ monachorum philosophiam indicat, dum in scienti^ratur viuentium mandatorum. Est enim (vt dix^) ^ medij ordinis, sed omnibus celsioris Idcirco pluri^ impune a medio geruntur ordine, monachis omni^ terdicuntur: quippe qui vnum ipsum ambire debe^ ad sacram monadem cogi, itaque ad sacerdotalem (^tum fas est) formari vitam, and vt in plurimis ill^ gruentem. Nullus quippe ex ordinibus reliquis i^ pinquat magis. At vero crucis sanctae signacul^iam dictum est, mortificationem omnium simul^lium cupiditatum signat. Porro tonsura crinium ^ mundissimam indicat, and nulla figura fucatam, ^ nullis fictis coloribus animi deformitatem exor^ ipsa inscipsa non humanis venustatibus, sed sing^
 ^s and vnicis ad Dei exactissimam similitudinem proeret. Prioris autem v^stis positio, alteriusque assump^o, migrationem illam a media vita (sacra scilicet) ad ^rfectiorem significat: sicut in diuina generatione, pro^otionem indicabat a purgata vita ad contemplantem, ^luminantemque habitum illa vestis candentis immu^tio. And saith plainely that this profession, and ^onsecration, giueth them perfecting grace: porfi^entem eis indulsit gratiam. Which hee doth not ^eane, in such manner as Sacraments doe ex opere ^erato, by their owne efficacy from their diuine in^itution, but rather the merit and worthinesse of ^e estate so professed, and the forsaking of all ^orldly things for the loue and perfect seruing of ^od, which is the greatest loue wee can shew vnto ^im in this life, and so perfecteth man towards ^im, and consequently the grace and loue of God ^ man so duely louing and seruing him is shewed in ^e measure, accordingly as is intreated of merit be^re, which good works done in grace do carry ^ith them. As Christ himselfe is best witnesse, Matth. ca* 19. Marc. cap. 10 ^hen he saith: Omnis qui reliquerit domum, vel fra^es, aut sorores, aut patrem, aut matrem, aut vxorem, ^t filios, aut agros propter nomen meum, centuplum ac^piet and vitam aeternam possidebit. Euery one which ^r saketh house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mo^er, or wise or children, or possessions for my name, ^all receaue an hundred fold more, and possesse eternall ^e. If such perfection and reward is due for lea^ng any of those things for God, They which by ^s grace, vowe, and performe the foresaking of ^em all, and all earthly things, for his loue and ^uice, must needs be endued with perfect grace, ^erit, and haue reward accordingly.



THE VI. CHAPTER.
The 15. 16. 17. 18. Articles so examined: and wh^so^uer repugnant to the Roman Church, likewise condemned.
THE next and 15. in number English Protest^ Article being intituled: of Christ alone with^ sinne, seemeth by their glosse vpon it to haue be^ agreed vpon, to condemne the old heresies of ^nichees, Catharans, Donatists, Pelagians, Marcion^ Adamites, and Carpocratians, reuiued among th^ and especially their new sect called the family ^ loue. For to speake in their owne words: S^ Protestant publ. glosse vpon Articl. is Conc. Mileu. c 8. Display tit. 6. Answ to the fam. libera. li. 3. Display. R. 6. were of opinion, as the Pelagians, and family of l^ that they were so free from sinne, as they needed n^ say, forgiue vs our trespasses. Which family also ^cheth, how there be men liuing, as good, and as holy* euer Christ was. An errour of Christopher vitel^ cheife ^ld^r in the saide family: and that he wh^ a familist, is either as perfect as Christ, or els a ^ deuill.
These things cannot be applied to any opi^ held by Catholiks about the immaculate in^centy and freedome of the blessed Virgin, both fr^ originall and other sinne. And neither this art^ nor any other Protestant confession once nam^ her, when they treate of this subiect, but t^ plainely speake of the ordinary sorte and condit^ of people, especially lyuing in these dayes, to pr^ vnto vs, that they herein contradicted the na^ heresies then raigning among them, as these t^ article words be cleare: All wee the rest, alth^
 baptized, and borne againe in Christ, yet offend in many things, and if wee say, (as those named heretiks did, and doe) wee haue no sinne, wee deceaue ourselues and ^he truth is not in vs. Where they speake plainely of the baptized; and actuall sinne, and sinnes: whereas Catholiks ascribe that purity of our lady, eue^ from originall sinne, and before any were baptized, or ^he Sacrament of Baptisme instituted.
And our English Protestants by their best pub^ike Engl. Protestant communion booke Calendar. 8. Decemb. warrant and authority expressed and set forth ^n their communion bookes, doe celebrate the feast of her conception as immaculate from all co^tagion of sinne; so likewise they doe concerning the na^iuity of Sainct Iohn Baptist keeping and making Iane 24 supr* Prot. Cataloge of holy daies in co^m. booke confir. by Parlam. ^t a greate holy day, and the euen fasted. Which ^hey could not doe without greate contradictory ^bsurdity, except thereby they professed they hold ^hat our lady was preserued from originall sinne, ^ Sainct Ihon sanctified before he was borne into ^he world. For opinion of either sinfull conception ^r natiuity rather requireth greife and sorrowe, ^hen ioye and festiuity, which may not be made ^or sinne, which is to be lamented and sorrowed ^or, and farre from being reioyced at, with any ^igne or shewe of gladnesse, much lesse with cele^ration of publike festiuities and such solemnities.
And in the authenticall decree of their holy ^ayes, where they thus set downe for holy day the ^irth day of Sainct Iohn Baptist: The day of the nati^ity of S. Iohn Baptist, they diuers times call and de^are our lady in their opinion and practise. The ^essed Virgin. Which they neuer so singularly ^iue to any other man, or woman. And euer to be ^lessed, euer excludeth the misery which is in all
 sinne, no such lamentable estate being able to co^sist with the least degree of blessednesse. Therefo^ if any Protestant will oppose against this her i^ maculate perfection, wee haue the Angell fro^ heauen; testifying shee was full of grace and m^ blessed of all women, gratiaplena, benedicta in ^ Ignat. epist. ad S. Ioan. lieribus before she conceaued Christ. Sainct Ig^tius is witnesse, she was a wonder of perfection, ^ often pilgrimage vsed by holy Christians to v^ and honour her when she was yet liuing. Sunt ^ multae de mulieribus nostris Mariam Iesu videre ^ pientes, and quotidie a nobis ad vos discurrere vole^ vt eam contingant, and vbera cius tractent, quae Do^num Iesum aluerunt. Et quaedam eius secretiora ^cunctentur ipsam Mariam Iesu. And not finding a^ like vnto her on earth for immunity from all si^ and fulnesse of perfection, calleth her singularly ^ leste prodigium, and sacratissimum spectaculum. ^ heauenly wonder, and most sacred spectacle.
That she abounded with all graces full of vertues and grace. That it was the common ^nion of credible good Christians, that the na^ of Angelicall innocency and sanctity was ioy^ to humane nature in her. Notificauere ca^ Matrem Dei omnium gratiarum esse abundantem, ^ gratiae faecundam. A fide dignis narratur, in Maria ^ humanae naturae, natura sanctitatis Angelicae soci^ And as she testified of herselfe, that all generat^ especially of the good, should call her blessed, ^ tam me dicent omnes generationes, so it was ^ formed in this first generation of Christians, ab^nibus magnificatur. In the Masse ascribed to S^ Iames the Apostle she is stiled, Sanctissima, imm^lata, Missa S. Iacobi. gloriosissima, Domina nostra, Mater Dei and s^
 ^irgo Maria* the most holy, Immaculate. Our most ^orious lady Mother of God, and euer a Virgin ^ary. In the Masse of Sainct Marke the Euange^t Missa S. Marci. Manuscr. antiquum Britan. vsed aunciently in this Kingdome, she is called ^ll of grace, blessed among all women, the excel^ntly most holy vnspotted, our blessed lady, Mo^er of God, and euer Virgin Mary gratia plena, be^dicta in mulieribus, in primis sanctissima, intemera^ and benedict a Domina semper nostra Dei genetrix, and ^mper Virgo Maria.
The old tradition of the Church from the time Damasc. orat. 2. de dormitione Deiparae. Breuiar. Rom. die 18. Augusti. Dionis. Areo. ad Doroth. ^ her death as Sainct Damascen and others de^er, ex antiqua accepimus traditione. That all the ^ostles wheresoeuer then dispersed were mira^lously assembled together, to worshippe her ^ly body, quod Deum susceperat corpus adorare. S. ^mothy, and Sainct Denis the Areopagite, with ^ers, besides the Apostles, as he himselfe is a ^od witnesse, were then present. And by all their ^dgments, her holy body after three dayes of con^uall angelicall musike in the place of her de^rture, out of this life, was assumpted into heauen, ^e place where her sacred body lay, filling their ^ses with an vnspeakeable sweetnesse: ea tantum ^enerunt in quibus fuerat compositum, and ineffabili, ^i exijs proficiscebatur essent odore repleti.
^ee need not appeale any further to our prima^e Christians and frends: for Mahomet and his Mahomet. in Alcoran. Azoar 5. ^rkes, and Tartars, our greatest enemies, in their ^coran the rule of their Religion, doe plainely, to ^ euerlasting shame of such Protestants or others ^ich maligne the Blessednesse of this most blessed ^gin, confesse, that our blessed lady Mary was ^re resplendant pure and vnspotted, then any other
 weere earthly creature continually seruei^ God. D. Maria omnibus viris and mulieribus sple^didi^ and mundior, at que lotior, soli Deo perseueranter st^dens. And further adde: there is none borne of t^ children of Adam, whom Sathan did not touc^ besides Mary and her sonne. No woman was euer perf^ Azoar. 75. but Mary the Mother of Isa. (So they call Iesus) nu^ nascitur defilijs Adam, quem non tangat Sathan, pr^ter Mariam, and eius filium. Nulla vnquam perfect^ mulieribus, nisi Maria Mater Isa.
The Father of Protestants Religion Ma^ Martin. Luth. in Euang. l. de Concept. Mariae. Luther deliuered the same doctrine for all th^ that would be children to such a Father: sayin^ is piously beleeued that the conception of M^ was without originall sinne, and in the first mom^ when she began to liue, she was without all fin^ Mariae conceptio pie creditur sine originali peccato f^ esse. Atque it a in primo momento cum viuere in^ret, omnis peccati expers erat. And saith, that e^ from her conception she was full of grace, and hauing no place for any sinne. Maria Virgo ^^ In Euang. de Annunt. Mar. anima^ pl^na gratia concepta est. Gratia Deiipsam ^^ boni abundantem facit. Et ab omni malo liberat. D^cum ea est, hoc est, omne quod facit, aut omittit, diui^ est, and in eo a Deo perficitur: ad haec tutatur eam, and ^fendit ab omni, quod obnoxium and incommodum esse^ Antiquitat. Glaston. manuscrip tabul. lign. fixe. Io. Capgrau. in vit. S. Iosephi ab Aramathia. Guliel. Malmesbur. l. de an^iq. coenob. Glastonien. test. That from her conception she was full of grace, whatsoeuer she did, or omitted was holy and di^ she was free from all thing illor sinfull. Her ho^ here in Britaine was so greate and timely, that ^^ in 31. y^ares of the passion of Christ, and 15. of the bl^ Virgins. Assumption, anno post Passionem Domin^ cesimo primo, ab Assumptione vero Virginis glor^ quinto decimo, S. Ioseph and his holy company, by ^ monition of the holy Angel Gabriel and diuine wa^
 ^ilded here a Chapell vnto her honour. It is accompted ^e first Church of Britaine dedicated miraculously by ^hrist in honour of his Mother, The Christia^ builders in ^eate deuotion, watching, and fastings and prayers, ^ere serued God, and the blessed Virgin, and by the ^lpe of the blessed Virgin were releiued in their neces^ies. Praedicti sancti per Archangelum Gabrielem in ^isione admoniti sunt, Ecclesiam in honore sanctae Dei ^netricis and perpetuae Virginis Mariae in loco caelitus ^^onstrato co^struere. Qui diuinis admonitionibus obe^entes capellam consuminauerunt. Et cum haec in hac ^ione prima fuerit Ecclesia, ampliori eam dignitate ^^ filius insigniuit, ipsain in honore suae matris dedi^ndo. Duodecim sancti praedicti in eodem loco Deo and ^atae Virgini deuota exhibentes obsequia vigilijs ie^ijs and orationibus vacantes, eiusdem Virginis, Dei ^etricis auxilio, in necessitatibus suis refocillabantur: ^hus haue our most auncient antiquities, both by ^atholiks and Protestants testimonies.
The three next articles being thus intuled: The ^. of sinne after Baptisme: the 17. of predestination, and ^ection: and 18. of obtaining eternall saluation, onely ^ the name of Christ, doe not seeme in equall and ^orall construction, euen as they expound them^lues, to haue opposition, to any Catholike do^rine, but to haue beene receaued by them to con^mne newly risen vp heresies among them, as li^rtines, denyers of saluation to penitent sinners, ^edestinaries not respecting to liue well, vpon ^icked presumption of their predestination, and ^ch as affirmed that euery man shall be saued, Iew, ^urke, Pagan, or whatsoeuer Infidell, or heretike ^all be saued by the law or sect, which he professeth, that he be diligent to frame his life according to that
 law, and the light of nature, as is plainely registred ^ set downe in those Articles.


THE VII. CHAPTER.
The 19. Article examined, and condemned by the same authority.
THEIR next and 19. Article intituled, of ^ Church, is this: The visible Church of Christ, i^ congregation of faithfull men, in which the pure wor^ God is preached, and the Sacraments be duely ministr^ according to Christs ordinance in all those things, th^ nec^ssity are requisite to the same. As the Chur^ Hi^rusalem, Alexandria, and Antioche haue erred: ^ also the Church of Rome hath erred, not onely in th^ liuing and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters ^ faith. Hitherto this article. Whose definition ^ description of the Church, if wee should allo^ wee are sufficiently instructed by that is said b^fore, that the Protestants new congregation c^ not be this true visible Church of Christ, e^^ from the truth in so many necessary, and requi^ things, as hath beene proued in all Articles befo^ wherein it opposeth the receaued doctrine of t^ primatiue Apostolike age, and the present Chur^ of Rome as the like demonstration shall be ma^ against them, in all their contradictory Artic^ following, in their due place, And so is also and ^^ be most manifest, that the present Roman Chur^ agreeing in all those Articles both already, and he^ after to be examined, with the vndoubted ^^ Church of the Apostles, and this their age, is, ^^ must needs be the true Church of Christ: A^
 ^eir assertion in the second parte of this Article, ^hat the Church of Rome hath erred not onely in their ^ing and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of ^ith, is most euidently false and impudently slaun^erous: And the open dore to infidelity. For if all ^e commaunding Churches in the world, Hieru^lem, Nicen. Concil. Can. Parlament. ^. of Queene Eliz. Parl. ^. Iacob. and 1. Caroli. Alexandria, Antioche and Rome, as they are ^t downe in the first greate Councell of Nice, and ^proued by the Parlaments and Parlament Re^gions of Queene Elizabeth, King Iames, and King ^harles, haue erred in matters of faith, as this Ar^le affirmeth, then all other Churches, all being ^biect vnto them, haue likewise erred. And this ^w Protestant pretended Church not being then ^runge vp, being noe congregation of faithfull ^en in that time, nor any congregation, or men at ^, and so neither hauing the pure word of God ^eached, nor Sacraments duely ministred, nor any ^e point of doctrine yet preached, or Sacrament ^nistred, nor man to preach or minister any such, ^uld not, nor can possibly by their owne rule and ^dgment be the true visible Church, or any ^ember, peece, or part thereof. That true prima^e and Apostolike Church teaching by all Preists ^d Cleargy men, it had, both to the congregation ^ faithfull men (to vse these mens phrase) con^rted, and to others yet not Christians, all those ^cessary articles, hitherto examined, contrary to ^otestant Religion, when the onely want of any ^e of such necessary things, by their owne defini^e sentence before, taketh away the name and ^e, to be the true Church, at this present, any ^e past, or to come, the preaching of the pure ^rd of God, and due ministring of the Sacraments
 in all things of necessity being one and the same ^ all persons, in all times and places.
And to be of any other minde quite crosseth wi^ Christs Institution, and the continuance, and visi^lity of his Church, which both that article of the^ Creede, I beleeue the holy Catholike Church, and t^ their article and confession of an euerduring visib^ Church doth proue. For if at any time after Chri^ founding his Church, either in this Apostolike, ^ any age after, it had generally erred, in matters ^ faith, that it retained not the name and truth of ^ true Church, there was then by this article no t^ Church in the world. For whosoeuer it was wh^ wee will dreame to haue beene the first finder o^ of this generall errour and supposed Aposta^ Martine Luther, Iohn Caluine, Thomas Cr^mar or whosoeuer in any time or place, a^ preacher of the co^trary truth as Protestants wo^ haue it, yet this man being but one, could not mal^ a congregation of faithfull men, which must ne^ be a number, nor preach the pure word of God, ^ ^^ongregation of faithfull men, nor duely minister ^ the Sainaments, according to Christs ordinance, no s^ Protest. Co^f. Helu. Gallic. Angl. Scotic. Belg. Polonu^. Argent. Augustan. Saxonic. wittemb. Palatin. Bohemich. Parliament. Henric. 8. Edw 6 Eliz. Can Comm. bookes Iniunct. Cano^s. faithfull men or congregation yet being to prea^ and minister them vnto, which is a generall a^ vnanswearable demonstration, by this Protes^ article it selfe, that the Church could neuer so ^nerally erre, nor their new pretended congregat^ be any part, or parcell of the true Church. Wh^ is also manifest by their fourteene fifteene or m^ seuerall Protestant confessions and pretended ^gregations, euery on of them different from ot^ and with it selfe also, as here in England the ^ Church of Kinge Henry VIII. King Ed^^.
 Queene Elizabeth, King Iames and King ^harles at open warrs with themselues, both in ^ctrine and Sacraments, as their seuerall approued ^wes, Parlaments, proclamations, Synods, Ca^ns, Iniunctions, Litanies, communion bookes, ^thorized Orders of prayer, conferences, and de^ees are too great witnesses. And to quench the ^ey, malice of the Protesta^ts against the Church of ^ome our Mother Church (as lately King Iames ^ed it) they saying in this article, the Church ^ Rome hath erred in matters of faith. The Apo^like men which liued this age, will teach the ^ntrary.
First whereas all agree that Sainct Peter was Bi^op, liued and died there, Sainct Dionisius the A^opagite saith, hee was the most auncient and ^eifest head of diuines. Petrus maximum antiquissi^mque Dionis. Areopag. l. de diu. nom. cap. 3. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 9. Ignat. ep. ad Rom. in ^itul* Theologorum columen. And testifieth plaine^ that without doubt he was Prince or cheifest of ^e Apostles. Ipse discipulorum facile princeps.
Sainct Ignatius proueth the Roman Church ^s the sanctified and ruling Church. Ecclesia san^ficata quae praesidet in loco Regionis Romanorum. That was the Church which was sanctified il^minated by the will of God who created all ^ings which belong to the faith and loue of Christ ^sus God our Sauiour, the Church worthy of ^od, most decent, to be blessed, praysed, worthy ^ be obtained, most chast, and of excellent charity ^ioying the name of Christ and his father, and re^enished with the holy Ghost. Ecclesia sanctificata, ^ illuminata per voluntatem Dei, qui omnia creauit, ^ae pertinent ad fidem and charitatem Iesu Christi, Deo ^gna, decentissima, beatificanda, laudanda, digna quae
 quis potiatur, castissima, and eximiae charitatis, Chr^ and patris nomine fruens, spirituque plena. And plai^ly of the Christians of Rome, that they v^ ioined in body and soule to all the commaun^ments of Christs, and replenished with all gra^ Spiritu and corpore coniunctos omnibus mandatis I^ Christi, repletos omni gratia Dei absque haesitatione, repugnatos ab omni alieno colore. Without all do^ting, freed from all errour. Sainct Clement is ^^nesse, Clem. Rom. epist. 1. that Sainct Peter was made the foundat^ of the Church. Simon Petrus veraefidei merito and ^tegrae praecicationis obtentu, fundamentum esse Eccl^ definitus est. And was cheifest ruler among the ^postles. Nec inter ipsos Apostolos par institutio f^sed vnus omnibus praefuit. And calleth him the ^ther Clem. Rom. epist. 2. of all the Apostles, and that he receaued t^ keyes of the Kingdome of heauen. Beatum Petr^ Apostoluni, omnium Apostolorum patrem, qui cl^ regni caelestis accepit. And relating, how Sainct Pe^ a litle before his constituting him his successour^ the presence of the whole Church, in auribus to^ Ecclesiae, committed his chaire and Apostolike supre^ power vnto him alone, as it was by Christ comm^cated and giuen vnto him. In auribus totius Eccle^ haec protulit verba: Clementem hunc Episcopum v^^ ordino, cui soli meae praedicationis and doctrinae c^^^dram trado. Ipsi trado a Domino mihi traditam potes^tem ligandi and soluendi, vt de omnibus, quibusc^^ que decreuerit in terris, hoc decretum sit and in coelis.
And this is not denied by our Protestant An^quaries, Robert. Barnes lib. de vit. Pontif. Rom. ^^ Clement. 1. but affirmed from the same authorit^ Clemens Romanus, a Petro apprehens a manu instit^^ est Romanus Pontifex, si Epistolis Clementis credend^ est. Acknowledging those epistles to be the wor^
 ^ Sainct Clement, which so testifie. In which and ^ers other bookes he giueth lawes for the whole ^hurch, which he himselfe sufficiently often wit^sseth writing and sending his decrees to be kept ^d obserued to, and by all Bishops, Preists, all ^ergy men, and all Princes greater or lesse, and ^nerally vnto all beleeuers: Clemens vrbis Romae Clem. epist. 3. de offic. Sacerd. and Clericor. ^iscopus, omnibus Coepiscopis, Presbyteris, Diaconis ^ reliquis Clericis, and cunctis Principibus, maioribus ^noribusue omnibus generaliter fidelibus. This epi^e tra^slated by Ruffinus is intituled of the office and ^d duty of Priests and Clergie men, de officio Sacerdotis Clericorum, for the whole Church of Christ. The ^e commaunde and generall authority of his Sea ^postolike he hath in diuers other bookes. Sainct Anaclet. epist. 1. 2. 3. ^acletus also is so cleare for this primacy, and in^libility of the Church of Rome, that our Prote^nts confesse it thus as plainely: To proue that the Ormer. pict. Pap. p. 78. Robert. Bern. l. de vit. pont. Rom. in Anacleto. ^urch of Rome hath the preeminence ouer all Churches, ^eadgeth math. 16. vers. 18. vpon this rocke will I ^lde my Church, and he expoundeth it thus: super ^c Petram, id est, super Ecclesiam Romanam, vpon ^s rocke, that is, vpon the Church of Rome, will I ^ld my Church.

Anacletus writeth, that the primacy of the Church of ^me ouer all Churches, and ouer all Christian people ^s graunted by our Lord himselfe, because, saith he, said to Peter liuing at Rome, vpon this rocke will I ^ild my Church. Ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae ^clesiae super omnes Ecclesias, vniuer sumque Chri^ani nominis populum concessum esse asseruit: quia (in^it) Petro agenti and morie^ti Romae dixit: tues Petrus, ^ super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.

Sainct Euaristus writeth the like, calling the Euarist. ep. 1.
 Church of Rome the head, ^^put, of Churches ^lexander Alex. 1. ep. 1. affirmeth that Christ committed th^ ^posing of the greatest causes and busines ^ Churches to Sainct Peter Prince of the Ap^ and to the Apostolike Roman Sea as head of t^ Middleton. Papist. p. 200. Cui sanctae and Apostolicae sedi summarum dispos^ causarum, and omnium negotia Ecclesiarum ab ipso^ mino tradita sunt, quasi ad caput, ipso dicente pr^ Apostolorum Petro: Tues Petrus and super hanc P^ aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Sainct Papias also; ^ Protestants confesse (to speake in their ^ words,) taught Peters primacy; and Romish E^pality. Sainct Martial a disciple of Sainct Pete^ ^sent Martial. ep. ad Burdegal. cap. 11. Hier. l. de vir. Illust. in Iren. epist. 29. ad Theod. Tert. l. contra Valent. Martyrol. Rom. die 28. Iunij. into Fraunce by the Apostolike R^ Church, and a member thereof, teacheth th^ Church of Christ is firme, and can neuer be ^ throwne or dissolued. Firma Ecclesia Dei and ^ nec cadere, nec disrumpi poterit vnquam.
Sainct Ireneus being by Sainct Hierome, th^ Romane Martyrologe, and others, scholler Polycarpus and Papias, and neare the Ap^ time Apostolorum temporum vicimus, must nee^ and be learned in this age, and both knowe ^ followe the approued doctrine thereof, be^ most Catholike holy learned Sainct, Marty^ Doctour, yet he witnesseth of the Roman C^ Iren. l. 3. c. 3. that it hath principality ouer all others, and ^ fore euery Church and all true beleeuers must concordance with it, euer keeping the tru^ Christian Religion, which the Apostles deli^ Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalit^ necesse est omnem conu^nire Ecclesiam, hoc est, e^ sunt vndique fidel^s, in qua semper ab his, qui s^^ dique, conseruata est ca, quae est ab Apostolis tr^
 ^e saith this Church is the greatest, most auncient, ^owne to all, founded by the two most glorious ^ostles Sainct Peter, and S. Paul keeping inui^^le the faith they taught, and confounding all ^t erre. Maximae and antiquissimae, and omnibus co^itae a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo ^maefundatae, and constitutae Ecclesiae, eam, quam ha^ ab Apostolis traditionem, and annunciatam homini^ fidem, per successiones Episcoporum peruenientem ^que ad nos indicantes, confundimus omnes eos, qui ^quo modo, velper sui placentiam malam, vel va^ gloriam, vel per caecitatem, and malam sententiam, ^terquam oportet, colligunt. Where this Church of ^me is euer pure and vnspotted, free from errour, ^ Iudge and confounder of all, wheresoeuer or ^wsoeuer erring and falling from the true Apo^like doctrine. S. Simeon Metaphrastes die 29. Iunij. Leland. in Arthurio. Harrison descr. of Britaine Stow hist. of Engl. Hollinsh. his. of Engl. Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. Caius antiquit. Cautab. Godwin. Co^uers of Brit. and Catal. of Bish. Io. Goscelin. hist. Manuscript. Mat. parker. Antiquit. Brit.
And particularly concerning Britaine, (So it ^s euer adiudged here) wee receaued our first ^h from Sainct Peter and the Roman Church, ^nct Peter stayed longe in Britaine, conuerted ^y, founded here Churches, ordained Bishops, ^ists, and Deacons: venit in Britanniam, quo in loco ^o temporefuit moratus, verbo gratiae multos illumi^it, Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque and Presbyteros, ^iaconos ordinauit.
^nd all our Protestant Antiquaries confesse, that ^ receaued this holy Apostolike faith, and ^at this time, and in euery age had Bishops and ^chers sent hither from Rome, as Sainct Da^nus and Faganus with others from Pope Eleu^ius in the second age, from Pope Victor wee ^ many in the third age, and Sainct Mellonius
 or Mello from Pope Stephen and S. Amphibalus with others from the same Romes authority in the same age. In the fourth age one holy Emperesse and Emperour, Queene and King, S. Helen with our whole Cleargy agreed with Sainct Syluester and others Popes there, and Sainct Ninian with others of ours, which where there consecrated, and sent hither by that power Apostolike, and many of our Bishops were then at diuers Councels as Arles in Fraunce, Sardyce and others both ioyning with the Roman Church, and acknowledging the supreame spirituall power thereof. In the next and fift age, Pope Celestine and other holy Popes sent hither S. Palladius, Sainct Germanus, S. Lupus, Sainct Seuerus, S. Patricius, S. Dubricius. Coelius Sedulius with others renowned in all the world.
In the sixt age the Sea of Rome sent hither and approued here, Sainct Iuo, Sainct Ethelardus, S. Dauid, Sainct Kentegern, Sainct Asaph, Sainct Molochus, Sainct Augustine, Mellitus Iustus with all that holy company sent hither by Sainct Gregory Pope then, especially to the Pagan and no^ yet beleeuing Saxons. Now that our Christia^ Britains neuer forsooke or chaunged in any on^ materiall point their first receaued Apostolike faith* Io. Balaeus l. 2. de Act. Rom. Pontif. in Greg. 1. and l. de scrip. Centur. 1. in August. Dauid powel. Annotat. in l. ^. Girald. Cambren. Haier. Camb. cap. 1. wherein they were assisted by the Popes, and Se^ of Rome, all this while to the cominge of S. Augustine in the end of the sixt hundred of yeares, o^ most esteemed Protestant Antiquaries directly t^stifie from Antiquities.
Two of them speake in these very same word^ apud Britannos vigebat veritat is praedicatio, doctri^ sincera, and purus Dei cultus qualis ab ipsis Aposto^ mandato diuino, Christianorum Ecclesijs tradi^us (...)
 At the comminge of Augustine hither, here florished among the Britans the preaching of the truth, sincere doctrine, and the pure worship of God, which by the Apostles themselues by Gods commandement was deliuered to the Churches of Christians. One of the^ saith, their doctrine was most sincere. Doctrinae sincerissima. Both of them cite the brittish history, so they might haue cited the old manuscript history of Rochester with diuers others. Two other principall Protestant Antiquaries, the one an Archbishop with them, say: Euangelium quod primis Apostolorum Mat. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 68. 9 45. and alijs. ^o. Goscelin hist. Eccles. manuscr. c. Brit^nunq. prolaff. a fide. Godwin conuers. of Brit. p. 43. temporibus in Britannia nuntiatum non modo semper retentum firmiter, sed singulis saeculis auctum and dilatatum creuisse. The Ghospell which was preached in Britaine in the first times of the Apostles, was both euer firmely retained, and encreased in euery age.
An other, a Bishop in their congregation writeth: The Britans continued still in the same tenour of pure doctrine, which they had receaued in the first infancy of the Church. The doctrine and discipline of their Church they had receaued from the Apostles of Christ. An other hath thus: among the Britains or welchmen Hollinsh hist. of Engl. c. 21. p. 102. Foxe Act and monum. pa. 463. edit. an 1576. Fulke Answ. to a counterf. Cathol. p. 40. Middleton. Papistomast. p. 202. Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. Christianity as yet remained in force, which from the Apostles time had neuer failed in that nation. An other hath thus: The Britains after the receauing of the Faith, neuer forsooke it, for any manner of false preachinge of others. An other thus witnesseth: The Britains before Augustines cominge, continued in the faith of Christ, euen from the Apostles time. The like haue many others, to many to be cited, not any of them contradicting it. And by this they haue euidently proued against this their Article, that the Church of Rome, in euery age, as they haue before declared assisting and directing the Christian Britans here,
 and concurring and agreeing with them ineuery point and article of Religion, neither did, nor could be said to haue erred in matters of faith. And this these Protestants expressely confesse, when they generally acknowledge, (as all Antiquities doe) that there was then no materiall or essentiall difference, in matters of faith, betweene the Christian Britains (except some Pelagian heretiks among them) and Sainct Augustine with his company being sent from the Church of Rome, the Pope then being a greate S. Gregory the most learned and holy Pope that euer was by these mens Testimony: Gregorius magnus omnium Po^tificum Romanorum Balaeus l. 2. de Act. Rom. Pontif. in Gregorio M^g^^o. doctrina and vita praestantissimus. And therefore by them and all holy writers stiled Gregory the greate. And wherein soeuer any difference though ceremoniall obseruing of Easter, any ceremony about the ministering of Baptisme, or giuing holy Orders, was betweene the Roman Church and the Britains, all writers both Catholiks and Protesta^ts proue, the Roman Church professed the truth.
And the Britains were in the errour, and so they freely and publikely in their first meeting co^fessed, as Sainct Bede and our Protestants themselues Bed. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2. with others acknowledge: Tum Britones confitentur quidem intellexisse se, veram esse viam iustitiae, quam praedicaret Augustinus; and this was inuincibly proued vnto them both by vnanswearably humane arguments, and diuine testimony and miracle. And they afterward generally corrected and conformed themselues to the Romane Church in all things formerly questioned betweene them, as all Antiquaries Brittish, English, Forreine, domesticall, Catholiks, and Protestants agree, neuer contending
 about any question moued by Protestants against the present Roman Church, but both the Romane Church then, and our Britains, as the whole Christian world also, iointly agreing in euery article against this new Protestant Religion. And this is manifestly proued, particularly already in all articles yet examined, and so will be in all that followe. Therefore it is manifestly false, by all testimonies auncient, later, forreine, domesticall, Catholikes and Protestants euen in their publike decrees, and Confessions, that which this Article so desperately, hath deliuered: The Church of Rome hath erred in matters of faith: and the contradictory, that it hath not so erred, nor shall at any time so erre, is euidently true, by all witnesses. This will be yet more euidently manifested, in the two next following examinations, and others.


THE VIII. CHAPTER.
The 20. Article thus examined, and in whatsoeuer contrary to the Church of Rome, thus condemned.
THEIR 20. and next article intituled: of the authority of the Church: is this. It is no^ lawfull ^or the Church to ordaine any thinge contrary to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one place of ^cripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore ^lthough the Church be a witnesse and a keeper of holy ^rit; yet, as it ought not to decree any thing against the ^ame, so besides the same, ought it not to enforce any ^hing to be beleeued for necessity of saluation.

 In this article no thing needeth other answeare or confutation then is made before in their article of Scriptures, and traditions, where the pretended sole necessity of the written Scriptures, heretikely insinuated, is most plainely confuted, both by the Apostolike doctrine and practise of this age, and otherwise. And the supreame power and authority which here they giue vnto the Church to be a witnesse and keeper of holy writ, and the cheifest expositour thereof, and as their common glosse ^^ this article is, the Church hath authority to Iudge and determine in controuersies of faith, doth vtterly disable and condemne those Protestants to haue any colour or pretence to hold the truth in any one article they maintaine, against the Roman Church either concerning, Scriptures, Church, or an^ thing else: for the Church which onely was, and ^ visible, as they haue described the true Church before, hath in all and euery article condemned a^ such Protestant Innouation.
And for these men to say, as they haue done, ^^ their 19. Article, that the Church is a congregati^ of faithfull men, in which the pure word of God ^ preached, and the Sacraments be duely ministred, an^ to make it an article of faith, as they doe in the^ publike profession of the Creede, that this Church one holy and Catholike, doth so continue for (...) without interruption, or corruption in ministri^ Sacraments, and preaching doctrine, and the things are in their censure should onely be take from the written word and Scriptures, It is vnpo^sible in such proceedings, that the Church sho^ ordaine any thing contrary to Gods word writte^ or so expound on place of Scripture, that it be repugnant
 to an other. For otherwise it should neither be one, holie, or Catholike, but diuers different, vnholy, particular, no pillar of truth, but a forge of falsehood, no howse of God, no spouse of Christ, no saluation to be had, or hoped for, in any Iudgment Catholike or Protestant, but in the true Church of Christ.
To this, the Apostolike men of this age giue Ignat. epist. ad Philadelp. Ephes. Trall. Magn. Antiochen. Ignat. ep. ad Philadelp. euident testimony. Sainct Ignatius doth make the Iudgment of the Church both supreame, and certaine, and receauing penitents, and saith Christ hath firmely builded his Church vpon a hile by spirituall building without help of mans hands, against which the floods dashing, and windes puffing could not ouerthrowe it; nor any spirituall wickednesses shall euer be able to doe it, but they shall be weakened by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ. Iesus Christus secundum propriam voluntatem suam, firmauit Ecclesiam super Petram, adificatione spirituali, citra humanarum manuam operam, in quam collisa flumina and venti non potuerunt eam subuertere: nec id valcant vnquam spirituales nequitiae, sed infirmentur virtute Domini nostri Iesu Christi. And saith plainely, as there is but one flesh and blood of Christ shedd for our sinnes, one Euchariste, one Altare, one Priestly order, one God the Father, one God the sonne, one holy Ghost, so there is but one preaching, and one faith, and one baptisme, and one Church, which with their sweate and labours the holy Apostles haue founded in the blood of Christ, from the one end of the earch to the other: vnapraedicatio, and fides vna, and vnum baptisma, and vna Ecclesia quam suis sudoribus and laboribus fundarunt sancti Apostoli, a finibus terrae, vsque ad fines* in sanguine Christi. Sainct Clement C^em Rom. Const Apost. l. 1. c. 1. saith, the Catholike Church, is the plantation
 of God, and his chosen vineyard, which cannot be digged vp, or destroied. Dei plantatio est Catholica Ecclesia, and vinea eius electa. So that no other can be planted or chosen by Christ, but this one alone.
Christ did purchase but one militant Church with his pretious blood, he hath no more but one such daughter, nor true Christians more then one such mother, which the same Sainct Clement likewise proueth thus; conuenite ad Ecclesiam Domini, quam acquisiuit sanguine Christi, dilect^ primogeniti Const. Apost. l. 2. c. 65. omnis creaturae. Eaest enim altissimi filia, quae part^rijt nos per verbum gratiae. He co^pareth this Church also, to one greate shippe. Carrying passengers from all contryes to the desired hauen and harbour, saying, that God is alwayes the Lord and owne^ of it, Christ the Master or Gouernour, the Bishop cheife ruler vnder him, Preists Deacons and other Clergy men euer supply their places and offices therein. Similis est omnis status Ecclesiae magnae na^, Clem. epist. 1. quae per vndo sum Pelagus, diuersis e locis and regionib^ viros portat, ad vnam potentis regni vrbem proper^^ cupientes. Sit ergo nauis huius Dominus, ipse omnip^tens Deus, gubernator vero sit Christus. Tum dem^^ proretae officium Episcopus impleat, Presbyteri nau^^rum, Diaconi dispensatorum locum teneant, hi qui ^^techizant nautologis conferantur. He giueth also ^^ lay persons their place in this shippe, saying th^ world is the Sea it passeth, and witnesseth that th^ shippe, notwithstanding all stormes and tempest^ persecutions, tribulations, daungers, false Prophet^ seducers, persecuting potentates, hypocrites, an^ whatsoeuer enemies, aduersaries and aduersities ^ euer is safe, and neuer maketh shipwrake, fo^
 Christ euer gouerneth it, and the whole Church must endeuour to serue and obey him and his commaundes. Saluator Dominus, gubernator Ecclesiae suae Martial ep. ad Burdegal. cap. 11. diligatur ab omnibus, and ipsius solius praeceptis ac iussis credat, and obediat omnis Ecclesia. Thus Sainct Clement from the Apostles themselues. And Sainct Martial also teacheth, that the Church of Christ is so firme, it can neuer fall, nor be broken. And yet in the same place he teacheth that the deuill and heretiks his vassals and instruments shall neuer cease to labour and fight against it: Inimicus venturus est vt superseminet in populo Dei grana errorum. Sed firma Ecclesia Dei and Christi, nec cadere, nec disrumpi poterit vnquam. Venient praesumptores absque gratia Dei loquentes, quorum gloria labiorum procedit ex superbia, similes illi qui superbia caelum praesumens habitare, mox de caelo cum Angelis suis sequacibus ruit in aeternam voraginem. Hi docebunt aliam doctrinam quae aliena est a Deo, amica autem diabolo, per quam ipse spiritus erroris, animas post se trahere festinabit. Which cannot more properly be applyed to any sects of heresies, then the libertine Protestants so first arising, encreasing and subsisting by wanton and lewde licentiousnesse.
S. Dionysius Areopagita wrote a whole booke Dion. Areop. l. de Eccles. Hierarch. in Greeke yet euery where extant de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia of the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy, or holy order, which was in his time, and to continue euer in the neuer fayling or ceasing Church of Christ. All the Apostles so firmely and vniformely beleeued, Clem. Rom. epist 1. Ruff. in exposit. Symbol Leo i^ mul^is locis. and professed this doctrine, as a necessary article of faith, for all Christians, and to obtaine saluation by as the rest, and so proposed it vnto all, in their Symbolum as Sainct Clement then liuing
 Ruffinus, S. Leo and all Christians acknowlegde, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, euer to be an Article of faith as the others, which possible could not be true, if at any time Christ should want a Church holy and Catholike. And our Protestants of England in these their articles doe twise in one article before, intituled of the three Creeds, make and receaue it with the other articles of their Creede, an article of faith throughly to be receaued and beleeued. For So they define: The three Creeds, Protest. artic. of Relig. art. 8. Nicene Creede, Athanasius Creede, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creede ought throughly to be receaued, and beleeued, affirming further, they may be proued by most certaine warrants of holy Scripture. And both in the Apostles and Nicen Creede this article is contained with the rest.
This is also confirmed in their publike communion Engl. Protest. com booke ^it. Catechisme. booke, vsed in their Churches, and allowed by their Parlaments, where besides the Article of the Apostles Creede, I bel^eue in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholike Church, they say vnto God, in the canticle Te Deum, as they translate it: The holy Church Tit. morning prayer. through all the world, doth knowledge thee.
And in their Creede of the Nicen Councell they Nicen Creede plainely professe and beleeue, that from the Apostles till now, and euer after, there is and shal be one holy, Catholike and Apostolike Church: vnam sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Ecclesiam. Where the Church is euer one, holy, Catholike, and the same in all matters of faith it was in the Apostles time. And in this sense and no other they haue in their 19. article before described or defined the Art. 19. supr. Church of Christ to be one congregation of faithfull men, with true preaching, and due ministration of Sacraments
 in all things necessary and requisite according as Christ ordained. And their publike glosse vpon this 19. article diuiding it into diuers propositions, and making this the second proposition: There is Thomas Rogers in art. 19. proposit. 2. but one Church: When wee doe say that the Church is visible and that there is a westerne, East, Greeke Latine: English Church, wee meane not that there be diuers Churches of Christ, but that one and the same Church is diuersely taken and vnderstood, and also hath many particular Churches, as the Sea many Riuers and armes, branching from it. For the visible Church is not many congregations, but one company of the faithfull. For proofe of this out of Scriptures, they cite diuers texts Rom. 12. 5. 1. Cor. 10. 17. 1. Corint. 12. 13. 27. Gal. 3. 28. and conclude thus: all Gods people (meaning Protestants) agree with vs in this point. And particularly cite Confess. Hel^et. 2. cap. 17. Bohe. cap. 8. Gal. art. 26. Belg. art. 27. August. art. 27. Wittemb. art. 32. Sueu. art. 15. and these Protestant Confessions so agree. I will onely cite* two for the rest, one of Heluetia, for the Caluinists, and for the Lutherans that of Wittemberge where Luther liued, as Caluine in Heluetia.
The Heluetian confession saith: Cum semper vnus Confessio Heluet. c. 17. modo sit Deus, vnus mediator Dei and hominum Iesus Messias, vnus item gregis vniuersi Pastor, vnum huius corporis caput, vnus denique spiritus, vna salus, vna fides, vnum testamentum vel foedus, necessario consequitur, vnam duntaxat esse Ecclesiam: quam propterea Catholicam nuncupamus, quod sit vniuersalis, and diffundatur per omnes mundi partes, and ad omnia se tempora extendat, nullis vel locis inclusa vel temporibus. Seing alwayes there is onely one God, one mediatour of God and men I^sus the Messias, also one
 Sheepheard of the vniuersall flocke, one heade of this body, to conclude one holy Ghost, one saluation, one saith, one testament or league, it necessarily followeth, that there onely is one Church: Which therefore wee name Catholike, because it is Vniuersall, and diffused through all parts of the world, and extendeth it selfe to all times, not concluded within any places or times.

This holy Church of God, is called the house of the liueinge God, builded of liuely and spirituall stones, and seated vpon an vnmoueable rocke, and vpon a foundation, on which no other thing can be placed, and therefore it is called the pillar and supporter of truth. Haec Ecclesia Dei sancta, vocatur domus Dei viuentis, extructa ex lapidibus viuis and spiritualibus, and imposita super petra^ immota^, super fundamentu^, quo aliud loc ari no^ potest: and ideo nuncupatur etiam colu^na and basis verit ati^.
1. Tim. 3.

The Lutheran Religion or confession of Wittemberge saith: credimus and confitemur, quod vna sit Confess. Wirtemberg. cap. de Eccl. sancta Catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia, iuxta Symbolum Apostolorum and Nicaenum. Quod haec Ecclesia ^ Spiritu sancto, ita gubernetur, vt conseruct eum perpetuo, ne vel erroribus vel peccatis pereat. Quod in hac Ecclesi asit verapeccatorum remissio. Quod haec Ecclesia habeat ius iudicandi de omnibus doctrinis. Quod haec Ecclesia habeat ius interpret and aescripturae. Ecclesia habet certam promissionem perpetuae praesentiae Christi; and Cap. de Concilijs. gubernatur a Spiritu sancto.

Wee beleeue and co^fess^, that there is one holy Catholike and Apostolike Church according to the Creede of the Apostles and Nicen Councell.


That this Church is so gouerned by the holy Ghost, that he preserueth it for euer, that it perish not, either by errours or sinnes.


That in this Church there is true remissio^ of sinnes, th^^

this Church hath authority to Iudge of all doctrines. That this Church hath authority to interpret the Scripture. The Church hath certaine promise of the perpetuall presence of Christ, and is gouerned by the holy Ghost.

By this it is euident by all Testimonies of this Apostolike age, and these Protestants themselues that the true Church of Christ neuer did, shall, or can erre in any Iudgment, decree, sentence, or profession in matters of faith, but is pure Catholike and Apostolike in all such, in all times, and places, And this article either denying or doubting of such power, and prerogatiue in the true Church, is very Idle or Antichristian, taking away all certaine and holy Religion of Christ. As also that the Church which was when these heresies began, euen Catholike and vniuersall in all places, and had beene so in all times before, hath beene so euer since, and still so continueth, and florisheth, is that true holy Catholike and Apostolike Church which the holy Scriptures, Fathers of this age, and the Article of our Creede, giue testimony vnto, And the Protestant particular Confessions and congregations of Heluetia, Fraunce, England, Scotland, Belgia, Poland, Argentine, Ausburgh, Saxony, Wittemberge, the Palatine of Rheine, Boheme, and perhaps some others, (being onely of particular Contryes or Townes, and onely of some and not all persons of them) cannot be possibly Catholike for place, and as vnpossibly for time, the eldest of them, by their owne testimony, and confession, vnknowne vntill the yeare of Christ 1530. the Confession of Ausburge first began, not printed vntill the yeare 1540. the Confession of Boheme 1532. Heleutia 1536. Saxony 1551. England 1562. Scotland. 1581.
 the like of the rest. These nor any of them by the same reason can be Apostolike, arising so many hundreds of yeares after the Apostles time. None of all these can be, that one Church, which was euer, those being diuers from that, and among themselues at warres, both for Sacraments, discipline and doctrine. None of their co^gregations or co^fessions yet hath brought forth any one man or woman knowne, which in their owne Iudgment or sente^ce is honoured, or calendred for a Saint, though their calenders, chronicles, and histories be full of Saints, which were of the Roman Church, and Religion.
They haue taken away and ouerthrowne many thousand foundations of holynesse and piety, their owne first foundation in such kinde is yet to begin, this cannot be the one, holy, Catholike, and Apostolike Church of Christ, which our Creeds doe teach vs; being in all respects diametrically opposite, or rather contradictory to whatsoeuer is, or can be defined, or described, as they themselues define the true Church, by those attributes, properties, or distinctiue differences, to be one, to be holy, to be Catholike, and vniuersall in all times, places, and points of doctrine, and Sacraments, and to be Apostolicall, continued without intermission from the Apostles, in sound and Apostolicall Christian Religion, in all articles and matters of faith. And thus it was confessed, and professed by our Christian Britains, from their first couersion, in the Apostles time, as these men themselues haue before deliuered.



THE IX. CHAPTER.
The 21. Article so examined, and condemned.
THE Article which followeth 21. in number, is intituled: of the authority of generall Councels. And in these their words. Generall Councels may not be grathered to gether without the commaundement and will of Princes. And when they be gathered, for asmuch as they be an assembly of me^, whereof all be not gouerned with the spirit, and word of God, they may erre, and some time haue erred, euen in thinges pertaining vnto God. wherefore, things ordained by them as necessary to saluation, haue neither strength, nor authority, vnlesse it may be declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture. Hitherto this English Protestant Article. The first part of it requiring of necessity the commaundement and will of Princes, for the validity of Councels is singular, not onely against Catholiks but all Confessions of Protestants, not any one consenting in this matter with our English Protestants, as is euident in those confessions. Neither doe the Protestants of Britaine agree herein, but all they, whom they terme Puritans or Disciplinarians are quite of an other opinion. And the Parlament Protestants themselues of best Iudgment doe euen with publike allowance condemne it. Thus with such approbation they write of themselues. Protestant relation of Religion. cap. 47.

The Protestants are seuered bandes, or rather scattered troopes, each drawing diuers wayes without any meanes to pacifie their quarrels, to take vp their controuersies. No Prince with any preeminence of Iurisdiction

aboue the rest: no Patriarcke one or more, to haue a common superintendance of care, of their Churches, for correspondancy and vnity: no ordinary way to assemble a generall Councell, the onely hope remaining euer to assuage their contention. The other haue the Pope as a common Father, aduiser and conductor to all, to reconcile their Iarres, to appease their displeasures, to decide then difference, aboue all things to drawe their religion by consent of councels, to vnity.

And this is euidently and experime^tally knowne to be true* by all men, no Prince or Potentate spirituall or temporall except the Pope of Rome, either hauing, or pretending to haue, any such power, as is necessary to call and assemble a generall Councell. And for Protestant Princes, none clayming such prerogatiue, but onely in his owne temporall dominions, it is absolutely vnpossible that any such assembly of Bishops, which could deserue the name of one halfe or third or lesse part of a generall Cou^cell, from all Christian Kingdomes, and contries, should at any time, or place, be called, and gathered together, by any such pretended power. And if wee should allowe meere lay and prophane men, Souldiars, The Subscriptio^s of these Protestants confessions. Captaines, Rebels, and heretikes without knowledge in diuinity, or humane duty, to haue decisiue voyces in Ecclesiasticall matters, and to offord to euery common Artizan, the place and office of holy and learned Bishops, in such assemblies, and Iudgme^ts it were a thing most ridiculous, And further to say, that all the Bishops and Catholike Cleargy men in all those contries, where Protestant confession haue beene kept were present, and consented vnto them, all those assemblies and conuenticles could not come to be the halfe of a fourth
 part of a Councell generall, out of the whole Christian world.
There was not in any of forreine conuenticles and conciables, any one man bearing the name of a Bishop, which inuented them, or subscribed vnto them, as is euident in their subscriptions, neither any one such at this day amo^g them except in Scotland, whether some of King Iames his bastard Bishops haue crept, sent, or appointed by his regall supremacy from the newly hatched broode of England, which neither now hath, or had any one true and lawfull Bishop, at the enactinge and first shaping of these articles called forsooth, Anglica confessio, the confession of England, and now scarcely a man to be founde in England, Scotland, Fraunce or other contry, where those confessions were first vented, which consenteth vnto them. Diuers of them of late as of Bohemia, the Palatinate of Rhyne, and others in Germany wholly ouerthrowne, and all returned to the Catholike faith, and the rest so farre at variance and distastes with their confessions, as wee see in England the late bookes of Doctor Montague, and, him that gathered the booke of prayers priuiledged by the present Protestant Bishop George of London, both them iustifiable by this booke of articles, their communion booke, and other allowed rules of their religion, are esteemed and accompted for strau^ge wonders among the present called Protestants. And to shew of what validity these pretended peeces of Protestants Councels and confessions were from the beginning in their owne Iudgment, disablinge all such, as be not gathered together by the commaundement and will of Princes, except
 here in England, where a woman was head in al^ things both temporall and spirituall, there was n^^ either the commaundement, will, or assent of a^^ true lawfull, and cheife Prince to those confession^ but the contrary, those assemblies and Confessio^ being gathered and concluded by refractory, disobedient, and vndutifull people, as is euident in th^ very Protestant proceedings and histories of the^ all. In the confession of Ausburg the Protestant p^blishers of it say, that Ihon Duke of Saxony E^ctour, George Marquesse of Brandeburge, Ernestus Duke of Luneburge, Philip Lansgraue ^ Subscriptio confessionis Augustanae. Hesse, Ihon Frederike Duke of Saxony, Franc^ Duke of Luneburge, Walfangus Prince of Anha^ the Senats of Nurnberge and Reutling subscribe^ but by their owne confession they subscribed ^ subiects to the Emperour and protesting their fidelity vnto him. Caesareae maiestatis v^strae fideles o^ subditi. And the Emperour their Supreame Lord* and Prince, neuer consented vnto it. No Prince ^^ Potentate Protestant that consented vnto any ^ these confessions, neuer had, or claymed any Iuridiction or power spirituall, or temporall ouer ^ other, or any one other Prince or contry, and so no^ generall Councell euer was, or can be called, b^ any right, or title claymed or pretended in their religion; all Protestants agree the true Church e^^ had, hath, and shall haue true discipline, Sac^ments, and due ministration of them, and true d^ctrine in all things necessary: none of these co^fessions thus agree together, And the Protestan^ of England with their temporall Princes spiritua^ Supremacy with two onely Sacraments, and d^uerse points of necessary doctrine differ from the^
 all. Neither euer was there any Christian, temporall prince, King, or Emperour, or euer like to be, that did or shall Reigne ouer all prouinces, and contries, where Christians, did; doe, and are to liue hereafter, yet councels haue beene kept, and lawfully called, euen such as be named generall; from the beginning, and before any Christian King was in the world, and were lawfully kept and called, contrary vnto, and against the temporall Princes will and commaundement.
The Apostles themselues kept diuers councels in such manner; The Scripture witnesseth, that S. Peter and the Apostles assembled in Councell to be called generall for that time, consisting of all the Apostles, hiomnes erant perseuerantes vnanimiter, Act. cap* 1. and almost 120. Petrus in medio fratrum dixit, erat autem turba hominum simul f^re c^ntum viginti, when Sainct Matthias was chosen in the place of Iudas.
It was a generall Councell also for that time Act. cap. 6. which was called and kept by the Apostles. When Sainct Stephen and the other 6. Deacons with him were chosen, remembred in the 6. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. For both all the Apostles, and disciples being then very many, crescente numero Act* cap. 6* discipulorum, were present at it, called thither by Apostolike authority, both without and against the consent, will, or liking of any temporall Prince. It was also a generall Councell, for that time, when S. Paul, S. Barnabas with others, Paulus and Barnabas Act. cap. 18. Clem. Rom. const. Apost. l. 6. cap. 12. and quidam alij, went a long Iorney to the rest of the Apostles and disciples at Hierusalem, about the question then moued concerninge circumcision. For these were receaued by the Church, Apostles and others of the Clergy there. Suscepti sunt ab E^clesia,
 and ab Apostolis, and senioribus. And the Apostles with the disciples and rulers of the representatiue Church gaue resolution and sentence vpon that doubt. Placuit Apostolis and senioribus cum omni Ecclesia.
So wee may say of the councels, wherein the Canones Apostol. Const. Apost. l. 6. c. 12. Canons of the Apostles, and their constitutions registred by S. Clement, and remembred in many auncient writers Greeke and Latine were made.
The like is also set downe by S. Clement, when Clemens recognit. l. 1. he relateth it in the name of the Apostles, a Councell which they kept at a feaste of Easter. Cum nos duodecim Apostoliad diem Paschae cum ingenti multitudine conuenissemus, ingressi Ecclesiam fratrum, quae a nobis per loca singula gesta sint, breuiter exponimus. So of that their holy Councell, wherein they decreed and composed the Creede, which the Church euer since professeth, and our Protestants before receaue, as composed by them; the history of it is expressely set downe by Sainct Clement, Ruffinus and others. Christo resurgente and ascendente in coelum Clem. epist. 1. Ruffin. l. de expos. Symb. misso sancto Spiritu, collata Apostolis scientia linguarum, adhuc in vno positi, Symbolum quod fidelis nunc tenet Ecclesia, vnusquisque quod sensit, dicendo, condiderunt, vt discedentes ab inuicem, hanc regulam per omnes gentes praedicarent. And reciting the contents thereof, concludeth, that the Apostles penned it by instinct of the holy Ghost. Hoc praedicti sancti Apostoli inter Clem. Const. Apost. l. 6. c. 14. 15. 16. 17. etc. se, per Spiritum sanctum salubriter, vt dictum est, condiderunt. Diuers other such sacred Councels of the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ, wee might recite from approued writers, and yet none of them was by the commau^de or allowance of any temporall Prince, or Potentate, but otherwise.
 And to make it manifest to all posterity that Princes te^porall were not to haue any commaunde in such affaires, as Protestants in this article pretend, the same holy Apostles in their Canons, by some readings in the 36. by others, the 37. and by others 38. do thus decree, that Bishops should twise Canon. Apo^stol. can. 36. 37. vel 38. in the yeare keepe councels and among themselues examine the decrees of religion, and compose such Ecclesiasticall Controuersies as should arise, first in the fourth weeke after Pent^cost, and the second the 12. day of October. Bis in anno fiat Episcoporum Synodus, and inter se examinent decreta religionis, and incidentes Ecclesiasticas controuersias componant: semel quidem quarta hebdomade Pentecostes: iterum autem Hyperb^retaei, duodecimo.
And S. Clement from the same Apostles teacheth Clem. Apost. constit. l 2. c. 30 c. 26 in al. exempl. further, that Episcopall power and dignity was the greatest on earth, Bishops were Mediatours betweene God and men, in things belonging to diuine worship. The Bishop is the Master of piety and Religion, the Father of Christians vnder God, their Prince, their Leader, their King, their Ruler. After God, the earthly God who ought to enioy honour, the Bishop must gouerne being adorned with the dignity of God, whereby he hath power ouer the Cleargy, and ruleth all the people. Qui Episcopus est, hic est minister verbi, scientiae custos, Mediator inter Deum and homines, in ijs, quae ad eum colendum pertinent: hic est magister pietatis and religionis: hic est secundum Deum pater vester: hic Princeps, and Dux vester: hic vester Rex, and praefectus: hic post Deum terreus Deus, qui honore v^stro frui debet. Episcopus vobis praesideat, vt dignitate Dei cohon^status, qua clerum sub potestate sua ten^t, and toti populo p^aeest.
 He tell^th vs againe by the same Apostolike warrant, Cap. 11. that a Bishop representeth the example of God to men, and ruleth all men, Preists, Kings, Magistrats, parents, children, and all subiects. Stude Episcope, vt mundus purusque sis, locum tuum, dignitatemque tuam actionibus declara, vt pote qui exemplar Dei repraesentas, praesidendo omnibus hominibus, Sacerdotibus, regibus, Magistratibus, parentibus, filijs, and pariter cunctis Cap. 12. subditis. And iudgeth with power as God doth: Iudica Episcope potestate fretus, tanquam Deus.

And as Moses by God was called a God, so a Bishop
Cap. 30. c. 34. 37. 13.
is to be honoured as God. By how much the soule is more excellent then a Kingdome. Wee must loue a Bishop as a Father, feare hym as a King, honour him as Lord. It is graunted onely to Preists, to Iudge in spirituall causes. Lay men must obey, the Bishop is Steward and dispenser
Cap. 40. 39.
of Ecclesiasticall things. Wee must not aske an accomp^ of him, nor obserue how he performeth his dispensation, when, with whom, where, well or ill or conueniently. He hath God his Iudge, who hath committed this dispensation into his hands. Without a Bishop wee must do
Cap. 31.
nothing. If any man doth any thing without the Bishop, he doth it in vaine. A Bishop is the heade, and must no^
Cap. 17.
obey the foote, a lay man, but onely God. He must rule hi^ subiects, not obey them. The sonne doth not rule the Father, nor the Seruant his Lord, nor the Scholler his mastor, nor the Souldier the King, so the lay man must no^ commaund the Bishop. Si de parentibus secundum carnem lex diuina inquit honora patrem tuum and matrem tuam quanto magis de spiritualibus parentibus vob^ praeceptum est, vt eos honoretis, and diligatis tanquam b^n^ficos ligatosque ad Deum. Hos venerabiliter colite varijs honoribus. Hos Principes and Reges vestros p^tatote, and tributa tanquam Regibus penditote. Si aliquid

orationi addendum est, plura hic Episcopus, quam ille, Rex, olim. Ille enim rem militarem tantum administrabat, belli pacisque moderator, ad tuenda corpora, hic vero Dei Sacerdotium administrans; corpus and animam periculis liberat. Quanto igitur corpore est excellentior, tanto Sacerdotium Regno praestat. Ligat enim id and soluit supplicio, vel indulgentia dignos. Ideo Episcopum diligere debetis, vt patrem, timere vt Regem, honorare vt Dominum. Non est aequum, caput cum sis, o Episcope, caudae obsequi, hoc est, laico homini seditioso in alterius pernici^m, sed soli Deo. Imperare enim debes subditis non parere: nam neque filius imperat patri secundum originis rationem, neque seruus Domino secundum potestatis rationem, neque discipulus magistro, neque miles Regi, ita neque laicus Episcopo.

The like he hath in diuers other places, and in S. Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen. ample manner. S. Ignatius is as plaine in this point. He telleth vs, that all, without exception of any, must followe the Bishop, as Christ his Father. And none must doe any thing in matters belonging to the Church without the Bishop. Omnes Episcopum siquimini, vt Christus patrem. Sine Episcopo nemo quicquam faciat eorum, quae ad Ecclesiam spectant. He manifestly maketh the Authority of Bishops, greater then any regall, or other, on earth in these matters, the Princes of Preists representing the Image of God, and next to him to be honoured and obeyed, and declareth it for a greater treason and disobedience to resist the Bishop, then the King, and the Episcopall office more honourable, then the Regall, this consisting onely in the inferiour temporall affaires, the Episcopall in superiour Ecclesiasticall and diuine. Honora Deum vt omnium a^thorem and Dominum, Episcopum vero vt Principem
 Sacerdotum, Imaginem Dei referentem, Dei quidem propter principatum, Christi vero propter Sacerdotium. Honorare oportet and Regem, nec enim Deo quisquam potior est, aut ei similis in rebus omnibus creatis: nec Episcopo qui Deo consecratus est pro totius mundi salute, quicquam maius in Ecclesia: nec inter principes quisquam similis Regi, pacem and aequitatem subditis procuranti. Qui honorat Episcopum, a Deo honorabitur, sicut qui ignominia afficit illum, a Deo punictur. Si enim Iure censebitur paena dignus, qui aduersus Regem insurgit, vt qui violet bonas legum constitutiones, quanto putatis grauiori subiacebit supplicio, qui sine Episcopo quid volet agere, concordiam rumpens, and decentem rerum ordinem confundens? And immediatly he further addeth this reason: because preisthood is the heade, and cheifest of all good things among men. And so he that opposeth or rageth against it, doth not offer reproch to man, but to God and Christ Iesus by nature the high Preist of his Father. Sacerdotium Ignat. epist. ad Trallian. enim est omnium bonorum, quae in hominibus sunt, Apex, quiaduersus illud furit, non hominemignominia afficit, sed Deum, and Christum Iesum primigenitum, qui natura solus est summus Sacerdos Patris. And testifieth, that the Apostles left this cu^maundement of honouring Bishops. And saith, that a Bishop is aboue and higher then any, or all principality and power on earth, and to be reuerenced as Christ. Reueremini Episcopum vestrum sicut Christrum, que madmodum beat inobis praeceperunt Apostoli. Quid enim aliud est Episcopus, quam is qui omni principatu and potestate superior est: and quoad homini licet, pro viribus Imitator Christi Dei factus? And therefore it is needfull that whatsoeuer wee doe, wee attempt nothing without the Bishop. But wee must also obey Preists
 as the Apostles of Christ. Episcopo subiecti estote velut Domino: ipse enim vigilat pro animabus vestris, vt quirationem Deo redditurus sit. Necesse est it aque quicquid facitis, vt sine Episcopo nihil tentetis. Sed and Preshyteris subiecti estote, vt Christi Apostolis. What soeuer Ignat. epist. ad Ephes. Bishop is placed to gouerne the Church of Christ, wee must receaue him, as him that sent him. Wee must regard our Bishop as our Lord himselfe. Quemcunque Episcopum paterfamilias mittit ad gubernandam familiam, huncita accipere debetis, vt illum ipsum qui mittit. Episcopum igitur profecto aspicere oportet vt ipsum Dominum. Wee must be subiect both to the Bishop and Priests and Deacons. He that obeyeth them, obeyeth Christ. He that resisteth them, resisteth Christ Iesus. He is peruerse contentions and proud, that obeyeth not Superiours. Enitimini subiecti esse Episcopo, and Presbyteris and Diaconis. Qui enim his obedit, obedit Christo, qui hos constituit. Qui vero his reluctatur, reluctatur Christo Iesu. Praefractus, contentiosus, and superbus est, qui non obtemperat Superioribus. Sainct Euaristus Pope liuing in this age writeth, as Sainct Ignatius also in diuers places doth, which I haue not cited, that preists are legates in the Church in the place of Christ: Euarist. epist. 2. and as the Church his spouse is ioyned to him: So Bishops are ioyned to their Churches, by proportion. And the Church ought to obey the Bishop in all things. Sacerdotes vico Christi legatione funguntur in Ecclesia. Et sicut ei suaconiuncta est sponsa, id est, Ecclesia: sic Episcopi tunguntur Ecclesiae vnicuique proportione sua. Et Ecclesia Episcopo in omnibus obedire debet. So our Protestants Rob. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Euarist. Barnes sup. in Anacleto. also testifie of him: Ecclesiam debere Episcopo suo in omnibus obedire praecepit.
And that Sainct Anacletus his predecessour decreed, that Ecclesiasticall causes should be hard
 onely before Ecclesiasticall Iudges, the greater to be brought to the primate, the lesser to the Metropolitane Bishop, and onely temporall matters to be tryed before temporall Iudges. In Ecclesiasticis negotijs, grauiores causas ad primatem, leuiores ad Metropolitanum Episcopum referendas, secularia negotia ad prophanos Iudices agenda esse iussit. And that all might appeale to the Ecclesiasticall Court Omnibus oppressis licere appellare Ecclesiasticum forum.
That he was an enemy to Christ whosoeuer should call Preists before temporall Iudges. And reputed them as Murtherers, which should take away the riches and right of Christ and his Church: because, saith he, the Apostles by the commaunde* of our Sauiour did commaund, that the priuiledges of the Church and Preists should be kept inuiolate. Christo alienos esse iudicabat, qui Sacerdotes in ius vocarent. Christi vel Ecclesiae pecunias auferentes, homicidas iudicari debere censuit: quia inquit priuilegia Ecclesiae and Sacerdotum, Apostoli Saluatoris iussu inviolata esse debere iusserunt. And yet the holy Apostolike writers being thus farre from allowing Kings, to haue any power to commaund councels of Bishops, or any one Bishop in such busines, doe giue vs assurance, and some of them also commaundement, that councels were to be assembled, and kept, euen in those times when there was no King Christian to call, will, or commaunde them, and in all ages to succeede without any such commaunde, or will of them. Which our Protestants themselues plainely acknowledge, and first in this last mentioned Pope Sainct Anacletus, who as they confesse decreed, that councels should be kept twise in the yeare. And such causes as could not
 otherwise be determined should be decyded in Robert. Barn. in Anacleto supr. Anacletus ep* 1. Canon. Apostol. can 36. Clem ib concil. Chalced. act. 25. can. 19. them. Statuit congregationem virorum Ecclesiastici ordinis his in anno habendam^ and causas quae apud primarios Ecclesiastici ordinis componi non possent in quarto concilio finiendas esse. In the place which these men cite that holy Pope saith, that such councels were vsed, and ought to be kept twise in the yeare. Summorum congregata congregatio per singulos annos his ficri solet and debet. And the Apostles themselues, as Sainct Clement and others witnesse, made that decree, that councels of Bishops should be kept twise in the yeare, to determine Controuersies in religion, and Ecclesiasticall contentions, and expressely set downe the times of their assembling. Bis in anno Episcoporum celebrator Synodus, and pietatis inter se dogmata in dispositionem vocanto, nec non in Ecclesijs incidentes contradictiones dirimunto, semel quidem quarta feria, Pentecostes, secundo duodecima hyperberetaei. Which is receaued not onely in our Concil. in cen. 1. cen 1. can. ^. Concil. Antioch. c. 20 Ignat. epist. Polycarp. most auncient Popes and writers, as Sainct Anacletus before, but in first and generall Councels themselues. Sainct Ignatius testifieth it was the order in his time, and giueth that order, that such councels should be often kept. Crebrius celebrentur conuentus, synodique. And euident it is by all antiquities, that many such Councels and Synods were kept, longe before, and when and where there was not any Christian Prince or King to giue his will, commaund; or consent vnto them. Diuers such are yet extant, and Tertullian lyuing long before any such Christian King was either in Britaine which had the first, or els where, is an ample witnesse, that in diuers places, and from all Churches councels were assembled, about affaires in religion, and
 with greate reuerence, and such as represented all Tertullian. aduers. Psychicos cap. 13. that were Christians. Aguntur praecepta per Graecias illas certisin locis concilia ex vniuersis Ecclesijs, per quae and altiora quaeque in communa tractantur, and ipsa represent atio totius nominis Christiani magna veneratione celebratur. And if wee should follow the will, and Rule of Protestants, to accompt them generall Conc. Arelat. to. 1. Conc. in Subscript. Io. Bal. l. de Scriptor. Brit. cent. 1. Stowe hist. Romans. Godwine conuers. of Britaine Concil. Sunessan. to. 1. Concil. in. 3. examp. Act. antiq. S. Marcellin. Robert. Barnesse l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Marcellin. councels, where the most Bishops and from most prouinces in greatest number be assembled, wee may relate for such the Councels of Arles where our Archbishop of Lo^don Rectitutes was present, gathered forth of aboue 30. Kingdomes and contries, and that of Sunessanum hauing 300. Bishops present at it in such time, when the King of the Contry and Emperour of the world Diocletian reigned and raged, the greatest persecutour of Christians that euer was, and they assembled themselues against his will, and to keepe their meetinge vnknowne to him, kept their cou^cell in a secret Caue of the earth, and thither entered not aboue 50. at one time, it not able to receaue more together, at one meetinge: these things thus agreed vpon, both by Catholike and Protestant antiquaries, must needs make vs all Catholiks in this point. As also to see the first Christian Kings and Emperours, so to haue behaued themselues in this matter, as Catholiks now professe.
Britaine was made happy with the first Christian King, and holy S. King Lucius, who neuer tooke vpon him any such pretended spirituall power, but so much honoured that true power in the Pope of Rome, that by all antiquities, he sent humble Ambassadge and suppliant letters to the then Pope S. Eleutherius to haue his Kingdome conuerted, and
 Christian Religion setled here by his meanes, and authority, and by him and his holy legates all such busines was here established, ratified, and confirmed, all historians forreine domesticall, Catholike and Protesta^t so consenting. Philipp was the first Christian Emperour though a short time he was so farre from arregating any such power to him selfe, or denying it to the Pope of Rome, that as Eusebius and others testifie, he did publike pennance, euen among the common penitents at the Popes enioyning it vnto him. De Philippo fertur, quod cum Euseb Eccl. hist. l 6 ca. 3^. Nicephoras Callist. l 5. ca. 25. Christianus esset, and in die qua vltimae Paschatis vigiliae seruabantur, in precationibus multitudini Ecclesiasticae tanquam consors coniungi vellet, ab eo qui tum Ecclesiae praeerat, admissum non esse nisi primum consiteretur, and ijs se, qui propter peccata inquirebantur, and in poenitentiae loco constituti erant, coniugeret. Alioqui nisi hoc faceret, nonfore ipsum admiitendum, propterea quod in multis culpabilis esset: fertur itaque prompte obediuisse, sincerumque ac religio sum animum erga Deum ipsis operibus declarasse.
This Pope as Nicephorus with others writeth was Sainct Fabian, which so commaundeth the first Christian Emperour, and hee Christianly and dutifully obeyed him. When the first Nicen Councell against Arius, which is commonly reputed for the first generall Councell, was called. That greate glory of this Kingdome, borne here, Constantine the greate was Emperour, and although he was the greatest benefactour to the Church of God, founder and dilatour of the honour and renowne thereof, that enioyed the Empire, and hauing onely in his power then to permit so greate assemblies of learned and holy Christians Bishops
 as were present there, yet as Eusebius then liuing Euseb. lib. 3. de vit. Constantini cap. 6. writeth, he called not the Bishops together by his commaunde, as this article giueth to Kings, but wrote honorable letters vnto them to such purpose, per literas honorifice scriptas. And as Ruffinus a Ruffin. lib. 1. hist. cap. 1. man also of that time expoundeth those proceedings vnto vs, this was as the Bishops willed and directed: ex Sacerdo^um sententia, apud vrbem Nicanam Episcopale cuncilium conuocat. And S. Damasus Damasus in vit. Syluestri Papae. an other old writer of the liues of the Popes saith expressely, it was called by the consent of Sainct Syluester then Pope of Rome. Huius temporibus factum est concilium, cum eius consensu, in Nicea Bithiniae. Besides it is euident in the authenticall subscription Subscript. in Concil. Nicaeno in fine. Euseb. l. 3. and 4. de vit. Constantini. to that holy Councell, that diuers Bishops were present and subscribed vnto it, out of Persia, and other Kingdomes and contries where Constantine had no temporall commaund or dominion, and they which so then ruled in them were not Christians at that time. So hath Eusebius and others when they say, that assembly was fro^ all Churches in Europe, Afrike, and Asia, ex omnibus Ecclesijs quae frequentes in tota Europa Africa and Asia extiterunt. And name diuers in particular, where Constantine Euseb. l. 3. de vit. Constantini. cap. 7. Socrates Ecclesiastic. hist. l. 1. c. 5. Sozomen. hist. l. 2. c. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12, 13. 14. had then no power by his owne relation, giuing still the most he could to that Emperour in all respects.
This is euident also, by the exceeding greate desire, which all good Bishops in all places then had, to assemble in such a councell, which could not be done at that time, persecution scarcely yet ceased by inferiour rulers, and the Bishops in greate pouerty, and distresse, by their late persecution, without the temporall helpe and allowance
 of the Emperour, which being had, as Eusebius and others write, came together with greatest alacrity, and ioye, as men newly set at liberty out of prison. Vbi edictum in quaque prouincia diuulgatum crat, omnes Euseb. l. 3. de vit. Constant. cap. 6. summa cum animorum alacritate tanquam e carceribus ad cur sum emissi, propere aduolarunt.
This is proued by the greate temporall prouision of Horses, other beasts, and instruments of carriage: in care peragenda multum attulit subsidij authoritas Imperatoris, ac nutus, qui nonnullis fecit potestatem, equis publice ad iter celeriter conficiendum dispositis vtendi: alijs permagnum iumentorum instratorum, quibus vcherentur, numerum suppeditauit. This is manifest by his prouision of the place of their assembly, with Seats, dyet, all necessaries in his owne palace, and he himselfe would not set downe vnlesse entreated, or vrged by the Bishops: Non prius sedit, Ecseb. sup. ca. 10. Socrates l. 2. hist. cap. 5. quam Episcopi ad id innuissent. And to put it out of all contradiction, or question, that he onely vsed his temporall power in this busines, referring all spirirituall things to the Bishops, and nothing of that nature to himselfe, he did in open councell protest, and confesse, that they had power from God to Iudge of Kings, and Emperours, and these no such power at all ouer Bishops. None but God could Iudge them. They by God were constituted as Gods ouer men, no man could bee their Iudge. Ait ad Episcopos: Deus vos constituit Ruffin. lib. 1. histor. cap. 2. Sozomen. hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 16. Sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis, dedit de nobis quoque iudicandi, and ideo nos a vobis, recte iudicamur. Vos autem non potestis ab omnibus iudicari. Propter quod Dei so lius inter vos expectate iudicium. Vos nobis a Deo dati estis dij, and conueniens non est vt homo iudicet Deos, sed ille solus de quo scriptum est. Deus stetit in Synagoga deorum, in medio autem Deos discernit. Mihi
 non est fas, cum homo sim, eiusmodi causarum cogniti^nem arrogare. Theodorit saith, that he would not Theodorit. l. 1. hist. Eccl. cap. 7. sit downe vntill he had first asked and obtained leaue of the Bishops. Paruo in soliolo posito assedit, praefatus veniam prius, and petita concessione ab Episcopis. Hee did not intermeddle in defining or deecreing Ruffin. hist. Eccl. l. 1. ca 5. Sozom. h^st. Eccl. l. 1. c. 19. the Canons of that councell, but left that to the holy Bishops. And when they had giuen their sentence, and subscribed vnto it, being brought to the Emperour, he reuerenced it as the sentence of God, protesting to bannish whosoeuer should oppose against it, as contradicting the decrees of God. Defertur ad Constantinum Sacerdotalis concilij sententia Ille tanquam a Deo prolatam veneratur. Cui si quis tentasset obniti, velut contra diuina statuta venientem, in exilium se protestatur acturum. Which he performed, to Arius and 6. others, all the rest subscribing. Sex soli cum Ario se patiuntur exp^lli: reliqui Epist. Const. apud Euseb. l. 3. de vita c. 16. 17. 18. Socrat. lib 1. c. 6 hist. Theodor. hist. lib. 1. cap. 10. Constant. ep. ad Ecclesias de Nic. Synodo apud Euseb. l. 3. de vit. Constant. ca. 16. and alios. vndecim, consilio inter se habito, acquicscunt ad subscribendum manu sola, non mente. So he himselfe writeth in diuers epistles recorded by Eusebius, Socrates, Theodorit, and others neuer taking vpon him to be a Iudge, or commaunder in or ouer Ecclesiasticall men and matters. But wholly leauing such affaires to the councell of Bishops, protesting that in such times of controuersies, as that was, vnity of faith, sincere charity, and true worship in Religion could not be preserued, except either all or the greatest part of the Bishops should assemble together, and euery of them giue his Iudgment in things belonging to most holy Religion. Vt in Sanctissima Catholicae Ecclesiae multitudine, vna fides, sincera charitas, and consentiens erga Deum omnipotentem religionis cultus seruaretur: Istud haud poterat in loco
 tuto firmoque collocari, nisi vel omnes Episcopi, vel maxima eorum pars in vnum conuenisset, singulique s^^^ iudicium de rebus ad sacratissimam Religionem perti^entibus interposuissent.
And by this it also appeareth to whom the title, right and authoritatiue power of callinge councels, euen generall, which concerne the whole Catholike Church of Christ, belongeth: To no temporall King, Emperour, or Prince, as is manifest before, and in it selfe euident, when hitherto no such man had, or claimed any power spirituall, or temporall, in or ouer those contries and Kingdomes, from which came to many co^fessed generall councels, hundreds of Bishops, and so wee should deny there euer was any one lawfull generall councell, when all agree there haue beene 20. or more, and our Protestant of England by publike Parlaments, Canons, statutes, decrees and practise haue receaued many for such. And so the Church of God hath euer from Christ beene destitute of this Soueraigne helpe, and so is now, and euer like to be in that desolate condition, in hauing no remedy to end the Controuersies which now be, and hereafter are to growe to the end of the world. For it is rashe and madde lyeing foolinesse, to affirme, or coniecture, that there either now is, or euer shall be, such an vniuersally ouerruling temporall Prince in the world. No spirituall Patriarke, or potentate of Antioche, Alexandria, Hierusalem, or Constantinople euer claymed this prerogatiue, and if they had, it could not possibly be their due.
Constantinople was not builded, when this first generall Councell was kept, and the Patriarkes
 of them all haue beene either quite ouerthrowne* or very obscure and wanting all meanes and power diuers hundreds of yeares, when many confesse^ generall Councels haue beene called and assembled. Mutuall assent without a Superiours commaunding ability is by experience vnpossible, a^ ordinary or equall Bishop or Bishops could not do it, hauing no iurisdiction the one ouer the other par in parem non habet authoritatem, much lesse oue^ Superiours, whose presence is more, and most requisite and needfull in such cases, places and times. Therefore wee must of necessity co^fesse this power to be the peculiar right of the onely Popes of Rom^ for the times beeing. They in these and such controuersies, from the dayes of the Apostles, and by their order and allowance both claymed and practized; and so wee after so many hundreds of yeares in times of Controuersie and contention may not deny it, especially when denying it wee shall deny all hope, and meanes to decide and end the most daungerous debates in Religion. Pope Iulius in his epistle to Bishops assembled at Antioche a patriarchall See; claymeth that Councels could not be called without the Pope of Rome, that the Eccleasticall Canon was so, and decrees otherwise made were voyde: Canon Ecclesiasticus vetat, ne decreta Iulius Pap. ep. ad Episcopos Antiochiae. Socrates hist. Eccl. l 2. c. 13. Sozomen. hist. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 9. absque sententia Episcopi Romani Ecclesijs sanciantur. Legem esse ad Sacerdotij dignitatem specta^tem, quae pronunciat acta illa irrita esse, quae prae^^r sententiam Episcopi Romani constituuntur. And those Bishops themselues in their common epistle acknowledge that the Church of Rome had primacy ouer all, and with all, as being the schoole of the Apostles and Metropolitaine City of piety, euen from
 the beginning. Literis suis fatebantur Ecclesiam Rom^^^^ Episcopi Antiochiae conuen. epist. ad Iulium Pap. Rom. Sozomen. hist. l. 2. cap. 7. Socrat. l. 2. c. 11. Concil. Constantin. 1. can. 5. Socrat. hist. l. 5. cap. 8. Primas apud omnes ferre, vtpote quae Apostolorum schola, and pietati^ Metropolis (licet authores Religi^^^^ Christianae primum ex oriente eo venissent) iam ^^ initio fuisset. Ecclesia Romana priuilegium praeter (...) obtinet. And after, the City of Constantinople, being made Imperiall claymed the greatest glo^y could be giuen vnto it, the Church of Rome was still the cheife and primate euen by the Councell of Constantinople it selfe. Decretum fuit, vt Episcopus Constantinopolitanus proxime and secundum Episcopum Romanum primas propterea obtinere, quod illa ciuitas nona Roma esset appellata. Our Protestants Rob. Barnes lib. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Marcello. themselues acknowledge, that Sainct Marcellus Pope decreed longe before any generall Councell, that no Councell should be kept without the peculiar authority of the Pope of Rome. Ne conciliu^ sine peculiari Pontificis authoritate haberetur statuit.
But S. Marcellus euen in the place these doe cit^, deduceth this supreame authority to the S. Marcell. ep. 1. ad Episcop. Antiochiae Prouinciae. Church of Rome euer since Sainct Peters coming thither, so writinge to the Bishops of Antioch yeelding when Sainct Peter was at Antioch, the primacy was there, but Sainct Peter coming from thence to Rome by Christs commau^de, Iubente Domino, his See and primacy was translated thither. Eiu^ sedes Romam translata est. And the See of Antioch at the first the cheifest thus yeelding to the See of Rome, euery other must needs be subiect vnto it. So were the decrees of the Apostles. Who also ordayned that noe Councell might be kept without the authority of that See, nor any Bishop iudged but in Councell called by that authority. Si vestra Antiochena, quae oli^ prima erat, Romanae cesset sedi,
 nulla est, quaecius non subiectae fit ditioni, ad quam o^nes quasi ad caput, iuxta Apostolorum eorumque Successoram Sanctiones Episcopi, q^i voluerint, velquibus necesse fuerit, suffugere, eamque appellare debent, vt inde accipiant tuitionem and liberationem. Simulque ij dem inspirante Domino constituerunt, vt nulla Synodus fieret praeter eiusdem sedis authoritatem, nec vllus Episcopus, nisi in legitima Synodo, suo tempore Apostolica authoritate conuocata, super quibuslibet criminibus pulsatur audiatur vel iudicetur. Quia Episcoporum iudicia, and summarum causarum negotia, siue cuncta dubia, Apostolicae Sedis authoritate sunt agenda and finienda. Et omnia comprouintialia negotia, huius sancta vniuersalis Apostolica Ecclesiae funt retractandaiudicio, si huius Ecclesiae Pontifex praeceperit. Sainct Alexander Pope, liuing in this first Apostolike age, is witnesse, that Christ himselfe gaue this supreame Alexander 1. epist 1. Anaclet. epist. 1. Robert. Barn. l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Anacleto. Edict. Const. to. 1 Concil. Isodor. Hisp. in hist. Isod. Iun. collect. can. Adrian. 1. epist. ad Co^st. and Iren. 20. Abraha^ leuita chron. Indiar. R. Abraham Aben Esra ad cap. 11. Danielis. Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 27. power to that Apostolike See. Huic Sanctae and Apostolicae Sedi summarum dispositiones causarum and omnium negotia Ecclesiarum ab ipso Domino tradita sa^^ quasi ad caput. So hath S. Anacletus before him, both Catholike and Protestants so acknowledging. Ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae Ecclesiae super omnes Ecclesias vniuer sumque Christiani nominis populum concessum esse asseruit. The words of Sainct Anacletus are more large and plaine, then this Protestant allowance is.
And to come againe, to the first generall Councell held at Nyce: first the Edict of Constantine his donation and endowing the Romane Church, and acknowledging therein as greate priuiledges to belonge to that Apostolike See, as any Pope, or learned Catholike now giueth vnto it, was passed by all writers before Constantine his seating himselfe
 in the east, and the callinge of the Nicen Councell.
This is manifest, not onely by Christian antiquaries, too many to be cited, but Iewes and Pagans also. By that donation it is euident that neither the Nicen, nor any other such Councell, could be called without the allowaa^ce of the Pope of Rome. secondly in the Councell of Rome consisting of 284. Bishops all subscribeing as Constantine himselfe present likewise did, by all their harts and hands, as greate primacy is graunted to that See as euer it claymed. Nemo iudicabit primam (Romanam Concil. Rom. sub Syleustro* can. 20. sedem) quoniam omnes sedes a prima sede iustitiam desiderant temperari. Neque ab Augusto, neque abomni cler^; neque a Regibus, neque a Populo Iudex indicabi^^r. Et Subscripserunt 284. Episcopi, and 45. Presbyteri; and 5. Diacont and Augustus Constantinus and mater eius Helena. This was before the Nicen Councell by many arguments. Thirdly the Fathers of the Nicen Cou^cell sent it in Latine to Pope Syluester. Placuit vt haec omnia mitterentur ad Episcopum vrbis Nicen Conc. in praefat. ep. Concilij Nicaeni ad Syluestr. Conest. Rom. 3. Romae Syluestrum, and he there in a Cou^cell of 275. Bishops thus confirmed it. Syluester Episcopus Sanctae and Apostolic aesedis vrbis Romae dixit quicquid in Ni^aea Bithinia constitutum est adrobur sanctae matris Ecclesiae Catholicae and Apostolicae a sanctis Sacerdotibus erecentis decem and octo, nostro ore conformiter confirmamus: qui ausi fuerint dissoluere definitionem Sancti and magni Concilij, quod apud Nicaeam congregatum est, anathemat^zanius, and dixerunt omnes, placet. The Pope of Rome, the Imperiall City of the Euseb. l. 3. de vit. Constant. c. 7. Socrates. hist. l. 1 cap. 5. Theodorit. world had his Preists there which supplied his place. Vrbisillius penes quam Imperium est, Episcopus ingrane s^ente ae^a^e praepeditus, absuit: eius tamen presbyteri,
 qui ad^rant, locum eius suppleuerunt. Their Hist. l. 1. ca. 7. Sozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 16. names were Vitus and Vincentius, Vitus and Vi^centius eiusdem Ecclesia Presbyteri, pro illo adfuere. What it was forthem being but onely Preists, and not Bishops, to supply the place of the Pope of Rome, and to be present for him among so many Patriarks, Archbishops and Bishops, sufficiently declareth his dignity, and their cheife authority i^ Councell in that respect. Which these auncient Authours of that time haue proued before, assuring vs, that no Councell might be kept or decree made without the Bishops of Rome their allowance, and Nicaen. Conc. in Subscriptione ante nomina Episcoporum. consent. This is proued also by the auncient copie and subscriptions of this first generall Councell, where these two Preists Legats for the Pope of Rome subscribe for him, and by his power before all others Bishops, Archbishops or Patriarks present whatsoeuer Victor, or, Victus, and Vinecenti^^* Presbyteri vrbis Romae, pro venerabili vno Papa ^ Episcopo nostro Syluestro, subscripsimus, ita cred^^^^ ficut scriptum est.
And then after follow the subscriptions of the Bishops of Afrike, Asia, and Europe, The Bishop^ of Europe, wherein Rome is, beinge the last there in subscription, these Legates of the Pope, onely Preists subscribeing first of all Europe Asia or Afrike, when of themselues as Preists they had ^^ place at all, without power, and authority from th^ Apostolike See of Rome, by which they had, an^ thus executed the cheifest, in that first cheife, an^ generall Christian Councell of the world, as it i^ commonly accompted, and by that title propose^ as an example, and preside^t for those that followed* Which hath enforced me to continue my examination
 of this part of this Protestant Article thus longe, in regard this Councell being so generally ^^c^^ued by all, may be^ paterne square and rule vnto all in this kinde of Question.
The pretended onely reason, which our Protestants before haue made, to proue that which followeth in this article, That generall Councels may erre, and sometimes haue erred, euen in things pertaining vnto God, being this: forasmuch as they be an assembly of men, whereof all be not gouerned with the spirit and word of God, is vaine, Idle, and to no purpose: for so wee might discredit and deny all those Councels of the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ before remembred, especially all after the choosing of the seuen Deacons, Sainct Stephen, and therest. For among these Nicolas authour of the Nicolaite heresie, was one, and so being so vnworthy an heretike, may not be said to haue beene allwayes gouerned with the spirit, and word of God. And not finding any other generall Councell from that time vntill the first of Nice, which our Protestants with generall applause receaue, and all the Canons and decrees thereof, being receiued by Parlaments, statutes, communion bookes, Canons, articles before, and all authority they haue, wee may still doubt, or plainely say rather that this erred euen in things pertaining vnto God, and the very nature of God himselfe the blessed Trinity. And diuers others: for although, it consisted of the cheifest Prelates of all noble Churches in all Europe, Afrike; and Asia, ^x ^^nibus Ecclesijs quae frequentes in tota Europa, Africa Euseb. l. 3. de vit. Constant. cap 7. Socrat. Eccl. hist. l. 1. cap. 5. and Asia extiterunt, Dei ministri, qui facile primas ferre putabantur, in vnum conuocati: all Patriarkes, either by themselues or Legats were there, and the
 Emperour himselfe, (for such as require his consent) yet they were all but an assembly of men, whereof Ruffin. hist. Eccl. l. 1. ca. 5. Theodorit. hist. l. 1. Sozozomen. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 19. all were not gouerned with the spirit and word of God, our Protestants goodly reason, for by all writers ther^ were 17. knowne Arian heretiks amo^g them, and for such diuers of them with Arius condemned and exiled, at that time, and many more were absent in greate number. And if wee should for this, or any other pretended reason, doubt of the truth of this men Councell, it were in vayne euer to labour our seeke to haue a true generall, and vndoubted Councell, for a greater assembly and more likely to co^clude the truth, is not morally possible to be gathered. For besides the Emperour, all the Socrates hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 5. Euseb. l. 3. de vit. Constant. cap. 9. Patriarks, and aboue 300. Bishops, there were learned Cleargy men there without number. I^ hoc praesenti choro fuit Episcoporum multitud^ ad n^morum (...) torum and a^plius: Presbyteror^^ a^tem, Diaconorum, acolithorum, and aliorum q^^ istos; comitabantur, turbane munera^ quidem potest. Atque ex (...) Dei ministris alij prudenter and discrte dicendo, alij vitae grauitate, and constanti rerum arduarum perpessione, nonnulli quasi media inter istos interiecta viuendiratione eximij, praeclara laudis insignia adepti sunt.
Thus Eusebius there present, and others liuing in that time. And if in ciuill and morall bodies, such as the Church, Councels, Diets, Parlaments and such like assemblies composed of many and diuers persons and conditions, are, wee should expect an vniuersall and generall co^sent of men so assembled, wee shall finde there were or haue beene or can be very few or none such in the world.
That first Parlament of Queene Elizabeth which ouerthrewe Catholike Religion, and set vp that
 new profession which professeth and decreed the articles, had but 4. or 5. voyces and suffrages more for their new Religion, then were for the old, and yet shee made so many new Protestant Lords for that purpose, and vsed such irreligious practises to encrease the number for their new erection, as their owne historians aboundantly haue testified. The Cambd. hist. Mar. Regio. Scot. Stowe hist. an. 1. Elizab. Roman and Catholike Church neuer proceeded with such poore shists and small difference of consents, either in the Councell of Trent against protestants, or any other former generall Councell, in suppressing and condemning other heretiks and their heresies, as is euident in this first generall Councell of Nice, where as before so many agreed, and so few dissented.
Constantine the greate Emperour, if wee would followe Protestants for Princes Supremacy, hath before made the Iudgment and sentence of the Nicen Councell, the Infallible Iudgment and sentence of God, and giueth the same infallibility to all such Councels. Quicquid in Sanctis Episcoporum concilijs Constant. ep. ad Ecclesias apud Socrat. l. 1. hist. Eccl. c. 6. Ruffin. hist. l. 1. c. 10. Episcopi Nicaeni Concil. epist. ad Episcopos Aegyptum, Libyam and Pentacol. incol Socrat. supr. l. 1. ca. 6. Theodorit. l. 1. hist. c 9. decernitur, id vniuersum diuinae voluntati debet attribui. If wee will beleeue hundreds of learned Bishops there assembled, so they testifie: quaerite constituta and decreta sint, earata stabiliaque permaneant, Dei Patris omnipotentis, and Domini nostri Iesu Christi auxilio, vna cum Spiritus sancti gratia. And they Anathematized the resisters of their decrees: Quibus omnibus Sa^ctum Concilium indicit Anathema. Placuit Concilio, communibus suffragijs Anathema denuntiare. It is euident by the 6. and 7. Canon of this Nicen Councell that the Pope of Rome, Patriarke of Antioch, Alexandria, and by some Hierusalem, had Iurisdiction ouer all Bishops in the world, and they
 all assented, if they could haue assented to errour, the whole Church vnder them might haue erred.
Sainct Syluester Pope of Rome, as before, with 275. Bishops confirmed that Councell in all points, anathematizing all gaynesayers vnto it. Omnes qu^ ausi fuerint dissoluere definitionem Sancti and mag^^ Concilij, quod apud Nicaeam tongregatum est, anathematizamus. Et dixerint omnes, placet. Things concluded and confirmed for the whole Church by so many and greate authorities, and their deniall so seuerely punished, must needs be of highest and vnfallible truth.
The Apostles themselues in their Councels before haue giuen vndoubted testimony to this if they Ignat. epist. ^d Polycarp. epist. ad Her. had not by their Councels prefigured and giuen testimoy to the infallible verity of the decrees of generall Councels, Their so many assembles and Councels might haue beene spared, for whatsoeuer any one of them did, or should haue decreed, was without question true in matters of faith, otherwise wee might call all their sacred writings and the whole new testament into question.
The Apostolike men of the first age haue giuen like euidence before. And among them S. Ignatius who would haue such councels often kept: Crebrius celebrentur Conuentus Synodique: doth make their decrees, and constitutions, of so greate and vnquestionable power, and authority, that he which doth otherwise, although he is in other things worthy of credit, although he fasteth, although he liueth in virginity, doth miracles and prophesieth is to be accompted for a wolfe, which vnder a sheeps skin bringeth destruction and bane to the sheepe. Quicunque dixerit quippi^^
 praeterea quae constituta sunt: tamet si fide dignus (...), quamuis ieiunet, quamuis in virginitate degat, q^amnis signa edat, quamuis prophetet: pro lupo illum ^^^eas, qui sub oninae pelle exitium, pestemque adfert ^^ib^^. So vnpossible he maketh it, that such decrees should be vntrue. And the first Nicen Councell Concil. Nic. in Symbolo, apud Ruffin. l. 1. hist. Eccl. c. ^. Socrat. l. 1. hist. c. 6. declaring, that a generall Councell is the Catholike Church, and reason so warrantinge, by errour of such a Councell the whole Church might erre in articles of faith. And that article of our Creede, I beleeue the holy Catholike Church, euer most true, might be false at sometimes: which is a thing most prophane, and Antichristian to be affirmed. For if a generall Councell representing the whole Church, ruling, gouerning and teaching it in the cheifest Bishops, and Pastours there present, might erre, the whole Church both the Gouernours, and gouerned therein must needs be in the same desolate estate. And our Protestant Bishops and Doctours Engl. Protest. in Bilson Suru. p. 82. Morton. part. 2. Apolog. p. 340. l. 4. c. 18. feild p. 228. with their publike allowance, and approbation doe thus giue warrant vnto vs.

The authority of generall Councels is most holsome in the Church. A generall Councell is highest Iudge. Bishops assembled in a generall Councell haue authority to subiect euery man that shall disobey such determinations, as they consent vpon, to excommunication, and censures of like nature. Wee must receaue and respect the authority
L. 4. c. 5 pag. 202.
of all Catholike Doctours, whose doctrine and writings the Church alloweth: wee must more regard the authority of Catholike Bishops: more then these the authority of the Apostolike Churches: amongst them more especially the Church of Rome: of a generall Councell, more then all these. False it is, that wee admitte no Iudge, but Scriptures,
Sutcliff ag. D. Kell. pag. 40. 42.
for wee appeale still to alawfull generall Councell.




 This being thus generally written with authority, and in the name of all Protestants, especially in England, they must needs graunt, that generall Councels be of infallible Iudgme^t, in articles of religion, otherwise there is no meanes left to finde the truth, but wee might and must wander from one false and deceitfull rule to an other, without end. And seeing euery Court and Consistory; fro^ which appeales are, or may be made, is inferiour, more vncertaine, and of lesse authority, then that Seate of Iudgment to whom it is appealed, it is most certaine, by these Protestants themselues, that they which neuer had, haue, or, as before, can haue hereafter any generall Councell, to which they must appeale, as they doe, cannot haue any possible title to true religion, for themselues or the least colour or pretence of Iustice or Religion for such monstrous, and horrible penalties, and cruelties, as are inflicted, to enforce the Catholiks, so many generall Councels, consisting of diuers hundreds of learned and holy Bishops, or to perswade them to embrace their Protestant professions which neuer had any lawfull Bishop according to this fift Councell. Illud generaliter clarum est, quod si quis praeter Concil. Nic. can. 6. Ruffin. l. 1. hist Eccl. in Concil. Nicen. sententiam Metropolitani fuerit factus Episcopus, eum magna Synodus definiuit non esse Episcopum. That is generally manifest, that if any man is made a Bishop against the will or likeing of the Metropolitane, this greate Councell, doth define that he is no Bishop. And so can make no Bishop or Preist. So by this most holy Councell, so often and authoritatiuely receaued by our English Protestants, as is before declared, they neither haue nor possibly hereafter by their proceedings can haue any one Archbishop, Bishop, Preist
 or Cl^^^gy man among them: for if their pretended ^^^ner of constitution were true, which wee haue in^^ncibly proued otherwise, yet they themselues, and all other writers confesse, they had not the assent, but vttermost dissent and disagreement of any domesticall or forreine Metropolitane for their new Religion or consecratio^. But this sacred Councell euen in those Canons which our Protestants Nicen. Con^. can. 14. receaue, doth vtterly condemne the pretended consecration, and ministry of England erected against the Catholike sacrificing Preisthood, assuring vs, that true Preists did offer sacrifice and this Sacrifice was the body of Christ. Presbyteri offerendi sacrificij habe^t potestatem. Offerunt corpus Christi. It maintained the Popes Supremacy as before. It receaued more Scriptures then Protestants doe: librum Iudith Synodus Hieron. praef. in librum Iudith. Concil. Nic. can. 11. 13. 14. Can. 3. Nicaena in numero Sanctarum scripturarum legitur computasse. It approueth Indulgences in 4. Canons: and giueth authority to Bishops in such cases. It forbiddeth Clergy men to keepe any women in their howses, but mother, Sister, grandmother, Aunt. They declared it to be the old tradition of the Church, that Ecclesiasticall men might not marry, and so commaunded. Qui in clerum ante ascripti Socrates hist. l. 2. c. 2. Sozomen. hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 22. erant quam duxissent, hi secundum veterem Ecclesiae traditionem, deinceps a nuptijs se abstinerent. By which the Protestants Church is vtterly disabled, and ouerthrowne, by their owne rule, and article, before, neither hauing the true word preached, Sacraments duely ministred, Church rightly gouerned, nor any one man among them to performe most needfull functions and duties, by their owne definitiue sentence.
Their conclusion of this article, Things ordained
 by generall Councels, as necessary vnto saluation h^^e neither strength, nor authority, vnlesse it may be declared, that they be taken out of holy Scriptures. This is aboundantly before confuted where I entreated of their article of Scriptures. So it is by that is deliuered in this Councell, which they wholy, and without any the least exception, admit. For in denyall of marriage vnto Cleargy men, it hath done it by the old Apostolike tradition of the Church, Can. 6. 7. secundum veterem Ecclesiae traditionem. So they doe in the true gouernment of the Church by the Pope, and Patriarkes. Antiqua consuetudo. Antiqua mores. Mos antiquus. Seruetur, Seruentur. Consuetud^ obtinuit, and antiqua traditio. Yet true gouernment of the Church, is with them an essentiall property of the true Church, vnseperable, and so necessary to saluation. So is the true Cleargy and consecration as also the holy Sacrifice and Sacrament of the altar, really containing the body of Christ, yet by these men not to be declared by Scriptures, they finding no such thing in them.
And these Protestants themselues with publike Protest. of Engl. in feild. libr. 4. of the Church pag. 228. allowance write: Bishops assembled in a generall Councell haue authority, to interpret Scriptures, and by their authority to suppresse all them, that gaine say such interpretation. Therefore if there were question of truely interpreting Scripture, Protestants must yeeld to generall Councels, and not these to them, particular Churches (if the Protestant was such) must of duty and necessity submit themselues to the vniuersall, and Apostlike Catholike, such as a generall Councell is, as the first Nicen Councell in the Creede thereof, which Protestants receaue, doth declare it selfe, and such generall Councels to
 be, and so inflicteth censures. Anathematizat Ca^^olica Symb. Nice^. Ruffin. lib. 1. hist. c. 5. Soc. l. 1. hist. c. 6. and Apostolica Ecclesia. Therefore wee are sure a generall Councell cannot erre in expounding Scriptures, or any decree of faith. That our Christian Britains were of this minde, opinion and prof^ssion, their Bishops with longe and tedious labours present at the greate primitiue Councels of Arles, Sardice, Ariminum, and others by all witnesses, and with our King and Emperour at Nice, in most probable Iudgment, also Rome, and the sacred Nicen Councell here then authentically receaued and embraced by all holy writers, giue aboundant testimony.


THE X. CHAPTER.
The 22. Article thus likewise examined, and condemned.
THE next article the 22. in number is intituled: of Purgatory. And is thus. The Romish doctrine The doctrine of Purgatory prayer, and other satisfaction for the true faithfull deceased practised in this first ag^. concerning Purgatory, pardons, worshipping, and adoration aswell of Images, as of reliques, and also inuocation of Saincts, is a fond thing, vainely inuented, and grounded vpon no warranty of Scripture, but rather rep^gnant to the word of God. Much matter in few words, many things peremptorily affirmed, nothing proued. All false, and foolish also, where as they would haue all thing grounded vpon warranty of Scripture, so many times by the^ affirmed, and as often by me before confuted.
And to take their assertions in order beginning with their first, about the Romish (their phrase) doctrine concerning Purgatory. This is thus set
 downe in the Councels of Florence and Trent: If men truely ponitent depart this life, in the loue of God, before they haue satisfied for their sinnes, their soules are purged with the paines of Purgatory. And that they may be releiued from such paines, the suffrages of the saithfull aliue, to wit, sacrifice of Masse, prayers and almes and other offices of piety, which by the faithfull are vsed for other faithfull people, according to the institu^^ons Concil. Flor. Concil. T^id. Sessione 4. can. 30. of the Church, doe profit them. Definimus si vere poenitentes in Dei charitate decesserint, antequam dignis poenitentiae fructibus de commissis satisfe^eri^^ and omissis, eorum animas paenis Purgatorij purgari. Et vt a poenis huiusmodi releuentur, prodesse his viuorum fidelium suffragia, Missarum scilicet sacrificio orationes, and eleemosynas and pietatis officia, quae a fidelibus proaijs fidelibus fieri consueuerunt, secundum Ecclesiae institutae.
Nor is this the Romish onely but also the Greekish and Catholike doctrine of the Church of Christ. So is affirmed by Gennadius their learned Patriarke in his defence of the recited Councell of Florence: The doctrine of Purgatory, prayer and Sacrifice G^nad. Schol. in defens. Co^cil. Floraent. def. ^. cap. 3. for the deade was a tradition of the Apostles. That which the La^^nes call purgatorium, purgatory, they of the Greeke Church name catharterion, a purging place, They were onely Scismaticorum Sectatores, followers of Scismatikes, which denied it. This is likewise confessed Relation of Relig. c. 53. 54. 55. by our English Protestants, and knowne vnto all trauaylers either into the contries, or writers of the Greekes. Now let vs see whether it was the doctrine of the Apostolike age, or noe.
The Greeke Patriarke hath before affirmed it, So will our Protestants hereafter. And the Apostolike
 men of this age affirme and proue it. Sainct Clement saith his Master and predecessour Sainct Clem. Rom. Epist. 1. Peter among other things did teach, mortuos sepelire, and diligenter corum exequias peragere, proque eis or^^e, and eleemosynas dare. To bury the deade, and diligently performe their funerals, and pray, and giue almes for them. He deliuereth further how in their publike Constitut. Apost. l. 8. c. 19. Church seruice, and Sacrifice of that time, among their prayers for other necessaries, they prayed for the faithfull departed out of this world. Pro ijs, qui infide quieuerunt, oremus.
And from Iames Alphaeus named the Brother of our Lord, frater Domini, he setteth downe the manner how the Deacon vsed publikely to giue warning in the time of the holy Sacrifice, to pray for the soules of the faithfull deceased, deliuering the very prayer commonly vsed in such cases, directly proueing a place of Purgatory, and prayer for the deliuery of the faithfull departed from thence, with a remission of all punishment, they had deserued, and were to suffer, vntill they were by such meanes freed thereof. Pro defunctis qui in Christo requieuerunt, L. 8. supr. cap. 47. iuxt. al. 40. and 41. postquam Diaconus edixit, orandum esse, adiunget etiam haec: oremus profratribus nostris qui in Christo requieuerunt, vt Deus summae erga homines charitatis, qui animam defuncti suscepit, remittat ei omne peccatum voluntarium, and non voluntarium, and propitius illi factus, collocet eam in regione piorum qui laxati sunt, in sinu Abrahae, Isaac, and Iacob, cum omnibus qui a saeculo condito Deo placuerunt, vnde fugit dolor, maeror and gemitus. And againe: ipse nunc respice hunc seruum tuum, quem in aliam sortem elegisti and assumpsisti, and condona ei, si quid tum volens, tum nolens peccauit: and exhibe ei Angelos beneuolos, ac colloca
 ^um in s^^^ Patriarcharum, and Prophetarum, at que Apostolorum. And expresseth plainely, that such holy prayers, Sacrifice, almes, and the like workes of piety, did onely helpe and profit such, as the Catholike Councels haue before deliuered, and Catholiks performe such duties for, dying in state of grace, not yet hauing satisfied for their sinnes. Sed Cap. 49. haec depys dicimus: impios enim tametsi omnia bona externa pro eis largiaris, nihil iunare queas. And pu^ctually remembreth diuers solemne times to pray, especially for such. The third day, neenth day, Cap. 48. fourteth day and the yeares day or their deathes, then vsed. Exequiae mortuorum fiant tertio die, die nono, quadragefimo, item anno exacto, ad habend^^ memoriamipsiue defuncti, and suppeditetur ex bonis ei^^ pauperibus ad recordationem eiusdem. The like he Cap. 50. hath in other places. Sainct Denis the Aeropagite speaketh as plainely in this matter, and affirmeth that this manner of praying for the deade, dying in state of grace was both an Apostolicall tradition, and warranted by holy Scriptures. Speaking of the faithfull deceased, and the ceremonies of the liuing for them, he saith the Preists powreth fourth his (...) holy prayer for him that is departed this life. Accede^s dininus praeful, precem super to sacratissimam fun^^^. And repeating the same againe, he setteth downe, how all saluted the deade, and prayed for him, or them, and their prayer was, that God would remi^ them all their sinnes which by humane frailty they had committed, and place them in the light and region of the liuing, in the bosomes of Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob, Dion. Areop. l. de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. in the place from whence all greefe, sadnesse and groneing flyeth away. Accedens diuinus Antistes precem suam super mortuum peragit: postquam precem, and
 ipse eum praesul salutat, and suo deinceps ordine qui (...) omnes. Precatur oratio illa, diuinam bonitatem, (...) cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem humanam admissa peccata defuncto: eumque in luce statuat, and regione viuorum, in sinibus Abrahae, and Isaac, and Iacob, in loco vnde aufugit dolor, and tristitia, and gemitus. And expoundeth this Bosome of Abraham, whither the faithfull are translated by the prayers, and other good deeds of the liuing, from the place of punishment or Purgatory, where they were beforeto the eternall felicity in heauen, as Catholiks now hold and teach. Sinus autem beatorum Patriarcharum reli^^^rumque sanctorum omnium, vtreor, diuinissimae ac beatissimae sedes, quae deiformes omnes suscipiunt, insenescibili, and beatissima perfectione. And there hee solueth that pretended exception, which our Protestants make against this Apostolike doctrine, and practise, because they suppose the soules of these faithfull deceased to be without all hope, to goe to any other place, then that they are receaued in, when they are newly seperated from their bodies, and the center of all for euer to be after death as their liues and actions were in this world, and he affirmeth that the prayers of the iust doe as well helpe those, that are deade, being worthy of such prayers, in the time of their life, as the liuing, and the true traditions of the Scriptures so teach vs. Verum, inquies fortassis, haec quidem recte a nobis dicta esse; sed te dubitare, cur a diuinabonitate postulet Antistes mortuo peccatorum remissionem, and parem Sanctis ac lucidissimam haereditatem. Sienim vnusquisque praemia consequetur a diuina iustitia, eorum bonorum aut malorum quae in hac vita gessit; perfecit autem is qui defunctus est huic vitae consentaneas actiones: quanam
 A^^tistitis orationis in aliam quietis sedem migrabit; praeter eam quaeipso digna, est, and quae vitae hi^ actae respondet? equidem probe scio, scriptis diuints insistens, vnumquemque remuneratitiam sortem adepturum. Conclusit enim, inquit, Dominus apud se: and referet vnusquisque ea quae per corpus gessit, siue bonum siue malum. Quod autem and iustorum preces etiam i^ hac vita, nedum post mortem, ijs solum profint, qui digni sunt sacris precibus, Scripturarum nos edocent verae traditiones. He teacheth as Sainct Clement hath done before, that this manner of praying and doing other workes of piety, for the deade, was vsed and auayle able for true beleeuing Christians onely, which died in the state of grace. Prophanis vita functis haec non precatur: non modo quia in hoc diuinitut acceptum desereret ordinem, and aliquid Hierarchicum contumaciter praesumeret non motus a caeremoniarum conditore, sed quia in execrabili oratione non exaudiretur, atque non immerito ipse audiret oraculum illud institiae plenum: petitis, and non accipitis, quia male petitis. Iacob. c. 4. Wee reade that Sainct Phocas a miraculous Sainct of this time, did acknowledge two lower places, one of the damned, the other must needs be Purgatory, when prophetically foretelling the death of Traian, by whom he was martyred, to followe, within three dayes, as it did, he told him that he S. Phocus ad Traianum. Walter. Rollwinke fascic. Tempor. in Traian. was to goe to the parts of the furthest deepe place, where he should be in perpetuall darkenesse, and burned with cruell fire for euer. Traiane perge ad vlterioris abissi loca, and ad praeparata tibi tormenta festina, vbi nocte perpetua, and saeuo exurendus es incendio.
This he spake by the spirit of God prophetically, and co^seque^tly truely: cui spiritu prophetico dixit. This was the doctrine, and practise of the whole Church
 of God expressed, and professed in the most auncie^t liturgies, and publike Masses, ascribed to the holy Apostles, then publikely vsed. In the Masse of S. Missa S. Iacobi. Iames called the lesser, Bishop of Hierusalem wee finde this prayer: pro requie ante defunctorum, and Patrum, and fratrum, Dominum ^remus. Let vs pray to our Lord for the rest of them that be already departed this life, our fathers and brothers.

That God will graunt their oblation to be acceptable, for propitiation of sinnes, and ignorances, and rest of the soules of them that be deade before vs. Fac vt oblatio nostra acceptabilis sit, sanctificata in Spiritu sancto, in propitiationem nostrorum peccatorum, and ignorantiarum populi, and in requiem animarum eorum, qui ante nos dormierunt. Memento Domine Deus spirituum and vniuersae carnis, quorum memoriam egimus, and quorum memoriam non egimus, orthodoxorum, ab Abeliusto vsque in hodiernum diem. Ipse ibi fac cos requie scere in regione viuentium, in regno tuo, in delicijs Paradisi in si^^ Abrahae, and Isaac, and Iacob, sanctorum Patrum nostrorum, vnde exulat dolor, tristitia and gemitus, vbi lustrat lumen vultus tui, and refulget perpetuo. Pro requie patrum, and fratrum nostrorum, qui ante nos dormierunt, dicamus omnes toto animo, Domine miserere.

The like hath the liturgy of Sainct Matthew: Missa S. Matthaei. Memento Domine omnium fidelium dormientium, and in signo rectae fidei quie scentium, Domine Deus noster memento dormientium, and in recta fide quiescentium. So is the Masse of Sainct Marke: animabus patrum and Missa S. Marci. fratrum nostrorum, qui antea Christi in fide obdormierunt, dona requiem Domine Deus noster. And relating how it was the vse to reade the cataloge of such deceased, and then to pray thus for all their soules. Horum
 omnium animabus da requiem, Domine Deus ^^ster, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in c. 1. ad Philipp. Hom. ad pop. Anthiochen. Hom. 41. in 1. Cor. cap. 15. Epiph. haer. 75. Tertull. l. de coron. milit. c. 3. cap. 4. August. Enchirid. c. 100. de ciuit. Dei l. 21. c. 24. l. de cur. pro mart. de verbis Apostoli serm. 32. Isod. l. 1. de offic. Eccl. c. 18. Amal. l. 1 c. 27. Epiphan. l. de haeres. etc 53. Philastr. l. de haer. Middlet. Papistom. pa. 49. 137. 138. 47. 64. 45. 46. 51. feild l. 3. c. 29. p. 138. Couel. Exam. p. 114. Middl. supr. pag. 51. Morton. Apol. part. 1. p. 329. Caluin. apud eund. ib. Perkins problemat. pag. 178. in sanctis tuis tabernaculis, inregno tuo, largiens eis promissionum tuarum bona quae oculus non vidit, and auris non audiuit, and in cor hominis non ascenderunt, quae praeparasti Deus, dilige^tibus sanctum nomen tuum: eorum, inquam, animabus dona requiem, easque regno caelorum dignare.
All other auncient publike liturgies and Masses of all natio^s agree herein. The best learned Fathers both of the Greeke and Latine Church doe assure vs, it was a tradition of the Apostles, and receaued and practised in the whole Church. Ab Apostolis sancitum est, vt in celebratione venerandorum mysteriorum memoria fiat eorum qui hinc decesserunt. Qui ante nostestes fuerunt, habentes ante nos traditionem ^^ Ecclesia, quique etiam a patribus suis traditum acceperunt, quemadmodum etiam hi a suis patribus didicerunt. Pro peccatoribus facimus memoriam, pro peccatoribus misericordiam Dei implorantes. Ecclesia necessario hoc perficit traditione a patribus accepta. Quis autem poterit statutum matris dissoluere, aut legem patris? Sacrificium pro defunctorum fidelium requie offerre, vel pro eis orare, quia pertotum hoc orbem custoditur, credimus quod ab ipsistraditum sit, hoc enim vbique Catholicatenet Ecclesia.
This was so generally receaued, and confessed doctrine, practised in all times and places, That vntill Aerius the heretike in the dayes of Constantine, no man denied it, and he for his singular deniall thereof, was and is condemned of heresie, with all his followers. This is a truth so euident, that our Protestant writers doe with their publike warran^ thus acknowledge it. The primatiue Church did offe^ sacrifice at the altar for the deade. Sacrifice for the dead^
 was a tradition of the Apostles, and the auncient Fathere. Sainct Chrysostome taught it to be the Apostles ordinance to pray for the deade. Aerius condemned the custome of the Church in naming the deade at the altare, and offering the sacrifice of Eucharist for them: and for this his rash and inconsiderate boldnesse, and presumption in condemning the vniuersall Church of Christ, he was iustly condemned. In the Masses or liturgies of Basile, Chrysostome and Epiphanius, the deade were prayed for. Ipsi veteres preces fundebant pro defunctis. The ^^ncient Fathers powred out their prayers for the deade. Dionysius (the Areopagite, Sainct Paules scholler) ^aught that sinnes are purged in purgatory. In purgatorio expiari peccata.
The prayer made for the departed doth beseech the diuine Clemency, to forgiue the party deceased all sinnes committed by humane infirmity. Oratio illa precatur diuinam clementiam, vt cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem humanam admissa peccata, defuncto. If wee should giue any respect to the Iewes, Mahometans and Coccius tom. 2. l. 7. artic. 5. and such, to make this a receaued opinion of all the world, they euer held, hold and practise prayer, and such workes for the deade.
Now wee need not doubt but this so publike and common truth was also brought into Britaine, and here practized and taught by our first Fathers in Religion. Whosoeuer they were the Apostles or their disciples from Hierusalem, Rome or what Apostolike place else they held professed and taught the Apostles doctrine and tradition and vsed their liturgies: if from Hierusalem, that of S. Iames where the deade are so often prayed for, and the sacrifice of Masse offered for them. And where there was a particular Church, in the first dayes of Christianity
 as S. Bede from antiquity sequens veter^^^ Bed. libel. de locis Sanctis Arnulphus and Adama. ib. and l. 5. hist. Eccl. monumenta, with others assureth vs, in quasuper altare pro defunctis sacrificium solet fieri, positis interi^ in platea corporibus, in which Church sacrifice was vsed to be offered for the deade, their bodies in the meane time remaining in the streete. But because I haue inuincibly proued in my Ecclesiasticall history, and it is not to be denied but our conuersion was by S. Peter and his Church of Rome, wee must Manuscript. antiq princip. stores. needs say with our old Brittish manuscript written in the Britains time, that his Masse and the Masse of S. Marke his Scholler, came into these parts and were vsed here. And no man, Protestant or other finding yet that the prayer in the Romane Masse was added by any, Memento Dominc famulorum famularumque Missa S. Petri in Canone. tuarum qui nos praecesserunt cum sigm fid^i and dormiunt in somno pacis. Ipsis Dominc and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus, locum refrigerij, locis and pacis, vt indulgeas deprecamur, and the Masse of S. Marke being so manifest as before for this religious doctrine and practise, wee must needs say this was the profession and custome, of our Christian Britans from their first instruction in the faith of Christ. To this old monuments of our most auncient and renowned Church of Glastenbury giueample testimony, when assuring vs, that thousands of Brittish Christians millia dormientium were Antiquit. glast. buried there aboue a thousand yeares since, they giue these reasons of the religious desires of good people to be buried there: quia omnibus hic sepultis per Sanctorum inibi requiescentium preces and merita, creditur magna peccatorum remissio a Domino concessa. Propter Missas and alias orationes quae quotidie pro eis dicuntur, because those that were buried there had
 great pardon by the merits of the Saincts, and their p^^iers resting there, and the Masses and prayers there dayly offered for the dead there buried. Wee finde in the old antiquities of landaffe a Publike Charter of King Mauricus in S. Dubrit^^^ his time, Manuscript. antiq. de primo statu Landauen. Ecclesiae. that it was the old custome and duty of Churches, daily to pray for the soules of the benefactours deceased, and all the faithfull departed out of this life: oratione quotidiana and Ecclesiastico seruitio pro anima ^^^us and animabus parentum suorum Regum and Principum Britanniae, and omnium fidelium defunctorum.
So is the charter of King Arthur to the schoole of Cambredge, proremedio animarum antecessorum Chart. priuileg. Reg. Arthuri apud Caium l. 1. antiquit. Cantabrig. pag. 60. 70. Caratoc. hist. M. S. de vita S. Gildel. Probus l. 2. de vit. S. Patricij. Caius l. 1. sup. p. 147. 148. l de vit. Sa^ct. Walliae in S. Iltuto. vneorum Regum Britanniae. Sainct Gildas our oldest writer, and greate diuine did daily pray for the foule of his brother being slaine. Orabat pro spiritu fratermp quotidie. Sainct Patrike prayed for the dead orauit pro anima eius. S. Iltutus appointed 50. of his schollers to pray for the soules of the deade continually. Constituit quinquaginta fratres, qui continuam animarum memoriam haberent.
And as I haue spoken before, how the first Christians at Hierusalem had a particular Church founded, and employed to that holy vse. So our Christians Britans insisting in the same deuotion from the beginning, had diuers such foundations and Churches especially to offer sacrifice, and pray for the deade. One of them was at london. Ecclesiam Galfrid. Monum. hist. Reg. Briton. l. 12 c. 13. aedificauerunt, in quo pro ipso (Rege) and fidelibus defunctis, diuina celebrantur obsequia. And this is sufficient for this question.
The next exception, which is taken by our Protestants The Catholike doctrine of pardons and Indulgences. in this article, is against the Catholike doctrine about pardons, or Indulgences, saying, as
 they haue done already, of Purgatory, that the Romish doctrine concerning pardons, is a fonde thing, vainely inuented, and grounded vpon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. The Councell of Trent setteth downe the Catholike doctrine in this point, which these men call the Conc. Trid. seff. 9. in decreto de Indulgentijs. Romish doctrine, that power of graunting indulgences was by Christ graunted to his Church, and the Church in the most auncient times vsed it, by so great warrant, and therefore declareth the vse of Indulgences to be retajned in the Church, as necessary for Christian people, and allowed by the authority of holy Councels, anathematizing them, which affirme them to be vnprofitable, or deny there is power in the Church to graunt them. Cum potestas conferendi Indulgentias, a Christo Ecclesiae concessa sit; at que huiusmodi potestate, diuini^^s tradita antiquissimis etiam temporibus, illa vsa fuerit: Sacrosancta Synodus, indulgentiarum vsum Christiano populo maxime salutarem, and sacrorum conciliorum anthoritate probatum, in Ecclesia retinendum esse docet, and praecipit: eosque anathemate damnat, qui aut inutiles esse asserunt, veleas concedendi, in Ecclesia potestatem esse negant.
The same holy Cou^cell with all good Catholiks as much co^demneth abuses in pardons or Indulge^ces, and as wisely preuenteth them, as any enemy of Indulgences doth, euer did, or can desire.
That there this power of graunting pardons and Indulgences for remitting the temporall punishment, due to sinne, is first euident by that is said of the paines and punishment of purgatory before. For no man will or can deny but if the Church hath power or meanes to remit paines, to them that be
 deceased, and out of the state of meriting, in themselues, much rather it hath such power and remedies for the liuing which by themselues may, and doe merit, and are in all respects parts and subiects of the militant Church of Christ.
Secondly whereas this Protestant article saith pardons haue no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. The Apostolike Fathers of this first age haue taught vs otherwise before, euen of the paines of Purgatory. And the Scripture is cleare both that Christ did graunt this power to his Church, and the Church practized it in the Apostles time. Of this power of remitting sinnes, and their punishment, Christ must needs meane when he said to S. Peter, he would giue Matth. c. 16. vnto him the keyes of the Kingdome of heauen, and whatsoeuer he should loose on earth should be loosed in heauen. Tibi dabo claues regnicaelorum. Et quodcumque solueris super terram, erit solutum and in caelis. So when he said to all his Apostles. Whatsoeuer Matth. 18. you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heauen. Quaecunque solueritis super terram, erunt soluta and in Ioh. cap. 20. coelo. And againe, whose sinnes you forgiue they are forgiuen vnto them. Quorum remiseritis peccata, remitiuntur ets.
And that wee may be assured, these words and warrants of Christ did carry this construction, and giue this power, and not onely to the then present Apostles but their Successours, and Rulers in his Church for euer, first Sainct Paul who was not an Apostle, Preist nor Christian then at the giuing of this cominission, nor there present, did thus expounde it, and practise it. For first excommunicating the wicked Corinthian which had committed 1. Cor. 5.
 sinne with his Fathers wife, his mother in lawe, a sinne both in Catholiks and Protestants Iudgment deseruing greate and longe pennance, and punishment, he soone after wrote vnto them againe to giue him pardon and indulge^ce for the punishment thereof, donetis, or condonetis, cui donastis, or condonastis and ego, and ego donaui or condonaui in persona Christi, S. Paul gaue pardon in the person of Christ, and the Church of Corinth did the same by the 2. Cor. 2. same warrant and authority.
So the learned holy Fathers after expound it, Primasius in c. 2. epist 2. ad Corinth. Aug. l. 2. co^tr. epist. parmen. c. 11. Chrys. Homil. 5. de verb. Isaiae vidi Dom. l. 3. de Sacerdo^io. Euseb. Emissen. hom. in dom. 19. post Pentecost. Hilar. can. 18. in Matth. Pacia^. epistol. 1. ad Simpronian. Nouatian. Aug l. 50. homil. hom. 40 27. l. 20. ciuit. cap. 9. Engl. prot. Booke of Ordinat. with the Churches approbation: cui aliquid donastis. Pro donaueritis, and ego. Sicut vobiscum vindicaui, ita and vobiscum dono. Nam, Et ego quod donaui. Non in mea persona, sed Christi, qui dixit, quae solueritis in terra, erunt soluta and in coelo. Si quid donaui propter vos. N^ grauemini. In persona Christi. Quia personam gerimus Christi. And both the Greeke and Latine Church euer from the beginning expound those words of Christ in the Ghospell before cited, as I haue done. And our Protestants themselues doe the like making those words of Christ in S. Ihons Ghospell to be the forme and manner to make their pretended Bishops and ministers, their pretended co^secratours, saying to all such at their admittance, these words: Take the holy Ghost, whose sinnes you forgiue they are forgiuen vnto them, and whose you retaine they are retained. And thereby claime as ample warrant and power as any Priest, Bishop, Prelate or Pope doth or euer did, both to absolue from sinnes, and pardon and giue Indulgence, for all paine, and punishment in any wise due or belonging to any sinne, or sinnes, how many or enormeous soeuer they be, and by the greatest
 authority in their Religion presume to practise it in such manner. For absolution and pardoning of all sinnes they haue the warrant of as many Parlaments as they haue kept since Queene Maryes time, all the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth: King Iames and Charles all their books of articles, Canons, Iniunctions, and generall practise of their congregation Protestant in England now about 70. yeares allowing and exercising publikely their communion booke, vtterly and vnder greate penalties forbidding all other Rituals or Church seruice, in this euery minister doth may or is bound thus to say to men confessing their sinnes vnto them. Our Lord Iesus Christ hath lest power to his Protest. Communio^ booke Titul. visitation of the Sicke. Church to absolue all sinners which truely repent and beleeue in him, and by his authority committed to me, I absolue thee from all thy sinnes, in the name of the Father, and of the sonne and of the holy Ghost, Amen.
King Iames Supreame heade of their Church, in his Prouinciall Councell, or conference, with his Protestant Bishops and Doctours thus defineth or declareth. The particular and personall absolution King Iames and Protest. Bishops at Hampton. confer. p. 13. from sinne after confession, is Apostolicall, and a very godly ordinance. Where wee see, that euery Parish pretended Preist, or minister with our Protestants (for so their directory is) may, and ought by their Religion, attempt to giue plenary pardo^s, and Indulgences, in as ample, or rather more ample, and illimited manner then any Pope did. For by their religion this is to be or may be executed by any minister to any penitent whomesoeuer without any restriction, and from all sinnes and punishments due to them, which is most manifest by their last assertion and doctrine of denying purgatory
 and prayer for the deade, onely constituting two places for the deceased, hell and heauen, and teaching that euery penitent so absolued, and receauing Indulgence from them, so dying doth immediately goe to heauen, and so of necessity by their doctrine and practise, they must needs hold, that they giue plenary Indulgence to euery such confessing penitent. This they confirme further, proue, and practise in all their Ecclesiasticall Courts, where they inflict, and continue, or at their pleasure forgiue, pardon and giue Indulgence of all punishments and paines for sinne. This they protest and declare with their publike authority in their Church seruice, diuers times in the yeare, their publike direction and commaunde, openly in their Churches thus pronouncing: Brethren in the primatiue Church Protest. Communio^ booke Tit. a Commination against sinners. there was a goodly discipline, that at the beginning of lent, such parsons as were notorious sinners were put to ope^ penna^ce, and punished in this world, that their soules might be saued in the day of the Lord: and that other admonished by their example, might be the more afraide to offend: it were much to be wished, the said discipline may be restored againe. And this booke of articles it Protest. artic. of Relig. art. selfe in the 33. article hath, how after temporall pennance arbitrary by a Iudge hauing authority, who may assigne more or lesse, longer or shorter, remit and pardon some or all, the greatest sinners euen excommunicated, are to haue Indulgence, pardon, and absolution. Our Protestant Parlame^ts, Parlament. 1. Elizabeth. and Religion doe expressely receaue the first Nicen Councell, wherein the doctrine of Indulgences, and Concil. Nic. 1. c. 12. 11. practise of them is as expressely approued, and calleth it the auncient and canonicall law, antiqua and canonica lex seruabitur, and to be obserued, and they
 leaue it in the power of the Bishop to be Iudge, when and how they are to be vsed, licebit Episcopo h^manius aliquid de ^is statuere.
And their priuate writers both in their publike sermons, and bookes published with authority, and for which some haue beene made Bishops among them, doe thus confirme it. As there is a death in Theoph higg. ser. 3. Mart. an. 1610. sinne, and a death to sinne, so there is a double resurrection: the first a culpa from sinne: the second a poena, from the punishment which followeth thereupon. The Feild bookes of the Church l. 1. c. 17. p. 33. true Church admitteth and receaueth all, that with sorrowfull repentance returne, and seeke reconciliation, how greate soeuer their offences haue beene: not forgetting to vse due seuerity* which yet she sometime remitteth. The auncient Bishops were w^nt to cut of greate parts of enioyned pennance: which remission and relaxation was called an Indulgence.
The like haue others, and among other reasons Feild supr. l. 1. c. 17. 1. Cor. 2. v. 8. 9. 10. and authorities for this old custome, and doctrine they cite and expounde as Catholiks doe, the practise and place of S. Paul to the Corinthians before alleadged. Therefore hauing so ample and euident testimony, and confession of our Protestants in this point, wee may be more breife in relating the Fathers of this Apostolike age, the doctrine in question being by all euen aduersaries thus confessed to haue beene deliuered by Christ, Apostolicall and Godly. First to begin with the See of Clem. Rom. epist. 1. Leo 2. in epist. decret. Marian. Scot. l. 2. e^at. 6. Flor. Wigornie^ chron. in Siluan. and O^ho. Cons. Rome Sainct Clement and many others are worthy witnesses, that Sainct Peter the Apostle left vnto him his Successour in the Roman See this power, in as ample ma^ner as Christ communicated it vnto Sainct Peter, and calleth it a rule of the Church, Ipsi trado a Domino mihi traditam potestatem
 ligandi and soluendi, vt de omnibus quibuscumque decreuerit in terris, hoc decretum sit and in coelis Ligab^ enim, quod oportet ligari, and soluet quod expedit solui, tanquam qui ad liquidum Ecclesiae regulam nouerit.
And for all Bishops he setteth downe, from the Apostles order, that all Bishops should vse mercy humanity, and indulgence towards penitents. Primum Clem. Const. Apost. lib. 2. c. 13. 12. Cap. 18. potestate reum iudica, deinde cum misericordia, humanitate and indulgentia eum concilia, promittens ei salutem, si morem mutauerit, and ad paenitentiam redierit. Oportet poenitentes libenter admittere, gaudentes illorum causa cum misericordia, and humanitate, iudicantes eos, qui deliquerunt. He setteth downe the Cap. 19. manner how Bishops should not suffer sinners to enter into the Church, vntill they had done pennance as he should thinke fit, and then to forgiue them. Cum aliquem peccauisse cognoueris, iube cum foras eijci ingressique pro eo rogent. Tunc iubebis illum iuuare and expendens an paeniteat, and dignus sit, qui in Ecclesiam omnino recipiatur, afflictum illum diebus ieiuniorum pro ratione peccati hebdomadas duas, vel tres, vel quinque, vel septem, dimitte. Where the graunting of pardon, and Indulgence, more or lesse is referred to the Bishops iudgme^t, and discretion. And Cap. 21. further, omnium curam habeat Episcopus. Poenitentibus remissionem concedere oportet. Recognosce o Episcope, dignitatem tuam, quod sicut ligandi potestatem accepisti, sic etiam soluendi. Obtinens igitur soluendi potestatem, recognosce teipsum, and secundum dignitatem loci tui, in hac vita versare, sciens quod de pluribus rebus ratio abs te requiretur. Cui enim, inquit, depositum est Luc. 12. multum, abundantius repetetur ab eo. Nam peccati expers reperitur nemo, excepto eo, qui propter nos factus est homo. Quoniam scriptum est nemo mundus a Iob 25.
 s^^^^bus, neque si vnum diem vixerit. Where pardons and Indulgences are commaunded, and the necessity of them among all men sinners deliuered.
He teacheth the like thus againe, peccantem ca^^iga, Lib. 2. Const. Apost. c. 21. Cap. 21. and ieiunio afflictum remissione releua, and ingemiscentem recipe. And leauing all to the Church, to impose pennance, to alter chaunge, ease or giue, pardon, release, and giue Indulgence of it, he addeth: nolite pro omni peccato eandem sententiam ferre, Cap. 52. sed vnicuique propriam poenam statuite, cum multa prudentia. Alios minis subijcies, alijs subsidijs pauperum, alios ieiunijs affliges, alios segrcgabis pro delicti magnitudine. Diuersis delictis diuersas poenas imponatis. Si poenitentem non receperis, insidiatoribus trades, Cap. 14. oblitus Dauid dicentis, ne tradas bestijs animam confitentem tibi. Si quis Episcopus aut presbyter, cum qui a Psal. 73. Can. Apost. can. 51. peccaco reuertitur, non recipit, sed reijcit, deponitor, eo quod Christum offendat, qui dixit, ob vnum peccatorem qui resipiscat, gaudium oboriri in coelo.
And Sainct Ignatius earnestly vrgeth to take Ignat. epist. ad Philadelp. mercy of, and pardon penitent sinners, and receaue them with all gentlenesse, as a meanes to bring them from sinning to saluation. Obsecro vos, quot-quot paenitentia ducti redierint ad vnitatem Ecclesiae, suscipite illos cum omni mansuetudine, vt per bonitatem This doctrine of Indulge^ces vsed in Britaine from the first conuersion thereof, to Christ. Girald. Cambren. descriptione Cambr. cap. 18. and patientiam vestram resipiscentes ex diaboli laqueis, digni iam Christo facti, salutem consequantur aeternam in regno Christi. And to come home to this our owne contry of Britaine, Giraldus Cambrensis an old learned Bishop, and greate antiquary entreating of the first faith, and Religion of the Britans, de antiqua fidei fundatione, Christianitatis amore and deuotione: saith they euer co^tinued in the same, and
 among other customes and obseruances kept fro^ the time of their first conuersion, their Churche^ had farre greater Immunities priuiledges or Indulgences then in other places: Ecclesiae istorum long^ maiorem quam alibipacem habent.
These Indulgences here did farre exceede them which the Canons graunt, Longe Canonum Indulgentiam excedente. An euident argument they were more auncient then the Canons. And being as h^ teacheth without Innouation or chaunge, eue^ from the first conuersion of this Kingdome and the Apostles time. Which our oldest antiquities warranted both by Catholike and Protestant historians, and our Protestants themselues will thus proue vnto vs. They testifie with Antiquity that Io. Bal. l. 1. de vit. Pont. Roman. in Eleut. Robert. Barn. in vit. pont. Rom. in eod. Pope Eleutherius was bonus paterfamilias, a good Steward of Gods Church. And King Lucius entreated him to be ioyned to the Christian faith and Church which was then and had beene from the beginning. Lucius Britanniae Rex Christiano ca^^i cum suis subditis adiungi a pontifice petijt, per literas. And hee so effected it, that the Brita^s were co^firmed and strengthened in the doctrine which they had receaued from the Apostles, and the whole Kingdome here professed it. Eleutherius vt bonus paterfamilias effecit, vt confirmatis and consolidatis Britan^is in suscepta prius ab Apostolis doctrina, totum illud regnum in eius fidei verbum iuraret. And this Apostolike faith and doctrine was the same, which this good Pope S. Eleutherius and the Romans then, Bal. lib. de Script. Brit. centur. 1. in Eluana and Meduino. Godw. conu. of Brit. and the Christian Britains here also professed, as these Protestants and all Antiquaries agree, saying that the first preachers to King Lucius were Apostolike men or instructed by them, per Apostoli^os
 viros in Christo renati, and our King sent for this Apostolike faith to Pope Eleutherius at Rome: literi^ suis Rex Lucius, apud Eleutherium Pontificem egit vt apud Romanos Christianorum adscriberetur numero. And the Apostolike Catholike faith which was Io. Bal. sup. Io. Leland. Assertion. Arthurij. Charta S. P^tricij. Antiq. Glastenien. tab. lign. in membran. affix. Guliel. Malmesbur. l. de antiquitat. Coenob. Glasten. Acta per legat. Crapgr. Catal. in S. Patricio. Io. Leland. in Arth. here, at Rome and from, thence sent and confirmed here, in this question of Indulgences, was the same which the present Roman Church now professeth. For wee reade in the old Acts of those legates which S. Eleutherius sent hither recommended by these Protestants for authenticall, as written by themselues, Fugatius and Damianus vt apud posteros clariora perdurarent, membranis his ded^runt Acta per legatos, inde ad nos peruenerunt, and many other antiquities. That th^se holy Legates procured 10. yeares of Indulgence for all visitours of that sacred place of Glastenbury: Sancti Phaganus and Deruianus perquisierunt ab Eleutherio Papa qui eos miserat decem annos Indulgentiae. And these old Acts did testifie, that the same holy Legates obtained 30. yeares of Indulgence for all Bishops, that should with deuotion visit the chappell there builded, in honour of S. Michael the Archangell. Dicebat eadem scriptura quod venerandi Phaganus and Deruianus perquisierant triginta annorum Indulgentiam omnibus Episcopis ipsum locum, ob honorem beati. Michaelis pia voluntate vis^ tantibus. The old Manuscript antiquities of Glastenbury set downe the names of almost an hundred holy and auncient Bishops, which had giuen Indulgences to that holy place. Wee cannot but Iudge the like of other Churches, and places whose monuments haue not beene so happily preserued. And this is sufficient for this Question.
The next Protestant exception in this article is
 concerning Images, and is this: The Romish doctrine The reuerent vse of holy Images thus proued. concerning worship and adoration of images is a fond thinge, vainely inuented, and grounded vpon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. The Councell of Trent for Catholiks thus deliuereth their doctrine, and practise in this point, which these men terme the Romish doctrine. Imagines Christi, Deiparae Virginis and aliorum Sanctorum, Concil. Trid. Sess. 9. in templis praesertim habendas and retinendas: eisque debitum honorem and venerationem impertiendam: non quod credatur inesse aliqua in ijs diuinitas, vel virtus propter quam sint colendae: vel quod ab eis sit aliquid petendum: vel quod fiducia in Imaginibus sit figenda* veluti olim fiebat a gentibus, quae in idolis spem suam collocabant: Sed quoniam honos qui eis exhibetur, refertur ad prototypa, quae illae representant. Ita vt per imagines quas osculamur, and coram quibus caput aperimus, and procumbimus, Christum adoremus, and Sanctos, quorum illae similitudinem gerunt, veneremur. Id quod conciliorum, praesertim vero, secundae Nicaenae Synodi decretis contra imaginum oppugnatores, est sancitum. That the Images of Christ, The Mother of God and other Saincts are to be had and retained especially in Churches: and due honour and reuerence is to be done vnto them: not because wee may or doe beleeue, there is any diuinity or vertue in them, for which they are to be reuerenced: or that any thing is, or may be asked of them, or trust placed in them, as it was vsed of the gentils, which placed their hope in Idols. But because the honour which is done to them is referred to these whose Images they be, and represent. So that by the Images which wee kisse, and before which wee put of our hats, and kn^ele downe, wee adore Christ, and worship the Saincts, whose similitude they beare. Which is defined in the decrees of Councels,
 especially of the second Councell of Nice against the oppugners Concil. Nic* 2. of Images.
That Nicen generall Councell so defineth, and testifieth it to be the doctrine of the Fathers, and tradition of the Catholike Church in all the world. Imaginis honor in prototypu^ resultat, and qui adorat Imaginem, in ea adorat quoque descriptum argumentum. Sic enim Sanctorum nostrorum patrum obtinet disciplina, vel traditio Catholicae Ecclesiae, quae a finibus vsque ad fines Euangelium suscepit. They say it was the faith of the Apostles, Fathers, and all true beleeuers in the world. And doe anathematize all that alledge the sentences of holy Scripture against Idols, against such sacred Images, or call them Idols, or say the Christians adore Images, as Gods, and those that wittingly communicate with them, that hold opinion against such Images, or abuse them. Sancta Synodus exclamauit omnes sic credimus, omnes idem sapimus, omnes approbantes subscripsimus. Haec est fides Apostolorum, haec est fides patrum, haec est fides orthodo^orum, haec fides orbem terrarum confirmauit. Credentes in vnum Deum, in Trinitate laudatum, venerandas Imagines amplexamur. Qui secus agunt, anathemate percelluntur. Quicunque sententias sacrae Scripturae de Idolis contra venerandas Imagines adducunt, anathema. Qui venerandas Imagines Idola appellant, Anathema. Qui dicunt quod Christiani Imagines vt Deos adorent, anathema. Qui scientes communicant cum illis, qui contra venerandas Imagines sentiunt, aut eas dehonestant, anathema. And this being a generall Councell, as our Protestants confesse, and so by their owne allowance before, the greatest authority in the Church of Christ, doth expressely confute all prete^ded obiections out of Scripture, which
 Protestants now vse against holy Images being vrged by the I conoclasts Image breakers, heretiks at that time, And proueth that from the Apostles time, the Catholike doctrine and vse of them had euer beene obserued in the Church.
And for this first Apostolike age, Eusebius, Sozomen, Nicephorus and others testifie, that the woman of phoenicia cured of her infirmity by our Sauiour in the Ghospell, by touching the hemme of his garment, did make Images of that miracle of Christ healing her, and herselfe kneeling vnto him: and that at the Image of our Sauiour there grew vp an herbe curinge all diseases, to proue the allowance, and reuerent vse of such, for the Christians had that Image in greate reuerence, and so it continued at Paneades in phoenicia, vntill Iulian Euseb. histor. Eccl. l. 7. c. 17. Sozom. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 20. Niceph. l. 10. c. 30. Synod. Nicaen. 2. the Apostata pulled it downe, as he did other such Christian monuments, and set vp his owne statua in the same place, which was miraculously broke^, and ouerthrowne by God to make knowne his wickednesse therein. And they were onely Pagan Idolaters which broke and prophaned the Image of Christ, the Christians gathered the peeces together, placed and reuerently preserued them in the Church. Id temporis gentiles statuam Christi tanta c^^ violentia trahebant, vt eam confringerent. At Christiani postea cius fragmentae cum collegissent, in Ecclesia posuerunt, vbi etiam adhuc custoditur. Nicephorus and others write. Statuam autem Christi, Christiani tum i^ Diacocinum Ecclesiae transtulerunt; and honoratiore loc^ positam, cultu conuenienti prosecuti sunt, locum ^^^que eum libenter frequentantes, and Imagin^m ipsam i^spectantes, desiderium suum and amorem ergastatuae ipsius archetypum, primariumque exemplar declararunt.
 Like is the history of our Sauiours holy Image, mi^^culously Tabul. and Archiu. ciuit. Edessae apud Nicep. l. 2. ca. 7. and alios. Euagr. l. 4. c. 26 Damasc. li. 4. de fid. orth. c. 17. Orthod. c. 17. Const. Porph. Imperat. orat. apud Metaphr. 10. Aug. Monol. Graecor. cal. septem. Metaphrast. 15. Nouem^. and in vit. S. Alexi^ Niceph. l. 2. c. 7. Conc. Nic. 2. Stephan. 1. Pap. apud Adrian. Pap. ep. ad Corol. Mag. Tom. 3. Concil. Tradit. Ecc^. de S. Imagine Rom. Meth. in Tyberio. Marian. Scot. in chronic. an. 39. Matth. Westmonast. chron. an: gra^iae 31. Ranulph. hig. Polychro^. l. 4. c. 4. made by himselfe and sent to King Abg^^us, or Abagarus at Edessa, in Syria, kept and frequented with greate honour and reuerence, as inuincible testimonies and authorities of antiquity proue.
Euagrius and others call it sanctissionam Imaginem diuinitus, fabricatam. The most holy Image made by God. The Greeke Church keepeth a yearely feaste, and solemnity of this holy Image on the 17. of the Calends of September. The same I say, of the holy Image of Christ made by himselfe in wipinge his face, going to his passion, with a linnen cloath deliuered to him by S. Veronica, by some Bereuice, as the traditio^ of the Church of Christ, Methodius, Marianus, Scotus, Mattheus Westmonasteriensis and others, and the same holy Image still with greate reuerence preserued at Rome inuincibly proue. How much this sacred Image was honoured presently in this age, and euer after, wee may informe our selues by that history of Tyberius the Emperour, as it is thus related by our old historian Matthew of westminster, euen as he is published by our Protestants and others. Tyberius being troubled with a grieuous leprosie, and hearing of the miracles of Christ, at and about Hierusalem sent Volusianus thither to entreate Christ to come to cure him, but the Iewes hauing put him before Volusianus coming to Hierusalem to death, he meeting with S. Veronica, and informed by her and others that this holy Image being deuoutely vsed, (huius Imaginis aspectum si Dominus tuus (...) intueatur, continuo sanitatis beneficio potietur.) he should presently be healed. He bringeth S. Veronica with
 the Image of Christo to Rome, and enformed the Emperour of this matter, whereupon Tyberius caused the way to be spredde with silke cloathes, and the Image to be thus presented vnto him. Who presently thus beholding it, obtained his former health.
Caesar pannis sericis viam sterni fecit, and Imaginem sibi prasentari praecepit: Qui mox vt eam fuit intuitus, pristinam assecutus est sanitatem. This greate honour the greate Emperour by the direction of Christians vsed, as they likewise did, being himselfe Gild. l. de excid. and conq. Brit. c. 6. Tertulsian. Apol. con^. gent. Antiq. Eccles. Tauronen. Baron. Annal. an. 34. c. Athan. Serm. de pass. Imag. Nicen. Conc. 2. act. ^. Mat. Westmon. an. 560. Epiph. li. 1. Tom. 2. cont^. haeres. c. 27. Irenaeb. lib. 1. con^r. haeres. c. 24. Niceph l. 4. Eccl. hist. c. 2. Tertull. con. her. and apud Nicep. supr. Epiph. supr. contr. Carpocrati^^s. either actuall a Christian, or so farre a friend and professour of their faith that as our oldest historian S. Gildas and others write he threatened death to the accusers of Christs Seruants euen against the will of the Senate. Comminata, Sen^^ nolent^, a Principe morte d^latoribus militum eiusde^ Christi. Wee finde also that the Syndon wherein the sacred body of Christ was wrapped in his holy sepulcher, did receaue and retaine the Image of him, and was preserued with much honour, as still it is so kept in Ecclesia Tauronensi, to this day with greate reuerence. So of the Image of Christ in regall attire made by Nicodemus and still honoured at Lucas in Italy. Such was the Image of Christ at Beritum, most miraculous when it was abused by a Iew testified by S. Athanasius, the second Nicen Councell and others, and attributed to S. Nicodemus the maker thereof.
Sainct Epiphanius also maketh mentions of diuers Images of Christ, some of gold, others of siluer, others of other matter preserued from the time of Pontius Pilate before Christs Passion. And those Images must needs be both very auncient, and honoured,
 for both S. Ireneus and Tertullian make mention of Carpocrites and his followers the heretiks of that name, and who began about the yeare of Christ 129. whome S. Epiphanius doth charge to haue exceeded the due Christian honour giuen to Images, and among other their errours to haue offered sacrifice, euen such as the gentiles vsed to these and other prophane Images of Pagans. Habent Imagines per colores depictos, quidam etiam ex auro and argento ac reliqua materia, quas sane Imagines Iesu esse dicunt: and has Iesu Imagines sub Pontio Pilato factas esse, quando inter homines versabatur. Insuperque philosophorum quorundam, Pythagorae, Platonis, Aristotelis, and aliorum. Cum quibus Philosophis etiam alias Imagines Iesu collocant, collocat asque adorant, and gentium mysteria perficiunt. Erectis enim his Imaginibus de caetero gentium mores seruant. Qui vero sunt gentium mores alij, quam sacrificia atque alia? Nicephorus Niceph. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 7. hauing related the history of Christ his Image, sent by him to King Abgarus, whom he nameth Augarus, reigning vltra Euphratem, beyond Euphrates, immediatly addeth, that the King of Persia also sent for, and receaued by a skillfull painter both the Image of Christ and his blessed Mother: dicitur quoque Persarum Rexmanu ingenioqu^ promptum pictorem misisse, and per hunc, feruenti fidei desiderio, simul and ipsius Christi, and quae eum diuino modo genuit, matris, quam celerrime Imaginem depictam accepisse. And to assure vs of the certainty of this history, he immediatly addeth, that it was both registred in the publike records of the then regall City Edessa, kept among their publike monume^ts there, contained in the history of King Abgarus, translated out of Syriake, and so published. Atque
 haec quidem ex Tabularis and archiuis ciuitatis Edess^* quae tum regia administr abatur potestate, sunt des^^pta. Fucrant enim in publica libr^rum monumenta relata. Et libri de Augari rebus conscripti, haec quoque complectebantur, ex Syrorum lingua translata. Quae amo (...) recte hoc loco opinor esse exposita.
The worshipping of these holy Images, especially that which King Abgarus a Christian receaued, is deliuered vnto vs by no lesse then such publike regall warrant, decree and practise. For as the Emperour Constantinus porphyrogenitus, Simon Metaphrastes and others proue vnto vs, King Metaphrast. die 10. Aug. and 15. Nou. Const. Poph. supr. 10. Aug. Harr. hist. manuscript. l. c. 11. hist. Mis. l. 17. Abgarus being Christened by S. Thaddeus and warranted by that Apostle in his Christian proceedings, this King receauing the Image of Christ with greate Ioy and honour, whereas there was a Pagan God placed before the common gate of the City, which euery one that was to enter into the City was first to adore, and offer vnto it certaine prayers, such as the Paga^s ordained for their Gods, and then freely to passe into the City. This Idoll the King tooke downe, and set in place thereof the Image of Christ which Sainct Thaddeus had brought vnto him with these words written in letters of gold: Deus, qui in te sperat, a spe non ex^idet. O God he that trusteth in thee, shall not fayle in his hope. And withall he gaue commaundment, that whosoeuer passed into the City by that porte, should first doe reuerence, and due honour to that Image. And this order was obserued of all Passengers Arcuulf. and Adaman. in relat. locorum Sanctoru^. Beda libello de Iotis sanctis. during the Reigne of Abgarus and his sonne after him.
Arcuulfus an auncient Bishop of Fraunce and pylgrime to Hierusalem, quilocorum gratia Sanctorum
 (...) Hierosoly^iam lustrata omni terra pro^^s^ionis, Adamannus an holy Preist and Abbot of th^^ Britaine, and S. B^de after them is witnesse, that ^mong the holy memories of Christ at and about Hierusalem, there was kept a lynnen cloath aboue 8. foote longe, made as was thought by the blessed Virgin, redde on the one side, and greene on the other, containing the Image of Christ and his 12. Apostles, and was there worshipped in the Church. Aliud quoque aliquanto maius linteum in Dorothaeus Synop. de vita and morte prophe^arum in Ierem. Ecclesia illa veneratur, quod fertur a Sancta Maria contentum, duodecim Apostolorum, and ipsius Domini continens Imagines, vno latere rubro, and altero viridi. S. Dorotheus writeth, that Ieremy the Prophet prophesying of the coming of Christ, gaue this for a certaine token and signe, to know the time, because all people then should worship the crosse. Signum aduentus ipsius er^t ^obis, quando vniuersae Pallad* hist. laus. in vit. Apollinis. So^. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 20. Cassio. l. 6. c. 42. Niceph. l. 10. c. 31. Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1. part. 1. distinct. 3. Volater. c^mmen. l. 13. Pet. de Natal. l. 3. c. 228. gentes lignum adorabunt. And gaue an other signe as certaine, and notorious, as the other to the Preists of Egypt, where he prophesied, that when the Messias should be borne of a Virgin, and ly in a manger, all their Idols should be broken and fall downe; which the Prophet Esay also thus foretold: mouebuntur simulachrae Aegypti a facie eius. Which all writers Greeke and Latine, Catholiks and Protestants confesse and proue to haue beene ^ffected, when Christ newly borne with his mother fledde into Egypt, the Idols of that nation most Idolatrous then fallinge downe. And to make euident euen to blinded men, that Christian Images be not idols, or forbidden, but allowed, and to be reuerenced, at that very time when the idols were thus miraculously destroyed, the holy Prophet both appointed
 the Egyptians, to make Christian Images namely of Christ and his blessed mother, and reuerence Dorothaeus supr. them which they did. And this was both publikly, and by all practized, and by their King as authentically examined and approued. Ieremias signum dedit Sacerdotibus Aegyptiacis quod oporteat simulachra eorum concuti, and decidere per seruatorem puerum ex virgine nasciturum, and in praesepi iaciturum, propterea etiam nunc virginem in lecto, and Infantem in praesepio collocant and adorant. Et cum causam olim Ptolomaeus Rex percontaretur, responderunt mysterium esse ipsis a maioribus traditum, quod illi a sancto Propheta acceperint. Sueto^. in Aug. lactant. firm. Aug. l. de inuitat. Mart. Polon. chron. in Augusto. Ran. Highed. hist. l. 4. c 2. 3. Her^^. Schedel. aetat. 5. fol. 93. Speed Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. Annal. Eccles. Chart. in Gallia Francisc. Belleforest Cosmog. l. 2. p. 303. in Iud. v. druid. and alij.
This was likewise reuealed to Augustus the Emperour by the apparition of a Virgin with a child in her armes from heauen. And he fell downe and worshipped the Image or apparition. And is commended for it by all writers. Apertum est coelum and. nimius splendor irruit supereum, and vidit in coelo pulcherrimam virginem stantem super altare, and puerum tenentem in brachijs. Et miratus est nimis, and vocem dicentem audiuit: Haec ara filij Dei est. Qui statim proijciens se in terram, adorauit. This was the doctrine and practise of the Druides of this Kingdome a^d Fraunce, whome our Protestants merueylouslie commend vnto vs, for hauing a Prophesie among them, that the Sauiour of the world should be borne of a virgin, they erected Churches and Images vnto the^, namely at Charters in Frau^ce. Where their Prince and they both founded such a Church with an Image of the blessed virgin with Christ in her armes, and worshipped it, as the auncient tradition and Annals of that Church with others proue.

 The Image or signe of the Crosse is not so resembling, representatiue of Christ, or his Passio^, as the Images of Christ and his Saincts be of them, especially that being a common Instrument of death, in the greate Romane Empire at the death of Christ.
And yet in honour of Christ suffering death and r^deeming the world by his passion vpon a Crosse, The signe ^nd Image thereof was presently after his death euen by his Apostles, disciples, and first Christians in this age, had, and vsed with greate reuerence; and honour. I may be more breife in this matter seeing our Protestants by their greatest euen regall authority, haue thus declared: The signe King Iames and his B. B. confer. at Hampt. Couel. ag. Burg. p. 139. 124. 125. Communion Booke Tit. publike Baptisme. of the Crosse is an Apostolicall constitution and Tradition. And so they vse in their publike practicall communion booke at the baptisme of euery child, thus prescribing for a rule and law: The Preist shall make a Crosse, vpon the childes forchead, saying: wee receaue this child into the congregation of Christs flocke, and doe signe him with the signe of the Crosse, in token that hereafter ^e shall not be ashamed to confesse the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to sight vnder his banner, against sinne, the world, and the deuill, and to continue Christs faithfull seruant vnto his lines end. Amen. Therefore if by so greate a Protestant warrant and profession the signe of the Crosse is so honorable, that it is an Apostolicall constitution, binding and commaunding all, an Apostolicall tradition, to be religiously kept and obserued of all, so honorable and necessary a profession, confession and testimony of our faith, and Religion neuer to be denied, that when wee were infants, and could not doe this of our selues, it was, and ought to be performed by others for vs, as our whole faith
 was so professed for vs in our baptisme, much more ought all Christians coming to yeares of Iudgment, and discretion performe those holy bondes and duties by themselues.
And that our Protestants need not feare they haue herein donne or graunted too much, they shall heare the Apostolike men of this age, from whom they haue in some sorte borrowed this their doctrine, practise, and confession, deliuer the Apostolike doctrine, vse and custome, farre more plainely, amply, and honorably, in this busines.
The old Anonymus writer of the Apostles liues Fredic. Nausea ep. Vienn. Prooemen. in vit. Apostol. Anonym. antiq. in vit. S. Thomae Apost. Idem in vit. S. Bartholomaei. published by the learned Bishop Fredericus of Vienna allmost an hundred yeares since, and then the exemplar exceeding old characteribus plusque vetustis inscriptum, writeth, that Sainct Thaddeus cured K^ng Abgarus with the signe of the Crosse, imposito Regi crucis signaculo, ab omni eum languore sanauit. An holy Angell engraued in square stones foure Crosses in euery corner of the Church one, per quatuor angulos circumuolans, digito s^^ in quadr^tis sax^s sculpsit signum crucis. And gaue Charge to make the signe of the Crosse on their foreheads. Quale signum ego sculpsi in his saxis, tale vos digit^ Id. in vit. S. Ioan. Apost. vestro facite in frontibus vestris, and omnia mala ^^gient a vobis. Sainct Ihon the Apostle making the signe of the Crosse ouer poyson drunke it without hurt. Fa^to signo Crucis venenum sine laesione bibit. S. Ephrem in his Sermon intituled of the most holy S. Ephrem Sermon de Sanctissima Cruce Domini. Crosse of our Lord. De sanctissima Cruce Domini, speaking of the glory thereof boldly affirmeth, that the holy Apostles armed therewith, draw all nations to adore it. Hac Crucis armatura muniti sa^cti Apostoli omnem inimici potentiam, conculcarunt,
 (...) gentes suis sagenis ad huius adorationem (...), and congregarunt.
S. Basil speaking of traditions of the Apostles, Basil. l. de Spiritu sancto c. 27. Tertull. l. de coron. mil. c. 34. Cyrill. Hierosolim. catech. 13. Basil. de Spir. 5. c. 1. Hier. ep. 22. ad Eust. Theod. l. 3. hist. c. 3. Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. c. 8. nameth this for one. V^ signo Crucis eos, qui spem (...) in Christum, signemus. So hath Tertullian, and others, that it was a tradition to vse it in all actions. Ad omnem progressum, atque promo^um, ad ^^nem aditum and exitum, ad vestitum and calceatum, ad ^^^^c^ra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quaecumque nos conuersatio exercet, frontem Crucis signaculo terimus. Traditio tibi praetendetur auctrix, cons^et^do confirmatrix, and fides obseruatrix. He liued soone after this first age, and S. Martiall conuersing with Christ, and his Apostles confirmeth it: Crucem Domini, semper in mente, in ore, in signo tenete. Crux enim Domini armatura vestra contra Sathanam, galea custodiens caput, lorica protegens pectus, clypeus tela maligni repellens, gladius iniquitatem and Angelicas insidias peruersae potestatis sibi propinquare nullo modo sinens. Hoc solo signo coelestis victoria data est nobis, and per Crucem baptismo Dei sanctificatum est, The Crosse of Christ is euer to be in our minde, our mo^th, and signe. It is an armour against Sathan, a Sallet defending the heade, a breasteplate defending the breast, a sheild repelling the darts of the deuill, a sword keeping vs from his iniquity and deceits. The signe by which celestiall victory is giuen vnto vs, by the Crosse baptisme is sanctified.
Sainct Clement from the Apostles witnesseth, that the Bishops and Preists in the beginning of the sacrifice of Masse armed themselues with this signe on their forehead. Episcopus splendidam vestem indutus, vna cum sacerdotibus, and stans ad altare, and facto manu in fronte trophaeo Crucis, dicat. The
 history ascribed to S. Linus Successour to S. Pete^ Hist. S. Petri Petri ascript. S. Lino. testifieth, that Sainct Peter standing by the Cross^ wonderfully commended and honoured it for the misteries thereof, defending vs, representing ou^ redemption vnto vs, vsed in the sacred misteries, driuing away the poison of the serpent. S. Ignatius Ignat. epist. ad Philippen. Vincent. specul. l. 10. vit. S. Andreae per Presbyter. and Diacon. Achaiae. Breuia. Rom. in festo S. Andr. Breu. Sarisbur. ibid. Author. l. de duplici Mart. inter opera S. Cypriani. Metaphr. in S. Andrea. S. Iuo Carnat. serm. de Sacram. ser. 4. Remig. Antisiod. in psal 21. and 4. Bern. ser. de S. Andr. Lanfran. cont. Berengar. Miss. S Chrysost. SS. Petri, Iacobi, Marci, and Dionil. Areop. Eccl. Hierarch. c. 2. c. 5. part. 2. part. 3. saith it is a Trophy, or signe of victory against the deuill, he trembleth, when he seeth it, and feareth when he heareth of it. Trophaeum est contraipsius potentiam: quod vbi viderit horret, and audiens timet.
The history of Sainct Andrew that greate Apostle written by the Cleargy of Achaia where he suffered martyrdome, then present or liuing, and both confirmed by many other old writers, and receaued by the Churches authority is wonderfull for his worshipping of the Image of the Crosse. Adductus Andreas ad locum martyrij; cum Crucem vidisset, longe exclamare caepit: o bona Cr^^^, quae decorem ex membris Domini suscepisti, diu desiderata, sollicite amata, sine intercessione quaesita, and aliquando cupienti animo praeparata, accipe me ab hominibus, and redde me magistro meo. And he is accompted first composer of the Masse now called S. Chrysostomes Masse, wherein the signe of the Crosse is vsed with greate honour. So it is diuers times in the Masses of S. Peter, S. Iames, S. Marke, and others, S. Denis the Areopagite witnesseth it was honorably vsed in the holy mysteries, Sacraments, and ceremonies of the Church in this age. Pontifex trino Crucis sanctae signaculo vnctionem inchoat. Cuilibet ipsorum a benedicente Pontifice Crucis imprimitur signum. Signi vitalis impressio omnium simul carnalium desideriorum vacationem, vitamque ad Dei imitation^m effictam signat. Prochorus and others write,
 ^hat S. Iohn the Apostle did diuers miracles with this holy signe. Sanctae Crucissignaculo muniuit. Sanctae Prochorus in S. Ioa. c. 3. c. 31. Petr. Maffaeus in S. Thoma epist. Indic. Gulielm. Eisengren. cent. 1. part. 5. dist. 7. Gul. Eiseng. supr. fol. 93. 130. 138. 139. 142. 143. 144 147. 149. 149 150. 153. 157. 163. 163. 167. 168. Authour Cosmogr. discript. gent. Edw. Grymston Booke of Estates p. 261. Tradit. de S. Cruce. Guliel. Eisengr. cent. 1. dist* 1. f. 42. The first Christian Britans of this profession. Girald. Ca^br. descr. Cambr. cap. 18. Crucis signo dixit infirmo: in nomine Domini nostri Ies^ Christi surge, and vade in domuni tuam sanus: and (...) surrexit aeger sanus. The like is written of S. Thomas the Apostle, and there still remaineth to this day from his time, an Image of the Crosse engraued in stone vpon a tombe, where he preached among the Indians.
The recitall of others in this age committed to writing by credible Authours, would be longe and tedious in so manifest a truth. Gulielmus Eisengrenius in his fift Ce^tenary hath gathered many there to be seene. This holy vse and custome was transported euen in this time by all humane Iudgment, euen into the new world, as some call America, for both Catholike and Protestant Authours and eye witnessing trauaylers assure thus: In Acuzamil an Ilande neare vnto Iucatan, they founde a Crosse two fadoms high, to which they of the contry had recourse as to acclestiall and diuine thinge. Which must needs be erected by Christians there, in this primatiue time, this being a plaine and geometricall Image and paterne of the Crosse of Christ, by tradition fifteene foote longe Crux sancta quindecim erat longa pedes.
And to come home to our Britans here, their auncient learned Bishops and Antiquaries assure vs, that from their first conuersion they vsed deuoute reuerence and gaue farre greater honour to the Image and signe of the crosse, and such representatiue holy signes, then any other nation Christian did. Cruci deuotam reuer^ntiam exhibere longeque magis quam vllam gentem honorem deferre videmus.
 And wee finde in the Antiquities of Glastenbury, Manuscr. ant. Glasten. Eccl. tabulis lig. affix. Baron. and Spondan. Annal. an. 60. and 112. Seuer. Bin. Tom. 1. conc. annot. in Euaristum. Sozomen. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 1. and alij ib. that S. Ioseph of Aramathia who bury^^ Christ, and his holy companions which with hy^ liued and dyed there, vsed holy Images of the crosse and others, and by these founde ther after in King Lucius time Damianus and Faganus knew that to haue beene the lyuing and dying place of those Saincts. Figuram nostrae redemptionis alias que figura manifestas repererunt, quibus bene cognouerunt, q^^^ Christiani prius locum inhabitauerunt. Where wee see the sholy Christian Images then to haue beene a certayne distinctiue signe, and token, of the first Christians from other people. For as Baronius, Spondanus, Seuerinus Binius an others proue by many auncient old lawes and other authorities, i^ was a receaued custome euen from the Apostles, to erect crosses in the Churches which were founded. And Sozomen with others affirme, that the gentils themselues did freely confesse, that this was the Sibyls verse. Ipsi gentiles ingenue fatentur, ho^ esse Sibyllae carmen.

O lignum foelix in quo Deus ipse pependit.
O happy crosse whereon God himselfe did hange.

And no man can deny it. Nemo pernegabit. And the Sybils did both Prophesie of the crosse and the worship thereof. Quare and lignum crucis, and ei^ veneratio a Sibylla praefignificata est. And this hee affirmeth from certaine tradition, and vndoubte^ true testimonyes. Haec ex viris, qui illa accurate ^^runt, and ad quos eorum cognitio a patribus ad liberi^ successione quadam deriuata peruenit, and qui eade^ ipsa literis prodere, posterisquerelinquere studueru^ audiuimus. And thus it was obserued here in Britaine the first Christianitie herein euery age, by S*
 Ioseph and his ossociats in the first age, by S. Dami^nus Phaganus and their company in the second, and third also. In which we find it was a custome also among Christians both to carry about with them the Image of the crosse or crucifixe, and to giue honour vnto it, as much as Catholichs now doe. This we proue by S. Amphibalus that blessed priest, Bishop and martir sent hither from Rome, and continually carryinge a crucifixe about with hym in the moste bitter persecution of Dioclesian. What was the worship hee and others then did Anonym. Brit. in vit. S. Albani. manusc. ant. Io. Capgrau. Iagenuen. and alij in eodem. vnto it, wee cannot bee better informed then by the president and example which S. Albane our first glorious Martyr by common computation, left vnto vs penned by a Britan then liuing as he testifieth in his life, in the presence and with the allowance of S. Amphibalus, thus related: saepe prosternitur ante crucem, and quasi pendentem, Dominum Iesum in cruce cerneret, veniam precatur. Sie pedes, sic vulneris loca assidua exosculatione demulcet, ac si adipsius quem crucifigi viderat vestigia procumberet Redemptoris. Sanguine mixtae per ora voluuntur lachrimae super illud venerabile lignum crucis vbertim decidentes. He often falleth downe before the Crosse, and as he had seene our lord Iesus on the Crosse. The blessed penitent craueth pardon. So hee did with dayly kissing embrace the places of his woundes, as if he had fallen downe at the feete of our redeemer, whom he saw crucified. Teares mixt with bloode do runne* downe his face, and plentifully fall downe vppon the venerable Crosse.
This is as much as the present Church of Rome alloweth, or any good Catholike doth, or is allowed to doe. And yet this greate glory of Britayne, so glorious and noble a Saint, and Martyr, giuing
 so greate honour, and reuerence to the Image of Christ crucified, doth by the same Authours, as strictly and punctually condemne the Idolatrous gentils for their Idols, as any Christian, Catholike or protestant can doe, and with the same censors and authorities which our protestants vnlearnedly and vnaduisedly vse, or abuse rather against this Catholike custome and practise, he still carryed the crucifixe in his hand to his death, kissing, reuerencing Mat. West. chron. an. 303. and honoring it, being found prayeinge bare fooled before it. Reperiunt nudis pedibus, ante crucem Domini, precibus incumbentem. Albanus vt se seruum crucis ostenderet, signum dominicum in manibu^ iugiter praeferebat. Crucem Domini quam manu tenebat, frequenter deosculans, and adorans, causam suam Domino commendabat. And thus hee perseuered vntill his heade being stricken of, his Crosse embrued with his martirs blood fell out of his hands, and was secretly taken vp and preserued by a Christian there present, none but Ghrists enemyes disallowed these holy Christian signes persecuting him whome they represented. Crux quam vir sanctus iugiter in manibus ferre consueuerat, foelici iam cruore respersa, super herbam decidit, eamque quidam Christianus occulte rapuit, and ignorantibus Paganis abscondit. Concerning the Images of holy Saincts I haue said before for Britayne that at Glostenbury besides the Image of the Crosse or crucifixe in S. Ioseph his tyme, there where other holy Images there, and the Image of our lady with Christ in her armes, was the auntient armes of that most auntient Abbey. For Hierusalem wee haue hard that the Images of all the Apostles were there worshipped from their tyme. There was also the Image of our lady paynted by S. Luke the Euangelist,
 which is called by Nicephores and others a diuine Niceph. hist. Eccl. l. 14. c. 2. Theod. lect. collect l. Bar. Annal. an. 453 vit. S. Alexij apud Sur. lippom. Bret. Rom. and al. Sigebert. chron. an 405 Matt. Westm. an. 620. Sigechronic. an. 624. Image. Diuinam illius Imaginem quam Lucas Apostolus in Tabula depicta reliquit. Her Image was also kept with greate honour at Edesse in Syria where Abgarus so much honoured the Image of Christ. There was also an other Image of her miraculously made and doing miracles, which the Emperour Heraclius vsed in his wars against Cosdroas, and thereby preuayled, this was with honour kept at Constantinople Byzantium. H^raclius ferens secum sanctae Dei genitricis Iconem, quae apud Bizantium est; non hominis manu, sed diuino miraculo pictam. Heraclius* Iconis Dei genitricis fultus auxilio, omnes aduersarios suos in bello peremit.
The Image of this blessed virgyn was honorable and renowned both in Britayne and fraunce from, or before our first Christianitie as I haue proued Sebast. Manst. in Typ. orbis. Bilibald. pirckim. in Tob. nou. totius orb. in Claud. Prol. Ioan. Brun. commen. in Bened* 12. Patriarch. Anonym. ant* in vit. Apost. Auth. of the Booke of Estates in S. Tho. Grimston. p. 738. before. Both Catholick and protestant Antiquaries writing of China where diuers of the Apostles preached, thus testifie of the people there: They haue the picture of an exceeding fayre woman, holding a child in her armes, whereof they say hee was deliuered a virgin. And these nations though so remote had also the Images of the 12. Apostles, as these and other Authors thus deliuer vnto vs:
There bee certayne pictures of the fashion, and with the markes of the twelue Apostles, and being demaunded, what maner of men these twelue Apostles were, they answeare, they were greate Philosophers, which liued vertuously, and therefore they were made Angels in heauen. That God, which they doe the greatest honour vnto, they paint with a body, out of whose shoulders come three heades, which looke one vppon an other, which signifie, as they say that all three haue but one will. Which no ma^ can well doubt but that they are true memoryes, though afterward misunderstood in longe tract of tymc, of the holy Trinitie, and Christian Religion preached there by some of the Apostles, whose Images bee so longe honoured there, and that was the maner in that first Apostolicke Arnulf. and Adam. relat. de locis sanct. Beda libell. de loc. Sanctis. Euseb hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 17 tyme in all places. At Hierusalcm the Images of the 12. Apostles painted vppon the cloath made by our lady before remembred were honoured in the church in Ecclesia veneratur. For Greece, Eusebius is wittnesse that the Images of the Apostles namely of S. Peter and S. Paule were paynled as hee had seene them Apostolorum Imagines, Pauli videlicet and Petri in tabulis coloribus depictas asseruari vidimus. And the Apostles by them so honoured. Veteres adhunc modum honorare soliti fuerunt. Nicephor. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 16. l. 2. c. 43. Petr. de Nat. l. 9. c. 79.
The like or more amply hath Nichephorus and others affirming that S. Luke Euangelist painted their Images as diuers others. It is manifest in the historie of S. Syluester and Constantine, that not onely the Images of S. Peter and S. Paule which appeared vnto Constantine, but of the other Apostles were with reuerence kept, and preserued at Rome amonge so many persecutions.
I need not to proceed to more particular places and examples, when we haue both vnwritten and written tradition, that euen from the tyme of Nicephor. hist. l. 2. c 43. the Apostles, and Sainct Luke the Euangelist and others then makeinge and reuerently vseinge such sacred Images, the same art and vse was from thence deduced into all the world. Vnde in omnem d^inde habitabilem orbem tam venerandum and pretiosumopus est illatum. And this Christian manner and custome of makinge reuerencing and honouring
 holy Images in such sort as is before defined, by the generall Councels, and still vsed by Catholiks, so auntient from the begynninge of Christianitie, so generall in the whole Christian worlde was neuer disallowed or impugned by any man bearing the name of a Christian, vntill about the yeare of Christ 494. Xenaias a prophane, vnbaptized and Cedren. in compendio Hist. in Xenaia Persa. sacrilegeous Persian vsurping Ecclesiasticall orders, was the first which opposed against it, and therefore is stiled in histories to be a man of an audacious and impudent mouth and placed in the Nicephorus hist. Eccl. l. 16 c. 27. Synod. Nic. 2 Ench. haeres. in Xenaia. Baron. an. 485. 486. 487. Spond. ib. and alij. catalogue of damned Heretiks Xenaias primus, o audacem animum, os impudens, voeem illam euomuit, Christi and eorum qui illi placuere, Imagines venerandas non esse. The world hath scarcely seene a more desperate and wicked wretch, then antiquities describe this man to haue beene, and they which haue since followed, and follow hym at this tyme haue hardly hitherto gotten much better fame for their like proceedings, doing therein onely as Iewes, Turkes, Tartars, Pagans, and onely heretiks for that condemned among Christians haue done, and The Catholick doctrine and practise of reuerence to holy Relikes. at this tyme where they ouer rule.
The next exception of our Protestants in this Article Against the doctrine and practise of the Church of Rome and Catholiks, is to vse their words concerning their worshippinge an adoration of Reliques, termed by them as the others before, a fonde thinge, vainely inuented, and grounded vpon no warrantie of scripture, but rather repugnant to the worde of God.
The Councell of Trent for Catholiks thus defineth Conc. Trid. sess. 9. in this matter. Sanstorum Martyrum and aliorum cum Christo viuentium sancta corpora quae viua membra fucrunt Christi; and Templum Spiritus Sancti, a fidelibus
 veneranda esse. Affirinantes Sanctorum reliquijs venerationem atque honorem non deberi, vel eas aliaque sacra monumenta a fidelibus inutiliter honorari, omnino damnandos esse, prout iam pridem cos damnauit, and nuncetiani damnat Ecclesia. The bodyes of holy Martyrs and others that lyue with Christ are to be reuerenced. The Church doth now condemne, as longe agoe it hath condemned those which affirme that reliks of Sainsts, or that they and other sacred monuments ar vnprofitably honoured of the faithfull.
Now lett vs examine what was the doctrine and practise of the Apostles, and Apostolike men in this first age, in this question. Moses Bar-cepha a Syrian many hundreds of yeares since, and Iacobus Orrohaita before hym, and by hym cited, be wittnesses that the body and Reliks of the first man Adam a penitent and holy father after his fall, Moses Barcepha Syr. Episc. comm. de Paradis. part. 1. c. 14. Iacob. Arrohaita apud eund. ib. were honorably preserued by his posteritie, and in the time of the flood to keepe it from perishing No carryed it with him into the arke, and left it to his children. Noe arcam cum esset cum liberis suis conscensurus impendente diluuio, secum in eam intulisse ossa Adami, eaque deinde post diluuium arca egressum, suis distribuisse. And this was the manner and custome after the deludge vnto the time of Christ amonge the faithfull to preserue with honour and reuerence the bodyes and reliks of the holy Saincts of that Time. And as the scripture 4. Reg. c. 13. wittnesseth, of the deade body of Elisaeus restoring a mans deade body to life by touching his bones. Quod cum tetigit ossa Elisaei, reuixit homo and ste^it super pedes suos: So we haue vnquestionable authorities both of Scripture and Fathers, for the honour, and reuerence of the bodies and reliks of
 the rest of the Prophets, the Iewes themselues as the scripture testifieth adorning and reuerencing them. Aedificatis sepulchra Prophetarum, and ornatis Matth. 23. monumenta iustorum.
S. Epiphanius and other noble wittnesses proue, Epiph. l. de Prophet. vi^a and interitu. in Daniele. that Daniel the Prophet was buryed and reuerenced with greate honour, and his graue so continued renowned in his time. Humatus est magnis honoribus. Extat monumentum ipsius vsque ad hoc seculum nostrum in babylone cunctis notissimum. The body of Idem supr. in Ezechiele. Ezechiel was so likewise honoured, and had such concourse of people resorting one pilgrimage vnto it, to pray there and worship it, that the chaldaeans in whose contry it was, feared they would carry it away, and there vpon obserued and watched them. In terra Spyrorum vir pius ille sepultus iacet. Multique ad monumentum eius corfluunt ad precationem and obsequium, Sane quando tantae eo frequentia vna ad monumentum eius conueniunt, formidant chaldaei ac mutuunt, ne illum auferant, quapropter egredientem comitantur and deducunt.
The like they testifie of Micheas: est monumentum In Michea Prophet. in Abac. Proph. in Achia. in Aggaeo Reg. in ch^on an. 350. Hieron. l. aduers vigil. Theod. lect l. 2. N^c^phor. Eccl hist. l. 10. cap. 13. ipsius vsque ad hod^ernum tempus, nobilissimum. So of Abacuc: Magnis honoribus sepultus est. So of Achias: postremum honorem and monumentum sortitus est. Likewise of Aggaeus: prope Sacerdotes, cum honore and gloria conditus est. So of Samuel the Prophet preserued with greate honour and his reliks in the time of Arcadius the Emperour. he himselfe with a greate number of Bishops, which put his holy reliks in silke and a vessel of golde being praesent and translating them from Iury into Thracia with such pompe and honour, that the traine continued from palestina to Chalcedon. Omnes Episcopi in
 serico and vase a^reo portauerunt. Omnium Ecclesiaru^ populi occurrenunt sanctis reliquijs, and tanta laetiti^, quasi praesentem vinentemque Prophetam cernere^^, susceperunt: vt de palestina vsque Chalcedonem iungerentur populorum examina.
The reliks of the Patriarks were buryed and Michael Glycas parte 4. Annal. honoured with those of the Apostles in our Christian altars. Istic venerabiles Patriarcharum and Apostolorum reliquiae conditae. S. Ephrem relateth the Ephrem Syr. l. de Laudibus Ioseph. Patriarchae. greate honour and worship, which the holy Patriarke Ioseph, carryed prisoner away by the Ismalites, to whome his Brothers sold him, did to the graue and Reliks of Rachel his holy mother, with the lamentable prayer he made in that sacred place, truely translated in these words.

O Rachel, Rachel my mother behold Ioseph thy sonne whome thou hast loued, what is befallen vnto hym. Beholde he is ledd captyue as a Malefactour. O Rachel receaue thy sonne: O mother receaue me: o my mother heare the mourning and bitter scriking of my hart: my eyes can no longer sustayne teares, neither my life sufficeth, to such lamentations and groanings.

The honour which was due and done to her graue at her first buriall the scripture recordeth: Erexit Iacob titulum super sepulchrum eius: hic est titulus Gen. c. 35. Monumenti Rachel, vsque in praesentem diem. Thus it was honoured from the time of her death to the time of Moses so longe after. And with his allowance in holy scripture. Both the old and new testament with other holy writers vnder either lawe relate vnto vs the greate honour and reuerence were done euen to the figuratiue things of the lawe of Moses, the place of the Temple called holy of holyes Sancta Sanctorum whether none
 went but onely the high preist, and onely once in the yeare with sacrifice, the Arke of the Testament, not to bee touched but by sanctified persons.
The reliks which were in it, and made it more Hebr. c. 9. honorable were as S. Paul setteth them downe, a golden pitcher with Manna, the Rodd of Aaron, which had budded, and the Tables of the Testament, and aboue it the Cherubim and Images: in qua vrna aurea habens manna, and virga Aaron quae fronduerat, and tabulae Testamenti, superque eam erant Cherubim gloriae abumbrantia propitiatorium. And this holy place was there vpon called the propitiatorie or mercy seate or place of mercy, God often mercifully appearing, and shewing mercy there. Where these holy reliks were kept and honoured, Numer. c. 4. all the vessels of the Sanctuary were vayled with greate honour, none but the sonnes of Aaron might touch, or couer them, whosoeuer els touched them vntouerred, or did see them vnueyled, it was death: non tangant vasa Sanctuarij ne moriantur. Alij nulla curiositate videant quae sunt in Sanctuario priusquam inuoluantur, alioquin morientur.
The Apostoliks Fathers of this age did also vse Clem. Apost. const. l. 6. cap. 29. and approue this reuerence both in the Iewes and Christians, as also giue the reason thereof. S. Clement giueth this, because they are holy, and the soules of the bodyes honoured were with God. Eorum qui apud D^um viuunt, ne reliquiae quidem corporum sunt inhonoratae. Siquidem Elisaeus Propheta, postquam defunctus est, mortuum sus^itauit a piratis Syriae occisum: quod nunquam accidisset nisi Corpus Elisaei Sanctum esset. And alleadgeth to this purpose and sence that Ioseph embraced the deade body of his Father Iacob, and Moses and Iesus the sonne
 of Naue carryed with them the Reliks of Iosephs body. Castus Ioseph Patrem iam defunctum in lecto iacentem amplexus est: Item Moses and Iesus filius Naue Reliquas Corporis Ioseph ferebant. And persuadeth all Bishops and others to the like reuerence of such holy things. And deliuereth it so obserued of the Christians then euen going on pilgrimadge (as now it is termed) to visit and honour Reliks, and God miraculously approued it in the graues and Tombes of two holy Christian Saincts euery yeare miraculously without mans helpe whited and adorned quite ouer, and so pacified the Rage of persecutors towards their Reuerencers. Progressi Clem. l. 2. Recogn. essemus nos ad Sepulchra duorum fratrum quorumdam quae sponte sua, per annos singulos dealbabantur. Quo miraculo multorum aduersum nos repressus est furor, videntes haberi nostros in memoria apud Deum.
S. Dionysius the Areopagite setteth downe also Dion. Areop. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 12. this Christian vse and practise, and yeeldeth this reason, because the body was partaker of paines and labours, together with the soule, when they were in this life vnited together it is to be honoured with the soule in such respects. Si animo and corpore Deo gratam acceptamque vitam egit is qui decessit, in honore etiam and pretio erit cum sancto animo corpus, quod sacris sudoribus cum eo certauit and dimicauit.
The same S. Denys, S. Damascen, and others warra^ted by the receaued tradition of the Church, frome the Apostles time ex antiqua accepimus traditione, that all the Apostles, then liuing S. Denys, S. Tymothie first Bishop of Ephesus S. Hierotheus, and many others of Christs Disciples, at the death and assumption of the blessed Virgyn Mary, assembled together where shee ended this life at Hierusalem
 and Gethsemanie to visit and reuerence her Dionis. Areopagit. l. de diuin. nom. c. 3. and apud S. Ioa, Damasc. ser. 2. de dormitione Deiparae. Tradi^io Eccles^^ Bren. Rom 18. die Aug. d^e 4. inf. octau. assumpt. ^. Mariae. Dam. supr. and alij. holy body. Multi ex Sanctis fratribus nostris, corporis quod authorem vit ae Deumque recepisset videndi causa conuenissemus, ador at autem, and Iacobus frater Domini, and Petrus maximum antiquissimumque Theologorum columen.
The tradition of the Church plainely expoundeth their pilgrimage thither to worshippe that sacred body, corpus quod Deum susceperat adorare. And so then did. And an Angelicall vision was seene, and an heauenly harmony continued three dayes there. Visio apparuit Angelica, and audita est psa^nodia caelestium potestatum. Where wee see, that both the Apostles, and disciples of Christ liuing on earth, and the Angels in heauen gaue honour, and reuerence to this holy relike. Greate was the Matth. c. 14. Ruffin. l. 2. c. 28. Theod. l. 3. c 6. Niceph. l. 10. c. 13. l. 1. c. 19 Metaph. 29. August. honour and reuerence which the disciples of S. Iohn Baptist did vnto his holy body both as the Scripture and other writers witnesse, when nothing respecting the rage of his most potent persecutours, they honorably buried it, carrying it out of Herodes iurisdiction vnto Sebaste in Samaria to giue it due honour more freely: where also the reliks of Eliseas the Prophet were buried, and reuerenced, and so they continued in honour, vntill the time of Iulian the Apostata, when the Iewes and Gentiles maligning the greate honour the Christians did vnto them, tooke them out of their shrines, mixed the^ with the bones of beasts burned them together, and scattered their ashes into the ayre, which antiquities terme the greatest and horrible wickednesse. Illud omnium maxime indignum S^bastianae in Pal^stina est admissum. Ossa namque Elisaei Prophetae, and Ioannis Baptistae loculis suis extracta,
 and irrationalium animantium ossibus, o immanem audaeciam, mista atque ignitradita, in cineres redacta, atque in aerem disiecta sunt.
The auncient Fathers, and Antiquities say, that S. Iohn Baptist his disciples buried his body in a famous place, with greate reuerence; eum discipuli furtim sublatum, cum solemni veneratione in celebri Metaphrast. de exportat. man. San. Io. Bapt. extra Antiochiam. Gulielm. Eiseng. centen* 1. part. 5. dist. 7. Matth. westm. chron. an. 458. quodam apud Sebasten Pal^stinae sepeliere loco. Simon Metaphrastes and others write, that S. Luke the Euangelist with much difficulty, procured his right hand, and carried it to Antioch his natiue place, and from that time vntill Iulianus his persecution, it remained therein greate honour, doing many miracles. Ab illo tempore sita est manus illa apud Antiochiam in magno honor^ habita, and iugis quae in ea habitat gratiae fidem faciens miraculis, ad Iuliani Imperatoris vsque tempora.
The auncient learned French Bishop Gregorius Turonensis writeth, that a noble matrone of that contry brought with greate reuerence, part of the blood of that greate Martyr, Christ yet liuing vnto the City of Vaseus, where building a Church in his honour, shee placed it one the Altare. Concham Gregor. Tur. in lib. in glor. plur. Mar^yr. cap. 12. Mat. West. chronic. an. 458. argenteam praeparat, truncatique martyris cruoremin patriam detulit, and apud vasatensem vrbem aedificata in eius honore Ecclesia, in Sancto altari collocauit. His head though concealed and hidden by his wicked Murderesse, was yet after found and kept with greate honour. Such reuerence and deuotion was vsed to the reliks of the Apostles, and other Saints of this age.
All hystories are full of the greate honour done to the holy bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul at Rome. And their Tombes reuerenced as Trophies euen in
 this age presently vpon their deathes as most auncient Gaius Epist-ad Proclum. Euseb. lib. 2. hist. c. 25. writers are witnesses: Ego Apostolorum Trophaea ostendere possum. Etenim siad vaticanum, vel ad viam Ostiensem abire voles, Trophaea inuenies eorum, qui Ecclesiam hanc Romanam, fundarunt. And pilgrimadges were made thither to reuere^ce them, and the Reliks of other Martyrs there, from remote parts of the world, as Persia Afrike and others in the storming times of the first persecutions, and the pilgrims themselues, euen whole families all most, as S. Marius, and S. Martha his wife, with their two holy Sonnes S. Audifar and S. Abachum were Martyred for such holy deuotions. Marius Breuiar. Rom. die 19. Ianua. Martyrolog. Rom. and Bed. Martyrol. 19. Ianuar. Vsuar. die 20. Ianua. Sur. die 14. Febr. Martyr. Roman. 22. Nouemb. Vsuard. eod. die Bed. die 21. Greg. l. 3. ep. 30. ad Const. Aug Abdias. certam. Apostol. l. r. Marcell. Petri discipul. in vit. Petri Linus in past. Petri. Presbyter. and Diacon. Achaiae in Passion. S. Andreae Bed. and Ado prid. cal. Dec. Anton. part. 1. Petr. de Natal. l. 1. c. 8. Sur. and and lippel. die vlt. Nouemb. in S. Andrea. Greg. Turon. l. in glor. mart. cap. 30. Anton. part. 1. tit. 6. Doroth. Synop. Theodor. lect. l. 2. Bed. and. vsuar. Martyr. in S. Iacob. Anton. part. 1. Tit. 6. c. 7. Petr. de natal. l. 6 c. 133. Vincet. l. 8. c. 7. Mant. fast. l. 7. Martyrol. Rom. Callist. Pap. 2. ser. de translat. S. Iac Leo 3. de translat. eius Trithem l. de vir. Illustrib. Hieron. l de Script. Eccl. in Io Euang. Breuiar. Rom. 27. Decembr. Martyr. Rom. Bed. and Vsuar. ^od. die Men. Graec. 6. c^l. Octob. Celestin. Pap^ epist. ad Syn. Ephesin. Chrys. hom. in laudem 12. Apost and hom. 26. in Epist. Pauli ad Heb. Anonymus antiq. in vit. Apostolorum in Ioanne. persa, nobili loco natus, cum Martha coniuge pari nobilitate, and du^bus filijs Audiface and Abachum, Romam venerunt, vt Martyrum sepulchra venerarentur.
So likewise S. Maurus out of Afrik, ex Africa veniens ad Sepulchra Apostolorum. And the Christians in the easte from whence these greate Apostles came to Rome so much honoured them as the Christian Romans likewise did, that they would with greate honour to them, and daunger to themselues haue translated them from Rome into the east soone after their death, but that God miraculously decided the question for the Romans as S. Gregorie and other worthie Authours are witnesses. They were buried by the Christians with greate honour, and presently there was pilgrimadge, waching, praying and reuerence at their graues, as there now is, so much as the time of persecution would permitt.
The body of S. Andrew had the honour to be buryed with greate reuerence euen by Maximilla, wife to Aegeas the Proconsul of Achaia who put
 him to dearh. Sacratissimum illius corpus ins^g^^ pudicitia and sanctitate faemina Maximilla nomine S^natrix, suorum adiuta solatio cum omni reuerentia de cruce deposuit, conditumque aromatibus honorifice sepeliuit. And so it continued therein greate honou^ with much resort of pilgrymes vnto it vntill the quiet time of Constantine, when it was, as many others, translated to the Emperiall citie of Constantinople, some parte of it into Satland and some to Rome with exceeding glory and reuerence. For the body of S. Iames the greater, all antiquities at witnesse, how it was soone after his Martirdome at Hierusalem translated from them into Spayne where hee had preached, and there at Compostella preserued with greate honour, and frequented by deuoute pilgryms from all contryes to this day. S. Iacobus Apostolus Frater Beati Iohannis Euangelist^ ab Herode Aegryppa decollatus. Eius sacra ossa ab Hierosolymis ad Hispanias translata, and in vltimis earum finibus apud Galliciam recondita, celeberrima illarum gentium veneratione, and frequenti Christianorum concursu religionis and voti causa illuc adeuntium, pie coluntur.
I cannot speake of this honour to the body of S. Iohn the Apostle and Euangelist in this first age, which by common consent of writers he ouerliued. Dying in the second age: Sexagesimo octauo post Passionem Domini anno mortuus. But as I haue proued before of him with all other the Apostles, that he honoured the sacred bodie of the blessed Virgin, and ruling of the Churches of Asia after the Martirdome of the other Apostles, totas Asia fundauit rexitque Ecclesias, where diuers of the Apostles and other Saincts of this age were martired,
 and their bodies honoured, he ruling this Church that gaue such honour vnto them, must needs also giue allowance there vnto and after his death was at the place thereof honoured with greate concourse of pilgryms, that being one of the most frequented in all those parts of the world.
S. Chrysostome writheth that after his death he and his holy Tombe protected Ephesus, where it was, as he did when he liued. Post mortem tamquam vi^us Ephesum curat. For S. Thomas wee may omitte all others both old and late Antiquaries of other nations, and content our selues with our owne of this Kingdome so fare remote from the Indyes, where he was martired and his body after ward honoured with greate deuotion, testifying vpon knowne experience that the Christians of this nation went so longe and daungerous pilgrimages from hence to visit and reuerence his holy body, and make oblations there. Thus did our best and noblest kings, So our renowned Bishops, with others. So write our renowned Historians Florentius wigorniensis, William of Malmesbury Flor. Wigorn. Chron. an 883. Guliel. Malmesbur. l. de gest. Reg. Roger. Houeden part. 1. Mat. Westm. chron. an. 883. Godwin. Cataloge. of BishoPs in Salesbury 11. an. 883. Roger houeden, and others, our Protestant Antiquaries themselues confessing and confirming it. They exemplifie in our most triumphant and holy king S. Edgar Sigelin or Suithelmus Bishop of Shyrburne, and their retinnes.

Edgarus trans mare Romam, and ad sanctum Thomam in Indiam multa munera misit. Legatus in hoc missus Sigelimus Scireburnensis Episcopus eum magna prosperitate, quod quiuis hoc saculo miretur, Indiam penetrauit. Our Protesta^t Antiquaries say Swithelm or Sigelm trauelled into India to the place of S. Thomas his Buriall, carried thither the almes or offering of King

Alfred, and brought home many pretious stons of greate
Flor. wigorn. supr. an. 883. Henric. Hunting. h^st. l. 5. Mar^yrolog. Rom. Bed. Vsuard. Ado and alij 3. die Iulij.
pryce. Florentius hath the very same of king alfred.

Our Martyrologes and Antiquities sett downe the translation of part of his body out of India to Edessa in Mesopotamia on the third day of Iuly. Edessae in Mesopotamia Transtatio S. Thomae Apostoli ex India: cuius reliquiae Ortonam postea translatae sunt.
And Ruffinus Socrates Sozomen and others are auncient witnesses, that the Reliks of S. Thomas Ruffin hist. Eccl l 2. c. 5 Socrat. hist. Eccl l 4. c. 14 Sozom. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 18. were honoured therein a noble Church dedicated to him. Edessa Mesopotamiae Vrbs fidelium populorum est Thomae Apostoli Reliquijs decorata. In ea Ciuitate egregium and magnificum Templum est diuo Thoms Apostolo dicatum, crebraque hominum multitudo eo propter loci sanctitatem consluit. So that wheresoeuer in places neuer so distant, Reliks of his body were from the time of his martirdome, wee see them preserued and honoured with greate deuotion.
Like was the cause of S. Iames Bishop of Hierusalem, Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccl. in Iacobo. Breu. Rom. 1. die Maij in S. Iacobo. Epiph. h^r. 78. Egesipp. l de exnid. Hierosol. Euseb. hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap 22. Euseb. hist. Eccl l 7. c 18. in this kind, his Sanctitie was such, whilest he lyued, that people in multitudes contended to touch the hemme of his garment, tanta erat Iacobi vitae Sanctitas, vt fimbriam vestimenti eius certatim homines cuperent attingere; And being martired, he was with greate honour buryed by the Temple in a piller still standing in the time of Egesippus, and Eusebius after him as they are witnesses: Columns eius iuxta Templum adhuc manet, Wee may gather what honour was vsed to his sacred body, if wee consider the greate reuerence was performed to his very chayre wherein he had sit cloathed, being prescrued and honoured from his death: Sedem Iacobi. Apostoli ad hoc vsque temporis seruatam, fratres ^sti^ qui successione ordinaria subsecuti sunt, omnibus
 manifeste monstrant, sicut circa sanctos viros, pietatis gratia, cum veteres tum and praesentes competeutem honorem seruarunt, and hodie qnoque seruant. Thus hath Eusebius.
So Theodosius Bishop of Hierusalem witnesseth Theod. Episc. Hier. epist. ad S. Ignat. Syn. 8. act. 1. Breu. Rom. 1. die Maij martyrol. Rom. Bed. Vsuar. cod. die Menol. Graec. 13. cal. Iul. Nice. l. 2. hist. c. 39. Continuat. Sigeb an. 1157 Sigeb. chron. an. 489. Mat. westm. chron. an. 479. 831. Abdias certa^ Apost. lib. 8. Petr. de Nat. l. 7 c. 103 Anton. part. 1. tit. 6 c. 12. Guliel. Eisengr. cent. 1 part. 5. dist 7. Martyrol. Rom. die 25. Aug. Bed. Vsuard Ado and alij die 24. Aug. Nicephorus hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 41. of his stole, which he sent to S. Ignatius Patriarke of Constantinople for an holy Relike with others. His body was honorably preserued by the Christians, and after with greate reuerence translated to Rome, where it is buried with the body of S. Philip the Apostle martired at Hierapolis in Phrygia, and honorably there first buryed by S. Bartholomew the Apostle with other Christians, as Nicephorus with others witnesse, Bartholomeus Philippi sepulturae honore praestito, and vrbe totaillussrata, was there prescrued with honour, vntill the the honourable translation there of, and now honoured at Rome with the body of S. Iames in one Church, as the Church of Christ honoureth them with one festiuall day.
The body of the same Apostle S. Bartholomew was so likewise honoured. First immediately after his martirdome, king Polymius and the Christians of 12. cities buried his body with greate glory. 12. Ciuitatum populi qui per eum crediderant vna cum Rege Polymi abstulerunt cum hymnis, and cum omni gloria corpus eius. And when it was afterward translated, it was worshipped in all places, with as greate honour and reuerence eius sacrum corpus primo ad liparam Insulam, deinde Beneuentum postremo Romam ad Insulam Tiberinam translatum, ibipia fidelium veneratione honoratur.
Nicephorus writeth that the body of S. Matthew Martired in Aethiopia, was praesently layd on
 a bedde of gold, wrapped in pretious cloathes, and so placed in the Princes palace. Cuius sacrum tabernaculum in aureo repositum lecto, splendidisque inuolutum Martyr. Rom. die 6. Maij Greg. 7. epist. ad Alfanum Episc. Salerni. Leo Ostien. in chron. Casin. l. 3. c. 44. Anonym. ant. in vit. Apost. in S. Symone and Iuda. Abd. cer^a^ Apost. l 4 Anton. part. 1. titul. 6. cap. 14. Petr. de Nat. l 9. c. 115. Ado Treuer. Bed. and Vsuard 5. Calend. Nou. Rom. Mart. 24. Febr. Ant. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 15. Petr. de Natal. l. 3. cap. 149. Anton. supr. Annal. Eccl. Treuer. Sur. and Lippol. die 24 Febr. Petr. Merss. Catal Episc. Treuer. Iust. Martyr quaest. 28 Doroth. in Synopsi. S. Io. Damasc. h^st Barlaam c. 12 and al^^. vestibus, palatio Fuluianus infert. It was afterward with greate honour translated into diuers nations, and buried after with much glory at Salernum. Salerni translatio S. Matthaei Apostoli, cuius sacrum corpus olim ex Aethiopia ad diuersas regiones: and demum ad eam vrbem delatum, ibidem in Ecclesia eius nomine dedicata summo honore conditum fuit. Wee finde that S. Simon and Iude being martyred in Persia, King Zerses, or Xerxes confiscating the Pagan Priests goods which put them to death, did with greate honour within three moneths translate their bodies into his City. Rex Zerses confiscauit omnes Pontifices, corpora autem Sanctorum Apostolorum Symonis and Iud^ ingenti honore ad suam translulit ciuitatem. He erected a most sumptuous Church vnto them, there burying their bodies in a syluer shrine. Sarcophagum corpora beatorum Apostolorum portantem ex argento puro instituit.
S. Matthias chosen in the place of Iudas was martyred in Iury, his body was preserued with greate care and reuerence, and in after times honorably translated to Rome, and Treues in Germany, and there visited with greate deuotion. And not onely the holy bodies of the Apostles, and other Saincts in this age were thus honoured and reuerenced of the Christians, but their cloathes and whatsoeuer touched their sacred bodies as the auncient learned Fathers and Saincts which also were worshippers of them with the whole Christian Catholike world are witnesses. Apostolorum virtus vsque adeo emi^uit, vt in omnem terram eorum sonus
 exierit. Horum non verba duntaxat, and opera, sed ipse quoque cruor, and ossa omni sanctitate plena sunt. Daemones namque in fugam vertunt, atque ijs, qui cum fide accedunt, incurabiles alioqui morbos profligant. Quin vestes quoque ipsae, and si quid aliud ad pretiosa eorum corpora proprius accessit, omnibus venerationi sunt.
Thus were the chaines of S. Peter both those Bren. Rom. 1 die Aug. Martyr Rom. Beda. Vsuard. Ado eod. die. Menol. Graec. 17. cal. Frebr. Greg epist. l. 1. epist. 6. lib. 6. epist. 23. Aug. Serm. 29. de Sanctis Arator l. 1. in act. Chrysostom. apud Metaph. Breu. Rom. in octau. SS. Apost. Petri and Pauli. die 6. Iulij. wherewith he was chained vnder Herod, at Hierusalem, adorned with gold, and pretious stones, auro ge^misque ornata, and wherewith he was chained at Rome vnder Nero, his chaire and other such reliks of him were honoured by the greatest and holiest Christians. So haue the Latine, so the Greeke antiquities. Veneratio praetiosae cathenae qua beatus Apostolus Petrus, Christi causa Herodis iussu vinctus est.
So were the nayles with which S. Peter was nayled to his crosse honoured by the holy Fathers: beati claui qui sancta illa membra penetrarunt. S. Chrysostome expresseth how they and the sword wherewith S. Paul was be headed had euer beene honoured, when he wished that sword for his crowne, and S. Peters nayles to be set as pretious stones in his diademe. Sit mihi gladius ille pro corona, and claui Petri pro gemmis infixis in diademate.
The garment of the blessed Virgin Mary was Io. Zonoras in Leone. Mag. Matth. West. chron. an. 910 Zonor. de Imperio Rom. pueri. accompted pretious, preserued with honour in a siluer chest, translated with great reuerence, in arge^teo loculo, and the very house wherein it was kept and reuerenced, there vpon called the holy Chest: quae aedes ex co sacer loculus appellatur. Part of the garment of S. Iohn Baptist was so kept, and reuerenced: Venerabilis vestis Ioannis Baptistae, as likewise
 part of his hayre clotered with blood. Parte^ Beda Arcuulfus and alij de locis Sanctis. capillorum eiusdem sanguine concretam.
The cloath made by our lady with the pictures of Christ and his Apostles was honoured at Hierusalem. In Ecclesia vencratur. There is no end in antiquities in such holy reuerence. And not onely of the Reliks of our Lady, S. Iohn Baptist, and The first Christians in Britaine did Professe and practise this doctrine. the Apostles, but of all other holy Martirs, and Saincts of this age, S. Stephen, S. Luke, S. Marke, the three Princes of the East, that offered to our Sauiour new borne, S. Timothie, S. Lazarus, S. Mary Magdalen, S. Martha and others holy men and women to many to be recited.
And this Kingdome of Britaine was as forward as any other in this kinde of worship as their renowned Bishop and Antiquaty relateth of his Britans. Praeomni peregrino labore, Romam peregre Girald. C^br. descr. Cambr. c. 18. libentius eundo, deuotis mentibus Apostolorum limina propensius adorant. Sanctorum reliquijs deuotam reuerentiam exhibere, longeque magis quam vllam gentem honorcm deferre videmus. And this he writeth of them from their first conuersion, which was in this age. And doth so accordingly intitle that Chapter: De antiquafidei fundatione, christianit at is amore and deuotione.
Pope Bonifacius in an Epistle to King Edward Bonifacius Pap. epist. ad Rege^ Eduard. The Walsingham hist. Angl. in Eduard. 1. the first, testifieth, that the Further part of Britayne now named Scotland was conuerted by the holy Reliks of S. Peter the Apostle. Regnum Scotraeper Beati Petri Apostoli vonerandas Reliquias non finc superni dono muneris conuersum extitit ad ^idei Catholicae vnitatem. S. Ioseph of Aramathia coming hither by all assent, both of Protestant and Catholike Antiquaries, with his Religious company,
 was present with the Apostles at the death six: Io: Capgrau. in S. Ioseph Aramathie^. and Assumption of our blessed lady, and so honoured her sacred body with them, spoken of before, and brought with him hither, and preserued here with greate reuerence all his life two little syluer vessels full of the bloody sweate of Christ, duo vasc^la alba argentea cruore Prophetae Iesu, and sudore perimpleta.
All histories agree that the body of S. Ioseph was there preserued with greate honour, and reuerenced with greate resorte of pilgryms to that, and other Reliks there vntill these times of desolation, and those holy Reliks gaue that glorious denomination to the happy place of their preseruing to be stiled camiterium Sanctum, tumulus Sanctorum, Hieronyn. cont vigilant. and ep. 53. ad Riparium, and Defider Gennad. in catalog. cap. 53. willet Antilog pag 13. Wotton des. of part. pag. 9. perkins probl. pag. 81. Iouas A^elian. l. 1. Sedul. and alij. Hieronym. sup. and Ripar. and dehderium. lib. aduers. v^gilant. cap. 2. the holy Church-yard, graue of Saincts, and the like. Vigilantius is remembred in histories to haue beene the first man of note among Christians which denied or impugned this doctrine, and for that, as other his singular assertions condemned for an heretik, so our Protestants thus confesse: Vigilantius was condemned of heresie for deny all thereof. He lyued in the fourth hundred of yeares the Church of Christ neuer hearing of this heresie before; and S. Hierome then liuing and writing calleth him for such stramage dreames, rather Dormitantius, a sleepy drowsy fellowe, then Vigilantius, a waking watchfull ma^. Negat sepulchra veneranda, damnat que Sanctorum vigilias. Ex quo sit, vt dormitantius potius, quam vigilantius, vocari debeat. He calleth him an vnhappy man to be bewayled with floods of teares, a stinking mouth breather of most silthy rotonnesse, a monster to be abandoned to the vthermost part of the world. Os saetidum putorem spurcissimum
 proferens. Portentum in terras vltimas deportandum.
The last exception which our Protestants in this Inuocation and honour of Saincts. Article make against the doctrine of the Church of Rome, is thus registred by them. The Romish doctrine concerning inuoation of Saincts, is a fonde thing, vainely inuented, and grounded vpon no warrantie of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the worde of God. This is confuted by that is said before of the holy Reliks and Images of Saincts: For if they, as is inuincibly proued by the doctrine and practise of this age, may and ought to be reuerenced, their happy and blessed soules, and Angels in eternall Ioye and blisse must needs challe^dge such dutie from them that liue, and prayers may be offered to such perfected in celestiall knowledge, charitie and Concil. gangren. epist. and can. 14. 15. 16. Socrat* Histor. l. 2. cap. 33. Sozom. Histor. Eccl. l. 3 cap. 13. Epiphan. Hier. 40. Nicephor. Hist. l. 9. cap. 16. Hieron. contra vigilant. neuer chaunging blessednes.
The first among Christians suspected to haue denyed this Catholike doctrine and practise of the church of Christ was Eustachius by some Eutactus a Bishop in Armenia disallowing the Churches of Martyrs loca Sanctorum martyrum vel Basilicas, as he is charged in the councell of Gangra wherein he was condemned for that, and other wicked assertions, and by other antiquities. Yet Sozomen, Nicephorus and others write, how he sought to cleare himselfe from accusations. And to speake of certaine things, Vigilantius was the first knowne and certainely proued impugner of the Inuocation of Saincts, as of worship to their reliks before spoaken of, and was condemned for such a monster as is already declared. And Eustachius for Socrat. Supr l 2. cap. 33. his singular boldnes in such things was degraded, and his errours co^demned in publik Councel. Concilium Gangris in Paphlagonia coa^lum, gradu Episcopali
 dimouit, eiusque dogmata anathemate damnauit. Morton Apolog. part. 1. pag. 227. 228. Perk. probl. pag. 89. 93 Ormer pict. pap. pag. 26. 27. Middlet. papista. pag. 129. Ephrem Syrus lib. de laudibus Ioseph Patriarchae.
This is sufficiently proued by our Protestant writers themselues, openly confessing; all antiquitie taught Inuocation of saincts. Therefore few testimonies of this first age will be needfull in a confessed doctrine, and practise of all ages with faithfull people. Lesse was the knowledge of the Saincts deceased before the Passion of Christ, then after, when they were by that happy redemption in glory. And yet S. Ephrem produceth the holy Patriarke Ioseph praying to his mother Rachel deceased. O Rachel, Rachel mater mea, exurge de pul^ere, and intuere Ioseph filium tuum. Suscipe Rachel filium tuum. Audi mater mea cordis mei gemitum, amarumque ^iulatum.
S. Ignatius in this age, is a worthie witnesse, that not onely the liuing, which were present at the Ignatius epist. ad Trallianos. Passion of Christ, did know, behold and see it, but the Angels in heaue^ and the soules of the^ that were vnder the earth, which arose with their bod^es at the Resurrection of Christ, did likewise the same. Crueifixus and mortuus est, videntibus coelestibus, terrenis, and ijs qui subterra detinebantur: caelestibus quidem inspicientibus, nimirum incorporeis naturis: terrenis vero, vt Iudaeis and Romanis, and caeteris qui tunc temporis Crucifixo Domino aderant: subterraneis autem ijs videlicet, qui plurimi cum Domino resurrexerunt.
If a man on earth and in body, might, though Igna^. epist. ad Trallian. extraordinarily, know the Angels and spirituall things, with their orders in heauen, as S. Ignatius witnesseth of himselfe, haec no^e^im, much more do they know the things on earth. Angelicos ordines, Archangelorum, militiarumque coelestium discrimina,
 virtutum dominationumque differentias, thronorum, potestatumque distantias, principatum magnificentias, Cherubim Seraphimque excellentias, spiritus sublimitatem, and Domini Regnum, and incomparabilem Dei Patris Omnipotentis diuinitatem. Haec cum nouerim.
And he plainely teacheth in an other place, that Ignat. epist. ad Heronem. the Angels in heauen, and not onely God know our affaires on earth and haue regard of them, and so witnesseth to S. Hieron. Praecipio tibi coram Deo, qui est super omnia, and coram Christo praesente, and Spiritu Sancto, and coram ministrantibus legionibus, 1. Timoth. 5. custodi depositum meum. So S. Paule the Apostle wrote to S. Timothie: Testor coram Deo and Christo Iesu and electis Angelis vt haec custodias. Where both the Apostle and S. Ignatius acknowledge both knowledge and care of mens actions on earth to be in the holy Angels, as in God himselfe, though with a difference of the Creatour, and excellent creatures. S. Hierotheus Master of S. Denis the Areopagite, as he termeth him testifieth and hee approueth it that all loue not onely of God, but Angels also hath this nature that Superiour things Dionisi Areopag. l. diu. nom. cap. 4. haue care of the inferiour, and those conforme themselues to the Superiour. Amorem siue diuinum, siue angelicum, siue spiritualem, siue (vt ita dicam) animalem, fiue naturalem vim quandam coniungentem miscentemque intelligamus, quae superiora quidem impellit, vt inferioribus prospiciant vt consulant, paria autem, vt inter se societate iungantur, inferiora vero, vt se conuertant Dionys. l. caelest. Hier^^^h. cap. 9. ad superiora.
And the same S. Denis saith plainely, both that the Angels are Rulers of nations euen all nations, Angeli vnicuique nationi praefecti. And that God hath co^mitted all men to his Angels, for their Saluation,
 and this is the prouidence of God. Vna quidem de omnibus altissimi prouidentia omnes homines cap. 3. patr. 3. ante med. salutis causa Angelis suis ad se deducendos distribuerit. And he plainely saith that the prayers of holy people and Saincts both in this world and in heauen are profitable to them which be worthie of them. Iustorum etiam in hac vita, ne dum post mortem, ijs dum^axat prosint, qui sacris precibus dignisint, vere oraculorum traditiones nos edocent.
S. Clement is also witnesse, and citeth it from S. Peter the Apostle his mouth, that the Angels Clem. Rom. l. 2. Recognit. haue the care and custody of men, and euery nation hath an Angel to whome it is committed by God. Est enim vniuscuiusque gentis Angelus, cui credita est gentis ipsius dispensatio a Deo. And proueth that not onely God the holy Trinity* but all Saincts and l. 8. Constitur. Apostolic. cap. 11. administring Angels do so and behold our Actions on earth, and exemplifieth in the election of Bishops. Coram Iudice Deo and Christo, praesente etiam Spiritu sancto, atque omnibus Sanctis, and administratorijs l. ^. cap 8. edit. Turr. Graec. etc. 7. Latin. l. 8. c. 33 spiritibus. And co^maundeth to honour Saints and Martirs. De Martiribus praecipimus vobis, vt in omni honore sint apud vos. And prescribeth diuers of their festiuities to be kept holy, with honour.
The short historie of S. Paule ascribed to S. Linus Successour to S. Peter, who by all Antiquitie wrote the Martyrdome of S. Paule, doth testifie in the name of S. Plantilla, who ministred to S. Paule, and was present at his death, that this glorious Apostle soone after his martyrdome appeared to that holy woman in glory, with an Innumerable company of heauenly creatures innumerabilium candidatorum S. Linus h^st. S. Paul^. caterua comitatus, and sayd vnto her, that as shee had done holy offices to him on earth, so he in
 heauen would remember her and shortly returne to bring her thither, and there shew her the glory of God. Which was soone after performed at her Martyrdome. Tu mihi Plautilla in terris absequium prestitisti, ego tibi quam primum ad Regna pergenti officiofissime obsequar, in proximo namque pro tereuer^ar, and tibi Regis inuicti gloriam demonstrabo.
This is proued by the auncient Masses ascribed to the holy Apostles, in which there is expresse prayer, not onely to God to be assisted and helped by the prayers of the blessed Virgin Mary, and other Saincts, libera nos qu^ f^in^s Domine, ab omni Missa S. Petri Marci, Iacobi Minor. Mat. Missa S. Iacobi Maioris. malo prasente acfuturo, intercessionibus Iminacul^^ and Gloriosae Dominae nostrae Deiparae, Semper que Virginis Mariae. But to the very Saincts themselues commemorationem agamus Sanctissima, Immaculata Gloriosissimae, benedictae Dominae nostrae Matris Dei and semper Virginis Mariae, atque omnium Sanctorum and Iustorum, vt precibus and intercessionibus corum omnes misericordiam consequamur. It is manifest in histories, that in all places, where Christ was preached, Marti^l. epist. ad Burdegal. c. 3. Petr. de Nat. lib. 6. c. 151. Vinc. l 9. c. 99 and feq. Ant. part. 1. Titul. 6. c 20. Petr. Masseus in Cat. Episcop. Colon. Annal. Colonien. Annal. Tungren in S. Materno. Annal. Treu. Churches, and Altars were founded and dedicated in honour of Saincts which dyed in this age. And they ther ly and are honoured. S. Martial then liuing and writing so testifieth of S. Stephen. S. Martha with allowance of S. Maximus Bishop there builded a Church in honour of the blessed Virgin Mary betwene A^les and Auinion. S. Maternus sent into Germany by S. Peter founded a Church at Bonna in honour of S. Iohn Baptist, and an other at Cole^ in honour of S. Mathias the Apostle. And an other at Tungers in honour of the blessed Virgin. S. Eucharius an other of S. Peters disciples in this time dedicated a Church at Tre^er^
 honour of S. Iohn the Euangelist. S. Saui^^^^^ sent by S. Peter into France, builded there (...) Churches, one in honour of the blessed Vir^in Mary, a second in honour of S. Iohn Baptist, ^he third in honour of S. Stephen: constructis tribus ^cclesijs in honorem Virginis Mariae, Iohannis Baptistae and S. S^eph^ni. And S. Altinus one in honour of our ^ady. The Churches which were thus founded and The first Christian Britans thus professed, and practised. de^i^^ted to Saincts in this age in histories; are too (...) to recite, confessed to be so in all places hathby Catholik and Protestant Antiquaries. So it was here in Britayne as the first knowne Church thereof at Glastenbury witnesseth ere^^^^ and dedicated to our blessed lady both by ^e^u^^ly and earthly warrant. The Angel of God so directed S. Ioseph and his holy company: And to make euident to all, that to dedicate Churches then to the honour of Saincts, was in them to honour Saincts and pray vnto them, and by them to be protected, it is so proued of hese our primatiue founders in Religion; of this first age, that they prayed vnto the blessed Virgin and honoured her, and Antiquitat. glast. manuscript. Tabul. ligneis fix. Gal. Malmesb. l. de antiquit. Caenobij glaston M. S. Capgran. catal. in 6. Ioseph S. Patric in episto! H^storia apud S. Edmundum. she protected them, as the most auncient monuments of that place and other Antiquities clearely proue: praedieti Sancti in eodem deserti conuer santes per Archangelum Gabri^lem in visione admoniti sunt, Ecclesiam in honore Sanctae Dei Genitricis and perpetuae Virginis Maria caelitus demonstrato construere, duod^cim igitur Sancti in eodem loco Deo and Beatae Virgini deuota exbibentes obsequia, vigilijs, Ieiunijs and orationibus vacantes; eiusdem Virginis Dei Genitricis auxilio in necessit atibus suis refocillabantur.
These antiquities say this was the first Church which the Christians builded in this country, and
 it was a greate honour vnto it to be dedicated b^ Christ to his mothers honour. Et cumhaec Eccles^ in hat Regione prima fuit, ampliori cum dig^i^ate D^ filius insigni^it, ipsum videlice^ in honore s^ae (...) dedicando. All agree that this Church was builde^ by S. Ioseph, and his Associats.
And yet the same antiquities, and other Historians, euen Protestants who alleadge, the Authoritie of S. Augustine termed the Apostle of the English nation, to the same purpose are witnesse^ that there was a Church miraculously builde^ before S. Ioseph and his holy companians ca^^ hither, and here founded by them wholly finished Antiquitat. glast. tabulis fix. sup. S. Augustinus in Ecclesia S. Edmundi. Matth. parker. An^iquit. Britan. c. 2. p. 3. edit. Hanouiae an. 1605. and perfected, dedicated also to the blessed. Virgi^ Many. Primi Catholicae legis Neophyta antiqua^ De^ dictante repererunt Ecclesiam, nulla hominion arte, v^ referunt constructam, immo ^umanae saluti a Deo p^^atam, quam postmodum ipse caelorum fabricator m^ltis mir^culorum gestis, multisque virtutum mysterij^, (...) Sanctaeque Dei Genitr^ci Mariae se consecrasse monstrauit. This was in the ^1. yeare after the Passion of Christ, and after the assumption of our lady 15. Anno post Passionem Domini 31. post Assumptio^e^ Gloriosa Virginis 15. When few other Saincts in the lawe of Christ were deceased this life, and then in heauen. Thus were our Two first Churches dedicated here by greatest warrant to the honour of the blessed Virgin Mary Mother of God, where shee assisted and protected her Suppliant Seruants and petitioners there, And S. Bede with all Antiquaries, Catholiks and Protestants consenteth, that the Britans kept their first faith inuiolate and whole vntill the cruell persecution of Dioclesian: Bed. histor. Eccl Angl. l. 1. cap. 4. susceptam fidem Britanni vsque in tempora Dioclesia^
 (...) inuiolatam integramque quieta in pace serua^^^: And when this Kingdom was generally, ^^^^erted, which happend in the succeding age all ^^^ Temples before founded to false Gods were by common and greatest authoritie in all opinions, (...) now whatsoeuer, of the holy pope S. Eleu^^^^i^s his legats, and our holy kinge S. Lu^^us, c^^^nged into Christian Churches, dedicated to God and his Saincts. Templa quae in honore plurimo^^^ Galfrid. histor. Briton. l. 4. c. 19. Matth. west. an. 185. Deorum fundata fuerant, vni Deo, eiusque San^^^^ dedicanerunt. So they dedicated Churches to ^^^ holy Angels namely S. Michael the Archangel, ^^^oured and prayed vnto him and he protected Antiquitat. glaston. manuscript. epistol. S. Patricij Capgr. catal. in S. Patric. and Ioseph. Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 7. Matth. westin. An. 303. Manuscript. Antiq. Iacob. gemen. in vit. S. Amphibali Cap grau. in eod. and in S. Alban. Gradual. antiq. and miss. Sarisb. in festo S. Albani. litan. Angl. antiq. ante bapt. and commend. anim^. ^^em.
Phaganus and Damianus Oratorium aedificauerunt in honore S. Michaelis Archangeli quatenus ibi ab hominib^^ haberet honorem qui homines in perpetuos honores i^^ente Deo est introducturus. So they prayed vnto the Saincts as is euident in the Examples of Sainct Heraclius our Martyr at the death of our fist Martyr S. Alban praying to him and heard, and helped by him. And S. Amphibalus that conuerted Saint Alban, thus prayed vnto him, both to be assisted by him and the holy Angels. Sancte Albane Deum nostrum depreceris, vt mihi Angelum bonum obuiam mittat, ne mihi praedo truculentus obsistere, nec Iter meum pars iniqua valeat impedire. So it was in all after times which I am not to speake of in this place, but thus may end this tedious and confused Article stuffed with so many fulshoods, and aunciently condemned heresies. I may be more breife in the rest of their followeing Articles, not conteyning so many particulars.



THE IX. CHAPTER.
The 23. article examined.
THeir next Article, the 23. in number, is this ^ is not lawfull for any man to take vpon him, ^^ office of publik preaching or ministring the Sacrame^^ in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called, ^^ sent to execute the same. And those wee ought to Iudg^ lawfully called and sent, which be thosen and called ^ this worke by men who haue publik authoritie giu^ vnto them in the Congregation, to call and send mi^^sters in the Lords vineyard. This is the whole Article wherein there is no controuersie with, or again^ the Church of Rome neuer allowing any fo^ Preists or publike ministers of the holy Sacraments but such as are duely and truely consecrate^ in the Sacrament of holy orders, onely ministre^ by lawfully and Canonically Sacred Bishops, a^ the doctryne and practise of this Apostolike ag^ was, as I haue proued before and S. Ignatius wit^ S. Ignatius epist. ad Smyrnen: others thus proue vnto vs: Non licet sine Episcop^ baptizare neque offerre, neque sacrificium immol^^^, neque Dochen celebrare, sed quodcumque illi vis^^ fuerit secundum beneplacitum Dei, vt tutum and ra^^^sit, saci at is. No Sacrament could be ministred, nothing done in the Church without the Bishop^ authoritie, and approbation. No man could be ^ Preist, minister Sacraments, or exercise any Ecclesiasticall order, or function, but onely such as wer^ Epistol. ad Heron. consecrated thereunto by lawfull Bishops. Nih^^sine Episcopis facito, baptizant, sacrificant, elig^^^* manus imponunt. And these Protestants themselue^
 both in their Booke of their pretended consecration Protest. Booke of consecrat. pref. and per tot. artic. 36. infra. prot. glosse vpon the same. canons, Iniunctious etc. and their 36. Article hereafter, intituled, of Consecration of Bishops, and Ministers, as also their publik glosse therevpon, and common practise do thus testifie: The Superioritie and authoritie which Bishops and Archbishops do exercise in ordering ^^d consecrating of Bishops and Ecclesiasticall ministers, i^ grounded vpon the word of God. From the Apostles d^^es hither to there neuer wanted a Succession of Bis^ops neither in the East, nor westerne Churches. And from the first nursing of their Religion here in England, they euer by their publik proceedings allowed that consecration, which was in the Romane Church, and most willingly without any addition or ceremony allowed such as were so consecrated to be Preists, Ministers, and Ecclesiasticall men among them, if they would in wordly respects, and in externall shew giue any allowance to their Religion. And at this day they contend to deriue their owne pretended Bishops and Ministers by Consecration from our Catholik Roman Bishops.
This Article as their glosse expoundeth it, seemeth to haue beene made agaynst the Mancerians, Them: Rogers Analis. vpon the b. of Articles, art. 23. allowed by the lawf. authoritie of the Church of Engl. Anabaptists, family of loue, and such others risen vp in their Protesta^t Schoole denying externall Ordination, and calling of cleargie men. But being well examined, it doth both free the Roman Church, as is proued and they confesse, and condemneth all Protestants in the world. First for forreyne Protestants none of them take or clayme ordination true or pretended, from eyther true or pretended Bishops, and so by that is already saide, are vtterly condemned by this Article. And for our English
 Protestants which pretended a calling, and ordination by Bishops, they are in the same case by their owne decree in this Article, for therein they say that men lawfully called, and sent, be onely they, which be chosen and called by men who haue publike authoritie giuen vnto them in the congregation (Churche they meane) to call and send ministers in the Lords vineyard: But I haue proued before, in particular, and euery of their Articles more then halfe of them in order without excepting any one inuincibly confuted proue the same, that these men art no part, parcell or congregation of the true Church of Christ, and so no men among them can pretend to haue authoritie, publike, or other to send Ministers in the Lords vineyard being themselues no members or parsons, commaundeing or to be commaunded, consecrating or to be co^secrated therein, much lesse to haue such publike authoritie in it, as this Article appointeth for this busines. Secondly there were no men amonge them at the makinge of these Articles, nor at the birth of thir Religion here in the first yeare of Queene Elizabeth, which had or possibly in their proceedings could haue any such publik authoritie, to call and send Mininisters in the Lords vineyard. For their whole congregation consisted of a woman Queene Elizabeth, their pretended cleargie, and others confessed meerely temporall men.
Lette vs take all these eyther ioyntly togeather as in parlament, or by themselues seuerally, and no such publik authoritie will be founde in them. The Queene a woman by Sexe was neyther men, nor man haueing such authoritie, and their 37. Article denyeth any such prower in her, eyther
 (...) ^^^selfe or others. All their pretended Bishops ^^^re by all Consistories Ecclesiasticall and Tempo^^ll euen the parlament, and Iudgements in the Temporall lawe, adiudged to haue no such autho^i^ie.
The first parlament of Q. Elizabeth which re^iued Stow hist. in Q. Mary an. 1. and an. 1. of Q. Elizabeth. Parker. Ant. Brit. in Tho. Cranmar. Godwin. Catal. of Bish. solpe. Hollin. hist. of Engl. in Q. Mary Statutes of Q* Eliz. K. Iames and K. Charles make Preisthood treason. their Religion, had not one true or pretended Bishop that had voyce in parlament that cons^nted vnto it, but all the Bishops which had, and o^ely had, such publik authoritie, did disclayme ^nd disagree to that change, the Temporall Lords, ^^ights, and burgesses neyther had nor could giue which they had not, such authoritie. No forreyne Pope, Patriarke, Archbishop or Bishop did or could giue it here, by their owne lawes. For Q. Elizabeth, King Iames and K. Charles by their parlaments and Statutes haue made holy preisthood Treason. And this new Protestant Queene Elizabeth her Religion beginning here in the yeare 155^. and 1559. in her first parlament, neuer had (...) knowne publike allowed square, rule, forme, ^^nner, Order, or fashion whatsoeuer, for any to h^ue publik authoritie to call, make, send or sette forth any pretended Minister vntil the yeare 1562. when their Religion was 4. yeares old, and these The new Protestant booke of Consec. an. 2. Eduardi 6. in Parlam. statut. an r. Mariae. Booke of ar^icles an. 1^62. art. 36. Articles were made, and in them the booke of King Edward the 6. about 10. or 11. yeares old, when he sette it forth by parlament, was first called from death werewith it perished in the first yeare of Queene Mary.
It hath beene pretended from a new borne Register of Matthew parker, that hee was made a Bishop by Barlowe, Scorye, and 3. others by vertue of a commission from Queene Elizabeth, and
 this new worke was acted on the 17. day of December, but alas, they had then no forme our order to do such a busines, if they had beene such publik allowed and authorized men as this Article appointeth, vntill 4. yeares after, this pretended admittance alleadged to haue beene 17. Decemb. an. 1559. And their owne publike confession is, in the Register it selfe as they haue published it in Matthew parker their first pretended protestantly made Archbishope his booke and Register, That none of those pretended Consecratours was admitted for a true or pretended Consecratour vntill after this supposed consecration of Matthew parker. For they say from their pretended Register of Matthew parker Anno 1559. Matth. part. cant. cons. Franc. Mason l. 3. c. 4. of cons. p. 127. ex Regist. Matth. park. to. 1. f. 2. and 10. Godw. catal. of Bish. in Canterb. 69. Matth. parker. 17. Decem. by william Barlowe, Ihon Scory, Miles Couerdale Ihon hodgeskins, by these Matthew parker was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, the seuententh day of December, in the yeare 1559. Their Catalogue of Bishops saith: he was consecrated December. 17. 1559. by W. Barlowe, Io: Scory, and Ihon hodgeskins. This is vtterly false, and vnpossible, by their owne testimonies, and proceedings, to be true. For their owne Register as it is published in Matthew parker his owne writings proueth directly that two of these 4. pretended Consecratouts were neuer allowed for such or Bishops, or any men hauing such publike authoritie in their Protestant Religion, as this their Article requireth of necessitie to call and send Ministers, These were Miles Couerdale, and Ihon Hodgeskings neuer hauing any such power in Q. Elizabeth her time. And for the other two william Barlowe, and Ihon Scory they were not allowed by these Protestants
 ^^^ Bishops or such men, vntill Matthew parker ^^^ as they pretend by their Register consecrated by them william Barlowe stiled before D. of Diuinine or a preist Regular was allowed for such a man vpon the 20. day of December 1559. 3. dayes Register. Episcopor. Protestant. Angl. apud Matth. park. antiquit. Britanniae. pag. 39. edit. Hanouiae an. 1605. alt^^ matthew parkers pretended ordination, by him. Will: Barlowe Th. D. Presb. Reg. Conf. 1559. Decem. 20. and the other Ihon Scory then s^iled onely Bachelour of Diuiuitie and preist Reg^lar, was also first allowed the same 20. day of December. Ioh: Scory Th. Bac. Presb. Regn. Conf. 1559. Dec. 20. And their owne catalogue of their pretended Bishops assureth vs further that this Matthew parker was amo^g them Archbishop Godwy^ Catalog. of Bishops in Durham 58. Cutbert Tunstall. of Conterbury in the month of Iuly before. So he could haue no consecration true or pretended, by their owne proceeding. I adde further concerning the pretended Register by which they haue thus vainely claymed an Inualid Title to Ecclesiasticall function, and orders, sette out in the booke of their first pretended Protestant Archbishop, Matthew parker printed at Hanouia 1605. called Antiquitates Britannicae of the Archbishops of Canterbury, there is no worde our mention at all, of any such thing, in that old manuscript copie thereof, which I haue seene and diligently examined.
And any man reading the printed booke will manifestly see it is a meerely foisted and inserted, thing hauing no connexion correspondence or affinitie either with that which goeth before, or followeth it. And conteyneth more things done after Matthew parker had written that Booke. But of this their new founde consecration I shall entreate, more largely hereafter in their 25. and
 36. Articles, whither it more properly belongeth, and there vtterly disable it, for making, or leauing among them, either true Bishop, Preist, or any other Ecclesiasticall person at all.


THE XII. CHAPTER.
The 24. article. Likewise examined and condemned by this first Apostolike age, and writers therein.
THe 24. article is this: It is a thing plainely repugnant to the word of God, and the custome of the primatiue Church, to haue publike prayer in the Church, or to minister the Sacraments, in a tongue not vnderstood of the people. What is agreable or repugnant to the word of God, the Church of God, as those Protestants haue confessed before, is the best witnesse and interpreter, and of necessity it must needs be so in such things as be graunted to be agreable or repugnant vnto both, as this question is.
The word of God extendeth both to that which is written in Scriptures, and the vnwritten preserued in the Church without such canonicall writing, otherwise (which is vnpossible) God might be contrary to himselfe, and his word contrary to his word, which is blasphemous to say or write. And in this question of the publike Church seruice, finding no prescript, forme, order, or office, nor of what language or tongue it is to be vsed, in the written word of God, wee must needs resorte to vnwritten tradition and the custome of the primatiue Church to finde it forth. And wee finde in all the publike offices of the Church in this age, ascribed to S. Peter, S. Andrew, S. Matthew, and S.
 Iames Apostles, to S. Marke Euangelist, S. Clement successour to S. Peter at Rome, and whosoeuer in antiquities is taken to be Authour or composer of any liturgy, Masse, or publike seruice or forme of prayers in the Church, in this time, they were all first penned and after practised in all places, wheresoeuer they were vsed in the learned common languages, and no where in any barbarous, or vulgar tongue of any particular Prouince or Contry. All histories, their oldest manuscripts and generally receaued tradition, witnesse they were in the Greeke or Latine tongue. This is so manifestly Doue persuas. p. 23. 24. c. o^ prayer. true that our Protestant writers do thus confesse it: vntill of late (since Protestant Religion began) through out the west part of the world publike prayers were in Latine: in the east part in Greeke, euen among Edw. Sands Relation of Relig. c. 53. or 54. those nations, to whom the languages were no mother tongues. Thus one of their Bishops with publike allowance.
Their first Protestant Archbishop Matthew Mat. Parker. Antiq. Brit. in Aug. c. 17. p. 47. Parker writeth, that the publike Church seruice named Masse, Missa dicta, did continue 200. yeares and more from Christs institution a Christi primo ^^stituto, vntill Pope Zepherine the 16. Pope did change it to a better matter and forme. Donec eam Zepherinus 16. Romanus Pontifex, quorundam suasio^ibus ad pulchriorem materiam formamque mutare vo^uit. And this Masse was the same which sainct ^ames vsed at Hierusalem, and sainct Peter in the ^asterne Contries. And when this man and other Protestants come to set downe what change S. Zepherine Pope made in the holy Masse, it was ^ot to change it into a Vulgare tongue, but he a Roman Zepherinus Romanus kept it still vnchanged
 in the Latine tongue, as all his predecessours had Damas. Pont. in Zepherino Magdeburg. in eod Rober. Barns in vit. Pontif. Rom. in eod. Bal. l. 1. act. Pontific. Rom. in Zepherino. Robert. Barnes and alij in Alexandro Sixto and Telesphoro. done before in the west and Latine Church, onely he tooke away wodden chalices vsed then in some places, ordaining better, and in this all writers Catholikes and Protestants agree. Vitreos calices pro ligneis ordinauit. And wheresoeuer there was any thing changed or added in the Masse, it was as these men confesse, euer done in the Latine tongue. Alexander Romanus ad Adriani tempora peruenit. I^ Missa, pridie quam pateretur, vsque ad haec verba, HOC EST CORPVS MEVM, addidit, ad memoria^ passionis Christi inculcanda^. Sixtus Romanus, vt SANCTVS in co^munione Eucharistiae ter caneretur, ordinauit. Telesphorus Graecus, GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO esse in Missa cane^dum praecepit. These be all the additions and changes they finde in the holy Masse before S. Zepherines time, before which S. Eleutherius Pope had publikely sent it into Britaine, and S. Lucius our King here publikely receaued it, and all those addition^ were taken out of Scripture, not then translated into any vulgar vnlearned language. So they prou^ of all additions after, all euer made in the Latine tongue, except some very few in the Hebrew an^ Greeke, in the whole Latine Church. And this i^ vnquestionably conuinced out of the publike offices of he Church of Christ, whether the Sacrific^ of Masse, or the rest, Matins, Laudes, houres, euen songe, compline or whatsoeuer, to be termed publike prayer of the Church, for the farre greate^ part of all these consisteth of the holy psalmes, an^ other parts of Scripture, all bookes thereof publikely reade euery day, and the psames euery week^ yet none of these were in any vulgar tongue in th^ age, nor many after this time.

 The rest which is contained in the Catholike Church Creeds, Prefaces, Hymnes, Antiphons, or ^hat else amont not vnto the tenth part of what is taken from Scriptures, and yet these were deliuer^d to the Church in learned to^gues, in them composed, and not in other. Wee are assured by Scriptures, and good histories that the Apostles 72. dis^^ples and other holy Cleargy men in this first age preached in all nations, they prayed, and had publike prayers, in many contries, and in them founded Churches, and must needs leaue some forme, of such publike seruice for them they conuerted. But wee are assured againe both by Scriptures, and such antiquities, that they all had not the guift of tongues, numquid omnes linguis loquuntur? and sainct 1. Cor. 12. Paul reckoneth it for a singular guist, and priuiledge in himselfe, to speake in all languages, gratias 1. Cor. 14. Godwin. Conuers. c. 3. p. 36. Io. Leland. in commentar. Ant. Brit. v. Britanniae. Io. Caius hist. Cantabr. p. 19. ago Deo, quod omnium vestrum linguis loquor. And our Protestants themselues with other antiquaries ^onfesse, that these renowned men did preach in many places, by interpretours, and diuers Barbarous nations where they preached, had then no vse of letters to write any thing at all in their owne la^guage, much lesse formes and offices of publike prayers, which were, and of necessity, to be vsed in all Churches and by all Preists. And in this condition was this Kingdome of Britaine, all Gallia, now Fraunce, and other parts, where the Druydes ruled, not vsing letters, and writing, because all nations were then accompted, and called by the Romans, Barbarous, in that and such vnciuill respects. Some write the Greeke letters were vsed in Gallia, but if it were so, they were by the same authority, very vnperfect, many added afterward to bringe that
 writing to perfection, and no history mentioneth that euer any forme of publike prayer, or such office was so written or deliuered among, or to that people, in this, or any after time: but the contrary, that the first publike office and Church seruice they had in this age, was brought thither from Rome, and so the Latine tongue.
This is proued by the French Annals, testifying Annal. Gallic. Matth. westm. an. 94. Clem. Roman. Ep. that the first Apostles of that nation were sent vnto them by S. Peter, and his successour S. Clement at Rome. Our old brittish history of the first institution of Church seruice, prima institutio and varietas Ecclesiastici Seruitij, as our Peotestant Antiquaries name it, testifieth plainely that S. Trophimus Bishop of Arles, and Sainct Photinus Bishop of Lyons, disciples of S. Peter the Apostle did deliuer in all Gallia, the Romane order, and forme of Church seruice. Beatus Trophimus Episcopus Arelatensis, Manuscript. antiq. Britan. de prima Instit. Eccles. officij. and Sanctus Photinus Martyr and Episcopus Lugdunensis Discipulus S. Petri Apostoli Cursum Romanum in Gallijs tradiderunt. And it citeth others, more auncient in this sense. And addeth that this Church seruice was after sent to S. Clement at Rome, by the Bishops and Martyrs of Gallia, to be approued by him, and all the Churches of Zozimus Pap. epistol. ad Episcop. Galliae de priuileg. Eccl. Arelat. tom. 1 concil. Martyrol. Roman. die 29. Decem. in S. Trophinius. Fraunce then embraced that Order, that of Arles being there the cheife Metropolitane Church, from which, and S. Trophimus, all others there as Pope Zozimus is an able witnesse, receaued light and direction. Metropolitanae Arelatensium vrbi vetus priuilegium minime derogandum est, ad quam primum ex hac sede (Romana) Trophimus Summus Antistes, ex cuius fonte tota Gallia fidei Riuulos accepit directus est. So hath the old Romane Martyrologe,
 and diuers others. And So it must needs be, by all antiquitie consenting, that all Gallia receaued the water of life from the same fou^taine, the Church of Rome, both with their forme and order of Church seruice and other directions in Religion, all their first Apostles and pastours with full instruction, and power being directed and sent from them, as sainct Martial, sainct Denys the Annal. Gallican. Eccles. Martyrolog. Roman. Bed. Adon. vsuard. in his Sant. Matt. westm. an. 94. and mult. al. apud Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1. part. 5. dist. 3. Henric. Erford. cap. 5. Monsterus in Cosmogr. in German. Antonin. part. 1. petr. de natal. l. 10. vincent. l. 9. Annal. Eccl. Treuer. Tungr. meten: Martyrolog. Roman. Beda vsuard. Ado die 15. Maij. Breu. Toletan. cal. maij. Areopagite, sainct Lucianus, sainct Eutropius, sainct Eugenius, sainct Ionius, sainct Timotheus, sainct Apollinaris, sainct Aphrodisius, sainct Sanianus, sainct Potentianus, sainct Altnus, sainct Totaldus, sainct Iulianus, sainct Fronto, sainct Taurinus, sainct Paulus Narbonensis, sainct Staurinnus, sainct Astremonius, sainct Gratianus, sainct Firmius, and others sent from Rome thither in this age, in which time also sainct Peter the Apostle sent into Germany, sainct Egistus, sainct Clement vncle to sainct Clement the Pope, sainct Eucharius, sainct Valerius, sainct Maternus, sainct Mansuetus, and many others.
The Apostles of Spaine were sent thither also from Rome in this Time, namely sainct Torquatus Ctesiphon, Secundus, Indalitius, Caecilius, sainct Hesychius, sainct Euphrasius and others. In Hispania Sanctorum Torquati, Clesiphontis, Secundi, Indaletij, Caecilij, Hesichij and Euphrasij, qui Romae a Sanstis Apostolis Episcopi ordinati, and ad praedicandum verbum Dei in Hispanias directi sunt. And to proue that all nations in this part of the world, called the Latin Church, receaued their first Bishops, preists, cleargie men, with their Church seruice from Rome S. Peter or his Successour in this age: S. Clement his Successour so speaketh from S. Peters
 owne direction and testimonye. Episcopos per Clem. Roman. epist. 1. singulas Ciuitates quibus ille (S. Petrus) non miserat, iuxta Domini praeceptionem nobis mittere praecepit. Quod etiam facere inchoauimus, and Domino opem ferente, facturi sumus. Aliquos vero ad Gallias, Hispaniasque mittemus, and quosdam ad Germaniam and Italiam, atque ad reliquas gentes dirigere cupimus. And euen to such barbarous and sauage contryes, as had not vse of letters and learning ferociores and rebelliores gentes.
This Kingdome of Britayne, excepting, the Scotts when they came hither, had euer learned men, and of ciuilitie as the Druids their cheifest being here, and others. Yet after the coming and rule of the Romans here, at and after the birth of Christ and his Religion preached in this contry, the latin tongue was vsuall to all of qualitie, no man might beare office but such as vnderstood it, all publike guifts donations charters, priuiledgs and Records whatsoeuer, both as old and late Catolike and Protestant Antiquaries proue, were performed and written in the latin tongue, and onely the vulgar people vsed thcir vulgar language, and yet corruptly without writing. Coniectura ducor Io: Leland. in commenrar. antiq. voc. Britan. v. Britannin. Cains histor. Cantabrig. p. 19. eo tempore vulgus Brita^norum ineruditissimum fuisse, ac prorsus non potuisse linguae suae voces depingere. Quamdiu Imperium Britanniae in Prouinciam reductae penes Romanos stabat, tamdiu necesse erat Britannis Magistratum gerere cupientibus latine loqui. Prouincialem linguam vulgus cum magna difficultate, and id quidem corrupte discebat. Tabulae donationum omnes, and rationes alicuius momenti latine fiebant. By which it is euident, that their publike Church seruice, must needs also be latin, in which onely as S. Bede
 with others proue all people Inhabitants here, euer Bed. histor. ang. l. 1. c. 1. studied, and reade the scriptures, from which it is taken. Haec Insula quinque gentium linguis vnam eandemque summae veritatis and verae sublimitatis scientiam scrutatur and confitetur, Anglorum videlicet, Britonum, Scotorum Pictorum and Latinorum, quae meditatione scripturaecaeteris omnibus est facta communis. And as S. Gyldas writeth, this Kingdome was by the reigning of the Romans there so latinized, Gild. epistol. de excid and conquest Britan. cap. 5. and Romanized, that it was rather to be named Romana then, Britannia: vt non Britannia, sed Romania censeretur. And though the Romans had many Hands, yet this in antiquities is aboue all, named the Romane Hand. Greek and latin Catholik and Protestant Antiquaries agree, that S. Peter the Apostle, who deliuered that latin Church seruice which the Romans vsed, and brought into Fraunce by his disciples as is proued before, preached in this Kingdome, stayed here longe time longo tempore moratus, founded vs Churches, consecrated S. Symeon Metaphrastes in S. Petro. Euseb. apud eund. ib. Sur. die 29. Iuuij. Cambden in Britannia. prot. Theater of greate Brit. l. 6. for vs Bishops Preists and Deacons: Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque and Presbyteros and Diaconos ordinauit, could deliuer vnto them no other Church, seruice, then that latin, which he deliuered at Rome in Fraunce and other westerne places.
These Bishops Preists and Deacons which were not Britans, could not vse that brittish tongue, in their seruice which they did not vnderstand, and which neither they nor the Britans could write for them or others to reade. And whosoeuer any man will say preached here first, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Symon, S. Ioseph, or any other, they not vnderstanding the brittish language, nor any man writing, they could not possibly vse or deliuer the
 seruice of the Church in that language, our old brittish manuscript mentioned before saith the Manuscrip. Brit. antiq. de prima Institutione Eccles. officij. Church seruice which S. Marke vsed, was also here in vse, in Scotijs ac Britannijs. Cursum qui dicitur praesenti tempore Scotorum beatus Marcus decantauit. It testifieth further that S. Germanus, S. Lupus S. Patrik and others vsed this seruice here both in Britayne and Scotlands, when our Protestants confesse there was no errour in Religion. Ipsum cursum decant auerunt Beatus Lupus and Beatus Germanus: and S. Patricius in Scotijs ac Britannijs ipsum cursum decantauit. And after them S. Vuandilocus ad S. Gomogillus who had 3000. monkes in his Monastery, and S. Columban, in whose time this Authour liued, with others, sent with him into Fraunce, vsed euery where in Ireland and Scotland as also Britaine, Fraunce, Germany and Italy the same publik Church seruice in the latin tonge. Beatus Vuandilocus and Beatus Columbanus partibus Galliarum destinati ipsum decantauerunt. And he deriueth this Church seruice from S. Marke, shewing where and by whome it was vsed. And it was Gildas in prolog. apud Fecknam orat. public. in 1. parliamento Elizabethae Reginae. iustified in open parlament the first of Queene Elizabeth by Abbot Fecknam out of S. Gildas in the prologue of his booke now suppressed by our Protestants, but then extant, that the same publik Church seruice which was vsed here in Queene Maryes time, and now in the Catholike Church, was brought hither and publickly deliuered here in the latin tongue in the generall conuersion of Britaine in King Lucius his time. And that Gildas Gildas l. de excid. and conquest. Brit. which Protestants propose vnto vs diuers times citeth the old Church seruice of Britaine in the latin tongue. And the old manuscript antiquities of
 Glastenbury william of Malmesbury, Capgraue Guliel. Malmesb. manuscrip. lib. de antiquit. caenob. glaston. in collego S. Benedict. Cantabrig. Antiquitat. glaston: tabulis. fix. Capgrau. in S. Ioseph and S. patric. Galfrid. monum. l. 4. histor. Brit. cap. 20. vlt. Matth. Westin. chron. an. 186. Matth. Westin. an. 187. Galfrid. l. 5. cap. 1. and others proue as much and more then Doctour Fecknam cited from S. Gildas. For they speaking of the Religious men which S. Damianus and S. Phaganus placed at Glastenbury to be successours in place and profession to S. Ioseph of Aramathia, and his associates there do plainely deliuer, that as in other things these professed the same Religion, order, Church seruice, and manner of life, which S. Ioseph and his companie did, so also as they did, they come often euery day together into the old Church, to say their diuine office which they brought from Rome, with them, and deliuered here in memoriam primorum ex suis socijs 12. elegerunt (S. Damianus and Phaganus) and in praefata Insula Rege Lucio consentiente habitare fecerunt, qui in diuersis locis sicut Anachoretae manserunt ibidem in eisdem lucis inquibus prima 12. primitus habitarunt in vetustam tamen Ecclesiam ad diuina obsequia deuotius complenda crebro conuenerunt quotidie.
And this latin publik Church seruice being the very same which had beene vsed at Rome from the Apostles time, not changed at that time, as all Catholiks and Protestants agree, was planted and deliuered here, not onely by these legates of Pope Eleutherius, but by himselfe, with the rest which his legates did here confirme. restauratis omnibus, redierunt Antistites Romani: and quae fecerant a beatisssimo Papa co^firmari impetrauerunt. Confirmatione facta reuersi sunt in Britanniam compluribus alijs comitati. And if any Protestant will haue the Kings confirmatio^ needfull, our holy King then S. Lucius likewise confirmed this, as the rest. Glorio sus Britonum. Rex Lucius chartis and munimentis omnia communiuit.



THE XIII. CHAPTER.
The 25. Article, intituled, of the Sacraments, thus examined, and condemned, in all things contrary to Catholike doctrine.
THEIR next the 25. Protestant Article is intituled: of the Sacraments. And thus beginneth. Sacraments ordained by Christ, be not onely bages or tokens of Christian mens profession but rather they be certaine sure witnesses, and effectuall signes of grace, and Gods good will towards vs, by the which he doth worke inuisibly in vs, and doth not onely quicken but also strengthen and confirme our faith in him.
Hitherto ther appeareth no difference betweene these Protestants in this article and Catholiks, for they decreeing that Sacraments be effectuall signes of grace, that is in all true proper manner of speach, signes which doe effect cause and worke grace, otherwise they be not effectuall signes of grace, and that God worketh in vs inuisibly by them, is as much as Catholiks professe, whe^ they define a Sacrame^t, Sacramentum est visibile signu^ inuisibilis gratiae. A Sacrame^t is a visible or externall signe of inuisible grace giuen thereby. And these Protestants declare the^selues so Protest. art. 27. 28. infra. farre, and plainely, in both those they accept for Sacrame^ts, Baptisme, and the Eucharist called by them, the Supper of the Lord. In the first, they manifestly confesse it, and approue and practise baptisme of Infants, who borne by them also in originall sinne, cannot possibly haue remission thereof and grace but by their baptisme, not able to vnderstand or haue any act of faith, or other vertue. Yet the^^ Art. 27.
 decree is: The baptisme of young children, is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreable with the institution of Christ. So they doe or ought to speake of their other Sacrament, confessing it was in the primatiue Church, ministred sometimes to infants.
The difference betweene vs in this article, is in that, which thus followeth.
There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Ghospell, that is to say, baptisme, and the supper of the Lord. Those fiue commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation Pennance, Order, Matrimony and extreame Vnction are not to be compted for Sacraments, of the Ghospell, being such as haue growne partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the scriptures: but yet haue not like nature of Sacraments, with baptisme, and the Lords supper, for that they haue not any visible signe or ceremony ordained of God. Hitherto this Protestant ^rticle denying those fiue Sacraments which the Catholike Church receaueth for such with the ^wo former, baptisme and the most holy Sacrament of the altar. Now I will proue by this Apostolike age the doctrine, and practise thereof, that these fiue are, and then were vsed, and receaued for Sacraments, and first of Confirmation the first Confirmatio^ a true Sacrament. Clem. Rom. Constitut. Apost. l. 2. c. 36. which these men name and deny.
S. Clement testifieth this to be a Sacrament, mi^istred by Bishops with holy oyle, and giuing the ^oly Ghost and grace, all that these men doe, or can ^equire to a Sacrament. Quid dicemus de Episcopo? ^r quem Dominus in ordinatione Spiritum sanctum ^obis dedit. Per quem consignati estis oleo exultationis, ^ chrismate sapientiae: per quem filij lucis facti estis:
 per quem Dominus illuminatione vestra, Episcopi manus impositionem testimonio suo comprobans, in singulis vestrum suam sacram vocem emisit. This he further declareth (making a Sacrame^t needfull to Christian Clem. Rom. epist. ad Iuliu^ and Iulian. perfectio^, except necessity hindereth, giuing grace) that Peter and all the Apostles so taught, and practised, and Christ so instituted. Omnibus festinandum est sine mora renasci Deo, and demum consignari ab Episcopo; id est, septiformem gratiam Spiritus sancti percipere, quia incertus est vniuscuiusque exitus vitae. Quum autem regeneratus fuerit per aquam, and postmodum septiformi spiritus gratia ab Episcopo, (vt memoratum est) confirmatus, quia aliter perfectus esse Christianus nequaquam poterit, nec sedem habere inter perfectos, si non necessitate, sed incuria aut voluntate reman serit, vt a Beato Petro accepimus, and vt caeteri Apostoli, praecipiente Domino docu^runt.
S. Denis the Areopagite saith, that they which Dion. Areop. l. Hierarch. Eccl. cap. 4. Prope fin. In contemp. were baptized were brought to the Bishop to be confirmed. Ducunt ad Hierarcham, is virum vnguento quod maxime diuinos efficit, insignit. And further thus sheweth the Sacramentall power of this holy Vnction. Vnguenti illa, quae perficiendi vim habet, perfusio, eum qui initiatus est, suauitate odoris fragrantem facit. And plainely calleth it a Sacrament, comparing it in that respect euen with the Sacrament of the altar, assuring vs, that was the opinion and doctrine of his Masters in Religion, the Apostles. Finitimum L. Eccl. Hietar. c. 6. alterum Sacramentum, quod praeceptores nostri vnguenti mysterium nominant. Est igitur ^^ In contempl. quod dixi, mysterium quod nunc a nobis laudatur, ei^s ordinis atque potestatis quae vim habet perficiendi ^^ quae Pontificem attingunt. Itaque ipsum diuini praeceptores nostri, vt eiusdem and ordinis and efficacita^^^*
 cuius est Synaxeos Sacramentum, ijsdem saepe figuris atque imaginibus mysticisque descriptionibus, ac sanctis verbis descripserunt.
It is the constant opinion, and testimony of the Fathers, that the Church of Christ receaued and ministred this Sacrament for a true and properly named Sacrament, both by Scriptures, and tradition. So both the Latine and Greeke Fathers expound that passage and practise of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Iohn in the acts of the Apostles, giuing grace to those that were baptized by others, not Bishops, by imposition of hands. Impon^bant Act. c. 8. manus super illos and accipiebant Spiritum sanctum. And doe thereby proue that Bishops onely may minister this Sacrament. Cum Philippus Diaconus esset Ephip. l. 1. To. 2. Contr. haer. c. 21. contra Simon. Aug. lib. 15. Trin. c. 26. Hieron. Dial. aduers. Lucif. Tom. 2. c. 4. non habebat potestatem imponendi manus, vt per hoc daret Spiritum sanctum. So hath S. Augustine, S. Hierome and others prouing this Sacrament both by Scripture and tradition of the vniuersall Church from Christs time. In actibus Apostolorum scriptum est. Etiam si scripturae authoritas non subesset, totius orbis in hanc partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret. Non abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, vt ad Ambr. c. 7. de ijs qui init. mysterijs S. Basil. libr. de Spirit. sancto c. 27. Greg. Naz. serm. in Sanctum lauachrum. Ambr. in cap. 6. ad Hebr. Primas. in cap 6. ad Hebr. eos qui longe in minoribus vrbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad inuocationem sancti Spiritus manum impositurus excurrat. This S. Hierome writeth in the name of all, both Catholiks and others. S. Ambrose, sainct Basile, sainct Gregory Nazianzen and others haue the like. S. Ambrose, Primasius with others expound those words in the 6. chapter to the Hebrewes, impositionis quoque manum, in the very same sense, in these words. Impositionem manuum appellat, per quam plenissime creditur accipi donum Spiritus sancti, quod post
 baptismum ad confirmationem vnitatis in Ecclesia a Pontificibus fieri solet. S. Cyprian and his fellow Cypr. epist. 72. Bishops in Councell speaking in the name of the Church, calleth it a Sacrament as baptisme is: si Sacramento vtroque nascuntur.
Tertullian also doth number it with the other Sacraments, euer vsed in the Church, and giueth both a visible externall signe holy Vnction, and internall Tertull. l. de resurrect. carnis. Et libr. de praescript. haeretic. grace giuen thereby vnto it. Caro abluitur, vt anima emaculetur, caro vngitur, vt anima consecretur. Caro signatur, vt and anima muniatur, caro manus impositione adumbratur, vt and anima spiritu illuminetur. Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and anima de Deo saginetur.
To come to our Primatiue Christian Britans, The Christia^ Britans of this opinion and practise. Giral Cambr. descr. Cambr. c. 18. cum approb. Prot. Dau^dis powelli, Theol. prof ib. Golfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 12. c. ^8. their learned old antiquary and Bishop writeth of them, that from their first conuersion, they held this for a Sacrament, giuing grace, that holy Vnction by a Bishop was vsed in it, and all our first Christians in Britaine honoured, and affected this Sacrament, more then any other nation did. Episcopalem confirmationem, and Chrismatis, qua gratia spiritus datur inunctionem, prae alia gente totus populus magno pere petit. This wee may easiely learne by the example of their King Cadwalladar, which went to Rome to be confirmed by the Pope there. Cadwalladrus abiectis mundialibue, propter Deum regnumque perpetuum, venit Romam, and a Sergio Papa confirmatus. But wee need not stand vpon particular Theod. lib. de fabul. haeret. Lindan. Dubitant. Dial. 2. prateol Elen. l 12. in Nouatianis. examples, when wee haue a generall graunt before, that all the Britans, totus populus, both by old and new, Catholike and Protestant historians, were so deuoted to this holy Sacrament. And both Theodoret and others do proue that they were onely the
 Nouatian heretiks, (which by no antiquity euer entered into Britaine) which denied holy Vnction to be vsed in this Sacrament. Negligant confirmationem habere olei sacri illinitionem.
And our English Protestants themselues by their owne most authorized and allowed proceedings haue, and doe condemne this their article doctrine in this point. For first in the publike correctio^ of their religion at Hampton court, King Iames being present Conference at Hampton. p. 10. 11. and consenting, they thus decree: Confirmation is an Apostolicall tradition. That Confirmation deliuered by the Apostles is a Sacrame^t is proued before. Secondly these Protestants confesse and decree, that the order of Bishops hath euer beene in the Church, from the Apostles time, but these men not condemning all forrayne Protestants and in denying to Bishops onely power to make Preists and Clergy men, leaue no act of Order peculiar and proper to them, if they deny confirmation to be a Sacrament, and by them onely to be ministred, for all others are lawfully ministred by Priests, noe Bishops. And these our English Protesta^ts by the greatest power they haue, haue set fourth, and vse a publike forme, and manner of ministring confirmation by them onely, which they pretend to be Bishops among them. In which they proue it in their proceedings, and by the doctrine of this very article, for supposing their opinion though false, that holy Vnction is not necessary in this practise of Confirmation, English Prot. Communion booke. Titul. Confirmatio^. Et tit. Catechisme. they requiring onely two things needfull to a Sacrament, a visible signe, or ceremony ordained of God, and grace giuen thereby thus propose and practise both: first they say and direct. The Bishop
 shall lay his hand vpon euery childe seuerally. And that in their Iudgment it is a signe, and ceremony, ordained Communion Booke supr. @. alliuinghly. of God, and that grace is thereby giuen, their pretended Bishops in ministring this to children thus proue: wee make our humble supplications for these children, vpon whom after the manner of the Apostles, wee haue laide our hands, to certifie them, by this signe of thy fauour, and gratious goodnesse towards them. Therefore being a signe vsed by the Apostles, giuing and certifying grace, by this very article, and their owne definition of a Sacrament before, this of Confirmation must needs by their Religion be a Sacrament in the same degree as they allowe baptisme and the Eucharist to be. This their communion booke is daily practized by them in all their Churches, vsed both before and after these articles were ordained, and at this present, and supported and warranted with the greatest allowance, their religion, or any, or point therein by their owne proceedings possibly can haue, Queenes and Kings supremacy, Parlaments, Iniunctions, Canons, Conuocations, publike approbation, and practise of all their pretended Bishops, or named Clergy men.


THE XII. CHAPTER.
Pennance, so called in this article, and by Catholikes. The Sacrament of Pennance, was so iudged and vscd in this Apostolike age.
TH^ next Sacrame^t of the Catholike Church, which this Protestant Article demeth to be such, is the Sacrament of Pennance. S. Ignatius in
 this Apostolike age giueth power vnto Pennance, to bringe sinners both to the vnity of the militant Church on earth, and inherite euerlasting life in heauen. Obsecro vos, quotquot poenitentia ducti redierint Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph. ad vnitatem Ecclesiae, suscipite illos cum omni mansuetudine, vt per bonitatem and patientiam vestram resipiscentes ex diaboli laqueis, digni iam Christo facti, salutem consequantur aeternam in regno Christi. And writeth how Christians were then bound, to admonish and exhort sinners to pennance. Oportet eos commonefacere and ad poenitentiam cohortari, si forte manus dent, monitisque cedant. S. Denis the Areopagite deliuereth the manner of penitents, and pennance to haue beene then, as the Catholiks now vse, the penitent to kneele to the Preist, and with sorrowe confesse his sinnes, and the Preist by absolution to forgiue them, and so iustifie the penitent sinner, and greately reprehendeth one Demophilus for hindering it, saying it was the order of discipline then. Tu, vt tuae literae indicant, procedentem Dion. epist. a^ Demophil. ante med. Sacerdoti impium, vt ais, and peccatorem n^s^io quo pacto contra disciplinae ordinem astans calce abiecisti. Adhuc cum ille quidem, quod oportuit, fateretur se ad peccatorum remedium quaerendum venisse: tu non exhorruisti, sed and bonum Sacerdotem ausus es lac^rare conuitijs miserabilem eum dicens, quod poenitentem and impium iustificasset. S. Ignatius maketh it one of the Igna^t. epist a^ Heronem. Sacraments ministred by Preists: Baptizant, sacrificant, eligunt, manus imponunt. S. Clement setteth it downe for a tradition of S. Peter and the other Apostles to confesse all sinnes, vnto the Pastours of their soules, and to rceaue cure and remedy from them. Si forte alicuius cor vel liuor, vel infid^l^tas, Clem. Rom. ep^st ^. vel aliquod malum ex his quae superius memorauimus,
 latenter irrepserit, non erubescat qui animae suae curam gerit, confiteri haec huic, qui praeest, vt ab ipso per verbum Dei, and consilium salubre curetur.
And he addeth afterward, from the mouth of S. Clem. Rom. sup. epist. 1. Peter: Instruebat, actus suae vitae omni hora custodire, and in omni loco Deum respicere, firmiter scire cogitationes malas cordi suo aduenientes, mox ad Christum allidere, and Sacerdotibus Domini manifestare. S. Peters instruction was diligently to take knowledge euen of the euill cogitations of the hart, and to confesse them to the Preists of God. He saith in an other Constitut. Apost. l. 2. cap. 49. place that penance is like vnto baptisme. Erit ei in locum lauachri impositio manuum. He setteth downe the verie manner of enioyning penanc, according to the qualitie of the sinnes committed, dayes or weeks in fasting and penance: Afflictum diebus Cap. 19. Ieiuniorum pro ratione peccati bebdomadas duas, vel tres, vel quinque, vel septem, dimitte, dicens ei quaecumque conueniunt ad peccatorem corripiendum. And he expoundeth those words of Christ in the ghospel, of bynding and loosing of this Sacrament as others after him do. Paenitentibus remissionem concedere oportet. Cap. 21. Recognosce o Episcope, dignitatem tuam, quod sicut ligandi potestatem accepisti, sic etiam and soluendi. Obtinens igitur soluendi potestatem, recognosce Pennancea Sacrament among the Britans. t^ipsum, and secundum dignitatem loci tui, in hac vita versare. It was so generally a receaued truth here in Britaine, that euen when our Protestant Antiquaries confesse our Christian Britans kept their first faith inuiolate, the contrary was adiudged heresie, and a King himselfe frequard summoned Hector Boeth. l 9. Scotor. Hist. fol 179. Georg. Buch. l. 5. Rer. Scotir. Reg. 52. and proceeded against for laughing at the Baptisme of Infants, and Confession of sinnes to Preists. Notatus est aliquando risisse paruulorum Bap
 tisma, peccatorumque ad Sacerdotis aurem confessionem. Thus it is testified both by Catholike, and Protestant Historians.
And our most auncient Brittish writers as S. hollinsh* hist. of Scut. l* pag. 112. Gildas speaking of this Sacrament, the practise and vse thereof here in Britayne deduceth it from Christs words, of bynding and loosteing spoke^ to S. Peter and the other Apostles. Petro eiusque Successoribus Gild. l. de excid. cap. 26. dicit Dominus: and tibi dabo claues Regni Coelorum. Itemque omni sancto Sacerdoti promittitur, and quaecumque solueris superterram, erunt soluta and in caelis: and quaecumque ligaueris super terram, erunt ligata and in caelis. Our learned Britan the old Archbishop of Orleance, Ionas Aureliensis, testifieth the auncient deuotion to this Sacrament was such, that both Preists and penitents wept in the ministring thereof, and giueth instance in S. Eustachius, Ionas aurel. in vit. S. Eustachij cap. 1. so weeping when penitents confessed their sinnes vnto him, that he caused them also to weepe. Quoties illi aliquis ob recipiendam paenitentiam lapsus suos esset confessus, ita flebat, vt and illum flere compelleret. And this is so euident a truth, that King Iames, King Iames Confer. at Hampton court. with his Protestant Bishops and clergie in their publik examination of their Religion, conclude this point in these words: That the particular and personall absolution from sinne after consession, is Apostolical, and a very godly ordinance.
And this is no new thing in their Religion, but a new approbation of their doctryne herein, against their puritans, for their communion booke elder then these Articles, and at this time the most practicall and allowed Rule which they haue, doth giue direction both for confession of syns, and absolution from them, in the very same words, which
 Catholik Preist vse in this Sacrament. The sikpersou Engl. Protest. communion Booke Titul. visitation of the Sike. shall make a speciall confession, if he feele his conscience troubled with any weightie matter. After which confession the Preist shall absolue him after this sort. Our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath left power to his Church, to absolue all sinners which truely repent, and beleeue in him, of his greate mercy forgiue thee thyne offences, and by his authoritie committed to me, I absolue thee from all thy syns, in the name of the father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy ghost. Amen. Here is all which this Article requireth to a Sacrament, a visible or externall signe or ceremonie as is Manifest, and this ordeined of God, both because this communion booke saith, it was left by Christ the sonne of God, to his Church, so to befor euer, as is Church shall be euer forgiuing sinnes and giueing grace; which no visible or externall signe or ceremony, but such as is ordained of God, to such end and purpose can do.
This power is pretented to be giuen to euery minister among them, when their Protestant Bishop maketh him, by laying his hands vpon him, saying these words: receaue the holy ghoste, whose Protest. Booke of consecration. Articul. 36. inf. sinnes thou forgiuest, they are forgiuen, and whose sinnes thou doest retayne, they are retayned. Thus hath the Protestant manner of consecration in their booke thereof, approued in these Articles, in as ample manner, as any thing in their Religion. And if their consecration were true and lawfull, if they could not minister this as a Sacrament, they could do nothing at all, this being the power that is pretided to be be giuen vnto them at that time, and nothing els in playne and expresse termes, at the least in so manifest true meaning and construction.



THE XV. CHAPTER.
Holy Orders contrary to this Article, was vsed and held a Sacrament in this first age.
AND by this sufficiently appeareth also, that both by the doctrine, practise and authoritie of this Apostolike age and their owne Protestant cheifest grownds and proceedings, how vntruely this Article denyeth in the next place, that holie Orders is a Sacrame^t; for it is manifest before, that both by the Apostostolik men of this time, and their owne profession and confession, it hath all things needfull to a Sacrament, a visible externall signe, or ceremonie ordained by God giuing grace, and extraordinarie spirituall power, and itselfe by that consecration also giueth grace in other Sacraments, which cannot be ministred without it, either by Catholike Religion, or our Protestants practise and profession. Noe terrene and earthly power may or can performe the duties and offices of that gratious and spirituall function. This is the plaine and euident testimonie of the blessed Fathers of this time. S. Clement euen in the words of the Apostles maketh preishood more excellent, then the Regall power and dignitie, for that he ruleth soules, an this the bodies. And is so farre from our Protestant courses in making holie preisthood treason, that he maketh it an offence Clem. Rom. l. 2. constitut. Apostol. c. 2. deseruing greater punishment, to do wrong to Preists, then temporall Princes. Si Reges inuadens supplicio dignus iudicatur, quamuis filius vel amicus sit, quanto magis qui Sacerdotibus insultat? Quanto
 enim Sacerdotium Regno est excellentius, cum regendarum animarum officio praefit, tanto grauiori supplicio punitur, qui aduersus id aliquid temere fecerit quam qui aduersus Regnum.
The like, and more vrgent hath S. Ignatius: Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen. Honora Deum, vt omnium Authorem and Dominum: Episcopum vero vt Principem Scaerdotum, Imaginem Dei referentem: Dei quidem propter Principatum: Christi vero propter Sacerdotium. Honorare oportet and Regem: neque enim Rege quisquam praestantior, aut quisquam similis illi in rebus omnibus creatis: neque Episcopo qui Deo consecratus est pro totius mundi salute quicquam maius in Ecclesia. Sacerdotium est omnium bonorum, quae in hominibus sunt apex, qui aduersus illud facit, non hominem Ignominia afficit, sed Deum and Christum Iesum primogenitum, qui natura solus est summus Sacerdos.
And they ascribe this extraordinarie dignitie and excellencie of sacred preisthood, to their supernaturall chaunge, and grace bestowed miraculously vpon them in their consecration, and by vertue of that holy Sacrament, no other reason to be giuen of so wonderfull an alteration and preminencie, as both the holy Fathers in the common construction of the Church of Christ, and the light of nature assuer vs, that men so lately and euer before their consecration, were but as other men, and now nothing externally chaunged, should by Gods decree and ordinance, be eleuated vnto, and endowed with so incomparable honour, power grace, and vnquestionable priuiledges, onely the Sacramentall grace performeth it say these holy Fathers as it doth the like in the holy Eucharist and Baptisme. Ead^m vis etiam Sacerdotem augustum and honorandum Gregor. Nys^en. l. de
 facit, nouitate benedictionis a comunitate Bapt. Gregor. Naz. Orat. de S. Athanasio. Cyprian l. de ablut. ped. Tertullian. l. exhort. cast. vulgi segregatum. Quam enim heri ac tempore superiori vnus e multitudine ac plebe esset, repente redditur Praeceptor, Praeses, Doctor pietatis, mysteriorum latentium Praesul. Eaque contingunt ei, quam nihil vel corpore velforma mutatus, sed quod ad speciem externam attinet, ille sit qui erat, inuisibili quadam vi ac gratia, inuisibilem animam in melius transformatam gerens. S. Clement, S. Denys the Areopagite S. Anaclet. epist. 2. Ignatius, S. Anacletus made Preist by S. Peter the Apostle, a quo and praesbyter sum ordinatus, and others of this Apostolike age, being as they confesse instructed so by S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, vt a Beato Petro Principe Apostolorum sumus instructi, do plainely testifie and proue holy Orders to be a holy Sacrament, both in Preistly and Episcopall consecration, deliuering both the matter and manner of them, as the Roman Church now vseth. A Bishop to be consecrated by diuers Bishops, by imposition of hands, the holy ghospell, and Inunction with holy Chrisme giuing grace, and the holy ghost. Ordinationes Episcoporum, authoritate Anaclet. supr. Tom. 1. concil. epist. 2. cited and approued. by protest Matt. parker antiq. Britan. p. 24. Io. Prisens def. histor. Britan. p. 73. Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontific. in Anacleto and Alexandro Apostolica ab omnibus qui in eadem fuerint prouincia Episcopis sunt celebrandae. Qui simul conuenientes, scrutinium diligenter agant, Ieiuniumque cum omnibus celebrent precibus, and manus cum sanctis Euangelijs quae praedicaturi sunt, imponentes, sacraque vnctione, exemplo Prophetarum and Regum capita eorum, more Apostolorum and Moysis vngentes, quia omnis sanctificatio constat in Spiritu Sancto, cuius virtus inuisibilis sacro Chrismati est permixta. With this agree S. Clement, S. Ignatius, S. Denys, with the generall custome and practise of their Apostolike age. Not requiring a necessitie of the presence
 of all Bishops of the prouince, but seeking their Marc. Anton. l. 1. de republike Eccl. c. 12. p. 147. Clem. l. 8. Const. Apost. Ignat. epist. Dionys Eccl. Hier. c. S. Clem. Rom. Const. Apost. l. 3. cap. 20. and vlt. Dionys. Areopag. l. Eccl. Hierar. cap. 6. consent in so greate, a businnes. Quod si simul omnes conuenire minime poterunt, assensu^ tamen suis precibus praebeant, vt ab ipsa ordinatione animo non desint. Onely they require of necessitie three or two Bishops to consecrate a Bishop, and onely one for the consecration of Preists, Deacons, and inferiour Orders. Episcopum mandamus ordinari a tribus Episcopis, vel ad minus a duobus: non licere autem ab vno vobis constitui. Presbyterum and Diaconum, and reliquorum clerum ab vno Episcopo. S. Denys the Areopagite Scholler to S. Paule, as he had learned of that his holy Master, and other Apostles and seene it the generall doctrine and practise of that Apostolike time, that great and extraordinary grace and power was giuen by the externall rite, signe and ceremonie thereof, so teacheth, and setteth downe the Order of this consecration, as of Preists and Deacons, euery of them different and distinct from other as their dignities and functions are with Ecclesiasticall rites and solemnities before the Dionys. Eccl. Hierarch. cap. 5. holy altare, as Catholicks vse at this day: Praesul vbi sacrandus offertur, vtroque genu posito ante altare supra caput habet a Deo tradita Euangelia manumque Pontificis: atque hoc modo a consecrante Pontifice castissimis imprecationibus consummatur. Sacerdos vero coram sancto altari ponens vtrumque genu, in capite habet Pontificis dextram, and in hunc modum a sacrante Praesule sanctissimis inuocationibus consecratur. At vero minister altero tantum coram sanctis altaribus posito genu, sacrantis se Pontificis dexteram in capite praefert, atque ab coperficitur precationibus ad eam rem accomodatis, cuilibet autem ipsorum a benedicente Pontisice Crucis imprimitur signum, and perfingulos sacra
 praedicatio nominis, consummansque consalutatio fit.
S. Clement also testifieth, that from the first consecration of Ecclesiasticall men after Christs ascention, when S. Stephen and others were made Deacons, both Bishops and Preists were so consecrated by the Apostles before the Altar, and at Masse, as Christ ordayned. Nos ablato secundum Clem. Const. Apost. l. 8. cap. 52. vlt. Christi ordinationem sacrificio puro, and incruento, constituimus Episcopos, Praesbyteros and Diaconos numero septem, e quorum numero vnus erat Stephanus Beatus Martyr. And plainely proueth, that these holy Orders with their particular offices were appointed by Christ himselfe the Bishops to giue Orders, the Preists to offer Sacrifice and receaue grace and power so to do at their consecration, and Deacons to Minister to them both, in their sacred functions. Nisi propria quaedam iura essent, atque ordinum discrimina, Supr. paul^ ante. satis esset, vt per vnum nomen vniuersa perficerentur. Sed a Domino edocti consequentiam rerum, Episcopis Pontificatus munera assignauimus, presbyteris Sacerdotij, Diaconis ministeria erga vtrosque, vt quae ad Religionem pertinent, pure perficiantur. Nam nec Diacono fas est offerre sacrisicium, vel baptizare, aut benedictionem paruam vel magnam facere, nec Presbytero ordinationes exercero: impium est enim ordinem peruercti.
S. Denys recompteth their grace and duties in likeDionys. Eccl. Hier. cap. 5.manner: Antistitum ordinem perficientem esse, and perfectionis authorem: Sacerdotum vero illuminantem, atque ad lucem promouentem: porro ministrorum, purgantem atque discernentem. Videlicet Pontificalis ordo non perficere solum, verum and illuminare and purgare nouit: Sacerdotum vero virtus in se cum illuminante habet purgantem quoque scientiam. Verum quae inferiorissunt ad praestantiora transire nequeant, proptere^ quod fas illis non est ad istiusmodi prosilire superbiam. Porro sacratiores virtutes vna cum suis, inferiores quoque, suaipsa perfectione scientias sacras nequaquam ignorant. S. Ignatius also is witnesse, that these seuerall Ignat. epist. ^d Ephes. Orders were ordained by Christ. Enitimini charissimi, subiecti esse Episcopo, and Presbyteris, and Diaconis. Qui enim his obedit, obedit Christo, qui hoc constituit. And deliuereth their offices seuerall, and distinct, as the others do. The Episcopall function he hath before remembred. And saith, all must Epistol. ad Trallian. obey the Bishop, as our Lord himselfe. Episcopo subiecti estote, velut Domino. Episcopus omni principatu and potestate superior est. Decet obedire Episcopo, Epistol. ad Magnes. and in nullo illi refragari. He telleth vs, the function of a Preist, is, to offer Sacrifice, and Minister other Sacraments, and Deacons are to Minister vnto them, in such holie mysteries, and so must needs haue power giuen them accordingly in their consecration, and this was so with the Apostles, and Ignat. epistol. ad Heronem Diaconum. the first Preists and Deacons. Sac^rdotes sunt, T^ vero (Diaconus) Sacerdotum Minister. Baptizan^ sacrificant, manus imponunt, tu vero illis ministras; vt Sanctus ille Stephanus Iacobo and presbyteris qui Epistol. ad Trallian. erant Hierosolymis. Oportet and Diaconos mysteriorum Chtisti ministris, per omnia placere: nec enim ciborum, and potuum ministri sunt, sed Ecclesiae Dei administratores. Ipsi itaque tales sunt, at vos reueremini illos vt Christum Iesum, cuius vicarij sunt, and Episcopus Typum Dei Patris omnium gerit: presbyteri vero sunt consessus quidam and coniunctus Apostolorum chorus* Sine his Ecclesia electa non est, nullasine his Sanctoru^ congregatio, nulla Sanctorum electio. Quid Sacerdotium aliud est, quam sacer caetus, consiliarij and assessore^
 Episcopi? Quid vero Diaconi, quam imitatores Angelicarum virtutum, quae purum and inculpatum ministerium illi exhibent, vt sanctus Stephanus beato Iacobo, Timotheus and ^nius Paulo, Anacletus and Clemens Petro? Qui igitur his non obedit sine Deo prorsus, and impurus est and Christum contemnit, and constitutionem eius imminuit.
S. Martial deliuereth plainely a cheife and principall cause of the honour and excellencie of this Sacrament of holie Orders, because among other eminencies thereof, Bishops and Preists offer, and Deacon assist them therein, the most holie sacrifice of Christs bodie and blood vpon an holie Altar, the very same which the Iewes did by malice offer, Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. cap. 3. when they crucified Christ. Sacerdotes honorabatis, qui decipiebant vos sacrificijs suis, qui mutis and surdis statuis offerebant. Nunc autem multo magis Sacerdotes Dei omnipotentis qui vitam vobis tribuunt in calice and viuo pane honor are debetis. Christi corpus and sanguinem in vitam aeternam offerimus. Quod Iudaei per Inuidiam immolauerunt, putantes se nomen eius a terra abolere, nos causa salutis nostrae in ara sanctificata proponimus, scientes hoc solo remedio nobis vitam The Britan^ here so held. praestandam, and mortem effugandam, hoc enim ipse Dominus noster iussit nos agere in sui commemoratio^em.
This was also the doctrine of our first Christian Gildas l. de excid. and conq. Britan. c. 26. manuscript. antiq. de tit. S. Patricij Capg. in cod. Gi^ald. Ca^mb. Britans. Their Preists were consecrated to offer the heauenly Sacrifice at the holie Altar. They conse^rated Christs bodie and blood with their mouthes ^roprio ore. And of all the people in the world, as ^heir Antiquities witnes, they most honoured clear^ie men in such respects. Ecclesiasticis viris longe ^agis quam vlla^ gentem honore^ deferentes. Their Bishops
 were consecrated, with holie Chrisme imposition in descript. cambr. c. 18. of hands and consecrating words: in consecratione Pontificum, capita eorum sacri Chrismatis infusione perungere, cum Inuocatione sancti Spiritus, and manus impositione. The hands of Preists were consecrated Gild. l. de excid. Britan. in castigatione Cleri. to offer and handle the blessed Sacrifice. Benedictione initiantur Sacerdotum manus. S. Paule in diuers places proueth it giueth grace, so making it a true and proper holie Sacrament. Noli negligere 1. Timoth. 4. gratiam, quae in te est; quae data est tibi cum impositione manuum presbyterij. And, admoneo te vt resuscites 2. Timoth. 1. gratiam Dei, quae est in te per impositionem manuum mearum.
And Christ himselfe by his owne example, and testimonie, S. Iohn the Euangelist so recording affirmeth, that the holie ghost, and power to forgiue sins were giuen in this Sacramentall ceremonie. Io: 20. Accipe Spiritum fanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis, And it is the witnesse of God, that holie Orders is the worke of the holie ghost. Dixit Spiritus sanctus: Segregate mihi Saulum Act. 13. and Barnabam, in opus ad quod assumpsi eos. Tunc i^iunantes and orantes, imponentesque eis manus, dimiserunt illos. It is confessed by the greatest Protestant authoritie in England, of King, Protestant Bishops, K. Iames and his protest. publike conference at hampton court Couell def. of hooker p. 87. and others their best scollers in their publike examen of their Religion. That this power of Orders, giuen as they pretend by imposition of hands. I^ diuinae Ordinationis, and de iure diuino. The ordin^^ce of God, and by his diuine lawe. To these persons G^^ imparted power ouer his mysticall bodie, which is ^^ societie of soules, and ouer that naturall, which is himself, Mod. ex^mina^. pag. 105. 155. def. of hooker pag. which antiquitie doth call the making of Christ body. The power of the ministry by blessing vis^^
 elements, it maketh them inuisible grace, and giueth 87. 88. 91. daily the holy ghost, it hath to dispose of that flesh, which was giuen for the life of the world: and that blood which was powred out to redeeme soules. It is a power, which neither Prince nor potentate, King nor Caesar on earth can giue. The Apostles did impart the same power, to ordayne, which was giuen to them.
And in their publikly authorized Rituall, and Protest. Booke of Consecrat. in Order. Bish. and Preists. booke of consecration, or making Protestant Bishops, and Preists, warranted by their parlaments, in these very Articles, and their generall practise in ordayning all their Church men, it is diuers times and plainely confessed, both by words and actions, that the holy ghost, grace, and power to giue grace, and forgiue sinnes, is infallibly giuen Protest. confat hampton. Communion Booke Titul. visitat. of the sike. by the externall signe, or ceremony vsed therein. And both their publike conference and examen of their Religion, and the common booke of their Church seruice do proue and giue warrant, from hence, from their ministers to forgiue sinns, by such power committed to them from God in their ordination. Therefore if there be any ground or warrant for the Protestant Religion of England, or any one point, or article thereof, though but such as they pretend for the proposers, and authorizers thereof, whether Protestant Prince, parlament, conuocation, canons, Articles the publik bookes, and practise thereof, or whatsoeuer els they can name in this kinde, holie Orders and preisthood so vehemently persecuted by them, is by their owne doctrine and Religion an holie Sacrament, in such proper true sense and meaning as it is vsed in the Romane Church, at this time, and euer was. They were the Messaliani or Massaliani,
 Euchitae or Enthusiastae heretiks about the Damascen. de haeresib. hist. tripart. l. 7. Theod. l. 4 c 11. Niceph hist. Eccl. l. 11. cap. 14. yeare of Christ; 80. which in antiquitie are remembred first to haue denyed the grace of this holie Sacrament, as they did of others, and affirmed that the holie ghost was not receaued therein, and for this as other their Errours were condemned then of heresie. Messaliani dicunt in clericorum ordinatione Spiritum sanctum non suscipi. These Protestants Ordination will be spoken of in their. 36. Article, of that Title.


THE XVI. CHAPTER.
Matrimonie thus proued a Sacrament.
THE next Sacrament which this Protestant Article excepteth against in the same wordes, and phrase of speach, as against the former is that of matrimonie, euer in the Church of Christ, from his, and his Apostles time, receaued, and vsed for an holy Sacrament. The holie scriptures say it is an honorable estate: honorabile connubium. God Hebr. 13. maketh the vnion of husband and wife vnseparable by man. Quod Deus coniunxit, homo non separet. Matth. 19. The bonde of matrimonie is the greatest, greater then towards father or mother. And a reason is because it is a Sacrament. Relinquet hom^ Ephes. 5. patrem and matrem suam, and adherebit vxori sua, and erunt duo in carne vna. Sacramentum hoc magnum est: ego autem dico in Christo, and in Ecclesia.
This supernaturall and Sacramentall Iustitution in Christian Religion maketh the obligation inuiolable, Matth. 10. not admitting separation, to take any other. Quicumque dimiserit vxorem suam, and ali^^
 duxerit, adulterium committit super eam. and si vxor dimiserit virum suum and alij nupserit, maechatur. Ijs 1. Cotinth. 7. qui matrimonio iuncti sunt, praecipio non ego sed Dominus, vxorem a viro non discedere, quod si decesserit, manere innuptam; aut viro suo reconciliari; and vir vxorem non dimittat. It was not so, either with the Iewes or gentiles. The Iewes enen in the dayes of Moyses had their diuorces Moses mandauit dare Matth. 19. libellum repudij and dimittere. Moses permisit dimittere vxores. As they also had pluralitie of wines then. At the cominge of Christ and after, by their Rabbines allowance. Rabbini vestri sane ad hunc vsque Iustinus dial. cum Tryphone, diem, and quatuor, and quinque vestrum quemque vxores habere permi^tunt. And yet condemned them not, for other incontinencies. All which as S. Iustine liuing in this age, witnesseth against them, is condemned by the Christian Sacrament of matrimony. Si quis vestrum venustam inspiciens, eam expetiuerit, nihil iniqui agere asseuerunt, quo quidem etiam miseri and stulti sunt nomine. Nam sicut prius dixi magnorum Sacramentorum aeconomiae and dispositiones in quolibet eius generis facto sunt celebratae.
The gentiles though euer without title of true Religion, and therefore needles to be remembred in this busines; were not inferiour to the Iewes in this disorder no more then the later Hereticall Turkes and Mahometans now be. Yet I shall speake of the gentiles by accidentary occasion hereafter. S. Martiall in this age doth say not onely that marriage among Christians, is honest, constituted by God, lawfull, and immaculate, but hath sanctification, and honour of chastitie. Coniugium Martial. epist. ad Tholosan. cap. 9. honestum; and constitutum a Deo, l^gitimum and immaculatum, eis qui ex sanctificatione and honore castitatis
 nubere volunt. And Christ our Lord himselfe so approued it. Dominus and Magister meus Christus approbauit.
S. Clement from the Apostles proueth, there could be no dissolubilitie in Christian mariage, no taking a second wife, or husband, during the life of the first. Si quis Laicus, vxorem propriam pelle^s, Clem. Can. Apost 48. Euarist ep. 2. alteram, vel ab alio dimissam duxerit communione priuctur. So S. Euaristus expoundeth S. Paul cited before, of not parting husband, or wife. So Tertullian prouing that mariage among Christians is Tertullian. de Monogam. cap. 11. l. 4. contra Marcion cap. 34. onely dissolued by death, and not diuorce. Per mort^m, non per repudium facta solutione, quia repudiatis non permitteret nubere Apostolus aduersus pristinum praeceptum. Manet matrimonium quod non rite diremptum est. Manente matrimonio nubere, adulterium est. He maketh the prayses of matrimonie l. 2. ad vxorem cap. 9. all most vnspeakeable, the Church maketh it, sacrifice confirmeth it, the Angels honour it, God ratifieth it. It is a coniunction of two Faithfull of one hope, one vowe, one discipline of the same seruice. To these God sendeth his peace. V^^ sufficiam ad enarrandum faelicitatem eius matrimon^^ quod Ecclesia counciliat, and confirmat obligatio, and ob^^gnatum Angeli renunciant, pater rato habet? Qua^ iugum fidelium duorum vnius spei, vnius voti, vni^ disciplinae, eiusdem seruitutis? His Deus pacem su^ Tertullian. l. de Monog. cap. 5. aduers. Valentinian. cap. 30. l. de praescript. aduers. heret. c. Euaristus Pap. epist. 2. Ephes. 5. mittit. He diuers times, and in diuers places calleth it a Sacrament. Sacramentum, celebrandu^ Sacramentum, diuinum Sacramentum, euen as Baptisme and confirmation. So doth S. Euaristus Pop^ liuing in this age, and as other Fathers both greek^ and latin, so expound S. Paul before cited, callin^ it a greate Sacrament, Sacramentum hoc magnum (...)

 S. Chrisostome though liueing after this age yet giueing the custome and practise of thes and after dayes for his reason, besides S. Paules authoritie so expoundeth him saying it is a Sacrament and a greate Sacrament as S. Paul did, prouinge a Sacrament by the Sacramentall grace giuen therein, for a man or woman to forsake him that begotte Chrisostom. in cap. 5. ad Ephes. Hom. 20. them nourished and hrought them vp, her which conceaued them, brought them forth with payne and affliction, who bestowed so many benefites vpon them, as parents do on children, with whom there was so long acquaintance, and cohabitation, to adhere to him or her, that was not seene to them before, and preferr them before all things, this is verily a Mysterie. And the parents when these things are done, are not greeued, but rather if they bee not done, and with Ioy pay money, and make expences to see them performed. Veriely this is a greate mistery, hauing a certayne secrette wisedome, This long since S. Paul Prophesied, saying in Christ and his Church. But this was not spoken alone for him, but what? That the husband should cherish his wife, as his owne flesh. And as Christ doth his Church. Reuera est mysterium, and magnum mysterium, eo qui procreauit, qui genuit, qui educauit: ea, quae concepit, quae cum dolore peperit and afflictione, quitot ac tantis affecerunt beneficijs, cum quibus diuturnus fuit vsus, and consuetudo, relictis, ei adherere, quae ne visa quidem fuit, and cum co nibil habere commune, and eam omnibus praeferre, reuera est mysterium, and parentes cum haec fiunt, ^on egreferunt, sed potius aegreferunt, si non fiant, and cum impenduntur pecuniae, and fiunt sumptus, laetantur. Reuera magnum est mysterium, arcanam quandam habens sapientiam. Hoc multis retroactis soeculis prophetans dicit: In Christo and Ecclesia. Sed non propter
 ipfum solum hoc dictum est. Sed quid? Vt ipsam tanquam propriam carnem foueat, sicut and Christus Ecclesiam.
And to insist vpon the graunt of this Protestant Article. That Sacraments be effectuall signes of grace, we haue the testimonie of the whole Christian world in this Apostolike time, to proue Matrimonie, to be such a signe, and Sacrament, for all the world at the coming of Christ, Iewes, and gentils were giuen to Poligamie and pluralitie of wiues, and yet not so contayning themselues* from other incontinencies, but such as receyued this holy Sacrament abstayned both from the sinnes of Poligamie, and other vnchastities, an euident and vndeniable argument, of the power and sanctitie of this Christian Institution and holy Sacrament. I will onely exemplifie here in Britayne, infected as the rest of the vniuersall world with that generall errour and sinne, at that time. Iulius Caesar Emperour which inuaded this Kingdome and others Iul. Caesar belli gallici l. 6. Ioh. Zonaras in Seuero. Bandica orat. Solemni apud Ioan. Xephil. in Epitom. Dionis, in Nerone. Dion. ibid Dion. Hect. Boeth. descript. Scotiae. william Harrison descrip. of Scotl. cap. 14. after him giue such shamefull testimonie hereof, modestie forbiddeth me to write it in English: Vxores habent deni, duodenique inter se communes, and maxime fratres cum fratribus, and parentes cum liberis nudi degunt, mulieribus promiscue vtuntur. Their Queene Bandica in her publike sacrifice to the Britans Godd^sse Andraste, or Andaste, in her solemne prayer openly pronounced of them: Qui cum caetera omnia, tum liberos and vxores communes inter se putant. Pagans, Catholiks and Protestants write the like of the Picts, The Protestants thus speake it in English: They liue naked in Tents, th^ir wiues are common.
The Scots were more barborous in these sinnes,
 and their Kings especially Euenus confirmed them by publike lawes. Leges tulit improbas omnem olentes Leges Euan. Regis Scotorum. Hector Boeth Scot. Hist. l. 3. fol. 36. pag. 1. spurcitiam, vt liceret singulis suae gentis plures vxores alijs sex, alijs decem pro opibus ducere. Nobilibus plebeorum vxores communes essent, ac virginis nouae nuptae, loci Dominus primam libandi pudicitiam, potestatem haberet. This was the miserable condition of this Kingdome of greate Britayne, as of other nations, before it receaued the lawe of Chist, and the holie Sacrament of Matrimonie, betweene one man and woman, one husband, and one wife, to giue infallible demonstration to all people, present and to come, that great supernaturall assistance, and grace was giuen by that externall rite or ceremonie, and so consequently ordayned of God, no other being able to do it all those most horrible lasciuious incontinencies generally ceased in the true and due receauers of this Sacrament.
And for the barbarous customes and lawes before, Veremund. Hect. Boeth. hist. Scot. l. 10. fol. 202. Hollinshed hist. of Scotl. pag. 133. caplawes. these were made, kept, and seuerely executed. Our Protestants thus translate them. Any mans lemman or concubyne shall suffer the same paynes, that he doth which offendeth with her. He that rauisheth a mayde shall dye for it, vnlesse shee require for safe-gard of his life, to haue him to her husband. If any man be taken with another mans wife in adulterie, shee consenting vnto him therein, they shall both suffer death for it. But if shee consent not, but beforced against her will, then he shall dye onely for the same, and shee shall be released. In such greate seueritie the sinne of Incontinencie was punished here after this holie Sacrament, by the grace thereof a preseruatiue against it was receaued, and few were founde transgressours thereof, all though these lawes were prosecuted
 with such zeale and deuotion, that we finde, that Princes and Kings found delinquent were neither exempted, nor spared in such cases, as we see in the lamentable example of King Vortigerne testified both by brittish, English, Catholike and Protestant historians who breakeing his Matrimoniall Nennius hist. manuscript. in Vorthigerno Rege Mat. westm. an 450. Mat. Park. Antiq. Britan. pag. 7. 8. Protest. annotat. in Mat. westm. an. 454. Stowe and Howes hist. in Vortigern. Hollins hist. of Engl. in eod. Protest. Communion. booke Tit. Matrimonie. @ Dearely. 1. @. O God. @. Allmightie God. Faith, with his first lawfull wife, and adulterously ioyning himselfe with an other woman, Rowenna Daughter of Engist, was by S. German the Popes legate, with the aduise and consent of the brittish cleargie, cited, Iudged and excomunicated, and by the whole Kingdome deposed. Neyther can the Protestants of England deny Matrimonie to be a Sacrament. For in the manner of celebrating thereof at euery mariage, it termeth it, holy matrimonie, an honorable estate, instituted of God, signifying vnto vs, the misticall vnion which is betwene Christ and his Church. God instituted it, and did teache, it should neuer be lawfull to put a sunder those, whom he by matrimonie had made one. God hath consecrated the stat of matrimonie to such an excellent mistery, that in it is signified and represented the spirituall mariage and vnitie betwixt Christ and his Church. And this Rituall expresseth, that God giueth grace, sanctification, and blessing at this externall ceremonie, so instituted and ordeyned by him. Which euidently ouerthroweth what they haue saide to the contrary in this Article, and proueth by their owne most generall and warranted vse, practise, and profession, that Matrimonie is truely and properly an holie Sacrament.



THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Extreame vnction thus proued, to be a Sacrament.
THE Sacrament following being the last in number, and order, which this Protestant Article desalloweth, is extreame vnction. But we are most assured, that in this Apostolike age, and by the Apostles themselues it was taught and practised for an holie Sacrament, S. Iames the Apostle in his epistle maketh it a precept, and matter of necessitie, and not arbitrary so to vse it. Insirmatur Iacob. c. 5. quis in vobis? inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super eum, vngentes eum oleo in nomine Domini. Etsi in peccatis sit, remittentur ei. Here we haue all which this Protestant Article requireth to a true and properly named Sacrament, testified by an Apostle in holie scripture and tradition of the Church from that time, to be founde in extreame vnction.
That it was ordayned of Christ, and an effectuall signe of grace, the words are playne, as also that the visible signe or ceremonie thereof was ordayned of God, for no power limited and created can ordayne, or institute a signe or ceremonie externall to forgiue sinnes: si in peccatis sit remittentur ei. The auntient Fathers both of the greeke Origen. hom. 2. in leuitic. Chrisostom. l. 3. de Sacerdotio. Cirill. Alexandr. l. 6. de adorat. in spiritu victor Antioch. ad c. 6. marci. Ambros. in missali Hier. ad c. 14. Oseae August. Serm. 215. de tempor. in Tract. de rectitud. cathol. conuersat. l. 2. de visitat. Infirm. c. 4. Innocent. 1. epistol. ad Decent. Eug. cap. 8. Aug. l. de Haeres. cap. 47. Gabriel Prat. Elench. haeresum in Hierarchitis. Epiph. haeres. 67. Extreame vnction a Sacrament with the Britans. Manuscript. Brit. Antiquissimi Authoris. and Latine Church doe thus expound this place, and deriue this Sacrament from thence, and affirme it euer to haue beene so receaued in Christs Church and by him instituted, proposed by S. Iames. sic roges dete, and pro te fieri, sicut dixit Apostolus Iacobus,
 immo per Apostolum suum Dominus: ipsa videlicet olei sacrati delibutio intelligitur Spiritus sancti typicalis vnctio.
I need not to make repetitions of their testimonies, this veritie being so generally receaued and practized in the first times of Christian Religion, that about the yeare of Christ 279. it was commonly adiudged heresie to deny it, and is so censured, registred, and condemned in the exploded heresies of the Hierarchite Heretiks: dicebant extremae vnctionis Sacramentum a Deo institutum, non esse. Which being condemned for herefie in the whole Church of Christ, must needs be so also adiudged in this Kingdome, renowned then for true Christian Religion, and the Catholike doctrine, yet we want not particular testimonies hereof, for our Protestants themselues commonly teaching that the Britans neuer chaunged any materiall point in Religion, produce vnto vs a most auntient manuscript as they terme it, written, ab authore antiquissimo, and as is euident in the same Antiquitie, when there were yet many Pagans and Idolaters here, in which, commaunde and direction is giuen that all sick persons in daunger of death should both receaue the Sacrament of Christs holie bodie, and this of extreame vnction, sette downe by S. Iames the Apostle and the primatiue Fathers before. Quotiens aliqua Infirmitas superuenerit, corpus and sanguinem Christi illi qui aegrotant, accipiant: oleum in nomine Domini a presbyteris humiliter petant, and inde corpus suum vngant: vt quod scriptum est, impleatur. Infirmatur aliquis, inducat Iacob. 5. presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super cum vngentes eum oleo in nomine Domini, and oratio fidei saluabit
 infirmum, and alleuiabit eum Dominus, et si in peccatis sit; dimittentur ei. Videtefratres, quia qui infirmitatem habent, ad Ecclesiam currant, corporis sanitatem re^ipere, and peccatorum Indulgentiam merebuntur obti^ere.
The Protestants of England euen the composers of these Articles, cannot by their owne Religion be of other mind, without grosse Ignorance and contradiction, for defining a Sacrament, as they haue done in this Article, and in their most Protest. commun. booke Tit. catechisme. warranted communion booke thus do define it: by this word Sacrament I meane an outward and visible signe, of an Inward and spirituall grace giuen vnto vs, ordeyned by Christ himselfe, as a meanes whereby we receaue the same, and a pledge to assuer vs thereof: They must needs graunt that S. Iames in expresse words in holie scripture, their pretended Rule, hath deliuered as much for this Sacrament as they require, the outward visible signe, the Preists prayer and vnction with oyle, and remission of sinnes, which cannot be without grace, receaued by the same.
Thus I haue inuincibly proued by this first Apostolike age for the doctrine and practise of the Catholike Church and against this Protestant Article, the whole compleat number of 7. Sacraments. And yet if I had onely proued three Sacraments, or any lesse number then seuen, and greater then two I had sufficiently confuted this Article which onely alloweth two, Baptisme and the Eucharist stiled by them, the Supper of the Lord, for such.



THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
The rest of this Article repugnant to the Catholike faith, likewise condemned.
THE remnant of this Article they deliuer in these words: The, Sacraments were not ordeyned of Christ, to be gazed vpon, or to be carryed aboute but that we should duely vse them. And in such onely as worthyly receaue the same; they haue a wholesome ^ffect or operation: But they that receaue them vnworthily, purchase to themselues damnation, as Sainct Paule saith.
This is the whole content of this Article, and in this last, if these Protestants desire to speake properly, as they should, and would so be vnderstood: there is very little or no difference betwene Catholiks and them. For where they say, that Sacraments haue a wholesome effect or operation in their worthie receauers, this agreeth with the Catholike doctrine, that Sacraments giue grace, and worke ex opere operato, which many Protestants denie. And concerning the vnworthie receauing of them, it is not a thing questioned. What they meane, by these wordes, The Sacraments were not ordeyned of Christ to be gazed vppon, or to be carryed about, So speaking of Sacraments in the plurall number, is a straunge speach, excepting one Species of the Sacrament of Eucharist we reserue none, nor carry any about for any respect nor can by their doctrine, professing they consist in their ministration and receauing, as is euident in Baptisme, Confirmation, Orders, Confession
 and Absolution, Matrimony, and Extreame vnction. What they meane by their words, gazed vpon, requireth a better glosse, then they giue to v^derstande their meaning, for to take the worde as it is commonly and properly vsed in our language, earnestly* or intensiuely to beholde, if they forbid such gesture at Sacraments, they forbid publik ministration of them, which their practise alloweth, warranteth and prescribeth by their greatest authoritie.
If they would haue this their termed gasing vpon, or carrying about to be vnderstood any re^^rence or reseruation the Romane Church vseth ^owards the blessed Sacrament of the Altare, the question with them properly belongeth to their ^8. Article, where they expressely speake against Transubstantiation, or chaunge of breade and wine into the body and blood of Christ, and his true and reall presence in those most sacred misteries, which being vndeniably confuted, as in that place it shall, this errour is thereby clearely ouerthrowne. For wheresoeuer Christ is, or howsoeuer heis, heis to be worshipped and adored, with as greate dutie and reuerence as any Catholike giueth vnto him in this Sacrament. In the meane tyme the Apostolike men of this first age do thus testifie.
S. Clement often testifying the reall and true presence of Christ in this most holie Sacrament, setteth downe the deuotion and honour of all people then, Bishops, Preists, Deacons, Subdeacons, Virgyns, widowes, married, old and young to be as greate or greater then Catholiks now commonly vse vnto it. When consecration is ended, and the blessed Sacrament was shewed vnto the Christians
 present, the Deacon vsed to say, let vs a^tend or behold. The Bishop or Preist offering the Sacrifice, said to the people holie things for the holie, and the people answeared one holie one Lord, one Christ in the glorie of God the Father blessed for euer Amen. Glorie to God on highest, and peace to men of good will: Osanna to the sonne of Dauid. Blessed is he that cometh in the name of our Lord, God our Lord, and hath appeared vnto vs, hosanna in the highest. Then all communicate with greate reuerence, acknowledging that which they receaue to be the bodie, and blood of Christ. And that was left, by the Deacons was reuerently carryed into, and kept in the Pastophories. Postquam omnes dixerunt Amen. Diaconus dicat attendamus: Clem. Rom. Const. Apost. l. 8. cap. 20. l. 2. cap. 61. Et Episcopus alloquatur populum ijs verb^^ sancta sanctis, and populus subiungat vnus sanctus, vnus Dominus, vnus Christus in gloria Dei Patris benedictus in saecula Amen. Gloria in altissimis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis. Osonna filio Dauid. Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini Deus Dominus and apparuit nobis. Osanna in altissimis. Post hoc sumat Episcopus, deinde Presbiteri, and Diaconi and Hypodiaconi, and Anagnostae, and Cantores, and Ascetae, and ex mulieribus Diaconissae. and Virgines and Viduae, postea pueri and omnis populus cum pudore and reu^rentia. Episcopus det oblationem dicens, Corpus Christi, and sumens dicat Amen. Postquam omnes sumpserunt, accipiant Diaconi reliquias, and portent in pastophoria.
Thes Pastophories were sacred and religious Carol. Bou. Scot. in l. 2. Clement. de Const. Apost. cap. 61. tabernacles in Churches, wherein the blessed Sacrament, holie and sacred vestments and vessels were kept. And this holie Sacrament was so religiously
 ^^eserued, that as S. Clement witnesseth, to be negligent therein in the time of the Apostles was Clem. Rom. epistol. 2. excommunication. Presbyteri, Diaconi, and ministri c^m timore and tremore clericorum reliquias fragmentorum corporis Domini custodire debent, ne qua putredo in Sacrario inueniatur, ne quum negligentur agitur portioni corporis Domini grauis inferatur iniuria. Communio enim Corporis Domini nostri Iesu Christi si negligenter erogetur, and presbyter minora non curet admonere officia, graui anathemate, and digna humiliationis plaga feriatur.
So greate reuerence, and honour was vsed in reseruing this blessed Sacrament in that time, that neither pall, vayle, or any thing that touched it, might be washed out of the Sacrary, so named in respect this most holie Sacrament was therein with such deuotion preserued. And the basen wherein they were washed was accompted so holy, that nothing but such holy things might be washed in it. Palla and vela quae in sanctuarij sordidata fuerint ministerio, Diaconi cum humilibus ministris iuxta Sacrarium lauent, non eijcientes foras a sacrario velamina dominicae mensae, ne forte puluis Dominici Corporis male decidat a sindone foris abluto, and erit haec operanti peccatum, idcirco, intra sacrarium ministris praecipimus, haec sancta cum diligentia custodire: peluis noua comparetur, and praeter hoc nihil aliud tangat. Pallae altaris solae in ea lauentur.
S. Ignatius proueth the Eucharist to be the flesh Ignat. epist. ad Rom. epist. ad Smyrnens. apud Theod. Dial. 3. and al. of Christ our Sauiour, which suffered for our sinnes, and which arose agayne, and so must needs be honoured. Panem Dei volo, panem caelestem, quae est caro Christi filij Dei. Eucharistiam esse carnem Saluatoris nostri Iesu Christi, quae pro peccatis nostris passa
 est, quam Pater suae benignitate suscitauit. And maketh them notorious heretiks which denyed, or called it into question: non confiteantur, which did, not confesse it.
S. Denys the Areopagite deliuereth to vs, how Christ in this Sacrament was honoured, and prayed vnto, setting downe the very prayer itselfe, which that Apostolike time there vsed vnto him. O diuinum Dion. Areopag. Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 3. pignus sacrumque mysterium abducta tibi significantium operimenta signorum dignant^r aperiens, nobi^ palam atque aperte lucesce nostros spirituales oculos singa^ari and aperto tuae lucis fulgore imple. He telleth also, how both the Preist that offered this most holy Sacrifice, worshipped it, and did shew it vnto the people present likewise to be worshipped of them. Pantifex sacro sancta and augustissima mysteria Dionys. supr. cap. 3. conficit, and quae ante laudauerat, venerandis opert^, atque abdita conspectu agit, diuina munera reuerenter ostendens.
All things belonging to this most holy Sacrament were holy, and honoured both by the writers of this age, and our Ptotestants testimonie. The Bishops, Preists, Deacons, and others were consecrated as before. And as S. Anacletus euen by Protestant allowance saith, the Preists might not be Iudged by others, they were honoured ^^ Christ, and their priuiledges were graunted the^ Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Anacleto. Anaclet. epist. Tom. 1. concil. and alibi. Sixtas Pap. 1. Rob. Barnes supra in eod. by Christs commaunde. Anacletus Christo alie^^ esse iudicabat, qui Sacerdotes in Ius vocarent. Qui^ inquit, qui sacerdoti detrahit, Christo detrahit* sacerdotes omnino Christi sunt. priuilegia Ecclesiae and sacerdotum Apostoli saluatoris iussu inuiolata esse debere iusserunt. The Altar whereon it was sacrifised, was holy: Missam non nisi in altari celebrandam esse. Th^
 ^^^po^^ll whereon it was layed, and the cloathes ^^ the altare were holy, so were all the vessels vsed ^bout it, that none but consecrated persons might touch them. sacra vasane qui praeter sacros mini^^ros attingerent. The Church vestures both of the Preist, and other clergymen which assisted him in this Sacrifice, sacred and holy. sacerdotem sacrifi^^^urum, Anaclet. epist. Rob. Barnes in vit. Pontif. Rom. in Anaclet. ministros vestibus sacris indutos, seu testes and custodes sibi adhibere ordinauit Anacletus. The place named there vpon Sacrarium Sacrary, or holy place, was holy, So was the Tabernacle or P^stophorium wherein it was religiously kept. Thus testifie the holy Popes which were liuing in this first age, Thus testifie our Protestant Antiquaries, whose very words for more suertie I haue cited.
And the larned Fathers both greeke and latine Tertullian. l. 2. ad vxorem. Ciprian. Sermon. delapsis. Basil. in Gordio mart. Chrisost. epist. ad Innocent. to. 4. and cit. a Nicephor. l. 13. cap. 19. concil. nic^n. 1. can. 14. An old manus^ipt. British and dulch Serm. read in our old Churche^ an. 366. Foxe Act. and monum. p. 1142. in the next ages following testifie this religious and reuerent manner of reseruing this blessed Sacrament: So hath the first generall councell of Nice, and other authorities vndeniable. And that this was the custome in Britayne is proued before, when I cited from the antiquities thereof, that the like receaued this Sacrament reserued, when extreame vnction was ministred vnto them. And one of their most auntient antiquities carrying with it our Protestants approbation, doth witnesse that the primatiue Christian Britans did publikely ^^ Euery Masse worship and pray vnto Christ present in this Sacrament, this hath our Protestants translation: Hereof singe Gods seruants at euery Masse, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis: That is in our speach: Thou lambe of God; that takest away the sinnes of the world, haue mercy vpon vs.
 And thus I end this their many braunched Article.


THE XIX. CHAPTER.
The 26. and 27. Articles examined and Protestant doctrine in or by them condemned.
THeir next Article being the 26. by their numbring them, is thus intituled. Of the worthi^es of the ministers, which hinder not the effect of the sacraments. The whole Article followeth in these All though in the visible Church the euill be euer mingled with the good, and sometime the euill haue cheife authoritie in the ministration of the worde and sacraments: yet for asmuch as they do not the same in their owne name, but in Christes, and do minister by his commission, and authoritie, we may vse their ministerie, both in hearing the word of God, and in receiuing of the sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christes ordinance taken away by their wikednesse, nor the grace of Gods guifts diminished from such as by faith, and rightly do receiue the sacraments ministred vnto them, which be effectuall, because of Christs institution (...) promise, allthough they be ministred by euill men. Neuerthelesse, it apperteyneth to the discipline of the Churche, that inquirie be made of euill ministers, and that they be accused by those, that haue knowledge of their offences: and finally, being founde gyltie by (...) Iudgment, be deposed.
Hitherto this Article, in which there it not any one proposition, or sentence, against the doctrine of the Romane Church and Catholike Religion, but rather a graunte and confirmation thereof,
 (...) a renowncing of Protestant profession, and proceedings in diuers particular poyntes, and some most materiall. As declaring that in the visible Church the euill be euer mingled with the good, they confesse the Church to be euer and inde^ectible. And so Luther, Caluyn, Cranmar, King Henry 8. with his daughter Queene Elizabeth, or whomsoeuer els they will or can make the first publisher or aduancer of their doctrine, separating themselues, and being separated and cutt of from that visible true Church, which was then generally so held, this their Protestant congregation, and Religion takeing Originall, and being from thence, cannot possibly be the true Church and Religion of Christ.
And in making the true Church euer visible, they must needs make their association or prerended companie euer inuisible, and so nothing vntill these dayes, and condemne those their brethren Protestants, who knowing their new fraternitie was neuer vntill those late times, haue mathematically framed in their Imagination, a new straung, chimericall, Inuisible, vnbeeable and vnpossible Church. Agayne professing that Preists the Ministers of Sacraments do Minister them in Christes (...), by his commisson, and authoritie, they sufficiently confesse, that if Christ omnipotent could and did consecrate breade and wyne into his body, and blood, forgiue sinnes and giue grace in sacraments, truely consecrated Preists haue that power, and do the same. And affirming, The sacraments to b^ effectuall because of Christes Institution and promise, ^either is the effects of Christes ordinance tak^n away, nor the grace of Gods guists diminished by the wikednesse
 of ministers, They proue what the Catholiks holde in these things, and Protestants cammonly deny. Their last clause of Discipline in the Church making but one true visible Church, and their congregation being, as before no part thereof, depriueth them of all such discipline, as they haue already spoyled themselues of the pure worde of God preached and Sacraments duely ministred vnseparable signes and properties of the true visible Church, by their 19. Article, and thereby want all things which by their owne confession are euer founde in, and belonge vnto the Church of Christ.
The 27. Article intituled, of baptisme, hath no thing contrary to Catholik Religion: But the last clause thereof is against their 6. Article before, that nothing is to be beleeued as an Article of faith or to be thought requisite necessarie to saluation, that is not read in, nor may be proued by scriptures. And in this place thus they decree: The Baptisme-ef yong Prot. Articl. 27. children, is in any wise to be retayned in the Church, as most agreable with the Institution of Christ. In this whole Article before they make Baptisme in all requisite necessarie to Saluation, So they do i^ Protest. communion Booke Tit. Baptisme. Protest. Conference at hampton Court. their communion booke in the administration thereof, and in the reuewe of their Religion ^^ Hampton court, thus they define: That baptisme to be ministred by priuate parsons, in tyme of necessitie, is an holie tradition. And so they vse in their common practise, and Baptise Infants both by their ministers, and others men and women, especially my dwiues, instructed how to Baptisme in time of Engl. Protest. in feild Bookes of the Church pag. 239. and others. necessitie. Yet with publik consent and allowan^^ thus they write and publish: Baptisme of Infants ^^
 ^^^ed a Tradition, because it is not expressely deliuered i^ stripture, that the Apostles did baptize Infants, nor (...) expresse precept there founde, that they should so do.
T^^t the holy Fathers of the first age held Baptisme Supr. in articul. 6. of Infants for an vnwritten tradition I haue spoken before. And S. Clement doth giue com^^^nd, Clem. Rom. l^b. 6. constit. Apostolic. cap. 15. Dionys. Areopag. Ecclesiast. Hierarch. cap. 7. concil. mileuit. cap. 2. Chrisostom. homil. de Adam and Eua. Augustin. cont. Donat. l. 1. cap. 23. Epiphan. Aug. and alij de haeres. Innocent. 1. epist. concil. African. cap. 77. concil. Carthagin. 5. cap. 6. Hect. Boeth. Scot. h^st. l. 9. Georg. Buchan. Rer. scot. l. 5. Reg. 52. holinsh. hist. of Scotland in F^equard. pag. 112. to haue it obserued: Baptizate vestros pue^^^ (...). S. Denys the Areopagite affirmeth it was so vsed: Pueri qui necdum possunt intelligere diui^^, sacri hapti smatis participes fiant. And shew^^g^ how others answeare and promise for them, (...) pr^ ipsi^ abrenun^iant, sanctaqu^ ineunt faedera; (...) i^ an holy tradition, sanctam traditionem; (...) S. Chrisostome and others testifie generally in the whole Catholik Church in all places, Praedi^^t Ecclesia Catholica vbique diffusa, debere par^^^^^ Baptizari prepter original^ peccatum. And they were Nouatian, Pelagian and such condemned H^retiks, which at any time called this holy tradi^^on and custome into question. So it was here ^^ Britayne, which though it was Mother and Noble longe time to pelagius the Archeretike, w^o among other his damned Errours denyed the Baptisme of Infants, yet it so much detested among t^^ rest this his obsurd Inuention, that it spared n^^ Princes themselues, that followed him therein, at all Antiquities tell vs, in the case of King Frequard, who being noted to haue laught at the Baptisme of Infants, and confession of sinnes to P^^ists, Notatus est aliquando risisse paruulorum ^^ptis^um peccatorumque ad Sacerdotis aurem confes^^^^^, was accused of pelagianisme, cited, condemned, imprisoned and deposed. So testifie both Catholik and Protestant Antiquaries.



THE XX. CHAPTER.
The 28. Article intituled, of the supper of the Lord, examined, and condemned.
THEIR 28. Article being intituled: of the (...) supper: is as followeth. The supper of the Lorde is not onely a signe of the loue, that Christians ought to haue among themselues, on to an other: but rather it is a Sacrament of our redemption, by Christes death: in so much, that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receaue the same, the bread which we breake is a partaking of the body of Christ, and likewise the cuppe of blessing is a partaking of the blood of Christe. Transubstantiation (the chaunge of the substance of bread^ and wine, in the supper of the Lord, cannot be pro^ed by holy writ: it is repugnant to the playne words of scripture, ouerthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, (...) hath giuen occasion to many superstitions. The body ^^ Christ is giuen, taken, and eaten in the supper, (...) after an heauenly, and spirituall manner: And t^^ meane whereby the bodie of Christ is receaued, and (...) in the supper, is faith.
The Sacrament of the Lords supper was not by Christs ordinaunce reserued, carryed about, lifted vp, or worshipped. Hitherto this 28. Protestant Article. In the first part thereof vntill we come to the wo^^ Transubstantiation, or the chaunge of the substance, there is no apparant contradiction to the doctrine of the Catholik Church, And if our Protestants secretly meane otherwise, their Intention i^ plainely expressed in that which followeth, i^ denying Transubstantiation or chaunge of the
 substance of breade and wyne. Which I affirme with the Catholike Church, and thus proue against this Article. First by holy writ or scripture, allthough that is not necessarie, as is often made manifest against these men. Where soeuer there is a chaunge or mutation of one thing into an other, as in this case of breade into the body of Christ, and this manifestly expressed and conteyned in holy writ and scripture, there is transubstantiation or chaunge of breade by scripture into Christs body, likewise of wyne into his blood.
This is euident by their owne exposition and transubstantiation, in this place, declaring it to be a chaunge of the substance of breade and wine. But the holy writ and scripture in three Euangelists, and S. Paule expressely proue, that before Christ blessed and consecrated the breade and wine, it was noe other but breade and wine, and proue likewise euen from the testimonie of Christ himselfe, that after his Matth. cap. 26. Marc. cap. 14. Luc. cap. 22. 2 Chorinth. 11. blessing and omnipotent worde spoken it was now chaunged into his body and blood, playnely saying this is my body, which is giuen, or shall be giuen for you, and this is my blood which is shedd, or shall be shedd for you. Therefore by these Protestants exposition before there was, and of necescessitie must be transubstantiation, or chaunge of the substance of bread and wine. Thus hath holie writ and scripture in all learned languadges Hebrue Greeke and Latin before consecration it was (...) lechem, (...) artos, panis, breade: after consecration (...) ghenijah (...) son^a corpus. Christs body: likewise of the wine chaunged into his blood, this is the testimony of Christ, S. Matthew, S. Marke, S. Luke, and S. Paule in holie
 writte and scripture, And S. Iohn is witnesse also, Io: cap. 6. that Christ had taught and promised this before And yet any one place of scripture in so playne words maketh a matter of faith, out of doubt, and vndeniable. Nothing can be more playne, then such an affirmatiue proposition, of a Subiect present, in the hands of Christ the speaker, and in the sight and presence of the greatest witnesses his Apostles, at his last supper, in the greatest Sacrament. Christ neuer interpreted himselfe otherwise That his Apostles so vnderstood him, beleeued, practized and left to others, is euidently proued both by Scriptures and the antiquities of this age. First S. Iohn in scripture speaketh in Christs words, Io: 6. that breade is made his bodie. Panis quem ego dab^, caro mea est pro mundi vita. And were plaine and often in that his 6. Chapter. And both Catholike and Protestant Antiquaries confesse, that hee said Masse wherein this chaunge and transubstantiation is vsed, and confirmed, HOC EST CORPVS MEVM etc. And assuers vs that the Altare on which he said Masse many yeares, before the blessed Virgyn, was preserued in a Church on mount Syon, miraculously brought thither. Ad occidentalem Guliel. way. Etonem: presbyter l. Itinerar. cap. Ioc. Sanct. mont. Sinay. Hakligis booke of Trauailes in eod. Matth. cap. 26. partem Ecclesiae, quae est in monte Sion est lap^^ rubens prae altari, qui lapis portatus erat de monte Sinay per manus Angelorum: super quem celebrabat S. Ioannes Euangelista coram Beatisima Virgine Maris Missam per multos Annos post ascensionem Domini.
Thus testifie holie pilgryms eye witnesses euen of this Kingdome so remote from Hierusalem. S. Matthew in his ghospell saith in the words of Christ: This is my bodie: HOC EST CORPVS MEVM. This is my blood HIC EST SANGVIS MEVS. In his
 ^^^^rgie or Masse deliuered to the Church, and S. Matth. in missa Aethiopum. which he vsed, he directly teacheth transubstantiation and chaunge of breade and wine into Christs bodie and blood: o Amator hominum benedic, sanctifica, munda and transfer panem in carnem tuam immaculatam, and vinum hoc in sanguinem tuum pretiosum. And thus hee vsed all his life euen to his martyrdome at the holie Altare, where he thus consecrated Christs bodie by chaunging breade Anonym. antiquiss. in vit. S. Matth. edit. per Frederic. Naus. Episcopum Viennen. Breuiar. Rom. 21. Sept. 1. Corinth. 11. into it, as the old historie of his life and death bea^^^h wittnes. Cum misteria Domini celebrata fuissent, and missam suscepisset omnis Ecclesia, retinuit se Sanct^^ Matthaus iuxta Altare, vbi corpus fuerat Christi ^^fectum, and illic martyrium expectauit.
S. Paule in holie scripture saith it was breade before benediction: Accepit panem gratias agens, and ^fter Christs consecrating words, it was his bodie HOC EST CORPVS MEVM. And promiseth there to deliuer by tradition, what was to be beleeued and practised herein caetera cum venero disponam. Which his most learned scholler S. Denys the Areopagite was most like to knowe who before hath testified it was Christs bodie and to be adored. S. Marke hath assured vs in his ghospell in the words of Christ, that it was breade before the words of Consecration, accepit Iesus panem: But after them, the Marc. cap. 14. Manuscrit. antiq. de prima Instit. Ecclesiast. Seruit. S. Marcus in Missa. bodie of Christ: HOC EST CORPVS MEVM. So he testifieth of wine chaunged into his blood. In his Order of Masse receaued and vsed here in Britayne, as our old brittish writer of the first Institution of Ecclesiasticall Seruice allowed by our Protestant Antiquaries, proueth, he calleth it after consecration, the holy, most boly vnspotted body of Christ, Sanctum, Sanctissimum Intemeratum Corpus
 Christi, so chaunged from breade: likewise of his pretious blood pretiosus sanguis Christi, from wine before.
S. Luke in his ghospell is most playne: HOC Luc. cap. 22. EST CORPVS MEVM quod pro vobis datur. And being so inseparable a companion to S. Paule as he witnesseth in many places of scripture, he could not differ from him in this poynt. Neither from Luc. cap. 1. the rest of the Apostles, from whom as he writeth in the beginning of his ghospell he receaued what Isidor. l. 1. de offic. c. 25. de Missa and orat. Albin. l. de diuin. offic. Egbert. Stephan. Eduen. l. de Sa, Magdeburg. centur. 1. l. 2. cap. 6. col. 500. Matth. Parker. antiquitat. Britan. cap. 17. pag. 47. Paschas. Ratb. lib. de Corp. and Sang. Christi. Walfrid. Strab l. de obseruat. cap 22. Martin. Polon. Supputat. temp. in S. Petro col. 27. Missa antiq. S. Petri manuscript. Brit. antiq. supr. cit. he wrote therein. Sicut tradiderunt nobis, qui ab initio ipsi viderunt, and ministri fuerunt sermonis.
That S. Peter said masse, and deliuered a forme and order thereof to the Church of Christ we haue more witnesses, then can easely be cited, and their citations more needles, seing the principall Protestants themselues confesse it and that it remayned without alteration 200. yeares, and more vntill Pope Zepherine added some what vnto it. A Christi primo instituto ducentis amplius annis in prima Ecclesia durauit. And this as they and others teach was by S. Peter, instituente Beato Petro. Yet therein we finde most playnely deliuered, that the breade and wine were transubstantiated and chaunged into Christs body and blood. Domine Deus noster, qui te obtulisti pro huius mundi vita, respice in nos, and super panem istum, and calicem bunc, and fac eum immaculatum tuum corpus, and pretiosum sanguinem. And in the masse still vsed Corpus and sanguis fiat dilectissimi filij tui. And often therein repeted, that after consecration it is so chaunged. Our old Brittish manuscript of the first Institution of Church seruice with others proue, that S. Photinus S. Peters disciple Bishop of Lyons, and S. Trophimus Bis(...)
 in Fraunce brought this Order of S. Zozimus ep. to. 1. concil. Martyrol. Roman. die 29. Decemb. in S. Troph. Magdeburg. cent. 1. l. 1. in Troph. Old. Engl. chron. an. domini 34. part. 4. Peters M^sse thither, and all Fraunce receaued it from them.
Our old English chronicle in our old language pl^inely saith: Peter the first Pope was a blessed man, and glorious Apostle of Christ, he was heade of the Church, he said Masse, he made our Lords bodie. No men can better witnesse* what was the doctrine and practise of this cheife Apostle, then his renown^d disciple and Successours, S. Ignatius, and S. Element, the one at Antioche the other at Rome, both which as I haue before proued from them, and shall more hereafter, do directly teach Christs ^^all presence in this Sacrament, and so transubstantiation and such chaunge of breade and wine into Christs bodie and blood, as this Article denyeth, for so greate mutation Alteration or whatsoeuer we shall name it, cannot possibly be otherwise.
And our old brittish manuscript saith plainely that this Masse of S. Peter brought into Fraunce by S. Photinus and S. Trophinus was afterward car^^ed to S. Clement at Rome to be viewed. Cursum Romanum quem Beatus Trophinus and Sanctus Photi^^s in Gallijs tradiderunt, ad Beatum Clementem quartum loca Successoris Beati Petri Apostol^ deportauerunt. S. Andrew the Apostle is thought to be the Author Onissa S. Andreae Eccl. Constantin. and Chrisost. of the Masse of the Church of Constantinople, named now S. Christostoms, in which there is manifest transubstantiation: Emitte spiritum tuum super nos, and super proposita dona haec, and fac panem hunc pretiosum Corpus Christi tui: and quod est in calice ifto pretiosum saguinem Christi filij tui, transmutans spiritu tuo sancto. Which he practised in his
 life, and at his holie martyrdome openly both before Christians and persecuting pagans he th^^ professed. Ego Omnipotenti Deo immolo. quotidi^ i^maculatum agnum in al^ari, eius carnem poste^quam omnis populus credentium manducauerit, agnus q^^ sacrificatus est, integer perseuerat and vinus.
Thus testified the Preist and Deacons liuing ^^ Vit. S. And. per presbyter. and Diac. Achaie Breuiar. Roman. Breuiar. Salisbur. in fest. S. Andreae l. de duplici mart. inter opera Cypr. Anonymus. de vit. Apost. in S. Andrea. Metaphrast. in S. Andr. Iuo carn. Serm. de Sacram. dedicat. Serm. 4 Bernard apud Franc. Eenardent. in Iren. l. 4. Alger. cont. Berengar. Iacob. gemens. in S. Andr. Clem, l. 6. Hypotepos. Euseb. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. Miss^ S. Iacobi. and Eccl. Hierolomitanol. his death, the Church of Rome, ours of England, with others in their publik seruice of him, S. Cyprian or whosoeuer authour of the booke de ^^plici martyrid amonge his workes. The old Anonymus writer of the Apostles lines, Symeon Metaphrastes, S. Iuo, S. Bernard, Algerus Iacobus igemensis, and others without number. S. Iames brother to S. Iohn was soone after Christs Ascension martyred by King Herode, as we reade in the Acts of the Apostles cap. 12. by reason whereof, much memory is not left of him in histories, but being of Christs three most beloued Apostles, brother to S. Iohn, and companion to S. Peter, the two others so inuincibly proued to haue beene professours and practisers of this Catholike doctrine no man can Imagyne hee could be of other minde, especially being martyred in Hierusalem, where he, S. Peter and S. Iohn professing this doctrine, as before, ordeined the other S. Iames Bishop, who in his Order of Masse writeth: Rogamus vt Spiritus sanctus adueniens sancta bona and gloriosa sua pr^sentia sanctific^^, and eff^^iat hunc panem Corpus sanctum Christi tui, and calicem hunc praetiosum sanguinem Christi ^ui. Where transubstantiation, and chaunge of breade and wine into Christs bodie, and blood in the blessed Sacrament by the omnipotent power of God is most playnely deliuered. And so must needs be
 (...) of this S. Iames as of the other, and S. Censura Oriental. Hier. Patria^r. Constinopol. ibid. Proclus S. Michol. Methon. Bessar. apud Gul. Eisen. centen. 1. part. 6. dist. 6. concil. general. 6. can. 52. Francisc. Aluar. de reb. Indic. Florin. Raem. de Orig. Haer. l. 8. c. 8. Grym. booke of estates pag. 1088. 1089. 201. 203. Sebast. Munster. l. 6. cap. 57. Rich. Hacklints booke of Trau. in Mount Syon. Mandeu. pag. 36. cap. 14. Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1. fol. 168. and mult ib. Steph. Eduen. l. de Sacram. Altaris. English. Prot. in Marcus Anton. l. 2. c. 4. p. 118. Pet^^* and 8. Iohn. And this answeareth also for S. I^m^s ^^med the brother of our Lord, his Masse before cited, being warranted both by Fathers and councels, greeke and Latine.
S. Thomas the Apostle who preached not onely to many easterne contryes of our continent, but by many Arguments and authorities in the new world, as men call America, was of the same faith and practise. The Annals of the Indians proue they had a Christian Church within 10. yeares of Christs Ascension, and the Altare was made of a Stone brought from mount Syon, and thereby called the Church of our Ladie of Mount Syon. And in many places there Christian altars are founde, and as both Catholike and Protestant Antiquaries confesse, the Preists of these Indians conuerted by S. Thomas do in holie Masse make, conficiunt, the bodie and blood of Christ and wine, behauing themselues with greatest attention, reuerence, humilitie, and deuotion. I need not proceede to the other Apostles, in particular, they could not beleeue or teach otherwise then these I haue recompted: And both Catholiks and Protestants so acknowledge. Sicut Magister docuit, Apostolise and alios communicando consecrationem corporis and sanguinis Domini facere caeperunt and fieri per vniuersas Ecclesias praedicando institerunt. And English Protestants with publik warrant most plainely say that Christ both so did, and so gaue power and commaunde to all his Apostles, and they so performed: Panis consecrationem in corpus Christi, and vinum in sanguinem, Ipse Christus, coram Apostolis feci^: candem ipsi quoque vt faccrent, expresse mandauit.

 This was the faith, doctrine, and practise whic^ Tradit. and Antiquit. Eccl. Medol. in Italia. all the Apostolike men of this age warranted by the example and authoritie of the Apostles followed and vsed. S. Barnabas so neare and deare to S. Peter and S. Paule as scripture and histories assu^^ vs, and he also called to be an Apostle, with S. Paule is accompted Authour of the Masse of Millane after called S. Ambrose his Masse, famous in these westerne parts, where this doctrine is plainely taught.
S. Clement, S. Peters Successour at Rome doth Clem. Const. Apostolic. l. 7. cap. 27. l. 8. cap. 14. often confirme the same, calling it, the holie bodie pretious bodie and pretious blood of Christ, Sanct^m Corpus Saluatoris nostri, pretio sum Corpus, and pretios^^ sanguis Iesu Christi: And teacheth in the forme of Masse deliuered by him, the doctrine of transubstantiation or chaunge of breade and wyne into Christs bodie and blood: Mittas sanctum spiritum tuum super hoc l. 8. supr. cap. 17. sacrificum, testem Passionum Domini Iesu, vt ostendat hunc panem corpus Christitui, and hunc calicem sanguinem Christi tui. Setting downe the verie words of consecration, by which this miraculous chaunge is made, the words of Christ, as the Euangelists deliuered before: HOC ^ST CORPVS MEVM quod pro multis frangitur in remissionem peccatorum. HIC EST SANGVIS MEVS, quipro multis effunditur in remissionem peccatorum. S. Alexander Pope lyuing in this Apostolike age, and learning his diuinity the^ writeth, euen as Protestants confesse, that Christ did giue instruction to offer this Sacrifice, which being at the first but breade and wine, is by consecration made Christs bodie, and blood, being so Alexander Pap. 1. epist. 1. c. 4. Robert. Banes l. de vit. Pontif. in Alexandro. consecrated, it is the greatest sacrifice, syns are thereby forgiuen, it is to be worshipped of all: and
 ^^ it is more excellent then all other, so it is more ^o be worshipped and reuerenced. Ipsa veritas nos (...), calicem and panem in Sacramento offerre, quando ait: accepit Iesus panem etc. crimina atque p^^cata oblatis his domino sacrificijs delentur. Talibus ^ostijs delectabitur and placabitur Dominus, and peccata dimittet ingentia, Nihil enim in Sacrificijs maius esse potest, quam Corpus and Sanguis Christi: nec vlla oblatio hac potior est, sed haec omnes praecellit. Quae pura conscientia Domino offerenda est, atque ab omnibus ve^eranda, and sicut potior est caeteris, ita potius excoli and veneraridebet.
S. Ignatius S. Peters Successour at Antioch, the Ignat. epist. ad Roman. next and immediate by some, and by all but one S. Euodius betwene them saith, it is the breade of God, heauenly breade, the flesh of Christ the sonne of God: Panem Dei volo, panem caelestem quae est c^^o Christi Filij Dei. It is the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, which suffered for our syns, and was Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen: cit. Theodor. dialog. 3. raised agayne: Carnem Saluatoris Iesu Christi, quae propeccatis nostris passa est, quam Pater sua benignitate suscitauit.
S. Martial, who as he himselfe wittnesseth, had Martial epist. ad Tolosan. cap. 3. conuersed with Christ, and was instructed by him, and by S. Peter sent to preach in Fraunce, saith plainely that the same bodie of Christ which the lewes for enuie did sacrifice, thinking to blott his name from earth, the Christians then did offerit on Martial. epist. ad Burdegal. cap. 3. the holie altar, for saluation knowing that by this remedie life is to be giuen, and death auoyded, and Christ himselfe thus commaunded it to be done in commemoration of him. Vbique offertur Deo oblatio munda, sicut testatus est cuius corpus and sanguinem in vitam aeter^am offerimus. Ipse enim corpus habens, and immaculatum,
 and sine peccato, in ara Crucis ipsum permis^^ i^molari. Quod autem Iudaeiper inuidiam immolauer^^, putantes se nomen eius a terra abolere; nos causa s^^^tis nostrae in ara sanctificata proponimus, scientes ^^c solo remedio nobis vitam praestandam, and mortem e^^ogaudam hoc enim ipse Dominus noster iussit nos ag^^^ in sui commemorationem.
S. Iustinus liued and learned his Religion in this age, though dying in the next he affirmeth plainely, that as by the word of God Christ our Sauiour became flesh, and had both flesh and blood for our saluation, euen so we are taught, that the Iustin apol. ad Antonium Pinm. foodc on which by prayers of the word which came from him, thankes be giuen, is the flesh and blood of Iesus ^^carnate. Quemadmodum per verbum Dei Caro fact^^ est Christus Seruator noster, and canem and sanguine^ salutis nostrae causa habuit: Ad eundem modum eti^^ eam, in qua per preces verbi eius ab ipso profecti gr^^i^ actae sunt, alimoniam, incarnati illius Iesu carnem ^^ sangiuem esse edocti sumus. And besides tradition, and the co^mon custome and doctrine of the Church* he doth interprete the Euangelists before cited i^ this manner, that Christ so instituted and commaunded, and this in his very next words: N^ Apostoli in commentarijs a se scriptis, quae Euang^^ vocantur, ita tradiderunt praecepisse sibi Iesum, ^^ enim panc accepto gratias egisset, hoc facite in ^^ recordationem HOC EST CORPVS MEVM. and (...) similiter accepto, and gratijs actis dixisse: HIC ^^ SANGVIS MEVS. And most plainely: Panem C^^stus Iustin. dial. cum Triph. post med. and in quaest. agent propos. quaest. 44. conficiendum tradidit, vt Corpus eum factum ^^ recordaremur. And, Dominica caro conscientiam ^^ rum qui ipsam edunt, ab omni scelere expiat. S. I^^naeus also, by our old brittish manuscript, be^
 (...) Bishop by S. Clement in this first age, Bea^^^ Ire^aeum Episcopum Beatus Clemens ordinauit, ^^^ueth, that none but such Infidels or heretiks as denyed Christ to be the sonne of God, and so not Irenaeus contra haees. lib. 4. cap. 34. omnipotent, did or could deny this transubstantiation or chaunge of breade and wine into his bodie and blood by his powerfull words in consecration: Quomodo constabit eis, eum panem, in quo gratiae actae s^^t, Corpus esse Domini sui, and calicem sanguinis eius: ^^ non ipsum fabricatoris mundi silium dic^nt, id est verbum eius, per quod lignum fructificat, and defluunt ^^^tes and terra dat primum quidem foenum, post deinde spi^am, deinde plenum triticum in spica.
I haue cited S. Denys the Areopagite to this This holy faith euer in Britaine. purpose before. And shewed also for Britayne that it had and vsed the Masse of S. Marke as their old maniscript proueth, where this doctrine and practise is recorded. And S. Peter preaching here his Masse brought into these parts both by his, and S. Paules Disciples, as I haue proued with this vse and doctrine, Britaine could not be ignorant thereof. And I haue cited euen from Protestant Antiquaries, that our first Christian Britans both worshipped, and prayed vnto Christ present in this most holie sacrament, when it was shewed vnto them or they receaued it, at Masse. And our Protestants of England of cheife note among them with greatest applause and approbation do deduce this Catholike doctrine and practise in the Church Protest. of Engl. apud Sutcliffe Subuers. pag. 32. Pe^k^^s probl. p^g. 15^. 154. of Christ from this first age, and in this manner: W^e reade in Ignatius this phrase offere and Sacrificium immolare, to offer and immolate Sacrifice, and like phrases in Irenaeus Tertullian and Martialis, who mentioneth also Altares. The auntients when they speake of
 the supper, haue many formes of speach, which she^ a conuersion. Ambrose vseth the name of conuersion, ^^d the name of mutation. Cyprian saith it is chaunged (...) in shape but in nature, Origen saith, that breade is made the bodie by prayer. Gaudentius saith, Christs bodie is made of bread, and his blood of wyne. Eusebius Emissenus saith, that the Preist by secrete power doth chaunge the visible creatures into the substance of Christs b^die, and blood, and that the breade doth passe into the nature of our Lords bodie. So they deduce it to lower times, wherein they all confesse, the doctrine of transubstantiation to haue beene generally taught and professed.
And with speciall warrant and allowance of King Iames as they themselues testifie, they publikly iustifie, that it was Religio Regis the Religion Casanbon. respon. ad C^^dinal. peron. pag. 50. 51. D. Androwes Prot. Bish. of Ely. Midleton Papiston. p. 106. Copell. def. of hooker pag. 276. Feild. of the Church pag. 150. Couell. def. pag. 87. Couell modest examinat. pag. 105. of the King and Kingdome, that it is Christs bodie, the same obiect and thing, which the Romane Church beleeueth, others with publick allowance also write: though bread^ by nature bee but a prophane and co^mon element, yet by grace it pleaseth the Lord to make it his bodie. The omnipotencie of Christ maketh it his bodie. The primatiue Church thought the fructified and consecrated Elements to be the bodie of Christ: To their perso^s (Preists, God imparted power ouer his misticall (...) which is societie of soules, and ouer that naturall, wh^^^ is himselfe for the knitting of both in one, a worke whic^ antiquitie doth call the making of Christs body. The power of the ministry by blessing visible Elements ^^ maketh the inuisible grace. It giueth daily the holie gho^^. It hath to dispose of that flesh which was giuen for t^^ life of the worlde: and that blood which was powred ^^ to redeeme soules. In their most warranted publick communion booke in the ministration of this sa^^^^ent
 after their manner, they deliuer Christs institution thereof, in such significant manner of transubstantiation, or chaunge, that they must needs thereby graunte, and affirme it, or deny him to haue spoken truely, but to haue told an vntruth, ^ thing most blasphemous, and vnpossible, thus they sette it downe as Catholiks do at Masse: Iesus Protest. commun: booke Tit. communion. Christ who in the night he was betrayed, tooke breade, and when he had giuen thankes he breake it, and gaue it to his disciples, saying, take, eate, this is ^y bodie which is giuen for you, do this in remembrance of mee. Likewise after supper he tooke the cuppe, and when he had giuen thankes, he gaue it to them, saying, drinke yee all of this, this is my bloode of the new testament, which is shedde for you, and for many, for remissio^ of s^^s: do this as oft as yee shall drinke it, in remembrance of me^. Here Christ omnipotent that cannot speake any vntruth, expressely testifieth, it was breade and wyne before, and by his words, his bodie which was giuen, and blood shedd for vs. Therefore such transubstantiation and chaunge as Catholiks hold. And this these Protestans confirme in their distribution of this Sacrament to communicants, assuring euery communicant as Catholike Preists do, and in the very same words, that it i^ the bodie of Christ, which they giue to them, and so of his blood, in expresse termes, which should be most true, if they were true Preists, as the others be.
And that no testimonie might be wanting to this Catholike truth, by Protestants allowance, they haue both published and approued with greate Francisc. Staucar. in praefat* ad Pe^r. Gallatin. warrant, the sentence and opinion of the old Rabbines before Christ of this mistery, and thus confesse
 of them: They are more playne and pregnant for Prot. Bafilien. in editione eiusd. Thom. Marton appeale pag. 396. 395. transubstantiation, then are the sayeings of the transubstantiators themselues. They make so directly for transubstantiation, that the most Romish Doctours for the space of all most a thowsand yeares after Christ, did not in so expresse termes publish this misterie to the worlde.


THE XXI. CHAPTER.
Tbe 29. Article, intituled: of the wicked, which do not eate the bodie, and blood of Christ in the vse of the Lords supper: examined, and condemned.
THEIR next 29. Article affirming that the wicked do not eate the bodie of Christ in the vse of the Lords supper, is confuted in the former, transubstantiation and chaunge of breade and wine into the bodie and blood of Christ by his omnipotent power and words being therein inuincibly proued both by his owne diuine testimonie, and practise, in, and by his Apostles, Apostolike men, of that Age, and the allowance of Protestants* the auncient Rabbines and all withnesses both Catholiks and Protestants, no thing els besid^ the outward formes and species of breade and wi^^ there remaining, it is demonstrated, that whosoeuer, good or bad receaueth that Sacrament, m^^ needs receaue Christs bodie there. And if S. Augustine here cited, held the contrarie against ^^ greate diuine and humane authoritie, he could ^^ be S. Augustine or to be followed, but forsaken, ^^ any Article so grounded, be true, But to redee^
 S. Augustines honour I must leaue the first age, and in this come to him. This Article is intituled: Of the wicked which do not eate the bodie of Christ in t^^ vse of the Lords Supper. And thus followeth.
The wicked and such as be voide of all liuely faith. allthough they do carnally and visibly Presse with their teeth (as Sainct Augustine saith, the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Christ, yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but rather to their condemnation, do eate and drinke the signe or Srcrament of so greate a thing. This is wholly and vnquestionably condemned before* And if they cite S. Augustine, as though he meant the wicked are not partakers of the grace of Christ in this Sacrament, that Catholiks confesse and it proueth no thing against them, and Protestants makeing the Eucharist but a signe, and that to godly onely and true beleeuers with a liuely faith as they speake here can neither say that the wicked and vnbeleeuers do eate or drinke the signe or Sacrament, seing by them it is no such signe or Sacrament to such people.
But if they contend from S. Augustine, that he meaneth the wicked communicants do not receaue Christs bodie: it is manifestly false and contrarie to Sainct Augustines doctrine, in many places. For no man could be more vnworthie and wicked, then Iudas, which betrayed Christ, yet he witnesseth with the holie scriptures, and Antiquitie, that Indas really and truely receaued Christs bodie and blood, as the other Apostles did. Tolerat Augustin. ep. 162. epist. 163. August. Tract. 6. in Euang. Ioh. in Psalm. ^0. ipse Dominus Iudam diabolum, furem and venditorem suum: Sinit accipere inter Innocentes discipulos, quod fideles norunt pretium nostrum. So he speaketh further both of him, and all wicked communicants
 that they receaue the same bodie of Christ: communiter omnibus dedit. And he maketh his opinion and faith free from all such Protestant construction, saying plainely, that Christ gaue to this Disciples, Augustin. Serm. ad Neophytos apud Paschas. apist. ad Fradegrad. Iuo epist. 264. Augustin. in Psal. 33. conc. ^. that bodie, which hanged vpon the Crosse, and that blood, which issued out of his side: Hoc accipite in pane, quod pependit in Cruce: Hoc accipite in Calice quod manauit de latere Christi. And he saith Christ carryed himselfe and his bodie in his owne hands, when he gaue it to this Apostles: Ferebatur Ghristus in manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum corpus suum, ait, HOC EST CORPVS MEVM. Ferebat enim illud in manibus suis. And so gaue the same his bodie both to Iudas, whom he calleth a deuill, theife and traytour before, and the rest of his holie Apostles. And so he expoundeth the place of S. August. tract. 6. in Euang. Ioh. and tract. 16. Paule, to the Corinthians of worthie and vnworthie communicants, as the other Fathers do, that both of them receaued one and the same holie consecrated bodie. Et sancta possunt obesse: in bonis enim sancta ad salutem insunt, in malis ad Iudicium, cert^ ^nim fratres nouimus quid accipiamus, and vtique sanctum quod est accipimus, and nemo dicit non est sanctum. Et quid dicit Apostolus? qui autem manducat and bibit 1. Cor. 11. 27. indigne iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. Non ait quia illa res mala est: sed quia ille malus male accipie^de, ad iudicium accipit, bonum quod accipit.
He assureth vs plainely, that communicants August. apud P^o^per. l. ^entent. cit. Gratian. dist. 2. de consecrat. receaue the bodie of Christ vnder the forme of breade, and his blood vnder the forme of wine. Caro Christi est quam forma panis opertam in Sacramento accipimus: and Sanguis cius, quem sub vini spe^^^ and sapore potamus. Nos in specie panis and vini qu^^ videmus, carn^m, and sanguinem honoramus: (...)
 militer comprehendimus has duas species, quemadmodum ante consecrationem comprehendebamus, cum fideliter fateamur ante consecrationem panem esse, and vinum, quod natura formauit: post consecrationem vero carnem Christi and sanguinem, quod benedictio consecrauit. The bread ceased to be by consecration: Augustin. l. 3. Trinitat. c. 10. Panis in accipiendo Sacramento consumitur. He affirmeth it was so constantly and commonly beleeued of all, that Christ was truely and really present vnder the formes of bread and wine, that if they had not beene otherwise instructed, and neuer seene those but in the holie misteries, they would haue beleeued Christ had not otherwise appeared in any other shape or forme to the world. si nunqua^ discant experimento, vel suo vel aliorum, and nunquam illam speciem rerum, videant, nisi inter celebrationes Sacramentorum, cum offertur and datur, dicaturque illis authoritate grauissima, cuius corpus and sanguis sit, nihil aliud credent, nisi omnino in illa specie dominum oculis hominum mortalium and de latere tali percusso, liquorem illum omnino fluxisse. He deliuereth, l. 3. Trinitat. cap. 4. that the omnipotencie of God, is the meanes to cause this miraculous transubstantiation: operante inuisibiliter spiritu Dei.
And againe: Ante verha Christi, quod offertur panis dicitur: vbi Christi verba deprompta fuerint, Aug. Ser. 5. in Appendic. Tom. 10. iam non prius dicitur, sed Corpus appellatur. So soone as the Preist hath there pronounced the words of Christ it is called Christs bodie. And he saith plainely, that both Christ^ Apostles at his last supper did receaue Christs bodie and blood, and Christians, in all the world did receaue Christs bodie into their mouthes, Aug. ep. 118. ad Ianuar c. 6. l. 2. (...). c 20. (...). these fasting, the Apostles not fasting. Liquido apparet, quando primum acceperunt dis^ipuli Corpus and Sanguinem
 Domini, non eos accepisse ieiunos. Nunquid tamen propterea calumniandum est vniuersae Ecclesi^, quod a Ieiunijs semper accipitur? and hoc placuit spintui sancto, vt in honorem tanti Sacramenti, in os Christiani prius dominicum corpus intraret, quam cae^^^ cibi. Nam ideo per vniuersum orbem mos iste ser^^tur. And in an other place, that the Christians receaue Christs bodie and his blood. De Agni i^maculati corpore partim sumere, and in poculo sang^^nem. He saith that all communicants receaue by l. 2. contra Aduers. Leg. and Prophetar. cap. 9. their mouth, the flesh of Christ: Carnem suam ^^ sumamus. Christ gaue in this Sacrament, and communicants there receaue that flesh of Christ, which he tooke of the flesh of his mother, that where^^ In Psal. 98. he walked on earth, and no man cateth that flesh, ^^ he adoreth it before. Christus de carne Mariae carn^^ accepit, and quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit, and ips^^ carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem dedit: (...) autem illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adoraue^^* He saith the bread is made Christs bodie by consecration: Noster panis and calix, non quilibet, s^^ l. 20. contra. faustum. certa consecratione mysticus, fit nobis Corpus Chris^^ He relateth, how his Mother S. Monica desire^ to be remembred after her death at Masse, at t^^ l. 9. confess. cap. 13. holie Altare, from which that sacrifice is dispense^ which redeemed the world. Memoriam sui ad al^^re fi^ri d^siderauit, vndesciret, dispensari victim^^ qua de^^tum est chirographum, quod ^rat contrar^^ nobis. He saith, it is Made the bodie of Christ o^ l. 4. Trinita^. cap. 4. high Preist. Corpus effectum S^cerdotis nostri. T^^ bodie of Christ doth enter into the mouthes ^ Christians: Ex ore Christianorum, vbi Corpus (...) ingreditur. And in this very ^lace obiected, in ^^ Protestant Article.

 S. Augustine saith plainely, that both the good Aug. Tract. 26. and 67. in Iohan. and wicked do receaue Christs bodie, and blood, in this Sacrament: Carnem Christi and Sanguinem Christi non edamus tantum in Sacramento, quod and multi mali: sed vsque ad spiritus participationem manducemus and bibamus, vt in Domini Corpore tanquam membra maneamus. And againe: de mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium: And this which both the good and wicked there receaue, is the same bodie of Christ, norunt fideles Corpus Christi: where he so expoundeth S. Paule as others do: quam multi de altari accipiunt and moriuntur, and accipiendo moriuntur: vnde dicit Apostolus, Iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. And this which bringeth this Iudgment and condemnation to them, is Christs bodie which they vnworthely receaue, carnem suam dat nobis Christus manducare: and distinguished a double receauing, the one foris externall, which the wicked do as the godly, the other intus internall also giueing grace to the worthie receauers, which is not so with the wicked, not participating grace but Iudgment and damnation so dishonouring Christ and his holie Institution. Yet all, both the l. Sentent. prosperi Gratian. Dist. 2. de consecrat. good and bade receaue the bodie of Christ vnder the forme of bread, and his blood vnder the forme of wine. Caro eius est, quam forma panis opertam in Sacramento accipimus. Et Sanguis eius quem sub vini specie and sapore potamus.
And in the same, place thus prophanely cited by this Article, he solueth the obiections vsually made against this holie Sacrament, first how Christ could giue vs his flesh to eate: Quomodo potest hic carnem suam dare nobis ad manducandum.
 That by Christs asce^sion into heauen with his immortall Aug. supr. tract. 26. bodie, we should see it could not be consumed, though receaued in these mysteries, non e^ modo quo putatis, erogat corpus suum. Certe vel tunc intelligetis, quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. And that, caro non prodest quicquam, flesh profiteth nothing, he answeareth it was onely true in such wicked sense as the prophane capharnites conceaued, as of dead peeces of flesh, and not of the flesh of Christ as hee gaue it, gyuing life. O Domine Magister bone, quomodo caro non prodest quicquam cum tu dixeris, nisi quis manducauerit carnem meam, and biberit sanguinem meum non habebit in se vitam? an vita non prodest quicquam? quid est ergo, non prodest quicquam, sed quomodo illi intellexerunt: carnem quippe sic intellexerunt, quomodo in cadauere dilaniatur, aut in macello venditur, non quomodo spiritu vegetatur. Spiritus ergo est qui viuificat, caro non prodest quicquam. Sicut illi intellexerunt carnem, non sic ego do ad manducandum carnem meam.
And concerning their cauill that one bodie (naturally they should say) cannot be at one time in diuers places, he proueth directly against Iewes and others, that this one bodie of Christ is that sacrifice spoken of by the Prophet Malachie to be offered in all places, in all the world. Ipse de corpore Aug. in Psal. 33. l. 1. cont. aduers. legis and Prophetar. c. 20. l. 16. de ciu^tat. Dei c. 22. l. 18. ciuit. cap. 35. orat. contra Iu^^os c. 9. and sanguine suo instituit sacrificium secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Vident tale sacrificium nunc offerri toto orbe terrarum. Sacrifi^ium quod non a Christianis offertur toto orbeterrarum. Hoc sacrificium per Sacerdotium Christi secundum ordinem Melchsedech in omni loco a solis ortu vsque ad occasum (...) videamus offerri. Quid ad haec respondet is? aper^^ oculos tand^m aliquando and videte, ab oriente (...)
 vsque ad occidentem, non in vno, sed in omm loco sacrificium Christianorum offerri, ei, qui ista praedixit Deo Israel.
No man can better witnesse, what was S. Augustines doctrine, or interprete him in this question, then Primasius Bishop of vtica his renowned and learned scholler, which setteth downe this question, and the present Catholike Religion therein, as plainely as any present Catholike writer doth. Istud Sacrificium nostrum cum causa infirmitatis Primasius Episc. vticen: in Africa discipulus S. Augustini in cap. 10. ad Hebr. suae repetitur, quod nonpossit perfectam salutem conferre: sed in commemorationem Passionis Christi, sicut ipse dixit, hoc facite, inquiens, in meam commemorationem, and vna est haec hostia, non multae, cum a multis, diuersiis in locis, diuersisque temporibus offeratur? Aptissime ergo aduertendum est, quia diuinitas verbi Dei quae est vna, and omnia replet, and tota vbique est, ipsa facit vt non sint plura sacrificia, sed vnum, licet a multis offeratur: and sit vnum Corpus Christi cum illo quod suscepit in vtero virginali, non multa corpora: nec nunc quidem est aliud magnum, aliud minus, aliud hodie, aliud eras offerimus, sed semper idipsum aequam magnitudinem habens: proinde vnum est hoc sacrificium Christi, non diuersa. Nam si aliter esset, quoniam multis in locis offertur, multi essent Christi, quod obsit. Vnus ergo vbique est, and hic plenus existens, and illic: Plenum vnum corpus vbique habens. Et sicut qui vbique offertur vnum corpus est, non multa corpora, it a etiam and vnum sacrificium. I haue beene enforced by this Article forging S. Augustines authoritie for the grounde thereof, to discend thus ^owe, to defend him, and shew the feeble and false foundation of our Protestants in this poynt.



THE XXII. CHAPTER.
The 30. Article, intituled, of both kindes: examined and where it is contrary to the Romane Church condemned.
THE 30. and next Article being intituled: of both Kindes: consisteth of these words. The cuppe of the Lord is not to be denyed to the lay people. For both the partes of the Lords Sacrament, by Christs ordinaunce and commaundement, ought to be ministred to all Christian men alike. This is all this Article, and it is confuted before, where I haue proued, that both in, and immediately after the Apostles time, and by their order and direction, this blessed Sacrament was both honorably preserued onely vnder the forme of bread, and so often ministred vnto the primatiue Christians, which in no case, or respect might be done, if Christ had ordeyned, and commaunded otherwise, and the contrary as this Protestant Article pretendeth. And so the Apostles themselues, and the Apostolike Church then, the true Church of Christ without all question, both by Catholiks and Protestants, had erred in a thing of necessitie requisite according to Christes ordinance, in so greate a Sacrament, and so by these men and their diuinitie in this Article, the true Church of Christ was not the true Church, and he neuer had a true Church: for in their Article of the Church before they define it to be, a congregation of faithfull men, in which the Prot. Arti^l. 19 sup. of (...) o^ the Church pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be du^ly ministred in all th^se things that of necessitie are
 requisite to the same: Therefore this Protestant Article assirming that both the partes of the Lords Sacrament by Christs ordinaunce and commaundement, ought to be ministred to all Christian men alike, is false in itselfe and contradictorie to their owne most allowed proceedings: for not onely diuers of their priuate writers, but the parlament lawe of all our Protestant Princes King Edward 6. Queene Elizabeth, Statute of King Edw. 6. Titul. Sacram. in both Kindes. Stat. in parliam. 1. Elizabeth Iames 1. Charles 1. King Iames and King Charles their Rule and warrant for this Article, doth confesse enact and decree, that in the true primatiue Church this Sacrament was not allwayes ministred in both Kindes, but some times in both, some times in one onely. Therefore by these men the true primatiue Church neuer did nor could adiudge or hold that the ministration of this Sacrament allwaies in both Kindes was Christs Ordinance, and commaundement, otherwise by ministring it often in one onely Kinde, as this che^fe Protestant parlament, and their religion therein, confesse it had acknowledged itselfe to haue erred from Christs ordinance, and commaundement in a Sacrament and necessitie requisite, and so by these Articles not to haue beene Christs true Church, and he had by these men no true Church at all.
Againe These Protestants standing in this Article vpon the Ordinance and commaundement of Christ, confesse that he instituted and ordeyned this Sacrament at his laste supper, and what he commaunded concerning it, he then commaunded it, and they also confesse the three Euangelists S. Matthew, S. Marke and S. Luke to be the Euangelicall Registers of that his holie ordination, But all thus do plainely testifie, that none but his
 twelue Apostles were then present. Discumbebat Matth. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. cum duodecim discipulis eius. Venit cum duodecim. Vnus ex duodecim discubuit, and duodecim Apostoli cum eo. Et ait illis, desiderio desideraui hoc Pascha manducare vobiscum. And our Protestants before in their most allowed publick communion booke, haue so deliuered, saying of the Sacrament vnder the forme of bread, Iesus gaue it to his Disciples, saying take eate, this is my bodie, which is giuen for you. And of the other parte, he gaue it to them saying drinke you all of this, for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shedd for you.
And all these witnesses the Euangelists, S. Paule, 1. Corinth. 11. Catholiks, and Protestants do freely acknowledge, that Christ then pronounced, and spake these words, hoc facite in meam commemorationem, do this in commemoration of me, vnto them all. Giuing them thereby power and commaunde, to do, what he had don^ in that misterie, which was, as is proued before, to transubstantiate and chaunge breade, and wine, into the blessed bodie, and blood, giuen and shedd for the sinnes of the world, and this euen our Protestants haue before acknowledged, confessing that supernaturall power to haue beene in Christes Apostles then present, and Preists after them, for there is no other place in scripture, the Rule of these men, wherein such power was communicated vnto them, or Christ a Preist after the Order of Melchisedech exercised the office or Act of that preishood. So that none but they which were then consecrated Preists, which euer offer this Sacrifice in both Kindes, were present to receaue this charge of them both.
And this is directly told vs, not onely by all
 Catholike writers, but Protestants with the greatest allowance their Religion can giue, the authoritie of the supreame of their Church, by the greatest champion externall which euer it had, the Archbishop of Spalato which with King Iames Marc. Anton. l. 2. de repub. Christian* c. 2. pag. 167. and his cheifest Protestants warrant thus writeth: Ad hoc Sacerdotium promoti sunt Apostoli a Christo Domino in vltima caena, quando eis dixit: hoc facite in meam commemorationem.
The Apostles were promoted to preisthood by Christ our Lord in his last supper, when, he said to them: do this in my commemoration. And agayne: Quod consecrantes panem, orationes fundamus, c. 4. p. 219. eoque fideles pascamus, Christi Iussum facimus, qui id iniunxit, dicens hoc facite in meam commemorationem, hoc ipsum quod me nunc vidistis facere and vos facite, circa panis and vini benedictionem. Where the Apostles and Preists receaued and receaue power and commaunde to consecrate bread and wine into the bodie and blood of Christ, as he then did. And we must needs so say, otherwise we haue no warrant in scripture, to which onely Protestants appeale in such matters as Sacraments be, either to proue that Preists haue any power at all to consecrate, or minister this Sacrament, or that it is a Sacrament, for besides S. Paule to the Corinthians, and in the 6. Chapter of S. Iohns Ghospell, there is no place in the new testament that is by any interpreted to speake of the communion vnder both kyndes. S. Paule plainely referreth himselfe to Christs Institution sette downe in the Euangelists cited.
And for S. Iohn our Protestants deny, that he speaketh of the Sacramentall and actuall receauing
 of this misterie. And yet he onely hath words Io: 6. that haue likelynesse of precept to communicate in both Kindes: Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis and biberitis eius sanguinem non habebitis vitam in vobis. Except you eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his blood you shall not haue life in you. And yet this is not so of Sacramentall eating and drinking the bodie and blood of Christ, for the holie scriprures and all expositours of them, Catholiks and Protestants agree, that new baptized infants, and others, martyrs all holie, and iust men shall haue, and haue life in them, though they neuer actually and Sacramentally receaue Christs flesh, and blood, and neither Catholiks nor Protestants do communicate young people, though in daunger of death, or dying. S. Paule hath no semblance of a commaundement or necessitie of both Kindes, to be receaued by all. Therefore the precept, commaund and necessitie onely concerning Preists, at holie Masse, then and there to consecrate and offer as Christ did, and commaunded in both Kindes, hoc facite, Catholike Preists at their sacrifice in all places most dutifully performe it; at other times, as sicknes, they communicate onely in one Kinde as the lay people doe.
All that is to be founde in scripture of both Kindes, to be receaued or haue beene receaued of all, is in S. Paule to the Christians of Corinthe, arguing that in that Church, and likely some others, both formes were receaued af all: Quicunque manduca^^rit 1 Chorinth. 11. pan^m hunc, and biberit calicem Domini indign^, ^^us erit Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, probet autem s^^^sum homo and sic de pane illo edat, and de calue bibat.
 Qui enim manducat and bibit indigne iudicium sibi manducat and bibit, non dijudicans corpus Domini. Yet here is no praecept. And his words, non dijudicans corpus Domini, onely speaking against the abuse towards the bodie of Christ, not mentioning his blood which to dishonour was as greate a sinne, may make questionable, whether he there speaketh of the Sacramentall receauing of both by all persons or no. But if he so did, we finde in diuers other places of scripture, as they be expounded to vs, by the holie Fathers, that communion was then vsed, diuers times and in diuers places in one Kinde onely.
S. Chrisostome, S. Augustine Isychius S. Bede Chris. homil. 16. oper. imperfecti in Mat. August. l. 3. de consensu Euang. c. 25. Isych. Hierosol. l. 2. in leuit. c. 9. Bed ad c. 24. Luc. Theoph^lact. ibid. Luc. 24. Chris. homil. 17. oper imp. in Mat. Bed. ad c. 20. Act. Apost. Ionas Aurelian. lib. 3. de Imag. Act. 2. Act. 20. Text. Syriac. Act. 2. Theophilact and others so expound that act of Christ taking bread, blessing, breaking and giuing it to his two disciples, at Emaus, registred by S. Luke. Accepit panem and benedixit ac fregit and porrigebat illis.
And the scripture, our Protestants Rule, mentioneth not the other Kinde at all. So do the same S. Chrisostome S. Bede, Ionas Aureliensis with others expound that in the 2. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, erant autem perseuerantes in doctrina Apostolorum, and communicatione fractionis panis and orationibus. Where no memorie is of the other Kinde. So likewise that in the 20. Chapter of the Acts: cum conuenissemus ad frangendum panem: and whereas in the 2. Chapter of the Acts the Latin translation readeth, in communione and fractione panis, the Syriak text is, infractione Eucbaristiae, in breakeing the Eacharist.
And this was vsed both by the Apostles, and Apostolike Preists in this first age to minister this
 blessed Sacrament to the Christians onely vnder the forme of breade. So S. Clement writeth of S. Clem. epist. de reb. gest. B. Petri. Peter, he himselfe being one among many others which so communicated from S. Peters hands: Petrus panem acceptum actis gratijs consccrauit, fregit primoque matri porrexit deinde nobis filijs. The approued Apostolike Relation of S. Andrew his Presbyteri and Diac. Achaiae in vit. S. And^eae Breuiar. Rom. die 30. Nouemb. Breuiar. Surisbur. and al. eodem die Metaphrast. in S. Andr. Anonym. Antiq. in eius vita Cipr. l. de 2. Martyr. Lippom. to 1. Sur. Tom. 6. S. Bernard Ser. de S. Andrea Ro^ig. Antisiod. in Psal. 21. and 4. ^aufr. cont. Bereng. Iuo Sebast. Munster Cosmogr. l. 6. c. 57. Ignat. epist. ad Ephes. martyrdome, written by present wittnesses in this age, doth wittnesse, that the Christians vnder him receaued the bodie of Christ vnder the forme of bread, making no mention of the other Kinde. Cuius agni immaculati, carnem posteaque omnis populus credentium manducauerit, agnus qui sacrificatus est integer perseuerat and vnius. Here all, omnis populus, so communicated. It was thus preached, and practized by the Apostle or Apostles which preached to the Abissines, as both they, and others both Catholiks, and Protestants are witnesses, and they keepe this custome still from the Apostles vpon the feaste of the Epiphanie. Accipiunt Corpus Domini sub exigui specie panis.
S. Ignatius in this age is a sufficient wittnesse, in diuers places, that it was so vsed in his time. Nemo erret, nisi quis intra altaris septa sit, priuatur pane Dei. And exorteth often so to communicate. Date operam vt crebrius congregemini ad Eucharistiam. And telleth vs such communion bringeth immortalitie, is a preseruatiue against death, giueth life and expelleth all euils. Frangentes panem, quod pharmacum immortalitatis est, mortis Antidotum, vitamque in Deo concilians per Iesum Christum, and medi^amentum omnia expellens mala.
And allthough in his epistle to the Philadelphians Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph. hee speaketh, as if this breade and cup were
 giuen and distributed to all. Vnus panis omnibus confractus, and vnus calix qui omnibus distributus est, he speaketh of the giuing and distributing of them by Christ to his Apostles, vseing the tense and time past, as in Greeke is playne (...), and when he there speaketh of the present vse and time, he saith, there is one Eucharist, (...), yet entreating Ignat. epist. ad Symrnen. apud Theodoreth. Dialog. 3. and alios. of the Institution and as it is offered by Preists at Masse, he vseth the plarall number Eucharists and oblations, Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, and there nameth the Eucharist receaued by all the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, not speaking of the other Kinde. Non confiteantur Eucharistiam esse carnem Saluatoris nostri Iesu Christi, quae pro peccatis nostris passa est. Calling them Heretiks which denyed that Eucharist which was vsually then receaued in the Church in his time, to be the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that flesh of his that suffered for our sinnes.
S. Clement, besides that he hath testified before, of reseruing and receauing this blessed Sacrament onely in one Kinde, vnder the forme of bread, he further wittnesseth, and prescribeth by and from the warrant of S. Peter, and giueth order that if any Preist should negligently minister and giue the bodie of Christ, speaking nothing of the other Clem. Rom. epist. 1. Kinde, that he was greuously to be punished. Communio Corporis Domini nostri Iesu Christi si negligenter erogetur, and presbyter minora non curet admonere officia, graui anathemate, and digna humiliationis plaga feriatur. And in thes words immediately, that so many hostes should be prepared, as shall serue the communicants (not speaking of the other Kind) and if any be
 left, they shall be reuerently receaued by some of the clergie. And they which receaue the remnants of the bodie of our Lord, which was left in the Sacrary, shall fast from eating any thing after a good while, tanta in altaria holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant. Quod si remanserint cum timore and tremore ^l^ricorum diligentia consumantur. Qui residua corporis Domini, quae in sacrario relicta sunt, consumunt, non statim ad communes accipiendos cibos conueniant, ne putent sanctae portioni commiscere cibum. And he giueth most strict charge, for the reuerent keeping of that Kinde alone of this most blessed Sacrament, that is left and to be reserued. Iterum Irenaeus epist. ad victor. Origen. hom. 13. in Exod. Dionys. Alex. ep. ad Fatium Anthiochen. Basil. epist. ad Caesar. Patric. Amphil. in vit. S. Basilij conc. Nicaen. 1. can. 63. Arabic. Terrullian. l. 2. ad vxor. c. 5. Ciprian. l. de Iapsis. Ambros. orat. f^neo. de excess. fratris Satyri. Hier. Apol. ad Pammach. cap. 6. Aug. homil. 26. quinquag. hom Ser. 252. de temp. concil. Carthag. 4. c. 38 Paulin. in vit. S. Ambrosij prosper Aquitan. l. 4. c. 6. de promiss. vt praedict. concil. Turonen. 2. c. 3. concil. matiscon. 2. c. 6. Basil. supr. Ioh. Maschus in prat. spirit. c. 79. Metaphr. in martyr. SS. Indae and Domnae tem. Dioclesiani. Euagrius lib. 4. hist. Eccl. cap. 35. atque Iterum de fragmentis Dominici Corporis demandamus. And they which be the most auncient writers after this age, as Irenaeus, Origen, Dionysius Alexandrinus, S. Basile, Amphilochius among the greekes, and the first generall councell of Nice. Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Paulinus prosper, the 4. councell of Carthage, the second of Towres and others both councels and learned Fathers do not onely testifie, this custome to haue euer beene continued in the Church reuerently to reserue this most honourable Sacrament, in the forme of breade, and so onely to communicate the lay Christians especially pylgryms, straungers, trauailers, persecuted and liuers in desarts, but iustifie, allowe and honour such practise and custome for holie and religious. And assure vs, as namely Tertullian, S. Ciprian and S. Basile with others, that this reseruation and communion was not onely in Churches, but in priuate howses, where Preists
 could not be had. Illud in persecutionis temporibus necessitate cogi quempiam, non praesente Sacerdote aut Ministro, communionem propria manu sumere, nequaquam esse graue, superuacaneum est demonstrare, propterea quod longa consuetudine hoc ipso rerum vsu confirmatum est: omnes enim in eremo solitariam vitam agentes, vbi non est Sacerdos, communione domi seruantes a seipso communicant: in Alexandria vero and Aegypto vnusquisque eorum qui sunt de populo, vt plurimum habet communionem in domo sua. Semel enim Sacerdote sacrificium consecrante, and distribuente, merito participare and suscipere credere oportet. Etenim and in Ecclesia Sacerdos dat partem, and accipit eam, qui suscipit, cum omni libertate, and ipsam admouet ori propria manu. Idem igitur est virtute siue vnam partem accipiet quisquam a Sacerdote, siue plures partes simul.
Euagrius relateth it an hold custome in his time, vetusfuit consuetudo Constantinopoli, in the Church of Constantinople to make this reseruation, and communion in one Kinde. And in all the greeke Church at this day the sicke do communicate onely in one Kinde, as in the Latin Church. Ad aegrotos Gilbert. Genebr. l. de g^aecor. ritibus. Ioh. Scraminius in Elucidar. erritus ru^henici cap. 18. Hypothius Legat. Ruthenor. in fidei profess. an. 1595. Ioh. Latisciu^ ad c. 11. Theol. Mos^oiticae fol. ^15. Communion in one Kinde in Britayne. panis dumtaxat species defertur.
And the Russians when they go to war carry with them this holy Sacrament in one onely Kind, and so receaue it. Consecrant pro bellantibus panem in Corpus Christi, and laicis and bella praecedentibus tradunt in manus, qui cum sunt cum hoste conflicturi, illic pane illo posito seipsos ordine communicant. And yet they professe euen in the publike profession of their faith by their Ambassadours that Christs all and whole and the true Sacrament is, receaued in one Kinde. Fat^or sub altera tantu^m specie totum
 atque integrum Christum, verumque Sacramentum suum. And so they reserue it consecrated both for trauailers, and those that die. Quae super sunt consecrata, ea in vsum and peregre euntium and morientium seruantur. No man can now question but this Catholike doctrine and custome, so Apostolicall so Vniuersall was also receaued, and vsed in Britayne, allwayes ioyning with the Catholike Church. And our most auncient brittish Authours allowed Sermo antiq. legisolit. in Eccl. Brit. foxe Act. and mon. pag. 1142. by our Protestants doth wittnes, that before the Christians then receaued, they prayed thus to Christ in the forme of bread, which they were to receaue. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccaca mundi miserere nobis. O lambe of God that takest away the syns of the world haue mercy vppon vs. And to cite it further as Peotestants translate it. The housell is dealed into sondry parts, chewed betwene teeth: how be it neuerthelesse after ghostly might, it is all in euery part. Many receaue that holy body, and yet notwithstanding, it is so all in euery part, after ghostly mistery.
S. Gildas calling the holie Altare, where masse Gildas l. de excid. and conquest. Brit. was said the Seate of the heauenly sacrifice, sedes caelestis sacrificij, sufficiently argueth this part of the sacrifice was not onely offered, but vpon occasion kept and reserued there, for that is properly sedes a seate, on which a thing is seated and sometime permanent, longer then the short space betwene consecration and communion at Masse. We finde in the second councell of Tours where were our Bishops of little Britayne, receauing both norme and Christian Religion, from hence, that Order was therein taken, for the reuerent keeping Concil. Turouen. 2. c. 3. this blessed Sacrament in one Kinde, and so to be ministred. Vt Corpus Christi non in armario, sed sub
 Crucis titulo componatur. Gregorius Turonensis confirmeth, Gregor. Turon. l. de vit. patrum. cap. 3. l. 1. de glor. patr. cap. 86. that custome with that people, and exemplifieth how the holie, Bishop S. Gallus, three dayes before his death did communicate all the people in this one Kinde. Sciens S. Gallus, reuelante Domino, sepost triduum migraturum, conuocat populum, and omnibus confracto pane communionem sancta ac pia voluntate largitur. The like he hath in other places. We read this vse and custome in the life, and in the time of S. Patrik, and among others that so communicated one named Echen, and a King did so receaue. Accepto Corpore Christi migrauit ad Dominum.
Neuer any order of Religion in the Church of Christ especially in this westerne part of the world was more renowned then our old brittish, I rish and Scottish monkes not onely among the Brittons, Saxons, in Ireland Scotland, Norway Island, but in Fraunce, Germany and Italy itselfe, and none more Religious towards this Sacrament then they, yet by their Rule and vowe they were forbidden to drinke wine, as we finde exemplified by approued Antiquaries in one of their cheifest monasteries, that of Lindisfarne the Nurse of so many Saincts, where King and Saint Ceolnuph entering into Religion about the yeare 733. licence was giuen to that Monastery to drinke wyne or ale, they neuer drunke any before, none but milke or water. Hoc Rege iam monacho facto efficiente data est Lindisfarnensis Roger. Houeden. Annal. parte priore. Mat. Westm. An. 733 continuator Bed. l. 1. cap. 9. Ecclesiae monachis licentia bibendi vinum vel ceruisiam: antea enim non nisi lac velaquam bibere solebant, secundum antiquam traditionem Sancti Aidani primi eiusdem Ecclesiae Antistitis, and monachorum, qui cum illo de Scotia venerunt. These holy
 men could neuer drinke the cuppe of Caluyns and our parlaments Protestants communion but being made Preists and at Masse transubstantiating wine into Christs bloode, to receaue this at that time was neuer denyed vnto them. And this custome of communicating onely in one Kinde among our primatiue Christian Britans, Scots and Irish, was so farr from being an offence, and against Christs ordinance, that as their auncient learned brittish Bishop testifieth it was miraculously approued by him. For a Church of S. Michael the Archangel in an Iland there was euery day in the hollownes of a stone neare the Church so much wyne miraculously prouided, as would serue all the Preists at Masse that celebrated there. Yet no prouision for any communicants spoken of. In australi Momonia, Girald. Cambr. Topographiae Hibech c. 9. circa partes Corcagiae, est Insulaquaedam, Ecclesiam continens Sancti Michaelis antiquae nimis and authe^ticae religionis. vbi lapis quidamest extra ostium Ecclesiae a dexteris, in cuius superiori partis concauitate, quotidie mane permerita Sanctorum illius loci, tantum vini reperitur, quantum ad missarum solemnia, iuxta numerum Sacerdotum, qui ibi eodem die, celebraturi fuerint, conuenienter sufficere possit.
The reason of this is not onely deliuered by Rabbi C^hanna ad cap. 49 genes. Catholike Christians, but the Rabbines before Christ also taught, that whole Christ, bodie and blood is in either forme, and so wholly receaued in one onely Kinde, as in both. In Sacrisicio quod fiet expane, non obstante quod album sit velut lac, conuertetur substantia in substantiam corporis Messiae; eritque in ipso sacrificio substantia sanguinis Messiae. Erunt item in sacrificio vini sanguis and caro Messiae, and eadem erunt in pane, quoniam Corpus Messiae non potest
 diuidi: idque ratio postulat. Nam, si earo and sanguis diuisa essent. Distinguerentur ab inuicem. Corpus ^^^em Messia non potest diuidi, sicut scriptum est Exodi 12. Et substantiam non confringetis in eo. Praeterea caro sine sanguine, and e conuerso, sunt res mortuae. Corpus vero Messiae post resurrectionem quia glorificatu^ erit semper viuet.


THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
The 31. Article, being, intituled, of the one oblation of Christ finished vpon the crosse, thus examined and condemned.
THE next their 31. article, being intituled of the one oblation of Christ finished vpon the crosse: is this. The offering of Christ once made, is the perfect redemption propitiation and satisfaction for all the sinnes of the whole worlde, both originall and actuall, and there is noe other satisfaction for sinne, but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly saide that the preists did offer Christ for the quicke and the the dead, to haue remission of payne, or guilt, were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceites. Hitherto this Protestant article.
The first part being take^ in that sense the words doe giue, making Christs oblation of himselfe vpon the Crosse the perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sinnes of the world, originall, and actuall, doth euacuate and take away the necessity of any Christian act internall, or externall, faith, hope, charity, repentance, Sacraments, and whatsoeuer confessed by all to be necessary to saluation, Protest. artic supr. artic. 9 art. 11. 16* 2^ 27. euen by these men themselues before in diuers articles, as that of originall sinne that of faith,
 that of good workes, those of sinne after baptisme, of Sacrame^ts in generall, of Baptisme, of the Lords Supper, and others. And it blasphemously contendeth, that all Infidels, Turkes, Tartars, Iewes, Pagans and whatsoeuer misbeleeuers, and notorious sinners shall be saued by this meanes, and haue as true and certaine Title to Saluation, as the most Catholike holy and religious Christians haue, for all sinnes of the world originall and actuall being thus, as this article saith, perfectly redeemed, propitiated and satisfied for, no sinne of heresie, Infidelity, or any wickednesse is excluded, but hath thereby, as the words of this article be, perfect redemption, propitiation and satisfaction, and consequently eternall saluation, neyther shall the deuills themselues, by this article be damned but saued also, for their sinnes which they haue committed, and all they shall or can committ, are comprehended within this generall protestant circle and compasse of all the sinnes of the whole world, both originall and actuall. All lawes, orders, decrees, rules, gouernement, and principality are needlesse, all are sure to be saued without them, and the most wicked wretch as secure as the holyest Sainct that euer was, there is noe damnation, there is noe hell at all.
This doctrine putteth downe that beastely saying of Epicurus, to take all pleasure in this life, because he thought there was none after death, for this doth Breede all wantonnesse, and yet promiseth euerlasting pleasures in the world to come. Therefore although wee most freely doe, and are so bounde to beleeue, and professe, that the passion and merits of Christ are of infinite cure, validity, worth, and value in themselues, able to haue beene a perfect redemption propitiation and satisfaction
 for all the sinnes of the whole worlde, and more then euer were shall or can be committed if Christ had so ordeyned, and sinners so applyed them by such holy Instruments, and meanes, as Sacraments and others, as he prouided and Instituted, and they which are and shall be saued, haue and will vse and apply to that end, and purpose, the meanes yet to those that doe not receaue and practise, neither Christs oblation vpon the Crosse nor any thing he did or suffered can be a perfect redemption, propitiation or satisfaction for all or any sinne.
And among these necessary Instruments, meanes and applications of Christs redemption, propitiation and Satisfaction for sinners, the holy sacrifice of Masse is one, and most excellent, eminent, and honorable, wherein the truely and duely consecrated Preists of Christs Church by vertue and power giuen them in their consecration, doe offer Christ for the quicke and the deade to haue remission of paine or guilt, which this article blasphemously faith, were blasphemous fables, and daungerous deceites.
And first our Protestants themselues euen King Iames the heade and cheife interpretour of their Religion and congregation whilest he liued, with his approued protestante writers, Bishops, Doctours, and others publickly priuiledged, and warranted, by cheife authoritie in their proceedings, thus confesse for truth this article to be hereticall. Neither is Casanbon. resp. ad Card. Per. p. 51. 52. etc. the King ignorant, nor denyeth that the Fathers of the the primatiue Church did acknowledge one Sacrifice, in the Christian Religion that succeeded in the place of the Sacrifices of Moses lawe. Middlet. Papistm. pag. 92 113. 49. 137 138. 47. 45.

The sacrifice of the Altare and vnbloody sacrifice were vsed in the primatiue Church, and the auncient

Fathers called the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, a sacrifice. The primatiue Church did offer sacrifice at the altare for the deade, sacrifice for the deade was atradition of the Apostles, and the auncient Fathers. Aerius
Feild. l. 3. pag. c. 29. p. 138. Couel. exam. pag. 114.
condemned the custome of the Church, in naming the deade at the altare and offerring, the sacrifice of Eucharist for them: and for this his rache and inconsiderate boldnesse, and presumption in condemning the vniuersall Church of Christ, he was iustly condemned.

Here we see by our Protestants themselues, that vpon a second and better consideration they grau^te from our first founders in Christ, that the Catholike doctrine and custome so basely censured in this their Article is Orthodoxall, the Religion and tradition of the Apostles, Iudgment and practise of the vniuersall Church of Christ, and that which this their article concludeth, was iustly condemned for heresie. Therefore I may be more breife in alleadging the Apostolike writers to such propose.
Sainct Paul witnesseth that euery high preist orHebr. c. 8. Cap 5.preist is ordayned to offer Sacrifice to God for the people, omnis Pontifox ad offerenduni munera, and hostias constituitur. Omnis namque Pontifex ex hominibus assumptus, pro hominibus constituitur in ijs quae sunt ad Deum, vt offerat dona and sacrificia pro peccatis. He also with other Scriptures saith both that Christ was a Preist after this Order of Preisthood, and Preists of this Order should be for euer Hebr. 7. Ps. 109. in the lawe of the Ghospell. Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech, necessarium fuit secundum ordinem Melchisedech alium surgere Sacerdotem. Translato Sacerdotio, necesse est, vt and legis translatio fiat sempiternum habet Sacerdotium. But it is also euident, both by Scripture and all Apostolike
 writers, that neither Christ, nor any Christian Preist of that Order offered any other sacrifice, hauing resemblance to the Sacrifice of Melchisedech in breade and wine, then when Christ at his last supper offered, and gaue his blessed bodie and blood vnder those formes, and gaue then power and commaunde to his Apostles and other Preists to doe the same, as I haue aboundantly proued by the Fathers of this age, and our Protestants haue so confessed before.
It was also so certaine among the old Hebrues before Christ, that Christ the Messias should be such a Preist, and offer such a sacrifice and his Preists after him, and all sacrifices in the lawe should then cease and giue place vnto it, That Theodor. Bibliandor de SS. Trinit. lib. 2. pag. 89. vit. l. de test. Miss. Petr. Gallat. l. de arcan. fid. ca. Franciscus Stancar: and Prot. Rasil. in pref. ad Petr. Gallat. de Arcan. Mort. Supr. and alij. Protestants themselues thus confesse it. Erat apud Veteres Hebraeos dogma receptissimum, in aduentu Messiaebenedicti cessatura esse omnia legalia sacrificia tantumque celebrandum sacrificium Thoda, and illud peragendum pane and vino, sicut Melchizedech Rex Salem and Sacerdos Dei altissimi temporibus Abrahami panem and vinum protulit. And the old Rabbines of the Iewes before Christ, euen as they are commended vnto vs both by Catholike and Protestant Antiquaries, do most playnely deliuer vnto vs the same Catholike truth and as hath beene before confessed by thes Protesta^ts, that in this holie sacrifice offered for sinnes, bread and wine are miraculously chaunged into the bodie and blood of the Messias.
Rabbi Samuel saith vpon the oblation of Melchisedech Rabbi Samuel in Bereschit Rabba ad cap. 14. Genes. that he sacrificed, and taught that Sacrifice: Actus Sacerdotij tradidit: erat ipse Sacrificans panem and vinum Deo sancto benedicto. So haue Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, and Rabbi Enachinam.
 Melchisedech proferens panem and vinum, ostendit quod docuit eum Sacerdotij actum, quier at panem and vinum sacrificare. Et hoc est quod habetur in Psalmis: Iurauit Dominus and non paenitebit eum; tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundrm ordinem Melchisedech. And Rabbi Phinees saith most euide^tly, that in the time of Messias all other Sacrifices should cease, and the Messias being a Preist after the Order of Melchisedech should except this alone, and this onely should be vsed in this Religion. Tempore Messiae omnia sacrisicia cessabunt, sed sacrificium panis and vini non cessauit sicut dictum est Gen. 14. and Melchisedech Rex Salem protulit panem and vinum: Melchisedech enim Rex Messias excipiet a cessatione Sacrificiorum panis and vini, sicut dicitur psalmo. Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. And they as manifestly testifie, that this euer continuing Sacrifice vnder the formes of bread and wine should be the bodie and blood of the Messias, offered by the Preists of his lawe. Panis quem dat omnibus, ipse Rabbi Moses Hadarsan com. ps. 39. est caro eius, and dum gustatur panis conuertitur in carnem, and erit hoc mirabile magnum.
An other saith: sacrificium quod fiet ax vino solum Rabbi Cahana ad ca. 49. Gen. transmutabitur in substantiam sanguinis Messiae, sed etiam conuertetur in substantiam corporis eius, in sacrificio quod fiet ex pane, non obstante quod album sit velut lae, conuertetur substantia in substantiam corporis Messiae: erit que in ipso sacrificio substantia sanguinis. Ernnt item in sacrificio vini sanguis and caro Messiae, Rabbi Barac. in Ecclesiast. Rabb. Iud. ad c 28. num. Rabbi Sim. Bor. Ioan. l. Reuel. Secret. and eadem crunt in pane. Rabbi Iudas saith: transmutabitur ex substantia panis, cum sacrificabitur, in substantiam corporis Messae, qui discendit de coelis: and idem ipse erit sactificium. An other writeth: Messias erit placenta frumenti in terra. And Rabbi Salomon
 witnesseth that generallie the Rabbinesse, magistri nostri exposuerunt, did so expounde these words in the 72. psalme. Erit placenta frumenti interra, in vertice montium.
And that this miraculous chaunge in this sacrifice should be made by the power of the sacrificing Preist words by Gods extraordinary assistance. Tunc Deus misericordia implebitur, and virtute ingenti sanctorum verborum, quae ab ore Sacerdotium manabunt, illud Sacrificium, quod in vnoquoque altari celebrabitur, in corpus Messiae conuertetur. And accordingly they deliuer how vnspotted the liues of our Preists should be, which thus offer Christs body, and blood in sacrifice. Qualis debeat esse Sacerdotis Rabbi Nehumias epist. arcanor. vita, hoc sacrificium pertractantis, Dominus ipse insinuat, cum de nostri temporis sacrificio, and consecrantis qualitate, ita leuit. 21. capite inquit: and sanctificabis eum, quia Carnem Dei tui ipse ^st vel erit sacrificans.
This auncient Rabbines Testimonies being so plaine and pregnant for transubstantiation of bread and wine into the body and blood of the Messias in this holy Sacrifice, as protestants haue confessed before, and their words themselues so euident, that no Catholike or Romane writer can set it downe in more manifest, or expresse termes, make also the contradictory of this Article a clearely and vndeniably true. To take exception to those authorities would be grosse and foolish rashnesse, for first as I haue proued already, and shall hereafter they agree with the Apostolike doctrine of this first age, and the vniuersall Church of Christ. Secondlie if they had beene counterfaite, being in Hebrewe* and extant in the libraries of the Iewes, they were most like to be counterfaite by them, but this had beene
 to condemne themselues. Noe Christian coulde inuent and place them in their libraries. There could not be the least suspition, of such Inuention, for they were vulgarly published to the Christian world longe before the beginning of the Caluinian Sacramentarie Religion, or other impugners of this most honorable Sacrifice, and so receaued, allowed and approued both by the greatest spirituall Petr. Gallot. praefat. in l. de Arcanis fid. cath. and temporall authoritie, euen of the Emperour giuing both power, meanes and allowance for the searching fourth, publishing and receauing those antiquities.
And Rabbi Samuel Marochianus in his booke of the coming of the Messias, de aduentu Messiae, receaued Rabbi Samuel Morachian. lib. de Aduentu Messiae c. 19. by all, and doubted of by none, doth inuincibly proue and demonstrate the same by manie Scriptures, as the Iewes reade and allow them. He proueth it from the 109. psalme and other Scriptures prouing, that the sacrifice of the Messias in the forme of bread and mine and his Preisthood after the order of Melchisedech, being to succeede the sacrifice and Preisthood of Aaro^, were promised to endure for euer, and not to cease as those of Aaron, were to cease, and ceased when the euer during sacrifice and Preisthood of the Messias were instituted. Attende quanta sit differentia inter sacrificium Psal. 109. Aaron and Iustiistius Domini. Dixit Dominus Domino meo, tu es Sacerdos in aeternum, non adtempus sicut Aaron. Item sacrificium Aaron fuerunt carnes, and sacrificium illius iusti Dominifuit panis and vinum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. In quibus verbis Dominus per Prophetam ostendit manifeste, quoniam sacrificium Aaron finiretur, quando inciperet sacrificium in pane and vino, aeternaliter duraturum, eum Aaron
 no^ sit data aeternitas in Sacerdotio, ficuti Sacerdoti Christo. He there proueth, that if that promise of eternitie in Sacrifice, and Preisthood, haue beene made by God to Moyses, which he made to the Messias, or Christ, the sacrifice and Preisthood of Moyses lawe had beene eternall, as those of Christs be, by that promise. Si Deus dixisset nostro Moist, sicut dixit per os Dauid, Messiae, siue Christo: Tu venies Sacerdos in aeternum secu^dum legem Myosi and Aaron, staret illa lex: sed dixit: tues Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech.
This he proueth also from Moyses in the 26. chapter of Leuiticus, that the Sacrifice of the Messias and his Preistood after the old Order of Melchisedech being established, and published, those of Aaron we^re to end, Ad hoc sonat verbum Moysi, cum Leuit. ca. 26. dixit: comedetis vetustissima veterum, per quod intelligit sacrificium Melchisedech. Et iterum: and nobis superuenientibus, id est, nouae legis sacrificio publicato, vetera, scilicet vestra, proijcietis. He proueth it from Rabbi Samuel supr. c. 20. Leuiticus cap. 23. Exodus cap. 25. and numeri cap. 21. Where the sacrifice in breade and wine is set downe, and prefigured.
He proueth it from Salomon his words which the Prouerb. c. 9. Apostle vseth. Hoc sacrificiu^ vini cum aqua mixtum p^^cherrime and apte describit Salomon Propheta in libro prouerbiorum cap. 9. cum dicit, Sapientia altissima communicauit sacrificium suum, miscuit vinum suum and parauit mensam. Quis est paruulus, veniat ad me, and insipientes comedent pan^m meum, and bibent vinum meum temperatum aqua. Quid mensa parata sapientiae altissimi, nisi altare? Quid panis and viuum mixtum, nisi sacrificium de pane and vino, and de aqua quod sit in altari? not abiliter dicit. Panem suum, and vinum suum,
 perid enim innuit hoc Sacrificium gratum esse Deo, and quod ad istud conuinium tam diuinum and spirituale non vocauit patres nostros, qui erant sapientes in lege, qui erant occupati in sacrificio legis, quod etiam carnale sacrificium Rabbi Samuel supr. cap. 22. Prou. c. 17. non dimisit nobis, sed priuauit nosilla.
He proueth it from the 17. chapter of the same booke, where the Prophet saith: melior est buccella panis cum charitate, quam vitulus saginatus cum inimicitia: that a peece of breade, meaning the sacrifice of the Christians, is better, then a fat calfe the sacrifice of the Iewes reiected: otherwise in ciuill valuation it is not so. He proueth it from the Prophets Esay, and Malachie, expressely foretelling that God would reiect, and haue the sacrifices of the Iewes as abomination, and yet haue an euerlasting externall sacrifice among the gentiles. Completum ect, quod Deus dixit de nobis (Iudaeis) per hoc I saiae, vbi ait: completa Isaiae 32. est vindemia, and non est de caetero collectio. Et illud Malachiae, non est mihi volunt as in vobis, and sacrificium non accipiam a vobis. Et illud Isaiae c. 1. Sabbata Isa. cap. 1. vestra, and festiuitates, and sacrificium vestrum non accipiam, quia omnes vos estis in ira mea. Et illud Isaiae: completum est: Quid mihi multitudo victimarum vestrarum, quid multiplicastis mihi sacrificium de arietibus, and carnibus hircorum, arietum carnes and hircorum. Non offeretis vltra sacrificium, quoniam incensum vestrum, and Sabbata vestra, and solemnitates vestras non recipiam a vobis, quia odit illa anima mea. Omne sacrificium vestrum cadauer foetidum. Ille qui mihi iugulauerit taurum, sicut qui decollauerit hominem, and ille qui obtulerit in sacrificium hircum, sicut qui obtulit canem, and qui obtulit vinum, sicut qui offert sanguinem porci. And hereupon inuincibly thus concludeth, that God thus reiecting, and hauing in abomination
 the sacrifices of the Iewes, it can signifie nothinge, els, but that he hath chaunged those grosse and carnall sacrifices into the spirituall and pure sacrifice of Christ. Sed abominatio de sacrificijs apud Deum nihil aliud significat, misi mutationem sacrificij nostri (Iudaici) carnalis and grossi, in sacrificium istius iusti Domini spirituale and subtile.
He proueth it by vnanswearable reasons, from these holie Prophets and the lawe of Moyses, first The Sacrifices of the lawe were offered in Hierusalem onely, and the temple there: Sacrificium nostrum non fuit acceptum, nisi in vno loco scilicet in domo sancta praetise But the Sacrifice of the Messias among the gentiles conuerted vnto him, was by them to be offered in all nations euen from the riseing of the su^ne to the setting of the same. Valde timeo ab illo verbo quod Deus fortis and gloriosus dixit peros Malachiae cap. 1. vbi sic tangit de sacrificio gentium ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum, gentes offerunt sacrificium nomini meo mundum: neuer any such generally offered Sacrifice to the true God was in the worlde, but this blessed Sacrifice of Christs bodie and blood, at Masse. offered and sacrificed as that Prophet said, in omni loco sacrificatur and offertur, in euery place, and not onely temple, citie, or nation. He proueth it further because the sacrifice of the gentiles conuerted to the Messias was to be receaued, when that of the Iewes was to cease, which ceased with them, soone after their crucifying of Christ, their citie and temple destroyed and the Iewes captiues aboue a thowsand yeares, as this Rabbine confesseth writing 500. yeares cap. 20. 21. synce. Deus etiam carnale Sacrificium non dimisit nobis, sed priuauit nos illo. Iam sunt mille anni completi,
 quod nobis accidit, propter illum iustum in quem peccauimus. When the conuerted gentiles haue noe other external sacrifice, but this of Christs bodie and blood.
He proueth it, because the Prophet witnesseth, the sacrifice of the conuerted gentiles should be sacrificium mundum, a cleane and pure sacrifice in respect of the sacrifices of the lawe of Moyses, being so vncleane, that they were forced to be washed, the bellyes of the beasts offered were purged, and the places cleansed with water, when in the Sacrifice of the Messias haueing in it nothing but cleane, pure, and vnspotted things, the purest breade, wine and water, chaunged into Christs bodie, and blood his humanitie, in a spirituall and acceptable manner to God, it must needs bee this cap. 21. 24. sacrificium mundum pure and cleane sacrifice, that was so generally to be offered to God. Deus instituit offerre panem loco carnium, and aquam mundam loco pinguedinis carnium, and vinum purum loco sanguinis; and homo offertur spiritualiter and acceptabiliter D^o, non sicut animalia decollata per nos (Iudaeos) quae per Prophetam comparantur cadaueri putrido. Synagoga indiget lauare carnes sacrificiorum, and purgare ventres animalium, quae in sacrificio sacrificabantur, and lauare locum de sanguine, and pinguedine sacrificiorum, aliter esset horror tractare and videre. In sacrificio autem panis and vini and aquae non apparet aliquid indecens, aut turpe. Timeo de verbis per Mala^hiam Prophetam dixit Deus Synagogae: non est mihi voluntas in sacrificijs vestris: quia abortu solis vsque ad occasum magnum est nomen meum inter gentes, quae offerunt nomini meo sacrificium mundum. Sicut de natura sua munda sunt, aqua, vinum, and forma pura de
 quibus factum est sacrificium, and non indiget mundatione and lotione.
And if any would interpret mundum Sacrificium, the cleane sacrifice of the Prophet, to be ment as gratefull and acceptable to God, allthough no thing in sacrifice can be more acceptable to him then the bodie and blood of the Messias offered in this sacrifice, euen by this and the other Rabbines, cap. 20. yet he most clearely expoundeth how in this sense also the Sacrifice of Catholike Christians is the onely most pure and acceptable sacrifice, and they iustly by the warrant of God auoyde the Iewes now as the Iewes auoyded the gentils whilest their Sacrifice was approued by God. Apud Deum Sacrificium gentium est mundius quam Sacrificium nostrum: and insuper, quia Deus priuauit nos omni sacrificio mundo, and alias docens Christianos, vt ipsi vitarent nos, (Iudaeos) ne contaminarentur sicut nos vitauimus gentes omni tempore quo sacrificium nostrum fuit mundum apud Deum and acceptum.
This is proued by the Apostolike writers of Ignat. epist. ad Smyrned. this first age; S. Ignatius speaketh of this Sacrifice of the Christians, offerre, sacrificium immolare, and speaking in particular what it is, saith it is the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ which suffered for our Ignat. apud Theod. Dial. 3. sinnes. Caro Saluatoris nostri Iesu Christi, quae propeccatis nostris passa est. S. Dionisius the Areopagite hath told vs before, of the greate honour, and adoration the Christians in that tyme, gaue to Christ present in this holie sacrifice, and in diuers Dionys. Areopag. Eccl. Hierarc. c. 2. c. 3 and epist. ad Demophilum. Clem. particulars deliuereth the verie Order and manner thereof.
S. Clement speaketh of this holie sacrifice in many places, and setteth downe at large the whole
 order, of offering it for the liuing and deade, and so expressely recordeth the custome and vse in that Apostolike tyme. Offerimus tibi Regi, and Deo secundum ipsius (Christi) ordinationem panem hunc and calic^m hunc, and mittas spiritum tuum super hoc sacrificium, testem Passionum Domini Iesu, vt ostendas hunc panem Corpus Christi tui, and hunc calicem Sanguinem Christi, vt qui percipiunt confirmentur in pietate, and remissionem peccatorum consequantur, Christo tuo digni efficiantur, vitam aeternam adipiscantur. And againe: offerimus tihi pro omnibus qui a saeculo c. 18. 19. 21. placuerunt tibi, offerimus pro populo hoc, pro virginibus, and castitatem seruantibus, pro viduis Ecclesiae, pro copulatis honorabilibus nuptijs, pro infantibus populi tui, vt neminem nostrum reijcias. Pro ijs qui in fide quieuerunt rogemus. And he there recited all sortes of people for which this most holie Sacrifice of Christs bodie and blood is offered, quick or deade, and that it is for remission of their sinnes and euerlasting life. In salutem nobis fiant in vtilitatem animae and corporis, in remissionem-peccatorum, in vitam futuri saeculi.
S. Iustine and S. Irenaeus allowed to haue liued Iustin. Dial. cum Triph. Irenaeus aduers. haer. l. 4. cap. 32. in this age, do expound the prophesy of Malachy, as the Rabbines haue done before, they say Christ instituted and taught and deliuered it to be vsed, and the Church receauing it from the Apostles, offered it in all the world. Noui testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, Iesus Christus fieri tradidit, Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. S. Alexander an holie Pope, learning his diuinitie Alexander Pp. 1. epist. 1. cap. 4. and offering this blessed sacrifice in this age, doth most clearely say, that in this sacrifice, Christs bodie and blood is consecrated of bread and wine,
 mixed with water, that it is offered to God, so receaued from the Apostles, sinnes are thereby forgiuen, God is therewith pleased, and his wrath pacified, because no sacrifice can be greater then this, which is the bodie and blood of Christ, and so with greatest puritie to be offered to be worshipped of all, and aboue all to be reuerenced and honoured. Sacramentorum oblationibus, quae inter missarum solemnia Domino offeruntur, Passio Domini miscenda est, vt eius, cuius corpus and sanguis conficitur, passio celebretur, panis tantum and vinum aqua permixtum in sacrificio offerantur. Non debet enim, vt apatribus accepimus, and ipsaratio docet, in calice domini aut vinum solum, aut aqua sola offerri: sed vtrumque permixtum: quia vtrumque exlatere eius in passione sua profluxisse legitur. Ipsa vero veritas nos instruit, calicem and panem in Sacramento offerre, quando ait: accepit Iesus panem etc. crimina enim atque peccata oblatis his Domino Sacrificijs delentur* Talibus hostijs delectabitur, and placabitur dominus, and peccata dimittet ingentia. Nihilenim in Sacrificijs maius esse potest, quam Corpus and Sanguis Christi: Nec vlla oblatio hac potior est, sed haec omnes praecellit. Quae pura conscientia domino offerenda est, and pura mente sumenda, atque ab omnibus veneranda. Et sicut potior est caeteris: ita potius excoli, and venerari debet.
This was the order, vse, and custome of Gods Church in the publike Masses thereof, deliuered by the Apostles vnto it. In the Masse of S. Peter Missa. S. Petri and Roman. Eccl. and the Romane Church, thus we finde it: Memento Domine seruorum tuorum, qui offerunt hanc hostiam pro seipsis, and suis omnibus, pro redemptione animarum and corporum, pro spe salutis and incolumitatis suae. So it was in the Masse of S. Iames and the Missa S. Iacobi and Eccl.
 Church of Hierusalem: Domine concessisti, vt confidentes Hierosolym. accederemus, ad sanctum altare tuum, and offeremus tibi verendum hoc and ineruentum sacrificium pro peccatis* nostris admitte nos accedentes ad sanctum tuum altare, vt digni simus qui offeramus tibi sacrificium pro nobis, and pro ijs quae populus per ignorantiam admisit. Fac vt oblatio nostra gratae and acceptabilis sit in propitiationem peccatorum nostrorum, and eorum quae populus per ignorantiam admisit. O Deus respice in nos, and ad nostrum hoc rationale obsequium intuere, vt de manu Apostolorum tuorum verum hunc cultum accepisti.
S. Marke and the Church of Alexandria, our Miss. S. Marci and Alexandr. Eccles. primatiue Church in Britayne here, as before, vseing it with others haue the like. Purga^or nostrum vt corde puro tibi hoc Thimiamae offeramus, in remissionem peccatorum nostrorum, and totius populi. Offerimus rationabilem and incruentam oblationem hanc, quam offerunt tibi domine omnes gentes ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum, a Septentrione ad meridiem: quia magnum nomen tuum in omnibus gentibus, and in omni lo^o ince^sum offertur nomini tu^ sancto, and sacrificium, and oblatio. So hath the Masse of S. Matthew: Domine Miss. S. Mat. and Aethiop. Deus noster oblationem meam; and omnium famulorum famularumque tuarum, offerentium in nomine sancto tuo, suscipe, and pro meis and eorum peccatis fiat redemptio. So hath the Masse of S. Barnabas afterward Miss. S. Barnab. Ambros. and Eccl. Mediolanen. called S. Ambrose his Masse at Millan longe time vsed in many west contryes: Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, placabilis and acceptabilis sit tibi haec oblatio, quam ego indignus pro me misero peccatore, and pro delictis m^^s innumerabilibus, tuae pietati offero. Off^rimus pro Ecclesia tua sancta Catholica. In the Masse of the Church of Constantinople ascribed Miss S Andr. C^risostomi and Eccl. Constantinop.
 first to S. Andrew the Apostle, and now called S. Chrisostomes Masse, it is offered for all: pro vniuerso populo ^^o. And it is the bodie and blood of Christ therein consecrated by the Preist, Christ himselfe being said to be offerer, and that is offered. Propter infinitam clementiam tuam homo factus es, and Pontifex noster extitisti, and mysterij huius ac incruentae hostiae Sacramentum nobis tradidisti vt omnium Deus. Fac me dignum Sacerdotij gratia indutum consecrare sanctum corpus tuum, and pretiosum sanguinem: concede a me peccatore offerri tibi haec Sacramenta. Tu enim es offerens and oblatus, suscipiens and distributus, Christus Deus noster.
These be the most auncient publike Church Masses or liturgies, which Christians do, or can alledge in their Religion, bearing the names of the Apostles themselues, and yet in euery one of them this most holie Sacrifice of Christs bodie and blood is, quite contrarie to this article, offered both for the quicke, as is manifest, and the deade also to haue remission of payne and gilt. Fac Domine vt oblatio nostra accepta sit in propitiationem peccatorum nostrorum, and inrequiem animarum eorum, qui ante nos dormierunt.
So S. Iames. Memento Domine famulorum famularumque Miss. S. Iacob. tuarum qui nos praecesserunt cum signo fidei, and dormiunt in somno pacis. Ipsis Domine and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus locum refrigerij and pacis indulgeas, deprecamur. So S. Peter. Animabus patrum Miss. S. Petr. and fratrum nostrorum qui antea in Christo fide dormierunt, dona requiem Domine Deus noster: horum omnium animabus Domine Deus noster dona requiem in sanctis tabernaculis tuis, in regno tuo, easque caelorum regno dignare. So S. Marke: Memento Domine Miss. S. Marc.
 omnium fidelium dormientium, and in rectae fidei quiescentium. So, and much more S. Matthew. Memento Miss. S. Matt. Domine, Seruorum tuorum, and quaecumque in vita deliquerunt ignosce. Offerimus tibi rationabile h^c obseqnium pro fidelibus dormi^ntibus. So S. Andrew and S. Chrisostome after him with the consent of the Fathers both of the greeke and Latin Church, testifying it was so decreed and left by the Apostles, and practised by the Church of Christ. Non Chrisostom. Hom. 69. ad populum Antiochen. temere ab Apostolis haec sancita fuerunt, vt in tremendis mysterijs desunctorum agatur commemoratio. Sciunt enim illis inde multum contingere lucrum, vtilitatem multam. Cum enim totius constiterit populus, Sacerdotalis plenitudo, and tremendum proponatur sacrificium quomodo Deum non exorabimus pro his deprecantes. And, neque abs re, is, qui astat altari dum venerand^ Oratione 41. in 1. Corinth. peraguntur mysteria, clamat: pro omnibus, qui in Christo dormierunt, and ijs, qui pro ipsis celebrant memorias.
So in the Masses of S. Barnabas and S. Ambrose, S. Basile, the Syrians, Mozarabes, Gothes, Muscouites Armenians and all Christians before thes times. So it was in the old Masse vsed in Fraunce Hilduinus epist. ad Loduic Imperat. Berno Augen. Abb. Libell. de reb. ad missa spectant. r. 2. Bryta^ne and all this west part of the world from the first receauing of Christianitie here, as Hilduinus writing 800. yeares since, with others proue, the auncient copies thereof being then so old and worne, that they were allmost consumed with age. Cui adstipulari videntur antiquissimi and nimia vetustate pene consumpti Missales libri, continentes Missae ordinem more gallico, qui ab initio receptae fidei vsus in hac occidentali plaga est habitus, vsque quo tenorem, quo nunc vtitur, Romanum susceperit. These our Missals so old 800. yeares since were no new Inuention.



THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
The 32. Article, intituled, of the marriage of Preists thus examined and condemned.
THeir next 23. Article, intituled, of the marriage of Preists: is thus. Bishops, Preists, and Dcacons are not commaunded by Gods lawe, either to vowe the estate of single life, or to abstaine from marriage: Therefore it is lawfull also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their owne discretion, as they shall Iudge the same to serue better to godlinesse.
This is their whole Article, and making the only Scripture, which they meane by Gods lawe, to be the rule of Religion, it is often confuted before. And most false, prophane, and in many cases euen by their owne lawes and proceedings rebellious, trayterous, and tumultuous, to say, or write that no thinge is to be obeyed, and performed, but what is commaunded by Gods lawe or scripture, and euery priuate carnall minister may Iudge herein at his owne discretion. For by this Paradoxe all temporall and ciuill lawes of Princes not commaunded in scripture, are voyde, frustrate and not to be obeyed, and such men and ministers against all publike rule and gouernment, may Iudge and censure, doe and practise against all or any such lawes of his true and lawfull Soueraigne King, though the wisest, most Godly, and potent in the world, all common weales are layde open, to manifest, or rather certaine daunger, and destruction.
And no law of England in particular is by this article to be obeyed, except these ministers will interprete
 it to be commaunded by Gods laws. And so all humane lawes doe cease, and onely the lawe of God is in force and to be obeyed.
So wee must say of all Ecclesiasticall lawes also, if they be not commaunded in the law of God. all Courts, Consistories, and Tribunals, must be taken away with their Iudges, Rulers, and Gouernours, both ciuill and Ecclesiasticall, except they can proue to these men, that all their processes and proceedings are commaunded in the lawe of God.
Againe by their owne Religion this Articles doctrine both for the reason it maketh, and the conclusion it selfe, is false: for first in their 6. Article before intituled, of testimony of holy scriptures for saluatio^. They haue declared that things read in scriptures or to be proued thereby are articles of faith, and requisite or necessary to saluation.
And so by these men it is allowed against this article, that although it is not commaunded by Gods lawes, or the Scripture, that Bishops, Preists and Deacons must vowe the state of single life, or abstaine from Marriage: yet if this is either reade in holy Scripture, or can be proued thereby, their Marriage is vnlawfull by their owne confession. Queene Elizabeth her Iniunctions an. 1. Regni eius. Secondly the iniunctions of Queene Elizabeth nothing inferiour to these Articles, doe forbid all their ministers to marry, without their Bishops licence, and allowance. Therefore this article in their owne proceedings is vntrue to say, they might lawfully marry at their owne discretion, as all other Christian men might doe. And as false it is, that all other Christian men might lawfully Marry euen in these mens doctrine in this article. For if the scripture and Gods lawe did not commaunde Bishops, Preists,
 Deacons or any other to vowe the estate of single life, or to abstaine from Marriage: yet they which voluntarily doe make such vowes, are commaunded by Gods lawe to keepe them: redde altissmo vota Naum 1. psal. 20. 60. 65. 115. Hier. 44. Psal. 75. Is. 19. tua. Tihireddetur vot^m. Faciamus vota nostra quae vouimus. Voue^e and reddite Domino, Vota vonebunt Domino and soluent. If a iust promise of man to man doth so stricktly binde by all lawes, how much more obligatorie and binding is the promise and vowe of man to God.
The vowes of Chastitie, Pou^rtie, and Obedience in religious men neither Bishops, Preists, nor Deacons, and of women incapable of such degrees, are not commaunded in Gods lawe ynto them before they voluntarilie vowe that holie state, Yet none but monstrous men doe or can thinke but their vowes being so made, doe binde then. Thirdly whereas the lawe of God, and these men in their publike practicall of Religion doe say that true Marriage is holy Matrimony, an honorable estate, Protest. communio^ booke Tit. Matrimony. @. dearely etc. instituted of God, signifying vnto vs the mysticall vnion, which is betweene Christ and his Church: which holy estate Christ adorned and beatisied with his presence and first miracle. The so called Marriage of Protestant Bishops, Preists, and Deacons was not such in the reigne of Queene Elizabeth, by their owne lawes, but quite contrarie: the children betweene such men and women, termed their wyues, were not legitimate, could not inherite either lands or honour from such a Father, the Father being a gentleman the sonne could not giue his Armes but with a bend Sinister a testimony of bastardie, nor inherite anie lands he had. The woman had noe dower by their lawes, giuing it to all lawfull
 wyues, So that in these pretended lawfull Marriages there was nothing by their owne proceedings, which belongeth to the lawfull, holy, and honorable matrimonie, the pretended husbands were fornicarious concubinaries, their women harlots and concubines, all their children bastards and illegitimate, and in this opprobrious shamefull condition, though tolerated without further punishment they continued vntill King Iames after 44. yeares age Statute of King Iames for marriage of minist. of their Religio^, by his Parlament lawe made such Bargaines, men women and their children legitimate, or not vnlawfull among English Protestants. 4. The Protestant lawes and Religion of England haue not taken away, or disabled the Canon lawe, in which they freelie confesse the Marriage of all such men is forbidden, and condemned, further ther Stat. in Parliam. 1. Eliz. An. 1. Iacobi. it is contrarie to the lawe of God, as in this point it is not, but most conformable vnto vs, as is euident before, and shall be made most manifest hereafter. Therefore these Protestants supplying those places of Bishops, Preists, and Deacons may not yet lawfullie, marrie, in their owne Iudgments, and proceedings, nor by the lawe of God in holie Scriptures themselues, by their exposition of them. For first it is euident in Scripture in manie places, that the virginall Matth. 19. 11. 1. Corin. 7. 8. Apoc. 14. 4. 1. Reg. 21. Is. 25. 1. Cor. 7. Ieuit. 20. Luc. 1. exod. 19. Mat. S. Marc. 9. Luc. 14. etc. Prot. art. 6. and chaste life in respect of Religion, is to be preferred before marriage, and cleargie men by the same lawe being Pastours, guides, teachers, light, and example to others, and called to the greatest perfection, it is most needfull for them, therefore if the 6. Protestant article decreeth truelie, that things read in scripture or proued thereby, are articles of faith, and requisite necessarie to saluation, they may
 not by Scripture allowe Bishops, Preists, and Deacons, or any of them to marrie, either by their owne discretio^, which this Article contendeth, or by their pretended Bishops allowance, by their Iniunction, noe Protestant Article or Iniuctio^ can be of greater authoritie, then the lawe of God, and Christ himselfe, our high Preist, and Sacrifice, a most pure Virgin, and sonne according to his humanitie of the most immaculate Virgin, who often in holy Scripture calleth vpon all Preists to followe him. And promising to heare the petition of all that duely aske, calleth vpon vs embrace Virginitie. Sunt eunuchi, qui Matth. 19. seipsos castrauerunt propter regnum caelorum. Qui potest capere capiat. He telleth vs by his Apostle, virginitie and chastitie are more pleasinge to him, and better for them that serue him, especially in sacred functions, then the married life. Dico non nuptis and viduis: 1. Cor. 7. bonum est illis, si sic permaneant, sicut and ego. Qui sine vxore est, solicitus est quae Domini sunt, quomodo placeat Deo. Qui non iungit matrimonio virginem suam melius facit. And these virgins, be they which followed Apocal. 14. Christ in this life and doe soe in heauen. Hi sunt qui cum mulieribus non sunt coinquinati. Virgines enim sunt. Hi sequuntur agnum quocunque ierit.
This chastitie could not soe virginallie and perpetuallie be kept by the Preists of Moyses lawe being onely of one tribe, the tribe of leui, and so could not be without marriage to keepe a successio^ in that tribe, yet although their Sacrifices and seruing God were then vnperfect, in respect of those in the lawe of Christ, and they serued not continuallie in the temple, and at the altare, as Christian Preists daylie doe, but by their turnes and succeeding times, yet when their times and turnes of seruing
 in the temple came, they left their wyues a^ Leuit. 21. 1. par. 23. Luc. 1. Exod. 19. their contrie howses in their tribe, and they in Hierusalem during their time of sacrifice, and seruic^ there, performed it in holy chastity, euen from thei^ wyues, And after knowledge of their wyues, before they might serue at the altar, were to be sanctified: and ne appropinquetis vxoribus, was in some cases generally commaunded. No Preist might marrya dishonest woman. Scortum and vile prostibulum non ducet vxorem, nec eam quae repudiata est a marito, quia consecratus est Deo suo, and panis propositionis offert: sit ergo sanctus, quia ego sanctus sum, Dominus, qui sanctifico vos.
The high Preist might Marrie none but a virgin. Virginem ducet vxorem. Neither was it lawful^ in that vnperfect, figuratiue, and marrying lawe either for Preist or other euen in need, not chaste, to eate things sacrificed, as in the rase of Dauid, and his company coming to Abimelech the high ^. Reg. 21. Preist for releife and succour, who hauing nothing to releiue the^ with, but the sacrificed breade, would not giue it vnto them, but first examining them, whether they had abstained from women, si mundi sunt pueri, maxime a mulieribus. And Dauid answeared they were. Et respondit Dauid Sacerdoti and dixit ei: and quidem si de mulieribus agetur, continuimus nos ab heri and nudius tertius, quando egrediebamur, and fuerint vasa puerorum Sancta. And the Preists which did eate this sacrificied breade, and other oblations were absent from their wiues seruing in the Tabernacle, and temple, at such ^imes in chastitie. And S. Epiphanius saith, tha^ ^piphan. Haer. 79. Moyses himselfe the giuer of that lawe, did euer after he was called to be a Profete, absteyne from
 his wife, Postquam prophet auit moyses, non amplius co^^^^ctus est vxori, non amplius liberos genuit: habet enim vitam domino vacantem, vacare autem domino non potest, qui marits officio fungitur.
Therefore seing the Preists of the lawe though marryed, all wayes when they went to serue in the temple were sanctified; and lyued chaste, and the continuall state of Seruing God, especially in a more perfect lawe, doth continually require such puritie, and chastitie, of life, rightly doth S. Ambrose, and other holie learned Fathers, euen from hence conclude by the lawe of God against this Article, that Christian Preists euer conuersant in and executing their sacred offices, must lyue in perpetuall chastitie. Veteribus idcirco concessum est Ambros. ad c. 3. ep. 1. ad Tim. Euseb. Caesarien. l. 1. demonstrat. Euang. c. 9. Innocent. 1. epist. 1. c. 9. Siric. ep. ad Himer. Tar^^c. Episcop. c. 7. Hier. l. 1. contr. louinian. c. 14. 19 Apol. ad Pamach. c. 3. 8. ad c. 1. ep. ad Tit. Paralip. cap. 23. Leuitis and Sacerdotibus vxores ad vsum habere, quia multum tempus otio vacabant a ministerio, aut Sacerdotio. Multitudo enim erat Sacerdotum, and magna copia Lcuit arum, and vnusquisque certo tempore seruiebat ceremonijs, secundum institutum Dauid. Hic enim viginti and quatuor classes, constituit Sacerdotum, vt vicibus deseruirent. Vnde Abia octanam classem habuit, cuius vice Zacharias fungebatur sacerdotio, ita vt tempore quo, non illos contingebat deseruire altari, domorum suarum agerent curam. At vbi tempus imminebat ministerij, purificati aliquantis diebus accedebant ad templum offerre Deo. Yet these Preists continued a yeare together in this seruing of God, neuer going to their wyues, or howses: priscis temporibus de templo Dei Sacerdotes anno vieis suae non discedebant, sicut de Zacharia leginius, nec domum suam omnino tangebant.
And the number of them was so greate that seruing but in one place, it euer had thowsands there,
 as the scripture witnesseth, assuring there were founde in the time of Dauid 38000. Leuits, aboue P^ralip. cap. 23. the age of 30. yeares appointed by their turns, to serue in the temple. Numer ati sunt Leuitae a triginta annis, and supra: and innenta sunt triginta octo millia virorum. Ex his electi sunt, and distributi in ministerium domus Domini viginti quatuor millia: praepositorum autem and Iudicum sex millia. Porro quatuor millia Ianitores: and totidem psaltes canentes Domino in organis. Et distribuit eos Dauid per vices filiorum Leui.
This persuading these learned Fathers, that chastitie was so generally requisite, exacted by the lawe of God, in so many thowsands of Preists during the execution of their offices so longe time together induring, they conclude from hence by the lawe of God, that the Preists of the lawe of Christ fare more perfect, and holie, and being at all times and places bound to the exercise of their sacred functions, not to be borne of one tribe alone, nor to be either the twelueth part of the people, as in that lawe, or the hundreth of true beleeuers should lyue in perpetuall chastitie. Quanto magis Innocent. 1. Siric. and Ambros. supr. his Sacerdotes and Leuitae pudicitiam ex die ordinationis suae seruare debent, quibus vel sacerdotium vel ministerium sine successione est, nec praeterijt dies, qua vel a sacrificijs diuinis vel a baptismatis officio vacent?
The holie Fathers conclude the same necessitie of chastitie in Preists, from the words of S. Paule, how the vnmarryed man is free, and fitte for the seruice of God. Qui sine vxore est, solicitus est quae 1. Corinth. 7. Domini sunt, quomodo placeat Deo. But the marryed otherwise. Qui autem cum vxore est, solicicus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat vxori. And sheweth
 the bonde and debt betwene marryed people, to hinder their seruing of God. Nol^^e staudare inuicem, nisi forte ex consensu ad tempus, vt vacetis orationi. Therefore they conclude that Preists allwayes Origen. ho^. 23. in numer. hom. 4. in leuitic. l. 8. contra Celsum Euseb. Caesar demonst. Eua^g. l. 1. c. 9. Siric. ep. 4. ad Episc. Africae c. 9. Hier. ad c. 1. ep. ad Tit. l. 1. contr. Iouinian. c. 19. bounde to the seruice of God, are allwayes bounde to chastitie. Certum est quia impeditur sacrificium indesinens ijs, qui coniugalibus necessitatibus seruiunt. Vnde videtur mihi, quod illius est solius offerre sacrificium indesinens, qui indesinenti and perpetuae se deuouerit castitati.
The perpetuall and neuer ceasing Sacrifice among Christians requireth perpetuall chastitie in them, that offer it. And this to be so is ordeined by the lawe of God. Diximus nuptias concedi in in Euangelio: sed tamen easdem in suo officio permanentes, praemia castitatis capere non posse. Quod si indigne accipiunt mariti, non mihi irascantur, sed scripturis sanctis, imo Episcopis, and Presbyteris and Diaconis, and vniuerso choro sacerdotali and leuitico, qui se nouerunt hostias offerre non posse, si operi seruiant coniugali. Neyther need we the consent of Fathers, and antiquitie, in this exposition of the lawe of God, but onely to insist vpon the verie words and letter of the scripture in the new testament, it is allowed by our Protestants, and both in the Greeke and Latin text interpreted, and translated by their owne Greeke and Latin lexicons, and Dictionaryes, and comparing places one with an other, being their Rules and directions in expounding scripture, we finde S. Paule to say, oportet Episcopum epist. ad Tit. esse, A Bishop must be among other necessarie proprieties, and conditions, continentem (...) which absteineth and keepeth himselfe especially from haunting women, continent, chaste. So he
 saith in an other epistle: oportet Episcopuni esse a ep. 1. ad Tim. c. 3. Bishop must among other laudable qualities, be pudicum, chaste, shamefast, honest. Thus our Protestant Lexicons and Dictionaries do transtate.
And in the same place to contradict this Article in all he saith likewise of Deacons as of Bishops and Preists Diaconos similiter pudicos, (...). Deacons must be likewise chaste, as Bishops, and Preists. And this he wittnesseth in both places, allthough the man now called to holie Orders was marryed before. As diuers were in that tyme, the pagan lawe, in the Empire especially, debarring the vnmarryed and wanting children to be heyres, being in force vntill it was taken away by Constantine the greate and good Euseb. l. 4. de vit. Const. cap. 26. Christian Emperour, as hard and wicked. Dura sane contra infaecundos lex: quae illos tanquam scelus aliquod admisissent, graui supplicio afficiebat.
The Apostolicall Fathers of this first age are wittnesses against this Article in the canons ascribed to the Apostles, onely such as were in inferiour Can. Apost. 25. orders were permitted to marry. Ex his, qui caelibes ad clerum peruenerunt; Iubemus vt Lectores tantum and Cantores, si velint, nuptias contrahant. S. Ignat. epist. ad Anthioch. ep. ad Ephes. ep. ad Philadelphien. Ignatius writeth of, and saluteth the holie colledge of Preists, in this time, in the Church of Antioch as in other places liuing in chastitie, as also the Deacons did. Saluto sanctum praesbyterorum collegium, and placeth his predecessour S. Euodius Bishop there, among the holie Virgins.
So did the Deacons also liue in perpetuall chastitie, epist. ad Heron* as he exemplifieth in S. Heron, Deacon of Antioch to succed him in his Episcopall dignitie there. Teipsum castum custodi, vt Christi babitaculum,
 Templum Christi es, Spiritus es instrumentum. Tu introduces and educas posthac populum Domini qui ^st Antiochiae. Saluto sanctos Condiaconos tuos. He Epistol. ad Smyrnens. which teacheth that preisthood is the highest dignitie, Sac erdotium est omnium bonorum quae in hominibus sunt Apex: and their Sacrifice, the sacred bodie and blood of Christ, and they which offer it, and performe the other sacred functions, are to be most perfect, in the most holie estate: and virginitie and chastitie, are to be preferred before the married life vxores maritis subditae sint in timore Dei, Epistol ad Philadelph. Virgines Christo, in puritate, id quod praestantius est amplectentes, vt liberius diuinam legem meditentur, virgines solum Christum in precibns vestris ante oculos habete, and patrem illius illuminatae a spiritu, must needs so much as he can, ioyne them together in this most holie and sacred calling, as he doth.
S. Clement assigneth such to be admitted to holie orders as are vnmarried, or if married, neuer kept company with their wiues, and if any such shall after his ordination haue knowledge of his wife, though married before, he shall not be admitted to execute his sacred function, but onely the inferiour offices, as of the dorekeeper, and such. Ad Clem. Rom. epistol. 2. Dominica ministeria tales eligantur, qui ante ordinationem suam coniuges suas non nouerint. Quod si post ordinationem ministro altaris contigerit proprium vxoris cubile inuadere, sacrarij non intret limina, nec sacrificium portet, nec altare contingat, nec ad Dominici Corporis portationem accedat, nec aquam Sacerdotibus ad manus porrigat, nec vrceum siue calicem ad altare ferat; sed ostia forinsecus claudat, and minora sectatur officia. He vtterly disableth, in the name of the Apostles, that any Bishop* Preist, or Deacon
 vnmarried at their consecration, should marrie after. Episcopum and Presbyterum ac Diaconum dicimus Lib. constitut. Apost. c. 17. vnius vxoris debere constitut, siue viuant eorum vxores, sine decesserint: non licere autem eis qui post ordinationem sine vxore fuerint, ad nuptias transire. Where he expoundeth that saying of S. Paule of a Bishope or Preiste being husband of one wife, to be vnderstood of such, before consecration, as Catholiks now doe against Protestants, as he also doth before in the second booke of Apostolike Lib. 2. const. Apost. cap. 2. constitutions.
And to auoyde all suspition and occasion of breach of chastitie in such persons, no woman alone without an other, and shee a consecrated Diaconissa was permitted to come vnto them. Sine Clem. lib. 2. const. Apost. cap. 30. Diaconissa nulla mulier accedat ad Diaconum vel Episcopum. And this was not onely taught by the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ, but practised also in themselues.
Tertullian neare the Apostles time, writeth, Tertull. l. de Monogomia. that he could not finde, that any of them but S. Peter onely, was married. Petrum solum inuenio maritum per socrum. Caeteros cum maritos non inuenio, aut spadones intelligam necesse est, aut continentes. S. Igna^t. epist. ad Philadelph. Ignatius in some copies seemeth to hold that not onely S. Peter, but S. Paule also and some others of the Apostles were married men, vt Petri and Pauli and aliorum Apostolorum, qui nuptijs operam dederunt. But in the most auncient Manuscripts of S. Ignatius, this is not founde, and by the word aliorum, he neither doth, nor can meane by any copie in his owne opinion, that all the other Apostles were married, for immediately before he proueth that S. Iohn both the Euangelist and Baptist, were
 perpetuall Virgins. Virgines solum Christum prae oculis habete, sicut Ioannes Baptista, sicut dilectissimus discipulus, qui in castitate de vita exierunt. And S. 1. Chorinth. 7. Paul for himselfe hath proued before, that he was either vnmarried, or a wydower then liuing in chastitie. Dico non nuptis and viduis, bonum est illis, si sic permanserint sicut and ego. And S. Ignatius hath Ignat. epist. ad Philadelphen. supr^. sufficiently before proued the chastitie of clergie men, after ther calling, whether Apostles, Bishops Preists, or Deacons, and in this very place deliuereth in particular, that S. Euodius who succeeded S. Peter at Antioch, and S. Clement his Successour at Rome, and S. Timothy and S. Titus to whome S. Paule gaue so strict charge before, of chaste clergy men, lyued and dyed pure Virgins. And neuer denyeth, that either S. Peter or any other Apostle supposed by any man to haue beene married did forsake their wiues, and liued in chastitie, after they were called to be Apostles. Which both holy scriptures and fathers inuincibly proue vnto vs.
S. Peter speaketh in the name of all the Apostles, that they had forsaken all things, and followed Christ: Ecce nos reliquimus omnia and secuti sumus Matth. 19. te. And expected reward for so doing. Quid ergo erit nobis? Among all things forsaken for Christ, wiues the most neare and deare to married men among temporall matters, must needs be comprehended, if they or any of them were Married. And Christ himselfe so expoundeth that speach of S. Peter, putting wife vxorem (...) among the things which S. Peter, and the Apostles had forsaken for his seruice, and were therefore to receaue eternall reward. Centuplum accipiet and vitam aeternam possidebit.

 So S. Hierome and other fathers expounde this Hierom. l. 1. con. Iouin. Apolog. ad Pammach. c. 8. Chrisost. hom. 33. in Gen. hom. 2. in Iob. Basil. de. ad Amph. c. 3 Epiphan. Her. 59. Euseb. pr^par. Euang. l. 9. c. 1. Porphir. and Herat. ib. Enseb. l. 1. c. 9. supr. c. 8. l. 3. c. 8. scripture, assumpti in Apostolatum, relinquunt officium coniugale. Apostoli vel Virgines, vel post nuptias continentes. The like haue the Greeke Fathers S. Chrisostome, S. Basile, S. Epiphanius, Eusebius, and others: wittnessing not onely that the Apostles liued thus in chastitie, but among the Iewes the Essaei liued in chastitie vxores non ducunt. And all that serued in the temple remained in chastitie, vbi nocte ac die Sacerdotes caste versantur, nunquam in templo vinum bibentes. All that write of the lyues of the Apostles giue testimonie to this. So it was with the 7. Deacons, except Nicolaus that fell to wantonnesse. So of the Euangelists not Apostles, so of the 72. Disciples of Christ. So with all we finde in Antiquities to haue beene Bishops Preists or Deacons in the vniuersall world in this first Apostolike age, they were all either vnmarried, or absteyning from their wyues which they had before their conuersion. We finde the names and liues of very many such clergie men both in Greeke and Latin Authours, we finde not any one but such as liued and died in chastitie, in any approued authour. Their names and number are to greate to be particularly remembred. It will be sufficient for this time and place to make mention onely of them, which ruled in the cheefest Sees, and were a rule to the rest.
To begyn with Hierusale^ when Christianitie began Enseb. Caesar. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. cap. 5. Epiph. Her. 66 Abd. l. 6. Irenaeus in S. Io. Eua^g. Hieron. l. de Script. Eccl. in S. Ioanne. Philo. l. de laude su^ gent. Hieron. l. de Eccles. Scriptor. in S. Marco Euangelista. S. Iames, S. Symeon, S. Iustus, renowned for puritie and chastitie. And after S. Iames and the Apostles death, S. Iohn the Apostle, Euangelist and Virgin, ruled all the Churches of Asia vntill the end of this age, totus Asiae fundauit rexitque Ecclesias.
 The Church of Alexandria gouerned by S. Marke the Euangelist directed thither by S. Peter, S. Anizanus or Anianus or by some Ananus and Abilius in this time is renowned for chastitie, and all religious conuersation both by Iewes and Christians. In the commaunding See of Antioch after S. Peter, who as before forsooke his wife, and all, for the loue of Christ, the pure and chaste remembred S. Euodius, and after him that greate and most continent commender and aduancer of virginitie, and chastitie S. Ignatius, gouerned vntill the end of this age. Ignat. epist. ad Tarsen. He sufficiently, besides that is cited from him before, euidently testifieth that all Preists then liued in chastitie, and so were bound to doe: eas quae in virginitate degunt in pretio habete, velut Christi Sacerdotes: viduas in pudicitia permanentes, vt altare Dei. The See of Rome is confessed euen by Protestants to haue beene the highest Rule in the whole Latin Church, and all this west part of the world. Yet we finde none but professours of chastitie there, S. Peter, S. Linus, S. Cletus and S. Clement in this time. Of S. Peter I haue said before, which will also testifie for S. Linus, which was his next Successour both in dignitie, and holie chastitie, as that Church, place, and time then required, and the miraculous sanctitie of his life, casting out deuils and raysing the deade proue, with his consecrating of many chaste Preists and Bishops, and decreeing, that noe woman might vnuealed Dam. Pontif. in S. Lin. vita S. Lini in Breuiar. die 23. Septemb. Rib. Barnes l. de vit. ^ont. Rom. in Lin. enter the Church, so honouring and maintaining chastitie, as both Catholiks and Protestants confesse Linus presbyteros 18. and Episcopos 11. sacris initiauit. Mulierem nisi velato capite ingredi templum prohibuit, mortuos suscitauit.

 S. Cletus likewise after him liued in the same Damas. Rab. Barnes sup. in Cleto vit. eius in Breuiar. April. 26. manner, and ordeyned 25. Preists in such order as S. Peter had directed to be professours of chastitie, as is proued before, this both Catholiks and Protestants acknowledge. Is expraecepto Principis Apostolorum in vrbe viginti quinque presbyteros ordinauit.
Of S. Clement his chastitie I haue spoken before from S. Ignatius, putting him in his catalogue Ignat. epist. ad Trallian. epist. ad Mar. Cassobolit. of chaste Virgins, and stiling him most blessed Clement the scholler of S. Peter and S. Paule, Beatissimus Clemens Petri and Pauli auditor, who taught him and all such their schollers and Disciples preistly chastitie as before, and as S. Clement himselfe is a wittnesse from S. Peters owne words, the chastitie of S. Clement was one of the motiues which caused S. Peter to designe him to that great Clem. epist. 1. S. Petrus ib. pastorall dignitie. Quem prae caeteris expertus sum Deum colentem, homines diligentem, castum etc. This holie chaste Pope is further wittnesse, that his Master S. Peter did giue him power, and charge to send such worthie Bishops, where S. Peter had not ordeyned the like before. Episcopos per singulas ciuitates, Clem. epist. ^. supr. quibus ille non miserat perdoctos and prudentes sicut serpentes, simplicesque sicut columbas iuxta Domini praeceptionem mi^tere praecepit, quod facere inchoauimus, and domino opem ferente fa^turi sumus. And expressely nameth Fraunce, Spayne, Germany, Italy, and sufficiently proueth the same of this our greate Britayne, and other contryes in this part of the world. Aliquos ad Gallias, Hispaniasque mittemus, and quosdam ad Germaniam and Italiam, atque ad ^eliquas gentes dirigere cupimus.
These other nations in these parts besides Italy
 Germany Spayne and Fraunce must needs include Britayne also. And to omitte other nations here remembred, we finde both in our owne and the historians and Annals of Gallia now Fraunce, that this virginall Bishop and Pope, by direction of that his chaste Master and predecessour S. Peter sent very many such chaste Bishops with such their Preist, and Deacons thither. Anno gratiae 94. Clemens Mat. Westm. chron. an. 94. Antiquit. Eccl. mult. in Gallia. Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 1. part. 4. dist. 3. Gregor. Turon. Hist. Fran corum l. 1. Hincmar. ep. ad Carol. Magn. Imper. Marty^ol. Rom. vsuard. Ado. Bed and alij. Romanae Sedis Episcopus ad locandum in Gallijs fidei fundamentum industrios ac magnificos viros destinauit. Parisiensibus Dionysium, Siluanectensibus Nicasium, Ebroicensibus Taurinum, Arelatensibus Trophinium, Narbonensibus Paulum, Tholesensibus Saturninum, Aramicis Astremonium, Lemouicensibus Martialem, Turonicis Gratianum, Cenomannicis Iulianum, Beluacensibus Lucianum, Ambianensibus Firmium, Lugdunensibus Photinum. Per quos innumera multitudo hominum ab Idolorum cultura recessit.
Many more holie Bishops with their Preists and Deacons are remembred in the Annals of Fraunce to haue preached therein this time. And not the least suspition left in any antiquitie, but they all liued perpetually in chastitie. And they which haue left any thing written behind them, that is still extant, as S. Martial, and S. Diony^ius the Areopagite conuerted by S. Paul testifie so much for themselues and the rest both in Fraunce or wheresoeuer in this time. S. Martial making the preistly Martial epist. ad Burdega^. cap. 3. Epist ad Tolof. c. 9. c. 8. life and state most excellent of all others, teacheth vs plainely that the viduall life is better then marriage, and that of Virgins most perfect like to that of Angels. Vltra hunc (matrimonij) gradum homini licite concessum, viduitatem in praemio maiori constituit Dominus. Sed and t^rtium excellentem gradum
 honestatisin virginitate demonstrauit nobis perfectum, and per omnia similem angelicae dignitati. And he thought the chaste life to be so fitte, and requisite for the more perfect seruing of God, that euen princes then, and not onely clergy men embraced it to that holy end. So he writeth of the Queene or Princesse Valeria, though espoused, how shee had professed virginitie by his preaching Virgo Valeria Sponsa Regis caelestis per meam praedicationem virginitate^ mentis and corporis Deo deuouerat. And of King or Prince Stephen: pro suauitate praemij futuri illectus, copulam carnalium nuptiarum deuitauerit per meam praedicationem: quatenus liberior Deo famulari possit.
S. Dionysius is most playne in this matter, and Dionys. Areopag. Eccl. Hier. c. 6. ep. ad Gain. and alibi, setteth downe the very manner how chastitie was professed before the Bishops, in that time, and how that such in respect of others were cheifly called Therapentae, cultores, the perfect worshippers of God, euen by the Apostles themselues, Sancti praeceptores nostri diuinis eos appellationibus sunt prosecuti. So both he and they must needs teach, that Bishops, Preists, and Deacons euer conuersant about most sacred things, were to liue in chastitie. So we Sim. Metaphrast. die 29. Iunij. must needs say of Britayne: first because we finde that S. Peter admitting onely men of chastitie to thes holie Orders, as before, did first, consecrate our first Bishops Preists and Deacons here, Apud Britannos Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque and Praesbyteros and Diaconos ordinauit. Secondly if any were wanting after, they were, as before, supplyed by S. Clement, onely allowing such to those sacred offices. Thirdly, all those whose names be preserued to haue beene Bishops, in, or of this nation, as S. Aristobulus, S. Mansuetus, S.
 Beatus, S. Ioseph sonne of S. Ioseph of Aramathia which buryed Christ, and some others by some writers, are so reme^bred by the Antiquities where we finde, that there is not the least suspition but they continually liued in virginall or chastelife. If this Aristobulus was the same which Metaphrastes Metaphr^st. die 26. Iunij. Mat. 8. Marc. 1. Luc. 4. Gulielm. Eisengren. centenar. 1. part. 1. dist. 3. Petr. de Natal. l. 11. Anton. Democh. l. 2. c^nt. Caluin. Arn. Merman. Theatr. conuers. gent. in metensib. Martyrolog. Rom. Bed. vsuard. and Molan. die 9. Maij Guliel. Eisengren. centen. 2. part. 5. Annal. Helueth. Antiquit. Eccl. Constant. Baron. an. in mart. Rom. 9. Maij. Theater of great Britaine l. 6. Antiquitat. Glaston. manuscript. writeth, to haue beene Father in lawe to S. Peter, the scripture wittnesseth his wife remayned in Iury so farre distant from him in Britayne, if shee liued so long.
S. Mansuetus liued a collegiall life with onely Preists, and clergy men, no women with them, and was consecrated by S. Peter the Apostle, hauing before forsaken contrie, kindred verie noble ex nobili prognatus familia, men, women and all for the loue of Christ. S. Beatus of noble birth here in Btitayne, both by Catholike and Protestant Antiquaries forsooke all, and went to Rome and there with an other Britan whose name is not perfectly remembred, one calleth him Achates, was consecrated, and was so chaste, that except when he preached he seldome or neuer saw women one or other, liuing a solitary single Eremiticall life.
Of S. Ioseph sonne of S. Ioseph said in the oldest monuments and antiquities of that holie company to haue beene miraculously by Christ himselfe consecrated, or at the least elected and designed a Bishop, and the rest of that sacred company, Preists, Deacons, or whatsoeuer, it is most euident they liued, and died in perpetuall chastitie, in the Iland Aualan, all Antiquaries, Catholiks and Protestants confesse, that King Aruiragus gaue the place onely to those holy men, it was to them onely confirmed by the two next following Kings
 Marius and Goillus, celles were made onely for Tab. fix. Gul. Malmesbur. l. de Aut. Caenobij Glaston. Capgr. Catal. Sanct. in S. Ioseph Aramath. and S. Patricio. Iacob. Genuen. in ijsdem. Ioh. Bal. l. de Script. cent. 1. in S. Ioseph. Aramathien: Ioh. Leland. assertion. Arthurij. Godnyn. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Caius l. antiq. accadem. Cantabrigien. Stowe Hist. Romans Charta Regis Hen. 2 and aliorum Reg. Socrat. Hist. Ec^l. l. 1. cap. 8. them, there they liued alone, they left no children, or posteritie after them, and the place of habitation was so desart, and desolate, when S. Damianus and Phaganus were sent hither by Pope Eleutherius in King Lucius his time the next age, that their place of dwelling was become a denne for wylde beastes. Caepit idem locus esse ferarum latibulum, qui prius fuerat habitatio Sanctorum.
Therefore we are enforced by the authorities of Scripture, tradition, the whole Church, Geeke and Latin, the Apostolike age and writers, and all warrant in religion, to conclude that the doctrine of this article is false: that Bishops, Preists and Deacons may lawfully marry at their owne discretion. And verie vainely our Protestants singularily alledge, for their defence from Socrates the historian, that Paphnutius dissuaded the Fathers of the first Nicen councell, not to decree that Bishops, Preists, and Deacons might not keepe companie with their wyues, which they had marryed when they were lay men: vt qui essent sacris initiati, sicut Episcopi, Presbiteri, Diaconi, cum vxoribus, quas cum erant Laici, in matrimonium duxissent, minime dormirent. But it should suffice, that they which were vnmarried when they were called to the clergie, should according to the old tradition of the Church abstayne afterward from marriage: vt qui in clerum ante ascripti erant, quam duxissent vxores, hi secundum veterem Ecclesiae traditionem, deinceps a nuptijs seabstinerent. For here the marriage of such men, and this Article, is plainely condemned by their owne Authour, and the old Apostolike tradition in the Church.

 And this is confirmed by aboue 200. Later Bishops Episc. Gr^^. 227. in can. Trullen. can. 6. of the Greeke Church itselfe, testifying it was the doctrine and tradition of the Apostles, that among those of the cleargie none but Lectours and Singers might marrie, and they accordingly decree, that no Subdeacon, Deacon or Preist may marrie, and if he should he must be deposed. Quoniam in Apostolicis Canoibus (...) est, torum qui non ducta vxore, in clerum promouentur, solos lectores and cantores vxorem posse ducere: and nos hoc seruantes, decernimus, vt deinceps nulli penitus Hypodiacono, vel Diacono, vel Presbytero post sui ordinationem, coningium contrahere liceat: Si autem hoc facere ausus fuerit, deponatur. And this is their vse and practise to thes dayes.
The other clause of Paphnutius opinion, about Bishops, Preists, and Deacons married before their consecration, not to be barred from such their former wiues, married vnto them when they were lay men, by any expresse lawe to be made by that councell, if it be truely related, nothing concerneth this article, onely speaking of Marriage of such men after holie Orders taken, and not when they were lay men. Yet that citation of Sacrates in this poynt wanteth not suspition of vntruth. For the same Socrates speaking vpon his owne certaine Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. cap. 21. knowledge, affirmeth it was the receaued custome in Thessalia, Macedonia, and other parts of the Greeke Church, that if a clergie man kept companie with his wife, that he had married when he was a lay man, he was to be degraded. Ipse in Thessalia consuetudinem iuualuisse noui, vt ibi qui clericus sit, si cum vxore, quam eum esset Laicus ducebat, post quam clericus factus sit, dormierit, clericatu abdieatus
 sit, eadem consuetudo etiam Thessalonicae, and in ^acedonia, and in Hellade seruatur. And saith, that all the renowned Preists and Bishops also in the easte absteyne from such wiues. Omnes illustres presbyteri in Oriente, and Episcopi etiam, ab vxoribus abstinent.
And he confesseth, that the absteyning of clergie Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8. supr. men from the^^ formerly married wiues, when they were lay (...) was so religious, iust, and necessarie, in the Iudgement of the whole generall councell, that they determined to make a decree and canon thereof: visum erat Episcopis legem in Ecclesiam introducere: vt qui essent sacris initiati, sicut Episcopi, Presbiteri and Diaconi, cum vxoribus, quas cum erant Laici, in matrimonium duxissent, minime dormirent. And it seemeth by the Arabike Concil. Ni^. can. 78. Arabico. copie of that councell* that this or the equiualent lawe and decree was then made: si vxorem duxit, and adhuc vxor viuit, and cum eo habitat, debet imponi duplex panitentia. Idem seruandum de Diacono.
And the third of those canons of this councell which both Catholiks and Protestants commonly receaue, forbiddeth all Bishops, Preists, Deacons, Concil. Nic. can. 3. and clergie men to dwell with any woman, but their mother, sister, grandmother, or Aunt, sister to their father or mother. Nisi forte mater aut Soror aut auia, aut amita, aut matertera sit. And the second councell of Arles held about the same time, in the dayes of S. Syluester Pope, and Constantine Emperour, plainely forbiddeth all cohabitation or meeting with wiues married before, vnder payne of excommunication. Si quis de clericis a gradu Concil. Arel. 2. can. 3. Diaconatus in solatio suo mulierem praeter auiam, matrem, sororem, filiam neptem, vel conuersam secum vxorem habere praesumpserit, a communione aliena^
 habeatur. Here the wife marryed before except conuersa professing chastitie as the husband now doth, is forbidden his companie, and he from her, and most plainely in the canon before, a married man is disabled to be a Preist, except promising and professing chastitie. Assumi ad Sacerdotium non potest, in vinculo coniugij constitutus, nisifuerit promissa conuersio. In this councell our Archbishop Const. Magn. epist. Eccles. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. of London Restitutus, was present, and subscribed vnto it for this Kingdome, which with Fraunce where this councell was kept, Spayne, Italy, and other contries of the west presently receaued the Nicen councell.
Eusebius Caesariensis present at the councell of Euseb. demonst. Euang. l. 1. c. 9. Nice, and writing after it, is plaine that married men receauing holie Orders were bounde to chastitie. Oportere dicit sermo diuiuus, Episcopum vnius vxoris virum esse. Veruntamen eos, qui sacrati sint, atque in Dei ministerio cultuque occupati; continere deinceps seipsos a commercio vxoris decet. And S. Epiphanius also a grecian and liuing at that time, and writing in that age, testifieth plainely, that the holie Church of God, where the canons were sincerely kept, did admitt none to be eyther Bishop, Preist, Deacon or Subdeacon but such, as absteyned from their wiues if marryed before, or in single and chaste life. And if it was otherwise vsed in any place wheresoeuer, it was an abuse, this being the custome of the Church directed by the holie ghost euer from the beginning, that Ecclesiasticall men, married, or not married should euer liue in chastitie. Adhuc viuentem and liberos gignentem Epiph. Hae^. 29. and in compendiar. vnius vxoris virum non suscipit sancta Dei Ecclesia, sed eum qui se ab vna continuit, aut in viduitate vixit, Diaconum and Presbiterum, and Episcopum
 and Hypodiaconum: maxime vbi sinceri sunt Canones Ecclesiastici. At dices mihi, omnino in quibusdam locis adhuc liberos gignere, and Presbyteros, and Diaconos, and Hypodiaconos. At hoc non est iuxtae Canonem, sed iuxta hominum mentem, quaeper tempus elanguit. Nam quod decentius est, id semper Ecclesia per spiritum sanctum bene disposita videns, statuit apparare, vt cultus diuini indistracti Deo perficerentur. And he maketh this a commaundement in scripture. Si populo praecipit ^. Cor. 7. Sanctus Apostolus, dicens, vt ad tempus vacent orationi: quanto magis Sacerdoti idem praecipit? vt indistractus sit, inquam, ad vacandum secundum Deum Sacerdotio, quod in spiritualibus necessitatibus ac vsibus perficitur.
But if we should allowe, which these holy Fathers both of the Greeke and Latine Church would not doe, that the chastity of Bishops, Preists, and Deacons is not commaunded in scriptures, but that the scriptures onely commend it for the more perfect and better duly to execute those sacred functions, as all both Catholiks and Protestants agree, it is without question, that the vniuersall Church of Christ hath euen by these Protestants most religiously decreed, and commaunded Ecclesiasticall men to liue in chastity. And they contradict and condemne themselues herein, in their next article Prof. Artic. ^4. but one in these words: whosoeuer through his priuate Iudgment, willingly and purposely doth openly breake the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approued by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, as hee that offendeth against the common order ^^ the Church.
Therefore the continent and chaste life, and profession
 of the Cleargie being confessed by all both Catholiks, and Protestants; not to be repugnant to the word of God, but most conformable vnto it: And both commaunded, generally receaued, approued Couel. Exam. p. 64. 65. 114. feild pag. 138. l. 3. cap. 29. Middleton. Papiston. p. 134. and practised, not onely by all commaunding cheife Churches, but through out the whole Catholike world; must needs be maintained. And our Protestants confessing this, and with priuiledge writinge, the auncient Fathers so receauing it from the^, that went before them, taught; That vowes of chastitie, and single life in Preists, is to be obserued by tradition: The doctrine taught in the article cannot be true, nor the liberty therein allowed, lawfull, but wantonly licentious, and damnable.


THE XXV. CHAPTER.
Tbe 33. 34. Articles examined, an in whatsoeuer repugnant to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, thus condemned.
THeir 33. next article intituled, of excommunicate persons, how they are to be auoided, containeth nothing contrarie to the doctrine or practise of the Church of Rome, as is manifest in these the verie words thereof. That person, which by open denuntiation of the Church, is rightly cut of from the vnity of the Church, and excommunicate, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the faithfull, as an heathen and publican, vntill he be openly reconciled by pennance, and receaued into the Church by a Iudge, that hath authority thereto.
Therefore I passe it ouer, and come to the next 34. article, intituled: Of the traditions of the Church.
 and followeth in these words: It is not necessary, that traditions, and ceremonies be in all places one, or vterly like: for at all times they haue beene diuers, and chaunged according to the diuersity of contries, times, and mens manners, So that nothing be ordained against Gods word. Whosoeuer through his priuate Iudgment, willingly and purposely doth openly breake the traditions, and ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approued by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, that others may feare to doe the like, as he that offendeth against the common order of the Church, and hurteth the authority of the magistrate, and woundeth the consciences of the weake brethren.
Hitherto this article seemeth to haue litle or no opposition to the Church of Rome, but it may be passed ouer with silence. The rest of it immediatelie thus followeth. Euery particular and nationall Church hath authority to ordaine, chaunge, and abolish ceremonies, orrites of the Church ordained onely by mans authority, So that all things be done to edifying.
This clause is euidentlie false and prophane in itselfe, for making euery particular Church, many thousands such being in the world, to be supreame iudge and sentencer, not onely to ordaine, chau^ge, and abolish ceremonies, and rites of the vniuersall Catholike Church, but to haue ouerruling authority to decree and commaund, what is fit, or fittest for edification, taketh away all possible hope of edification, and bringeth most certaine destruction, confusion, and desolation, by making so many thousands of Supreame Iudges in these doubts, as there be particular Churches, which is a thinge most foolish and irreligious to affirme, and vnpossible
 to be acted. Further it is directly opposite and repugnant to their owne 19. and 20. articles before of the Church and authoritie thereof. In the 19. article they teach that all particular Churches euen the cheifest haue erred not onely in their liuing and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of faith.
Therefore by these Protestants, wee may neither admit so many, or any one such erring, and false Iudge in such things. Neither by their doctrine may wee stand, to the censure of any particular nationall Church, but onely of the one Catholike militant Church of Christ, which as it is euer by that article of our Creede, I beleeue the holy Catholike Artic. 19. Church, holy and vnspotted from errour, so by these men in the same article it is thus assigned to be our onely true Iudge in these affaires. The visible Churcb of Christ is a congregation of faithfull men, in the which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacrame^ts be dayly ministred, according to Christs ordina^ce, in all those things, that of necessity, are requisite to the same.
And in their next article of the same one onely Church, thus they decree, in these words: of the authority of the Church. The Church hath power to decrecrites, or ceremonies, and authority in Controuersies of faith. And their best writers haue published with their common and best allowance, this sentence in this Question. The primatiue Councels haue condemned Couell. Mod. exam. p. 65. them as heretikes, onely for being stiffely obstinate in this kinde, of denying the ceremonies of the Church. They exemplifie thus in Aerius: Aerius Feild l. 3. cap. 29* pag. 138. Couel. exam. pag. condemned the custome of the Church. For this his rash and inconfiderate boldnesse, in co^demnig the vniuersall Church of Christ, was iustly condemned.
The custome ceremonie and tradition which
 this heretike denied, and was therefore by these men, iustlie condemned, was as they confesse, naming the deade at the altare, and offering the sacrifice of Eucharist for them.
This is but a ceremony by them, because they contend, it is not contained is scripture, nor may be proued thereby, as they likewise haue pretended for all other things, which their Articles before haue reiected, both in Sacraments and other doctrines, and customes, which I haue proued against them, and doe leaue them as alterable ceremonies, vpon that feeble and vaine pretence. Vnder this pretence they haue taken away all our Missals, or orders of holie Masse, vsed in all Churches, with their religious ceremonie from the Apostles time, as I haue proued before. So they haue done by all rituals, and ceremonials, about the ministring the Communion Booke, and Booke of Consecrat. of King Edu. 6. Franc. Mason and the Prot. of their consecrat. in Mat. Parker. Prot. art* 36 infra. Stat. in parlamento. an. 2. Eduardi 6. holy* Sacraments and brought in their places the childish and womanlie deuises of a named communion booke by yong King Eduard 6. and Queene Elizabeth, and an other named and stiled by them, The forme, and manner, of making and consecrating Bishops, Preists, and Deacons, quite omitting all other orders euer vsed in all Churches from Christs time, and these fashions neuer vsed before by their owne co^fession by anie Christian Britans, Saxo^s, French, or others in this Kingdome, or all the world, but, to vse their owne words, in these articles, lately set fourth in the time of Eduard the sixt, and confirmed at the same time by authority of Parlament, the second yeare of the aforenamed King Edward. He then being about eleuen yeares old, a farre to yonge censurer, Iudge, and condemner of all Churches with their holie, vniuersallie receaued ceremonies,
 to bring in so straunge and childish an Innouation. We are assured by the Apostolike men of this first age, and others, that euen from the Apostles, there were manie particular ceremonies deliuered to be immutably vsed in all Churches.
Thus S. Clement, and S. Dionisius the Areopagite, Clem. Rom. Apost. const. lib. 8. cap. 29. Dion. Areop. Ecclesiastic. Hierarc. c. 2. with diuers others deliuer of hallowing oyle and water to heale diseases, driue away deuils, and and like effects settinge downe the verie manner how to sanctifie them. Domine Deus Sabaoth, Deus virtutum, qui dedisti aquam ad bibendum, and oleum ad exhilarandum faciem, in exultationem laetitiae, ipse etiam nunc sanctifica per Christum hanc aqua^, and oleum, ex nomine eius qui obtulit, and tribue ei vim sanandi and depellendi morbum, fugandi daemones, expellendi insidias, per Christum spem nostram. And by Apostolike Alexander Pap. 1. epistol. omnes orth. authority commaunde those ceremonies especially of holy water, to be perpetuallie vsed by Preists in all Churches, aquam sale conspersam populis benedicimus, vt ea cuncti aspersi sanctificentur and purificentur, Quod and omnibus Sacerdotibus faciendum esse mandamus. So auncient was this holie ceremonie of sanctifying water and salt, so co^tinuall generall and inuiolable, which our Protestants themselues thus acknowledge. Alexander Romanus aquam admixto Robert. Barn. l. de vit. Pont. Roman. in Alexandro 1. sale precibus benedicendam, eamque and in templo, and domi ad Satanam propellendum, and ad peccata tollenda, seruari iussit.
So it was in hallowing the water of baptisme, S. Clement and others deliuering the verie manner thereof* deprecetur Sacerdos instante baptismo. Et dicet: Clem. const. Apost. l. 7. ca. 43 and l. 8. c. 35. Aspice e Coelo and sanctifica hanc aquam: tribue gratiam and vim, and qui baptizatur secundum mandatum Christi, cum eo crucifixus, commortuus, consepultus and
 consufutatus sit, in adoptionem, quae in eo fit, vt mortuus quidem sit peccato, viuat autem iustitiae. There he deliuereth Cap. 42. also, the forme, and order, of hallowing Chrisme to annoint the baptized. Benedicitur oleum a Sacerdote in remissionem peccatorum.
There he deliuereth the abrenuntiation which was made before baptisme. Abrenuntiatio sathanae Cap. 41. and operibus eius, pompis, cultui, Angelis, and machinationibus eius, and omnibus quae subipso sunt. He deliuereth Cap. 23. ep. 3. const. Apost. l. 3. c. 16. 10. Iustinus quaes. 137. Missa. S. Marci. Clem. co^st. Apost. l. 8. c. 12 Ciprianus ep. 63. Miss. S. Iacob. Alexand. 1. ep. 1. Iustin. orat. ad Ant. pium Ireneus l. 4. c. ^7. lib. 5. cap. 2 Dion Areop. l. Eccl. Hier. c. 43. Clem. const. Apost. l. 3. c. 6. Ignat. epist. ad Eph Iren. l 4 c. 20. c. 34. Euarist. apud Burchar. l. 1. cap. 27. Pius r. apud eund l. 5. c. 47 l. 3. c. 72. Tom. 1 conc. etc. Clem. can. Apost. 72. ep. 2. the annointing of the baptized, vnges oleo sancto caput eorum, qui baptizantur, siue viri sint, siue mulieres. It was Dominica Traditio, the Tradition euen from Christ, that in the chalice water should be mixed with the wine to be offered, ne quid aliud fiat a nobis, quam quod pro nobis Dominus Priorfecerit, vt calix qui in commemorationem eius offertur, mixtus vino offeratur. The Apostolike writers of this age assure vs, there were altars, and they consecrated, to consecrate and offer vpon them, the blessed and perpetuall sacrifice of Christs body and blood, and how they were consecrated as now they are, with holy oyle. Diuini altaris consecrationem sanctissimorum mysteriorum lex sacratissimi vnguenti castissimis infusionibus perficit. And deliuer the verie manner with incense and other ceremonies, Pontifex vbi orationem sanctam super diuinum altare peregit, ex ipso incensum adolere inchoans, omnem plani ambitum circuit. Demum ad sanctum altare iterum rediens, psalmorum incipiens melos. Qui vero ipsius ordinis praecipui sunt, vna cum Sacerdotibus sanctum panem and benedictionis calicem sanctis altaribus imponunt. So they write of chalices, patens, and veales hallowed: vas aureum, vel argenteum, vel velum sanctificatum nemo amplius in suum vsum conuertat, hoc enim fit contra ius, and contra leges.

 So of the holie vestiments of Bishops, Preists, Deacons, Subdeacons, and others of the Cleargie: Sacris induti vestimentis. So our Protestants themselues Clem. ep. 2. Anac. ep. 1. Robert. Barnes l. de vit. Pontif Rom. in Anacle^o. confesse: Anacletus, Sacerdotem sacrificaturum, ministros vestibus sacris indutos, contestes and custodes sibi adhibere ordinauit. Episcopus vero vt plures ministros sibi in sacris faciendis adiungat. I haue spoken of diuers others before, and shall remember more in the 36. of consecration of Bishops, and ministers, hereafter.
And our auncient monuments are witnesses, that as other nations, so all the Churches of Britaine did in the Britans time, receaue and followe these manners, and ceremonies euen by authoritie of the Romane Church. Omnes Britannicae Ecclesiae modum, Manuscr. ant. in vit. S. Dauidis. Capgr. Catal. in eodem. and regulam Romana authoritate acceperunt. Therefore most certaine it is, that euerie particular and nationall Church, hath not, against this article, authority to ordaine, chaunge and abolish such ceremonies or rites of the Churche as the Protestants of England haue done.


THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
The 35. 36. articles, intituled, of homilies, and of consecration of Bishops, and ministers, thus examined and condemned.
THeir next 35. article intituled of homilies, doth onely receaue and allowe to be read, in their Protestant Church 2. Bookes of homilies, one set fourth in the time of King Eduard the sixt, the other in the beginning of Queene Elizabeth her Reigne. Of which the reader may easilie giue censure, according
 to that is said and proued in the former articles, for wherein soeuer either of those 2. bookes, any homilie, in them, on anie part point or doctrine in anie one of them all doth differ from the first Apostolike Catholike true doctrine inuinciblie proued before, those bookes, homilies, parcels, or assertions of them, are vtterlie to be reiected and renounced. Which the verie times themselues of their publication, the condemned erroneous dayes of that King, and Queene, and their Protestan^ composers, and publishers, likewise condemned for their false teaching, and writing doe manifest vnto vs.
Their 36. article, of Consecration of Bishops, and ministers, is thus. The booke of consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops; and ordering of Preists, and Deacons, lately set for the in the time of Edward the sixt, and confirmed at the same time by authoritie of parliament, doth conteine all things necessary, to such consecration, and ordering, neither hath it any thinge, that of it selfe is superstitious, or vngodly. And therefore whosoeuer are consecrated or ordered according to the rites of that booke, since the second yeare of the a forenamed King Edward, vnto this time, or here after shall be consecrated, or ordered according to the same rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated and and ordered. Hitherto this article, which in euery part thereof is fully confuted before, in my Examination of their 23. Article intituled of ministring in the congregation. Where I haue demonstratiuely proued, that they neither haue any true lawfull Iurisdiction, or ordination, among them.
But to do a worke of Supererogation in this so much concerning the standing or ouerth^owe of
 our Protestants whole religion quite ouerthrowne by this one dispute if they haue no rightly, orderly and lawfully consecrated Bishops, Preists or Deacons I further thus demonstrate. First then if the decree of this Article, as they terme it, were to be accepted, and receaued for a iust and lawfull decree, yet the first Protestant Bishops, Preists, and Deacons in Queene Elizabeth her time, from which all that now bee in England, or haue beene since then, cannot be saide to be rightly orderly and lawfully consecrated and ordered by this verie Article it selfe. For that supposed booke of King Edward the sixt, being abrogated, and taken away by Queene Maryes lawes, and not afterward receaued by the Protestant lawes of Queene Elizabeth, vntill in thes Articles in the yeare of Christ Booke of Articl. an. 1562. 1562. as their date is, Queene Elizabeth beginning her Reigne on the 17. day of Nouember in the yeare 1558. all their first pretended Bishops, Preists, and Deacons, must needs be vnrightly, vnorderly, and vnlawfully made, though by that booke of King Eduard: because there was no Protestant Right, Order, or lawe, to make or admitte any into such places by that booke not approued, or allowed by any Protestant Right, Order or lawe, all that time. Againe the first Protestant consecration, or admittance of any, to bee a Bishop by that booke, or order in Queene Elizabeth her Reigne; Franc. Mason. of consecrat. Registr. Matt. Parkeri. Butler ep. de consecrat. ministr. Su^cl. ag. D. Kell. pag. 5. was on the 17. day of December, in her second yeare, as they pretend from their Register of Matthew Parker. But their owne both priuate and publike Authorities proue, that both Matthew Parker their first Protestant Archbishop, and others were receaued, and allowed for Archbishops
 and Bishops long before that time. Franci^ Franc. Godwin catal. of Bishops in Durham 58. Cutberth Tunstoll. Godwyn a Bishop among them saith, Matthew Parker was Archbishop of Canterburie in the moneth of Iuly before, about 6. Months before their first pretended consecration one the 17. of December.
Stow their historian then liuing and writing Stow Histor. in Queene Elizab. an. eius 1. testifieth, that the same Matthew Parker, Barlowe, Scorie, and Grindall were allowed and receaued for Bishops in the moneth of August the 9. day in publik solemnities. The publik Iniunctions Iniunction: Elizab. Regin. ^n. 1. Regin. Iniunct 8. 28. 30. 51 53. of that Queene stiled, Iniunctions giuen by the Q^eenes Maiestie, Anno Domini 1559. the first of the Reigne of our Soueraigne lady Qu^ene Elizaheth, proue the same in diuers Iniunctions. No man can say thes were onely Bishops Elect, and not perfectly allowed, or admitted for true Bishops. For by the Statut. an. 25 Henr. 8. an. 1. Elizab. c. 1. statute of King Henry 8. an. 25. reuiued by Queene Elizabeth in her first parlament anno 1. cap. 1. consecration must be within twenty dayes of election. And their common consent in their greate Theater of great Brit. l. 9. cap. 24. col. 20. Theater is, that they were compleately allowed Bishops, co^secrated (as they tearme that allowance many moneths before. D. Parker was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, and of yorke D. Yong in steade of Heath, who refused the oath, and so of others. Then went forth commissioners to suppresse those monasteryes restored by Queene Mary and to cast out Images Hollinsh. hist. of Engl. an. 1. Elizabeth. Iniunct. of Q. Elizab. Iniunct. 23. sette vpp in Cburches. So hath Hollinshed, with others, So in that Queenes pulike Iniunctions.
Thes commissions and commissioners being thus after those Protestant Bishops made or allowed went out so soone, that as their histories confesse, the religious howses were suppressed,
 Protestant ministers were putte into westminster in place of monks, all Church Images were pulled Stowe and howes histor. in an. 1. of Q. Elizab. downe and to speake in their owne words, on the euen of S. Bartholomew, the day and the morrow after* were burned in Paules Church yarde, Cheape, and diuers other places of the citie of London, all the Roodes, and other Images of the Churches, in some places the coapes, vestiments, altar cloathes, bookes, banners, Sepulchres, and rood lofts were burned. The verie Iniunctions Iniunct. 8. 30. 51. testifie, that there were compleately receaued for Bishops diuers moneths before that 17. day of December both in the See of Conterburie, yorke and in the other Diocesses, with ample and full Episcopall power. Therefore thes pretended Bishops could not possibly bee made but onely by a womanly presumed vayne, and frustrate authoritie, in such things. Neither could any Register called Parkers Register be so termed, except he had beene accepted and reputed for Archbishop before.
And all the first Protestant citers of this Register, whether Matthew Parker himselfe, as it is alleadged in his booke stiled Antiquitates Britannicae Antiquitat. Brit. Hanouiae 1605. Butler ep. de consec. minist. Sutcliffe contr. Kell. Godw catal. of Bish. canterbur. in Mat. Parker. and alijs. Franc. Maso^ booke of cons. etc. as Doctour Butler, Doctour Sutclisse, their Bishop Godwyn, and Frauncys Mason, do differ one from an other, in citing thereof. And whereas the printed Booke of Parkers Antiquitates Britannicae is the first that mentioneth any such pretended consecration of him, and the rest, and the others seeme to borrowe this from thence: In the old manuscript of that booke which I haue seene and diligently examined, there is not any mention or memorie at all, of any such Register, or consecration of either Matthew Parker or any one of those
 pretended Protestant Bishops, as the obtruded Register speaketh of. Neyther was there any one of the pretended consecratours of Matthew Parker, from whome all the rest do clayme ordination, a true and lawfull Bishop, by Protestant proceedings. Thes they name vnto vs: william Barlowe, Franc. Mason booke of consecrat. pag. 127. Iohn Scory, Miles Couerdale, Iohn Hodgeskins, by these Matthew Parker was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury the seuententh day of December, in the yeare 1559.
Two of thes 4. namely Couerdale, and Hodgeskins, were neuer allowed for Bishops in all Queene Elizabeth her time, as the same pretended Register, the printed Antiquitates Britannicae, Godwyne, Mason, and others of them confesse, confessing also that the other two were but Bishops elect, Barlowe elect of Chichester, Scory elect of Hereford. But all men graunt both Catholiks and Protestants, that men onely elect Bishops, not consecrated, or admitted, cannot consecrate Bishops much lesse an Archbishop Metropolitan. And Scory had beene adiudged before publickly to be no Bishop. And Barlowe if he had beene a true Bishop, neither would, nor could in his owne Iudgement consecrate a Bishop. For as thes men acknowledge both this Barlowe and Couerdale also held this horrible opinion against Episcopall Order.
The names of blasphemie against the Lord, and hi^Barlowe and Couerdale apud Bal. l. Image of both Church.Christ. What els is Pope, Patriarke, Metropolitane, primate Archbishop, Diocesan and such like, but very names of blasphemy? Here is not one true consecratour. Yet thes men in their pretended ordination of Bishops necessarily require to the admitting o^ any such Bishop, especially an Archbishop, bot^
 the presence and concurrence of a lawfull true Archbishop and others such Bishops as their owne pretended Prot. forme and manner of making Bishops Preists and minist. Ti^ul. consecrat. of Bishops in praefat. Rite and booke of consecrating Bishops doth thus plainely expresse: Then the Archbishop and Bishops sent, shall lay their hands, vpon the head of the elected Bishop, the Archbishop saying. Take the holy ghost, etc. And it proueth further in these words, It is euident vnto all men diligently reading holy scripture, and auncient Authours, that from the Apostles time, there haue beene thes orders of ministers in Christs Church, Bishops, Preists, and Deacons. Therefore to the intent thes Orders should be continued, a^d reuerently vsed in the Church of England it is requisite, that no man, not being at this present, Bishop, Preist, nor Deacon, shall execute any of them, except he be called, tryed, examined and admitted, according to the forme hereafter following. Which is that booke of King Edward the sixt receaued in this article and approued by their greatest warrants, parlament, Princes Supreamacie, and publike practise among them.
And therefore howsoeuer either with, by, or without this booke, forme, and manner of King Edward, their first Protestant pretended Archbishop, Matthew Parker, maker and allower of all such after, as they freely confesse, was made, his making, and admittance was frustrate, inualid, voide and of noe force by their owne censure, and doome against themselues; and so of all others made by him no Bishop pretending or clayming that honour, dignitie and office after by that vaine, Idle, and vnpossible Title, to challendge to haue that, or any other thing, from him, or them, which neither had it for themselues, or to giue to others.
 And this I haue proued before from the Apostolike men of this age and from the Apostles themselues, that a Bishop cannot bee consecrated but by true and vndoubted Bishops. Episcopum mandamus Clem. const. Apost. l 3 c. 20. Anacl. ep. 2. Clem. const. Apost. l. 8. c. 33. ordinari a tribus Episcopis, velad minus a duobus: non licere autem ab vno vobis constitui. And againe: Episcopus a tribus vel duobus Episcopis ordinetur. Si quis ab vno ordinetur Episcopo, deponatur ipse, and qui eum ordinauit. This is sette downe for an Apostolicall decree. Now lette vs come to King Edwards booke so dignified in this article, and particularily examine and disproue the validitie, or sufficiency of that forme in euery point thereof.
And first whereas it maketh mention onely of Clem. const. Apost. l. 3. c. 11. l. 8. c. 21. 22. 28. ep. 2. Ignat. ep. ad Antioch. ep. ad Philadelphien. ep. ad Philippenses Anacl. ep. 2. Synod. Rom. sub Syluestr. c. 7. 11. Canis ep. ad faelicem c. 6. Clem. const. Apost. l. 2. c. 61. Clem. Supr. l. 8. const. Apost. c. 21. concil. corth. 4. c. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Bishops, Preists, and Deacons to haue beene in the Church from the Apostles time, This holie time assureth vs, of all other orders now vsed in the Catholike Church, to haue beene also in those dayes in vse, and practise, Subdeacons, Acolythists, Exorcists, Lectours and Ostiarij, with their particular and seuerall offices, duties, consecration, or admittance, to those degrees, and that no man might be a Bishop Preist or Deacon, except he had first receaued those orders, nifi prius fuisset lector, deinde exorcista, and postea caperet onus Acolithi, vt acciperet onus Subdiaconi, and deinde ad diaconatus honorem pertingeret. By their consecration they were ordeined to assist and minister at the holie sacrifice of Masse, a Subdeacon for the holie vessels, calice, paten, cruetts: Tribue ei spiritum sanctum vt vasa ad ministrandum tibi, Domine Deus, facta digne attrectet. An Acolithus to light candels and prepare; and minister wine for the sacrifice of masse: accipiat ceroserarum cum cereo, vt sciat s^ ad accendenda Ecclesiae
 luminaria mancipari: accipiat and vrceolum vacuum, ad suggerendum vinum in Eucharistiam sanguinis Christi. An exorcist receaued the booke of Exorcismes, and power against deuils: accipiat de manu Episcopo libellum, in quo scripti sunt exorcismi, dicente sibi Episcopo: accipe and commenda memoriae, and habeto potestatem imponendi manus, super energumenos. So of Lectour and Ostiarius. All thes be wanting in this booke of King Edward, and this Protestant Religion, and all is wanting in it for which they were ordeined, except deuils and possessed persons. They may well want both them No true clergie man among Protestants of England: and first, no Deacon. The English. Prot. forme of making Bish. pr. and Deac. Titul. Deacons. all Bishops, Preists, and Deacons, also, as they do. For first their pretended booke of consecration giueth a Deacon onely authoritie to reade the ghospell in their Church, for allthough their pretended Bishop layeth his hands one the heade of euerie such parson, at his admittance to that office; and sayeth vnto him: Take thou authoritie to execute the office of a Deacon, in the Church of God committed vnto thee. Yet they presently interpret, and limitte this office, to be onely confined in reading the ghospell in thes words. Take thou authoritie to reade the ghospell in the Church of God. And such is their practise, extending a Deacons office no further.
And they obstinatelie denie, that he hath power, or office to assist either Bishop, or Preist in the holy Sacrifice of Christs blessed bodie, and blood, as that either Preist or Bishop may, or can consecrate and offer the same. We finde both the doctrine and practise of this first apostolike age, to haue beene otherwise, and the cheifest office of a Deacon, as the very Greeke name it selfe still testifieth to be as Catholiks


 still vse it, to minister vnto, and assist th^ Bishop or Preist in his holy Sacrifice.
So it is plainely witnessed in the old Masses and Miss. S. Petri, S. Iacobi, S. Marci. Clem. Const. Apost. l. 3. c. 20. l. 8. c 28. Missals ascribed to S. Peter, S. Iames, S. Marke, and others. S. Clement from the Apostles saith: Diaconus ministret Episcopo and Presbyteris. oblatione ab Episcopo aut Presbytero facta, ipse Diaconus dat populo, non tanquam Sacerdos, sed tanquam qui ministrat presbyteris. And expresselie teacheth, that it is the office and function of a Deacon thus to minister vnto Bishops, and Preists, this onelie or principally, Diaconus L. 3. c. 20. sup. ministret Episcopo and Presbyteris, id est, agat Diaconum, and reliqua ne faciat. And settinge downe the whole forme, and Order of Masse, and sacrifice vsed, and approued by the Apostles, Bishops, and Preists in his time, euen from the beginning thereof, vnto the end, he bringeth in Deacons to performe their holie ministration and seruinge therein. Praying to God to accept that Sacrifice. Deaconus pronunciet. Clem. supr. l. 8. c. 19. Rogamus Deus. Prodono oblato Domino Deo, oremu^ Vt Deus suscipiat illud in caeleste altare suum, in odorem suauitatis. For all the people of God liuing, and deade. Pro vniuerso Ecclesiae caetu. Pro ijs qui in fid^ quieuerunt.
They deliuer the breade and wine to be consecrated, Cap. 1^. to the Bishop or Preist, that said Masse Diaconi offerant dona Episcopo ad altare. They attend that nothing falleth into the chalices, ne i^ pocula incidant. At the time of consecration, they Cap. 20. called vpon the people for attention. Diaconus dicat, attendamus.
They hold the consecrated chalice, and confess^ it to be the blood of Christ, the cuppe of life. Diaconus teneat calicem, and quando tradit dicat, sang^^
 Christi, calix vitae. And after all had communicated, they take that which is left, and with reuerence preserue it. Postquam omnes sump serunt, accipiant Diaconi reliquias, and portent in pastiphoria. And they said this prayer, testifying it was the pretious bodie and blood of Christ, which had beene there offered and receaued for remission of sinne and preseruation in pietie. Diaconus dicat. Percepto pretioso corpore, and pretioso Cap. 20. 2^* sanguine Christi, gratias agamus ei, qui dignos nos reddidit percipiendi sancta eius mysteria, and rogamus vt non in iudicium sed in salutem nobis fiant, in vtilitatem animae and corporis, in custodiam pietatis, in remissionem peccatorum in vitam futuri saeculi. And as our Deacons now conclude and end Masse, with. Ite Cap. 23. Missa est. So did they then with Ite inpace. Et Diaconus dicat: Ite in pace.
Thus from S. Clement, and the Apostles, by his relation. S. Denis the Areopagite is witnesse to the Dion. Areop. Eccl. Hierar. cap. 3. like, where testifying of the most holie Sacrifice of Christs bodie, and blood, as is proued from him before, he teacheth that as inferiour orders performed their duties therein, So the Deacons more high in degree, with the Preists more nearelie assisted at the altar about this blessed sacrifice. Qui ipsius ordinis praecipuisunt, vna cum Sacerdotibus sanctum panem, and benedictionis calicem sacrosanctis altaribus imponunt.
So testifieth S. Ignatius writing to S. Hero a Deacon, Ignat. epist. ad Heronem Diaconum. that such as he being Deacons, did minister vnto Preists at Sacrifice, and that so did S. Stephen to S. Iames, and Preists in Hierusalem. Sacerdotes Ep. ad Trallian. and a^ Philadelph* sunt, tu Sacerdotem minister. Sacrificant, tu vero illis ministras, vt sanctus ille Stephanus Iacobo, and Presbyteris, qui erant Hierosolymis. So of all Deacons in other
 places. Diaconi Imitatores Angelicarum virt^tum, qui purum and inculpatum ministerium illis (Sacerdotibus) exhibent, vt S. Stephanus beato Iacobo. And for the dignitie of their ministrie in so great misteries ought to be honoured as Christ. Oportet Diaconis mysteriorum Christi ministris per omnia placere^ nec enim ciborum and potuum ministri sunt, sed Ecclesiae Dei administratores. Ipsi itaque tales sunt: at vos reueremini illos, vt Christum Iesum, cuius vicarij sunt. So Epist. ad Heron. was saint Stephen, to saint Iames, saint Timothie, and saint Linus, to saint Paul, saint Anacletus, and Clemens to saint Peter. He that obeyeth them not, is an enemy to God, and impure, and contemneth Christ, and diminisheth his ordinance. Vt sanctus Stephanus beato Iacobo: Timotheus and Linus, Paulo: Anacletus and Clemens Petro. Qui his (Diaconis) non obedit, sine Deo prorsus, and impurus est, and Christum contemnit, and constitutionem eius imminuit. And speaking of the dignitie, of the altare, and Sacrifice of Christians, wherein Deacons with Bishops, and Preists, haue so excellent Ignat. epist. ^d Ephesios. ministration, he giueth charge to obey them, assuring vs, he that doth not so, disobeyeth Christ, and is an abiect. Enitimini subiecti esse Episcopo and presby^eris and Diaconis. Qui enim his obedit, obedit Christo, qui hos constituit. Qui vero his reluctatur, reluctatur Christo Iesu, qui autem non obedit filio, non videbit vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum. Praefractus enim, contentiosus and superbus est, qui non obtemperat superibus.
S. Anacletus Deacon to S. Peter, as S. Ignatius before hath proued, and made Preist by the same greate Apostle, as he himselfe confesseth, and so perfectly knowing both the doctrine, and practise of the Apostles did when he came to be Pope ordaine
 ^s both Catholiks and Protestants acknowledge, that Deacons in their holy vestiments should minister Anacletus ep* 1. Robert. Barn. l. de vit. Pontif. Rom. in Anacleto. vnto Preists and Bishops in the solemne sacrifices. Sacerdotem sacrificaturum, ministros vestibus sacris indutos, adhibere ordinauit. Episcopus vero vt plures ministros in sacris faciendis adiungat.
This is the doctrine of all holie Fathers after, and of the whole Church of Christ, the first generall Councell of Nice receaued in this Kingdome declareth, that this was euer the rule and custome of Christs Church, Regula and consuetudo, that Deacons Conc. Nicen. cap. 14. were ministers to Bishops in the holy sacrifice, and vnder Preists to helpe them in their Sacrifice, and not to offer sacrifice, or giue the bodie of Christ to Preists that offer it. Peruenit ad sanctum concilium, quod in locis quibusdam and ciuitatibus, presbyteris Sacramenta diaconi porrigant. Hoc neque regula neque consuetudo tradidit, vt hi qui offerendi sacrificij non habent potestatem, his qui offerunt corpus Christi porrigant. Haec amputentur and maneant Diaconi intra propriam mensuram, scientes quia Episcoporum ministri sunt, Presbyteris autem inferiores sunt.
This is the cheife office of a Deacon, so his name ^n Hebrewe, in Greeke and Latine signifie, so his dutie to serue at the altare, to minister there, to the Bishop or Preist, to prepare it, to propose breade and wine to be consecrated, and minister in the whole sacrifice, So write our most auncient writers of these things from the oldest monuments, and authorities. Diaconus Graece, Hebraice l^uita, Latine assumptus Albin. flace* Alcuin. l. de diuin. offic. in Diacono. vel minister interpretatur, assumptus quia assumitur, id est, eligitur ad seruitium altaris: minister, quia ministrat Presbytero. Ponit linteum in altare, ponit panem and calicem, quae nec mittendi, nec auferendi
 habet potestatem Presbyter, si Diaconus adfuerit. Sicut Presbytero officium consecrandi competit, ita Diacon^ ministrandi. Therefore, howsoeuer wee expounde this pretended Protestant making, or admitting Deacons, that they receaue their power or office, when their pretended Bishop giueth to them the new Testament and saith vnto them, Take authority to reade the Ghospell in the Church of God; or when he saith, Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon in the Church of God committed vnto thee: or both together, here is no true consecration of a Deacon in their owne proceedings, nor Deacon so made, if their pretended consecrating Bishop were a true and a lawfull Bishop, for first of giuing the new testament Act. 6. and power to reade the ghospell, this cannot be the full and lawfull manner to make Deacons. The first Deacons in the lawe of Christ being made otherwise by the Apostles, as the Scripture witnesseth, and before the new testament or anie part thereof was written, to be giuen to them, or for them to reade the ghospels, then vnwritten, and vnpossible to be read, by them or any at that time, or longe after.
The other of taking authority to execute the office of a Deacon cannot be the manner, for first no man can truely and lawfully execute that, wherein he hath no power, and here is no power of a Deacon giuen in all this their forme, and order. And Statut. in parliament. an. 27. Elizabethae Reg. ad. 1. Jacobo. their owne parlaments and highest authorities in their religion doe not onely disable any man in England, Deacon or other to execute the office of a Deacon, such as the Apostles and Apostolike men of this age haue deliuered, vnto vs, but make it an offence of high treason, for any lawfull Deacon, either
 to execute that office in any Church, Chappell or other place, or to be in England without executing any such office or function at all, euen reading the ghospell, or any other. And so if we ioyne this Protestant pretended power to execute the offices of a Deacon, and reade the ghospell in the Church together, there is not the least power of a true Deacon thereby either giue^, or permitted by them in all England vnto any such Deacon, to doe, or not doe such, or any dutie of that holy function. And thus much of Deacons. No true Preist amon^ English Protestants.
Now it can be no question but the pretended Protesta^t Ordination of Preists is altogether vaine, Idle and friuolous; for being so iuuincibly proued, that the cheifest and principall office and function of a Deacon is to assist and minister vnto Preists and Bishops in the holy Sacrifice of Christs blessed body and blood at Masse, such Sacrificing Preists, not heauing any such power before their consecration to holy Preisthood, must needs receaue it a^ that time, otherwise they should still remaine without it, as they did before. And our Protestants vtterly before denying all such sacrifice, and sacrificing power, and in this their pretended forme, and manner of consecration hauing no thing at all, to receaue or allowe it, but the quite contrary, and by their lawes so straungely persecuting sacrificing Preists, and Preisthood, this their fashio^ of making or ordering their pretended Preists, must needs be voyde, and frustrate, and they still remaine in that lay state, in this respect, wherein they were before, euen from their first birth into the world. Their Practise in this pretended consecration is this.
The Bishops, the Preists present shall lay their hand^seuerally vpon the heade of euery one, that receaueth orders:Prot. forme and manner of maki^g and consecr. Bish. Preists and Deac. Tit. forme of Order of Preists.The receauers humbly kneelinge vpon their knees, and the Bishop saying. Receaue the holy ghost, whose sinnes thou doest forgiue they are are forgiuen, and whose sinnes thou doest retaine, they are retained. The Bishop shall deliuer to euery one of them, the Bible in his hand saying. Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy Sacraments in this congregation, where thou shalt be so appointed. Here is all their pretended consecration of Preists, so farre from all meaning, or intention to conferre any sacrificing power, or Preisthood, that before they come to this article, in their 31. Article before they thus defined.
The Sacrifices of Masses in the which it was commonlyProt. art. 31. supr.sayde, that the Preists did offer Christ for the quicke and the deade, to haue remission of paine or guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceites. In that place I haue inuincibly proued against them, both this Sacrifice and sacrificing Preisthood, and Preists Institution. All his Apostles, and all consecrated by them and their Successours were massing and sacrificing Preists, all the Apostolike writers of this first age gaue testimony to that doctrine and practise. All Masses Missales, or publike liturgies of all Churches ascribed to the Apostles themselues, and continued by continuall, neuer interrupted generall tradition beare witnesse vnto it. The holy Prophets so described the Messias, by a perpetuall holy Sacrifice to be offered in all places in his time, that he should be a Preist after the order of Melchisedech teach and establish that Preisthood, neuer to end or cease in his Church. Thus taught the most learned rabbines among the Iewes before
 Christ; So the Fathers and common practise of both Greeke and Latine Church with the best least learned Protestant writers; euen of England writing, and published by their publike allowance and authority, as I haue vndeniably proued in that article, and there made demonstration by all authothority, that Christ at his last Supper, when he onely did execute the act and office of his Preisthood, according to the order of Melchisedech, did ordaine his Apostles sacrificing massing Preists at that time, in expresse termes, set downe in holy Scripture, hoc facite in meam commemorationem.
To offer his consecrated holy body and blood in Martial. ep. ad Burdegal. cast. 3. Clem. Coust. Apost. l. 8. c. 3. Iustin. dialog. cum Triphon. Irenaeus adu. haer. l. 4. c. ^2 Eus. l. 1 cap. 10. demon. Euang elicar. Theod. in c. 8. ad Hebraeos. Alexa. 1. ep. 1. cap. 4. Cyprian. l 2. epist. 3. ep. 63. Ambr. in Psal. 38. Gandentius tractat. 2. Aug. lib. 83. q. q. 61. Sacrifice as he had done. So the Apostolike men of this first age assure vs. Vbique offertur Deo oblatio munda, sicut testatus est: cuius corpus and sanguinem in vitam aeternam offerimus. Quod Iudaei per inuidiam immolauerunt, putantes se nomen eius a terra abolere: nos causa salutis nostrae in ara sanctificata proponimus, scientes hoc solo remedio nobis vitam praestandam, and mortem effugandam. Hoc enim ipse Dominus noster iussit nos agere in mei commemoratione^. Domine omnipotens potestatem Apostolis dedisti offerendi tibi sacrificium mundum and incruentum, quod per Christum constituisti, mysterium noui testamenti. Suis discipulis dans consilium primitias Deo offerre, eum, qui ex creatura panis est, accepit, and gratias egit dicens, hoc ^st corpus meum and calicem similiter, qui est ex ea creatura, quae est secundum nos, suum sanguinem confessus est, and noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. This was the opinion, profession, and practise of the whole Christian worlde, in that generally confessed puer and vnspotted time, both by Catholiks, and Protestants.
 And these men confessing that Christ did not in any other place of scripture giue this sacrificing Preistly power vnto his Apostles, the cheife founders of his Church, and yet being acknowledged before to be our high Preist, according to that Order of Melchisedech, and both to offer the Sacrifice thereof, and establish it for his perpetuall Preisthood and sacrifice, it cannot be said by any, but his Apostles were by him ordained sacrificing Preists at that time.
The words of the power hee then gaue them, hoc facite: do that which he in that preistly act and office, did or had done, being spoken by him, which had both ample power, and intention to giue and continue that preistly order, at and in his place and time of Sacrifice, and now no longer to continue with his disciples, be as significant of that power, as the words of consecrating true Preists, by true and lawfull Bishops, euer vsed in the Church of Christ. Accipe potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo, Pont. Rom. in ordinat. Presbyteri. missasque celebrare, tam pro viuis, quam pro defunctis. Receaue power to offer vpp sacrifice to God and celebrate Masse both for the liuing and deade. For as I haue proued before, both Christ, and his Apostles so did, and left that preistly power, and practise to posteritie, for euer, to offer Sacrifice both for the liuing, and deade. And our Protestants themselues haue with publike allowance confessed it was the generall custome of the primatiue Church so to do, and such as impugned ordenied it, were iustly condemned for so doing. And they haue with Regall Is. Casaub. resp. ad Card. peron. pag. 51. 52. Middleton papist omast. pag. 51. 92. 113. 44. 137. 138. morton appeale l. 3. cap. 13. sect. 1. pag. 394. and cap. 13. authoritie, and direction from King Iames published, that it was the Religion of the King, and the whole Protestant Church of England, Haec est
 Regis, haec est fides Ecclesiae Anglicanae, that the fathers of the primatiue Church did acknowledge one sacrifice in Christian Religion, that succeeded in place of all the sacrifices, in the lawe of Moses. And the King with his Protestants agreed with the Catholiks in their opinion de duplici sacrificio, expiationis nempe, and commemorationis siue Religionis. Concerning two Kindes of sacrifice, the one of expiation, for the world, the other commemoratiue or of Religion. And this Sacrifice is the bodie of Christ in the Eucharist, as Catholiks hold. Nobis vobiscum de obiecto conuenit. De hoc est, fide firma tenemus quod sit. Praesentiam credimus, praesentiam inquam, credimus, nec minus quam vos veram.
Therefore to giue Preists power to offer this sacrifice, there must needs be some consecratorie words or forme to bestowe it vpon them, which if we recurre to scripture, as thes men must do, we can finde nothing there, but those words, of hoc facite in meam commemorationem, spoken at the sacrifice time and place by Christ to those he then ordeined sacrificing Preists. And this is most plainely confessed by thes our English Protestants with common and publike warrant, both confessing that the order of the preisthood in the lawe of Christ was to offer sacrifice, this sacrifice was the bodie and blood of Christ, he made his Apostles such Preists, at his last supper, when he saide those words vnto them: Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Marc. Anton. lib. 2. cap. 1. num. 3. Do this is my commemoration. Ordinis potestatem intelligo ad conficiendam Eucharistiam, and sacrificij in cruce per Iesum Christum peracti memoriam celebrandam: ad quod Sacerdotium quoddam est necessarium. Ad hoc Sacerdotium promoti sunt Apostoli
 a Christo Domino, in vltima caena, quando eis dixit: Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Quando Christus Eucharistiae conficiendae Apostolis dabat potestatem, dixit eis: Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, cap. 3. pag. 193. nimirum id quod me videtis nunc facere, and vos facite: Hoc est sumite panem, benedicite, frangite and porrigite: similiter and vinum, and consequenter Apostoli ex ipso facto Christi instructi, certe diuina Christi institutione dabant Eucharistiam. And they say that Christ in those words gaue power to his Apostles to consecrate or transubstantiate breade into Christs bodie, and wine into his blood, as he himselfe had done. Accepto pane gratias egit, and fregit, and dedit cap. 4. pag. ^18. eis di^ens. HOC EST CORPVS MEVM, quod pro vobis datur: Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Panis consecrationem in Corpus Christi, and vini in sangui^em, ipse coram Apostolis fecit: eandem ipsi quoque vt* facerent, frangerent, and darent, expresse mandauit.
Thus haue our Protestants published with their cheife authoritie. Which I haue inuincibly proued before, And the Apostles themselues best witnesses of their owne consecration to preisthood, and how others are to be consecrated thereto, so testifie and direct as S. Clement their disciple thus recordeth from their owne words: Quare vos quoque Clem. const. Apost. l. 5. cap. 20. suscitato Domino offerte Sacrificium vestrum, de quo vobis praecepit per nos, dicens, hoc facite in meam commemorationem.
The like testimonie is from them of themselues l. 8. const. Apost. cap. 5. and other Preists before: offerendo Sacrificium mundum and in^ru^ntum quod per Christum instituisti, mysterium noui testamenti. So haue others also before. And to followe our Protestants Rule in expounding scriptures, by comparing places, and the new
 testament to preferre the Greeke Text, S. Paule maketh it plaine vnto vs euen in our Protestants proceedings, that those words of Christ to his Apostles. Do this in commemoration of mee, were spoken vnto them onely, as Preists then consecrated. For in S. Matthew and S. Marke they are not vsed Mat. 26. Ma^r. 14. Lu^. 22. at all, and in S. Luke, they are onely at the deliuery of Christs bodie, vnder the forme of bread, hoc facite in meam commemorationem, and not at the calice.
But S. Paule saith plainely, that he had receaued from our Lord, and so deliuered vnto others, before he wrote it, Ego enim accepi a Domino quod 1. Cor. 11. and tradidi vobis, and so writeth afterward, that Christ said those words to this Apostles twice, once at deliuering his bodie, the other time at the calice, yet it is euident before, and our Protestants haue so graunted, that lay people haue often communicated onely in one Kinde, which had neuer beene lawfull if this commaunde, and power in both had beene giuen to them; therefore it must needs be a power and commaunde onely to Preists at their holie sacrifice, who onely in the holie Masse haue euer and in all places both consecrated, offered, and there receaued in both Kindes, and no others so euer receaued at all times, and places, nor the Preists themselues, as all writers Catholiks, and Protestants confesse. And this our Article Protestants themselues in their pretended booke and forme of consecration receaued in this Article, Prot. forme and Manner of Making Bish. Preists. and Deac. in praef. and other places, do thus acknowledge: It is euident vnto all men diligently reading holy scripture and auncient Authours that from the Apostles time, there hath beene thes Orders of Ministers, in Christs
 Church, Bishops, Preists, and Deacons, which office^ were euermore had in such reuerent estimation, that no man by his priuate authoritie might presume to execute any of them, except he were first called, tryed, examined and knowne to haue such qualities, as were requisite for the same, and also by publike prayer, with imposition of hands, approued, and admitted there vnto. Where we finde it thus plainely and authoritatiuely with them confessed, that Bishops, Preists, and Deacons were euer in the Church, and truely and lawfully ordeined by such forme and Order of consecration, as was then vsed, and thes Preists as they haue confessed in thes their Articles before in thes words vsed the sacrifices of Masses, in which it commonly said Pro^. Artic. 31. supr. was, that the Preists did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to haue remission of payne or gilt, they are so farre from disallowing or disabling our Catholikly consecrating Massing Preists of the Roman Church, whom they make Traytours in England, to be truely and duely consecrated Preists, that if any of them for feare or any other wordly respects will ioyne with rhem in their new Church seruice or profession, he is allowed a minister with them without any further pretended order or admittance, and they dignifie their first Catholike ordination so much, that as they haue bestowed their greatest Church liuing vpon such, so they deduce Francis Mason booke of Consecr. Ma^. Parker Print. Antiq. Britan. Sutcliff and alij. Pont. Rom. in ordinat. Presbyteri. and deriue their owne pretended ordination onely from such men, Matthew Parker, Iohn Scory, and Miles Couerdale, as they freely confesse. And yet all our Catholike Pontificals, or bookes of ordination do plainely proue, and testifie that our Preists being Deacons before, are consecrated Preists by those words of the Bishop: Accipe potestatem offerre
 sacrificium. Take power to offer sacrifice to God, and celebrate Masses both for the liuing and dead. And immediately before, he calleth such a parson ordinandum and quem ordinat Episcopus, a man to be ordered, and to whom the Bishop giueth preistly order, and presently after those words nameth him or them that were thus ordered, ordinati Sacerdotes, Presbiteri ordinati, Preists that be ordered. And being thus fully ordered before any other ceremonie vsed by Protestants or not, they celebrate the rest of the Masse euen consecrating the blessed bodie, and blood of Christ, with their consecratour Bishop, and as consecrated Preists. Presbiteri ordinati post Pontificem in terra genuflexi habeant libros coram se, dicentes. Suscipe Sancte Pater etc. and omnia ali^ de missa, prout dicit Pontifex: qui tamen bene aduer^at, quod secretas morose dicat, and aliqaantulum alt^, ita vt ordinati Sacerdotes possint secum omnia dicere, and praesertim verba cons^crationis, quae dici deben^ eodem momento per ordinatos, quo dicuntur per Pontificem.
And to putte all things out of question in this matter. The scripture itselfe is euident witnesse, that the Apostles themselues were ordered Preists by those words of Christ vnto them, Do this in my commemoration, equiualent as I haue proued to the forme now vsed in the Roman Church recited, for all writers, Catholiks, and Protestants agree, that all the Apostles S. Thomas and the rest were true and most properly lawfull Preists, all our preisthood claimed and deduced from them, and that they were all present at his last supper, when he said the words, do this: vnto them. Discubuit, Luc. 22. M^^. 26. M^rc. 14* and duodecim Apostoli cum eo. Discumbebat cum duodecim
 discipulis suis. Dedit eis dicens HOC EST CORPVS MEVM, quod pro vobis datur, hoc facite in meam commemorationem. But when he said those words to his Apostles: receaue the holie ghost, whose sinnes you forgiue, they are forgiuen, and whose sinnes you reteyne, they are reteyned. From and by which thes our Protestants do clayme or pretend ordination. S. Iohn the Euangelist then and there present doth witnes, all were not there, and namely S. Thomas was absent. Thomas vnus ex duodecim non erat cum eis, quando venit Iesus. And so could not possibly be made Preist then with those words. Yet all agree he was a Preist as perfectly and fully as any Apostle. Agayne Iudas the Traitour was a Preist, present at the consecration in the last supper, of Christ, and as S. Peter saith, connumeratus erat in nobis, and Actor. c. 1. sortitus est sortem ministerij huius. Scriptum est in libro psalmorum: and Episcopatum eius accipiat alter. Psal. 68. De loco ministerij and Apostolatus praeuaricatus est Iudas. Which is more then our Protestants pretend for their pretended Preists, or ministers. Yet he was ha^ged and deade before Christ spooke the other words, and so could not possibly be eyther made Preist, or be present then. And S. Paule defining a Preist, whether of the lawe of Moyses, or Christ, Hebr. 5. saith, euery high Preist, or Preist (...) omnis Prontifex, is taken forth of men hauing no such power ex hominibus assumptus, to offer sacrifice for sinnes. V^offerat dona and sacrificia pro peccatis. (...). The Greeke words and reading which our Prorestants followe, are most proper for sacrifice, and sacrificing Preists, and so both Catholike and our Protestant linguists, and lexiconaries, confesse, and translate, Masse and
 Masse Preist. Sacrificium (...) a sacrificio sacrificulus Thom. Thomas and Scholae cantabrigien. dictionar. v. v. Sacrificium. Sacrificulus and al^are Morton. Apolog. part. 2. pag. 82. appeal. l. 2. sect. 1. cap. 6* pag. 162. and sacrificus (...). A Preist, a Sacrificer a Masse Preist. He setteth downe also the Sacrificing altar of Christians, as thes our Protestants also translate (...) altare, altar and vnseparable correlatiue to (...) sacrifice as they confesse and the word proueth. And the Apostle doth so appropriate that altare to our Christians at holie Masse, and the sacrifice of Christs bodie, that it can be applied to nothing els, saying none but Christians may eate of the sacrifice offered there vpon. Habemus altare de quo edere non habent potestatem, qui tabernaculo deser^iunt. When neither Iew, nor gentile is forbidden to beleeue in Christ, our Protestants eating, but called and exhorted vnto it by all meanes in holie scriptures. And the same Apostle directly affirmeth, Hebr. 7. v. 24. that as Christ and his Religion remayne for euer, So must, this is sacrificing preisthood be for euer (...), vnchangeable, perpetuall, without offence, or exception, as thes Protestant lexicons do expound that Greeke adiect.
Therefore we may not giue such power to a ten yeares old Kings booke, a womans, Queene Elizabeths Articles, or any power of Protestants, or other one earth to make that mutable, arbitrary and to expire, which Christ hath instituted to be vnchangeable, perpetuall and neuer to cease. And because we are enforced vpon this Protestant exception, eyther to say there neuer was consecration of Preists in Christs Church vntill the deuising of this new Protestant forme, and so thes men cannot clayme any from them that had it not, for themselues, or onely say thes Protestants haue none, and the true Catholike Church as they haue graunted
 before, euer had true Blshops, Preists, and Deacons we are necessitated by thes mens owne proceedings, and so many vnansweareble proofes and authorities singularily to exclude thes men from all true and lawfull preisthood and consecration. And thes men must needs be the preistlesse people, without Preist or sacrifice fore told and prophesied of, as the famous auncient Fathers, Hippolitus, Methodius Method. Peter. lib. de reb. quae ab initio mundi, and deinceps, Hyppolyt lib. de consummat. mund. and An^ichristo. and others haue recorded. Tolletur honor a Sacerdotibus and supprimetur mysterium Dei, and quie scet omne sacrificium ab Ecclesijs, and erunt Sacerdotes sicut populus in eodem tempore Ecclesiarum Aedes tugurij instarerunt, pretiosumque Corpus and Sanguis Christi non extabit in diebus tllis.
And by this not onely these Protestants forme and manner of making their pretended Preists or ministers, but their pretended Bishops also, is vtterly ouerthrowne. For, holy Preisthood being No true Bishop among Protestants to make Preists, Deacons or giue orders, or doe any Episcopall or Preistly act at all. giuen by such meanes, and wholly or principally to such effects, acts and ends as I haue proued, as no parsons but truely consecrated Preists can haue power to forgiue sinnes, or minister Sacraments, except onely baptisme a Sacrament of necessity, in time of necessity, and absence of Preists, and so all pretended power of giuing the holy Ghost to forgiue sinnes, or such pretended authority to Minister Sacraments, presumed to be conferred to any others then truely consecrated Preists is frustrate voyde, and to no purpose, So a man not a truely co^secratest Preist ca^not possiblely either by Catholike doctrine, or these our Protestants in this, and other their articles, and their pretended booke, and forme of consecration, be truely and lawfully made a Bishop, these men in these their most authorised
 proceeding in this matter not allowing or permitting any man to be a pretended Preist, or minister with them, but such as was allowed for a Deacon before, nor any to be a prete^ded Bishop, with them, which was not both admitted to be both a Deacon, or Preist, at the least by this their pretended forme and fashion, so confuted in both those callings. But forefull content I will particularly also and breifely examine and confute this in like manner and demo^strate that it is voyde and inualid, although the pretended consecratour, or consecratours were true Bishops, and the pretended consecrated true and lawfull both Deacons and Preists.
Thus it is set downe in this pretended forme of Prot. forme and manner of making and cons. Bish. pr. and Deacons in Bish. consecration. The Archbishop and Bishops present, shall lay their hands vpon the head of the elected Bishop, the Archbishop saying; Take the holy Ghost, and remember that thou stirre vp the grace of God which is in thee, by imposition of hands: for God hath not giuen vs the spirite of feare, but of power, and loue, and sobernes. Then the Archbishop shall deliuer him the Bible, saying. Giue heed vnto reading, exhortation, and doctrine. thinke vpon these things contained in this booke. And the rest of that exhortation being onely a persuasion and admonition to doe well, without any pretence of giuing Episcopall order or power at all. And yet these men and this their forme and manner to make Bishops doe assure vs, that the party whome they pretend to make a Bishop, is so made by that first ceremony of hands, and words then spoken, or not at all. For, as it is cited from the^, they name and take him to be onely, elected Bishop, at their laying on of hands. And presently after that, which I haue cited is endeed, they call him, the new
 consecrated Bishop, in these termes. Then the Archbishop shall proceed to the communion, with whom the new co^secrated Bishop with others, shall also communicate. But here is not any one singular, or priuiledged thinge, signe, ceremony, word, or act, that may by probable or possible meanes giue Episcopall order, though the pretended co^secratour or consecratours were the most lawfull and best Bishops in the world; for in their owne proceedings, except in number of Bishops which take not for a matter of necessity, here is noe more done, or said, then was in their making of pretended Preists or ministers before, for these the same were their ceremony and words, which now. The Bishop with the Preists present shall lay their hands seuerally vpon the head of euery one that receaueth orders, the Bishop saying. Receaue the holy Ghost.
Here is no materiall difference, a Bishop is pretended consecratour in both a like, except that they appoint an Archbishop to consecrate a Bishop, and any other Bishop to make a Preist, but this in their owne proceedings is no materiall point, for they graunt their first pretended Archbishops Matthew Parker was made without any, either true or pretended Archbishop. The ceremony of laying on of hands is the same in effect, for if in the consecrating of a Bishop, some Preist or Preists with the consecrating Bishop should lay hands on the elect, though this were a sinne in them, yet it hindereth not consecration, if all essentiall things be vsed. The words spoken doe not differ in substance. For all men knowe, that the words receaue the holy Ghost. Spoken to their prete^ded Preist, be as significant, full, and effectuall, as, Take the holy Ghost,
 spoken to their pretended Bishop. The words, receaue, and, take, differ not in force, and signification. The other words, the holy Ghost, and, the holy Ghost, be the same. In both there is the same sentence, and sense in our language in all co^struction. If we seeke construction from the words, which immediately followe in both places, wee shall rather finde that the words receaue the holy Ghost spoken to their prete^ded Preists are of greater efficacy and meaning, being interpreted with the very same words, wherewith Christ gaue the highest power of binding and lowsing to his highest Bishops, and Apostles. In the other pretended ordination of Bishops, there is no power at all giuen, but the partie onely put in minde or admonished to styrre vp that g^ace, which was in him before, as they suppose in the^ owne words. Take the holy Ghost, and remember 2. Timoth. 1. that thou stirre vp the grace of God, which is in thee by impositio^ of hands: for God hath not giuen vs the spirit of feare bu^ of power, and loue and sobernes. The very same whic^ S. Paul absent wrote to S. Timothy, longe after he ^ad consecrated him Preist. Adm^neo te vt resuscite^ gratia^ Dei, quae est in te per impo^^tione^ manuum mearum* non enim dedit nobis Deus spiritum timoris, sed virtut^s, and dilectionis, and sobr^etatis.
So to him in a^other place: Noli negligere gratiam 1. Timoth. 4. quae in te est, quae ^ata est tibi per propheti^m, cum impositione manuum pesbyterij. And it must needs haue this signification ad reference to grace giuen before, by impositio^ of hands in a precedent consecration, for this act ^f imposition of hands being in fieri, doing, and n^ acted, cannot possibly giue grace in any opini^n ^hough it were in lawfull, and true imposition, an^ c^nsecration, vntill it be acted
 and finished, because it is not an acted and perfect act, nor grace vntill then. And this act still continueth after those words, vntill all these for God hath not giuen vs the spirit of feare, but of power and loue and sobernes, be pronounced. And grace is supposed here to be in that party before any mention of imposition of hands. And both the Greeke, Latine and their owne English word, (...) resuscites stirre vp the grace, which is in the, proue there is grace before, if at all, and not then giuen, for none of those words in any language haue a giuing signification. So it is in the whole sentence both in the Greeke, and Latine Text, (...). I doe againe put thee in minde to styrre vp the guift of God which is in thee. Thus the Greeke. Adomoneo te, vt resuscites gratiam Dei, quae est in te. I admonish ^e thee, that thou stirre vp the grace of God which is in ^hee. Thus the Latine. Here is no grace giuen at th^^ time, b^t onely a putting in minde and admo^^tion to styrre vp the grace which was befor^ So in the words translated into English by ou^ Protestants, and he^e vsed: remember that thou sty^^ vp the grace of God which is in thee by imposition ^^ hands.
So the^^ words immediatly f^llowing: for God hath not giuen vs, the spirit of feare, but of power, and loue, and sobe^nes. All speaking of ^race and power giuen before, and not at that ti^^. And there is no scripture in any language, nor adition, no Ecclesiasticall writer, no Pontificall or booke or Rites, that euer appointed thes w^rds. Take the holy ghost, and those immediatly io^ned in this Protestant forme of pretended conse^^ation to be vnited and spoken together in such ^a^ner, nor those from S. Paule to be vsed, eit^^r wi^h others, or by
 themselues to be powerable to giue consecration, and holie Orders, to Bishop, Preist, or Deacon. Neither possiblely can they co^ferre any such grace or power, being words neyther of giuing or receauing any thing at all from the speaker at that time. The first words, Take the holie ghost, were not vsed of our Britans, neyther are in the old Roman Order. Yet our Protestans confesse they both had true Bishops and consecration, and yet without them, and the ceremonie of the booke one the head of the elect. And though the Roman Order now Pontif. Rom. in consecrat. Electi in Episcopum. vseth them, yet it declareth that consecration is not so giuen, nor a Bishop so consecrated, but after them remayneth onely elect, without that holie Order, as before, and so calleth him, electus, and consecrandus, elect, and to be consecrated, but not consecrated. Further thes Protestants haue told vs before, both in their pretended booke of consecration, and thes Articles, that, It is euident vnto all men, diligently reading holy scripture, and ancient Authours, that from the Apostles time, there hath beene thes orders, of ministers in Christs Church, Bishops, Preists, and Deacons, which officers were euermore had in reuerent estimation.
Men so euidently knowne to be Bishops, Preists, and Deacons, and euermore had in such reuerent estimation, must euermore be certayne, that they are truely and effectually admitted to those callings, and dignities, otherwise it would not be euident, that there be, and who be such men-it would be Prot. forme of Order: in Preists. Prot. A^ticl. Articul. 19. vncertayne, and doubtfull, who is a Deacon, a Preist, or Bishop, whether there is any true preaching, ministring of Sacraments, any Sacraments, or Church at all. For thes men allowe none to
 preach and minister Sacraments, but such, they define Articul. the visible Church to be a congregatien of faithfull men, in the which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duely ministred according to Christs ordinance. Sacraments be certayne sure witnesses and effectuall signes of grace, and Gods good Will toward vs, by which he doth worke inuisibly in vs. And yet making but two Sacraments, Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord, they thus declare, and decree. Those fyue commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Pennance, Orders, Matrimonie, and Extreame Vnction, are not to be compted for Sacraments of the ghospell, for that th^y haue not any visible signe, or ceremonie ordeyned of God.
Therefore this pretended Protestant forme, and manner of consecration, as also all their pretended Bishops, Preists, and Deacons are vaine and voide by their owne confession, for in all thes they assigne laying one of hands, a knowne and euident signe and ceremonie, to be the certificate and assurance of such admittance, and grace and power giuen as those Ecclesiasticall Orders require. But if God did not ordeine this visible signe or ceremonie to such a purpose, to make Episcopall and other holie Orders a Sacrament, which thes article, and all their Religion denie, no created or humane authoritie can giue such power and preeminence vnto it, to be a signe or ceremonie ordeined of God, a certayn^ and sure witnesse, and effectuall signe of grace. Which their Article, and Religion allowe onely to two Sacraments; and in expresse terms vtterly denyeth to all Ecclesiasticall Orders, either in Bishop, Preist, or Deacon. Hereby falling into such desperate doubts, and proceedings in this case, that they are
 not onely condemned by priuate Catholike writers, but publike censures, sentences, and consistories, of the Catholike Church, and all auncient, and publikly receaued formes, Pontificals, and Orders of consecrating Bishops, Preists, and other Orders, how old, and generall soeuer from the Apostles time, But by our owne temporall lawes and publike Iudgments, as spirituall also, both in in Catholike and Protestant times, registred in their owne lawes, and Records in their owne courts and historians to haue neyther Bishop, Preist, Deacon, or any other true Ecclesiasticall man among them. They write how Ridley made Preist by Catholike Order, but Bishop by their new fashion, when he was to be degraded by B. Brooke Bishop of Glocester, delegate thereto, in Q. Maryes time, hee did onely then degrade him, concerning preisthood, being iudged to be no Bishop, Foxe tom. 2. pag. 1604. Mason l. 2. pag. 92 Record. degrad. Rid. as our Protestants and Records thereof testifie in thes his words to Ridley: we must proceede according to our commission, to degrading, taking from you the dignitie of preisthood, for we take you for no Bishop.
So it was also adiudged by the common lawes Brooke Abridg. an. 1576. ti^ul. leases num* 68. of the land in that time: Bishops in the time of King Edward the sixt were not consecrated, and therefore a lease for yeares, made by such, and confirmed by the deane and chapter, shall not binde their Successours, because such were neuer Bishops. Of thes pretended Bishops which were thus by publike Iudgment in lawe disabled to do te^porall offices, for want of true ordination and power, how much more were they vnable to performe any spirituall function, belonging to that highest holie Order? yet this is published
 for law euen in Q. Elizabeth her time, longe after thes new Protestant Bishops were so allowed, and still remaineth among their receaued and adiudged lawes. And so generall and vniuersall a consent was of all in authoritie, Pope, Prince, Prelates, and whosoeuer, that this new Protestant forme gaue no consecration, that their owne Protestant applauded writers thus confesse it. Touching Articles of Q. Mary to Bish. Boner. Consecrat. l. 5. cap. 12. foxe Act. and mon. vol. 2. p. 1295. such parsons as were here to fore promoted to any Orders after the new sorte and fashion of Orders, they were not ordered in verie deed.
This was the common and publike sentence of Pope, Prince, and Prelates in Queene Mary her time, of the prete^ded Bishops of King Edward the 6. when there was more pretence for them, the^ these, diuers Catholikely ordained Bishops then liuing, and some helping in their new ordering; now and from Q. Elizabeth her time not one at all. And it is contained in our old lawes: Iudex secularis non potest Bracton fol. 401. degradare clericum, magis quam ad ordines promouere. A secular Iudge can no more degrade a Preist, or Clearke, then he can promote him to orders.
And it was publikly adiudge in lawe: That the parlament Temp. Henrici 7. fol. 27. 28. could not make the Kinge being a lay parson, to haue spirituall Iurisdiction. Then much lesse could it giue to King Edward the sixt (to speake Protestants Stow an. 1. Edw. 6. Hist. words) proclaimed King of England, and also of Ireland, the supreame heade immediately in earth, vnder God, being of the age of nyne yeares, and to Queene Elizabeth, a woman by Sexe disabled in such things, both to haue spirituall Iurisdiction, and supreame spirituall Iurisdiction, and spirituall power Episcopall or Pontificall to conferre and giue both spirituall highest order, and Iurisdiction, to whom, and
 by what meanes it pleased them, contrary to all Christians in the world, Catholiks Protestants, and whosoeue^, none out of England so proceeding in such affaires. A^d in the time of Queene Elizabeth both particular wr^^^rs, records and her parlament publikely in the 8. year^ of her Reigne assure vs, that their new Bishops making was by diuers both doubted of, and denied to be lawfull, The Protestant cheife Iustice of the common plees Lord dyer setteth downe, that Bishop ^onner publikely pleaded they were no Bishops, and namely Doctour Horne, so admitted, and it w^s adiuged by all the Protestant Iudges, that Bish^^ Bonner might so pleade. And the Protestants would neuer come to tryall with him therein.
And the next Parlament in her 8. yeare cleared him and all other Catholikes so in i^pugning those Bishops offering the oath of suprema^y vnto them, in these words: Be it exacted that no person or persons Statut. in parliament. an 8. Elizab. cap. 1. be empeached, or molested in body, lands or good by occasion are meane of any certificate by any Archbishop, or Bishop, heretofore made in the first session of this parlament, touching or concerning the refusall of the oathe, set fourth by act of parlament in the first yeare of Queene Elizabeth. And that all tenders of such oath made by any Archbishop, or Bishop aforesaid, and all refusals of the same oath, so entered by any Archbishop or Bishop, shall be voyde, and of noe effect or validity in the lawe. And to helpe afterward, what they could, thus they enact: diuers questions haue lately growne, vpon the Statut. in parliam. an. 8. Eliz. supr. c. 1. making and consecrating of Archbishops, and Bishops, within this realme, whether the same were and be duely done according to the lawe, or not: Therefore it is thought conuenient, hereby partly to touch such authorities,
 as doth allowc and approue the making of the same Archbishops, and Bishops, to be duely and orderly d^^e, according to the lawes of this Realme, her h^^^nesse in her letters patents vnder the greate S^^^e of England, directed to any Archbishop, Bis^^p, or others, for the confirming, inuesting, and co^secrating of any parson, elected to the office or dig^^^y of an Archbishop, or Bishop, hath not onely vs^^ such words, and sentences as King Henry, and King Edward did in their letters patents, diuers other general words, and sentences whereby her highnesse by her su^r^ame power, and authority, hath dispenced with all ^auses, or doubts, of any imperfection, or diasbility th^t can, or may in any wise be obiected, against the sa^e.
These be the on^ly authorities the statute doth, or could bringe, ^eing all carnall and humane, not one diuine or ^cclesiasticall, vtterly vnable to make a lawfull true Bishop, or confirme any for such, being b^t meere phantasies, letters patents, the greate Seale of England, of a woman, such words and sentences as King Henry the eight, and King Eduard his child, contrary to the vniuersall Church of Christ vsed. A womans supreame power authority and dispensation in all causes, doubts, Imperfections, or disabilities in any wise to be obiected, and that not onely their pretended Archbishops, and Bishops, but others neither true nor pretended Archbishops or bishops did as their words be plaine, by this most straunge, and infirme feminine commission, confirme, inuest, and consecrate Archbishops, and Bishops, which as they haue confessed before, with all authorities, none but true and lawfull Bishops, in approued and receaued forme, and manner can doe.

 And yet this parlament doth thus approue and all such, as were thus made, whether by the Queenes letters patent, and men no Bihops true or pretended and without King Edwards forme, or any other remembred, or by King Edwards forme and fashion to be lawfull Bishops in these words: All, Statut. an. 8. Eliz. supr. acts, and things made or done by any person, or persons in, or about any elected to the office of any Archbishop or Bishop by vertue of the Queenes letters patents, shall be by authority of this Parlament be declared good, any matter, or thing, that may be obiected to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding. All persons that haue beene, or shall be made Archbishops, Bishops, Preists, ministers after the forme and Order prescribed in the order and forme, how Archbishops and should be made, by authority hereof be declared and shall be Archbishops, Bishops, Preists, Ministers, and rightly made: any statute, lawe, canon, or other thing, to the contrary notwithstanding. Hitherto this Protestant Parlament, and Queene Elizabeth taking vpon them more then omnipotent and diuine power, for God himselfe euer omnipotent, cannot make that a thing done, is not, or was not done, nor a thing ill done, to haue beene well done, or not ill done. The light of reason, the light of grace, all Philosophers Christians, and others agree, non est potentia ad praeteritum, there is no power, or possibility, to make a thing that is past not to be past, nor otherwise passed, the^ it passed. Therefore when it appeareth by so many testimonies before, that men called Bishops by our Protestants, were neuer truely and lawfully made Bishops, and this Protestant parlament it selfe confesseth, not onely that diuers questio^s had beene whether it were duely, and orderly done according
 to the law or not, but declareth their acts and effects done by them, as Bishops, to be voyde, and of none effect, or validitie in the lawe: It farre surpassed a womans power, or her parlament thereby, or any power on earth, or higher, to make and proue by authoritie of this parlament (in her 8. yeare) such men by authoritie hereof be declared, and shall be Archbishops, Bishops, Preists, Ministers, and rightly made, any statute, lawe, canon, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Producing no other reason, but that, her highnesse by her supreame power and authoritie hath dispenced with all causes, or doubts of any imperfection, or disabilitie, that can or may in any wise be obiected against the same.
If Queene Elizabeth and her Protestants would make Episcopall Order, and dignity onely an humane inuention, she as a temporall greate Prince might haue had place for her dispensation, for time to come. Though not past, in aboue 6. yeares, when thousands, of such Bishops, and ministers were made among them; But all Protestants of England, King, Bishops and whosoeuer hauing decreed and deliuered before, that it is diuinae ordinationis, the ordinance of God, an Apostolicall tradition manifest to all the world, a canon or constitution of the whole Trinitie, enacted for succeeding posteritie: it is vtterly vnpossible, that any Queens, Kings or what dispensation soeuer on earth, can or euer could make that which was, and is questioned, doubtfull, imperfect, and inualide, to be without question, doubt, perfect, and valide, either from the beginning, any time past, or to come hereafter. Thus howsoeuer wee examine the making of these Protestant Bishops, and ministers by them, either by holy scripture, witnessing that God placed Bishops in his
 Church to gouerne it; attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, in quo vos spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos, regere Act. c. 20. 1. Timoth. 3. 4. Tit. 1. 1. Petr. 5. 2. Timo^h. 1. Ecclesiam Dei, quam acquisiuit sanguine suo. And not a woman or child Queene Elizabeth and King Edward the 6. by a new deuised manner: or by the Apostolike Fathers of this first age, tradition of the Apostles, all the old Orders of consecration in Britaine, or what place soeuer, by all Catholike Fathers, or by these Protestants themselues, we finde nothing but a desolation and an vndoubted want of all Episcopall and Ecclesiasticall holy orders among them.
But if we come to the Sacred Bishops, of the Catholike and Romane Church, the holie preisthood and other Orders, we finde by all these testimonies, all things in Order, subordinate, required and necessarie to this highest spirituall dignitie. We haue with the Apostles and the Apostolike Can. Apost. 43. Clem. const. Apost. l. 3. c. 11. l. 8. c. 21. c. 22. 28. epist. 2. Ignat. epist. ad Antioch. ad Philadelph. Philip. Engl. Protest. in Abb. Prot. Archb. of canterb. and Franc. Mas. Booke of Consecrat. l. 5. p. 96. 97. c. 1. p. 207. Fathers of this time S. Clement, S. Ignatius, and others, Subdeacons, Acolythists, Exorcists, Lectours and all. We haue founde Deacons ministers to Bishops and Preists in the Sacrifice of Masse, we haue founde true massing Sacrificing Preists, and Protestants both by writing and practise so confessing, as also in these words of them all by generall assent: We thinke that no man possibly haue the Order of a Bishop, which hath not the right Order of preisthood. To the verie being of a Bishop, the Order of preisthood is essentially required.
Thus they exclude themselues from, and entitle Catholiks to this greatest Order. And plainely confesse the Roman Church not onely to obserue, and vse in the consecration of Bishops, all things whatsoeuer, in any opinion, of Catholiks, or Protestants,
 essentiall and necessarie, but also all ceremonies, and ceremonialls therein vsed euer since, and before England was conuerted to Christ, plainely confessing that their first Protestant Archbishop Abbot. and mason. consecr. in Mat. Park. Matthew Parker being the 70. from S. Augustine was the first of all admitted without them, and otherwise then they were, and their publike continuall practise is so, euer since that time.
The ceremonies of pastorall staffe, ringe, deliuerie of the booke of Ghospels to the new consecrated Bishop, by the Consecratour and his Assistants, taken from the sholders of the newly consecrated, Miter and gloues, we are assured to be ceremoniall onely, all and euerie of them performed, and done after the new Bishop is declared to be consecrated.
And yet these were so aunciently vsed by these Protestants, that all our Bishops of England were consecrated they being vsed. And before S. Augustine S. Asaphus and Capgrauius in vit. S. Kentegerni. came hither S. Kentegern in the Britans time being consecrated without them going to Rome, ipso multoties petente, with very often suite and desire, the Pope then ministred them vnto him. Sanctus Papa quae deerunt consecrationi eius supplens. The Order of Consecration by which this S. Kentegern was made Bishop, and all the Britans, Scots, and Irish vsed, was more old, then the canons of the ceremonies vsed in consecration, and their old custome mos in Britannia inoleuerat, when S. Kentegern about 1200. yeares past was consecrated, was this: In consecratione Episcopi tantummodo capita eorum sacri chrismatis infusione perungere. cum inuocatione Sancti Spiritus, and benedictione,
 and manus impositione. In the consecration of Bishops onely to anoynte their heads with holy Chrisme, with inuocation of the holie ghost, and benediction, and imposition of hands. This Order was adiudged by the Popes of Rome, to be auayleable. And all Protestants graunt, the Britans haue true consecration, and Bishops. Here is neyther the ceremonie of saying, take the holie ghost, nor deliuering the bible to him that is admitted among them, beinge the onely signes they vse except layinge hands one the head of the Elect, which signe of itselfe cannot by any opinion giue this greate dignitie and calling, and as S. Albinus Amalarius and others witnesse 800. yeares since this ceremonie of imposition of hands was neither in the old, or new booke of Ordination, or in the Romane tradition* Non reperitur in authoritate veteri, neque noua, sed neque in Romana traditione.
So they write of the ceremonie of the booke of the ghospels not vsed in any of those authorities, neyther remember that the ceremonie of saying, take the holie ghost, was founde in any of them, and in the old Roman Order it is wanting, as likewise in that was vsed in Fraunce, as in that of Britayne Scotland, and Ireland. And yet it is acknowledged freely by all, aswell Protestants as others, that all these Kingdomes, contryes, and nations where these traditions, Orders, and consecrations were thus vsed, had true and lawfull Bishops, Preists, and other clergie men, yet omitted all, and vsed none of those Rites to which Protestants ascribe Episcopall consecration.
Therefore it must needs be euen in their owne Iudgements that Protestants haue no true consecration,
 or persons consecrated in their congregations: But the present Catholike and Romane Church now practising all, and euerie Rite, and ceremonie, which all those Orders, and Ordinations did, in consecrating Bishops, and other clergie men, and vsing, as our Protestants also confesse, true and lawfull Bishops, to be consecratours, must needs haue true and vndoubted consecration. The Rites be besides the remembred which it vseth herein. First the Examen of the person to be consecrated ended, wh^ch was in all orders of this consecration, and helpe of the holie ghost as the Britans Scots and Irish with others vse cum inuocatione Pont. Rom. in consecrat. electi in Episcopum. sancti Spiritus, being called vpon, the consecratour telleth him, the office of a Bishop to be, to iudge, interprette, consecrate, giue Orders, offer sacrifice, baptise and confirme. Episcopum oportet iudicare, interpretari, consecrar^, ordinare, offerre, baptizare and confirmare. With this all the cited Orders agree, and the holie Fathers of this first age before, S. Clement, S. Ignatius S. Ignat. ep. ad Trall. Antioch. Phil. Ephes. Smyrn. Clem. 3. const. c. 10. 11. ep. 4. 1. 3. const. l. 7. 2. c. 11. 12. 3. 30. 31. 36 with others among the greate duties of this highest dignitie haue told vs: Quid aliud est Episcopus, quam qui omni principatu and potestate superior est? Episcopi sunt Sacerdotes, baptizant sacrificant, eligunt, manus imponunt. Nemo Episcopo honorabilior, in Ecclesia Sacerdotium Deo gerent pro mundi salute. Sine Episcopo nemo quicquam faciat eorum, quae ad Ecclesiam spectant, non licet sine Episcopo baptizare, neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare, neque dochen celebrare. Non sibi quis sumit honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo. Nam per Episcopi manus datur haec dignita^.
The benediction remembred in the manner of the Britans, Scots, Irish, and others is performed
 with the signe of the Crosse, vt hunc praesentem electum benedicere and sanctificare, and consecrare digneris. Producendo semper signum Crucis super eum, thus the Elect kneeling before the altare S. Denys Dionis. Areop. Eccl. Hierarch c. 5. Clem. Rom. const. l. 8. c. 122. and S. Clement in this first age, together with the old Roman Order, thus remember this Rite. Praesul sacrandus offertur, vtroque genu posito ante altare, a consecrante Pontifice castissimis imprecationibus consumantur cuilibet ipsorum a benedicente Pontifice crucis imponitur signum. The Rites of laying the booke of ghospels one the Elect, with the hands of the consecratours, and the words, accipe spiritum sanctum, I haue shewed before, they were not vsed in diuers publike Orders, of consecration, which by all gaue true Ordination. And both in the Roman Pontificall, and others in which they are vsed, the person to be consecrated is after they be ended, still named onely Elect, and not consesecrated, vntill the holie vnction of him with holie Chrisme into Episcopall Order, thus: vngatur, and consecretur caput tuum, caelesti benedictione, in ordine Pontificali in nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus sancti Amen. And after this vnction, immediately it is declared, both in the Pontificall now vsed, and in the old Roman Order, that Episcopall power and calling is giuen vnto him. His hands be also anoynted in two Orders. And they call this vnction the summe and complement of Ordination, and that vsed the consecration is ended. Comple in Sacerdote tuo mysterij tui summam, caelestis vnguenti flore sanctifica, and this ended, compl^ta benedictione, they call him consecrated Bishop, consecratus, Pontifex, and Pontificatus dignitatem sublimatus, and before onely electus, and designatus, Elect and designed.

 The Order which the Britans Scots and Irish vsed, vsed onely Anoynting of the head: tantummodo capitaeorum sacri Chrismatis infusione perungere. So did the old Order which Amalarius Bishop of Treuers vsed: additur ad consecrationem infusio olei super caput. So S. Augustine, so S. Gregorie, S. Bede and others, yet all agree, that Episcopall Order is hereby conferred and ended. S. Augustine August. tract. psalm. and apud Amalar. l. 3 de offic. Eccl. c. 14. saith: vicarius Christi Pontifex efficitur: ideo in capite vngitur. Caput nostrum Christus. Caput nostrum vnctum est oleo inuisibili: Episcopus quia vicarius Christi est in capite vngitur: ab illo enim significatur se accipere hanc vnctionis gratiam, qui caput est totius Corporis, imitando illum, qui caput est totius Ecclesiae, per vnctionis gratia^ sit and ipse caput Ecclesiae, sibi commissae. S. Gregorie plainely teacheth this vnction Gregor. ad cap. 10. lib. 1. Reg. is the Sacrament here. Qui in culmine ponitur, sacramenta suscipit vnctionis. Quia vero ipsa vnctio Sacramentum est, is qui promouetur, bene foris vngitur, sed intus virtute Sacramenti roboretur. And againe: spiritus Domini post vnctionem dirigitur: quia foris Sacramenta percipimus. Vt intus spiritus sancti gratia repleamur. Besides our brittish manner of consecration before remembred, S. Bede and Amalarius Bed. l. 3. de Tabernacul. and vas. eius. Amalar. fort. l. 3. de Eccl. offic. c. 14. from him, and others witnesse, how in this Kingdome this was accompted a Rite necessarie essentiall and giuing grace in this Sacrament: oleo vnctionis perfunditur, vt per gratiam spiritus sancti consecratio perficiatur.
And that this was the tradition of the Church from the Apostles, we are assured, both because the Fathers of this first age, S. Denis, S. Anacletus and others so remember it, and the fathers before, and after to be named, euen by English publike Engl. Prot. apud Marc.
 Protestant consent, so proue and deriue it. S. Denis Anton. l. 2. de Republ. Eccl. ca^. 2. is so plaine, that they plainely thus confesse it: Areopagitae Dionysio tributum opusculum vnctionem ponit expresse. So they confesse of S. Anacletus, made Preist, by S. Peter, the Apostle: addit vnctionem capitis Anacletus, quae est antiquissima.
The words which he vseth, deducing his doctrine, Anacl. ep. 2. and practise from the Apostles, be these: Bishops are to be made by Imposition of hands of Bishops, with the ghospels which they are to preach, and holie vnction by the example of the Apostles, because all sanctification consisteth in the holie ghost, whose inuisible power is mixed with holie Chrisme, and by this Rite solemne Ordination is to be celebrated. Where we finde by this greate Apostolike authoritie, that the grace of this Sacrament, and power Episcopall is giuen by this Rite.
And these Protestants, as by this they must, and Prot. supr. in Marc. Anton. are enforced, confesse so of the holie fathers following, both in the Greeke and Latin Church, that they were consecrated Bishops by holie vnction. Gregor. Nazianc. orat. 20. de laudib. Basil. orat. 5. ad Basil. and part. Sim. Metaph. in vit. Crisost. Petr. Chrisolog. Ser. de S. Seuero. Isidor. l. 2. de offic. Eccl. c. 25. S. Iuo. Ser. de reb. Eccl. Steph. Aduen. Sacr. alt. c. 9. So of S. Basile, vnctione sacra adhibita est ordinatus. So of S. Gregorie Naziancen, me Pontificem vngis. So were S. Iohn Chrisostome and S. Seuerus. Of S. Augustine, S. Gregorie with others I haue spoken before; To which we may ioyne S. Iuo, Stephanus Aduensis and other auntient writers, and expositours of holie mysteries, and all Orders of Consecration.
By this it is euident, how certayne and vndoubted a thing it is, That the consecration vsed in the Romane Church, is most true, holie, and honourable, both for Order, and Iurisdiction, euer, as is demonstrated before, both in this and other nations,
 from the Apostolike Roman see, and in the old Orders of consecration the Bishop to be consecrated protesteth obedience to the Popes of Rome. And how the case standeth with the Protestants both of England, and all others, it is as lamentable to know their desolate condition.


THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
The 37. article, intituled, of the ciuill Magistrates, thus examined, and whosoeuer against the Roman Church, condemned.
THeir 37. and next Article is intituled: of the ciuill Magistrates. And thus followeth. The Kings Maiestie hath the cheife power in this Realme of Engla^d, and other his dominions, vnto whome the cheife gouernment of all estates of this Realme whether they be Ecclesiasticall or ciuill, in all causes doth appertaine, and is not, nor ought to be subiect to any forraine iurisdiction. The Bishop of Rome hath no Iurisdictio^ in this Realme of England.
The rest of this article containeth an excuse of Protesta^ts that they did not giue to their temporall Prince power to preach and minister Sacraments, as some interpreted their opinion, and other things not questioned betweene Catholiks and English Protestants, but betweene these Protestants and some other new sectaries, among themselues, and be these. The lawes of the Realme may punish Christian men with death, for heynous and grieuous offences. It is lawfull for Christian men, at the commaundement of the Magistrate, to weare weapons, and serue in the warrs.
These positions are graunted and allowed by all
 Catholiks. The first part of this article giuing vnto the King a temporall Gouernour, and Ruler cheife gouernment ouer all estates in all causes Ecclesiasticall or ciuill, as also their statute and oath of Princes Supremacy in spirituall things, fighteth with, and contradicted it selfe: for thus it addeth: we giue not to our Prince, the ministring either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments: the which the Iniunctions also sometime set fourth by Elizabeth our late Queene, doe most plainely testifie. Therefore seing Kings be not Teachers, preachers, Doctours, Pastours, and sheephards in the Church and fould of Christ, to giue them some place therein, members of it, and not to be quite excluded from the name, and number of Christians we must needs say, they be of them which be taught preached vnto, instructed, sheepe and subiects, fedde, ruled and gouerned by them, which haue authority, and spirituall power in such things. And these our Protestants haue accordingly this defined the Church before in these their articles. The visible Church of Christ, is a congregation of faithfull men, in the which the pure word of God is preached; Protest. art. 19. sup. and the Sacraments be duely ministred, according to Christs ordinance.
They to whome the word is preached, and Sacraments be ministred, and neither haue power to preach nor minister Sacraments, which this Article confesseth of their Protestant Kings, and temporall Rulers, cannot possibly in the respect be cheife Gouernours of the^ to whome God himselfe hath power and preeminence. The holy Scriptures do in many places commaund obedience both to temporall and spirituall Rulers, but obedie^ce in matters of Religion in feeding and ruling soules the
 flocke of Christ, gouerning his Church and such spirituall emnencies is onely appropriated in the^ to spirituall gouernours. Qui bene praesunt Presbyteri duplici honore digni sunt. Pascite qui in vobis est gregem 1. Tim. 5. 1. Petr. 5. Ioh. 21. Act. 20. Hebr. 13. Dei, pasce agnos meos. Pasce oues meas. Attendite vobis and vniuer so gregi, in quo vos Spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei, quam acquisiuit sanguine suo. Mementote praepositorum vestrorum, qui vobis locuti sunt verbu^ Dei. Obedite praepositis vestris and subiacete. Ipsi enim peruigilant quasi rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri. Where we see neither king nor Prince, if he will belonge to the Church of Christ, haue his soule purchased with his blood, a care had of it, and accompt made for it, can be free from this obedience; much lesse can he clayme it for himselfe, from them to whom it so infallibly belongeth, by the highest authority.
The Apostolike men of this first age, haue testified this at large before, in the examination Ignat. epist. and An^ioch. Ep. ad Smyrn. Epist. ad Philadelph Magnesian. Trallian. of the last precedent article. S. Ignatius hath taught vs, a Bishop is aboue all principality and power. Episcopus omni Principatu and potestate superior est. No man is more honorable then the Bishop. Nemo Episcopo honorabilior. Preists and Deacons, all the clergy together with the people, and Souldiars, and Princes, and the Emperour also must obey the Bishop. Cum populo, and militibus at que Principibus, sed and Caesare obediant Episcopo. Be subiect to the Bishop, euen as to our Lord, for he watcheth for your soules, and is to make accompt for them. Therefore it is needfull that you doe nothing without the Bishop. No man may doe any thing that belongeth to the Church without the Bishop. Sine Epis^opo nemo quicquam faciat eorum quae ad Ecclesiam spectant.

Sainct Clement testifieth that Sainct Peter the ApostleClem. Rom. epist. 1.commaunded praecipiebat Petrus Apostolus, that all Princes of the earth, omnes Principes terrae, and all men should obey Bishops. And proued that all which did contradict them were in state of damnation, and imfamy vntill they made satisfaction; and commaunded them to be excommunicate except they were conuerted. The Bishop Clem const. Apost lib. 2. c. 11. 12. 3. 30. 31. ruleth all Lords, Preists, Kings, Princes, Regibus, Principibus, Fathers, children Masters, and all subiects. He Iudgeth as God with power. The Bishop is mediatour betweene God and men. He is the next after God our Father, Prince, Ruler, King, Rex, Gouernour. A Bishop is adorned with the dignitie of God, he ruleth the clergie and commaundeth all the people. Omni populo imperat. Dion. Areop. Hier. Eccl. c. 2. par. 2. 3. c. 4. 5. Martial. ep. ad Burdegal. cap. 3.
The like haue other Apostolike men of this first age. And they are so farre from giuing superiority, and commaund to ciuill power ouer Bishops in things of Religion, that in such affaires and causes they make inferiour all temporall people euen to Preists and Deacons. Preisthood is the heade or cheife of all good things in this world, saith S. Ignatius. Ignat. epist. ad Smyrnen. Sacerdotium est omnium bonorum quae in hominibus sunt, apex. He that rageth against it, doth not ignominy to man, but to God. Lay men must be subiect not onely to Preists but to Deacons. Laici Diaconis subditi Polycarpus epist. ad Philippen. sint Subiecti estote Presbyteris and Diaconis sicut Deo and Christo.
And our Protestants themselues acknowledge, Rob. Barnes l de vit. Pont* Roman. in Anacleto. Anaclet. epist. 1. that the holy Popes of this time, iudged them no Christians that called holy Preists to ciuill consistorys Anacletus Christo alienos esse indicabat qui Sacerdotes inius vocarent. They which tooke away the riches of the Church were to be adiudged homicidas, because the Apostles
 by our Sauiour his commaunde, gaue chardge that the priuiledges of the Church and Preists should be kept inuolate. Christ vel Ecclesiae pecunias auferentes, homicidas iudicari debere censuit: quia inquit priuilegia Ecclesiae and Sacerdotum, Apostoli Saluatoris iussu inuiolata esse debere iusserunt. In Ecclesiasticall busines the the greater causes were to be referred to the primates, the lesser to the Metropolitane Bishop, and secular causes to secular Iudges. In Ecclesiasticis negotijs, grauiores causas ad primatem, leuiores ad metropolitanum Episcopum referendas, secularia negotia ad prophanos iudices, agenda esse iussit. All that were oppressed might appeale to the Ecclesiasticall Court.

And that such causes as could not be composed by the cheifest of the cleargie, should be ended in their councells. Et causas quae apud primarios Ecclesiastici ordinis componi non possent, in Concilio finiendas esse.

To that which followeth in this Article: The Bishop of Rome hath no iurisdictio^ in this Realme of England: I haue aboundantly answeared, and so proued the weakenesse of such assertion in my Examine of their 19. Article and that which is here said most manifestly conuinceth the same. For if as is proued here, the Bishops in euery Prouince haue the highest and cheifest spirituall power, ouer all others therein whether spirituall or temporall, he which hath the supreame power, and Iurisdiction ouer all, and euery such Bishops, or Bishop, cannot be depriued of that. Title, and right, though a farre greater consistory then these Articlers, or their Approuers, and applauders should deny it vnto him? He that hath iurisdiction and power ouer the greater, must needs haue it ouer the lesser and Inferiour in that Kind. S. Ignatius calleth the Church
 of Rome, the sanctified and Ruling Church being himselfe Patriarke of Antioch. Ignatius Ecclesiae sanctificatae Ignat. epist. ad Rom. in inscriptione. quae praefidet in loco Regionis Romanorum. S. Polycarp lyuing in the same age, went from Smyrna in the East, to Rome for decision of Questions about the day of Easter. Propter quasdam super die paschae Hier l. de. vir. illustrib. in Polycarpo. Dion. Aerop. c 3. de diuin. no minib. Clem. Rom. epist. 1. Rufino Interpret. quaestiones Romam venit.
S. Dionisius, saith S. Peter liuing and dying Bishop of Rome was the supreame glory and head of diuines. Petrus supremum decus, and antiquissimum Theologorum columen. S. Clement saith, S. Peter was by Christ defined, the foundation of the Church Simon Petrus fundamentum esse Ecclesiae definitus est. And as the most worthy commaunded by Christ to conuert the westerne parts, and performed that precept. Qui obscuriorem mundi plagam occidentis, velut omnium potentior illuminare praeceptus est, quique and integre potuit implere praeceptum. He liued much, and dyed at Rome by martyrdome, and committed his supreame Pastorall charge, and office to S. Clement, which Christ had committed to him, full power to binde and loose, and whatsoeuer he should decree on earth should be decreed in heauen. Clementem Episcopum vobis ordino, cui soli me ae praedicationis and doctrinae cathedram trado. Ipsi trado a Domino mihi traditam potestatem ligandi and soluendi, vt de omnibus, quibuscumque decreuerit in terris, hoc decretum sit and in caelis. Among other Pastorall and highest Pontificall duties, he gaue him power, and chardge to send Bishops into all cyties, whether, or where S. Peter had not sent, or ordained before. Episcopos per singulas ciuitates, quibus ille non miserat nobis mittere praecepit.
And S. Clement performed it. Quod facere inchoauimus,
 and Domino opemferente, facturi sumus. Aliquos ad Gallias, Hispaniasque mittimus, and quosdam ad Germaniam, and Italiam atque ad reliquas gentes dirigere cupimus. Among these Bishops some were primates, or Patriarks, and Archbishops, and the causes of Bishops and greatest Ecclesiasticall Questions and busines of the Churches, were to be tried and decided by the primates, and Patriarks, and the Apostles so decreed. Petrus Episcoporum primates vel Patriarchas ordinauit, qui reliquorum Episcoporum iudicia, and maiora, quoties necesse foret, negotia in fide agitarent, and secundum Dei voluntatem, sicut constituerunt sancti Apostoli, ita vt ne quis iniuste periclitaretur, definirent. Archiepiscopos institui praecepit, qui non tamen primatum, sed and Archiepiscoporum fruerentur nomine. Episcoporum quoque iudicia, vt superius memoratum est, and maiora Ecclesiarum negotia, si ipsi reclamauerint, aut aliquem timorem, aut istos vel alios suspectos habucrint, ad iam dictos primates vel Patriarchas, transferri perdocuit. And this was among the Apostles themselues, one. S. Peter, aboue the rest. Quoniam nec inter Apostolos par institutio fuit Sed vnus omnibus praefuit.
This is the testimonie of S. Clement, confirmed Anaclet. ep. decret. Ruffin. interpr. epist. Clem. Leo 2. ep. decret. Marian. Scot. l. 2. aetat. 6. Flor. wigorn. chronic. in Clem. Mart. Polon. Supputat. col. 33. in Lino Robert. Barnes. l. de vit. Pont. in Lino and Anacleto. Anaclet. ep. decretal. 3. Barn. sup. in Anaclet. Omerd pict. Pap. pag. 78. by S. Anacletus then liuing, Ruffinus, Marrianus, Martinus Florentius wigorniensis, Pope Leo the seconde, and many others both Catholike and Protestant writers. S. Anacletus made Preist by S. Peter, and by him instructed, euen as our Protestants confesse, did teach that Christ gaue to the Church of Rome, primacy ouer all Churches, and all Christian people, neither King nor Caesar exempted. Anacletus ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae Ecclesiae super omnes Ecclesias vniuersamque
 Christiani nominis populum concessum esse asseruit. Thus our Protestants, and S. Anacletus is more playne that this supreamacie of the Roman Church was not giuen vnto it, by the Apostles but Christ himselfe. Haec sacrosancta Romana and Apostolica Ecclesia non ab Apostolis, sed ab ipso Domino Saluatore nostro primatum obtinuit, and eminentiam potestatis, super vniuersas Ecclesias ac totum Christiani populi gregem assecuta est. And both Christ commaunded, and his Apostles decreed, that great and difficult questions should be referred to the Apostolike Romane see, to be decided, and that Anacl. epist. 1. Christ builded his whole Church vpon it. Apostoli hoc statuerunt, iussu Saluatoris, vt maiores and difficiliores quaestiones semper ad sedem deferantur Apostolicam, super quam Christus vniuersam construxit Ecclesiam.
So haue also S. Euaristus and S. Alexander, Euarist. ep. 1. Alex. ep. 1. who liued in this first age. Relatum est ad huius sanctae and Apostolicae sedis apicem, cui summarum dispositiones causarum, and omnia negotia Ecclesiarum ab ipso Domino tradita sunt, quasi ad caput. Our Protestants Sutcliffe subu. pag. 57. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. also acknowledge thus: Irenaeus saith, that euerie Church ought to haue respect to the Church of Rome, for her eminent principalitie.
But S. Irenaeus is more cleare, in this manner: ad hanc (Romanam) Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc est eos, qui sunt vndique fideles. There is a necessitie, that euerie Church and all faithfull Christians, wheresoeuer should acknowledge the more powerable principalitie of the Romane Church. No King, contrie, or nation is exempted, from, but all are included in this necessitie, of being vnder the Iurisdiction of
 the Church of Rome. And particularly for this Kingdome of England, which singularly this Article would thus depriue of that honour, and happines from being in the folde and vnder the chardge of the vicar and highest pastour and shephard of Christ one earth.
To begin with a Protestant Bishops censure in Godwyn conuers. of Britayne pag. 6. these words: we should accompt it a great glorie to deriue the pedigree of our spirituall linage, from so noble and excellent a father, as S. Peter. And yet both Greeke and Latin, domesticall and forreyne, Catholike and Protestant Antiquaries, do thus deriue and proue it. Petrus venit in Britanniam, quo in loco Sim. Metaphrast. die 19. Iunij Euseb. and antiq. graec. apud eund. ib. Sur. eod. die. Andr. Chesu. l. 3. histor. Angl. Bucley pag. 171. Cambden in Britan. Sutcliffe Subu. pag. 3. Prot. Archb. whitg. answ: to admo. pag. 65. sect. 1. def. of the answeare pag. 318 Marc. Anton. de Dom. de reb. chr. l. 4. c. 10. cum longo temporefuisset moratus, apud Britannos verbo gratiae multos illuminauit, and Ecclesias constituit, Episcoposque and Presbyteros and Diaconos ordinauit. S. Peter came into Britayne, and staying there longe time, did illuminate many with the word of grace, and founded Churches, and ordered Bishops, Preists, and Deacons. Which more Protestant Doctours and Bishops euen Archbishops with them thus confirme. Peter preached in no place, but he there ordeyned Bishops and teachers and founded Churches.
The Apostle Peter did in euerie prouince appoynt one Archbishop, whome all other Bishops of the same prouince should obey. Est caput Roma, quatenus ab ea diffusum est Euangelium in reliquas totius occidentis Ecclesias. Rome is the heade, in respect that from it, the ghospell was diffused into the rest of the Churches of the west, and into many of the east, and into barbarous nations out of the Romane Empire. Et in multas orientis, atque in harbaras extra Romanum Imperium nationes. Diuers of the holie Bishops and Apostolike Doroth. l de 72. discip. in Aristob. Arnol. merm. Theatr. conu. gent. Antiq. Ecel. Tullen. Gul. Eisengr. cent. 1. Petr. de Natal. l. 11. Pantal. de vir. Ibl. part. 1. Stumph. l. 7. de Sanctib. Theater. of great. Brit. l. 6. Tho. Rogers Anal. in Prot. Articl. ar. 36. whitg. supr. Clem. Sup. ep. 1. Arnol. mirm. sup. Antonin. hist. part. 1. will. harrison. descript. Brit. pag. 23. Harris Theatr. l. 1. Girald. Cambr. l. 2. de Iure Metrop. Eccl. Meneu. ad Innocent. 3. Mat. Parker. Antiq Britan. pag. 24. Io. Pris. defens. hist. Britan. pag. 73. Nennius hist. manuscript. Preists, which S. Peter consecrated for, this
 Kingdome are remembred both by Catholike and Protestant Historians, S. Aristobulus, S. Mansuetus, S. Beatus and his holie companion, not named in Antiquities. Our Protestants make S. Aristobulus Archbishop here: Britayne Aristobulus, and by their Rule before, The Apostle Peter did in euerie prouince appoynt one Archbishop, he must needs be ordeined Archbishop, by S. Peter.
S. Clement hath sufficiently proued before, that he sent Bishops hither, saying he sent to the other nations of the west, ad reliquas gentes, besides Italy, Spayne, Fraunce, and Germany. And both Catholiks and Protestants from antiquities affirme, that he sent to vs S. Nicasius, who instructed the Britons, Britones instruxit formauitque fide S. Nicasius a S. Clemente delegatus. These Britans must needs be those of this Kingdome, they of little Britayne in Fraunce came not thither vntill aboue 200. yeares after S. Clement, and S. Nicasius time. Both Brittish and English Catholike and Protestant Antiquaries affirme, that the diuision of Primates or Patriarkes, Metropolitans, and others with their seuerall Iurisdictions, from the see of Rome, being as he ackdowledgeth the decree of his predecessour S. Clement and the Apostles also was receaued in this Kingdome of Britayne, as it comprehendeth England wales and Scotland. Nennius our old brittish historian in his manuscript antiquities affirmeth that his Successour Pope and S. Euaristus sent legates to our Brittish King, to receaue the faith of Christ, Missa legatione a Papa Romano Euaristo. Who yet saith the generall conuersion was not vntill the yeare of Christ 197. Albertus Krantius well acquainted with our
 Brittish antiquities, writeth the like of S. and Pope Io. Caius Antiq. Cantabrig. l. 1. Alber. Krantzius Metropol. l. 1. c. 6. Alexander, next Successour to Pope Euaristus, both of them liuing in this first age, though dying by martyrdome in the seconde, that he sent diuers Apostolike men hither, to preach the faith of Christ, and so they did.
These Popes haue taught vs the supreamacie of the Church of Rome ouer all Churches before. So did the next holie Pope S. Sixtus, euen Protestants Sixtus 1. ep. 2. Rob. Barn. l. de vit. Pont. Rom. in Sixto 1. Telesph. Higin. pio Anice^o So^ero. so confessing. Ab Episcopo ad Romanum Pontificem appellandi ius dedit Ecclesiasticis ministris. So they confesse of all Popes Telesphorus, Higinius, Pius anicetus and Soter, vnto Pope Eleutherius, vnder whome and by whose meanes and authoritie, this Kingdome was wholly conuerted, by all antiquities and testimonies, and made the first Christian Kingdome in the world. This holie Pope as Rob. Barn. sup. in Eleutherio Eleuther. ep. ad Episcop. Gall. cap. 2. our Protestants write, did Order, and practise, and as the Apostles and their Successours had defined as he testifieth sicut ab Apostolis eorumque Successoribus multorum consensu Episcoporum definitum ^st, that nothing should be proceeded in, against Bishops, vntil it was defined by the Pope of Rome: accusationem contra Episcopos, Episcopos audire permifit, sed vt nihil, nisi apud Pontificem definiretur, cauet.
This highest spirituall Authoritie in the Pope of Damas in Eleuth. Monolog. G^aec. in eod. Breuiar. Roman. die 26. Maij. Martyrol Roman. eod. die Bed. l. 1. ^^st. c. 4. and l. de 6. ae^a^. Ado Chron. Marian. Scot. an. 177. Martin. Pol. Supput. an. 188. Galfrid. monum. hist. l. 4. Virun. l. 4. Radulp. de Dicet. hist. in Lucio. Gul. Mal. l. Antiq. caenob. glaston. Math. west. chron. an. 185. 186. 187. flor. w^gor. chron. an. 162. 184. Antiq Eccl. land. Antiq. Eccl. wint. Cambd. Brigant. Stowe hist. hollinsh. hist. of Engl. Theatr. of Brit. l 6 Hect. Boeth. l. 5. Parker Godwin. etc. Eleuth. ep. ad Reg. Lucium Lambert. l. de leg. Stowe hist. Godw conu. of Brit. Mat. Parker. Antiq. Brit. Mason. of consecr. foxe tom. 1. Theat. of Brit. l. 6. Bridg. def. of the gouern. l. 16. pag. 1355. Iewell ag. hard. old. Booke of Const. Guil. hall. in lond. l. Antiq. Brut. Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. leges Antiq. Reg. Edward. cap. 17. Gul. Lambard. l. 2. de priscis Angl. legib. fol. 130. p. Hect. Boeth. Scot. hist. l. 5. f. 83. Godw. conuers. of Brit. pag. 22. 23. Antiq. Eccl. Glastonien. Galfrid monum. l. 5. hist. Reg. Brit. c. 1. Mat. west. chron. an. 186. Rome, was not vnknowne to the Christians and King Lucius in Britayne, which moued that King as both Greeke and Latin, Brittish and Saxon, domesticall and forreyne, Catholike and Protestant Antiquaries informe, to write humble letters supplices litteras, to that Pope, entreating him, obsecrans, that by his commaundement, he with his
 Kingdome might receaue Christianitie, vt per eius mandatum Christianus efficeretur. The Pope most willingly assented, and sent his legates with full power to founde the Church of Britayne, to Ordeyne three Archbishops, and 28. Bishops, with their particular Sees, power, and Iurisdiction, who hauing established all things here, returned to Rome, to haue them confirmed by the Pope: the Pope confirmed that they had done, and they with many other preachers and the Popes confirmation, returned agayne into Britayne. Beati Antistites Romam redierunt, and cuncta quae fecerant, a Pontifice confirmari impetrarunt: confirmatione facta, cum pluribus alijs redierunt in Britanniam. Our King craued direction of that Pope also, what lawes he should vse in his Kingdome, and the Pope directed him therein, as his epistle still extant witnesseth, as our Protestants write, and themselues testifie. We haue seene the Bishop of Romes owne letter to King Lucius. So witnesse these men.
This Pope went further, in prescribing the limits, bounds, and circuites of the Dominions of this Kingdome, and assigned vnto it all the Ilands to Denmarke, and Norway by his sentence: and by that definition ordonation, they were parts of Britayne, as is conteined in our old lawes, many hundreds of yeares since published and approued by our Protestant lawyers, and historians, aswell as others. Vniuersa terra and tota, and Insulae omnes vsque Noruegiam, and vsque Daniam pertinent ad coronam Regni, and sunt de appendicijs, and dignitatibus Regis, and vna est monarchia, and vnum est Regnum. Tales enim metas, and fines constituit and imposuit coronae Regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa sententia sua, qui
 primo destinauit coronam benedictam Britanniae, and Christianitatem Deo inspirante, Lucio Regi Britonum. Here also he se^t first a crowne, or hallowed crowne to our King, being before, as some Catholiks and Protestants write, but a King by courtesie of the Romane Emperour, and authoritie. Lucus Britonibus Caesaris beneuolentia and authoritate imperitabat. He gaue Indulgences to our Churches, namely to the old Church of Glastenbury ten yeares Indulgence, as in the old antiquities of that holie place is recorded. And by his Order and direction, King Lucius endowed the Churches of Britayne with liberties regall, Lucius Rex Ecclesias Britanniae libertatibus muniuit. Gloriosus Britonum Rex Lucius cum infra Regnum suum verae fidei cultum magnificatum esse vidisset, possessiones and territoria Ecclesijs and viris Ecclesiasticis, abundanter conferens, chartis and munimentis omnia communiuit. Ecclesias vero cum suis caemeterijs, ita constituit esse liberas, vt quicumque malefactor ad illa confugeret, illaesus ab omnibus remaneret.
Thus reuerent and honourable was the spirituall power, and supreamacie of the Church and Pope of Rome, in Britayne, and all places in these Apostolike dayes. All those Apostolike men, Popes, or others which haue thus taught vs, were glorious Saincts, and King Lucius also, Sainct Lucius, who with all his Kingdome, clergie, and others so embraced it; and though neither he, nor the Roma^s had then any temporall Rule or dominion in the Kingdome, now called Scotland, yet that glorious Pope by his spiriruall supreamacie subiected that contrie to the Archbishop of yorke in the land of an Enemie.

 And this Papall supreamacie and Iurisdiction continued here euer after, vntill It was taken away by King Henry the 8. taking first of all Kings, the title and name of Supreame head of the Church of England, neuer heard of before in any time, as his owne historian Polydor virgill, and all others both Catholike, and Protestant, English and other historians, acknowledge. Habetur concilium Londini, Polydor. Virgil. Anglic. Hist. l. 27. p. 689. Stowe and Howes hist. an. 1534. statut. in Parliament. an. 26. Henr. 8, in quo Ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis nullis ante temporibus visam induit; Henricus enim Rex caput ipsius Ecclesiae constituitur.
And after King Henry the 8. had thus, as he endeuoured, expelled the Papall Authority spirituall out of England, and assumed it to himselfe, though he punished with death, as others often since then haue done, the professours thereof, yet both he, and all or Rulers temporall since, Kings, or Queens, haue retained in their stile of honour, that title, Defensor fidei, defendour of the faith, which the Pope gaue him for defending before his fall, the Catholike faith against Martine Luther; though they all, except Queene Mary, impugned it.
And our present K. Charles. (whome together with his Queene Mary, God blesse with all good, and happines) in his late publike declaration to all his louing Subiects, among whome his Catholiks be not in the lowest place of duty, and desert to him, though not in like degree of his fauour to the^, thus, and thus vehemently, protesteth: wee call God to recorde, before whome we stand, that it is, and alwaies hath beene, our harts desire, to be found worthy of that title, which we accompt the most glorious in all our Crowne, DEFENDOVR OF THE FAITH.
But to defend the faith, is not, to reprint the articles
 of Religion, established in the time of Queene Elizabeth, and by a declaration before those articles to ty, and restraine all opinions to the sense of those articles: as he speaketh immediately before, and to persecute Bishops, Preists, and Catholiks as he doth.
That title was giuen by the Pope to King He^ry, for defence of the true faith, longe before the articles of Queene Elizabeth, or she was borne. Longe before, hee, K. Edward 6. Queene Elizabeth, King Iames, and King Charles, persecuted Catholiks, and their faith, whereof by their stile, they should be defendours, and longe before their religion, or any of them (I except King Henry the 8. to whome it was giuen) receaued beeing. The true faith Catholike, and Apostolike, which by that regall stile and title they should defend, against these articles, I haue aboundantly by the best testimonies proued in euery point, for the two last following articles, the 38. intituled, of Christian mens goods, which are common, and the 39. the last, of a Christian mans oath, doe not containe any co^trouersie with Catholikes, but were ordained against new Sectaries, among themselues. I hope no Protestant Parlament will hereafter glory, that their religion was almost 80. yeares old, though it wanteth 10. of that number, and so extraordinarily contend to persecute that which I haue proued to exceed it, aboue 1500. yeares in time and truth, which they ought to embrace and honour, and not so maliciously or ignorantly, not being the most religious, nor learned diuines, to persecute it.

FINIS.

