


PVRITANISME THE MOTHER, SINNE THE DAVGHTER.

The I. Part.
BEFORE we begin to vnfould the particular doctrines and Positions of Puritanisme, (all being euen great, and as it were in labour with Libertinisme in manners) I hould, it will not be reputed a superfluous (...), or By-matter (but rather a point much conducing to our proiect in generall) if I briefly touch vpon the necessiity of Holines of doctrine, in the fayth of
 Christ. For the better vnderstanding of which poynt, we are to conceaue, that Gods sacred Writ describeth two waies of a Christian man; the one it termeth The straite way (meaning of austerity and piety) which leadethMath. 7. and Luke 13. to life. This isMath. 22. the way of God;Esay 26. The way of Iustice;Hebr. 19. in which we ought to walke pleasing God. So deseruedly did the Psalmist celebrate the doctrine of God touching manners, in these wordes of prayse:Psalm. 29. Lex Domini immaculata, testimonium fidele, praeceptum Domini illucidum. To this way the Scripture opposeth the way called, The broad way. This is thatMath. 7. lata porta, and spaciosa, quae ducit ad perditionem: the broad and spatious gate which leadeth to destruction;^. Pet. 3. promising liberty; andIude l. 4. transferring the grace of God into wantonnes. Thus we see, that the fayth and doctrine of Christ (by which we are to regulate and gouerne our co^uersation and manners) ought to be in it owne nature, most incontaminate, pure, and holy; voyding the soule of man, of vnlawfull concupiscence and desires.
That the Catholike Fayth of the Romane Church teacheth this strayte way
 of vertue and piety, is most euident. For it teacheth her children to make restitution for wrongs committed; It teacheth, Confession of sinnes (most vngratefull to mans nature,) and tyeth the Confitent to sorrow for his sinnes, and to performe his enioyned Pennance; It teacheth the keeping of set Fasts, and of prescript tymes of Prayer; It teacheth the practising of all good workes; It teacheth the perfection of Euangelicall Counsells, to wit, voluntary Chastity, Pouerty, and Obedience; briefly, it teacheth and instructeth her children in points, most opposite and contrary to all those licentious Positions of Puritanisme, insisted by me in this ensuing Treatise: A course of life so peculiar to the members of the Catholike Church, as that some of our Aduersaries thus fully co^fesse hereof:Iacob. Andraea^ in Concione 4. in c. ^^. Lucae. A serious and Christian discipline, is censured with vs, as a new Papacy, and a new Monachisme. And Caluin himself acknowledgeth no lesse of our Professours of former tymes, reprehending them for the same in these wordes:Calu l. 4. instit. cap. 12. sect. 8. Qua in parte excusari nullo modo potest etc. In which course (meaning a rigid course of life and pennance) the
 immoderate austerity of the Ancients cannot be excused, which did wholy differ from the Commandement of the Lord, and was also otherwise in it selfe most dangerous. Thus Caluin.
But now; if (on the contrary) we cast our iudgments to the behoulding of the many Theses, and Speculations of Puritanisme, (wherof I haue made choyce only of Twenty, hereafter layd open in this short Treatise) all which are euen fraught, and loaden with liberty of doctrine; and withall, if we do obserue, how no meaner men, then the first broachers of them (as willing to be most firme, and true to their owne Principles) haue incorporated the said doctrines in their owne most wicked lyues (both which points are the Subiects of the two different Parts of this small Worke, and both proued from the Aduersaries owne expresse wordes,) we shall rest euen amazed thereat: such a conformity and precise correspondency did their lyues beare to their doctrines.
We obserue, that Nature, which is Gods subordinate Instrument, or Lieutenant (as I may call it) gouerning vnder
 his diuine Maiesty the Vniuerse of the whole world, is endued (among many others) with this one Priuiledge; to wit, that if no preueniency be made through the indisposition of the secondary causes, that the lyke in Nature euer produceth and begetteth the like. Thus irreasonable Creatures do ingender irreasonable Creatures, and men beget men; and this oftentimes with such a great resemblance and similitude in the particulars, as that we may easily glasse the Fathers eye in the Childs face. The like (by allusion) we may affirme of the Theoremes and Principles of fayth, whose immediate subiect is Morality or Conuersation of life. Yf the Thearemes do resent of vertue, piety, and deuotion; the fruites which they beget in mans soule belieuing them, are vertuousnes of life, Practise of good workes, Austerity in manners, and the like. But if the Theoremes be of such nature, as that they send and steame forth nothing els, the^ sensuality, libertinisme, and voluptuousnes; then such as giue assent and beliefe to the said Theoremes, do in their manners participate of the same prophane Qualities.

Touching the vertuous liues of Catholikes in particular, proceeding from their doctrines teaching vertue, I will not heere in the displaying therof laboriously insist; since my mayne Proiect at this present is, to spend these ensuing leaues in this later point, to wit, to demonstrate first, that the Principles of Puritanisme do inuolue in themselues the warra^ting of vice, falshood, and Impiety, and the dishonouring of vertue: And secondly, that the first Inuentors or coyners of them, sucking from their owne grounds and elements of doctrine (tanquam ex traduce) the secret poyson lying in them, haue beene men of most enormous, and facinorous liues. And now to beginne with the doctrines.
1. First I will begin with their chiefe Principle of the Priuate Spirit, which they describe very gloriously to be,D. VVhitak. in controuers. 1 q. 5. c. 3. and 11. A persuasion of the truth from the Holy Ghost, in the secret closet of the belieuers hart. With this I begin, in that it comprehendeth within it selfe (as a greater number doth many lesser) diuers other positions of liberty. For first it begets an vnaccustomed pride, and
 elation of mind, in the belieuers of this doctrine; seeing it teacheth, that euery one; that enioyeth this spirit (as euery Puritane by his owne religion ought to belieue, that he enioyeth it) is to preferre in exposition of Scripture, and determining points of fayth, Himselfe, aboue all other mens authorities of Gods Church whosoeuer. And therefore Luther, as resting himselfe vpon this ground, writeth:tom. 2. contra Regem Angliae. fol. 344. Gods word is aboue all etc. I regard not, if a thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand Churches stood against me. And another, as presuming to enioy this spirit, thus condemneth all Generall Councels:Peter Martyr l. de votis. p. 476. As long as we insist in Generall Councels, so long we shall continue in the Papists errours. And the same priuiledge of this spirit doth euery obscure particuler Minister (by the help of his owne spirit) challenge to himselfe. Now, what an insufferable pride is it for a fellow, being but one, a man lately appearing, and for most part but meanly learned, to aduance his iudgment in matters of fayth and Religion aboue so many, so ancient, and so learned Doctours and Fathers of Christs Church, as haue
 flourished?
The second kind of Sinne flowing from this Principle, is Multiplicity of Heresyes; Seeing all Heresyes fortify themselues for the tyme, vnder the rampyer of this Priuate Spirit in interpreting the Scriptures. And from he^ce it is, that Vincentius Lyrinensis complayneth of the Spiritualists of his dayes in these wordes:l. aduers. haeres. An Haeretici diuinis Scripturae etc. Do Heretykes cyte the diuine testimonies of Scripture? They do, and that most vehemently; but therefore they are so much the more to be taken heed of. And hence also ryseth that Hydra of different Sects and Heresyes in these dayes, as the Moderate Protestant, the Puritane, the Brownist, the Anabaptist, the Anti-trinitarians, and others; all which Heresyes did first take their roote from each particuler mans priuate spirit, interpreting the Scripture in a different sense and construction from the rest of his Brethren. And hereupon it proceedeth that so many hundreds of bookes mentioned by Coccius, and byCoccius in thesauro tom. 2. and Hospiniam in his Historia Sacramentaria parte altera. Hospinian the Protestant, are written by the Professours of the foresaid Sects, one against another; and often by men of
 the same Religion, euen against others of their owne Brethren.
The third current of this Reuealing Spirit runneth not only to interpreting of passages of Scriptures, which meerely touch Speculation in matters of fayth; but also to giue most sensuall explications of such Texts thereof, as may best sort to liberty and sinne. Thus (but to instance in one, in place of many) the priuate Spirit hath cast such an exposition of these wordes:Matth. c. 5. qui dimiserit vxorem suam, excepta fornicationis causa, facit eam maechari: and Qui dimissam duxerit, adulterat. Whosoeuer shall dimisse his wife, except for cause of fornication, maketh her to commit adultery: and he, that shall marry her that is dimissed, committeth adultery. As that it teacheth that in case of fornication on the wyues syde, the husband may marry agayne; and consequently if his future wyues should offend therein, might haue a dozen, twenty, or more wyues liuing all at one instant. Thus the Priuate Spirit for his better maintayning of his voluptuous doctrine of Polygamy referreth those wordes, excepta fornicatione, to be the cause of taking a second
 wife, which are to be referred only to the cause of a mans dimitting, or parting with his wife, according to the exposition ofIn exposit. huius loci. Ierome, and almost all others.
2. In this next place I proceed to that doctrine of theirs, which teacheth that God is the Authour of sinne; seeing this blasphemy implicitly contayneth within it selfe (as a greater circle doth the lesse) diuers other strange Paradoxes, taught by the Puritans. And first we find Luther thus to teach:Luth. in assertion. damnat. per Leonem. art. 36. How can man prepare himselfe to good, seeing it is not in his power to make his wayes euill: for God worketh the wicked worke in the wicked? Againe;Vbi supra. Art. 36. Nullius est in manu etc. It is not in the power of any man, to thinke euil or good; but al things proceed fro^ absolute necessity. Swinglius heerto accordeth saying:Tom. 2. de Prouident^ Dei. fol. 166. sayth: Mouet Deus latronem ad occidendum etc. and there againe: Deo impullore latro occidit. and finally, Latro coactus est ad peccandum. God moueth the theefe to kil, and the theefe killeth, God procuring him. Yea, the theefe is enforced to kill. Mela^cthon thus affirmeth of the adultery of Dauid:In Rom. 8. The adultery of Dauid was the proper worke of God, as was the conuersion of Paul. Which sentence in MelancthonL. de vniuers. Grat. p. ^09. Hemingius the Protestant reciteth, and vtterly condemneth Melancthon for such
 his iudgement therein. Caluin sayth:Instit. l. ^. c. 18. sect. 1. That God pronounceth Absaloms incestuous pollution of his fathers bed, to be his owne worke. And further Caluin layeth the foundation of this his doctrine in these wordes:Iustit. l. 3 c. 23. sect. 6. What thing soeuer God doth foresee, the same he willeth: and vpon this false ground concludeth, that God causeth sinne in man, because he forefeeth it in him. Beza conspireth in iudgement with the former Authors, thus playnely teaching:In his display of Popish practises. p. 202. God exciteth the wicked will of one theefe to kill another, guideth his hand and weapon, iustly enforcing the will of the theefe.
Finally (to omit many others) D. Willet thus iumpeth with the former, saying:In Synops. Papism. pa. 563. God not only permitteth, but leadeth into temptation, with an actiue power, and not permissiuely. Now, howsoeuer the fore-named Authours do seeke to auoyd in wordes, the scandall necessarily attending on this their blasphemous doctrine; yet they stand so iustly chargeable with teaching, that God is the authour of sinne, as that they are for their maintayning this their doctrine, written against by diuers other most learned Protestants,
 as by Osiander the Protestant, whose wordes are these:Enchirid. contra Caluinist. c. 7. There openeth a gulfe of hell of Caluinian doctrine, in which God is sayd to be the Authour of sin. By Castalio, thus inueighing against Caluin:Lib ad Calu. de praedest. By this meanes not the diuell, but the God of Caluin is the Father of lyes; By Iacobus Andreas, who thus playnly writeth;In epit tom. Colloq. Montisbelgar. p. 47. Deus est author peccati secu^dum Bezam; finally byIn Ecclesiast. Policy. l. 5. p. 104. M. Hooker,In his defence of M. Hooker. pag. 62. D. Couell, and diuers others for breuity heer omitted: so crasse and repugnant is this their doctrine to those wordes of holy writ: Non Deus volens iniquitatem, tu es; as also to the sentence of S. Iames the Apostle:Cap. 1. let no man when he is tempted, say he is tempted of God; for God is not a tempter of Euills, and he temptteth no man; but euery one is tempted of his owne concupiscence etc.Psalm. 55.
Now, admitting this doctrine of God, being the Authour of our sinne, to be true; how willingly is man drawne to Sinne by giuing assent therto? Seeing by this doctrine he may disburden himselfe of all fault therein, and transferre it vpon God, as being the highest and most forcible cause or agent thereof: so strong a sanctuary he hath for
 his Sinne. And which is more, he may pretend, that if it be the part of a dutifull Subiect, officiously to performe, what his Prince commandeth; much more then doth that man deserue reward (rather then punishment) who with all sedulity, and readines of mind and will stands prepared (as an inferiour and seruiceable Instrument) to put that in execution, which God) who is the supreme Lord of all) commandeth, willeth, and euen forceth him to act, or doe. And yet more; this doctrine euen potentially commandeth vs to sinne; seeing the Scripture exhorteth vs in infinite places to doe good, and consequently to sinne; for sinne (if God be the Authour thereof) is good; for we reade:Genes. 1. Cuncta quae fecerat Deus, erant valde bona.
Lastly by this doctrine, we ought not to repeate that passager in our Lords Prayer: Forgiue vs our trespasses etc. by reason we doe not offend in committing them; since not we, but God worketh them: yea, we should rather be blamed and rebuked for reciting of the sayd sentence; because it would imply that we had some penitency, and repentance
 of them; but it is a thing displeasing to God, for man to haue a dislike of that which God worketh in him, or to be refractory or stubborne to his will and disposall; since the same Lords Prayer teacheth vs, that we ought in all things to say, Fiat voluntas tua. Seest thou not (good Reader) not only how potently this former blasphemous doctrine moueth man to commit any sinne whatsoeuer, as laying the fault thereof vpon God; but also how it freeth him from all future griefe or repentance therof; as presuming himselfe to be but a naked Instrument, necessarily concurring to the performa^ce of Gods will and pleasure in him? And thus farre of the working efficacy of this most impious doctrine, of God being the Authour of sinne.
3. In this next place we will descend to the doctrine touching Good workes, first broached by Luther, and others, and now entertayned by the Puritans of these dayes; where we shall find, that in their depressing of them they are most luxuriant and plentiful; and consequently, that they beare a fauourable eye to vice and sensuality.
 And first I will display their doctrines of good workes in generall; that performed, I will descend to good workes in particuler. Now for the greater vnderualewing of them, Luther thus endodoctrinateth his followers.In his sermons englished 1578. pag. 47. Workes take their goodnes of the Authour; andIbid. pa. 276. no worke is disallowed, vnles the authour thereof be disallowed Luther further thus teacheth:Luther vpon the Galath. englished. fol. 68. It is impiety to affirme, that fayth, except it be adorned with charity, iustifyeth not.
Swinglius expressely sayth (therby to deterre men from practising of good workes) that, quaecunque promissa operibus nostris facta sunt, Hyperbolae sunt; All promises made in the Scripture to our workes: As, if thou wilt enter into life, keepe the Commandements etc. are but amplifications of speach aboue the truth.
M. Fox recordeth, Tindall the Protestant to say:Act. Mon. pag. 1336. That there is no one worke better then another: as touching pleasing of God: to make water, to washe dishes, to be a Sower, or an Apostle, all is one to please God. These men yet proceed further: for Illyricus (the famous Lutherane) thus writeth:Il^yrie. in praefat. ad Rom. To affirme that good workes be in any respect necessary
 to saluation, (he meaning only, but by way of accompanying fayth) is a Papisticall errour: he futher terming it: The doctrine of the new Papists. And Conradus Slussemburg (the great Protesta^t) writeth: thatIn Catalog. Haeret. l. ^3. in epist. dedicatoria. p. 22. Good workes are not necessary (necessitate praesentiae) by way of presence to mans iustification. Yea Luther proceedeth yet further, teaching (marke good Reader and be amazed) that,Luth. tom. 1. propos. 3. Fides nisi sit sine etc. Fayth, except it be without euen the least good workes, doth not iustify, nay it is not fayth. Which sayingIn his defence of M. Hooker, printed 1603. pa. 42. D. Couell, acknowledging it to be Luthers, termeth:In his defence of M. Hooker. pag. 42. Harsh, and iustly called in question by the Church of Rome. Vpon this former doctrine these men further teach,Luth. serm. de Moyse. that the keeping of the ten Commandements doe not belong to vs Christians. And the Deuines of Wittenberg (as also Melancthon) are also charged with this errour byHutterus in his explicat. libri Concordiae. printed 1608. art. 5. c. 1 pag. 478. Hutterus, publike Protestant Professour at Witte^berg: He calling the defendours of this position: Anti-nomi, that is, Enemyes to the Law.
The same doctrine is (to omit others) taught by M. Fox, thus saying:Act. Mon. 1335. The ten Commandements were
 giuen vs, not to keepe them, but to know our damnation, and to call for mercy of God. With whom agreeth herein D. Whitakers in these wordes:Contra Camp. rai. 8. Qui credunt, ij non sunt sub lege, sed sub gratia etc. They which belieue are not vnder the Law, but vnder Grace. What is more to be said? Christians are freed from the curse of the Law; meaning from the punishment, due for the breach of the Commaundements. I will conclude this point with D. Willets wordes:Synops. Pap. pag. 564. The law remayneth still impossible to be kept by vs, through she weakenes of our flesh, etc. Thus by these mens doctrine we sinne not in breaking any of the Commaundements, as in stealing, committing adultery, and the like; for man sinneth only in breach of those precepts which are giuen him to obserue and keep. To conclude this passage of good workes in generall, Luthers iudgment of workes is this:Luth. in Assert. Art. 32^ All good workes, God iudging them, are mortall sinnes, God resting propitious, veniall and more pardonable.
Now, if Luthers doctrine be here good, then followeth it, that who laboureth to performe a good worke, is of the diuell: my reason is this: we read,
 that1. Iohn. 3. who committeth sinne is of the Diuell: but who doth a good worke, sinneth: because by the former doctrine of Luther, we are taught, that euery good worke is sinne. Thus according to Luthers doctrine, he sinneth, who prayeth, who practiseth the workes of faith, hope, and Charity, seeing all these in the iudgment of Luther, are sinnes. Agayne, Gods word commandeth vs to flie sinne:Psal. 36. Declina a malo, Therefore we are commanded by God to flie the doing of any good worke; because euery good worke in Luthers iudgment, is sinne. See how forcibly this doctrine of Luther by necessary sequels and deductions withdraweth vs from the practising of vertue, and exercise of Good Workes. Now to come to good workes in particuler.
The three principall Good workes, which necessarily and essentially concurre to the vowes of euery Religious order are; to wit, Chastity, by the which a man voweth perpetuall continency from the pleasures of the flesh, according to that,Math. ^9. Sunt Eunuchi, qui seipsos castrauerunt, propter regnum caelorum. Pouerty, by the which is voluntarily renounced
 the enioying in priuate of any temporall goods, as riches, honours etc. only resting content with poore fare, or diet, and apparell;Math. 19. Si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende omnia quae habes, and da pauperibus, and habebis the saurum in caelo.
Obedience, through which the will and mind of one sta^ds, in all lawfull things subiect to the will and disposall of his superiour. Now marke, how these three vertues are betrampled vpon by our Aduersaries, with all indignity and scorne. Touching Chastity, D. Whitakers iudgment is, ThatContra Cam^rat. 8. p. 15^. Virginity is not simply good; but after a certaine manner. But Luther proceedeth further, saying:Tom. ^. VVittenberg. ad cap. 7.1. Cor. Yf we respect the nature of Matrimony, and single life, Matrimony is as gold, and the spirituall state of single life, as dung.
Concerning Voluntary Pouerty, D. Willets censure is this:In his Synops. pag. 245. He is an Enemy to the glory, of God, who changeth his rich estate, wherein he may serue God, for a poore. Touching Obedience, you may see how they stand disaffected towards it euen out of their owne not practising of it, since they loath all Obedience with a most inexplicable dislike. I will
 close this point with their doctrine of fasting, to which vertue the Religious men of the Catholike Church are most deuoted; M. Perkins iudgment is, thatIn his reformed Catholike. pag. 220. fasting in it selfe is a thing indifferent, as is eating, and drinking. And D. Willet accordeth thereto, thus writing:In Synops. pag. 241. Neither is God better worshipped by eating, or not eating. And more particulerly touching the deniall of set tymes of fasting, appointed only for spiritual ends,D. Fulk against the Rhemish Testam. in Math. 15. D. Fulke is not ashamed to obiect and insist in the authority of the old Heretike Montanus, for the deniall therof. And D. Whitakers blusheth not to call the Catholike Churches vse therein,D. VVhitak, cont. Duraeum. l. 9. pa. 839. The doctrine of Diuells. Thus far of the former points, of Vowed Chastity, voluntary Pouerty, voluntary Obedience, and fasting; in the depressing whereof, our Aduersaries do withall depresse our Catholike doctrine of Euangelicall Counsels, which teacheth man to arriue to more high points of perfection in vertue, then the vulgar and common sort of Christians are accustomed to exercise. And vpon these grounds and doctrines they deny the lawfulnes of Monasteries, and other Religious houses;
 whitherunto men and women retire themselues, for the better seruing of God in austerity of life, and abandoning the pleasures of the world, so pernicious and exitiall to mans soule.
4. In the next place we will touch a little vpon our Aduersaries doctrine, of Imputatiue Iustice; by which they teach, that man hath no true and reall Iustice contracted of fayth, hope, and charity, inherent in his soule, but that his Iustice is meerely relatiue, as being only an application of Christs Iustice vnto him. By the which neuertheles Caluin teacheth, thatL. 3. Instit. c. 2. numb. 28.42. a man is as secure of his saluation; as if he did already enioy heauen. And accordingly hereto our Aduersaries further teach, thatIllyricus in varijs libris de Originali peccato Calui. Insti. l. 2. c. 3. Kempnit. contra cens. Col. the Image of God is wholly obliterated in man; all his fayre impressions are so extinct, as that the regenerate and Holy man is intrinsecally nothing els, then meere Corruption or contagion. Now these doctrines are forged by them, therby to withdraw vs from seeking to be truly vertuous, (seeing by this their former doctrine, man is not possibly capable therof;) but that therby we disburdening our selues of keeping the Commandements,
 or exercising of vertuous actio^s, may only by fayth seeke to lay hands vpon the kingdome of Heauen.
5. But now to cast our eye vpon the other end of the ballance, and as we haue here aboue seene, how our Aduersaries haue depressed and beaten downe the worth of all vertue and good workes; so let vs a little consider, how they labour to extenuate, and lessen by their positions, the atrocity of all Vice and Impiety, that so they may seeme lesse worthy of reprehension and dislike, for their imbracing of such courses. And first. Let vs take into our consideration, that Position of theirs, which teacheth, that all sinnesSo teacheth Calu. in Antidot. Conc. Trident. And Wickliff apud VValdens. de Sacram. c. 134. are equall, if so God, as Iudge, do weigh and ponderate them. Now doth not this doctrine much encourage that man, who is resolued to commit but any one lesser sinne, also to perpetrate the most sacinorous crime whatsoeuer, seeing he is herby taught, that the lesser sinne, and the greatest are alike, and of the same nature, in Gods iust trutination and weighing of them? But to proceed further. Touching the diuision of sinnes, they teach, that to the true Professours of the Ghospell, the
 most flagitious sinne that is, is onlyMusculus in loc. com. de peccat. sect. 5. D. Fulk against the Rhemish Test. in epist. loan sect. 5 Calu. Instit. l. 3 c. 4. sect. 28. Veniall: thus they, making the difference of sinnes not to proceed from their difference in their owne nature, but from the diuersity of the parties committing them. Now euery one of our Precisians is bound by the Principles of his owne Religion, to belieue himselfe to be one of the faythfull: Therfore let him sinne in neuer so grieuous a manner, such sinne in him is but veniall, and easily pardonable. O Phrensy of Iudgment! And hence it is, that some of them do thus write:D. Wotton in his answer to the late Popish Articles. pag. 92. and 41. To the faythfull the sinne is pardoned, assoone as it is committed. And D. Whitakers accordingly teacheth, that,De Eccles contra Bellar. controu. 2 q. 5. pag. 301. Si quis actum fidei habet, ei peccata non nocent; who exerciseth an act of fayth (to wit, that Christ died for him) that man no sinnes can hurt. And hence further it is, that D. Fulke teacheth thatIn the Tower disput. with Edm. Cam^ian, the second dayes Conference. Dauid when he committed adultery, was and remained the child of God: And againe, M. Fox thus writeth:Act. Mon. pag. 1338. When we sinne, we diminish not the glory of God, all the danger of sinning, being the euill example of our neighbour. Another saith: ThatVide Epitom. Colloq. Montisbelg. p. 44. and 48. He, who doth once truly belieue, cannot afterwards fall from the grace of
 God, or lose his fayth by adultery, or any other like sinne: and accordingly, Beza affirmeth, thatBeza in respons. ad Colloq. Montisbel part. alter p. 73. Dauid by his adultery and murther did not lose the Holy Ghost, and fall from his fayth. And if Dauid still continued in that happy state, why may not other Adulterers and murtherers enioy the same priuiledge and warrant? To conclude, the last vp shot of them in this point is thus deliuered in Luthers wordes:Luth. in captiuit. Babilon. fol. 74. Ita diues est homo Christianus etc. A Christian man is so rich, as that he cannot lose his saluation, quantiscunque peccatis, by any sinnes how great soeuer, except he will not belieue. And for a close of all, he further thus teacheth:Luth. in loc. com. cl^ss 5 c. 17. p. 68. Vt nihil iustificat, nisi fides; ita nihil peccat, nisi incredulitas. As nothing iustifyeth, but fayth, so nothing sinneth, but vnbeliefe and incredulity. Thus far hereof.
Now to recapitulate a little. If a man cannot loose his saluation, but only by want of beliefe: if a Murtherer and adulterer, euen during the tyme of perpetrating these acts, do not loose the Holy Ghost, but remayneth the child of God; if who once belieueth cannot after fall fro^ the grace of God; if one act of fayth taketh away all Sin;
 if sinne be pardoned to the faythfull, assoone as it is committed; if to the faythfull the most atrocious Sin is but veniall; if the greatest Sin be but equall to the least; To conclude, if we are to belieue, that not we, but God himself is the authour of our sinne, he forcing, and compelling vs to theft, murther etc. and that the Adultery of Dauid was Gods proper worke; I leaue to any indifferent iudgement, whether considering how proue and propense Man is to Sinne of his owne corrupt nature, these Theoremes and Principles of our Aduersaries do not mightly encourage men to commit Sinne, and this with all impunity, and want of feare of punishment.
But I will conclude these two former paragraphs of good workes, and sins, with some acknowledgements of the learned Protesta^ts touching these two former points; and how preiudiciall this doctrine of a Iustifying fayth is to vertue, and gratefull to sinners. Iacobus Andreas (that learned Protestant) speaking in the person of these defendours of only fayth, with reprehe^sion of them, thus discourseth:Concione 4. in c. 21. Lucae. We haue learned to
 be saued only by fayth, we cannot satisfy by our Almes, fasting, prayer; therfore permit vs, that we may giue ouer these thinges, seeing that we may be saued otherwise by the grace of God. And further the same Protestant thus writeth:Andraeas, vbi supra. That all the world may know them to be no Papists, nor to trust in good workes, they take course to put none in practise. Whereunto M. Stubs the Protestant, thus accordeth:In his Motiues to good workes, printed 15^6. pag. ^2. The Protestant trusteth to be saued by a bare and naked fayth (deceauing himselfe) without good workes, and therfore either careth not for them, or at least setteth little by them. Who further thus writeth: There are (I feare me) mo good workes done daily by the Papists, then by the Protestants; he giuing his reason thereof in his former words: so euident it is, euen by the confessions of the learned Protestants themselues, that the doctrine of only fayth, of disualewing the worth of good workes, and of lessening the grieuousnes of Sinne, openeth a fludgate to all Impiety whatsoeuer, and precludeth or shutteth vp the way, for the exercise of Vertue, and Piety.
6. In this place I will treate of Freewill. The which our Aduersaries deny
 to be in man, The Protestants are so full and confessed in the deniall of freewill, as it would be but superfluous to amasse together the many such their aknowledgments. Therefore I will content my selfe with Luthers doctrine herein. His wordes are these:Luth. in assertion. Art. 36. Th same doctrine is taught by Caluin Instit. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 11. by M. Willet his Synops. pag. 808. 810. and by all other Precisians. Freewill is a fiction in things, or a title without substance, because it is in no mans power to thinke any thing euill or good, but all things etc. happen by absolute necessity. And thereupon in hatred of freewill, Luther did write a booke, entituling it, de seruo arbitrio; in one place wherof he thus further teacheth: The foreknowledge and omnipotency of God fighteth agaynst our freewill. So forgetfull it seemes was Luther of those wordes of our Sauiour:Math. 23. How often would I haue gathered thy children togeather etc. and thou wouldest not?
Now doth not the denyall of Freewill become a Sanctuary for all Sinnes whatsoeuer? May not the thiefe say in his owne defence by force of this doctrine; that it is not in his Freewill or choyce to forbeare stealing, the Murtherer to forbeare Homicide and Mansslaughter, the Fornicatour and adulterous man or woman to forbeare Adultery
 or Fornication, the traytour to forbeare committing of treason against his Prince or common wealth? and are they not all secured and iustly exempt fro^ al punishme^ts for such their sins, admitting (as they are catechized by this their denyall of Freewill) that it was not in their power to abstaine from the perpetrating of the forsaid sins? Since punishme^t is due only to such transgressions, which are in the power of the tra^sgressor to performe, or not to performe.
7. I wil next come to our Aduersaries doctrine of Reprobation and Predestination; since they chiefly depend vpon the denyall of freewill. Touching Reprobation they thus teach. Caluin thus writeth of this point:Calu. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 6. Co^silio nutuque etc. God doth ordaine by his Counsell and decree, that among men some be borne destined to certaine damnation from their Mothers wombe; who by their destruction may glorify God: and this without any respect had to their workes good or euill. And Beza further in defence hereof maintayneth thatIn respons. ad act. Colloq. Montisbelg. part. alter. pag. 215. and 221. God did not suffer death for those men, so ordained to destruction.
The same Beza further yet proceedeth herein, thus saying:Beza vbi supr. in praefat. p. ^1. et. p. 123. Many Infants
 (of belieuing Parents) being baptized, are notwithstanding damned though the secret decree of God. And hee^pon he most blasphemously thus concludeth:Bez. in his Treatise Englished and entituled the display of Popish practises. pag. 17. and 31. God createth some to destructio^, createth to perdition, predestinateth some to his hatred and destructio^. So litle Beza regardeth those words of holy writ:Ezech. 33. As I liue, saith the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his waies, and liue. And againe:2. Petr^ 3. and 1. Thessal. 5. God is not willing, that any perish, but that all returne to pennance.
8. Now, touching the doctrine of the Certainty of mans saluation, or Predestination, thus our Aduersaries teach. Luther affirmeth, thatTom. ^. epist. Latin. fol. 334. ad Philipp. no sinne can draw vs from Christ, although we should commit fornication, or kill a thousand tymes in one day. And Iacobus Andraeas confirmeth the same in these wordes:In epitom. Colloq. Montisbelg. pag. 48. and 44. He who once truly belieueth cannot afterwards fall from the grace of God by his adultery, or any other lyke sinnes; And heerupon (as aboue it is set downe) they teach, that Dauid, when he did commit murther, was, and remained the Child of God, and consequently, he was certaine of his saluation. To which
 end of certainty of Saluation, D. Whitakers thus writeth: FidesD. Whitak. contra Camp. rat. 8. aut perpetua, aut nulla est. And hereupon they conclude, that euen during mans committing of Sinne, he is certaine of Saluation, seeing it would otherwise follow, (which our Aduersaries will not admit) that his former certainty was no certainty at all: so crosse these men tread to the steps of the holy Scripture:Ezech. 18. If the iust man do turne away from his righteousnes etc. in his sinne he shall dye. And,Rom. 11. Yf we abyde in his goodnes, otherwise we shalbe cut of.
Well now, to look backe vpon these two doctrines of our Aduersaries, touching Reprobation, and Predestination or Election: marke, how forcibly they incite a man to all turpitude in manners: may not any man belieuing the same doctrines to be true, thus dispute with himselfe? Either I am already vnalterably and infallibly reprobated to Hell, or predestinated to Heauen, and this without any reference or foresight of my workes, good or bad. (this the former alleaged Protestants teach me to belieue, and this I am to belieue) Yf I be reprobated, let me exercise neuer so many good workes, and liue piously in the
 highest degree, yet certaine it is, I shalbe damned. Yf I be predestinated to Saluation and Heauen, then cannot any sinnes committed by me (though neuer so great and enormous, seeing my predestination is without preuision of workes) hinder my Saluation, but certainely and assuredly I shallbe saued. Seeing then a bad life cannot hinder my saluation, nor a good life preuent my Reprobation, I will during the tyme I liue, enioy all pleasures whatsoeuer (though neuer so vnlawfull and prohibited in the Holy Scripture) without any remorse of conscience. Vpon these said grounds the belieuers of them may, in this former manner discourse, and I probably assure my selfe, that many hundreds in England belieuing our Aduersaries doctrines therein, do vpon such their beliefe, ingulfe themselues in all wickednes, and dissolution of life and manners. Thus farre briefly of this point.
9. I proceed to their deniall of Purgatory. By the deniall therof men are taught, that let them practise all wickednesse whatsoeuer, either in murther, adultery, fornication, Robbery, extorsion or any otherwise, yet if at the houre of his death, a man haue but on
 act of fayth, he is certaine to go immediatly to Heauen, without suffering any temporall paynes for his former Sinnes, or without making restiturion for the iniustice, losses, and wronges by him proffered to others. Now this doctrine (I say) much encourageth men to Sinne; and the rather, seeing their finall Saluation resteth only but vpon a bare act of fayth and beliefe, which they maintayne, euer to be in the power of the faythfull to performe: So little eare they giue to those wordes of Holy Scripture, spoken of the state of the man cast in prison, wherby is shadowed the soule in Purgatory:Math. 5. Non exibis inde, donec reddas nouissimum quadrantem.
10. The deniall of Auricular Confession of our sinnes, in like sort much harteneth a man to sinne, seeing by that doctrine he is taught, that it is sufficient to confesse them in hart only to God: whereas on the contrary, to belieue, that God hath appointed, that there are certaine men allotted by him in his Church, to heare all particular sinnes of others, much deterreth and withdraweth vs from sinning, considering
 that shame is a great hinderance of sinnes, and how vngratefull and vnpleasing it is to mans nature to reueale euery secret sinne, euen in expresse and particuler wordes (or els not to haue the^ remitted to him) to another man. But we must rest contented with the Institution of Christ:Ioa^. 20. Whose sinnes you shall forgiue, they are forgiuen; and whose you shall retayne, they are retayned. But how shall it be knowne, what sinnes are to be forgiuen, and what sinnes to be retayned, except it be first knowne, what the particular sinnes are?
11. Our Aduersaries deniall of the necessity of Baptisme, causeth (no doubt) that many Children borne of Puritaine Parents are not baptized at all, but remaine during all their life in that Heathenish estate, subiect to eternall damnation. That the necessity of this Sacrament is not required, is taught by Luther, who thus teacheth:Lib. de captiu. Babylon. Yf thou hast receaued Baptisme, it is well, if thou wantest it, no losse: Belieue, and thou art saued before thou be baptized. That Baptisme of Children borne of the faythfull, is not necessary, is further taught (as appeareth from thePag. 105. Suruey of the
 booke of Common Prayer) byIn his meditation vpon the 122. Psalme. pag 92. M. Willet, and most resolutely by Caluin, and Beza in many places ouerlong to recite. But we fynd Gods Holy Word to teach the contrary:Ioan. 3. Vnles a man be borne agayne of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God.
12. Touching the licentious doctrine of diuorce in case of any impotency, or otherwise, Luther thus teacheth:Serm. de Matrimonio. If the wyfe will not, or cannot (to wit, performe the act due to Mariage) let the mayde come. Of which sentence D. Whitak. was so ashamed, as that he thus writeth:Contra Camp. rat. 8. Luthers iudgment in this kind of diuorce, I do not defend. Yet Luther further teacheth thus:Luth. in Proposit. de Big^m^a edit. 1528. propos. 62. 65. 66. Poligamy, or hauing many wyues at once, is no more abrogated, then is the rest of Moyses Law; and it is free, as being neither commanded, nor forbidden. Bucer is as indulgent and full herein as Luther, for Bucer teacheth diuorce, and marying agayne with another, in case thatBucer in Script. Anglic de regno Christi. l. 2. c. 26. c 37. c. c. 42. one depart from the other, in case of Homicide, or theft, or but in repayring to the Company or banquets of immodest persons; or in case of incurable infirmity by Childbirth, or of the mans falling into Lunacy, or otherwise.
 And further it is taught expresly byBeza lib. de repudijs and diuortijs. p. 1^3. Beza,In Synops. of the yeare 1600. pag. 685. M. Willet,In partition: Theolog. pag. 739. Amandus Polanus, and others, that in case but of the husbands departure, he might becaused by his wyfe to be proclaimed, and if he did not returne within the time appointed, that thereupon the Minister might giue the wyfe licence to marry agayne. I assure my selfe, there are many hundred wiues in England, who would be glad of their husbands long absence, and not returne, and of the execution of this doctrine, therby to satisfy the flesh by marying agayne; So dangerous is this Position of diuorce (if full practise thereof were made, as in part it is) to the state of wedlocke, and to the inuiolable bond of chastity, which the one party in mariage oweth to the other. But let vs remember, that we read:Math. 19. Which God hath ioyned togeather, let no man separate.
13. Touching the authority of Princes and all Magistrates, our Aduersaries do strangely dictate. And first Luther thus teacheth:Luth de secular. potest. in tom. 9 German. Among Christians, none can, or ought to be a Magistrate;Luth. vbi supra. ech one is to other equally subiect. And yet more:In se^mons Englished, and printed. 1579. p. 97. As Christ cannot suffer himselfe
 to be tyed by lawes etc. so ought not the conscience of a Christian to suffer them. With Luther agreeth Swinglius in thus betrampling all soueraignty:Tom. 1. in explana. Art. 42. When Princes do euill, and contrary to the rule of Christ, they may be deposed. Caluin is no lesse sparing in censuring Princes, for thus he writeth.^n Daniel c. 6. Earthly Princes depriue themselues of authority, when they erect themselues against God etc. and we are rather to spit vpon their faces, then to obey them. I will close this Scene with Beza, who did write a booke entituled, de iure Magistratuum in subditos: A booke so destroying all obedience to the Prince and Magistrate, that D. Sutcliffe thus censureth thereof:In his answere to a certaine Libel supplicatory. p 75. Beza in his booke of the power of Magistrates, doth arme the Subiects against their Prince, in these cases etc. And further saith thereof:Vbi sup. p. 98. It is a booke, which ouerthroweth in effect all authority of Christian Magistrates. But here I would demaund of these men, how do they answere those diuine Testimonies?Rom. c. 13. Who resisteth the Power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist, purchase to the^selues da^nation. And agayne:Rom. vbi supr. We ought to be subiect euen of necessity, and for conscience sake.

But now let vs contemplate a little vpon the dangerous effects ordinarily ensuing of this doctrine of deniall of the authority of Princes, and Magistrates. And first if Luthers doctrine be true, that ech one is equall to another, and that there ought to be no Magistrates: This being (I say) once granted, what an insufferable confusion, and Anarchy would there be in the society of Christians? seeing from hence it would follow, that there should be no lawes to keepe men in duty, no Magistrates to punish the delinquents, no rewards for well-deseruing men, no chastisement for malefactors. Would there not be in such a State daily perpetrated all homicide, theft, rapine, incest, Adultery, fornication, and all other most flagitious crimes whatsoeuer, and all this with all impunity, and without the least feare of any castigation* Were not this a Common wealth fitting to be instituted rather by mans Ghostly Enemy, as being the high way to lead soules to Hell, then by Christ, who suffred death for our sinnes?
Agayne, admit that the subiects might rise at their pleasure in armes
 against their King, as the former sentences of Swinglius, Caluin, and Beza do warrant; what tumults, what intestine seditions, and simulties, what insurrections would there be in euery Monarchy, and absolute State? finally what vtter euisceration and disbowelling (as it were) would be made in euery such nation euen by it owne borne subiects? And were it not far better, for such Princes rather to hide themselues in solitude and obscurity, and to liue vnder the hatches of a priuate state, then to be placed vpon this glorious (yet most dangerous) Theater, or Stage of supreme soueraignty and domination?
14. To this former may be adioyned their doctrine, of Parity of Ministers in the Church, by the which they teach, that there ought not to be any Bishops, but that euery Minister should haue equall authority and Iurisdiction. All the Puritanes are so precipitate and headlong in this doctrine, as that it would be needles to set downe their many sentences thereof: Therefore I will content my selfe with the wordes of our English Puritanes, who thus write:This is to be seene in the booke entituled: Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiasticall, printed 1604. The gouernment of the Church
 of England by Archbishops, Bishops, and Deanes, is Antichristian, and repugnant to the word of God.
Now if all Ministers should haue one and the same authority, and that there should be no subordination amongst them, what a distraction and confusion would follow to be in the Church? And how ready would euery illiterate Minister be to ve^t out new doctrines and Heresies, without all controule; and such Heresies, as would not only infect the vnderstanding with falshood and errour, but also the will with Sinne and wicked conuersation? Againe, who then would there be to chastise the Ministers the^selues for their great dissolution of life, touching drinking, fornication, and adultery, too much vsed by many of the^ at this day in England, to the great disedifiing of many more sober and temperate Protesta^ts.
15. To the former I may range their doctrine of extraordinary calling; by the wch they teach that there is extraordinary of calling Ministers immediatly fro^ God himselfe, without the concurrency therto of ma^, or imposition of any Bishops hand. And accordingly we find Caluin thus to writ
 of himselfe and other first Preachers of the Protestant Religion:The Protestant Lascitius reciteth this saying of Caluin. l. de Russor. Muscouit. etc. c. 23. Quia Papae Tyrannide etc. Because through the tyranny of the Pope, true Succession and Ordination was broken of, therefore we stood in need of a new Course heerin; and this function or calling was altogether extraordinary. To which accord the wordes of M. Perkins, saying:In his workes printed 1605. fol. 916. The calling of Wickliffe, Hus, Luther, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr etc. were extraordinary. As also those of D. Fulk^:Against Stapleton, Martiall. etc. pag. 2. The Protesta^ts, who first preached in these dayes, had extraordinary Calling. But how repugnant is this their calling, to the calling of the ministery mentioned in holy Scripture?Hebr. 5. No man taketh the honour (vz. of Priesthood) to himselfe, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. And agayne:Rom. 10. How shall they preach, except they be sent?
But now heer I vrge, that as Caluin and the rest, by challenging to themselues an extraordinary Calling, broached the former new doctrines, touching liberty and licentiousnes of life, neuer before heard of; so why may not others in like ma^ner heerafter, as of late the Libertins, the family of loue, and other
 sectaries haue done, aryse, and assuming to themselues the like priuiledge of Extraordinary Calling from God alone, dogmatize other new doctrines, as pernicious to manners, vertue, and good life, as these former wicked doctrines are?
16. In this place I wil touch the string of the most wicked doctrine of Swinglius, and other his fellow-Ministers, who teach plainly, That Heathens, not belieuing in Christ (and so euer continuing) may yet be saued. For first Swinglius doth thus gentilize:Swingl. in l. epist. Oecolamp. and Swingl. l. 1. pag. 39. Ethnicus, si piam mentem domi foueat, Christianus est, etsi Christum ignoret. A Heathen leading a good life, is a Christian, though he know not Christ. And Swinglius further particularly writeth: thatSwingl. tom. 2 fol. 118. Hercules, Theseus, Socrates etc. are now in the same Heauen with Adam, Abel, Enoch. Finally Swinglius proceedeth also further teaching thus:L. epist. Oecolamp. and Swingl. l. 2. p. 513. Gentilium liberos nulla lex damnat. No law damneth the Children of Gentils. This Opinion of Swinglius is also defended (and himselfe for teaching the same highly extolled) byVid. Swingl. tom. 2. fol. 550. Bullinger, as also by^n vita Bullingeri. Symlerus, the Protestant, and others. This doctrine is so resolutely maintained by
 Swinglius and others, that Echarius (a learned Protestant) thus by way of complayning therof, writeth:Echarius in his fasciculus Controuersiarum, printed Lipsiae. anno 1609. cap. 19. Quod Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus, Hercules etc. Swinglius writeth to the King of France, that Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus, Hercules, the Scipions, the Catoes, and other Gentills are partakers of eternall life. And Swinglius is defended for teaching this doctrine, by the Tygurine Diuines, Bullinger, Gualterus, Hardenburgius, etc.
Thus farre the foresayd Echarius. O, what Scholia or Paraphrase can Swinglius and his compartners cast vpon those choaking wordes of diuine Scriture?Acts. 4. There is not any other name vnder heauen, giuen to men (then that of IESVS) wherein we must be saued. AndIohn. 4. Christ is the Sauiour of the world:1. Ioan. ^. The reconciliation for our sinnes; and not onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world.
But now what indignity to the Redeemer of the world, and to all Christia^ Religion, doth this former most blasphemous doctrine of Swinglius and his fellowes exhale and breath forth? Are they Christians, who teach thus? Were
 the many Prayers, watchinges, whipping his most sacred body, crowning his reuerend head with thornes, buffeting of him by the Iewes, and finally his most painfull and pretious death and passion (of all which paines euery litle touch, in regard of the impretiable and infinite worth of the person so tormented, was able to redeeme thousands of worlds) so needles and superfluous, as that Prophane Heathens (who only belieue in generall (if so much) that there is a God, or a Diuine Prouidence,) though wholly disclayming in the beliefe of Christ, and treading all Christian fayth and Religion vnder their feete, can neuertheles be saued?Hier. c. 2. O you Heauens, be astonished at this, be afrayd, and vtterly confounded.
17. Here may occurre the Aduersaries doctrine touching their deniall of all Miracles since the Apostles tymes: A doctrine which secretly leadeth the way to Atheisme. For the greatest reason that the Atheists alledge in defence of their blasphemous Atheisme, is, that they hould Nature (that is, the connexions of Physicall causes with the effects) to be the supreme cause of all
 thinges, and therefore these incredulous persons desire nothing more in tryall of this their misbeliefe, then to see any thing performed aboue the ordinary, and vsuall course of nature; which they absolutely deny, that it can be performed. And accordingly hereto, I know a man (witty inough, but dissolute in manners, and partly suspected of Atheisme, but in externall show a Protestant) who is accustomed to say, that he would gladly see the diuell, because he would gladly see something aboue the ordinary course of nature. I beseech God, that his desire in the end of his life be not accomplished.
Now, how forward our Precisians are in denying all Miracles since the Apostles tymes, may appeare from the liberall Confessions in this point of D. Fulke, who thus acknowledgeth:Against the Rhem. Testame^t. in Apocalyps. p. 13. It is knowne, that Caluin, and the rest, whom the Papists call Arch-Heretikes, worke no miracles. And of D. Sutcliffe:In his Exam. of D Kellisons Suruey, printed 1606. pag. 8. We do not practise miracles, nor do we teach, that the doctrine of truth is to be confirmed with miracles.
Thus we see, that these men are in their Iudgements so strongly persuaded,
 that all Miracles (by the which God suspendeth stupendiously the working of nature) are so fully ceased, since the dayes of the Apostles, as that they freely confesse all want of working Miracles to haue beene in the plantation of their owne Religion; directly impugning that course of working Miracles granted by our Sauiour to his Apostles, at the first preaching of the Gospell:Math. 10. As you go, preach, heale the sicke, cleanse the leprous, raise vp the dead, cast out the Diuels etc.
18. Our former Aduersaries do in great riot of splenefull acclamations, cry out in their Pulpits and writings against Holy-dayes, (the Sabaoth day only excepted) with great auersion and dislike of them. This their so much affected doctrine wholly introduceth a forgetfulnes of the Misteries of Christian faith: for those daies were instituted by the Church of Christ, in her Primitiue tymes, to put vs in mind of the misteries of our Fayth. As for example, Christmas day, in remembra^ce of Christs birth and Natiuity; Innocents day, or Childermas day (as it is vulgarly called) in remembrance of the slaughter
 of the Infants, at the tyme of our Sauiours birth; New yeares day, in remembrance of our Sauiours Circumcision; Epiphany, or Twelft day, in remembrance of the Comming of the three Kings with presents to our Sauiour. The Annunciation day, in remembrance of the Angels salutation of our Blessed Lady, and bringing her that most ioyfull message, that she shall bring forth the Sauiour of the world; Good Friday, in remembrance of our Sauiour Christ his death and passion on that day; Easter day, in remembrance of our Lords resurrection from the graue; Ascension day, in remembrance of his ascending in Soule and body into Heauen; Pentecost, or Whitsuntide, in remembra^ce of the descending of the Holy Ghost; Trinity Sunnay, in honour and remembrance of the most Blessed Trinity: finally Corpus Christi day, in remembrance of our Sauiours Institution of the most blessed Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist.
Now, most of these great festiuall dayes are much neglected and vilifyed by our Aduersaries: nor for the most part do the Puritane Ministers instruct their Proselites, and followers, why
 those Feasts, and vpon what occasion, they were first instituted: which want of care in the Maisters, and ignorance in the Schollers, do beget a great forgetfulnes of our Christian Mysteries. And this my Assertion is warranted with all experience. The like we may proportionably conclude of our Aduersaries small respect they beare to the Feast dayes of the Apostles, or of diuers other great Saints: For example the ignorant Protestant knowes when Midsomer day (as they call it) commeth, but that that day was instituted in the honour of S. Iohn Baptist, as being the Precursor of our Sauiours comming, few of them know.
In like sort our Aduersaries reiect with full mouth all Ceremonies in Fayth, (styling them, superstitious, and Idolatrous) though the said Ceremonies were first instituted, and are still vsed, the better to recall to the mind of the ignorant, the Mysteries of Christian Religion. And vpon the same ground they mainely vociferate, and cry out against the true vse of Pictures, which serue only to put vs in mind of the vertues, and liues of the Saints, of which they are
 the Pictures. Neither can they endure the sight of the Crosse, though it be only to put vs in mind of our Sauiours death and passion, suffered vpon the Crosse: so willing they are to extinguish and wholy blot out all remembrances, prints, and cognizances of Christian fayth. Thus we see, that our Aduersaries proceeding herein finally tends to the obliterating and cancelling of most of the chiefe Mysteries of our Christian fayth and Religion, and of the most godly Professors of it.
19. The Aduersaries acknowledged doctrine of the Inuisibility of the Protestant Church, hath induced many to forsake the Christian Religion, and in lieu thereof to become Arians, Iewes, or Turkes. For first, seeing the Old Testament is most full in its authorities, for aEsay 60. Dan. 2. Psal. 28. Continuall splendour, and visibility of Christs true Church: and further, seeing, that this exacted visibility hath bene wanting in the Protestant Church by their owne Confessions, whereof I will heere for breuity alledge the acknowledgment of Sebastianus Francus (a learned Protestant) who thus confesseth:In epist. de abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis Ecclesiasticis. For certaine through the worke
 of Antichrist, the externall Church together with the fayth and Sacraments vanished away presently after the Apostles departure, and for these fourteene hundred yeares the Church hath not bene externall and visible.
To whose iudgment D. Fulke subscribeth in these wordes:In his answer to a Counterfeyt Catholike. p. 1^. The true Church decayed immediatly after the Apostles. And lastly seeing such Protestants, as acknowledge the want of the visibility of their owne Church, will not acknowledge the Catholike Roman Church to be the true Church of God, though they do acknowledg, that that Church hath beene euer visible for these fourteene hundred yeares: Therfore diuers of the said emine^t Protestants through the want of fulfilling of the Prophecies touching the Churches visibility in their owne Protestant Church, haue therevpon Apostated from Christianity, some of them imbracing the doctrine of the Iewes, others of the Turkes, and therupo^ haue employed all their dayes after, with infecting other Christians with their new imbraced doctrines, wherby they haue secretly instilled into their followers minds and wills the poyson (both for doctrine, and impious
 conuersation of life) which Iudaisme or Turcisme do teach and warrant.
Many examples of diuers learned Protestants, forsaking their Christian Religion, through the acknowledged doctrine of the Inuisibility of the Protestants Church, may be alledged. As ofSo witnesseth Beza in epist. 65. p. 308. Alamannus a great Protestant, who became a Iew. OfIn historia Dauidis Georgij, printed at Antwerpe. 1568. Dauid George once Professour at Basill, who became a blasphemous Apostata. Of Ochinus, who first brought Protestancy into England, with Peter Martyr in King Edwards dayes; who finally turned anAs witnesseth Zanchius in his booke, de tribus Elohim and Conradus Slussenburg (a Caluinist) in Theol. Caluinist. l. 1 fol. 9. Apostata. Neuserus chiefe Pastour at Heydelberge, who became aSo witnesseth Osiander the Protestant. Cent. 16. part. 2. p. 818. Turke; and diuers others here for breuity omitted: So certayne and vndoubted it is, that the confessed doctrine of the Inuisibility of the Protestants Church hath caused diuers to forsake the Christian fayth, and wholly to disclayme from our Sauiour; ingulfing themselues into all those wickednesses and Impieties, which Iudaisme or Turcisme at this day maintayne and defend.
20. The last doctrine heer to be alledged (to omit thatVsury is defended by Bucer, in Script. Anglican. p. 789. 790. 791. By Geneua it selfe, for M. Wotton in his second part of the Answere, etc. in his preface to his fellow Brethre^ thus writeth. Two Ministers at Geneua were deposed and banished, for speaking against Vsury, allowed in that state. Defe^ded also by Mathew V^rell in his principall grounds of Religion, englished and printed 1595. pag. 148. and 149. As also defended by many others, mentioned by D. Pye in his epistle dedicat. in his Answere written against a Treatise in defence of Vsury. pa. 20. and 22. Vsury is defended by our Aduersaries) which resulteth
 necessarily out of some of the premises, is, that our Aduersaries (howsoeuer they make shew, to practise in some sort the contrary) do take away all Prayer, (as is aboue intimated) as a thing needles, vnprofitable, and superfluous. This I proue seuerall wayes. And first our Aduersaries teach, that only fayth iustifyeth: then if fayth only iustifyeth, it iustifyeth without prayer, or any other good workes. Yea it iustifyeth according to Luther and others aboue cyted, being accompanyed with the greatest sinnes; seeing they teach (as aboue is shewed) that nothing looseth their fayth or hope of saluation, but only infidelity, or want of fayth.
Secondly, they teach, that there is no merit in any of our good workes, therfore not any in Prayer; for if our Prayers do nothing merit, they nothing obtayne: because impetration and obtaining doth import some desert (at least de congruo:) if then our Prayers do neyther merit, nor satisfy for the offence, nor for the punishment due to the offence; to what end then are Prayers to be powred out?
Thirdly, to what purpose should we
 pray (for example) that we shall not sinne heerafter: seeing God (as Luther, Caluin and the rest aboue specifyed do teach) so forcibly impelleth vs to sinne, as that it is not in our power to resist his ordinance and decree therein? But who dare pray to resist, what God hath infallibly appointed shalbe?
Fourthly, it is shewed aboue, that according to our Aduersaries Principles and Theses, Fayth consisteth, in that a man firmely belieueth, that his Sins are already forgiuen him, that he is one of the Elect, and that he shall infallibly obtayne saluation. Now, this fayth preuenteth, and taketh away all Prayer for remission of Sinnes, and mans saluation. The reason is, in that Fayth doth precede all this prayer, according to that, Quomodo inuocabunt, in quem non crediderunt? Rom. 10. Therefore it followeth, that we are assured by faith of our saluation, and eternall life, and this before we pray for it.
Fifthly, Prayer is euer for the obtayning of that, of which who prayeth, is (though hopefull yet) partly doubtfull and vncertayne of his obtaining of it. For if he be certayne before his
 praier, that he shal obtaine his request, to what purpose the^ are his Prayers made? and to pray for that, which we eyther already haue, or are certayne that heerafter we shall haue, is most ridiculous and absurd. Now, from this ground it riseth, (as in part aboue is intimated) that we cannot, nor ought not to pray for the remission of our Sinnes, or for obtayning of eternall lyfe: seeing our Fayth (according to our Aduersaries former doctrines) instructeth vs, that we are aforehand assured of both. And thus vpon this ground, he no more foolishly prayeth for the remission of his Sinnes, or for eternal life; then a man should pray, that the Sunne might shine to day (seeing that already it hath shined) or that it would shine to morrow, of which he is assured, that it will shine.
Thus according to the force of these reasons, ineuitably rising out of our Aduersaries former doctrines, no man ought to pray, or so much as to recite (by way of Praier) our Lords Praier, Our Father which art in heauen hallowed be thy name etc. Thus far now of these former twenty seuerall doctrines of our
 Aduersaries, displayed in the precedent leaues: all which (we see) breath nothing but Sensuality, Enormities, and Sinnes, in the wills of the belieuers of them.
Now, here we are to conceaue, that these former Positions (as they are doctrines) do consist in speculation, and rest in the Vnderstanding; yet because the Obiect of most of them is manners, vertue, vice, and the like; therefore the beliefe of them is the more dangerous for mans will. For the better vndersta^ding whereof we are to conceaue, that there is such a strayt entercourse betweene the Vnderstanding and the Will in mans soule, that the will worketh not, but as the Vnderstanding out of its owne receaued Principles, doth dictate to the Will, as true, or false; and so the Will puts in execution those said Principles in its operation in manners. Yf the Theories and speculations be true, then the Will by working accordingly, worketh well and laudably. Yf false, then the Will worketh viciously: and of this nature are the former aboue recited doctrines of our Aduersaries; so as they being most false and wicked, as tending
 to extirpate all vertue, and to plant impiety in mans soule, they most forcibly beate vpon the Will, and neuer cease their battery, till they haue forced the Will to exercise all its operations and actions touching manners and conuersations of life, according to the said false doctrines: and therefore the Will of man is so much the more endangered by such impious and blasphemous Principles and doctrines: but otherwise, and in this respect, with lesse, or no danger, it falleth out in those merely speculatiue doctrines (though false) which haue no necessary reference to the working of the Will according to them. Such were the Heresyes of Origen, who taught that the Diuels should in the end of the world be saued; of Cyprian, in defending Rebaptization, and the lyke; from which (though erroneous) the Will sucketh no poyson.
But to passe on further in the speculation of these former doctrinall Positions; let vs by way of recapitulation see, how potent and forcible they are for the patronage and defence of the most flagitious crimes and sinnes; as also
 on the other syde, for the preuenting of all good workes of Vertue and Piety, though both these points haue in part, beene aboue touched. And as concerning the first, I will exemplify it in the most facinorous crimes that may be, as Sodomy, Adultery, Fornication, Murther, Theft, and the like. May not the Workers of such Impieties, and particularly these Sodomits, or Gomorreans of London, thus apologize for themselues, euen from the Principles of their owne Religion, and this in their chiefe Maysters owne wordes?
First, may they not thus reply: We want Freewill in all our actions, and therefore what we haue committed, we could not but commit: but punishment is not in any sort due to actions, proceeding from an absolute Necessity, or Stoicall fatum: for we read,So Luther aboue in assert, damnat. per Leonem. Act. ^6. It is not in our power to thinke euill or good, but all things proceed from absolute necessity.
Secondly,Luth. aboue in sermone de Moyse. the Ten Commandements appertayne not vnto Christians. And therfore though what we haue committed be prohibited by the Commandements; yet we Christians are not commanded to forbeare the violating of the said
 Commandements, vnder any penalty or punishment.
Thirdly, what is committed, is no Sinne in vs, for we know we are of the number of the faythfull, therfore we are good: for Luther teacheth vs,Luther in his sermons englished. pag. 178. that a faythfull man worketh nothing, but good workes; neither can it be but good, which he being good bef^re, shall do. Agayne, we belieue, and therefore we cannot sinne; for Luther hath taught vs, that, as nothing iustifyeth but only fayth; so nothing sinneth, but want of beliefe.
Fourthly, Admit it be a Sinne, yet it is no Sinne in vs but in God; and therfore we are wholly excused therein, as being but Gods bare Instruments therein; for we are taught:Luther aboue tom. 1. de prouidentia Dei. pag. 166. That God moueth the these to kil, and the theefe is inforced to sinne. And further, that (i) The adultery of Dauid, was the worke of God. Now if these actions be of God,So Melancth. aboue in Rom. 8. they are so farre from being Sinnes, as that they are good:Genes. 1. for all things which God made are good.
Fiftly, admit it be a sinne in vs, yet it is no greater, then any other Sinne, though it be tragically amplifyed by our Enemies; for Caluin teacheth, and
 we belieue, ThatCaluin supr. in Antidot. Concil. Trident. All Sinnes are equall.
Sixthly, if there be any Sinne in vs, yet it is but a veniall sinne in vs, and therefore easily pardonable; for we are taught, thatD. Wotton aboue in his Answere to the late Popish Articles. pag. 92. 841. to the faythful (of which number we assuredly are) the sinne is pardoned, assoone as it is committed.
Seauenthly, admit our sinne be a mortall, or grieuous Sinne in vs; yet it is in no sort preiudiciall to vs; for eyther euery one of vs is already without preuision of any workes, euen from our mothers wombe, reprobated to da^nation, or predestinated to saluation, asCaluin ^boue (...) Instit. l. 3. cap. 13. and sect. 6. Caluin assureth vs: if reprobated, then this our Sinne no way furthereth, or causeth our damnation; seeing that was decreed from all eternity without any respect of our liues and conuersation. If predestinated, then can neither this our Sinne, nor any other how flagitious Sin soeuer, hinder or preuent vs of our saluation.
Eightly, admit it to be a Sinne in vs, yet we are more to be pittied, then rebuked; seeing we are taught, that theIllyric. aboue cited. de Origin. peccati. Kemnitius aboue cited. Image of God is wholly obliterated in vs, and all our fayre impressions are extinct,
 and that euen the regenerate and holy man is nothing els, but meere Corruption and contagion. Now here then, can any man expect to gather grapes of thornes, or figges of thisteles? Matth. 7.
Lastly, let our Sinne be what it wilbe, great or small; yet no detriment (touching our saluation) can it bring to vs, (who are true belieuers) for our perpetrating of it: Seeing we are taught, that aLuth. vbi supr. in captiuit. Babil. fol. 74. Christian man is so rith, that he cannot lose his Saluation by any sinnes how great soeuer, except he will not belieue. And further it being in our power at any tyme to exercise an act fayth; how can eyther this, or that Sinne hurt vs, seeing D. Whitakers assureth vs; thatD. Whitak. aboue in l. de Eccles. contra Bellar. co^trouers. 2. q. 5. pag. 301. Siquis actum fidei habet, ei peccata non nocent. Sinnes cannot hurt him, who produceth an Act of fayth. So certaine it is, (as our owne brethren do teach) thatSee Acts and monuments printed anno 1563. pag. 488. We cannot be damned, except Christ be damned with vs. And as for suffering any temporall paines for the expiating of sinne after our death before we come to Heauen, it is but a iest to surmize any such thing; since we wholly account the doctrine of Purgatory, a meere forgery, or fable.

Thus far now may the greatest sinners that are, proceed in defence of their wickednes, euen from the head-Theoremes, and Principles of their owne Religion. O execrable Monsters! did Christ (thinke you) incarnate himselfe and suffer death for the taking away of the Sinnes of the world; and yet would institute and leaue behind him a Religion for all men, vpon their soules saluation, to follow, which should patronize villany and Sinne in the highest degree?
But now let vs cast our eye vpon some other of the premises mentioned in the beginning, and recall to mynd, what is, aboue deliuered by our Aduersaries touching the depressing and vilifying of vertue and godlines of life. And heer now I demand, that considering, it is a most nauseous, and vngratefull thing, and naturally crosse to mans disposition to spend his tyme in laborious and painefull workes of vertue, if so there be no rewards (as pleasing Allectiues) proposed to him for such his endeauours: Heere I say, I demand (as aboue in part I did, though I heer iterate it, for the better imprinting of
 it in the memory of the Reader) how such a man belieuing the former doctrines, can with any alacrity practise good workes, or be sollicitous to lead a regular and pious life: when before hand he is persuaded by his owne doctrines, viz.
1. ThatRead the Authorities aboue set downe touching all theese seuerall branches of this Periode, or Paragraphe. Prayer is needles, and vnprofitable. 2. That a man (labour he neuer so much in vertue) cannot become truly vertuous, but onely imputatiuely lust, or vertuous. 3. That the practise of Chastity, Pouerty, Obedience, and fasting are not pleasing to God. 4. That all good workes) God iudging them) are mortall sins. 5. That we are not obliged to keepe the Ten Commandements. 6. That, Good workes are not only not necessary to fayth, and saluation, but hurtfull thereto. 7. That one worke is not better, then another; and that to wash dishes, is as good, as to be an Apostle. 8. That these workes, which we call good workes, are not our workes (seeing we want freewill to performe them) but that God only vseth vs as dead Instruments (or as the writer vseth the pen, as an insensible Instrument, wherby he writes) in all such operations-To conclude, 9. That all the Rewards in
 Holy Scripture proposed for the exercise of good workes, are not truly and sincerely intended by God, to be giuen to the practizers of the said good workes; but are only amplifications of words, aboue the reall, and true measure of Gods meaning.
Thus we see how our Aduersaries doctrines, by disualewing the dignity of good workes, are no lesse potent in the belieuers thereof, to induce them to forbeare the practise of vertue, sanctity and piety, the^ they are forcible (through their lesning of the atrocity of Sinne) to encourage men to the perpetration of all abominable and most detestable Sinnes, and crimes, that can be imagined.
Now, who shall deeply consider the different Natures of these two different doctrines of our Aduersaries (I meane of blandishing Vice, and dishonouring of Vertue) will the lesse maruaile, how Luther and other first broachers of their Religion, could in so small a tyme inuade with these their most pestilent Heresyes so many Countries in Europe. The reason hereof is, in that their doctrines in respect of their multiplicity, may well be compared to a Magazine or great Warehouse, furnished with all
 diuersity of merchandise, and wares, sorting to ech mans state or condition of life to buy; as of Silkes, Cloath, Wines, Oyles etc. So Luthers doctrine is so various, so choyce, and so select, as that it was made fit and apt to meet with euery mans different humour and appetite. For example: 1. Is he a Prince, King, or State, that would aduance by any vniust meanes the greatnes of his Signiories? Then is he by our Aduersaries taught, that he may take into his hands all Bishoprickes, Ecclesiasticall liuings, and lands of Monasteries, and other Religious houses, as ourGen. 10. Nemrod of this age (I meane King Henry the eight) and some other Protestant Princes following, haue done. For this King Henry made accordingly, an vtter depredation, and spoile of Monasteries, impropriating their liuings to himselfe and his Parasytes.
2. Is he a dissolute religious man, and weary of performing the rigid austerity of his vndertaken life? Then may he by these me^s doctrine, breake out of his Cloyster, and cast of his habit, and inworld himselfe agayne in all temporalities.
 3. Is he a loose Priest, and will not lead a chast and continent life? He is heer catechized, that he may lawfully mary. 4. Is he marryed, and yet eyther the Husband or the wyfe (as being weary one of the other) would seeke to be diuorced? Then may he, or she lawfully pretend diuers impediments, as of impotency, incontinency, absence, and others aboue mentioned for diuorce, and presently mary agayne.
5. Is he of the Laity, and of that height of pride, and elation of mynd, as that he ca^not, or will not brooke to liue in subiection, or to acknowledge any soueraingty? He is aboue indoctrinated that now among Christians, there ought to be no Magistrates or Princes at all. 6. Is he of the Protestant Clergy, and yet scornes to be vnder his Diocesan, or any other? He is thereof disinthralled, by the doctrine of the Parity of Ministers. 7. Is he a Man Theathralis, that affects to haue many followers, for stamping and preaching of strange and new doctrines, and this without any controule? He may then alledge the priuiledge of the reuealing Spirit, and Extraordinary
 Vocation.
8. Is he of a couetous and muddy disposition, not caring by what iniust and base wayes he may increase his stocke, and siluer? Then he may be warranted to practise Vsury, and so to breed vpon siluer. 9. Is he of a fearefull conscience, and resteth doubtfull of some temporall punishment to hang ouer his head, for his former finnes, though forgiuen him? He may be freed from all such feare, by the denyall of the doctrine of Purgatory, and by belieuing that no te^porall punishment is reserued for man, after the Sinne is once forgiuen. 10. Is he willing to wallow in al turpitude of wickednes and enormous life, whyles he breatheth in this world; and this without all feare and change of colours? He may by the doctrine of his iustifying fayth, and certainty of Predestination assure himselfe (as is aboue sayd) that he cannot be damned, except Christ be damned with him.
11. Finally, is he so plunged in sinne by a continuall custome, as that by reason of the infinitenes of his sinnes, he may doubt himselfe to be of the number of the Reprobate? Let him for
 feare he should forsake sinning, remember, that he is taught, that a change from a vitious to a vertuous life, cannot hinder Reprobation. So crafty (we see) was the serpent (for from him all the former Theoremes originally streamed) so to poyson Luther, and the first Gospellers with such choyce and variety of Heresyes, as might seuerally suite to seuerall mens estates, conditions, and dispositions. And thus accordingly we may heere obserue, that the foresaid doctrines of Luther and his Compartners speake to euery man in that Dialect or language, in which he would haue them.
O, had Sardanapalus the King, who became a prey to all sensuality, or Epicurus the Philosopher, who theorically placed mans chiefest felicity and good, in voluptuousnes and pleasure, liued in this our age; how much by imbracing of many of these former Principles, might they haue better warra^ted their proceedings? So true is that censure of Osiander the Protestant, saying:This is reported by Sleydan, englished l. 22. Anno 1550. fol. 3. 58. Luther and Melancthon haue compiled a Diuinity, which sauoureth more of the flesh, then of the spirit.

Now if by way of recrimination, following this methode, it be obiected by any (as by diuers Puritanes it already hath beene obiected) that the Papists teach, that the Pope can aforehand giue pardon for the most atrocious Sinne, as for murthering heerafter of Princes; or by his Indulgences can pardon any Sinne, before it be committed: Which doctrines (say they) much open the way for the perpetration of many most great Sins; seeing the workers of them are by thes doctrines assured, that such their sinnes are forgiuen them, before they be committed.
To this I answere, that heer is wonderfull mistaking, proceeding eyther from ignorance or malice; for not any Catholike doth so teach, or belieue. Therfore to take away this foolish and absurd stumbling blocke, let the Puritan and all others know; that the Catholike Religion teacheth, that the Pope can no more giue liberty to a man hereafter for to sinne, or can aforehand forgiue a sinne hereafter to be committed, then he can create a new world. For the Catholike doctrine is, that the Obiect
 of the Sacrament of Penance, is a Sinne already committed; the guilt of which Sinne (I meane the eternall punishment of damnation) is taken away only by force of the said Sacrament; and yet the Penitent must confesse such his Sinne with an absolute determination not to commit it, or any other Sinne hereafter; and must haue Contrition (or at least Attrition, and sorrow, for his committing his said Sinnes; or els the very confession of his said Sinnes is so far from affording him any absolution of them, as that by such kind of confessing his Sinnes, he committeth a new sinne.
Agayne, where it is aboue obiected, that the Pope by his Indulgence, can pardon the greatest Sinne that is: heere agayne I say, is the lyke ignorance, or malice. For the eternall damnation for any mortall Sinne (though of the least) cannot be remitted by any Indulgence, but only (as is sayd aboue) by the Sacrament of Pennance and Confession. The reason hereof is, because the Obiect of an Indulge^ce is only a temporall punishment, due for the guilt of Sinne, already remitted by the Sacrament
 of Confession; and therefore it followeth, that no ma^ can take the benefit of any Indulgence, but at the same time he must be in state of grace, to which state he is brought by the vertue of a sincere and sorrowfull Sacramentall Conf^ssion, with a resolued purpose neuer to sinne more. Now this being the true and acknowledgedSee S. Thom. Aquin. 4. sent. dist. 10. art. 5. Sotus 4. sent. d. 21. Bellarm. de Indulg. etc. doctrine of the Catholi^e Church herein; I refer to any indifferent Reader, whether this our doctrine doth not rather much deterre a man from sinne, then inuite and impell him thereto?
But to returne to the deformity and vglines of these former doctrines of the Puritans; It is to be obserued, that commonly the Professours of them are the only men, who vsually haue in their mouthes (so wickednes m^sketh it selfe in wordes of deuotion)Math. 5. the sauing fayth, AbbaRom. 8. and Galat. 4. Father, the Vnction1. Ioan, 2. of the Holy One, and other such passages of Scripture, wherewith they may the better varnish ouer the foule graine of these their documents, that so they may appeare in other mens eyes more specious and regardable. From hence now may the Reader discerne, what
 he is to conceaue of other doctrines, different from the fayth of the Church of Rome, maintained by Luther and other his Brethren aboue alledged. For if they did grosly erre in these their positions, touching Vice and Vertue, why may they not also erre in other speculatiue articles of fayth taught by them, which do not concerne Morality, or conuersation of life; seeing the certainty of erring in one point, necessarily implieth a possibility of erring, in any other point.
And from the mature consideration of all the former passages it may be further irrepliably inferred, that once granting the former Theses and Tenets of Luther and the other Protestants to be false, that the Protestant Church is not the true Church of God: since we read,Ephes. 4. Vna fides, vnum baptisma. And therfore Christs Church is one, entyre, and perfect in fayth; not brooking the entertaineme^t of any one dogmaticall Errour:De vnitate Eccles. post initium. Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi (sayth S. Cyprian) incorrupta est, and pudica. And with this, I close the first part of this Treatise.



THE SECOND PART. Touching the vvicked liues of the first Broachers of Puritanisme.
IN the precedent Part (good Reader) there is layd before thee, a Synopsis of the Theory, or Speculation of such Puritanicall doctrines, which inuite man to vice, and deterre him fro^ vertue: In this Section now, we will shew how the first stampers of the former doctrines haue incorporated the sayd doctrines, in their owne liues and actions; I meane, how they haue giuen themselues ouer to al dissolutio^ in manners, and so haue caused their owne vitious liues, and deportment to comment their owne doctrinall Positio^s.
 Thus they beare themselues like to honest and well meaning Phisitians, who are loath to giue any thing to their Patients, either good or euill, but themselues afore will tast it.
I will not heer expatiate into any long discourse by alledging the liues of many of the former Protestants, whose names are aboue mentioned. I will content my selfe by displaying, (though in part) the liues of sixe of them, to wit, Luther, Zwinglius, Iacobus Andraeas, Ochinus, Caluin, and Beza. Of these I particularly make choice because these men were chiefly, and with greater bent and endeauour busied in first planting the sayd former Paradoxes; and the rest of the Authours aboue co^parting with these in their doctrines were but their Schollers (as it were) and followers. But by that, which heerafter will be deliuered of these me^ we shall haue full reason to recall to our memory those wordes of Christ:Math. 7. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheepes cloathing, but inwardly are rauening wolues.
I will begin with Beza, and so ascend higher. And first that the Reader
 may see, how some of our first Publishers of this their new Ghospell and fayth (wholy different from the ancient fayth of Rome) did practise the most execrable Sinne of Sodomy, and therein led the way to other Sodomiticall persons; I wil set downe certaine verses made by Beza himselfe, touching a boy called Andebertus (which Beza kept as his Adonis, or Ganimede, by abusing the boyes body) and his whore Candida. In which verses he co^pareth the pleasure of the one with the other Sinne; and in the end preferreth the sinne with his boy, before the Sinne of fornication with his woman. This Epigrame of Beza touching his Ganimede Andebertus, and his whore Candida, is extant among other of his Epigrames, printed at Paris in the yeare 1548. by Robertus Stephanus. The verses are these following, which shame forbids me to English: but euery one that vnderstandeth Latin, may pick out the sense.

Abest Candida, Beza quid moraris?
And bertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent Parisij tuos amores,
Habent Aurelij tuos lepores.

Et tu Vezelijs manere pergis?
Procul Candidula, amoribusque,
Immo Vezelij procul valete,
Et vale Pater, and valete fratres:
Nam Vezelijs carere possum,
Et carere parente, and his, and illis;
At non Candidula, Andebertoque etc.

Next there followeth.

Sed vtrum, rogo, praeferam duorum?
Vtrum inuisere me decet priorem?
An quenquam tibi Candida anteponam?
An quenqua^ anteferam tibi Andeberte?
Quid si me in geminas secem ipse partes?
Harum vt altera Candidam reuisat,
Currat altera versus Andebertum.
At est Candida sic auara, noui,
Vt totum cupiat tenere Bezam:
Sic Beza est cupidus sui Andebertus,
Beza vt gestiat integro potiri.
Amplector quoque sic hunc, and illam,
Vt totus cupiam videre vtrumque,
Integris frui integer duobus.

Then next after followeth.

Praeferre tamen alterum necesse est;
O duram nimium necessitatem!

Sed postquam tamen alterum necesse est,
Priores tibi defero Andeberte:
Quod si Candida forte conqueratur,
Quid tum? basiolo tacebit vno.

That Beza did write this Epigram, is auerred by Conradus Slussenburg (the great Protestant) thus charging Beza herewith:In Theolog. Caluin. printed 1594. l. 1. fol 93. Constat and hoc etc. This also is euident, that Beza did write obscaenissimos versus, most obscene and filthy verses to Andebertus at Orleans, whom Beza kept as his Adonis. And Heshusius (another Protestant) chargeth Beza with this his Epigram in these wordes:In his booke entituled verae and sanae Confessionis. Beza nefandos amores, illicitos concubitus, scortationes, faeda Adulteria sacrilego carmine decantauit orbi. Beza did publish to the world in sacrilegious verse, his beastly and inhumane loue, his vnlawfull pleasures, his whoring, and filthy adultery. Thus Heshusius.
The same is confessed byIn his answere to M. Iohn Albins, printed 1592. D. Sparkes,De Turca. Papism. printed 1599. l. ^. cap. 10. D. Sutcliffe, andIn Apolog. Cathol. part. 1. l. 2. ^. 21. D. Morton, though weakely excused. And lastly confessed by Beza himselfe; who being charged therewith, thus excuseth the writing of the formes Epigram:See this confessed, in these words by the Authour of the Answere for the tyme to the defence of the Censure. printed 1583. fol. 99. Also the same Auth^ur in his said Answere relateth, How Beza maketh m^ntion of his Epigrams, and testifieth, that there were many things in them, for which he was hartily sory. Indeed Andebert was a yong man most deare vnto
 me etc. to whom being at Vezel, I wrote triflingly certaine verses, wherein I did declare my singular desire of seeing him. But let any man vnderstanding the Latin, giue his true Iudgment, whether these verses do not import more, then his only seeing of Andebertus. And further touching his woman Candida, the foresaid Protestant SchlussenburgSchlussenb. in Theolog. Calu. l. 1. fol. 92. writeth, that Beza kept her foure yeares, as his whore, before he would marry her.
I heere will not much insist, how Beza sold his Priory for ready money then receaued, and after leased it to others for fyue yeares then to come, with receauing money aforehand for such his leasing. Vpon which occasion there began a suite (presently vpon his secret stealing away) betweene the two seuerall parties, with whom he seuerally had contracted, which suite dependeth on Record in the Court of Paris.
Also I pretermit his getting of his mayd with child at Geneua, at what time he feigned himselfe and his maide to be sicke of the Plague, to preuent that any should come to them; and thereupon intreated, that he, and his
 maide might be lodged in two chambers of one Petrus Viretus, in an outward garden, where he caused a Surgeon to let the woman bloud, who presently after was brought to bed of a dead Child. I say I will not peremptorily insist in these points, (though I assure my selfe, that they are most true, as being circumstanced with time, place, witnesses, and other proofes of Morall certainty, and all written and published in Beza his owne life time) in that they are written by one Hierome Bolsecke, a Catholike Doctour of Physick, to whom the Surgeon confessed the deed. Because I here chiefly tye my selfe to the Testimonies, and acknowledgements only of the Protestants (and none others) in relating the deportment and conuersation of Beza, and the other fyue aboue specifyed. Thus far touching Beza his Sodomy, and incontinency of life.
Now to obserue Beza his conscience (or rather want of conscience)In his Suruey cap. 8. pag. 127. D. Bancroft (Archbishop of Canterbury) chargeth Beza with dissimulation in Religion, thus saying: Beza was a busy body against the lawfulnes of Bishops calling etc. And
 yet (forsooth) he can write to other men, and pretend quite the Contrary. In like sortCent. 1^. l. 3. cap. ^8. p. 657. Osiander (the Protestant) accuseth Beza most highly with his dissimulation, touching the doctrine of the Reall presence; he maintayning different doctrines thereof, according to the different places he came vnto. But no Christian fearing God, or hauing any Conscience would, for a thousand worlds, dissemble his Religion.
Touching Beza his pride; he is charged therewith by the foresaid ArchbishopIn his Suruey. c. 3. p. 54. D. Bancroft. And his pride more fully discouereth it selfe, in his contemning of all the Ancient Fathers and Councels: for thus we fynd Beza to write in his ballancing of the ancient Fathers with the Protestants of this age: to wit, that the Fathers had (to vse his owne wordes)Beza in ^pi. Theolog. printed 1572. Epist. 1. pag. 5. plus conscientiae, scientiae minus: more conscience (then the Protestants) but lesse learning. And as touching all the Generall Councels of the Primitiue Church, Beza thus betrampleth them:In his epistle dedicatory to the Prince of Condv set before his new Testament. In the best times a man may plainly see, that Sathan was President in their Assemblyes and Councels.
In this last place I will come to Beza
 his Insolency and boldnes with the holy Scriptures; which insolency proceeded from the authority of his assumed reuealing Spirit: I will touch a Text or two of Scripture, depraued by him in his Translation of the New Testament; and then I will conclude with the Censures of learned Protestants passed vpon his said Translation. And first in that sentence,Heb^. 13. Honorabile connubium in omnibus; Let mariage be honourable in all: asmuch to say, Let mariage be inuiolably preserued in all points. Now Beza translateth, Mariage is honourable (inter quosuis) in all men; so he, adding in defe^ce of Priests Mariage, these two wordes, Is, and men, contrary to the Translations of his owne BrethrenIn omnes Pau^^ epist. Hebr. 13. Caluin, andIn Castalio his great Bible dedicated to K. Edward the sixth printed at Basil. 1573. Castalio (the learned Protestant) who translateth thus: Honestum esto matrimonium in omnibus; so retayning the Imperatiue moode and Neuter Gender, wheras Beza vsed the Indicatiue moode, and Masculine Gender.
For a second example of this kind; whereas the Text in S. Luke 22. Hic ca lix in sanguine meo pro vobis ^ffusus, is in these expresse wordes according to all Greeke copies whatsoeuer: by which
 Grammaticall contexture of the wordes is shewed, that bloud is in the Cup. Now to preuent this so necessary a Co^struction,Beza in nouum Testam. pag. 317. Beza is not afrayd to say, that S. Luke committed a manifest Solecophanes, and incongruity of speach; or els, that it is a corruption, crept out of the Marge^t into the Text, in defence of the Reall Presence. Now in regard of these and many other corruptions in his Translation, had not Molinaeus (a learned Protestant) iust reason to say, thatSee Molineus in Testam. part. 20. 30. etc. Beza, de facto mutat Textum, actually changeth the Text? AndIn his defensio suarum Translationum. printed at Basill, per Ioannem Oporinum. pa. 182. 183. Castalio to auerre, That he might gather a long Register of Beza his errours out of his whole worke (meaning, touching his Translation of the new Testament) for Beza oftentimes erreth (sayth the foresaid Castalio) not only in wordes etc. But also in thinges, and the same most weighty. And yet further the said Protestant thus chargeth Beza his said Translation:Castalio vbi supra. pag. 170. I will not set downe all Errours of Beza his Translation, for that would require too great a volume. Thus much briefly (leauing out much more for greater expedition) of Beza his carriage, and comportment.

To come to Caluin, who (as it should seeme) was the first of his Tribe, that did lead the dance in this Gomorrhean and abominable Sinne. Caluin liuing in Noyon (a Citty in France) was charged with the crime of Sodomy; and thereupon was burned on his shoulder for the same crime; vpon which occasion he presently fled to Geneua. That this is most true, appeareth (besides from the life of Caluin, written by the aboue mentioned Bolseck) from the Testimony of the foresaid learned ProtestantIn Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 7^0. Schlussenburg, who auerreth the same to be iustifyed by publike records and Testimonies yet extant; as also by the yet common report of the Citty of Noyon; which Citty did testify the said sinne of Caluin, and his punishment inflicted vpon him for the same, to Monsieur Bertilier (Secretary to the Councell of Geneua) vnder a publike and sworne Notaries hand; which Testimony is yet extant, and hath beene seene by diuers men. This Crime of Caluins Sodomy is so true, as that the forsaid Schlussenburg sayth in plaine termes:In Theo. Calu. vbi supra. I do not yet see any sound and cleere refutation thereof; and as, that it being
 obiected against him (by that blessed Martyr, Father Campian) D. Whitakers in his Answere thereof, denieth not the fact, but lesneth it in these wordes:Contra Camp. rat. 3. Si stigmaticus fuit (Caluinus) fuit etiam Paulus, fuerunt alij: So most prophanely and impiously the Doctor comparing Caluins burning on the shoulder for Sodomy, with S. Pauls like punishment, for the profession of the name of Christ.
I will let passe his lesser Sinnes of Incontinency, as his stealing away of a Gentil-woman of Mongis, who priuately departing from her husband at Lausanna, kept company with Caluin at Geneua; as also his attempting of the wife of Iames Bourgoigne, Lord of Fallaice. In like sort I passe ouer, how Caluin contracted with one Brule, and his wyfe, that the said Brule should counterfeyte himselfe dead, that in the sight of many people, he might seeme to be restored to life by Caluin. But this Brule, so cou^terfeiting in the beginning, was found to be dead indeed. At the sight whereof Brules wife was so astonished, as that she exclaimed publikely against Caluin, and reuealed the whole matter to many.

I finally pretermit, how Caluin was so curious and choyce in his diet, that when he went abroad to dyne, his owne wine was caried about with him in a siluer Pot; and his bread was made of fyne flower, wet in rose water. All this (I say) I forbeare to insist in, (though I presume they were most true) because they are recorded by the foresaid Bolseck a Catholike, (who did write also the life of Beza*) for my methode here vndertaken, is to charge Caluin and the rest with such Crimes, as are reported of them, by the learned Protestants, their brethren.
Therfore I will next come to vnfould his great Sinne in detorting and misconstruing diuers Texts of Holy Scripture, from whence all the Ancient Fathers and learned Doctors euer mainly insisted vpo^, for the proofe of Christs diuinity: and yet Caluin hath corrupted them in the behalfe of the Arians, for the impugning of Christs diuinity. The places among others, are these; I and the Father are one. Iohn 10. Caluin thus sayth hereof:Calu. in Ioan. 10. The Fathers abused this place, to proue Christ to be of the same substance with his Father; for Christ speaketh
 not of the vnity of substance, but of Consent: contrary to the iudgment euen of Zanchius,Detribus Elohim, part. 2. l. 5. c. 3. the great Protestant.
Agayne, That Text: Thou art my sonne, this day I haue begotten thee: Psal. 2. which Text is alledged euen by the Apostle in proofe of Christs-Diuinity, asL. de filio Dei, printed 1586. Simlerus a Caluinist confesseth: Yet Caluin thus disualeweth this place to the contrary:Calu. in Psalm. 2. I know this place to be expounded by many of Christs eternall generation etc. but the reason of Austin is friuolous, who by the word, Hodie (this day) feigneth Eternity. Briefly (to omit his blasphemous Construction of many other Texts against the Diuinity of Christ, wherin he comparteth in the Constructions of the same Text with the Arians,) that other passage: The Lord rayned vpon Sodome fyre from the Lord etc. Gen. 19. D. Willet thus writeth hereof:In Genes. c. 19. This place is well vrged by the Fathers, to proue the Eternity of Christ: Yet Caluin thus writeth to the contrary:Caluin in Genes. cap. 9. Whereas the Fathers laboured to proue Christs Diuinity from this testimony, it is nothing firme.
I will contract this point of Caluins Arianizing in his Construction of
 Scriptures, against the Diuinity of Christ, with the Testimonies of learned Protestants charging him with the same. For according hereto I find, that Hunnius (the great Protestant, and publike Professour in the Vniuersity of Wittenberge) hath digested Caluins expositions of Scripture of this Nature, into threeOne of them is intituled: Caluinus Iudaizans etc. 1595. Another Antiparaeus. printed Wittenbergae, 1063. The third, entituled: Antiparaeus alter printed vt supra. seuerall Treatises.
Touching Caluins false translating of the Scripture to serue his owne turne, I will content my selfe with the iudgment of Molinaeus heerein, (a learned Protestant.) His wordes are these:In sua Translat. Testam. Noui. part. 12. fol. 110. Caluin in his Harmony maketh the Text of the Gospel to leape vp and downe; he vseth violence to the Letter of the Gospel; and besides this, he addeth to the Text.
Touching Caluins peremptory pride with the Ancient Fathers: And first touching the doctrine of Freewill,Instit. l. 2. sect. 4. Caluin chargeth, and reprehendeth the Fathers therein. Touching Grace and Iustification,Calu. Instit. l. 3. c. 11. @. 15. Caluin betrampleth S. Austins authority. Concerning the Reall-Presence,L. epist. and respons. printed 1597. epist. 208. he opposeth himselfe against Hilary and Cyrill. CaluinInstit. l. 4. cap. 13. @. 17. in like sort reprehendeth Nazianzen, Basil, and Ierome, for their commending, and
 defending of Monachisme, and austerity of life.
I will omit all other Controuersyes between the Catholikes and the Protestants, in all which Caluin opposeth himselfe to the ioint consent of all the Ancient Fathers of the Primitiue Church, and I will conclude with his reprehension of Chrysostome, Austin, Epiphanius, and others, concerning the doctrine of praying and offering vp Sacrifice for the dead: his wordes for close of all, are these:In Tract. Theolog. de ver. Eccles. reform. pag. ^94. Fateor eiusmodi preces etc. I confesse, that the custome of these prayers was ancient; and that such prayers were allowed by Austin, Chrysostome, and Epiphanius, as receaued by succession from their Ancestours; the vsage wherof the aforenamed Fathers followed without reason etc. Thus we see, that Caluin doth fully parallell, and equall Beza in contempt of the Fathers of the Primitiue Church: such a fastidious Magistrality, and pride in the highest degree, do their former doctrines of their Reuealing Spirit, and extraordinary Vocation, beget in the mindes of the belieuers thereof.
But to conclude with relating of Caluins death, which was most sutable
 to his life, (forPsal. 33. Mors peccatorum pessima) Conradus Schlussenburg the foresaid Protestant, deliuereth it in these wordes:^n Theolog. Caluin printed 1594 lib. 2. fol. 72. Deus manu sua potenti etc. God in the rod of his fury visiting Caluin, did punish him before the houre of his death, with his mighty ha^d: for he being in despayre, and calling vpon the Diuel, gaue vp his wicked soule, swearing, cursing, and blaspheming. He dyed of the disease of lyce and wormes, increasing in a most loathsome vlcer about his priuy parts, so as none present could endure the stench. These things are obiected against Caluin by Publike writings, in which also horrible things are declared concerning his lasciuiousnes, his sundry abhominable vices, and Sodomiticall lusts, for which last he was burned by the Magistrate at Noyon, where he liued, being branded vpon the shoulder with a hoat burning Iron. Thus far the foresaid Slussenburg, an earnest Protestant, and as great an Enemy to the Pope, as Caluin euer was, and therfore his Testimony is to be reputed lesse partiall, and more indifferent.
The foresaid miserable death of Caluin is confirmed with the vnanswerable Testimony of Herennius (a Caluinist
 Preacher, and therefore the rather heerin to be credited.) His words are these:In libello de vita Caluini. Caluinus in desperatione siniens vitam etc. Caluin ending his life in despaire dyed, being consumed of a most filthy and loathsome disease; and such as God is accustomed to threaten to the wicked, and such as be rebellious against him. This of Caluin I dare testify to be most true, because I my selfe being there present, did behould that calamitous and tragical end of his, euen with these mine owne eyes. Thus the said Herennius, and thus far of Caluin, though most briefly. This one obseruation touching his death I will add, to wit, that it is the lesse to be wondered, that Caluin should dye despayring of his Saluation, seeing it may wel be thought, that Christ by way of speciall punishment (in withdrawing his grace from Caluin,) did inflict this particuler kind of death vpon him, because Caluin taught, that Christ himselfe was for the timeCaluins words in Latin are these in Math. 27. Sed absurdum videtur Christo elapsam esse desperationis vocem: Solucio facilis est etc. and in the same place thus more: Sic videmus (Christum) omni ex parte vexatum, vt desperatione obrutus, ab inuocando Deo absi. steret. in despayre, and as being ouerwhelmed in desperation, gaue ouer prayer. O monstrous (and neuer afore heard of) Blasphemy!
The next shall be Ochinus: This man with the helpe of Peter Martyr, first
 broached Protestancy heer in Engla^d in K. Edwards the sixth reigne; asOsiander Cent. 16. l. 2. c. 67. Osiander witnesseth, and the whole world knoweth. Ochinus was first a Religious ma^ of the Catholike Romane Church; but being weary of seruing God in that austerity of lyfe, left hisSo sayth Sleydan, l. 9 at anno 1547. fol. 297. Monstery, with breach of all his former vowes of Religion. This Ochinus did write a bookeLauather. in histor. Sacrament. fol. 50. against the Masse; and him Caluin thus exalteth in these words:Lib de scandalis. extat in h^ Tract. Theolog. printed 1597. p. 111. Whome can Italy oppose (for they were both Italians) against Peter Martyr, and Bernardine Ochine?
There is not written against Ochinus so much touching his extraordinary licentiousnes of lyfe, as touching his doctrines: for first he began to defend (by wryting of certayne Dialogues) the doctrine of Polygamy, or hauing many wyues at one and the same tyme; of which DialoguesBeza in lib. de Polygamia. p. 4. Beza maketh mention. But Ochinus did not content himselfe with this; but proceeded to the height of all Impiety; For he confessing the doctrine of the euer necessary Visibility of Christs true Church, grounding himselfe (and but truly) vpon the predictions thereof in the
 Old Testament; and on the one syde, not acknowledging the Catholike Roman Church to be the true Church, though in it he could not deny, but that it euer enioyed a continuall visibility: and on the other syde, seeing the predictions of the Churchs vninterrupted Visibility were not accomplished in the Protestant Church, did heerupo^ wholy forsake Christ and Christian Religion, and betooke himselfe to the imbracing of Iudaisme.
That Ochinus became an Apostata, is witnessed by Beza, who calleth him thus:L. de Polygam. p. 4. Ochinus, impurus Apostata. And further Beza more fully enlargeth himselfe thus writing:Beza in epist. 1. pa. 11. Ochinus, Arianorum clandestinus fautor, Polygamiae defensor, omnium Christianae Religionis dogmatum irrisor. Ochinus is a secret fauourer of the Arians, a defender of Polygamy, and a scoffer of all the doctrines of Christian Religion. The Apostasy of Ochinus, is further witnessed byIn his booke de ^ribus Elohim. printed. 1594. l. 5. c. 9. Zanchius (the Protestant) and by Conradus Slussenburg, the afore me^tioned Protesta^t, writing heerin agaynst Ochinus most particularly; the title of which passage in this Protestants booke, is:In Theolog. Caluinist. l. 1. fol. 19. Responsio ad
 Ochini blasphemiam.
Thus farre touching Ochinus his Apostasy, and of his imbracing Iudaisme, and finally dying therein One thing chiefly I referre to the iudgment of any indifferent Reader: seeing this Ochinus was one of the two Apostles, who first planted Protestancy in England; to wit, whether it sorteth with the accustomed proceeding of God (who euer vseth meanes proportionable and sutable to their ends) to vse as his Instruments, for the planting of true Christian Religion (suppose Protestancy be such) a man, who should afterward turne his pen to the absolute denyall of the Redeemer of the world, reputing him to be a Seducer, to the imbracing of Iudaisme, and to the vtter renunciation of all Christianity? And conseconsequently whether it be not a great dishonour to England, to ascribe her first plantation of Protestancy to such a Man?
I come next to Iacobus Andraeas. This Andraeas was Luthers prime scholler and a great spreader of Luthers doctrine. He was for his presumed worth madeOsiand. Cent. 16. l. 1 cap. 7. pag. 13. Chancelour of the Vniuersity of Tubinge,
 and was as famous and eminent inSo sayth Osiand. vbi supra. l. 4. c. 43. pag. 1084. Germany, as euer Beza or Caluin were in Geneua.
Now, concerning the comportment of this presumed worthy man, charged euen by his owne Brethren, read what followeth. First,In Zanchius in his epistles printed 1609. l. ^. pag. 340. Lauater (a Protestant) auerreth, that he was taken in publike Adultery: and that certaine verses were made against him, vpon this occasion by certayne Caluinists. But to proceed. Hospinian (the Protestant) thus blazeth him:Hospinian in Histor. Sacrament. fol. 389. Andraeas nullum omnino habuit Deum, si Ma^monem and Bacchum excipias etc. and quando cubitum iturus, vel de lecto surrecturus etc. Andraeas had no other God, except Mammon and Bacchus etc. And when he went to bed, or rose from thence, he was obserued neuer so much as to recite the Lords prayer, or to make any mention of God. And in the whole course of his life and actions he shewed no sparke of piety and vertue, but extraordinary great lightnes. Thus Hospinian.
The same Hospinian speaking of the wonderfull Inconstancy of Andraeas in matters of Religion (from which point may be gathered, that he prized
 no Religion at all) thus writeth:Hospinian, vbi supra. Iacobus Andraeas doctrinam, and sententiam suam de Religionis capitibus mutauit saepius; vnde Anhaldini promittunt se ex eius autographis demonstrare posse, ipsum octidui spacio, ter suam de Controuersis capitibus, fidem and Confessionem mutasse. Iacobus Andraeas often changed his iudgement in points of Religion, in so much, that they of Anhalt did vndertake to shew, out of his owne handwrytings, that in the compasse of eight dayes, he changed three seuerall times his confession of fayth, touching some heads of Religion then in controuersy.
To conclude, the said Hospinian thus further discourseth of the pride and disposition of Andraeas, saying:Ho^pin. vbi supr. Conuitijs, calumnijs, mendacijs etc. Andraeas did striue to abound in reproaches, deceits, lyes, and impudent taunts and iests. He thought very highly of himselfe, and contemned all others. And yet more.Hospinian vbi supr. Selnecerus and Musculus (sayth Hospinian) haue tearmed Andraeas to be erronem, leuissimum scurram etc. A wandring fellow, a most giddy and light gester or scoffer, and One that neuer had any religion. Thus far Hospinian of this Andraeas, and with this I end.

Now in this next passage, Swinglius presenteth himselfe Whose doctrines tending to liberty and licentiousnes of life aboue alleaged, I will here passe ouer. This Swinglius did take his degrees of Schooles in Basill, and thereupon was madeHospin. vbi supra fol. 22. Priest; but after he intended to reuolt fro^ the Roman Church, he chiefly laboured to impugne the Masse, and this from an apparition in his sleepe, which Swinglius calleth his Monitor, saying:Swingl. tom. 2. in subsid. de Eucharist. printed 1581. Ater fuit an albus, nihil memini. Thus did Swinglius first forsake the Masse, doubtlesly from the instruction of the Diuell^ for his owne Brethren censure it to be no lesse, then a meere illusion, asTract. de Eccles. printed 1598. pag. ^8. Benedictus Morgensterne,In Swenkfeldio Calui^ismo, printed 1597. in praefat. Iacobus Heilbrunerus, and others. And the words ofIn Theolog. Caluinist. printed 1594 in prooem. Conradus Slussenburg, of this vision of Swinglius, are these: Sole meridiano clarius est, non Deum verum, sed ipsissimum Diabolum Swinglio per somnium etc. It is more cleere then the Sunne, that not the true God, but the Diuell himselfe inspired Swinglius in his dreame. Neuertheles Swinglius so rested vpon the force of this his diuelish apparition, as that being warranted therewith (most irreligiously and impudently,
 and the rather the better to impugne the Sacrifice of the Masse,) he dared to alter the very wordes of Christ saying, This is my body; and in lieu thereof, did translate in his owne printed Bibles (as though they had beene the very wordes of Scripture)Swingl. in his new Testame^t in Latin dedicated to the French King. This signifyeth my Body.
But to proceede to Swinglius his behauiour: for the better apprehension whereof, we are to conceaue, that Swinglius and other certaine Ministers in Heluetia (all which afore were deuoted Priests) vpon their forsaking of the Roman Religion, and vndertaking to plant their owne new Gospel; did first make a generall petition to the Heluetian Common-wealth, within which state they liued, that they might be suffered to take wyues, and marry. The title of their petitio^ is this:Swingl. in tom. 1. fol. 11^ Pietate and prudentia insigni Heluetiorum Reipublicae Huldericus Swinglius, alijque Euangelicae doctrinae Ministri, gratiam and pacem a Deo. The Petition beginneth thus: Hoc vero summis precibus contendimus, ne matrimonij vsus nobis denegetur etc. We earnestly contend, that the vse of Mariage be not denied to vs, who feeling the infirmity


 of the flesh, perceaue that the loue of chastity is not giuen vs by God. For if we consider the words of Paul, we shall fynd with him no other cause of Mariage, then for the lustful desires of the flesh; which to burne in vs, we may not deny, seeing that by meanes therof, we are made infamous before the Congregations.
And then Swinglius proceeding forward, thus expresseth the burnings of the flesh: Aestu vero libidinis etc. BySwinglius vbi supra. the burning of the flesh, we vndersta^d those desires of the flesh, wherwith a man being inflamed, tosseth in his mynd the studies of the lustfull flesh; in these only he spendeth all his thoughts, vpon these he meditateth, and is wholly busied in this, that he may satisfy the fury of the flesh. Thou seest here (Good Reader) how lustfully, and goatishly Swinglius, with his fellowes, writeth of this subiect.
But to proceed in this their supplication. They further thus write: Si carnisSwingl. vbi supra. licentiam quaerere etc. Yf we respected the liberty of the flesh, who seeth not, how much more commodious it were for vs, that we should forbeare the lawes of Mariage, as hitherto we haue done? etc. For we haue knowne, how easy in this free and loose
 estate, being glutted with satiety, we might change. Wherefore for the loue not of lust, but of Chastity, and the soules to vs committed, we desire marriage; least that the soules committed to our charge, by example of our sensuality (diutius offendantur) should be any longer offended. And yet more: QuareSwinglius vbi supra. cum carnis nostrae infirmitatem etc. We haue proued, that the weaknes of our flesh hath beene (proh delor!) O for griefe! cause of our often falling. Thus far in the petition of Swinglius, and the rest to that State.
Now in another epistle to the Bishop of Constance, written and subscribed vnto, by Swinglius, and twelue more Ministers there named, Swinglius thus confesseth and sayth:Tom. 1. fol. 121. 122. 123. Hactenus experti, quod etc. Hitherto we haue tryed, that this gift of Chastity hath bene denied vs etc. We haue burned (O for shame!) so greatly, that we haue committed many things vnseemely. To speake freely without boasting; We are not otherwise of such vnciuill manners, that we should be euill spoken off, among the people to vs committed, for any wickednes (hoc vno excepto) this one point excepted. Thus far Swinglius with his Complices.

By this now we may coniecture of the extraordinary sensuality of Swinglius, and of his incredible thirst after a woman. For heere we see, how himselfe with the rest, are not ashamed to confesse themselues to haue liued (till that day) most incontinently and dissolutely: a course little sorting to those, who vndertake the first planting of the true Religion and fayth of Christ; which Religion vtterly forbiddeth all vnchast and lustfull actions:Galat. 5. The workes of the flesh are adultery, fornication etc. Who do these, shall not inherite the Kingdome of God.
I here passe ouer Swinglius his temporizing liberty in writing of matters of Religion. For speaking after, of certaine of his writings some yeares afore penned, he thus blusheth not to say: That when he did such and such thinges before,Swing. tom. 2. de vera Religione, fol. 202. Tempori potius scripsimus quam rei, sic iubente Domino etc. We rather fitted our writings to the tyme, then to the truth of the matter, God himselfe so commanding vs etc. A most irreligious and heathenish saying; and so disliked, that at the Alphabeticall table there vnder the letter z. it is said: Swinglius docendo seruiuit
 tempori, Swinglius in his teaching, serued the tymes. The death and end of Swinglius was so calamitous, that diuers most markable Protestants do write, that he was infallibly damned. For first Luther thus censureth thereof, by the testimony of Hospinian. Hospinians wordes are these:In histo. Sacrament. part. 2. at anno 1544. fol. 187. Lutherus dicit Swinglium miserrime in praelio a Papistis interfectum, ideo in peccatis suis mortuum esse. Luther sayth, that Swinglius was miserab^y killed by the Papists in warres, and that he dyed in sinne. And agayne the said Hospinian thus further writeth:Vbi supra. Lutherus se etc. Luther sayth, that he wholly despayreth of the saluation of Swinglius soule. And Gualterus speaking of the iudgme^t of diuers Protestants herein, thus writeth:In Apolog. fol. 30. and 31. Nostri illi etc. Those our men are not afrayd to pronounce, that Swinglius died in Sinne, and the sonne of Hell. Thus much of Swinglius.
Now to conclude this Scene with that Prodromus of Antichrist, I meane Luther, who first layed most of the chiefe corner stones of Puritanisme: Luther was first a CatholikeLuth. in his Epist. to his Father, extat tom. 2. VVittenberg fol. ^69. Priest and Monke; during which his state of life, he thus writeth of himselfe:See Luthers words hereof in in his Comme^t vpon the epistle to the Galathians, englished in cap. 1. fol. 35. I then
 honoured the Pope of meere conscience, kept chastity, pouerty and obedience; and whatsoeuer I did, I did it with a single hart, of good Zeale, and for the glory of God; fearing grieuously the last day, and desirous to be saued from the bottome of my heart. Of whose pure and sincere intention at that tymeIn epist. ad Thomam Cardinalem Eboracens. Erasmus speaketh fully; and Simon Voyon more particularly thus dilateth thereof:Vpon the Catalogue of the Doctors of the Church, ^nglished, pag. 180. Luther in his Monastery punished his body with watching, fasting, and prayer. But after he had once apostated from the Church of Rome, and cast of his Catholike Religion; then he began to speake in another Dialect, and thus writeth of himselfe: (marke here good Reader, the difference of one and the same man, when at one tyme he is Catholike, at another, Protesta^t:)Luth. tom. 1. epi. Latin. fol. 334. ad Philippum. I am burned with the great flame of my vntamed flesh; I, who ought to be feruent in the Spirit, am feruent in the flesh, in lust, sloth etc. Eight dayes are now past, wherein I neither did write, pray, nor study; being vexed partly with temptations of the flesh, partly with other troubles.
Agayne the same Luther thus acknowledgeth further of himselfe: I am almost mad through the rage of lust, and
 desire of women. And yet more:Luth. tom. 5. VVittenberg. serm. de Matrimonio, fol. 119. As it is not in my power, that I should be no man: so it is not in my power, that I should be without a woman etc. It is not in our power, that it should be stayed or omitted; but it is as necessary, as that I should be a man; and more necessary, then to eate, drinke, purge, make cleane the nose. And yet he ceaseth not, but further sayth:Luth. in Prouerb. 31. addeth these words in Ducth, which are englished, as are here set downe. Nothing is more sweet, then is the loue of a woman, if a man can obtaine it; and finally:Luth. tom 7. VVittenberg. epist. ad VVolphangum. fol. 505. He that resolueth to be without a woman, let him lay asyde from him the name of a man, making himselfe a playne Angell or spirit. And according to these his speaches, he hauing cast of all his former Religion, tooke Catherine Bore out of a Monastery, and maryed her.
Behold here (good Protestant Reader) and blush at the Primitiae of that Spirit, which in this age first sowed Protestancy, or our new reformed Religion. For where are now those former wordes of Luthers keeping his chastity, pouerty, and obedience? and what he did, he did with a single hart, to the glory of God, and desirous to be saued from the bottome of his heart? etc. So iust reason had euen Caluin himselfe to say of Luther:These words of Caluin are alleaged by Schlussenburg. in Theolog. Calu. l. 2. fol. 126. magnis
 vitijs abundat. As also so fully is warranted, from Luthers sensuality, that phraze vsed among many of his followers, who when they would giue assent to the prouocation of nature, by accompanying lewd women, were accustomed to say amongst themselues:This Benedictus Morgensterne the Protestant (in tract. de Ecclesia, printed Francofurti 1^98. pag. 22. affirmeth that the Caluinists were accustomed so to say. Hodie Lutheranice viuemus: to day we will liue Lutheranlyke. And here now the lesse wonder it is, that Luther (for the patronizing of his owne most sensuall and lasciuious life) did vent out such his fleshly doctrines, mentioned in the first part of this discourse; as Yf the wyfe will not, let the Chamber-mayd come, besydes many others. But let vs proceed to other Actes of Luthers Scene.
And touching his pryde; Where first we will speake of his presumed certainty of his owne broached doctrine, proceeding from the pride of his owne priuate Spirit, of which point he thus vaunteth:Luth. aduersus falso nominatum Ecclisiasticum statum. I would haue you to know, (speaking to the Ecclesiasticall state) that I will not hereafter vouchsafe you so much honour, as to suffer eyther you, or the Angels to iudge of my doctrine etc. For seeing I am certaine of it, I will iudge of you, and of the Angels. And more:Tom 2. VVittenb. fol. 333. I
 am certaine, I haue my opinions from Heauen etc. they shall continue. And yet more fully:Swinglius chargeth Luther with saying these words. to. 2. ad Luther. Confess. respons. fol. 478. If I be deceaued, God hath deceaued me.
Touching Luthers pryde of censuring Moyses, and the Apostles, he thus speaketh of Moyses:Luth. Tom. 3. VVittenberg. in Psalm. 45. fol. 423. Moyses had his lippes full of gall and anger etc. Away therefore with Moyses. Touching S. Peter, Luther thus writeth:Luth. in epist. ad Galat. c. 1. Peter (the chiefe of the Apostles) did liue and teach (extra verbum Dei) besides the word of God. S. Iames the Apostle is thus charged by Luther, touching Extreme-vnction:Luth. l. de Capt. Babil c. de extrema vnctione, in tom. 2. VVittenb. fol. 86. I further say, if that in any place it be erred, in this especially it is erred. But though this were the Epistle of S. Iames, I would answere, it is not lawfull for an Apostle (by his authority) to institute a Sacrament.
Touching Luthers pryde in controwling, or rather reiecting the Holy Scriptures, it is euident, that Luther denyed for Canonicall Scripture, theAs witnesseth Bullinger vpon the Apocalyps. Englished. 1573. c. 1^ ^^rm. 1. fol. 1. Apocalips,Luth. in praefat. in epist. Iacobi, in editione Ieuensi. the Epistle of Iames,As witnesseth Oecolampadius in epist. ad Hebraeos, printed Argent orat. 1534. the Epistle to the Hebrews. Touching Luthers pryde in condemning all the Fathers, reade what heer is set downe:Luth. lib. de seruo arbitrio, printed anno 1551. pag. 434. The Fathers of so many ages haue beene plainely blind, and most ignorant in the Scriptures;
 they haue erred all their life tyme; and vnles they were amended before their deaths, they were neyther Saincts, nor pertayning to the Church. Thus he.
To ^hing Luthers proud boldnes in translating the Holy Scriptures, one place shall serue insteed of many. Where S. Paul sayth:Rom. 3. A man is iustifyed by fayth, without the workes of the Law: Luther in his Translation thereof translateth: Man is iustifyed by fayth alone: and being expostulated for adding the word alone, he insteed of any other answere sayth:Luth. tom. 5. Germ. fol. 141. 144. I am sorry, I did not translate it worse: and a little before the sayd wordes: sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas. Thus much touching Luthers deportment: of which Subiect I doe assure the Reader, I relate not the sixt part, contenting my selfe to picke heere and there, where I thinke most conuenient, and suting for the present.
If now it be heer demaunded, that seeing Luther was in the beginning of his tyme a Catholike Priest; and (as it should seeme) deuout and religious in his fayth; how came it to passe, that he first altered his Religion? To this is answered, That he had a true and reall
 disputation with the Diuell, and vpon the force of the Diuels reasons, he renounced (first) priuate Masse: and then after by degrees, and through the violence of his owne sensuality, he proceeded further in forging the rest of those voluptuous Paradoxes, aboue ascribed vnto him.
That Luther had this disputation with the Diuell appeareth from Luthers owne wordes deliuered thereof, for he writeth:Luther. tom. 7. VVittenberg. printed anno 1558 lib. de priuata missa. etc. vnct. sacerd. fol. 228. Contigit, me sub mediam noctem subito expergefieri: ibi Satan mecum caepit eiusmodi disputationem: Audi (inquit) Luthere, Doctor perdocte etc. It hapned, that about midnight, I awaked, and Satan then begun with me this kind of disputation: Heare (sayth Sathan) O Luther most learned Doctour etc. And the Diuell proceedeth to his arguments; to the strength wherof Luther finally subscribed. And thus Luther did first leaue the saying of Masse by the persuasion of the Diuell. And which is worthy of obseruation: Luther writing after this disputation, against the Masse, is not ashamed to vse all those particular reasons and arguments against the Masse, which the Diuell afore had vsed to him.

This disputation of Luther with the Diuell, is so certaine, as that (besides it is testified from Luthers owne words, aboue alleaged) it is acknowledged, (though most weakly auoyded) byIn his reply to the Censure, printed 158^. fol. d. 5. and d. 6. Mr. Charke,In his Treatise against the defence of the censure, printed by Thomas Thomas. pag. 234. D. Fulk.Sutcliff. de vera Catholica Christi Ecclesia printed 1592. l. 2. c. 4. p. 298. D. Sutcliff, D.D. Mort. in his Apolog. Catholica. part. 1. printed at Lo^don. 1005. l. 2. c. 21. pag. 351. Morton.Balduinus in his booke intituled de disputatione Lutheri cum Diabolo, printed Islebij. 1605. c. 4. and pag. 81. Balduinus, and others. All which seuerall particular Protestants do giue seuerall answeres hereto, (a point, which deserues chiefly to be noted) so little confidence did each of them, for the auoyding of this most foule blemish to Luther (and indeed to Protestancy) put in one anothers Answere.
And with this I will conclude with these former sixe most remarkable and eminent Reformers, assuring the Reader (as afore) that I haue related scarse the sixt part of their licentiousnes and impieties, with which most of them stand iustly charged by the pennes of other Protestants, their owne Brethren, hauing for greater expedition contented my selfe (as aboue I said) with discerping here and there such their acknowledgments herein, as might seeme best to sort to my present proiect, and intention.

Only here I will demand, if it can sinke into the brayne of any iudicious indifferent man, but to weene that God would euer suffer the true fayth and Religion of Christ (admitting it had vanished away for many ages afore, as is pretended) to be restored to Christians, by the instruments and meanes of such most prophane, sensuall, beastly, and flagitious men, as these former six Authours are co^fessed by their own Brethren to haue beene: their very soules being become euen the sinkes or channells for the receite of all ordure and filth of Sinne and abominable impiety? No: it is impossible, it should be so. Let no man therefore thinke his diuine Maiesty, would euer for the re-establishing of his Church (the most supreme end, that can be conceaued) make choyce of a company of obscure petty Doctours, and these but few, lately stept vp, but competently learned, iointly broching in their doctrines sensuall liberty, and finally in their conuersation most wicked, prophane, and execrable: so certayne it is, that the wine euer tasketh strongly of the vyne, the water of the fountaine, the fruite of
 the tree, and the life, of the Doctrine.
But now (good Reader) to reflect backe. Heer thou may see, what Puritanisme is eyther in speculation, or in the practise or execution. Yf then whether we respect the doctrine, or the co^uersation in life of such men, as were the first Institutours thereof, we do find all to be seated, (or rather grounded) vpon sensuality and impiety; how ca^st thou be persuaded that Puritanisme is a Religion, wherewith God himselfe will be honoured? To the which thou canst neuer giue thy full consent, except thou be first persuaded, that God is a Patron and defendour of Sinne and impiety: Therefore least any such prophane conceite should by the suggestio^ of the Enemy seize vpon thy soule: I will (for the close of this Treatise) partly display the vglines and deformity of Sinne, and consequently the infinite and invtterable hatred which God beareth to Sinne, and Iniquity.
My first proofe hereof shall be taken euen from the Nature of sinne in it selfe, to the which God beareth an infinite hatred. Which infinitenes of hatred is proued by this reason: To wit; euery
 offence committed against another, is the more great, by how much the Personage, against whom it is committed, is greater: but God, against whom ech Sinne is perpetrated, is of infinite Maiesty, worth, and dignity; therefore it followeth, that euery Sinne committed against God, deserueth infinite hatred; and consequently deserueth to be punished with infinitenes of paynes. Agayne; by how much God doth transcend man in goodnes, by so much he loueth goodnes, and hateth Sinne, more then man doth: but he surpasseth man infinitely in goodnes; therfore his loue to goodnes, and hatred to sinne is infinite. And more, we may obserue, that euery tyme a man committeth a mortall Sinne, there passeth through his iudgment a practicall discourse, by the which he compareth together God, and the pleasure of the Sinne which he is to commit, and thus in this trutination and ballancing, he finally preferres the pleasure before God; and therfore the wrong done to his Diuine Maiesty, by making choyce of a base fading pleasure before him, is infinite and inexplicable.

The second Reason, shewing the atrocity of Sinne, may be taken from Gods comminations, and thundering of punishments most aboundantly in his holy Scriptures against Sinne, and the perpetratours thereof. As where we read:Esa. 1. Behold, I will be reuenged vpon mine enemies (speaking of Sinners) and will comfort my selfe in their destruction. Agayne:Psalm. 91. Sinners and workers of iniquity do perish euerlastingly:Psalm. ^^. God shall rayne snares of fyer vpon sinners; brimstone with tempestuous wynds shall be the portion of their Cup.Ecclesiastic. 40. Death, bloud, contention, edg of sword, oppression, hunger, contrition, and whips; all these things are created for wicked sinners.Prouerb. 14. Sinne bringeth all men to misery.Ecclesiastic. 21. Flie from sinne, as from a serpent:Eccl. 20. the end of a wicked mans flesh, shall be fyre, and vermine: And to conclude (omitting infinite other passages, all seruing to denounce Gods future reserued punishment for Sinne (and consequently his hatred thereto) that most dreadfull relegation of Sinners:Math. 25. Depart from me, you accursed, into euerlasting fyre.
The third Reason, which setteth out the hainousnes, and atrocity of Sinne
 (and that more fully, then either of the former two) is, the consideration of the mistery of the Redemption of mankind. Which God in the inscrutable Abysse of his wisedome, would not otherwise performe, then by descending so low, as that himselfe (being of infinite power and Maiesty,Esay 66. Whose seate is Heauen, and the earth his footestoole; and,Iob. 9. vnder whom do crouch and tremble, euen they, that do beare vp and sustayne the world) should be content to become Man, to conuerse here vpon earth thirty-three yeares, to tast in the meane tyme all kynd of afflictions, griefes and indignities, and in the end to suffer at the hands of most base and vnworthy persons, vpon the Crosse, a most ignominions and dishonourable death: and all this for the expiating of our sinnes, and Redemption of mankind: He isIohn. 4^ the Sauiour of the world;1. Iohn. 2. the reconciliation for our sinnes; and not for ours only, but also for the sinnes of the whole world (sayth the holy Scripture.)
But now to wind vp in few wordes (and so to giue the last stop to my pen) the force of the necessary inferences and deductions, resulting out
 of all the former Reasons of this whole discourse. Thus then I conclude: Yf on the one syde, Puritanisme be a Religion defending all turpitude of Sinne and Vice, as also wholy discouraging men from the exercise of all Vertue; and that the first broachers thereof haue beene men of most flagitious conuersation, incorporating in their vitious liues their owne positions and doctrines: And if on the other syde, the atrocity of Sinne be such, and the hatred of God to sinne so infinite, and inexplicable, as that the vnderstanding not only of Man, but euen of the Angels cannot comprehend it, (much lesse in words vnfold it) what then can follow, but that Christ, should sooner cease to be Christ then resolue first to institute Puritanisme, and the former doctrines therof aboue mentioned, and willingly to suffer himselfe to be truly worshipped therewith, and to ordayne, (as a meanes necessarily conducing to mans saluation) a fayth, or Religion, so prophane, vicious, and blasphemous? And with this I end this short Treatise.

FINIS.

