A re-examination of the five articles enacted at Perth anno 1618 To wit. concerning the communicants gesture in the act of receaving. The observation of festivall dayes. Episcopall confirmation or bishopping. The administration of baptisme and the supper of the Lord in privat places. Calderwood, David, 1575-1650. A re-examination of the five articles enacted at Perth anno 1618 To wit. concerning the communicants gesture in the act of receaving. The observation of festivall dayes. Episcopall confirmation or bishopping. The administration of baptisme and the supper of the Lord in privat places. Calderwood, David, 1575-1650. To the Reader. YOu know (good Reader) if a man have a pretious Iewel, hee will bee exceeding carefull to keep it from any tash. True religion is more pretious then the most pretious jewel, it should be the breath of our nosthrils, and the oy of our hearts. Wee finde that in all ages the preservation of religion in puritie hath beene dearer to the godly then their very lives. As the preservation of religion in puritie hath been maintained, so hath the restauration to puritie beene purchased with the bloud of Martyres, and grievous troubles of many confessors. The reformation of the Church within this realm was not obtained without the martyrdome of some, and the ha∣zard of the lives and estates of many other of our worthie pre∣decessours. The temple was throughly built, and the head∣stone brought foorth, with the acclamation of other reformed Churches, (the Church of England, which as Bucerus obser∣ved in histime, standeth in the midst betwixt the Romane and reformed, only excepted) crying Grace grace unto it. No where was the doctrine sounder, the divine worship purer, the government fitter for the building of Gods house. But of late yeares the doctrine is leavened with Arminianisme and po∣perie, the worship of God defiled with superstition and idola∣trie, the joint government of Pastors in presbyteries, synodall and generall assemblies, with subordination of presbyteries to synods, and synods to generall assemblies, is changed into ty∣rannicall oligarchie: So that it may bee observed in our times to bee true, which was noted by Aventinus, to have beene done among the Popes in his time, that the same deedes are at one time branded with the mark of superstition; and at another time set out with the glorious title of pietie, at one time attri∣buted to Antichrist, at another time to Christ: at one time judg∣ed tyrannicall and unjust, at another time just and righteous. That which before we rejected as superstitious or idolatrous, is now called truely religious: that which before was called Antichristian and tyrannicall, is receaved now as ancient, and Apostolicall. Is it not lamentable to see that government which maintained the kingdome of Antichrist in former times, and with much paines thrown foorth, to bee reestablished. Some idle mini∣sters, deserting their owne particular flocks, have taken upon them to bee diocesan pastors, the principall and only pastors of all the congregations within an whole diocie, to plant and trans∣plant Ministers without consent of presbyteries, to stay their proceedings against hainous offenders, to sit as Princes amongst priests at their diocesan synods, to suspend and deprive Ministers by the power of the high Commission, without the consent of any lawfull, let bee pretended assemblie of the Church, to fine, confine, imprison Ministers, or other professours, without con∣sent of the estates, to sit in the Checker, Counsell, Session, and to bear offices of estate, to vote in Parliament in name of the Church, without consent of the Church, many of the Ministrie repyning, and none consenting, but upon conditions and cauti∣ons which are not regarded, to send Commissioners to Court, as directed from the Clergie or Church, who return with ar∣ticles in favours of Papists, or for advancement of their estate: is not the office of Deane, and election of bishops by deane and chapter, rejected as Popish by our generall assemblies, re∣called again, without consent of the Church, or so much as a pretended assemblie? Are not the best qualified exspectants debarred from entrie to the Ministrie, unlesse they subscrive such articles as the pretended bishops have devised, and others obtruded upon congregations to their great grief. Ministers are troubled by them with the acts of pretended assemblies, whereas themselves transgresse the acts of many laudable assem∣blie. Ministers are become dissolute, and erroneus doctrine is taught without controlement. We have cause to fear ere it be long, that sound and faithfull Ministers shall become as rare as wedges of gold. Consider further, that soone after the government was chan∣ged, idolatrous, superstitious, and ridiculous ceremonies were introduced into the worship of GOD with the five famous arti∣cles, of which we are now to treat. Moe are intended in the cannos lately blished, and yet moe expected with the liturgle not yet printed: neither can wee look for an end, till the whole worship of God be defiled. And yet these ceremonies are ei∣ther commended as ancient, or slighted as matters indifferent. It is called in question, if not altogether denyed, whether the Pope bee the great Antichrist or not: the possibilitie of re∣conciliation with Rome is maintained, and to this end errone∣ous points of doctrine delivered in publick, or defended in p ivate, or our differences from the Romish church slighted as not fundamentall. Bookes of this kinde are printed with priviledge in our neighbour church, and in private commended by such amongst us, as apprehend the maintai∣nance of this course to bee the easiest way to preferment. Doctor Francis White in his treatise of the Sabbath ranketh among the traditions of the church, the baptisme of infants, re∣ligious observation of the Lords day, the administration of ba∣ptisme, and the Lords supper in publick assemblies and congre∣gations, the deliverie of the elements of the holy communion in both kindes, the service of the church in a known language. The Reader may finde more of this stuffe in Coz ns devotions, in Montagues Gagg and Appeal, and in Shelfords sermons. Have wee not need to f ar the burning of our owne house, when our neighbours house is in fire? Have wee not greater cause to fear and bestirre our selves, when the fire hath seased upon the thack of our own house, and poysonable errours are vented amongst our selves, Do wee then complain without iust cause, or for matters of no importance? The reconcilers cry peace, peace, but mean to peace, till wee bee at peace with Rome. The Prelates charge us with shisme and sedition, but they mean to peace without peaceable possession of their places, and obedience to their di∣rections. They call us shismaticks, and yet cannot endure gene∣rall assemblies, the ordinarie remedie of division and shismes, as was acknowledged by the Kings Commissioners, and such as were acquainted with his Maiesties minde at Linlithgow, anno 1606. To what end was it enacted with their owne consent at Glasgow, 1610. that those who were called bishops, should be lyable to the triall and censure of the generall assemblie, for their office and benefice, life and conversation, if we have not yearly or set generall assemblies, to try them, or censure us, if we shall be found guiltie of shisme. Grievances presented by Ministers to parliam nts, which should be the chief sanctuaries of refuge to all distressed subiects, are suppressed, and not suf∣fered to be read in publick before the Estates: yea lawes are made in parliament concerning matters Ecclesiasticall, without the knowledge or consent of the generall assemblie, and acts of pretended assemblies are ratified, sometime made worse with omissions, additions, alterations. We want our assemblies to direct commissioners with articles, grievances, and petiti∣ons, to parliaments, conventions, court and counsell, and to treat of all the affaires of the Church: what wonder is it then that all be out of frame? But wee are still charged with frowardnesse, that wee ever except against assemblies when wee have them. So did the Ubiquitars the Theologues in the Palatinat, Synodum appellatis, said they, & synodum detrectatis. The Theologues answered in their admonition, Hinc istae lachrymae, quod synodum ejusmodi vellent, qualem principibus praescripscrunt, in qui ipsi fuissent accusato∣res, ipsi judices, ipsi saltarent, c spectarent suam fabulam, & ipsi sibi plausum d ent. So do wee answere to our Prelats, if they will suffer no assemblies, but such as they themselves overrule at pleasure, they can not pretend desire of peace. Wee call for no other assemblies then such as shall bee constitute according to the order agreed upon with his Majesties owne consent, in the generall assembly holden, anno 1598, such as shall have li∣bertie to conveen yearly, or at set times, and to treat of all affaires belonging to the Church, such as shall have free∣dome in their proceedings. It were dangerous to acknow∣ledge every meeting, which claimeth to it self the name and authoritie of a generall assemblie. Can wee acknowledge that convention at Perth, anno 1618. for one of our lawfull generall assemblies? The pretended pri∣ at occupied the place of the Moderator, without the election of the assembly, which was contrare to the order ever obser∣vedi ur Church, even when wee had Superintendents, and contrare to the cautions agreed upon at Montross, anno 1600, and at Linlithgow, anno 1606. These who were entituled bi∣shops; wanting commission from presbyteries, where they should make residence, had place to vote contrare to the cautions a∣greed upon at Montrose, and notwithstanding they had put in practice before kneeling, and observation of festivall dayes. Mo ministers then three out of a presbyterie were admitted, or ra∣ther drawn to that meeting to give their voice. Some modera∣tors of presbyteries being the bishops substituts, were admitted without commission. No Baron ought to vote according to the act made at Dundie, anno 1598, but one out of the bounds of a presbyterie having commission. But a number were present at this assemblie, being only required by his Majesties missives' and their voices were numbred with the rest Some minister were the Kings pensioners, or looked for augmentation of sti∣pends, or were threatned in privat by their diocesan bishop with deposition, or were circumveened with promises, that they should not be urged with practice. Necessitie of yeelding was urged, under no lesse danger then of the wrath of authoritie, and utter subversion of the order and state of our Church. Such as had courage to oppose, were checked, interrupted, threatned: yea, it was plainly professed, that neither reasoning nor voting should carie the matter: All the five articles were put to once voting, with this certificat, Hee that denied one should be reputed to have denied all. Much more might bee said to this purpose, but these few particulars are sufficient to justifie our exceptions against that assembly, as null in it self. Because many are desirous of information concerning these five articles enacted at this assembly, and treatises formerl printed are become scarce, we were moved to prease throug many difficulties to the publishing of this Re-examinatio Here you shall finde the ab idgement of what was w i ten be fore, with a more particular reply to Doctor Lindseyes defence, than that which is in Altare , or to any objection of moment moved by Doctor Burges, or Master Pa bodie. Doctor Forbes hath nothing but what he hath borrowed from our Do∣ctours defence. I beseech you (good Reader) read and ponder without a minde preoccupied, either with fear of trouble, or hope of pre∣ferment, and submit your iudgement to the light of the truth. For that is the way to apostasie to seek for shifts and fig-tree leafes, when the truth is born in upon us. What hath made so many so unsetled in religion this day, and prone to receave Pop∣ ie, as the defence of the late novations with frivolous cavilla∣tion? Men glorie now to dispute like Scepticks upon the very articles of our faith, so that they are like to lose the sense of all religion. The detaining of the truth of God in unrighteousnesse bringeth men at last to a reprobat sense. Pitie the case of our Church, which is more pitifull then in forraign parts, where the blo de: sword rageth. For howbeit their externall peace bee troubled, yet they hold fast without backsliding. If the Lord will spew the luckwarm out of his mouth, what may backsli∣ders look for? Remember the words delivered by M. George Wishart, which he uttered a little before his martyrdome, God shall send you comfort after mee, This realme shall bee illuminated with the light of the gospel, als dearly as ever was any realme sines the dayes of the Apostles: the house of God shall bee builded in it, yea it shall not lack, whatsoever the enemie imagine in the contrare, the kaipstone, meaning, that it should once bee brought to the full perfecti∣on: Neither (said hee) shall the time bee long, till that the glory of God shall evidently appear, and once triumph in despite of Sathan: there shall many not suffer after mee. But, alace, if the people shall prove unthankefull, fearfull and terrible shall the plagues bee, that shell follow. By our Doctour, or L. or D. L. I mean Doctor Lindsey: by B. or D. B. Doctor Burges. by P. or M. P. Master Paybodie. OF THE COMMVNI∣CANTS GESTVRE IN THE ACT of receaving, eating and drinking. The Introduction. MAster nox, one of the first and chiefe instru∣ments of reformation of religion within this Realme, was called before the Counsell of England in the dayes of King Edward the sixt, anno 1553 and demanded, Why the kneeled not at the recea∣ving of the Sacrament. He answered, Christs action was perfite, that it was with sitting and without kneeling, that it was surest to follow his example. After hote rea∣soning, it was said unto him, That he was not called be∣fore them of any evil minde, yet they were sorrie to finde him of a contrary minde to the common order. He answered, I am sorrie that the common order is contra∣rie to Christs ir stitution. This I finde in one of his manu∣scripts. Within a yeare after, being exiled after the death of King Edward, Admonition pag. 35. in his Admonition d rected to Eng∣land, which was printed anno 1554, he ranketh kneeling at the Lords table among the superstitious orders; which prophane Christs true religion, and censureth the English reformation for retaining of it. When some of the English in the English Church at Frankford, where ee was Minister, contended for the receaving of the English Liturgie, he opposed stoutly to it. And when the contention was like to grow to some hight, hee and his Collegue Master Wittingham, with some others, drew forth of the English booke a plat in Latine, and sent it to Master Calvin. Howbeit the description of the corruptions was favourably set downe, yet kneeling at the receaving of the elements is noted up among the rest in that extract. Among his letters which are extant in writ, we finde one dated the yeare 1559 at Deep, and directed to Mastresse Anna Lock, where he calleth the crosse in Baptisme, and kneeling at the Lords table Dia∣bolicall inventions. After his return to his native country, he ministred the Communion according to the order of the English church at Geneva, where he had been last Minister. This order was observed in all the reformed congregations, before the re∣formed religion was established by authority of Parlia∣ment, and is yet extant before the Psalmes in meeter, with addition of the treatises of fasting and excommuni∣cation, some prayers, the forme and manner of the ele∣ction and admission of Superintendents. In the con essi∣on of faith prefixed and approved by our Church, we have these words, Neither must wee in the administration of the Sacraments follow mans phant s s, but as Christ him selfe hath ordained, so must they be ministred. In the order of celebrating the Lords supper wee have these words, The exhortation being ended, the Minister commeth downe from the pulpit, and sitteth at the table, every man and woman likewise taking their place as occasion best serveth. And againe, The Minister breaketh the bread, and delive∣reth it to the people, who distribute and devide the same among themselfes, according to our Saviours commandment: And likewise giveth the cuppe. In the second head of the first b oke of discipline drawne up in the first yeare of publike and universall re∣formation, wee have these words, The table of the Lord is then rightly min stred, when it approacheth ne rest unto Christs owne action. But plaine it is that at Supper Christ Jesus sate with his disciples; and therefore doe we udge that sitting at a table is most convenient to that holy action. And againe, That the M nister break the bread and distribute the same to these that be next to him, commanding the rest, every one with sobrietie and reverence to break other, we think it nearest to Christs action and to the perfite prac ice. Yee see our first Reformers preferred kneeling, but also to standing, and none of them approached so When they rejected standing man judge what they thought of kneeling. ye may perceive that they rested upon , o only for a time, because of the abuse of kneeling, , because most agreeable to the paterne. It was ordained in the generall assembly holden the year 1562, That the order of Geneva be of served ministration of the Sacraments. By the order of Geneva was meant the order which was observed in the English Church at Geneva, where Master Knox had beene of late Minister, which order is called in the first booke of dis∣cipline, The order of Geneva, and The book of Common order. This order, as I have already said, is set downe before the Psalmes in meeter. In the assembly holden anno 1564 Ministers are referred to the order set do, be∣fore the Psalmes, which is a renewing of the former act. In the Parliament holden the yeare 1567 it was decla∣red, that whosoever refused to participate of the Sacra∣ments, as they were then publikely administred in this reformed Church, were not to be reputed members of this Church. An act was likewise made concerning the Kings oath to be given at his coronation to maintain the religion then professed, and in speciall the due and right administration of the Sacraments then receaved. This act concerning the Kings oath was ratified again by acts of Parliament in the yeare 1581, and againe in the yeare 1592. In the yeare 1572 it was ordained by act of Parlia∣ment, that such as did not communicate, and partake of the Sacraments as they were then truly ministred in the Church of Scotland, if they continue obstinate and dis∣obedient, shall be reputed infamous, and unable to sit or stand in judgement, persue, bear office, &c. When in the second confession of faith, which is commonly called the Kings confession, we professe that we detest the ceremo∣nies of the Roman Antichrist added to the ministration of the Sacraments, we professe we detest kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramentall elements of bread and wine. The order of celebrating the Lords supper, which hath beene receaved and observed since the beginning of reformation, and acknowledged both by generall assem∣blies and Parliaments, to be the due and right order, was perverted by a number of noble men, Barons, Ministers, and pretended Bishops conveened at Perth, in the yeare 1618, either having no lawfull commission, or terrified with threats, or corrupted one way or other. They in their full and pretended assembly to please King James, made this act following, as it is extant among the acts of Parliament: Since we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him, wee fall downe and kneel before the Lord our Maker, and considering withall, that there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spirituall, then is the holy recea∣ving of the blessed body and bloud of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: Like as the most humble and reverent gesture of the b dy in our meditation and lifting up of our hearts best becometh so divine and sacred an action, therefore (notwith∣standing that our Church hath used, since the reformatio of religion, to celebrate the holy Communion to the people sitting, by reason of the great abuse of kneeling used in the idolatrous worship of the Sacrament by the Papists, yet now, seeing all me∣morie of by-past superst tion is past) in rev rence of God, and in due regard of so divine a mysterie, and in remembrance of so mysticall an union, as we are made partakers of▪ the assem∣bly thinketh good, that that blessed Sacrament be celebrated hereafter meekly and reverently upon their knees. This act, if the lying parenthesis were culled out, which is insert onely to deceave, may passe among Pa∣pists and Lutherans. It is untrue that all memory of by∣past superstition is past, and untrue that the abuse of kneeling among the papists was the onely occasion that moved our first reformers to make choice of sitting, but the paterne of the first supper at the institution was the chiefe cause. And therefore they not only rejected knee∣ling, but also standing and taking in passing by, as wee have shewed before. We shall first defend the communicants sitting, and next impugne their kneeling in the act of receiving the sacramentall elements of bread and we shall prove it first to be warrantable; next, downe our reasons whereupon wee in∣stituted. THE FIRST PART CONCER∣neth the defence of sitting. CHAP. I. That the Communicants sitting in the act of receaving eating and drinking is lawfull and warrantable. WE have the exemple of Christ and his Apostles at the first supper to warrant the communicants Sitting war∣rantable. to sit in the act of receaving. No man ever doubted of it, till of late two or three wranglers hath called that in question, which hath been holden as an undoubted truth in all ages. After the ordinarie wash∣ing of their hands they sate downe to the first course of the paschall supper to eat the paschall lambe with the unleavened bread, then they rose againe to the washing of their feet. Thereafter they sate downe againe to the second course of the paschall supper, and did eat of a sal∣let made of sowre hearbs, which they dipped in a com∣posed liquour as thick as mustard. This second course was a part of the paschall supper, Scaliger de emendat temporum lib. 6. as Scaliger and others of the learned prove out of the Jewish writers, and not their common and vulgar supper. M. P. yeeldeth to this, because the paschall supper was a sufficient meal of it selfe, and therefore they needed no other supper. It is clear that they sate howbeit not upright, yet leaning on their elbowes at the paschall supper. Scaliger citeth out of a booke set forth before Christs time, entituled Kid∣d sh pesach, a canon for twice washing, and that kinde of sitting at the eating of the paschall supper. The Evange∣lists likewise make mention, that after they rose, and Christ had washed their feet, they sate downe againe. Now while they were eating after this sitting downe to the second course of the paschall supper, and conse∣quently while they were yet sitting, Christ took bread, and gave thankes, &c. that is, he instituted, and mini∣stred the evangelicall supper, Matth. 26. 26. Mark. 14. 22. Yea the very close or conclusion of the second course, or whole paschall supper was changed by Christ into the evangelicall supper. Luke and Paul relate that Christ tooke the cup after supper. The consecrating, breaking, and eating of the bread had interveened be∣tweene the second course and the taking up of the cup. Therefore they might well say, After supper he tooke the cup. Yea they might have said also after supper hee tooke the bread, to wit after both the first and second course of the paschall supper, but then it must be meant immediatly, and without any other action interveening, because Matthew and Marke say, While they were eat∣ing. Hear Ba radius a Jesuit, Barradas in concor. evan∣gelist. Tom. 4. lib. 3. cap. 2 Howbeit the whole Sacrament was instituted after supper, yet it was instituted in the end of the supper, while as they were sitting and eating, for they did eat other meat, till the time of the institution of the hea∣venly food, and therefore Matthew and Marke say, That the Sacrament was inst tute while as they were eating, for they were yet eating when the Lord tooke bread, blessed, and brake. Quamvis autem totum sacramentum post coenam in∣stitutum fuerit, in ipsius tamen coenae fine institutum est, cum adhuc discumberent & m nducarent, Nam manducarunt ci∣bos alios quousque ad institutionem caelestis cibi ventum est. Ideoque Mattheus & Marcus aiunt, manducantibus ipsis ef∣fectum sse hoc sacramentum. Adhuc enim manducabant cum Dominus accepit panem benedixit & fregit. Barona al. om. 2. an. 34. num. 14. Baronius the Cardinall collecteth that they were sitting, beca se Matthew and Marke say, they were supping or eating, Vnde quod dicit Matthaeus coenantibus autem iis accepit Iesus p nom & benedixit, & quod Marcus ait, & manduoantibus illis accepit Jesus panem & benedicens fregit, idem est acsi dixisset, Chrys. hom. de prodit. Iud. And Pope Leo serm. 7. de passione Domini. recumbentibus illis. Chrys stome likewise, that wh le they were eating and drinking, Christ ooke bread. The collection is so cleare, that none either of the ancient or moderne Writers, Popish or Protestant did call it in question. In steed of many testimonies therefore I co ∣tent me with the old hymnes. M John Mair on Matth. 26. bringeth in an old hymne to this purpose, as follow∣eth, Rex sedet in coena turba cinctus duodena. Se tenet in ma∣nibus, Se cibat ipse cibus. And the like we have in the Ro∣mane Rituall, In supremae nocte coenae Recumbens cum fratri∣bus, Observata lege plenè Cibis in legalibus, Cibum turbae duc∣denae, Se dat suis manibus. But it is likely, That Christ and his Apo∣stles kneeled not. Athenaens lib. 4. say some, when Christ gave thank s, that he and the Apostles kneeled. I answer, There is no likelihood at all. What the Naucratits did at their idol feasts on the birth day of Vesta, or Apollo Cumaeus, is o matter. It is noted as singular in them, and not accordi g to the custome of other Ethnicks. It was the custome of the Jewes to sit in time of blessing the bread and cup at the paschall supper. The words, which they used, were sooner uttered, then they could conveniently change sit∣ting in kneeling and rise againe. Luk. 24. 30. Mat. 14. 13. Mark. 6. 7. Luk. 9. Ioh. 1. & 27. We never read that the Jewes kneeled when they blessed their meat. Christ sate when he brake bread and gave thankes at Emaus. When hee sate with the multitude, which hee fed with five loaves, and two fishes he blessed the bread. P. granteth that Christ and his Apostles used the same gesture in blessing and giving thanks that hee did in receiving. Suppose they had kneeled in time of the blessing before the breaking of the bread, it would not follow, Pag. 39. that they continued kneeling, or received the elements with that gesture. All agree, ancient and modern that they were sitting, when Christ spake to them, Haec verba (nempe bibite ex eo omnes) dicuntur solis Apostolis, De eucharist lib. 4. ca . 5 qui tum ad mensam cum Christo sedebant, saith Bellar∣mine, Becanus, and others, as ye may see in the testimonies cited in this and the chapter following. The Naucratits after they had supplicated upon their knees, sate downe againe upon their feasting beds, as Atheneus reporteth. We prove also by collection from some circumstances, That Christ and his disci∣ples sat. and the forme of the celebration, that they sat. They nei∣ther stood nor kneeled. Therefore they sate. They stood not, for the beds upon which they sate leaning on their elbowes, were so neer to the tables, that they might reach to it, so that they could not easily stand betwixt. It were ridiculous to alledge that they stood upon the beds. Iohn 14. 31 And Christ when he had ended, sayeth to them, Arise, let us go hence. If they had beene standing, hee could not say to them, Arise. It may bee gathered likewise that they kneeled not. 1. If there had beene a change from sitting, which was the ordinarie gesture at the Paschall supper, in∣to kneeling a gesture of adoration at the Evangelicall sup∣per, some of the Evangelists would have made mention of it, for they make mention of other changes. 2. If there had beene such a change, then kneeling should have beene institute, and all have sinned that have not kneeled since the first supper, which our opposits dare not affirm. To what end should the change have been made, if not that that gesture might be observed afterward. 3. The form of celebration could not comply with the gesture of kneeling: for Christ spake in an enunciative form, and not prayerwise, and the elements were carried from hand to hand, and divided by the Apostles among themselves. The distributing of the elements by the Communicants among themselves is not compatible with kneeling, a ge∣sture of adoration which should bee directed to God. Wee conclude then with Mouline, that the Apostles con∣tinued sitting at the table to the ve y end of the action. On the Lords supper. 1 part pag. 136. But say they, the site or posture of Christ and his Apo∣stles at the first supper was lying and not sitting. There∣fore their example is no warrant for sitting. That their gesture was a kinde of sit∣ting gesture. I answere, it was not lying altogether, but partly sitting, partly lean∣ing, and therefore saith Casaubone the Hebrew doctors call that posture sitting on beds. Hic situs neque plane jacen∣tis est, Exercit. pag. 490. neque plane sedentis: idcirco Hebraei hoc dixerunt se∣dere in lectis. And to this purpose he alledgeth also Eze∣chiel 23. 41. where the Prophet expresseth that posture by sitting in a bed. And where the scriptures speak of up∣right sitting as in Genes. 43. 33. Onkelos expresseth it by a word which signifieth sitting with leaning: and Iosephus in his historie by a Greek word , signifying the same, as if it were indifferent which of the expressi∣ons to use for any of the formes. Christ himself while he was at table expresseth it by another word, which expres∣seth upright sitting, Luke 22, 27, and alludeth unto it in the same word, verse 30. As a man may stand upright, or stand leaning, so hee may sit upright, or sit leaning. There sitting, our sitting, and the Turkes answere analo∣gically to other. L. at Perth assemblie confessed the two gestures were analoga. D. Mortoun confesseth it was a kind of sitting gesture. The English translators expresse it by sitting, and not by lying. Neither are the words used by the Evangelists the proper words which expresse that gesture, but , as Beza observeth on Matth. chap. 8. 11. M. P. pag. 69, protesteth and witnesseth to the world, that the holdeth the gesture of sitting at the Lords table in it self lawfull and commendable. P. acknow∣ledgeth sit∣ting lawfull. What a madnesse is it then to drive poor souls from a sure way to a dange∣rous and doubtsome way: In dubiis animae insistendum est in via tutiori, In all doubts of the soul we should insist in the surest way. But we shall clear the doubts, and prove it pernicious. CHAP. II. That wee are bound to sitting in the act of receaving eating, and drinking. THat the sitting of Christ and his Apostles at the first supper serveth not only for a warrant, but al∣so for a direction to us to follow, appeareth by these reasons. First, Christs ex∣ample our di∣rection. Examples in setting down a patern, serve ordi∣narly for directions in times to come, if there bee not some singular occasion to hinder him that setteth downe the patern to do otherwise. D. Mortoun in his late work of the institution of the Sacrament, pag. 47. while as hee is main∣taining Communion under both kindes, layeth downe the same rule in these words, Were it not that wee had no precept of Christ to do this, but only the example of his doing it in the first institution, this should bee a rule for us to ob∣serve it punctuallie, except in some circumstances, which on∣lie occasionallie & accidentallie happened therein, and there∣fore dar not give a non-obstant against the example of Christ as your councel of Constance hath done, and which your Ie∣suite also teacheth, as if the example of Christ were no argu∣ment of proof at all. Ye see he acknowledgeth the force of Christs example, even where there is not a comman∣dement in expresse words, unlesse there bee circumstan∣ces occasionallie or accidentallie hapning therein. Moulius in his heavenlie alarum, pag. 56. saith, Christ and his Apostles sate at the table, without any kinde of adoration, and that the first institution was given for a patern, whereunto we ought to conforme. When our opposits object, that if we must imitate the patern, then we ought to celebrate in an upper chalmer, exclude wo∣men, put off and on our upper garment, wash our feet, sit leaning on beds, eat unleavened bread, with twelve in number, in the even-tide after supper. But these particu∣lars were accidentall and occasionall, and therefore exce∣pted in the rule, or were not in the time of the evangeli∣call supper. The washing of the disciples feet, the put∣ting off and on of Christs upper garment, were ended be∣fore they sate down to the second course of the paschall supper, and consequently the second course interveened between and the evangelicall supper. The evangelicall supper being instituted after the paschall supper, to which it was to succeed, and Christs suffering so neere at hand, they might not lawfully eat leavened bread, nor at any other time eat the paschall supper, to which the evan∣gelicall supper was to succeed, but in the evening. The Jews were commanded to eat the lamb not in the temple, but in houses; and upper chalmers served for strangers that come to Jerusalem, as other private hou∣ses did to the inhabitants. There might not bee fewer then ten for one lamb, but their number might amount to twentie, as eza upon Matth. 26. 20. observeth. They might not eat the passeover but in one societie, and if two societies were in one house, they might not mixe together, as some have observed out of the Iewish Doctors. Those who eat of one lamb together, were called the sons of societie, as if wee would say Commu∣nicants at one table. There ye see, wherefore they were so few. And yet seeing there might be twentie in one so∣cietie, what warrant have we to affirme there were on∣ly twelve, to wit, the twelve apostles. The Canon of the masse sayeth, he gave to his Apostles and disciples. And by the same reason, what warrant have they to affirme that no women were present, seing the Iews among their precepts ordain that male and female celebrate the passe∣over rightly, Iudeorum praecept. ut mas & faeminae pascha rite faciant. It can not bee proved, saith Fulk, that no women were pre∣sent. Yee may see his reason upon 1 Cor. 11. 23. Cassa dri o∣pera pag. 737 Cassan∣der in his tractar. de baptismo infantium, saith, that it is sufficient that they are fit for the communion, seing they appertain to the societie of the members of Christ. Sa∣tis est quod eas aplas off communion constet, cum & ipsae ad societatem membr . Christi pert n ant. But let it be gr ed, that none were present, but the Apostles, Answere to the Rhe∣mists. Matth. 20. 20. the reason may bee partly the number was suf∣ficient to make up one societie for the lamb, partly as M. Cariwright observeth, that as other things so the holy Sa∣crament should not come to the church but by the hands of the Apostles. Their manner and kinde of sitting with leaning on the left elbow was the forme observed among the Jewes at their common feasts, and at the paschall sup∣per, by reason of the paschall canons, because it was the most solemne time the Jewes had. So all the particular instances above mentioned were only occasionall and ac∣cidentarie, falling out by reason of the paschall supper, which might not lawfully or conveniently bee changed, yea at whatsoever time it had beene celebrate, some cir∣cumstances might occurre, which belong not to the acti∣on, as at every action there occurre individuall circum∣stances, as time and place, nothing belonging to that acti∣on except it be so appointed. The Rhem sts (sayeth M. Cartwright) assigne things done in the Lords supper some impossible to bee done by us, On. 1. Cor. 11. 23 some inconvenient to bee done in our sacrament, which were necessarlie done in that action of our Saviour Christ. Their sitting might easily have beene changed in kneeling, and verie commodiously, se∣ing they sate upon beds leaning on their elbowes, yet Christ would retaine the same gesture at the evangelicall supper which they used at the paschall. But at the institution of the first passeover the Jews stood, Standing at the passeover changed. and yet afterward they sate, as ye see here, Christ and his Apostles sate. As they changed their standing at the first supper, which was their paterne, why may not we likewise change sitting into kneeling? I answer, when standing is changed in sitting, it is not changed in∣to a gesture of adoration, as when sitting is changed into kneeling, which is no gesture for a feast. Next, it cannot be proved, that the people of God stood at the first passe∣over in the judgement of sundrie of the learned; let be at the rest following as P. acknowledgeth, pag. 57. How∣beit L. pag. 68. affirmeth that they stood. There is neither expresse mention made of their standing, howbeit every ceremonie be set downe punctuallie, nor can it be colle∣cted by necessarie consequence, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 17. saith Barradius. But let it passe as undoubted, yet it was extraordinarie, and for that night only to signifie their hastie departure out of Egypt. Iunius & Tremel. in Mat. 26. 20. in Exod. 12. 11. Scaliger. All the Hebrew Doctours both ancient and moderne with full consent deliver, that the commandement of sprink∣ling the doore posts with bloud, putting on shoes, gird ng up the loins, tak ng staves in their hands, and eating the lambe with h ste, was not to be extended to the following ages, but belonged only to that night that they were to depart out of Egypt. If standing had beene commanded, and that for times to come as well as for that night, the Jewes had transgressed in sitting, and Christ would not have applied himself unto their custome. Next, Sitting sute∣able with the supper. it appeareth that sitting was the ordinarie ge∣sture used at all religious feasts. The Gentiles no doubt borrowing their custome from the people of God, sate at their feasts made of the remainder of the sacrifices of∣fered to their idols, Amos 2. 1 Corin. 8. 10. to professe their communion and society, with their idol, or fellow∣ship with devils, as the Apostle calleth it, 1 Corin. 10. 20. The Ethnikes sate not at the altars of their Gods, but at tables in the idol chappel. Ethnicos insuis altaribus bibisse ne quidem fando auditum est, Alstedius in supplemento tom. 4. Paustrat e cap. 10. The Lord instituting his supper to be the only religious feast to be used in the Christian Church, observed the same gesture, which was used at the paschall supper, and other religious feasts. So that the using of this gesture at the first supper, was as it were a ratification, that the common and ordinarie gesture of religious feasts should not be altered at this feast. Fur∣ther, seeing this supper was in forme of a banquet, and represented another spirituall banquet, as sitting is the usuall gesture at banquets or feasts, even when men are invited by kings, in token of that familiar societie where∣with they are honoured, so it represents that which is answerable the familiarity of the soule with Christ at the spirituall banquet. Christ intended not only to represent unto us our spirituall nouritour, for then it had sufficed he had given the signes any way without a table, without dividing and distributing among themselfes, without sit∣ting, but in celebrating after this manner, Piscator in Matth. 26. 26. in speciem con∣vivii, as Piscator termeth it, he intended further then to represent spirituall nourishment, to wit societie and fel∣lowship with him, and that he was to sup and feast with us, as it is said, Revel. 3. 20. Coenam Domini esse convivium v lepulum liquet exeo quod d scipuli de pane illo ederunt, & de po ulo illo biberunt acc mbentes simul ad mensam, Piscator in Matth. 26. in observat in vers. 26. & seqq. Kneeling obscureth that familiarity and rejoycing, which the Lordwould have signified and sealed at that time. The Polonian Baron Johannes Alasco, maintaineth further, That our sitting eating and drinking at the communion table is a figure and representation of our sitting at the heavenly. In Matth. 26 Musculus saith, That this supper is a type of the supper to come. Aquin. par. quest. 60. Aqu nas saith, it is not only a signe commemorative of Christs passion, which is past, and demonstrative of a present benefite, but also futurae gloriae; A foreshewing signe of our glorie to come. Christ himselfe expresseth our peaceable fruition of the joyes of heaven by sitting with Abraham, Is ac, and Ja∣cob, in the kingdome of heaven, Matth. 8. 11. Alluding to feasts, where the feasters feasted at one table, sitting lea∣ning on beds, as here at Christs supper. In another place he bringeth in Lazarus resting in Abrahams bosome; Luke 16. that is sitting at the heavenly table, and leaning upon Abrahams bosome after the same manner that Iohn lay on Christs bosome, when he sate at this table, Iohn 16 And Christ himself while hee was at table promised to his Apostles that they should eat and drink at his table in his kingdome, and sit upon twelve throns, Luke 22. 30. Hee hath slender affection to the glory of Christ, forme & maniere du ministre ec∣clsiastique. fol. 84. or persuasion of his eternall felicitie, that would abolish out of the kirk that image of our eternall felicitie in the celestiall glory to co e, which is so much recommended unto us by Christ himself our Lord, by the symbole of sitting at a banquet to the unspeakable comfort of all the faithfull, saith Alasco. It followeth, that Christ precept Hoc facite, do this, comprehendeth sitting, Christs pre∣cept, Do this. as if Christ should have said, Ce∣lebrate this holy ordinance after the same manner as yee have now seen the patern set before your eyes, that is as a feast or banquet with the formes yee have now seene, sit∣ting, eating, drinking, distributing▪ &c. Time and place were not comprehended, because they were more cir∣cumstances or occasionall. But gestures are meere then meere circumstances, as M. P. pag. 34. confesseth: and a a sutable gesture for a feast was chosen by Christ, where∣unto he was not forced through necessitie. Iohn Alas∣co presseth this precept for sitting in speciall, both in the former work, and in book de acramentis. Hoc faci e. Ad totam illam actionem hoc referendum est, De sacramēt fol. 95. ut qued tum Christus cum discipulis fecit, itidem nos in sacris coetibus factitemas, & quemadmodum discipul in illa ipsa vespera dispositi ab ipso Christo hoc acceperunt sacramentum, ita & nunc d sponam is, saith Marlorat. in. 1. Cor. 11. It appeareth thirdly by the practise of the Apostoli∣call kirks, The Apo∣stles continu∣ed sitting. observing still this gesture, howbeit other cir∣cumstances of time and place and other things, which fell out occasionally at the first supper are not regarded. Their practise may be a commentarie to the precept Do this, that wee may take up what is comprehended under it. Howbeit Christ had not said Hoc facite, Do this, his example in setting down the patern, and put in practise by the Apostles afterwards, is equivalent to a precept: Chri∣sti & Apostolorum exempla sunt n strum exempla exemplar Amesius in Bellarm. enervato. tom. 3. p. 177. autem rei faciendae probat rem esse praeceptam & necessariam. Christ himself after hee was sitting at table in Em us with the two disciples, Luke 24. 30. hee took bread, blessed it, brake it, and gave to them. This place is interpreted by sundrie ancients and moderne of the breaking of the sacramentall bread, which may be granted without any vantage to the Papists for communicating in one kinde, because the example is extraordinarie: and by the He∣brew phrase of breaking of bread synecdochically may bee meant the whole supper. M. P. thinketh likewise, pag. 86. that it is like, this breaking of bread was sacramentall: but, saith hee, the sitting was onlie occasionall. But there was no occasion to hinder him to use another gesture, when hee come to that acti∣on. Yee see then in the judgemeut of all the interpre∣ters, who expound this place of the sacrament of the supper, that Christ celebrate this sacrament, while he and his disciples were sitting, and used no other gesture, but that which they had used at their ordinary eating before. It is obiected, The Corin∣thians sa . that the Apostle in the rehearsall of the words of the institution, 1 Cor. 11. maketh no mention of sitting. I answer, that the Apostle rehearseth not all that was requisite for the celebration of the supper. His chief purpose was to correct the abuse of the Corinthi∣ans, that is, their not staying upon other; For the Lord that night he was betrayed said to all his disciples con∣veened together, 1 Cor. 11. 19. Take ye, eat ye, drinke ye all of this. Illa coena (Christi) omnes commun ver accumbentes habuit. That supper had all sitting in common together, saith Chrysostome, rebuking such as neglected to communicat with the poore. In illud oportct hae∣reses esse. O umenius hath the like. This is not to eat the Lords supper, he meaneth that supper, wh ch Christ delivered, when all his disciples were present. For in that supper the Lord and all his servants sate together. Hierom in 1 Cor. 11. The Lords supper ought to be common to all, because he deliver d the sa∣craments equally to all his disciples that were present. It was not the Corinthians fault that they sate t table, but that nei∣ther at their common meats, nor at the Lords table would they sit together, but sorted themselfes in factions and companies, saith D. ilson in his book of obedience. Page 654. edit. in 40. And again, Saint Paul, as Chrysistome thinketh, brought the table and supper, where the Lord himself was, and t which his d sc ples sate, for an example to shew them, that that is rightly judged to be the Lords supper, [quae omn bus simul convocatis concordi er & commun ter sumitur] which is received in common, Ibid. and with one consent of all assembled together. The Apostle saith not, I deliver to you here all that I receaved of the Lord, but I have received of the Lord, that which I have delivered unto you. The Apostle presupposeth a lawfull minister, a table, and sitting at the table, and rehearseth only Christs actions, and his words uttered to communicants sit∣ting at that table together, bidding them all eat, drink, &c. conveened together. Not yet all his actions and words, as giving of the bread, blessing of the cup, either severally or conjunctly with the bread, and the precept, to drink all of it. Decretal. l. 3. t. 41. cap. 6. Ipsi et am Evangel stae mutuo inter se sup∣plev sse leguntur, quae ab e rum aliquo vel aliquibus sunt om ssa. The Evangel sts themselses supply mutually, what is omitted by any of the rest, saith Innocentius 3 in the Decretals. There was but one action, saith Casaubon, which con∣sisted of the holy and common banquet, Exercit. 16. pag. 511. and from the no∣bler pa t was called the supper of the Lord. Totam illam Corinth. orum actionem, quae sacro & communi convivio con∣stabat, a potiori parte vocat coenam dominicam. The love-feast then and the Lords supper went together, the love-feasts in these times preceeding, Estius in 1. Cor. 11. 20. and the Lords supper immediately following. For as Estius a professour in Do∣way reasoneth. It is likely that in imitation of Christs example at the first supper, they celebrat after the love-feast. Next, they stayed not upon other at the com∣moun supper, which could not have beene, if they had communicated together before, as the Greek fathers conceave, who are of the other opinion. Thirdly, the A∣postle putteth them in minde of triall before, and good behaviour. If these abuses had fallen forth after, the A∣postles exhortation had not beene so pertinent. Fourth∣ly, this opinion is confirmed by the custome, which was observed after in many Churches, even till Augustinus dayes. Will ts in his synopsis. pag. 677. In the end of those feasts they used to r ceave the sacrament. or. 11. Cornelius a Lapide a Professour in Lovane affirmeth likewise, that the love-feast preceeded the holy supper. Agape haec tempore Pau∣le fiebat ante non post sacram synaxin. Druthmarus who wrote about the yeare 800. saith, that the Apostles cele∣brated after meat, as Christ did: Fe runt autem Apostoli multo tempore similiter post alium elbum dominicum fumen∣tos. D. Bilson saith likewise, by Saint Pauls words, it should appear, the communion was distributed to them after meals, Obek. pag. 653. but (saith he) to us it is all one, whether before or after at their banquets and feasts it was ministred and even served at the r t bles, Pag s Augustine noteth, epist. 118. And againe, Because these brotherly repasts did either end or begin with the Lords supper, they could not devide themselfes each from other, and disdaine the poore at the r common meat, but they must off r the same abuse at the Lords supper, which was m nistred to them as they sate at the r tabl s immediatly be∣fore or af er their usuall and corporall refreshings. M. P. pag. 86. and 94. M. P. a la e champion for kneeling, thinking it likely that Christ ministred the sacrament at Emaus hath this observation. Hereupon I thinke together with the institution it selfe, after supper were grounded the love-feasts, by continued occasion whereof, the disciples might possiblie for a time use sitting in the very act of receiving. Second serm. pag. 61. D. Downame Bishop of Derrie confesseth sitting to receave the sacrament to have beene used in the Churches in the Apostles times. I passe by the names of Table, Other cir∣cumstances not conti∣nued. and Supper, and breaking of bread, and the opposition made by the Apostle be∣twixt communicating at the Lords table, and sitting at the tables of Idols, which may import this gesture, be∣cause I will have occasion to treat of them in the second part. Only let it be observed that the occasionall circum∣stances of the first supper were not followed as the ge∣sture was, but upon speciall occasion. By the practise of the Apostles, wee see the time was indifferent, Act. 2. and 20. Paraeus de symbolis & ritib. euchar. pag. 152. Neque Apostoli ad tempus vespertixum sese adstrinxe∣runt, sedipro o asione coenam administraru t, aliàs d urno tempore, lege e est, Act. 2. 46. aliàs intempesta nocte ut, Act. 20. quo pacto satis ostenderunt tempus c enae esse indi e∣ ens. As for the denomination of supper, it doth not im∣port, that we should celebrat ever at night. It is true, in our language this word Supper signifieth only the even∣ing meal, but the originall word , signifieth indefi∣nitly the repast that a man take h any time of the day. The proper Greek word for a supper is or . I referre the Reader for further clearing of this point to C saubon his exercitations. Exercit. pag. 511. The like may be said of the number, the sex, the parlour, the manner of sitting, &c. They were not continued by the Apostolical Churches, as sitting was, which was also continued at some times, and in some places in the ages following. CHAP. III. That sitting in the act of receaving hath con∣tinued to our times. HOwbeit the supper of the Lord soone after the Apostles dayes began to bee stained with some rust, Sitting con∣tinued in ages follow∣ing. as M. Calvine observeth, yet was this ge∣sture of sitting continued at some times, Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 17. s. 13. namely upon the Thursday, which is now called Maundie thursday, the day of the Lords supper, because upon that day the Lords supper was f rst celebrate, Mornaeus de missa lib. 1. c. 1. & 5. and institute. Mornae∣us reporteth that in the monasteries of S. Bennet, they have no other forme of Masse for three dayes before Easter, but this following. The Abbot sanctifieth the bread and the wine, and the Monks do communicate sitting, receaving the elements out of the Abbots hand, and this forme is by them called Mandatum, the commandement. But Bullinger more plain∣lie, that not only in the monasteries of the Benedictines, but also in the cathedrall kirks upon this day the tables are set in order, they sit downe, break bread, and reach the cup every one to other, every man following the foot∣steps of the ancient supper. Vnde nimirum ritus ille ad nos d manavit, De origine error. pag 46 quo vel hodie incathedralibus ecclestis, & in Monasteriis Benedict orum n die coenae Domini ante para∣sceuen, Coe a Do i palam & splendidius celebratur. Nam Evangelium Iohannis à diacono publice praelegitun, & dulcis∣sima c llo uia Christ abiturus cum discipulis habuit, re∣cita ur, i terim or disposi is mensis convivae assident, pa∣nem azymum frangen es, & calioem invicem propinantes, & in to um veteris coenae vestigium praeferentes. Now it was the custome of old, not onlie for the Monks, but al∣so other Christians to communicate upon this day, except offenders, as appeareth evidently in Gratians decree. And therefore the glosse both old and new upon that place, hath these words, Decreti part. 3. de conse∣crat. distat. cap. 17. Sic olim, modo non sic est, sed Monachi faciunt, that is, It was so of old, that the faithfull did com∣municate, but it is not so now, only the Monks doe it. Augu∣stine epist. 18. ad Ianuarium reporteth, that in his time the custome was in many kirks to communicate after supper upon Thursday. And whereas there is sundrie Canons for communicating fasting, yet that anniversarie Thursday was excepted, as yee may see in Conc l. Car∣thag. 3. can. 31. Ne Sacramenta altaris, n si a jejunis homi∣nibus celebrentur, excepto uno die ann versario, quo coena Do∣mini celebratur. What the Monks of S. Bennets order retained, wee may verie well judge it to have beene the auncient forme of celebration upon that day. For no doubt in that other Christians celebrated after meat which they needed not, they neglected not sitting and distributing. The two thousand souldiers, who were reconciled to the Empe∣rour Mauritius, about the year 590. by the travell of Gre∣gorius Bishop of Antioch, receaved the Sacrament sitting upon the ground, Euagrius l. 6. cap. 13. as Euagrius reporteth. Doctor Lind∣say alledgeth the like done to the Scottish armie at Ban∣nockburn, in the dayes of King Robert Bruce. L. his de∣fence, pag. 53. 54. But beside this day, which was called Coena Domini, that all the faithfull did communicate, wee finde that at other times also the people communicated in sundrie pla∣ces immediatly after meat, as Socrates reporteth of the Aegypt ans, Hist. l. 5. c. 23 who dwelt neere to Al xandr a, and the in∣habitants of Thebais, Nam ubiepulati sunt, & var is cibariis se satur runt sub vesperam oblatione fact a mysteriis commu∣nicant, Ni ephorus reporteth the same. Nicephor. l. 12. c. 34. Balsamo upon the 90 of Concilium Trullanum saith, the devoter sort upon Saturday at midnight fate in the kirk and communicate. Alexander de Holes in the second part of his tractat. con∣cerning the Masse, sayeth, The Pope communicateth sit∣ting in remembrance, that the Apostles at the last supper communicated sitting. Si quaeratur quare Dominus Papa sed endo communicat, Potest dici quod hoc fit in recordatio∣n m, quod eatus Petrus, & alii Apostoli, sedendo corpus Domini in coena ultima acceperunt. The Waldens s, who are justly called the pure seed of the auncient kirk, and have continued since the dayes of Pope Silvester, some think from the dayes of the Apo∣stles, saith Rainerius the Inquisitor, and their enemie, ce∣lebrated the Communion sitting. Concern ng the supper of the Lord their faith was, that it was orda n d to be eaten, and not to bee shewed or worshipped, for a memoriall, not for a sacrifice: First volum pag. 209. edit. 1610. to serve for the present ministration, and not for reservation, to be received at table, and not to be carried out of doores, according to the use of the primitive Church, when they used to communicat sitting, and this they prove by an old Chronicle called Chronica gestorum, saith Master Fox in his acts and monuments. His warrant I finde in their apologie against one Doctour Augustine, which is extant in Lydii Waldensia, Existo manifestum est, quod primitiva ecclesia hane fidem habuit, & illam, con∣fessa est, & non fecit reverentiam hu c sacramento, quia illo tempore exemplo Christi sedentes statim acceperunt & nihil retinuerunt, nec extra domum extulerunt, & haec institutio di stetit, sicut Chronica gestorum estendunt. The like they have in the confession of their faith sent to Vladiflaus king of Hungarie. Namque discipulis Christus discumbentibus de∣die utendum. Luther expounding the epistle upon Saint Stephens day, saith, Christ so instituted the sacrament, that in it wee should sit at the sacrament. But all things are changed, and the idle ordinances of men, are come in place of divine ordi∣nances. Zwinglius setting downe the forme of c lebration used at Berne, Zwingl. ex∣positio fidei Christianae edita Bu ∣ling. anno 1536. Zurick, Basile, and other neighbour townes, saith, Sedentes & tacite auscultantes verbo Domi∣ni edimus & bibimus coenae sacramentum: Sitting and harkning with silence to the word of the Lord, wee eat and drink the sacrament of the supper. Alas o I have cited al∣ready. Not only the strangers Churches at London in his time communicated sitting, but even to this day other Churches in the Low countries, &c. Other Churches as in Pole such as adheered to the confession of Hel etia sate, as we may see in Confensus Poloniae. Standing not so conveni∣ent as sitting. Standing about the table may consist with the distri∣bution of the elements by the communicants, but in re∣gard by it is pretended more reverence, the gesture of sitting is indirectly taxed, and that pretended reverence taketh away that representation of familiar f llowship, whereof sitting is a more lively representation, seeing standing is not the usuall and ordinarie gesture at civil feasts. Communicating in passing by doth not only in∣directly take sitting, but taketh away the oresaid distri∣bution, Of which more afterward. THE SECOND PART. Concerning the unlawfulnesse of kneeling in the act of receaving, &c. CHAP. I. Kneeling in the act, &c. not warranted by the example of Christ and his Apostles. WE should (as we said before) take us in all doubts to the surest way. Kneeling not warranted by the ex∣ample of Christ. Our warrant for sitting can not be doubted of. We have the example of Christ and his Apostles, and the practice of the apostoli∣call Church for warrant to sit, but not to kneel. When Christ himselfe ministred and was present, the Apostles kneeled not. Though the Apostles did not alwayes wor∣ship Christ while he was present, especially being occu∣pied in cruell and common acts, yet upon extraordinary occasions they and others worshipped him, Matth. 8. 2. and 9. 18. and 14. 33. and 20. 20. Luke 5. 8. Ioh. 9. 38. Nor yet directed any outward adoration to God the Fa∣ther. Though they were sitting at supper, yet they m gh s on have changed their gesture, especially seeing the leg ll sup∣per was finished, and Christs Supper began, saith W ll ts, pag. 648. Instit. lib. 4. c. 37. sect. 33. They who receave, as is commanded, w thou a∣doration, are secure that they depart not from Gods comman∣dement, then the which securit e there can bee nothing be ter, when wee intrepris any thing. Th y have the example of the Apostles, whom wee read not to have adored prostrate, but as they were sitting they receav d, a d did eat. They have the pract se of the Apostol ck Churches, where it is declared, that the Faithfull did communicate, not in adoration, but in breaking of bread, saith Calvine. Beza in his disput against Iodocus Harchius saith, So l ke, as when the Lord truely to bee adored as God and man, Beza centra Harch. vol. 3. pag. 182. at table did inst tute this holy supper, that the Disciples arose to the end, that falling upon their knees, they might receav that bread and wine out of his hand. And so lik as the Ap ∣s les were ignorant how to deliver to the Churches the mann r how to celebrate these holy mysteries. It is known well enough, that the Love feasts could hardly, or sca ce a ll dmit g ∣niculation. Agapa quidem certe constat quidem geniculationem admississe. Hist. sacra∣ment. lib. 4. pag. 182. Hospi nsa The Waldenses in the apologie above hujus testimonio est, quod Dominus noster Iesu C ristus se∣dentibus ded t, & successores longo tempore per domos fregerunt panem, & acceperunt cibum cum benedicti∣one, & non fecerunt reverentiam. CHAP. II. Kneeling in the act of receaving is not sutable with the forme of a banquet, or use of a supper-table. THis holy action is denominate the Lords table, Kneeling not sutable to the Suppertable. and the Lords supper, from the use of the one, and formes of the other. Wonderfull is the subtilitie of our Doctor, L. pag. 51. who answereth, that the sustaining of meat set on the table is the only use of a table, but of beds and furmes to sit upon. Wee say, this also is the use of a ta∣ble, that the guests, or persons invited may sit at and a∣bout it, and partake of the meat set upon the table. O∣therwise, if there bee no use of a table but to set meat upon it, a dressour or a cupboord may bee called a table. Whereas they say, the altar is called the table of the Lord Malach. 1. and yet none did sit at it. True and so do the Papists also call the lid of their altar a table. But it is plain wee speak of a supper or feasting table. The Altar is called the Lords table, because the Lords meat, ( Levit. 22. 25.) that which was burnt with fire in oblation to GOD, was consumed on it. But the Lords supper is called the Lords table, because our Lord and Saviour appointed it for his guests, whom he inviteth to it. So the table of the shew bread might bee called the Lords table, but not in our sense, not a supper or feast ta∣ble, and therefore impertinentlie alleadged by L. pag. 54. Kneeling is a gesture more agreeable to the Popish altar, where the Priests beside communicated kneeling, then with a feast table wherewith it agreeth not at all. Wee have put down altars, saith Alasco, and use a table, because it agreeth better with a supper, and the Apostle hath given the title of a table to denom nate the Lords supper. And again, The termes Supper, and Table of the Lord, ver e familiar with the Apostle Paul, seeme to require sitting rather then stand∣ing, kneeling, or passing by. Where the Apostle saith, L. pag. 43. 44. Yee cannot partake of the table of the Lord, and the table of devils: Our Doctor saith, there is no materiall and artificiall table to be understood, but things offered to Idols in the one speach, and Christs bo∣die and blood in the other. But both are to bee under∣stood: for meat offered to Idols can not bee called the ta∣ble of devils, unlesse there had beene a materiall table, up∣on which the meat was set. The Apostle telleth us, that they sate at these tables in the Idols chappels, 1 Cor. 8. 10. The Idolaters had a table, whereon they eated the remainder of the sacrifice, which was offered upon the Al∣tar, as the Iewes had, Habebant Iudiei primum altaria ubi sacrificabant, deinde mensa , quas instr ebant reliquiis ob∣ i jam sacrificis, atque in illis mensis epulabantur, saith Zanchius, Tilen. synt. de sacrif. mis∣sae sect. 32. Wille s sy∣nops pag. 478 edit. 1614. tom. 4. col. 466. See Tilenus, Willets, and Cor∣nelius à ap de, a Popish writer upon 1 Cor. 10. 21. and 1 Cor. 8. 10. So the by table of the Lord must likewise bee understood, not the bare elements, or as the Doctor speaketh, the bodie and blood of Christ in the sacrament, but with all a materiall table. And Beza out of the same verse, 1 Cor. 10. 21. inferreth, that in the primitive Church they had materiall tables, and not altars. Willets infer∣reth the like in his Synopsis. pag. 681. The Lords supper then is called the Lords table, by a trope called Metonymia sub∣jecti, because the elements were set on the table, when Christ said, This cup (meaning the wine which was in the cup) Is the new testament in my blood, the metonymi∣call speach importeth necessarlie, that hee had a materiall cup in his hand, when hee uttered these words. But saith the Doctour it was possible for a man to sit at both the materiall tables. It is true, if ye look to abilitie and not to right or warrant, Ad possibilitatem facti non ju∣ris. Apostolis demonstrat. Corinthios bona conscientia non posse esse participes conviviorum idolatricorum, quippe qui participes esse soleant coenae Domini, A stedius in suppli∣mente. pag. 45. Wee require not of necessitie an artificiall table of timber consecrated, and set apart for that use only. A bull hide or a plot of ground may serve in time of neces∣sity, and answereth analogically to a standing table, as the plot of ground did, whereabout the multitude sate in rowes by fifties and fifties, Mark 6. Neither do wee stand upon the fashion, whither it be long or round. We looke to the use more then to the matter o fashion, and require, that the Communicants alwayes sit tablewise, that they may observe the forme of a feast. The Ethnicks of old thought the Gods were present, when they feasted at their ta les. Ante foces lim longis considere mensis M s erat & mensae credere ad sse deus. Ovid. Fast. 5 The Poets bring in sometime their Gods feasting their tables. The Jewes say, That when some alter a n arose in the house of Ishbosheth the sonne of Saul, the ser∣vant incontinent spread the table, and the alteration ceased. There is a noble saying of Bensyra, Mensa para∣ta sive posita contentio tollitur. Men am & salem non transgredi, was an old proverbiall speach importing, that the table, was, and should be a band of fellowship. The other denomination importeth, The Com∣munion cele∣brate in form of a feast. that this holy action was celebrat, as a supper or in forme of a feast or . Piscator saith, That the holy supper was so institu∣ed, and at the first time so celebrated by our Lord and his disciples, Piscator in Matth. 26. in observationi bus in versu 26. & seqq. while they sate together at table, that it had the ew or resemblance of a banquet, Ita ut haec actio habuerit convivit, imò fuerit convivium, sed sacrum, & divin ca se, & ad piorum c nsolationem institu∣ m. Plessie saith likewise, Mornaeus de eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 7. That of old, and not at the only, this sacred supper was celebrated in the for e of a banquet. sacrum coenam o im c nvivii instar, in quo discumbeba ur, celebratam, cujus etiamnum norum mandato vestigium. The Waldenses the supper in forme of a banquet, saith their ene∣ Hayneri s. Now the forme of a feast or banket not kneeling. None entertaineth men after that Alasco, Forma min ster. ecclesia ster. tbat they who are invited to a banquet standing, walking, or kneeling, but they will the at table, that all may eat together with repose of nd minde. They use to cause servants stand, or walke hout the table, not these who are invited. Kneeling is not a gesture which hath beene used at feasts or banquets, but ra her a gesture of supplicants. Plessie, ye see, saith, Con∣viv i instar in quo discumbebatur. They say, It may be called a supper in respect of the thing signified, whereof the soules of the faithfull are par∣takers. This is just the Jesuits answer, for the bread with∣out the cup; But is not the spirituall supper represented by the externall resemblance of a supper. Sacramentu hoc nego dici convivium ratione rei ipsius significatae, sed ratione significationis sumptae a rebus visbiilibus, saith Cha∣m er de ucharist. lib. 8. cap. 6. num. 26. It may be called a supper rightly, howbeit it resemble not a supper in all things. Neither do we require all the formes used at com∣mon feasts, but these which Christ the Institutour and master of the feast thought sufficient. And this is like∣wise an answer to that which they alledge for other reli∣gious feasts, that they kneeled not at the eating of the passeover, because it was coena recta a full meale, and in∣dured a good space, but the action of the communicant is soone dispatched. For it is not the length or shortnesse of time, that we consider so much as the forme of a feast, whereunto the gesture of kneeling is not suteable. The same formes, which were used at the close of the paschall supper, were used at this, with a little change. Further, they kneeled not at any part of the paschall supper, no not when the cuppe of praise was reached from hand to hand, which was done in a very short time, or when the bread was eaten in the quantity of an olive, and lesse then an egge. We desire this to be observed throughout all this di∣spute, that if wee will speake not in the termes invented by men, Observation upō the form of speach. as to receave or give the sacrament or eucharist, but in scripture language, as to celebrate the Lords sup∣per, to partake of the Lords table, to come together to breake bread, Act. 2. 46. Act. 20. 7. the weaknesse of all arguments for kneeling will appear more clearly, and on the other side, the pith of our arguments for a table ge∣sture, namely sitting. The ancient Doctours, On the Lords supper, part. 1. pag. 8. saith Moulins, had done better, if they had held themselves to the termes expressed in God word: for they had not by this meanes (though besides their meaning) opened the doore to this a buse, giving example to others which came after them, to invent other new names lesse proper, and to pluck away from this sacrament the in∣scrtption, which served to shew the nature thereof, for the small st faults can Satan manage with dexterity, and by the least sparkes in a small time kindle a great fire. But, saith he, the manner of speach usuall among the Apostles, to wit, to come together to break bread, is become foolish and vaine in this age. It were harsh language to use these phrases; They brake bread together kneeling, they compassed the table of the Lord kneeling, they celebrate the supper of the Lard kneeling. To shu t this harshnesse, the common phrases are, to receave the sa∣crament, or eucharist, or sacramentall elements kneeling. CHAP. III. The distribution of the elements by the Communicants among themselfes excludeth kneeling in the act of receaving. TO kneel for adoration, The distri∣bution by the Commu∣nicants ex∣cludeth kneeling. and to breake and di∣stribute the bread, and reach the cup from hand to hand, are not compatible. Nor was it ever heard that the like was practised in any part of the world, but where Doctour Lindsey hath beene, that is, at Dundy, as appeareth, pag. 63. But what is absurd or grosse in that mans eyes? Can the Communicant be both adoring God upon his knees, and at that very in∣stant be reaching the elements to his brother likewise kneeling and adoring. Ye have heard out of Culvine be∣fore, that the faithfull in the Apostolical Churches did not communicate with adoration, but breaking of bread, as if adoration and breaking of bread could not consist together. We shall have occasion againe to treat more of confusion of actions, or different acts and parts of Gods worship. Christ reaching the cup to his disciples, Christ com∣manded them to de∣vide the cup. commanded them to divide it among them, Luk. 22. 17. This cup is the evangelicall cup, or which is all one, the last paschall cup changed into the evangelicall. Luke applieth Christs protestation, that he would drinke no more of the fruite of the vine, &c. to the cup, which he commanded them to divide among themselfes. But that protestation is ap∣plied to the communion cuppe by Matthew and Mark, who make mention only of the cup of the Lords supper, in the verses immediatly preceeding. If it had not beene the communion cup, how could Christ protest, that he would drinke no more of the fruite of the vine in this life, if he was to drinke incontinent after of the commu∣nion cup, as they oppose the paschall cup to the evange∣licall. Cyprian by this protestation proveth that vine was in the cuppe, Hierom. epist. ad Hedibiam. Epist. 63. ad Coecilium. Hierom saith, Christ was both Conv va & convivium, the fellow-feaster, and the feast it selfe; commedens, & qui comedi ur, one who did eat, and was eaten. The old hymne beareth the same, Se nascens dedit socium, Clemens Alexan. in p edagog. . c. 2. convescens in edulium. See another hymne to the same purpose cited before. Clemens Alex∣andrinus disputing against the Euc atits, who abhorred wine, proveth, that Christ himself drank wine, by this, that he dranke of this cuppe. When the Schoolmen would prove, that wine was one of the elements at the evange∣licall supper, they cannot finde a all the Evan∣gelists, but in this protestation. I thinke there is no man will deny that wine was in the cup, Muscul. de coena Domi∣tū. saith Museulus, seeing the Lord said, Matth. 26. Luk. 22. That he would drinke no more of the fruit of the w ne. Fulk , The demonstrative pronoune This, Mat h. 26. 29. declareth that he spake of the wine in his hand, tha is, of the communion cuppe. Dominus etiam in nducavit, utest communis sententia, saith Bellar∣mine de euchar. t. lib. 4. cap. 16. Further Christ in his pro∣testation alludeth to the Canon or custome of the Jews. forbidding to taste of any thing after the last cup, which was called the cup of praise. Annot. in Marc. 14. 25. Alludit ad morem quo ne∣fas crat post poculum illud apolyticon quicquam cibi in po∣sterum diem , saith Beza. Meuschii de∣fens. harm. generalis cap. 4. Theobaldus Meuschius pro∣veth likewise by this custome of the Jewes, that this protestation concerned the communion cup. To imagine that Christ protested twice, and that he bad devide the one, and not the other, is a fiction without any ground in the text. For none of the Evangelists make mention of two protestations, or to what end two, seeing the last paschall cuppe and the evangelicall was all one, the one being changed in the other. Or to what end should he have bidden them devide the paschall cup more then the evangelicall. And if there were two protestations for two severall cuppes, the later should have crossed the former. Vasquez proveth by this protestation, that Luke meant only of one cup, howbeit he maketh mention of it twice, that it was in the communion cup, that the prote∣station containeth the cause, wherefore he willed them to drinke of it, and devide it among them, because now at his last farewell, In 3. part. tom. 3. quast. 78. num. 41. he would testifie his love to them, and joyne them in mutuall love to other. Ipsos inter e mut a charitate conjungeret, dum ex eodem calica eis propinaret. Another reason, that the cup, which Christ commanded them to divide, was the communion cup, is, that he gave thanks; when he tooke it in his hand. Matthew and Mark refer the thanksgiving to the communion cup. Luke there∣fore, maketh no mention of this thanksgiving, when he maketh mention of the cup the second time, because he had made mention of it before; But useth an article referring to that cup, of which he had made mention be∣fore , as Euthymius hath observed. Luke then by way of anticipation, before he come to the order of the institution, bringeth in Christ protesting in the 17. verse, that the protestation of not drinking more, may be joyned with the protestation of not eating more, precee∣ding in the former verse. Therefore when he commeth to the order of the institution, vers. 20. he omitteth the protestation and thanksgiving, which are recorded by other Evangelists, because he made mention of them be∣fore, vers. 17. and 18. This anticipation or inversion of order in the Evangelist Luke, was observed by Augustine and Euthymius, Barradius the Jesuit, Jansenius, and Swarez. Swarez. in 3. part. tom. 3. p. 909. Meuschius observeth other inversions in the same chapter. For Judas went out immediatly after he got the sop, and consequently before the evangelicall supper. And yet Luke maketh mention of his going out after he hath set downe the evangelicall supper. Beza con∣jectureth, that through the negligence, and caresesnesse of writers of manuscripts, the verses have beene transpo∣sed, and not by the Evangelist himselfe, and that the 19. and 20. verses should be subjoyned to the 16, and that the 17. and 18. verses should be subjoyned to the 19. and 20. Me schius saith, It is likely, yea, almost necessary to thinke, that the 17. and 18. verses were taken out of the institution of the supper which followeth, and placed here by the negligence of Scribes. Verisimile igiturest & prope necessarium hos versiculos ex sacrae coenae inst. tutione huc esse à scribis trajectos. I might, if it were needfull, cite moe testimonies, that the protestation concerned the communion cup, and consequently that Christ bad them devide it, but the reasons I have brought are of them∣selfes snfficient to evince it. L. 62. And L. doth not gansay it. But yet, saith he, Christs meaning was not, that they should reach the cup to other, but that one should not drinke all out. This silly shift he hath borrowed from Bellarmine de eu haristia lib. 4. cap. 25. B canus de sub utraque specie. c. 10. hath the same. Will he have the first set downe the cup that the next may take it. But this is ridiculous or superstitious, not accipere, but sume∣re. Nor yet gave hee to every one the cuppe out of his hand, which had beene sufficient for parting of it, if no further had beene intended, but only to the first, the first reached it to the second, Hospin. hist. sacra. l. 1. c. 1. & lib. 2. c. 1. p. 31. and so sorth, saith Hospinian. So saith Piscator on Matthew 26. So saith Swarez the Jesuit, speaking of the cup, Fuit per as Ap stolorum manus ab uno ad al um delatus. Swarez in 3. part. Thomae tom. 3. p. 861. Bellarm. de euchar. l. 4. cap. 25. Piscator in Matth. 26. v. 26. in scho∣ilis. And so saith Bellarmine, Calicem autem n n fregit, nec d v sit ipse discumbentibus, sed dedit integrum unus alteri porrigeret. The last paschall cup it selfe; which was changed into the evangelicall, was reached from hand to hand. Christ then devided it not, but bad them devide it among themselfes, as the manner was at the paschall, and is usuall at common feasts. To drinke of one cup, representeth fellowship in one com∣mon benefite, but not that communieation of mutu ll love and amity, which is represented by reaching the same cup to other. The guests at civil banquets of old, en∣tertaining others courteously, Antiquita∣ um convi∣vialium lib. 3. cap. 10. reached a cuppe of wi e to others, which cappe they called philotefia, metonymica y, because it was a symbole of love or fr endship, which name any man may justly impose upon the cup of the hol. supper of the Lord, saith Stu kius. In iis eaim, amicitiae ergo huma∣nite se mut accipi n es, vini calicem sibi invicem porri∣geb , quem philo esiam appella an, metonym ce nimirum, quia symbolum erat amoris & amicitiae, quo nom ne ver ssi me quis illud sacrosancti Dom ni coenae poculum insigni rit. One of our Doctours saith, That they had in the primi∣tive Church other tokens of love and friendship, as love-feasts, and the kisse of peace, but one token should not justle out another. Beside that, both are worne out of use, and the kisse is turned into the kisse of the pax. So much the rather should that signe and token which was recommended by Christ himself, be preserved. If there were no more, They distri∣buted not only the cup, but the bread. but reaching of the cup from one to another, and deviding of it, it were sufficient to exclude kneeling, howbeit the communicants did not breake and distribute the bread to other. For what rea∣son were there to kneel at the receaving of the bread, and not at the receaving of the cup. Were it not also ab∣surd to see the Communicants reaching the cuppe to other, and the minister walking along to give to every one the bread. Is the bread holier then the wine? Ana∣logy requireth, that the bread should be distributed by the Communicants, as well as the wine. When the E∣vangelists say, Christ gave the bread, they meant not to every one severally, more then when he gave the cup, or the disciples the bread to five thousand, Matth. 14. 19. for Mark 6. 4. they set the bread before five thousand. Pilat gave the body of Christ, that is commanded it to be given, Mark. 15. 45. Matth. 27. 17. Christ said in the plurall number, Take ye, ca ye, this is my body, as well as he said, Piscat. in Matth. 26. devide ye. It is probable (saith Piscator) that brake the bread in two parts, and gave one of them, o him that sate arest on the right hand, the other, to him that sate on the left, and that they reached in order to the near st. Tossanus upon Matth. 26. saith the like, and Hospinian, and Estius a popish writer. Sit autem & Chr sti discipulos in ul ima coena fe sse nonest improbabile, ut qui∣bus Chr stus d erit, accipite & dividite inter v s, Luc. 22. qu d et side caliced ctum sit, nihil tamen vetat d pine simi∣liter intell gi Beza saith, Hosp. hist. fa∣cr m. lib. 2. p. 31. That the manner of their sitting could not permit Christ to give every one severally the Bread, Estius in 1 Cor. 10. 16 Beza epist. 2. but as he gave the cup to the nearest, and the nixt reached to the nearest, so it is probable that those, who sate most remote, receaved the bread from the nearest. Moulins maintaineth, On the Lords sup∣per, 2. part pag. 97. That Christ might with as good reason have said, Eat ye all of this, as dr nke ye all of this; his reason is, Consider ng that being set at table among persons, he could not deliver the bread into every one of the disciples hands: especially considering that the parties, ly∣ing halfe a long upon beds at the table, tooke up more roome then they do now adayes. The Canon of the Masse hath, Drinke ye all of this, Bellarm. de euchar. lib. 4. cap. 25. Mand cate ex eo omnis, which Bellar∣mine alle geth, they have receaved by tradition from the Apostles. But to us there is the like force in the words, Eat ye, and Eat ye all of this; for speaking in the plurall number, he spake to all. The Apostolicall Churches, The Apo∣stles conti∣nued this distribution. and such as in the ages following celebrated, as near as they could, to the ∣terne, continued this distribution. P. acknowledgeth page 92. 101. 104. that the Communicants at the first supper did communicate the bread and cup one with another, as also in the Apossles times, pag. 95. Of the Monks of Saint Bennets orders yee may see before, and that was a footstep of the order observed universally before upon the anniversarie day, called the day of the Lords supper. Raynerius in summa. Frier Raynerius saith, The Leonists, for so he calleth the W ald rses, celebrate the sacrament of the uchar st in their conventicles ( so it pleased the Frier to call the assembly of the persecuted ) r hearsing the words of the Gospel at their table, and participating mutually as was done at Christs supper; In conventiculis suis celebrant, verba illa evangelii rec an es in mensasua, sibique mutuo parti∣cipantes, sicut in Christi coena. Bull nger saith, That the supper of the Lord is then rightly celebrated, when the communicants distribut the bread and the cup among themselfes. Bulling de∣c d. 6. serm. 9. fol. 364. Idcirco legittime coenam Domini celebrantes, mu ò inter se panem Demin de manibus ministrorum Christi acceptum fran unt, distribu & manducant, pocu∣lum insuper Domini de manibus m nistrorium Christi accep∣tum, inter sedistributam omnes pota . fol. 364. And again, Primoge∣n simplie tati & institutioni magis conven t, & sedere & sa∣cram nt aln manus propr as accipere de man bus praesidenti∣um, deinde verò frangere, percipere & alliis impertir. Vt en m Dominus ad mensam cum discipulis accubui , ita dixit por∣rectis symbolis, fol. 360. pite, dividite inter vos And againe, Ac¦constat veteres non exhibuisse ca nantibus buccellas, sed mu∣tuum fr gisse panem. It is well known ( saith he ) that the an i∣en's gave no to the Communicants at the suppermorsels, but they brake bread one with another. Hom. 118. Gualter in his homilies upon Mark setting downe the best forme of celebration, requireth that they breake the bread to other, and distri∣bute the cup, deinde cum solenni gratiarum actione pa∣nem inter se mutuò frangant, & poculum Demian distri∣bu que in coetum illum convenorunt. And when hee , hee saith, Est hic ritus simplicissimu , & Chri∣sti nititur, quae sola nebis in omnibus sufficere debe , This is the most simple for me, and is grounded upon Christs which alone should bee sufficient to us in all things. Tindall in his tractat upon the Lords supper pag. 477. requireth, that every man breake, and reach foorth to his neighbour. In the later consession of Hol∣vetia, which was approved by many reformed Chur∣ches, and by our own, anno 1566. The bread is offered by the Minister, and the words of the Lord are heard, Receave it, this is my bodie, divide it amongst you, Drink yee all of this, This is my blood. The Lords supper was denominate breaking of bread from that rite, or ceremonie of breaking of the bread by the faithfull: It is said, Act. 2. 42. that the Christians con∣tinued in breaking of bread. This place is interpreted of the sacrament breaking, not only by ancient, but also modern writers, both popish and Protestant, as also Act. 20. And the Syrian interpreter translateth it eucharist in both the places. But the breaking of the bread in both the places is attributed not to the Ministers or Pastors only, but to the people also, and is made common to the whole meeting. In the one place is said, they continu∣ed in breaking of bread: and in the other place yet more clearly, the Disciples conveened to break bread, which is clearer then if Luke had said, Bellar. de eu. charist. lib. 4. cap. 24. they conveened to the breaking of bread. Bellarmine saith, that Luke descriveth what the people did, not what the Apostles did. Hee might have said, both the Apostles, and the people. Estius a popish professor in way acknowledgeth the same, Estius in 1 Cor. 10. 16. and sayeth, Fiebat autem ujus panis fractio Tempore primitive Ecclesiae, primum quidem sbyter is & diaco∣nis, deinde verò magisque particulatim à singulis fidelibus, quibus eucharstia, dabatur in manus ut ea n , si porro nter se vel domi inter fuos distribuerent. In the primitive church (saith hee) they had the breaking of bread which was first done by the presbyters and deacons, and after them in smal∣ler pieces by the faithfull to whom it was given, that they might distribute the same among themselfes, or at home a∣mong theirowne. For Luke meaneth so much, when hee attributeth this breaking to the faithfull in generall, Act. 2. For their distributing in the convention he alleadgeth Act. 20. For distributing at home, hee alleadgeth Act. 2. 46. whereas the meaning is, that the faithfull convee∣ned sometime in one house, sometime in another, for fear of persecution, or not having yet appointed, and certain places for meeting. The Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 16. sayeth, The bread which wee break, is it not the communion of the bo∣dy of Christ? that is, the bread which we break, distribute, and eat. For the breaking alone by the Minister is not the communion of the bodie of Christ, P nis quē frangi∣mus (1 Cor. 10.) idem est, atque inter nos dividimus: The bread which wee break, that is, the bread which wee di∣vide amongst us, R. Stephan. glossa in Mat. 26. saith Robertus Stephanus. Whereas the Apostle saith, the cuppe which wee blesse, the words may bee spoken generally in the persons of all the faithfull, who are present. Qui quidem omnes alici benedicunt, eo modo & sensu, quo omnes ibidem praesentes dicuntur unà cum sacerdote offerre, Estius in 1 Cor. 10. 16. videlicet animi consensu & devotio∣one, saith Estius. The Minister blesseth in name of the rest as their mouth: so the blessing may bee attributed to the people likewise. The Apostle rehearsing the words of the institution, said but in the plurall number, Durand. Ra∣tiona . c. 1. Tak ye , eat ye. saith, that the Apostles celebrated as Christ did, e ndem teriam in rebus, & formam in verbis. It appeareth not then, that the Apostles gave to everie one severally, say∣ing to each one, Take thou, eat thou: but that speaking in the plurall number to all at once, the Communicants brack and distributed among themselfes. Now that rite from which the Apostolicall Church denominate the whole action is sacramentall and necessarie, saith Paraeus in 1 Cor. 11. When the holy supper is called breaking of bread, it is not to be imagined, that there was only communicating in bread, but the whole is denominated from a part ac∣cording to a custome of speech usuall among the Jewes, who used the phrase of breaking of bread to expresse their full meals, or common civill feasts, as Ierem. 1 . 7. As the Grecians on the contrarie, tooke the denomina∣tion sometime from the drinking, and called their feast symposium a drinking together. Yea, one of the names, which of old was given to this holy feast, was synaxis. Now , Casaub. oxer∣cit. pag. 537. saith H sychius, is , to drinke with other. The breaking of the bread served for two uses: Breaking of bread for re∣presentation. First, for representation of Christs sufferings. If their powring of the wine out of the cuppe into the mouth be a mysti∣call representation of the effusion of his bloud, their breaking may have the like use. Wee can well allow of a mysticall shedding of Christs bloud in the supper, Against the Rhen ists, or Mat. 26. 28. faith Ma∣ster Cartwright, for when the wine is powred out of the cuppe into the mouth, thereby mystically and sacramentally, is shed the bloud of Christ out of his blessed body into the earth, that is the shedding of it is . So saith Prosper in his book of sentences, Dum sangu sidelium sunditur, sanguinu de latere effusio defignatur Lanfranous, Lanfranc. de euchar. Alger. de sa∣crament. lib. 2. cap. 8. Chamierde cucharl. 7. c. 13. num. 14. Bullinger Decad. 5. serm. 7. and A ∣gerus say the like. Solenne est cum frangitur panis, calix in fidelium funditu, tunc significari sacrificium illud quod in cruce immolatun est, saith Chamierus. The Communicants taking, eating, drinking, are mysticall, why may not also his breaking of the bread. Bullinger saith, Ac nos ipsi quidem panem Domini proprits frangi us manibus. Nos enim ipsi in culpa sumus quod ille ait itus. That is, Wee breake the bread of the Lord with our own hands: for we ou selfes are to be blamed, that he was brui∣fed. Our sinnes wounded him, we crucified him. We reach not only the bread and cuppe to other, but partake our selfes. For we beleeve not only that he suffered for others, but in spe∣ciall for our selfes. Gualt. Ho∣mil. 295. in Matth. Gualter in his Homilies upon Matth. Vt vero Christus panem accepit, & fregit, postquam gra∣tias egisset, ita eundem discipulos quoque accipere & fran∣gere voluit, ut ita singuli admonerentur hunc ad se privatim pertinere, se item necis illius authores esse, ad hac debi∣tores omnibus ut eos in Christi, atque salutis que in eo habetur, so∣cietatem adducant. That is, As Christ had taken the bread, and after thanksgiving brack, so he would have his disci∣ples to doe the like, that thereby every one might be admoni∣shed, that he belongeth to every one of them particularly, that they were the authours of his death, that they are deb∣tours to all, to bring them to the fellowship of Christ and the salvation which is to be found in him. And in his 118. ho∣mil. upon Mark, he saith, Fractio panis Christi passionem & mortem representat, & dum singuli panem ipsi frangunt, se ex corum numero esse fatentur, qui Christo mortis authores fuerunt, id quod peccatorum servit, & animum ad punitentiam extimulat. The other use is for distribution, Breaking of bread for distribution. and reaching to other, to testifie mutuall love and amitie, which dutie is expres∣sed in a more lively manner, then if they should drinke only of one cuppe together. Therefore L. his reason page 60. that it appertaineth only to the minister, be, cause it is mysticall, is naught, for it serveth both for re∣praesentation and distribution. Fractio non solum ad distri∣buendum, sedetiam ad significandum ordinatur, Bellarmine de missa, lib. 2. cap. 10. For the representation ye have heard already sundrie Divines. If two should drinke out of one cup, and yet not reach it to other, it might well be thought, there were no great kindnesse betwixt them, Communion in one common benefite is one thing, and the communication of mutuall duties and tokens of love and friendship another. It is one thing to the guests to participate of the same dainties, which are to be united to their bodies, another to interchange and communi∣cate with other tokens of love. Justly may the commu∣nion cup for this cause be called Philotesia, saith Stuckius. To divide the bread also, Se rariu in Iosuam 6. 9. quest 6. and to eat together in token of love and bene volence, was a custome observed in all the orientall countries, and is yet observed in ma y countries of the west, say Lyra and Arias Montanas, as Serrarius the Jesuit relateth. Bulling decad. 5. serm. 7. Facit ad amicitiam conciliandam, re∣parandam, & conservandam, quòd de uno pane participa∣mus, quòd panem offerimus fratribus, quodque de manu fra∣trum poculum accipientes bibimus. Non enim aliam ob cau∣sam videntur veteres coenam appellasse synaxin, saith Bullin∣ger. That is, It serveth for the procu ng, reparing, and keeping of friendship, that we participate of one bread, that we offer bread to our brethren, and that we drinke taking the cup out of the hands of our brethren. It seemeth for no other cause the ancients called the Lords supper Synaxis. And in the 9. sermon of the same decade, Quondam arctissima faed ra fractione panis consecrabantur. Of old, Leagues or covenants were confirmed by breaking of bread. Hom. 118. in Marc. Gualter saith, Panem & peculum pii inter se distribuunt, quod illis charitatis officium commendat, & de conjunctione mutua eos admonet, ut se unum iu Christo corpus esse intelligant, & sibi invicem officiis mutuis inserviant, quemadmodum in corporibus nostris membra facere videmus. The godly di∣stribut the bread and wine among themselfes, which recom∣mendeth to them the duty of chariti, and putteth them in minde of mutuall conjunction, that they may understand that they are one body in Christ, and serve one another with mu∣tuall duties, as we see the members to do in our owne bodies. Zwinglius in his exposition of the Christian faith, Expos. fidei Christian. ad Reg. Chri∣stian in 80. fol. 40. setteth downe a notable proofe of this. How that some sitting together casually, and participating after this manner, were reconciled, who before had beene at variance, and that this fell forth often. Deprehensum est saepenumerò, quòd quidam, qui tem re consederant, quì tamen simultates & odiapriùs inter se exercuissent, ex hac participatione sive panis, sive potus, animi impotentiam deposuerunt. The ancients had the kisse, which was a familiar kinde of sa∣lutation among the Orientals, as the striking of hands with us, they joyned hands also, and embraced another at the communion. Seeing so many signes, and protesta∣tions of love were thought requisit at this banket of love, ought we not to be the more carefull to retaine that signe, which was practised in the patterne. I end this section with a passage out of Lauaterus, descriving the forme of celebration used in the Church of Zurich, to wit, with sitting, and the communicants di∣stributing: posthac per totam ecclesiam ministri, De ri ibus ecclesiae Ti∣gurinae c. 13. that is, those that serve, az mumpanem in tinis circumserunt, at accipit quisque particulam de exhibito pane, & posteà reli∣quam partem dat proxime assidenti: Deinde sequuntur alii ministri cum poculis & cantharis, ac praebet alius alii pocu∣lum Dominicum, atque sit omnes de uxo pane participant. If none must give the sacramentall bread, Not necessa∣ry that the minister di∣spense the elements. but the mi∣nister, because he acts the person of Christ, who gave his owne body, by the same reason, they may not reach the cup to other, as the Apostles did at the first supper, where they represented the faithfull, and communicate not as pastours, but as disciples, as guests, as faithfull, as all our divines do hold, and among the rest Musculus himselfe cited by L. pag. 59. All that was done in pri∣son, Joseph was the doer of it, because he was direct our, and commander of every thing that was to be done, Gen. 39. 22. . confesseth the cup may be reached from one communicant to another. Proceedings at Perth as∣scmbly, pag. 60. 61. For (saith he) he in whose name the commandement is uttered, is properly the giver and propiner, because by his authoritie it is given, and by the warrant of his word it is ceaved. When the King drinketh to any of his servants, and sends it by the hands of his ser∣vant, the servant is not properly the giver and propiner, but the deliverer of the gift and propine. He granteth like∣wise, that the Communicants may deliver the cuppe to other, the minister still acting Christs person in his owne place. pag. 61. 62. So may we say, that Christ at the first supper, or the minister representing Christs person, is properly the giver of the bread, because by his com∣mandement or direction it is given. When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, that is, brake and gave to the disciples to set before them to be further broken. The disciples in setting the bread before five thousand, Mark 6. 41. gave the bread to five thousand, Matth. 14. 19. Christ gave the cup to his Apostles, say the Evange∣lists, because at his direction they reached one to an∣other. Swarez saith, Swarez in . part. tom. 3. p. 861. It is one thing to distribute as a dispen∣ser, or as of power, another to touch, carrie, or applie this sa∣crament to the mouth of the receaver. Aliud est dispensa∣tive, seu ex potestate distribuere hoc sacramentum, aliud verò illud tangore, deferre, aut ad os sumentis applicare. Let them make of the word dispense what they will, we say the Communicant may carrie the bread, and apply it to the hand of another Communicant. Againe, if none but the minister might doe it, because hee represents Christs person, then might not the deacon in the ancient Church do it, because he represented not Christs person, yet his giving was called dispensing. Vazquez in part. 3. tom. 3. disp. 219. num. 12. & 13. Vazquez confesseth, That it is not forbidden by divine law, that the sacra∣ment be ministred, or carried by a layman, but by hu∣mane lawes. Non quia jure divino vetitum sit hoc sacra∣mentum per laicum ministrari aut deferri. But humane lawes forbad laymen to touch it with their hands. I would aske, when the minister commeth from his owne place, and goeth along to deliver the elements, how doth he act the person of Christ the master of the feast. There can be no other reason of this guise, but to nou∣rish a superstitious conceat, that it is holier to receave out of the h nd of the minister, who perhaps is a Judas, then out of the hand of a faithfull brother, as if his hands profaned or polluted it. Are not the peoples hands as holy as the ministers? saith P. pag. 313. Nay superstition encreasing, at last they might not take the sacrament in their owne hand to put it in their mouth, but it behoved the priest to put it in their mouth. Such superstitious conceats condemne Christ and his Apostles, and the faithfull in their time who distributed to other, and de∣prive us of the profitable uses of fraction, or breaking of bread, whereof we have already treated. The repre∣sentation and forme of a feast or banquet is not obser∣ved. It is rather Sportula, which is opposite to coena, then coena, that is, rather like a dole of meat, then a sup∣per. For Sportula was a dole of meat distributed by the princes to the people, which was called Sportula, from the panier, or basket, in which it was brought. This giving of the elements to every one severally, The incon∣veniences following upon the mi∣nisters di∣spensing. whither the communicants sit, stand, or kneel, bringeth in also confusion of actions, and private communions in the publike assembly. For while the ministers are giving the elements to every one, the people is in the meane time exercised in hearing the word read, or psalmes sung, and heare not what they say to the communi∣cants, nor do the communicants understand, what is read or sung in publike. Yea, sometimes two ministers will be speaking at once to sundrie communicants. So the communicants communicate a part, and might as well go aside, or to an Ile of the Church, to communi∣cate, yea, and farre better. For the minister can scarce know his owne voice, when he speaketh to the commu∣cant, being troubled with the exercise of the whole con∣gregation, as one of the ministers of Edinburgh confes∣sed publikely in pulpit. The exercise is dead, and cold, when the minister giveth to every one severally. There∣fore they are forced to reading and singing in the mean time, to drive away tediousnesse, and so bring in confu∣sion of actions. But if they would speake in the plur ll number to the communicants, as Christ did, saying, Take ye, eat ye, and not to every one, Take thou, eat thou, the action should bee more comfortable. For the phrase of speach in the plurall number, fittest (saith Fenner in the doctrine of the sacraments) to note ut the fellowship and communion of the Church in this worke, the person of Christ by the minister bidding all his guests with one love, as from him, to be merrie, and eat with faith one spirituall meat to∣geither. It setteth an edge upon us, when with one heare, as it were, and together we apply every one of us to our selfes, that which is uttered by the minister. But when the action is prolonged with speaking to every one, the mindes of men languish and wander. Our Doctour saith, L. pag. 56. Christ spake in the plurall number at the deliverie. they utter the words in the plu∣rall number at the consecrating of the elements, he mea∣neth at the rehearsall of the words of the institution, at, or before the thanksgiving, but Christ uttered them at the deliverie of the elements, which they do not. Next (saith he) they apply the generall command to every one in particular, as if the Apostles, or other communi∣cants, to whom the words were uttered in the plurall number, did not apply to themselfes particularly, when every one did take, eat, and drinke. And the Doctour himselfe confesseth, that every worthy receaver ought to apply the words to himselfe in particular. If Christ spake in the plurall number, when the communicants were so few, what would he have done, if there had been a great multitude present. Another profound Doctour imagineth, that Christ spake first to all generally in the Number, and after in the singular delivering to every one particularly. But this imagination is without any ground of appearance in the text. And Swar z re∣jecteth this fancie, because it changeth the order of the text set downe with so full consent of the Apostle Paul and the Evangelists, no reason forcing them so to doe. rullairatio cogit, Suarez in part. tom. 3. pag. 702. non oprte ordinem textus mutare, praefertim cum ab Evangelistis & Paulo tanta consensione obiervatus sit. This rate of fraction or breaking of bread after thanksgiving, Paraeus de symbolis pag. 166 either for representation or distributation, is not injoyned by the English service book. Paraeus repor∣teth, That the Lutheran Churches have it not, but have the bread cut in small pieces, before it be brought to the hand of the minister, which is not the sacramentall breaking. The Doctour saith, Distribution continued in ages, follow∣ing; That in the ancient Church the sacrament was delivered by the pastour, or the deacon who helped him, and supplied his place, but not by any of the people. If so were, wee ought to take h ed, saith Cyprian, not what any before us hath done, but what Christ before all hath done, we must not follow the cu∣stome of men, Calvin. insti∣tint l. 4. c. 13. &c. s. 11. but the truth of God. Calvin saith, That the ancients went nerer to a judaicall manner of sacrifi∣cing, then the ordinance of Christ and course of the Gospel could suffer. They carried the read of the sa∣crament home to their houses in Tertullians time, that is, about 200 yeares Christ. The custome of giving the communion to infants continued for 600 yeares. Yet wee have already produced some instances in the contrary, as of the Waldenses, and some footsteps of the ancient Church, howbeit declining, yet remaining among the Monks of Saint Bennets order, when they ce∣lebrated lebrated according to the paterne. The deacon, as I have said, represented not Christs person, and therefore should not have ministred or delivered the elements, if that were true, that none should deliver them immedi∣atlie but the pastour, because he representeth Christs person. It is like at the first, that deacons ministring at tables in time of love-feasts, served likewise at the com∣munion, which was conjoyned with them, and carried only the platters and cuppes, out of which the commu∣nicants them selfes tooke the elements, and distributed. Olim ex patin suis quisque ma ibus suam sumpsit particu∣lam, See Salme∣ on in Mor∣ on of the in∣ tution 31. ut morisfait ad sextam usque synodum, nempè Caesar angustanam, saith Salmeron. Thereafter they gave the elements themselfes, both the bread and the wine, and did not help the minister going along. In processe of time indeed the minister went along with the bread, and the deacon delivered the cuppe. And words were put in their mouth to be uttered at the deliverie, as Sauguis Christi; calix vitae. At last they were made halfe priests, Clemens Alexandrinus saith, That the communicants tooke the eucharist themselfes; Str at. l. 1. Cum eucharistiam qui∣dam, ut mos est, diviserint, permittitur unicui que è populo partem sumere. In Tertullians time it seemeth, that in A∣frick they tooke the elements out of the hands of their rulers or presidents, that is, the bishop, elder, or deacon, when he saith, De corona militis c. 3. Eucharisti m non aliorum qu m de pr es . dentium in m nu sumin us. For so not only Ju us, but also mel. us in his annotations expone that place. All these formes were aberrations from the right forme, and ope∣ned a doreto let in many corruptions. For if the distri∣bution of the communicants had beene at all times con∣tinued, as it was at some times in the yeare, kneeling had not entred, the words uttered by Christ at the de∣liverie of the elements had not beene changed, confu∣sion of actions, and a privat forme of communicating had not taken place, the forme of a feast, which is now changed into the manner of distributing a dole, had beene preserved. Therefore suppose the distributing of the communicants were not recommended to us, nor had no other profitable use, make it only lawfull, this is a most profitable use, that it is a barre to hold out so many corruptions. The first assault therefore was made upon it, at a meeting in Saint Andrewis, in the year preceeding Perth assembly. But that meeting, neither was nor is acknowledged to be a free generall assem∣bly. For as long as wee retaine the distribution by the communicants, they perceave there was no place for kneeling. Therefore as wee would stand for the pre∣servation of that holy action, from being prophaned with confusion of actions, and polluted with privat communion, superstitious receaving out of the mini∣ster hand, and the idolatrous gesture of kneeling, let us stand for this distribution. Homil. 118. in Marcum. What shall we say then of those, who this day ke away the chiefe parts of the Lords insti∣tution, to wit, the b e k ng of the br ad, and distribution, and involve this most wholesome m ster ew th superstitious, and contentious . They may perhaps have the popes supper, or som other mens, whom they prop ne to themselfes to be imitated, but they cannot have Christs supper, till lea∣v ng the i v ntions of me , they foll w le first institution, aith Gu lt r. Quid ergo de illis hodièd cem ts, qui praeci∣puas institution is dom n ae partes, fractionem mi∣rum, & distributionem tollunt, simulque mysterium sa∣luberrimum superstitiosis, & contentiosis opini nibus invol∣vunt. Habent illi fortassis caenam Pape aut alterius cujus∣dam, quem sibi imitandum proponunt. At Christi Jesu cae∣nam non habebunt, nisi relictis hominum ad inventionibus primam ejus institutionem sequantur. If any man then will aske, Christs forme the most perfite. where is kneeling forbid∣den in the act of receaving? We answer, In the institu∣tion. For the whole frame of the paterne forbiddeth it, where magisterio vel exemplo; by precept or exemple, as Cyprian speaketh, wee are directed to celebrat after the forme of a feast or banket, to fit, which is the usuall ge∣sture, and most suteable to a feast, and to breake and di∣stribute. Christs forme was most perfite ( saith Bullinger) Bulling. Decad. 5. serm. 9. and to what purpose is it the Lord himself having devised a st simple and perfite forme, and the Apostles receaving it, to devise another. Who can devise a better, then the Sonne of God himselfe, the supreme high Priest of his Church: Quor∣sum attine simpli issima, optima, perfectissima que illa coe∣nandi formula, ab ipso Christo tradita, & ab Apostolis ejus accepta, comminis i aliam? Quis enim m liorem tradet ipso Dei filio pontifice catholiae ecclesiae summo? Hospin. hi∣stor. sacra∣ment lib. 1. cap. . &c. 5. If another more commedious and better forme could have beene devi∣sed, out of all doubt ( saith Hospinian) Christ would have de∣vised it, and the Apostles would have recommended it to the Churches; and therefore willeth, that if any thing be found different, either in the nature and proper sense of words, or in rite or externall ceremonie from this rule, that it be amended according to the same, as the most holy, most excellent, most uncorrupted, and most certaine rule. Grat. de co ∣secrat. dist. 2. cap. 3. Sed vide, frater charissime, si quis de ante∣cessoribus nostris, velignoranter, vel siplmiciter, non hoc servavi & tenuit, quod nos Dominus & magisterio & exemplo suo docuit, potest simplicitati ejus de indulgentiâ Domini venia concedi, nobis verò non poterit ignosci; qui nunc a Domino dmoniti & instructi sumus. But see, most deare brother, if any of our ancestours, either through igno∣rance or simplicitie, hath not keeped or holden, that which the Lord hath taught us, both by precept and example, his simplicitie may be pardoned of the Lords indulgence, but wee cannot bee forgiven, who now are admonished and in∣structed, saith Cyprian. The testimonie ye may finde in Gratian. Doctour Mortoun in his late worke of the institu∣tion of the supper, pag. 49. saith, It was good divinitie in Cyprian, and pope Iulius dayes, to argue from the example of Christs instituti n negatively, by rejecting such acts, and accoun∣ting them as centrarie to the institution of Christ, which ac∣cord not with his example, and which are not comprised within the Canon of Christ his hoc facite. Bellarmine himselfe putteth It out of all doubt, that that is best, which Christ did, and what he did is to be done, Neque enim dubita i potest, quìn illud sit mel us, & faciendum quod Christus feci , De ucharist. lib. 4. cap. 7. And yet Master Struther was not ashamed to averre, that Christs forme might be bettered. THE FOVRTH PART. CHAP. IV. It maketh us conforme to the Papists in a rite devised, by man horribly abused, and not necessarie. WE ought not to keepe conformitie in the wor∣ship of God with idolaters, Conformitie with idola∣ters forbid∣den. papists in speciall, in any rite or ordinance devised by man, speci∣ally the man of sinne, if after it hath beene abused, or be still abused to idolatry or superstition, if the same be not necessarie, though the originall were lawfull, farre more, if the first use or institution of it was unlawfull. The Lord forbad his people to round the corners of their heads, or marte the corners of their beard, Levit. 19. 26. and 49. 32. The Egyptians and other Gentiles, saith Becanus, Becan. ana∣logia vet. & novi testa∣menti. thought the Gods delighted in the round figure, therefore they rounded their heads, and builded round temples to them, least the Jewes should seeme to be like the Gentiles, they were forbidden to imitate them in this. The Lord would have his people to bee dignosced by other people, by their very habi s. There∣fore they were frobidden to wear linsey-woolsey, be∣cause the Gentiles used such in the worship of their gods, Aqui , 1. 2. quaest. 10 , rt. 6. ad 6. saith Aquinas. They were forbidden to sow their field with mingled seed. The priests were forbidden to make their heads bald, or shave off the corner of their beard for the dead, Levit. 21. 5. 5. These fashions were observed by Egyptians, Arabians, Syrians, Canaa∣nits, and others, saith Iunius upon that place, The priests shall neither shave their head, nor suffer their locks to grow long, Bellarm. de monach. cap. 40. they shall only powle their head, Ezech. 44. 20. Bellar∣mine saith, This shaving was not forbidden, because it was evil in it selfe, but least they should seeme to be like to the priests of the Gentiles, beside whom they dwelt, who sacrificed to their idols with their whole head sha∣ven. Iunius saith, Howbeit the matter was free, the equi∣tie or reason remaineth. Ne vel sign , vel specie quidem communicare nos cum superstitione piet iti adversa oper∣tere. That is, We must not by any signe or shew communi∣ te with superstition, which is contrarie to pietie. They might not plant any groves of trees near the altar of the Lord, Deut. 16. 22. the Gentiles did so, Exod. 34. 13. Say not how did these nation se, ve their gods. so will I do like∣wise, thou shalt not do so to the Lord thy God, Deut. 12. 30. After their doing ye shall n t do, nor after their ordinances, Levit. 18. 3. the words are generall, howbeit in that chapter be brought in some instances of their wicked and impious deeds: for he opposeth to that generall, the judgements and ordinances of the Lord in generall on the other side. And some instances, we have already brought of facts in themselfes not abominal le. Al∣though rounding or cutting the haire was in it selfe in∣different, yet God would not have it indifferent to his people, but will have them to be altogether unlike to the aliens and uncircumcised, specially in those rites, where∣in religion was shewed, Lyra on Lev. 18. . Intendit ex∣cludere e filiis Israelitum omnem Gentilem ritum: Calvin on He in∣tended to exclude from the children of Isra l every rite of the Gentiles. The Gentiles worshipped their Gods in and by images, God would not be so worshipped, but ex∣presly forbad it in the second commandment. And therefore saith Zanchius, That the summe of the second precept, Zanch. de redempt, l . r. c. 14. circa initium. is, that we must not devise of our owne heads any thing in ceremonies, or the worship of God, nor bor∣row from the rites of idolatrous nations, but to be con∣tent with these rites and ceremonies, which God hath prescrived. Tertullian saith, That Christians might not wash their hands (meaning for a ceremonie) or lay aside their cloaks before prayer, Tertul. de oratio. c. 12. Sic enim adeunt ad idola nationes: because the Gentiles go after that manner to their idols. And such like, that they might not sit upon beds after prayer, mea∣ning for a ceremonie, Por ò cum perinde faciunt nation s adoratis sigillaribus suis residendo, vel prepterea in nobis re∣prehendi meretur, quod apud idola c e bretur: because the Gentiles do sit, after they h ve dored their small imag s, it deserveth to be reproved in us, which is obs ved beside ido s. When he hath rebuked Christians for observing some of the Ethnicks dayes, De idol. cap. 14. he cryeth out, That the nations have a greater regard to their owne sect, who will claime to no solemnitie of the Christians, not the Lords day, nor pentecost, and if they know them, they will not communicate with them, in that observation, timerent enim ne Christiani viderentur, De corona militis. for, they wou d be asray d last they should seeme to be Christian. He standeth m ch up∣on this, that a Christian man ought not to goe wich a lawrell garl nd upon his head, because the Heathen used so to go. August. con∣fess. l. 6. c. 2. August ne saith, his mother Menica le t bring∣ing of wine and cakes to the church, for that shee was war ed, it was a resemblance of the superstition of the Heathen, Quòd superstitioni Gen ilium essent simillima. In the second councell of Bracara it was decreed, Brac. 2. can. 73. that Christians deck not their houses with laurell and greene boughes upon the first day of the moneth, quia tota haec observatio paganismi est, because all this custome is heath∣nish. The ancients having the like reason, carried them∣selfes after the same manner toward Jewes and Here∣ticks. Th y would not keepe Easter on that day that the Jewes did. If they had carried themselfes so con∣stantly, both toward Jewes and Gentiles, so much su∣perstition had not entred into the Church, as wee heare of this day. Because the Manichees fasted on the Lords day, August epist. 86. they forbore fasting on that day, saith Augustine. The fourth councell of Tolledo decreed, Tolled. 4. can. 5. That once dipping in baptisme only be used, not three, n videantur apud nos qui tertio m rgunt haereticorum approbare asser∣tionem, dum sequuntur & morem; least these who dippe thrice, seeme to approve the assertion of heretick, while they follow their custome. Brac. 1. can. 32. The first councell of Bracara forbad clergie men bstinence from eating of flesh, to cut off all suspition of the Priscill an heresie. To come to our owne times. S are in 3. part. tom. 3. dis . sect. 2. Even Suarez the Jesuit saith, The Church shunneth all fellowship or appearant conformitie with Iewes or other infidels in ce emonies and observances, as may be gathered out of Augustine epist. 119. and Epiphanius 3. booke against heresies about the end. I said, That conformity is to be avoided not only in things impious, but even in things indifferent, when they are abused to idolatrie or superstition, except they have some necessarie uses, howbeit their first use or institution hath beene lawfull. Last ed t. pag. 40 . Zanchius hath this ground, writing upon the second precept. Rive tus pag. 205. Rivetus likewise writing up∣on the fourth precept of the d logue, It is a rule, that things indifferent, not being necessarie, if they be polluted with idolatrie, are to be abolished. Adiaphora non necessa∣ria, horrenda idolomania polluta esse adolenda. Nay the light of nature hath taught even a Pope to acknowledge this much, howbeit it hath not beene put in practise, as oft, as occasion required. Distinct. 63. cap. Quia sancta. Si non nulli ex praedecessoribus nostris fecerunt aliqua, quae illo tempere potuerunt esse sine culp , & postea vert ntur in enrorem & superstiti nem, sine tanditate aliqua, & magna cum authoritate destruan∣tur, saith Pope Stephen. That is, If some of our ancestours have done some things, which in the meane time might be without blame, and after are turned to e rour or supersti∣tion, let them be abolished without delay, for th y have a good warrant, to wit, the exemple of Ez kias, who brake the bra en serpent in pieces. This is registred in Gratians detree. And the glosse upon this place saith, Successo∣ries debere mutare facta & instituta essorum etiam bona, si vid rint ea ess pern ci sa exempl , Successours should change the deeds and ordinaries of the ancestours, howbeit good, if they see, they become pernitious by ill ex∣emple. I added that clause, unlesse they be of necess rie use, to answer to such, as object the abuse of Gods creatures, and things profitable for the use of man. For the sunne, moone, starres, and other creatures, have been abused and adored, but they are Gods creatures, and of necessarie use. Gold, silver, temples, are profitable helps unto the necessities of mans life, as Tertullian speaketh, Certa subsidia necessi atibus vite humanae procur nt. The gold, brasse, and iron of Jericho taken into the Lords treasurie, were the civill goods of idolaters, and had no state in their idolatrous worship, as kneeling hath. Wee should shun conformitie with Papists in special, because the Pope their head is the great Antichrist, and wee are more troubled with rites abused, and polluted by him, then by any other, wee dwell neerer to papists then to any other idolaters, and they dwell or converse amongst us. Bellarm. d Monach. cap. 40. For this c use perhaps, saith B llarmine, priests were not shaven in Hierome and Ambrose time: for yet in their time the priests of Isis, were shaven. Is it not very frivolous which our Doctor answereth, pag. 116. that by this reason, wee should not pray kneeling, nor rest upon the Lords day, because the papists pray kneeling to Saints, and rest on the Lords day, seeing the one is allow∣ed by God to himself, and the other commanded. Such∣like the burning of incense, howbeit abused to the wor∣ship of the brasen serpent, our question is of humane in∣ventions. If ye would know, what rite or ceremonie, to call popish, Cap. de tra∣dition. Musculus will tell you, I call these rites pe∣pish (saith hee) which either of the r owne nat re, or by abuse do s rv unto popish impuritie, superstition and blind∣nesse, allwhich, I am persw ded, are to bee detested, as much as is possible. saith, Censura. c. 4. That S tan wrought powerful∣ly and cunningly these many ages by his Roman Antichrist, to obtrude the bread upon us to be ador d for Christ, there∣fore wee should put to flight whats ever may seeme to nou∣rish this bread worship in the mindes of the simple. Censura. c. 9. And in the ninth chapter, That; if wee love God and our Saviour Christ, none of these things, words, or gestures, will finde or keepe place among us, which have appearance of affinitie with the impieties, and abomin tio s brought in by Anti∣chist upon the holy mysteries, or which may be taken hold of, to make up any commendation of them, howbeit unjustly and without cause offered. Nihilque loci vel invonient vel re∣tinebunt apud nos, e e res omnes, verba, & g stus, in quibus appareat esse aliquid tantis impietatibus affine, aut ad ul∣lam rapiatur, quanquam improbe & absque data causa ha∣rum su rum impi tatum commendationem. The equitie of this rule or direction, The equitie of none con∣formity with idolaters. that wee should not conforme with idolaters in such rites and ordi∣nances, as are above described, appeareth evidently, first, in that we show not, as we ought, our hatred and dete∣station of idolatrie, when we retaine any monument or memoriall of it. God will not have us to utter with our lips the very name of the idol, with respect or any honour. The brazen serpent, after the miraculous use of it, for which it was set up, ceased, was keeped 700 years for a memoriall of that miracle, and as a monument of Gods mercie, and benefite receaved at that time. Yet, when it began to be abused, and polluted with idola∣trie, Ezekias brake it in pieces. Farre more ought the monuments and memorials of idols, or idolatrie. We honour the idol and idolatrous worship, when we re∣taine any monument or memoriall of idolatrie. Next, in so doing, wee keep a stumbling block in the Church, and both harden the idolater in his idolatrie, and lay a stumbling block and snare before our selfe and our bre∣thren, by retaining of such allurements and provocati∣ons, to commit the same kinde of spirituall fornication and adulterie, and so to fall in an hainous and most de∣restable sinne. Woe be to him that giveth offence, it were better, that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the deep of the sea. That kneeling in the act of receaving the sacrament, hath beene abused to idolatire, Kneeling a monument of idolatrie. can not be denyed. Nay, it is confessed, that kneeling in that act hath been abu∣sed to the vilest idolatrie, that ever was, to the worship∣ping of a piece bread, which the worshipper esteemed to be his god. To retaine it therefore, is to retaine a me∣moriall or monument of that vile idolatrie, because we use that same gesture, in that same very act, and without necessity. For our opposits affirme, That all the maine gestures are indifferent. pag. 370. Master P. hath a poore shift, when he saith, No ordinance of God can bee a monu∣ment of idolatry, gesturs are Gods ordinances, and his outward worship consists in them. Such like, that no creature of God can be a monument of idolatrie, but all gesturs are Gods creatures or abilities, whereunto man is disposed by creation. pag. 118. And our Doctour saith, That kneeling is not an humane invention, but a religious ce∣remonie appointed by God. But they should first have made good, that kneeling in the act of receaving the sa∣cramentall elemen s w s Gods ordinance, and then in∣deed the ret ining of it had not beene a retaining of a monument of idolatrie. It is grosse, that he calleth ge∣sturs abilities. The power or ability is naturall to man, but the gesture it selfe is volnntarie, free, and acciden∣tall. A man hath abilitie to stand upon one of his legs, or with his back to the elements, is such a posture of the parts of a mans body, therefore lawfull in the act of re∣ceaving. Seeing neither by Gods ordinance, nor any naturall necessity wee are bound to kneel in that act, the retaining of kneeling so horribly abused in that act, is the retaining of a vile monument of idolatrie. How dangerous it is, Kneeling scandalous to papists. consider it first in the papist. The papist is confirmed in his vile idolatry by our con∣formitie with him in that gesture. Do they not vaunt, that we are comming home to them, and hope for the full restoring of poperie againe, because we kneel at the receaving of the eucharist as they do. It is confessed al∣so by conformitants. The ministers of Edinburgh, after they had vexed the people ten yeares with their knee∣ling, and seeming to bee wearied by contending with them, sent up a supplication to the king for dispensation with kneeling. In the instructions given to the bearer M. William Lev Lev ngstoun, subserived also by them, they have these words, The Papists se g us in that gesture, ha∣ving some externall symbolizing with them, are thereby confirmed in their errours, as though that our practise were an approaching to them, and an increase to their idolatrie and bread worship. These instructions were subscrived by all the ministers of Edinburgh in April anno 1628. M. Struther, Sydserf, Maxwell, and the rest. It is a scandall given to the godly, Scandalous to the godly. because it is not a necessar duetie, and is a provocation and Intisement to idolatrie. Wee are forbidden all provocations and en∣tisements to idolatrie, as in all other precepts, wee are forbidden, as well the provocations and entisements to evill, as the evill it self. In 2. praecept. pag. 387. If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, that is, whatsoever is an impediment unto us to hin∣der us to do good, and to worship God, though it were never so deare to us, is to bee removed out of the way, much more if it bee a cause or occasion to do evill, saith Zanchias. Last edit. de redempt. pag. 541. Whatsoever bee the intention of the doer, intent ntis, ye , if the qualitie of the work it selfe conditio operis bee induct ve to scandall, it ought to bee eshewed. They ask, what apinesse there is in the ge∣sture to intice us to idolatrie, We answere, it is the same in forme and fashion that idolaters use in that same very act, and it is done for reverence as they also do. We are more proue by nature to idolatrie, then any other sinne. Therefor greater diligence is to bee used in avoiding the o casions of this sin, then of any other, saith Zanchi∣us. What needeth further proofe, if it bee true, which they seeme to grant themselfes, that adoration in the act of receaving the bread hath opened an occasion to breed worship or artolatrie. Beza in his 8. epist. faith, The event and lamentable face of the Church, doth more then sufficiently teach us, how hurtfull tis, and commendeth those Churches which abolished it with no lesse care then other manifest made idolatrie, apert as idolomanias. Peter Martyr being a stranger, when he was a profes∣sour in Oxford, was loath to contradict the order, which was retained for the appeasing the papists, who were a strong party at that time, excuseth the matter the best he could, but with all, privie to the insuffiencie of his ex∣cusus, he wisheth it were removed. And writing against Gardin r, Col. 160. he wisheth, that it were not, howbeit the knee∣lers direct their worship not to the symbols themselfes, but to Christ reigning in the heavens. But after the re∣volt of England in Qu ene Maries dayes, when he was in Zurich, writing to the Polonian ministers, he saith, Let the evil seed, and rotten rootes be plucked up at the first beginning, for if they be neglected at the first (I know what I speak) it is more difficill to take them away afterward: And this is wisely to be looked to, as in the sacraments, so specially in the e charist, that it be most sincerely done. For there are there, beleeve me, pestilent seeds of idolatrie, which unlesse they be taken away, the Church of Christ will never be beau∣tified with pure and sincere worship. Let not the sacra∣ments be contemned, as empty and vo d signes; And on the other side, let them not give greater honour to them, then their institution will suffer. Averruncentur sub ipsis ini∣tiis mala semina, & putres radices. Nam si principio ne∣gligantur, (scio to quod loquor) pestea difficiliùs tolluntur. Idque providendum est, ut in sacramentis, & prae ipue in encharistiae quam sincerissimè fiat, ibi sunt, mibi crede, idololatriae pestifera semina, que porr , isis i lara suerint, ecclesia Christi puro sinceroque cul nunquam erit o nata. Non centemnantur sacramenta, ut in nla & signa. Rursmque non illis plus tribuant homines, quam institutio ferat. This was his advice, after experience he had in England, and in the same epistle he , That ite in the ministration of the sacraments be which is most of all, and furthest rem ue from papisticall toyes and ceremonies, and commeth to that puritie, which Christ and his Apostles used. in his S. sennon upon Ienah saith, The outward gesthred and behaviour of the receaver should want all kinde shew orineli∣nation to idolatrie. Wherefore seeing kneeling is a shew and externall kinde of honouring and worshipping, and here∣tofore grieveus and damnable idolatrie heth beene commit∣ted by the sacram nt, I could wish it were com∣manded by the magistrat, that the communicants might re∣ceave it sitting or standing. Reply 2 part pag. 164. Master Cartamight reporteth, that in divers places the people have knocked on their breasts, and holden up their hands, whilst the minister was in giving the bread, and not only those who recea∣ved it, but also those who looked on, and were in the Church. In a national synod of the Belgick and French Churches in the Low-countries holden in Junie 1578. they concluded against geniculation. Genuflexionem non admittimus ob periculum adorations ad∣mit not kneeling for perill of the adoration of bread wor∣ship. And in a nationall synod holden at Midleburgh, it was likewise concluded, Genuflexio omnino omittetur propter periculum superstitiosae adoratienis; Kneeling shall altogether be omitted, because of the danger of superstitious adoration. Homij speci∣men controy Belg. in fine. Festus Homi s out of these consti utions, th set downe their minde in the harmonie of their synods, to the same effect, That the communionibe not celebrated kneeling for the danger of bread worship. pag. 123. Our Doctour answereth, That they knew best, what served to the edification of their owne Church, as if the Hollanders were more prone to bread worship, then Scots on En∣glish. P. acknowledgeth, pag. 70. that they which kneel may receave too reverently. Cyprian answering to some maids, who walked with young men, talked with them, went to bed with them, and said, they abstained not∣withstanding from the act, Cyprian. lib. 1 epist. 11. saith, Non est locus d ndus Diabolo mo diu tutus periculo proxim s; We should not give place to the devill: No man that is near danger can be long in suretie. They alledge a Polonian synod allowing kneeling or standing, The Poloni∣an synods mi∣staking. but not sitting. But they must know first, that they were farre mistaken. For they thought in sy∣nodo Graconiensi anno 1573. and Vledislanitensi anno 1523. that none but the Arrians or Arrianabap∣tists among themselfes did sit. It is strange, that they should thereupon exhort to the forbearance of sitting, seeing the Arrians did not sit upon conceat of par ie, or equality with Christ. It is grosse mistaking, saith P. that fellowship and societie necessarily imports equalitie, pag. 200. who knowes not, that a king and a meane man may be fellow-like and sociable, and yet remainefarre un∣equals. Next, it is as strange, that they should be igno∣rant, that the gesture of sitting was in use even then, to wit 1573. 1578. 1583. in sundry Churches in Europe, as in the Low-countries, Helvetia, Scotland. Yea, as a worthy Polonian, as that Church hath bred in his time, that Polonian Baron Iohannes Alasco, wrote before the holding of that synod more amply, and more earnestly for sitting; then any man else; and put it in practise in the Churches where he had credite and authoritie. We are not therefore conforme to Arrians in the gesture of sitting, for it is not their invention, nor is it approved only by them; It was in use before ever the name of Arrius was heard. Yet, howbeit their synods were mixed, and consisted partly of Lutherans, partly of such as adheared to the Boh mian, partly of such as adheared to the Helvetian confession, they would urge no man, fearing that urging would draw on censures, which they thought neither commendable nor expedient. For they confesse, That it is neither the will of God, nor the cu∣stome of the pur r Church, to smite m n with ecclesiasticall discipline for externall rites. Propter externos ritus homi∣nes pios ferire, neque est Dom ni v tun as, neque purioris ec∣clesiaemos. As ye may see in Synodus Petriconi insis, which was holden anno 1578. Their next shift is, The preten∣ded remedie of preaching naught. that he people may be taught and informed to direct he r adoration internall and exter∣nall to God, and so all erroneous opinion may be re∣moved. But we have told them, that it is better to fill up the pit in the way, then to set one beside to warne the passingers, that they fall not in. Watchmen are sometime negligent, sometime blinde and ignorant, or corrupt and perverse: meat doth not nourish so fast, as poison doth corrupt. Time should be better spent, then in leading poore souls through dangerous wayes, which may be forsaken. Their strength should not be tried by bringing them to the brinke of danger. Sup∣pose information by doctrine were used at all times, and every where all are not alike capable, example and ap∣pearance of evil would worke more powerfully, then the doctrine. Epist. 121. Of the insufficiencie of this remedy, see Calvin in his epistle to the protectour of England. The third shift is, Commande∣ment of the magistrate no just e cuse. In 3 praecept. col. 634. that the command of the supreme magistrat in things indifferent taketh away the scandall. There are two sorts of indifferent things, saith Z n∣ hius, some that are manifest occasions of sinning, others are not of that kinde. Res adiaphorae duplices sunt. Quae∣lam su t alicui aport e occasiones peccatorum, ita ut exillis verè immineat p ricul m, pèceandi: alie vero non ita se habent. For the first sort, that we ought to abstaine from evill, and all manifest occasion of evil: For who, saith he, will venture to passe along a ruinous bridge, if hee perceave manifest danger of falling into the river. Can the supreame magistrat take away that aptnesse and fitnesse, that any thing hath to intise and provoke men to sinne. The Apostle Paul saith, he had rather ne∣ver eat flesh, then offend a weake brother for eating flesh offered to the idol, and sold in the market. And I think, he had greater, authority in such matters, nor any prince or generall assembly. The Belgick synods, yee see, would not take so much upon them, but for ad kneeling for fear of idolatrie. If the Church (to whom the rule for directing the use of things indifferent in maters of religion are laide down, to wit, that all things bee done decently, in order, to edi∣fication, without offence) may not presume so farre, far lesse may the magistrate; for his power is cumulative to assist the Church, not privative, to deprive the Church of her power. The magistrates countenance maketh the scandall the greater, and hee strengthneth it by his au∣thoritie, whereas hee should remove scandals, and not lay stumbling-blocks in the way of the people. The brasen serpent was but a passive, active scandall, and yet Ezekias brake it in pieces: for more should active scandals bee removed. These Cour -clawbacks tell us, wee should rather offend the people, then the supreme magistrate. But better offend, that is, displease him, nor offend, that is, give occasion to the poorest soule, let bee many thousands, to fall into any sin, let bee so haynous a sin, as is the sin of idolatrie. The magistrate is not in danger of stumbling, for (yee say) he esteemeth the matter indifferent. Is not the supreme magistrate a sin∣full man? May hee not make Israel to sin? May hee not abuse things indifferent, and transgresse the rules above mentioned? May hee not bee a secret friend to the pope, or an a bettor of superstition? Suppose hee have no such intention, yet hee can not by his authoritie alter conditi∣onem operis, the qualitie of the work it self, and make a thing, which of it selfe is inductive to scandall not indu∣ctive. Doth his commandment make all so sure, that none can bee scandalized? That is impossible, conside∣ring the shew of evill in the deed it self, the ignorance of many thousands, the disposition of the ignorants to su∣perstition, the pronnesse of mens nature to idolatrie, and the increase of papists. Ioab was guiltie of Vriahs bloud, notwithstanding of the Kings commandment, so art thou of thy brothers falling, 1 King 20, 39. Thy life for his life, if hee bee a missing. Say not therefore with Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? Active obedience to the magistrate ought not to bee a rule of thy love to Gods glory, and the salvation of thy brother. Passive obedience is not denied; but defences by lawes aright first to bee heard. Whereas they alleadge, that sitting is dangerous for breeding contempt and propha∣nation. To passe by the institution, experience is a testi∣monie in the contrare. Rusticitie in the behaviour of simple ones, not acquainted with all the points of civili∣ , is not prophanation, but may bee where the minde is in good order Horrible prophane were the words of our blind bishop to a gentle woman in the offering of the elements, because shee would not kneel. Wee maintain, Kneeling established by the Anti∣christ, and not by the ancient Church. that kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramentall elements was not devised, or at least authorized, till the great Antichrist overruled. Wee need not to poin at the time when it first began: for there are many corruptions in the Romane Church, which can not bee ded ed a certain beginning, by the Ro∣manists themselfs. It is sufficient, that wee point out a time, wherein it was not in use. There can not be an authen∣tick testimonie alleadged for kneeling in the act of re∣ceaving the sacramentall elements, before the opinion of reall presence yea, or of transubstantiation began to spread, or to come to a more certain date, for the space of a thousand years after Christ. I say, authentick testi∣monie: for wee regard not supposititions, or counterfite works. Origens first homilie in divers loca, is brought in, saying, Thou therefore humbling thy self, itat the Cen∣turie , nd say, Lord, I am not worthie, &c. but that works is acknowledged by the papists themselfs to be coun∣terfite. See Riveti specimen critici sacri. lib. 2. cap. 13. Bellarm. de script. pag. 84. Suchlike counterfi e Cyrillus of Jerusalem in his fifth catechisme saith, Then come to the cuppe of the blood, not stretching out thy hand, sed pr nus & in modum adorati∣onis & venerationis, dicens Anten But stow ing downward, or with the face bended downward in manner of adorati∣on or veneration, saying, Amen. He sayeth not, Cade pronu , fall down on thy fa e, sed accede pronus, but come inclyning or bowing thy he d, or upper part of thy body, as men use to do, when they make courtesie for men can not come falling flat. But what need wee trouble our selfes with his words, seeing hee is marked for a counterfite by Mou∣lias on the Lords supper, part. 2. pag. 65. the bishop of Spalato, and Ples∣sie, who in his answere to the bishop of Evereux saith, Spalat. de rep. eccles. l. 5. c. 6. num. 69. These catec ismes of Cyrillus are supposititious, and come not to light, but in our time. M. Down in his treatise of tran∣substantiation. pag. 3 . 38. saith, Ad E roi∣censem epist. pag. 241. That these catecbeticall booke are but of a verie late edition, that Harding acknow∣ledgeth, that in his time they were known to ve ie few, and in rite, that they have beene published since in print, and per∣haps, to winne more authoritie to them, misfathered upon Cyrillus of Ierusalem. This Cyrill directs the Communi∣cant to touch his lips, which are sanctified with the touch of Christs body and bloud, that by the touch of that finger hee may sanctifie his eyes, brow, and others. No authentick testimonie can they produce bearing the word kneeling, which is an adoration not in a large, but strict sense. The testimonies bearing the word adore, are either counterfite, or to bee understood of inward adoration, as Doctour Burges himself confesseth, sundrie of the learned do construe them, or of adoration in time of prayer before they communicate: or adoration is taken taken only for veneration. See Iewel in the article of adoration. Bilson in his book of obedience, and Mor∣toun the late defender of the ceremonies, in his latest worke entituled, Of the institution of the sacrament. He bringeth in sundrie exemples to prove the latitude of the word Adore. When Theodor t saith, dialog. 2. that the mysticall signes are adored, he should speake very grosly, if the word adore meant not only reverent usage. Mou∣lines on the Lords supper, 2. part. page 24. translateth Theodoret , reverenced, and disputeth against adored, as not agreeable to his meaning. And so Bilson expoundeth Theodoret, and to this purpose alledgeth the glosse of the Canon law. In hoc sensu possumus q am libet rem sacr m adorare, id est, reveren iam exhibere. Ana. stasius saith, De consecra∣tio. dist. 3. cap. venera ilis. De consecra∣tio. dist. 1. cap. Apostolica. Tertull. ad∣vers. Hermo∣ginem. Dominica verba attentè audiant, & si leliter adorent 1. venerantur, saith the glosse. Adore plenitudinem scripturae. I adore the fulnesse of the scripture, saith Ter∣tullian. Doctour Burges is forced to constru the word adored, in this sense, when he would give a right sense to some words of Iewell. The sacraments in that sort, in re∣spect of that, which they signifie, and not in respect of that which they are of themselfes, are the flesh of Christ, and are so understood and beleeved and adored, but the whole honour resteth not in them, but is passed over from them to the things, which be signified, D. B. of knee∣ling. pag. 85. saith Iewel. His meaning is (saith the Doctour) that no more is or may be done respectively to the sacrament, then that which wee call veneration, that, which in strict sense, we call adoration or divine worship is reserved to God. Chrysostome meaneth spirituall reve∣rence, in 1 Corin. 11. and therefore he useth emphaticall speeches of ascending up to the gates of heaven, Fulk in 1 Cor. 11. sect. 18. even the heaven of heavens, like eagles, saith Doctour Fulk. followeth not that they kneeled in Augustines time, be∣cause the Ethnicks objected, that Christians honoured Bacchus and Ceres. The reverene carriage of Christians at the participation of the sacrament all bread and wine, was sufficient to be an occasion of the mistaking. Aver∣roes the Arabian Spaniard, about 400 yeares since, ob∣jected, That Christians adored that which they did eat. It may be, that in his time they kneeled, and gave just oc∣casion to Averroes reproach. But his time is not within our date. In a word, looke how old they can prove kneeling, we shall prove reall presence. Doctour Purges hath found out a place which was ne∣ver found out before, Tertullians testimonie vindicated. wher hee confidently conclu∣deth, that the communicants k eeled in Tertull ans time, for (faith he) the people shunned to take the sacrament, when they might not kneel in the act of receaving or partaking of it, and therefore forbore to come to the communion table on the station dayes, because it beho∣ved them the stand on these dayes. Tertullian, saith he, inviteth them to come, and take the bread standing at the table publikely, and to reserve and carry it away with them and receave it at home, as they desired, knee∣ling, and so both duties should be performed, the recea∣ving of the eucharist, and the tradition of standing on these dayes observed. Lib. de ora∣tione. c. 14. Tertullians words are, Similiter de stationum diebus, non putant plerique sacrificiorum ora∣tionibus interveniendum, qu d statio solvenda sit accepto corpore Domini. Which last words he translateth, be∣cause station or standing is then to be performed in receaving the body of the Lord: whereas he should ranst te, because the fast is then to be brocken after the receaving of the bodie of the Lord. For the word statio in Tertullians language is taken for fasting, both in this place, and in his booke De corona militis, cap. 11. and in his booke De jejuniis, cap. 2. 10. 14. as Pamelius hath well observed upon that place, and after him Baronius in his annales. In his booke De jejuniis he bringeth in for illustration Moses per∣severing in prayer, till the going downe of the sunne, when the people was fighting against the Amalekits, Nonne statio fuit sera, saith he. Did Ioshua dyne that day, saith he, that he fought against the Ammorits, that com∣manded the sunne to stand in Gibeon, and the moone in Askalon? That God gave such authority to Sauls com∣mandement concerning fasting till even, that I nathan for tasting a little hony was scarce delivered at the in∣stant request of the people, Tantam authoritatem dedit edicto stationis Saulis, ut Ionathan filius, &c. H. bringeth in such exemples for the custome their owne sect of the Mountanists had brought in, which was to keep these fasts till evening, whereas the custome of the Church was to keepe them only to the ninth, that is, our third houre afternoone. In the 2. and 14. chapter he maketh mention of weddensday and f yday: appointed for these fasts, Cur quartam & sextam sabbathi st tionibus dicamus? speaking of the custome of the Church at that time. The meaning of Tertullian, in the place above cited, is, They were in an errour, who thought that if they had receaved the sacrament, their fast should be broken, which should have continued to the set houre. For (saith he) d th the encharist lose that service which wee have devoted unto God, or rather doth it binde us more to God. Nonne solennior erit statio tua, si & ad aram Dei steteris; Shall not thy fast bee the more solemne, if thou stand also at the altar of God; th is, the communion table. Accepto corpore Domini & re∣servata (as Iunius reade ) id est stationis officio, (not re∣servato ) that it may answer to the other member, both are safe, & participatis sacrificti & exc utio off cii, both the participation of the sacrifice nd performance of thy ser∣vice, id est, jejunii, (saith his answer to the theologues of Burde ux. pag. 54. his answer to the bi∣shop of Ever ux, pag. 225. he saith, That Tertullian would remove that scruple, that after they had communicated, their fast was broken, they thought, a si particip tio euch a∣ristiae jejunium abrumpere if the participation of the eucharist had broken up their fast: Ambrose giveth the rea∣son, wherfore these set fasts were called Stationes, quod stantos & commarantes in eis inimicos insidiantes repelli∣mus; because standing and sta ing in them wee rep ll our enemies lying in wait for us, meaning spirituall enemies. The metaphore is borrowed from souldiers, who beho∣ved to fast so long as they were in statio ; Metaphora à militi m sumpta quod quamdiu in statione erant, jejunare oportebat. See Pamelius upon both the places. Do∣ctour Burges finding, that Tertullian lib. 2. ad uxorem, maketh mention of jejunia, fasts, after hee had made mention of stationes, concludeth in his owne fancie, that stationes were not fasts, whereas he might have seene stationes distinguished, à jejuniis in the former place also, but by the one he meaneth of such as fasted at any time of their owe free accord; by the other the set dayes of fasting. Iejunium est indifferenter cujuslibet Di i abstinen∣tia, non perleg m sed secundum propriam voluntatem, statio statutorum dierum vel temporum. And this difference Pamelius acknowledgeth, he hath out of Rabanus Ma ∣rus. The very phrase it selfe solvere stationem, might have guided him aright: For what more frequent a phrase for breaking of a fast, then solvere jejuniums. We denie not that they stood both these dayes, and other also, but that statio signifieth only standing in Tertullians phrase, when he saith, Solennior statio, or solvere stationem. I have insisted the longer upon this testimonie, because Do∣ctour Burges doth so confidently gather out of it, which never man did before, that the Christians then did, and before had used to take the sacrament kneeling. This raw, Sitting or standing pra∣ctised in the ancient Church. See Euseb. histor. lib. 7. cap. 9. but too confident antiquarie, his collection may be refuted by other testimonies, witnessing, that s metimes they sa e, of which we have alledged some before, or at other tim s stood. Pionysius Alexandrinus writing to Xystus bishop of Rome, concerning one that was in sorrow, because hee was baptised by hereticks, saith, he du st not baptise him over againe, because he had a long time stood at the table, and reached forth his hand to receave the holy food, and had beene for a long time partaker of the body and bloud of Christ. Iusti∣nus telleth us, That the people rose, and the deacons gave to every one to partake of the bread and the wine. Is it likely, that they kneeled, when the deacons gave the elements? Homil. in oncoeniis. In the homily which goeth under the name of Chrysostome, Stemus trementes timidi & demissis ocutis; Let us stand trembling with fear a d our eyes casten downe. So yee see both before and after Tertullians time testimonies for standing. There was an ancient custome in the Church (which, Bellarminus de cultu san∣ctor. cap. 11. Bellarmine saith, was left off but about 500. yeare before his time) to stand upon the Lords day even in time of prayer. Zovaras in synod 6. can. 90. s ith, That no wayes might they kneel betwixt the evening service on satter∣day and the Lords day at evening. Tertull. de Corona mi∣litis. Die dominico de geni∣culis ad orarenesa , saith Tertullian. And such like, betwixt easter and pentecost, not only upon the Lords day, but no day of the weeke might they kneele. Yea, by the de∣cree of Alexand r the third, they might not kneel upon the Lords day in publike, Decretal. l. 3. tit. de cele∣brat. Missa. cap. sarct. but only at the consecration of Bishops, and giving of orders▪ he that did consecrate, and he that w s consecrated might kneel, and this was decreed about the yeare 1159. at which it seemeth this one exception entred in. Now will any man affirme, That they never communicated upon the Lords day, for a thousand yeare, or 1159. or imagine as Doctour Burges doth, that because they might not kneel, that all this time they tooke the sacrament standing in the Church, and went home to their houses, where they ea∣ted kneeling, or to their seats in the Church, where they might not kneel. L. page 52. confesseth, That the com∣munican s in the primitive Church stood at the table, when they receaved the sacrament on the Lords day. Well, say they, seeing they prayed standing, they used that gesture in the receaving of the eucharist, which they thought fittest for prayer. I answer, they thought not that gesture fittest for prayer. The authour of the que∣stions extant in Iustinus, Quaest. 1 5. saith, Genu m inclinatio in pre∣catione magis peccatores Deo commendat, qu m sistantes orent. He preferreth, yee see, kneeling in prayer before standing: But both are indifferent. They stood to signi∣fie their joy for Christs resurrection, and not because they though it the fittest gesture for prayer. It was a conceat they tooke up, which entred not in the Apostle Pauls minde: for wee finde Acts 20. that he kneeled be∣tweene Easter and Pentecost. Alwise by that custome, ye may see, they communicated standing. The testimo∣nies above cited have not relation to any day, and the custome observed yet to this day in the orientall Churches, to communicate standing, notwithstanding, that other custome hath ceased, declareth that they in∣tended never geniculation in the act of receaving. Ephraim Placit in his Christianographie, descriving the manner of the administration of the Lords supper in the Greek Church, in the Churches of the Mengrel∣lians, Circassians, Georgians, Muscovits, Melchits or Syri∣ans, Armenian, Iacobits, the Christians falsly called Nestorians, the Cophti or Egyptian Christians, the Abys∣sinos or Ethiopian Christians, produceth no instance for kneeling in the act of receaving, eating, drinking, which he would not have pretermined, being conforme, and dedicating his booke to the bishop of Elie. Cassander in his Liturgicks, descriving the order observed in the Churches of the Arm n ans, Muscovits, and in the king∣dome of preste Iohn maketh no mention of kneeling, but of standing. Il ssie in his 4. bo ke of the Masse, trusseth up all in few words. Quarè orientales ecclesiae adoratio∣nem sacramenti admiserunt nusqu m, non quae patriarchae Consta tinopolitano obsequuntur, n n quae Antiocheno. Et in Abyssnis etiam ipsis hodie st ntes sacramenta partici∣pant, nec minus reverenter; The orientall Churches no where admitted edoration of the sacrament; not those which are obedient to the patri rch of Constantinople, or yet the patriar h of Antioch. And the Abyssins themselfes participate of the sacrament, standing, and yet not without reverence: Where by adoration he meaneth kneeling, whereunto be opposeth standing. If ever kneeling in the act of receaving had beene in use among them, it had not beene left off, considering mans pronnesse to idola∣trie and superstition, and delight to stick in the mire when he is wallowing in it. It resteth then that kneeling is only found in the Churches subject to the Pope, of old. or at the present. Other Churches, howbeit they fol∣lowed not the paterne, using another forme and gesture, not was sutable to this first, yet they degenerated not so as the Roman Church did, Synops. cuest. 8. of the masse, pag. 691. The Muscovite Graeci∣ans, L tine Priest chance to say Masse upon one of their altars, they forthwith breake them downe, as defiled and pol∣luted. And they old the priests of the Latine Church to be no letter then hereticks, and vouchsafe not to salute them. Willets out of Sacranus. We have not yet heard of any authentick testimonie for kneeling, which is adoration in proper and strict sense, for the space of a thousand year after Christ, which is the date we set downe. Nor yet till after the dayes of Pope Honorius the third, who lived bout the yeare 1220. And he decreed nothing, owing, not of the knee, but of the head or superiour bulk of the body, at the elevation in he masse. The bowing of the knee at the elevation entred not till afterward, yea, prevailed not universally even in our dayes. For I finde in Bochel∣lus a decree made in a popish synod at Rhems, Bochel. de∣cret. lib. 3. c. 140. anno 1583. Quoriam apud omnes sere catholicos usus modo obtinuit, ut procumbentes adorent divin eucharistiam; Because the use prevailed almost among all catholicks, that falling they a ore the divine eucharist, the holy sy∣nod exhorteth, that if there be any Church, useth another custome, a d the body of Christ in this sacrifice standing, that they f ll downe her after, while the holy myste∣ries are set forth to be adored. Sancta synodus hortatur, ut si quae ecclesia altero more adhuc utatur, & stando Christi corpus i hoc sacrificio adore , proeumbat san∣cta mysteria proponantur adorari. Where, by the way observe, that when ye finde the word adore in the anci∣ents, it followeth not, that ye must interpret i knee∣ling. For yee see, they that stood are said to adore, which is not to adore in strict and proper sense. Whi∣ther kneeling at the receaving come in with that decree of Honorius, or after, which is more likely, and that no other gesture was used at the one, which was not used at the other, I cannot determine. Howsoever it entred under Antichrist raigning, and is the receaved gesture of all such as are wit the bounds of his jurisdiction, where he is Pat ch. The Churches under the Patri∣arches of Constantinople or Antioch, hath not recea∣ved it, as ye have heird. If the priests, and others of the elergic, be directed to the Romane ri all to kneel in re∣ceaving the eucharist, can wee thinke any of the people had liberty not to kneel. Howbeit this idolatrous gesture prevailed under the raigne of Antichrist, Opposite to kneeling. yet there wanted nor faithfull wit∣nesses to stand out against it. Of the Walden yee heard before. Iohannes Slechta a Bohemian, writing to Eras in the veare 1519, Erasm. epist. lib. 14. telleth him, that there was among them a sect, of such as were called Pyghardi, be∣cause their first ring-leader, who came to these parts in the dayes of Zisca, about four score and seventeene years before, that came out of Picardie, that they main∣tained, these committed idolatrie, who kneeled before the bread in the sacrament of the eucharist, or bowed before it, or adored it. In sacramento eucharistie nihil esse divinitatis credunt, sed solum panem & consecra∣tum signis quibusdam occultis mortem Christi affirmantes, & propterea in idolola riam cadere om∣nes quot quot coram illo genua flectunt, & incu vant, vel il∣lud adorant. All the Sacramentaries call it idolatrie to kneel before the eucharist, saith Bellarmine. And yet so impudent is our Doctour, that he is not ashamed to af∣firme, that never any divine ancient or moderne to this day, except Arrians and Anabaptists, hath doubted, but Christ may and should be adored externally in the act of receaving. Seeing therefore this gesture entred in under Anti∣christ, and is maintained by him with fire and faggot, ought we not to reject it, and retaine the exemplarie sit∣ting of Christ and his Apostles. If at any time, wee should not seeme to have communion with Anti∣christ, we should most of all at this holy supper, which setteth forth our communion with Christ and his Church. But put the case this gesture in the act of receaving had beene devised by others, Kneeling to be rejected, be∣cause abused. then the great Antichrist, or might have beene used without blame, which is not possible, yet seeing it was not commanded by Christ, or his Apostles, but is the invention of man, hath beene so horribly abused, and rem ineth still in the owne nature indifferent, as they alledge, and not necessarie by their owne confession, it ought to be abandoned for the dan∣ger of many thousand weake souls, which may bee brought on to bread worship. Wee may scandalize sometimes, even when the fact is neither evill in it selfe, nor hath appearance of evil. Etiamsi factum non fit se cundum se malum, neque secundum se habeas speci m mali, tamen toterit esse aliquando scandalum infi niorum, quia secund m illorum opinione habet speciem mals. Domine. s Bannes in 2. 2. 43. in art. . We might a score here, and proceed no further. For what we have said, is sufficient to restraine every man from kneeling. To offend one of Christs little ones, is a hainous sinne. CHAP. V. Kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramentall elements of the supper is idolatrie. WE prove it to be idolatrie, first considering it, as it is enjoyned by the act of that pretended as∣sembly holden at Perth, next as the action is considered simply in it selfe. We are directed by the act of Perth to kneel in reve∣rence of the sacrament, The act of Perth inten∣deth idola∣try. which is idolatri , as L. confes∣seth, if we do so. But we are directed to kneel in due re∣gard of so divine a mysterie, pag. 70. to wit as is the sacrament, or as is the receaving of the body and bloud of Christ, to wit, in the sacramentall manner. Wee will examine the act by parts, according to L. his analysis, howbeit wee acknowledge him not for the authentike interpreter of it. The first reason for kneeling in the narrative, The first rea∣son of the act exa∣mined. is set downe in these words, Since wee are commanded, by God himselfe, that when wee come to worship him, we fall downe and kneel before the Lord our maker. Relative to this rea∣son, we have in the conclusion this inference. Therefore in reveren e of God, the assembly thinketh good, that the sacrament be celebrated to the people meekly, and reverently ling upon their knee . For the confirmation of this reason is alledged, Psal. 35. vers. 7. out of which verse the words are taken. By this reason, Christ and his Apo∣stles, and all that have communicated sitting, or stan∣ding, or passing, since the dayes of Christ, have sinned. For if wee be commended by God to kneel, wee sinne if we kneel not. Next, the word translated worship, Psal. 95. 7. is taken, not generally for any action, or service divine, or religious expressed by the word Cul us in La∣tine, as it is taken here in the act, for then wee should sinne, if we kneel not, when we bear the word read or preached, but it is taken more strictly for a speciall kinde of worshipping of God, to wit, adoring God by the gesture of prostration. And so wee shall bee com∣manded to prostrat our body with our hands and feet spread upon the ground, and not to kneel only. For the people of God under the law used foure kindes of gestures in signe of honour: First, a bending, or bow∣ing downe of the head or face only, which was the least degree, and is expressed by the word Cadad: next, a bending or bowing of the superiour uk of the bo∣die expressed by the word Carang: the third, kneeling, expressed by the word Barach: the fourth, prostrating the bodie with hands and feet spread, as I have said, ex∣pressed by the word Histachaveh. The last three are all mentioned in the verse alledged. Thirdly, we have not here a commandement from God, but David his exhor∣tation, or invitation to the godly, not to kneel or fall downe before the Lord, when they come to worship him, or as the word beareth to prostrate themselfes, for that were as much as to desire them to fall downe and kneel, when they come to fall downe and kneel; but he exhorteth and inviteth them to come and prostrate themselfes, bow and kneel before the Lord their maker in token of thanksgiving, that is, in the temples where the arke was, and where the Lord was present in a won∣derfull manner sitting betweene the cherubims. It is grosse ignorance to inferre hereupon, that wee should, or are commanded to kneel at the receaving of the sa∣crament, more then at the hearing of the word, or at any of them, unlesse they think the sacrament the Lord their maker. The second reason in the narrative, The second reason of the act exa∣mined. saith the Do∣ctour, is this, And considering withall, that there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spirituall, then is the holy receaving of the blessed bodie and bloud of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Relative to this reason we have in the conclusion these words, And in regard of so divine a mysterie, the assembly thinketh good, that that blessed sa∣crament be celebrated to the people humbly, (or as the act ratified in parliament hath, meekly) and reverently up∣on their knees. We have here no other description of re∣ceaving the sacrament in the narrative, but the receaving of the body and bloud of Christ, which smelleth strongly of the reall presence. For the like, and some other phrases hath Master Prinne discovered Doctour Cou ins to be popish in the survey of his privat devoti∣ons. Then all that communicate, receave the body and bloud of Christ in at their mouth good and bad. This shall please the Lutheran and Papist full well. But by mysterie, L. p. 72, 73. saith the Doctour, is no meant the elements, nor is it said mysteries, but mysterie. It may well be the elements are not meant, because it may be, they thinke the elements vanish away, and nothing re∣maine but the accidents, or that Christs body and bloud are substantially present with the elements, or some other unknowne way, as the Doctour hath beene mute∣ring in privat. And that is a mysterie indeed. But by mysterie must be meant the sacrament: for in the narra∣tive we have no other phrase to expresse the sacrament, but the receaving of the body and bloud of Christ, which is relative to this word mysterie. And in the conclusion, the word sacrament both preceedeth and followeth: So the words in the same sense may be framed thus, Consi∣dering, there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spirituall then is the holy receaving of the blessed sacrament, therefore the assembly thinketh good in regard of so divine a mysterie, or in regard of so heavenly a pa t of Gods worship, that that blessed sacrament be celebrated, &c. Whereas he saith, the word is mysterie, not mysteries in the plurall number, howbeit we finde it so in the first copies, let it be mysterie; The Doctour himselfe in his solutions for kneeling, useth sometime the word mysteries, sometime mysteries. Casaub. exer∣cit. pag. 550. Casaubone speaking of this sacrament, saith, It is called sometime m sterie, sometime mysteries. Dicitur autono masticè , aut numero multitudinis . Dionysius Areop git a entituleth the chapter of the Lords supper, The mysterie of the syna is or holy commu∣nion, Ambrose saith, Ambrose in 1 Cor. 11. Hieron. in Psal. 147. Oecumen us in 1 Cor. 11. Indignus est Domino, qui aliter mysterium celebrat, quàm ab eo institutum est. Hierome saith, Licet in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen veriùs corpus Christi & sanguis ejussermo scripturarum est, Oecumenius saith, That the Apostle calleth the mysterie of our Ma∣ster, the Lords supper. A number of testimonies might be cited to this purpose. The reason of such speach is, because both the sacramentall signes are referred to one Christ. It is but one action the celebration of the sup∣per. Further, we receave the bodie and bloud of Christ, when we heare and beleeve the promises of the Gospel, read, Origen in num. Homil. 23. & 16. exponed, or rehearsed. Origen saith, Hoc quod modo loqu mur, sunt earnes Christi, that which we are presently speaking to you is the flesh of Christ. And in another place, We are said to drinke the bloud of Christ, not only by the rites of the sacraments, but also when we hear the word. Hierome, as ye heard before, That more truly the speach of the scri∣pture is the body and bloud of Christ. If then in the narra∣tive, be no me o me nt then the spirituall receaving of Christs body and bloud, it is no more a reason for knee∣ling at the receaving of the sacrament, then at hearing of the promises of the Gospel read and exponed. The words therefore must bee meant of the sacramentall manner of receaving, and the words relative in the con∣clusion, In regard of so divine a mysterie; must meane, In regard of the mysticall o sacramentall receaving; and so the Communicant is directed to kneel, in regard of the sa∣crament. The third reason in the narrative, The third reason exa∣mined. L. p. 74. is the correspon∣dence betweene the outward gesture of our body, and then meditation, and lifting up our hearts, whe wee re∣member, and consider the mysticall union betwixt Christ and us, and among our selfes, whereof we are made par∣takers by the receaving of Christs body and bloud. He shunneth to set downe the words of the narrative, and of the conclusion answerable to them, as he did in the former two reasons, because he perceaved they could not be framed to his purpose. For there is no mention made in the narrative of mysticall union, nor is it said in the narrative, that the most humble and reverent gesture of the bodie, well becommeth the meditation, and lift∣ing up of our hearts, when wee remember and consider the mysticall union betwixt Christ and us, but that the most humble and reverent gesture of our body in our meditation and lifting up of our hearts, becommeth well so divine and sacred an action, to wit, as is the receaving of the body and bloud of Christ. Wee are not directed by the act to meditate and lift up hearts, but to use that kinde of gesture, which becommeth meditation and the lifting up of the heart; nor is kneeling a gesture well becomming meditation. Wee meditate sitting, lying, walking. Kneeling is a gesture well becomming prayer, but not meditation. By lifting up the heart, no necessity to meane prayer: for the minde and heart may be lifted up by faith and contemplation, without prayer. And to this lifting up the Communicants were exhorted of old with sursum corda, least their hearts and mindes should be groveling and onely bent upon the elements. And so the lifting up of the eyes may be a signe of lift∣ing up of the heart and minde, in token that wee looke confidently to have our desires granted by God, who dwelleth in heaven, as the casting downe of the eye as a token of humiliation for sinne. Suppose by lifting up of the heart prayer should be meant, yet kneeling is not the humblest gesture for prayer, but prostration. Then we should prostrat our selfes when wee receave the sacra∣ment. Next, if the Communicant shall pray mentally, when hee receaveth the sacrament, and in that regard kneel, he shall be exercised other wayes then the act of receaving requires. Further, a secret mentall prayer shall be commended to him in publike without a vocall, and the signe of it the humble gesture of kneeling, whereas the signes of secret and mentall prayer in publike should be concealed, so farre as may be. The minister, when he delivereth the elements, is not directed to use a vocall prayer to be followed by the Communicant. And wee see, the Conformitants are not uniforme among them∣selfes in the words uttered at deliverie of the elements. If we may sit, or stand, or kneel in time of prayer, then kneeling is not enjoyned in regard of prayer, but some other thing intended. But, as I have said, we are not di∣rect, by the act to lift up our hearts or pray; and there∣fore I need not, as yet, to insist upon this pretext. Gi∣ving, that in the conclusion these words, In remem∣brance of so mysticall an union, e answerable in the nar∣rative, the meditation and lifting up of our heart; then by meditation and lifting up of the heart, is meant not prayer, but remembrance. And what is that, to say, to kneel in remembrance, that were to kneel for a memo∣riall. But suppone it were thus, when we remember, and as he addeth consider, to remember and consider is not to pray. Shall we kneel, whensoever we are put in minde of that mysticall union? And what is meant by this my∣sticall union? It may meane as well a materiall con∣junction, as they call it, or corporall union of the body of Christ, with the bodies of the Communicants, by touch in the mouth, swallowing downe to the stomack, and mixture with the bodies of the communicants, as spirituall with the soule. O Lord, let thy bodie which I have taken, and bloud which I have drunken, c eave uut my guts and en rals, saith a Romane missall. But the spi∣rituall eating of Christs flesh, and drinking of his bloud, and the mysticall union between Christ and us wrought by it, is as well done out of the sacrament, as in it, saith Master Downe, pag. 46. Wee are not united with Christ by recea∣ving his flesh into our mouthes, but by faith, which may be done without ever participat ing the sacr ment. That the Reader may perceave the better, how the act is contrived, let him read it without the two lies clo∣sed within the parenthesis, seeing the act is whole, and entire without them, and he shall see, that it may passe among Papists and Lutherans, not one word or syllable sounding against a reall presence in the signes, and that we are directed to kneel not in regard of any prayer, but in due regard of so divine an action or mysterie, as is the sacrament, or sacramentall receaving of Christs bodie and bloud. The intent of the church of England in kneeling. Wee may also consider the intent of the Church of England, or rather of their prelats and adherents, that wee may take up the better the intent of our act. For conformitie with them is intended. At the first, Knee∣ling was left free in the dayes of King Edward the sixt. The Papists making a stirre for want of reverence to the sacrament: at the second reviewing of the booke of common prayer. Kneeling was enjoyned upon this rea∣son, That the sacrament might not be prophaned, but holden in a holy and reverent estimation; this was done by the directours and contrivers of the booke, partly to pacifie the Papists, partly, because their judgement was not cleare in this point. They could not see every thing throughly at the dawning of the day. Yet it was not al∣tered, but by a sta ute 1. Elizabeth, that second booke of King Edwards was confirmed. D. B. of kneeling, p. 30. Doctour Burges brin∣geth in a passage to explaine the matter, which, saith he, is left out by negligence of the printer. But it is more likely, that it hath beene done of purpose by such as were directours. Doctour Mortoun saith, That their Church thought it fit by outward reverence in the manner of re∣ceaving the eucharist, to testifie their due estimation of such holy rites, to stop the mouths of blasphemous Pa∣pists, vilifying the sacrament with the ignominious names of bakers bread, vintners wine, profane elements, ale-cakes. But Doctour Ames, in his reply to Doctour Mortoun, Reply 2. part pag. 50. answereth, That it was not so much for the stopping of the mouths of Papists, but that some close dissembling adversaries did hinder the worke of refor∣mation so much as they could, and that they have done so ever since, and do so still to this day. It may be such pretended the scoffing of Papists; bu what matter of any glosse, if kneeling be directed, that the sacrament be not prophaned, but hold in reverent estimation. Then the sacrament is prophaned belike, if wee either sit, or stand, and kneel not. Master Hu ton saith, They kneel to put a difference betweene the ordinarie bread and wine, and these sacramentall, to which they give the more re∣verence, because it is more then ordinarie bread and wine. What more plaine? They say not, they kneel to God that the sacrament may not be prophaned, but hol∣den in reverence, &c. But simply, they are enjoyned to kneel, that the sacrament be not prophaned, &c. And suppose they were, it were no better shift then the Pa∣pists use, when they say they dedicate temples to God in honour of this or that Saint. And yet wee kneel not to God, but in prayer and thanksgiving, which are not compatible with the act of receaving, eating and drink∣ing, of which more afterward. A bare kneeling can not be presented without some signe of extraordinarie pre∣sence, or apparition. Some of their formalists pretend, The pretence of prayer ex∣amined. they kneel, because of the prayer u tered at the deliverie of the elements, The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, pre∣serve thy body and soule unto everlasting life. I answer, That it is already proved, that kneeling is enjoyned for the sacraments fak . Next, Christ prayed not at the deliverie of the elements, but in an enunciative forme uttered the word of the promise, This is my body, This cuppe is the new testament. 2. The word of promise is the speciall clause of the charter. The sacramentall signes, are like seales hanging at the charter. If at any time therefore the word of promise should be uttered, then specially when the seales are delivered. The Evan∣gelists Matthew, Mark, Luke, and the Apostle Paul, repeat precisely and constantly that word, so that any man may perceave, the sacramentall forme of words ought precisely to be observed and uttered in the name of Christ, without change into a prayer in name of the Church. The sacramentall forme of words is observed in baptisme, why not here. Our formalists forbeare to to utter the word of promise to the Communicant. They say, They have uttered it before. It is not enough, that they were uttered before narr iv ly, or in rehearsall of the words of institution; For this sacra∣ment is an imitation of Christ, not a recitall of his words and actions. It is to doe as he did, and not to report what he did, Of the eucha∣rist. p. 95. saith Mouline. The rehearsall of the words of the institution le terh us see, what warrant wee have to cele∣brate such an action, and in generall of use I read and wine. But it can not bee said demonstratively of this bread and wine in particular set on the table, that it is the body and bloud of Christ, till it be first sanctified by prayer and thanksgiving to that use, and after delivered to the communicant, with command, to take, eat, and assurance if he so doe, the bread shall be a pledge of his body, and the wine of his bloud. Christ said not, This is my body, take, eat, but Take, eat, this is my body, or actu continuo, bad them both take and eat. The promise is annexed to the commandment as conditionall, and hath no effect otherwise, but if the condition be performed. It is a receaved action among the Divines. Elementa ex∣trausum non sunt sacramenta: The elements out of the use are no sacraments. And sacramenta perficiuntur usu. If the elements after the blessing be not delivered, shal they be sacramentally Christs body and bloud? or if delive∣red, and not eaten? It fareth with the sacramentall elements, as with pawnes and pledges in contracts and bargans: A ring may bee set a part to bee a pledge in matrimonie, yet it is not actuallie a pledge, without consent of the other par∣tie, but only a meere sing. A stone chosen out from a∣mong many, to bee a signe of a march, is not actuallie a march stone, but in the use, when it is set with consent of parties in the march to that end. There was never a sign without the use wherefore it was appointed to be a sign. Never a march but that which divided land, nor a ban∣quet but in eating and drinking, De euchari∣stia l. 8. c. 3. num. 22, 23. saith Chamier. So the elements are sanctified, and set a part by prayer and rhanksgiving to this use, but are not Christs bodie and bloud actuallie till they be receaved and used. Panis nun∣quam est signum corporis Christi, nisi in edendo; nun quam vinum sanguinis, nisi in potando. And therefore this ho∣lie ordinance is properly defined a sacred act on, consi∣sting of so many rites. By a figurative kinde of speach it is true, the bread may bee called the sacrament of Christs bodie, because it is appointed to that end, as when Isaac said to Abraham, Where is the sacrifice? that is, the lamb or the ramme appointed for the sacrifice, but not properly. Doctour Lindseves proceedings at e th. page 5 . Now the Formalist presupponeth, that the sa∣crament is made alreadie, before hee come to deliver the elements, and therefore, hee sayth, hee uttereth other words at the deliverie. So yee see, they place such ver∣tue in uttering these words, This is my bodie, in the rehear∣sall of the institution, as the papist doth, that they thinke the read alreadie Christs bodie, and therefore absurd to utter these words againe at the deliverie to the Commu∣nicants: for then they should seeme to consecrate again. So grosse poperie is the ground of omitting the comfor∣table word of promise at the delivering, and snbstituting a pray r, page 336. or ministeriall blessing, as P. calleth it, in the rowme of it, and such a prayer as presupposeth the bread already to bee Christs bodie: and therefore they say, The bodie of the Lord pr serve thy bodie and soule. Heere also is a wil-worship: for howbeit prayer bee of it selfe a pure of Gods worship instituted and allowed by God, yet to pray unseasonablie, and out of time, at the will and de∣vice of man, when you should bee serving God in ano∣ther forme, it is wil-worship: neither is there necessitie of this, a prayer alreadie preceeding. And surely this their prayer is a senselesse one, like that old prayer, Anima Christi sanctificaine, which is directed to Christs soule, whereas wee should direct our prayers to his person, not to his humanitie by it self. Let it bee observed by the way, that the words of the institution are rehearshed in the English service book, and among the rest these ords, This is my bodie, to God in a continuall tenor with the prayer begun before, just according to the order observed in the Canon of the masse, when the priest offereth his sacrifice, which is an horrible abuse of the words of the institution, which Christ uttered to the Communicants, and not unto God. I dare bee bold to affirme, the sacrifice of the masse had never en red in the Church, if the word of promise had beene uttered at the deliverie of the elements to the Communicants in an enunciative forme, or demonstra∣tively, as Christ did. Thirdly, if in regard of prayer, then, if Christs sacramentall speach be uttered without addi∣tion of a prayer, the Communicants must not kneel. Christs forme of speach then must be thrust out, that prayer and with it kneeling may enter in. Fourthly, suppose the prayer might be substituted in the roome of the word of promise, kneeling should not be enjoyned nor urged more precisely at that bit of prayer, then at other prayers. Yea, it is superstition to urge kneeling at one prayer more strictly, then at another, and absurd, in my judgement, to enjoyne it at all in any. They may as well enjoyne any man to lift up his eyes, to knock on his breast, to bow the head, or crouch, as to kneel: as they doe in the popish service, which hath made it the more ridiculous. for kneeling, lifting up of the hands or eyes, knocking on the breast, are naturall expressions and adumbrations of the inward motions of the soule, and proceed ex abundantia interni affectu, De sacram. lib. 1. c. 10. s. 7. as saith Cha∣mier, and therefore ought not to be extorted by injun∣ctions, for that were to command men to play the hypo∣crits, and like comedians, to counterfite outward signes of such inward motions, as perhaps are not in them, so ve∣hement as to stir them up voluntarily to such expressions. Yea, some of them may serve for ejaculations, as the lift∣ing up of the eyes, to knock on the breast, and to bow the head, which bowing is finished in one instant, saith L. pag. 68. All undecent and unseemly gesture in prayer, ought to bee forbidden, but no gesture ought to bee comman∣ded in speciall, but left free. Fiftly, that prayer above mentioned, is but a short ejaculation, and sooner ended then the Communicant can addresse himself to his knees. Sixtly, that prayer or short wish is ended be∣fore the Minister offer the bread to the Communicant, and bid him take it, and yet the Communicant is enjoined to continue still upon his knees. Nor is kneeling enjoi∣ned to them by statute or their service book, in regard of mentall prayer, for none such is enjoined. what suppose kneeling were enjoined in respect of prayer also, for if also, or principallie for reverence of the Sacrament, it is sufficient for our purpose. for to adore any other thing but God, or with God, are both idolatrous. Master Paybodie saith, P. pag. 334. Concerning prayer, I do freely confesse, that in as much as it is but an occasion, and not the principall ex∣ercise of the soule, whither it be: mentall or vocall, in the sa∣crament all busi esse, I do neither deeme it the principall re∣spect of lawfull kneeling, neither have I reason to deeme it the principall respect upon which the Church enjoyneth it. And againe, pag. 299. Suppose there bee no prayer used in the time of receaving, I think never the worse of the gesture of kneeling. No wonder hee say so, for hee layeth down a ground, that any of the gestures may be used in any part of Gods worship, which is a begging of the question, and yet hee can not prove kneeling at the hearing of the word, let bee in the act of receaving the sacramentall ele∣ments, but out of a misprinted place in Perth assembly, pag. 45. where in is put for after. Farre lesse can our Formalists pretend the respect of prayer. No pretence of prayer in our act. For we have no act enjoyning either any vocall prayer to be uttered by the minister or mentall by the Communicant, when he is to receave the elements. Nor doe our Formalists observe one forme of words at the deliverie, either for prayer, or otherwise. Wheresoever the publike intent of a Church is to kneel for reverence of the sacrament, The intent of the knee∣ler must be interpreted by the act. every Communi∣cant following her direction, is an idolater. Howbeit his privat intent were divers from the intent of the act, which is urged as the publike intent of the Church, yet he is interpretativè an idolater, and to be so construed both before God and man. If any man receave the sa∣crament upon his knees at Rome, or in any other Popish Church, whersoever were his privat intent, yet he must be interpreted to kneel according to the intent of the Church of Rome. The heart may be carried one way, and the outward action another way for feare, or other respects, but that outward action must be interpreted not according to the intention of the minde, but the intent of the injoyner. If ye fall downe before an idol in Spaine, suppose for feare of the inquisition, ye commit idolatrie, and honoureth that idol in the sight of men. If it be asked, after what manner the Communicant must be interpreted to adore, Of the man∣ner of their adoration. I answer, That upon better consideration of the act then before, I thinke the Com∣municant may according to the act kneel with a Popish intent, carring both the inward motion of his spirit, and outward submission of his body to the sacrament upon opinion of transubstantiation, or with the Lutherans in∣tent upon opinion of consubstantiation, and that for two cases, first, because the words of the act make men∣tion only of the body and bloud of Christ, and of the blessed sacrament, but not one word of the elements of bread and wine. Next, because some of our ministers the chief urgers of kneeling are popish, and have taught in publike in the pulpits of Edinburgh, that wee ought not to contend, or descant curiously upon the manner of Christs presence in the sacrament, and that he is pre∣sent after an unknowne manner. To this purpose they cite a saying of Durandus. It is current among the En∣glish prelats. D. Ames 1. reply pag. 54. part. 2. The bishop of Rochester in his defence of kneeling, commendeth the simplicitie of the ancients, who disputed not whither Christ were present C n, sub, in, or trans, Hooker. l. 5. s. 67. in the supper. See Hooker likewise in his fift booke of ecclesiasticall policie. And Sutton on the Lords supper, in his appendix. They will talke more plainly, when they shall see their time. pag. 142, 145. Our Doctour commen∣deth them for this. They would have us beleeve, that the manner of the presence of Christs body at the sa∣crament is unknowne, whereas we know very well, that Christs body is present after a spirituall manner to the soules of the godly receaving by faith, ut to the sacra∣ment, or elemen s only after a sacramentall manner, that is, relatively, as things signified are to signes, how∣beit farre distant. That incomprehensible or unsearch∣able manner, whereof they talke, is a lurking hole for adversaries to the truth, Epist. 76. as Beza can tell him. Our Doctour from Christs personall omnipresence, inferreth, page 142. the flesh and bloud of Christ may be worshipped in the sacrament, because, wheresoever his person is, his humanity is corjoyned with his divinitie. By this Popish reason, Christs flesh and bloud may be worshipped in a stone, in the moone, the sunne, or any other thing else. His argument is borrowed from the Rhemists note upon Heb. 1. 8. Our doctour rejecteth the Vbiquitaries conceat of Christs humanitie, extended and diffused through every place: yet notwithstanding of this personall omnipresence, he hideth himself in the lurking hole of the imperceptible manner of the sacramentall presence. He acknowledgeth a spiritual presence of Christs body in the sacrament. B llarmine acknowledgeth as much, De Eucharis. lib. 1. cap. 2. for saith hee, Non habet Christus in Eucharistia mo∣dum existendi corporum, sed spirituum. If ye will bear the word Bodily, so will Bellarmine he content, because (saith he) Christ is not present after that manner, that bodies have existence of their own nature, unlesse the right explica∣tion bee added: He commendeth the expression of the councell of Tre , Verè, realiter, substantialiter, Truely re∣allie substantiallie, as the best and surest For the popish sence. When our doctours will not have us to contend about the manner of presence, whither by consubstanti∣on, or transubstantiation, yet this taketh not away Sub∣stantially in generall, but leaveth place to substantially in an unknown manner. But wee proceed: If any will extend the words of the act to the elements of bread and wine, and interpret the receaving of Christs bodie and bloud, of the souls inward receaving, then howbeit hee kneeleth not upon opinion of the reall presence of Christ in the sacrament, yet his adoration is terminated, and re∣steth someway upon the sacrament, or sacramentall ele∣ments, otherwise hee cannot bee said to kneel for recei∣ving of the sacrament. Now, as the papists agree not among themselves about the manner of worshipping their images, so the Com∣municants may differ in the manner and way of termi∣nating that adoration or worship. Therefore suppose he believe not the reall presence or existence of the body of Christ in the bread, yet hee may in his apprehension and imagination unite them, as the papist doth his image with the prototype, and so adore the thing with the thing sig∣nified; as the purple robbe with the King is coadored or adored per accid ns: or hee may consider the signe, as substitute in the roome of the thing signified, howbeit absent, and performeth before it, or about it, that adora∣tion which hee would bestow upon the thing signified, and by it, or in it honoureth the thing, signified proper∣ly, but the signe improperly: As when a Kings Ambas∣sadour or Vice-gerent is honoured at some solemnitie with the honour of his Master, but improperly; for the King is properly honoured. Or as Vas uez will have ima∣ges to bee adored, to wit, with the inward motion of the minde to the thing signified the bodie of Christ, and the exterior or outward signe of submission to the signe, to bee transmitted to the thing signified, or considering the signes as things sacred, and in relation to God, whom we are serving in the use of them. So howbeit the way and manner of terminating the reverence in the Sacrament bee different, according to the conceat of the Communi∣cant, all come to one end, to wit, to kneel for reverence of the Sacrament. Now to kneel for reverence, is a gesture of adoration, pag. 70. and soveraigne worship, as L. ackow∣ledgeth. It is nothing to the devil, whether a man erre this or that way. Howbeit the Communicants were not directed to kneel for reverence of the Sacrament, dare any man say, but they may easily fall upon it one of these wayes. I might draw another score heere, for it is enough that the Communicants are directed by the act of Perth to kneel, for reverence of the Sacrament: for seeing hee kneeleth in obedience to that act, hee must bee inter∣preted to kneel for that end: otherwise hee may goe to Rome, and take Corpus Christi out of the popes hand, re∣serving a secret intent to himself. Therefore howbeit kneeling in the act of receiving might hee lawfull, no professour in our Church can bee excused, if he kneel. But wee proceed, Kneeling in the act of re∣ceiving can not be free of idolatrie. and setting aside the act of P rth, wee consider the act or action it self, kneeling in the act of receaving, eating, drinking the simplie. We will prove it can not bee done but for reve∣rence of the Sacrament, or sacramentall elements, and that by two arguments. The first argument shall bee this, The first ar∣gument. To be tied to kneel, whither by direction of others, or resolution of our own mindes, to kneel with reverence, in any religious exer∣cise or senselesse creature, can not bee done but for of that creature. The communi∣cant is by the direction of others, or his own to kneel with reverence before dead and senselesse creatures, when hee is in the act of re∣ceaving the sacramentall elements. Therefore he knee∣leth for reverence of the sacramentall elements. I say, by direction of others, or resolution of our own minde. for we can not kneele to God in prayer, but there are many things before us, a house, a wall, a tree, &c. but they are set before us only by casuall position or situation ther can wee choose to do otherwise, but wee do not lie our selfes. I adde with reverence: for if a person finding him∣selfe diseased at the hearing of the word, finde himselfe eased with kneeling, that can not bee called kneeling with reverence. If yee bee tied to kneel with reverence, when you are to do any religious exercise, suppone prayer, be∣fore such a creature, suppone but a'tree, and is not like∣wise tied when you pray before any other creature, your gesture of adoration can not bee without respect to the tree. God himself never appointed any creature to bee an object to the eyes of man, when hee was to adore him upon his knees, but only directed his people to kneel to∣ward a certain place, where he was present himself in an extraordinarie manner, or bound himself by promise to hear them from thence. Hee was present in the Ark af∣ter an extraordinarie manner, sitting betweene the Che∣rubins, answered by a lively voice out of it to Moses, and vouchsafed to hear such as turned toward the Temple, when they called upon him. But there is no such place appointed under the Gospel, far lesse any creature before which hee hath directed us to kneel. Our adoration is directed to that place, where wee know the manhood of Christ, whereof the Ark and the Temple were types, doth exist naturally or substantially, that is, to the heavens The sacramentall bread is not a place of Gods extraor∣dinarie presence, nor of the existing of Christs manhood substantially, or of promise to hear us from thence. It is idolatrie (saith Perkinse) to turne, Treatise of idolatie . dispose or direct the wor∣ship of God, or any part thereof to any particular place or creature without the appointment of God, and more specially to direct our adoration to the bread, or the place where the bread is. The Theologues, and ministers in the Palati∣nat in their admonition, touching the booke of Con∣cord, teach us, that it is idolatrie to worship God other∣wise then he hath commanded: that they are guilty of this idolatrie, that direct the adoration of God to any other place or creature, then God hath commanded: that for this cause only these worshipped God aright, who in their gesture turned their faces toward the arke, where he was, prefer after a singular manner, because God had commanded this ceremoniall adoration, pro∣mising to heare such as worshipped him after that man∣ner. But that under the new testament all ceremoniall adoration by turning us to any certaine place or thing, is damned. In the admonition above mentioned, therefore they condemne them as guiltie of as grosse idolatrie, who adore Christ in, or beside, or before the sacramentall bread; s if he were corporally there, as those who fal∣ling down before any common bread, a stocke, or stone, would say, they adore Christ in it. Qui igitur Christum adorant in isto vel apud istum, vel coram isto pane, tanquam ibi corporaliter praesentem, aeque crassam ac Deo displicen∣tem idololatriam admittunt, atque is qui coram quovis pa∣ne communi aut quovis trunco, aut quovis lapid: procidens, in eo Christum se aederarit dicat. They adde, as corporal∣ly present, because these against whom they were wri∣ting maintained a corporall presence. Our doctour sayeth, It is no errour to worship Christs flesh there, pag. 142. which must bee understood as present there, whither in respect of his personall omnipresence, or by imaginarie u ion of the bread and his bodie, or that unknown manner of sacramentall presence, with which they cloak perhaps a meaning, which as yet they think not expedient to pro∣fesse. Kuchlinus disp. theolog. pag. 597. inferreth out of Ierem. 3. 11. and Iohn 4. 23. likewise, that our ado∣ration should not bee directed, either in bodie or minde, to the altar, or the ministers hand. Ter Simecdochen enim tollit circumstantiam omnem verti loci; ad quem in terris di∣rigitur adoratio Dei, quod ostendit Antithesis manifestè, sed in spiritu & veritate. Yee see then, howbeit wee are not tied to direct our adoration at all time to the place where the bread is, as the Jewes were toward the arke, because it is not alwayes fixed in a certaine place, these divines condemne the like manner, at whatsoever time we adore before the bread. We uncover our heads, The unco∣vering of the head not like kneeling. say they, when wee receave the elements, why may wee not also kneel? I answer, first, the uncovering of the head is a gesture of reverence only, and that only among some nations, but not of adoration. The Jewes, Turkes, and Mahometans pray with their heads covered. The Grecians and Romanes of old, howbeit they walked in publike with uncovered heads, except in raine, great heat, or mourning, yet in the service of their Gods, they had their heads covered. The Europeans this day uncover their heads when they are praying. Kneeling is a gesture of adoration among all nations, either in civill or religious use. Augustine saith, Honorat emnis qui adorat, no autem adorat omnes quid onorat; Every one that doth adore, doth honour, but not every one that honoureth, adoreth. Contraserm. Arian. c. 23. I will not kneel to every one, to whom I uncover my head civilly. Every one that standeth with his head uncovered in presence of the king, is not adoring, as he is who is presenting his petition to the king upon his knee in their sight. A provinciall synod holden at Lon∣don, anno 1603: ordained the head to be uncovered, when their service is read in the Church, yet I thinke they would not have enjoyned kneeling. We heare the canonicall scripture read with uncovered heads, but yet we kneel not. The words of Christ, which he uttered at the institution, are still and often uttered; that same voice soundeth through all the tables of the world, his actions, which were divine and holy, are reiterat. In Gratians decree, De consecrat. dist. 1. cap. 68. we have a superstitious direction of Pope Anastasius, that when the Gospell is reade in the Church, those that are present, shall not sit, but stand venerabiliter curvi, bowing reve∣rently, hearken and adore. Wherefore more at the hea∣ring of the Gospell, then the Epistle, which is also Evan∣gelicall? Yet you see, howbeit that standing with bow∣ing be more then to have the head uncovered, it was but veneration. And, whereas he saith, Et fideliter adorent, the glosse hath, id est venerentur, because the word ado∣ring, is taken there in a large sense, as yee may see sundrie places above cited, not for that which is in a strict sense called adoration. Adoration in strict sense is kneeling or pr stration. Whereas Matthew saith, chap 8. . of the leprouse man, That he worshipped Christ, or adored Christ, as the Latine translation hath according to the origi∣nall, Mark 1. 40. He kneeled dew e to him, and Luke 5. 12. that he fell in his face. Suchlike, where it is said of the Cananitish woman, Matth. 15. 25. That she worship∣ped, or adored him: & adoravit eum. Mark 7. 25. it is said, That she fell at his feet. The Greek word , signifieth to fall downe like a dog o whelp at the feet of another, as our Lord. Further, our heads are not other way uncovered in the act of receaving, then in the rest of the time of the celebration; when wee are not neare the elements. And thirdly, the uncovering of our head is compatible with the varietie of actions in time of ce∣lebration, praying, singing, the words of the in∣stitution, and chapters reade, but adoration directed, as they pretend to God, can not be without presenting our petitions, and thanks to God, which requireth a se∣verall part of the action by it selfe. It is objected, Occasionall. neeling not warrant r ordinarie. pag. 88. that 1 King. 18. 39. when the people saw the fire fall upon the sacrifice, to consume it, the wood, the stones, the dust and lick up the water that was in the trench, they fell on their faces, and cried, The Lord is God. I answer, The people fell on their faces af∣ter the fire had consumed the burnt sacrifice, the wood, the stones, and licked up the water, and not in the meane time; for it is not likely that they fell downe, till they had seene what the fire had wrought. Next, what sup∣pose they had fallen down in the meane time, that the fire was working the worke, wherefore it was sent. Is it any wonder, that men amazed with the presence of Gods majestie in a miracle, fall downe as astonished, to worship God. Levit. 9. 23, 24. The origi∣nall of unbe∣ eef. pag. 332. Such a visible signe of Gods presence is called the glorie of the Lord. Doctour Jackson the Ar∣minian hath this rule to be observed, Such actions as have been managed by Gods Spirit suggested by secret in¦stinct, or extracted by extraordinarie and speciall occasions, are then onely lawfull in others, when they are begotten by like occasions, or brought forth by like impulsions. In mat∣ters of secular civilitie or moralitie, many things (saith he) will beseeme one man, which are uncomely in an∣other, and in one, and thes me mans deportment many things are decent and lawfull, whiles they are drawne from him by speciall or rare occasions, whose usuall practise upon dislike or no occasions, becommeth accor∣ding to the nature of the subject, r diculous, or dishonest. That in the service of God, and matters spirituall, the least digression or declination from proposed paternes, is farre more dangerous. To attempt the like enterprise unto Jonathans, upon warrant of his exemple, and upon like speeches of enemies inviting him to come up, would bee a superstitious tempting of God. Every man may not use the like prognostication, that Abrahams servant made use of, when he was sent to bespeak for his young master Isaac a wife. Jacob expressed his tender affection to his sonne Joseph, whom he never looked to see again, by kissing his coat, but to have hanged it about his bed or table, that it might receave such salutations evening and morning, or at every meales time, might have coun∣tenanced many breaches of superstition. Charles the fift after his fyrewell to the warres, and safe arrivall to Spaine, saluted the spanish shore in such an affectionat and prostrat manner, as his meanest vassall could nor or∣dinarly have saluted, either him or it without just impu∣tation of grosse idolatrie. These are Doctour Jacksons examples, which hee bringeth in for illustration of his rule. If there come into the Church one that beleeveth not, or one that is unlearned, and heare one after another prophesie, and finding himself convinced, and the secrets of his heart made manifest, falling downe on his knees, he will report that God is in you of a truth, 1 Corin. 14. 24, 25. Yet if hee fell downe before: them ordinarily, were it not idolatrous? Thirdly, suppose they had fal∣len downe when the fire was in working, yet it is not said, that they fell downe with their eyes po ing upon the fire, but upon their faces, and cried. The Lord is God, because he had manifested by his presence and power in such a miracle, that he was the true God, as 2 Chron. 7. 3. when the children of Israel saw, how the fire came down, and consumed the sacrifices, and that the glorie of the Lord had filled the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavem n , and worshipped and prai∣sed the Lord, saying, &c. Salomon kneeled, Salomons kneeling at the dedica∣tion of the temple. say they, before the altar of the Lord, when he prayed at the dedication of the temple. For it is said, 1 King. 8. 54. that when he had made an end of praying all his prayer and application to the Lord, he arose from before the altar of the Lor , from kneeling on his knees, and stood, and blessed the people. I an∣swer, The altar is not set downe there as the object, to∣ward which he directed his countenance, when he was kneeling, but only as a circumstance of the place where he was, when hee praved at that time; for he had pre∣pared a brazen scaffold; and set it in the middest of the court, over against the altar of the Lord, 2 Chron. 6. 13. He kneeled where he had been standing on the scaffold, and spread his hands toward the heavens, not toward the altar. It is said; 2 Chron. 6. 13. That he fell downe upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands towards heaven. Neither is it said, That he turned his face to the altar. They turned their face ordinarily to that part of the temple, where the arke was the place of Gods extraordinarie presence. The arke was metonymically called God, 1 Sam. 4. 7. The Lord, 1 King. 9. 25. The Lord of hosts, the King of glorie, Psal. 24. The face of the Lord, Esa. 1. 12. for it the tabernacle was made, and the temple. It represented Gods seat, and God delivered his oracles from the mer∣cie seat above it. What likelihood then is there, that they kneeled ordinarly in their prayers looking toward the altar, or that they come never before the altar but kneeled before it; for the altar was but dedicated at this time. It was not already dedicated, but in fieri, saith D. B. Augustine lib. Of kneeling. pag. 7. 2. ad Simplicianum qui. 4. saith, Da∣vid pr yed before the arke, Quia ibi sacratior & com∣mendatior presentia Domini erat; because the presence of the Lord there was more sacred and more to bee re∣spected. The like answer may bee given to that place, Micha 6. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God. They bowed themselves before the high God sitting betweene the Cherubims, not toward the altar, they bowed, when they had offered their oblations, not to their oblations. As when they presented the basket with first fruits; they first set it downe, and after bowed themselves before Jehovah their God, and so went out, Deut. 26. 24. 10. What if they had bowed, when they were offering to God? When wee are in the act of receaving, eating, drinking, we are receaving, and not offering. They say, The pre∣tence of ob∣jectum a quo significative. the sacramentall elements are only as obje∣ctum à quo significative, that is, as an active object mo∣ving them to worship the things signified, or God. Put case that were true. So said Purandus, Holcot, and Picus Mirandula; That they adored the prototype or samplar before the image, which put them in minde of the sam∣plar, and spake in as abstract a manner, of their worship, as the Formalist doth, when he pretendeth the purest intent he can in he manner of his adoration. And yet were they never ranked among the Iconomachi, but by the Papists counted good Catholiks. It is true, Bellar∣mine and Suarez are not content with this adoration, which they call improper adoration, when any person or thing is honoured in place of another, as when the ambassadour is honoured with the honour due and pro∣per to the king, but for the king, or, as when all the cere∣monies are celebrat about a statue in steed of the true corps. De imagini∣bus. cap. 19. 20. 21. Bell irmine granteth notwithstanding that, Coram illa, vel in illa, aut per illam adoratur exemplar, that after their manner of worship the samplar is adored before the image, De cultu adorat. Disp. 108. num. 73. or in the image, or by the image. Vazquez pro∣veth, That these Doctours made the image objectum quod, the very object passive of adoration, and that both the samplar and the image were adored, simul cum ima∣ginibus exemplaria proximè & ut quód adorari. For they used the same respect to the images, that other Catho∣liks used, they uncovered their head to them, they bow∣ed toward them, kneeled before them, and kissed them. And this he defendeth to be the right manner, when the image and the samplar are adored with one adoration, the inward motion and submission of the minde, being carried to the samplar, and the outward signe of submis∣sion to the image, being transmitted by the spirit, or in thought and defire, De adorat. disp. 108. num. 90. num. 132. 134. & disp. 110 num. 34. Disp. 109. num. 7. to the samplar. That all the Catho∣liks agree in this, that the kisse be so fixed upon the image, and the body be bowed before it, that the affe∣ction being inflammed with the remembrance of the samplar, be carried to it with inward reverence, Virtute cujus externum esculum in ipsum etiam veluti sagittam transmittat; by vertue or power whereof it transmitteth the outward kiss , as an arrow, to the samplar it selfe. So kneeling before the image, prostration, or any other signe of submission is to be transmitted by the image to the samplar after the same manner. For, De adorat. disp. 106. num 2. & 6. saith he, in the time of the 7. synod, there were some enemies to images, who were content, that images were brought into the Church, not only for decorement, sed etiam ad excitand m f delibus memoriam exemplaris, ut coram eis ipsum solum ven rentur, illis tamen nullum signum honoris aut submissienis, neque osculo, nec inclinatione corporis, nec alio modo exhiberent, id enim idolatriam esse dicebant, ut also to stirre up the remembrance of the samplar, to the faithfull, that before them they might reverence only the samplar, but exhibite no signe of honour or submission, ei∣ther by kisse or bowing of the body, or any other way, for they said that was idolatrie. Quare nec osculabantur imagines, neque ipsis corpus inclinabant, nec thurificabant, sed recti coram eis, in memoriam ex emplaris exictati, in ipsum mente sola ferebantur. And therfore (saith he) they neither kissed images, nor bowed their body to them▪ nor of∣fered incense, but standing upright before them, being stirred up to the remembrance of the samplar, they were carried on∣ly in their winde to it. In another place he saith, Disp. 108. num. 128. Icono∣machi, qui ad solam recordationem imaginibus utuntur, ante illas genua non flectunt, nec se prosternunt, sic enim ip∣sas nota extcriori adorarent, sed erecti absque ullo gestu corporis qui reverenti m judicet, coram imagine, exempla∣ris recordantur & ipsum spiritu solùm adorant. That is, The adversaries to images, who use images only to put them in remembrance of the samplar, they neither kneel, nor pro∣strat themselves before them, for so they should adore them with the outward note or signe, but standing upright without any gesture of the body before the image, which might be a shew of reverence, they remember the samplar, and adore it in spirit only. But these Doctours above mentioned, how∣beit their inward reverence was directed to the sam∣plar, yet the outward signe of submission was first di∣rected to the image. Ye see then, that taking the images only as objectum à quo significativè, as instruments and meanes to stirre up their remembrance, these mangrels who were called Semiprobi, would not kneel before them: for then, saith Vazquez, they should have adored them, which he in his Popish judgement, thinketh they should have done; but these Doctours did so. So if the elements be used only as objectum à quo significativè, to stirre up their remembrance, why kneel they before them. Nay, why are not the elements lifted up, as among the Papists, after they have said, This is my body, (for, say they, it is made then a sacrament) that the peo∣ple being stirred up at the elevation with the sight of the signifying object, may kneel in whatsoever part of the Church they be. And howsoever the Doctour see∣meth to disallow the elevation, pag. 119. 120. 121. Yet he saith, we may kneel before the elements, having them in our sight, or object to our senses, as ordinarie meanes, signes, and memorial, to stirre us up to worship God and our Saviour, pag. 88. 92. what fault were there then to lift them up to be seene. Seeing then they kneel before such a signifying object, and are tyed to kneel, the signi∣fication of the object doth not help, but rather be wray∣eth, that they give that respect unto it, as by it to trans∣mit the outward signe of worship▪ mediatly to the thing signified, pag. 5. or to God, which L. confesseth to bee idolatrie, hypocrisie, and a mixture of worship: and yet this is at the least their worship. For if they used them onely as active objects, to stirre them up, they would not kneel before them in the meane time, more then when they are stirred up by the word, or works of God, by a toad, an asse, or a flee. And therefore it is not to the purpose, that he so often harpeth upon the use of stirring and moving. pag. 84. 85. 81. 92. D. B. of kneeling. pag. 33. D. B. saith plainly, That objectum à quo significativè, is medium per quod, a means by which, and that by the sacrament, they tender adoration to God. Doctour Mortoun saith, The adoration is relativ from the signe to Christ. If it be from the signe, it must first be carried to the signe, as a meane of conveyance unto Christ, Reply 2. part. pag. 65. No diffe∣rence be∣tweene images and the elements in the case of adoration. saith Doctour Ames in his reply. But D. L. in his solutions, saith, there is a great diffe∣rence between images, which are the inventions of men, and the workes of God and the sacraments. But say we, in the case of adoration there is no difference. If the historicall use of images be lawfull, as some now main∣taine, quid obstat praesentia imaginis, saith Vazquez, what doth hinder you at the sight of a crucifix to fall downe before it, and worship Crist. And if the use of images to this end be forbidden, so are also the creatures. Wee esteeme more indeed of the workes of God, then of the workmanship of man. Wee owe reverence at the hea∣ring of the word, decent and comely usage in the parti∣cipation of the sacrament, which we owe not to images, howbeit this reverent use be not properly a spece of ado∣ration. L. pag. 77. Gods word and workes are ordained by God for our instruction, and so are not images. But God never ordained them to this end, that in them, by them, or before them, we should adore him, or any other thing wee are put in remembrance of by them. They are not commanded to be used, either in or out of the time of divine service, in modo & statu accomodato ad adoratio∣nem. Wee may, and do use the word and sacraments for meanes, occasions, instruments to stirre us up to wor∣ship God, but it followeth not that wee should or may worship God by kneeling before them. The generall Councell holden at Constantinople, anno 750. in con∣demning images, speaking by the way of this sacrament, hath these words, Ecce igitur vivificantis illius corporis imaginem totam, panis scilicet substantiam, quam manda∣vit apponi, ne scilicet humana effigie figura a, idololatria intro duceretur; Behold therefore the whole or only image of that quickning body, the substance of bread, which he com∣manded to be set before them, least if it had a humane shape, idolatrie might have beene brought in. The braz n ser∣pent was set up upon a pole, that these who were stinged with the firie serpents, looking upon it, might be cured. Yet, De adorat. disp. 104. num. 24. saith Vazquez, God commanded them to looke up∣on it, standing upright without any adoration or signe of submission. The people of God had their sacra∣ments, yet they kneeled not before them, nor yet heard they the word either read or exponed kneeling. When they heard the law of the passeover, they bowed not their head, howbeit it might bee finished in an instant, saith L. pag. 68. and farre lesse kneeled, but after they had heard. Gods workes are the booke of nature to teach us many things concerning God. But wee must not therefore fall downe before the sunne or moone, every green tree, an asse, a toad, when they worke, at the sight of them, upon our mindes, and move us to consider Gods good∣nesse, wisedome, power. For then wee should fall into the horrible errour of Vazquez, De adorat. disp. 110. who doubted not to averre, that not onely an image, or any holy thing may be worshipped in the same adoration with God, but also any thing in the world, the sunne, the moone, the stirres, a stock, Solut. p. 62. a stone, a straw: Doctour Lindsey in his soluti∣ons, to shunne this absurditie, saith, To bow downe, when we have seene the workes of God, when we have heard the word, and when we receave the sacraments, to ador him, when by his workes, the word, and sacraments, we are taught to adore, is neither to bow downe to an idol, nor to worship God in an idol. He durst not say, When we see the workes of God, when wee heare the word of God, as he should have done, if he would have showen the difference betwixt the word of God, the workes of God, and images. Nor yet doth he say, When we have receaved the sacrament, as he said of the other two, When we have seene the workes of God, when wee have heard the word of God. But now hee affirmeth boldly, that we may bow our knees to God before his creatures, if wee use them onely as meanes and instru∣ments to stirre us up to worship God, pag. 94. That this errour grounded upon the significant object, may be the better perceaved, consider, that the booke of na∣ture is like the booke of grace. If I were reading and meditating upon a passage of scripture, I am then consi∣dering what is read. When I have ended that worke, if I finde my selfe moved to pray, or give thankes, I pore not still with the eyes of my body, and my minde upon the booke, but turne my selfe to a wall, or a chaire, or a bed, or any other thing casually placed before me, yea perhaps before the booke it selfe, but casually, as before any other thing. I am not then gathering leassons or in∣structions, for that exercise is ended. So when I am be∣holding a tree, an asse, or toad, and considering in them the goodnesse, power, and wisedome of God, I am rea∣ding upon the booke of nature, I am contemplating and gathering profitable instructions. I cannot still be con∣templating, and in the meane time adore kneeling in prayer, or praise, for that were a confusion of holy exercises. Nor yet after my contemplation, and pre∣paratorie worke for worship is ended, must I tie or set my selfe before that asse, to d, or tree to kneel; for then I should kneel for a greater respect to that creature, then to any other beside for the time, before which I might have kneeled casually without respect. And so the mo∣ving object shall participat of the externall adoration, my kneeling being convoyed by it to God, to whom it is directed by my spirit or affection, as Vazquez hath de∣scrived the manner of adoration by images. The man∣ner is not different. If the old opinion of some Heath∣nike philosophers were their tenent, that the world was animated by God, as our bodies are by our soules, then they might with some probabilitie conclude. Jupiter st quodcunque vides, All that thou seest is great Jupiter, and infer this worship before every creature. But Christian religion will not admit such gros e opinions. They say, Mediat civill wor ip no good war∣rant. men how before the chaire of estate, or the princes seale, which are dead and senslesse creatures. I answer, civill worship is conveyed mediatly to the per∣son of the prince, by bowing before such senslesse crea∣tures, because men thinke it expedient to uphold the in∣firmitie of princely majestie by such meanes. But God needeth no mediat worship to uphold his majestie, nor will have none. Againe, the ceremonies of Kings and Emperours courts are no rules for religions worship. For, De civitat. Dei lib. 10. cap. 4. as Augustine saith, Multa de cultu di vino usurpata sunt, quae honoribus deseruntur humanis, sive humilitate ni∣mia, sive adulatione pestifera. That great humilitie or pe∣stiferous statterie, may be the originall of many honours gi∣ven to princes, borrowed from the formes used in Gods wor∣ship. Nazianzen saith, The Roman Euperours were ho∣noured with publike images. Their crownes, and dia∣demes, and purple robes, many lawes, tributs, and mul∣titude of subjects were not sufficient to make sure their empire, but they behoved to be adored, not only in their owne persons, but also in colours, and other works made with mens hands, that they might seeme the more vene∣rable. That is, Chamier de Imagin. c. 6. num. 9. as Chemier interpreteth, these images proceeded ab inexplebili fostū Imperatorum, from the in∣satiable ambition of Emperours. The statues of some Kings have had divine honours conferred on them. Do∣ctour Abbots in his defence of Perkinse saith, It should seeme s range, that formalities observed to princes in their courts for majesti and royall estate, should be made paternes of religious devotion to be practised in the Church. Francis Whit in his reply to Fisher saith, pag. 228. Civill and reli∣gious worship are of divers beginnings and formes, and eve∣ry thing that is possible, lawfull and commendable in the one, is not so in the other. There is civill ordin nce for the one, but there wanteth divine ordinance for the other. But ye will say, Gods extra∣ordinarie presence in the arke. The people of God worshipped God by the arke. I answer, They worshipped God not by the arke, but in the arke. For God was present in the arke after an extraordinarie manner. God was likewise in the temple after a peculiar manner hearing their prayers. De cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 4. Immo hic est modus qno Deus est in templo pecu∣liaciter, nimirium quia ibi est per exauditionem, saith Bel∣larmine, which was true of Salomons temple, but not rightly applied to ours. God is not in the sacramentall elements after such an extraordinarie manner, nor yet the body of Christ. Nay the body of Christ is not spi∣ritually in the sacrament, to use the Doctours phrase, pag. 95. if by sacrament be meant the sacramentall ele∣ments, as commonly it is taken, for so the meaning shall be popish as I have declared before. But there is a spi∣rituall presence of Christs body, not without, but with∣in the hearts of the faithfull. This presence of God by his spirit, or spirituall presence of Christs body in the heates of the faithfull, is not extraordinarie, but ordina∣rie, and common to all the godly, not exposed to the senses, but inward and invisible. Howbeit in words they deny a relative worship of Christ by the signes, Their rela∣tive adora∣tio . to gull the simple, yet wee must look to their carriage before the signes, and their ground taken from the moving and stirring object, Yea, some∣time words escape plaine enough. The Lutherans wor∣ship Christ in the sacrament as wee should do. Their errour is only in the manner of presence, saith our Doctour, pag. 141. No errour to worship Christ flesh and bloud there, in respect of the personall presen e of Ch ists body, pag. 142. There then either really, or by imagination, as the Papist uniteth the image and the samplar, or as there, as when an emptie coffin is carried at funerals, and all the solemnities ob∣served, as if the corps were present. Let him take his choice. And pag. 144. If ye except out of the number of re∣formed Churches all that thinke that Christ is present in the sacrament, and in the sacrament to be adored, I fear ye draw the number of the reformed Churches to a very small account, whom ye call the purer sort, such as Arrians, Anabaptists, and their followers. He abstaineth from cleare speeches, that he may lurke under the word Sacrament, and for∣beareth the expression of our divines for the manner of Christs presence. D. Mourton, pag. 291. saith, that in the relative reverence, which is used in their Church, rela∣tion being made from the signe to Christ the thing signi∣fied, the sacrament is objectum à quo significativè. And what is that but reverence relative by the signe to Christ? And what hindereth adoration to be carried by a signi∣ficant object, more then by a representative? The signes in the sacr ment, notwithstanding of the want of hu∣mane shape, represent Christ to us. Yee may aske, What if yee keep not a constant course, but sometimes sit, sometime stand, and sometime kneel? I answer, Put case, yee kneel sometime for feare like a temporizer, or of your owne accord, ye take liberty in∣deed to sit, stand, or kneel, but when and how oft yee kneel, yee adore, and tie your self to adore at these times before such an object, after the same manner, and for the same respects, and considerations, which are observed by those who keep a constant course. For it is not here as in prayer. Wee may pray without externall adora∣tion, or with it, as in the petition of the mother of Zebe∣dees children, Matth. 20. she came to Christ, adorans & pe ens, worshipping him, and petitioning. And 2 Sam. 14. 4. the woman of Tekoa fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, when shee petitioned the King. For every gesture in praying to God, is no more a gesture of adoration, then in petitioning men. Now when yee adore in prayer, your adoration is directed immediatly to God, having no object before you, but such as standeth casually before you, from which you may turne your selfe in the very act of praying, to which you have no more respect then to other objects round about you. But here you kneel before such an object, an object significant, and for that respect doth kneel, that that signe of outward worship may bee convoyed to Christs flesh and bloud signified by that object. We have in the former argument considered the sa∣cramentall elements, The second argument. as an object presented before us in the hand of the minister without any further use. Wee are now to consider them in the use, when wee take, eat, and drinke, and our next argument shall bee this. To adore upon our knees, when wee are performing an out∣ward action, which is not directed to God immediatly, and in that action are occupied about an externall object, is idolatrie, unlesse that whereabout the action is em∣ployed be worthy of divine honour. Our taking, eating, drinking the bread and wine at the Lords supper, is not an action directed to God immediatly, as prayer and thanksgiving is, nor is it an outward signe of adoration, as kneeling is. De adoratio∣ne disput. 93. num. 45. Susceptio & collatio sacramentorum, est cultus quidam sa er, eum ea dignè tractantur, nullius tamen rei est adoratio: The receaving and giving of the sacra∣ments is a kinde of sacred worship, but it is not the adoration of any thing, saith Vazquez. And ye our Doctour, to whom what is absurd, saith, that the sacrament is an act of reall adoration, pag. 133. They alledge commonly, that we may kneel before our meat set on the table, when wee are to blesse it. But they do not prosecute it to the point, because they see, it will not frame for their purpose: First, we are to consi∣der the time of the blessing; The meat is to bee consi∣dered not only as an object active, putting us in minde of a benefite, but also as passive, not of adoration, but of blessing and sanctification for our use, for the meat is not set upon the table meerly to be gazed upon, but to bee blessed and sanctified for our use. Next, we are not, nor can not be tied to blesse kneeling. Yea, wee read not in scripture, that any blessed the meat upon the tabl kneeling. Christ himself blessed sitting. Salomon knee∣led, 1 King. 8. 54. when he prayed, and spake to God: but when he was to blesse the people, it is said, he rose and stood up. It is an incongruous thing among the Pa∣pists to adore a thing, which is not higher then their polles, when they adorer, because they can not be said to humble themselves to that which is lower then them∣selves, say D. P. and P. D. B. pag. 68. P. pag. 387. It were incongruous likewise, and inexpedient to set the meat as high as our polles or above, Decret. pag. 366. and adore before it kneeling, and looking up to in. Bochellus citeth a canon forbidding the priest to lift up the bread to be seene before the words of consecration be uttered, least the people adore and commit idolatrie. Thirdly, when we kneel, we are not bound to gaze upon the meat, but may turne our selves to a chaire, a wall, or a forme, or any other thing set before us casually. Yea, when we sit at table, we are not bound at the blessing to gaze upon the meat, but may, and do ordinarily lift up our hands and our eyes to the heavens, as Christ lifted up his eyes. But if they would come to the purpose; and make a just comparison, they should consider next, that after the meat is blessed, it were strange to see every one who is present sit downe upon his knees, with his countenance fixed upon the bread in the hand of the ma∣ster of the family or feast. And after this sort we have considered already in the former argument, the elements holden in the hands of the minister. But now we are to consider thirdly, the act of taking, eating, drinking, our meate and drinke. Wee may not take, eat, and drinke our ordinarie meat and drinke upon our knees. Nature and custome teacheth us, it were rather a mocking of God, then a reverent adoration of him. You will say, there is a differences The sacramen all elements are ho∣ly bread and wi e, the other common and ordinarie. There ye betray your kneel then in taking and ea∣ting the sacramentall bread, because it is holy. Now to kneel in respect of the holinesse of bread and wine, is ido∣latrie. And the true cause of your religious respect and bowing before it, is the holinesse of it. We are too prone to conceat too highly of things set apart to holy uses, as if they were of greater worth then our selves, for whose use they were instituted. Next, suppose there be a diffe∣rence, yet our ordinarie bread is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, to our use. Therefore it is but a mocking of God, unlesse that which you eat and drinke be worthie of divine honour. Lib. 3. de na∣tura D ∣rum. Thinkest their any man so as to beleeve, that that which Cicera. Yet the Papist is thus mad. Ave roes said, My souls shall hold with the philosophers, since the Christ a s worship that which they eat. And this do our kneelers. Yet the Papist thinketh hee taketh and eateth the body of Christ, which by reason of the concomitance of the God∣head, hee adoreth. The Lutheran thinketh both the bread and the body are present: yet they are consonant to their erroneous grounds of the reall presence, and un∣lesse Christs body were there really and su stantially, they would not take, eat, and drinke, adoring upon their knees. Neither would any reasonable man bee so ab∣surd, as to take, eat, drinke, adoring, unlesse he beleeved, that he were eating, were worthie of divine honour. It is otherwise so absurd to kneel before God after that manner. It were absurd to kneel before an eart ly king, est eating and drinking. But it may bee our kneelers bee grosse enough in their opinion of the reall presence. Suarez saith, Suarez in 3. part. tom. 3. p. 780. Bellar. de e char. l. 2. c. 3. l. 4. c. 29. Alger. de sa cram. altar. l. 2. c. 3. That as reall presence proveth adoration a priori, so adoration proveth reall presence a postiriori. Bellarmine likewise proveth adoration by reall presence, and reall presence by adoration. Algerius writing in the eleventh centurie, that is betweene a 1000. an 1100. yeare, condemneth it as a vaine and senslesse fancie to bestow so much reverence upon the sacrament, unlesse Christs body bee present there. Tarnov. de ministe 10. l. 2. c. 31. Tarnovius a Lutheran, Pre ermittendo hanc venerationem Christi externam, ge∣nuflexionem scilicet, communicantes presentiam Christi se∣cundum corpus negare, & se Calvinians jungere. That is, By praetermitting this veneration, to wit, kneeling, the com∣municants should seeme to deny Christs bodily presence, and to joyne themselves to the Calvinians. They thinke, kneelers, who beleeve not the reall presence, worship a piece of bread. They say, The pre∣tence of mentall prayer. We may pray mentally in the act of recea∣ving, therefore we may kneel or adore in the act of re∣ceaving. I answer first, Wee may not pray when we are bound to another exercise. In the act of receaving, ea∣ting, drinking, we should attend upon the audible words, the visible signes and rites, meditat upon the analogie be∣tweene the outward signes and rites, and the things signified, take, eat, drinke mentally, and spiritually by faith. And so meditation upon the analogie, is not the onely worke of the soul, pag. 102. 109. pag. 112. as L. supposeth us to imagine. Our desires are not prayers, as L. dreameth. Prayer is more then desire. It is a manifesting of our desires to God. Desiderium non dum dicitur oratio, quousque pere intellectus loquertis cum Deo exprimatur, disp. 93. num. 11. saith Vazqu z. This exercise of the minde, correspondent to the out∣ward exercise of the members and senses of the body outwardly, cannot consist with oratio continua & instru∣cta; set prayer. The soul may send forth to the heavens short ejaculations like darts. Prayer intermixeth it selfe with every ordinance whatsomever, pag. 199. pag. 236. s ith P. He must meane ejaculatorie prayer, for otherwise he confesseth, that one ordinance is to be distinguished from another. But these ejaculations may be incident to all our actions, even ci∣vill, let be religious, when wee are eating and drinking our ordinarie meat and drinke, transitoriae, or ejaculatoriae orationes, as they call them, and therefore cannot be at∣tended with kneeling. In sudden ejaculations no other gesture is required, then that wherein the motion of Gods spirit shall finde us, saith Master Downe. Next, suppose yee might pray a set prayer mentally, yet yee should not kneel in publike at your set mentall prayer, when the congrega ion is at another exercise, nay, nor make any show by any other signe or gesture, that ye are praying. If it be mentall, it is in secret before the Lord, and the signes of it before men should bee concealed. Thirdly, it followeth, not, suppose ye may pray, that yee must pray kneeling: ee▪ use the one may sometime be without the other. The Jewes prayed standing as well as kneeling, Drusti prae∣terita in Matth. 6. and therefore, saith Drusius, of old prayers were called stations or standings. And Rabbi Jud had a saying, Sine stationibus non subsisteret mindus; The world cannot subsist without stations or standings, that is, pray∣ers. If yee will not, or may not pray but kneeling with reverence, when yee come before such a creature, it can∣not be imagined to be done without respect to that crea∣ture. The like answers may be made to mentall thanks∣giving. Ejaculations of thankes may agree with the pro∣per exercise of the soule in the time of receaving, eating, drinking, as it may also with the ordinarie feeding, or any worldly businesse, but not a set thanksgiving, which should require the attention of all the powers of the soule, and cannot bee done without diverting the soule from the exercise proper for that time. Next, the signes outward should be concealed, if it be but mentall. Third∣ly, what if ye must kneel, and no other gesture will serve the turne. But say they, The pre∣tence of reall prayer or thanksgiving. the very action it selfe is a reall prayer or thanksgiving, and we offer sacrifices. I answer, prayer is a craving, our taking, eating, drinking, is not a craving, but a receaving. Craving and receaving is not all one. But say they; L. pag. 107. it is a reall thanksgiving, and therefore cal∣led eucharist. It is a showing forth of the death of the Lord, till his comming againe. I answer, it is not proper∣ly thanksgiving. For thanksgiving is properly directed to God, as prayer is, either mentally onely, or also vo∣cally and verbally, so is not our act of taking, eating, drinking. Neither was the name of eucharist given by the scripture, but by the ancients: and not for the act of taking, eating, and drinking, but for the thanksgiving preceeding, for the same reason it was called Eulogia also, because of the blessing. For, he gave thankes, and he blessed, are used indifferently by the Evangelists. Denomi∣natio non est semper quata subjecto. Exercit. p. 517. From one part of the action the whole action is called Eucharist, saith Ca∣saubon. Eulogia & eucharistia, utraque vox a parte una totam Domini actionem designat. Whereas the Apostle saith, So oft as yee shall eat, &c yee shall show forth the Lords death till he come againe; is meant, say they, not verball, but reall preaching onely acted by taking, eating, drink∣ing. So say the Rhemists upon 1 Corinth. 11. 26. But Doctour Fulk answereth, that even according to the judgement of the fathers, the Lords death must bee showed not only by the action, but also by words, which may stirre up to remembrance, and thankfulnesse. So al∣so Willers. Willets qu. 1. of the sa∣craments. Pezel. refuta∣tio Catechis∣mi Iefuit. pag 421. So ezel us, and others. This kinde of annun∣ciation answereth to the Hagadah, that is the declaration which was made at the passeover according to the com∣mandement, Ex d 1. 8. And thou shalt show. There∣fore t the paschall supper one made the declaration, ex∣pounding everie ceremonie in their owne place, the mea∣ning of the lambe, of the bitter hearbs, and so forth of the rest. cit. pag. 224. This Ha a ah and d claration of the Jewes, saith Casaula us, answereth to that annunciate show forth, 1 Corinth. 11. 26. But be it so, that the act it selfe be cal∣led a declaration or setting forth of the Lo ds death, yet that is not properly a declaration, or commemoration, nor yet representation of his death. Further, both repre∣sentation and commemoration are to men, and not to God, resemble preaching and not prayer. The celebra∣tion of the action it selfe is a profession of thankfulnesse before men, for a great benefite, but is not thanksgiving dir cted to God. Bell rmine himselfe exponing how the act of eating and drinking may bee called a showing forth, give h this reason, that the partakers should re∣member with thanksgiving the death of the Lord, De euch. l. 4. c. 27. So the proper and principall end of the sacrament is a further confirming and sealing of our communion with Christ, and his benefits purchased to us by his death. The testification of our thankfulnesse by showing forth his death, and commemoration of the benefits receaved thereby is a secondarie end. Neither is it directed to God immediatly, as thanksgiving is, howbeit honour redound thereby to God, because his praise is proclaimed before men. De Missa. l. 1. c. 13. & lib. 2. c. 9. Non enim concionamur Deo neque sacramenta Domino dispersamus, sed populo. Do∣mino ministrare dicuntur, quia ad ejus honorem id faciunt, saith Bellarmine. To honour God is more generall then to adore, for God is honoured by preaching, praying, singing, swearing; praising, and not by adoring onely. Neither can eating and drinking of bread and wine be called properly a sacrifice. For a sacrifice properly so called, importeth destruction of the thing sacrificed, by killing, burning, effu . That cannot be called proper∣ly a sacrifice, which is only for commemoration, or re∣presentation of a sacrifice. The acting of a tragedie upon a stage, is not a true tragedy indeed, howbeit the object represented, was a true tragedie. Giving of almes may be called a sacrifice, yet wee kneel not when wee give almes. It is a sacrifice only improperly, and in some re∣spect so called. The Gentiles are said to be sacrificed by the preaching of the Gospel, Rom. 15. 16. but figurative∣ly. There is as great difference between a sacrament and sacrifice, as taking and giving. It is yet objected, The pre∣tence of re∣ceaving a benefite. that in the act of receaving, wee re∣ceave an inestimable benefite. Ought not a subject kneel, when he receaveth a benefite from a prince to testifie his thankfulnesse? I answer, If we were to receave a gift, suppose but a morsell of bread out of Gods owne hand immediatly, wee ought no doubt to adore upon our knees, but not, if by the hand of the creature. The per∣son who receaveth the gift from the king, is supposed to receave it immediatly from the king, or suppose he kneel receaving from his servant, mediat civill worship are not rules for religious adoration, which should be directed immediatly to God. Now wee receave the sacrament out of the hand of the minister, not out of Christs owne hand. Multum interest inter actionem Filii Dei perse, & per ministrum. Illa enim est actio immediatè producta à divino supposito, ista ab humano. Bellarm. de Missa. lil. 2. cap. 4. Yea the Apostles at the first supper adored not on their knees, when Christ himselfe ministred the sa∣crament, howbeit upon occasion, and at other times they adored, not did they adore God the Father upon their knees for the benefite they were receaving. The inward benefite Christs body and bloud are receaved by the soule, not by the body, by the godly only, not by all that receave the sacrament, by faith embracing Christ present by his spirit in the soul. The godly under the law recea∣ved the same gift, the same spirituall food, and drink, and yet kneeled not. The D. pag. 113. saith, that in the law they had but the shadow of the gift, a popish speach, whereas the Apostle saith, the same food. If the clearer revelation make the difference, which is without ground or reason, then adoration is not in respect of the gift. The godly take, eat, and drinke Christs body and bloud by the act of faith and beleeving, Now the act of faith or beleeving is not an act of adoration, as the schoolmen acknowledge, nor is it expressed outwardly by kneeling, In a fidei non potest apprehendi aliqua submissionis nota propria religionis exhibenda ipsi excellentie Dei, In 3. tom. 1. p. 93. num. 20. & 21. sicut nec ratio sacrificii aut laudis, saith Vazquez. Never man yet adored upon his knees, if his principall work was actuall beleeving desire, Christ, short ejaculations of the soule, and the acts of other graces concurre, as concomitants to remove impediments, that faith may put forth its act with greater strength, which is the principall worke of the soule in the act of receaving the elements: All dis∣positions which are required unto right receaving, can not distinctly and solemnely bee expressed at the same time by outward gestures, except wee would use divers gestures together, saith P. 195. The principall therefore must be considered. Next, wee receave, eat, and drinke Christs body and bloud, as soone as we are effectually called, and beginne to beleeve, and as oft as we heare the promises of the Gospell read and exponed, and doe be∣leeve. Christs body is as farre absent from us at the re∣ceaving of the sacrament, as at the hearing of the word. The symbols, when they are added to the word, while the my∣st r s are celebrated, Contra Gar∣diner. col, 735. edit. 1581. I doubt not, sai h P ter Martyre, serve very much for assurance, for th y s ale the promise, tamen illa Christi nobis praesentiam magis constituere quam verba aut promissiones, constanter pernego. That is but that they make Christ more present to us, then the word and sacra∣ments doe, I utterly denie. The Formalist speaketh, as if Christs body were present in the sacrament, or as if wee had never receaved Christs body, till wee receaved this sacrament, or never but when we receave this sacrament. Whereas Augustine saith, De conse∣crat. dist. 2. cap. 56. & dist. 4. c. 131. Dist. 2 c. 47. There is no doubt, but every one of the faithfull is made partaker of the body and bloud of Christ, when in baptisme he is made a member of Christ, as ye may see in Gratians decree. Againe he saith, Credere in eum, hoc est panem vivum manducare, to beleeve in him, is to eat the living bread. The glosse saith, Christ is eaten spiritually by faith without the sacrament. We are united with Christ, and made members of his body, before we come to this sacrament, and doe not receave his body of new at every communion, as if wee had lost it since the former; and yet there is but one body receaved at all the times. The celebration of the Lords supper is not a new institution of the testament, but a repetition of the same. This sacram authentike instrument of the testament, and as of as it s ministred, the same authen∣tike instrument is over gain, Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. cap. 11. Becan. de Coena calie. c. 11. See this illustra∣tion in Bellarmine, and anus, Wee are said then, to take, eat, drinke Christs body and bloud at every cele∣bration of the holy supper, because wee put forth our faith in act at that time, and renewing the act of faith, wee take, eat, and drink by beleeving, that same body and bloud, which before, our faith being strengthened by the outward signes and seales to that end, and so grow in faith, Reply to Harding. art. 1. Whittakerus de sacram. pag. 68. and by faith in union with Christ, The holy my∣steries do not beginne (saith Jewel) but rather continue and confirme this incorporation. Whitaker saith, Familiar lo∣quendi modus est ut fieri dicatur, quod factum obsigna ur; That is, It is a familiar kinde of speaking to sa that thing is in doing, which being already done is sealed, and confirmed. Thirdly, the manner or forme of receaving a be answerable to the manner of the offering, the n ture of the gift, and the will of the giver. If a King call his nobles to a banket, it is his will that they sit at table. Da∣vid and Jonathan sate at table with King Saul, as you may see, 1 Sam, 20. Such as were called the Kings friends or companions (for the originall word signifieth as well the one as the other, Sociu s amicus ) I take to have sit∣ten ordinarily with Kings: as Zabud, 1 King. 4. 5. and Husha the Archite, who is called, 2 Sam. 15. 37. Davids friend, and 1 Chron. 27. 33. by the same translaters, the Kings companion. Such an one was Daniel to the Ba∣byloniah Emperour, as the Apocrypha historie of Su∣sanna reporteth, cap. 14. 1. To this Christ alludeth, Joh. 15. 15. when he saith to his disciples at table, Hence forth I call you not servants, but I have called you friends. Abraham for his faith was called Gods friend, Jam. 2. 23. By the same reason all the faithfull are preferred to this dignity. As wee are friends and fellow-heires with Christ, so hath hee instituted this holy feast, the onely feast in the Christian Church, to assure us of our pre∣ferment, and fellowship with him. Howsoever then otherwise, and at other occasions wee behave our selves as supplicants, we are now according to our Lords will and pleasure, to observe that externall forme of a feast, which he hath left to his Church, and to act thereat in our outward carriage the persons of guests and friends. And therefore, howbeit the inviter be a great person, the manner of invitation is familiar, and our not acceptance the more offensive. Chrysostome declaiming against such as were present, and did not approach to communicate, saith, Hom. 3. in epist ad E∣phesios. The King table is here, the King himselfe is present. Why standeth thou yawning? If thy garments be cleane, sit downe and participat. In the English booke of common prayer, there is an exhortation to bee made to the people, when they are negligent to come to the table, where we have these words, Ye know how grievous and unkinde a thing it is, when a man hath prepared a rich feast, decked his table with all kinde of provision s that there lacketh nothing, but the guests to sit downe and yet these who be called (without any cause) most unthankefully refuse to come. The exhortation seemeth to ee dr w e out of that place of Chrysostome, but they omit the words, Sit downe and participat. For all the the first part of the comparison, they bid not the Com∣municants sit downe. But they must kneel and receave, that which is reached to them. So that there is no more use of the table, then if it were a cupbord or altar. Fourthly, if we should kneel, because we are receaving a gift, by this reason wee should kneel, when wee receave any benefite or gift of God, as for example, when we are taking, eating, drinking, our ordinarie meat and drinke. If yee will say, the sacramentall is holy bread, the other common, then yee confesse ye kneel, because of the holi∣nesse, that is, the setting a part of it to a holy use, and that is idolatrie. If ye will say, ye receave a greater gift, then when yee receave your ordinarie food, that is no more, but then there is a greater motive. Yet, if because a gift, then whensoever, or whatsoever gift ye receave, ye ought to kneel. God deserveth thankes for the least of his be∣nefits, and is to bee adored for whatsoever benefite spiri∣tuall or temporall receaved, in the time of divine service, or out of it. For this is the common doctrine of the school men, Vazquez de adorat. disp. 94. num. 7. Eundem honorem adorationis, atque eodem modo Deo esse deferendum, etiamsi varia sunt ipsius bene∣ficia & attributa. That is, That the same honour of adora∣tion is to be given to God, and after the same manner, how∣beit his benefites and attributes are divers. For the reason upon Gods part that moveth us to adore him, is the ex∣cellenie of his dignity. All his attributes concurre to make up this excellencie, whatsoever benefite move us, never so meane, hee deserveth honour, because bestowed by so great a Lord, who is the fountaine, & primum prin∣cipium. When the Israelites were to be cured miracu∣lously by looking up to the brazen serpent, If we may receave upon our knees, what we crave upon our knees. a type of Christ, they kneeled not. It is a frivolous objection, and scarce worthie the an∣swering, when they say, what wee may crave upon our knees, wee may receave upon our knees. They should conclude, we must receaue upon our knees. But neither the one, nor the other doth follow. For wee crave our daily food upon our knees, and rayment, therefore by their reasoning wee should kneel with reverence, when we receave our food in at our mouth, or put on our dou∣blet. Yet say they, what wee crave of God upon our knees in publike worship, wee may receave upon our knees. But this is yet as frivolous. For wee may crave in time of publike worship upon our knees things neces∣sarie for this temporall life, and so wee doe, when in the Lords prayer, we say, Give us this day our daily bread. Fur∣ther, the diff rence of place and time, is but a difference in circumstances, and altereth, not the nature of wor∣ship, and so I may receave upon my knees, whatsoever I may crave of God in privat worship upon my knees; if this kinde of reasoning were good. But it is not the diversitie of the time or place where wee receave the benefite, more then the diversity of the benefite it selfe, that is the ground of adoration, but Gods excellencie, as we said before. Next, they consider not, that these three things are to bee clearly distinguished, a blessing or sanctifying of the creature, or meane God hath appointed, either for our temporall or spirituall life (of which some are recko∣ned by L. pag. 85. 86.) before the use, the use it selfe, and thanksgiving after the use. Blessing before meat, the use of the meat in enjoying it be receaving, eating, drin∣king, and thanksgiving after, blessing before the reading preaching or hearing of the word, the act it selfe of reading, hearing, preaching, and thanksgiving to God after, blessing before the receaving of the sacrament ll. elements, the receaving and participation it selfe, and thanksgiving after. They aske, The pre∣tence of hu∣mility and reverence. if humility and reverence be not requisite in the act of receaving the sacramentall elements. I an∣swer, Yes, in all religious exercises, at the hearing of the word, reading of the word, &c. But it followeth not, that there should be humiliation upon our knees be∣cause humility of minde is required, nor adoration, be∣cause reverence is required. Is there no reverence nor humility, but in kneeling before dead and senslesse crea∣tures? There is a damnable humility, plausible to will∣worshippers and idolaters, condemned, Coloss. 2. 23. Pe∣ter was censured, when hee refused, that Christ should wash his feet. It is Christs honour to command, obedi∣ence upon our part is true humility. Humility is an ha∣bit, adoration is an act. The act of humility is imma∣nent, whereby a man resteth content, and well pleased with his owne estate and ranke, and doth not conceat greater worth in himself, then there is, specially in com∣parison with God. But adoration is a transient act, whereby a man goeth out of himselfe, as it were, to di∣rect some homage, and worship to God. Such like re∣verence is a common adjunct to all sorts of worship, preaching, praying, praising, adoring, but is not a distinct kinde of worship, Of the insti∣tution of the supper. p. 63. as is adoration. The pretence of reve∣rence cannot be a sufficient reason for altering the ordinance of Christ and the opinion of reverence, hath often beene the dame and nour e of manifold superstitions, saith Doctour Morto n To concludes that because wee must use reverent ge∣sture in receaving the holy communion, therefore wee must kneel in the act of receaving, is to condemne our owne Church, and other reformed Churches of want of reverence. Vnlesse yee will say, sitting is reverent for some, to take in passing for others, but kneeling for Scot∣land. So may the Monkes conclude, saith Doctour Ames, wee must have garments, therefore wee must in one order have blacke, in another white, in a third gray, and so forth. If any judicious Reader will review all their reasons or pretences for kneeling, hee shall finde, they inferre a duty to kneel, and consequently an indi∣rect taxing of Christ, and his Apostles, and all others in ancient time, or in reformed Churches, who have not kneeled. And if there were no more, this alone may let them see the weaknesse of their reasoning. Seeing kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramen∣tall element is idolatry, and cannot be used but idola∣trously, it followeth, that kneeling in the act of recea∣ving brought not in a tolatrie or bread worship, as some divines construing charitably, some old Writers, or mis∣taking counterfeit workes for genuing, have imagined. We may observe other ushers to have prepared the way for bread worship by kneeling. After that the virgine times of the first age or prime primitive, that is the apo∣stolicall times were past, changes entered. They were not content to sit, but at some time, and more frequently stood. They left off distribution and breaking of bread with other, and receaved out of the minister or deacons hand. Other words were substitute in place of Christs words. In processe of time, the women might not re∣ceave the bread with their naked hand, but in a clean lin∣nen cloath or napkin. And in many places the cuppes had pipes, whereby they sucked the wine out of the cuppe. At length the Communicants were not suffered to receave with their hands, but in at their mouther. And this proceeded from a sup rstitious reverencing of the signes, which ended at last in bread worship, saith Vossius, Theses theolog. pag. 476. Et san consuetudo altera ing r ntli panem in os, circa annum sexc nt simum demum pisse videtur, neque id aliunde quam à superstitiosa veneration signorum, quae in tandem evasit. Adde also the corrupting of the doctrine with the opinion of the reall presence, and worshipping of images, Of the Lords sup∣per. 1. part. pag. 40. which entered both about one time. After the worshipping of images, which Master Moulins calleth the elder sister, followed bread∣worship. An advertisement to the Communicants. WE are all bound to maintaine the puritie and in∣tegritie of Gods ordinances, which wee had in possession since the reformation. And there∣fore cannot communicate, where the gesture is changed, and distributing of the elements by the communicants is wanting. No man will be so carelesse of his legge or arme, as to suffer them to be cut off, but will venture him∣selfe for their preservation, or preservation of the least joynt of his fingers, howbeit they bee not such noble parts of the body, as the head and the heart, without which the body can not subsist. Farre lesse ought we to tollerate such a horrible stumbling block, as kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramentall elements, eating, and drinking. Whosoever countenanceth such commu∣nions, is accessorie to that deformation and mutilation. For if none would communicate with the ring-leaders and introducers, they would be forced to desist, had de∣sisted long ago for shame, and had returned to our for∣mer practice. The kneeler is the thiefe, but the commu∣nicant is the recetter. Some thinke, they may, if they have liberty to sit themselves, and to reach to the nearest. But they should not looke to their owne personall priviledge, but to the liberty of the whole Church and congregation, where they are members. If some citisens would give way to the enemie, upon condition they enjoyed their owne li∣berty, would they not bee counted traitours and betray∣ers of the city. Next, that liberty shall be permitted on∣ly for a time, till others be drawn in after them, and then they shall be deprived of that libertie. But ye will say, shall I separate from a Church. I an∣swer, when a congregation is devided, that part which doth not communicat is a part of that Church, as well as that which communicateth, and both maketh up but one congregation or Church, howbeit they bee devided in that particular act. As both the parts of the house make up but one house, notwithstanding there be a rift in the wall. Next, the part which communicateth not, adhe∣reth to the reformed Church of Scotland, of which eve∣ry particular congregation is but a part. Now, the most part, if not the two parts of the congregations have ad∣mitted no alteration. And as for the number of knee∣lers, it is very small in comparison. Yet it is hard, say ye, to want the benefite and comfort of the sacrament. But what comfort or benefite can y e finde, if ye be accessorie to the introduction of such alte∣rations, and setling of such a stumbling block in the con∣gregation. When we cannot communicate but by com∣mitting a sinne, our forbearing is no contempt, and the Lord who hath promised to bee a little sanctuarie to his people, when they were to bee scattered among the hea∣then, Ezech. 11. 16. will supply our want. Doctour Featlie saith, The great sacriledge of the Church of Rome, pag. 206. That neither the only, nor principall thing to bee regarded in the sacrament is our benefite, but Gods glorie, and the testification of our obedience to his ordinance. Non potest autem videri sacramenta con∣tempsisse, cui non licet eaita percipere; ut sunt à Domino constituta, & a sit ut ullos necessitatis casus imaginemur in quibus liceat ordinationem Domini viol re. That is, Wee cannot seeme to have contemned the sacraments, who a e not permitted to partake of them, as they are appointed by the Lord. Confess. c. 4. Farre be it from us to imagine any causes of necessity, by which wee may violate the Lords ordinance, saith Beza. This answer may serve, if the case were so hard, that they could not have the occasion of the right and pure admi∣nistration of the sacraments else where. But, praised be GOD, as yet they may have it not farre from the dores. Nota. The 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. lines in the 33. page, are not Master Moulines words, but the authours. OF FESTIVALL DAYES. IN the explication of the first head of the first booke of discipline penned anno 1560, Festivall dayes aboli∣ ed by our Church. the first yeare of universall reformation, it was thought good, that the feasts of Christmas, Circumcision, Epiphanie, with the feasts of Apostles, Martyrs, and Virgine Marie, be ut∣terly abolished, because they are neither commanded nor warranted by the Scripture, and that the obstinate maintainers of those and the like abominations be puni∣shed by the civill magistrat. Here utter abolition is cra∣ved, and not a reformation of abuses only, and that be∣cause observation of such feasts have no warrant from the word. In the generall assembly holden at Edin∣burgh, anno 1566. the later confession of Helvetia was approved, but with speciall exception against the same five dayes, which are now urged upon us. It was not then the popish observation only, with the popish opi∣nion of worship and merit, but simpliciter all observa∣tion, that was disallowed by them. In the assembly hol∣den anno 1575, complaint was made against the mini∣sters and readers beside Aberdeene, because they assem∣bled the people to prayer and preaching upon certaine festivall dayes. Yee see not onely prophanitie, but prea∣ching and prayer of purpose upon festivall dayes were judged rebukable. It was ordained likewise, that com∣plaint be made to the Regent, upon the towne of Dun∣freis, for urging and convoying a reader to the Church with tabret and whisle, to reade prayers all the holy dayes of Christmas, upon the refusall of their owne reader. Item, an article was formed to bee presented to the Regent, craving that all dayes heretofore keeped holy in time of papistrie beside the Lords day, be aboli∣shed, and that a civ ll penalty bee inflicted upon the ob∣servers. In the assembly holden in Aprill, anno 1577. it was ordained, that the visitour with the advice of the synodall assem ly, shall admonish ministers, preaching or ministring the communion at Easter or Christmas, or other like superstitious times, or readers reading, to de∣sist, under the pain of deprivation. Ye see reading, prea∣ching, and ministring the communion at th s times was forbidden, and not onely cessation from worke, and excesse of banketting, playing, &c. In the ninth head of the first booke of discipline, wee have this reason set downe against E ster communion, Your honour ar not gnor ant how superstit ously the people run to that action it Pasche, even as if the time gave vertue to the sacrament, and the rest of the whol yeare, they are carelesse and negli∣gent as if it ppertained not to them, but at that time onely. And for this reason other times were appointed by that booke for that holy action. In the generall assem∣bly holden anno 1590. King James praised God, that he was b rne to be a king in the sincerest Church of the world, sincerer then the Church of England, for their ervice was an asse in English, sincerer hen Ge∣neva it selfe; That is Ea∣ster and Ch ist s. they observed Pasch and Yoole, and what w rrant, for that? In the assem∣bly holden anno 15 6. when the covenant w s renewed, superst t on and idolatrie bre ing forth in keeping of festivall dayes, setting out of b nefires, and singing of carrols, are reckoned among the corruptions, which were to bee amended. In the parliament holden anno 1592. wee have acts to this purpose. The pulpits have founded from time to time against all show of observing these dayes. But in the pretended and null-assembly holden at Perth, anno 1618. it was concluded by a num∣ber, not having power of voice, or broken with threats or allurements, that every minister shall make comme∣moration of the birth, passion, resurrection, ascension of Christ, and sending downe of the holy Ghost, upon the dayes appointed for that use, that they make choise of se∣verall and pertinent texts of scriptures, and fraime their doctrin and exhortations accordingly. This their con∣clusion was tified by act of counsell, and proclamation was , upon the 26. of October follow∣ing, comma ding cessation from all kinde of labour or these five dayes, appointed to be de∣dicate , to the effect the subjects may the better at end the exercises, which are to be keeped in the Churches at these times. REASONS AGAINST THE FESTI∣VALL DAYES. WE shall consider these dayes, first as they are cal∣led holy, next as they are called festivall. Our first reason. GOd only hath power to sanctifie a day, The first rea against festival day s. and it holy, that is to separate it from a common se o holy exercises. Zaneh tom. 4. col. 655. Willet Sy∣nop. p. 501. Kuchili us in Catechismo. Perkins. Ga∣lat. 4. Zanchius affirmeth, that it is proper to God to choose any person, or any thing to consecrate and sanctifie it to himselfe. Willets, that it belongeth on∣ly to the Creatour, to sanctifie the creature. Perkinse, Kuchlinus, and others, say the like. Master Cowper, pre∣tended bishop of Galloway, confessed no King, no church could make an holy day. The like was acknow∣ledged by Master Galloway, in one of his Christmas ser∣mons. But so it is, that God hath permitted six dayes to man for the worke of his calling, and selected the seventh to himselfe, to be spent in his service. Seeing therefore God hath given libertie to man to worke six dayes, and counteth them common and prophane, no man ought to be compelled to keep them holy, but when God him∣selfe maketh exception, as hee did by the yoke of some anniversarie dayes under the law, or calleth us to a pre∣sent humiliation or thanksgiving. The civill magistrat may command cessation from worke for a politick end, as weapon-showing, exercise of armes, defence of a city or sort of the countrey, but that is not to enjoyne a holy day, nor yet a meere idle day, but that oeconomicall and privat worke give place to publike and politick. Pa∣raeus in epist ad Romano cap. 14. dub. 4. Tametsi rectè qui∣dem sacra quotidiana concionum & precum publicè insti∣tuuntur, tamen omnes ad ea adstringere durum esset. The Doctour saith, some dayes were made holy, not onely because they were dedicated to the worship of God, but because a speciall worship was appointed by God, and appropriated to them, as the feast of the passe∣over, or whi sunday. Other times were holy onely by reason of the use or divine worship performed on them, and not for mysterie or solemne worship appropriated to them. He saith, our divines meane only, that it is on∣ly proper to God, to make dayes holy after the first manner, but not after the second, which is false, as may appear by their description of sanctifying a day, which is generally to set it apart to an holy use, and not to a my∣sticall only. Next, by such an answer men make holy dayes like the Lords day. His comparison with the temple of Jerusalem, and the synagogues and Christian churches will not helpe him, unlesse the synagogues and Christian churches answer in holinesse to the sabbath and the Lords day, as hee saith, the temple did to the anniversarie feasts, which, I trust, hee will not maintaine. And this same comprison of time and place shall cleare and confirme our argument. For as no man can sanctifie a place, or make it holy but God, that is, set it so apart from all worldly uses, that it shall bee a prophaning of it to entertaine any worldly purpose or riste in it, or carrie a vessell through it, and to be bound to holy exercises in it, otherwise it cannot bee said to be sanctified, and set apart to God, if it stand up like an idol, so no man can sanctifie a day, that is, set it so apart to God, that when it recurreth weekly, monethly, or yearly, we must not use worldly, but must use holy exercises. But the first is true, none but God can ap∣point such a place, and under the new testament he hath appointed no such place. Christian churches or houses are builded for the commoditie of Gods people to de∣fend them from the injurie of the weather, to serve them to sit in commodiously, when they are conveened to serve God, which use is civill, and is common to houses builded for civill meetings. The congregation may permit the use of their church to a civill meeting, with∣out prejudice to their owne libertie to meet when they have occasion. Nex , the congregation is not bound to meet in that house, but may forsake it, and take them to another. But if it were sanctified and set apart to God, they should be bound to use it. Our churches then are dedicate to the communalty of the faithfully, w thin such a precinct for the uses foresaid, as a stateh e or judge∣ment hall may bee dedicate to a citie, but they are not sanctified and made holy to God. Our prayers are not more holy or better heard in this or that temple, then at home, Whittakers opera. pag. . saith Whittaker in his answer to Dur us, but that God is more moved, when the faithfull meet toge∣ther to pray. Impertinently doth the Doctour alledge the houres appointed for preaching in the weeke, or prayers morning and evening. For these are not houres sanctified, or consecrated to Gods service, but the most convenient times men finde in their wisedome, when most may resort to hearing of sermons and prayers, which m y and ought to be changed, when occasions offer a more convenient time. So time is designed oc∣casionally, not dedicat or sanctified. Time is made to serve Gods people, and not Gods people made to serve the time, or to serve God, because it is a holy time. After I had finished this worke of reexamination, there came to my hands some unsound tractats upon the sabbath. Whereupon I thought good to insert in this place, as the most pertinent, this short disconrse fol∣lowing, OF THE SABBATH. THe light of nature leadeth a man, What changeable, what un∣changeable in the 4. pre∣cept. acknowledg∣ing that there is a God, and to be worshipped, to acknowledge also, that tim s should be set a part for his worship, and not onely that, but also competent and sufficient times. But nature cannot lead us without further direction, to setle upon one of the seven dayes, more then upon one of eight, ten or twelve. The Lord set downe one in the circle of seven to bee observed per∣petually, and universally by all that were to worship him. In his wisedome he could best discerne what time might be spared. In respect of this perpetuity, and uni∣versality this determination participateth of the nature of a law morall. For this cause it was placed in the de∣calogue among the precepts purely morall, and partici∣pated with them of the same prerogatives. It was deli∣vered by God himselfe, written in tables of stone, and preserved in the arke as the rest were. The determina∣tion of such a seventh day in particular, was made also by the Lord. Both the determinations are divine posi∣tive, the first unchangeable, the second changeable, but yet only by divine authoritie. The ten precepts of the decalogue, are called ten words, Deut. 4. 13. that is, as one expoundeth, ten sentences, or as Vossius addeth, Soul∣tentiae praecipientes, preceptive sentences. And yet there are fourteene sentences for precepts in the decalogue. How then are there but ten words, hee answereth, there are ten chiefe, and principall, the rest are secundarie, and like appendicles. Theses Theolog. pag. 528. Primum istud in confesso est, quam is quatuiorde im inveniantur sentent in decalogo, quibus aliquid praecipiatur, tamen dec m esse duntaxat primarias & principes: Caeteras secundarias; & altarum quasi appen∣dices. Vnde & Moses decem verba & Graci ap∣pellarunt. In the fourth commandement, there are three preceptive sentences. The first is the principall. Some reason after this manner. The Lord saith not, Remember thou, keepe holy the seventh day, but Remember thou, keepe holy the sabbath-day, and in the end, he sanctified the sab∣bath-day, hee saith not that seventh day from the crea∣tion, howbeit it was so for the time. But that seventh was to be changed, and the sabbath was to be fixed upon another seventh day. But to come nearer to the purpose, that this commandement requireth not directly the se∣venth day from the creation, but the seventh day in ge∣nerall, appeareth by the reason, which enforceth not ne∣cessarly the seventh day from the creation, that wee should rest the same day that the Lord rested, but that wee should rest from our workes the seventh day, as hee rested from his. Which seventh, as under the law he ap∣pointed to be saturday, so under the Gospell, sunday, the substance of the commandement remaining. See Ma∣ster Cartwrights Catechisme. pag, 110. But to come yet nearer. The Lord might have created the world in six houres, as easily as in six dayes. Hee might have done it in a mo∣ment, or have taken eight ten or twelve dayes. The Lord would do neither the one, nor the other, but con∣formed himselfe to that space of time, which in his wise∣dome he thought sufficient for man to doe all manner of workes of his owne. This paterne doth not concerne his peculiar people of the Jewes onely, but both Jew and Gentile, and not for a time onely, but to the end of the world, as if the Lord would reason after this manner with mankinde, What needed me to have spent six dayes in creating the world, for I might have done it in one? or wherefore stinted I my selfe at six, I might have taken ten? you may easily then consider wherefore I have done it. I did it, that thou may doe the like: Do all thy workes and businesse in six dayes, and rest the seventh. The imitation lieth in this then, not so much that wee rest upon such a seventh day, as upon a seventh. There is equitie in it indeed, that seeing the Lord hath granted us six dayes to worke, wee should rest the seventh, but the force of the reason lieth chiefly in this, that the Lord purposly tooke six dayes, and rested the seventh, to be a paterne to men, howbeit with all in setting downe that paterne, he considered that equity. That the precept concerning the sabbath, concerned not the Jewes onely, but all mankinde, appeareth also by this, that it was given to Adam in the beginning, Gen. 2. 2, 3. Whereas some would have here an anticip tion, and the words to be referred to the time, when the Lord rained Manna, and forbad his people to gather upon the seventh day, Exod. 16. as if the sabbath had never beene institute or observed before. This were a strange anti∣cipation, to make mention of the blessing, and sanctify∣ing the seventh day, without so much as an inckling of the proper time, which is assigned by them, which fell not forth till 2453 yeares or thereabout, after the weake of the creation. Next, the words are knit together by the same copulative with the present historie, Hee ended his worke on the seventh day, and herested on the seventh day, and he blessed the seventh day, and he sanctified it. The blessing and sanctifying then were not destinate to bee done 2453 yeares or thereabout afterwards, but pre∣sently when he had ended all his worke of creation, hee blessed and sanctified, that is, by blessing sanctified, that is, separate to a holy use, as the minister blesseth when he se∣parateth bread and wine from a common to an holy use at the Lords suppe . Or, he blessed and sanctified, that is, praised it, and sanctified. For the originall word signi∣fieth also praising or rejoycing, as Gomarus himselfe brin∣geth exemple of praising, out of Psal. 8 27. And Philo Judaeus expresseth it by praising▪ Every dayes, workes had the owne commendation, but now looking upon the whole frame, the order and harmonie of it, he rejoy∣ced, and pra sed it, and sanctified that day. After he had perfited the worke in six dayes, DE opificio undi in fol. pag. 5. he added honour to the seventh day following, , saith Philo udaeus, that is, Which when hee had praised or com∣mended, incontinent hee deinzed to call it holy, as Gelenius translateth. Further, there is no mention of blessing the seventh day, Exod. 16. Gomarus alledgeth, that twice as much Manna fell on the sixt day, as upon any other day, there is no warrant for it, but onely that they were com∣manded to gather twice as much that day. Suppose his conjectute were true, that were a blessing of the sixt day, and not of the seventh. But as I have said, there is no mention of blessing in that place. But so it is, th t when he blessed, he sanctified▪ And seeing wee reade not that he blessed it, when he ceased from raining Manna, but when he had ended the worke of creation, it followeth that then he sanctified. Consider againe, that in Exod. 16. mention is made of the sabbath, as a time of rest ap∣pointed before, vers. 23. To morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the Lord. Vers. 25. To day is a sabbath unto the Lord. Vers. 26. But on the seventh day which is the sab∣bath. They had neglected, or were forced to neglect that day in Egypt, where they were not suffered to rest on that day, and therefore he putteth them in minde of it, and exacteth the observation of it, which was now ne∣glected of other nations. Consider againe, that soone af∣ter when the decalogue was promulgate upon mount Si∣nai, the reason given for the observation of the sabbath, was not, that the Lord rained Manna six dayes, and desi∣sted the seventh, which concerned onely the Iewes, but that hee created all in six dayes, and rested the seventh, which concerned all mankinde. Were it not ridiculous to imagine, that God spent six dayes in creating the world, and rested the seventh, onely for the Iewes, to whome hee was to intimate the sabbath 2453. yeares after. But ye will say, what needed Adam a sabbath-day in the state o innocencie? I answer, because the dressing of the gard n was committed to him, and he was to live an animall life, which would draw with it some distra∣ction. Therefore the Lord would have a day appoin∣ted, wherein he might be wholy sequestrat from other affaires. Further, howbeit Adam was in the state of in∣nocencie, yet his state was mutable. Whereas it is al∣ledged, that there was no positive precept given to A∣dam in paradise, but the eating of the forbidden tree, I answer, none meerly positive, but that. But this is not meerly positive, but determinative, of the indefinit time required by the law of nature, which urgeth a time for sequestration. Some thinke, that Adam fell the same day that he was created, and therefore that the sabbath was sanctified after his fall. But the imposing of the names upon the creatures, the precept concerning the forbidden tree, the tentation of Adam and Eve, &c. move others to thinke otherwayes. Lyd at agreeth not, either with too short time, or yet three yeares, which were too long, but with those who alledge eight moneth wanting a week, that hee might be the more sensible of his fall and defection, after hee had for a certaine space enjoyed the pleasures of that estate. But suppose Adam fell upon the sixt day, yet the sanctification of the sab∣bath after, was for all mankinde, and not the Iewes onely. But yet we have no mention made, The sabbath observed be∣fore Moses time. that the Patriarchs observed it. What then? It is sufficient, that it was in∣stituted, howbeit the observation had beene neglected. But wee must judge more charitably of the holy Patri∣archs, that they were observant of the institution recea∣ved by tradition from Adam. They receaved the law of sacrifices and other positive lawes, by revelation, by oracle, and by d vine inspiration, pag. 45. saith Doctour Francis White in his treatise of the sabbath. Is it likely then, they obser∣ved not a set day, or wanted direction what day to ob∣serve, or that the Lord would hav set any other day for ordinarie. Some gather the observation from Noahs sending forth the dove the seventh day after her returne, and againe the seventh day. That it is likely, Noah was taken up with holy exercises, every seventh day hee sent forth the dove, and that he sent it forth rather then, then any other time, because hee was craving and expecting good successe. But I will not stand upon this. Junius approveth the opinion of the Hebrew Doctours, who all agree, that there passed seven dayes betweene the go∣ing of the people out of Egypt, and the drowning of the Egyptians in the red sea, and therefore there were seven dayes appointed for the feast of the passeover. He con∣firmeth their opinion with his owne reckoning in his annot. upon Exod. 12. Vpon Deut. 5. he noteth, that is was the sabbath, that day Pharaohs hoast was drowned, and the people of Israel sang that song of triumph, Exod. 15. The Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrewes, chap. 4. proveth, that there is a sabbatisme me, or keeping of a sabbath yet remaining for the people of God, and all beleevers, whereinto the incredulous were not to enter, and to this purpose citeth a passage out of the psalmes. There the incredulous are threatned to be excluded from rest, which was to come: For there were two rests al∣ready past in Davids time, the one beginning at the rest of God from his workes, which were finished from the foundation of the world, and the other, when Josue brought the people into the land of Canaan. The Apo∣stles enumeration had not beene sufficient, if the sabbath day had not beene observed from the beginning: for he maketh not mention of another sabbatisme past before Davids time, but two, whereinto man entred. There was no oth r sabbath then in Davids time, beside that rest in Canaan, except that which was from the begin∣ning, and consequently the sabbath observed in his time, was all one with that which was observed from the be∣ginning. The rest of the sabbath is called Gods rest or sabbath, because God was the instituter of it, gave exem∣ple himselfe to man, and appointed it for his owne wor∣ship, Levit. 23. 1. and 28. 2. Jesa. 56. 4. Ezech. 20. 20. Exod. 16. 23. If the words of the Apostle were taken only for Gods owne proper rest or sabbath, the Apostles reasoning had not beene pertinent: for David maketh mention of a rest, whereinto men might enter, and were exhorted to enter in, but men cannot be said to enter in Gods owne proper rest. The sabbatisme which is to come, is called Gods rest, and yet men are said to enter in it. Further, if the first rest were so called only, because it was Gods owne peculiar rest, it would fol ow, the thy sabbath enjoyned to man had beene omitted, and the Apostles induction had beene unsufficient. epist. ad Hebr. . 4. v. Requies s b ati dicitur ei, tum fo maliter, quia in die septimo qui vit Peus à creatione, tum exempla ter & efficienter, qui quies hominum in sabbato, & cultus sabbati institutus est à D o ad exemplar quietis Dei in sabbato, saith Corne∣lius a Lapide, a professour in Lovaine. And a little before, after hee hath opened up the three rest , the rest of the sabbath enjoyned to man, the rest of the people of God in the land of Canaan, and the eternall rest in heaven, hee inferreth, that the rest of the sabbath was in use before the law of Moses, even from the beginning of the world, or else the Apostles reasoning cannot hold. Hinc satis clarè elicitur & evincitur, sabbati cultum & requiem in us f isse apud homines ante le em Mosis, ab origine licet id neget Abulensis in c. 23. Levit. 4. 3.) ut s i e diem septimum homines colerent, eoque à laboribus qui s r nt, in memoriam & gratiarum actionem creatio∣nis, sui quam totius mundi, quam Deus complevit die septimo: alioqui enim vim non haberet discursus & argu∣mentum Pauli, ut patet exdictis. Howbeit scripture bee sufficient for confirmation of this truth, I will adde for superaboundance some foot∣steps of the first institution, which were found among the Gentiles. Whence came the name of Septimane weekes to be receaved among the Ethnicles of old. Not from the Jewes, for they abhorred their customes, and derided their sabbaths. Not from Astrologians, for di∣stinction of dayes by weekes was more ancient, then the imposing of the names of the planets upon the dayes of the weeke. Or Ptolem his time, who wrote about the yeare of our Lord 140 as Rivetus proveth by the testi∣monie of Georgius Syncellus, and Philoponus. The anci∣ent Greek Poets cited by them for the name of weeke, I omit. De eme at temp. lib. 1. I onely adde the testimonie of Scalig r. ex diebus dicitur septiman , res omibus, quidem orientis populis, ab ultima usque antiquita e us ata, nobis autem Enrop eis vix tandem post Christian smum. recepta. Hee saith, from the upmost antiquitie his systeme of dayes in a weeke, was in use among all the orientall na∣tions. But that was the part of the world, which was first planted, and where the holy Patriarches lived. Whereas, he saith, this colection or distinction of dayes in weekes, was not receaved in Europe till Christiani . entred, testimonies of Ethnick Poets, alledged by ∣vetus, make good, that the name of weekes was more an∣cient, even among the Latines. I adde also that place in Genes. 29. 27. where Laban saith to Jacob, Fulfill her weeke. Whither he meant a weeke of dayes, or as others inter∣pret, a weeke of yeares, it is all one. For seven yeares was never called a weeke of yeares, but where seven dayes was called a weeke of day s. Whence then could this so ancient a circuit, or circle of dayes come, but from the Patriarches, who observed that circle, because of the seventh-dayes-sabbath, or from the first weeke of the creation it selfe. Wee have not onely the traces of weekes among the ancient Ethniks, Dissertatio e origine sabbathi. but also of the seventh day in speciall. I pretermit the testimonies cited by Rivetus out of Ho∣mer, Linus, and Callimachus; who make mention of the perfiting of the worke of creation the seventh day. I content mee with the testimonies alledged for observa∣tion, in some sort, of the seventh day, by Casaubon, com∣mencing upon that place of Suetoni , Lib. 3. 32. Diogenes gram∣maticus disputare sabbutis Rhodi solitus, vententem, ut se extra ordinem audiret, non admiserat! ac per servalu suum in septim diem dis ulerat. Where he bringeth in Lucian, making mention of resting dayes granted every seventh day to children who were at schoole: Vul a∣tius Gallicanus; that souldiers exercised themselves upon the seventh day in archerie and armes: Dampridius, that Alexander Severus went up to the Capitoll upon the se∣venth day, when hee was in Rome, and frequented the temples: In this same place Suetonius reporteth of Dio∣genes the Grammarian, that if any were desirous o heare declamation or discourse, he differred them to the se∣venth day. Euseb. de prepar. evan∣gel. l. 13. c. 7. Eusebius saith, That alm st all, as well ph loso∣phers as Poets, understood, that the seventh day was more sacred then other dayes. Phil Jud eus cited saith, It was an holy day not of one region only, , De vita Mo∣sis, l. 2. but of all. And in another place he s ith, Our law admonisheth all of duetie, , Grecians, the inhabitants of the les, and the continent, the orien∣tall people, the Entrop cans, and the even the whole habitable world to the uttermost coasts: for who doth not honour that holy day returning every weeke. Buxtorsius telleth us, Buxtors. sy∣nag. Iudaica, c. 11. p. 287. that the Jewes at this day thinke, Christians and others shall bee phnished, because they keepe not their sabbath. And this I beleeve, they thinke not of their other holy dayes. I will close this point concerning the first, institution of the sabbath with pointing at the testimonies both of ancients and neotericks. Adversus Iudaeos, c. Tertullian reporteth, that the Jewes hold that the Lord sanctified the seventh day from the beginning, and that thereupon when the law was given, the Lord said, Rem mber. Gen ardus in his chronologie affirmeth, that the Hebrew Doctours taught so. Peter Martyr citeth Rabbi Agn , Broughtoun in his concent alledgeth Rambam and Aben-Ezra. In Gen. 2. Philo Judaeus his consent ye had a little before. Cyprian de Spiritu sancto. Chrysostome hom. 10. in Genes. 2. Epiphanius contra here∣sin Anoet haeres. 51. The doretus est in Genesin. Au∣gustine epist. 86. ad Casulannm. Waleus in his dissertatio de sabbatho, citeth Luther, Calvine, Zwinglius, Beza, P. Martyr, Bullinger, Zanchius, Vrsinus, Gualtor, Aretius, Bertramus Mercerus, Antoniu Faius Juntus, Paraeus, Al∣stedius. Rivetus in his dissertatio de origaine sabbathi, ad∣deth other Neoterikes. Dan ws, Ho pinian s, Chimni∣tius, Gerardus, Marloratus, with some others, and po∣pish writers, Eugubinus, Gen brardus, Cornelius à Lapide, and Emanuel Sa. A diligent reader may easily finde moe, affirming that the sabbath was instituted at the be∣ginning. Seeing the sabbath was observed from the beginning, it was not instituted in the wildernesse, but only renewed to the people of God, and enjoined to them with so∣lemnitie, both because of their owne neglect, or forced prophanation in Egypt, as also, because it was neglected among other nations, who observed it not, or not in the right manner, but rather prophaned then sanctified it. The question ariseth, whether it was then onely morall, or partly morall, partly ceremoniall. But the question should bee stated other wayes. For there is a difference betweene these two questions, whether the sabbath of the Jewes was partly morall, partly ceremoniall, or whe∣ther the fourth precept, as it standeth in the decalogue, was partly morall, partly ceremoniall. That the Iewish sabbath was partly morall, partly ceremoniall, is the commun and receaved opinion, which, for mine owne part, I would be loath to contradict, even taking cere∣moniall for typicall and profigurative of our pur∣chased forus by Christ. But it followeth not, that the fourth precept, as it standeth in the decalogue, is partly morall, partly ceremoniall in that scene, that is typicall and prefigurative. There is nothing in the pre∣cept, as it was promulgat upon mount Sinai, ranked among the rest of the morall precepts; placed in the midst, and written with Gods owne finger in ibles of stone, that soundeth any way to typicall ceremonie. At other times when the ceremonies of the law were inti∣mated, then were typicall and ceremoniall precep s delivered. It is true, when the fourth precept was pro∣mulgated, it was accommodated to the state of man af∣ter his fall. or strangers within our gates must cease that day from all manner of workes, which might give offence to Gods people, which needed not to be enjoy∣ned in the state of innocencie, or, if mankinde had conti∣nued in the bosome of th Church, and had not made defection falling in a second fall. But that specification of persons bound to worke, was not a ce∣remonie, but a needfull in respect of the time. The reason in the precept is morall, and the end of the cessation and rest is morall, to wit, to sanctifie, and keepe holy the sabbath-day. To sanctifie is taken in a generall notion; and without reference to ceremoniall exercises, or legall more then evangelicall. The leg ll offices were commanded by other lawes, which were positive. But White to prove that the word sanctifie is taken in a parti∣cular notion, pag. 47. alledgeth Deut. 5. 12. Remember to sanctifie the sabbath-day, as the Lord thy God ath commanded thee. This maketh nothing to the purpose; for the word san∣ctifie may be still taken in a generall notion, to sanctifie the sabbath, as the Lord commanded before at the deli∣verie of the law. Suppo e the word were to be taken in a particular notion in that place, Moses applying it as an interpreter and expounder to that present time, it fol∣loweth not, that it was so taken at the promulgation and engraving in ables of stone, for at that time there was no sacrifices appo ed for the sabbath, but afterward, Numb. 28. and s ing on the shew-bread, Levit. 24. But these things were ceremoniall, belonged onely to the priests, and not to all and every one of the people, and were commanded afterward. So was the precept of kindly fire, which was but temporall, and that the sab∣bath be observed as a memoriall of their deliverie out of Egypt, Deut. 5. 15. which saith Master Ainsworth, seemeth to have fallen forth upon the sabbath day. To be a sign , that the Lord did sanctifie them, was also set downe afterward, as one of the ends of the observation, Exod. 31. but yet that was not to be signum obsig ns, a sealing ligne or sacrament, but onely a declarative sig or indicant, or document, that God was the santifier of his people, or an argument, as others call it, or a pub∣lick note and signe of their profession, to distinguish be∣tweene the observers of the sabbath, as a holy and sancti∣fied people from others. But this may bee common to Iewes and Christians. The mutabilatie of the seventh day from the creation, maketh it not ceremoniall; for a thing may bee mutable, and not ceremoniall. To ap∣point the seventh day to bee observed and sanctified, is not a ceremonie, unlesse the word ceremonie be abused, and taken more largely, then for a thing significant or typicall. It is properly but a politick order, determining a time for the worship of God, To bee a memoriall of the creation, and Gods rest the seventh day followed indeed upon the observation of that day, but was not the only nor principall end of the institution; for then that should have beene the chiefe or onely exercise on that day, to contemplate and meditate upon the creatures. God propoundeth his worke of creation, and resting the seventh day, not as the onely subject to bee mused upon, but as an example for the observation of a seventh day sabbath. De diebu estis. cap. 4. Howbeit of the setting of that seventh day from the creation, the prerogative it had to bee the day of Gods rest from the worke of creation, and therefore made choise of, yet perse & directè, of it selfe and direct∣ly, as Suarez speaketh, it was not appointed for comme∣moration of such a worke, but to worship God for him∣selfe, for his owne majestie and excellencie. To end this point, wee must not confound precepts, concerning ob∣ ervancies and ceremonies, with morall. The ceremo∣nials are only appendicles, and have their owne positive lawes for their ground. If because there be some cere∣moniall precepts concerning the sabbath, delivered af∣terward or apart from the promulgation of the deca∣logu , the fourth precept shall be holden, partly morall, partly ceremoniall: by that reason other precepts also of the decalogue, shall bee partly morall, partly ceremoniall, for both the ceremoniall and judi∣ciall law, saith Master Dow, have in them something, which is juris moralis, and so farre forth are contained un∣der the morall precepts. pag. 7. De festis, c. 1. num. 12. Swarez likewise saith, Nihilomi∣nus tamen in illis ceremoniis seu observant i s sunt quaedum rationes generales, que secundum se pertinent ad moralem rationam vir utum, u de se abitr hunt à particulari signi∣ficatione & ritu veteris legis. In a word, there is nothing ceremoniall in the fourth precept, no positive worship, either legall or evangelicall, enjoyned, but only sanctifi∣cation, in generall without determination either of the one or other, De fest s, c, 2. no type or signification of things to come expressed, yea, or intended, saith Swarez, but only the in∣stitution it selfe renewed with accommodation to the state of man after his fall, of which I made mention a little before. All the determination, which is added over the naturall and morall obligation, to se apart a time to holy exercises, is divine positive, not ceremoniall or typicall: for divine postive is more generall, and comprehendeth also other lawes imposed by God for order and policie in his Church. Howbeit wee distinguish betwixt in the fourth pre ept concerning the sabbath, Differences betwixt the sabbath and anniversarie feasts. and the sabbath, as it was observed by the people of God upon the imposi∣tion of more precepts concerning ceremonies and ob∣servances, yet even in their observation wee may observe some markes, whereby it might be discerned from their anniversarie feasts, and to bee ordained pr marly for a morall use. The sabbath was observed every where throughout the land, and abroad, where they remained, in the wildernesse, in the places of their captivity and dispersion. The ceremoniall feasts on I rusalem, whither Iews and prose i s resorted from all countries, as at the Pentecost when the firle tongues were sent downe, and whereat the Apostle Paul hastened to bee present. Next, the ceremoniall feasts had some s crifices and ce∣remonies appropriate unto them, which might not bee used at other times. The sabbath had only the doubling of the daily sacrifice at the appointed place, beside the ordinarie exercises throughout the land. Thirdly, the sabbaths of anniversarie feasts were transfe red to the or∣dinarie or weekly sabbath, if it was to follow imme∣diatly, because the dead corps and meat prepared spe∣cially of herbs, See Cas ub▪ exercit. pag. 482. Scaliger de . could not be preserved without spilling or putrifying specially in those hote countries. Non fa∣cimus inqu , duo contin a sabbatha propter olera & prop et mortuos. restraineth this custome to the store moneth T ri. But the ordinarie or weekly sab∣bath was not drawne to the sabbaths of these anniversa∣rie feasts. Fourthly▪ at the anniversarie feasts they might not fast, they were dayes of joy and festivity which or∣reth not with mourning of f sting. See Nehem. 8. 10. Exod. 12. 14. Num. 29. 15. And therefore these dayes were called Chaggim, which is derived from a word, signifying wheeling about, leaping or dancing. The most solemne day of these feasts was called jom tob, Exortat. pag. a good or merrie day. The ordinarie sabbath-day was not called jom tob. See Casaubonus, nor yet Chag. They were not forbidden to f st, yet they might fast. That injunction, Exod. 16. 23. was a permission, not a com∣mand, or for preparation onely, not for eating the day following. Yea, they not only might fast, but did it usu∣ally, at lest to the twelft houre, as Hooker proveth by te∣stimonies out of Josephus, Justinus, Suctonius, Balsam upon the 66. Canon, Epist. 86. ad Casulanum. called the Apostles, saith, Wee fast not upon the sabbath, , lest wee should seeme to imitate the Jewes. Augustine saith, God spake no∣thing concerning dining or fasting upon the sabbath, when he sanctified the seventh day, nor afterward, when hee gave precepts concerning it to his people. Of these differences the reader may finde more in Altare Damascenum, page 667, 668, 669. The Jewish sabbath which was the seventh day from the creation, The satur∣day sabbath changed. was abolished at the resurrection of Christ, because it had types and ceremonies annexed to it, which were shadowes of things to come. The ground ceasing, the observation of that day ceased also; for the sha∣dowes flee away when the body commeth in place. Yea further, I will yeeld, that the abrogation was meant by the Apostle, Coloss. 2. 17. and under the name of sab∣bath there, is to bee meant onely the weekly sabbath, which is more then White craveth. Not that I thinke, they answer sufficiently to those, who will have the word to be applied to the first and last day of anniversary feasts, which were also called sabbaths. But because I thinke these to bee comprehended under the name of feasts, whereof these sabbaths were the principall, and most solemne dayes. So that here is a perfite division of all their solemne dayes, to wit, that they were either feasts, to wit, anniversarie dayes, or new moones, which returned monethly, or the sabbath, which returned weekly. I so thinke the rather, because we have the like division, 1 Chron. 23. 31. where the Levits office is set downe, to offer burnt sacrifices unto the Lord, in the sab∣baths, in the new moones, and on the set feasts. And againe, in Esay 1. 13, 14. wee have the like. As for that, that the word Sabbath is in the plurall number, it crosseth not this sense: for so is the weekly sabbath usually expres∣sed by the Greek translaters of the old testament; and in the new testament also, Matth. 12. 1, 5, 10, 11, 12. Matth. 2 . 1. Mark. 1. 12. Mark. 2. 23, 24. Mark 3. 2, 4. Luk. 4. 31. Luke 6. 9. Luke 13. 10. Act. 13. 14. Act. 16. 13. In these places the word is taken either for one sab∣bath-day onely, or for moe. And so it may bee taken in this place, Coloss. 2. and translated either sabbath, or as the late english translation hath, sabbath dayes. The sab∣bath-day is expressed in the plurall number for the fre∣quent and often returning. By the way observe, that the old sabbath was not reckoned among the Jewish festivall dayes. Addenda prolegome∣nis in libro de emenda∣tione tempo∣ru . S atiger saith, Manifestò sabbata distinguuntur (to wit Esay 1. 13, 14.) à magnis diebus. The sabbaths are early d stinguished from the great dayes, which were all one with Chaggim. The Iewish sabbath then, seeing it shadowed things to come, behoved to bee abolished. Suppose it had not beene a shadow, yet even as it was but a circumstantiall point of the fourth precept, which is morall positive, it might have beene changed for a greater reason, then was the occasion of the choice of the former. For the resurrection of Christ, and begin∣ning of his triumph, after he had ended his course of hu¦miliation, was a greater reason for making choice of the first day of the weeke, then resting from the worke of creation was for the seventh day before. The first respect of necessitie required abolition; The congruity. The first day of the weeke succeeded in the roome of the last day of the weeke, The Lords day observed in and from the Apostles times. and hath beene observed in the Christian Church from her infancie to this day, without any change or contradiction. The Apostles were conveened together that day, when the holy Ghost descended upon them, Act. 2. When Paul had stayed at Troas seven dayes, upon the first day of the weeke, being the seventh day of his abode, the disciples convee∣ned together to break-bread, and Paul preached and con∣ferred with them till break of day, Act. 20. 7. 11. The originall hath, upon one of the sabbath, but sabbath is put for weeke, because from the sabbath as the principall day, they numbred the rest of the dayes of the weeke to the next sabbath in order, first, second, third, fourth, &c. of the sabbath, and distinguished them not by the names of the planets. As when the pharisie said, I fast twice in the sabbath, that is, twice in the weeke, Luke 18. 12. When Jesus was risen early the first day of the sabbath, that is, of the weeke, Mark 16. 9. And Levit 23. 15. seven sabbaths shall bee compleat, that is, seven weekes. Likewise one, ac∣cording to the forme of speach familiar to the He∣brewes, is taken for first. The evening and morning were one day, that is, the first day. This place cannot bee tr s∣lated one of the sabbaths: for the Apostle stayed but se∣ven dayes, in which there was but one sabbath day. Nor yet is it likely, that the Christians did assemble upon the Iewish sabbath to their exercises. Howbeit the Apostle went in to their synagogue, Act. 13. upon their sabbath, that was not for the observation of their sabbath, but because hee could not finde the Iewes assembled toge∣ther at any other time or place, that hee might have oc∣casion to winne them, as yee may see at that time hee found occasion to deliver a word of exhortation. Wee have the first day of the weeke expressed with the like phrase, 1 Corin. 16. 2. where the Corinthians are directed to lay aside some thing for the poore the first day of the sabbath, that is, of the weeke, or every first day of the weeke. pag. 211. 212. Now although this text of S. Paul maketh no expresse mention of Church assemblies this day, yet because it was the custome of Christians: And likewise it is a thing conv ni∣ent to give almes upon the church-dayes, it cannot w ll hee gainsaid, but that, if in Corinth and Galatia, the first day of ev ry weeke was appointed to be a day for almes, and cha∣ritable contributions the same was also the Christians week∣ly holy day for their religious assemblies, saith White, and to this purpose citeth Chrysostome, in 1 Corin. hom. 43. where he sheweth, that the time was fit for collections, because that day they had receaved many great bene∣fites, and the first of the sabbath, hee interpreteth the Lords day. So do the translations of the Bible expound both the former and this place of the first day of the week, the Belgike, the French, the Italian, the Spanish, the late English, Beza's and Tremellius out of the Syri∣ack. With frivolous cavill tion doe some few to their great discredite preasse to another sense, which is to the full overthrowne by Wal e s and Amesius. This first day of the weeke, Revel. 1. 10. is called, not the day of the Lord, as sometime in the scripture, the time of some hea∣vie judgement is called the day of the Lord, or because the Lord revealed to him upon a day these great myste∣ries, for that day had beene uncertaine, the sense ca to logicall, as if John should have said, I was ravished in the spirit that day I was ravished in the spirit. But John maketh mention of this day as a thing knowne before to the Churches, to designe the time, when he saw th se visions. And he calleth it not the day of the Lord, but the Lords day, or the dominicall day, and so it hath ever beene called in the Christian Church since the dayes of the Apostles. Justi u c ll th it Apoc. 2. Diem solis, Sun∣day, because the apologie was directed to an ethnick, and in his dialogue with Trypho, the first day of the weeke, be∣cause Trypho was a Jew. It were superfluous to cite te∣stimonies to prove that in everie age this day hath beene called the Lord day, and observed by Christians in eve∣ry age. Notwithstanding it bee cleare and evident, that the Lords day was observed in the Apostles times, it is que∣stioned whither it was instituted by Christ, or by the A∣postles, or if by the Apostles, whither by them as ordi∣narie pastours, or as extraordinarie office-bearers, assisted with the infallible direction of the spirit. Discourse pag. 3. Master Daw, It concerneth us little to know, whither it was delivered by the Apostles themselves, or their next after commers. Those who come after are equalled by him with the Apostles, who were assisted extraordinarly in laying the founda∣tion wherein the Church was builded, and setting down the government and unchangeable policie of the Church. Either every Church had power to hallow a day like the Lords day, or else the Church universall. If every nationall Church, then they might have differed, and hallowed sundrie dayes. If the Church universall, that could not be brought to passe but in the representa∣tive, an oecumenicall councell. None such could be had for 300 yeares after Christ. But so the hallowing of such a day had beene suspended for 300 yeares. If the Church may institute such a day, it may abrogate it also, and change at pleasure. If the Church, or ordinarie pastours may institute such a day, they may make lawes binding the conscience. For wee are bound in conscience to ob∣serve the Lords day, even out of the case of scandall and contempt, in secret as well as in publike, with internall worship as well as externall, or els we sinne, howbeit the Church cannot take notice of it, or judge upon it. If there be no such day for the Lord, then wee deny to him that which the verie law of nature granteth to him, for the law of nature requireth such a day. Seeing no ordinarie pastours may doe it, it followeth, that if the Apostles did it, pag. 43. they did it not by vertue of their pastorall power and of∣fice, which was common to them with their successours, as Ma∣ster Dow speaketh, but by that power which was proper∣ly apostolicall, and that it cannot be called an ordinance of the Church, as Master Dow alledgeth it may. Even Bellarmine distinguisheth between traditions divine, De verbo Dei non script. cap 3. apo∣stolicall, and ecclesiasticall, and confoundeth not aposto∣licall with ecclesiasticall. The apostolicall constitutions, may be also called divine, saith he, because they were not instituted without the assistance of the spirit, and divine may be called apostolicall, not that they were instituted by the Apostles, sed quod ab eis primùm ecclesi traditae sunt, cum ipsi seorsim eas à Christo accepissont, that is, that by them they were first delivered to the Church, after they had first receaved them apart from Christ himselfe. The observation of the Lords day is not like the Pa∣pists unwritten verities, for it is extant in the scripture, but the question is about the precept. We confesse pra∣ctice, say they, but where is precept? I answer, their pra∣ctice was a paterne to us, and hath the force of a precept. Rivetue himselfe in his exercitations upon Genesis, pag. 2. an∣swers, In such things we need no expresse precept, if wee have practice and example, namely of such as we know to be the first institutours of good order, by vertue of a speciall calling, such as were the Apostles, but chiefly where the practice is repeated, for then it is inculcat, if there be no necessarie reason craving a change. Respondeo in talibus non opus esse praec pto expresso, si habeamus exem∣plum, praesertim eorum quos scimus in ecclesia fuis∣se, ex speciali vocatione primos institutores, quales fuerunt Apostoli. In talibus enim exemplum & praxis vim aliquam habet pracepti, praesertim ubi praxis illa repetitur, tum enim incul atur, si nulla ratio necessaria mutationem requi∣rat. Adde also, that the observation was uniforme in all the Churches, and constant, which presupposeth a pre∣cept, an ordinance, or institution. For what likelihood is there, that one began, and the rest every one after other followed the example of others that went before in practice, and that this way the observation crept in by exemple, and did grow to a custome. The places above cited make mention of the first day of the weeke, and the Lords day not as then begun, but as knowne and ob∣served before, even at the Pentecost, before the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles. And yet Rivetus inferreth a precept out of 1 Corin. 16. where the Corin∣thians are directed every first day of the weeke, to lay aside some thing for the poore, where, howbeit the chiefe intention of the Apostle is to give direction for the helpe of the poore, yet because hee will have it to be done the first day of the weeke, it followeth that hee willeth also, that they should dedicate the Lords day to the solemne assembling of the Church, for hee that in∣tendeth the end, intendeth also the midst, Vbi etsi prima intentio Tauli sit de collecta statuere, tamen quia vult eam primo di hebdomadis fieri, inde sequitur voluisse etiam ut diem Dominicam solemni ecclesiae congregationl dedicarent. Qui enim vu t finem, vult etiam media, si nihil in eis sit ille∣gitimum, aut verbo Dei prohibitum. Yet his words would bee somewhat corrected; for the Apostle enjoyneth them not to observe that day, as if they had never obser∣ved it before, but maket mention of it, as a thing knowne, and as Chrysostome observed, would move them to bee the more free-hearted, because of the benefites which they had receaved that day. He enjoyneth them no new thing, but concernidg the collection for the Saints, as he had given order to the Churches of Galatia. Yet this direction implieth a direction to continue in the observation of that day; for in directing them to doe a little, farre more would he have them to performe grea∣ter duties. Bellarmine giveth some rul s to trie genuine apostolicall traditions, which, if yee will admit, howbeit they cannot be justly applied to their unwr tten verities, yet very well to the observation of th Lords day. De verbo Dei non ser pto, p o, c. 9. When the universall Church observeth any thing, that none might appo nt but God, and yet nowhere is it found written, it be∣hoveth to averre, that it was delivered by Christ and his A∣p stles. Anot e rule, What the universall Church hath observed at all mes before, justly we may beleeve, that it was in Apostles, howbeit it bee of uch a qualitie, as i stituted by the Church. To this pur∣p se quoteth Aug stine lib. 4. contra Donatist as cap. 23 These are the words, That which the universall Ch rch , and hath not beene instituted by Councels, but ever mainta ned, is to be beleev d in all reason, not to have been ordained by o her power, then the aposto ique autho∣ri . Quod universate eccle a nec conci iis institu∣ , sed semp r tentum, non nisi authoritate ap st ica tra ditu certissime creditur. But seeing the ordinances of the Apostles were of two sorts. Some were tempo∣rarie, and to endure onely for a time, as abstinence from bloud, and strangled, which was enjoyned only for avoi∣ding the offence of the weake Jewes: others were to bee observed constantly. Of this sort was the observa∣tion of the Lords day. Experience hath proved the per∣petuall observation of it hitherto, and no reason can bee given, wherefore it should bee changed hereafter, as I shall show. It were superfluous to cite the testimonies of divines, referring the institution of this day to the Apo∣stles. Walaeus hath quoted a number, dissertat. pag. 165. After hee hath laid downe his reasons, consenting with them in judgement, hee concludeth that the first day of the weeke was substituted to the sabbath by the Apo∣stles, not onely by an ordinarie power, Dissert. pag. 172. such as all pa∣stours have to order rites meerly indifferent in their Churches, but by a singular power, as by such as had in∣spection over the whole Church, and to whom, as to ex∣traordinarie office-bearers, was concredit to be faithfull, not onely to deliver certaine precepts of faith and man∣ners, but also of comely order in the Church, Vt quis dies in septimana ex vi & anal gia quarti praecepti esset servandus, ne diss nsio aut confusio ex eo inter ecclesias ori∣retur, omnibus ubique Christianis constaret; as that it might bee knowne to all Christians, what day in the weeke is to bee observed by vertue and analogie of the fourth precept, least dissention or confusion should arise there about the Churches. He citeth other divines, concluding likewise that the Apostles being guided by the holy Ghost, sub∣stituted the Lords day in place of the Jewish bath. But others referre the institution to Christ himselfe, which is more likely: for after his resurrection hee ap∣peared sundry times, taught the Apostles things pertai∣ning to the kingdome of God, that is, the instruction, and government of his Church, and gave them com∣mandements, Act. 1. 23. These commandements, and instructions, they delivered after to the Churches, and set them downe in their canonicall writes. Next, Christ himselfe appeared, the day of his resurrection five times. At the third appearance, hee appeared to the two disci∣ples going to Emaus, at which time hee celebrated the holy supper according to the judgement of great divines. At the fifth appearance, he appeared to all the disciples, save Thomas, who were conveened together before. Then he gave them commission to goe and teach all na∣tions, and in conferring his spirit hee breathed upon them, John 20. Mark. 16. Eight dayes after, that is, the eighth day after (as Luke 2. 21. when eight dayes were ac∣complished for the circumcision of the childe, that is, when the childe was circumcised upon the eight day) Christ appeared againe, and Thomas was present, at which time he cured his unbeliefe. It would appeare, their meeting was not frequent at other times, and that Christ appea∣red purposly at that time. And therefore it is likely, that every eight day after ordinarily they conveened, and Christ appeared unto them, wherein that great di∣vine Junius is confident. Die ipso resurrectionis, & octa∣vo quoque die, Praelect. in Genes. cap. 2. usque dum in coelos ascendit, apparuit disc ∣pulis, & in conventum eorum venit. At last upon the Pentecost, which fell upon the eight day, that is, the first day of the weeke that yeare, Christ sent downe the ho∣ly Ghost in the likenesse of firie tongues upon the Apo∣stles conveened together. There is no speciall time noted for any of Christs apparitions, but the first and eighth day, which seemeth to be done of purpose. There∣fore Cyrillus lib. 12. in . 8. willeth us to ob∣serve, that the Evangelist is no content with a simple narration, but addeth carefully, after eight dayes, and all being gathered together in one place. The Lords day could not have beene observed so long as Christ remained up∣on the earth without his direction. And this appeareth to be one of the commandements, which he gave them. Eusebius ascribeth the institution of this day to Christ, Orat. de lau∣dib. Constan∣tini. advancing Christ above all the great pote tats of the Gentiles, who could not prescrive to all the inhabitants of the earth to conveene every weeke, and observe the Lords day, as Christ did. Athan sius cited by White, pag. 78. , The Lord hath changed r translated it (meaning the sabbath) into the Lords day. The word may as well import, that it was so cal∣led, because the Lord was the authour and institutour of it, as because it was instituted for the honour and wor∣ship of our Lord. As the Lords prayer is called , the Lords prayer, because the Lord was the au∣thour of it. Zanchius is of opinion, that when the Lord blessed the seventh day, the sonne of God spent that whole day in instructing Adam and Eva, De operi . Dei; part. 3. . 1. c. . 539. exercising them in the worship of God, and admonishing them to teach their posteritie to doe the like: for it beloved Adam to understand the sanctification of that day, which the Lord had blessed and sanctified. Wee have farre greater reason to thinke, being certaine that Christ was here on earth, appearing to his disciples at sundrie times from the day of his resurrection, till the day of his ascension, and instructing them in things belonging to his Church, that hee instructed them in this point also. Yea, yee see, hee conveened with them, and in a manner observed it also. Whither Christ himselfe instituted the observation of this day, or the Apostles by the inspiration of the Spi∣rit, the authoritie is divine: Syntag. lib. 1. cap. 47. For howsoever Bellarmine distinguisheth traditions in divine and apostolicall, the distinction is but imaginarie, saith Junius in his answer; and Bellarmine himselfe acknowledgeth, that the aposto∣licall traditions in respect of the assistance of the spirit, may be called also divine, howbeit they were not deli∣vered immediatly by Christ himselfe. Tratitiones verè apostolice sunt divinae, saith Polanus. Beza in his great an∣notations upon Apocal. 1. 10. calleth it, Apostolicam & verè divinam traditionem, Atradition truely divine, how∣beit Apostolicall. In Genes. cap. 2, 3. Cornelius à Lapide joyneth both toge∣ther, Christ and his Apostles. Vnde à Christo & Apostolis festum à sabbato in dominicum est translatum. Some, The Lords day substi∣tute to the old sabbath. saith Dow, ground the institution of the Lords day upon the fourth commandement, some upon the sanctification of the seventh day at the creation, other seeke for authority out of the new Testament; but all these three agree in one. For the fourth commandement was but a renovation of the first institution after the creation. The substance of the commandement is to observe a seventh day, the renewing the appointment of that seventh day of the first weeke, was a circumstantiall point, and therefore it was changeable, like as for some types and ceremonies annexed to it, it behoved to bee changed. The institution of the Lords day, was but a substitution of another day to that which was, the sub∣stance remaining, to wit, that the seventh day of a weeke be sanctified. For, as I observed before, the force of Gods example alledged in the fourth commandement, lieth in this chiefly, that God purposly tooke six dayes to create the world, whereas he might have done it in six houres, and rested upon the seventh; not in this, that he created in those six dayes, and rested upon that seventh day, which followed immediatly after: for the Lord saith, for in six dayes, not, for in those six dayes. God made choise of that seventh day at that time to sanctifie it, to bee a memoriall of his rest from the worke of creation that seventh day. When Christ rose from the dead, and a new creation, as it were, of a new world was begunne, there was greater reason to sanctifie that day, howbeit there had beene no types and ceremonies annexed to the former, farre more seeing it behoved to bee abolished. The seventh day in the precept is to be considered mate∣rially, as it were, or formally. As it is considered for∣mally, and in generall, it is of the substance of the com∣mand, but consider it materially, as the seventh from the creation, it is not of the substance of the commandment. The seventh day may bee considered both the wayes: S arez de diebus festis cap. 1. nu. 15. Septimu autem dies intelligi potest, vel ille qui est septi∣mus d es à creatione numerando à primo die creationis, que dici potest velu imaterialis numeratio, vel potest dici septi∣mus, quasi generat m, seu formaliter ille, qui est ultimus in septenario numero dierum, sicut Aristoteles dixit ultimam unitatem esse formam numeri. The institution then of the Lords day, is nothing els but a substitution of another seventh day to the former seventh day, considered mate∣rially. These are the common phrases of divines; that the old sabbath was changed into the first day of the weeke, that the glorie and excellencie of the old sabbath was translated into that day, that that day succeeded or was substitute to the old sabbath. What can these phra∣ses import, but that vis praecepti the force of the precept yet remaines, and only the materiall numbring for great respects was changed. Philo Judaeus in his booke de opificio mundi in the place above cited, The perpe∣t ity of a se∣venth day. upon occasion of the sabbath discourseth at large upon the mysteries of the sacred septenarie, as hee calleth it, or number of feven. Peter Martyr saith, that God delighteth in the number of seven, and hath closed up great and wonderfull workes, within the compasse of the number of seven. Scaliger saith, that the number of seven dayes is instituted by a divine power, because it is so commodious for all the course of the year, called Solar, non. I g. p. 198. and hath into it some divine thing. Divinitus igitur institutus est numerus dierum septenarius, qui ad omnem ci∣vilis anni Solaris rationem commodissimus est, & ut dixi nescio qui habet. But in the institution of the sab∣bath, God had not an eye to the mysteries, or hid vertue which is in the number of seven, but to the abilitie of man. The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath. Our reason thē for the perpetuity of a sevenths day sab∣bath to be sanctified, that this order cannot be changed, that it is of the substance of the fourth commandement, are these. First, if by vertue of the fourth precept of the decalogue, wee bee not bound to sanctifie one day of se∣ven, then we have no divine precept for any certaine cir∣cle, or circuit of dayes for the sanctification of a certaine day: for no where in scripture have we any precept for any other revolution of dayes to observe one of them. Without a certain and set systeme of dayes there would arise great confusion and division in the Church of God, some judging one of ten, others perhaps one of twenty, or thirty suffi ient, &c. It behoved th Lord therefore by his supreme authoritie to s int the time, to exeeme all Scruples out of mens mindes, and to prevent all confusion and disorder. No humane authoritie could have bound mens conscience to the observation of it. The Lord no where hath done it, but in the fourth pre∣cept. Next, the reason in the precept concerneth us all, for as I have said before, the Lord tooke six dayes to creat the world, no moe, no fewer, and rested the seventh to be a paterne to man, many hundred yeares before the Iewes became a nation, and in that precept, which was a renewing of the institution, commandeth us to follow that paterne. Thirdly, the proportion betweene the six dayes for man to doe his owne businesse, and the seventh to be dedicated to God, is so just, that it cannot bee al∣tered without prejudice; for to give man but five, were an heavie burthen, to give him seven, or eight, or moe, the time set apart for God would not be sufficient. Vn∣lesse wee will thinke God exacted more then was suffici∣ent, when he required the seventh. But we must acknow∣ledge that God is good, and wee professe equity in his precept, in that he hath given us six dayes, and taken but the seventh to himselfe. And who was so wise, as to finde out this proportion without prejudice either to God or man. 1. 2. quaest. 100. art. 1 Aquinas distinguisheth morall precepts in three rankes: The first are such as naturall reason doth yeeld to incontinent: The second are of such as need the more subtile consideration of the wiser sort, considering sun∣dry circumstances: A third sort are of such as need di∣vine instruction to help mans reason to judge, and con∣descend. These of the first ranke are absolut de lege natura, simply or absolutly of the law of nature, the rest are attained unto by humane discipline and instruction as these of the second ranke, or v ne inse uctio as these of the third. And to this ranke may this proportion bee referred. But wee are content to urge it onely as divine positive, but unchangeable, as the rest of the morall pre∣cepts are. So that the fourth precept is partly divine naturall, that God must have a time set for his worship, partly divine positive, that he must have one whole day of seven. Fourthly, Christ or the Apostles would not varie from this circle, when they changed the seventh day from the last to the first day of the weeke, but kee∣ped themselves within that circle, which they might and would have done, if the fourth precept had beene given onely to the Jewes, or the circuit had been cere∣moniall, and had relation onely to the Iewish sabbath. And this is an argument by the way, that this systeme of seven, or circuit of the weeke, was set from the begin∣ning. The reason of the institution of the Lords day, saith Bellarmine, De cultu sanct. lib. 3. c. 11. was, that it might succeed to the sab∣bath, for divine law required, that one day in the weeke should bee dedicated to divine worship. Nam jus divinum requirebat, ut unus dies hebdomadae dedicaretur cultui divi∣no. And seeing it was not convenient that the old sab∣bath should bee still observed, it was changed into the Lords day. For the perpetuity of one of seven, the testi∣monies of many divines may bee alledged. Homil. 10. in gen. 2. Chrysestome, Jam hinc ab nitio doctrinam hanc nobis insinuat Deus, eru∣diens in c culo hebdomadae diem unum integrum segregan∣dum & seponendum in spiritualem opera ionem. Theodore∣tus, Septem d ebus circulum omnem dierum conclusit. Beza in Apocal. quaest. in Gen. 1. 10. Quartum praeceptum de septimo quoque die sanctificando, quo ad cultum De a net esse leg moral & immotae. P. Martyr in his common places, that it is stable and firme, that one day in the weeke bee dedicated to God. Zanchius upon the fourth precept, that it is morall, so farre as it commandeth us to consecrate one day of seven to Gods externall worship. Junius saith, it is natural that the seventh day bee consecrated to God. Praelecti in Genes. cap. 2. Suarez acknowledgeth, De festis c. 4. num. 9. that the dedication of the seventh day, howbeit hee calleth it an ecclesiasticall precept, cannot be changed by the ordinarie, or ordinat as he calleth it, power of the Church. Because some ec∣clesiasticall precepts are so neare and like to divine insti∣tutions, so conforme to the law of nature, fenced with so many reasons of honestie and religion, so ancient, and strengthened by universall custome, that simplie, or by the ordinate power of the Church; they cannot be abro∣gated. Among which precepts, he ranketh that of the dedication of the seventh day. And therefore he infer∣reth that by the absolute power of the Church and the Popes, it may be abrogated, tamen practice & moralit dici posse aliquo modo immutabile, licet ecclesiasticum sit, that is, it may be said in some sort to be morally, and for pra∣ctice unchangeable; Which is as much as to say, with lit∣tle honestie or credit can it bee put in practice. Such shifts are sophists driven unto, when they would ad∣vance the authority of the Church too high, as if the Church onely in imitation of God had dedicated one of seven, and had not direction from God. Alwayes yee see hee acknowledgeth, that to observe holy one of the seven dayes, is conforme to the law of nature. This seventh day, The Lords day un∣changeable. to wit, the Lords day, cannot e changed as the old seventh day, which was the last of the weeke. It is not onely unfit, and unconvenient, but it cannot bee changed. Not because of the nature of the day, for it differeth not in nature from another day, more then the former sabbath. If the former sabbath had beene holier in nature then other dayes, it could not have beene changed. But the reason of the immutabili∣tie of the Lords day is, that it was set downe by divine authority, and therefore cannot bee abrogated by hu∣mane authoritie of princes, pastours, or prelates. Wee must not looke for Christ till his comming againe, nor for any to arise hereafter equall in power and authority to the Apostles. Next, the consideration taken in ma∣king choise of this day, cannot serye for another day. Christ is not to suffer death, and rise againe at any other time. A weightier consideration to make a new change, will never fall forth, then the resurrection of Christ. And therefore nowbeit the Church had instituted it, it can∣not be changed. De festis c. 4. num. 10. At verò ecclesiasticum praeceptum iti∣tur mysterio resurrectionis Chr sti am fa lo, quod ut sic, im∣mutabile est: Nec enim potest C ristus non resurrexisse, nec potest non vivere glories postquam resurrexit, saith Sua∣rez. Seeing Christs resurrection fell forth that day, it can never be true that Christ rose not that day. Therefore for the dedication of such day, to wit, the Lords day, Suarez saith, Num. 10, 11. the reasons are perpetuall and unchange∣able, which have so fixed the determination, that this precept of the Church cannot reasonably be abrogated, and that the holy Ghost, which governeth the Church, will not suffer such a change to bee made against reason and the utilitie of the Church. But if it bee of divine in∣stitution, and not the Churches, it cannot bee changed, but by the like divine institution. For what ever be the considerations in making choise of the day, the deter∣mination, or as they call it, taxatio diei, dependeth chiefly upon the will of the institutour. Of the divine institu∣tion I have treated a little before. I referre the Reader for more to Willets his Synopsis, Perkins cases of con∣science, Fulke against the Rhemist, Apoc. 1. 10. and other worthie Divines. The places alledged Rom. 14. All diffe∣ ence of dayes not abrogated. and Galat. 4. maketh not against all difference of dayes, but the ceremoniall, or dead judaicall. The weaker Jewes; Rom. 14. thought the holy dayes commanded by God in the old law, were still holier then other dayes. The Apostle willeth such to be borne with, till they come to the fuller knowledge of their Christian libertie. The Galathians had beene converted from paganisme, had begun in the spirit, but were now by the persuasion of the false apostles, like to end in the flesh, beginning to observe the dayes, moneths, and yeares, which the Jewes observed of old: Dayes, that is, their weekly sabbaths; Moneths, that is, their new moones; Yeares, that is, their yearly dayes, or an∣niversarie feasts; or tymes and yeares, that is, Statuta tempora annorum, the appointed times of the yeares. For by the same reason, that moneths may be taken for new moones, yeares may be taken for yearly dayes. I see no likelihood, that they observed the seventh or fifty yeare. This exposition agreeth with the division of the Iewish solemnities, whereof I made mention before. The ob∣servation of such dayes, is taxed here, as were in some respect, of the quality of the new moones and yearly feasts. Now these were the sabbaths. This ceremo∣niall difference was abrogated, but the morall use of a set holy day was not taken away. For the same time the Lords day was observed, and by the Galathians in particular, as yee may see 1 Corin. 16. 1. where the Apo∣stle maketh mention of the Churches of Galatia. Now to set a day is not a shadowing ceremonie more then to designe a place for the congregation to meet in, but a matter belonging to order. But there was more requi∣red to this day. For it was not instituted only for order and policie, that the people might know what dayes to conveene to publike, exercises, howbeit it was one re∣spect. Times may bee appointed for preaching and prayer on the weeke dayes by any particular Church. But there is more required here, a day to be obseved holy by the universall Church, not only for publike wor∣ship, but also for privat, not onely for externall, but also for internall, which could not be done but by divine au∣thoritie, which is supreme, and onely able to binde the conscience to internall as well as externall, to privat as well as to publick worship, as I have said before. The last point which I am to touch, The manner of observa∣tion. is concerning the strictnesse of the observation: Whither we be bound to as strict observation of the Lords day, as the Jewes were of their sabbath. The superstitious observation of the Iewes wee are not bound unto. For they observed that day more precisely, then God required. They found fault with Christ healing of the sicke man upon the sab∣bath, and the sicke mans carrying home of his bed. They have had, and have many foolish observations, as not to pull to an herb on the sabbath, nor to eat an aple which they pluck upon that day, nor claw with their nailes in publike, nor catch a flea unlesse it bite. Let us then see, what God hath forbidden them. They were bidden ake that which they had to bake upon the sixt day, and seeth that they had to seeth, Exod. 16. 23. and forbidden to kindle a fire upon the seventh day. But that which was baken and seethed upon the sixt day, a part of it was not reserved to the seventh day, but that which remai∣ned over unbaken and unsodden. The text importeth no further, for if it had beene baken or sodden, they would perhaps have attributed the not putrifying upon the seventh day to the baking or seething. It was food that might bee eaten without baking, like comfites or fruit. It seemeth then this injunction was given onely during the time the manna rained. If this direction had beene to bee observed afterward, they might not have eaten any thing which was baken two dayes before. Is it likely that Christ and others bidden to the Pharisees house upon the sabbath-day, had no meat dressed for them by baking of seething. The kindling of fire was forbidden, not simply, but for baking or seething the manna, as some thinke, and therefore endured onely so long as the manna lasted, howbeit the most superstiti∣ous sort of the Jewes in later times observed it. It is noted of the Essens, Drusius de tribus sectis, lib. 4. a strict sect of the Jewes, as singular in them, that they kindled no fire upon the sabbath-day. They were commanded, Exod. 16. 29. to abide every man in his place, and not to goe out of their tents, at lest out of the campe. This was but temporarie. Af∣terward they might take journey upon the sabbath to the Prophets or synagogues, 2 King. 4. 23. Levit 23. 3. Yea, if they were not to journey for that, the Scribes prescrived to them 2000 cubits, that is a mile or there∣abouts, out of a towne or citie, which was called the sab∣bath-dayes-journey. But afterward they became more superstitious, not taking up the Lords intent, in that place of Exodus, as the Jew that would not be drawne out of the jackes, wherein he had fallen upon the sabbath-day. So howbeit the Iewes should be superstitious now in not kindling fire, that is no warrant that the direction was not oratie. Some thinke, this prohibition served onely during the workmanship of the tabernacle. But let it bee granted, that both the one direction and the other were to endure during the policie of the Iewes, I denie that they were forbidden by vertue of the fourth precept of the decalogue. They would and might have kindled fire notwithstanding of the fourth precept. Their rest upon the sabbath was ceremoniall and figu∣rative. And because ceremoniall and figurative, there∣fore, saith Bellarmine, pag. 31. and Dow after him, with others, it behoved to be more strict, exact, and rigid. For the more exact the figure is, the better it representeth and signifieth. So granting, that dressing and preparing of meat by fire were not a temporarie precept during the manna, yet it depended upon the ceremoniall rest and typicall state of Gods people under the law. They ab∣stained from the buriall of the dead upon the sabbath∣day, 2 Maccab. 12. 39. because if any touched the dead, or entred into the house where the dead lay, or touched a grave, was uncleane seven dayes, Numb. 19. 14. 16. and consequently they might not enter into the tabernacle. Here a duty forbidden for legall uncleannesse, which bindeth not us. The prophanation of the sabbath was a capitall crime, Exod. 31. 14. but this law bindeth not us. The workes depending upon the ceremoniall rest, or any particular ceremonie bindeth not us, but only the workes inhibited in the fourth precept, wherein the ce∣remoniall and iudicall precepts are not included, but onely annexed to them, as peculiar unto that people, which was under the tutorie, and paedagogie of the law. Aquinas saith, that the ceremoniall and judiciall precepts are not contained in the decalogue. Secunda, se∣cundae qu st. 122. art. 1. a secundum. Ad secun∣dum dicendum, quod judicialia praecepta sunt determinatio∣nes moralium praeceptorum, prout ordinantur ad proximum; sicut & ceremonialia sunt quaedam determinationes pracep∣torum moralium, prout ordinatur ad Deum. unde neutra praecepta continentur in daecalogo. If then these workes were not forbidden by vertue of the fourth precept, we are not bound to for beare them. If our observation of the Lords day praefigure that blessed and glorious life which we expect, as some doe hold, then our rest should be also as exact and rigid, because figurative. Dominicus dies, D civie. De lib. 22. c. 30. qui Christi resurrectione s xat e, , e ernam requiem spiritus & corporis praefigurat, saith Augustine. But wee will not build strictnesse of rest upon such a weake ground. It may bee fill drawne to resemble heavenly and spirituall things, but that is not any end of the institution. It is not pu destinatu , instituted for any shadow or signifi∣cation, though t may befitly applied unto such an use, Synops. pag. 500. saith Willet. Our rest upon the Christian sabbath is only sub∣servient to the sanctifying of the day. The strictnesse required of old by the vertue of the fourth precept, is re∣quired of us. As Whit maketh sunday an holy day only by the ordinance of the Church, pag. 109. 150. so the particular forme and circumstances of resting are pre∣scribed unto us, saith hee, by the Church, pag. 135. mea∣ning the Church governours, the prelates. So doth Bel∣larmine allow such workes, as shall be permitted by the prelats, De sanc . c. 10. or have beene used by long custome. Tertiope∣ra concessa à pralatis. Quartò opera quae ex consuetudine sunt licita. Our holy fathers the prelats, paternes and pa∣trons of the prophanation of the Lords day, usurpe di∣spensation with Gods morall precepts. The very light of nature leadeth a man to acknowledge, that what time is set apart as holy, it should not bee prophaned with worldly businesse or exercises, howbeit this light hath beene detained in unrighteousnesse among the Gentiles, who would not spend the time as they ought to have done, or were ignorant, and thought their games and playes were a hononring of their gods. I need not to reekon particular workes, this generall ingraft in mans minde by nature, that a holy day should be spent in holy exercises, will direct every one in the particulars. This or that will be an impediment to the spirituall exercises, whereunto I am bound this day. In hoc pracepto est ali∣quid, quod est morale, ut vacare, id est, intendere Deo, oran∣do, colendo, meditando, quae sunt in dictamine legis natura. Et ista hodie in lege Christiana magis manent in virtute, quàm in lege veteri. Ex statutis synodalibus dioecesis Lin∣gonensis anno 1404. Here yee see in the statutes of that diocie it is acknowledged morall in the fourth precept to pray, worship, meditate, that nature diteth this much, and that these dueties remaine more in strength under the Gospell, then under the old law. This statute with the rest was approved by a Cardinall, Ludovicus de Bar∣ro. In a councell holden at Mascone 588, the people is exhorted to spend the Lords day in hymnes and praises, prayers and teares. Sunt oculi manusque vestrae toto illo die ad Deum expanse: Let your eyes be bent, and hands spread toward God all that day. They require also spirituall ex∣ercises, in the night it selfe. In the synods holden in France, by the Popes legates Galo and Simon, it was or∣dained under the paine of excommunication, that none grind at watermills, or any other mills, from saturday at evening till the Lords day at evening. Cardinall Galo and Simon were sent legates to France about the yeare 1812. In a synod holden in Ange s 1282. the like or∣dinance was made against grinding at milles, notwith∣standing of the abuse for a long time before, for that sins are the more hainous, the longer miserable fouls are bound to them, cumali qua praescriptio contra praecepta de∣calogi locum sibi vindieare non possit. Seeing no prescri∣ption can take place against the precepts of the deca∣logue. Yee see they ground their ordinance upon the fourth precept, and conclude ex vi quart praecepti, that Christians may not grind at milles that day, from eve∣ning to evening. They inhibited also cutting or shaving of beards that day, or any other exercise of barbar ra t, under the paine of excommunication, but in case of im∣minent perill of death or grievous disease. This strict∣nesse then required of us, admitteth not lawfull and ho∣nest games, shooting, bowling, wrastling, &c. farrelesse unhonest and unlawfull, w i h ought at no time to bee suffered. For honest games and passe-times, howbeit honest, may be impediment to spirituall exercises, and distract the minde as much as the lawfull workes of our calling. Refreshment by meat and thanke was allowed by God himselfe, when hee provided for the seventh day, and by Christ himselfe, who being invited, went to the pharisees house upon the sabbath to dinner. Aman may recreate himselfe with the free aire of his garden or the fields, if family dueties or the like hinder him not, providing hee spend the time in holy exercises, or holy conference with some other. But games and passe- cannot consist with such holy exercises. Workes of pietie, as to travell to the places of publike worship; or charitie, as to visit the sicke, and of necessity, as to pre∣serve the life of man and beast in danger, are lawfull. The Jewes suffered themselves rather to be killed, then take armes upon the sabbath-day, after better advice, they resolved to fight if any invaded them, 1 Maccab. 2. 41. The Hebrew Doctours have a saying, Periculum animae impellit sabbatum, the perill of the life driveth away the sabbath. Yet we should pray to be free of those necessities. Christ foretelling his disciples, Matth. 24. 20. the destruction of Ierusalem, biddeth them, and in their name, other disciples, who were to follow after, pray, that their flight might not be in winter nor on the sabbath-day: wherefore not on the sabbath-day, but because it would be an hinderance of their ho∣ly and spirituall exercises upon that day. Now the de∣struction of Jerusalem fell not forth till fourtie yeares af∣ter Christs ascension. But so it is, the Iewish sabbath was one of the dead ceremonies, which obliged not to necessarie obedience after the passion of Christ. Christ meant then of the Christian sabbath. I have exceeded farre the bounds I set to my selfe, and therefore I am forced to end this discourse. THE DEFINITION OF A FE∣stivall day. IUdicious Piscator defineth thus a festivall day, Gala . 4. 10. ∣stum propriè loquendo est publica & folennis ceremonia mandata à Deo, ut certo anni tempore, cum singulari letitia obeatur, ad gratias agendum. Deo pro certo aliquo beneficio in populum suum collato. that is, A feast or festi∣vall day is a publike or solemne ceremonie, commanded by God to be executed at a certaine time of the yeare, with sin∣gular gladnesse, to give God thankes for some certaine bene∣fite bestowed on his people. Hooker the master of ceremo∣nies, Policie 5. book sect. 2. maketh festivall solemnitie to be nothing els, but the divine mixture, as it were, of these three elements, praises set forth with cheerefull alacritie of minde, de∣light expressed by charitable largenesse more then com∣mon bounty, and sequestration from ordinarie workes. The sabbath under the law was never called jom tob, The Lords day not a fe∣stivall. a good, that is, a merrie day, as were the solemne anniver∣sarie feasts. Other dayes also, which were not solemne feasts, were so called, as dayes of banketing and feasting. Drusius in his annotations upon Ester 9. citeth Elias Thes∣bite to this purpose. Master Aiusworth in his annota∣tions upon Exodus 16. citeth the Chaldee paraphrase, speaking of the sabbaths and good dayes, that is, the so∣lemne feasts as distinct things. Puxtorsius also in abbre∣viaturis. So the Lords day succeeding to the old sab∣bath, should not be ranked among the festivall dayes or feasts, as the word is taken in our common language. The definitions agree not to the Lords day. It is not an anniversarie, but a weekly day. It is not instituted for the commemoration of a particular benefite, but for the worship of God at large, as the morall law requireth, and as the old sabbath did. For howbeit that day, was made choise of, which was the day of Christs resurrection, yet it was not instituted onely for the commemoration of that particular benefit, but for the worship of God in generall. It hath no peculiar service of epistles, gospels, collects, or sermons and homil es for Christs resurre∣ction. The Church invented afterward a feast or festi∣vall day, to wit, Easter, for that purpose, which is called the feast of the resurrection. S rez having reckoned the many prerogatives of the Lords day, as that Christ rose that day, the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, &c. hee willeth us to observe, that howbeit all these prerogatives might have beene considered in the deter∣mination of the day, yet the day of it selfe, and directly was not instituted for the peculiar commemoration of these rkes of God, but to worship God for himselfe and his owne exellencie. De festis c. 4. Nihilominus per se ac directè non referri vel istitui hunc diem ad peculiaerem commemo∣rationem illorum operum Dei, sed ad Deumipsum propter se colendum, & propter suam excellentiam & majestatem. It wee had no dayes but festivall for some particular be∣nefits, we should have no day for the worship of God in generall. The Lords day therefore may justly bee cal∣led the schoole-day of Christians, as Petrus Ramus cal∣leth it. Thirdly, as the sabbath of old was distinguished from the yearly feast, which were called good, that is, merrie dayes, so is the Lords day from the yearly feasts, invented afterwards by men. Vpon the anniversarie feasts called good dayes, they might not fast as yee have heard before. Mirth and mourning could not stand to∣gether. But upon the sabbath they might lawfully fast. Epist. 86. ad Casulanum. Ne quando sanctifica it De is diem septimum, quia in illo requievit ab omnibus operibus suis, aliquid de jejunio vel prandio expressit, nec cum postea populo Hebra de ipsius dici observatione mandavit, aliquid de alimentis sumendis vel non sumendis locutus, saith August ne. that is, God enjoyned nothing concerning fasting or eating, either the first time that he sanctified the seventh day, or after∣ward when he gave the manna. The Lords day succee∣ding in the roome of the old sabbath, as it standeth in the decalogue, is of the same qualitie. Wee may lawfully fast upon the Lords day, which were absurd to dee upon our anniversarie feast dayes. It is true, that in the ancient Church it was thought a hainous thing to fast upon the Lords day. So did they also forbid to pray kneeling that day, to signifie their joy for Christs resurrection. This use of signification or testification was the foun∣taine of much superstition, and brought in a heap of ce∣remonies, some of which the Papists themselves were shamed of long since. The same ceremonie of not knee∣ling in time of prayer upon the Lords day, De cultu sanctorum cap. 11. is worne out of use nigh 500 yeares since, sai h Bellarmine. If the rea∣son of the institution had beene solide, it should become us no lesse then them to pray standing upon the Lords day. But the ground was naught. The like may bee said of not fasting upon the Lords day. Some reason they had indeed not to fast upon this day, when the Ma∣nichees and Priscillianists fasted; for the Manichees fa∣sted ordinarily upon the Lords day, lest they should seeme to rejoyce for the resurrection of Christ, which they be eeved not. The Priscillianists fasted likewise ordinarily upon the Lords day, and the nativitie day. But when there are no knowne Manichees, nor Priscil∣lianists, there is not the like reason for not fasting. But the extremities should be avoided. To thinke it unlaw∣full to fast that day, or unlawfull to dine and breake our fast, are both without warrant, and superstitious. But to fast upon occasion, or in time of any imminent judge∣ment, is lawfull. When Paul continued preaching upon the sabbath till midnight at Troas, before the tasted any thing, or the rest were refreshed with meat, this conceat of not fasting upon the Lords day, had not entred in the Church. Was Paul a Manichaean, saith Hierome, because hee and those who were with him fasted on the Lords day. Di 76. c. 11. His words are extant in Gratians decree, Atqui utinam omni tempore jejunare possimus; quod in Actibus Apostolorum diebus Pentecostes, & die dominico Apostolum Paictum, & cum eo credentes fecisse legimus. Non tamen Manicheae haereseos accusandit sunt. If any had resolved to fast seven dayes or moe, he might have fasted upon the Lords day included, as ye may see in Balsamo and Zona∣ras upon the constitutions falsly called apostolicall, and Augustine epist. 86. ad Casulanum. Whitaker defending the occasionall fas s of our Church, telleth Duraeus, that the respects the ancients had, concerne not us. C erum to 1. p. 227. Etsi illîs temporibus die dominica jejunare nefas fuit, propter haereli∣ces & Judaeos, qui Christi resurrectionem impugnabant, jam dudum tamen illa offensio nullum in ecclesia locum ha∣bet, ut planè nugatorum sit quod tu de nostris in Anglia & Scotia calumniaris, quasi eò spectent, ut his cuniculis resur cti fidem evertamus. In a pronounciall synod holden at Dort anno 1574 it was ordained, that there bee three sermons on the Lords day, Tom. 3. l. 29 cap. 6. num. 6 when a fast is to be keeped on . It is to observe a day, to say, the morne is the Lo ds day, therefore it is unlawfull to fast, Theolog po∣lemica, p. 509 saith Chamter. Alste∣dius, Jejunandum etiam die dominica, si necessitas flagitet. What need I multiply testimonies, that is sufficient, which Augustine saith What dayes wee ought to fast, and what not, I finde it not defined by any precept given by our Lord, or any of the Apostles. Quibus diebus non oporteat je∣junare, & quibus oporteat praecepto Domini vel Apostolorum non havenio definitum, epist. 86. But if the Lords day were a festivall day, it should follow, that we should not not fast on it at all. Now we proceed in our reasons against festivall dayes. THE II. REASON. NOne appointed holy festivities under the laws when the times were more ceremonious, but God himselfe. The dayes of Purim were called simply the dayes of Purim, The dayes of Purim not the holy dayes of Purim. They were not called Chaggim No peculiar sacrifice was appointed, nor any holy convocation of the people enjoyned. The ordinance required but feasting and joy, and sending of portions to other. The rest mentioned Esther 9. was onely from their enemies. So much worke as might stand with a feasting day was not forbidden. Suppose they had rested altogether from worke, that would only prove an idle day, but not an holy day. Our Doctour therefore hath no warrant to say, pag. 18. that they were made holy dayes by Mordecay. Afterward, it true, wh n the Jews become more superstitious, they read the book of Esthe , after the reading whereof they sp nt the rest of the day in revelling and riotousnesse. Next these dayes were instituted by Mordecai, and therefore were called Mordecai's dayes, 2 Maccahab. last chap. vers. 37. Sixtus Senensis saith, Biblioth li. p. 20. he is thought to be the penman of the booke of Esther, he was one of the 120. of which the great synagogue consisted, of which number were Za∣charie, Daniel, Ezra, De sacram. pag. 206. and Malachie. Whitaker thinketh Mordecai did this, God inspiring him, or perhaps by the advice or warrant of some Prophet, and doubteth not, but it was done by divine authoritie. Many things might have beene done then by their direction, the like whereof wee have not now. Thirdly, it appeareth Esther 9. 28. that this custome was to bee observed as long as the feasts appointed by the Lord himselfe. Ho∣ly dayes of ecclesiasticall constitution are not of such a nature as Doctour Fulk acknowledgeth. Fourthly, it was not done without consent of the people of the Jewes themselves, Against the Rhem. Apoc. 1. 10. Contr. 3. l. 4. cap. 17. . 5. as Junius observeth. The Jewes tooke upon them and their seed to keepe these two dayes, Esther 9. 27. Howbeit they were not religious, but politike dayes, 3 part. decre. i dist. 3. c. 2. De etal. ti∣tulo de Fae∣riis cap. Con∣questus. Mordecai would not impose them without their consent. The equitie of this is seene in the Canon law, where bishops are forbidden to appoint any particular festivall dayes within their diocies without consent of the people. And there is good reason, seeing they are to be withdrawne from their calling, I put now the case they had power to make a holy or festivall day. Lastly, can any prince or state make the like ordinance for the posteritie, to feast, and send portions and gifts one to other, or were it seemly to command feasting in a Christian common-wealth, howbeit allowed, and in a manner commanded to the Jewes. Alstedii po∣lemic. p. 399. Alstedius denieth that the Christian Church can imitate the Jewes in the like. The memoriall dayes of the dedication mentioned, The dayes of dedica∣tion. Joh. 10. 22. serve as little for their purpose, for first, they are not called, either 1 Macchab. 4. or here; the feast of dedication, howbeit the English translatours without warrant have translated the word dedication so, which the Rhemists retaine without such a supplement. If any supplement were needfull, it may be translated the dayes of dedication, as the former were called the dayes of Purim. And so they are called 1 Maccab. 4. 59. and in the testimonie cited by Junius out of the Talmud. Joh. 10. If yee will call them the feast of dedication, because of their bodily feasting, yet unlesse there was holy con∣vocations to divine service upon them, and cessation from worke, they cannot bee made a president for holy festivities composed of Hookers three elements, nor a e they anniversarie holy dayes added to those the Lord himselfe appointed. There was offering of sacrifices, singing and playing upon instruments at the time of de∣dication of the altar eight dayes, but not enjoyned at the yearly memoriall. Thirdly, Judas Maccabaeus and his brethren, had the consent and assistance of the whole congregation of Israel to this ordinance, 1 Macc. b. 4. 59. which is wanting to our festivall dayes, But Junius citeth a testimonie out of the Talmud, bearing, that the wise men for the time instituted eight dayes of dedica∣tion, in memorie, that a little quantitie of oil, which was found in the temple scarce sufficient to enterta ne the lamps one day, vet sufficed eight dayes, till new oil was pressed out of the olives. By the wise men are meant the Pharisees. in Marc. 2. 18. Nam sapientes & Pharisaei synomina sunt, saith Drusius. We are not to imitate the inventions of Phari∣sees, or of such corrupt times as those of the Maccabces. There was no yearly remembrance by solemnitie of feast, not so much as of one for the dedication of the whole temple, either the first under Salomon, or the se∣cond under Zorobabel, nor for restoring of the temple by Ezekias, after it was prophaned by Ahaz and Vrias, or by Josias after it was polluted by Manasses and Amon. But now there was an annuall memorie appointed for renewing of the altar only, and other decayed places of the temple. As for Christs conference in the porch of the temple in the dayes of dedication, it proveth not that he honoured that feast, as they call it, with his pre∣sence. Only the circumstance of the time is pointed at, when that conference was, as the dayes of the shew∣bread, Act. 20. and of the fast, Act. 27. are mentioned, to note a circumstance of time, but not that Paul obser∣ved them. Christ came up to the feast of the tabernacles before, and stayed in Jerusalem. In the meane time the dayes of dedication fell forth, De emendat. temp. as Scaliger hath obser∣ved. So Christ came not up to Ierusalem for this feast, and went away in the time of it immediatly after this conference. Further, Christ and his Apostles tooke oc∣casion of frequent meetings to thrust their sickles in thick harvests. In a word the dayes instituted to Gods people, beside such as God himselfe appointed, were either appointed by extraordinarie warrant, or were not holy dayes, or were the inventions of the pharisees, and corrupter times. THE III. REASON. NEither Christ nor his Apostles appointed festi∣vall dayes to be observed by Christians, The third reason against. festi∣vall dayes. but rather inhibited the observation of them, and changed onely the old sabbath to the first day of the weeke. The anniversarie solemnities were not changed but abrogated, because ceremoniall. Wee finde not the Apostles or Christian Churches in their time observed any festivall or anniversarie dayes. The Apo∣stles obser∣ved no festi∣vall dayes. Bellar. de cultu sanctor. cap. 13. That pentecost mentioned 1 Corin. 16. and Act. 20. was the Iewes Pentecost. Bellarmine himselfe dare not af∣firme, that it was the Christians. The Apostle having occasion to treat upon this subject, condemneth obser∣vation of dayes, Gal. 4. Coloss. 2. Suppose, which is more likely, that the Galatians embraced the observation of the Iewish dayes, Whitak. cont. 1. quest. 6. cap. 12. Galate potius Judaizabant quam astro∣logicas regidas servabant. Yet the Apostle reasoneth against all observation of such like dayes as judaizing. As if he had said, the observation of ceremoniall dayes, moneths and yeares, was convenient for Gods people under the law for their instruction, and to shaddow things to come, because of their non-age, and was a pe∣dagogicall and rudimentarie instruction, which besee∣meth not the state of a Christian Church, and clear light of the Gospell. These dayes were all ceremoniall, yea, the very dayes of Purim, and the dayes of dedication. Doctour Mortoun saith, Defence of the ceremo∣nies. pag. 64. were of a ceremoniall a re. To celebrate the memorie of any particular act of Christ at a set time in the yeare with cessation from worke, sermons, gospels, epistles, collect, and hymnes belonging thereto, with mirth and gladne e, without admitting of a fast at any time, is not to observe a day morally, but ceremonially. Not to fast when such a day of the yeare or weeke returneth, but to hold it festivall, is to observe a day, as to fast yearly upon another day. No doubt the Galatians observed not these dayes with the Iewish worship of sacrifices and oblations, or as sha∣dowes of things to come, for then they had denied Christ. Neither is it likely, that they neglected the Iew∣ish Easter and Pentecost, but yet the Apostle calleth it a returning to the Iewish rudiments, that is, Iudaizing. He instructeth the Corinthians, how they shall observe Easter, to wit, all the yeare long with the unleavened bread of sinceritie and truth, not after the Iudaicall man∣ner. If there had beene other festivall dayes, which might have beene observed by Christians, the Apostle having so faire occasion, would have directed them to the observation of them, and not spoken so generally. Chamieraom. 3. l. 19. c. 6. embraceth a more generall ex∣position, that the Apostle condemneth both Iewish and Ethnick observation of dayes. Decanone lib. 9. cap. 21. num. 15. Non est verisimile Apo∣stol um adeo incaut locutum, ut generaliter observationem damnare videtetur, si aliquam excipiebat, saith Chamie∣rus. Or is it likely, that the dayes appointed by God himselfe being abol shed, the Apostles would have brought in other in their roome. Is it reason then, that others should bring them in. Zanchius confesseth, That it is more agreeable to the first institution and writings of the Apostles, that one day of the weeke onely bee san ctified. om . col. 671. Magis consentaneum est cum prima institutione & cum scriptis Apostolicis ut unus tantum dies in septimana sancti∣ficetur. There was but one day observed in the Apostles times, and called the Lords day. If other dayes had beene dedicated to Christ, they should all have beene the Lords dayes. Beatus Rhenanus in his annotations upon Tertullian, De corona militis, observeth, that in the primi∣tive times, the word Lord was more familiar and fre∣quent in the mouthes of Christians, then the name of Christ. So it was as much as to say, Christs day. The Lords day then was Christs day, and Christ had no other dayes, of nativitie, passion, &c. Eusebius treading unknowne footsteps, as himselfe confesseth in the beginning of his storie, filleth up his booke with some old fables. Among the rest he maketh mention of an epistle of Polycrates bishop of Ephesus, to Victor bishop of Rome, 5. c. 24, 25. wherein he reporteth, that hee and his predecessours, even upward to John the Evan∣gelise, celebrated Easter upon the fourteenth day of the moone. That epistle may be marked for a counterfite, for it beareth, that Iohn was a priest, and bare in his fore∣head the petalum, that is, the golden plate like that of the high priests. The Doctour calleth such gay tales Rhe∣toricall flowres. pag. 53. Elench. tri∣haeresi c. 2 . But saith Scaliger, Neutrum concedet, qui sciverit nullum Christi Apostol um sacerdotem fuisse & nulli praeterquàm summo sacerdoti petalum gestare licuisse. Augustine, who lived in the fift age after the Apostles, could not resolve upon the originall of our five festivall dayes, but floated betweene two opinions, and not one of them sure. For they were neither instituted by the Apostles, nor by generall Councel. Socrates in his hi∣storie commeth nearer to the point, lib. 5. c. 21. I am of opinion (saith e) that as many other things crept in of custome in sundrie places, so the feast of Easter to have prevailed among all people of a certaine privat custome and observation, in so much that not one of the Apostles hath any where prescri∣ved so much as one rule of it to any man. A little after, They that keepe Easter the fourteenth day of the moneth, bring forth Iohn the Apostle for their Authour. Such as inhabite Rome and the west parts of the world, alledge Peter and Paul for themselves, that they should leave such a tradition: yet there is none of them that can shew in writing any testimonie of theirs for confirmation and proofe of that custome. It hath beene an old refuge, when any countrie or province could not finde the beginning of their customes, to fa∣ther them upon the Apostles. A notable exemple whereof wee had in this same Ile, when there was hote contention about the formes of shaven crownes. Hie∣r himselfe saith, Epist. ad Lu∣ci um. Vnaquaeque provincia pracept a ma∣jerum leges Apostolicas arbitretur. Let every province esteeme the traditions or precepts of their forefathers to bee Apostolicall lawes. It will rather follow, that the Apo∣stles observed not, nor appointed Easter to be observed at all. For the Apostle being directed infallibly by the spirit, had agreed upon the day as well as upon the thing it selfe, and not left occasion of contention to the Chri∣stian world. Chamier. com. 3. l. 19. cap. 7. n. 37. Quae aliter atque aliter observabantur non possunt ab Apostolis esse instituta, quorum ab eodem spiritu eruditorum non potuit non esse individuus consensus. Neque unquam piis fuit persuasum ab Iohanne institutum pascha decima qua ta Luna, à I etro autem post eam, quomodo jacta∣bant veteres. It is well said in the preface to the harmo∣nie of confessions, that the old contention about the ce∣lebrating of Easter tossed very hotly the space of two hundred yeares or thereabout, betwixt the Greekes and the Latines, was long since of us thought worthy of laughter. Whitaker wondereth at their frivolous con∣tentions, Whitak. de scriptura quaest. 6. c. 9. Tom. 3. l. 19. c. 7. num. 9. and he saith, there was no necessitie to observe it any day. Chamierus saith, Si institutum fuisset ab Apo∣stolus eodem ubique modo fuisset institutum & observatum, quod falsum esse jam olim observavit, Socrates. Seeing they have no sooting for the Apostles appointing of the ob∣servation of Easter, farre lesse will they be able to prove the Christians pentecost, and other festivities that came in after, as of Christs nativitie, ascension, &c. to have beene instituted by the Apostles. Iustinus questions Clemens constitutions, some sermons ascrived to Cy∣prian, all suppositious workes are the most ancient proofes they alledge for them. THE IIII. REASON. IF it had beene the will of God, The fourth reason against festi∣vall dayes. that the severall acts of Christ should have beene celebrated with seve∣rall solemnities, the holy Ghost would have made knowne the day of his nativitie, circumcision, presenta∣tion to the temple, baptisme, transfiguration, and the like. For it is kindly, say they, to remember opus diei in die suo, the notable worke of a day in the owne day. Bellar∣mine saith, that Christs acts did consecrat the dayes and times wherein they were wrought. Hooker saith, that the wonderous workes of God did advance the dayes and times wherein they were wrought. There is not a day in the yeare, wherein some wonderous worke of God hath not beene wrought. All the dayes of the yeare, Epist. 4. saith Leo, are full of Christs miracles. If Christs actions advance and consecrate the dayes where on they were wrought, they ought to have beene made knowne, lest we keep holy such dayes as were never consecrated or advan ed. But it is confessed, that the day of Christs nativitie, and consequently of the rest depending there∣upon, as of his circumcision, presentation, baptisme, have beene hid from mortall men. And therefore the day of Christs nativitie was observed diversly of old, by some in one moneth, by some in another. The 25. of December was grounded upon an erroneous conceat, that Zacharie the father of Iohn the Baptist was high priest, which errour is yet fostered by observing that day. Yee see then, as God hid the bodie of Moses for avoiding of idolatrie, so hath he the day of Christs nati∣vitie for avoiding superstition. And this is sufficient to declare the will of God concerning other notable acts, which were knowne, to wit, that not the act, but divine institution maketh a day holy. Gods resting upon the seventh day made it not holy, but his sanctifying of it, and instituting it to be observed as holy. Ratio conveni∣entiae non fuisset sufficiens, nisi praecessisset mandatum divi∣num. Rivetus in Decalogum, pag. 167. Christs actions did no more consecrate the times, wherein they were wrought, then his body did the manger, or the crosse by touch. And suppose this might have beene, it would not follow that all mangers and crosses are consecrated, no more would it follow that every 25. day of December should bee consecrated and made holy, because that whereon he was borne (I put the case it were true) was consecrated. Verum etiam non est, dies illos fuisse consecra∣tos per actiones aut passiones, quae talibus diebus acciderunt. Idenim si verum esset nullus fuisset dies, qui aliqua Christi actione non esset nobilitatus & consecratus, Rivetus in Decalogum, pag. 204. As for remembring of Christs na∣tivitie no man denieth but it is needfull, and so it is, wheresoever the Gospel is preached. But we deny that the memorie of it must be celebrated with the solemni∣tie of a festivall holy day, with cessation from worke, with feasting or forbearance of fasting, and a proper service. THE V. REASON. SUppose the observing of holy dayes had at the first beene a matter indifferent, The fifth reason against festi∣vall daye. yet seeing they have beene abused and polluted with supersti∣tion, they ought to bee abolished. Upon this ground Z nch us inferreth, Tom. 4. col. 678. Non ma è igitur f'cerunt, qui omnia pro er diem dom nicum aboleverunt. They have therefore not done am sse, who have abolished all other holy dayes but the Lords day. If Ezekias fact in breaking the brazen s r∣pent belandable, by which he confirmeth that pule, then their fact is laudable also. But sure it is, that in former ages holy dayes have not onely beene abused with pro∣phane and licentious revelling and surfetting, but also polluted with the opinion of worship, merite, necessitie, and a judaicall conceat, that the devill is not so bold to tempt men on these dayes as at other times. And there∣fore, saith Zanchius, Col. 679. Magicians observe holy dayes to exercise their mag call feats with the greater efficacie. The Lords day it selfe may bee abused, but because the observation is necessarie in respect of divine institution, it cannot bee removed for the abuses of men. But the festivall dayes were not appointed by God. Col. 678. The num∣ber, the abuses, the will-worships of feasts so increased, that there is nothing so unsavourie to God, so pernicious to men, as to sanctifie such and so many dayes, faith the same Zanchius. Holy dayes devised for the honour of Christ, resh 2. art. pag. 84. drew on holy dayes to saints. Easter brought on a superst tions lent to attend upon it, made baptisme wait for her moone, confor∣med our Lords supper unto the Jewish passeover in unleave∣ned bread. It was the first aple of contention among. Chri∣stians, the first weapon wherewith the bishop of Rome played his pr ses against other Churches; and after flew so many Britons with, by Austin the Monke, saith Doctour Ames. Even in Chrysostomes time, the people would forbeare to communicate at other times. But at Easter they would communicate, howbeit they had committed recently some hainous sinne, Homil. 61. 2d populu n Antioche∣ um: whereupon he exclameth, O consue∣tudinem! o presumptionem! O custome! O presump∣tion! Because people ranne superstitiously to that holy action at Easter, as if the time gave vertue to the sacra∣ment, and were careles e the rest of the yeare, our re∣formers appointed other times free of superstition, as ye may see in the first booke of discipline. pag. 58, 59. Therefore seeing the observation of festivall dayes is not commanded by God, and it cannot be denyed, but it hath beene much abused, it ought not to be continued, farre lesse introduced where it hath beene disused, sup∣pose it might be now used without these abuses, because it may degener after the same manner as before. But what if it be not, nor cannot be free of abuse and super∣stition. They say, they esteeme them not holier then other dayes, or place any worship of God in the observation of them, but only keep them for order and policie, that the people may be assembled to religious exercises, and instructed in the mysteries of religion. But that is false, howbeit an old shift. The Papists themselves confesse, that one day is not holier then another in the owne na∣ture, no not the Lords day, but in respect of the use and end. And in this respect our Formalists esteeme their festivall dayes holier then other dayes, call them holy dayes, and maintaine, as yee have heard before, that they may be observed as holy dayes. If the observing of a day holy for the honour of a saint be a worshipping of the saint, the observing of a day to the honour of Christ cannot bee without opinion of worship. If the obser∣ving of the Lords day as a festivall, as it is in their ac∣compt, be worship, the observing of their holy dayes is worship. Whereas they alledge, that it is not worship, because they hold not the like necessitie in observing the one as the other, it will not helpe them. For that doth not alter the nature of worship, but maketh the one ne∣cessarie, because God instituted it, the other arbitrarie and voluntarie, and consequently will-worship. The same matter, forme, and end is in both, but God institu∣te h the one, and therefore lawfull, the other is instituted at the pleasure of man, so it is worship, but a vicious worship. Further, some other Formalists have of late maintained the mutabilitie of the Lords day it selfe. What our Doctour will doe now, let any man judge who knoweth him to be temporiz r and a sceptike. Master Dow, p. 58. saith, as other holy dayes, it goeth pari¦passu in their canons and ancient statutes, which require the same observances under the same penalty. Th y are not only holy dayes but also mysticall, howbeit the Do∣ctour denieth it. For els he must disclaime his ancien s, who call them so. Are they not appointed for the so∣lemnitle of some mysterie of religion? Doe they not carrie the names of Christs nativitie, passion, ascension? &c. Are they not ordered according to the knowne or supposed times, when such things fell forth? If it were for order and policie, they were observed, that the peo∣ple may assemble and be instructed, wherefore is there but one day betweene the passion and the resurrection, fourty betwixt the resurrection and ascension, and then againe, but ten betwixt the ascension and whitsontide. Wherefore follow wee the course of the moone in our moveable feasts, and observe not a certaine day in the moneth, as we doe for other. If we observed dayes on∣ly for order and policie, then wee would not sticke to dayes, as we doe, for the commemoration of Christs na∣tivitie; passion, pag. 18. 23. ascension, &c. The Doctour saith, we do not observe festivall dayes as the Jewes did, which were holy, not only for the use whereunto they were appoin∣ted to serve as circumstances, but by reason also of their mystik signification, and of the worship appropriated to them, which might not bee performed at another time. But that will not save the ma ter. For a day is called mystike, not onely for shadowing things to come, but also for the mysteries solemnely remembred. And as for appropriation, doe wee not appropriat to the day of Christs nativitie a peculiar kinde of service, of epistles, gospels, collects, hymnes, homilies belonging to Christs nativitie, and thinke it absurd to performe the like ser∣vice upon another day, with the like solemnitie of cessa∣tion from worke, and sup rstitious forbearing of fasting. Wee thinke it likewise absurd to performe upon the na∣tivitie day that peculiar service which belongeth to ea∣ster. Yea, pag. 25. the Doctour saith, the commemoration ap∣pointed to bee made upon the five dayes, must not bee omitted on these dayes. If it bee absurd to celebrate an∣other day after the same manner with the same service, and no other service will serve on these dayes; is there not a peculiar service appropriated to our festival dayes, as of old among the Jewes? pag. 23. 18. That shift is of no weight, that a minister may preach, or wee may meditate upon Christs passion another day, then the nativitie. For that is not to celebrate with solemnitie. To use another day with the like solemnitie in the place of it, or both, would be thought very absurd. The Jewes themselves without the service appropriated to their feasts, might remem∣ber these same benefites and mysteries upon other dayes, but not with the like solemnitie and peculiar ser∣vice. And so the solemnitie is tyed to the time. To ob∣served dayes after this manner is not like the appointing of houres, for preaching or prayers on weeke dayes or times for the communion, according to the policie and order set downe by everie particular congregation, we tye not our selves to them, not any peculiar service to any of them. Wee use time then onely as a circum∣stance, and for order, and not as a sacred time, let be as a holy festivitie. Wee observe dayes after the same man∣ner that the Jewes did, howbeit not the same dayes, nor with the same kinde of worship. The change of the cir∣cumstance, the day and manner of wotship, doth not free us of Judaizing. Non sublata sed mutata est significa∣tio dierum, saith Bellarmine. and so it is with the Forma∣lists. Wee doe not say that the anniversarie revolution made the Jewish festivals ceremoniall, for in the revo∣lution of time there was no mysterie, but the tying of such a peculiar service to the time of anniversarie reso∣lution with such solomnitie. To performe the same du∣ty in substance upon the morall sabbath, as occasion ser∣ved, had not beene ceremoniall. What then, they say, ought not Christs inestimable benefites and notable acts to be remembred? I answer, Yes, and so they are, for where the gospell is preached, his acts are published. Christ is set forth crucified by the preaching of the word, every communion day, his passion and death is and will be remembred to his com∣ming againe. De eucha∣rist. l. 3. c. 9. The Eucharist, saith Bellarmine, est memo∣riale omnium miraculorum & quasi compendium vitae, pas∣sionis, & resurrectionis Domini. In the written word, sermons, prayers, creeds, catechismes, his nativitie, pas∣sion, ascension, &c. are remembred. It followeth not, they should bee remembred, therefore their memorie should be celebrated severally with the solemnity of a fe∣stivall day. For the Lord hath appointed an holy day, which we call the Lords day, and may call Christs day, as I said before, for publishing all Christs acts and bene∣fites. Pope Alexander the 3. gave this reason, where∣fore the Romane Church doth not observe an holy day to the Trinitie, to wit, because glorie to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost, and other like things belonging to the praise of the Trinitie, are publi∣shed daily. Decretal. l. 2. tit. 9. cap. Ecclesia Romana in usu non habet, quòd in ali∣quo tempore hujusmodi celebrat specialiter festivitatem, cum singulis diebus, gloria patri & filio & spiritui sancto, & catera similia dicantur ad laudem pertinentia trinita∣tis. The Popes ground must bee this. Whatsoever is treated on or remembred in the ordinarie divine service, needeth not a speciall holy day to celebrat the memo∣rie of the same. I assume. The nativity, passion, resur∣rection, ascension of Christ, and sending downe the ho∣ly Ghost, are not only remembred in privat, but also in publike, and in the ordinarie service, specially on the Lords day. Concil. Con∣stantinop. 6. Can. 8. If all be true that is affirmed by a councell holden at Constantinopl , that Christ was borne on this day, the starre shined to the wisemen on it, Christ fed 5000. persons with five loaves and two fishes on it, that hee was baptized, rose and sent downe the holy Ghost on it, the light was treated on it, and which Pope Le affirmeth, that the Lords day is consecrated with so ma∣ny mysteries dispensed on it, that whatsoever notable thing was done on earth, was done to the honour of this day, it appeareth that the Lord would have us to ob∣serve only this day, as holy and sanctified by himself for the proclaiming of all his worthy acts, and not to pre∣sume to institute holy festivities upon our owne heads. There is no danger but the memorie of Christs nativi∣tie, &c. will be preserved to the end of the world with∣out observing such solemnities, and making holy dayes which lyeth not in the power of man. This pretext of remembring and putting in minde, hath beene a cloak to bring in crosses, images, surplices, and other popish garments, with much other superstition, and among the rest these memoriall dayes. THE JVDGEMENT OF FOR∣raine Divines. I Passe by the Petrobrusians, The judge∣ment of for∣raine Di∣vines. the Waldenses, and Wicleffs followers, and come to later times. Lu∣ther in his booke de bonis operibus, set forth anno 1520. wished, that there were no festivall dayes among Christians, but the Lords day only were observed. And in his booke to the nobilitie of Germanie he saith, Con∣sul nesse ut o nia festa aboleantur, solo die dominico re∣tent . That is, It were expedient that all feasts were aboli∣s ed, t e Lords day onely being retained. Farellus and Vi∣ et r n ed all holy dayes out of the Church of Ge∣neva, as Calvine epist. 118. testifieth. The same decree, which banished Farellus and Calvine out of Geneva, brought in other holy dayes. In a nationall synod hol∣den at Dort anno 1578. of the Belgick, Almaine and French Churches, we have these words. Optandum fo∣r t nostros sex diebus laborare, & diem solum Dominicum celebrare. That is, It were to be wished, that our countrie people laboured six dayes, and celebrated only the Lords day. So yee may see festivall dayes are rather tolerated by them, because of the wilfulnesse of the magistrates and people then commended or allowed. Among the arti∣cles agreed upon and concluded concerning ecclesia∣sticall policie in the Palatina , anno 1602. we have this following. Omnes Feri per annum & festi dies tollendi è medio. All the festivall dayes through the yeare are to be abolished. Yee see where they finde the opportunity, they abolished them. Bucer, howbeit not one of the pre∣cisest reformers, upon Mathew 2. hath these words, as I finde him cited by Amesius in his fresh suit, pag. 360. I would to God, that ev ry holy day whatsoever, beside the Lords day were abolished. That zeal which brought them first in, was without all warrant or example of the Scripture, and onely followed naturall reason, to drive out the holy dayes of the pagans, as it were to drive out one nail with an∣other. Those holy dayes have beene defiled with so grosse superstitions, that I marvell if there be any Christian who doth not shake at their very names. Seeing then festivall dayes have no warrant, we ought not to hear the sermons delivered on these dayes of pur∣pose for the day: for that is the chiefe element of a fe∣stivall day to use a peculiar kinde of service proper to it. And without divine service, it were but an idle day, not a holy day. The word of God is good of it selfe, but may bee abused to charming, and to foster supersti∣tion, whereof we should keepe our selves free, that wee be not guiltie of the prophanation of the name of God. Our preachers went to rebuke the people when they con eened more frequently to the Church npon any fe∣stivall day, falling upon an ordinarie day of teaching, howbeit neither time nor text was changed. But how farre have both. preachers and professours, degenered without appearance of amendment. At the beginning of the late novations they were skar, but now many have digested that scruple. OF CONFIRMATION. OUr act, The act ex∣amined. it is true, alledgeth that the Papists have made of the triall of young children their edu∣cation, and how they are catechised, a sacra∣ment of confirmation, as if no such thing were aimed at but the said triall, yet in respect that by that act the pre∣tended bishop shall cause them to bee presented before him, that hee may blesse them with prayer for the in∣crease of their knowledge and continuance of his hea∣venly grace with every one of them, and wee know that they dare, and will take upon them the rest of the rites used in the English Church, laying of hands, &c. we rea∣son, as before, against confirmation, as it is used in the English Church. Yet two things I perceave in the act as it standeth. The one is, that the bishop is not ound to try by himselfe every one that is to be presented before him, but only to try, whither the minister hath beene re∣misse in catechising, and yet he must upon the report of others blesse them with prayer, for the increase of knowledge, and continuance of grace. Next, that he must blesse who hath not a calling to blesse, that hee must blesse as if hee were the pastour of all the souls within the diocie old and young, which charge that null and pretended assembly could not give him, seeing it hath beene acknowledged before in free assemblies to have no warrant in the word of God, and hath beene sup∣pressed by our Church as a damnable office. There∣fore his blessing is but a prophanation with his fingers. But what language is this, to say, that the bishop shall blesse them with prayer, for to blesse is one thing, and to pray another. For prayer seeketh of God good things for us, but to blesse is in Gods name to assure us, that the blessing of God is upon us, and shall accompanie us. But let us come to their paterne. That which now the Papists make the sacrament of confirmation, The origi∣nall of the act of the sacrament of confirma∣tion. was of old a part of the solemnitie of bap∣tisme. After the person was baptized, they laid on hands, that is prayed for increase and continuance of grace to the baptized, as we doe now, but without laying on of hands, because it was a rite indifferent without any use, but to designe the person for whom the prayer was made, and afterward abused to make up another sacra∣ment. Afterward entred a superstitious device, to strike Chrisme, that is, oile of olives tempered with balme, in manner of a crosse upon the forehead of the baptized. This anointing in the forme of a crosse was called signa∣tion, or consignation, because of the signe of the crosse made upon the forehead. This unction or consignation, and imposition of hands, became in the mindes of super∣stitious men so necessarie, that without them they thought they had not gotten their perfite christendome, that the signe of the oily crosse perfited baptisme, and conferred the spirit of God upon the baptized. T s consignation and imposition of hands at the closure of baptisme was called confirmation, like as the giving of the cup to the communicants, after they have receaved the bread, Cassand. Li∣turg. p. 218. was called also confirm tion, as Cassander hath observed, but the controued onely with the first. The b shops arrogated to themselves the unction or consignation, and imposition of hands to advance their estate. They doe that part which consummateth baptisme, which maketh a fall and pe fite Christian. But when it was found, that the bishop could not bee present at every baptisme, the priest was permitted after baptisme to anoint the baptized in the top of the head with holy Chrisme, but he must not crosse the forehead. That must bee reserved to the bishops leasure. Then they were presented to the bishop to be confirmed, and get their perfite Christendome by rit s, Chemier. tom 4. l. 4. cap. 11. Spa∣lato l 5. c. 5. Hooker. l. 5. p. 353. which were ap∣pendicles, and c remonie of bapt sme before. Th English at their rude reformation reserved imposition of hands to the bishop, and gave their priest power to make the signe of the crosse upon the forehead of the baptized, but without chrisme. Howbeit there bee no greater antiquitie for the crossing without it then with it, they call notwithstanding the bishops imposition of hands onely confirmation, and not their priests cros∣sing of the forehead. And yet when the priest crosseth, he saith, Wee receave this childe into the congregation of Christs flock, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confesse the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner against sinne, the world, and the de∣vill, and to continue Christs faithfull souldier, unto his lifes end. Which words agree according to their do∣ctrine better with confirmation▪ For doe they not say, Hooker l. 5. p. 354. Hockwells ser ron of confirma∣tion. that in baptisme infants admitted to live in Gods fa∣mily, but in conf they are rabled to fight in the armie of God. That in baptisme they beleeve the re∣mission of sinne unto justification, in confirmation they are emboldened to make open professon of this beleefe unto salvation. And this is just the doctrine of the Pa∣pists. So they have parted the rits of confirmation, or els they must acknowledge that they have two-confirmati∣ons, which is as absurd. But let us come to the last, and that which they call confirmation or laying on of hands. It is true in their articles set forth, anno 1562. they deny confirmation to be a sacrament, The Forma∣ ists hold confirmation to be a sacra∣ment. De politera. l. 3. c. 16. and acknowledge that it flowed from a naughtie imitation of the Apo∣stles. But Doctour Rainolds in the conference holden at Hampton court, alledged, that that article was contra∣dicted by the rubrick of confirmation in the booke of Common prayer, as Parker hath well observed. In that rubrik it is said, That confirmation is ministred unto them that are baptized, that by imposition of hands and prayer they may receave strength a d defence against all tentati∣ons to sinne, and the assaults of the world and the devill. Bellarmine maketh imposition of hands and prayer but one sensible signe in confirmation, howbeit the Papists have no right imposition of hands. Master Hutton saith, that imposition of hands is one of the externall meanes by which the holy Ghost is given, Parkerus de politeia l. 3. c. 16. l. 12. and howbeit that prayer hath the chiefe force, yet imposition of hands hath some also, otherwise (saith hee) what needed Peter and John to have travelled to Samaria, they might have prayed in Jerusa∣lem for the holy Ghost to the Samaritans Downame like∣wise saith, that grace is conferred to the baptized for confirmation by imposition of hands. Defence l. 3. c. 4. l. 6. In the prayer af∣ter the laying on of hands wee have these words, Wee make our humble supplication unto the for these children, upon whom after the example of the Apostles wee have laid our hands, to certifie them by this signe of thy favour and gratious goodnesse towards them. Ye see then, they make imposition of hands a certifying signe of Gods favour, and a meane, whereby grace and strength against tenta∣tions and assaults is conferred. Is it not then made a sacrament & derogatorie from baptisme and the Lords supper, as if by baptisme we were not certified of Gods favour, and entred not to Gods armie as well as his fa∣mily. Our Christian valour and courage to resist the devill, and professe the truth, is a fruit of that regene∣ration and sanctification, which is sealed to us in bap∣tisme. Let him be a athema, who saith, that baptisme is gi∣ven to the remission of sinnes, and not also to the help of grace, Concilium Melevitan m. Ordinarie imposition of hands a ge∣sture of prayer. Is not the Lords supper a confirmation of our faith and often cel brated for that end. Because the example of the Apostles is alledged, wee answer, that imposition of hands mentioned, Act. 8. was extraordinarie. The Apostles by imposition of hands might conferre the gifts of tongues, prophesy∣ing, healing, which Philip the Evangelist had not, and therefore Peter and John were sent to Samaria for that end. For they had need of some to prophesie, and to have the Gospell in these times confirmed to them by such wonders. The effects of this imposition of hands were sensible to these that were present. And therefore Simon Magus would have bought with money that gift which the Apostles had. Strength against tentati∣ons is a grace invisible, and given onely to the faithfull, whereas the gifts of tongues, prophesying, healing, might have beene given to the unregenerat. The bishop of Spalato saith, De rep. l. 5. c. 5. nun. 33. That the imposition of the Apostles hands was but temporarie, and for a sensible effect, which was to cease, and that it was not a stable and constant sacrament of the Church, nor was it properly sacramentall. The confes∣sion of Wittenberg hath the like saying, cap. 11. Of a temporall and personall fact of the Apostles, a generall and perpetuall sacrament cann t be ordained in the Christian Church with∣out the speciall command of God. And so saith Suarez also in 3. tom. 3. disput. 33. sect. 4. Their laying on of hands then in imitation of this extraordinarie example of the Apostles is apish. As for that imposition of hands mentioned, Ordinarie imposition of hands 2 esture of rayer. Heb. 6. 1. I will let passe the different interpretation of Divines, who thinke, some that it was that extraordinary, where∣of wee have made last mention, others that it is that which was used in ordination of ministers. I will give; that it was an ordinarie laying on of hands upon the faithfull. But as it is joyned with baptisme in that place, so it seemeth to be that imposition of hands, which was used in the end of baptisme, when the minister prayed for persons baptized, that the Lord would increase and continue his graces with them. The Apostle there oppo∣neth the doctrine of the beginning, that is the catatheti∣call doctrine of repentance from dead workes, faith, re∣surrection from the dead, and eternall judgement, to the doctrine of perfection. The converted Jewes and Gen∣tiles behooved to be catechised in these grounds suffici∣ently, and tried before they could be baptized, and have hands laid upon them. These were called Catechument, till the time of their baptisme. Others apply it to the children of the faithfull, and thinke that when they come to age, and were fit for the communion, they were after triall in the grounds of religion admitted with im∣position of hands into the societie of communicants, in ecclesiam adultorum, as Paraeus calleth them. But wee finde that imposition of hands was used after, as a ce∣remonie in the end of baptisme, even in the baptizing of infants; Yet this laying on of hands upon the baptized, was, as Augustine saith, gestus orantis, the behaviour of him that prayed for, or blessed any particular person, a gesture used both under the old and new testament. As ye may see, when Jacob blessed the sonnes of Joseph, Genes. 48. when Moses laid hands upon Josua, Num. 27, Such as had power, laid hands on these that were to bee admitted to an office in the Church, Acts 6. 1 Tim. 4. The teachers and prophets at Antioch upon Paul and Barnabus, when they were separated for the worke to which the Lord called them, Act. 13. Yea, the elders who were admitted to be Counsellers in the great Synedrion, and the Rabbins who were promoved to their degree of Doctourship were admitted and promoved with im∣position of hands. So it was used in actions both civill and religious, and in religious it served to be an indicant signe of the particular person whom they were to pray for, or blesse. For when they were to blesse or pray for moe, they lifted up their hands, Levit. 9. 22. Luke 24. 10. See also Drusius. If it was only the gesture of him that prayed according to the forme of the Jewes, In pen ate u∣c Fin. p. 370. and did nei∣ther signifie nor seal the grace which was prayed for, it could not bee a sacrament. De confirm. cap. 7. Bellarmine acknowledgeth, that the imposition of hands at the receaving of peni∣tents, which was called Impositio manuum reconciliato∣ria, was not a consecration imprinting a character, but a ceremonie furthering prayer, or a prayer upon the per∣son. If it was no more at there-entrie, it was nothing els in the entrie. Seeing imposition of hands was but the gesture of him that prayed, Imposition of hands used as a sa∣crament. it might have beene either used or omit∣ted, which our Doctour, pag. 98. confesseth. And should be omitted, say we, seeing it hath beene so abused, as to make it a sacrament without precept or institution, and without a promise. Farther, seeing it is but a gesture of prayer, 2 de ba∣ptism. c. 16. it may be re-iterat if it were in use. Manus au∣tem impositio, non sicut baptismus, repeti non potest, quid enim est aliud quàm oratio super hominem, saith Augustine. In the Catechisme before confirmation it is said, That there are but two sacraments generally necessarie to salva∣tion. What then? Estius in l. 4. dist 7. So will the Papists confesse, that confirmation is not necessarie to salvation, otherwise, they would minister it to the baptized at the point of death. The English booke ordaineth, that the childe shall be brought to the bishop by one that shall be his god-father, or that every childe may have a witnesse of his confirmation. This the Papists observe in their confirmation. Thus al∣so is a token, that of old, that which is now called Con∣firmation, was but an appendicle or closure of baptisme, from which being afterward separated, it must not want the god-fathers it had, when it was the appendicle of baptisme. In the prayer before the laying on of hands, they pray that the childe may be strengthened with the holy Ghost the Comforter. The Papists say, the Com∣forter promised by Christ, was bestowed in the sacra∣ment of confirmation. The Papists say, that in confir∣mation they receave the sevenfold grace of the holy spi∣rit, wisedome, counsell, strength, knowledge, understan∣sting, godlinesse, feare. They crave the like in the prayer before the laying on of hands. But what suppose confirm sacrament, The bishop not the pro∣per minister of confirma∣tion. may not every pastour minister it. It appertaineth to the captaine, say they to take up the roll of the souldiers, and furnish them with armour, the shephard should marke his owne heep, &c. As if every minister were not a cap∣taine in the Lords armie, and a sheep-hard feeding the flock concreded unto him. In lib. 4. dist. 7. num. 17. Bonaventure confesseth such similies force not, but institution only maketh necessitie. Our first reason then against them is the want of institu∣tion, or exemple in scripture, that bishops had this charge, and not presbyters. We now suppone only, not grant, that there were such office bearers in the Church. Peter and John were sent to Samaria, not only to lay on hands, but to advance the worke begunnely Philip. Du∣randus saith, it is not clear, whither they laid on as bishops, In lib. 4. dist. . Quaest▪ Quaest. 101. or as presbyters. Augustine, is the authour of that booke, entituled, Quest veteris & novi testamenti▪ saith, they did it as priests. But the truth is, they did it neither as bishops, or priests, and there∣fore neither the one nor the other succeeded unto them in it. For it was extraordinarie, and extraordinarie ef∣fects followed it. The second reason, bishops and pres∣byters, as themselves confesse, are equall in the power of order. If the power be equall, who can hinder them to put it in execution. Hath Christ given them a power which they may not exercise. In 3. tom. 3. disp. 36. sect. 1. Synt. part. 1. disp. 25. Suarez the Jesuit saith, If presbyters have sufficient power by vertue of their ordi∣nation to minister this sacrament, it were no reason that they should be wholy hindered. What God hath insti∣tuted, the Church cannot inhibit, De rep. l. 5. c. 12. num. 23. saith Tilenus. If pres∣byters had not had that power by vertue of their ordina∣tion, neither Pope nor bishop might give them commis∣sion or licence to doe it, Amach. l. 3. quaestionum lib. 11. saith Spalato. But so it is, that by dispensation of licence from the Pope, the Papists grant, they may. Our third reason, presbyters may impose hands in ordination of ministers, therefore they ay also in confirmation. Dist 45. c. 6. So reasoneth Armachanus. Our fourth reason, they may celebrate and minister the Lords sup∣per, therfore they may doe this also. So reasoneth the authour of that epistle, ad Rusticum Narbonensem. Our opposits are forced to confesse, that this is not proper to bishops by vertue of their office, but reserved to them for the dignitie of it. Adversus Luciferia∣nos. Hierome saith, that this was reser∣ved to them not by necessitie of any law, but for the ho∣nour of their priesthood. Yet not in all places, but mul∣tis in locis. The authour of that epistle to Rusticus saith, it was the custome in the orient, in Illyricum, in Italie, in Africa, and in all places in the Apostles time, Decretal. l. 1. that pres∣byters did confirme. In the decretals it is said, that simple priests at Constantinople according to the cu∣stome did minister the sacrament of confirmation. Tur∣rianus reporteth, that the Grecians reprove the Latines, because they inhibit the priests to annoint the foreheads with chrisme, as yee may see in Suarez. The bishop of Spalato complaineth, De rep. l. 5. c. 12. n. 24. that bishops are so rigid, that they will not permit the parish priests to confirme, the rather because they come seldome to visite their parishes, and thinketh, howbeit they refuse, the priests may, as for himselfe he might have suffered the priests in his diocie confirme, Suarez in 3. to n. 3. disp. 36. sect. 1▪ but he gave them not that libertie, because he saw no necessitie of such a ceremonie, and that it was not worthie the name of a sacrament. If there were any moment in it, should the bishops honour, or lordly bi∣shoping bee-preferred to the utilitie of it for the people. Hierome saith, Adversus Luciferia∣nos; If the holy Ghost should come downe only at the prayer of the bishop, these were to bee lamented, who in prisons or castels, or farre places being baptized by priests and deacons, die before the bishop visit them. If it were a matter of moment, Institut. l. 4; c. 19. sect. 9. saith Master Calvin, wherefore doe bishops suffer so many halfe Christians in their diocies. They betray by a tacite confession, that it is not a matter of such moment, Beda in ps; 26. as they pretend. Beda is plaine, that confirmation, as also many other things was not per∣mitted to priests, Notae disp aboritrr. p. 28. for the arrog ncie of bishops. altha∣sav Lydius saith, It was untolerable superstit on that the priest might anoint the breast and the shoulder, but it beho∣ved all to abstaine from the forehead, except only the bishop. Seeing this subject is already treated upon at large in an∣other worke, and both the sacrament it selfe, and the bi∣shop who callengeth it as proper to himselfe are ba∣stards, I will in fast longer upon this point. In their book of comm prayer it is required, that these who are to bee confirmed bee able to answer the qu stions of a little catecat me, The pretēce of catechi∣sing young children. that with their own mouth and consent they may atifie and confirm open∣ly before the church, what the godfathers and godmo∣thers promise in their name, and promise to endeavour to observe and keep such things, as by their own confession they have assented unto. Is not this plain mocking of God, to require publick profession before the Church of children, who cannot give a serious confession of their faith, howbeit they can utter some few words of a short catechisme like parrets. They require that they bee of a perfect age, but that is not observed, or else by perfite age they meane onely years of discretion, as they call them in the same place, that is, when they come to the use of reason, that they can discern somewhat betweene good and evill: or as Hackwell interpreteth, when reason beginneth to break up. Is this a fit time for publick pro∣fession of their faith, or to make them capable and fit for the Communion, whereof notwithstanding they do not partake many years after. Eucerus in his censure, Di polit. l. 3. c. 16. sect. 11. censureth sharply this pretext of catechising. M. Par∣ker telleth us, that for all this, they confirm them some∣time in their own houses, and not openly, sometime in a Church distant many miles from the Church whereof they are members, sometimes in the same church, but without their advise or consent. It is not then either publick profession of their faith, or fitnesse for the Com∣munion, that they are so carefull of, not their understan∣ding of the quuestions of a short catechisme, but to shew their grandour, and what preheminence they have over other mens flocks, in making of half whole, and perfite Christians. Parents must bring their children many miles to them, to bee confirmed or bishopped, as if the holy Ghost could breath no where but upon their fin∣gers. with the words of Tindall. After that bishops had left off preaching, Obedience pag. 52. then falned they this dumb ceremonie of confirmation, to have somewhat at the least wherby they might raigne over their diocie. They reserved also to themselves the christing of bels, and con∣juring or hallowing of Churches and Church-yards, of altars and superaltars, hallowing of chalices, and whatsoever is of honour and profite: which confirmations, and other conjura∣tions also they have now comitted to their suffragians, be∣cause they themselves have no leasure to minister such things for their lusts and pleasures, and aboundance of all things, and for the cumbrance that they have in the Kings matters and bu n sse of the realme. One keepeth the privie seale, another the great seale, the third is a confessour, that is a privi traitour, and a s cret Judas. He is president of the prin e his counsell, he is an ambassadour, another is of the pri∣vie counsell. Woe is unto the Realmes where they are of the counsell. As profitable are they verily unto the Realmes with their counsell, as the woulfes unto the sheep, or the foxes unto the geese. OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF the sacraments in privat places. IN the booke of common order set downe before the psalmes in meeter, The judge∣ment of our church, con∣cerning ad. it is said, that the sacraments are not ordained of God to be used in privat cor∣ners, as charmers and sorcerers use to doe, Ministration of the sacra∣ment in pri∣vat places. but left to the congregation, and necessarily annexed to Gods word, as seales of the same. In the assembly holden at Edinburgh in October anno 1581. it was ordained, that the sacra∣ments be not ministred in privat houses, but solemnely, according to the good order hitherto observed. But in the late pretended assembly holden at Perth, anno 1618. it was ordained, that the minister shall not refuse to ba∣ptise infants in privat houses, when great need compel∣leth the parents to crave it, but the great need is not spe∣cified, and therefore left to the judgement of every cor∣rupt minister, who shall be willing to pleasure his pari∣shoner upon pretence of any alledged necessitie, as a rainie day, or the saving of some charges, as a dinner, &c. Such like the minister must not refuse to admini∣strat the communion in a privat house beside him, that for infirmitie is unable to resort to the church to receave it, or if the sick person that shall declare upon his con∣science to the minister, that hee thinketh his sicknesse deadly. It is required only, that there be three or foure of good religion and conversation present to communi∣cate with him. But, which shaketh all loose, these must be free of all impediments. What if they bee not free? What suppose there were fourtie, let be foure, if it be not celebrated in the congregation, it is but a privat com∣munion. Tilemus, Reasons a∣gainst povat administra∣tion. Ti in∣sy ag de ha∣ parte . when he was found and orthedox, laid downe this for a ground, A sacrament is a publicke action, to be performed publickly by publicke ministers, neither can any necessitie or sufficient cause be alledged, wherefore a sacred and publick action should passe in a privat because Gods or∣di should be us a supreme law, and greatest neces∣sitie, which wee ought to obey rather then foster the igno∣rance and infirmitie of the people. He had beene disputing before against the administration of baptisme by lay∣men and woman, but concludeth in end against admini∣stration also in a privat place, and requireth, that all sa∣craments be administred, not only by publike and law∣full office-bearers, pag. 110. but also publickly. How can the Do∣ctour then alledge, that Tilenus words were perverted? That the sacraments are actions of publike nature, and therefore ought to bee celebrated publickly in the con∣gregation, appeareth by these reasons: 1. The sacra∣ments are appointed not only to be signes and seales of invisible graces, but also to be testimonies of our pietie towards God, and badges of our profession distingui∣shing true Churches; from false. All sacraments are kindes of protestation of our faith, Part 3. quest. 7 artic 5. saith Quinae. Se∣cret corners are not fit places for such protestations. 2. Visible communion in the holy things of God, is the end of our union and consociation with a particular Church. Because wee cannot attaine to a visible com∣munion in the holy things of God, immediatly with the whole Church militant, wee enjoy it mediatly by our communion in a particular congregation. Therefore the sacraments which are the holy things of God, ought to bee administrated in common. 3. All other actions which concerned the whole Church, were done with consent and presence of the Church, as elections, ordina∣tions, excommunications. By the same reason ought the sacraments to be administred in publike, for the in∣terest that all have in them, and the benefite and fruit may redound to all. 4. The sacraments ought to bee preserved from contempt, neglect, and corruptions. Heretickes take occasions to corrupt the pure admini∣stration of the sacraments, when they are administred in privat houses. The publike is the lesse regarded when people may have them in privat, as they thinke they have need, nor yet are they so reverently used, as when cele∣brated in the publicke assemblie. 5. It breedeth opinion of extreme danger of salvation, if any die without ba∣ptisme, or the Lords supper. Wee will have occasion to touch these reasons, when wee descend to baptisme and the Lords supper in particular. The Doctour in his answers useth often the distin∣ction of ordinarie and extraordinarie, The distin∣ction of or∣dinarie and extraordina∣ry frivolous. that ordinary they should be administred in publick, but extraordinar∣ly and in case of necessitie they may bee administred in privat, which is a begging of the question; for the rea∣sons are directed against administration in privat, in whatsoever case, and there is no necessitie to violate the common order, unles it were the danger of mens salvati∣on, for want of such a middle or meane, which is a grosse and damnable opinion ingendred and intertained by the administration in privat. He wresteth also that place in Matthew, Where two or three are gathered, &c. where Christ promised to be in the midst of two or three conveened in his name, as if three or foure conveened to the admi∣nistration of baptisme or the Lords supper, were a suffi∣cient number to make up a lawfull assembly. But this speach of Christ in the precise termes cannot be exten∣ted to the sacrament. For then where two only are con∣veened, the communion may bee administrated. The Priest then may celebrate masse, having none to beare him companie, but the clerke to say Amen. Christ spea∣keth not there, as Master Cartwright hath already answered, of the publicke administring of the word and sacraments, but of the proceeding in the Church disci∣pline against offences, and of that part which was done privatly by two or three, and promiseth, that not onely the proceeding of the Church should be ratified, but al∣so that the admonition given by two or three, whereof hee spake before, with invocation of the name of God, should not be in vaine, but have the owne effect, either for the conversion of the offender; or to make him inex∣cusable. Or by two or three is meant only a few number, where a greater number cannot be had to make up a se∣nat, with power to execute the censures of the Church, or a few but sufficient number, where a greater may not be had to make a visible Church. But where a sufficient number may be had, and of these a Church already con∣stituted, two or three apart cannot binde and loose. And what they may doe, other two or three may undoe, or doe the like, whereupon would follow great confusion. Wee reason against two or three conveening in a privat place to minister the holy things of God, where there is already constituted a Church, and a number consociate to that end, of which societie these two or three are but members. We meane not that the sacraments may not be admi∣nistrated at no time in a privat place, but onely in a pri∣vat meeting of some few; for the congregation is not tyed to, and some time hath not the libertie of materiall Churches, but is forced to retire to woods, caves, privat houses, but their the administration is publike, because in sight and presence of the congregation. Baptisme is that initiatorie sacrament, Against pri∣vat baptisme. Epist. 185. wher by wee enter into the bosome of some visible congregation, or is Calvine saith, it is a sacred or solemne introduction into the Church of God, a testimonie of our heavenly burgesship, into which these are written, whom he hath adopted to himselfe. By baptisme we became members of some societie joyned together, to make up one visible Church, as it were one bodie. Baptisme therefore should bee celebrated in the presence of that visible Church whereof we are to be members. The minister then, and the parents have not the onely interest in this businesse, but the congregation also, and principally, because of their right to receave, or refuse, their concurrence to assist the minister in prayer to God for the infant, their testi∣monie of his entrie, and receaving, and the benefite they may reap to themselves, by remembring their owne ba∣ptisme, and the promises made to God, when they were baptized. The baptized must have communion with them in the holy things of God afterward. And there∣fore good reason, they enter in with their approbation, and acceptance. If a member may not be cut off by ex∣communication without their consent, 1 Corin. 5. none ought to bee receaved without their consent, and after this manner of entrie. Nature teacheth men, saith Bucer, that when any socieitie or corporation is to accept of one to be of their number, Censura c. 9. Reasons. Id sacere cum collegae frequentiores convenerint, ut ita quasi ab omnibus illi in collegium reci∣piantur, & singuli offic a collegarum eis deferant, ad eaque se ita publicè astringant; to doe it when the fellowes have conveened in a frequent number, that so they may bee recea∣ved, as it were of all into the companie, and every one may shew the duty of fellowes unto them, and binde themselves to the same after the same manner publickly. This promi∣scuous meeting of sundrie out of sundrie quarters and parishes to the morning and evening prayers in Edin∣burgh, is not that body or societie whereof the bapti ed is to be a member, nor y t are these times appointed for the meeting of that societie to that end. Was it not then a superstitious or foolish conceat in many of the ancients who delayed baptisme, to the end of their life, or till they were overtaken with dangerous diseases, that being purged from all the sinnes of their former life, they might flie straightway to heaven. These were called Cliniei q. d. lecticularii. When we maintaine baptisme in publicke assemblies, wee meane where there is a visible Church constituted, and an order established. Therefore the exemples of the Eunuch, the jaylour, Cornelius, &c. make nothing for baptisme in privat and apart, where there is a visible Church constituted. The defence and practice of baptisme in privat, Privat ba∣ptisme hath bred the ne∣cessitie of baptisme. hath bred an opinion of an absolute necessitie of baptisme, as if the infant could not be saved without it, and doth ill foster the fame damnable opinion. Neither cast any other necessitie bee p tended. For there is no precept requiring baptisme, when it cannot be had orderly. It is not the neglect, but the contempt which maketh not the infants but the parents guilty. It is not contempt or ne∣glect, when the ordinarie times of publicke meetings ap∣pointed for such ends are not neglected and co ned. In the ancient Church, Easter and Pentecost eves were appointed to bee the solemne times of baptisme. Whereby it came to passe, that many died without ba∣ptisme, as Socrates reporteth. Lib. 5. 21. But that order, which was not commendable, is worne out of use many hundred yeares since. We have now weekly ordinarie assemblies for the purpose, and yet these are neglected and con∣temned, specially by the wealthier sort, and the times of evening prayers are preferred before the times appoin∣ted for preaching in the morning, or upon the Lords day, whereunto they were restrained by the first booke of discipline. Whereas the sacraments should bee celebrated with reverence, Baptisme prophaned by privat ad∣ministration. and we see how solemne the baptisme of Iohn was, and of Christ at Jordan; this baptisme in privat is irreligiously, and unreverently ministred, and the pu∣blicke scarce attended unto; for upon the opinion of the necessitie of baptisme in privat, hath followed the defence of baptisme by women, baptisme by a pagan, baptisme with pudle water, baptisme by supposition. For if the infant recover health, they baptisme againe in publicke, if they doubt it was baptized after the right manner in privat, saying, It thou bee not baptized N. I ba∣ptise thee in the name of the Father, &c. But what if the childe was already baptized after the right manner, is not this publicke baptising rebaptization. I know our Formalists doe not defend baptisme by laymen or wo∣men to be lawfully ministred by such persons, yet they esteeme it valide and effectuall, if the right forme and manner was in substance observed, as yee may see in our Doctours grounds. Proceedings pag. 105. That which our worthie divines have condemned as nullin it selfe, they account as va∣lide, which no man would doe, that were not infected with the opinion of absolute necessitie of baptisme to the salvation of the infant. For necessitas precepti, the pre∣cept to baptise cannot drive them to this absurditie, see∣ing none are commanded or have warrant to baptise but pastours or ministers. It is necessitas medii then, that driveth them to such courses. The English service book permitteth, in privat baptisme to omit the doctrine con∣cerning the institution and use of baptisme, and also to spare the Lords prayer, if the time will not suffer. That booke supposeth likewise, that some things essentiall to this sacrament may bee omitted in the privat ministra∣tion, through feare or haste in such extremitie. Is this re∣uerent using of the holy things of God, or is it sure worke, that forceth them to flie to a conditionall ba∣ptisme. The case of baptisme and circumcision is not alike, The case of baptisme and, circumcision different. for the Lord appointed a precise time for circumcision, to wit the eight day, which in no cas they might pre∣vent, suppose the infant should die in the meane time. It might have beene delayed, if there were some urgent oc∣casion to hinder, as in the wildernesse for many yeares, because they behoved to be in readinesse to remove ac∣cording to the moving of the cloudy rollar. But Moses had no urgent occasion, therefore the Lord chastised him, and Sephora circumcised the childe Moses being sicke. Her example was not imitated by the Jewes them∣selves after, and the Church of God was yet in families. When synagogues were erected, and places for the pu∣blike service of God, circumcision was ministred onely in publike, as some thinke, and so it is an this day in the synagogues, Bueanus lec. 46. Zepperus de sacram. pag. 251. Chamier. tom. 4. lib. 5. c. 14. Barrad. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 2. where a synagogue is to bee had. Others hold that the Lord committed not the act or office of circumcision to the priests or Levits, but that the infants were circumcised at home, the family and nighbours being conveened, because present remedy was to be pro∣vided for curing of the wound. Barraillus the Jesuit saith, that circumcision required not either a peculiar place, Suar. in 3. partem. tom. 3. disp. 29. sect. 2. or a peculiar minister. Suarez saith, that at this day, he that is called the circumciseth, circumciseth in∣differently in the house or the synagogue. But it is not so in baptisme, as it cannot be ministred, but by a lawfull minister, so likewise only in the publicke assembly. The make of circumcision was permanent, and by it the cir∣cumcised might bee easily discerned whither they were counterfite professours or not. But it is not so in ba∣ptisme The paschall lambe was eaten only in families, and small societies conveened in some chamber on par∣lour, and might not be eaten in publick assemblies. But who dare affirme, that the Lords supper howbeit it be the sacrament answerable to it, must be celebrated after the same manner. Different is the case betweene the sacra∣ments of the old law which belonged to one nation, and the sacraments under the Gospel belonging to the whole Christian world. The Lords supper is the sacred banket of the whole Church assembled together, Reasons against privat communion. Decad. 5. ferm. 9. saith. Bullinger in his De∣cades, and therefore, saith he, the Apostle requireth the Corinthian to assemble together to partake of this sup∣per, 1 Corin. 1 . 32. It is a finew of publicke assemblies, a hadge of our profession, a band of love, and representa∣tion of communion and fellowship, which is and ought to bee among the members of the congregation. It is not a part, or two, or three, but the whole body of the congregation which is compared to one bread, when the Apostle saith, We that are manie are one bread, and one body, for we are partakers afore bread, Corin. 10. 17. Be∣cause it is not possible to us to celebrat a sacramentall union with the whole Church militant, the Lord hath appointed us to keepe a sacramentall communion with some particular congregation or visible Church. The Doctour borroweth an absurd answer from Bellarmine and the Rhemists, pag. 117. 118. that were have sacramentall commu∣nion with the whole militant Church, howbeit it be not so visible, as with any one particular Church, and his reason is, because wee are partakers of the same sacra∣ment. I reply with Master answer to the Rhemists, On 1 Corin. 11. §. 14. Although all the faithfull, even those, that ne∣ver receaved the sacrament, by faith communicate with Christs body, yet doe they alone communicate sacramentally which have their communion sealed by the outward action of eating of one sacramentall bread. And that the Apostle meaneth of these, that in one congregation or Church eat to∣gether, and not of the communion of us with those, that re∣ceave the sacrament in another Church, it is evident, for that he placeth the seal of this communion in eating all of one bread, and of one table: Whereas they that communicate in another congregation, communicate not of one table or bread with them, that are so removed, no more then they that cele∣brated the passeover in divers houses, were partakers of one lambe or kid. It is the same sacrament in spece or kinde, but not in number. Wee communicate in one fruit or effect, because we all receave the same Christ, but that is a spirituall, not a sacramentall communion, Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 13. num. 33. saith Cha∣mier. For it was never heard, saith he, that these in Jeru∣salem communicate sacramentally with those in Ale∣xandria. Otherwise what needed the bishop of Rome to send the eucharist to other bishops when they come to Rome. The Lords supper then should not be cele∣brated, but in the assembly of the faith for united toge∣ther in one bodie of a Church. A companie conveened apart from the rest to communicate with the sicke per∣son is not unied by themselves into the body of a Church, farre lesse three of foure, asttake, the English service booke meaneth to be a number sufficient, seeing they allow the communion to bee ministred to three or foure in the Church, and in the time of plague, sweat, or such other like contagious sicknesses, the minister may communicate with the person diseased alone. Ergo coe∣na Domini non est privata, Dead. 5. serm. 9. sed publica nulli privatim dan∣da. Et quoniam non est publicus vel generallis catus, quandò quatuor aut quinque cum agro communicant, nihil dicunt quia not apud agros coenam instrui p sse, si alis quoque si∣mul coenent saith Bullinger. That is, Seeing it is not a pu∣blicke or generall meeting, when three or foure communi∣cate with the sicke, they say nothing to purpose who say, that the supper may bee celebrated beside the sicke, if others also communicate. Suppose a companie of the faithfull in a family be called a Church, Rom. 16. 7. because the whole family consisting of Christians, and frequently exercised in religious exercises, resembleth in some sort a Church, and may be called ecelesiola, as it were, a little Church. Yet it is not that Church which hath the power and right to use the sacraments and censures, for then every family in a Christian commonwealth might celebrate the sacraments at home. So howbeit the name be com∣municated for the greater commendation of such a fa∣mily, yet the definition doth not agree. And yet that place may be applied to the Church, which used to con∣veene in Aquila and Priscilla's house In that same cha∣pter Gaius is called the host of the whole Church. See Parcus in Rom. 16. 7. 1 Corin. 16. 19. Philemon. 2. The names also given to this sacrament, may teach us, that t should bee celebrated in the publicke assemblie. The name synaxis importeth a ga ering or assembling to∣gether. Casaubon saith, synaxis and synagogue are all one, because derived from one word. Liturgie signi∣fieth a publicke service or ministrie; both the names import the celebritie of the assembly, and the solemnitie of the administration before the assembly. The elements were sent to the absents in time, or im∣mediately after the action in Justinus Martyrs time. The prete ∣ded necessitie of privat communi∣ons. Which was the first abuse we read of. After followed reservation of the eucharist for the use of the sicke, which was a greater abuse, and carrying of it home to their houses. The opinion of the necessitie of privat commu∣nious did grow to such an hight, that the eucharist was given not onely to aged persons departing this life for their Viaticum, to bee their voyage victuall, as they call it, but also to infants and babes, and this indured for the space of 600. yeares. The Papists themselves are asha∣med of it, and expresly inhibit it. Yea of old, in some parts, it was the practice, to use Master Perkins words, to cram the eucharist into the mouth of them that were deceased, or to lay it upon the breast; and burie it with the corps. Such horrible prophanations arose from the opinion of necessitie engendred upon these reservations, and giving of the eucharist to the sicke. The continua∣tion of the like customes doth foster and entertaine the same opinion of necessitie. The ignorant are fostered in superstition, as if the grace of God were tyed to the sa∣crament, and no comfort could be had by there receaving of it in former times, but they must have it now for their voyage victuall, whereby they may bee enabled to at∣taine to life eternall without fainting in the way. Polyander after he hath concluded, that the Lords sup∣per should not bee celebrated in privat, either for sick∣nesse of any person, or other case of necessitie whatso∣ever, granteth that not long after the Apostles times, for condescending to the weaknesse of some, this custome prevailed to send to the sicke the elements of bread and wine in the time of administration. Miscellan pag. 166. Sed hoc medium at∣que adm niculum, quod infirmioribus juvandis ac consolan∣dis ex zelo irregulari absque Christi mandato patres exhi∣buerunt, paulatim in eam transiit idololatriam, nt aliqui non minùs administrationi sacra coena, quàm baptismi, sa∣lutemex opere operato tribuerint. That is, The helpe and nemedie they used out of irregular zeale without Christs precept, for the comfort and helpe of the weaker, ended at last into such idolatrie, that they ascrived no lesse their salvation to the administration of the holy supper, then of baptisme, and that by vertue of the worke wrought or deed done. Therefore he adviseth us to beware, that we fo∣ster not men in a superstitious opinion, by privat or do∣mestick administration of the Lords supper. Epist 361. Calvin saith, Difficillimum est hic cavere, ne alios superstitio, alios ambitio & vana ostentatio ad petendum solliciter. That is, It is verie hard to bee avoided, that superstition stirre not up some, ambition and ostentation others to crave it. Bullinger saith, Decad 5. serm. 9. If wee bee contentious in the defence of this viaticum, there will bee bred againe, that which wee have seene receaved in some ages before, a relying npon the very receaving it selfe of the sacrament, as if for it wee were ac∣ceptable to God, and departing out of this world, did flie straightway to heaven, and without it were carried straightway to hell. And many errours will spring up. Tilenus saith, in his syntagma, Disp. 61. thes. 36. Whatsoever necessitie be pretended, hardly cast any sufficient cause be rendered, where∣fore the publicke action should passe in a privat. Because he ord nance of God is supreme necessitie, which wee must obey rather then faster the infirmitie of man. Illa enim in∣firmorum levamenta, ex ordinem olim adhibita infirmi∣tatem publicam totius ecclesia magis foverunt & auxerunt quàm privatam agrotan ium sanarunt. That is, The ease tendered by the cont non order upon the infirme, d d rather cherish and augment the publicke disease of the whole Church, then heal the privat disease of the sicke. As for the pretended necessitie of comfort to the sicke, that same answer may be given, that the English service book giveth, when none can be had to communicate with the sicke, or for extremitie of sicknesse, or other just impe∣diment he cannot communicate. The carat shall instruct him, that if hee doe truly repent him of his sinnes, and st ed∣fastly beleeve, that Jesus Christ hath suffered death upon the crosse for him, and shed his bloud for his redemption, ear∣nestly remembring the ben sits he hath thereby, and giving him hartie thankes therefore, hee doth eat and drinke the body and bloud of our Saviour Christ profitably to his soules health, although he doth not receave the sacrament with his mouth. May not the like b e said to the sicke in body, but ignorant or superstitious in minde, when the sacra∣ment may not bee celebrated at their bedside without breach of Gods ordinance. The Rhemists do acknow∣ledge, On Job. 6. 1. 8. that they doe eat the flesh, and drinke the bloud of Christ, which joyne in hart and desire with the part of the sacrament. A man may die a martyr before he re∣ceave either baptisme, or the Lords supper. How many Catechumeni have died before they were baptized. The comfort and benefit wee receave at any publicke com∣munion, is not restrained to the present time, but ser∣veth at all times for our use. Wee were but once bapti∣zed, yet the comfort and benefite endureth all our life long. Our spirituall communion with Christ, and to eat his flesh, and drinke his bloud by faith, is ever so ne∣cessarie, that otherwise we cannot be safe, but so is not the participation of the Lords supper. Onely wee must beware of neglect and contempt of the publicke admi∣nistration. The godly know in their agonie, they never want shall, R eti Ca∣thol. C tho∣do. tom. 2. pag. 198. which is chiefe and onely necessarie, where in they so ac∣quiesce, that they will not without the Lords institution, trouble the comlinesse and order of the Church for their owne privat satisfaction. Norunt pij in agone nun qua ijs d esse, quod praecipuum est & so ùm necessarium, in quo ita acquiescunt ut extra Dom ni institutionem, nolunt ecclesia ordinem & decorum turbare, ut sibi privatim satisfaciant. This pretended necessitie grounded upon superstiti∣ous conceats, Privat com∣munion hath bred neglect and irreve∣rence Ricti ca∣thol. orthod. tom. 2. p. 199. hath drawne on a neglect of the publicke communion, because in time of their need they looke for it in privat. Ab ista manducatione clinica, cui quis∣que in papatufidit, ortho est in plerisque communicandi con∣temptus, cum prospera valetudine fruuntur ad quod semel tantum in anno ex ecclesiae sua praescripto obligantur. The whole congregation hath interest in the celebration, and is bound to see it performed reverently and religiously, which they cannot see done, when it is administred in privat. Nor can the privat administration bee perfor∣med with such reverence as is requisite. Wee read not that at any time it was the custome in the ancient church to celebrate at the bedside of the sick, but onely to carrie the eucharist to him, which notwithstanding was superstitious. The synod holden at Laodicea, cap. 58. ordained, Ne fierent in domibus oblationes ab episcopis aut presbyteris. And Justinian Novell constit. 57. hath the like. Not that I thinke the place of it selfe disgraceth the action, but the paucitie of the communicants. If the con∣gregation were assembled in a barne, or any like capaci∣ous place through want of a church, the action might bee celebrated with no lesse grace. The sicke mans chamber is not a fit meeting place for the congregation, saith Rive is. Suppose it were, such assemblies could not but breed or foster the opinion of necessitie. Beside the paucitie, the paines of the patient might enforce sundrie disorders. De eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 23. Bellarmine alledgeth, in defence of depriving the communicants of the cup, howbeit more comfort might bee had by participating both the bread and the wine, that there is lesse ill, that men want some good thing not necessarie, then that the sacrament be ex∣posed to the hazard of irreverence. For it could not be, but the bloud of Christ would bee often split. That which hee alledgeth against the Lords institution, wee may farre more justly alledge against this privat com∣munion, which the Lord never ordained, that the reve∣rent usage of the sacrament is to bee preferred before the good, or rather preposterous pleasing of the sick, and feeding their ignorance and superstition. FINIS. Errata. BLot out p. 11. last line, not. p. 12 l. 15. when 81. l. 27. that. 99. l. 11. not 122. l. lest. p. 56 lin. l. the fourth part. read p. 14. l. 4. canon. 17. 22. more. l. 23. meere 20. 28. Pauli. 23. l. 24. that thursday. 27. l. 25. Hospinian. 29. l. 26. then. 30. last line notable. 3. l. l. 29. Encrarits. 39. l. 2 sic. l. 25. eat ve all of this. 45. l. 14 great. l. 25. Montanus. l. 26. members. 47. l. 4. & l. 8. sic. 54. l. 30. simplici er. 57 l. last, Israelitarum, 60. l. 18. decree. l. 19. succes∣sates. 6. l. 18 popu 6. . l. 13. of. 65. l. 18. excuses. 67. l. 24. Cracouien∣i. 6 l. als. 68. l. 4. als. 69. l. 15. apertae. 74. l. 19. to stand. 76. l. 13. stantes & commorantes. 77. l. 30. Zonaras. 79. l. 14. praetermitted. 80. l. 24. quod . 9. l. 12 to these words. 98. l. 1. causes. l. 13 whither. 99. l. 11 if ye will bear. 122. l. 3. bewray. 128. l. 30. Christ. Desire, stort ejaculations. 135. d. l. 19. genuine. 154 l. 7. commenting. 157. l. 20. kindling fire. 158 l. 1. mutabilitie. 159 l. 7. rationem. 160. l. 27. were not bidden fast. 164. l. 26. 10. logicall. 165. lin. 2. apolo. l. 19. whereon. 168. l. 5. makein. 190. l. 29. gatorum. 202. l. 20 salve, 205. l. 23. ye observe. 217. l. 22. concredite. 220 lin. 30. questions. 22 lin. 12 suffraganes. 226 l. 4. become. Lesser escapes I remit to the correction of the understanding reader. A PASSAGE OF MASTER WILLIAM Cowper, peetended bishop of Gallaway his sermon, delivered before the states anno 1606. at which time he was minister at Perth. On 2 Corin. 6. 3, 4. . The Apostle wrote this epistle in his owne name, and in the name of Timothie his brother, as yee may penceave by the first verse of this epistle. And now in both their names hee directeth the exhortation. Preachers are workers together, brethren, and fellow-labourers. Here a worthie Apostle claimeth no superiour stile to Timothie an Evangelist, alb it justly hee might, h e b ing an Apostle, the other an Evangelist, both which were temporarie and ex∣traordinarie callings in the Church of God, but the one, namely the office of an Apostle more excellent then the other office of an Evangelist. This may serve to make these men ashamed, who being partakers of one office of pastorship with the rest of their brethren, will bee separated from them by slately sitles. Order is good, I grant, but away with such or∣der, as hath bred that I omane Hierarchie, the tyrannie of the Antichrist. Alwayes here our chiefe lesson is that ministers should work together. They should not worke one against another. We are the servants of one Lord, wee have all one citie to build, we are fortifiers of the wall of one Jerusalem, what part of the wall wee stand and into, that is no matter, the worke and the waze is one to us all. Vnion among brethren is ay the forerunn r of blessing, division againe bringeth on the fall; for a kingdome devided against it selfe cannot stand. In the primitive church S. Luke saith, The multi∣tude of beleevers were of one heart. There upon followed a flourishing estate of the church, notwithstanding the powers of the world were enemies to them. Great things are al∣wayes performed by union, yea suppese of mean instruments. There is non, saith Job, can restraine the influence of the Pleiades, it is but a constellation of the seven starres, which we commonly call the seven sisters; yet do they bring with them the spring of the year. Thus a nature her self advanceth her greatest workes by unin. A materiall building is made up by the uniting of stones and timb r b fore disjoyned, and and the fall thereof is procured againe by their renting and sundring one from another. I exhort you therefore brethren, in the name of the Lord, that as one man our hearts may bee joyned together to doe the worke of the Lord, and this devision threatning a fearfull decay of Christ his kingdome in the midst of us, may be eshewed. Where if it be objected to me, where is the blame or cause of division? For I know that as Salomon saith, every mans way seemeth good in his owne eyes. I answer, I have not a de∣ligh to make a sport of the nakednesse of my father, and I desire not to be cursed with Chaent. If the division were not so evident that the most simpley perveaveth it, I could willing∣ly also misknow it, but since the evill is manifest, the cause of the evil is also easily espied: for looke what part of the wall is gagged from the o ation, where upen the building stands, and from that policie we receaved from our fathers, let th be drawne in to the rest againe, then shall arise a happie uni∣on, that may assure us of a continuance and increase of Gods work in the midst of us. FINIS.