A relation of the successefull beginnings of the Lord Baltemore's plantation in Mary-land Being an extract of certaine letters written from thence, by some of the aduenturers, to their friends in England. To which is added, the conditions of plantation propounded by his Lordship for the second voyage intended this present yeere, 1634. Declaratio coloniae. Selections. English White, Andrew, 1579-1656. A relation of the successefull beginnings of the Lord Baltemore's plantation in Mary-land Being an extract of certaine letters written from thence, by some of the aduenturers, to their friends in England. To which is added, the conditions of plantation propounded by his Lordship for the second voyage intended this present yeere, 1634. Declaratio coloniae. Selections. English White, Andrew, 1579-1656. A Relation of the successefull beginnings of the Lord Baltemore's plantation in Mary-land. O N Friday the 22. of Nouember 1633. a small gale of winde comming gently from the Northwest, we weighed from the Cowes in the Ile of Wight, about ten in the morning; and (hauing stayed by the way twenty dayes at the Barbada's, and fourteene dayes at S t. Christophers, vpon some necessary occasions) wee arriued at Point-Comfort in Virginia on the 24. of February following, the Lord be praised for it. At this time one Captaine Claybourne was come from the parts where wee intended to plant, to Virginia ; and from him wee vnderstood, that all the natiues of those parts were in preparation of de∣fence, by reason of a rumour some had raised amongst them, of sixe ships that were to come with a power of Spanyards, whose meaning was to driue all the inhabitants out of the countrey. Wee had good letters from his Maiesty to the Gouernour and Councell of Virginia, which made them fauour vs, and shew vs as noble vsage as the place afforded, with promise, that for their cattell and Hoggs, Corne or Poultry, our plantation should not want the open way to furnish our selues from thence: they told vs likewise, That when his Lordship should bee resolued on a conuenient place to make himselfe a seat; they should bee able to prouide him with as much Bricke and Tile, as he should haue occasion to imploy, vn∣till his Lordship had made of his owne: Also, that they had to fur∣nish his Lordship with two or three hundred Stocks ready grafted with Peares, Apples, Plummes, Apricotes, Figgs, and Peaches, and some Cherries: That they had also some Orange and Limon trees in the ground, which yet thriued: Also, Filberds, Hazel-nuts, and Almonds; and in one place of the Colony, Quince-trees, where∣with they could furnish his Lordship; And in fine, that his Lord∣ship should not want any thing that Colony had. On the 3. of March wee came into Chesapeake Bay, and made sayle to the North for Patoemeck riuer, the Bay running betweene two sweet lands in the channell of 7. 8. and 9. fathome deepe, 10. Leagues broad, and full of fish at the time of the yeere; It is one of the delightfullest waters I euer saw, except Potoemeck, which wee named Saint Gregories. And now being in our owne Coun∣trey, wee began to giue names to places, and called the Southerne Point, Cape Saint Gregory ; and the Northerly Point, Saint Michaels. This riuer, of all I know, is the greatest and sweetest, much broader then the Thames ; so pleasant, as I for my part, was neuer satisfied in beholding it. Few Marshes, or Swampes, but the greatest part sollid good earth, with great curiosity of woods, which are not choaked vp with vnder-shrubbs, but set commonly one from the other, in such distance, as a Coach and foure horses may easily trauell through them. At the first looming of the ship vpon the riuer, wee found (as was foretold vs) all the Countrey in Armes. The King of the Paschattowayes had drawen together 1500. bowe-men, which wee our selues saw; the woods were fired in manner of beacons the night after; and for that our vessell was the greatest that euer those Indians saw, the scowtes reported wee came in a Canow, as bigge as an Iland, and had as many men as there bee trees in the woods. Wee sayled vp the riuer till we came to Heron Ilands, so called from the infinite number of that fowle there. The first of those Ilands, wee called Saint Clements ; The second, Saint Katharines ; And the third, Saint Cecilies. Wee tooke land first in Saint Clements, which is compassed about with a shallow water, and ad∣mitts no accesse without wading; here, by the ouerturning of the Shallop, the maids which had beene washing at the land, were al∣most drowned, beside the losse of much linnen, and amongst the rest I lost the best of mine, which is a very maine losse in these parts. The ground is couered thicke with pokickeries (which is a wild Wall-nut, very hard and thick of shell; but the meate (though little) is passing sweete) with black Wall-nuts, and acrons bigger then ours. It abounds with Vines, and salletts, hearbs, and flowers, full of Cedar, and sassafras. It is but 400 acres bigg, and therefore too little for vs to settle vpon. Heere wee went to a place, where a large tree was made into a Crosse; and taking it on our shoulders, wee carried it to the place appointed for it. The Gouernour and Commissioners putting their hands first vnto it, then the rest of the chiefest aduenturers. At the place prepared wee all kneeled downe, and said certaine Prayers; taking possession of this Countrey for our Sauiour; and for our so∣ueraigne Lord the King of England. Here our gouernour had good aduice giuen him, not to land for good and all, before hee had beene with the Emperour of Paschat∣toway, and had declared vnto him the cause of our comming: which was, first to learne them a diuine Doctrine, which would lead their soules to a place of happinesse after this life were ended: And also to enrich them with such ornaments of a ciuill life, wherewith our Countrey doth abound: and this Emperour being satisfied, none of the inferiour Kings would stirre. In conformity to this aduice, hee tooke two Pinnaces, his owne, and another hired at Virginia ; and leauing the ship before Saint Clements at Anchor, went vp the riuer, and landing on the south-side, and finding the Indians fled for feare, came to Patoemeck Towne, where the King being a child, Archihau his Vncle gouerned both him, and his Countrey for him. Hee gaue all the company good wellcome; and one of the company hauing entred into a little discourse with him touching the errours of their religion, hee seemed well pleased therewith; and at his going away desired him to returne vnto him againe, telling him hee should liue at his Table, his men should hunt for him, and hee would diuide all with him. From hence they went to Paschattoway. All were heere armed: 500 Bow-men came to the Water-side. The Emperour himselfe more fearelesse then the rest, came priuately a boord, where hee was courteously entertained; and vnderstanding wee came in a peace∣able manner, bade vs welcome, and gaue vs leaue to sit downe in what place of his kingdome wee pleased. While this King was a∣board, all the Indians came to the Water-side, fearing treason, whereupon two of the Kings men, that attended him in our shippe were appointed to row on shoare to quit them of this feare: but they refusing to goe for feare of the popular fury; the interpretours standing on the deck, shewed the King to them that he was in safe∣ty, where-with they were satisfied. In this iourney the Gouernour entertained Captaine Henry Fleete and his three barkes; who ac∣cepted a proportion in beauer trade to serue vs, being skillfull in the tongue, and well beloued of the natiues. Whilest the Gouernour was abroad, the Indians began to lay a∣side feare, and to come to our Court of guard, which wee kept night and day vpon St. Clements Ile: partly to defend our Barge, which was brought in pieces out of England and there made vp, and part∣ly to defend the Captaines men, which were imployed in felling of trees, and cleaning pales for the pallizado: and at last they ventured to come aboard our ship. It was worth the hearing, for those who vnderstood them, to heare what admiration they made at our ship; calling it a Canow; and wondering where so great a tree grew that made it, conceiuing it to bee made of one piece, as their Canow's are. Our great Ordnance was a great and fearefull thunder, they had neuer heard any before; all the Countrey trembles at them. The Gouernour being returned, wee came some nine leagues low∣er to a riuer on the North-side of that land, as bigg as the Thames : which wee called Saint Georges riuer: It runnes vp to the North a∣bout 20. miles before it comes to the fresh. This riuer makes two ex∣cellent Bayes, for 300 sayle of Shipps of 1000. tunne, to harbour in with great safety. The one Bay wee named Saint Georges; the other (and more inward) Saint Maries. The King of Yaocomoco, dwells on the left-hand or side thereof; and wee tooke vp our seate on the right, one mile within the land. It is as braue a piece of ground to set downe on as most is in the Countrey, and I suppose as good (if not much better) then the primest parcell of English ground. Our Towne wee call Saint Maries : and to auoid all iust occasion of offence, and collour of wrong, wee bought of the King for Hat∣chetts, Axes, Howes, and Clothes, a quantitie of some 30 miles of Land, which wee call Augusta Carolina. And that which made them the more willing to sell it, was the warres they had with the Sas∣quesa-hanoughs, a nigh bordering nation, who came often into their Countrey, to waste and destroy; and forced many of them to leaue their Countrey, and passe ouer Patoemeck to free themselues from perill, before wee came. God no doubt disposing all this for them, who were to bring his law and light among these Infidells. Yet seeing wee came so well prepared with armes, their feare was much lesse, and they could be content to dwell by vs: yet doe they daily relinquish their houses, lands, and corne-fields, and leaue them to vs. Is not this a piece of wonder, that a nation, which a few dayes before was in armes with the rest against vs, should yeeld themselues now vnto vs like lambes, and giue vs their houses, lands, and liuings for a trifle? Digitus Dei est hic: and surely some great good is entended by God to this Nation. Some few families of In∣dians are permitted yet to stay by vs till next yeere, and then the land is free. Wee had not beene long time seated there, ere Sir Iohn Haruey Gouernour of Virginia, did our gouernour the honour (in most friendly manner) to visit him: and during the time of his being there, the King of Patuxunt also came to visit vs; and being come aboard the Arke, and brought into the great cabbin, and seated be∣tweene the two Gouernours (Captaine Fleete and Master Golding the interpretors being present) hee began his speech as followeth. When I heard that a great Werowance of the English was come to Yoacomoco, I had a great desire to see him. But when I heard the Werowance of Pasbie-haye was come thither also to visit him; I pre∣sently start vp, and without further counsell, came to see them both. In the time of his stay at Saint Maries, wee kept the solemnitie of carrying our colours on shoare: and the King of Patuxunt ac∣companying vs, was much taken with the ceremony. But the same night (hee and Captaine Fleete being at the Indian-House) the Arke's great gunnes, to honour the day, spake aloude; which the King of Patuxunt with great admiration hearing, counselled his friends the Yoacomoco Indians to bee carefull that they breake not their peace with vs; and said: When wee shoote, our Bow-strings giue a twang that's heard but a lit∣tle way off: But doe you not heare what cracks their Bow-strings giue? Many such pretty sayings hee vsed in the time of his being with vs, and at his departure, hee thus exprest his extraodinary affection vnto vs. I do loue the English so well, that if they should kill me, so that they left me but so much breath, as to speake vnto my people, I would com∣mand them not to reuenge my death: As for the Natiues, they are proper tall men of person; swarthy by nature, but much more by Art: painting themselues with colours in oyle, like a darke Red, which they doe to keepe the Gnatts off: wherin I confesse, there is more ease then comlinesse. As for their faces, they haue other colours at times, as Blew from the nose vpward, and Red downeward, and sometime contrariwise in great variety, and in very gastly manner sometimes; they haue no beards till they come to bee very old, and therefore drawe from each side of their mouthes, lines to their very eares, to represent a beard, and this sometimes of one colour, and sometimes of another. They weare their haire generally very long, and it is as blacke as Iett : which they bring vp in a knott to the left-eare, and tye it a∣bout with a large string of Wampampegg, or Roanoake, or some o∣ther of the best Iewels among them. Vpon their fore-head, some vse to weare a Fish of Copper, and some weare other figures. About their neckes, they vse to weare many bugle chaynes, blew and white, and other colours; though these begin now not to bee e∣steemed among them for truck. Their apparrell generally is deere-skin, and other Furre, which they weare like loose mantles: yet vnder this, about their middle, all women and men, at mans estate, weare Perizomata (or round aprons) of skinnes, which keepes them de∣cently couered, that without any offence of chast eyes, wee may conuerse with them. All the rest of their bodies are naked, and at times, some of the younger sort both men and women haue iust nothing to couer them. Their feete are as hard as any horne, when they runne ouer prickles and thornes they feele it not. Their Armes is a Bow, with a bunch of Arrowes, of a yard long, furnisht with three feathers at the top; and pointed either with the point of a deeres horne, or a sharpe three-corner'd white flint; the rest is a small cane, or straight sticke. They are so expert at these, that I haue seene one a good distance off strike a very small bird through the middle: and they vse to cast a thing vp from hand, and before it comes to ground to meete it with a shaft. Their bowes are but weake, and carry not leuell very farre; yet these are their liuelyhood, and euery day they are abroad after squir∣rells, paretidges, turkies, deere, and the like game; whereof there is a wonderfull plenty; though wee dare not yet bee so bold our selues, as to fetch fresh meate by this meanes farre off. The Indian houses are all built heere in a long halfe Ouall; nine or tenne foote high to the middle top, where (as in ancient Tem∣ples) the light is admitted by a window, halfe a yard square; which window is also the chimney, which giueth passage to the smoake, the fire being made in the middest of the floore (as in our old halls of England ) and about it they vse to lie. Saue only that their kings and great men haue their cabbins, and a bed of skinnes well dressed (wherein they are excellent) set on boards, and foure stakes driuen into the ground. And now at this present, many of vs liue in these Witchotts (as they terme them) conueniently enough till better bee set vp: But they are dressed vp somthing better then when the Indians had them. The naturall witt of this nation is good and quick, and will con∣ceiue a thing very readily: they excell in smell and tast, and haue far sharper sight then wee. Their ordinary diet is Poane and Omine, both made of corne, to which they adde at times, Fish, Foule, or Venison. They are of great temperance, especially from Hott-waters or Wine, which they are hardly brought to taste, saue onely whom the English haue corrupted with their owne vices. For modestie, I must confesse, I neuer saw from Man or Woman, any action tending to leuitie: and yet daily the poore soules are here in our houses, and take content to bee with vs, bringing sometimes Turkies, sometimes Squirrills, as big as English Rabbetts, but much more dainty; at other times fine white cakes, Partridges, Oisters ready boil'd and stewed: and doe runne vnto vs with smiling coun∣tenance when they see vs, and will hunt and fish for vs, if wee will; and all this with entercourse of very few words, but wee haue hither∣to gathered their meaning by signes. It is lawfull among them to haue more Wiues then one; but all keepe the rigour of coniugall faith vnto their Husbands: The Wo∣mens very aspect, is modest and graue. Generally the Nation is so noble, that you cannot doe them any fauour or good turnes, but they returne it. There is small passion a∣mong them, but they weigh all with a calme and quiet reason. And to doe this the better, in great affaires they are studdying in a long silence what is to bee said or done: And then they answere yea, or no, in two words: And stand constantly to their resolution. If these people were once Christians, (as by some signes we haue reason to thinke nothing hinders it but want of language) it would bee a right vertuous, and renowned Nation. As for their religion, wee haue not language our selues to find it out; Master Throughgood, who driues his Lordships trade vpon the riuer of Patuxunt, hath related somwhat: First, they acknowledge one God of Heauen, which they call [our] God; and cry, a thousand shames vpon those Christians that so lightly offend so good a God. But they giue no externall honour vnto him, but vse all their might to please an Okee (or frantick spi∣rit) for feare of harme from him. They adore also Wheate and Fire as two gods, very beneficiall vnto mans nature. In the Machicomoco, or Temple of Patuxunt, there was scene by our Traders this Ceremony. Vpon a day appointed all the Townes mett, and a great fire being made; about it stood the younger sort, and behind them againe the elder. Then taking a little deere suett, they cast it into the fire, crying Taho, Taho, and lifting vp their hands to heauen. After this, was brought forth before them a great Bagg, filled with a large Tobacco-pipe and Poake, which is the word which they vse for our Tobacco. This was carried about the fire, the youth following, and singing Taho, Taho, in very good tune of voice, and comely gesture of body. The round ended, one comes reuerently to the bagg, and open∣ing it, takes out the Pipe, and deuides the Poake from one, to one. As euery one tooke his draught, hee breath'd his smoake vpon all the limbs of his owne body; as it were to sanctifie them by this ce∣remony, to the honour and seruice of their God, whomsoeuer they meant. This is all I can say touching their religion: Saue onely that they seeme to haue some knowledge by tradition, of a flood wherein the World was drowned for sinne. And now to returne to the place it selfe, chosen for our plantation. Wee haue beene vpon it but one moneth, and therefore can make no large relation of it: Yet thus much I can say of it already, For our safety, wee haue built a good strong Fort or Palizado, and haue mounted vpon it one good piece of Ordnance, and 4. Murderers, and haue seuen peeces of Ordnance more, ready to mount forthwith. For our prouision, heere is some store of Peasen, and Beanes, and Wheate left on the ground by the Indians, who had satisfaction for it. Wee haue planted since wee came, as much Maize (or Indian Wheate) as will suffice (if God prosper it) much more company then wee haue. It is vp about knee high aboue ground already, and wee expect the returne of 1000. for one, as wee haue reason for our hope, from the experience of the yeeld in other parts of this Coun∣trey, as is very credibly related to vs. Wee haue also English Peasen, and French-beanes, Cotten, Orin∣ges, Lemmons, Melocotounes, Apples, Peares, Potato's, and Sugar-canes of our owne planting; beside Hortage comming vp ve∣ry finely. But such is the quantitie of Vines, and Grapes now already vpon them (though young) as I dare say if wee had Vessells and skill, wee might make many a tonne of Wine, euen from about our plan∣tation; and such Wine, as those of Virginia say (for yet wee can say nothing) as is as good as the Wine of Spaine. I feare they exceede; but surely very good. For the clime of the Countrey is neere the same with Siuill and Corduba : lying betweene 38. and 40. degrees of Northerlie latitude. Of Hoggs wee haue already got from Achomack (a plantation in Virginia ) to the number of 100, and more: and some 30. Cowes; and more wee expect daily, with Goats and Hennes; our Horses and Sheepe wee must haue out of England, or some other place by the way; for wee can haue none in Virginia. For the Commodities, I will speake more when I see further; one∣ly wee haue sent ouer a good quantitie of Iron-stone, for a tryall, which if it prooue well, the place is likely to yeeld infinite store of it. And for that flaxe and hempe which wee haue sowed, it comes vp and wee hope will thriue exceedingly well; I end with the soile which is excellent, couered with store of large Strauberies, Raspices Vines, Sassafras, Wall-nuts, Acornes and the like; and this in the wildest Woods too. The mould is blacke a foote deepe, and then comes after a red Earth. All is high Wood, but in the Indian fields, which are some parcells of ground cleered for Corne. It abounds with good springs, which is our drinke: Of beasts; I haue seene Deere, Racounes, and Squirills, beside which there are many others, which I haue not yet seene. Of Birds diuersly-feathered there are infinite; Eagles, Bit∣ternes, Herons, Swannes, Geese, Parteridge, Ducks, red, blew, partie coloured Birds, and the like. By all which it appeareth, the Coun∣trie aboundeth, not onely with profit but with pleasure. And to say trueth, there wanteth nothing for the perfecting of this hopefull plantation, but greater numbers of our countrey-men to enioy it. From S t. Maries in Mary-land, 27. May, 1634. W Ee whose Names are heere vnder written, hauing beene Aduenturers in this first voy∣age, and lately come for England, with in∣tent to returne thither with more prouision of Men and other necessaries; were Eye-witnesses of the trueth of this whole Relation; and are rea∣dy to giue further satisfaction to any one in such particu∣lars as shall bee desired. Captaine Edward Wintour. Captaine William Humber. Robert Smithson. Robert Sympson. The Conditions of the plantation. 1 VVHat person soeuer, subiect to our Soue∣raigne Lord the King of England, shall in this second voyage, be at the charge to transport into the said Prouince of Mary-land, himselfe or his Deputy, with ten able men fit for labour, betweene the ages of 20. and 60. every man being provided in all things necessary for a plantation: the particulars whereof they shall vnder∣stand at the place mentioned at the end of these Con∣ditions: (which together with their transportation, will amount to about 20 l. a man) His Lordship will assigne to euery such vndertaker, and for every such tenne men, a proportion of good land within the said Pro∣vince, containing in quantity 3000. Acres of English measure, which shall bee erected into a Mannor, and bee conveied to him, and his heires forever: with all such Royalties and Priviledges, as are vsually belonging to Mannors in England. Rendring and paying yearely vnto his Lordsh. and his heires for every such Mannor; 600. pound weight, of good Wheate : and such other services as shall be generally agreed vpon, for publike vse, and the common good; and as are vsuall in all other Plantations. 2 And forasmuch, as the stragling manner of dwel∣ling vsed heretofore by our English in forraine Plantati∣ons, hath bin found by experience to be very inconveni∣ent, without comfort or security; besides the disorder and distraction, which it causeth in the government. And that at last (feeling the effects of that error) they haue bin compelled to vnite themselues together in one place. His Lordsh. therefore intends, that all his Plan∣ters, shall dwell together at the first, at or as neere as may be vnto St. Maries Towne, the seate now chosen for the Colony: where his Lordsh. will assigne, and conveigh vnto every such vndertaker as aforesaid, and his heires for ever, a plot of ground fit for a house and garden, to build vpon, and so much land as neere vnto the Towne as conveniently may bee (to plant Victuall vpon, and such other things as he the said vnder-taker shall thinke fitte) according to the proportion of fiue Acres of English measure for euery man. 3 Those that are not willing to bee at the charge to transport the foresaid number of men required for a Mannor, and yet perhaps will be contented to bee at the charge of a lesser number, they shall haue assigned to them and their heires for euer, the like proportion of land, in, and about the Towne, according to the number of their men as aforesaid; and a 100. Acres more for each man, allotted to them in some convenient place of the Province, as others haue, and be made Free-holders to hold of his Lordsh. paying a yearely quit rent of 20. pound weight of Wheate, for every such 100. Acres. 4 If any man shall bee vnwilling, to trouble himselfe with providing such men and their necessaries, as afore∣said, and yet are desirous to imploy some money vpon this Plantation; if they signifie such their desire, accor∣ding to the time and place, here-vnder prefixed: they shall haue directions to dispose their money, in such a way, as shall giue them content, whereby they may haue the advantage of the former conditions, according to the proportion of the money they adventure. 5 Whatsoeuer Adventurers shall carry, or send over any women, more or fewer, in the second voyage, hee shall bee allowed 30. Acres of good land in surplusage aboue the former proportions: for every woman he shall so carry over, or send over. 6 Whatsoever husband-man, or other laboring-man, shall bee willing to goe to this Plantation, and to binde himselfe a seruant there for fiue yeares, he shall be enter∣tained (if he come within the limited time to the place appointed) vpon these termes; that is to say; he shall be found sufficient meate and drinke, and clothing, during the said terme: and at the end of the said terme, he shall haue 50. Acres of good land conveied to him, and his heires for ever, within the said Province, a whole yeeres provision of all necessaries according to the vsuall cu∣stome of other Plantations. And if hee bee either a sufficient Carpenter, Ioyner, Brick-layer, Brick-maker, Mason, Wheele-wright, Coo∣per, or Ship-wright, in stead of these 50. Acres propo∣sed, hee shall haue 100. Acres of good land, at the end of his terme, and the rest of the aforesaid conditions, for three yeares service onely. VVHosoever intends to partake in this second Voyage, must come, or send before the 20. of October next ensuing, to M. William Peasely Esq. his Lordsh. brother in-law, at his house on the back-side of Drury-lane, over against the Cock-pit on the field-side: And there to him deliuer their transportation-money, according to the number of men they meane to send over, at the rate of sixe pound a man, to the end convenient passage may bee reserved for them, in his Lordsh. shipping; beyond which time it will not be pos∣sible for any to partake in this second Voyage. 15. Iuly 1634.